B2957A R230869 99896579 134572
HEARTS-EASE IN HEART-TROUBLE. OR, A Soveraign Remedy against all Trouble of Heart that Christ's Dis∣ciples are subject to, under all kinds of Afflictions in this Life. Prescri∣bed by the great Physician, the Lord Jesus Christ, which hath never fai∣led those that have used it, or ever will, to the End of the World. O the blessedness of all them that trust in him. The full Soul lotheth the Honey-Comb; but to the hungry Soul every bitter thing is sweet, Prov. 27. 7. By J. B. Minister of the Gospel. LONDON, Printed for J. Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Church-yard, 1696.
An EPISTLE to the Meek and Lowly-Hearted Readers, who Mat. 11. 29. have learned of their dear Lord so to be, who himself will not break the bruised Reed, Mat. 12. 20. nor quench the smoaking Flax. Charitable Reader, CHarity (which is the Bond of Per∣fectness, and the greatest Rarity now in the World, and in the Church too, the more is the pity) thou must put on, who
adest this, the plainest and  unpolish'd Piece that ever thou sawest, (for the Author never had skill in dressing) if thou meanest to profit any thing by it, which is the only thing, God knows, is aimed at by the Author, who always prays and studies to speak (and write) ra∣ther to Mens Hearts than Ears, his own and others; and by God's Word, to work Faith, rather than feed Fan∣cy: Charity, I say, thou must have, for that will cover a multitude of Sins, much more of Infirmities, which here thou must expect to meet: Charity beareth all things, 1 Cor. 13. 7. believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things: If thou wilt but ex∣ercise thy Charity in reading,
and join therewith thy fer∣vent Prayers for a Blessing, thou mayest attain thine End and mine also, to wit, thy E∣dification, for Charity edi∣fieth. In hope of gaining thy Cha∣rity, suffer me to give a short (but true) account of the en∣suing Treatise, viz. I being about three Years since, for some Reasons, retired from my Family, and place of A∣bode; and by Sickness, and other things, confined; du∣ring which time, many of my dear Friends and Relations in Christ were called home to their Father's House; whereupon I thought it my Duty to write some Lines to their surviving Relations, as I was by them desired to do; and after seek∣ing
God for Counsel and Assi∣stance, I thought on this Text spoken to in the following Dis∣course; (for it was not at the least in my thoughts ever to publish this, or any other, know∣ing my own inability) I wrote in my homely Stile what thou wilt here find (all except the Title Page, This, and the Post-script) calculating it to the Capacities of the plainest Christians; to whom I then sent it, and with whom it lodg'd; until about six months since it pleased the only Wise God to bring me to a trial of my Faith and Patience; so deep a stroke it was, that I used all means for my sup∣port; and it came into my Mind, that such a thing I had written so long before, to help in such Cases, and that se∣veral
had found benefit by it, I made enquiry after it, and at last found it; and in read∣ing of it, as the Word of God, and begging God's Blessing on it, I found much Relief and Comfort thereby, (all Praise and Thanks to 2 Cor. 1. 4, 5. God) and thereupon had some small Inclinations to comuni∣cate the same to others; and after many struglings and reluctancies in my self, and with Prayers and Tears I be∣sought the Lord to direct me: At last I considered, I must shortly put off this my earthly Tabernacle, and having for ma∣ny Years been lain aside like a broken Vessel of no use, and compassed with many bodily In∣firmities, I was willing to leave behind me a little scrap of my Labours to my Children and
Friends, to put them in mind of what I had taught them for above thirty Years toge∣ther, that they might be for∣tified against all the Troubles of this Life, and by Faith in God and Christ, hold fast and not lose their Crown. But why so mean a thing as this among the learned Labours of so many eminent Writers on the like Subject? I Answer, That our Lord took special notice of the Widows Mites; and he will not despise the day of small Mar. 12. 43, 44. things, Zech. 4. 10. But what can you aim at? may be said. Answ. Not Applause to be sure, being conscious of my Weakness; nor Profit or Gain,
expecting but Acceptance: But this, God and my Con∣science bear me witness, this is my Aim, my most humble and fervent Prayer, that some of Christ's poor little Flock (my Children and others, whose Souls are precious to me, and whom I dearly love in the Lord) may receive some ad∣vantage; and chiefly, that God may have all the Glory, who hath chosen the weak things of this World, &c. and who accepts the Will for the Deed, &c. Such as will not make use of it, let them do better, and I will be glad. None may be afraid to buy or read it, for there is not a word of the State or Church-Matters in it; I daily pray for the Prosperity of both,
but think it not my Duty to meddle with either, but in sub∣jection. Two Requests I have to thee, loving Reader: 1. Pray for a Blessing up∣on as much as you find to be the express Will of God. 2. Pray for me, that I may more and more find and feel the Life and Power of those, and all the Truths of God in mine own Heart, and may ex∣press more of the Life of Faith in my whole Conversation, and I will also pray for thee that thou mayest find as muc (and much more) benefit i reading this, as I have in com¦posing and perusing it; a praise to the God of all Grac If you find some Passages (i
your Opinion) too often re∣peated, be not offended, till you find them too powerful on your Hearts. Thus committing this poor Essay to the Blessing of him who is the Father of Mercies, and can teach us to profit, by his Word and Rod, and thy self to his Love and Favour in Jesus Christ; in him I re∣main for thy Soul's good, From the House of my Pilgri∣mage, Mar. 1690. Thy humble Servant, J. B.
HEARTS-EASE IN HEART-TROUBLE. JOHN 14. 1, 2, 3. Ver. 1. Let not your Hearts be troubled; ye believe in God, believe also in me. THese words are a part of our Blessed Saviour's last Sermon upon Earth just before his Passion, which begins (as is probable) at the 13th Verse of the 13th Chapter of this Gospel, and ends at the last Verse of the 16th Chapter; in which Verse our Lord tells his Disciples, (how dear soever they were to him,
yet) in the World they should hav Persecution, Tribulation; of which he had often told them before in effect; that they should not ex∣pect Mat. 16. 24. 1 Thess. 3. 3. Job 14. 1. Mat. 10. 22, 24. their Heaven here, but hi Cross they must bear, if they would wear his Crown: Tribu∣lations of all kinds, Outward and Inward, you must endure: It is your Portion here, you are thereunto appointed. Man is naturally born to trouble, as the Sparks naturally fly upwards▪ and new-born to trouble also▪ and commonly to new and more Troubles, Act. 14. 22. 2 Tim. 3. 18. All that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer Persecution; of Hand, or Tongue, one way or other. Indeed, such as can be content with a profession of a Godliness that may suit with the Times; that can please them∣selves with any kind of Godli∣ness, or with a Form, any Form of Godliness, and that can change their Forms when they please, such may avoid Persecution; but all that will live godly in Christ
Jesus, in the Power and Spirit of Christ Jesus, and resolve to live up to the Example and Rule of Christ Jesus, they shall have Per∣secution, no avoiding of it. No entring into the Kingdom of God but by Tribulation. But notwithstanding this, our Lord lays this positive Command on his Disciples; Let not your Hearts be troubled. These poor Disciples were like shortly to sustain an heavy loss, of their dearest Lord; he was now a going away from them, a greater loss they could not have; and yet, saith Christ, Let not your Hearts be troubled; which Command is repeated and ex∣plained in the 27th Verse; Let not your Heart be troubled, nor let it be afraid. What! might they say, Must we not be troubled at all? Must nothing trouble us? No, we must not be troubled for any outward Loss, for any outward Tribula∣tion, for parting with the near∣est and dearest Relation, we
must not be troubled. Yet we are not forbidden to be troubled for Zion: It is a grievous Sin, not to be grieved for the Afflictions of Amos 6. 6. Joseph: Surely, we must be troubled for God's Dishonour, because Men break God's Com∣mandments. Psal. 119. 53, 136. Trouble of Heart, except for Sin, is sinful trouble. Where Sin lies heavy, Affliction lieth light. Isa. 33. 24. They shall not say, I am sick; for their Ini∣quities shall be forgiven them. Sense of Pardon to those Souls that have felt the burden of Sin, much alleviates and lightens the burden of Affliction. Strike, Lord, (said Luther) now I am absolved from my Sin. We are always too prone to fall into Extreams, to sin either in Excess or in Defect, too much, or too little; we are faulty both ways. As for Sin, which is the worst of Evils, we are apt to be troubled too little. How few fail here in the Excess, tho 'tis possible so to do; and some have, that refuse to be comforted by
all the sweet Promises of Christ Psal. 38. 3, 4. in the Gospel: But there are but few of those; most of us fail in the Defect. We are not troubled for Sin as much as we should; our Sins do not lie so hard and hea∣vy upon us as they should; our Hearts do seldom feel the weight of Sin pressing us down: many Sins lie light on us; our vain Thoughts, our Omissions, care∣less performance of holy Duties, mispending precious Time, idle Talk, &c. and such like Evils, which should trouble us most, they trouble us least. But our Afflictions, which, com∣parativley, 2 Cor. 4. 17. are but light, lie too heavy upon us, and press us down even to the Dust. So, in respect of Afflictions themselves, we are apt to run into Extreams, against which the Holy Ghost gives cau∣tion as to both Extreams. Prov. 3. 11, 12. My Son, despise not thou the chastning of the Lord; neither be weary of his Chastisements; the Apostle explains it, neither faint Heb. 12. 5, 6. when thou art corrected of him:
Adding a most powerful Argu∣ment against those Extreams; Ver. 6. For whom the Lord loveth, he correcteth, even as a Father the Son, in whom he delighteth; and therefore despise not his Cha∣stisements, and fatherly Cor∣rections, slight them not, for they come from a loving Father, a wise Father, and should not be despised by his Children, they are the Fruits of his Love: Also, you must not be weary of them, nor faint under them, for the same reason, viz. because they shall not hurt you, they flow from your Father's Love, from a Fa∣ther they come, who delighteth in you, and therefore ye ought not to faint under them; or as it is in the Text, Whatever Af∣fliction befals you, let not your Heart be troubled. It is Heart-trouble you see that is here forbidden; not a filial sense of God's Hand, nor a Child-like acknowledgment of God's Rod: God's Rod hath a Voice, and its Voice must be Mich. 6. 9.
heard. When his Hand is lifted Isa. 26. 11▪ 16. up to strike, to lay on any blows on us, or on any of our Relati∣ons, or earthly Comforts, we must observe it, and him, and ac∣knowledg the same; but, not Eccles. 7. 13, 14. to acknowledg, and observe the Hand of God; not to consider in the Day of Adversity, not to humble our selves under his mighty Jan. 4. 9, 10. Hand, not to stoop and yield to God, but to think, or say, of our Affliction, that it cannot be hel∣ped, there is no Remedy, it is common and ordinary, and the like; this is to despise the chast∣ning of the Lord, take heed of this. But yet, we must take heed too, that under the pretence of being sensible of the hand of God, and of his stroaks upon us, that we do not fall into the other Ex∣tream, of being weary of his Chastisements, and of Despon∣dency, and fainting under his Corrections, we must be careful that we do not let our Hearts be troubled.
Quest. But is it possible that we should be afflicted, deprived of Liberty, of Estate, of loving Relations, of the Desire of our Ezek. 24. 16. Eyes, and of the Delight of our Hearts, (for such in a most emi∣nent manner was Jesus Christ to his Disciples, He was the Desire Joh. 6. 68. of all Nations) and not be troubled at our very Hearts? Can we behold our Benjamin's, Hag. 2. 7. our Sarah's, or Rebeka's, our Jo∣seph's, &c. taken away, our dear Husbands, or loving, faithful, tender Wives snatch'd away from us with a Stroak, with a sudden Stroke, to be in a moment deprived of such Comforts, and in such a Time too, in an Evil Time, in a sad and suffering Time, when such Helpers would sweeten our Sufferings, and help bear our Burdens, would give us sweet Counsel, and uphold us in the Way of God? What, is it possible such Knots should be un∣tied, and so suddenly, such Flow∣ers cropt off, cut down; such sweet Friends removed from us,
as lay once in our Bosoms, and sent to the Chambers of Dark∣ness, sealed up in the Dust, made silent in the Grave, to see their sweet Faces no more, till the Heavens be no more? Is it possible I say, in such cases, not to be troubled? or if it be possi∣ble, Is it necessary, or is it attain∣able? May we arrive to such a Temper, may we get such a calm, quiet, tranquil, and submissive frame of Spirit? It is Admira∣ble, but is it Attainable? I Answer, We must not De∣spise  the Chastning of the Lord, as was noted before, we must not be as Stocks or Stones, alto∣gether insensible of the hand of God upon us: no, we must be Eccles. 7. 2. sensible, we must lay those things to our Hearts, and consider the Work of God: Such losses, and of Such, are to be lamented, Isa. 57. 1. they will be found wanting, their Relations will find them Want∣ing, their Families will find them Wanting, the Poor will find them Wanting, and the Church
also. David laments the loss of Jonathan; And the Disciples the Joh. 11. 16. loss of Lazarus. Lawful it is then, to be affected with the Deaths and Departures of our dear Relations and Friends, and moderately to Mourn for them; but our care must be, that we suffer not Nature to work alone without Grace, for then it will soon go beyond its bounds: Na∣ture must be restrained and boun∣ed. It is moderate Mourning that is lawful. Mourn we may, but not as those that have no Hope, 1 Thess. 4. 13, 14. For, those that sleep in Jesus, they being safe and happy; for, If we be∣lieve that Jesus died, and rose again; even so they that sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. Troubled we cannot chuse but be in such cases, and under such strokes, but we must not let our Hearts be troubled, saith our Lord. And what this imports, you shall see by and by. It is trouble of Heart, that is here forbidden: But, what is it, that will prevent,
or cure this Heart-trouble? Our Saviour answers in the next Words; Ye believe in God, be∣lieve also in me: In my Fathers House are many Mansions, &c. In which, we may observe these Parts, viz. 1. An Evil Disease, or Spiri∣tual The Divisi∣on of the Text. Distemper; intimated and prohibited, to which the Disci∣ples of Christ are incident and prone in time of Affliction; and that is Trouble of Heart: This may seize you, but take heed of it, labour against it. As if the Lord had said, I know it will be a cutting, a killing thing to you, to part with me, your dear and loving Lord and Ma∣ster: but part with me you must, and take heed of this undecent Distemper of Heart-Trouble: Let not your Hearts be troubled, saith our Lord Jesus. 2. The best Preventive of, or Remedy for this Spiritual Distem∣per proposed and enjoyned: Ye Believe in God, Believe also in Me. As if our Lord had said,
Surely, you believe in God, why then are your Hearts troubled? Cannot your Faith in God sup∣port you, if you act it upon him? But if that cannot, then act your Faith also on me: Be∣lieve also in me. Set your Faith on work on me. Believe, that I love you, that when I leave you, I will not leave you Com∣fortless; I will send the Comforter John 14. 16, 17. unto you, and he shall abide with you for ever. Therefore, let not your Hearts be troubled. Be∣lieve in me; I must leave you, and I and you must part; but, believe where I am going, and let the consideration of that quiet you, and comfort you: In my Father's House are many Mansi∣ons: There is a better, a far bet∣ter condition for you above, than that you are in here; for, here you are tossed up and down from place to place, and are ex∣posed Matth. 8. 20. to many straits. I my self here on Earth, have not an House wherein to lay my head; but in my Father's House are ma∣ny
Mansions. There is an House above, not made with hands, eter∣nal 2 Cor. 5. 1. in the Heavens. When once you come thither, you shall re∣move no more; there are many Mansions, room enough for you all, and for all the innumerable company of Angels and Saints: therefore, Believe in me; for, these things are most true that I tell you. And believe also, That I go to prepare a place for you: I go to take Possession of those Ce∣lestial Mansions, of those ever∣lasting Habitations for you, in your Name and Stead: While you are here on Earth, I shall prepare you for those Mansions; and when I go from you, I will prepare them for you: There∣fore, to prevent those Heart-Troubles which you are subject to, because of my Departure from you, and to fortify you against them, (for I am sollicitous for you;) This is the Remedy that I propose you, and enjoin you to practise; That seeing you Believe in God, Believe also in me. Act your Faith on me.
From which Words thus ex∣plain'd, I commend to your Christian Consideration this Gospel-Doctrine, viz. That the lively Acting of Tr Faith upon God and Christ, o upon God in Christ, is the best Preventive of, and Remedy a∣gainst Heart-Trouble, under the greatest loss whatsoever: or, Faith Acted on God in Christ, is the Sovereign Cure of Heart-Trouble. Our Lord Jesus is very tender over his poor Disciples; and having foretold them of the hard usage, and bad entertainment they should meet with in the World, Losses and Crosses, Tri∣bulations and Persecutions; He now leaves with them some An∣tidotes against Distempers of mind; some Cordials against those faintings of Spirit, and troubles of Heart; to which, he knew, they, being Flesh and Blood, were subject: and this in the Text, is Chief and Principal: Let not your hearts be troubled; ye
believe in God, believe also in me. This your Faith will be your best Cure, your best Remedy. Poor Believers are but Princes in Disguise here in this World: Princes they are, Christ hath 1 Pet. 2. 9. made them all so; but while here below, they are in a foreign Land, under a Veil. It doth not Revel. 1. 6. now appear, what they shall be, 1 John 3, 2. They have a large Patrimony, but it lies indeed in a Land unknown to the World, it is in Terra incognita, if the expression can be born. The holy, the great God himself is their Portion, their Heritage; Deut. 32. 9. God is their Sure, their Full, their Lasting, their Everlasting Portion. They are Heirs of a Kingdom, Psal. 119. 59. Lament. 3. 24. Jam. 2. 5. Heirs of Salvation. Heb. 2. last. Heirs of God, Co∣heirs with Christ, Rom. 8. 17. Yea, All things of this World are theirs, 1 Cor. 3. 21. All things are Blessed, and Sanctified to them, and shall conduce to their Spi∣ritual and eternal Welfare, Rom. 1 Tim. 4. 5. 8. 28. Yet notwithstanding all
this, and although Heaven an Earth lies at the feet (as it were of Godliness, and of those tha profess it, in the Power of it (Godliness having the Promises o this Life, and of that which is 1 Tim. 4. 8. come:) and, notwithstandin Believers have a true Title to a the Good of both Worlds; yet may those poor (but blessed) Saints be exposed to manifold Temptations and Tribulations in this World; they may have a dark, and sad, and stormy way of it to their Father's House; they may be stript of all their earthly Comforts, may be de∣prived of their Liberty, Estate, nearest Friends and Relations, as we read in Scripture, that such hath been the Portion of the best Saints: And upon this the People of G have been deject∣ed, and disquieted; they have desponded, their Hearts have been troubled, and have thereby displeased their heavenly Fa∣ther, who would have them believe, That all things shall
work together for their good. Now, our Lord, in this Text, orbids this Distemper of Mind, nd would not have his Disciples, who had God for their Father, and Himself for their Redeemer, and who had Title to such Hap∣piness in the other World, to Despond, and to be Disquieted; therefore he laies this Charge on them, Let not your Heart be trou∣bled: adding, the proper means to prevent this sinful malady of Heart-Trouble, tha it might not seize on them; or if it had, to cure them of it, viz. Ye Be∣lieve in God. Beliue also in me. The lively Acting of true  up∣on God in Christ, it is the  Pre∣ventive of, and Remedy against Heart-Trouble▪ under the great∣est loss whatsoever. Which Pro∣position I shall prosecute, in the Assistance of God's Spirit, and according to the measure of Light and Grace I have received, after this manner and method following.
First, by way of Demonstra¦on. 2ly. Of Confirmatio And then to Apply, a make Improvement of it f our use. 1. By way of Demonstrati Endeavouring to shew, First, That God's choic  Saints, are in this World su¦ject to all kinds of Trouble▪ Losses, and Afflictions; a whence it is, and why so. Secondly, That under th  Losses and Afflictions, they a subject to Despond, to be D¦jected, and to be Troubled i their Hearts. Thirdly, What this Heart-Tro¦ble  is, that Christ forbids here▪ Fourthly, How, that Believi  in God and Christ, is the be means to prevent, and cure t Heart-Trouble. First, That God's choice  Saints are liable to all kinds  Troubles, Losses, and Affliction even the greatest, heaviest, a sorest: as we read of Job, Davi Heman, and others.
God had but one Son without Isa. 53. n, but no Son without Suffer∣g. His only begotten Son was a an of Sorrows; and the Holy host assures us, that if ye be ithout chastning, whereof all are rtakers, then are ye Bastards and t Sons, Heb. 8. 12. God's Children are liable to fferings, whether we consider em as Men, or as Christians: as en, Job 14. 1. Man that is born Job 5. 7.  a Woman, is full of Trouble. s our Relations and Comforts crease, so do the Occasions of rouble. God never appointed is World to be the place of an's Rest, but of our Exercise, Gen. 47. 9. nd only a Passage to another World: And in this our Passage e must look for Storms and Tempests: If we can through Mercy obtain a tolerable Passage horow this World, and a com∣ortable Passage out of it into hat better above, we shall have ause to bless the Lord to all Eternity. And much more as Christians
must we expect Troubles; fo Man is no sooner brought ho John 15. 19. Luke 22. 13. to God, but he must expect be hated by the World, assaul by Satan, chastned by the Lo our own corrupt Hearts will always vexing; the old Man,  Flesh, thwarting all the Motio of the new Nature, lusting agai the Spirit. The Lusts of t Heb. 12. 8. Gal. 5. 17. Flesh, will be as Pricks in o Eyes, and as Thorns in our Side▪ We shall have Enemies in o own Houses. But this Truth is so manife in all the Scripture, that I shall i¦sist no longer on it, only shall ad this by way of Use; Let all Chr¦stians prepare for Affliction,  getting an Interest in Go through Christ, by getting Si pardoned and purged, by ge¦ting Peace with God and Co¦science, by getting Hearts cruci¦fied to the World; and the when Troubles come, let us bea them as Christians, not murmur 1 Pet. 4. 16. Luke 21. 19. not repine, but in patience pos∣sess our Souls: not desponding
or fainting; remembring, that ur Troubles are no more, but nfinitely less than we have de∣erved. Job 34. 23. He will not Ezra 9. 13. ay upon Man more than right. God perfectly understands our Need, and knows our Strength: 1 Pet. 1. 6. If need be, ye are in 1 Cor. 10. 13. heaviness. He is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted a∣bove that ye are able. It is the Wise, Just, and Gracious God, and our Father that tempers our Cup for us. Many Earthly Pa∣rents do not correct their Chil∣dren in measure, being ignorant of their Nature and Disposition; and therefore their Correction doth them no good. Many Physici∣ans mistake the Constitutions of their Patients, and therefore may do them more hurt than good: But God knows our Need, and our Strength, and so sutes all his Remedies accordingly; therefore let us be patient, bearing our Troubles with an equal Mind not suffering as per-force, but willing∣ly. It is said, Dan. 3. 28. That
they yielded their Bodies, tha chearfully, to the Fire. In Lam. 3. 40. Jam. 5. 13. Mat. 16. 24. Luk. 9. 23. Affliction, let us search our He and try our Ways; let us fl God by Prayer, and resign our selves to him, and trus him, casting our Cares and ¦dens on him: Psal. 55. 22. 1▪ 5. 7. Moreover, it is our Wisd that while we are at ease, h our Comforts about us, let look for Troubles; Afflicti from God, as well as for G are part of our Cross which must take up daily. Sickn death of Friends, loss of Est &c. we must look for them, t we may not be surprized. He that buildeth an House,  a Ship, doth not make this  Work and Care, that it sho not rain upon it; or that it sho have no Storms or Tempests, this cannot be prevented by  care of ours, but that the H or Ship may be made able to ¦dure all without prejudice.  must it be our care, to provi¦
for Afflictions; for to prevent them altogether, we cannot; but pre∣pare for them we may, and must, as was hinted before; to treasure up God's Promises, and store our Souls with Graces, and spiritual Comforts, and firm Resolutions in God's strength, to bear up and hold on: We had need be well shod with the preparation of the Eph. 6. 15. Gospel of Peace. Most Christians are not morti∣fied and crucified to the World, not acquainted with God and the Promises, as they ought to be, nor so resolved to follow God fully, as they ought, and there∣fore are so dejected and discon∣tented when Affliction comes; O that we did count the Cost, when we first begin to make Profession of Christ; and that we had had such full Perswasions of the incom∣parable Worth and Excellencies of the Lord Jesus, as that we could willingly part with all things for his sake! O that we had such believing Apprehensions of the Wisdom, Faithfulness, Righte∣ousness
and Mercy of God, su sights of his reconciled Face, a such tastes of his fatherly Lo to us in Christ, as that we cou quietly submit to his holy Wi and be well satisfied with all  Dispensations towards us.  much of this first Particular. Secondly, The Disciples   Particular. Christ, under the Afflictions whi they meet with in this Wor are apt to be troubled in the Hearts, to be disquieted in the Minds, to be dejected and di¦couraged. It was so with ho David, Psal. 42. 5. Why art th cast down, O my Soul? Why a thou disquieted within me? He w sensible of his Afflictions, a that disquieted him, and ca him down. God's People a subject to such disquietment because they are Flesh and Bloo subject to the same Passion Jam. 5. 17. made of the same Mould, sub¦ject to the same Impressions fro without as other Men, and thei Natures are upheld with th
same Supports and Refreshments as others, the withdrawing and want of which affecteth them as well as others. And besides those Troubles they suffer in common with others, by reason of their being called out of the World, John 15. 19. the World hates them, and are therefore more exposed to Tri∣bulation than others, and there∣fore are apt to be cast down and discouraged: This our Lord foresaw would befal his Disciples after his Departure from them; and therefore he counsels them against the same: Let not your Hearts be troubled. Quest. But it may be demand∣ed, Whence ariseth this Heart-trouble, and disquietment of Mind, under Affliction? Answ. There are many Causes of it, which is necessary for us to know, that so, knowing the Causes, we may the better find the Cure. There are outward and inward Causes. First, Outward Causes. And  the first may be God himself. He
sometimes withdraws the Beams of his Countenance, withholds the sense of his Love, hideth his Face from his Children: (which the Saints in Scripture so bitter∣ly complain of, and so earnestly Isa. 45. 15. Job 34. 29. pray against). Whereupon the Souls, even of the strongest Chri∣stians are disquieted. This cau∣sed trouble to the Soul of Jesus Christ himself, Joh. 12. 27. When Psal. 13. 1. & 27. 9. & 30. 7. & 69. 17, &c. a poor Child of God, together with his Affliction, apprehends God to be his Enemy, and that his Troubles are mix'd with God's Displeasure; and it may be his Conscience tells him, that God hath a just Quarrel against him, because he hath not walked so holily, so humbly, so evenly Psal. 38. 3, 4, 5, 6. and so strictly with God as he might, had he been more watch∣ful, careful, and circumspect; and that he hath not renewed and kept his Peace with God as he should, and might have done; and this sense of God's Displea∣sure, puts a Sting into all his Afflictions, and this causeth trou∣ble
of Heart, and disquietment of Mind. And justly may such a Soul be troubled that hath ever felt the Joys of God's Salvation, Psal. 51. 12. the sweet Influences of his Love, that hath tasted that the Lord is Psal. 34. 8. gracious, seeing, that in his Fa∣vour is Life, and his Loving-kind∣ness is better than Life; Psal. 30. 5. & 63. 3. Secondly, The Devil is the  Cause sometimes of the Heart-Trouble of God's Children. For he being a cursed Spirit, cast out of Heaven, full of Disquietment and Discontent himself, labours all he can to trouble and disquiet others, to bring others (as much as in him lies) into the same cur∣sed Condition with himself: He being cast out of Paradise himself, envies us the Paradise of a good and quiet Conscience; for that is our Paradise until we come to Heaven: And this Pa∣radise a poor Child of God may possess in a Prison, in a Dungeon, on a Dunghil. Two main Designs the Devil
hath upon Men; the one is, if possibly, by all imaginable Slights, Temptations, and Inticements, he may keep Men in a course of Un∣godliness, to hinder them from coming to Christ by Faith and Repentance, to deter them from his holy Ways. And when he cannot prosper in this, but that unsearchable rich and free Grace takes hold of some poor Souls, and they are snatch'd out of his Hands, their Captivity led cap∣tive by that mighty Redeemer; then all the Devil's labour is, to hinder their Comfort, and to interrupt their Peace, and to make their way to Heaven as hard and uncomfortable to them as possible, pursuing them with all dejecting and Heart-troubling Temptations. Thirdly, Wicked Men are al∣so  active in the troubling of God's People; they are indeed the true Troublers of God's Is∣rael. They load God's People with Reproaches: And there is nothing that the Nature of Man
is more impatient of, than Re∣proaches, for there is no Man so mean, but thinks himself worthy of some Respect; now a re∣proachful Scorn shews an utter disrespect of a Man, which flows from the very supersluity of Ma∣lice. Reproach hath broken my Heart, saith David, Psal. 69. 20. and nothing more doth he com∣plain of than Reproach, and no∣thing more are God's People lia∣ble to than this. These are the Causes from without. Secondly, There are Inward Inward Causes. Causes also of Heart-Trouble and Despondency: When God's People are in Affliction, most times that black Cloud of Melan∣choly also surrounds them, and Darkness makes Men fearful and dejected. There are many Causes within our selves. As, ignorance of God, Psal. 9. 10. Exod. 34. 6, 7. and of Christ, of the Covenant of Grace, of the Name of God: they that know God's Name, will trust in him, and not be dejected. Also, forgetfulness of God, and
of what he hath done for us. We Isa. 51. 12, 13. forget God, when we are afraid of Man. Our overlooking, and passing by the many Comforts we enjoy, even while we are un∣der Affliction, taking little No∣tice of our Mercies, but let them Gen. 15. 2. be all swallowed up in our Mise∣ries; as Abraham, because he had no Heir: and Rachel, who said, Gen. 30. 1. Give me Children, or I die; tho she had all other earthly Com∣forts, yet the want of this one so troubled her, that all the rest seemed nothing. It is an evil thing for us to be wedded to our own Wills. None more subject to Discontent, than those who would have all things after their own way, and are meer Strangers to Self-denial. Like∣wise, false apprehensions of things cause Heart-Trouble; to think God hates us, because he corrects us; and when he takes from us, that it is all in Wrath. Another common Cause, is our own watch∣lessness ro. 4. 3. and carelessness, our neg∣lect of keeping our Hearts and
Consciences pure and clean; and in time of Affliction, these for∣mer neglects of Duty come to our Minds, then Conscience a∣wakes, and tells us our former Faults and this brings trouble of 1 Kig. 17. 18, Heart. Moreover, unnecessary Scruples cause Disquietness, Solitariness, Idleness, when Persons will not do what is needful, they are trou∣bled with that which is needless; and idleness tempts the Devil to tempt us and trouble us: If we cannot find work for our selves, the Devil will make work for us. Also when we are guilty of neglecting doing good to others, as to our Relations, not reproving, admonishing, or incouraging them as we ought, or have neg∣lected to receive that good from them that we might, but now they are dead and gone, and we can no more do any good to Gal. 6. 10. them, nor receive any from them; this hath troubled many on their Sick and Death-beds.
Inconstancy, wavering in the Ways of God, will also breed disquiet. And our inordinate love of Creature-Comforts, our set∣ting of our Hearts on Friends, Estates, and the like, letting out our Hearts on Hubands, Wives, Children, &c. this is to build Castles in the Air, expecting Contentment in and from those things that cannot yield it. Also multitude of worldly Business, and too much poring on our Afflicti∣ons, and fore-casting the Events of things. You see what a croud of Causes here be within our selves of Disquiet and Heart-Trouble. The third Particular proposed  Particular. is, What is this Heart-Trouble which Christ here forbids his People, and that he would for∣tify them against? A. This Heart-Trouble is such a sense of Evils felt or feared, as creates to us Heart-Disquiet∣ment, Dejection, Despondency, depriving us of that Tranquil∣lity,
Peace and Comfort which we had in our selves, or other∣wise might have: It is such a disturbance of our Passions, such a storm and tempest in our Spi∣rits, as causeth inward Motions, Emotions and Commotions of Mind, putting all things in the Soul out of order: and it carries in it several Evil Things, as fol∣low. First, Sinful Sorrow, worldly First Evil. Sorrow. When Christ had told his Disciples that he would leave them; and that after he was gone, they should be exposed to hard and heavy things from the World, bitter Persecution for his Name-sake; then sorrow fil∣led their Hearts, John 16. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. God's own Servants, Christ's own Disciples may have their Hearts filled with Sorrow; a∣gainst this, our Lord commands many Preservatives in this Ser∣mn. The ground of this Sor∣row is from our selves, from our own Heart, tho Stan will have
a hand in it; and it comes not from Humility, but from Pride; be∣cause we cannot have our Wills therefore we are discontented We may thank our selves, not only for our Troubles, but for our over-much troubling of our selves in our Troubles. If we ward and guard against this worldly Sorrow, our Troubles would not lie so heavy on us as they do: for, as the Joy of the Lord doth raise and strengthen Nehem. 8. 10. the Soul, so doth Sorrow deject and weaken it: Sorrow and Grief doth lie like Lead to the Heart, cold and heavy, and sinks it downward still: Sorrow con∣tracteth and draweth the Soul into it self, from that Commu∣nion and Comfort it might have with God and Man; and it weak∣neth the execution of the Offices of it, because it drinketh up the Psal. 119. 48. Psal. 107. 26. Spirits, it melteth the Soul, it causeth it to drop away. Yea, in this kind of Heart-Trouble, God's own People are many times more excessive than others.
1. Because, many times their Burdens are greater, their Temp∣tations, Desertions, Trouble for Sin greater: As their Joys are unspeakable and glorious, so their Sorrows are sometimes a∣bove expression. Common na∣tural Courage will carry a Man thorow other single Afflictions: But Sin is a heavier burden than Affliction, and the Wrath of God than the Wrath of Man. 2. They have a greater sense than others, their Hearts being made tender by Religion, they have also a clearer Judgment than others, and see more into the na∣ture of things than others; they see a greater Evil in Sin, and in the displeasure of God, than o∣thers: They value God's Favour more than other therefore when he hides his Face, they cannot but be troubled. They observe more of the displeasure of God in af∣flictive Providences than others do, and therefore they have more Sorrow. 3. They have more tender Af∣fections
than others, the new Heart is a soft Heart: A Stamp is sooner set upon Wax than up∣on a Stone. A wicked Man hath more cause to be troubled than a Psal. 102. 3. & 32. 4. Job 30. 30. Lam. 5. godly Man; but he is not a Man of that tenderness and sense, and therefore is not so affected, either with God's dealings with him, or with his dealings with God. Thus we find often in Scrip∣ture good Souls depressed with Sorrow. David said, he was like a Skin-bottle in the Smoak, all wrinkled and dried up. Read Psal. 38. & Psal. 39. 11. When thou with Rebukes dost correct Man for Sin, (that is, by Sicknesses, death of Relations, and other Losses) thou makest his Beauty (that is, of his outward Man) to consume away like a Moth. Whereas the Beauty of the Soul grows fair by Affliction, but that of the Body is blasted. Age, Sickness, Losses, will make the Beauty of the Body to fade, but of the Soul to shine. 2 Cor. 4.
14. Though our outward Man doth decay and perish, our inward Man is renewed day by day. But for worldly Sorrow; that, too often, not only weakneth the Body, but also causeth Heart-Trouble. A merry Heart doth good like a Me∣dicine, but a broken Spirit drieth the bones, Prov. 17. 22. Quest. But is this worldly sor∣row Lawful and Commenda∣ble? Answ. No surely, for there are many Evils in it, which we should avoid. As, 1st. Impatience and Murmuring 1. Evil. against God, that is an effect of immoderate Sorrow: when our Wills are crossed, we cannot bear it, for want of Self-denial. 2ly. Quarrelling at Instru∣ments. 3ly. Using indirect means for our Relief. It is better to pine away in our Afflictions, than to be freed from them by Sinning. 4ly. Desponding and distrust∣ful thoughts of God. Is hs Mer∣cy clean gone? will he be fauou∣rable
no more? Psal. 77. 7, 8. 5ly. Questioning our Interest in God, meerly because of the Affliction upon us. Judg. 6. 13. If God Revel. 3. 19 be with us, why is all this befallen us? Not considering, how hard soever God dealeth with his Peo∣ple, yet he loveth them, Heb. 12. 6. 6ly. Sometimes Atheistical thoughts do arise, as if there were no God, no Providence; as if it were in vain to serve the Psal. 73. 13 Lord. 7ly. This worldly Sorrow in∣disposeth to all good Duties; it makes a Man like an Instrument out of Tune, or a Bone out of Joint; which makes the Body move both uncomely and pain∣fully: it unfits for Duty to God and Man. 8ly. It makes a Man forget for∣mer Mercies, and overlook pre∣sent Mercies; all is nothing un∣der present Sufferings. Give me Children, or else I die. 9ly. It makes us unfit to re∣ceive Mercies, and to embrace the
best Counsels; such Plaisters will not stick, they refuse to be com∣forted. Psal. 77. 2. 10ly. It disposeth us to receive any Temptation: Satan hath ne∣ver more advantage than upon Discontent. 11ly. It hinders Beginners from coming into the Ways of God. 12ly. It rejoiceth and hard∣neth the Wicked, and it grieves and damps the Spirits of our Friends. All these, and many more Evils are in worldly Sor∣row. Therefore, this Evil Temper we must labour against, and not suffer our selves to be dejected in Sickness, contempt in the World, loss of Friends and Re∣lations, loss of Honour, and Earthly Interest; May we only think to be exempted from Cha∣stisements, whereof all God's Chil∣dren Heb. 12. 8. are partakers? And must God make a new way to Hea∣ven for us? Or, do we think it best for us to live here for ever, in Ease, and Plenty, and Honour,
and never see a Change? No, surely, it is in vain to think so: It becometh us betimes, to pre∣pare for Crosses. None so strong, lively, and brisk now, but they shall shortly wither and decay. None hold their heads so high now, but they must shortly lay them down in the Dust. We, and our dearest Relations must part. It would be our wisdom, to turn the stream of our Sorrow for Losses and Crosses, into god∣ly Sorrow for Sin, then it will run in its right Channel. Let our Sins lie heavy upon us, and then our Afflictions will lie light: Let us grow weary of our Sins, not of our Sufferings. God doth not Matth. 11. 28. Prov. 3. 11. afflict willingly, nor grieve the Chil∣dren of Men. Let us consider also, the real spiritual benefit of Afflictions: God aims at our Pro∣fit: am 3. 33. Heb. 12. 10 and in good time, in the best time he will send Deliverance. And be sure, those that are not unmindful of their Duty, God will not be unmindful of their Safety.
But that which should mostly affect us, and make us take heed of immoderate worldly Sorrow, is to consider, that this kind of Sorrow of Heart, is God's Curse, imprecated on God's Enemies; Lament. 3. 65. Give them Sorrow of Heart, thy Curse. As godly Sorrow is God's Blessing, a Grace of God's Spirit, a fruit of the Covenant of Grace, and a fruit Ezek. 36. 31. of Faith, Zech. 12. 10. So, world∣ly Sorrow is God's Curse, and a bitter Fruit of Ʋnbelief. They that sorrow for Sin shall be com∣forted: Math. 5. 4. but, they that mourn immoderately for outward Los∣ses, there shall be none to com∣fort them. This is the first piece of Heart-Trouble which Jesus Christ hath forbidden, Let not your Hearts be troubled; that is, Not filled, and overcome with world∣ly Sorrow: what ever your Los∣ses and Crosses be, let not your Sorrow go beyond its lawful bounds; take heed, Let not your Hearts be troubled.
Secondly, Another piece of Heart-Trouble is Sinful Fear. And against this Distemper also Christ counselleth his Disciples▪ Let not your Heart be troubled, no let it be afraid, as ver. 27th As if he had said, Let not tha distemper of base slavish Fear seize your Hearts. This Fear is a Passion, or ra∣ther a Perturbation of Mind whereby, upon the sense of ap¦proaching Evils, the Mind i discompos'd and disorder'd, and the Heart troubled and deject¦ed. This Fear is a Tyrant where i comes, and it tyrannizeth wher it prevails: As Job 4. 14, 15▪ We read, how it prevailed ove that famous Believer, the Fathe of Believers, Abraham, to his pre¦judice, and to the Discredit of hi Religion, who for fear denied hi Wife once and again, Gen. 12▪ and Gen. 20. And good Isaa was taken in the same fault, Gen▪ 26. This Fear troubles Men Peace, and disquiets their Minds
that they are said sometimes to be like the leaves of the Forest; and this Fear is often forbidden to Abraham, Gen. 15. 1. And to Isaac, Gen. 26. 24. And when Israel was in the greatest dangers that ever Men were, they were forbid to Fear; Exod. 14. Isa. 41. 10. 13. Isa. 8. 12. And in the New Testament, our Lord strongly cautions against this Fear, Luk. 12. 4, 32. Rev. 2. 10. Fear none of those things which thou shalt suffer. Slavish Fear troubles the Heart more than any thing. Object. But may we not fear God's Judgments? Did not good Josiah tremble at them? And did not holy David say in Psal. 119. 120. I am afraid of thy Judg∣ments? Answ. Doubtless, it is our Duties so to do: When we see the same Sins abound, for which God hath executed his Judg∣ments in former times, we ought to lay them to heart, and to be affected, Jerem. 7. 12. Luk 17. Jerem. 3 7, 8, 9, 10. 26, &c. Remember Lots wife, said
our Lord. So, 1 Cor. 10. 2 Pet. 2. 6. Rom. 1. 18. Zeph. 3. 6, 7. Dan. 9. 5. a remarkable Scripture. Altho' it went well with Ne∣hemiah himself, yet had he a sad Resentment of the State of Je∣rusalem, Nehem. 1. God's People have tender hearts. Wicked Men have hearts of Stone; when God smites them they are not grieved, Jer. 5. 3. But we must distinguish o Fear. 1. There is a Natural Lawfu Fear, when Evils are approach∣ing to our Bodies, or Names, o Friends, or the like, Dangers are apparent, 'tis natural to fear This was in the best Men in th World; it was in Christ himself, Mark 12. 14, 15. Also it is said. He feared, and was sore ama∣zed, Mar. 14. 33. yet without Sin. Secondly, There is a Lawfu filial Fear of God's Judgments, which ariseth from the considera∣tion of the Evil of Sin, and of God's Righteousness, of his ha∣tred
of Sin, and his wrath against it; which Fear produceth, Repen∣tance, Self-examination, a turning to God with our whole Hearts, thorow Reformation, and an en∣deavour to secure our selves in God's Covenant, and to hide our Selves. Prov. 22. 3. A pru∣dent Man foreseeth the Evil, and hideth himself. A striving to get into Christ, and to get clear Evi∣dences of God's love to us in Christ: I say, such a Fear, that worketh these Effects, is a great Duty. Thirdly, There is a base slavish Fear of approaching Evils, arising from our misapprehensions of God; producing in us unworthy thoughts, sinking into Desponden∣cy, and inciting to Murmuring, and Impatience, and putting us upon Sinful shifts, the use of unlawful means to prevent or escape Dangers; a Fear of De∣spondency, a vexatious, distract∣ing Fear, that drives from God, and unfits for Service: A tor∣menting, disquieting Fear, that
unsettles, and discomposeth our Minds, disturbs our Peace, sus∣pends our Acts of Faith, and dis∣poseth us to diffidence, distrust, and impatience; This is the Fear that Christ would not have his Peoples Heart troubled with. Thirdly, Another piece of Heart-Trouble is Care, vexatious distracting Care, which our Lord would not have his Disciples trouble themselves with, and therefore he useth so many pow∣erful Arguments to disswade them from it, Matth. 6. from ver. 25. Psal. 104. 21, 27, 28. onward. 1st. He assures us, it is God that takes care for our bodi∣ly Life, we trust him with that, how much more should we for Food and Raiment. 2ly. Saith he, Your Father takes care for the Fowls, and provides for them, Are ye not much better than ty? 3ly. He clotheth the Lillies, And will he not cloth you? 4ly. You cannot by all your care make your condition better than God hath appointed it shall be, ver. 27. 5ly. Your Heavenly Father knows
you want all these things. 6ly. They that are ignorant of God, and of his Fatherly Care, and good Providence, that have no God to care for them, they trouble themselves with those Cares; therefore you should not do so, who have an heavenly Fa∣ther that dearly loves you, and looks after you. 7ly. You have the Promise of the faithful God, to have all Necessaries provided for you, while you make it your care to Serve, and Please, and Trust him. Ver. 23. All these things shall be added unto you. 8ly. We have no cause to be thoughtful for time to come, be∣cause every day brings Evil e∣nough with it; and, therefore it is no wisdom to perplex our selves with Cares, ver. last. So Mar. 4. 19. again, Luk. 21. 34. Phil. 4. 6. Be careful in nothig: Our Lord also shews us how prejudicial Luk. 8. 1. such Cares are to our Profiting Psal. 55. 22. by the Word. Matth. 13. 22. And, exprsly commands us, To cast our Cares upon him, for he 1 Pet. 5. 7. careth for us.
Fourthly, Despondency of Spi∣rit, Dejectedness, Distrust, Dis∣couragment, are other pieces of Heart-Trouble. Such as was in David, Psal. 142. 3, 4, 5. and 143. 4. and Psal. 42. 5. Cast∣ing down breeds Disquietment, because it springs from Pride, which is a turbulent Passion; and every thing that crosseth and disappoints it, causeth a Com∣bustion in the Mind: When a Man cannot come down, and stoop to that condition that God casts him into, then is he dis∣contented; and this comes from his Pride. A Christian should be very careful to keep up his Spirits, when his condition in the World falls down. Could we but bring our Minds to our Conditions, to like and be pleased with our Conditions; as being certainly perswaded, that our present con∣dition is best for us: It would be all as good, all as well, all as comfortable to us, as if we could bring our Conditions to
our Minds; for one of these must be done, or else we shall never be free from Heart-Trouble while we live. Either our Minds must be brought just even to, and suted and compliant to our Conditions, be it Sickness, Poverty, Shame, Prison, &c. or, our Conditions must be suted just even to our Minds. We have a mind to Health, to Li∣berty, &c. we must have them, or we are troubled. Now, this latter is wholly and altogether out of our Power, we cannot add a Cubit to our Stature. It is the Lord that ap∣points all our Conditions for us; we cannot make our Conditions Happy, Honourable, &c. of our selves, and without God: But the former is in our Power, by the help of God's Spirit of Grace, we may bring our Minds to our Conditi∣ons: it is an holy Art, attainable 1 Tim. 6. 8. in the use of God's means. Con∣tentment in, and with our Con∣dition, is the bringing of our Heb. 13. 5. Minds to our Conditions, to lie even, and sutable, and square one with the other; and this is, as
I said, an holy Art, attainable by Christians, Phil. 4. 11. Saint Paul had learned it, and so may 1 Tim. 6. 6. other Christians. It is the suta∣bleness between our Minds, and our Conditions, that breeds quiet and content: and if we have not quiet in our own Minds, all outward Comforts will do no more good, than a silken Stocken to a scabbed Leg; or, a golden Slipper, to a gouty Foot. Now, it is only God that can, but never will (except in wrath) bring any Man's Condition to his Mind; for then his Condition should be changed almost every moment; so mutable is Man's Mind: God will not bring the condition of the Wicked to their mind, (except in Wrath, as was said;) for, as their outward Prosperity doth increase, so do Eccl. 4. 8. & 5. 10. their desires after more: Cressit amor Nummi, &c. And the wise Man tells us, The Eye is never sa∣tisfied with seeing. And the more Isa. 56. 11. they have, the more they crave. They can never have enough. And
for the Godly themselves, they are not so free from Covetous∣ness, as they should be, but still need to learn this Lesson of Con∣tentment, and to be learning of it all their days. And most com∣monly, if not always, God by his Grace brings their Minds to their Conditions, and not their Conditions to their Minds. And for this wise Agur prays, Prov. 30. 9. Two dangerous Extreams he prays against, the one is Po∣verty, that would breed Discon∣tent, in that his Mind would be below his Condition, debased to vile and sinful Practises, as Steal∣ing, &c. The other is Riches, that would breed Discontent, in that his Mind would be above his Condition, and that would lift him up to base Pride, and forgetfulness of God; therefore he begs a su∣tableness and conveniency be∣tween his Mind and his Conditi∣on: Feed me with food Convenient. Certainly, we shall never be free from Heart-Trouble, till our Minds be brought sutable to our
Conditions, and such a frame would prevent Casting-down in time of Affliction. To like our Condition, to be pleased and sa∣tisfied with it, and with the holy Will of God in it; that is, to be content, content with Sickness, Poverty, Shame, Prison, loss of Relations and Friends, &c. In a Word, when our Wills lie even with God's Will, (as in all reason they should,) and our Minds lie even with our Conditions, then have we inward Peace and Tran∣quillity, Quietness and Content∣ment, and never till then: and then Sickness is as good as Health; and Poverty as good as Riches; and a Prison, &c. And this is that blessed Frame of Spirit we must labour for, and we our selves shall have the sweetness of it: otherwise, it is in a Man's Mind, as it is with the Body when Bones are out of Joint, there is nothing but pain Psal. 42. 5. and trouble; but this bringing of our Minds to our Conditions, is as the Setting of the Bone
again. Casting down our selves, Despondency, Discouragement, which arise from Discontent, are great pieces of Heart-Trouble. This distrust of God's Pro∣vidence is a grand Evil; when we think we cannot live, unless we have a greater portion of earth∣ly things, and this sets us upon carking Cares, we know not how we and ours shall be provided for, &c. Now this we may cure, Psal. 55. 22. by casting our selves upon God's Promises. 1 Pet. 5. 7. Psal. 34. 10. & 84. 11. Heb. 13. 5. Let us cast our selves on God's Pro∣vidence: Will he provide for Ravens, and clothe Lillies, and neglect his own Children? It cannot be imagined. Earthly things are but a vain show, they can give us no joy of Heart, nor Peace of Conscience, they cannot add one Cubit to our Stature, nor one moment to our Lives. Moreover, this happy state of Psal. 39. 9. Phil. 4. 12, 13. Mind is attainable. Eli had it, 1 Sam. 3. 18. and David, 2 Sam.
15. 25, 26. It is the Lord, let him do what seemeth him good. There∣fore let us labour for such a Spi∣rit; such a contnted frame of Mind is worth a Kingdom: without it, Godliness it self is not great Gain: It must be la∣boured for; Paul said, he had learn'd it; it was a hard Lesson, but sweet when learned. Fifthly; Persecution may cause Heart-Trouble; when Men are offended. Mat. 13. 21. when Pe∣ter was an offence to Christ, he was a trouble to him. Our Lord did on purpose foretel his Disci∣ples what Persecutions they should undergo, that they might not be offended, Joh. 16. 1. fore-warn'd, fore-arm'd. It is a blessed thing not to be offended at persecution for Christ. He Mat. 26. 31, 56. foretold his Disciples, the Night before his Passion, that all of them should be offended at him that Night: Which came to pass, for one of them openly de∣nied him, and the rest forsook him and fled. To be troubled at Per∣secution
for Christ's sake, is to be offended at the Cross of Christ; and that he would not have his Disciples to be by any means; Mark 8. last. Object. But is it not said, Psal. 119. 165. Great peace have they that love thy Law, and nothing shall ffend them? How then come the People of God to be offended? I Answer; They that truly love God's Law, because they love God, such shall have Peace with God, and with their own Consciences, and that is great Peace, and nothing shall offend them, that is, much trouble them, since they have peace with God, and with their own Con∣sciences: Outward Losses and Crosses are easily born, they shall make no breach upon their in∣ward Peace. They that have this Character of God's Chil∣dren, will not be stumbled at God's Dispensations, let them be never so cross to their Desires, 2 Sam. 23. 5. because they have a God to fly unto in all their Troubles, and a
sure Covenant to rest upon: Therefore the Reproaches cast on them, and on the Ways of God, do not scandalize them, for they have found God in that very way which others speak e∣vil of; they are not so offended by any thing that attends the Way of God, as to dislike or forsake that Way. Nevertheless, we must take heed that we be not offended. Sixthly; Temptations from Sa∣tan may cause Heart-Trouble and Vexation: Satan's Sugge∣stions, his fiery Darts, these tormenting Thoughts which he casts into the Minds of Christ's Disciples, create to them much Disturbance and Heart-Trouble. So soon as any Man is pluck'd out of the Devil's Hands, by the mighty Power of Christ's Spirit, he falls upon him speedily with all his force, to trouble such a Soul and vex it; so that he shall enjoy little peace if Satan can hinder it. So long as the Devil Luke 11. 21, 22. keeps possession in the Soul, he
keeps all in peace, (a sad peace!) But when a stronger than he comes, and casteth out this strong Man armed, then Satan rageth, to recover his lost Captive Soul, and vexeth that Soul with all his Temptations. But let not this break your Peace, nor cause Heart-Trouble: As Christ hath overcome the World, and there∣fore bids his Disciples to be of good chear, Joh. 16. 20. So hath he also overcome the Devil, he hath trodden this Serpent under his Feet already, and this Prince of Peace will tread him under your feet also shortly: There∣fore, let not your Hearts be troubled. Seventhly; Desertion, another (and not the least) piece of Heart-Trouble; this may be the case of Christ's Disciples. We read of the Saints complaining that God had forsaken them; and when he hideth his Face, they cannot but be troubled. Sometimes God doth but seem to hide his Face, Isa. 49. 14, 15. When God takes away their
Earthly Comforts from them, and suffereth sharp and bitter Af∣flictions to befal them; and tho they cry unto him, he doth not remove them, then they think that God hath forsaken them. Sometimes God doth really forsake his People, as to the sense of his Favour; Isa. 54. 7, 8. For a small moment have I forsaken thee. In a little Wrath I hid my Face from thee for a moment. And this is, either by withhold∣ing comfort from them which they cry for; or by withdrawing that Comfort from them which they had; Psal. 51. 11. & Psal. 77. 1, 2, 3, 23. compared. Yet here God supported and sustain∣ed his Servant's Soul with Grace many times: when God's People have least Comfort, they have most Grace, most Humility, Patience, Self-denial, thirstings after God, Psal. 80. 3, 7, 19. Psal. 63. 3. Heavenly-mindedness, &c. God's People may lose the sense of his Love, but never lose his Love, for that is everlasting. But to lose the sense of his Love, is a
grievous trouble to a gracious Soul, that hath tasted and felt the Love of God and his Favour; for their great Happiness is to have the Favour of God; In his Favour is Life, and his Loving-kindness is better than Life: This is the Joy of their Lives (Psal. 119. 135.) which David so ear∣nestly prayed for. Now such as have found this, must needs be troubled when they lose it. Two things chiefly cause God to hide his Face from his People. 1. When their Hearts are too much set upon, and carried out after earthly Comforts, Psal. 30. 6, 7. Fleshly delight and confi∣dence in earthly Things, pro∣vokes God to hide his Face: When a Man smiles so much on the World, and gives it so much room in his Heart, God frowns, and is offended, that the Gift should be so much loved, and the Giver so neglected and forgot∣ten. 2. When their Hearts are let out too little after God, and
there grows a strangeness between God and them, and they begin to grow cold, dull and dead in Du∣ty, then God withdraws and hides himself, Cant. 2. 3, 5, 6. compared. But no Affliction like this, this disquieteth and de∣jecteth the People of God in∣deed. And as all the Candles in the World cannot make it day when the Sun is set; so all the Comforts in the World cannot rejoice such a Soul, nor can there be any Day in such a Soul, until the Sun of Righteousness arise there Mal. 4. 2. with healing in his Wings. So much for this third Particular, shewing what this Heart-Trouble is, which our Lord here forbids his Disciples, namely, Worldly-Sorrow, sinful slavish Fear, di∣stracting Care, Despondency, de∣jectedness of Spirit, Distrust, offence at Persecution for Christ's sake, Satan's Tempations, and Spiritual Desertions, all which may eithr be the Causes, or the parts and pieces of Heart-Trou∣ble, which must be avoided.
The fourth Particular to be  Particular. opened, is to shew how that be∣lieving in God, and in Christ, is the best Antidote against this sinful Heart-Trouble: Christ proposeth it as a special Remedy. Q. But how is it so? A. To answer this, I shall en∣deavour to shew these three Things. 1. What this believing in God is, which our Saviour here grants that they had: Ye believe in God. 2. What it is to believe in Christ: Believe also in me. 3. How that this Faith acted on God and Christ, is the best Remedy to prevent and cure Heart-Trouble, in all those se∣veral parts of it I have menti∣oned. 1. What this Faith in God is? Briefly, the Apostle tells us, Heb. 11. 6. it is to believe that God is, that there is a God, an infinite first and best Being; to believe that God is that, All that, which he hath revealed himself in his Word to be: viz. That he is
an All-sufficient, Almighty, only-wise God; a righteous, gracious, merciful God; an holy God, a loving God. He proclaims his Name himself, Exod. 34. 6, 7. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth, &c. To believe that he is won∣derful Isa. 28. last. 1 John 4. 16. 2 Cor. 1. 3. Heb. 12. 9. Jam. 1. 17. in counsel, and exeellent in working: That he is the Father of Mercies, the true and faith∣ful God, the God of all Grace, and of all Consolation; with ma∣ny more admirable Attributes of God doth the Scripture furnish us, that we may build our Faith, and place our Trust in him, to prevent Heart-Trouble, and to cure it when it hath seized on us. Whatsoever is revealed of God in his Word, that true Faith believes. Also this Faith in God, is, to believe that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. That he being God All-suffi∣cient, he is able to support, to supply, to deliver his People
out of all their Troubles; and that he is willing so to do, as well as able, for he hath promised; and he is a Rewarder, a God that will abundantly, plentifully re∣ward all his suffering Ones; 1 Cor. 15. last. Rom. 2. 6, 7, 10. Great shall be their Reward in Heaven, Mat. 5. 12. And to be∣lieve God to be a Rewarder, is to lay hold on his Covenant, where∣in he promiseth so to be: I will be thy God, thy Shield, and thy exceeding great Reward, Gen. 15. 1. The Sum of the Covenant is, I will be thy God: What is that but this, I will be All tht to thee, and I wi do All that for thee, which a God can be to 2 Cor. 6. 17. Psal. 84. last. thee▪ and do for thee. I will be a Su d a Shield to thee; I will give  Grace and Glory, and will withhold no good thing from thee. I that am the infinite first and best Being of all Things, the living Fountain of all Mercy, the Original of all Power and Good∣ness; I will be a God to thee, thy God, thy Father, if thou wilt take me for thy God, and
place all thy Happiness in me, and wilt become my Servant, and give up thy self sincerely to me, to serve and obey, to love and fear, and trust me only. This is to believe in God, to accept of God for our God, and to yield up our selves to him to be his People, Isa. 56. 46. to chuse the things that please him; to give him our Hearts, and become his Servants, as Deut. 26. 17, 18. And so God proposed himself to Abraham, when he called him, Gen. 12. 1, 2, 3. as a Rewarder; and more fully, Gen. 15. 1. I am thy Shield, and thy exceeding great Reward; and so Abraham's Faith was to act on God, so manifested: And, Gen. 17. 1. I am God All-sufficient; all-sufficient to sup∣port thee in thy Way, and Work, and All-sufficient to reward thee in the end; therefore, be thou upright and faithful; let not thy Heart be troubled, what-ever Dangers and Difficulties thou meetest with in my Way and Prov. 11. 18. Work, and what Losses soever
thou sustainest for my sake, be∣lieve, Abraham, I am God All-sufficient; Psal. 58. 11. I will sufficiently re∣ward thee, thou shalt be no lo∣ser by following and serving me. Also Moses his Faith had an eye to the Recompence of Reward, Heb. 11. 26. And that you may see that this is not legal and mercina∣ry, our Lord Jesus proposeth this as an incouragement to his Peo∣ple, Matth. 5. 12. Great is your Reward in Heaven. And he him∣self took incouragement from it, as Heb. 12. 1, 2. for the Joy that was set before him, &c. So that this is to believe in God, to believe that God is re∣ally and truly, He is All that which he hath revealed himself to be, and to believe that He is a Re∣warder, &c. This Faith in God, Christ took for granted that his Disciples had; Ye believe in God; Ye believe that God is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. And if ye believe this, let not your Hearts be troubled; be not afraid nor
dejected, but act your Faith in God, and seriously consider what God that is in whom you believe; and believing also your Interest in that God, that He is your God, this God All-sufficient is your God, you will have no cause to be troubled: Your acting of Faith on God, your God, will prevent and cure your Heart-Trouble, and that these several ways. First, more generally. He that believes in God as his God, believes God is always pre∣sent Isa. 41. 10. & 43. 2. Heb. 13. 5. with him, according to his Promises. In the worst Times God is present with his People. And can there be any cause of Heart-Trouble to such Souls as have always the presence of God with them, whose Presence makes Heaven, and in whose Presence is Psal. 16. 11. fulness of Joy, and at whose right Hand are Pleasures for evermore? Surely, Beloved, this will prevent Heart-Trouble, when a Soul can act his Faith, and firmly believe it. God is always present with
his People, and that for graci∣ous Purposes, (and not as a bare Spectator); as to proportion and measure out their Afflictions 1 Cor. 10. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 6. Isa. 27. 8. to them, that they may not be above their strength, nor more than need. All the Afflictions of God's People are measured by the Hand of a most wise, most mer∣ciful and gracious God: all the Malice of Men and Devils can∣not add a drachm to the Weight, nor a drop to the Measure, beyond God's appointment. He is pre∣sent to order and fix the Time of Rev. 2. 10. our Sufferings, it is an Hour of Temptation: It is our loving Father that sets up the Glass of the Time our Troubles; he appoints their Beginning, their Duration, their End; he holds the Glass in his own Hand. All the Powers on Earth cannot bring trouble on us, till the Hour come, till the appointed Time, nor continue Psal. 125. 3. our Troubles longer than his Time; The Rod of the Wicked shall not rest on the Lot of the Righteous. God is present, to
mix some Comforts with the Rev. 3. 10. Cross, thereby to allay the bit∣terness of it, present to support the Soul with inward strength; Psal. 138. 3. Thou strengthenest me with strength in my Soul: pre∣sent to sanctify Afflictions for Good, and at length in his good Time, which is the best Time, when he hath perfected his own Work in his People, he is pre∣sent for their full Deliverance. A true Believer in God hath always a God to go unto: O, what a Comfort, what an hap∣piness is that! He dwells in the Love of God as well in Affliction, as out of it; he may be cast out of his happy Condition in the World, but never out of the fa∣vour of his God: This believed by us, will cure Heart-Sorrow, Heart-Fear, Heart-Care, all De∣spondency, Dejectedness, Dis∣quietments and Distractions whatever. Faith acted on God, the Almighty, Allsufficient God, and our God, always present with us, is the Soveraign Antidote a∣gainst,
and the best Cure of all Heart-Trouble, Psal. 142. 1, 2, 3, 4. there are the Psalmist's Trou∣bles; and, Vers. 5. there is his Cure; I cried unto thee, O Lord, Thou art my Refuge, and my Por∣tion in the Land of the Living. So, Psal. 143. 4, 6, 8. his Spirit was overwhelm'd with trouble; but he cried to God, and trusted Psal. 25. 15, 16, 17. Psal. 31. 12, 13. in him, and that was his Relief: His trusting in God was an high exercise of his Faith. This kept David from sinking under his great distress; 1 Sam. 30. 6. He encouraged himself in the Lord his God. Thus in general. More particularly, I shall en∣deavour to shew what there is in God that a Believer's Faith fetch∣eth virtue from to cure his Heart-Trouble in his greatest distress, even under the loss of the perso∣nal presence of his best and dearest Friends on Earth; for such was like to be the Case of the Disciples in the Text.
First, That in God which Faith looks unto, and fetcheth Com∣fort from, is, his sweet and gra∣cious Nature. God is Love, the very Element of Love, 1 John 4. 16. and his gracious Name, which discovers his Nature; Exod. 34. 6. The Lord, gracious and merciful. When he gives to his People, he gives in love; when he takes, he takes in love. Now when a Soul believes, that all is from Love, and all in Love, he is supported. When a Man can believe that all his Troubles come to him from the Father of Mercies, and his Father in Christ, he cannot but bear them patient∣ly. Ye believe in God, saith Christ, ye believe that God loves you, therefore, let not your Hearts be troubled. Q. But how shall I know that God loves me when he afflicts me? I answer; When we can dis∣cern that we have received any Spiritual Benefit by any Afflicti∣on, we may certainly conclude, Heb. 12. 6, 10. that the Love of God was in
that Affliction. Fury is not in God towads his People, Isa. 27. 4. Deut. 8. 2. And he intends nothing but our profit; all his ends are for our good: to purge away our Sins, Job 23. 10. to wean us from the World, to draw us nearer to himself, to 2 Cor. 4. 17. humble us, to try us, to conform us to Christ, to prepare us for Glory, &c. Now seeing God's Ends are so much for our good, we must conclude, That all our Afflictions proceed from his Love, and when we find any of those Ends accomplished in us, and on us; and that we have received real spiritual good by them, we ought to be strengthned in our Belief, that God hath corrected us in Love; so that Faith acted on the love of God in our Afflicti∣on, will prevent or cure our Heart-Trouble. Our Lord told his Disciples, That the Father had loved them, John 16. 27. Secondly, Faith acted upon God's Glorious Attributes, will fortify against Heart-Trouble. First, upon his All-sufficiency,
Ye believe, that God is All-suffi∣cient, in, and of himself alone; Gn. 17. 1. every way able to supply all Wants, to make up, and repair all Losses, to satisfy all Desires, to sustain under all Burdens, and that with∣out all Earthly Comforts: for, how else are the Saints in Heaven happy, who have none of these Earthly Enjoyments? Ye believe this, act your faith on it: He must needs be All-sufficient who made the World, and all things in it, and upholds it to this day; He that owns all things, and is Possessor of Heaven and Earth, He it is, that is your God, your Father; act your Faith on him, and be comforted. He is All-mighty; you believe 2ly. this. So Christ hath told his Disciples, All things are possible to God. He can break the hard∣est Heart, and can bind up the most broken Spirit: He can make up the greatest Loss. We are kept 2 Pet. 1. 5. by the mighty Power of God. Oh, how safe is that Man, that is in the Love and Covenant, and that
lies in the Arms and Bosom of the Almighty God, Deut. 33. 27. Job 9. 12. He can bring Light out of Dark∣ness, and make the greatest Loss, to prove the greatest Gain. He Matth. 19. 26. hath the Keys of the Grave, to him belong the issues from death. All Gen. 18. 14. Power belongeth to him; no∣thing is too hard for him. Thirdly, His absolute Sove∣raignty and Supremacy: All Souls are his, Ezk. 18. 4. He gives, he takes, who can hinder him? May he not do with his own what pleaseth him? Ye believe this. Hath he not a Right in all the Works of his hands, and may he not dispose of all as he will? Fourthly, His Ʋnchangeableness. God is in one mind, Job 23. 13, 14. The thoughts of his Heart stand to all Generations. He sets bounds to the Sea, to the Life of Man, and to all the Com∣forts of Life; the number of his Months is with God. Believe Job 14. 5. this. Fifthly, His Wisdom. God is
only wise, the Fountain of Wis∣dom; he doth all he doth in in∣finite Wisdom. He is wise in Heart, and worketh all things ac∣cording to the counsel of his Will. He knows what is best for us; when to give, when to take, and what will do us most good. Believe this, And let not your Hearts be troubled. Sixthly, His Righteousness. All his Waies are just and equal: Yea, when Clouds and Darkness are round about him, (his Pro∣vidences towards us dark,) yet then, Righteousness and Judgment are the habitation of his Throne. God, the Judge of the World, can do no wrong: believe this of God, and it will quiet your minds. Lastly, His Faithfulness: In faithfulness thou hast afflicted me, saith holy David, Psal. 119. 75. He hath promised, he will with∣hold Psal. 84. 11. no good thing from his People: Now he sees and knows that Afflictions are good for them, good for their Souls; his
daily Rod as good for their Souls, as his daily Bread is for their Bo∣dies. Therefore he brings Affli∣ctions on them, and so makes good his Promise to them. O believe this, and let not your hearts be troubled. Certainly, Faith acted on God's Attributes will support under the greatest Stroaks, and most grievous Losses. Thirdly, Faith acted on the Co∣venant  Particular. of Grace. God's ever∣lasting Covenant will help to support under Trouble. Ye be∣lieve in God, that God hath made a Covenant with you, to become your God, Jerem. 31. 33. I will be your God, and ye shall be my people. This is infinitely more, for God to become our God, to give himself to us, than if he had said, I will give you Crowns and Kingdoms, Sons and Daughters: when God saith, I will be your God, he saith, I will be All that to you, and I will do All that for you, and bestow All that upon you, which a God can be, or do,
and which shall make you most happy for ever. I will pardon your Sins; I will give you new Hearts, give you my Spirit; I will give you Grace here, and Glory hereafter. This Acting of Faith in God's Covenant sup∣ported David in his greatest Troubles; 2 Sam. 23. 5. a nota∣ble Text: When the Lord had made breach upon breach in his Family, this Comforted him, that God had made with him an everlasting Covenant. That he was in Covenant with God; that God was his God in Cove∣nant: this ballanced all his Losses, and repaired all the Brea∣ches made in his Relations: tho' his Family was wasted and blast∣ed, this answered all, That he was in Covenant with God. This is the Language of Faith; If God be my God, if I be his Child, born of him, reconciled to him, pardoned, justified, sancti∣fied, in Covenant with him; Why am I troubled, though he give me neither Health, nor
Wealth, nor Friends, nor Rela∣tions? Have I not enough, in having God to be my God? Is not God more than All? But if God be not my God; I have cause enough to be troubled then, considering the Danger I am in; and my Trouble for this should swallow up all other Trouble. For surely, either God is mine in Covenant, or he is not; if he be mine in Covenant, then, tho' he break my Family, make brea∣ches upon all my earthly Com∣forts; yet, he will not break his Covenant, Psal. 89. 32. and so long I am well enough. If he leave me neither Son, nor Daugh∣ter, if he strip me of Friends, Estate, Liberty, Health, &c. yet he remains my God still; and so long it is well enough; it can∣not be ill with a Man so long as God is his; ye Believe this. Fourthly. Faith acted upon the  Particular. Word of God, will support the Soul; Ye Believe God's Word, the Word of Truth, Psal. 119.
50. This is my Comfort in my Affli∣ction, thy Word hath quickned me. So ver. 92. Had not thy Law been my Delight, I had perished in my Affliction. First, Consider the Word of Precept: as in the Text, it is Christ's Command, Let not your hearts be troubled. Many such 1 Thess. 4. 13, 14. Commands we have in Scrip∣ture, as, not to fear, not to be cast down, sorrow not as those that have no hope, and such like; now, Faith applies such Commands to the Soul; I must not be troubled in my heart, God forbids it. Why must we not prophane the Sabbath, nor Swear, nor Lie, &c. but because God hath forbidden these Evils? So here, God hath forbidden us to be troubled, and commanded us to be quiet, pati∣ent, contented, submissive to his Will in all his dealings; thus we should urge God's command on our Souls: Yea, we are com∣manded to be so far from trou∣bling our selves when Afflictions befal us, as that we must count Jam. 1. 2.
it all joy when we fall into divers 1 Pet. 4. 13. Temptations: And to rejoice in Sufferings; for Blessed is the Man that endureth Temptation, Jam. 1. 12. Secondly, Consider the Word of Promise: Many exceeding great and precious Promises are in the Word of God, which are Isa. 41. 10. and 43. 2. as a full Feast for Faith to feed upon. God promiseth to be our God, to be with us in the Fire, and in the Water; to support and sustain us, to lay no more 1 Cor. 10. 13. upon us, than he will enable us to bear: That all things shall work together for our good, Rom. 8. 28. And, what can we desire more? There is no trouble that can befal us, but we may find a 1 Thess. 5. 23. Promise sutable to it: And faith∣ful is he that hath promised, who also will do it. And why hath the great God so wonderfully con∣descended to poor Creatures, as to make so many sweet Promises which are recorded in the Holy Scriptures; but for this, That Heb. 6. 17. the Heirs of Promise might have
strong Consolation; And that their Hearts might not be troubled? Thirdly, The Word of Threat∣ning: Matth. 10. 37. He that loveth Father or Mother, Son or Daughter, (so Husband or Wife) more than me, is not worthy of me, saith Christ. Now by our im∣moderate Sorrow for the loss of these, we manifest our immode∣rate Love of these; we should consider, that when these are removed, that Christ remains ours still, and with us still; our Relation to him is not broken: and Christ will be instead of all, and better than all to us, and this should keep us from Heart-Trou∣ble. Fourthly, The Examples of God's Saints in the Word. We should consider also, what a famous Example is Abraham, who was content to part with his Isaac at the Command of God, his only Son, the Son of his old Age, the Son of the Promise, in whom all the Nations of the Earth were to be blessed; yea,
content to lay his own hands up∣on Gen. 22. 2 12. him, to slay him, and burn him: but when he was tried, God spared him. The way to keep our earthly Comforts, is to be willing to part with them, when God calls for them. So 1 Sam. 3. 18. Eli, when very sad Tidings was told him, It is the Lord, said he, let him do what seemeth him good. So Aaron, when that heavy Levit. 10, 3. stroke fell upon him, That both his Sons were struck dead upon the Place for their Sin, and it may be in their Sin too; it is said, Aaron held his peace. So Job stript of all his Friends at once, The breath of his Wife was strange to him. And David com∣plained, That Lover and Friend was put far from him. Now we should consider these Examples, and set Faith a-work on them, and know, That it is our duty to be followers of them who through Faith and Patience inherit the Pro∣mises, Heb. 6. 12. Fifthly, The Word of Experi∣ence. David tells us his Experi∣ence,
and saith, It was good for him that he had been afflicted. And many Christians living can, and do bless God for their Affliction; and that God, by taking away of their Relations from them, he made more room in their Hearts for himself, and communicated more of himself to their Souls: Thus by acting of Faith upon the Word of God, we may gain sup∣port, and be preserved from Heart-Trouble. Fifthly. Faith acted upon the Work of God, will support un∣der  Particular. Heart-Trouble. Eccles. 7. 13. Consider the Work of God. Faith looks to the Work of God; who it is that killeth, who it is that taketh away: who can stop, or mend, or hinder his Work? This quieted David's Heart, when the stroke of God was heavy up∣on him, I opened not my mouth, because thou didst it. It is the Psal. 39. 9. 2 Sam. 12. 23. Lord, he hath done it. It is he that doth whatsoever he plea∣seth.
Sixthly. Faith acted on the  Particular. Will of God. Faith resigns up all to the good and holy Will of God: So did our Lord himself, not my will, but thine be done; and so we pray continually, Thy will Luk. 22. 42 Matth. 6. 10. be done: and therefore when it is done, our Hearts must not be troubled. Lastly. Faith acted on the gra∣cious  Particular. Ends and Designs of God in afflicting us, and removing our earthly Comforts from us, will prevent Heart-trouble. God hath holy and good Ends which Faith looks unto: God aims at our Profit: as Heb. 12. 10. Such Ends as these, 1. God's End is, to disco∣ver and purge away our Sins, Isa. 27. 9. By this shall the ini∣quity of Jacob be purged, this is all the fruit, to take away his Sin. 2. To try and exercise our Graces, Job. 23. 10. 1 Pet. 1. Rev. 2. 10. 6, 7. 3. To Crucify our Hearts un∣to,
and to estrange our affections from the things of this World. Gal. 2. 20. 4. To draw our Hearts nea∣rer to himself: Therefore many times God takes away our earth∣ly Comforts from us, because they had too much of our Hearts, and because they lay between God, and our Hearts, and kept us at a distance from him. 5. To bestow greater, and bet∣ter Mercies upon us. God never takes away any Darling-Comfort from his People, but his Design is, to give a better in the room of it; as in the Text, Christ leaves his Disciples, in regard of his Bodily Presence, because he would send the Comforter to them, which should abide with them for ever, John 14. 16. 6. To make them partakers of his Holiness, Heb. 12. 10. 7. To fit and prepare them for that far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. These are God's holy, and good Ends in Afflicting his Peo∣ple, unto which Faith looks,
and so supports the Heart. Thus you see, how Faith acted on God in these Particulars, will prevent or cure all our Heart-Troubles: Faith acted on the sweet and gracious Nature of God; He is Love, all Love; on his glorious Attributes, his All-sufficiency, his Omnipotency, his absolute Soveraignty, his Ʋn∣changeableness, his Wisdom, his Righteousness, his Faithfulness, Faith acted on God's gracious everlasting Covenant; on the Word of God, on the Word of Precept, of Promise, of Threat∣ning, of Example, of Experi∣ence. And Faith acted on the Work of God, on the Will of God, and on his holy Ends in all his Chastisements. I say, Faith thus acted on God, will exceed∣ingly support under all Trouble. Let not your Hearts be troubled; ye believe in God. So much of this first Particular. And before I enter upon the second, I shall make some short Application of this.
First, It follows hence, that Applicat. Heart-Trouble under the af∣flicting Hand of God, argues the weakness, if not the want of Faith. All those sorts of Heart-Trouble, and the parts of it which I have mentioned, as Heart Sorrow, worldly Sorrow, immoderate Mourning, sinful Fear, vexatious Care, despon∣dency of Spirit, being offended; disturbance of Mind, Distracti∣on, Dejection, Discouragement, and the like, all these flow from the want of Faith, or, at least, from the weakness of Faith in God. We do not believe in God; we see the Causes of our Troubles, they are mostly in our selves, even our Ʋnbelief. What∣ever we profess, we do not be∣lieve in God: If we could but believe in God, our Hearts would not be troubled. O, our want of Faith; let us heartily lament it, and cry to God for Pardon through the Blood of Christ. If our Hearts be troubled, where is
our Faith in God? What doth God, and all that is in God, sig∣nify to us? What are we the bet∣ter for all that infinite All-suffi∣ciency and Goodness that is in God, if we do not act Faith up∣on it? Our Heart-Troubles would be cured, could we act Faith on God as we ought to do. Immoderate Sorrow then is very unbecoming Believers in God. If we will prove our selves Believers in God, let us discharge our selves from Heart-Trouble, and let us draw out Consolation for our Hearts by Faith, from all those comfortable Considerati∣ons of God, and from all those abundant Excellencies that are in God: O let us labour for Faith, and act it; let us live in the exercise of it, and then sure∣ly we shall find comfort. Secondly; Let us all labour to get an Interest in God, by Faith Gal. 3. 26. in Jesus Christ, that so we may be able to look upon God as our God, and then we may claim an Interest in All that God is, and in
All that God hath, and so shall 1 Sam. 30. 6. we have no cause of Heart-Trouble in any Condition. For if God be ours, All his Attributes Psal. 31. 14. are ours, his gracious Covenant is ours, his Word and Promises are ours: All is ours; There∣fore should we labour in this a∣bove all things, spending all our Thoughts, Affections and Spi∣rits upon this. O let us lay hold on God and his Covenant; let us chuse him for our Portion, and resign up our whole selves unfeignedly to him, terminating and centring all our Desires, Hope, Love, Delight in him alone, placing all our Happiness in him, and then commit all to him. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee, Psal. 73. 23. The Second Question. Secondly; What is it to be∣lieve in Christ? For, saith he in the Text, Believe also in me: It
is God in Christ that we must be∣lieve in; not in God without Christ, not in God out of Christ, but believe in God in Christ. Now what this believing in Christ is, I shall endeavour to show; looking up to the Father of Lights, and to the Author and Finisher of our Faith for Light and Assistance. In general; It is to believe all that which is revealed in the Holy Scriptures concerning Christ; to believe the Record that God hath given of him in his Word, as 1 John 5. 10, 11, 12, 13. To believe that Jesus Christ is the eternal Son of God; Joh. 1. 18. that he came out from the Fa∣ther; was made Flesh; took up∣on him our Nature; was born of a Virgin; lived on Earth in the form of a Servant, a poor de∣spicable Heb. 2. 14. Life; preached the Gos∣pel, working Miracles, &c. That he suffered upon the Cross, with 1 Pet. 2. 21. all the Sins of his People upon his Soul and Body; that he bore the Curse of the Law, the Wrath Isa. 53.
of God, which was due to Man for Sin: That he died a most Col. 1. 20, 21, 22. painful, shameful, and cruel Death, dying as a Sacrifice, to satisfy God's Justice, to aton and pacify his Wrath, to mak our Peace, and to reconcile us to God: That he rose again from Acts 1. John 14. 2, 3. Phil. 2. 7, 8. Heb. 7. 25. the Dead, ascended into Heaven, to prepare a Place there for his People; That he sitteth at the right Hand of God everlasting, to make continual Intercession for us: And that he shall come to judg the World at the last day: And while he is absent from u in Person here on Earth, he pro∣mised to send his Spirit the Com∣forter into the World, to con∣vince and convert all those which his Father hath given him, to call them by his Word, to quicken, strengthen, stablish, comfort and confirm them until he come again, to take them to John 16. 1, 2. & 14. 3. himself, that where he is, ther they may be also. This is the Re∣cord that God hath given of hi John 3. 16, 36. Son; That whosoever believeth i
him, should not perish, but have Everlasting Life. Now, to be∣lieve in Christ, is to believe all this Testimony of him. And also, out of a deep sense of our Sin and Misery, and sight of Christ's infinite Excellency, All-sufficiency, John 6. 37. & 7. 37. Mat. 11. 28. and Willingness to save Sinners; and upon his Call to us in the Gospel, to come un∣to him weary and heavy laden with our Sins, heartily willing to accept of the Lord Jesus upon his own Terms, to take him for our only Lord, to give up our Joh. 1. 12. Col. 2. 6. Cant. 4. 16. Psal. 2. last. whole Selves, Souls and Bodies, to his blessed Government by his Word and Spirit in all things, and unfeignedly and unreserved∣ly to enter into Covenant with him, to become his, and his a∣lone, and his for ever; and to relie upon him for Life, for Grace and Salvation; this is to believe in Christ. Thus believe in Christ, and let not your Hearts be troubled. The acting of this Faith on blessed Jesus, is a singular means to prevent and
cure all Heart-Trouble, all Hear Sorrows, Cares, Fears, Vexa¦tions, Despondencies, Deject¦ons and Distractions whatsoeve that may arise in our Hearts, b reason of any Loss, Cross, Dis¦appointment, Distress or A¦fliction that may befal us. If w can but thus believe in Chris and rest and rely upon him, an trust in him, our Hearts shall no be troubled. Q. But what is that in Chris which Faith must act upon, t effect this Cure of Heart-Trou¦ble when Afflictions come upo us? A. Such-like things (as I shew¦ed before) as are in God fo Faith to act upon, which ar these that follow. First, Faith must be acted up∣on the loving gracious sweet Na∣ture of Jesus Christ. Our Lord Jesus is of a most loving and sweet Nature, he is Love in∣deed, Cat. 5. 16. the Son of his Father's Love, and altogether lovely. His Thoughts of us who believe in
him, were Thoughts of Love from Everlasting. All his Words Jer. 31. 3. are sweet, his Mouth is most sweet. O what sweet Language doth he give his Church! My Dove, my Love, my fair One, my Sister, my Spouse, &c. He loved us, and gave himself for us: Gal. 2. 20. Loved us, and washed us in his Blood. He is one of our Nature, Rev. 1. 6. our Kinsman, our Husband, our Father, our Elder Brother, &c. So that, if there be any Love in the Head to the Members, if any in the Father to the Child, if any in the Husband to the Wife, or in any near and dear Relation, then sure there is Love, strong Love in Jesus Christ to all Believers; for in him is the Love of all Relations, and therefore he expresseth it under all these Relations. He calls us his Friends; Luk. 12. 4. He is of a most tender, a most merciful Nature, full of Bowels John 15. of Compassion, and of tender Mercies. It would be endless to express the loving Nature of Jesus Christ to poor Believers;
which when a Believer duly con¦siders, ponders upon, and actet Faith upon, it cannot but sup¦port him under all Heart-Trou¦ble. Act your Faith on Christ a yours, your Jesus, he that die Gal. 2. 20. Luke 22. for you, he that sweated grea drops of Blood for you in th Garden, wrestling and graplin with his Father's Wrath for yo in your Name and stead, there and upon the Cross. Conside that this your dearest Jesus no Psal. 25. 16. Isa. 63. 9. in Glory, knows your Souls i Adversity; he seeth all the Trou¦bles of your Hearts, he sympa¦thizeth with you in all your Af¦flictions; his Heart now in Hea¦ven is touched with the feeling o your Infirmities on Earth, Heb. 4▪ 15. He hath Humane Natur still, tho glorified. He feels ou Losses, Crosses, Griefs, Pain Sorrows, his Heart, his mos tender Heart is affected. O tha we could but believe this! an thus consider with our selves Here I sit solitary as a Widow
or Widower, or Childless, or Fatherless, or Motherless, or Friendless; my Family is bro∣ken, I feel Pains and Sicknesses; I am deprived of my Liberty, my sweet Relations and comfor∣table Friends are laid in the Dust; I have none about me to counsel or comfort me; I am brought low in the World, my Estate is diminished, my Honour and Reputation lost, my Pleasure gone, my Flesh faileth me, my Strength faileth, Lovers and Friends fail me, &c. Such Com∣plaints we are apt enough to make, and it may be worse than these: My God hath forsaken me, he hides his Face from me; I am compass'd about with Temptations, sad dejecting and distracting Thoughts; I am per∣secuted, banished from House and Home, all my outward and inward Comforts fail me. These have been the Cases and Condi∣tions of God's dearest Servants, as Job, David, Heman, and o∣thers; But yet let not your
Hearts be troubled for all this; Ye believe in God; act your Faith on God, yea, and act it on Christ also: Believe in Jesus, look up by Faith unto Jesus your dear Lord; whatsoever, whomsoever you have lost, you have not lost your Jesus, your best Friend, your Heavenly Husband; you have his Heart, his Bowels to∣wards Job 7. 17. Psal. 34. 15. you still; you have his Eye, his tender watchful provi∣dent Eye upon you still; you have his Ear open to your Cries still; yea, you have his ever∣lasting Isa. 40. 11. Arms underneath you to sustain you still, for else you would sink. Oh then, act Faith upon the sweet Nature of Christ as your Head and Husband. Can a Mother forget her sucking Isa. 49. 14. Child, that she should not have compassion on the Son of her Womb? possibly she may: But can Jesus forget those whom he died for, and travelled for? No, no, he will not hide his Face for ever, he will never for∣get his People. Your Maker is
your Husband; and he is the Fa∣ther of Mercies. If we read these things, or hear them read, and do not apply them to our own Souls by Faith; if we do not meditate on them, and let them sink down into our Hearts, if we do not pray ear∣nestly that the Holy Spirit would bring them home, and lay them close to, and fix them on our Hearts, they will do us no good, yield us no Comfort; therefore meditate on them, apply them, and act Faith upon them. Secondly; We must act Faith upon the many precious Attri∣butes of Jesus Christ; all which will afford to Faith much mat∣ter of support under all our Heart-Troubles whatever. And these are exceeding many, I shall mention only some. First, Jesus Christ is our Ad∣vocate with the Father, 1 John 2. 1, 2. One that undertaketh for us to plead our Cause, in that highest Court of Heaven; if a
Man be sued in Law, or be a¦cused Heb. 7. 25. of any Crime in any Cour it is a great priviledg to have Sollicitor there for him, that i skilful and faithful, and powe¦ful with the Judg in that Court Jesus Christ is such an Advocat Prov. 23. 11. 1 Cor. 1. 14. Isa. 6. 9. or Sollicitor, for us in Heaven he will plead our Cause; and h is Wise, he is the Wisdom of th Father; he is a great Counsellor▪ and the only Counsellor, non else can plead in that high Court and he is most faithful, he is  merciful and faithful High Pries Heb. 2. 17. in all things pertaining to God. H appears for us in Heaven, Heb. 9▪ 24. When a Man is indicted in  Court, and hath none to appea for him there, he is in a bad Case: But all poor Believers are in a better Case, they have a blessed Advocate to appear in the Pre∣sence of God for them: He con∣tinually presents his Blood, his Sacrifice to the Father for them And it is his Will, to have that Sacrifice accepted for our Justifi∣cation Heb. 10. 10 and Sanctification. Christ
prevails so with his Father, that he always heareth him, John 11. 42. Now, if we can act Faith on this Blessed Advocate in Hea∣ven, who is there always plead∣ing for us, ever-living to make continual Intercession for us, pre∣senting Rom. 3. 25. himself before God as our Sacrifice and Propitiation; when Men accuse us, and our own Consciences too; when we are deprived of our near and dear Relations, distressed with Pains and Sicknesses, pinched with Wants and Necessities; I say, then for us to act our Faith on this precious Advocate at the right Hand of God for us, in∣terceeding there for us, one who knows and feels all our Misery, it must needs be a great support and relief to us, and the best Remedy against our Heart-Trou∣bles: O that we could act Faith strongly on this our Advocate. To have a Friend in Heaven, and such a Friend, so wise, so powerful, so faithful, so merci∣ful▪ so sensibly affected with all
our Misery, so tender, so able and so willing to hear and help us; I say, this is infinitely bet∣ter than all the Friends that ever we had, or could have on Earth: And this Friend ever liveth, and maketh continual In∣tercession for us. And as this is matter of comfort in case of Suffering, so in case of Sin too. If any Man sin, we have an Ad∣vocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous; and he is the Pro∣pitiation for our Sins, 1 John 2. 1, 2. Faith acted on this blessed Advocate, is the best Remedy against Heart-Trouble, in case both of Sin and Suffering. Secondly, Jesus Christ is Bread from Heaven; the true Bread for Souls, the Bread of Life, the Wa∣ter of Life, John 6. 35, 48, 51. Now when poor Saints are fed with the Bread of Affliction, and with the Water of Adversity, let them look up to Christ, and act Faith upon him, he will be living Bread, Life-giving Bread, living Waters to their Souls, to
revive their drooping, and to re∣fresh their fainting Spirits. By acting Faith on this blessed Jesus the Fountain of living Waters, their Souls shall be so satisfied, as that they shall never hunger more, never thirst more (that John 4. 14. & 6. 35. is, inordinately) after the things of this World. When your Souls want strength to bear your Burdens, want comfort in your Distresses, act Faith on this Je∣sus, this Bread of Life, this Wa∣ter of Life, and you shall be re∣freshed; you shall have joy and peace in believing, Rom. 15. 13. Thirdly, Jesus Christ is called the Sun of Righteousness, and the bright morning-Star, Mal. 4. 3. Rev. 22. 16. He is the Fountain of Righteousness and Life, as the Sun is of Light; he hath heal∣ing in his Wings. He was wound∣ed Isa. 53. 4, 5. & 61. 1, 2. Psal. 103. 3. & 107. 20. for our Transgressions, that by his Stripes we might be healed. He was appointed to heal the broken-hearted, Luke 4. He will heal our back-slidings, Hos. 14. 4. He is the great Physician, he can
heal all our Spiritual and Corpo¦ral Diseases. His Blood, is a healing Blood; his Spirit, a healing Spirit; his Word, a Ps. 112. 4. healing Word; his Promises▪ healing Promises. He hath all healing Vertue in him: He is the true brazen Serpent; could we but act Faith on this Jesus, we should be healed of all our Dis∣eases. He is the bright Morning-Star. We are in Darkness, Clouds and Darkness upon our Spirits; many dark Providences befal us, we see not our way many times, know not what to do: Now let us act Faith on Jesus, he will bring Light out of Darkness: We are under black Fears and Sorrows, and all dark Night sometimes with us; but if we can look up to this bright Morn∣ing Star, he will enlighten our Isa. 50. 10. Darkness, he will shine in upon our Hearts, and scatter all those Clouds, and give us a joyful Morning. Fourthly, Jesus Christ is cal∣led the Captain of the Lord's
Hosts, and the Captain of our Salvation, Josh. 5. 14, 15. Heb. 2. 10. He hath the command of all the Creatures, for he is Head Eph. 1. 22. over all Things, over Men and Devils; All Power in Heaven and Mat. 28. 18. Earth is his. O if we could act Faith on this Almighty Jesus, our Hearts would not be troubled for any thing: What can hurt Rom. 8. 31. us? What should we fear? Our blessed Jesus, our Saviour, our Col. 1. 16. Husband, commands all Things; he rules, and over-rules all Things: No Creature, no Man, no Devil, can act any thing a∣gainst us without our Lord's leave: Believe in this Captain, Rom. 16. 20. and let not your Hearts be trou∣bled. He will tread Satan under Psal. 110. Rev. 14. 4. your feet shortly. He will make all his and our Enemies his Foot∣stool. Let us look by Faith un∣to our Captain, and keep our Eye on him, and follow him wheresoever he goeth: Let us make him our Leader, and by Faith in him we shall be more Rom. 8. 37. than Conquerors. He hath over∣come
the Devil and the Wor for us, and he will overcome a our Corruptions, Fears and Sor¦rows in us, and will shortly se his Crown upon our Heads Christ is the Captain of our Sal∣vation; Heb. 2. 14. John 16. last. and in bringing of many Sons to Glory, he was made perfect through suffering. Act Faith in him who hath perfected our Sal∣vation for us; that Work is done, and it was through suffer∣ing, to teach us to be willing to 1 Pet. 2. 21. Luk. 24. 26 suffer also, to walk in his steps; for in the way of suffering he en∣tred into his Glory; and the very same way will he bring all his Sons and Daughters unto Glory: So that while we are suffering for him, or from him, if we be his Children, (which we may Bom. 8. 9. Gal. 4. 6. know if we have his Spirit) we are in the right and ready way to Glory. And then have we any cause to let our Hearts be troubled with sinful Fears, Cares and Sorrows? Have we any cause to be cast down and discouraged, while we are following our Cap∣tain,
are making conformable to him, travelling the same way to Heaven that he went there, the same way to Glory, the way of Reproach, Shame, Grief, Sor∣row, Fear, Poverty, Persecuti∣on, Tribulation, Desertion, the same steps that our Lord went to Glory? O that we could but still keep our Eye on Jesus, and often consider what way he went to Heaven; and being our Cap∣tain, we should shew our selves his good Souldiers, and be con∣tent to go the same way. Fifthly, Jesus Christ is called the Consolation of Israel, Luke 2. 25. A sweet Name indeed. He is the only Person that brings true Comfort, being the Foun∣tain and Spring of all Consola∣tion; that One of a Thousand, Job 33. 23. who gave himself a Ransom for us. He it is that comforteth his 2 Cor. 1. 3, 4. People in all their Tribulations. He it is that speaketh and giveth his Peace to his People; and when he giveth Peace, none can cause Trouble. And it is his Promise,
that when he hath brought his People into the Wilderness o Fears and Troubles, that they know not which way to turn, that then he will speak comfor∣tably to them, will speak to their Hearts, as the word in the Ori∣ginal signifies, Hos. 2. 14. I might largely shew here, that Jesus Christ is the Consolation of his People many ways; as by his coming from his Father into the World, to become our Surety, to undertake for us, to take our Sins upon him, and to make his Soul an Offering for our Sins; and by his Blood to purchase our Ephes. 1. 7. Remission. O how comforta∣ble is a Surety to one that i Ar∣rested, Indicted, and Arraign∣ed! How comfortable is a Re∣deemer to a poor miserable Captive! How comfortable is a Pardon to a condemned Male∣factor! All this is Jesus to his People, and infinitely more. He is Gold to make us rich, white Rev. 3. 17, 18. Raiment to cover our nakedness, Eye-salve to make us see: He is
Light, the Light of Life, the John 5. 12. Fountain of Life, of Spiritual and Eternal Life; no Life but by him. And he hath assured us, That whosoever cometh to him, and John 3. 16. 36. believeth in him, shall have ever∣lasting Life, and shall not come in∣to condemnation. He is afflicted in Isa. 63. 9. all our Afflictions. And is not this a comfortable Considera∣tion? All his Promises are as so many Breasts of Consolation, all his Ordinances, means of Conso∣lation; his Word, a Word of Consolation; yea, his Rod of Psal. 23. Affliction, as well as his Staff, is blessed for the Comfort of his People. He hath also promised to send his Spirit, the Comforter, to his People, to abide with them for ever. Yea, Christ himself John 16. 7. makes this his own special Work also, to comfort them that mourn, Isa. 61. 2. and hath blessed those Mat. 5. 4. that mourn; that is, with godly Sorrow, for, saith he, they shall be comforted. How greatly then doth it con∣cern us to believe in this Jesus,
the Consolation of Israel, to look by Faith to this Fountain of Comfort, look to his Office, look to his Word and Promises; beg him earnestly to send the Spirit, the Comforter, into your Hearts; Look to Jesus alone for all Com∣fort, and draw from this Spring by Prayer, Faith and Meditati∣on, all supplies of Comfort; and Rom. 15. 4. let not your Hearts be troubled. Sixthly, Jesus Christ is called a Counsellor, Isa. 9. 6. He is most wise; he is the Wisdom of the Father: In him are hid all the 1 Cor. 1. 14. Col. 2. 3. Treasures of Wisdom and Know∣ledg: Yea, he is made of God our Wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. 30. So that when we are in Doubts and Darkness, perplexed with Temp∣tations, and know not what to do; when we are under sad and dark Providences, and know not how to interpret them; when we are under various Exercises, and know not how to answer God's Ends in them, nor how to im∣prove them; when we are in the Dark, and know not the mean∣ng
of God's Dispensations, nor he Design of God in them: Now are our Hearts troubled in ll such Cases; but here is our Remedy, this is the Course we must take: Act Faith now upon Jesus, he is Wisdom; he is a most wise and faithful Counsellor, we may freely open all our Cases and Conditions to him; he will not betray us, nor bewray us, we may safely trust him with all the Secrets of our Hearts; and let us labour by Faith to trust him for Counsel in all Cases; let us wait for his Counsel, trust to it, and let not our Hearts be troubled. Seventhly, Jesus is a Redeemer, Job 19. 25. Isa. 19. 25. Isa. 59. 20. 1 Pet. 1. 18. that is his Name; he came into the World on this very Business, to redeem his People, to redeem them from all Iniquity, Tit. 2. 14. from this present evil World: from our vain Conversations. He hath shed his precious Blood to pur∣chase us, we are bought with a price, we are none of our 1 Cor. 6. 20. 1 Thess. 1. 10. own, we are his, the purchase of his Blood; and we may be con∣fident
that he dearly loves us, fo he dearly bought us; and if h had not dearly loved us, h would never have given himsel for us, Gal. 2. 20. That wa the highest Testimony of hi Love; He loved us, and washe Rev. 1. 6. us from our Sins in his Blood. He will redeem us from the Wrath to come. O then let us act Faith on our sweet Redeemer, as Job did in the midst of all his Trou∣bles; I know, saith he, that my Redeemer liveth, &c. So may every Believer say, Although my Friends and dearest Relations die, my Credit and Estate dies; Psal. 19. 14. Prov. 23. 11. Luk. 21. 8. though my outward Comforts all die, this supports me, that my Redeemer liveth, and this our Re∣deemer is mighty, mighty to save, able to save to the utter∣most, Heb. 7. 25. Therefore let us act Faith on our dear Redeemer, and up∣on Col. 1. 14. Heb. 9. 12. his Redemption; and let us believe, that shortly the day of our full Redemption will come, when we shall be delivered fully
and for ever from Sin, Satan, the World; from all our Bur∣dens, Fears and Sorrows, Temp∣tations and Tribulations. I might mention many other sweet Names and Titles of Je∣sus Christ, which would be Food for Faith to feed upon; as, that He is the Everlasting Father; he Isa. 9. 6. hath pity and compassion for all his poor Children, and Power to help them, being the Father Psal. 103. 13. Almighty, and hath a Portion for them too; He is their Portion, and hath provided for them an Lam. 3. 24. 1 Pet. 1. 4. Inheritance incorruptible, undefi∣led, and that fadeth not away: He is the Prince of Peace, he giveth his Peace to his People, Joh. 14. 37 & 16. 33. Job 34. 29. even that Peace that the World can neither give to them, nor take from them. When he speaks Peace, none can cause Trouble. He is our Peace, and hath made our Peace with God; and it is He alone that speaketh Peace, and creates the Fruit of the Lips, Peace, Isa. 57. 19. He is also Eph. 2. 14. our Shepherd, therefore (said
David) I shall want nothing Psal. 23. 1. He is a Fountain o¦pened, a Fountain of Ligh Life, Love, Grace and Trut He is the Head of his Body th Church. The Husband, the Bride¦groom, Col. 1. 18. Eph. 5. 30. Col. 1. 19. Col. 3. 11. his People are his Mem¦bers, his Spouse. He is the Hei of all things, Heb. 1. 2. In him dwelleth all Fulness. He is the King of Saints, the Rock of Ages. Yea, He is All, and in All. O Beloved, had we but Faith to act on this blessed Jesus, and on these his most sweet Names and gra∣cious Attributes, our Hearts would not be troubled into what Condition soever we were brought. Could we act Faith on Jesus as our Head, Husband, and Father, who is All Fulness, All in All; Could we doubt of ha∣ving all seasonable Supplies from him? Let our Faith but appre∣hend, apply and appropriate Je∣sus as our blessed Head, our most dear Husband, and then consi∣der in earnest who he is, and what he is; how mighty, how
full, how loving, pittiful, com∣passionate, tender-hearted and kind; how ready to help, how engaged to us by many Promises, and can we then take up such unworthy thoughts of him, as to think he hath forgotten us? Will he not timely support and supply us? Hath he shed his Blood for us, and will he forget us, can he forget us? Are not all his People as dear to him as the Apple of his Eye? Surely it is Zech. 2. 8. our Want, or the weakness of our Faith, that causeth all our Heart-Trouble. O my poor Soul, how comfortably mightest thou live, if thou couldest live by Faith? Lord, I believe, help, strengthen my Faith. Could we but apply and appropriate Christ to our Souls, and act Faith upon those preci∣ous Names of Christ, which are not as so many empty Titles which are sometimes given to Men, but they are real Representations of that most dear Love and tender Affection, of that special Care, Mercy, and Loving-kindness
that is in Jesus towards all hi poor Children, that they migh draw out the same for thei strong Consolation; and tha Hebr. 6. 17. they might trust in him, and no despond nor be dejected. Thus, i we can believe in Jesus, our Heart shall not be troubled. Thirdly; Faith acted on th Covenant of Grace, whereo Christ is the Mediator, and upo all his exceeding great and preci∣ous Promises, will prevent an cure all Heart-Trouble. Believ Hebr. 8. 6. and 12. 24. in the blessed Mediator of th New Covenant, who hath un∣dertaken, not only on God's part to see that his Part be performed to us, but also is become our Sure∣ty; undertaking for us, and by himself, to fulfil the whole Law Hebr. 7. 22. of God both actively and passive∣ly; to fulfil all Righteousness for us, and by his Spirit to enable us to 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. Matth. 3. 15. Rom. 2. 8, 3, 4. fulfil the Conditions of the Co∣venant, working in us Faith, Love, Obedience, and all Grace. In this sense, God hath given Christ to be a Covenant to us,
Isa. 42. 6. and his Blood is the Blood of the Covenant, by which Rom. 3. 25. he rescueth poor Souls that were Prisoners to Sin and Satan, out of the Pit of Destruction, Zech. 9. 11. By this Covenant, upon Christ's shedding of his Blood as a Sacrifice for Sin, and his per∣forming all the work of Media∣tion, John 1. 12. and upon our receiving of him, and believing in him, as he is offered to us in the Gospel, God is pleased to promise to be∣come our God, our Reconciled 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17. Father, to pardon all our Sins, to give us his Spirit, and all Grace here, and Glory hereafter. Isa. 55. 3. Now, Christ our blessed Media∣tor, hath perfectly fulfilled all that God required for us, and Jerem. 31. 31. in our room and stead; that is most certain, for he finished the Work that his Father gave him to do; and he hath made many sweet Promises to us, That he John 17. will send the Spirit into our hearts, to work Faith in us, Psal. 84. 11. to receive him, and to apply the Merit of his Blood to us, to
Sanctify, and renew us thereby Joh. 15. 26. Heb. 12. 1. John 6. 37. and 7. 37. and hath promised, That whoso∣ever comes unto him, he will in  wise cast out. And all that com unto him, shall find rest to thei Souls. That whosoever believet Matth. 11. 28. in him shall be saved; that he wi keep them, and none shall pluck the out of his hand. That he will rais Joh. 10. 28. them up at the last day. Assurin us, That he is gone to Heaven, a our fore-runner, to prepare a plac for us there, and that he will com again, and take us to himself, tha where he is, we may be also. Now▪ if we can but act Faith on thi Jesus, and on the Covenant▪ whereof he is the Mediator, an on his Promises, applying them and relying on them, our Heart shall not be troubled. Besides; Let us consider, there is not a passage of Providence from God to us, but it comes through the hand of this Media∣tor. 1 Cor. 8. 6. All things are by him: Put what you will in the hand of a Mediator, and in his Power, it must needs turn to
the good of him, for whom he is a Mediator; now to support and comfort us in all our Trou∣bles, let us consider two things. 1. This Mediator steps in be∣tween God's Wrath, and us, in all our Afflictions; that no Fury, or Effects of it may break forth from God on his People, for whom he is the Mediator, that nothing but Fatherly Love may be in the Chastisement; and if Love send the Affliction, what∣ever it be, to try and purge, &c. there can be no hurt in that Af∣fliction. Again, our Mediator interposeth, either to hold off the Smart, or to allay and miti∣gate it, that it shall not distract, Dan. 3. 25. no nor hurt. 2. He steps in to uphold us, and to strengthen our Weak∣ness, enabling us to endure. Phil. 4. 4, 12, 13. It was the Mediator that did strengthen Paul; The Lord stood by me, and strengthned me, said he: Faith acted on this Blessed Mediator, eying him, and believing that our Afflictions
come through his Hands, ev his who loved us and died for  our dearest Friend, and who ha all Power in Heaven and Eart must be a mighty support to  in all our Troubles. Fourthly; Let Faith be act on the Word of Christ also;  believe the Word of God, b¦lieve the Word of Christ also His Mouth is most sweet; No Luk. 4. 22. but gracious Words proceed o of his Mouth. Grace was pour Psal. 45. 2. into his Lips; and he poured o Grace in all his Words: H whole Gospel is a Gospel o Grace, Words of Peace and Sa¦vation. Hear him speaking mo sweetly, Mat. 11. 28. Come un me all that are weary and heavy la¦den, and I will give you rest.  what sweet Words are these▪ Ho, every one that thirsteth, com ye to the Waters and drink, without Mony and without Price, Isa. 55 1, 2. I am the Way, the Truth John 14. 6. Rev. 3. 18. and the Life. Behold, I stand a the Door and knock; if any Man
hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will come in and sup with him, and he with me. This is but a taste of those sweet Clusters of most refreshing Grapes which hang upon the Boughs of the Gospel; let us take frequent view of what lies upon Record in the Evangelists, and often read over the manifold Promises of Grace that fell from the sweet Mouth of our Blessed Lord, and mediate, and ponder, and con∣sider of them, and act our Faith upon them, and we shall find com∣fort in them; his Words drop as an Hony-comb; his Words are Spi∣rit and Life. More particularly, First; Our Faith must be acted upon Christ's Word of Precept, his Word of Command in time of Trouble; Fear not him that can kill the Body, but him that can cast both Soul and Body into Hell. Fear Luke 12. 4, 32. Rev. 2. 10. Mat. 5. none of those things which thou shalt suffer. Let not your Hearts be troubled, nor let it be afraid. Re∣joice when Men shall persecute you, &c. In patience possess ye Luk. 21. 19
your Souls: with many such. No Christians must yield up the ¦bedience of Faith to such Co¦mands, and urge them upon the Hearts, charging themselves to ¦bey them, saying, O my Soul, m Lord hath forbidden me to fea to be troubled, to be thoughtfu to be dejected, &c. he hath com¦manded me to be patient, yea, t rejoice in my suffering: He is m Lord, and I must obey him, Joh. 14. 15 & 15. 10. Mat. 7. 24. must keep his Commandment else I cannot love him; I must kee his Sayings, or else I cannot b his Disciple; If I keep his Com¦mandments, he will manifes himself to my Soul, his Fathe will love me, and he will lov me, and they both will mak their abode with me, for it i his Promise, John 14. 21, 23. Say thus, O my Soul, Jesus Christ i my King and my Law-giver, I must obey him; he is my Pro∣phet also, and I must hear him in Act. 3. 22. all things whatsoever he shall say unto me. I have taken him for my Lord as well as for my Savi∣our;
for my King to rule me, as (well as for my Jesus to save me; for my Prophet to teach me, as well as for my Priest to satisfy for me. O my Soul, consider, He is the Author of Eternal Sal∣vation only to those that obey him. Thus applying the Commands of Christ to our selves, and urging his Authority upon our Hearts, it will help us to bear up under our Troubles. 2ly. Act Faith upon the Pro∣mises of Christ, of which some∣what was said before. He hath promised to be always with us, to send the Comforter, to ma∣nifest himself unto us, that he will not break the bruised Reed, nor Mat. 19. 29. Isa. 40. 11. quench the smoaking Flax: That he will give us an hundred-fold for all our Losses for his sake. That he will gather us with his Arm, carry us in his Bosom; that he will hear our Prayers; that he will give us a Crown, a Kingdom, Everlasting Life, with many more. O, could we act our Faith upon his precious Pro∣mises,
and lie sucking by Fait on those full Breasts of Consola∣tions, and draw by Faith, Prayer▪ and Meditation, from thes Wells of Salvation, we shoul find sweet support under all ou Troubles. 3ly. Faith acted on the Word of Threatning, may put a stop to Heart-Trouble: Jesus Christ Mat. 10. 37. Luk. 14. 26 Mark 8. st. Joh. 15. 3. hath dreadfully threatned those that love Father or Mother, Son or Daughter, more than him, or their own Lives; and those that are ashamed of him, or his Word; and those that fall from him, and those that hear his Sayings, and do them not, and those that are fruitless Branches, &c. Faith acted on the Examples in the Word of Christ, especi∣ally his own Example, Learn of me, saith he, I am meek and low∣ly Mat. 11. 29. 1 Pet. 1. 21 in Heart. He was as a Lamb, dumb before the Shearers: and we must follow his steps. We have also a Cloud of Witnesses, the Examples of the Primitive Chri∣tians,
who bore all their Trou∣les with Patience, and holy Courage; and we are expresly commanded to be followers of them who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promise. Heb. 6. 12. Thus Faith acted on the Word of Christ, will help against all Heart-Trouble. Fifthly; Faith acted on the Work of Christ, will either pre∣vent or cure Heart-Trouble. And that again, if Faith be acted upon the Work he hath done for us already, and upon the Work he is now doing for us in Heaven, and upon the Work he is now do∣ing in us on Earth, and upon the Work he will do for us, and in us, and upon us at the last day. All which Works of Christ, if we act our Faith on them, we shall not be much troubled in our Hearts. Believe also in Christ; Believe me (saith he) for the Work's sake, John 14. 11. 1. Faith must be acted upon that great and glorious Work of
Christ for us when he was upon Earth, that Work which his Fa∣ther gave him to do, in the days of his Flesh, as our Redeemer, and that in doing and in suffering; for he came to do the Will of God Heb. 10. 9. by his Obedience, as well as to suffer it by his Satisfaction, and Heb. 2. 14, 15, 16. this in his state of Humiliation. He assumed Humane Nature, en∣tred the Virgin's Womb, was born of her, yet without Sin. He Phil. 2. 6, 7. Mat. 3. 15. lived on Earth a time, doing Good, and healing all manner of Diseases; spent most of his time in Preaching, Praying, Fast∣ing, and revealing to Men the whole Will of God for their Salvation, and fulfilling all Righ∣teousness. He professed he came not to do his own Will, but the Will of him that sent him, John 6. 38, 39. And, saith he, This is the Father's Will which sent me, that of all which he hath given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up at the last day. A comfor∣table Consideration indeed, and a Cure for our Heart-Trouble:
That our Lord Jesus will raise up all our dead dear Relations and Friends, now rotting in their Graves: All that died in Jesus, 1 Thess. 4. 16, 17. will Jesus bring with him. And this also is the Father's Will, That every one that seeth the Son, that is, every one that by Faith re∣ceiveth and believeth in the Son, shall have Everlasting Life. Now, to accomplish and finish this Will of the Father, was the whole Work of Christ upon Earth, even to draw poor Souls unto him, to work Faith in them by his Word and Spirit, to ful∣fil the whole Law of God for them and in them, Rom. 8. 4. And to begin and finish the whole Joh. 17. ▪ Work of our Redemption. Faith acted on this Work of Christ upon Earth for us, in the several parts of it, He being partaker of Heb. 2. Flesh and Blood with us, to deliver us from him that had the Power of Death, that is, the Devil; and to free us from the fear of Death, by which we were always subject to Bondage. I say, if we can act
Faith on these Works of Chri for us, we shall have no caus of Heart-Trouble. Let us consider, that our Bles¦sed Lord denied himself o Earth, and was well-pleased no to have his own Will, nor to d his own Will, but referred him¦self intirely to his Father's, wha reason have we, poor Worms, t be troubled, when our Wills ar cross'd? Let us in Heart and Life say as we pray, Thy Will b Mat. 6. 10. done on Earth as it is in Heaven. And when the Will of God is done upon our Families and Re∣lations, let not our Hearts be troubled, but let us imitate Jesus Act. 21. 14 Christ, in our submission to the Will of God, making it our 1 Joh. 2. 6. Work on Earth to be doing all the good we can, and so to put him on, and walking as he walk∣ed, and not be troubled. Secondly, Faith acted on Christ's Suffering-Work on Earth, will greatly contribute to our Support: He was a Man of Sor∣rows; Isa. 53. 1, 2. so that if we meet with
Sorrows on Earth, we do but drink of our Master's own Cup, and that should quiet us. Christ's Sufferings on Earth were of two kinds, viz. for our Imitation, and for Satisfaction for our Sins. (1.) For our Imitation. His Mar. 10. 39 Mat. 26. 39 patient suffering of Reproaches, Scorns, Revilings, Contradicti∣on of Sinners, Temptations, Persecutions, Bonds, Poverty, Shame, loss of Friends, &c. suffering all with invincible Pa∣tience and Meekness, without the 1 Pet. 2. 22 least murmuring, repining, dis∣quiet or discontent, without any Retaliation; for when he was re∣viled, he reviled not again; he prayed for his Enemies, &c. and all this as our Example, that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2. 21, 22, 23. And if our Lord, the Lord of Heaven and Earth, suffered such things, what reason or cause have we to be troubled in our Hearts when we are per∣secuted, reviled, forsaken of all our Friends, impoverished, ex∣posed
to Shame and Sorrow, see¦ing our blessed Lord was so ex¦posed, and so exercised upo Earth? Is it not enough for th Servant to be as his Master Shall we think to fare better tha him? His Sufferings were t teach us to bear ours with Chri∣stian Patience, and to sanctify ours to us; yea, in all our Suf∣ferings he sympathizeth with us. Let us then act our Faith upon Christ's Sufferings on Earth, his whole Life being a Life of Suf∣fering, he knew what trouble meant, he was acquainted with grief, he knew what it was to lose a Friend, for in his greatest trouble, all his Disciples (whom he calls his Friends) forsook him and fled; and being tempted him∣self, Heb. 2. 18. & 4. 15. he knows how to succour them that are tempted. He hath a feel∣ing of all our Infirmities. Let us labour to act Faith on Jesus, and our Hearts will not be trou∣bled.
(2.) But his great Suffering-Work for us, was his Work of Satisfaction. All our Sins being Isa. 53. 6, 10, 12. laid on him, it pleased the Lord to bruise him, and to put him to grief, and to make his Soul an Offering for Sin: He poured out his Soul unto 2 Cor. 5. 20. Gal. 3. 10. 1 Pet. 2. 24. 1 Thess. 1. 10. Mat. 26. 37, 38. Luk. 22. 44. Death, was numbred among trans∣gressors, was made Sin for us: He bare our Sins on his own Body on the Tree; was made a Curse for us; suffered the Wrath of God for us, to deliver us from the Wrath to come. O blessed Je∣sus! when our Sins were upon him, he was sore amazed, groaned, was exeeeding sorrowful, even unto Death; He was in a bloody sweat, in a bitter Agony in the Garden; He was falsly accused, unjustly condemned, and then barba∣rously crucified, suffering that cursed and cruel, shameful and painful Death of the Cross, and all as our Surety, and as a Sacri∣fice Rom. 4. 25. to God for our Sins. Christ 1 Cor. 5. 7. our Passover was sacrificed for us, to make Atonement and Satis∣faction
to the Law and Justice o God for us, Rom. 3. 25. This was the great Work o the Transcendent Love of Jesu Christ when he was upon Earth▪ Gal. 2. 20. Rev. 1. 6. Ps. 110. 7. when he travelled in Soul, dran of the Brook in the way, that black Torrent of Wrath and Curse that lay in the way betwixt ou Souls and Heaven, which stopp'd up our Passage thitherward, and made it utterly impassable for for us: But Jesus made a Passage Heb. 9. 12. by his Blood, that his Redeemed might pass thorow. So great were his Sufferings in this World for us, that they made him cry out, My God, my God, Why hast Mat. 27. 46. Heb. 5. 7. thou forsaken me? offering up strong Cries with Tears. Now then, let us act our Faith on the Sufferings of Christ here on Earth, and believe that he suffered all those hard and hea∣vy, those bitter and grievous things for us, and in our Names; that he bore our Sins to satisfy God's Justice for them, to pur∣chase
and procure our Pardon. O that we could but believe in this Jesus, that he sweated great drops of Blood for us, and that he shed his very Heart-blood upon the Cross for us, and by Faith apply and appropriate all this to our own Souls, believing that he was wounded for our Transgres∣sions, Isa. 53. Eph. 2. 14. smitten for our Sins; that the chastisement of our Peace was upon him; that by the Blood of his Cross he hath made our Peace, and hath purchased for us Eternal Life! Believe this, and then see what little cause you have to have your Hearts troubled for any Loss or Cross whatsoever. The consideration, in a way of believing of what Christ hath done for us, and of what he hath suffered for us, should make us patiently do or suffer any thing for him and from him. Believe also in me. Secondly; Our Faith must be acted upon the Work of Christ, which he is now doing for us in Heaven. He is not idle there,
although he be set down on th Heb. 8. 1. & 7. 25. right Hand of the Majesty on High; but he is at work for hi People there; there he maket continual intercession for us. H Isa. 53. 12. Rom. 8. 34. is there as our Advocate to plead our Cause, and manage all ou Businesses there, presenting his Blood in the Vertue of it to his Father for our Pardon, present∣ing our Persons and Services per∣fumed 1 Joh. 2. 2. with the Incense of his own Righteousness, and by his Spirit applying the vertue of all to our Souls. He is able to save to the uttermost all that come unto Heb. 7. 29. God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for us. Of this I have spoken before. Now if we can act our Faith upon the Intercession of Christ, who knows all our Wants, Burdens, Cares and Fears, and whose Office it is to plead and intercede for us in Heaven, (tho we may scarce have any to plead or speak a Ps. 10. 14. word for us on Earth, yet) we should have no cause to have our Hearts troubled: We have a
faithful Friend, to whom we may commit our Cause. Thirdly; Christ is doing a Work in us on Earth, while he himself is in Heaven: He is humbling us, purging us, teach∣ing Phil. 2. 13. us, mortifying our Corrup∣tions, crucifying our inordinate Affections, sanctifying us, and so preparing us for Heaven: He is making us meet for the Kingdom; He is fitting us for his Father's House, by all his Or∣dinances, and by all his Provi∣dences, by every Loss and Cross; by all our Afflictions, as, 2 Cor. 4. 17. Our light Afflictions which are but for a moment, work for us (that is, by way of pre∣paration) a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. Je∣sus Christ is in the Word, and in the Rod, he is All in All; He is still forming, squaring, fashion∣ing and working by his Spirit, Rom. 8. 28. Ephes. 2. 20, 22. Word and Rod, upon his Peo∣ple, to make them more and more conformable to himself, to square them as Stones for his
Building, to make them Habi∣tations for himself, Temples for Heb. 13. 21 the Holy God to dwell in, and that he himself may delight to dwell in them here, and to make them fit to dwell with him for ever in Glory. Now, let us la∣bour to act our Faith on those blessed Works of Christ in us, and believe that he is thus work∣ing in us, even in and by all our Afflictions, and labour to feel and find these gracious Works carrying on in us, and we shall have no cause to be troubled. Moreover, our Faith should be acted upon the Work that Christ is now doing for us in Heaven; besides his Intercession for us there, he is preparing a Place for us in Heaven, as he told his Dis∣ciples, to comfort them: In my Father's House are many Mansions; I go to prepare a Place for you. A Place in Heaven is infinitely better, and more to be desired than the best Place on Earth. A Place in the Father's House, in the highest Heavens, in that glo∣rious
Paradise above, that's the Place of all Places, there the great and glorious God dwells, there blessed Jesus dwells; O that New Jerusalem, the City of the living God, that's the Place 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2. Acts 1. 9, 10, 11. indeed, that House not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. Some think that Jesus went lo∣cally into Hell, but we are sure he went locally into Heaven; and we know for what he went there, for he hath told us, it was to prepare a Place for us there. Here below all Places are full of Darkness, Snares, Temptati∣ons, Fears, Dangers, Persecu∣tions; but that is a Place of per∣fect Peace, perfect Rest, of Light, Comfort, Joy and Consolation. Here we are Pilgrims and Stran∣gers, there is our Home, our Fa∣ther's House. Here we have no continuing City, no abiding Place. 1 Cor. 4. 11 Christ's People here in this World, many times, have no certain dwelling-place, but are dri∣ven from House and Home, for∣ced to fly from one City to ano∣ther,
from Town to Country  from one Kingdom to another  constrained to wander fro Place to Place; while others a bide in their Habitations, the must seek their Quarters whe they can find them, a while unde one Friend's Roof, a while unde another's; which is no small Af¦fliction to them that feel it, th others lay it not to Heart. No what should comfort us in thi our Pilgrimage and Wilderness▪ condition; What should sup¦port us in this our wandring and desolate State, but that it was even thus with our blessed Lord himself upon Earth, who had not an House to put his Head in? And so it was with his Disciples, and with many choice Saints, as Heb. 11. 37, 38. What should bear up our Spirits, but this comfortable Consideration, that our Lord went to Heaven on purpose to prepare a Place for us there? If the Earth cast us out, Heaven will receive us: If  Cor. 6. 17 Men say to us, Remove, be gone
hence, depart away, here is no Place, no abiding for you; our dear Lord will call to us out of Heaven, and say, Come up hither, Rev. 11. 12 come up to me, I have prepared a Place for you here. There is room enough in our Father's House, there are many Mansions, and from thence there shall be no remove for ever, no more any changing Houses for ever, when once we are lodg'd in our Fa∣ther's House. There is our Fore∣runner Heb. 6. 20. for us entred. The hope we have through Grace of get∣ting into that blessed Place, by that new and living Way, to rest there after all our weary wan∣drings here, and never to re∣move more, is that which com∣forts us in these our troublesome removes here: O that Place, and that blessed state in that Place, to see God, and to be ever Mat. 5. 8. 1 Thess. 4. 1 John 3. 2, 3. with the Lord, to see our lovely Lord Jesus as he is, and to be made like unto him. Could we fix our Hearts and Eyes more stedfastly upon those invisible and eternal
things, we should more quie and comfortably bear our pr¦sent Troubles, yea, and rejoi in them. And when we can a our Faith upon that Place a State above, and conclude o Title to it, by our Interest  Christ, then our Hearts will n be troubled. Also this Consideration sho preserve us from Heart-Trou and Sorrow for the loss of o dear Relations which died  Jesus, for that they are go home to their Father's Hou they are arrived at their Ha¦bor, they are safely hous'd, th are where they would be, th are gone to the Place th their beloved Lord went to pr¦pare for them, to that City  God, to the general Assembly  Heb. 12. 23 the First-born, whose Names a written in Heaven, &c. Th would not exchange their Pla now for the most stately and mo magnificent Place in all th World. O, could we but rea¦lize by Faith that most happ
State and Place where our de∣ceased pious Friends are gone, our Hearts would not be trou∣bled for them. And this may comfort us also under all our present Sufferings and Sadnesses, that e're long we also shall go to that Place, to that City above, which God hath pre∣pared for us. Our Lord assures us, that he will come again, and Heb. 11. 16 take us to himself, that where he is, we may be also: O could we be∣lieve this, we should say, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Fourthly; Our Faith must be acted upon the Work that Christ will do for us, and in us, and upon us in Heaven at the last. It is a∣bove all our Understandings to conceive what glorious Works Christ will do for us and in us at the last day. It doth not yet ap∣pear 1 Joh. 3. 2. Rom. 8. 21, 23. what we shall be. There shall be a day of the Manifestation of the Sons of God. The poor despised Saints, all black and cloudy here, covered with Shame and Reproach now, shall then Mal. 3. 17.
be manifested to be the Lord Jewels: That will be a Day  their full Redemption, both  Soul and Body, their Weddi and their solemn Coronation-da Then their blessed Redeem 2 Tim. 4. 8. shall publickly own them, a bid them welcome to his F¦ther's House, saying, Come  Mat. 25. 34. Blessed of my Father, &c. The will Jesus put the Crown of Gl¦ry, of Righteousness, and of Li upon their Heads. Then w Jesus present them to his Fath without Spot, or Wrinkle, or a Eph. 5. 27. such thing. Then will he mai their (now) vile Bodies (su¦ject now to vile Corruptions,  vile Diseases, to vile Abuses, a to a vile dissolution at Death  like unto his own glorious Body  Phil. 3. 31. and their Souls shall be like  his, to their full satisfactio Then the poor Disciples of Chri Ps. 17. 15. shall have a full End put to  their Heart-Troubles, Sorrow Fears and Cares. Then the Joh. 16. 22 Hearts shall rejoice, and their J no Man (nor Devil) shall ta
from them. Sorrow and sighing shall flee away, and they shall en∣ter in, into Everlasting Rest: and into that unspeakable bles∣sed State which was purchased by the precious Blood of Jesus, and by him prepared and pos∣sessed in our Names and Steads. All our dear Relations that died in Jesus are already entred, Christ their dearest Lord hath wrought this glorious Work on their Souls already; they are trium∣phing, singing Hallelujahs in the highest Heavens, while we are fighting, sighing and sobbing here below. They are with blessed Jesus above, according to his Prayer for them, seeing his Glo∣ry, Joh 17, 22, 24. and participating of it. Thus much for the Work of Christ, upon which our Faith must act, that our Hearts may not be troubled. Sixthly; Our Faith must act upon the Will of Christ, in order to the preventing and curing our Heart-Troubles, Fears and Sorrows. What is the Will of
Christ? It is his Will that his Peo∣ples Hearts should not be trou∣bled nor afraid, as in the Text; It is his Will, that in the World they should have Tribulation, but yet, that they should be of good Joh. 16. last. chear. It is his Will, that in their Patience they should possess their Souls, and not faint nor be discouraged. It is his Will they should be sanctified, and that all their Afflictions should promote 1 Thess. 4. 3. Heb. 12. 10 Rev. 3. 19. their Sanctification. It is his Will, that although he love them yet to rebuke and chasten them And when he doth so, that they should be zealous and repent. It is his Will, that they should de∣ny themselves, and take up their Mat. 16. 24. Cross daily and follow him. That they should fear none of those Rev. 2. 10. things that they should suffer. That they should walk in his steps, hold fast to the End, be faithful unto Death. That they should overcome. It is his Will, that they should not love Father Mat. 10. 34. or Mother, Son or Daughter, more than himself; no, nor
their Lives, but be willing to part with all for his sake. Yea, it Luk. 14. 26 Joh. 17. 24 is his Will, his last Will, that all his poor Disciples, after they have suffered a while, may be with him where he is, to behold his Glory. Thus if we act Faith upon the Will of Christ, and la∣bour to yield to it, and acquiesce in it, we shall procure much freedom from Heart-Trouble. Lastly; Our Faith must be acted upon the En and Designs of Christ in all his afflictive Pro∣vidences towards us; and these his Ends are all very good and gracious. This Argument he himself used to cure the Heart-Troubles of his Disciples for his departure from them, viz. that he had good Ends in his going away from them; his End was, to prepare a Place for them, a better Place than any to be found here, a Place in Heaven, in the Father's House: And his End was to send the Spirit, the Comforter unto them, which would not come if he did not
go away, John 16. 6, 7. He had told them of his going away from them, upon which Sorro had filled their Hearts, (and it i even so with us, when our earth∣ly Comforts leave us, Sorrow fill our Hearts) but to cure this, our Lord answers them, that i was expedient for them, (goo and necessary for them) that he should go away, shewing them his End in going away, to wit that he might send them the Comforter; he would remove from them a great Mercy, th greatest earthly Mercy that eve they enjoyed, which was hi personal Presence; they must par with so dear and near, so sweet so loving, so faithful a Friend a himself was to them: And could there be a greater loss? for thi Sorrow had filled their Hearts▪ But he tells them, it was to make way for a greater Mercy, which was, to send them the Comforter▪ in all the saving and miraculou Gifts of the Holy Ghost, by which they should be able to d
greater Works than he himself did, John 14. 12. which was a grea∣ter Mercy than his bodily presence with them, and with this he calms and quiets their Minds. Now if we can act Faith upon the blessed Ends of Christ, in re∣moving our earthly Comforts from us, which are, to bestow upon us better Mercies, to give us more of his Spirit, and of the Graces and Comforts of it, our Hearts would not be trou∣bled; could we believe, that Christ's End in all his Chastise∣ments, is, to prepare us for that Place in his Father's House, it would comfort and support us. His Ends are very good, and that should quiet us. So long as the People of Christ enjoy most of the Comforts of this World, (I speak it by sad experience) commonly they enjoy least of God, and of his Spirit; and usually, when Christ takes away their earthly Comforts, then he manifests most of Him∣self, and of his tender Love
to them: He brings them into the Wilderness, and then speaks Hos. 2. 14. comfortably to them; then he speaks to their Hearts, and not to their Ears only, as in time of Prosperity, then he gives out most of the Graces and Com∣forts of his Spirit. Christ ne∣ver takes away these outward Mercies from his People, but with design to bestow better, if our Discontent and Unbelief do not hinder. When the Lord took away from his Servant Da∣vid the young Child begotten in Adultery, it was to give him a Solomon. Thus I have endeavoured to shew what it is also to believe in Christ, that thereby we may pre∣vent and cure our Heart-Trou∣ble. The last thing I have to do is, to shew how Faith acted thus on God and Christ, or, on God in Christ, is the best Preventive of, and Remedy to cure all our Heart-Troubles, which hath indeed been shewn, partly in the two
former Particulars, and will serve for the confirmation of the Point also. Two ways principally Faith acted on God and Christ, doth effect this great Cure of Heart-Trouble, and procure Hearts-Ease. First, By way of Application and Appropriation. Secondly, By way of Holy Confidence and Reliance. First, By Applying and Appropri∣ating God and Christ to the Soul, and All that God is, and All that Christ is, and all that God hath, and all that Christ hath, and All that God and Christ hath pro∣mised: Faith applieth and ap∣propriates All this to the Soul; Faith gives the Soul Right, Title, Claim, Propriety and Interest to, and in God and Christ; Faith makes All the Believer's own. Believe, and All is thine. This is the Language of Faith, My God, my Lord, my Christ, Psal. 19. last. my Saviour, my Redeemer;
and this quiets and satisfies the Soul fully, or nothing in Heaven or Earth can do it; when it can thus act its Faith on God and Christ. So was David cured of his great Troubles, 1 Sam. 30. 6. H encouraged him∣self in the Lord his God, his God, his God in Christ; so in that pregnant Text, 2 Sam. 23. 5. His Interest in God's Everlasting Covenant, (whereby God was become his God in Christ) he acted his Faith upon, and that satisfied him; So, Mich. 7. 7. Psal. 31. 14. Psal. 73. 25, 26. Either God is ours, or he is not; either Christ is ours, or he is not: If God and Christ be not ours, we have cause enough of Heart-Trouble, cause enough to mind our Danger, and to be troubled at our very Hearts, that we are in such a woful case; and should now above all things la∣bour after an Interest in God and in Christ; whatever our Losses in the World be, this dangerous State of our Souls
should be most minded, and speedily look'd after above all things. But if God be ours, and if Psal. 119. 57. Lam. 3. 24. Joh. 1. 12. Col. 2. 6. Gen. 17. 1. Col. 3. 11. 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. Christ be ours; if we have cho∣sen God for our Portion in Christ; and if we have rightly and truly received Jesus Christ the Lord, for our only Lord and Saviour, and have unfainedly given up our whole selves to him; then may we act our Faith upon God, as our God, and up∣on Jesus Christ as ours, and may claim our Right in God and in Christ, and in All that God and Christ is and hath, as our own; and then, what cause of any Heart-Trouble? If God be ours, if Christ be ours, All is ours, Life ours, Death ours: What if we want Relations and Friends, Honour, Wealth and Health, is not the All-sufficient God e∣nough? Is not Jesus, in whom dwells all Fulness, enough to sup∣ply the want of all? This God proposed to Abraham, I am thy God; and to Israel, Isa. 41. 10.
Jesus Christ is All, and in All; and if Christ be yours, all is yours; God is yours, and all the Good of both Worlds are yours; and what can you desire more. Secondly, Faith exercised in Holy Confidence in, and Reliance upon God, and Christ, and the Promises, will prevent or cure all our Heart-Trouble. David was cured both these ways, Psal. 31. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. viz. by appropriating God to himself, and by trusting in him: I trusted in thee, O Lord; I said, thou art Psal. 43. 5. my God: for God is pleased to ingage himself, to discharge those Souls from Heart-Trouble and sinful Fear, who trust in him; Psal. 37. 40. Trouble doth dis∣order the Heart, and discom∣pose the Mind; but Faith in this exercise of it, trusting in the Lord, doth fix and settle the Heart; so that then no evil Ti∣dings Psal. 112. 7. shall make such a Person a∣fraid, for his Heart is fixed, trust∣ing
in the Lord. God hath pro∣mised to keep them in perfect peace, whose Minds are staied on him, be∣cause they trust in him, Isa. 26. 3. Diffidence is the cause of all Disquiet; no true Rest can be had, nor Quiet to our Minds, but by Confidence in God, Psal. 2. last. O the blessedness of those that trust in Christ. God in Christ is the only fit Object of our Confidence, in all our Ex∣tremities. A Believer hath a God to go to in all his Troubles, an All-mighty and loving Father in Christ; and this should be our Comfort, that we are in Cove∣nant with him that Rules the World, and hath committed the Government of all things to his Son, our dear Redeemer, who hath bought us with his Blood; and we may be sure that no hurt shall befal us that he can hinder; and what cannot he hinder, who hath all Power in Heaven and Mat. 8. 18. Earth, and that hath the Keys of Hell and Death, unto whom
we are so near, that he carries our Names on his Heart, and who will in his due time make all the World know, that his People are as dear to him as the Apple of his Eye. Trust then, depend and rely upon God in Christ, and by an holy Confidence, resign up your Wills to his Will, to do, what he would have us do; to be, what he would have us be; to suffer, what he would have us suffer; and then Heart-trouble will cease, and sweet Peace cometh: when having trusted all with God, we can in heart say, Lord, if thou wilt have me poor, dis∣graced, imprisoned, diseased, de∣prived of my dearest friends; I am content to be so, I trust all my Concerns with Thee: O the sweet peace and quiet that will be in that Soul! There is the Al-mightiness, the Wisdom, Goodness, Love, Mercy, and Faithfulness of God in Christ for us to trust in, and to rely upon, a Bottom and Foundation
strong enough to build our con∣fidence upon, in all Storms and Streights: God hath also made many exceeding great and preci∣ous Promises in his Word, and not a naked Promise, but he hath entred into Covenant with us, founded upon full satisfaction by the Blood of Jesus, and confirmed it with an Oath; and to this Co∣venant, Hbr. 6. 17. sealed by the Blood of his Son, he hath added the Seals of the Sacraments; and all this, that the Heirs of the Promises, name∣ly, All true Believers, might have strong Consolation, and be cured of all their Heart-troubles. Upon this sure Foundation then must our Faith act in an holy Confidence in God, and in Christ: the Soul being taken off from all other Objects, carried out of Self, unto God and Christ; who presently (as soon as trust∣ed in,) communicate themselves, and their love, and goodness to the Soul, filling it with peace, strength, and settlement. By this trusting in God, we honour
God most, and best provide for our own safety. The way then, whereby Faith quieteth the Soul, and cures it of its Troubles, is, by raising it above all Disquietments, and pitching it solely upon God in Christ; and thereby uniting it to God in Christ; from whence it draws vertue and strength, to subdue what ever troubleth its Peace. For the Soul is made for God, and never finds Rest, till it return unto, and settle and center it self upon him again. And that we may thus place our confidence in God and Christ for all supplies, we must most earnestly beg, cry, and seek to God for Grace and Strength so to do; we must trust in God alone, for all things, and at all times: and thus by appro∣priating God to us, and Christ to us, and placing our confidence in them, we may be cured of all our Heart-troubles.
The Application. 1. For Information. These In∣ferences follow. First, If Faith acted upon God in Christ be such a Remedy against Heart-trouble; then surely, 2 Pet. 1. 1. Faith is a very precious, a very excellent thing; a Grace of very great worth and value, and of great use and efficacy: It is pre∣cious Faith indeed, the very Trial 1 Pet. 1. 7. of it is more precious than Gold. Precious for its Author, the Lord Jesus; for its Object, precious Je∣sus, Hebr. 12. 1. and all the exceeding great and precious Promises, the Pur∣chased Inheritance: For its Offi∣ces, John 1. 12. it unites to us Christ, gives us Title to eternal Life; it sup∣ports Eph. 3. 17. under all Afflictions; pre∣vents, Heb. 11. all Heb. 11. 39. 1 Pet. 1. 9. or cures all Heart trou∣bles; and precious for its End, which is the Salvation of our Souls. This Grace of Faith is of a transforming, Spiritual Nature;
and the Soul of a Believer, by acting it on God and Christ, and on Divine, Heavenly and Spiri∣tual things, becomes Divine, Heavenly and Spiritual. Faith unfastneth the Heart from the Creature, shewing the Soul the Vanity of it, and carries the Soul unto God and Christ, shew∣ing it God's All-sufficiency, and Christ's All-fulness; for Faith believes, what God in his Word hath revealed of both. It is the great Design of God, in all the Troubles he sends upon his People, effectually to teach them the exceeding Vanity of the Creature, to imbitter the things of this World to them, to wean their Hearts from them, to bring earthly things out of Request with them, to make them see, that there is no true Con∣tentment, nor solid Satisfaction for the Soul to be found in them, and to make them see where true Happiness and Contentment sal. 4. 5. is to be had; even in God and in Christ alone, for whom their
Souls were Created, Redeemed, Isa. 43. 21. Tit. 2. 14. and Sanctified. Now the great Work of Faith is, to take off the Soul from the Creature, and fix and settle it upon God and Christ the true Foundation. Natural∣ly our Hearts hang loose from God, and cleave to the Creature, and when the Creature fails, our Hearts are troubled; but Faith takes off the Heart from the Creature, and settles it upon God in Christ, where it finds Rest; and this is the great Ser∣vice it doth us. All the great and famous things which those Worthies did, and all the hard and heavy things they suffered, mentioned in Heb. 11. were all done and suffered by the Power of Faith, ver. 37, &c. The set∣ling of our Hearts upon God in Christ; trusting all there, is the best means to cure our Heart-trouble; and this Faith doth, and therefore it is precious. Secondly. It follows from the  Premisses, That the want of Faith in God, and in Christ, is the
great Cause of all our Heart-troubles, Despondencies and Dis∣quietness. Could we but act our Faith strongly on God and Christ, as our God in Christ, our Troubles would be preven∣ted or cured: For by Faith the Soul looks up to God in Christ, through the Promises, looking off from all other supports, unto God for all Supplies, for the re∣moving of all Evil felt or feared, and for the obtaining of all Good promised and needed; and by this exercise of Faith, the Soul is raised up above all Discourage∣ments and Disquietments: but where this Faith is wanting, or the lively exercise of it suspend∣ed, there the Soul sinks under Heart-troubles. But of this some-what was said before. Thirdly. Hence also we may  clearly see the absolute Necessity of getting Faith in God, and in Christ; and of acting it, and living by it: There is no living quietly and comfortably without it, no standing under our Bur∣dens,
no bearing with patience and chearfulness our Losses and Crosses without this Faith; no Rom. 15. 13. Joy and Peace, but by believing; by Faith we stand. Fourthly. Then the Things of  the World are not to be trusted to, nor trusted in, for Comfort in time of Trouble. Nothing but God and Christ to be trusted in, and trusted to, and there is enough in them to support and comfort us, as hath been shewed: Jerem. 15. 5, 6, 7, 8. but no confidence to be put in the Creature; there is a Curse upon Jerem. 9. 4. such Confidence, but a Blessing on them that trust in God: No trusting in Friends, Riches, Gifts, Mic. 7. 4, . or any thing; for so to do, is Idolatry, to give that to the Crea∣ture, which is due to God alone. Fifthly. Hence we see the Rea∣son  why so many faint in the day of Adversity, and sink under Trouble; and others use unlaw∣ful means to prevent Trouble, or to get out of it: It is, because they want this Faith in God and
Christ; and for want of it, too many miscarry under Afflicti∣on. The Second Use is, by way of 2 Ʋse. Exhortation to all the Disciples of Christ, in the Words of the Text; Let not your Hearts be troubled, but Believe in God, and Believe in Christ: You must get and act Faith in God and Christ, this is the onely Preventive, the onely Remedy against Heart-Trouble. Our Lord in this Text commands it, and com∣mends John 6. 29. it: we must needs get Faith Ephes. 2. 8. above all gettings; next to Christ, we must get Faith, for we can∣not Col. 2. 12. have Christ without Faith: Go to God for it, it is his Work, his Gift, yea, it is his Operation; yea, the same Power that raised up Jesus from the Dead, must be put forth upon a Soul to work Faith, Eph. 1. 19, 20. The ex∣ceeding great and mighty work∣ing of the Power of God, to raise up the Soul to God and Christ, and to enable it, to lay hold on God and Christ: for such is our
natural proneness to live by Sense and Carnal Reason; and such is the most transcendant Excellen∣cy of God and Christ, and of Divine things, which Faith looks unto; and so great an Inclinati∣on have we to Self-sufficiency, and so much rooted in Self-love, and inordinate love of the Creature, and so hard to take off the Soul from false bottoms; and because we are such Strangers to God na∣turally; and because there is so much Guilt of Sin still remain∣ing on us, by our renewed pro∣vocations, that we are afraid to entertain serious thoughts of God: and because of that infi∣nite Distance between God and us, we can never come to believe in him, and rely upon him, until our Hearts be renewed by the power of Grace, and this Divine Grace of Faith infused into them: Therefore must we go to God and Christ, and put up strong Cries and Prayers to God to work Faith in us, and never give over, until it be wrought in us.
And having got Faith, we must act and exercise it upon God in Christ; upon God, I say, He onely is the Object of Faith, and is worthy of it; for a Man can be in no condition, in which God is at a loss, and cannot help him: If Comforts and means of Deli∣verance be wanting, God can create Comforts, and comman Ps. 112. 4. Deliverance, Isa. 57. 19. He can bring Light out of Darkness, to him all things are possible. 1. Then, Faith assents to, and is perswaded that there is a God, the Infinite First, and Best Being of all things, and who giv∣eth Being to all things, Hebr. 11. 6. 2. That in this blessed Being are Three Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and all the Object of our Faith. 3. Faith must always act on God in Christ, and not other∣wise; for in Christ God reconciles 2 Cor. 5. 19. Col. 1. 21. the World. In Christ, God be∣comes our friend, at peace with us; by Christ, the Emnity be∣tween
God, and us is taken a∣way; in Christ, God becomes our Father, Joh. 1. 12. Gal. 3. 26. 4. Faith is acted by Medita∣ting on, Considering of, and Ap∣plying, and Appropriating of God in Christ to the Soul, lay∣ing claim to all that God is, and to all that God hath as its own. 5. It must also act upon the Promises of God in his Word, and upon God and Christ in them: God hath opened all his Heart to us in his Word, making many sweet Promises, exceeding 2 Pet. 1. 4. great and precious Promises: and also, He hath made a Covenant of Grace with us, to bestow him∣self, and all good things upon us, upon which we must live, until Promises end in Performances. Jerom. 31. These Promises, are our Spiritu∣al Treasury: Promises of Par∣don Hebr. 8. of Sin, upon Repentance and Faith; Promises of renewing sanctifying Grace; Promises of the Spirit, of Heaven, of Eternal Life and Glory, of Mansions in
the Father's House, and of a things needful in the way to th Kingdom, that we shall want no good thing, and that all thing shall work together for ou good, &c. Lastly, That our Hearts ma not be troubled, but fully satis∣fied and comforted, we must by Faith lay hold on God, take hol Isa. 56. 5. & 27. 4. Jer. 31. 32. 2 Cor. 6. 18▪ of God's Strength, which is hi Mercy in Christ; and most so∣lemnly, most considerately, and most sincerely take God for our God in Christ, and actually en∣ter into Covenant with him: This Covenant is founded upon Jesus Christ, his Satisfaction and Righteousness; and therefore we must also believe in Christ, taking him for our only Lord and Saviour, receiving him by Faith as he is offered to us in the Gospel, to be All in All to us. As God offers, so Faith re∣ceives; God offers himself in Christ, and so Faith receives him: God doth, as it were, say in the Gospel, O poor lost Sin∣ner,
come to my Son Jesus, take him for thy only Lord and Sa∣viour; and by him come to me, and take me for thy God and Father; and by Faith the poor Believer ecchoeth back, My Lord and my God, I humbly and heartily come to thee, accept of thee, close with thee; and so by Faith the believing Soul becomes one with God and Christ, and hereupon the Soul by Faith cleaves to God and Christ, and unfeignedly, and unreservedly, resigns and gives up its whole self to God in Christ, taking God in Christ for his, and in∣tirely surrenders up it self to be the Lord's. My Beloved is mine, and I am his. Now Faith thus acted, will certainly cure all our Heart-Troubles. In order then to obtain solid Comfort in all our Distresses, let us carefully look whether these Acts of Faith have really passed upon our Souls: Have we thus actually, understandingly, and sincerely believed in God, and
in Christ? Have we unfeignedly entred into Covenant with God in Christ? Can we conclude that God is our God in Christ, by our being his? If we be intirely his, he is ours for certain, 1 John 4. 19. Cant. 2. 16. If we place all our Happiness in him, Psal. 73. 25. If we give him the Throne in our Hearts, subjecting our whole selves to his Government, making God in Christ all our Love, our Trust, Joy, Desire, Delight, Fear, our All, cleaving to him alone and above all, de∣pending upon him as our chief Good; contenting our selves with him as All-sufficient for us, resigning up our selves to his good Will, to be, to do, and suf∣fer what he will: If we can and do engage our selves to sincere Obedience, that none of his Commandments be grievous to us: If in all things we give Christ the preheminence; if we have received the Spirit of Christ, as Rom. 8. 9. Gal. 4. 6. 1 Cor. 6. 17. which joins us to him, and makes
us one Spirit with him, and which is a Spirit of Adoption, whereby the Soul seeing his Interest in God as his Father, can freely go to God in all its straits. If we have the Graces of the Spirit, as Love, Meekness, Patience, Hu∣mility, &c. If we have a Re∣semblance of our Father in us, a Likeness of Disposition to God 2 Cor. 4. 10, 11. Gal. 2. 20. and Christ, the Image of God, the Life of Christ manifest in us: If we do side with God, and his Cause, in evil Times, so that we are willing to part with any thing, with all things for Christ's sake, and at his Call; If it be thus with us in the main Bent and constant Frame of our Hearts, and in the Sincerity and Integrity of our Souls, our Consciences in the sight of God bearing us witness 1 John 3. 21. that thus it is with us, then may we upon good grounds conclude, that God, the All-sufficient God, is ours, and Christ Jesus who is all Fulness, is ours, and then our Hearts should not be troubled; and to prevent and cure all our
Heart-Trouble, we must act Faith on all those things, in God and in Christ, which I mention∣ed before, and which would be too long to repeat again here; therefore I earnestly desire you to look back and view over those several particular things conside∣rable in God and in Christ, and believe in God and in Christ, ap∣plying and appropriating them to our selves, and we shall see we have no cause of Heart-Trouble. If the great God be ours, and the Lord Jesus be ours; if we have no Husbands, nor Wives, nor Sons, nor Daughters, nor Health, nor Wealth, we have enough to content and satisfy our Souls for ever. But to draw to a Conclusion, that there may be an effectual cure of all our Heart-Trouble whatever our distress may be, let us labour to act Faith on Christ, in considering and believing: 1. What he is. 2. Where he is. 3. What he hath declared.
4. What he hath promised; and all within the Confines of this Text, Ver. 2, 3. First, Let Christ's Disciples labour to believe what Christ is, and who he is. He himself asked his Disciples this Question, Mat. 16. 16. Whom say ye that I am? Peter answered, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God: I know in whom I have believed, saith the Apostle; and that sup∣ported 2 Tim. 1. 12. him: and for this know∣ledg of Jesus Christ his Lord, he counted all things but Dung and Phil. 3. 9. Dross. To believe all things that are written of Christ, is not enough; but to believe in him, is by Faith to receive him for our only Lord and Saviour, John 1. 12. Col. 2. 6. and actu∣ally, unreservedly, unfeignedly and heartily, to give up our whole selves unto him, taking him for our absolute Lord, our Head, our Treasure, and our All; and be∣lieving He is all that to us that he is. That he was made Sin for us, made Wisdom, Righteousness, San∣ctification
and Redemption to us. That he is indeed our Husband, our Head, our High-Priest, our Surety, our Ransom, our Re∣deemer. That he hath loved us, and washed us in his Blood. That he was delivered up to Death for our Offences, and rose again for our Justification. That he hath made our Peace with God by the Blood of his Cross; and purchased our Pardon, and an Inheritance for us with the Saints in Light: and that by believing in him we shall have everlasting Life, John 3. 16, 36. I say, this is to believe in Christ; and such as thus be∣lieve in him, have no cause of Heart-Trouble. And thus we must believe in him, and it is the great Commandment of God to believe in him, 1 John 3. 23. and the positive Command of Christ himself in the Text, Believe also in me. And he that hath this Faith, hath Christ, 1 John 5. 10, 12. and hath Life, Eternal Life. John 6. 47. Veri∣ly, verily, I say unto you, (saith
Christ, the Eternal Truth him∣self) He that believeth on me, hath Everlasting Life. He hath it in Pretio, in the Price of it, that was punctually paid down upon the Cross, therefore called the Purchased Possession: He hath E∣ternal Life in Promissis, in the Promises of it; it is promised to every one that believeth, God that cannot lie hath promised it, Tit. 1. 1, 2. and he hath it in Primitiis, in the first Fruits of it, the saving Graces of the Spirit, which in some measure every true Believer hath, 2 Cor. 5. 5. Ephes. 1. 13, 14. Now, he that thus believes in Christ, Christ is his; and all that Christ hath done, and suffered, and merited, is his, he hath Right and Title to it; for by Faith he is become the Child of God. Gal. 3. 26. We are all the Children of God by Faith in Je∣sus Christ. And if we be Christ's, then are we the Heirs of the Pro∣mise, Gal. 3. 29. Yea, Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Christ,
Rom. 8. 17. Yea, then, all things are ours, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22, 23. All is ours, if we be Christ's, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Ce∣phas. All the Gifts, Graces, La∣bours, Prayers, of all Gospel-Ministers, all Gospel-Ordinances are ordained and designed for our Good, Ephes. 4. 11, 12, 13. for the gathering of us in, and for the perfecting and building of us up in Christ Jesus, until we all come to Heaven. The World is ours; the Good and Evil of it, the Bitter and the Sweet of it, the Comforts and the Crosses of it, the Gains and the Losses of it, the Love and the Hate of it, the Smiles and the Frowns, the Friends and Foes in it; All is designed for, and shall further and promote our Spiritual and Eternal Welfare. Life is ours. All the Troubles, Sicknesses, Pains, evil Tidings, Persecutions, Dis∣appointmens, Losses of Relati∣ons, Shame, Reproach, or what∣ever attends this Mortal Life, shall be sanctified and blessed to
us for our Good. Yea, Death is ou, that shall be our Advan∣tge, our Gai, that shall put a full end  period to all our Sin  Suffering, and be a Door of Entrnce for us into Glory in our Father's House: Or things present, our present Fears, Sor∣rows, Miseries, Infirmities, &c. shall be so ordered and over∣ruled by the Wisdom and Love of our Father, that they shall all help us onward to Heaven: And things to come are ours, all that Glory to be revealed, that Saints Everlasting Rest that is prepa∣red for the People of God, that Crown of Righteousness, of Glory, and of Life; that King∣dom of Glory, that unspeaka∣ble, that inconceivable State of Happiness and Blessedness which Christ our Lord hath purchased by his Blood, all this is ours also. But how come we to have a Right and Title to all this? Why, saith the Apostle, thus, Ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's. As sure as Christ is God's, so
sure, if you be Christ's, All is yours: and, as I have proved, if we be true Believers in Christ, then we are Christ's, we are his Members, his Spouse, his Children; and then, what cause have we to be troubled at any thing, or in a∣ny Condition? What cause hath such a Soul to be dejected, what∣ever Crosses or Losses do befal him? Is there not enough in Christ, in the Promises, in the Purchase of Christ? Is there not enough in Heaven, in all that Glory to quiet, content and ful∣ly to satisfy our Souls? O my Beloved, (and O my base and faithless Heart) it is our base Ʋnbelief that doth us all the mis∣chief, that spoils our Peace, that hinders our Comfort, and makes us walk so heavily. O let us be∣wail this God-dishonouring Sin, this Peace-destroying Sin; and Col. 2. 6, 7. let us, who have received Jesus for our Lord and Saviour, be∣lieve that he is ours indeed, and that we are his indeed, and then act our Faith upon him, and our
Hearts shall not be troubled. Q. But may some say, 'Tis true, if Christ be ours, all is ours, we believe that; But how shall we know that Christ is ours? A. Briefly thus: If we be Christ's intirely, and sincerely Christ's, then Christ is ours: I am my Beloved's, and my Beloved is mine, Cant. 2. 16. & 6. 3. Her being Christ's, was a sure evidence to her that Christ was hers. Now it is not very hard to know whose we are, whether we be Christ's or our own, Christ's or the World's, Christ's or the Devil's: Let us take a little pains in trying and search∣ing our selves, the Matter re∣quires it; Whose are we? Put this Question seriously to our Hearts, in the sight of God: Whose am I? whose Image do I bear? by whose Spirit am I acted? who hath my Heart, my chief Love and Delight? Have we unfeignedly given up our selves to Christ? Have we actu∣ally
entred into Covenant with him, and taken him for our Head and Husband? Have we passed over and surrendred up our whole selves to Christ, our Souls, Bodies, all our Concerns? Have we given up our Hearts, Heads, Tongues, Time, Talents, Estates, Liberties, Relations, and all to Christ? Have we done this sin∣cerely? Then we have received Christ upon his Terms. If we be Christ's, and not our own, and live unto Christ, and not to our selves, Rom. 14. 9. 1 Cor. 6. 20. Gal. 2. 20. and are content that Christ should dispose of us and ours as he pleaseth; and are always labouring to be more and more like him, and still longing for more and more Com∣munion with him, &c. Then may we, upon good Grounds, conclude that Christ is ours: If we be his, he is ours. Again, if we truly believe in Christ, then he is ours, for it is by Faith that we receive him, and are united to him, and made
one with him, John 1. 12, 13. and are by his Spirit and Word regenerated, and made new Creatures, and are enabled to walk after the Spirit, and not after the Flesh, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Rom. 8. 1, 2. He that believeth, hath the Witness in himself, 1 Joh. 5. 10. he need not go far to seek: Make sure thy believ∣ing in Christ, and thou hast the Witness in thy self that he is thine, and that thou art his. Q. But how shall we know that we have true Faith, and that we do truly believe in Christ? A. Briefly, thus: If we have been made sensible of our lost Condition by Nature, of our misery by Sin, of our Unbelief; if we have sound it an hard John 16. 8. Ephes. 1. 17, 18. Rv. 3. 17. Mat. 11. 28. 1 Pet. 2. 7. Act. 20. 21. Work to believe; if we have been made weary and heavy la∣den with Sin, so as to be truly willing to part with all Sin; if we have been convinced of our absolute need of Christ, and of his incomparable Excellency, of
his All-sufficiency, and willingness John 6. 37. & 7. 37. Mat. 16. 24. Col. 2. 6. to save us; if Christ be most precious to us; if these Con∣victions have been powerful in us, to drive us from our Selves, and the Creature, and Sin; if we have hereupon been per∣swaded and enabled sincerely to come unto Christ upon his Call in the Gospel, to accept of him upon his Terms, and to receive him, as he is offered to us in the Gospel; if our whole Hearts have opened to him, and closed Joh. 14. 6. Mat. 11. 29. Joh. 1. 14, 16. Joh. 3. 16, 36. Gal. 5. 6. 1 Joh. 5. 1. Psal. 119. 97. Act. 15. 9. & 26. 18. Gal. 2. 20. with him, and we have given up our whole selves entirely to him, and taken him for our on∣ly Lord and Saviour, as the on∣ly way to God, and do most sincerely resign up our selves to his Government, trusting in him alone, and relying upon him for Life and Righteousness, for Grace and Glory, then we do believe in him, then have we this true Faith; which is further to be known thus, that it work∣eth in us true sincere Love to him, and to all that is his, his
Word, his People; your Hearts will run out after him, all your Affections will center in him. This true Faith draws Vertue from Christ to purify the Heart, and work Sanctification and Holi∣ness; 1 Joh. 5. 4. Heb. 11. 1. Eph. 1. 13. Ps. 1. last. Rom. 11. 20. 2 Cor. 5. 7. it doth crucify your Affe∣ctions to the World, it works true Repentance, and enables you to overcome the World, and to realize the Glory of Heaven, and to bear us up under all the Troubles in our way thither, as in that 11th to the Hebrews, ena∣bling us to trust and betrust our selves, our Souls and Bodies, and all our Concernments with Christ; by this Faith we shall stand, by it we walk, by it we Heb. 10. 38. live, and hold on, and hold out in following the Lamb to the end of our Life. Now certainly he that thus believes in Christ, hath no cause of Heart-Trouble, but quietly submits to the good Will of his God in Christ, under all the Di∣spensations of his Providence, while he is here in this Vale of
Tears, until he come home to his Father's House in Peace, where he shall meet his dearest Lord, and an hearty welcome. O this Faith, this precious Faith in Christ will conquer all our base Fears, moderate all our worldly Sorrows, ease our Minds perplexed with earthly Cares, and quiet our disturbed and di∣stracted Thoughts about our outward Losses and Troubles: By this Faith we shall find all our Losses made up in God and in Christ: O then labour for it, cry mightily to God for this great Gift; cry to Jesus for it, he is the Author and Finisher of Heb. 11. 1. it; and labour to act it upon him continually, and your Hearts shall not be troubled. I dare affirm, that if any thing bring Hearts-Ease in Heart-Trouble, this will do it. So long as our Faith holds up in Act and Exercise upon Christ, we shall be free from Heart-Trouble; but when our Faith sails, our Heart-Troubles pre∣vail:
As when Moses lifted up his Hands, (and his Heart too by Faith) Israel prevailed; but when his Hands were down, A∣maleck prevailed. Faith and Heart-Trouble are like a pair of Ballances, when one goes up, the other goes down: Faith is the Counter-poize of Trouble of Heart: Believe then in Jesus, act Faith on him, and that will prevent or cure Heart-Trouble. Continue in the Faith, and your Heart-Troubles will cease; believe what Christ is, and what he is to us. Secondly, Let us believe in Christ, and believe where he is. As to his Essential Presence, he Heb. 12. 2, 3. Heb. 7. 25. is in Heaven, at the Father's right Hand, making continual in∣tercession for us to the Father. He is our Advocate with the Fa∣ther, 1 John 2. 1, 2. pleading our Cause, pre∣senting all our Services, perfu∣med with his own Righteous∣ness, and resenting and feeling our Infirmities, Sorrows and Heb. 4. 14, 15. Sufferings, sympathising with us;
In all our Afflictions he is afflicted. Isa. 63. 9. He knows all our Trobles, Tri∣als, Temptations, Sicknesses, Losses and Miseries. Jesus him∣self knew, when he was on Earth, what it was to lose a Friend; He wept when his Friend Lazarus was dead. He is a most tender-hearted Saviour, a most merciful High-Priest: He sees and feels now in Heaven all the Miseries of his People upon Earth, and pleads for them there; believe this, and let not your Hearts be troubled. And as to his Spiritual and Providential Presence, he is al∣ways with his People on Earth: He is in his People, Christ in you Col. 1. 27. the Hope of Glory. He is in his Word and Ordinances by his Spirit, to bless them to his Peo∣ple. Christ is All, Col. 3. 11. and in All. He is All, that is, instead of All, of Father, Mother, Hus∣band, Wife; of Son and Daugh∣ter; instead of Health, Wealth, Liberty, and All to his People; in him dwelleth all Fulness. And he Eph. 1. 23. & 3. 17.
is also in All, he filleth all in all. In all his People, he dwells in their Hearts by Faith. All our fresh Springs are in him: All the Strength, Support, and Com∣fort we have, comes from him: He is in all Providences, be they never so bitter, so afflictive, ne∣ver so smarting, so destructive to our Earthly Comforts, Christ is in them all; his Love, his Wis∣dom, his Mercy, his Pity and Compassion is in them all, every Cup is of his preparing; it is Jesus your best Friend, (O ye poor Believers) who most dear∣ly loves you; It is he that died for you, that appoints all those Providences, orders them all, o∣ver-rules, moderates and sancti∣fies them all, and will sweeten them all; and in his due time will make them All profitable unto you, that you shall have cause one day to praise and bless his Name for them all. O that we could but believe all this, and could by Faith look unto our Jesus in all dark Providences,
and by Faith behold this Jesus managing of them, and believe his Love, Wisdom, Tenderness and Faithfulness in all; in our Sicknesses, Losses, Prisons, Re∣straints, &c. then surely our Hearts should not be troubled. Thirdly, Believe in Christ, Believe what he hath told us; In my Father's House are many Man∣sions; if it were not so, I would have Joh. 14 3. told you: I go to prepare a place for you. Let us act Faith upon these true sweet sayings of our dear Lord, who is Truth it self; In my Father's House are many Man∣sions. In my Father's House; my Fathers, and your Father's House, one House must hold us all. Joh. 20. 17. I ascend to my Fa∣ther, and your Father; to my God, and your God, and it is in tht House which is far above all Hea∣vens, all visible Elementary Hea∣vens, the third Heaven; that is, the Father's House, That House 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2. not made with hands, whose builder and maker is God, and is Eternal. This City of the living God. This
New Jerusalem; there, saith Christ, are many Mansions, many Dwellings, many fixed, abiding, lasting, everlasting Habitations: Not Tents and Tabernacles, such Luk. 16. 9. as we live in here on Earth, but Mansions, abiding-places. Is not this a most comfortable Conside∣ration to such poor Saints, as have here on Earth no certain dwelling-places, not an House of their own wherein to lay their Heads, but are forc'd to remove from place to place, still seek∣ing an Habitation, banished from Family and Friends, from Re∣lations and Acquaintance; some cast into Prisons, (while others dwell safely in their own Hou∣ses, and none to make them a∣fraid,) and others exposed to much hardship and danger; I say, this is good news to them, That in their Father's House are many Mansions; there are ever∣lasting Habitations ready to re∣ceive them, made ready for them; from which, when once they are entred, they shall never
be cast out more: from whence there shall be no more any re∣move for ever. When once their earthly House of this Taberna∣cle is broken down, they shall possess that House, not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. Let us then by Faith often look into the Father's House, and view, and review those many Mansions Rom. 5. 2, 3. that are there; and let us act Hope also, that shortly we shall possess that Place, and enjoy that blessed State: The believing fre∣quent Prospects of that place, will prevent our Heart-trouble, or cure it. If it were not so, I would have told you, saith our Lord: If there were not such a blessed State, and glorious Place for you my Disciples in the other World, after all your Sufferings in this, I would have told you so: For I have told of the many Trou∣bles you must endure in this World; and for your support and comfort, I am now telling you, what good things you shall
shortly enjoy above in my Fa∣ther's House; where is all Joy, Peace, Rest and Consolation: There are many Mansions, no Prisons, Chains, nor Fetters, but glorious Dwellings, enough to hold all the Saints that ever were, and that ever shall be in the World, where they shall en∣joy full and free Communion with the Blessed Trinity, and with one another; perfect Li∣berty, without any Restraint or remove for ever: Believe this, and let not your Hearts be trou∣bled. I go to prepare a Place for you. I have purchased this most Glo∣rious Place for you, by my Blood; I have promised it to you; now I go away to take possession of it for you, in your Name and Stead: O what an Heart-comforting, and Heart-easing Consideration should this be to us poor Belie∣vers, That our Lord went from Earth to Heaven, on purpose to prepare a Place in Heaven for us, to possess it in our Name and
stead; and in the mean time, he is preparing us by his Word and Spirit, by Afflictions and Delive∣rances for that glorious Place! Hence he is called, our Fore∣runner, Heb. 6. 20. who is for us entred into that within the Vail: So that, as sure as Christ himself ascended, and went into the Highest Hea∣vens, so sure shall all his Disci∣ples, all true Believers ascend, and enter into Heaven also; be∣cause he went thither himself, to prepare Heaven for them, by taking Possession of it in his Hu∣mane Nature for us, as our Head and Saviour. God hath pre∣pared Heb. 11. for them a City. Heaven, and heavenly Glory is said to be prepared: A Kingdom prepared Matth. 25. 34. from the Foundation of the World. If we could believe, that Christ hath prepared a Place in Heaven for us, and that Heaven will make amends for all our Suffe∣rings in the way thither; and if Heb. 11. 26 we could keep the Eye of our Faith upon that Recompence of 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18. Reward, that far more exceeding
and eternal weight of Glory, we should bear up bravely under all our Sufferings, and not have our Hearts troubled. Let us then look more Heaven∣ward, more to our Father's Phil. 3. 20. House; Let us have our Conver∣sations more in Heaven, and set Col. 3. 1. 2, 3. our Affections more upon things above; upon that blessed State and Place above; and know, That when Christ, who is our Life, shall appear, we shall appear with him in Glory. Believe this, and be comforted. Certainly we are too much taken up with, and too sollici∣tous about our earthly Taber∣nacles, these Houses of Clay, whose Foundation is in the Dust, crushed before the Moth: We are always minding the Disea∣ses, Distempers and Dangers of our Bodies, those old crazy tot∣tering Houses, the Prisons of our Souls: we mind Earthly Places too much, but too little those heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, Eph. 2. 6. where we shall shortly sit with
him. Were we more heavenly-minded, we should be more free from Heart-trouble, and dis∣quietness of mind. Lastly; To prevent and cure 4ly. all our Heart-trouble; Let us la∣bour to believe, what Christ hath promised here in the Text: Verse 3. I will come again, and receive you to my self, that where I am, ye may be also. Most sweet and comfortable Promises! I will come again. So ver. 18. I will come again; I will not leave you comfortless: For when I am absent from you, in respect of my bodily Presence, I will send the Comforter to you, that shall abide with you for ever. And I my self will come again unto you: you shall not long be without my Company. Tho' Christ seems to withdraw and hide his Face from his People, it shall be but a little moment. Isa. 54. 7, 8. He will return again and have Mercy; yea, with everlasting kindness will he return. I will come again; I will not stay long from you,
my Heart is still towards you, while I am absent, therefore I will come quickly, Rev. 3. 11. I will come to you with my Messenger Death; tho' it be the King of Terrours in it self, and a grim Porter; yet, by my co∣ming with it, it shall be to you the King of Comforts: I will come with it, by my Spirit, to strengthen you to look it in the Face, to apply to you the virtue of my Death, and thereby to take out the Sting of it; and I will come to you by my Angels, to secure your Souls through the Region of Devils, into my Fa∣ther's House. If Death did come alone to us, it would be terrible to us indeed, its ghastly Counte∣nance would affright us; but here is the Comfort, That Christ our dearest Lord, will come with Death, to sweeten it to us, and support us under it. This pre∣vented David's fear, Psal. 23. 4. When I walk thorow the valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear no Evil, for thou art with me.
O welcome Death! when Christ comes with it. This bitter Cup, of which we must all drink, is brought to us by the hand of our dearest Lord: This last stroke is given by the hand of Love; it is a taking us home to our Father's House; This last Enemy hath Christ conquered for us; because his Children are partakers of Flesh and Blood, He likewise took part of the same, that through Death (that is, his own Death) he might destroy him that had the power of Death, that is, Hb. 2. 14. the Devil, and deliver them, who through fear of Death, were all their life time subject to Bondage. Jesus knew what Death was, he himself had the Pangs of Death upon him: Sin the Sting of Isa. 53. 6. Death was laid on him; and the Law, which is the strength of Sin, the Curse of the Law was upon him: but now for us, who Gal. 3. 13. believe in Jesus, the sting and strength of Death is taken out, and when we die, we shall die in the Lord, Sleep in Jesus; in Uni∣on
and Communion with Jesus; we shall fall asleep in the Blessed Arms of our dear Redeemer. He will come then to keep us Com∣pany, through that dark Entry (Death), into the Father's House: His Angels shall carry our Souls into Abraham's Bosom, yea, into the Father's Bosom. O that we would make sure of our Union with Christ; and then let us believe, that he will come with Death, to translate our Souls out of these Earthly Tabernacles, these Prison-Houses, these Hou∣ses of Bondage (wherein our poor Souls have been fetter'd and chain'd, cloy'd and clog'd with Corruptions and Tempta∣tions, Rom. 8. 23. 2 Cor. 5. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 1 Thess. 4. 17. kept at a distance, and absent from the Lord, and in which they have been groaning for deliverance) into the glori∣ous Liberty of the Sons of God, in their Father's House, and shall ever be with the Lord. Secondly, I will receive you to my self: O sweet Promise. This is all the Hope, all the Desire, all
the Longing, Thirsting, Breath∣ing of poor Believers, viz. that Christ would take them to him∣self. This is the Sum of all ther Prayers and Labours, that they may be fitted for Christ, and then that Christ would take them to himself. Well, saith Christ, work and wait a little longer; do, and suffer a little more; act your Faith and Patience a lit∣tle longer, and I will come to you, and take you home to my self, where your Souls shall be at Rest for ever. The Saints, while they are here, at home in the Body, they are absent from the Lord; they see but in part, darkly, and know but in part, very imperfectly, and enjoy but a little, a very little of God and Christ. O how sweet are a few Drops, a few Glimpses and Glan∣ces of Divine Love now to a poor Soul; the least Cast of Christ's Eye, the least Beam of his Loving-kindness, the least Intimation of his Favour, the least Hint of his Goodness, how
refreshing to a poor Believer? But when Christ shall receive them to himself, they shall then 1 John 3. 2, 3. Ps. 17. 15. see him as he is, shall be like him, and shall be satisfied with his Like∣ness: Then shall they see him, whom their Souls love, Face to Face: and then will Jesus open to them all the Treasures of his Love and Grace, to their ever∣lasting Consolation: They shall Psal. 16. last. then be admitted into the glori∣ous Presence of the great God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ, in whose Presence is fulness of Joy, and at whose right Hand are Pleasures for ever-more. When the World shall cast them out, and their Ha∣bitations shall cast them out, and shall know them no more; yea, when their Houses of Clay shall be broken down and dissolved, and can hold them no longer, then will Jesus, blessed Jesus, re∣ceive them to himself: Then shall they be solemnly married to their glorious Bridegroom, the King of Heaven's Son, the Prince of the Kings of the Earth; He
will receive them to himself, he will take them for his Bride, em∣brace them in his everlasting Arms, and lay them in his blessed Bosom for ever and ever. I will receive you to my self, into the nearest Union and Commu∣nion with my self; and there∣fore be not unwilling to part with your dear Relations; be not afraid to be separated from your Bodies, your old Friends; for when these earthly Taber∣nacles are dissolved, immediate∣ly I will receive you to my self, which is best of all. You shall then Phil. 1. 23. enjoy the Fruits of all my Suf∣ferings, Death, Resurrection, Ascension and Intercession, and the Fruits of all your own La∣bours, Prayers, Tears, and Suf∣ferings; and shall find that I am faithful in making good all my Promises, and that your Labour was not in vain in the Lord; then shall there be no more any distance between you and me for ever. Comfort your selves, and comfort one another with these
words; Believe this, and let not your Hearts be troubled. Thirdly, That where I am, ye may be also: And what more can be desired? Where is Christ, but at the right Hand of the Ma∣jesty Heb. 12. 2. on high, far above all Prin∣cipalities and Powers, far above all Heavens; there shall you be al∣so. O admirable, astonishing Dignity, that blessed Jesus will advance his poor Saints unto at that Day! This high and won∣derful Honour shall all his Saints have; they shall now receive the Kingdom prepared for them, and that Crown of Glory, of Righteousness and of Life, which Christ hath purchased for them, perfectly freed now from all Sin and Sorrow, and stated in an unchangeable state of Happiness and Blessedness. What cause have we then to grieve for our dear Relations, whom Christ hath taken to himself, and pla∣ced in the Father's House, who are now sitting at his right Hand
in Glory, and singing Hallelu∣jahs? And could we but firmly believe these Promises of our Lord, and act our Faith in medi∣tating fixedly on them, and on Jesus in them, applying and appropriating them, and Christ in them, to our own Souls, con∣sidering and pondering on them, until our Hearts be warmed, and our Affections stirred and kindled with them, acting also Hope, Love, Joy, Desire, De∣light, Hunger, Thirst, Pant∣ing, Breathing; pouring out our Hearts in Prayer to God for his Spirit, to bring home these Promises to our Souls in Power, fixing them upon our Hearts, and eping us to lay hold on them, and upon Christ in them, and resigning up our whole Souls to Christ in them, stedfastly rely∣ing on his Goodness and Faith∣fulness, and trusting in him; I say, could we but do so, and in the strength of God betrust our whole selves, & all our Concerns,
thus with Christ, and live in the lively Exercises of Faith thus on God, and on Christ, we should find this to be Hearts-Ease to us in all our Heart-Trou∣ble. Behold, I lay in Sion a chief Corner-Stone, Elect, Precious; and he that believeth in him, shall not be confounded, 1 Pet. 2. 6. Let all Heart-Trouble cease, Let nought disturb your Peace, Who Faith in God profess, And in his Son no less. For in the Father's House Are many Mansions sweet, Christ hath prepar'd for us, When we for them made meet. THE END.
Postscript. Quest. IT may be demanded, That having heard the Excel∣lency and usefulness of this Sove∣raign Medicine to cure Heart-Trou∣ble, namely, Faith in God and in Christ; Can you tell us how we may get this Faith? and what means we shall use to obtain it? Answ. I shall endeavour, by the help of God's Spirit, and Scripture-Light, to direct you herein, and as briefly as I may. First, You must be convinced  of your Ʋnbelief, of the great∣ness of the Sin of Ʋnbelief, and of your absolute need of Faith: Of these three things you must be fully convinced. 1. Of your Ʋnbelief; for most People think they have Faith, and that they never were with∣out
it, and therefore labour not for it. Pray earnestly therefore that the Holy Spirit may be sent into your Hearts to work this Conviction in you, for it's his pro∣per Work, John 16. 8. to con∣vince the World of Sin, because they believe not on me, saith our Lord: this is the great Sin, the damning Sin of the World, their not believing on Christ. Now that we may be convinced, that by Nature we have no Faith, let us consider these Scriptures, Ephes. 2. 1, 2, 12. and that until we are regenerate and born again, we have no Faith, is evident from John 1. 12, 13. there, be∣lieving in Christ, and Regenera∣tion, are inseparably joined to∣gether; Acts 15. 9. & 26. 18. & 20. 21. From which Scrip∣tures it is most evident, that such as are Strangers to the Heart-pu∣rifying, the Heart-sanctifying Work of Faith, have no Faith; if we have not truly repented, nor know any saving Change wrought in us, and upon us, by
the Spirit of God; for certain, what-ever we think, we have no true Saving-Faith, it is but a Fancy: of this then we must be fully convinced, and must most heartily beg the help of the Spi∣rit to convince us. 2. Of the greatness of the Sin of Unbelief; it binds the Guilt of all other Sins upon us; it is Disobedience and Rebellion a∣gainst the great God; for he commands us to believe, 1 John 3. 21. and by our Unbelief, we make God a Liar, 1 John 5. 10. O horrible Wickedness! And, 3. We must be convinced also of our absolute need of Faith, we must needs have it, or we must perish. Without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. without it we cannot be the Children of God, John 1. 12. Gal. 3. 26. without it we can have no pardon of Sin, Acts 10. 43. Rom. 3. 25. John 8. 24. And in what a dangerous Case are we, so long as we lie under the guilt of all our Sins? With∣out
Faith we are not reconciled to God, nor justified, Rom. 3. 22. & 5. 1. Nor can we be sancti∣fied, Acts 26. 18. 2 Thess. 2. 13. No access to God but by Faith, Rom. 5. 2. Ephes. 2. 18. No li∣ving the Life of Religion, nor bearing up under Affliction, nor holding out to the End without Faith, Heb. 11. No Salvation, nor Eternal Life without it, Ephes. 2. 18. Joh. 3. 16, 36. Heb. 10. last. Of all these things we must be convinced, if ever we will have Faith. Secondly; If we would have  Faith, we must diligently search the Scriptures, read the Gospel, attend on the reading and preaching of the Gospel for this very end, that we may get Faith by it: I say, for this very end, certainly, that should be our End in reading and in hearing the Word, which was God's End in publishing of it; now this was his End in publishing of it, John 20. 21. Rom▪ 16. 25, 26.
Rom. 10. 17. Acts 13. 48. Ephes. 1. 13. This is the ordinary Means appointed by God, to work Faith in the Souls of Men, as appears by Acts 2. 42. and 4. 4. and 11. 20, 21. and many more. There are few that read, and hear the Word for this End, and therefore get no Faith by it. Now that the Word read, and heard, may be effectual to work this precious, this most necessa∣ry Grace of Faith in us, there are some things Antecedent, some Concomitant, and some Consequent upon our attendance on the Word, and our use of it. First; Some things Antece∣dent, are necessary; (1.) Preparation; For want of this the Word most times proves ineffectual. It is the empty, hungry-Soul that relisheth and taketh in this Food, Jam. 1. 21. 1 Pet. 2. 1. Mat. 13. 22. usually our Success is according to our preparation; as in Prayer, Psal.
10. 17. compare 2 Chron. 12. 14. with 2 Chron. 19. 3. make Con∣science then of preparation. (2.) Prayer: Pour out your Hearts to God in Prayer for a Blessing on the Word, that you read or hear. O, lift up a Cry to God, and say, Lord, make this Word effectual to work Faith in my Soul, &c. (3.) Earnest Desire and Ex∣pectation of meeting God in the Word, and of his blessing on it: if we expect nothing from it, no wonder if we receive no∣thing: there is a fulness of Bles∣sing in the Gospel, Rom. 15. 29. We should bring hungry and thirsty Souls after God, the Li∣ving God, as Psal. 63. 1, 2, 3. and 84. 1, 2. God filleth the Hun∣gry with good things, Luk. 1. 53. Secondly; Some things are Concomitant: As, (1.) We must read and hear it as the Word of God, and not as the Word of Man, 1 Thess. 2. 13. Acts 10. 33. and we must ac∣knowledg
God's Authority in it. (2.) Receive it with Meekness, opening our Hearts to it, and give it the most tender enter∣tainment, Jam. 1. 21. (3.) With Love, readiness of Mind, and gladness of Heart, 2 Thess. 2. 10. Acts 2. 41. (4.) With Faith, giving cre∣dit to it, believing it to be the Word of God, Heb. 4. 2. (5.) We must be careful to re∣member it: See what great stress is laid upon our remembring, 1 Cor. 15. 2. Our Salvation lies upon it, Psal. 119. 11. Love the Word, for Love is the Act of Memory. (6.) Prayer must be added a∣gain for a Blessing. Thirdly; Some things must be done afterward also. As, 1. Meditation upon what you have heard and read; for want of this usually all is lost. I am perswaded, this is one great Reason why most profit so little
by the Word, because they make no Conscience of Meditation; they hear and read, but never think more on it afterwards: So Preaching, Hearing, Reading, and all lost; and Souls, and Hea∣ven, and all lost. For God's sake then, whose Word you read and hear, and for your own Souls sake, if you are not willing they should perish for want of Faith, make Consci∣ence of Meditation on the Word, Psal. 1. 2. and 119. 97. if ever you get good by the Word, me∣ditate upon it. (2.) Application of it; take it home to your selves, Job 5. 27. Let it sink down into your Hearts, saith Christ; it must be an ingrafted Word, you must receive it into your Hearts, and not into your Heads only, 2 Cor. 4. 6. your Hearts must be joined to it, and mix'd with it. (3.) Practice: Yielding up our selves to the Government of it, making it the Standard and Rule of our whole Conversa∣tion.
We must be doers of the Word, and not hearers only, lest we deceive our own Souls, Jam. 1. 22. 1 Pet. 1. 22. Mat. 7. 22, 24. And in observing these Scripture-Rules here laid down, in the careful and conscientious use of God's Word after this manner, you may not doubt but the Holy Spirit of God will work with the Word of God, to make it effectual to work this most pre∣cious Grace of Faith in us, whereby to believe in God and in Christ, to the Consolation and eternal Salvation of our Souls: But if we neglect the Means God hath ordained to get Faith, and for want of it, die in our Sins, and perish eternally, our De∣struction will be of our selves. Thirdly; Would we have  Faith? let us engage our whole Souls in the deep and serious consideration of the infinite, un∣speakable, unconceivable Love of God the Father, in this, the highest and fullest demonstration
of it, in giving his Son, his on∣ly begotten Son, to be a Sin-Of∣fering, a Sacrifice, a Ransom for poor Sinners, and that for this very end and purpose, that we poor Sinners might believe in him, and by believing, might not perish, but might have Eter∣nal Life. I pray read and pon∣der upon the following Texts, and let your most serious Thoughts fix on them, and me∣ditate on them, Isa. 53. through∣out; John 3. 16, 17. Rom. 3. 25. Rom. 5. 8, 10. Prov. 8. 30. Col. 1. 12, 13. 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20, 21. Rom. 8. 3. & 8. 32. with many other, which for brevity sake I cannot transcribe: If we can but believe this wonderful Love of God the Father, in giving his dear Son to be a Surety, a Sin-Offering, to lay all our Iniquities on him; that he was pleased to bruise him, and put him to grief for us; and consider and medi∣tate upon the Heighth and Depth, the Breadth and Length of this immense, incomprehensible Love
of God in giving his Son, and that on purpose, that we might believe in him, and by believing might have Eternal Life; I say, it will greatly help us to believe in his Son, to accept of this his unspeakable Gift, and to receive him as he is offered to us in the Gospel. Moreover, let us also consider of, and deeply meditate upon the transcendent Love of the Son of God himself; who, though he were the Delight of his Fa∣ther, and lay in the Bosom of his Prov. 8. 30, 31. Father, even then his Delights were with the Sons of Men, then was his Heart full of Love to poor Sinners; and his Love brought him down from Heaven to Earth, to assume Humane Na∣ture, to take upon him all the Sins of his People, to bear them on his Soul & Body, in the Garden, there sweating great drops of Blood, and on the Cross, there pouring out his Heart-Blood, made a Curse, endured the full measure of the Wrath of God due for Sin, and
became the Ransom of Souls, Philip. 2. 6, 7, 8. Luke 22. 44. Gal. 2. 20. He loved us, and gave himself for us: Loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his Blood, Rev. 1. 6. 1 Pet. 1. 18. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Gal. 3. 13. Tit. 2. 14. But while I am writing these things, I cannot but conceive an Indignation against my self, and heartily wish, I were filled with shame, sorrow, and grief of Spi∣rit, that having read and heard so often of the surpassing Love of God the Father, in giving his Son; and so often of the un∣speakable Love of Jesus, and to be no more affected with it, no more sensible of it; to have my Affections no more stirred and moved, no more quickned and warmed: Alas, my dead Heart, my Adamantine Heart! Lord, sprinkle it with that Blood, Lord shed abroad that Love of thine upon my Heart abundantly by the Holy Ghost; Lord Jesus, ma∣nifest thy Love to me, that I may love thee. I am ashamed
and pained for want of Love to God, to Jesus; O that I could believe thy Love to my Soul, then I should not chuse but love thee. Lord, I believe, help my Unbelief. The consideration of this Love of God, and of Christ, is a means to work Faith; try it, I pray you, and you will find it so. Fourthly; Improve and act  the Historical Faith you have, on the Doctrines, Promises, and Threatnings in the Gospel, which you profess you do believe. Act the Faith you have on the Joh. 6. 37. & 7. 37. Mat. 11. 28, 29. Doctrines of the Gospel, the Promises of Rest for your Souls, Pardon for your Sins, Life and Righteousness, Grace and Glo∣ry made to those that believe in Christ, and to none else. Be∣lieve and think what Heaven is, that state of infinite Blessedness, in the seeing and enjoying the Blessed God to all Eternity: Believe what Eternal Life is, 2 Thess. 1. 9, 10. Eternal Glory; and believe also
what Hell is, separation from God; Go ye Cursed into Ever∣lasting Fire; Lakes of Fire and Brimstone, everlasting Death, the Wrath of God, Damnation; and seeing you profess that you believe all this, then believe al∣so and consider it well, that nei∣ther is Heaven's infinite Happi∣ness to be attained, nor Hell's unspeakable Misery to be a∣voided, but only by believing in the Lord Jesus Christ, John 3. 16, 17, 36. John 8. 24. Fifthly; Would you have  Faith? then seek it diligently; pray, O pray for it as for your Lives, cry mightily to God for it; pour out your Hearts to God in Prayer for it; pray continually for Faith, pray without ceasing, be importu∣nate with God for it, go all Day and Night panting and breathing after it, O that God would give me Faith! Go to Jesus also for it, cry to him, for he is the Author as well as the
Object of it, Heb. 12. 1, 2. It it is the Gift of God, O pray for it. Lastly; Consider seriously,  and often, how wonderful wil∣ling God is that you should be∣lieve in Christ, as you have heard; and how much he is dis∣pleased with those that will not believe in him; and how dread∣fully he hath threatned them, as Rev. 21. 8. Also consider how exceeding willing Jesus Christ himself is, that poor Sinners should come to him, and believe in him; how sweetly he calls them, how freely he offers him∣self, and All he is, to them, be they never so bad, never so vile and wicked: Ho, every one that thirsteth, Isa. 55. 1. they that have no Worthiness in them, no∣thing but Sin and Misery, John 6. 37. & 7. 37. Rev. 3. 18. & 21. 11. O, set your Hearts to the consideration of the incom∣parable unparallel'd Love of Je∣sus, in dying that cursed Death
of the Cross for Sinners: Con∣sider and meditate, hold your Hearts to it, until your Hearts be affected with his Love, his Love that passeth the Love of Women, Love passing Under∣standing; and consider how well he deserves, and how much he challengeth your Love. Consider once again, what a most lovely Person Jesus is, who is altoge∣ther Heb. 1. 3. Mat. 28. 18. lovely, the Brightness of his Father's Glory, in whom dwells all Fulness, and in whom is all Power in Heaven and Earth; and labour to affect your Hearts with his most admirable Excellencies, and then come unto him weary and heavy laden with your Sins, willing to part with them all; give up your whole selves to him, give him your whole Hearts, and take him for your Head and Husband, for your only Lord and Saviour; enter actually into Covenant with him, to become his, and his alone, and his for ever. Thus work out your Sal∣vation, and your Consolation,
by believing in Jesus, in Blessed, All-sufficient Jesus, trusting to him, betrusting all with him, and God will work in you both to will and to do, Phil. 2. 12, 13. Use these Means in the strength of God, and doubt not, but in the use of them, you shall ob∣tain this precious Faith; which having, and acting, you shall find it to be your Hearts-Ease in all your Heart-Trouble. Laus Soli Deo. FINIS
