b5105a e107_19 99871481 123892
Rules for Kings, AND Good Counsell for Subjects: Being a collection of certaine places of holy Scripture, directing the one to Governe, and the other to obey. Most necessary for all men that are desirous to square their actions according to the Rule of God's Law. Whereunto is added a Prayer for the KING In these times of Contradictions. classical scene with two people LONDON, Printed, for T. Paibody, and E. Dobson, and are to be sold in Queens-head-Alley in Pater noster-row, 1642.
To the Reader. IN a time when humane learning, and the discipline and precepts of men are so much despised, as in these our days; I thought it not labour lost to spend some minutes in collecting a few Texts of Scripture, which may be supposed the men of this age have either never read, or totally forgotten. To which short sentence, I have added none of myne own, lest to the Zealots it should appeare Apocryphall, or my selfe seem to arrogate the wisdom of the son of Sirach. But accord∣ing to the times, with as little learning and discretion as may be, I have in a very disorderly order patch them up under severall heads; The first two being of commands, that we should reverence our Prince, which I hope will be obeyed, though he were a Tyrant. For the third, that the King loveth Iudgement: Those that thinke he ful∣fils not the Scripture in that, let them fulfill it themselves in praying for him, which if done in faith no doubt they shall obtaine that bles∣sing, and (according to the two next points) will follow Gods care of his annoynted and a punishment on his advarsaries: that we may re∣ceive him again with triumph and thanksgiving. Lastly, if it be ac∣knowledged to be an office Jure Divine, (by all good Christians I am sure it is) the last point, an exhortation to obedience will not be unseasonable, concluding with a Prayer, that under him we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godlinesse and honesty, and that we may so do: God of his Mercy grant us for his son Christ Jesus sake our Saviour and Redeemer. Thine E. B.
Rules for Kings, and good Coun∣sell for Subjects. Speake not evill of the King. ACts 23.5. Thou shalt not speak evill of the Ruler of thy people. Eccles. 10.20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, for a bird of the ayre shall carry the voyce, and that which hath wings shall carry the matter. Prov. 30.32. If thou hast thought evill of the King, Iay thine hand upon thy mouth. Jude 8. These filthy dreamers despise dominion, & speak evil of dignities. V. 10. But these speake evill of those things which they know not, but what they know naturally. V. 11. Not unto them, for they shall perish in the gainsaying of Core. 2 Pet. 2.9. The Lord knoweth how to reserve the unjust to the day of Iudgement to be punished. V. 10. But chiefly them that despise government, presumptions are they, selfe willed, they are not afraid to speak evill of dignities. V. 12. But these are naturall bruit beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, speake evill of the things that they understand not, and shall utterly perish in their own corruption. V. 13. And shall receive the reward of righteousnesse. 2 Sam. 19.21. Shall not Shemei be put to death for this, because he cursed the Lords annoynted. 1 King. 2.9. Now therefore hold him not guiltlesse, for thou art a wise man, and knowest what thou oughtest to do unto him, but his hoare head bring thou down to the grave with bloud. Exod. 22.28. Thou shalt not revile the Iudges, not curse the Ruler of thy people. Exalt not thy selfe against the King. ECcles. 8.3. Be not hasty to go out of his sight: stand not in an evill thing for he doth whatsoever pleaseth him. V. 4. Where the word of a King is, there is power; and who may say unto him what doest thou? Prov. 16.14. The wrath of a King is as messengers of death; but a wise man will pacifie it. Chap. 19.12. The Kings wrath is as the roaring of a Lyon, but his favour is as dew upon the grasse. V. 10. Delight is not seemely for a foole, much lesse for a servant to have rule over Princes.
Cha. 17.26. To punish the Iust is not good, not to strick Princes for equity. Cha. 25.6. Put not forth thy selfe in the presence of the King, and stand not in the place of great men. V. 7. For better is it that it be said unto thee, come up hither, than that thou should'st be put lower in the presēce of the Prince whō thine eyes have seen. Cha. 30.31. Against a King there is no rising up. V. 32. If thou hast done foolishly in lifting up thy selfe, lay thine hand up∣on thy mouth. Cha. 20.2. The feare of a King is as the roaring of a Lyon, who so provo∣keth him to anger, sinneth against his own soule. The King loveth Iudgement. Prov. 16.10. A Divine sentence is in the lips of the King, his mouth transgresseth not in Iudgement. V. 12. It is an abomination to Kings to commit wickednesse, for the throne is established by righteousnesse. V. 13. Righteous lips are the delight of Kings, and they love him that speaketh right. Cha. 20 8. A King that sitteth in the throne of judgement scattereth away all evill with his eyes V. 20. A wise King scattereth the wicked, and bringeth the wheele over them. V. 28. Mercy and truth, preserve the King, and his throne is upholden by mercy. Cha. 22.11. He that loveth purenesse of heart, for the grace of his lipps, the King shall be his friend. V. 29. Seest thou a man diligent in his businesse? he shall stand before Kings, he shall not stand before meane men. Cha. 29 4. The King by judgement established the land. V. 14. The King that faithfully judgeth the poore, his throne shall be esta∣blished for ever. Rom. 13.3. Rulers are not a terror to good works but to the evill, wilt thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou shalt have praise of the same. V. 4. For he is the Minister of God to thee for good, but if thou do that which is evill, be afraid: For he beareth not the sword in vaine, or he is the Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that doth evill. Psa. 72 4. The King shall judge the poore of the people, he shall save the children of the needy, and shall break in pieces the oppressor. 1 Pet. 2.14. He is sent for the punishment of evill doers, and for the prayse of them that do well. Gods care of his Annoynted. PSal 105.15. Touch not mine Annoynted, and do my Prophets no harme. 2 Sam. 22.49. It is God that bringeth me forth from mine enemies, thou hast delivered me from the violent man.
V. 51. He is the tower of Salvation for his King, and sheweth mercy to his Annoynted. Psa. 18.50. Great deliverance giveth he to his King, and sheweth mercy to his annoynted. Psa. 28.8. The Lord is his strength, he is the saving strēgth of his anointed. Psa 20.6. Now know that the Lord saveth his annoynted, he will heare him from his holy heaven, with the saving strength of his right hand. Psa. 21.3. Thou preventest him with the blessings of goodnesse, thou set∣test a crown of pure gold upon his head. V. 5. Honour and Majesty hast thou laid upon him. V. 6. For thou hast made him blessed for ever, thou hast made him excee∣ding glad with thy countenance. Psal. 61.6. Thou wilt prolong the Kings life, and his yeares, as many ge∣nerations. V. 7. He shall abide before God for ever. The punishment of his Adversaries. 1 SAm. 11.12. And the people said unto Samuel, who is he that said, shall Saul raigne over us? bring the men that we may put them to death. Jos. 1.18. Whosoever he be that doth rebell against thy commandement, and will not hearken unto thy words in all things that thou commandest him, he shall be put to death. Psa. 45.5. Thine arrows are sharp in the heart of the Kings enemies, whereby the people fall under thee. Psa. 89.23. I will beat down his foes before his face, and plague them that hate him. Psa. 132 18. His enemies wil I cloth with shame, but upon himself shal his crown flourish. His Triumph and Thanksgiving. PSal. 144.1. Blessed be the Lord my strength, which teacheth my hands to war and my fingers to fight. V. 2. My goodnesse and my fortresse, my high tower and my deliverer, my shield and he in whom I trust, who subdued my people under me. V. 10. It is he that giveth salvation to Kings, who delivereth David his servant from the hurtfull sword. Psa. 21.2. Thou hast given him his hearts desire, and hast not witholden the request of his lips. 1 Sam. 2.10. The adversaries of the Lord shall be broken to pieces, out of heaven shall be thunder upon them: The Lord shall judge the ends of the earth, & he shall give strength unto his K. & exalt the horn of his Annointed 2 Sam. 22.40. Thou hast guided me with strength to battle, them that rose up against me, hast thou subdued under me. V. 44. Thou hast delivered me from the strivings of my people. V. 47. The Lord liveth and blessed be my rock, and exalted be the God of the rock of my salvation. V. 48. It is God that avengeth me, and that bringeth down the people under me. V. 49. Thou also hast lifted me up on high, above them that rose up against me, thou hast delivered me from the violent man,
V. 50. Therefore will I give thanks to theee, O Lord, among the heather and will sing prayses unto thy Name. Exhortation to Odedience. 1 PEt. 2.13. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreame. V. 14. O▪ unto Governors, as unto them as are sent by him. V. 17. Feare God, honor the King. Tit. 3.1. Put them in mind to be subject unto the higher powers, to obey Magistrates, to be ready to every good work. Rom. 13.1. Let every soule be subject unto the higher powers: for there is no power but of God, the powers that be are ordained of God. V. 2. Whosoever therfore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God: and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation. V. 5. Wherefore ye must needs be subject not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. V. 6. For this cause pay you tribut also, for they are Gods Ministers atten∣ding continually upon this very thing. V. 7. Render therfore to all their dues, tribut to whom tribut is due, cu∣stome to whom custom, feare to whom feare, honor to whom honor. Mark. 12.17. Render to Caesar the things that are Caesars, and to God the things that are Gods. Eccles. 8.2. I counsell thee to keep the Kings command, and that in re∣gard of the oath of God. Pray for the King. 1 Tim. 2.1. I exhort therefore that first of all supplications, prayers, inter∣cessions and giving of thanks be made for all men. V. 2. For Kings and all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godlinesse and honesty. V. 3. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour. A Prayer for the King. GIve the King thy Iudgements, O God, and thy righteousnesse unto the Kings son, Psal 72.1.4. That he may judge the poore of the people, and save the children of the needy, and break in pieces the oppressor, Prov. 25.5. Take away the wicked, O God, from before the King, that his throne may be established in righteousnesse, Psal. 89.44. But, O Lord, how hast thou made his glory to cease, and cast his throne down to the ground, Prov. 28.2. Even for the transgression of our land, many are the Princes thereof. It is for our manifold sins and offences, O God, that Psal. 89.38. thou hast cast off and abhorred, that thou hast been wroth with
thine annoynted, V. 42. Thou hast set up the right hand of his adversaries: thou hast made all his enemies to rejoyce: Lam. 3.14. He hath been a derision to all his people, and their song all the day. Ezek. 7.27. ô God, thou hast caused the King to mourn, and the Prince hast thou clothed with desolation, & the hands of the people of the land are troubled; 2 Sam. 3.39. He is now weak ô Lord, though annointed King and these men the sons of Zerviah, be too hard for him, thou, ô Lord, shall reward the doers of evill according to their wickednesse: Eze. 11.2. These ô Lord, are the men that devise mischiefe, and give wicked councell in this City. Eccles. 10.7. O God we have seen servants upon horses, and I rinces walking as servants upon the earth: Lam. 5.8. Servants have ruled over us, ô Lord, and there is none that doth deliver us out of their hand: Cha. 4.20. The annoynted of thee, ô Lord, hath beene taken in their pits, of whom we said, under his shadow we shall live among the heathen, Chro. 21.17. Even we it is that have sinned, and done evill indeed, but as for thine annoynted what hath he done? Lot thine hand we pray thee, ô Lord our God, be on us, but not on thine annoynted that he should be plagued, 2 Sam. 18 3. for he is worth ten thousand of us: Psal. 89.46. Lord, how long wilt thou hide thy selfe for ever? shall thy wrath burn like fire? V. 50. Remember Lord, the reproach of thy servant, how he doth beare in his bosome the reproach of all the mighty people: V. 51. Wherewith thine enemies have reproached, ô Lord, where∣with they have reproached the foot-steps of thine annoynted. 2 Sam. 20.21. If there be any son of Bichri that shall lift up his hand against the King, Deliver him, ô Lord, and let the people cut off his head, that the trumpet may sound a re∣treat of peace in our land: Numb. 16.32. Thou that didest cause the earth to swallow up the congregation of Korah, V. 35. and consmedst with sire those 250 Princes of the Assembly, that were famous in the Congregaion, for rebel∣ling agaist Moses, V. 5. Protect and defend him, ô Lord, whom thou hast chosen from the outrage of his people, and cause him to come neere unto thee, Chap. 17.10 and let his rod bud and blossome to be kept for a taken, against those Rebels that rise up against him, 1 Sam. 24.8. and let them stoup with their face to the earth, and bow themselves before thine annoynted: V 10. Let their eyes spare him, ô Lord, and let not them put forth their hand against our Lord the King, for hee is thine annoynted: V. 5. Let their hearts (mite them, yea do thou smite those, ô Lord, that shall cut off his skirt, or dvest him of his Royall roab and authority. Chap. 26 9. And let none that stretch forth their hands against thine annoyn∣ted be guiltlesse. Iudges 17.6. Let us not see such dayes, ô God, as when there was no King in Israel, lest every man do that which is right in his own eyes: V. 5. and make himselfe Gods, and consecrate his sons for his priests, or take to himselfe Priests without consecration. O Lord God, put an end to these dayes of trouble and confusion, and thou having given us a just King, not in thine anger, but in thy mercy, give us joy of our King, and Psalme 63.11. let the King rejoyce in thee, ô God, and let the mouth of those that speake lyes be stopped, V. 9. and those that seeke his soule to destroy it, let them go into the lower parts of the earth; Vers. 10. and let them fall by the sword, and be a portion for Foxes: Psal. 18.47 de thou, ô God, his avenger, and subdue the people under him. Isaiah 45.1. Thou,
ô Lord God that didst annoynt Cyrus, whose hand thou didst strengthen to subdue Nations before him, before whom thou didst open the two leaved gates; Verse . bfore whom thou didst go, to make the crooked places straight, and to breake in pieces the gates of brasse: V. 3. To whom thou gavest the hidden riches of secret places, V. 4 that didst call him by his name, though he knew thee not; Verse 5. That didst gird him, though thou wert unkown unto him; preserve thou thy ser∣vant our gracious King, and 2 Sam. 22.40. gird him, ô Lord, with strength in battle th those that rise against him, may be subdued under him, Ver. 44. and deliver him, ô God▪ from the strivings of his people: Let the servants of our Lord the King be no longer a reproach and a by-word, let them not be called evill coun∣sellors and enemies to the state that endeavour to do him service: Proverbs 19.6 But let many entreat the favour of our good Prince, Chap. 16.15. and in the light of the Kings countenance, let there be life, and let his favour be as a cloud of the latter raine. Ester 6.7. And for the man whom the King delighteth to honour, V. 9. let him be clothed in Royall apparell, and let him be brought on horseback through the City, and proclaimed before him, thus shall it be done to the man whom the King delighteth to honour; and we beseech thee, ô God, Isaiah 33.17. Let our eyes see the King in his beauty, and Psalm. 28.8. be thou his strength, ô Lord, and the wholesome defence of his annoynted: Psalme 21.1. Let the King joy in thy strength, ô Lord, and in thy salvation, let him greatly rejoyce, Verse 2. Give him his hearts desire, and withold not the request of his lips, V. 7. Let the King trust in thee, ô Lord, & through the mercy of thou, the most highest, let him not be moved; V. 5. Let his glory be great in thy salvation; Psalme 89.26. Let him cry unto thee, thou art his Father, his God and the Rock of his Sal∣vation. Psal 61.6. O prolong thou the Kings life, and his yeares as many gene∣rations: V. 7. Let him abide before thee, ô God, for ever: O prepare mercy and truth, which may preserve him: 2 Sam. 18.32. And let the enemies of our Lord the King, and all that rise up against him, be as was that young man Abso∣lom. Chap. 7.29. Therefore now Lord let it please thee to blesse the houses of thine annoynted, that it may continue for ever before thee: For thou, ô Lord God hast spoken it, and with thy blessing, let the house of thy servant be blessed for e∣ver: And this for the merits of Jesus Christ our only Saviour and Redeemer. Amen. FINIS.
