C2313 E171_9 99873562 157044
From Scotland. Tvvo coppies of Letters, The one sent from his MAIESTIE Aug. 31. to the Lord Keeper, and by him read unto the Lords in Parliament. Wherein is contained foure Reasons why he subscribed not unto the Commission sent to him. The other Sept. 1. from a Gentleman to his friend, concerning the proceedings of the Par∣liament in Scotland. royal English blazon or coat of arms Printed for Tho. Bates. 1641.
A COPIE OF A LETTER OF the Kings, sent from the Parlia∣ment in Scotland, to the Lord Keeper; Shewing the Reasons why he did not sub∣scribe the Commission sent Him by both Houses. THe first Reason was, for that the Treatie was ful∣ly determined between Vs and Scotland. Secondly, It might cause a new mat∣ter of difference, and His longer stay in Scotland.
Thirdly, That the Scots were totally disbanded, and marched home. Fourthly, That he had performed his promise to the Parliament in dis∣banding his forces, beginning with the horse first, which is not usuall.
A Copie of a Letter which came from Scotland, the first of September, 1641. to a Gentle∣man in London. WOrthy Sir: I salute you with the joy which we do receive of the happie going on of this Parliament; certifying you, that they received the report of the finall concluding of the peace with great joy, and that the Generall Thanks-gi∣ving will be observed by them on the seventh of September next. There was great opposition against the Duke of Lenox and Marquis Hamiltons sitting in Parliament, untill they had sworn to the Covenant. All their Army is come home, & disbanded, save onely five thousand foure hundred foot, & 500. horse, which remain in a body, and
it is expected every day they shall be dis∣banded. Mountresse his businesse, it is conceived, will be well composed, if he submit unto the Parliament, as it is expected. He petitioned the House with great submission, whereup∣on he was sent for, but his answers were so obscure in the main part, that it gave little satisfaction; wherefore he was again sent to the Castle. Sir Iohn Hey, and Sir Robert Spotwood, see∣med to recant from their former confidence, yeilding themselves up to the Parliament for their triall. Traquires Charge is drawn up, it contain∣ing five and twenty sheets of Paper close writ. The King was feasted on Tuesday last, the 31. of August, by the Provost of Edinborough, in the Parliament House, with great tri∣umph. Master Hinderson is in great favour with the King, and stands next to his Chaire in Sermon time.
His Majestie doth heare two Sermons every Sunday, beside week-dayes Lectures; but there is no service at all read, but onely a Psalme before Sermon. The King hasteneth his preparation for England, which is expected will be very sud∣denly. From Edinborough Sept. 1. 1641. Your friend R. C.
