C7100 E584_16 99872404 165489
A LETTER From the Right Honorable, The Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, TO The Honorable William Lenthall Esq Speaker of the Parliament of England, Concerning The Taking in and Surrendring OF Enistery. Carrick Town and Castle. Passage-Fort. Bandon-Bridge. Kingsale, and the Fort there. Die Mercurii, 12 Decembr. 1649. ORdered by the Parliament, That this Letter be forth∣with printed and published, and Read in all Churches and Chappels in and about the City of London, late Lines of Communication, and Bills of Mortality. Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti. London, Printed by John Field for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1649.
Die Mercurii, 12 Decemb. 1649. A Letter from the Lord Lieutenant from Ireland, was this day read. ORdered by the Parliament, That the said Letter be forthwith printed and published, and that the same be sent to the Lord Mayor of London, and that the Lord Mayor do take care, that the said Letters be sent and dispersed to the several Ministers of the se∣veral Parishes in and about the City of London, late lines of Communication and Bills of Mortality. Ordered, That publique Thanks be given to Almighty God on the next Lords Day, in all the several Churches in and about the City of London, and within the late lines of Communication, and Bills of Mortality, for his great Mercies, in giving us these seasonable and great Victories in Ireland; And that this Letter of the Lord Lieutenant General be then publiquely read in all the said several Churches in and about the said City, and within the lines of Communication and Bills of Mor∣tality. Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.
For the Honorable William Lenthal Esq Speaker of the Parliament of England. Mr. Speaker, THe Enemy being quartered between the two Rivers of Noer and the Barrow, and Masters of all the Passages thereupon, and giving out their Resolution to fight us thereby, as we conceived laboring to get reputation in the Countreys, and accession of more strength; It was thought fit our Army should march towards them, which accordingly upon Tuesday the fifteenth instant was done. The Major General and Lieutenant General (leaving me very sick at Ross be∣hinde them) with two Battering Guns, advanced to∣wards Enistery, a little walled Town about five miles from Ross, upon the Noer, on the South-side thereof, which was possessed by the Enemy; but a party of our men, under the command of Colonel Abbot, the night before approaching the Gates, and attempting to fire the same, the Enemy ran away through the River, lea∣ving good store of Provisions behinde them: Our Commanders hoped by gaining of this Town, to have gained a Pass, but indeed there fell so much sudden wet, as made the River unpassable, by that time the Army was come up: Whereupon, hearing the Enemy lay about two miles off upon near Thomas Town, a pretty large walled Town upon the Noer, on the North side thereof having a Bridge over the River; our Army marched thither, but the Enemy had broke the Bridge, and Garisoned the Town, and in the view of our Army marched away to Kilkenny, seeming to decline an En∣gagement,
although I believe they were double our numbers, which they had power to have necessitated us unto, but was no ways in our power (if they would stand upon the advantage of the Passage) to engage them unto, nor indeed to continue out two days longer, having almost spent all the bread they carried with them: Whereupon (seeking God) for direction, they resolved to send a good party of Horse and Dragoons under Colonel Reynolds to Carrick, and to march the residue of their Army back towards Ross, to gain more bread for the prosecution of that design, if by the bles∣sing of God it should take. Colonel Reynolds march∣ing with twelve Troops of Horse, and three Troops of Dragoons, came betimes in the morning to Carrick, where dividing himself into two parties, whilest they were amused with the one, he entred one of the Gates with the other; which the Soldiers perceiving, divers of them and their Officers escaped over the River in Boats; about a hundred Officers and Soldiers taken Prisoners, without the loss of one man of our part: In this place is a very good Castle, and one of the ancientst Seats belonging to the Lord of Ormond in Ireland; the same was rendred without any loss also; where was good store of Provisions for the refreshing of our men. The Colonel giving a speedy intelligence of Gods mercy in this, We agreed to march with all con∣venient speed, the residue of the Army up thither, which accordingly was done upon Wednesday and Thursday, the 21 and 22 of this instant; and through Gods mer∣cy I was enabled to bear them company. Being come thither, we did look at it as an especial good hand of Providence to give us this place, inasmuch as it gives us a passage over the River Sewer, to the City of Water∣ford,
and indeed into Munster, to our Shipping and Provisions, which before were beaten from us out of our Waterford Bay, by the Enemies Guns. It hath gi∣ven us also opportunity, to besiege or block up Water∣ford: And we hope our Gracious God will therein direct us also. It hath given us also the opportunity of our Guns, Ammunition, and Victuals; and in∣deed Quarter for our Horse, which could not have subsisted much longer; so sweet a mercy was the giving of this little place unto us, having rested there a night, and by noon the next day gotten our Army over the River, leaving Col: Reynolds with about One hundred and fifty Foot, his own six Troops of Horse, and one Troop of Dragoons, with a very little Am∣munition, according to the smalness of our marching store: We marched away towards Waterford upon Friday 23, and on Saturday about noon came before the City; the Enemy not being a little troubled at this unsuspected business (which indeed was the meer guid∣ance of God) marches down with great fury towards Carrick, with their whole Army, resolving to swallow it up; And upon Saturday the Four and twentieth, assaults the place round, thinking to take it by storm; but God had otherwise determined, for the Troopers and the rest of the Soldiers with stones, did so pelt them, they continuing very near four hours under the walls, having burnt the Gates, which our men Baro∣cado'd up with stones; and likewise digged under the walls, and sprung a small Mine, which flew in their own faces; but they lost above forty or fifty men dead under the walls, and have drawn off, as some say, near Four hundred more, which they buried up and down the Fields, besides what are wounded, and as In∣chiquin
himself confessed, in the hearing of some of their Soldiers lately come to us, hath lost him above One thousand men: The Enemy was drawing off his dead a good part of the night; they were in such haste upon the assault, that they killed their own Trumpet, as he was returning with an Answer to a Summons sent by them; both in the taking and defending of this place, Col: Reynolds his carriage was such, as deserves much honor. Upon our coming before Waterford, I sent the Lieutenant General with a Regiment of Horse, and three Troops of Dragoons, to endeavor the reducing of Passage-Fort, a very large Fort, with a Castle in the midst of it, having five Guns planted in it, and com∣manding the River better then Duncannon, it not being much above Musquet shot over where this Fort stands, and we can bring up hither Ships of Three hundred Tuns, without any danger from Duncannon; upon the attempt, though our materials were not very apt for the business, yet the Enemy called for Quarter, and had it, and we the place: We also possessed the Guns, which the Enemy had planted to beat our Ships out of the Bay, two miles below. By the taking of this Fort, we shall much streighten Duncannon from provisions by water, as we hope they are not in a condition to get much by Land; besides the advantage it is of to us, to have provisions to come up the River. It hath pleased the Lord whilest these things hath been thus transacting here, to adde to your interest in Munster, Bandon-Bridge, the Town as we hear upon the matter, thrusting out yong Jepson, who was their Governor, or else he de∣serting it upon that jealousie; As also Kingsale, and the Fort there, out of which Fort Four hundred men marched upon Articles when it was surrendred, so that
now by the good hand of the Lord, your interest in Munster is near as good already, as ever it was since this War begun. I sent a party about two days ago to my Lord of Broughil, from whom I expect to have an Accompt of all. Sir, what can be said to these things? is it an Arm of Flesh that doth these things? is it the Wisdom and Councel, or Strength of men? it is the Lord onely; God will curse that man and his house, that dares to think otherwise. Sir, you see the Work is done by divine leading: God gets into the hearts of men, and perswades them to come under you. I tell you, a considerable party of your Army, is fitter for an Hospital then the Field: If the Enemy did not know it, I should have held it impo∣litique to have writ it: They know it, yet they know not what to do. I humbly beg leave to offer a word or two; I beg of those that are faithful, that they give glory to God; I wish it may have influence upon the Hearts and Spirits of all those that are now in place of Government, in the greatest Trust, that they may all in Heart draw neer unto God, giving him glory by holiness of life and conversation, That these unspeak∣able Mercies, may teach dissenting Brethren on all sides to agree, at least in praising God. And if the Father of the Family be so kinde, why should there be such jar∣rings, and heart-burnings amongst the Children? And if it will not yet be received, that these are Seals of Gods Approbation of your great change of Govern∣ment, which indeed was no more yours, then these Victories and Successes are ours: with us say even the most unsatisfied heart, That both are the Righteous Judgments, and Mighty Works of God; that he hath pulled down the Mighty from his Seat; that calls to
accompt innocent blood; that he thus breaks the Ene∣mies of his Church in peeces; and let them not be sul∣len, but praise the Lord; and think of us as they please, and we shall be satisfied, and pray for them, and wait upon our God; and we hope we shall seek the Welfare and Peace of our Native Countrey; and the Lord give them hearts to do so too. Indeed I was constrain∣ed in my Bowels to write thus much: I ask your par∣don, and rest Your most humble Servant, O. CROMVVEL. FINIS.
