D660 E444_12 99864225 161736
THE DECLARATION OF THE COUNTIES OF YORKE AND LANCASTER, CONCERNING, The KINGS MAIESTIE, and both Houses of PARLIAMENT, and their unanimous Re∣solutions, touching the proceedings of the Essex, Surrey, and Kentish-men. As also touching the Northern Army. WITH, The proceedings of Sir MARMADUKE LANG∣DALE, and his advance from BARWICK, and joyning with a body consisting of 8000. in WESTMERLAND. AND, The Votes of the House of Commons concer∣ning a Treaty with His Majesty, and the manner thereof. LONDON, printed for W.R. 1648.
AN EXACT RELATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF The KENTISH Men. SIR, I Am sorry that I have no better newes to salute you with, then our sad divisions, by which we are much distracted, you may make as slight of it as you will in London, but I can assure you, I feare the con∣clusion will carry sorrow enough. The Petition is dayly signed by additionall hands, the number is great that have joyned in it. Since their seising of Rochester, and the Magazine, (which it was thought had been well over on the last
Lords day at night, and that they would have been sa∣tisfied) they have increased, divers, both Gentlemen, Servants, Souldiers, and men of all sorts come in; and stand upon their defence. There are also divers others, gathered at Maydstone, and in severall other places of this County. And ma∣ny or them are armed. They say that they will have the King to come to London, and a Treaty. And the Army of Sectaries (as they call them) disbanded. They have seized on a packet of Letters, that came from the Committee of the Nvy; and other Letters that were sent from the Vice-Admirall Rainsborough, to the Parliament, caused them to be opened, and read them; and delivered many of the Letters back again. They stop divers pssengers, and examine them, but let them goe again, without doing them hurt. But for Souldiers they put all out of the Country, and permit none except only such as comply with them. And they have prevailed so fayre with the Horsemen of the Country, that they are almost all the Troope gon in to joyn with them. And the Trained Bands are too cold to oppose them. And they will grow now (for ought I see) too numerous, if speedy course be not aken. They intend their randezvous, as is given out in these parts, next week at Black heath, and the Com∣mittee know not what to doe, nor where to sit in safty. Upon the rumor of Prince Charles his being come to Sawich, (which was at first beleeved, and many labour still that it may carry credence) many came in out of a pretended affection to them, and it was rumoured that
he was come over to joyn with them to release the King, and bring him safe to London. But we are since satisfied that it is not Prince Charles but a poore rascally fellow, not fit for Gentlemens company, The Officer of the ship that caried the Prince away, was to see him, and saying he was not the Prince, the fellow tould the Mayor that hee came to kill him, and desired he might be secured, which was done accordingly, and others are committed also for saying that he is not the Prince. A great deale of money is sent in by severall persons of the County to him, And he fares like a Prince, And still stands stifly in it, that he is prince Charles. Hee cam hither with poore cloathes, and a course dirty shirt, but he had other apparrell provided presently. If the Parliament sent for him, I know not whether those who are risen in this County will let him goe, for (so farre as I can understand) he was appointed by the Royalists, to encourage the Country, and joyne with them to disturbe the Parliament. There are in Rochester, and the parts hereabouts (I doe verily beleeve) at the least a thousand that are risen, besides their interest in some Sea-men; and others at Maydstone, and other parts. Here are aboundance of Ordinance, and many ships, a great number of Armes, much powder in the Ships, the Soveraigne neer, if some speedy course be not taken herein, it may be repented when it is too late. God send us all well setled. Chattum May 23. 1648.
A Declaration of the Counties of Yorke and Lancaster. SIR, HEre hath been severall meetings in these parts, and the Inhabitants of the County, have unanimously declared, that they will stand firme to their first princi∣ples, for the defence of King and Parliament, and that they will use their utmost endeavours, for the preserva∣tion of their peace and liberties, and that they will op∣pose all forces whatsoever, that shall attempt the ob∣structing thereof. We heare also that the West-Riding of the County of York, have declared to the same effect, and that they are resolved to proceede in pursuance thereof. Here is no little admiration of the proceedings of the Essex, Surrey, and Kentish men; but notwithstan∣ding all which, the well affected party are resolved to maintaine their first grounds and principles. We heare that the Parliament of Scotland adjourned the 11. In∣stant. D Hamilton, &c. are gone into their severall Prin∣cipalities to raise men. Forty daies pay at the Randez∣vouz, and then shift for themselves. It continues that Fife and Angus are as resolute to give non assistance (as the honest Zealanders are against the peace with Spain) and will not raise one man, whereupon it was ordained that every footeman that refused should pay 10. l. & eve∣ry one charged with a horse refusing, 20. l. whether Scots or Sterling we know not. They talke of raising the 4th man through the Kingdom. A list of all the Officers in∣tended for the Scots expedition might be inserted; but untill its known who wil hold, its no great matter, Iune 1. the Parliament sits, and by that time their Army is to
be ready, at least they give out so, to make you come off from your high demands of the Kings Majestie. The 11. Sir Marmaduke Langdale, with about 160. horse went from Barwick, all along the Scottish side of Tweed to Carlile, neither hurting, nor was hurt; leaving in Bar∣wick only 500. foot: He is to joyne with Sir Phillip Mus∣graves forces in Cumberland & Westmerland, who are already 8000. which with Sir Marmadukes will make as great an Army as was in Wales, and no doubt stand to∣gether; for Sir Philip is so popular, that men flcks to him from those pars, and all about; he doth what he pleaseth yet. The Sheriffe of the County is fled to S. For∣brits Island (which is sir Watfort Lawsons) with the Ma∣gazine, where also is 20 peces of Ordinace formerly removed from Carlisle; there is no passing to the Island but by Ba, the water being 5. or 6. fathom deepe, and they have taken the Boat with them, yet its blieved they will one way or other gain it before reliefe can come; the Sheriffe hath sent hither for reliefe, but how we shall be able to send it [so long are you before you send any to us] we know not. The newes of Laughorns defeat came seasonably to those parts, not only to raise the spirits of the Parl. friends, but to daunt the disaffe∣cted, which was declared with Thanks in Pulpits; with ringing of bels after, and other expressions of joy. We are also comforted a little by the resolutions of Lanca∣shire, who have no minde to let in any of the Musgrave or Langdale party, and for that end have made good all their straits and passages. They of Barwick have put men into Hagerston Tower. The County of Northumberland is indifferent quiet having no enemy in Field. Two Troopes of horse lie at
Anwick, and two Companies of Foot; Capt. Pie is in Warkworth Castle with a considerable force: Cartington being not tenable, the men in it were called of, and the house dismantled: the Royall party had a design upon Hartle-Poole but were prevented; and we have Garriso∣ned it. Mr. Barwise, & Mr. Cholmsey are prisoners in Carlile still Mrs. Barwise and the Sheriffs wife are come on foot hither, being plundered of all: this Town wil not be got to act for Par. what ever they may against it. The enemy begin their old way of plundering and where ever they find any Ministers put in by Parl. they leave them as bare as they can, being resolved if ever it lies in their way to pay that Tribe to the full. The papists rise also in all places, and though they can have no command, yet they will be Voluntiers. There is 4 Regiments of horse to be raised in these parts, but if forces come not with the Gen. to encourage the Countries, they will not dare to proceed with any vigour. Col-Charles Vane, son of Sir. Hen. Vane raiseth a Regiment of horse, and secures Rabie Castle, he hath 4 good Troops already, The great com∣fort and support of the Parliaments friends in all these parts, by our Governours comming, is wonderfull; and truly so honestly and resolutely doth he carry himself, that if forces once come, theres no doubt many will shew their good affection, that now mean it, but think it not discretion to shew is. The Commons considered of a Treaty with his Ma∣jestie, and voted, That if he grant the Militia, settle Re∣ligion, and recall all Proclamations and Declarations a∣gainst them, they will treat with him for other things. Collonel Whaleys Regiment is commanded back from the North, and are to quarter about Staines. Imprimatur G. M FINIS.
