E3564A R176804 45578370 172294
An Exact ACCOUNT Of the Affairs of IRELAND, With the Particulars of the SIGNAL VICTORY Obtained by the VALIANT MEN of ENNESKILLING, Under the Command of Colonel THOMAS LLOYD, On the Twenty fourth of September, 1689 In a Letter from Holyhead to a Friend at London. SIR, JUst now here is Arrived a Gentleman from his Grace Duke Schomberg, who left the Camp on Satturday last, being the 28th of September, and Embarked on Board the Fanfan, a small Ship of his Majesties, of Six Guns, Captain Pottinger Commander, a Valiant Man; he arrived safe at Hollyhead on Monday Morning, and brings this Account, That he left the Army in very good heart, and that he did not know Twenty Sick men in the Camp, and that they were full of Courage, and willing to Fight the Enemy whenever the General thought fit to command them to fall on, and that they were Encamped very near the Irish Army; that the Scouts did sometimes meet each other, his Grace the Duke of Schomberg quartering in my Lady Dungannon's House, and most of the Officers in the Town of Dundalk. The Artillery is arrived safely in the Camp, and Commissary Shales with the rest of the Stores and Provisions; so that now all things are very plenty in the Army, having two Months Bread beforehand, and all necessaries. My Lord Hewet's and Collonel Villar's Regiments of Horse are safe there, so that they only waited for Sir John Lanier's, Colonel Langston's Horse, and Colonel Heyford's Dragoons, and the Danes which they daily expected, the Winds having proved very fair this Four days, and then they did not question but with Gods assistance to give a good Account of the Irish Army, and to take Dublin for Winter Quarters. Those of the Irish Army that dare be so bold as
to see what posture the English are in, are commonly made to retire faster then they come on, often paying dear for their rashness. He likewise gives an Account of a wonderful Victory obtained by the Inniskilling Men, under the Command of that Renowned Champion Colonel Thomas Lloyd, who have so often tryed their Irish Mettal, and finding it to be of so base an Allay, fears not to meet them upon any terms. For the Irish understanding that the Inniskilling Men having joyn'd the Royal Army with Seventeen Troops of Horse, One Regiment of Dragoons, and two Regi∣ments of Foot, and having likewise sent a Body of Men to Garrison Sligo which they had so Cowardly deserted upon the last Defeat, thought now they had them secure; whereupon there was a Detachment drawn out of Five Thousand under the Command of Colonel O Kelly, who not only intended to make a prey of this remnant of Brave men, but thereby to secure all the Cattle of that part of the Countrey for the Late King James's use. And accordingly having marched as far as Boyle, in order to prosecute their Design, which the Enniskilling Men scorning to be abridged of their Liberty, resolved to give them the meeting; and there∣upon drew out their whole Force, and marched twenty Miles to find them out and fight them, knowing that all Victory is to be attributed to God alone, and that he is able to save by a few. Now Boyle is a Place strongly situate, and the Irish Army were advantageously posted, yet Co∣lonel Lloyd, and the rest of the Officers drew up their men in such good Order, and being such extrordinary Marks-Men, that not a man in ten misses his man, fell on with that Courage, that after the Slaughter of between seven or eight hundred of the Enemy, with the Loss of the Irish General O Kelly, the rest began to run, so that our Army had the Pursuit of them for five or six Miles, taking three or four hundred Prisoners, with three Colonels more, to wit, Colonel Dillon, my Lady Tyrconnel's Son-in-law, Colonel Boark, Colonel Ferall. This great Victory was obtained with the loss of very few men on our side; and thereby we have got a vast Boo∣ty of Cattel, as is believed, eight or nine hundred Head of black Cattel, and a whole Country at our Command. The General was very well plea∣sed, and rewarded the Gentleman that brought him the News, and was in the Action. This Battel was fought the 24th. of this last Month: Our Men were not above five hundred when we began the Fight. He also gives account by Deserters, that at Dublin there is a Proclamation pro∣hibiting the Importation of English and Scotch Coal, and that Dublin Streets were pestered with Turf, as it used to be with Butter-milk. Those Boats that used to go for Wickloe, many of them by that means transporting Protestants, the rest were ordered to be drawn up, and none suffered to pass; that the Commissioners of the Revenue have been fully imployed in setting Leases, and restoring to the old Popish Proprietors, very good Bargains being to be had, Land being sold at Sixpence an Acre, and at three years purchase, if ready money be paid down for it, with a Pro∣mise of better Penyworths to their Souldiers in England when conquered. London, Printed for Richard Baldwin in the Old-Baily. MDCLXXXIX.
