e3873 e968_9 99862434 168541
AN EXPEDIENT FOR The Preventing any Difference BETWEEN His Highness and the Parliament. ABOUT The Recognition. The Negative Voyce. The Militia. By a Lover of his Country, that desires at this time to be Namelesse. LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spead-Eagle, at the West∣end of Paul's. 1659.
THough I look not upon the present dispute about the Ne∣gative voyce, and the Command of the Militia, as like to give us much trouble, (for Usurpations and Tyrannies once judg∣ed by God, never recover to rise again in the same forme). Yet to satisfie the Doubts and Fears of those honest souls, who see not what strength they have on their side; I shall desire them to be assured. That there is Reason and Equity sufficient to stop the mouth of such a claime, by any single Person in this Nation: and therefore We shall need no other Comprimise of this Differ∣ence, but to reflect upon the Rice and Occasion of this Govern∣ment, from whence the Nature and power of it will best appear.
THe present forme of Government (then) as it varies from a Republick, was begotten by Ne∣cessity. For the Nation having travers'd all the wayes of a Parliament and Counsel of State; (and seen all they could affoard) and at length finding through long continuance (as standing waters) they did corrupt, discontent gathered, and fermented, and sought where it might most advantagiously discover it self; and so fell in with the power of the Army: and the person of the then General, whom they had found so stour and faithful, (and withall succesful) and was willing to throw themselves and their cause into his Armes and Protection, consenting that he should use any meanes, yea though he were most arbitrary therein, to ease them of their old Masters, whom they could bear no longer. So that as I said it was pure necessity and strait that cast us here, and not any affection to Monarchick Govern∣ment. The clear intent and expectation of the honest people (that were accessory to the Devolving the power here) being: That that person should in the name and power of God (or of his own Truth and Righteous∣nesse which was supposed to be in him) administer the power of these Nations, to settle us in fredome and peace upon all accounts, both civil and spiritual: and they never dream't of a Monarch or a Family interest, nor did they imagine any need of cautioning it here. Though others, wiser heads, (such, who perhaps by the opportunity of their high places, had approached nearer this Temptation in their own hearts) did foresee,
and were aware, what might be the consequence and product of this overhasty credulity, and trust as after∣wards indeed it came to passe. §. II. The Protector did clearly run biass to the Honest in∣tentions of those, that wisht him the administration of the Power, when he made himself a civil Ruler. But changes in States and Governments, being brought forth with such pangs and throws, as are very uneasie and dangerous, they are not every daies work. It was in vain to retract or withdraw the trust committed to the General, though many disliked the way he went, nor could men believe that the late passages and transacti∣ons could ever grow into such oblivion, as that He, or any Man, should think that this Nation should be wil∣ling to match the Militia and the Scepter together in the Government, but only in his Person; (whom, they look'd upon as an Extraordinary person). They having fought against it in the person of the late King. §. III. Hereditary succession in the Government, being so much disgusted by the Honest Patriots in the late Par∣liament. The Nomination of the immediate succession was indulged; his late Highness, as an Expedient to sa∣tisfie the then present, powerful, strivings for Hereditary succession, which was not neither yielded unto, but up∣on a very high confidence of the Spirit and Principles of his late Highness, to carry him above all private re∣spects, in the execution of the trust of Nomination.
§. IV. His now highnesse being in possession of the Govern∣ment, takes therewith the power of the Militia, which was invested in his Father (and he conceives also the Negative voyce) to descend upon him with the Civil Government. The Question is whether in truth it do so or no? I conceive not; And first for the Militia, It is true, the supreame Command of all the Armies in the 3 Nations was in his late Highness; but not as he was Protector, but as General, which he was, before he was Protector. So that the Protector or Civil Govern∣ment was annexed to the Militia, not the Militia to the Civil Government: or rather the power of administring to a Civil Settlement, was annexed to the Person, not to the Power or Office of the General; and that up∣on the reputation of his Personal Vertue: His Military Power and Capacity serving onely as a strength and security to him, in the due exercise of the power of Ci∣vil Administration intrusted. So that it was not Oliver Cromwel as Protector, or the supreame Civil Magistrate that was made General; nor Oliver Cromwel as General simply, that was made Protector; but Oliver Cromwel General of such a spirit, of such integrity and faithfulness, that the like qualified Person was not to be found in the three Nations; that was thought fit for all the Power that could be cast upon him. §. V. As for the Negative voyce as it was never disputed with his late Highness (where it was suffered to sleep as
in a safe hand) for his Personal Vertues; so was it never (since it was taken away from, or rather with the King and Kingly Government) concredited, or be trusted with any Power or Person. And indeed it is a thing altoge∣ther superfluous as well as dangerous, for take away from Parliaments (who sure in this light that is risen upon us, cannot be imagined (from their source and foun∣taine, the Generality and body of the Nation) to bring with them that choice discerning (which is singular) to Judge of spiritual things). I say, take a way from them the Coercive Power in things spiritual, and purely of the mind, and admit them (as Children of this World) to be so wise in their Generation, as to be able to Judge what is good and behoofeful for the Nation, wherein their Stakes and Interests lye; and what use will there be of a Negative Voyce in a Common-wealth as we are (or should be). Where no distinct Personal or Family Interest, is, or ought to be owned, but what is, one with the Common-wealth, and in a subserviency there∣unto? §. VI. The Negative voyce therefore being out of Doores with Kingship, and we having no Civil Head, now that is Master of the Common-wealth, but a servant to it: that was set up for that end (though an Honourable Ser∣vant, and it is fit he should be so maintained.) The Resolution is easie. Let his present Highness be acknowledged and con∣firmed as supreme Magistrate in these 3 Nations. Let the Officers of the Army choose their General, and let him have his Commission from the Protector and Parliament.
Let his Highness, now being with the Parliament, have the power of Disposing and Commanding these forces, and of making War and Peace. The light in which these things do evidence, and offer themselves to the Judgment and consciences of men, is manifest, For the first, a single person cannot hurt us, if an unfit power be not concredited and betrusted with him. When we engaged against a King, it was not against a single person simply; but so stated and Circumstanced, Arbitrary, tyrannical, with a luxurious Court, a bur∣densome State, &c. For this is a Principle We never intended by that engagement to engage against, what might be useful to us (no rational man would do so) but what we found hurtful. Therefore the single Person may stand. 2. When we admitted a single person, and abated so much of the Circumstance; We gave not up the substance of our Cause, Therefore be not baffled in that: but if We give the single Person a Negative voyce, and the dispose of the Militia, We give up the very heart and substance of our Cause. Therefore part not with that. Neither indeed can his Highness, who is but a single Person, expect whoever should invest him with the sole Command of the Militia; while the Army and the Officers thereof keep their integrity, that he can make any use thereof, but for publique ends, and therefore it would be Onus non honos. 3. It is fit his Highness should have an Honourable, though not the Onely Interest in the Commanding the Militia: Therefore let him be alwayes sought unto, to joyn with the Parliament in the dispose of the Forces of the Nation.
And as for those of the Other House, let them passe (or so many of them as the Parliament shall think fit) into the Council of State, and if they have a Con∣current Vote with his Highnesse and the Commons, yet no Negative Vote: their usefulnesse may be chiefly in the Vacancy of Parliaments, not to be a ballance upon the Commons: let their ballance be, that Reason and Righteousness that is among themselves, as to the things of this World, which is their proper Sphere. The End.
