G23 99871621 156268
DIVRNALL OCCVRRENCES, Truly Relating The most Remarkable Passages which have hapned in both Houses of PARLIAMENT, and other parts of this KINGDOME, and elsewhere. From Munday the 28 of November, to Mun∣day the fifth of December. 1642. By H. G. LONDON, Printed by Richard Herne.
Munday, Novemb. 28. THis day there was bickering at Manchester by some of the Earle of Dareyes follow∣ers, and the Townes-men; but the Malig∣nants were repuls'd with losse, the Par∣liament also having set forth a very gra∣cious Order for the reliefe of that good Towne and those parts against the attempts of Papists. Upon occasion of the former Letter intercepted as afore∣said was raised a rumor that the Prince of Orange and the King of Denmarke in person would put to Sea this Winter, but there was no such matter. It was also reported that the said Prince of Orange with ten thousand souldiers intended to have surpris'd and plun∣dred Amsterdam; but that when the souldiers perceived his purpose, none of them could be drawn against that Towne. This day also came out an Order for the Lord Generals speedy falling downe towards Oxford. There was committed to close prison this day Doctor Heywood the Rector of Saint Giles in the fields for preaching and printing seditious Sermons: he being an Arminian, and sometimes Chaplaine to the Archbishop of Canterbury. Tuesday, Novemb. 29. FRom Westchester this day arriv'd a Post here with ty∣dings of the proceedings of the Earle of Darby, who
has levyed all the Papists and Malignants in those parts. As also relating that there has lately been a victory in Ireland obtained against the Rebels. Abington in Barkeshire was this day cruelly plundred by the Cavaliers. As also, a Towne of good note in Surrey cal∣led Ockingham, which they rifled without mercy: the poore Inhabitants being inforced to forsake their dwellings. An Aviso from Calice testifies that Master larmin is very busie in making provision in France of amunition and the like. The money lent upon the last Contribution was this day brought in to the Lord Maior, who does study daily for the advancement of the cause of the Common-wealth. To day were brought to Towne some ten Cavaliers taken about Reading side by some of the garrison at Windsor. An Order came forth also that all souldiers in and about the City of London should repaire to their Colours, the Lord Generall being instantly to advance towards His Majesties Army. Wednesday, Novemb. 30. THis day from Excester we understood Sir Ralph Hopton and the Malignants in those parts are in much distresse, haaving so lamentably plundred the Country, that it is unable any longer to sustaine them. Some parties of the Earle of New-Castle, as Convoyes to some waggons of amunition sent from thence towards His Majesty, were valiantly set upon by Master Hothams forces, and put into rout; the wag∣gons with the amunition being surpris'd to a very conside∣rable value. This day both Houses celebrated their Fast very devoutly at Saint Margats Westminster. There were also some Barques taken from the coast of Norfolke comming from Dunkirke towards the North, their lading was men and amunition. The King this day returned from Reading towards Oxford
to provide for my Lord Generals approach, who this day set forward with a lawfull and couragious army, having order from the Parliament to pursue and apprehend the Cavaliers. This day also hapned to our side a very memorable victory. Colonell Browne with his Dragoneers beating the Cavaliers out of Farnham-Castle in Surrey which they had fortified, taking fourescore of them prisoners, which he sent to Wind∣for Castle, thence to be conveyed to London. Thursday, Decemb. 1. TO day came forth an Order from the High Court of Parliament concerning the sequestring to the use of the Common-wealth the Earle of New-Castles estate. As also, all Rents and profits belonging to all Deanes, Prebends, and the like. An Order also came forth for the fessing of those who had not yet contributed to the Common-wealth according to their estates; they being little better then Malignants, who in so great danger refuse to part with something out of their fortunes to serve the safety of the kingdome. Some of the Cavaliers taken at Farneham-Castle by Colonell Browne, this afternoon were brought up to the Towne to the number of forty persons, and disposed of to severall prisons. It is reported the King has with him fifty and odde good brasse Ordnance. Lord turne his heart from his ungraci∣ous Counsellors. To day also came forth a Proclamation from His Majesty, forbidding his Cavaliers the plundring of any persons whatsoever under the paine of his displeasure, but it is con∣ceiv'd only a scar-crow, it being impossible to alter their in∣humane dispositions. Friday, Decemb. 2. A Post from my Lord Fairefax this day verified that the Earle of Cumberland would deliver up the City of York
upon the conditions which he had within inclosed, whether it will be received or no, is not yet knowne. The City of London still persists in their determination of maintaining the Regiments for pursuite of the Cavaliers, men being taken on in Moore-fields in great numbers. This day towards Evening a up was sent up the River laden with amunition, and taken at Sea by the Earle of War∣wickes ships. The kings Majesty has fortified Oxford, intending as it is credibly informed, to remaine there all this Winter, though the Countrey cryes out of his Cavaliers. This day also came forth a new Declaration from His Ma∣jesty, and the Parliaments answer thereunto, and Sir Poter Klligrewes returne from the King caused much and deep agitations in both Houses, It is hop'd about accomodation. Drums beat up in the City and Suburbs for more supply for his Excellence the Earle of Essex, who is advanced as far as Windsor, the garrison there being in very good plight. Saturday, Decemb. 4. THis day came out an order from the high Court of Par∣liament, commanding all those who were interested in the collection of money, plate, and the like, to returne in up∣on Munday next the account ot the said money and plate, with their names who refuse to contribute according to their abilities, that the truth of the said accounts be pre∣sented to the Earle of Manchester, the Lord Brooke, Lord Wharton, Lord Edward Howard, and some members of the lower house. This day was a great hnbub in Holbourne at the Globe Taverne, the souldiers wanting their pay, as they pretended, would have pillag'd the said Taverne, but the approches of the train'd band made them desist that enterpize; and then flocking about the Lord Brookes doore, and some mutinous words being spoken, one of the souldiers was apprehended by Captaine Harvie, who was there with his troope, but
the rest promising to demeane themselves more orderly, he was discharged, and the money was paid them by the right honourable, the Lord Brooke his officers. This day was treaties in agitation about his Majesties Answer to the Petition of both the houses, printed at Ox∣ford, they being well inclin'd to peace, if it would please his Majesty in any indifferent way to confide in them and their Councell. This day clandestinely was reprinted a Declaraion from Prince Rupert, wherein he strives to extenuate the foulenes of his former cruelties, with many false calumnies on the right honourable Philip, Lord Wharton, but those Rodoman∣tades cannot excuse the confirm'd truth of his proceedings. It was likewise rumoured for certaine in Westminster Hall, that Yorke was yesterday surrendred to the Generall, the Lord Fairfax. There was some seven-score poore fellowes, whom they terme Cavaliers, brought up to towne, bound in Carts, if the King have no better souldiers, we shall be sure of sudden victory. At Plimouth came in, at it was to day certified, three dayes since, a small vessell from Saint Molos, which being search'd, in a Sailers habit was found a servant of Master Iarmines, directed with Letters to Sir Ralph Hopton, which Letters, with the said mssenger, are comming up to the Parliament. This day also came our a new Order from the right honou∣rable, the high Court of Parliament, expresly commanding all their souldiers, to restraine from plundring; as also an Order for restitution of all such moneys and goods as had been formerly taken away from any man by plunder or pil∣lage, with a strict command to all Maiors and other Officers, to see the said Order put in practice. Sunday, Decemb. 5. THis day was a most excellent Sermon preached in Christ Church London, in the forenoone, the Minister much, and with many efficatious reasons, perswading the
people to a liberall contribution towards the defence of the Common-wealth, which was very well approv'd of by the audience. A flying rumour was spred in the City, that Colonell Browne, who had taken Farnham Castle, was himselfe taken prisoner, but it was onely rais'd by some malignants, to the dishonour of that valiant Gentleman. A Letter this day from Newcastle testifies, that the Earle and his Cavaliers are almost quite disheartened by their late ill successes, and in much feare, left the Scots on the one side, and my Lord Fairfax with the Yorshire forces on the other side should invade him, and so ruine his forces. It was likewise this day reported, that Sir Ralph Hopton is either dead, or dangerously sicke, and that Sir Bevil Green∣vill and the rest of the malignants in Cornwall, are determi∣ned to breake up their army, being no longer able to conti∣nue them together for want of money and other provision. It was also reported this day by a Dutch Merchant of much credit, who arriv'd yesterday from Holland, that the Prince of Orange, with the best part of his forces, is with∣drawne to Breda, which being his owne towne, and Barony by inheritance, he is resolv'd there to stand upon his guard, which hath given much distaste to the Lords, the States of the united Provinces. The cause of his discontent, as it is supposed, being deprived of his place of high Admirall of Holland which was done by the States, left hee should, ayd the malignants here against the high Court of Parliament. It was also informed that Richelen the great French Car∣dinall is for certaine deceased at Fontanblean this weeke. FINIS.
