H2143A R42512 36282196 150088
THE HISTORY OF THE AMOURS OF THE French Court, VIZ. Of Madam de La Valliere, Madam de Olonne, Madam de Chastillion, Madam de Sevigny, With the Intrigues of seve∣ral other Persons of Great Quality IN THE Palace-ROYAL. In Four PARTS. Faithfully Translated out of French. Obedience, Printed for N. B. at the Three Cupids in the Kingdom of Love, 1684.
THE HISTORY OF THE PALAIS ROYAL, &c. LEt us wave all City-Adventures, and the Formal Gallantries of the Town; we have now more illustrious and splendid Sub∣jects of Entertainment: The King in his Throne of Love with as much Undaunted∣ness as in his Seat of Justice. Let us then a little observe his Majesty; and if it be possible omit none of his Proceedings, nor the good Offices of the Duke of Saint Agnan: whom for the future we shall call Duke-Mercury; as he who by his Care and Pains hath coupled our Gods in
despite of the Jealousy of our Goddes∣ses. To begin then with a Faithful Descrip∣tion of the King: He is Tall, some-what Broad-shoulder'd, has a Handsome Leg, Dances well, and very Dextrous in all Bodily Exercises: He has enough of the Meen and Port of a Monarch, Dark∣brown Hair, and his Face a little marked with the Small-Pox: His Eyes are spark∣ling and sweet, his Lips red; And yet all this renders him not Beautiful. He is of a Prodigious Wit, and Admirable in his Carriage towards her he loves: So that one wou'd think, he reserves for such occasions the Vigor of his Mind, as well as that of his Body. And what convinces all men that his Wit is extraor∣dinary, he hath never given his Love to any but Persons of that Character. He hath acknowledged, that nothing in this Life does so sensibly affect him, as the Pleasures of Love; and that's his Incli∣nation. He is a little Rough, very Co∣vetous; of a haughty and a disdainful Humour; amongst Men given to Vanity, a little Envious, and were he not a King some what uneasie in Company. But on the other hand, He is Couragious, Inde∣fatigable,
True, full of Honour, ex∣treamly Just to his Word; Grateful, of great Integrity; esteeming such as are so slighting those that are otherways: And in a word, constant in all his Under∣takings. Though I have told you, his only Weakness is his too much Love for the Femal Sex, yet he never admired many Women. The first Passion he had, was for Mademoiselle de Manbhiny, a Lady of a low Stature, Ugly, and Fat, with the Air of an Hostess; but Witty as an An∣gel, which covered all her Defects, and made her Company very delightful. She was in love with the King; and therefore some say He spent many plea∣sant Hours with her; insomuch, that Madama de Venel often surprized them, as they were preparing for greater Plea∣sures: But we must tell the truth, their Joys never attained to a full accomplish∣ment. The King wou'd have Marry'd her, had not the Cardinal opposed it; who was baited by the Queen-Mother. and made to promise one day when he beg'd some Marks of her Kindness, that he wou'd hinder the Business from taking effect. What I desire of you (said she)
is no such great Proof of your Passion as you imagine; For, to be short, if the King Marry your Neece. he will certainly Divorce from her, and Banish you; And I swear to you, the latter of these Two will more perplex me, than the Marriage; though I see, my Designs for a Peace quite ruined, if the King Marry not the Daughter of Spain. The Cardi∣nal was out-witted, and promised what the Queen defired, that he might have what he expected; so true it is, that another Man's Business is none of ours. At this time, he shewed himself no Italian; For the King to this very day testifies an invincible Aversion to all Divorces, and declares it so often, that he gives good ground to beleive, he wou'd never have practised so base a thing. The Cardinal at length Marryed his Neece to the Constable Colona; The News of which so afflicted our King, that he wept, cry'd, cast himself at his feet, and called him Pa Pa. But in a word, it was the Fate of those Lovers, to be separated. That disconsolate Lady be∣ing ready to depart, and for that pur∣pose stepping into her Coach, wittily said to her Lover, whom she perceiv'd
almost dead through Excess of Grief; You weep, you love me, you dispare, are a King, and notwithstanding, I am miserable, and must indeed be gone. This Separation had like to have cost the King his Life; But he was Young, and at last took Comfort-again; though it wou'd not be so easy a matter now a dayes, to make him forget his Passion; For no man was ever more in Love, than now He is. Mademoiselle de La Valliere is the pre∣sent Object of his Desires. She was a Maid of Honour to Madame; And though she be not after the order of Melchisedec, yet excuse me from relating her Gene∣alogy. Her Person being the most illus∣trious Thing she can pretend to, I will only tell you by the by, that the Duke of Mombazom promised her Father to pro∣cure him his Nobility, but he dyed be∣fore the Duke performed his Promise. His Widdow marry'd Monsieur de St. Remy. And in a word all that can be said, is, that La Valliere, who five years ago was no Gentlewoman, is at present as Noble as the King. There is somewhat now to be said of that person, which hath so strongly en∣gaged the heart of a proud and haughty
Prince: She is of a middle Stature, and very Slender: Her Gate not graceful, because she is Crooked: She is of a fair Complexion, and marked with the Small-Pox: Her eyes are brown, casting a lan∣guishing Look; but sometimes also, full of Life and Spirit: Her Mouth is large, with lips pretty red; bad Teeth, no Breasts, and flat Arms; which make Men judge disadvantagiously of the rest of her Body: She hath a sparkling Wit, full of Life and Vigour, speaks things pleasantly, has much Solidity, and Learn∣ing also; For she is acquainted with al∣most all the Histories of the World, and has enough to Read them: Her Heart is great, steadfast, generous, void of In∣terest, and tender; and without doubt, not unapt for Love. She is Faithful and Sincere, free from all frisking Levity; and of all Women living, most capable of a great Engagement. She loves her Friends extreamly; and it is certain She loved the King above a Year before he was acquainted with it; and that she often told a Friend of hers, That she wished he had not been of so high a Rank and Quality. It is well known to all that the Sport they made of it at Court,
stir'd up a Curiosity in the King to know her; and as it is natural to Generous Souls, to Love those who Love them; the King from that time had a Kindness for her; not that her Person pleased him, for his Passion was but Gratitude, and so he told the Count e Guich, that he would marry her to a Marquess whom he named, and a Friend of the Counts; which made him reply to the King, That his Friend loved handsom Women. Ha! Good God (said the King) it is true, she is not Beautiful, but I will do for her so, as to make her Desirable. Three Dayes after, the King went to visit Madame, who was ill; and staid with La Valliere in the Anti-Chamber, with whom he entertained a long Dis∣course; and was so charmed with her Wit, that from that minute his Grati∣tude was turned into real Love. He made no stay with Madame, but returned a∣gain the next day; and so continued for the Space of a Month; which gave occa∣sion of a Rumour that he was in love with Madame, and her self also to beleive it. But the King sought only an opportunity to discover his Love which much prest him; and he might have easily found it,
had he considered only his Quality of King; But he looked more on that of a Lover; And in effect he appeared so timorous and bashful that he thereby made a full Con∣quest of Heart, which he had already sufficiently wounded. Walking e day in the Park of Var∣selles, he complained that for Ten or Twelve Days, he found himself out of order: Mademoiselle de La Valliere ap∣peared much concerned, and testifyed her trouble with a great deal of Tenderness. Alas! Mademoiselle (said he) how Good you are, to concern your self in the Health of a wretched Prince, who has not deserved from you the least Compas∣sion, were it not that he is altogether at your Devotion. Yes, Madame (conti∣nued he, in a disorder that charmed the Fair One) You are the absolute Mistriss of my Life, my Death and Repose: and my Fortune depends wholly on you. La Valliere blush't, and was so out of Countenance, that she remained Speech∣less: She saw at her Knees a great King, whom She loved, melting in Passion; which could not but put her to Plunge. What is the Cause of that Silence, Made∣moiselle, (continued he?) Ah! It is an
Effect of your insensibility, and my Un∣happiness. You are not so tender, as you seem to be, and if so, how much am I to be pittyed, for Adoring you at the rate I do? No Sir (replyed she) I am not insensible of what you feel for my sake; My Heart shall make you a Return, if in reality you Love me: But also, if it be because I have been exposed in your Court, by reason of the particular Esteem hat I have had for your person: And hat one shou'd eye nothing in a King, ut his Crown, Scepter, and Diadem; hat it is almost unlawful for any to praise him; and that not withstanding, without minding the Custom, I have praised that which is more peculiarly our own: If upon that account, I say, ou think it will be easy to flatter my anity and to engage me to give a serious Answer, as to this point. Ah! Sir, onsider with your Majesty that you can ave no Glory by acting such a Part; and hat it is your Sincerity and Honour that ost of all charmes me: I should take he liberty to censure you in my Heart, s if you were an ordinary Man, if I had one in all France, to whom I might say ith Confidence, that your Vertue is not erfect.
O! how I esteem your sentiments, re∣plyed the King, in that you despise vi∣ces even in the Soul of a Monarch; but  have cause to complain of you for suspec∣ting me guilty of the most Ignominiou of Crimes: Good God! What glory would it be to be reckon'd a Skilful cheat when it should be known all the World over, that I had abused the most char∣ming Maid in France: I should infallibl be called the greatest of Knaves; and i that an honourable Character for a King No, Mademoiselle, beleive it, I was bor what I am, I thank God I have Honou and Virtue, and did I not really Lov you, I should not tell you so: I do an shall persist in it with a constancy, whic I doubt not, you will esteem; but, Alass I speak like one in possession of Bliss. an yet perhaps shall never be happy. I can∣not tell, (reply'd La Valliere) but I well know, that if the trouble which is no upon my mind continue, I am sure to b miserable. A great shower of Rain fal¦ling broke up that Conversation, whic had lasted three Hours: There was muc sadness observed in the Countenance o La Valliere, and disturbance in the Kings Next day he visited her again, and enter¦tained
her with a Discourse to the same purpose; after which he sent her a pair of Pendants to the value of Fifty Thou∣sand Crowns; and two days after a Watch of an inestimable price, with this Letter. TEll me sincerely, Mademmoiselle, is it my Death you design; you must be satisfied. All are solicitous to know what disturbs me; they tell me that Madame is not cruel, that Fortune is not niggardly to me; but they say not, I am in love with you and that you are the cause of my despair: You have a kind of tenderness that makes me mad: In Gods Name, change your man∣ner of Carriage for a Prince, who dies for you; Be either altogether kind, or alto∣gether cruel. The King, who is the most impatient Man living, when he is in Love, and holds it for a Maxime, that the more Wit and Discretion a Woman hath, the better she Loves; and that when she has once given her Heart there is nothing then in her Power that she can refuse her Lover, resolved at length to know how matters stood with him and his Mistress.
She her self had confessed that all hi Haughtiness forsook him, and he accoste her trembling. He had Put himself i most Magnificient Apparel, when h went to see her at Madam's Appartment and whilst Count de Guiche entertaine Madame, the Ladies that were with L Valliere, out of respect with-drew, s that he remained all alone with her. H told her whatever a tender and violen Love can put in the mouth of a Witty an Passionate Lover, assured her his Flam should be perpetual; that he beg'd no that favour with the common design o Men, but that he might only have the fatisfaction to perswade himself by con∣tinual Reflections on his Happiness tha she had now no cause to doubt, but tha his heart was wholly at her disposal. O the other hand she assured him, that no¦thing but Love could have made he grant that favour, that she was not daz¦led with greatness; that she Loved hi Person, and not his Royalty; and in fine having told him; pitty, Sir my weakness she allowed him that ravishing enjoymen for which the greatest men in the World spend many Vows and Prayers. Neve Maid sung so loud the Obits of an expi¦ring
Virginity she many times redoubled her Notes, for the King was braver than can be imgin'd, and like himself defied all Opposition. After he had received the avour he felt in himself new accesses of ove and swore to her, that if she askt is Crown, he would willingly give it er. Next day coming again to see her he prayed him that they might conceal heir Familiarities; for Madame (she told im) beleived that he was in Love with er. It is certain, (he answer'd) That e could not harbour so much Treachery n his Heart, as to endeavour to impose pon her. But should I beg it of you said La Valliere to him.) Ah! how rangely do you put me to it, (Answered he King;) but I have told you, you ay dispose of me as you please. About  Fort-night they continued this secret Commerce; but chance at length disco∣ered it, which obliged the King and Mademoiselle de La Valliere to own the ruth, and no more dissemble. It can∣ot be expressed in what chafe and anger Madame was and how basely she thought er self used; She is Lovely, high; and ore than that, a Lady of Court. How,  said she) prefer an ugly, crooked Citi∣zens
Daughter of Tours, to the Daughte of a King, such as I? She spoke of it t both the Queens at Varsilles; but as  Virtuous Lady, who would not serve a a pretext for the King's Amours: Th Queen-Mother thought it expedient, tha La Valliere should be spoken to; and in¦deed all the three gave her so sharp a Les¦son, that the poor Lady resolved for th rest of her days, to take up her Quarte in a Nunnery, there to Mortify her Bod for the short Pleasures she had tasted; an too days after went to one, whether sh was no sooner come; but she desired Chamber and went into it there to b¦wail the sadness of her Condition. A that time the Spanish Ambassadours ha publick Audience in the great Hall, whe they are usually received, many perso of Quality were there, and amongst th rest the Duke of St. Agnan; who havin for some time discoursed with the Ma¦quess of Sourdis, that talked very softly Answered aloud, and in a surprize What, La Valliere in a Monastery? Th King who heard only her Name, turne towards them in great trouble, and ask what the matter was; the Duke mad Answer, La Valliere is in a Nunnery, a
Challiot. By good fortune the Ambassa∣ours were dispatch'd before, for in the Transport the King was put into by this News, he would have done things with ittle Consideration. He commanded is Coach to be made ready; but with∣ut staying for it, immediatly took Horse: The Queen seeing him go away n this manner, told him, that he was ot Master of himself. Ha! (replyed he, rious as a Young Lyon) if I be not of y self Madame, I shall be of those that rovoke me: Having said so, he depar∣ed, and at full speed posted to Challiot. o soon as he had asked for her, and she as come to the grate: Ha! (cryed the ing all bathed in tears) you take little are of the Life of those that Love you: he would have Answered, but was hin∣ed with Weeping: He prayed her pre∣ntly to come out, but she resisted for a ng time, alledging for her excuse, the d usage she might expect from Mada∣e: In fine, (said she lifting up her eyes  Heaven) How weak are people that e in love, and I have no more strength  withstand! With that she came out, d going into the Coach, which the ing had Commanded to be brought;
This now (said she) will at length un me: No (replyed her Crowned Lover▪ I thank God I am King; and I shall ma it appear to any that dare be so bold  to displeasure you. Upon the road  proposed to give her a house, and ret¦nue, but that seeming too Conspicuo she humbly thanked his Majesty; b would not accept of it. So soon as t King returned he told Madame, that  intreated her to look on Mademoiselle  La Valliere, as a Lady whom he reco¦mended to her more than his own Lif Yes, (replyed Madame with a smile▪ I shall look upon her no more now, b as a Lady at your service. The Ki seemed to slight that silly point; b continued his visits with greater appli¦tion than before, and sent her continua most rich presents, even in the sight  Madame. In the Mean time, the Ki daily urged her to accept of a House  her self, which at length she did; on (said she) that she might have the gre¦er conveniency of seeing him. He ga¦her the Palace of Brion, which he hims saw furnished with the richest Furnitu in France, to be changed four times a Ye He hath honoured her Brother, thou
man of little worth, with a brave em∣ployment, and procured him for Wife and Heiress, with an estate considerable enough for a Prince. The Queen was out of all patience, and almost dead of Jealou∣sy, for she Loves the King and the King Loves La Valliere. Whilst matters stood thus, the King fell sick at Varsailes, and during his distemper, his Mind ran con∣tinually on his Mistress, whom he would not see for fear of putting her into dan∣ger; but when all fear was over, the Duke of St. Agnan by order from the King went for her and brought her to an adjoyning Chamber, where she staid a little, because the Kings Bed-Chamber was full of Visitants, No sooner had the Duke entred, and acquainted the King that La Valliere was come; but he wil∣ling to do dismiss the Company, made a bow to the Prince, telling him he must needs Write and give answer to a Packet he had just then received, and so delay'd not a minute the seeing of his dear La Valliere. O Heavens! (said she upon her entrance, with a tone, speaking the most tender passion) Fortune does again restore me to my dearest Prince! Yes my sweet Child (replyed he) to love you
more ardently than ever; with that he shew'd her the Letter she had sent him, which he carried in his Bosom, and was conceived in these Terms. IT is the report of all that you are very ill; perhaps it may be only raised to afflict me; it is likewise said, that you are disquieted at that late rumour: In these troubles, I de∣mand from you the Life of my Lover, and I freely renounce the state; yea and the whole World, What is the reason, if you love me as People say, that you will not see me? Fare∣well, send for me to Morrow; I mean if my anxiety suffer me to live till that day. The King kist that Letter before her a Thousand times over, telling her, he was endebted to her for his Life and Tranquility: But some excess that he could not forbare with his beloved, cast him into a Relapse, and made him as bad as he was before. Nevertheless, his en∣deavour were not without effect, seeing at Nine Months end, Mademoiselle de La Valliere paid for her pleasures by the pains of bring in into the World a little Daughter to the joy of the Father, whom it naturally resembled. But to return
to the Kings in disposition, which was more violent than lasting, you must know that he was no sooner perfectly re∣coverd, but all the Ladies at Court made t their business to make him change his Love. Madame de Chevreuse, who is now the tomb of Pleasures as▪ she was hereto∣fore the Temple, expecting nothing for herself; brought forth Madame de Luy∣es, one of the greatest beauties in France, ut of little or no Wit. The Dutches f Soubize, whose Eyes are continually ickeering, had better success than the rincess of Palatine, and the Countess of  Soissons. The King it's true, imparted l to La Valliere, and made himself mer∣ with it; and she without ceremony, sited the Princess Palatine, and profes∣d much civility and friendship to her. he King got Notice of it and was much xed. How (said he) so little Jealou∣? Ah! Mademiselle, there can be no eat Love then. Pardon me Sir, (an∣ered she) none are more Jealous in endship than my self; but I have too od an opinion of your Wit, to think t you would love a great Statue, and g a lump of Snow. This gave no Sa∣faction to the King, who in that point▪
is the most uneasy Man Living; ins much, that without any reason, f a whole Month together he did nothi but torment her and Cross her: For so time she endured all with extraordina patience; but at length she took him  roundly, which he suffer'd very quiet though dispair appeared in his Ey Meeting with Belfonds, he told him th he was the happiest of Men, in that Glo was the sole Object of his Love. A Sir (replyed Belfonds wittily) Glo is a Mistress more tickless than a Woma and I wish Heavens had given me a hea as sensible of Love, as it is of that oth Passion; my life would thereby have be much more happy. The King fetcht Sigh, and made no answer; but next d he saw Mademoiselle de La Motte a bri Beauty very agreeable, and full of W He said many obliging things to h waited constantly on her, Sighed ofte and in a word, did enough to make be beleived that he was in Love wi her, and to perswade her Mother of t same; who chid her daughter for  Corresponding with the passion of  great a Monarch. All the Ladies t were friends to my Lady Mareschal,
o consult about the matter, and having ufficiently urged, that we live not now n the silly simplicity of our Fore-Fathers, where a bare peice of Gallantry was rec∣oned an affront; and when a Maid never eard of Love till her Wedding day; hat the World was since grown more olished and rational, and by a happy icissitude, Love and Gallantry had recep∣ion in all places: They lesson'd that ovely Young Lady, whose heart as secretly engaged to the Duke of ichelieu, which made her take no delight n the passion of the King, nor in the coun∣el of her Relations. In the mean time he King went daily to La Valliere, and here did nothing but Muse and Read, ithout scarce speaking a word. None ut Monsieur de Vardes, and de Bassy, ouched on the right String; and dayly alked, that it was nothing but some lit∣le amorous disgust. In effect the King ooked Yellow, went no more a Hunting, aughed by constraint, and in a Humor, ut himself quite out of Humor. He pened his mind to the Duke of St. A∣an, in such terms as made it appear he as caught for ever. Yes, yes, (said he o the Duke) if ever Man was to be pit∣tied,
I am he; I do nothing but wh Racks and Torments me, and sometim my very Crown is a Burden; I am as mu in love St. Agnan, as Man can be, a but to sure, that I am not beloved agai or but so faintly, as will never give  content. Is there any thing however, that have not done, to make my self be Loved Speak St. Agnan, but speak sincerely, d deserve to be beloved? D'ont you see th all who have Loved in my Court, are i comparably better beloved than I? T Duke, who is a man of parts, and pe¦ceived that it was only the excess of t Kings Passion, that brought him to th pass, spoke so obligingly for La Vall that the King fell more in Love with he and told him, that he could brag that  observed an inviolable fidelity to h Mistriss; but that he pretended to  beloved of her again. About Two  the Clock, the King had this discour with the Duke, and about Seven he w taken with strange Pains in the Hea and cruel Vomitings. The Duke went  La Valliere, and told her word for wor what the King had said to him.  Valliere made answer, that the King
Whimsies were the cause of all his trou∣bles; but that for all that, she was not of the humour to ask him Pardon for a Wrong she was not guilty of, and that she had cause to complain of him: And that it was not because he was her King that she had studied to please him, but that she would have done the same for any other, whom she had loved so well. In the mean time, the King had a very bad Night, and all the Court came to wait on him next Day. de Vardes said a thousand witty Things (which carryed a double Meaning) concerning his dis∣temper; So that the Amorous Patient pray'd his Confident to go to his Mistris, and to inform her of the Cause of his In∣disposition. She received it with extream Sorrow, and acknowledged her self over∣whelmed with Trouble; and that he would do her a great Kindness to carry that Note to the King, whereof these were the words. IF one knew the Cause of your Troubles, Life it self should not be spared to give you Ease. But, Good God! How vain a thing it is
to tell you so! It is not I, who give your Majesty either Content or Displeasure. The Duke made haste to carry this Note to the King and found the Young Queen on his Bed-side. So soon as she saw him St. Agnan (cryed he) I am a weak Man and much weaker than you can imagine. Upon that the Queen withdrew, and the King read over the Note twenty times. He made the Duke admire her way of Writing, but could not endure that cru∣el Word, Your Majesty: And was still speaking of it, when Mademoiselle de La Valliere enter'd his Chamber with Mada∣me de Montauzeir; to whom that Torch∣light-Visit was the occasion of all those Fa∣vours, which the King did afterwards bestow upon her. Mountauzier, for Conveniency and out of respect, withdrew to the end of the Room with the Duke and Mademoiselle d La Valliere sate down on the King's Bed-side, being in a negligent dress, whic pleased the King very well who is obser¦vant of every thing; She beheld hi with such a Passionate and Languishing Look, as might assure him, that he Heart was eternally his: The King trans¦ported
with Joy, and having begg'd her Pardon, kissed her hand a Quarter of an Hour without speaking a word, But How miserable should I be Mademoiselle, if you took no pitty on me. In fine, they talked and conferred Notes together, spending, at ieast five Hours in muttering, I Love you, you were in the wrong, your Heart decives you, we had reason to be content, let us Love eternally. Thus they entertained themselves with soft and tender Words; And upon my faith I beleive, (but am not certain on't) that the King who got next day to visit La Valliers, did not spend it so after that Reconciliation. Never was a more happy Life than theirs, They have taken so much pains to perswade one another of their fidelity, and mutual love that they have left no more ground to doubt of it. La Vallire has with her Mademoiselle d' Artiny, a Lady of high Quality, and Beautiful as an Angel, whom she loved ex∣ceedingly, and is now her dear Confident: They stand not on ceremonies before her, God having endued her with a good com∣modious Disposition. Madame de Soissons, who thought her
self heretofore much in Favor, has born very impatiently La Valliere's Advance∣ment; insomuch that seeing her one day go before the Daughter of an Advocate of Parliament, on whom Madame de Sois∣sons exceedingly doted, said aloud to Madame de Vantadour; I alwayes thought La Valliere was Crooked but never knew she was Bind. La Ʋalliere who heard this, was sensibly touched therewith; and could not forbear to complain of it to the King with most biting and most Satyrical Words against Madame do Soissons. The King was highly offended, and said to her as he was taking leave, speak freely, Mademoiselle, tell me what I shall do to those that affront you? and be assured nothing will be impossible for me to give you Satisfaction. As he was coming out of her Lodgings, he met the Duke of St. Agnan, whom he commanded to come into the Coach; but said nothing to him there, only as he was stepping out: Well, (said he) be∣cause I love a Lady must all France hate her; but railing shall not do the work. I will have you go immediately to Mada∣me de Soissons, and tell her that  forbid her the Court. The Duke ask't him, if he
had well consider'd on that Order: Yes (replyed the King) so well that I'le have you put it presently in Execution: But durst I be so bold, (answered the Duke) I would put you in mind that heretofore you had some Esteem for Madamo de Sois∣sons. I understand you, (replyed the King) that's as much as to say, that I have loved her; No, take my word, I never did: She had not Wit enough ever to make any impression upon me, unless when at the Age of Fifteen, she talked to me of Co∣lours, which pleased me most; so that I shall not deprive my self of any thing that might obstruct the Revenge, which I owe to Mademoiselle de La Ʋalliere. I beleive it, (answered the Duke;) But Sir, have you no respect to a great Family, and to the Memory of her Uncle? How little do you know me, St. Agnan, (said he) if you think, that the Consideration of a Family is more powerful than that of a Mistriss? How! Must Master such a one, ond Madame such another, be per∣mitted to insult over a Person whom I Honor? Can they have a Respect for Me, who dispise thse I Love? Can insolence rise higher than, to slight what the King esteems? And in short, is not La Ʋalliere
as good as a Manchiny? I wonder that de Ʋardes, who knows so well what it is to Love, hath not taught Madame de Sissons, that a Man is incomparably more concerned at that which is spoke against ones Mistress, than himself. Dod! these lit∣tle Blades will in a short time, give Rules to my Love! Parbleu! this is a happy State indeed; there is not a Gentleman in my Kingdom so inconsiderable, who will not have his Mistriss respected by his Friends and Servants: And a King cannot do the same? I protest tho, that come what will I shall do it, and will begin with Madame de Soissons. But (said the Duke) have you well weighed the interest of Mademoisselle de La Ʋalliere? Don't you think the Queene will be over-joyed to find a pretext of exclaiming against her; and giving out, that she is only the Cause of disorders; Ha! (replyed the King in great trouble) enough, enough; I have no more to say: but that I am the most unfortunate of all Men living. Can therebe a man so mean, that does not revenge his Mistrisses Quarrel, and I cannot do it? You are in the right: The Queens will fall foul on that poor Lady; and hereafter, make it their business to
insult over her, and abuse her. My Ladies will like it they have so great a Kindness for me. having said so, the tears came trickling from his Eyes for Anger and Vexation. The Duke went and gave La Ʋalliere a faithful account of all that had passed; who sent by him this Letter. HOw I Love you my Dear! and how well do you deserve it! But I am vexed that my misfortunes do disturb your pleasures: But why call I that a misfortune, which is not so? No, I correct my self; for so long as my Dear Prince loves me I cannot be Ʋn∣fortunate: Nothing can afflict me, but the loss of him. These are my Thoughts, let Yours be conformable; and let us slight those who have no power to injure us. Farewel, Illustrions Lover; come sooner than you are accustomed to do. No sooner received the King this Let∣ter, but he immediately departed: And what kindness past between them in Word and Deed, there are some that Well know. Whil'st Matters stood thus, the King saw the Countess of Soissons in the Garden
of St. Clou, and put many slights upon her. About a Fortnight after the King hav∣ing spent his time with La Valliere from Noon till Four of the Clock next Morning, was coming to Bed; in his Chamber he found the Young Queen in her Petty-Coat sitting by the fire with Madam de Chevreuse, and being still displeased with her upon La Valliere's account, he asked her very coldly, why she was not gone to Bed? I staid for you (said she, with a de∣jected Countenance) By your Looks, (answered the the King) you are willing to stay very often for me. I know that very well (replyed she) for you take much more Pleasure in my Enemies, then in my Company. The King look'd upon her with some what of Disdain, and told her in a jeering manner; Alas! Madame, How came you to be so well informed? And turning from her, Go to Bed (said he) Madame and take your little reasons to sleep with you. The Queen was so touched at this, that she threw her self at the King's Feet, who was walking in her Chamber. Well, Madame (said he) what would you say? I would say, (an∣swered the Queen) That do to me what
ou Please, I shall ever love you. And  (said the King) shall so carry my self, hat you shall have no cause of trouble. But if you would oblige me, give no more ar to Madame do Soissons nor to Madame e Navilles, the King named to her Ma∣ama de Navilles, because she had clashed ith La Valliere; and persisting to urge, that La Valliere had never any Kindness for her, even before she was in favour, he King dimissed both her and her Hus∣and. Two months after the King took a fan∣y to have La Valliere introduced to the ueens; and she had a great desire to be eceived into their Favour, For that ef∣ect he spoke to Madame de Mountauzier; ho by the King's special Order, went mmediately to the Chamber of the Queen onsort. Madame (said she to her) it is e pleasure of the King, that I must de∣ver to you a Comission, which I am a∣aid will not be acceptable: It was not  my power to decline it: And the thing  Madame, that he intreats your Maje∣y would receive Mademoiselle de La Val∣ere, who is desirous to pay you her Re∣ects. She may forbare if she please, ere is no need of that, (replyed the
Queen) But durst I tell your Majesty (subjoyned Madame de Montauzier that complying with the King's desi will certainly affect him; and on the co¦trary, your denial will exasperate him  For in a word if the King love that Lad your Reservedness towards her, will nev Cure him, So that you may do an a more glorious for your Majesty, if yo will overcome the little Repugnan which with-stands the Will of the King and if you think fit to follow the Examp of so many Illustrious Ladies, who hav nobly done so, when their Husbands we in Love. But Madame (interrupted t Queen) The way to see that Lady?  love the King and the King loves no but her. The King who over heard a came briskly in; and in his presence  surprized the Queen, that she blushed an fell a bleeding at the Nose, which gav her a pretext to remove. Three Days after she was brought t Bed of a little She-Black, which had a most cost her her Life. The whole Cou were at their Prayers for her, the Quee Mother melted in tears by her Bed-sid and the King appeared Melancholly  But still continued his private Visits t
La Valliere, and gave her a Thousand marks of his Love. In the mean time, the Young Queen, in Presence of his Mother, and Confessor, prayed him to give La Valliere in mar∣riage. The King, who cannot dissem∣ble, could not resolve to grant their De∣sire; only being put into a plunge, told them, That if she was willing, he should not oppose it; and that they might think on a Match for her. They thought of Monsieur de Vardes, as the Man at Court most qualified to insinuate into a Ladies Affection. But de Vardes was over Head and Ears in Love with Madame de Soisson: So that when the Matter was proposed to him, he fell a Laughing, and told them, they were very Pleasant; but he was not a Man for Matrimony. Ma∣dame, who knew de Vardes his Passion for the Countess of Soissons, gave her a Visit, to condole with her, if her Lover should consent to that Marriage: And upon that occasion, offered her her Services, by engaging the Count de Guiche (the Mar∣quess his intimate Friend) to dissuade him from it. These are the two admi∣rable Gallants, that have contracted to∣gether so strict a Tye of Friendship, and
are the Confidents of one anothers ¦mours. De Vardes paid a Visit to the Countes and made her exceedingly prize the R¦fusal he had made of La Valliere: Fo (said he to her) it is not nicety; I val not the Familiarity that the King has ha with her. The late Count de Moret, m Father, who was as much a Gentlema as any in France, married one of the M¦stresses of Henry the Fourth, from who I am Descended. You may believe the that that would not startle me: Besides having no Kindness for the King, I shoul be over-joyed to rob him of his Delights But, Madame, (continued he, with  passionate and charming Accent!) it i your eyes that hinder me, which woul never after look upon me again wit Kindness; or rather, it is the Possession of your Illustrious Heart, which I should just¦ly forfeit, did I but yield to give you such  Discontent. I swear by your Self, (whic to me is a sacred Thing) that I shall never consent to any Engagement, how advan¦tagious so ever it might prove to me The Countess was so Charmed with those generous and tender Sentiments of her Lover, that she could not tell how to ex∣express to him her Joy.
Madame, accompanied with the Count de Guiche, came just in the Nick of this their Extasie; to whom they imparted all: And this was a Pleasant Society united amongst them, every one pro∣mising mutual good Offices to one ano∣ther. In the mean time, our two Loving Couple resolved to break up a Com∣merce more Virtuous and Witty, than heir own: For that Effect they Wrote a Letter to the Signora Molina, which the Count turned into Spanish; whereby they nformed her of the Slight the King made of the Queen, the Love he had or La Valliere, and several other things of that Nature. For it is to be observed, hat the Indignation of Madame against La Valliere still lasted; and that the Coun∣ess made, that her Lover was designed for er. The Signora Molina shewed the King his Letter, who let De Vardes see it; nd complained of it to him, as a faithful riend. Love must certainly be a Violent assion, in that it changes Mens Inclinations  a trice: For De Vardes is known to be  Man of Sincerity, and even Ingenuity  self: Nevertheless, his Remorse for
that Perfidiousness towards his King▪ was but Superficial; it lasted but fro the Louvre, to the Hotel de Soissons: Whe finding his Mistriss and Confidents, the rally'd the King with much liberty, cal¦ling him Bragadocio, as if the Pleasur of Love were only for his Enjoymen The Count and Madame sent often to on another Letters in these Terms, becau the King had debarred them a little fro the Freedom of their Visits. About this time it was, that the Coun disguising himself in Womens Appare was observed in the Room, by the Quee of England: And it was shortly after, tha the King commanded him to go to Ma¦seilles, and to depart the very same Day without going to wait on Madame. Go knows how he observed that Order; fo the same Hour he came to see her in h Boots: Well! Madame, (cryed he at th Door) I brave the King, and the S¦preme Powers, that I may come and tak my Leave of you; and am too Happ if you alone (who are to me All in Al do but assure me, that into what Pla my wretched Fortune shall guide me, yo will still wish me well. Yes, Madame,  I am now transported with Grief, I ne¦ther
fear the Anger of the King, nor that of the Queens: I am only apprehensive of the Rigor of a long Absence. No (replied Madame, all in Tears, and Em∣bracing him in her Arms) No, no, dear Count, nothing shall ever destroy the Af∣fection, which I have bequeathed to you; and I shall not be behind with you, in de∣spising every thing: Only love me, my Dear, and never forget me. So after many Lamentations and Embraces, they were necessitated to separate. Shortly after, some malicious Designs were framed against the Life of La Val∣liere: For the King, who loved her more passionately than ever, and who disco∣vered the Greatness of her Affection, (when that Proposition of Marriage was made to her) visited her thrice a Day with an Assiduity that gave sufficient Marks of his Love; not but that she was extreamly concerned at the Liberty which he allowed her before the Queens, of taking a Husband: Are you the same (said she) that I have heard swear, that the most cruel of Deaths, is nothing in in respect of seeing the Person whom one loves, in the Arms of another? Are you He that said, That on such occasion
Daggers and Poison were the only Reme∣dies? No, no, you are not; but to my great Misfortune, I am still the same I was: Yet nevertheless, I perceive it was now time for me to examine my Resolu∣tion, and to try if my Courage will be able to afford me any Consolation, whe I shall shortly be deprived of your Heart▪ But (replied the King) put your self i my Place, and in God's Name tell me▪ what you would have answered? Wha could I have said less, seeing a Queen a the Point of Death, conjuring me to giv you in Marriage? How could I have spok so cruelly as you would have had me, tha I would do nothing? Was in not enoug to say, That if you were willing, I shoul not be against it? Had I so much Reaso still to doubt of your Passion, as not t rely on your Fidelity? No, I did yo more right in trusting to the Sincerity o your Heart: How many would there hav been, who not being so averse fro Treachery as I am, would have grante all to a dying Queen: But thanks to m Love and and Integrity, I could never so far prevail upon my self, as to say that  would endeavour it. Now that my Ver∣tue is so scrupulous, will you not confid
in me? Do not you credit my Words as your own Eyes? There is nothing more certain, (answered La Valliere) than that I believe you have much Vertue: Ah! if it be possible, my dear Prince, have as much Love; for in short, I now declare to you, that it is easie for me to dye, but that it is impossible for me to shake off an Engagement so powerful as yours; and that I had rather renounce to live, than to be without the charm∣ing Hopes that you have given me: Love me then, for if you give over, I well per∣ceive that after the Loss of your Heart, my Life will seem tedious to me. What a baseness would it be, (cryed the King, embracing her Knees!) if having heard what now I hear, any but you should ever get Possession of my Heart. So ha∣ving assured her of an Eternal Con∣stancy, he bid her farewel till next Day. About this time it was (as I told you) when the King spent almost whole Nights with her, never leaving her until Three of the Clock; that one Night, just as he was gone, and she began to fall asleep, her little Dog awakened her by his Bark∣ing, and she hearing a Noise at her Win∣dows,
and the Tread of Feet in her Chamber, fled into her Maids Room: All the People of the House saw the Lad∣ders of Cord, which made so great a Noise next Morning, that it came to the King's Ears, and he immediately went to her, that he might learn the Truth of the Matter. So soon as he had it from her own Mouth, he was strangely troubled; and the same Week appointed her Guards, and a Steward of her House, who was to taste of every thing she should Eat. Every one discanted on this according to their Humor; but the Wiser knew from whence the Bolt was shot. Since that Accident the King's Love has daily increased, and the fear of losing her has made him many times grow Pale in Company. Madame, who is not altogether of that Temper, conti∣nued her Diversions, tho' the Count of Guiche was absent: One Day when she was discoursing with the King, she endea∣voured again to wheadle him; for pul∣ling a Handkerchief out of her Pocket, she dropt a Letter written by Monsieur de Vardes, which gave a Positive Account of the whole Letter that was written to the Signora Molina, concerning the King's
Love for La Ʋalliere, and wherein (as it was his Custom) he called him Young Bragadocio: Never was man more sur∣prized than the King was: And finding that de Vardes, in whom he confided, was a complice in the trick. he spoke of it to Madame without passion, but with ex∣tream Grief, which gave sufficient evidence of his good disposition: She who valued nothing, provided she could justify the Count de Guiche frankly confessed to the King the whole intriegue of the Countess of Soissons and de Vardes: the King sent for de Ʋardes, and having bitterly re∣proached him for his infidelity, banished him. The Trouble that Madame de Sois∣sons was in, cannot be exprest, when she came to know this News, which de Vardes informed her of by this Letter. I Would tell you, Madame, the Nature of my Grief were I not a fraid to involve you in my Misfortune, which I should embrace with Courage, did it not separate me from you for ever. I expect from Despair a sud∣den death, that will put an End to all my Miseries, and give me that Repose, which for a long time I wanted. In God's Name, Madame, now and then bestow a thought upon
an Honest, but unfortunate Lover; and make a generous Resolution not to be discou∣raged at the crosses you are to meet with, Ah! Madame, were I with you at this Minute, I would disclose my Heart at your Feet. Madame went to visit her, and endea∣vored to comfort her, assuring her that Monsieur de Vardes would speedily return which eased her a little: But at length finding no accomplishment of her Promi∣ses and having recommended to her the Care of her Lover, and uppraided her Treachery, she lost all Patience; and finding the King in one of her Fits of An∣ger, discovered all to him; not valuing her own ruine, if she could but undo the Count de Guich. She succeeded in her Enterprize, for the King ordered him to be Banished: Next both She and her Husband, took the pains to tast of the same cup; and none but Madame escaped whom the King hath never since loved nor esteemed. During those Transactions, the Duke of Nazarin, who plays the Saint, deman∣ded private audience of the King, and had it in his discourse he entertained the King with a vision that he had, the whole King∣dom
was like to be turned topsie turvey if he forsook not La Valliere; and gave him that advice in the name of God: And I (replyed the King) counsel you in my own Name, to have a care of your brain, which is sadly out of frame; and to make Restitution of all that your Uncle hath unjustly got: The Duke made a most humble Reverence, and marched off. Poor Father Annat (the King's Con∣fessour) inspired by the Queens, went to him likewise, and pretended a desire to leave the Court, cunningly insinuating, that it was because of his commerce with La Ʋalliere. The King Laughing, bid him freely be gone. The Father finding himself snapt, would have taken up the Matter; but the King still Laughing, told him, that hereafter he would have none but his Parish-Priest. It cannot be expres∣sed, how much all of his Order were of∣fended at him, for his Lack of Prudence. Two or Three Months after, the Queen-Mother resolved to make her last attempt: She spoke to him in the Accent of a Mo∣ther, and with Terms of tender affection; praying his Majesty to reflect on the Scandal that his publick Love occasioned. The King, who is not to be played with
on that point, and who is stedfast in his Resolutions, replyed to her; Ah! Ma∣dame, should one beleive all that is spo∣ken? I thought that your Majesty, least of any, should have preached that Gospel: However since I never made Observations on other Peoples affairs, I think they ought to do the like as to mine. The Pru∣dent Queen held her Peace. The King at night in his Closet, calling to mind that Conversation, said openly, that he could not indure those Creatures who having loved with all imaginable liberty themselves, will needs censure the Actions of others; and because Pleasures forsake them, they are mad that any should be in a condition of Enjoyments; when we are weary of Loving and Liv∣ing, we shall speak as they do. Consi∣der (said he) Madame de Chevreuse, Can any thing be bolder, than that that Wo∣mnn should speak against Gallantry? A Dutches of Eguilon also a Princess of Ca∣rignan, and generally all the Ladies at Court, are much the same. Then tur∣ning towards Roquelaure, In good Faith (continued he) Gallantry hath alwayes been, and will ever be: Those that are not talked of, are either more secret in their
Affairs, or mannage them with some base and insignificant fellow, or, in a word, are so silly, that no Body minds them. The King being in a good Humour, had a little Fling at all our Ladies; he spoke of Madame de Chastillon, and the Prince, Madame de Luines, with the President Tambonneau, the Princess of Monacco, with Pegelin, the Ladies of Angoulesme, Vitry, Valeutinois, Ʋienne, Soubize, and Brezy; with their Beloved Feuillade, de Ʋivonne, le Teleiere and Humieres; and heartily Laughed at all. Next a day troublesome accident chang∣ed his Joy into Grief; for being with his Mistress as Fine and Lovely as an Adonis and engaged in a concern wherein a third Party is never admitted, the poor Soul was taken with that distemper, which makes Women cry out so much, and that with so much Violence, and terrible Fits, that never was Man in more Perplexity, than our Monarch. All in disorder he called out at the Windows for help, and bid in all hast, call the Ladies Montauzier, and de Choisi, whil'st a Maid of La Val∣licres ran for the common Mid-Wife; but all came too late, to save the most stately Vest that ever was, (being em∣broidered
and set with Diamonds and Pearls) from carrying of same marks of the disorder. The Ladies upon their Ar∣rival found the King sweating like an Ox▪ having supported La Valliere in her pains; who was so cruel as to make him tear a Whisk worth a thousand Crowns, whilst she hung a bout his Neck. She could suf∣fer no other hands to come near her, but those that are appointed for the mana∣ging of Scepters and Crowns. In a word, in this Juncture, the King did Things, if not beseeming and neat, at least very passionate. It is certain, that he was like to Dye, (when▪ Madame de Choisi cryed like a Fool) she is dead; Madame de Mountauzier beleived it also; for she sounded a away in a violent fit. In the Name of God (cryed the King bath'd in tears, restore me La Ʋalliere and take all that I have! He was upon his knees at the foot of the Bed, immoveable as a Sta∣tue, unless now and then, when he made such Lamentable and Heavy out-cries, that the Ladies and Physicians seem'd drowned in tears: at length she came to her self again, and looking about her for the King, Madame de Mountazier desired him draw near the Bed: She squeezed his
hand; but with so much weakness, that the Kings Grief increasing, they were fain to pull him from her, and lay him on a Bed. It was a little Boy that gave so much Trouble to our Master: Which was quickly mitigated by the Soveraign Me∣dicines that were administred by the Phy∣sicians. So soon as she was a little eased of her pains she asked Madame de Mon∣tauzeir; What she thought of the King's Love? but in such a manner as being her self ravished therewith. Madame de Mountauzier, who was indeed surprized at what she had seen, told her sincerely, That one could not have too much love for a Prince, who loved so passionate∣ly. It cannot be expressed, how Affectio∣nately he thanked our Ladies; assuring them, that he should make Royal acknow∣ledgments, for the Service they had then done him: And in truth it is well seen, that he hath been as good as his Word. La Valliere cannot have too great an E∣steem of the Marks that the King has gi∣ven her of his love; it being certain that his heart is naturally so dilicate, that he cannot endure the impurities of a Child-Bed;
and hath always been observed with great Reluctancy to enter the Queen Chamber when she was in that condition Nevertheless he was constantly nailed to La Vallieres Beds-Head, and with his own Hands gave her Broths, and did often eat in her presence. But for all the Care and Pains he was pleased to take, his fai one is almost quite bent to one Side, which is much weaker than the other; and with∣all, so terribly Extenuated, that nothing now renders her Body Lovely, but the Charms of her Wit; which indeed does make such daily improvement, that in all Appearance, the Love of those Two is like to be perpetual. La Valliere is certainly the object of that great passion which will alwaies ravish the Heart and Soul of the King; all others being but sudden flashes, designed only for the satisfaction of his body, and to expire with the enjoyment. It is my opi∣nion likewise that the Count de Guich will for ever Love Madame; But I will not affirm that Madame will alwayes love the Count, for that Fair Princess cares not for old prentensions; and if she do no∣thing yet sure I am she'll give people occa∣sion to think enough.
In the mean time, the Count hath written to his Father, beseeching him to employ his interest, to procure the places that were his, to be conferred upon his Brother the Count of Lovigny: That he s resolved never to set Foot in France; ut more than death to shun that Misera∣ble and Ungrateful Country: That he has no Love nor esteem for his King, no Virtuous nor Generous Friends, nor any agreeable Society, seeing the Wife whom he marryed by his order, does no ways please him; that he cannot, nor never could Live contentedly with her, that it was a weak reason to alledge to him her Beauty, since none of her charms ffected him: That therefore, he would e pleased to sell his Estate, which he new well enough where to settle again; nd that no Countrey is so pleasant, as hat where one Loves. The Marescal was reived at this; but has armed himself with Resolution. Madames Vexation hath been much ore Violent; and she hath chose the Dutches of Crequi, for the confident f her grief. This is one of the Loveliest adies at Court: She is tall and Brown er Eyes glance Languishing Looks, her
Mouth is pretty, and has extraordinar Wit; She is a little Melancholly, an inclined to Devotion: But Nature in he now and then, surpasses Grace, a goo Catholick but better Roman. I know no how St. Peter will pardon her for havin invaded his territores, and shared wit him in his Empire. I speak now of m Jolly Legate, who every one knows  be the hansom'st man living; and tha none under an Angel, can challenge fro him the prerogative of Beauty. He  of a vast Wit, couragious, insinuating understands the Knack of Flattery: H hath a very tender heart for Women, i very Honest and passionately loves m Lady Crequi, who without doubt is no Ungrateful: Both Church and Court d Eccho her Conquests; for the Count  Froulay is also much in love with he But to consider him one would think tha Love were the God of the sick or of th mad, he made such hidious cryes and L¦mentations. But we will leave him there that we may listen to Madame; who com¦plains to the Dutchess, of the little ca the Count takes to send her News o him. Well now, my Dear (said she) what thin
you of that ungrateful Man, who having received a thousand marks of my tender Affection, hath left me without hopes of returning, abandoned to the extremity of Sorrow. I know (poor Wretch!) that the King's Order made him with∣draw: I acknowledg that my Dear; But you will likewise grant, that if he love me so passionately as he hath always pro∣fessed, he would labour to pacify the King. But, Alas! it is to evident that the a∣version he hath from him, and resent∣ment against his Enemies, is attributed to the Love he hath for me. Having then wiped her fair Eyes, She made two Stan∣za's of a Song, and sung them to a Me∣lancholly Air. I. Fair Iris by a River, side, (Her lovely eyes ore flow'd with tears) Thus to Young Celimene cry'd; Ah! nourish in thy breast just Fears Of Men for they our tender Sex Still with their foul inconstancies per∣plex.
II. Beleive not, lovely Maid, tho Men With eager Vows persue thy Love: With coldness answer them agen; Thee, never let their courtships move. For be the Traitors but one Week away, They their false vows will to another pay. This my Dear (said she to the Dutchess) is my opinion of all Men in general: Not that I doubt, but that there are some seceret Familiarities, where one may find fideli∣ty and Constancy. Ha! Madame (re∣plyed the Dutchess) you are much in the right: There are some happy people in the World, who make no noise nor desire any other Witnesses of their Integrity than themselves; and without doubt that is the Greatest. But I profess I cannot be perswaded that Love which marches with Drums beating, and Colours flying, can be passionate and sincere, no certainly it never is. Men have a kind of pride to out∣strip their Rivals; and it is Vanity that makes Ladies retain their Slaves: They would be extreamly vexed if it were not talked of at Court, That Monsieur the
Duke, Monsieur the Count, Monsieur le Chevalier, is in love with Madame such a one: They are much more taken with the Pomp and Expence, than with Sighs and tears; so that it is no wonder, if such commerce break up: For as Handsom Women are every where to be found, so Men recover as fast as they lose. But Madame, it is not so easy to find Ladies of clear Understanding, who are above Trifles, who have a tender and delicate Heart, and only love their Gallants for their Virtue, Love, and Fidelity. Never, (interrupted Madame) never did I so well before conceive the Pleasures of a Secret Love: And indeed, Dutches, I perceive that our Lovely Legate hath in∣spired into you a wise and discerning Heart; you shall tell me some Particulars of that at S. Clou, where I shall intreat your Company for some Days. She promised to do so, and parted on these terms. Let us return to the King, who talks more at ease than these Ladies, of the Delight he takes in Loving, and in being Beloved. The Duke of St. Agnan, and Madame de Montauzeir, those he entertained, when upon a debate arising betwixt the Duke
Lady, eoncerning the effects of a prompt inclination; The King, to shew either his Wit, or his Memory, I know not which; but it is certain, that he wrote in a Table-Book, and shewed these Four Lines. How little is true, what some beleive, That Hearts at the first sight, do Love conceive. And yet these Flames are kindled by a Glance, That after to the greatest Heights advance. It is to be well considered how Divine and Ravshing this is. He would have Madame de Mountauzeir, who does what∣ever he pleases, write likewise something concerning her Love, she declined it as much as she could, but at length made these following Lines upon what the King said, that he was resolved to satisfy his own Heart; and that he Laughed at those who spent their Life in censuring the Actions of others. Those tender Sentiments, can any blame, That now your Heart to gentle Love do frame?
Since all Men know, Love's soft yet noble Heat. Makes a Young Prince both generous and great. Love in a Monarch greatly I esteem, And think a Quality so worthy him. That where 'tis wanting one may all Things fear, As one may all Things hope, if Leve appear. The King returned the Praises that Madame de Montauzier had given him, and obliged the Duke also to employ his Muse; which indited to him these Verses. Yes, mighty Love is of all Passions King, And does attendant Virtues with him bring. He spurs on noble hearts to their great Fate, And every Hero's Breast does animate. Madame de Mountauzier had more Wit than to neglect so fair an occasion of making her Court to the King: She told him that his Joy was imperfect, if La Valliere saw not little poetical Conver∣sation: The King liked it well, and thought fit to puzzle her in sending it by an unknown Hand, which they did; and there-to she added what follows.
Nothing so pleasant can one ever find, As Love which merit kindles in the mind: Could any joys upon poor Mortals smile, If love from Human-life were in eile? Ah! no; for love to live its Pleasure gave; Life without Love, can small Enjoyment have. The same Person that carry'd th Table-Book to her, brought it back again, and the King appeared as impatient to see the Answer, and opened the Book with as much Disorder, as if he had expecte the News of Victory, or Loss of some great Battle: So true it is that the mean∣est thing coming from the Hands of  Mistress is of great Consequence to  Lover. He was ravished to find Verses i that passionate strain, which he beleive were composed to encourage him in hi Love; so he staid not long before h went, and gave her proofs thereof: H presently render'd her a Visit though h found her as passionte as she used to b yet he found her in extream, Melancholl which was occasioned (as she professed) by the Fear she had, that he would no
alwayes love her with the same Fervency: For (continued she) think not that my Glass deceives me; I well perceive, that for the future my person is not like to prove too agreeable; I have lost almost all that could please: And in a Word, have reason to fear, that Your Eyes having no more Satisfaction in me, you will cast them on some of the Beauties of your Court, that may give them more content: However, I dare be bold to say, that you shall never find in another, what you have found in me. I understand what you would say (replyed the King, with extream passion;) yes I know that I shall never find in any, those Divine Cha∣racters that have charmed my heart; that I shall never find in any but your self, that admirable and ravishing Wit, which can render ones Life Happy and Pleasant with you in the Solitude of remotest De∣serts. Wrong not then, by your Unjust Suspicions a Prince who adores you; and beleive, that I shall never find in any that Heart that I esteem so much, and on the Fidelity whereof, I wholly rely. I fancy there is none but it, that can Love as I desire to be Beloved. What Trouble should I have to discern whether those
frisking Lasses loved me or my Granduer, whether they delight to see a King at their feet. would not please them more than the excess of my love, could move their passion? But as for you, I am per∣swaded, you have a Soul above Crowns and Diadems; that I please you better in the Quality of a Passionate Lover, than in the Charecter of a great and powerful King; and that you sometime desire, that I had not been born of a Throne, that you might have enjoyed me with greater freedom. Think with yourself then if knowing your sentiments to be so Virtuous and Heroick, I can ever change for the Beauty of some Faces, which the least Fit of Sickness can destroy. No, no, Madame; imagine not that it was the Lustre of your Complexion, or the Spark∣ling of your Eyes, that hath Charmed me; you gained me by your lovely Qua∣lities, and shall never lose me whil'st I enjoy Life. In a word it was the inte∣grity of your Soul, your Wit, and Heart, which have fettered my Liberty, and en∣gaged me to your Devotion. How Good you are, my Dear Prince (replyed she) to employ the force of your eloquence to assure a Heart whose too much fear
proceeds only from too much love! How happy am I that I love a Prince who sees so clearly into my Heart: Yes (continued she, embracing him) you have reason to beleive, that I was not dazled with your greatness, that I had no regard to yout Crown when I loved you; and that your Person alone was the the object of my desires, it is beleive me to amiable to stand in need of Thrones and Scepters, to add to its Worth, and would to God, I had a Thousand Times said to my self, that my Dear Prince had no other Fortune and Estate, but what his Virtue hath entailed upon him, and that I might with him spend my life in a private Condition re∣mote from Court and Grandure; but love has not long suffered me to make so unjust a Wish. I am too well convinced, that no man living but your self deserves to Command us, and that Heaven with∣out injustice) could place nothing over us but such illustrious Vertues as yours, which ought to be encompassed with Crowns and Purple. Tho I cannot in Modesty (replyed the King) hear so high praises without some Confusion; yet I cannot deny, your Discourse has infinitely pleased me: For to be short
nothing is so sweet as to be esteemed  the person whom one loves: and no S¦tisfaction Comes near that. Mademoiselle de La Valliere once mo told the King, that she would betake he self to a Nunnery, in case his passion t¦wards her diminished. And it cannot  imagined what an affectionate Answ the King made her. When the King was gone La Valli went to visit the Princess; with who were many Ladies of the Court, and s¦veral Accomplished Gentlemen. Sometime after the King came wit much satisfaction in his looks, the Dutc¦ess of Mazarine being there, flurted ou two or three blunt sayings to Monsieur  Rochquelaur: At which the Prince of Cour∣tenay (who was in love with her) wa so ashamed that he blushed: The Kin perceiving it in a Fit of Laughter rose up and told Mademoiselle de LaValliere pretty softly, That he thank't her for the Care she took, to speak nothing but wha was agreeable, and he would have dyed, if he had met with that which happened to the Prince of Courtenay. LaVallier likewise laughing told him that she had reason also to thank him for the Great∣ness
of his Wit, and that she perceived that she should have been hardly put to it as well as he, if she had met with the like misfortune. The truth is Monsieur de Bussy, who heard them, said that no body could treat a Subject more Pleasantly and maliciously than they handled that point. In the mean time, the Dutchess of Cre∣qui failed not to wait on Madame at the day appointed, for their going to St. Clou: There she found Phison who was coming to see one of Madames Maids that were sick: He is La Vallieres Phisician, a Wit∣ty and Merry Man. When he understood the ladies distemper, courage (said he) I have remedies for all things even for the hearts of lovers. Good now (replyed Madame) tell me them quickly; for I have Ten or Twelve that I would willing ly cure provided it costs me no more but some garden herbs. Ha! Madame (an∣swered he) it costs me not so much as Herbs it costs me nothing but Words. In fine, Phison that would sacrifice any thing for Madames Diversion, told her how the King had sent for him, and with much earnestness if Mademoiselle La Val∣liere could certainly live, and if her lean∣ness was not a bad presage. And what
answer did you give him (replyed M¦dame?) How! (said he) can your high∣ness doubt of that? I assure you that assured him of her long life with as muc boldness, as if I had Credentials fro God Almighty: I spoke like a man skilfu in life, death and destiny. And perceivin the Kings Joy, I was within an Ace  Promising that Lady Immortallity. Goo God! (cryed Madame) What scere Charms has that Creature, to inspire so great a Passion? I assure you (replyed Phison) her Body does not afford them Madame dismissed Phison and prayed him to acquaint her with all his little News. An hour after our two ladies took Coach for St. Clou: Going thither they meet Madame de Chevreuse, with her concealed Husband Monsieur de L' Agies: But their heads at that time running on La Vallieres good Fortune, they had no discourse of the happiness of those Two Persons; tho' I know none greater. She ask't there∣fore the Dutchess, if she knew any thing more happy than that Lady. Yes, Ma∣dame (replyed boldly the Dutchess) I know my self to be happier than she, when I see the Legate, for he is certainly a thou∣and times more charmig than the King.
Ha! (answered Madame) but the King tho, is too lovely for such a creature as she; and there are but few that can di∣spute any thing with him. But Madame (replyed the Dutchess, with some Anger) you your self cannot deny, but the Cardi∣nal Legat is beyond comparison Handso∣mer, Genteeler, and in my mind, more Witty than the King: As for Tenderness, and Passion, my Heart is sufficiently sa∣tisfyed with that. It is certain, what you say (answered Madame) that the Legat has a better and more genteel Meen than the King; but as to Wit, you must know, that none can have more than the King hath with her whom he loves, nor yet greater Respect. Once more, Madame you know not how agreeable the King is, in private with a Lady, for whom he has a Passion: Imagine that one told you, that she is the only Person in the whole World, whom he eyes with as much love and passion at the last minute of a Visit seven or eight Hours long, as he did at the first; he sacrifices every thing to her, appears wholly to depend on her, and does her a thousand little kind Offices. In fine if what Madame d' Artiny told one of my Friends be true, as I do beleive it
is, I know no man who loves so well as the King. How! Madame, no not the Count de Guiche? He is indeed Lovely (reply'd Madame) but not so passionate as the King. With that the Dutchess prayed her to perform the promise she had made, to give her a short Account, how she came to discover that the King was in love with La Valliere. Madame condescended, and did it in these Terms.
THE HISTORY OF THE King's Feign'd Amour FOR Madame. YOu'l certainly confess, my dear that it is somewhat pleasant for a Princess of my Quality, to be made the May-game of such a Girl as La Valliere; yet this hath been my Case: And seeing you were not at that time at Paris I'le tell you the whole adventure. You must know then, that shortly af∣ter I was Married to Monsieur, whom I could never love, the King who I think is in the same terms with the Queen, came pretty often to see me, and complained of the troubles of his heart, in no obli∣ging or gallant manner; that since the
departure of Madame de Collona, he spent but few Hours of his Life, which seemed not tedious to him: this he often told us in presence of the greatest Beauties in France; and tho' we found his way not altogether so Courtly, yet we strove who should give him most Diversion. Being one day more Pensive than or∣dinary, Monsieur de Rocquelaure to draw him out of his dumpish Fit, unhappily fell into one of his merry Humours; and personating one of my Maids who was deeply in love with the King, said that he would see the King no more, for the repose and quiet of his own heart, with many other things of that Nature, which La Valliere had really spoken, you know that he has a drolling way in what ever he sayes; and then succeeded in it so well that he diverted the King, and whole Company. The King ask't who she was but having observed no such thing, he was not curious to inform himself further: Only was much taken with the Buffoone∣ries of the Sieur de Rocquelaur. Three days after the King going out of my Chamber espied Mademoiselle de Ton∣nechalaute pass by: Rocquelaur (said he (I should be glad that were she who is in love with me. No Sir (replyed Rocque∣laure) but there she is, (pointing to La∣valliere:)
To whom he said in Presence f us all, with a very pleasant Accent; ome hither my pretty Languishing Eyes ho can'st not love below a Monarch, his peice of raillery so extreamly dis∣omposed her, that she was quite out of ountenance, tho' the King made her a ow bow, and speak to her with all ima∣inable civility. It is certain, she made o impression on the King that day; how∣ave he would have none to rally her upon hat that Subject. Her Luck was better x days after, for she entertained him ost wittily, for the space of two hours: nd that was the fatal Conversation that on him into the engagement wherein he till persists. You know very well, he would have een ashamed to come to see that Maid n my house without visiting me: And herefore he found a means to have it pread a broad about the Court, that he as in love with me: He spoke of it con∣inually, prais'd my Air and Beauty; and n short, I had the Complements of all y Friends upon the News. In the mean time, he gave me no other roofs of his affection but continual Visits: When he oserved any approach my ear to ell me some little idle story, he fell again to strange Fits of Melancholly, he put
me often upon the discourse of his fa Ones, obliging me to tell him every le punctilio that concerned her: And sin I observed the cause of that Curiosity  be only because of what he had been to and that otherwayes I was glad to div him, I entertained him on that Subje as much as he pleased. He often saw  in private, and some times talkt dr¦lingly, to countenance his Coversation But if I did but in the least seem to ¦spect any thing. I clearly saw by  Looks that he has (when he is offende that he was not well pleased. He fr¦quently called for her and was rea more pleasing and more prompt in e¦tertaining the company, than when  was not there. In the mean time consider how I suff¦red thereby; No Body offering to co into my presence, for fear of giving hi offence, save only the poor Connt de Gui who boldly visited me still. Good Go How blind I was! I remember one da when Mademoiselle de Tonnechalaute w sick of a Feaver, La Valliere went to  her; so soon as the King knew of it, in great surprize he started up, and we himself to bring her away. Ah! Mad (said the Count to me) the King is excee¦ingly Civil if he be not in Love. I confe
beleived it not so much, being said to the contrary: and the Queen-Consort con∣irmed me in my opinion more than any other by her indifference towards me; which she pretended, was occasioned by my aughing one night, when she had like to have fallen as she was dancing here: Mon∣ieur likewise gave me some angry hints of it, as I was a Hunting. In reallity when I consider on't, our prightly Lovers made themselves verry Merry with my simplicity: But let us make an end. One day when the Countess de Maure ame to visit me, La Valliere askt her if he had not seen La Tonnechalaute, who was gone to wait upon her. You know he Humour of the Countess, who was er intimate Friend. She thought that La alliere spoke not as became her, of her Kinswoman and Friend, and complained of it to me. I do confess the Whimsie of hat Lady seemed to me pleasant, in that e took it amiss, that she took it amiss, hat she gave not the Title of Mademoi∣oiselle de Tonnechalaute; but having a ecret Grudge against La Vailliere, because he Night before, the King had enter∣ained her almost all the while, I took er up so sharply before Madame de Mau∣e; letting her know, that I put a great
Difference between her, and my othe Maids and that of late I observed she w grown somewhat Conceited and Wise that she wept for Anger and Vexation But what of all incensed her most, wa that she had heard us with contempt je at her pretended passion for the King. A as you know that Madame de Maure positive in deciding matters, she spo of her as a Maid, who would at leng fall in love with the Heroes of a Roman We had not fully determined th point, when the King entred my Cha¦ber. I declare to you Dutchess, that  time he appeared to me the most Love Person that ever I had seen. But Go God how soon did that charming joli vanish, when he perceived La Vailli enter by another door, with eyes swoll and red with weeping? No, I shall n undertake to describe to you that chang which he endeavoured to hide, by telli her laughing, That he had so much kin¦ness for her, that he was willing to be i formed of her Troubles. I beleive at th time she spoke very well of me to him for presently after he departed saying that he had seen me and that that w enough. He returned however at Night, w the Queen, attended by many Ladies. T
Queen shewed us a most lovely Bracelet of Diamonds, in the Middle whereof was the picture of Lucretia in water most rich∣ly set, being a Master peice of art, and the Work of that Famous Italian, who hath made so much noise in the World. There was not a Lady amongst us all, but would have given any thing for that pretty Toy: And to what purpose should I dissemble, I confess I thought it desig∣ned for me; and that if I should but sig∣nifie my desire of having it, the King would certainly ask it of the Queen; for none but himself would ever have obtained it from her. The truth is I omitted no∣thing that might perswade him that that Present might prove acceptable, if he bestow it on me: But he was so Melan∣cholly, that he made me no answer. Never∣theless, he took it from Madme de Sois∣sons, who had it in her hand, and shew'd it to all our Maids; and addressing him∣self to La Valliere, he ask't her, that see∣ing we were all so much taken with it, what was her opinion thereof. With a Languishing Accent, she answered him that it was precious and rare. the King had neither the patience nor prudence to forbare desiring it, till he was gone from my Lodgings; for with much Serious∣ness, he prayed the Queen to truck it with
him: she gave it him with a great deal of joy; and God knows how I was trans∣sported, when I saw it in his hands. When the Company was gone, I could not for∣bare to tell all my Maids, that I should think my self exceedingly disappointed▪ if next Morning I had not that Jewel; La Valliere blush't, and made no answer, but immediately departed, and La Tonnecha∣laute followed softly. She observed La▪ Ʋalliere as plainly as I can see you, look on that bracelet, kiss it and then put it in her pocket. When La Tonnechalaute, with design to put her in fear made a loud cry▪ which did indeed surprize her; but being again recovered, she sought for no Eva∣sin but freely told her. Well! Mademoi∣selle (said she) you are privy to the King Secret; it is a nice point, consider of it therefore more than once. Tonnechalaut at this earnestly entreated her, that sh would tell her the whole intrigue: And La Ʋallier without mincing the Matter acquainted her with the State of Affair as then it stood. Next Morning she wrote to the King an account of all that Adventure: And about Two of the Clock came to my Lodgings where he discours'd almost an Hour with her. He offered to have removed her from me that very day (but she would not) he
gave the Pendants and Watch you know of; and desired her that adorned with them, she should come into my Chamber, which she did. I ask't her before the King who had bestowed those Things on her: I did (said the King, with little Civility) at this I stood speechless; but the King having pray'd me to go to Varsailles, and take that Creature along with me, I took no notice of it at that time, till I might have the opportunity of doing it before the Queens. The King without doubt su∣spected as much, for that day he did us all the civility, to leave us in the Vain that then fell, and took La Villiere by the hand, covering her Head with his Hat. Thus slighting our dsiegns he, made no secret of an intrigue, whereof we inten∣ded to make a Mysterious Point. Judge then after all this, my Dear, how great my obligations are to the King. The Dutchess condoled with her; and after they had spent Five or Six dayes dis∣coursing of their several affairs, they re∣turned again to Paris. Madame Sup't at Louvre, where she found almost all the Ladies of the Court, who came to Visit the Queen-Mother, then a little indisposed. The King perceiving Monsieur de Rocqueluar come in, ask't him if his roguery with Woman-kind must
be always the subject of discourse. This he ask't, because the Night before he had made a very unhandsome rupture with Madame de Gersay: Really (said the King) that reputation of Procuring Ladies Fa∣vours, and ten slighting of them, does no way please me: Who can countenance a Man, that wants sincerity towards them? For in short is there nothing to be feared, because that all that they can do, is to persecute us but with Tears and Com∣plaining? That is barbarous: And be∣sides, who ever is honest in one Point, should be so in all. In reallity (replyed the first and most beautiful Dutchess of France) it is a great Honour for us, that such a King as ours does so generously maintain our Cause. Ha! Madame (said the King) I should not need to do so, were all Ladies like you. After all (said the Queen) Monsieur de Guiche lost himself so much Two or Three passages of that Nature, that not a Semptress in the Ex∣change would have trusted him, tho he were dead. But Madame (said Rocquelaur to her smilling) when a Confessour com∣mands to break off? Ah! (interrupted the King) a good Man hath always a Good Conscience. This Conversation lasted an Hour lon∣ger, the King still pinching Rcquelare on that Subject.
Afterward he went to prepare for Con∣fession next Day, which he made with wonderful Devotion, and divided the day into three Parts; one for God ano∣ther for the People, and a third for La Valliere, to whom he gave his richest pre∣sents; amongst which none pleased me more than a set of Christial-Furniture rarely wrought. I am certain that all the Furniture I have ever seen, comes far short of the Beauty and splendor of this, the Candlestick alone being worth two thousand Pistols. Two dayes after La Valliere sent the King by one of her Brother's Gentlemen, a Suit of Cloaths and Trimming, with this Letter. I Confes to you, I am not a little proud, when I consider I am in a condition to make pre∣sents to the greatest Monarch in the World: For, my Illustrious Prince, you are willing I should be perswaded, that what ever comes from me is acceptable to you, and that you set more value upon a Mark of my Passion and Friendship, than all the treasures of your Kingdom, consider tho a little whil'st you are a dressing that to please me there is no great need of Magnificence. This Letter as every thing that comes from La Valliere, exceedingly pleased the King and this is the Answer he made to it. YEs my Dear little Minion, you are in a condition to make me presents and I re∣ceive
them from your hand with greter joy than the Empire of the World from the hands of all men: But my pretty Child reserve ever for me the glorious Present you hve made me of your Heart, for it is that which makes me look upon all the rest with Pleasure. Have a liitle curiosity tn come and see me in the habit you have bestowed upon me. This Present turned to her great advantage; for the King having worn it a fortnight together sent her shortly after six Suite wonderfuily Rich and Sumptuous, with a Skale and Girdle of Dia∣monds to mount by with greater ease to the top of Pernasss; and a Vst just like the Queens, which becomes her very well. She was in this Equipage when the King went to Vincennes to muster his Troops in presence of the Ambassadours of Eng∣land. The King observing La Vallieres Coach pas∣sing, went to meet it at a Gallop, and stood an Hour and an half at the Boot uncovered, tho' there was then a little mizling rain, which much incom∣moded us: Upon his return meeting the Two Queens he made them a low reverence. Next Week the two Lovers went by themselves to Versailes, Mademoiselle d' Artigny not being per∣mitted to go with them; So true it is that Secrecy is the delight of Love, this puts me in mind of the Cardinal-Legate, who one day said to Monsieur de Crequi; Parbleu Monsieur, I should lose one half of my Pleasure if I thought any Body heard me. About half way Des Fountaines, by Order from the Kng prepared a great treat for tehm, for which he had a hundred Pistols. They staid seven or eight dayes at Versailles, where they diverted themselves at Hunting, Walk∣ing, in Bed, and at all other recreations they pleased.
As they were returning to Paris Mademoiselle de La Valliere fell from her horse, which would not have hurt her much had she not been the Kings Mistress; but because of that she must needs be let blood; and I know not why she would have Oppier to be the Man: The King who would be present did more hurt than good; for he made such a noise in the Surgeons ears, that for fear he twice mist of his hit. Her Lover grew pale as a Linnn Cloath; but it was a quite other mat∣ter, when he saw that Mademoiselle de La Valliere drawing hastily back her Foot, broke the point of the Launcet: The King exasperated as if the poor Wretch had done it purposely, gave him a kick with his foot with all his strength, (which in truth is enough to be said) and sent him dan∣cing from one end of the Chamber to the other. The King cast himself into his place, and held the Foot of that rare one, till another Surgeon came, who pluck't out the point of that Launcet, and her let blood extreamly well; tho for all that she was fain to keep her bed for a Month after. The King for her sake put off his Journey to Fountainblau, for the space of Ten Dayes; but must then be gone. She had every day News from the King, and the King from her. This is one of the Letters which she wrote to him. GOod God how uneasy a thing it is to love such a Charming Prince as you are? one has never a minutes rest, but even fears a thousand things that can never happen. In a word, I am many times vexed that you are so extream lovely: Pitty then, that Heart which you render unhap∣py; and impute not to it the Troubles my Love occasions, in being sad, absent importunate, and (if I dare say so) Jealous.
Here you have the Answer. THE sad Estate to which my heart reduces me, in that I see you not (my Child) is so much to be pittied, as to oblige you to share in my Pains, and to be affected with the evils that I suffer through your absence; which all the Plea∣sures of my Court cannot mitigate, or give ease to. So that I am fully perswaded, you have some Minutes, wherein you suffer whatever can be suffered by one that Loves. An Hour after this Letter was dispatched, the King was so impatient of seeing his Mistress, that he prayed the Duke of St. Agnan to go for her, not being able himself, because of some impor∣tant Affairs, that were then in agitation in his Councel. The Duke immediately departed, and two dayes after our two lovers tasted the Satis∣faction of beholding one another, after a short Absence their joy was great, but the Queens was not so; who without this, had Vexation e∣nough to hear the King almost every night dream, and talk aloud of that little Pute—(for so he called her, speaking not good French.) She is a good Princess, and the King is a great Prince: None but he deserves to Head us. There were never any Great Men, who have not as well as He been o∣vercome by Love. Let us alwaies then admire his Gratitude, In∣tegrity, Passion, and great Canstancy; and the Wit and Moderation of La Valliere. FINIS.
Loves Empire; Or, The GALLANTRIES Of the FRENCH COURT. NOtwithstanding that in the Reign of Lewis the Four∣teenth the War had continu∣ed above Twenty years, yet it did not hinder Love from causing some Amourous In∣trigues; but as the Court was only filled
with old insensible Gentlemen, and young Sparks bred up in Armies, and whom that Profession had rendred Brutal, most of the Ladies were become less modest than for∣merly; and seeing they should have lan∣guished in Idleness if they had not made Advances, or at least if they had been Cru∣el, a great many grew tender hearted, and some very Confident. Of this last Tribe was Madam d'Olonne▪ She had a round Face, a pretty Nose,  little Mouth, fine sparkling Eyes, and de∣licate Features, yet smiling, which embe∣lishes most people, had in her a quite con∣trary effect; her Hair was a bright brown▪ her Complexion admirable, her Neck▪ Hands and Arms were well made, her shap was not to be commended, nor would sh have been thought Charming had it no been for her Face: This much her Flatter¦ers say, That when he first appeared a Court she had a handsome Body; which i the usual plea of those who would exc Women who are too Corpulent. How∣ever this Lady was too sincere in this ca to leave people in an Errour, for eve one that had a mind might be informed  the contrary, and it was not her fault sh did not undeceive all the World.
Madam d'Olonne had a quick and plea∣sant Wit when she was free; yet she was something false, inconstant, bold, malici∣ous, loved pleasures even to Debauch; and there was excess in her least Divertise∣ments: Her Beauty rather than her Estate, which was but small, obliged the Count d' Olonne to endeavour the making her his Wife: Which he quickly effected; for be∣ing a Person of Quality, and having a great Estate, he was agreeably received by Madam de la Louppe her Mother, and had not the leisure to sigh for Charms which for two years had inflamed the desires of all the Court: This Match being consummated, those Lovers withdrew who pretended to Marriage, and others came who only aimed at being beloved. One of the first who of∣fered himself was Beuvron, whom the Neighbourhood of Madam d' Olonne gave the more conveniency of seeing; and by this means loved her a pretty while without being discovered; and I fancy this Amour would have still been concealed, if Beuvron had never had Rivals: But the Duke of Candale being fallen in love with Madam d'Olonne, quickly perceived what had thi∣therto remained concealed for want of in∣teressed People: Not but that d' Olonne
loved his Wife extreamly, but Husbands are stupid, and so are never Lovers, and the jealousie of these is much more piercing than that of the others: So that the Duke of Candale saw things that d'Olonne did not, and never has seen, for he is still ignorant that Beuvron has had an Intrigue with his Wife. Beuvron had black Eys, a handsom Nose, a little Mouth, a long Face, very black long and thick Hair, a fine Shape, and Wit e∣nough; He was not one of those who tal all in Company, but was a Man of good sense and honour, tho he had naturally a aversion for War, so that being fallen in love with Madam d'Olonne, he sought for an opportunity to discover to her his Passi∣on: Their Neighbourhood at Paris gave him occasions enough, but her Inconstan∣cy made him apprehend an Intrigue with her: At length happening one day to mee with her without other Company, If I on∣ly designed, Madam, said he to her, to l you know that I love you, words would be alto∣gether unnecessary, my cares and my looks have told you sufficiently what effect your Chars have had upon me; But, Madam, as I expect you should one day make returns to my flames▪ it is requisite that I discover 'em, and assure yo
at the same time, that whether you love me or not, I am resolved to be your Votary as long as I live. Beuvron having ceased speaking, Sir, answered Madam d' Olonne, This is not the first time I perceived you loved me, and tho you did not acquaint me with it, I did not fail to think my self obliged to you for all you have done for me since the first moment you saw me, and this ought to be my Excuse when I confess I love you: Therefore do not esteem me the less, having long understood your sighs, and tho I should be something blamed for my little resi∣stance, it would be a mark of the force of your merit rather than of my easiness. It is easie to imagine that after this Confession it was not long before the Lady delivered up her Fort to her Gallant: This Intrigue lasted four or five Months without disturbance to either Party, but at length the Beauty of Madam d' Olonne was too much talked of, and that Conquest promised too much Glo∣ry in appearance to him who should make it, for Beuvron to be at rest. The Duke of Candale, who was the handsomest man of the Court, fancied that nothing was want∣ing to his Reputation, but the being belo∣ved by the most beautiful Woman of the Kingdom: Wherefore he took a Resoluti∣on
at the Army, three Months after the Campaigne, to be in love with her assoon as he should see her; and made appear by a great Passion he had afterwards for her, that Love is not always the work of Hea∣ven and of Fortune. The Duke of Candale had blew Eyes, a handsome Nose, irregular Features, a great and disagreeable Mouth, but very fine Teeth, light yellowish Hair both long and thick, his Shape was admirable, and he dressed so well, that the greatest Spars endeavoured to imitate him; he had the air of a Person of great Quality, he held one of the first Ranks in France, was Duke and Peer, Governour of Burgundy joyntly with his Father, and sole Governour of Auvergne, and Colonel General of the French Infantry: His Genius was mean, but in his first Amours falling into the hands of a Lady who had an infinite deal of Wit, and as they had loved one another extream∣ly, she had taken so much care to polish him, and he to please that fair One, that Art had surpassed Nature, and he was a much better bred man than a thousand o∣thers who have more sense than he.
Insomuch that being returned from Ca∣talonia, where he had commanded the Army under the Prince of Conty, he begun by a thousand eagernesses to acquaint Ma∣dam d' Olonne with the love he had for her, thinking she had never had an Amourous Intrigue: But seeing she made no returns to his Passion, he resolved to acquaint her with it after such a manner as that she might not seem to be ignorant of it; but as he had a kind of bashful respect for all Women, he chose rather to write than speak to Madam d' Olonne, and his Letter was in these terms. I Am grieved, Madam, that all Delara∣tions of Love are alike, and that there is sometimes so much differences in Sentiments: I am very sensible that I love you more than all the World is used to love, and yet I cannot express it otherwise then is done by all the World: Wherefore do not take notice of my words that are weak, and may be deceitful, but be pleased to make reflexion on my Conduct towards you, and if you find that to conti∣nue it with the same force, I must needs be deeply struck; yield to these testimonies and be assured, that since I love you so much, not being beloved by you, I shall adore you, when
you oblige me to have acknowledgment. Madam d' Olonne having read this Let∣ter, made this Answer: IF any thing hinders you from being believed when you talk of Love, it is not that it is importunate, but that you tell it too well: Great Passions are usually more disordered, and methinks you write like a very witty Man, who is not in love, but would fain be thought so; and since it seems so to me, who am in∣finitely desirous that what you say were true, judge what People would imagine to whom your Passion should be indifferent, they would pre∣sently think you had a mind to railly; For my part, I'le never make a rash judgment, but will accept the Offer you make me, and am willing to judge by your Conduct of the Senti∣ments you have for me. This Letter which grateful People would have thought very kind, did not seem so to the Duke of Candale; As he was very vain, he had expected less intricate Favours: and this obliged him not to press Madam d' O∣lonne so much as she was willing he should have done, and made her a hard task in spight of her self; and the thing had lasted a
long time, if the Fair One had not gained upon her Modesty to make him so many advances, that he fancyed he might make an attack without being exposed to a Re∣pulse. The business being done, he quick∣ly perceived Beuvron's Commerce. Usually a Pretender looks only before him, but a Lover well treated, looks on the right and on the left, and is not long without discovering his Rival: Hereupon the Duke complaines; His Mistress calls him Caprichious and Ty∣rant, and takes him up so roundly, that he asks her pardon for his suspicions, and fan∣cies himself too happy in having appeased her. This Calm did not long continue, Beu∣vron for his part reproached her to as little purpose as the Duke did, and seeing he could not destroy his Rival himself, he caused notice to be given under hand to O∣lonne that his Wife entertained the Duke of Candale for her Galant. D' Olonne forbids her to see him, that is to say, redoubled the Passion of those two Lovers, who having the more desire to see one another since it was forbidden, found a thousand more conve∣nient oppurtunities than those they had be∣fore; However Beuvron remaining Master of the field of Battails, the Duke of Can∣dale renewed his Complaints against him,
and used all his endeavours to have him Cashiered, but all to no purpose; Madam d' Olonne told him that she perceived he only considered his own Interest, and that he cared not if he ruined her, since that if she should forbid Beuvron to see her, her husband and all the world would not doubt but that she made that sacrifice to him; Madam d' Olonne did not love Beuvron so much as she did the Duke, yet she was not willing however to lose him, and as well because One and One make Two, as that because Cocquetts fancy they can retaine their Galants better by a little Jealousy than a great Tranquility. In the mean time Paget a man pretty well stricken in years, meanly born, but very rich, fell in love with Madam d' Olonne, and having discovered that she loved the sport, he fancyed that his Money would serve him instead of Merit, and founded his greatest hopes upon the sum he resolved to offer her; He had access enough to her house to have spoke to her himself, if he had durst; but he had not the bold∣ness to begin a discourse, which might be of ill consequence if it was not kindly re∣ceived, so that he thought the best course would be to write to her, which he did in these termes.
I Have often in my life been in Law, Madam, but I never loved any thing so much as I do you: and what makes me think so is, that I never gave to any of my Mistresses above an hundred broad Pieces to purchase the Fruition of them; but to enjoy you I am willing to exceed to two Thou∣sand: Think of it I beseech you, Madam, and be mindful that Mony was never so scarce as it is at present. Quentine, Madam d' Olonne's waiting-woman and Confident, delivered her this Letter from Paget; and immediately after this Faire One made him he Answer that follows. I Had already perceived you had a great deal of Wit by the conversation I had with you; but I knew not that you could write so well as you do; I never saw any thing so pret∣ty as your Letter, I should be overioyed if I might but receive often such, and in the mean time shall be very glad to discourse you this E∣vening at six a Clock. Paget did not fail to be at the Assignation, and went thither in a Habit, that is to say, with his Bag and the appurtenances. Quin∣tine having introduced him into her Mi∣stresses
Closet, left them together: See here, Madam, said he to her, shewing what he brought, this is what is not daily met with: will you receive it? I am willing, said Madam d' Olonne, and it will help to amuse us. Where∣upon having counted the two Thousand broad Pieces they had agreed for, she shut them up in a little Trunk, and placing her self by them upon a little Couch, which did not last her long, Sir, said she to him, there is not a Man in France wrights like you; what I am going to say, is not to shew my self a Critick, but it is certain that I find but few people that have so much Wit as you have. Most men enter∣tain us only with Fopperies, and when they would write to us kind Letters, they think they have done Miracles in telling us that they adore us, that they shall dye if we do not Love them, and that if we will be so gracious to them, they will serve us as long as they live: we have much need in∣deed of their Services. I am overioyed, said Paget, that my Letters please you; I should not say this elsewhere, but to you, Madam, I shall not mince the matter, my Letters cost me nothing. This is hard to be beleived, answered she, you must then have a very great Stock. After some other Discourses, which Love interrupted two or thre times, they agreed of an o∣ther Interview, and at that of another: In∣somuch
that those two thousand Broad Pie∣ces procured Paget three Assignations. But Madam d' Olonne being willing to make advantage of the Love of this Citi∣zen, and of his Riches, desired him at the fourth Visit to begin again to write to her such Letters of Gallantry as that she had received from him: But he seeing that this would come to be of Consequence, he fell to reproaching her, which did him no good; and all that he could obtain was, that he should not be drove from her House, and that he might come and play when she should send for him. Madam d' Olonne fancied that by letting Paget see her, she should in flame his desires, and that perhaps he would be again so sim∣ple as to satisfie them at any rate; but tho he was so much in love as not to be able to forbear seeing her, yet he was not charmed to the degree of buying her Favours dai∣ly. Things being in these terms, whether spight made Paget blab, or that his frequent Visits and the Money that Madam d' Olonne had played away, caused the Duke of Can∣dale to make reflexions, he desired his Mi∣stress, when he departed for Catalonia, not to see Paget any more, whose Commerce
was injurious to her Reputation; which she promised him, but did not keep her word; Insomuch that the Duke being informed by those who sent him News from Paris, that Paget went oftner then ever to Madam d'Olonnes House, he wrote to her this Let∣ter. WHen I took my leave, I desired you, Madam, not to see that Rogue Paget any more, and yet he is ever at your Elbow; are not you ashamed to give me reason to be Jealous of a wretched Citizen, who could ne∣ver be feared, were it not that you your self did make him Confident? If you do not Blush, Ma∣dam, I blush for you and my self, and for fear of meriting that Scandal you would heap upon me▪ I shall make an Effort upon my love to consider you only as an infamous Woman. Madam d'Olonne was much surprized to re∣ceive so rude a Letter, but as her Conscience reproached yet more sharply then her Lo∣ver, she did not seek reasons for her excuse, and contented herself with answering in these termes. MY Conduct hitherto is so ridiculous, my Dear, that I should despair of being
ever loved by you, if I could not redeem my Credit by the Assurances I give you of a more honest civil Carriage in the future; but I swear by you your self, which is what I have most dear in the world, that Paget shall never enter my House; and that Beuvron, whom my Husband forces me to see, shall see me so seldome, that you shall know, that you alone are in stead of all things to me. The Duke of Candale was so fully assured by this Letter, that he resolved not to con∣demn his Mistris any more upon appearan∣ces, which he judged to be all deceitful. And for having been, as he thought, without reason suspicious, he fell into the other ex∣tremity of Confidence, and took in good part all the Cocquetry and Infidelity that Madam d'Olonne committed for six Months together; for she continued to see Paget, and to give Favours to Beuvron; and tho the Duke of Candale had notice given him of it from several parts, he fancied that it pro∣ceeded from his Father or his Frinds, who were desirous to divert him from loving Madam d' Olonne, believing that this Passion would hinder him from thinking of Marry∣ing.
So that he returned from the Army more in love than he had ever been▪ Madam d'Olonne likewise, with whom so long an ab∣sence made the Duke of Candale passe for a new Galant, redoubled her eagerness for him, even in the sight of all the Court; this Lover took the Imprudences she committed to see him, for marks of a passion she was no longer Mistriss of, tho they were only Testi∣monies of the natural Irregularity of her reason; when she did any Passionate act that made a Noise, he thought her deeply in love and yet she was only silly. And he was so perswaded of the kindness she had for him, that tho he should dye for her sake, he apprehended he should be still ungrateful. It is easy to imagine that the Carriage of these Lovers made a great Noise; they had both of them Enemies; but the Fortune of the One and the Beauty of the Other made a great many envy them: tho all the world would have served them, they would have destroyed all by their Imprudence, and all the world would have done them hurt: They made Assignations every where, with∣out having taken any measures with any Body. They saw One another often in a house, that the Duke of Candale kept in
the name of a Country Lady whom Madam d'Olonne pretended to visit most commonly by night at her own House▪ all these Ren∣devouzes did not take up all the time of this perfidious One, for when the Duke left her she went to the conquest of some new Lover, or at least to reassume Beuvron by a thousand kindnesses for the fears the Duke gave him. The Winter passed thus without the Duke of Candales suspecting the least ill in all she did, and he left her to return to the Army as well satisfied as he had ever been: he had not been there two Months but that he learnt news which troubled his joy: His par∣ticular friends who took strict notice of his Mistresses Conduct did not dare to say any thing to him as long as they found him pre∣possessed by that faithless One; but something very extraordinary having hap∣pened since his absence, and not fearing a sight of her should destroy the impressions they would give him, they altogether hazarded, without making appear any de∣sign or concert, to acquaint him with her behaviour. Whereupon they each of them singly sent him word that Ieannin was deep∣ly engaged with Madam d'Olonne, that his
assiduities gave cause to believe, not only a design, but a happy success; and in a word, that tho she were not culpable, he ought not to be satisfied with her, seeing she was suspected by all People. But while these News are going to put the Duke of Candale in a rage, it is fit I should speak of the birth, progress, and ends Jeannin's Passion. Jeannin de Castille was well shaped, had a pleasing Countenance, was very spruce, but had little Wit; his Quality and Profes∣sion were the same that Pagets, and was ve∣ry rich as well as he. He was handsome e∣nough to have it believed that in case he had worn a Sword, his Merit alone might have procured him the Ladies Favours, but his Profession and his Riches made it suspe∣cted, that all the Women he had had In∣trigues with, were interessed, insomuch that when he was seen to be in love with Mad d' Olonne, it was not doubted but that e would be beloved for his Money. The King after having passed the Sum∣mers upon the Frontiers, usually returned to Paris in the Winters, and all the Diver∣tisements of the World possessed his Mind by turns; Billiards, Tennis, Hunting, Plays, and Dancing had each their times
with him: At that time Lotteries were so much the mode, that every one had them; some of Money, others of Jewels and Mo∣veables. Madam d'Olonne resolved to have One of Money; but whereas in the most part of them all the Cash was employed they had received, and that Fortune shared it, in this, which was of Ten thousand Crowns, there was not Five employed, and those Five too were distributed according as Madam d'Olonne thought fit. Jeannin was present when she made the first Proposals of the Lottery, and as she asked a Sum of e∣very one according to their Abilities, and that she told him he was to give an Hundred pound, he made Answer, That he was wil∣lingly, and moreover promised her to pro∣cure amongst his Friends wherewith to make it up a Thousand. Presently after, all the Company being gone except Jean∣nin, I know not, Madam, said he to her, whether you are yet acquainted with my Passi∣on, for I have loved you a long time, and my sighs already mount to a very great sum; but after having given my self entirely to you, I must needs ask the confirmation of my Bail, which I beseech you to sign, Madam; and observe, that besides the Hundred pound you taxed me, I give you Nine hundred more for
the having your Affection; for what I said of my Friends was only to deceive the People that were here when I spoke to you of this Affair. I confess, Sir, answered Madam d' Olonne, I never thought you in love till now, not but that I have observed by certain Meenes in you, what made me suspect some things, but I am so disgusted with those kind of ways, and sighs and languishings are in my mind so poor a Galantry, and such feeble Testimonies of love, that if you had not taken a more gentile Course with me, you had lost your pains all your life time. Now as for Acknowledgment, you may believe that People are not far from loving, when we are well assured of being beloved: There need no more to make Je∣annin believe that he was at the Critical Minute. He cast himself at Madam d'O∣lonne's feet, and as he would have made use of that Action of Humility for a pre∣text to higher Enterprizes, No, said she, you are mistaken, Sir; In what Country have you heard say that Women make Advances? When you shall have given me reall marks of a great Passion, I shall not be ungrateful. Je∣annin, seeing that with her, Money was to be delivered before the Commodity, told her, That he had two Hundred broad Pie∣ces, and that he would give them her if she
pleased: She consented, and having recei∣ved them; If you think fit, Madam, said he to her, to grant me some favour upon the account of this Money, you will extreamly ob∣lige me; or if you will stay till you have re∣ceived the whole Sum, give me a Note under your Hand of the value received. She chose rather to kiss than write▪ and a Moment after Jeannin went away, assuring her that he would bring the rest on the morrow, which he did not fail to do; and the Mo∣ment was no sooner counted, then that she kept her word with him with all the Ho∣nour that can be expected in such a Trea∣ty. Tho Jeannin▪ came in through the same Door that Paget did, she used him much better; whether she hoped to draw greater Advantages from him at length, or that he had some concealed Merit that served him instead of Liberality; she did not ask him new Proofs of Love for the giving him new Favours. The Thousand pounds made her love him three Months together, that is to say, treated him as if she had loved him. In the mean time the Duke of Candale having received Advice of his Mistresses new Intrigues, he wrote her this Letter.
THo you would justifie your self to me of all the things you are Accused of, I can no longer love you, tho all that is said of you was done only out of Malice: All Lovers are usually overjoyed to hear their Mistresses na∣med, as for me I tremble as soon as I hear or read your Name, I ever fancy in these Occa∣sions, that I shall learn some Story worse, if possible, than the former: And yet I need not know more to have the utmost Contempt for you, you cannot add any thing to your Infamy; Wherefore expect all the Resentment that a a Woman without Honour deserves, from an honest Man that has loved her extreamly. I shall not come to particulars with you, because I do not seek for your Justification, for you are Convicted in my Opinion, and I will never have more to do with you. The Duke of Candale wrote this Letter just as he was upon returning to Court; he had newly lost a Battail, which did not a little contribute to the bitterness of his Letter: He could not suffer being beaten every where, and it would have been some Comfort to him in the Misfortunes of the War, if he had been more happy in Love. So that he began his Journey under a terri∣ble
Melancholy: At another time he would have come Post, but as if he had had some fore-knowledge of his ill Fortune, he came as slowly as possible; he began to find him∣self something Indisposed upon the way. At Vienna he fell very ill, but being but a days Journey from Lyons, he resolved to go thither, knowing he should be better looked to. But the Fatigues of the Cam∣pagnia having brought him very low, his Troubles made an end of him; for notwith∣standing he was young, and had the assi∣stance of the best Physicians, yet they could not save his Life: But as his greatest Sufferings could not make him forget Ma∣dam d'Olonne's Infidelity, he wrote to her this Letter just before his Death. IF I could preserve any kindness for you up∣on my Death-bed, I should be very loath to dye; but not being able to esteem you any longer, it is without Regret that I leave the World; I only loved it that I might pass it the more sweetly with you: But since some little Merit I had, and the greatest Passion imagi∣nable, could not procure me your Affection, I do not desire to live any longer, but perceive that Death will free me from a great many Troubles. If you were capable of any tender∣ness,
you could not see me in the Condition I am in, without dying for grief: But God be thanked, Nature has done the business, and since you could daily torment the Man of the World who loved you the most, you may well see him die without being concerned. Adieu. The first Letter that the Duke of Can∣dale wrote to Madam d' Olonne about Jean∣nin, had made her so much affraid of his Return, that she dreaded it like Death, and I fancy she wished she might never see him more. And yet the rumour of his being in that Extremity grieved her to the heart, and the News of his Death, which her Friend the Countess of Fiesque brought her, had like to have made her dye her self. She lost her Senses for some moments, and came only to herself at the Name of Merillus, whom she was told asked to speak with her. Merille was the Duke's principal Confi∣dent, and brought Madam d' Olonne the Letter from his Master that he had writ∣ten to her as he lay a dying, and the little Trunk wherein he put his Letters, and all the other Favours he had received from her. After having read this last Letter, she fell
a Crying more bitterly than before. The Countess not being willing to leave her in so deplorable Condition, proposed the o∣pening that Trunck for the amusing her grief. The Countess found at first a Hand∣kerchief stained with blood in several pla∣ces. Ah! my God, cryed Madam d' Olonne, how has that poor Man, who had so many o∣ther things of greater Consequence, kept this Handkerchief till now; is there any thing in the world so kind! And thereupon she re∣lated to the Countess, that having cut her Finger as she was working by him some years ago, he had asked that Handkerchief of her, with which she had wiped her hand, and had kept it ever since. After that they found Bracelets, Purses, Hair and Pictures of Madam d' Olonne; and coming to the Letters, the Countess desired her Friend that she might read some of them. Madam d'Olonne having given her Consent, the Countess opened this first. IT is reported here you have been beaten; this is perhaps a false Rumour, and set on foot by those who envy you: But perhaps it is a Truth. Ah! My God! in this uncertainty I require my Lovers life of you, and I aban∣don to you the Army, yes, my God, and not
only the Army, but the State and all the World together. Since I have been told this sad News without particularizing any thing of you, I have made twenty visits a day; I fell to talk of the War, to see if I could learn any thing that might give me ase: I am told every where that you have been beaten; but they do not speak particularly of you, and I dare not ask what is become of you, not that I am af∣fraid of making appear thereby that I love you; I am in too great a fright to take care of my Reputation; but I fear to learn more than I am willing to know. This is the state I am and shall be in till the arrival of the first Post, if I am able to expect it. What redoubles my dis∣quiets is, that you have so often promised to send me express Couriers upon all extraordinary Af∣fairs, that I take it ill I have had none in this. While the Countess was reading this Letter with motions of Concern and Pity, Madam d' Olonne was melting into tears; after having perused it, they were both some time without speaking: I'le read no more now, said the Countess, for since it puts me in pain, it must needs trouble you much more. No, No, replyed Madam d'Olonne, continue, I beseech you, my Dear, it makes
me weep, but it puts me in mind of him. The Countess having opened a Letter, found it in these terms. HOw! Will you never leave me at rest: Shall I always be in fear of losing you, either by your Death or Inconstancy: As long as the Campaigne lasts, I am in perpetual A∣larms, the Enemies do not fire a Shot but what I imagine is aimed at you; and then I hear you have lost a Battail without knowing what is become of you, and though after a thou∣sand mortal Apprehensions, I know at length my good fortune has saved you, (for you know by Experience you are not at all obliged to your own) I am told you are at Avignon in the Arms of Madam de Castillanne, where you comfort your self for your Misfortunes. If it be so, I am very unhappy you did not lose your Life with the Battail: Yes, my Dear, I should choose rather to see you Dead than Inon∣stant; for I should have had the pleasure to believe that had you lived longer, you would have still loved me, whereas my Heart is only filled with rage to see my self abandoned for another, who does not love you so much as I do. Is it true, Merille, said the Countess, that the Duke of Candale was in love with Madam
de Castillanne? No, No, Madam, said he to her, he was two days in Avignon at his return from the Army, to refresh himself, and there he made two Visits to Madam de Castel∣lanne; judge if this can be called Love. But, Madam, added he, addressing himself to Ma∣dam d' Olonne, Who has given you such good Information of all my Master did? Alas! answered she, I only know the publick report; but it is so common, that this Amour is even said to be partly Cause of his Death: And then she fell a crying again more than ever. The Countess, who only sought to make a Di∣version to her Grief, asked her if she knew not the Hand of a Superscription of a Let∣ter she shewed her: Yes, answered Madam d' Olonne, it is a Letter from my Steward. This must be something very Curious, said the Countess, I must see what he writes; and there∣upon opened this Letter. LEt my Lady tell you what she will, her House is never empty of Normans; those Devils would be much better in their Countrey than here; I am mad, my Lord, to see what I see, which I do not send you the Particulars of, because I hope you will be here very suddenly, where you will take order for all your self.
By these Normans the Steward meant Beuvron and his Brothers, Jarry and the Chi∣valier de Sainct Earemond, and the Abbot de Villerceaux, who were very assiduous at Madam d' Olonne's House. The plainness with which this poor Man sent this News to the Duke of Candale, did so move that foo∣lish Woman, that after having looked upon the Countess to see how she took it, she burst out a laughing; the Countess not having so much reason to be afflicted as she had, did the like: But poor Merille not being able to bear with so unreasonable a Joy, redoub∣led his Fears, and went out of the Cabinet in a pet. Two or three days after Ma∣dam d' Olonne being perfectly comforted, the Countess and her other Friends ad∣vised her to mourn for her Honours sake, her Intrigue with the Duke of Candale ha∣ving been too publick, to make a Mystery of it: So that she constrained her self four or five days, after which she followed her old Course, and that which hastened her laying by her Mask of Mourning was the Carneval, which by giving her an oppor∣tunity to satisfie her Inclination, helped her likewise to content her Husband, who had great suspicions of her Correspondence with the Duke of Candale, and thought
himself very happy in being freed from him. Wherefore to make him believe she was no longer concerned, she masked herself four or five times with him, and being willing to regain entirely his Confidence by a great sincerity, she not only confessed to him her love for the Duke, not only that she had suffered the Fort to be taken, but the par∣ticulars of their Enjoyments: And as she specified the number, He had but little lo for you, Madam, said he, insulting the me∣mory of the poor deceased, since he perform∣ed so seldom with so beautiful a Woman as you are. She had left her Bed but a week, which she had kept above four, by reason of  great hurt she had in her leg, when she re∣solved to mask herself. And this desire advanced her Cure more then all the Re∣medies she had used of a long time: So that she went in Masquerade four or five times with her Husband; but as these were only little private Masquerades, she resolved to have a great and famous One that might be talked of; and to that intent she, and three more, disguised themselves like Capuchins, and caused two others of her Friends to be diguised like Nuns: The Capuchins were she herself, her Husband, Jarry, and the
Abbot de Villersex: The Nuns were my Lord Crofts an Englishman, and the Mar∣quess de Sillery. This Troop run into all Companies on Shrove-Tuesday Night. The King and Queen his Mother having been informed of this Masquerade, were ex∣treamly displeased with Madam d' Olonne, and said openly that they would revenge the Injury and Contempt that had been had of Religion in that Occasion. Some time af∣ter their Majesties were pacified, and all these Threatnings ended in their having no more esteem for Madam d' Olonne. During all these passages, Jeannin pea∣ceably enjoyed his Mistress. When she caused the Lottery to be drawn, I have al∣ready said that of Ten thousand Crowns she had received, she had employed but the half at most, and the greatest part of this half was distributed to the Capuchins, to the Nuns, and others of the Cabal. The Prince of Marsillac, who was young, to act the chiefest part upon this Stage, had the greatest Lot, which was a Silver Ce∣stern. Jeannin, with all the Favours he re∣ceived, had only a Jewel of very small va∣lue: The great Rumour that run of the de∣ceit of this Lottery, vexed him to see that he was no better treated than the most in∣different.
He complaine to Madam d' O∣lonne, she not thinking fit to acquaint him with her Roguery, received his Complaints very ill, insomuch that before they parted, they both fell to Reproaches, the one for his Money, the other for her Favours. The Conclusion of which was, Madam d' Olonne's forbidding him her House, and Jeannin told her that he had never obeyed her so wil∣lingly as he should do in that Occasion, and that this Command would save him both Trouble and Expence. In the mean time Beuvron's Commerce with her, lasted still; whether the Spark was not much in love, or that he thought himself happy in having her avours at any rate, he tormented her a little about her Behaviour, she also treated as one she made use of when others failed her, and her love for him was as little as nothing. Shortly after her falling out with Jeannin, Marsillac who had Friends who were much brisker than he was himself, was advised by them to apply himself to Madam d' O∣lonne, and told him that he was of an Age to make himself talked of, that Women procured Esteem as well as War, that Ma∣dam d' Olonne being one of the greatest Beauties of the Court, besides the great
Pleasures, would likewise be an Honour to him she should love; and that it was very glorious to fill the place of the Duke of Candale. With all these Reasons they eg∣ged on Marillac to make his Visits to Ma∣dam d' Olonne; but because he was natu∣rally very distrustful of himself, his Cabal being also very distrustful of him, judged it was not fit he should be left upon his word with her; and it was concluded that Sillery should be appointed for his Gover∣nour, and to assist him upon occasion. Mar∣sillac had made great Application to her for two Months for this, without having spoke to her of Love, otherwise then in general terms: He had however told Sille∣ry, that it was above six Weeks since he had made an Amarous Declaration to her, and had likewise invented a very harsh An∣swer, that he said she made him, that he might not think it strange he was so long without receiving Favours. Whereupon this Governour, to serve his Pupil, spoke thus to Madam d' Olonne: I know very well, Madam, that nothing is so free as Love, and that if the heart is not touched by inclination, the mind will never be much perswaded by words; but I must however tell you, that when a Person is young and unmarried, I do not
comprehend why a young amorous Gentleman is refused, who is as well provided, or I am much mistaken, as any man about Court; it is poor Marsillac I speak of, Madam, since he is desperately in love with you, why are you un∣grateful? Or if you find you cannot love him, why do you amuse him? Love him or dismiss him. I know not since when, answered Ma∣dam d' Olonne, that Men pretend we should love them, without their having made it their Request; for I have heard say, it was they who formerly made Court. I know very well that in these latter days they treat Gallantry after a strange manner; but I knew not that they had reduced it to the point of requiring that Womn should be their Votaries. How, answered Sillery, has not Marsillac declared he loved you? No, Sir, said she to him, it is you who first tell it me. Not but that his Assid∣ties have made me suspect he had some design; bt till we are spoke to, we do not understand the rest. Ah Madam, replied Sillery, you are not then so much in fault as I thought, Maril∣lac's Youth renders him fearful; but the same Youth makes Women excuse several things: Persons of his Age are seldome faulty, and men but Twenty years old always meet with Com∣passion. I grant, replied Madam d' Olonne, that the Bashfulness of a young Man raises
ity, and never Anger; but I likewise pretend he should be respectful. Do you call respect, Madam, said Sillery to her, the not daring to say we are in love? It is all meer folly, I say, in regard of a Woman who would not make Returns: For in that Case the Gallant would not lose his time; and would quickly know what he was to trust to: But this respect which you re∣quire, Madam, is only of advantage to you with those you have no inclination for; for if the Man you are inclined to love should have too much of it, you would be very much perplexed. As he had done speaking, Company came in, whereupon he took his leave, and went to seek out Marsillac, to whom having made a thousand Reproaches for his Timidity, he made him promise that before that day was at an end, he would make an amorous Declaration to his Mistress: He likewise told him part of the things it was requisite he should say, which Marsillac had forgot within a Moment after; and having encou∣raged him as much as he could, he saw him set out for this great Expedition. However Marsillac was under strange disquiets, sometimes he thought his Coach went too fast, sometimes he wished he might not find Madam d' Olonne at home, or that he might find some body with her:
In a word, he feared the same things that a brisk Man would have desired with all his heart. However, he was so unhappy as to meet with his Mistress, and to find her a∣lone. He came up to her with so disorder∣ed a Countenance, that if Sillery had not already acquainted her with his Love, she would have discovered it by seeing him only that time. This Disorder helped to perswade her more then all he, or the Eloquence of his Friend could have said to her: And it is for this reason that Fools are more hap∣py than the Wise in Love. The first thing that Marsillac did after being seated, was putting on his Hat, so little was he himself; an instant after per∣ceiving his folly, he took off his Hat and Gloves, then put on one again, and all this without saying a Word. What's the matter, Sir, said Madam d' Olonne, you see to be concerned at something. Do not you Divine it, Madam, said Marsillac? No, said she, I do not comprehend it; How should I understand what you do not tell me, being hardly able to conceive what I am told? I shall tell you then, what it is, replied Marsil∣lac simpering, I am in love with you. But why so much Ceremony, said she, for so small a thing: I do not see there is so much difficulty in
loving, there appearing much more in loving well. Ah Madam! I find it much harder to tell it than to do it; I find none at all in loving you, and I should find it so difficult to cease loving you, that I should never be able to for∣bear, tho you should order it me a thousand times. I Sir, replied Madam d' Olonne blushing, I have nothing to Cmmand you. Any other than Marsillac would have un∣derstood the cunning way that Madam d' Olonne made use of to permit him to love her: But his Wit was gone a Wool-gather∣ing, and all Delicacy upon him was lost-How Madam, said he to her, do you not esteem me enough to honour me with your Commands. Well, said she to him, should you be glad I or∣dered you not to love me any longer? No, Madam, replied he bluntly. What would you be at then, said Madam d' Olonne? Love you as long as I live, said he. Well, said she, love me as long as you please and hope. This had been sufficient for a more pressing Gallant than Marsillac to have pretended to enjoyment immediately; and yet notwith∣standing all that Madam d' Olonne could do, he made her wait two Months, and at length, when they came to the point, she was forced to make all the Advances. The establishing this new Commerce did not
make her break that she had with Beuvron: The last Lover was ever the most beloved, but he was not so much in her Favour as to drive away Beuvron, who was a second Husband to her. A little before the Rupture of Jeannin with Madam d' Olonne, the Chevalier of Grammont was fallen in love with her, and he being a very extraordinary Person, it is fit I give a Description of him. The Chevalier had brisk Eyes, a hand∣some Nose, a pretty Mouth, a dimple in his Chin, and I know not what of fine in his Phisiognomy, his Shape had been comely, had he not stooped, his Wit was delicate and gallant. However, his Meen and his Accent gave a Grace to what he said, that became nothing in the Mouth of another. A mark of this is that he writ the worst of any Bo∣dy, and he writ as he spoke. Though it be superfluous to say that a Rival is incom∣mode, the Chevalier was to that point, that it would have been better for a poor Wo∣man to be troubled with four others then he alone. He was so sprightly that he hardly ever slept, he was liberal to Pro∣fusion, and by that means his Mistress and his Rivals could not have Servants nor Se∣crets but what he knew, otherwise the
best Man in the World. It was twelve years since he began to love the Countess of Fiesque, a Woman as extraordinary as he was a Man, that is to say, as singular in Merits as he was in ill Qualities; but as of those twelve years she had been banished, five from Mademoiselle d' Orleans, Gaston's of France's Daughter, a Princess whom Fortune persecuted, because she had Ver∣tue, and could not reduce her great Cou∣rage to the basenesses that the Court de∣mands. During their absence the Cheva∣lier had tied himself to a very regular Con∣stancy; and tho the Countess was very lovely, he merited some excuse for his Lightness, being he had never received a∣ny favour from her. He had however cau∣sed several to be jealous; Rouville was one of those who were so: As he was one day reproaching the Countess that she loved the Chevalier, that fair One told him that he was mad to believe she could love the great∣est Cheat in the World. This is a pleasant reason, Madam, which you alledge, I know you are a greater Cheat than he, and yet I cannot forbear loving you▪ Tho the Chevalier was in love with all Women, the Countess however had that power over him, that what engagement
soever he had elsewhere, so soon as he knew that any One visited her oftner that ordinary, he quitted all to return to her▪ And he was in the Right, for the Countess was a lovely Woman, she had blew and sparkling Eyes, a handsome Nose, an agre∣able Mouth, of a fine Colour, and white and smooth Skin; the forme of her Face was long, and never any One but she in the world was embelished with a long Chin; her hair was brown, and she was ever Gal∣lantly drest, but her finery proceeded rather from Art than the magnificence of her Clothes; her Will was free and naturall▪ her Humour cannot be described, for it was with the Modesty of her Sex of the Humour of all the World. People by much think∣ing of what they have to do, think usually better at the end than at the beginning. The contrary happened usually to the Countess, her Reflections spoyled her first Motions. I know not if the Confidence she had in her Merit made her careless of seeking Lovers, for she took no pains at all to have them. And indeed when▪ any One of himself made his addresses to her, she neither affected Rigour to be rid of him, nor Kindness to retain him, he left of his Courtship if he pleased, if he pleased he
continued it: and what course soever he took he did not subsist to her cost. So that the Chevalier as I have said, had not visited her in five years time, and during that absence that he might not lose time he had had a thousand Mistresses, amongst others Victoria Manciri, Duchess of Mer∣caeur, and three dayes after her Death, Madam de Villars, and it was for this reason that Benserade, who was in love with her, made this Sonnet upon the Chevalier. Can you rejoice after the Mortall stroak That kill'd the loveliest Object e're was seen? A real Lovers heart would have been broke, In the same Tomb he would have buryed been. A Heart so Charm'd can it new flames receive? 'Tis an unheard of infidelity! When a fair Mistress's death you ought to grieve, You turn Gallant and at new Game would fly. For this unworthy weakness you will smart; You love have fail'd, & love will fail your heart, And you're already fall'n into the Snare. I▪ know the Beauty who does you decoy I love her, and that all I may declare; What gives you ease, alas! does me destroy.
The Countess returning some time after to Paris, the Chevalier not being tyed to Madam Villars by any favours, quitted her to return to the Countess; but as he was never long in the same state, and being tyred with her, he made his addresses to Madam d' Olonne, at the same time that Marsillac entred into an engagement with her, and tho the Chevalier was less Modest than Marsillac with the Ladies, he was not however the more pressing; on the contrary provided he might toy with 'em, have it said in the world that he was in love, find some People of easie belief to flat∣ter his vanity, put a Rival in pain, be better received than he, he was not at all fond of a surrender. One thing he did that made it more difficult for him to per∣swade than it was for another, was that he never spoke seriously. Insomuch that a Woman must needs flatter her self ex∣treamely, to beleive he was in love with her. I have already said that never any Gallant that was not beloved was more incommode than he, he had ever two or three Lac∣quies without Liveries, whom he called his Bloodhounds, whom he caused to dog and observe his Rivals and his Mistresses.
Madam d' Olonne being in pain One day how she should go to an Assignation she had made with Marsillac, without being discovered by the Chevalier, resolved for her pleasure to go hooded up with her Cham∣ber Maid, and to Pass the River in a Boat; after having given orders to her servants to go wait for her at Fauxbourgs Saint Ger∣main, the first Man who gave her his hand to help her into the Boat, was the Cheva∣liers Bloodhound, before whom, without knowing him, she had been merry with her Chamber Maid, for that she had de∣ceived the Chevalier, and talked of what they were going to do that day; this Blood∣hound went immediately to acquaint his Master, who strangly surprised Madam d' Olonne the next day, when he acquain∣ted her with the perticulars of her Rende∣vouz of the Evening before. An honest welbred Man having convi∣cted his Mistress of loving another than himself, withdraws immediately and with∣out noise, particularly if she had not made him any promise; but the Chevalier was not of that humour; when he could not procure being beloved, he would rather chose to have been stabbed than leave his Mistress and Rival in repose. Now Ma∣dam
d' Olonne having reckoned for nothing the Assiduities that the Chevalier had payed her for three Months together, and tur∣ned into Raillery all that he had told her of his Passion, and the more for that she was perswaded, that he had as great an one for the Countess as he could have for her, she hated him as the Devil. Then this Lover fancying that a Letter would do his buisness much better than all he had done or said thitherto, in that Opinion he writ to her in these termes. IS it possible, my Goddess, that you should be ignorant of the love, that your fair Eyes, my Suns, have kindled in my heart? Tho it be useless to have recourse with you to those Declarations which we are forced to have with mortal Beauties, and that mental Prayers, ought to suffice you, I have told you a thousand times that I loved you; yet you laugh and make me no answer▪ Is this a good or an ill sign my Queen, I conjure you to explain your self there∣in, that the most passionate of mortals may con∣tinue to adore you, and cease to displease you. Madam d' Olonne having received this Let∣ter, carried it immediately to the Countess, with whom she fancyed it had been con∣certed,
but did not seem to beleive any such thing at first. As there was alwayes a seeming kindness between them, she smi∣ling valued at a high rate her refusing her Lover, and the notice she gave of the in∣fidelity he would have committed. This vexed the Countess, tho she did not love the Chevalier: most Women are no more willing to lose their Lovers whom they had no kindness for than those they favour, and particularly when they abandon them to give themselves to others, and their Vexation does not so much proceed from the loss they have as from the preference of their Rivals: which was the Countesses case in this encounter. However she thank∣ed Madam d' Olonne for the intention she had to oblige her, but protested she had no engagement with the Chevalier, but that on the contrary she should be obliged to those who would rid her of him. Ma∣dam d' Olonne did not content her self with shewing that Letter to the Countess, she likewise vapoured with it to Marsillac; and whether she or the Countess spoke of it to others, every body knew that the Poor Chevalier had been sacrificed, and he himself was quickly acquainted with the jeasts that were made upon his Letter▪
Contempt offends all Lovers, but when Raillery is joyned with it they are netled to the heart: The Chevalier seeing himself Casheired and laughed at, kept no longer any measures, he said all manner of ill things of Madam d' Olonne, and it was per∣ceived in this Occasion, that this foolish Wo∣man had found the secret of losing her re∣putation by preserving her Honour of being Cruel, and cryed out upon for a Gilt. The Chevalier hated none of his Rivals so much as he did Marsillac, as well because he thought him better treated, as for that he fancyed he the least deserved it: he cal∣led Madam d' Olonne's Lovers, the Philistins, and said that Marsillac by reason he had but little Wit, had defeated them all with the Jaw bone Bone of an Ass. In this same time the Count of Guiche, the Mareschal of Grammont's Son, as beautiful as an Angell, and full of Love, fancyed that the conquest of the Countess would be both easie and honorable to him; insomuch that he resolved to undertake it out of motives of Glory; he mentioned it to Manicamp his faithful and necessary Friend, who approved his designe, and offered to serve him in it. The Count de Guiche and Manicamp have so great a part
in this story, that it is necessary to speak of them en passant, and make them per∣fectly known; and in order to that it is fit I begin with the description of the for∣mer. The count de Guiche had great black Eyes, a handsome Nose, well made, his Mouth was something wide, the forme of his Face round, his Complexion was admirable, had a great Forehead and a fine Shape: he had Wit, was very know∣ing, addicted to raillery, light, presum∣ptuous, brave, hasty and without friend∣ship: he was Colonel of the French Gards, jointly with the Mareschal of Grammont his Father. Manicamp had sweet blew Eyes, a Hawk's Nose, a wide Mouth, his Lips were very red and full, his Complexion was something yellow, his Face was flat, his Haire thick long and white, his Shape was fine if it had not been too much neglected: As for Wit she had enough of the Count de Guiche's sort; he had not acquired so much, but his Genius way at least as good; his Fortune not being so well setled as the others, made him something the more cautious; but they had naturally both the same incli∣nations to the hinder parts and to raillery;
and indeed they loved one another as a∣dently as if they had been of different Sexes. At the same time Madam d' Olonne shew∣ed all the World the Chevalier de Gram∣mont's Letter, he discovered the love the Count de Guicke had for the Countess of Fiesque, this was of no small use to him for the making her fall out with Madam d' Olonne, fancying his Reconciliation would be the more easy with the Countess, the less he kept measures with the others: but while he is endeavouring to make Peace for himself, let us se what the Count de Guicke did to render himself lovely. First you must know then that the Count had a very great passion for Mademoiselle de Beauvais, a Maid of mean Birth, but of a great deal of Wit; it must likewise be known that he had been so traversed by his Relations in that Amour, that they feared she would make him commit the same folly, that his Sister had caused the Marquess of Richilieu to do, whom that Consideration, as well as the Rigours of the faire One, had very much disgusted, and had the deeper engaged him in the design of Loving the Countess; but he had not for this fair One, all the inclination she deserved, and it was less a second passion than a Remedy to the
former. But he got little ground, & all that he could do was to move the Countess and to put the Chevalier into dispair, and for that end he kept to Lookes and Assiduities, without caring to spur on faster. The Countess, whose heart, as is beleived, was never smitten with any thing but the merit of Guistand, the Prince of Condé's Favou∣rite, whom she had not seen in four or five years, but with whom she had kept a com∣merce of Letters, felt her Constancy sha∣ken by the Count de Guiches addresses, and notwithstanding all that Gersé, Guistavel's friend, could say to her, for the obliging her to chace away the Count, she would not at first yeild to it, but seemed to ridicule that Amour, and a long time elu∣ded the Counsels of all her friends: yet at length she her self perceiving that the Count took no advantage of it, she resol∣ved to procure her self honour by making a Virtue of the necessity she beleived her self in of loving her, and that this might not seem a Sacrifice to the Chevalier, who had bragged he could cause his Nephew to be Cashiered, she turned them both off, yeilding at that time to the advise of Gersé, as she told him; and hereupon was made this jeast, that the Countess was
going to signe the Discharges and Passports of her Lovers, but the Chevalier caused her to be so intreated by her best Friends, that he obtained leave to see her at a fort∣nights end, and it was upon this that this Song was made to the tune of Saraband. So zealously old Gersé plaid his part, With such success he serv'd his Flemmish Friend, That the fair Lady, who has still my Heart, Never to see her did me Orders send. He fancied then, and I was much afraid, An everlasting Doom on me was laid; In a short banishment yet all will end. Five or six Months being passed, during which the Chevalier was too happy, he was not troubled with his Nephew, had enjoyed the pleasures of solely loving the Countess; some freinds of the Count de Guiche repre∣sented to him that being the handsomest Man of the Court, it was a shame for him to find any Lady cruel, and that the success he had had with the Countess had done him any injury in the world: these reasons made him resolve to reingage himself: He returned from he Campagne wounded in his Right Hand, but his Wound, tho great, not
having hindred him from going abroad sometimes, he met the Countess One day in the Tuilleryes: He had the Abbot Fouequett with him, who was that Lady's particular friend, who thinking to do them a plea∣sure, engaged them in discourse, and left them together a pretty long time. The Count said nothing at all of love, but his ways and his looks made the Countess understand but too much, nay more than he designed she should: This Conversation was quick∣ly ended by the Count de Guiche's fainting away, out of which he was recovered by the help of the Countess and the Abbot. Their Opinion of the cause of his saint∣ing away were divers, the Abbot attribu∣ted it to the Counts wound, and the Countess to his passion. A Woman be∣lieves nothing more willingly than that she is beloved, because Love makes her beleive that she ought to be beloved, and because One is not hard to be perswaded of what One desires. These reasons made the Countess not at all doubt of the Count de Guiche's Love. At that time Madam de Olonne not being willing that a young spark so well made should escape her, desired Vieneuil to bring the Coun de Guiche to her, but this Gentleman's time was not yet
come, he went from thence as free as he came thither. He continued his Design for the Countess, his Assiduities having renew∣ed the Chevaliers jealousie; he to inform himself how his Nephew stood with his Mistress, wrote with his left Hand the fol∣lowing Letter to that fair One. IT is no small trouble to have only a poor left Hand; I beseech you, Madam, to grant me the honour of seeing you sometime this day, but my dear Ʋnkle must know nothing of it, for I should run a risque of my Life, and per∣haps you your self would come off but little bet∣ter. The Countess having read this Letter, gave charge to her Porter to bid him who should come for an Answer, that he should tell his Master, That he should send Mani∣camp to her at Three a Clock in the After∣noon. When the Chevalier had received this Answer, he fancied he had wherewith to Convict the Countess of being in the deepest Engagement of an Amorous In∣trigue with his Nephew; and in that Opi∣nion he went to her House: The Rage he was in had so changed his Countenance, that had the Countess ever so little distru∣sted
him, she had discovered all at the first sight; but not suspecting the least, she took no notice of his looks. Madam, said he to her, is it long since you saw the Count de Guiche? Not these five or six days, an∣swered she. But, replied the Chevalier, It is not so long since you received Letters from him. I, Letters from the Count de Guiche? said she; Why should he write to me? Is he in a Condition to write to any Body? Take care of what you say, Madam, replyed the Cheva∣lier, for it is of moment. The truth is, said the Countess, that Manicamp has newly sent to ask me if the Count de Guiche might come and see me to day; and I sent him word, he should come without his Friend. It is true, re∣plyed the Chevalier hastily, that you just now sent word to Manicamp that he should come without the Count de Guiche, but it was upon the Count's Letter that you sent him that Mes∣sage, and I come to know it, Madam, because that it was I that writ it, and had your An∣swer delivered to me. Is it not sufficient that you do not make Returns to the Passion I have had these Twelve years for you, but you must prefer a young Boy before me, who does not love you, nor has seemed to love you above a Fort∣night? After this Discourse he was like a Mad-man for a Quarter of an hour toge∣ther.
The Countess seeing herself Convi∣cted, would turn the thing into Raillery: But since you suspected an Intrigue between me and your Nephew, said she to him, why did you not ask me things of greater importance than an hour to see me? Ah! Madam, reply∣ed he, I know but too much to make me believe that you are the most ungratful Woman in the World, and I the most unfortunate of all Men. Manicamp came in just as he had spoke these words, whereupon he went away to conceal the disorder he was in. What's the matter, Madam, said Manicamp, I find you in a strange perplexity? The Countess re∣lated to him all the Chevaliers Deceipt, and their Conversation thereupon; and after some Discourses upon this Subject, Mani∣camp went away, and within an hour brought this Letter from the Count de Guiche. For fear Forgers should injure me by a∣cting my part, and lest you should be mi∣staken in the Character and the Stile, I was desirous to make known to you both the one and the other; the last is more diffi∣cult, being dictated by something above their Sentiments. The Countess having read this Letter,
My God, said she to him, how silly is your Friend! I am affraid he will bring trouble both upon me and himself. Provided, Madam, an∣swered Manicamp, that you understand one another, you cannot come to trouble. But, an∣swered the Countess, can he only act with me the part of a Lover? Yes, Madam, said he, it is impossible for him to change; and what ought to perswade you, is that he returns to the Charge after having been routed: This shews a furious necessity in him of loving you. As they were going to continue this Conversa∣tion, Company came in who interrupted it, Manicamp taking leave, went immediately to his Friend to acquaint him with what had just passed between the Countess and him. The Count de Guiche not believing that the Letter he had written to the Countess, was sufficient to perswade her perfectly of his Passion, he wrote another, which expres∣sed it more clearly, and gave it Manicamp in charge; who carrying it the next day to that fair One, lost it by the way, inso∣much that he returned immediately to ac∣quaint the Count with the Accident that had befallen him; whereupon that Count writ this Letter to the Countess.
IF you were perswaded of my Sentiments, you would easily comprehend, that I am ill satis∣fied with so careless a Man as Manicamp; you are going to see the greatest quarrel in the World, if you do not prevent it; think but what I do for you, since I break with the best of my Friends without Return on my side; but, as he has still other Assistance, and that you are not so much displeased as I am, I fear he will force me to pardon him through your Inter∣cession. Manicamp went and sought every where for the Countess, and having at length found her at Play at Madam de Bonnell's, I bring good luck, Madam, to People I approach, said he to her; and having placed himself by her, he neatly slipt his Friends Letter into her Pocket, and went away. The Countess withdrawing some time after to her own House, having left off Play, in taking out her Handkerchief, she found the Count de Guiche's Letter, sealed and with∣out Superscription; if she had thought what it was, she would not have opened it, but for fear she should be obliged not to break it open, she was not willing to spend thoughts upon it, and opened it immedi∣ately
without the least reflexion: All the Countesse's vivacity could not make her i∣magine what the Count de Guiche meant by his being dissatisfied with Manicamp; inso∣much that she ordered one of her Servants to go tell him, he should come and see her on the Morrow, being resolved to rattle him for the Letter he had given her from the Count de Guiche, and to forbid him to charge himself with any more for the fu∣ture. As he entred the Chamber the next day, her Curiosity made her forget her Anger: Well, said she, tell me your quarrel with your Friend. It is, Madam, said he to her, that as I was bringing you a Letter two days ago, I lost it, and he is enraged against me, and I know not what to say to him, for I am in the fault. The Countess fearing this lost Letter might be found by some one who might make a Story of it, to make the pub∣lick Sport; Go, said she to him, go seek it every where, and do not return till you have brought it me back. Manicamp went away immediately, and returned in the Evening to tell her, that he could not find it, that the Count de Guiche would no longer see him, and that he came to beseech her to reconcile them. I will, said she, tho you do not deserve it: And I shall go to morrow to
Mademoiselle, bid your Friend be there. I have no more Commerce with him, said Mani∣camp to her, and nothing can appease him but a Letter from you. I write to the Count de Guiche! replyed the Countess, you are a pleasant Man to make such a Proposal. Tho we are fallen out, Madam, answered Mani∣camp, I cannot forbear telling you still that he deserves that favour. Do not think of him in this Occasion, give this Letter to the Friend∣ship you have for me, and I promise that when it has done the business, I will return it into your hands. The Countess having made him engage his word he would bring back her Letter, she writ to him the day follow∣ing in these terms. THe intention of these Lines are only to ask Manicamp's pardon, and if it is necessary to say any thing more to oblige you to grant it me, give credit to what he shall ac∣quaint you with from me; he is so much my Friend, that I cannot refuse any thing that may be useful to him. The Count of Guiche having received this Letter, found it too hard to restore it; he fancied he should get quit by disavowing Manicamp, and in the mean time he en∣charged him with this Answer.
I Could infinitely desire you were as much in∣clined to grant me what I should desire of you, as it was easie for me to grant pardon to the Criminal: I avow to you, that with such a Recommendation it was impossible to refuse a∣ny thing: If I was so happy as to be able to give you proofs thereof by something more dif∣ficult, you would know that you did me an in∣justice, when you doubted of the truth of my Sentiments: They are, I assure you, as passio∣nate as so lovely a Person as you are can in∣spire, and shall ever be as modest as you can de∣sire them. Notwithstanding all what our Go∣vernours say, I conjure you to follow the ad∣vice of the Criminal; for tho he is something careless, his zeal for our Service deserves to be Commended. That advice was to be very distrustful of the Chevalier, who did all he could to tra∣verse his Nephew, and to make him appear indiscreet and unfaithful to the Countess. After that Manicamp told her that the Let∣ter she had written to the Count de Guiche, had so transported him with joy, that it was impossible to get it from him, but that she should not be in pain, for that it would be as safe in his Friends hands as in the fire;
and moreover, that he had never seen a Man so much in love as the Count was, and that he would certainly love her as long as he lived. But, interrupted the Countess, what is the meaning of so many Visits that your Friend makes to Madam d' Olonne? Does he go to desire her to intercede with me for him? He does not visit her at all, Madam, answer∣ed Manicamp, that is to say, he has been there but once or twice; but I discover the Chivali∣ers Malice in what you tell me, and I am cer∣tain the Count de Guiche will know this Kna∣vish trick to be of his Ʋnkles stamp. But, Madam, hear my Friend before you Condemn him. I am of your Opinion, said she to him; and indeed Manicamp guessed right: For the Chevalier had told the Countess that the Count de Guiche was in love with Ma∣dam d' Olonne, that she only served for a Pretext, and a thousand other things of that Nature, that appeared to her so like∣ly, that though she distrusted the Chevali∣er in what concerned the Count de Guiche, she could not forbear giving Credit to him in this Encounter. The next day a Lady of her Acquaintance being come to press her to go into the Country, she let herself be per∣swaded: And really fancying the Count de Guiche false, she would not come to any
Explication with him; and not to break off all, she thought it convenient to prepos∣sess Guitand by a false Confidence, for fear he should learn by other means the truth of all; Wherefore she sent him a Copy of the Count de Guiche's last Letter, and after that her Friend and she went out of Town. The Chevalier, who had an Eye upon all the Countesses Actions, and had bribed all her Servants, had the Pacquet she sent to Gui∣tand two hours after it was made up. He took a Copy of the Count de Guiche's Let∣ter, and cast the Pacquet into the Fire. Two days after, having learnt that the Countess was gone, he wrote to her this Letter. IF you had had as much desire to informe your self of things you seemed to doubt of, as I had by a thousand true reasons to take from you all manner of Scruples, you would not have undertaken so long a Journey, or at least you would have been sorry to have appeared so good a Friend. I would not forbid your having a kindness, but I should extreamly desire to have some part in the Application, and I avow to you, that if I was happy enough to compas it by the same means, I should endeavour to render my self worthy of it by my Conduct.
While this Letter was a carrying to the Countess, the Chevalier went to seek out his Nephew, with whom he found Mani∣camp. After a Prologue of Raillery upon the good Fortunes of the Count de Guiche in General: Faith, my poor Friends, said he to them, I confess you are younger and gen∣teeler than I am, and I shall never dispute with you a Mistress I have not been a long time ac∣quainted with: But however, you must yield the Countess to me, and all those I have any Engagement with. The Vanity Women take in a great number of Galants may oblige them to give you some hopes. There are few who at the first onset will stifle the Vows of their Ado∣rers: But sooner or later they return to reason; and it is then that the new Comer passes his time very ill, and that the old Gallant jointly with his Mistress cry, Farewel you Gentlemen Serenaders. You promised me, Count de Guiche, never to torment me more, as to what concerns the Countess; you have broke your word, and committed an infidelity that has done you no good: For the Countess has given me all the Letters you wrote to her; I'le show you the Ori∣ginals when you will: In the mean time here is a Copy of the last Letter you sent her; and say∣ing that, he took out a Letter of the Count de Guiche's, and having read it; Well! my
Dears, said he to them, you'l hunt upon my grounds again, will you? While the Chevalier was speaking, the Count de Guiche and Manicamp looked a∣mazedly upon one another, not being able to comprehend that the Countess had so basely deceived them. At length Manicamp broak silence, and addressing himself to the Count, You are treated, said he to him, as you deserved; but since the Countess has not had any Consideration for us, added he, turning towards the Chevalier, we are not obliged to have any for her: We easily perceived we have been Sacrificed, but there was a time, Cheva∣lier, that you was so too; We have indeed great reason to complain of her, but you have none at all to be satisfied with her: When we some times rejoyced and were merry at your Costs, the Countess went halves with us at the least. The truth is, said the Count de Guiche, that you would not have reason to be satisfied with the Countesses preference in your Favours, if you knew the esteem she has of you; and this makes me draw infallible Consequences that she is deeply engaged with you, since after all the things she has told me, she only betrays me to give you satisfaction. Thereupon being all three really reconciled, and having given one another a thousand Assurances of
Friendship for the future, they parted. The Count de Guiche and Manicamp shut themselves up to make a Letter of reproach∣es in Manicamps Name to the Countess, to which the poor Countess being innocent, made answer, that he and his Friend had been taken for Cullies, and that the Che∣valier was cunninger than they; that she could not tell by what means he had got the Letter he had showed them, but that they One day should clearly see that she had not made a Sacrifice of them. This Letter not finding Manicamp any longer at Paris, he being gone out the day before with the Count de Guiche to follow the King in his Progress to Lyons, he did not receive it till he arrived at Court, and thought neither the more, nor the less advantageously of the Countess: during all these passages, Marsillac's Intrigue with Madam d' Olonne jogged on▪ that Lover seeing her with the greatest conveniency imaginable by night at her House, and by day at Mademoiselle de Cornuelle's, a lovely Creature, and of a great deal of Wit. Madam d' Olonne had by her Bed∣side a Closet, in a corner of which she had caused a trap Door to be made, which went into another Closet underneath, where∣in
Marsillac entred when it was night; a Foot-Carpet concealed the Trapdoor, and a Table covered it. Thus Marsillac passing the Night with Madam d'Olonne, according to the com∣mon report, did not lose his time: This lasted till she went to the Waters, in which time Marsillac, who wrote to her a thousand Letters that are not mentioned here, be∣cause they are not worth the pains; wrote this Amourous Ticket to her one day, be∣forebidding her Adieu. I never felt so lively a Grief as that I am sen∣sible of at present, my Dear, because I never yet parted from you since we have been in love with one another. Nothing but absence, and that too the first absence of what a person infinitely loves, can reduce one into the la∣mentable Condition I am in. If any thing could lessen my trouble, my Dear, it would be the belief that you would suffer as much as I do. Do not take it ill that I wish you in pain, since it is a mark of your love. Farewel my Dear, be well assured that I love you, and that I shall love you ever; for if you are once really perswaded of this truth, it is impossible but that you must love me as long as you live. Her Answer was: COmfort your self, my Dear, If my Grief gives you ease, it is as great as you
could desire it; I cannot explaine it better, than by telling you that I suffer as much as I love you: If you doubt it, my Dear, come to me, but come early, that I may be a long time with you, and that I may in some manner recompence my self for the absence I am going to suffer. Farewell my Dear, be assured of my passion, it is at least as great as yours. Marsillac did not fail to be at the Assig∣nation much sooner than ordinary; In accosting his Mistress he flung himself upon her Bed, and was thus a long time melting into tears, and all his words were interrup∣ted by sobs. Madam d'Olonne for her part appeared no less concerned, but as she was desirous to receive other Marks of Love from her Galant than those of Grief, How! my Dear, said she to him, you sent me word a little while a go that my Grief would ease yours, and yet the affliction you see me in, does not render you the more capable of Comfort. At these words Marsillac re∣doubled his sighs, without making her an answer, the dulness of his Soul had caused the same effect in his Body; and I fancy that this Lover deplored at that time more the absence of his Vigour, than that of his Mi∣stress. However as young People recover easily, and he being of a good complexion,
he began to come to himself, and recove∣red his strength in a little time: Insomuch that Madam d'Olonne could hardly discover he had been so lately ill. After he had gi∣ven her so many testimonies of his good health, she recommended to him to have care of it above all things, and told him that he should judge thereby of the Love he had for her. Thereupon they made a thousand Protestations of loving one ano∣ther all their life-time; they agreed of the means of writing, and then took leave, the one to go to Court, the other to the wells. Prince Marsillac went the next day to take his leave of Mademoiselle Cornu∣elle, his good Friend, he desired her to per∣swade his Mistress to be more circumspect in her Carriage than she had yet been. Rely upon me for that, said this young Lady to him, she must be very incorrigible if I do not keep her within bounds. Two dayes after Mademoiselle Cornuelle went to Madam d' Olonnes, and having prayed her to order her Porter to say she was gone out: I am too much your friend, Madam, said she to her, not to speake franckly to you in all that con∣cerns your Carriage and your Reputation; you are beautyfull, young, you are of Quality, you have Riches and will, you have infinitely
Charmed a Prince who loves you extreamly: All this ought to render you however you are not so; you know what Reports run of you, we have talked of them sometimes toge∣ther, and this being so, you are mad you are not contented: I do not pretend to consider your weakenesses, I am a Woman as well as you, and I know by my self the want of our Sex: Your Manners are insupportable, you love pleasures Madam, and I allow them, but you take de∣light to set People a talking, and it is that I condemn you for; Can you not leave off your Extravagances? it is impossible but that you must be in a Rage, when you hear of the Repu∣tation you have in the world, and Men con∣ceal the love they have for you more out of Shame than Modesty. Well my Dear, said Madam d'Olonne, do you here any thing new? does the World renew its Satyr's against me? No, Madam, said Mademoiselle, it does on∣ly continue them, because you still continue to give it new matters. I know not what I must do then, replyed Madam d' Olonne, all the Prudence that one can have in love, I fancyed I had; and that since I have been concerned in loving, I never fruitlesly de∣layed nor spun out any Intrigue, well knowing that the greatest Noise is usually made before the business is agreed on; and when Lovers act
not in Concert together. Prethee tell me ex∣actly my Dear, added she, what I must do to love well, and entertain a Gallantry, that shall do me no injury in the world, tho it should be suspected: For I am resolved to do my Devoir in the future with the utmost Regularity There are so many things to say upon that point, said Made∣moiselle Cornulle, that I should never have don, if I would neglect nothing, however I shall tell you the principal as succinctly as possible. First you must know Madam, that there are three sorts of Women who make love, The Debauchées, the Cocquets, and the honest Mistresses. Tho the first are abomi∣nable, they certainly deserve more compassi∣on than hatred, because they are hurryed a∣way by the force of their Temper, and that almost an impossible application is required to reforme Nature; however if in any en∣counter we ought to conquer our selves, it is in that, wherein no less is concerned than our honours or lives. As for Cocquets, the number being much greater, I shall enlarge more upon that point: The difference between De∣bauchées, and them, is, that in the Ill the former commit, there is at least sincerity, and in what the Cocquets do there is Trea∣chery: The Cocquets tell us to excuse
themselves when they give ear to the Courtship of all Comers, that how ho∣nest soever a Woman is, she never hates a person who tells her he loves her. But one may answer them that distin∣ctions are to be made: either that Lover addresses himself to a Woman, who will be either honest for her self or for a Lover: allow that she cannot hate a Man for the Sentiments he had for her, yet this will not hinder her from being carefull of not having so much Complaisance for him as for another, who had never declared any thing to her, for fear she should thereby entertain his hopes, and that at length it might make a noise, and be injurious to the reputation she would preserve. If the Woman be prepossessed that the Man declares love to her, she will have the same precautions as the other to hinder it from continuing, but if he persists, I maintain that she shall hate him as much as she shall love her true Gallant: it being natural to hate the Enemies of the per∣son we love, because love will not allow love to be importunate, and because that a Lover well treated may suspect that a Passion that continues in his Rival, is at least nourished by some hopes; an honest
Mistress considers his Rival as her mortal Enemy, who maks her run the risque of losing her Lover whom she loves more than her life. This being plain, you must likewise know that there are several sorts of Cocquets; some take a pride in being beloved by a great many People, without ever loving any of them, and do not per∣ceive that it is the advances themselves make which invite men, and which retain them rather than merit. Besides as it is not possible they should dispose their Fa∣vours so equally, but that some one will seem better treated than others, and there being some who will not content them∣selves with equality, but pretend to pre∣ference; This gives jealousy to the Male∣contents, and makes them say in quitting them, all, nay more than they know. There are other Cocquets who manage se∣veral Lovers, that they may save the real one in the multitude, and cause it to be said, they have no amorous Intrigue, since they treat e∣qually all those who visit them; but the best luck that can happen to them is to have the truth discovered; or at least, it is better than by believing they love no Body, every one fancies they love All. There are others who by managing se∣veral
Gallants would fain perswade, that if they should love any one of them, they should hazard the vexing him, In the mean time they vex and lose him by these means. For to imagine that it is in the absence of their true Lover that they make love, he will know nothing of it; or if it is in his pre∣sence, by acting in concert together, he will easily see that is nothing, since he is taken for a Witness of what is done, or at all hazards if he is troubled, their Cares∣sing him, and their Promises to do so no more, will oblige him to be satisfied. All this is very subject to caution, a Lover is not long deceived, and if he does not dis∣cover it to day, he will discover it to Mor∣row. And crying 'tis well, adieu my Dear, I find no longer pleasure here. And tho his Passion should be so strong, that he could not get rid▪ of it, the re∣proaches and noise he would make, would occasion more vexation to the Cocquet Mi∣stress than all those managements could have procured her Pleasure. There are Cocquets who fancy they have so ill a repute in the World, that they dare not be cruel and rigorous to any man, for fear it should pass for a Sacrifice to some other, and ne¦ver
think that it would be better for their Honour that they were convicted of Sacri∣fice: This is, Madam, the Course the Co∣quets take. I must let you see that of ho∣nest Mistresses. As for them, they are either satisfied with their Lovers, or they are not: If they are not, they endeavour to reduce them to their Devoir by a tender and civil Carriage: If this cannot absolutely be, they break off without noise, upon a pretext of Devotion, or the Jealousie of a Husband, after having got from them, if they can, their Letters, and all that could Convict them: And a∣bove all things they so contrive it, that their Lovers do not fancy they abandom them for others. If they are satisfied with their Lovers, they love them with all their hearts, they are continually telling it them, and they write them the kindest Letters they can: But as this does not prove their love, be∣cause Coquets say as much, or more every day, their Actions and their Carriage does sufficiently justifie the meaning of their Hearts, because there is only that infallible. We can indeed say, We love tho we do not, but we cannot seem kind to any one long without having an affection for him.
An honest Mistress is more afraid of gi∣ving Jealousie to her Gallant than of Death, and when she sees him alarmed with any Suspicion that the obstinacy of his Rival might give him, she does not content her∣self with the testimony of her Conscience, she redoubles her Cares and Caresses for him, and her rigours for the other; she does not defer the extreamest Severity till ano∣ther time, fancying she could never be soon enough rid of an importunate Person. She knows that as many Moments as she defers the chacing away this Rival, she should give as many stabs in his Heart she is in love with. She knows that as soon as her Lo∣ver begins to have Suspicions, the least care she should take to remove them, would preserve in him the esteem and love he has for her; whereas if she neglected to satis∣fie and cure him, he would come again to have so little Confidence in her, that she should not be able to recover his good O∣pinion, tho she even offered him to lose her Reputation for his sake. She knows that a Lover would ever believe, that it would be the fear she was in of him, had forced those Sacrifices from her, that at a∣nother time he would have took for great Marks of love. She knows that in the Wo∣man
a Man confides in, all is excused, and that nothing is pardoned in her that is di∣strusted. She knows that at length a Man comes to be fatigued with the trouble a Mistress gives him, and the reproaches that he has made her after having pardon∣ed her a thousand considerable Faults, that he breaks off upon a Trifle, the measures being plain, and he not able to suffer any longer so much vexation. There are Women who love their Gal∣lants extreamly, and yet make them jea∣lous by their ill carriage, and this proceeds from their flattering themselves too much with the assurance they have of their good Intentions, and for that they do not suffici∣ently quash the hopes of those men, who make Court to them, or who only seem to love them by their Cares and their Assidui∣ties; and they are ignorant that the Civi∣lities of a Woman one loves, are such Fa∣vours as all Lovers flatter themselves with sometimes, because they have Merit; or of∣ten because they think they have so: Some∣times because they have no good Opinion of the Persons they make their Addresses to, and who fancy that the resistance that they make is only to set a greater value up∣on themselves. Insomuch, that if a Wo∣man,
who has never given occasion to be talked of, is till very jealous of her Re∣putation he ought to take care, as I have already said, not to entertain in any man∣ner the hopes of all that has the Air of a Lover, and if it is a Woman who has not thitherto b careful enough of her Car∣riage, but designs to be so for the future, which is your case, Madam, it is requisite that she be more rude than another, and e∣specially that she be impartial in her Seve∣rity, for the least favour she shall let herself loose to, does more reingage a Lover than a thousand Refusals does disgust him. An honest Mistress has so much sincerity for her Lover, that rather than fail to tell him things of consequence, she tells him even what are trifles: Well knowing, that if he came to be informed by other means of certain indifferent things, that are rendred Criminal at their being told again, it would have the worst effect imaginable. She keeps no Measures with him in point of Confi∣dence, she tells him not only her own se∣crets, but even those she knew before, or what she learns elsewhere every day. She calls those people ridiculous, Who say, that being Mistress of anothers Secrets, we ought not to tell it our Lovers: She an∣swers
to that, that if they still love us, they will never say any thing of it: And if they happen to abandon us, we should have much more to lose than our Friends secret; but she fancies, we ought never to consider them, as such as will one day leave off loving us, and that otherwise we should be Fools to grant them Favours. In a word, her Maxim is, That who gives her heart has nothing more to manage; she knows that there are only two Encounters that can dispence her from telling all to her Lover; the one if he was indiscreet, and the other if he had any Gallantry before hers. For it would be imprudence in her to speak to him in that case, at least with∣out he pressed her extreamly, and then it would be he himself that occasioned his own Vexation. Finally, an honest Mistress believes that what justifies her Love even with the most severe Men, is, when she is deeply smitten, when she takes pleasure in making it ap∣pear to her Lover, when she surprizes him by a thousand little favours, that he did not expect; when she has no reserve for him; when she applies herself to procure him esteem amongst all People; and that in a word, she makes of her Passion the great∣est
business of her Life: Without this, Ma∣dam, she holds Love for a Debauche, and that it is a Brutal Commerce, and a Trade by which ruined Women subsist. Mademoiselle de Cornuelle having left off speaking, Good God! said Madam d' O∣lonne, what fine things have you now said; but how difficult are they to be put in pra∣ctice? I even find therein some injustice; for in a word, since we even deceive our Husbands, whom the Laws have made our Masters, why should our Gallants come off at a better rate? They whom nothing ob∣liges us to love but the choice we make, and whom we take to serve us as long, and as little as we please. I did not say, answer∣ed Mademoiselle de Cornuelle, that we ought not to abandon our Gallants, when they displease us either by their own defects, or our weariness; but I have shown you the nice manner by which you ought to disen∣gage your self from them, not to give them any reason to cry out upon you in the world: For in a word, Madam, since they have im∣posed that tyranny upon the Honour of La∣dies, not to love what they find lovely, we must comply with Custome, and conceal our selves at least when we will love. Well my Dear, said Madam d' Olonne to her, I
am going to act wonders, I am fully resol∣ved of it, but withal I ground the greatest hopes of my Conduct upon avoiding Occa∣sions. Whether it be by avoiding, or resistance, said Mademoiselle de Cornuelle, it is no matter, provided your Lover be satisfied with you; and thereupon having exhorted her to remain firm in her good Intentions, she took her leave. During Madam d' Olonne's separation from Marsillac, they wrote to one another very often, but as there was nothing therein remarkable, I shall not mention their Let∣ters, which spoke of their love, and of their impatience to see one another again, but in a very common manner. Madam d' Olonne was the first who returned to Paris; the Count de Guiche during the Progress to Lyons, perswaded Monsieur, the King's Brother, with whom he was much in fa∣vour, to have a Gallantry at his return to Paris with Madam d' Olonne, and had of∣fered himself to serve him in it, and to procure him content in a short time. This Prince had promised the Count de Guiche to make the necessary Paces to engage that Cocquet, insomuch that in the Conversa∣tions he had with Madam d' Olonne, he on∣ly
spoke to her of the love that Prince had for her: He told her that he had declared it to him more than an hundred times up∣on the Journey, and that she would cer∣tainly see him sigh assoon as he was return∣ed. A Woman who had Citizens and Gen∣tlemen her Gallants, some handsome, o∣thers ugly, might well love a comely Prince, Madam d' Olonne received the Count de Guiche's Proposition with an unexpressible joy; and it was so great, that she did not so much as make those Excuses which Coquets make in such like Encounters. Another would have said that she would not love a∣ny one, but less a Prince than any man so∣ever, because he would not have so much application. Madam d' Olonne, who was the most natural Woman in the World, and the most passionate, kept no bounds of Mo∣desty, but answered the Count de Guiche, That she esteemed herself more than she had yet done, since she pleased so great and so rational a Prince. When the Court was returned to Paris, the Duke of Orleans did not answer the eagernesses, the Count had prepared Madam d' Olonne for, who deli∣vered herself all entirely. All this produ∣ced nothing, and made her but the more know how indifferent she was to that
Prince. The Count de Guiche seeing that the Duke of Orleans did not bite at the Hook, changed his Design, and was desi∣rous at least that the Services he would have rendred to Madam d' Olonne, should be of some advantage to him. Whereupon he re∣solved to act the part of a Lover himself, and being the Commerce he had had with her upon the Amours of the Duke of Or∣leans, had made him very familiar, he did not balance to write to her this Letter. WE have laboured hitherto in vain, Madam, the Queen haters you, and the Duke of Orleans apprehends displea∣sing her, I have reason to be in despair, Madam, but you can comfort me if you please, and I do Conjure you to do it, since the natural sharpness of the Mother, and the weakness of the Son, have ruind our Projects, other Measures are to be ta∣ken. Let us love one another, Madam, it is already done on my part; and I easily perceive, that had the Duke of Orleans lo∣ved you, I should quickly have fallen out with him, because I should not have been able to have resisted the inclination I have for you. I do not question but that at first you will be shocked at the difference,
but lay aside your Ambition, and you will not find your self so miserable as you ima∣gine. I am certain that when Spight shall have cast you into my Arms, Love will there retain you. Let People say what they will against Women, there is sometimes more impru∣dence than malice in their Conduct: Most of them no longer think, when they are courted, that they ought never to love: In the mean time they proceed further than they imagine, they do things sometimes, thinking they shall be always Cruel, which they extreamly repent of, when they are become more Humane. The same thing happened to Madam d' Olonne; she was stung to the quick that she had failed of the Prince's Heart, after having reckoned it a∣mongst her Conquests; in seeking some one to apply herself to for the amusing her grief, she found nothing more likely to be∣lieve, than that the Count de Guiche for his own Interest had hindred him from loving her. Insomuch that as well to revenge her∣self of him, as to reassure Marsillac, whom this Intrigue had alarmed, she sacrificed to him the Count de Guiche's Letter, without considering that Love would perhaps ob∣lige
her to do the same with those of Mar∣sillac, and he whom Madam d' Olonne gave a thousand Favours to, made the use of them that is common, when one is satisfied with his Mistress, he rendred her a thou∣sand thanks for her Sincerity, and content∣ed himself with triumphing over his Ri∣vals, without showing any indiscreet Pride. In the mean time the Count de Guiche not knowing the Destiny of his Letter, went the day after to Madam d' Olonne's House; but so much Company was there that day, that he could not speak to her about busi∣ness at that time. He only observed that she had eyed him very much, and from her House he went to acquaint Fiesque with the state of his Affairs, who since his return from Lyons, he had made his Confident; he went likewise to tell the same to Vine∣vil; and they both judged by the weakness of the Lady, and the Gentleness of the Spark, that his pursuit would neither be long nor in vain: And the truth is, Madam d'Olonne had found the Count de Guiche so handsome, and so much to her mind, that she repented the Sacrifice she had newly made to Marsillac. The day after the Count de Guiche returned to her House, and
having found her alone, he spoke to her of his Passion, the fair One was pleased, and received that Declaration the most a∣greably imaginable; but after having agreed upon loving one another, as they were up∣on certain Conditions, People came in; which obliged the Count de Guiche to go out a Moment after. Madam d'Olonne having disingaged her∣self from her Company as soon as she was a∣ble, took Coach, being desirous to disco∣ver if the Countess de Fiesque took no In∣terest any longer in the Count de Guiche: She went to her, and after some Conversa∣tions upon other subjects, she asked her ad∣vice in the Designes she told her the Count de Guiche had for her. The Countess told her that she was only to consult her Heart in such Occasions: My heart does not say to me much in favour f the Count, replyed Madam d' Olonne, and my Reason tells me a thousand things against him: He is a Spark I can never love. In saying these words, she took leave of the Countess, without wait∣ing for her Answer. On the other side the Count de Guiche be∣ing returned to his House, he met with Vinevil, who waited for him with great im∣patience to know what posture his Affairs
were in; the Count de Guiche told him something coldly, that he believed all was broaken off, considering how Madam d'Olonne treated him; and Vinevil desiring to know the particulars of the Conversation, the Count de Guiche not being willing to discover what passed, changed discourse every moment; this gave some suspicions to Vineuil who was cunning and in love with Madam d' Olonne, and only concer∣ned himself in the affairs of the Count de Guiche, that he might prevail with his Mistress by the things he should have learnt. He went away seeing he could not make any discovery, and was for three days in mor∣tal disquiets, not being able to learn the certainty of what he suspected, and what he would know. He went to Fiesque's House with the Countenance of a disgraced Favourite, since he saw he had no longer any share in the Count de Guiche's confi∣dence, he said nothing of it to that fair One, not to discredit himself in showing his Misfortune, At three days end he went to the Count de Guiche's House. What have I done my Lord, said he to him, that obliges you to treat me thus? I easily perceive that you hide from me your intrigue with Madam de Olonne,
learn me the reason of it, or if you have none, continue to tell me what you know as you used to do. I ask your pardon my poor Vinevil, said the Count de Guiche to him, but Madam d'Olonne upon granting me enjoyment, exacted from me not to speak thereof to you nor to Fiesque, much less then to any others, because she said that you are malicious, and Fiesque jealous. How indiscreet soever a person is, there is no Intrigue but what's kept secret in the beginning, if there be no need of a Confident: This I have had experience of in this Occasion, for I am naturally enough incli∣ned to tell an amourous adventure: And yet I have been three dayes without acquainting you with this, tho you know all my secrets; but have patience, my Dear, I am going to tell you all that passed between Madam d' Olonne and me, and by the exactest Relation in the World, in some manner requite the offence done to the friendship I have for you. You know then that the first Visit made her, after having written to her the Let∣ter you have seen, I did not find in her looks any aversion or kindness; and the Company that was at her house hindred me from having any further information. All that I could remarke was, that she obser∣ved me from time to time; but returning thither the day after, and having found her
alone, I represented my love to her so well, and so eagerly pressed her to make returns to it, that she Confessed she loved me, and promised to give me marks thereof upon Condition I have newly told you. You know very well that I would promise her all in those moments; we heard a noise, in∣somuch that Madam d' Olonne bid me come again the next day dressed in Womens Cloathes, and as one who brought her Lace to sell; whereupon being returned to my House, I found you there, and you might easily perceive by the cold reception I made you, that all the World importuned me at that time, and particularly you, my Dear, whom I was more jealous of than any one; you likewise perceived it, and it was that which made you suspect I did not tell you all: when you was gone, I gave order that my Porter should say I was not at home, and prepared my self for my Mascarade of the Morrow: All the pleasure that imagination can give beforehand, I had for four and twenty hours together: The four or five last hours were more tedi∣ous than all the others; at length that which I expected with so much impatience, being come, I caused my self to be carryed to Madam d' Olonne's House, I found her
in a Cornet upon her Bed, in a Rose Co∣lour Undress. I cannot express to you my Dear, how beautifull she was that day, all that can be said, comes short of the Charms she had: her Neck was half uncovered, she had more Hair loose than usual, and all in rings and curles, her Eyes were more sparkling than the Stars. Love and the colour of her Face animated her Comple∣xion with the finest Vermillion in the World. Well, my Dear, said she to me, are not you full of acknowledgment that I spare you the pains of sighing a long time? do you find that I make you pay too dear for the Fa∣vours you receive? Tell me my Dear, added she, but you are mute. Ah! Madam an∣swered I her, I should be insensible were I in cold Blood, seeing you in this posture. But may I assure my self, said she, that you have for∣gotten little Beauvais and the Countess of Fi∣esque? yes said I to her, Madam, you may; and how should I remember others, added I, since you may perceive I have almost forgot my self? I only fear, replyed she, the future; for for the present, my Dear, I am much mistaken if I suffer you to think of any Body besides my self; And in finishing these words she took me about the Neck, and pressing me you know how with her Arms, she
pulled me upon her; Both of us lying in manner, we kissed ill one another a thousand times: But not willing to stop there, and this seeking for something more solid; but on my part in vain. We ought to know our selves, and what we are fit for: For my part I perceive I am no Womans man. It was impossible for me to come off with Ho∣nour, what effect soever my fancy made, and the Idea and the presence of the most beautifull Object in the World. What's the matter said she to me, My Lord, What ales you, What is it that puts you in so sad a Condition? Is it my Person that disgusts you, or do you only ring me the leavings of an o∣ther? This Discourse made me so ashamed and out of Countenance, my Dear, that it quite deprived me of the forces I had left. I beg of you, Madam, said I to her, not to ruine a wretch with reproaches! Certainly I am bewitched. In stead of giving me an an∣swer she called her Chamber-Maid, Prethee tell me Quentine how do I look to day? am not I very ugly? Do not deceive your Lady, there is something about me that does not sit well? Quentine not daring to answer seeing her in that rage, Madam d' Olonne snatching a∣looking-Glass from her she held in her hands? After having made all the gestures
she used to do when she designed to Charm any one to judge if my insufficiency procee∣ded from her fault or mine. She got up and shaked her Petticoat that was something ruffled, and went in a fury into her Closet that stood by her Bed-side. For my part, I was like a Condemned Man, I asked my self if all that had passed was not a Dream, with all the reflections that one can make in such an Encounter; I went to Manicamps House, where having related to him all my adventure. I am mightly obliged to you, my Dear said he to me, for certainly it was for the love of me that you were so insensible near so pretty a Woman. Tho perhaps you may be the Cause of it, said I to him, I did it not to oblige you; I love you extreamely, and I do confess it; but withall that I had forgt you in that occasion; I do not Comprehend so extraordinary an Obligation by quitting the habit of a Man▪ I had quitted you before, but that part is dead in me, by which I have been hitherto a kind of Chancellour. As I had done speaking, one of my Servants brought me a Letter from Madam d' Olonne that one of hers had given him, here it is in my Pocket; in saying that the Count read this Letter to Vinevil.
IF I was a lover of Venereal pleasures, I should lament my having been disappointed, but far from complaining; I am obliged to your insufficiency, it is the cause that in the expect∣ation of delights you were not able to give me, I enjoyed others by imagination that lasted much longer than those you could have been capable of furnishing, tho you had been as well provi∣ded as an other Man. I send at present to know how you do, and if you were able to get a foot to your Lodgings: It is not without reason that I make this inquiry, for I never saw a Man under such sad Circumstances as you were when I left you. I Counsel you to settle your Affairs with more natural heat than you had when I saw you; for you cannot live much lon∣ger. Really my Lord, you raise my pity, and what outrage soever I have received from you, I shall not forbear giving you good advice. Avoid Manicamp if you are wise, you may recover your health, if you leave off seeking him for some time, it is certainly from him that your impotence proceeds: for my part neither my Glass nor my looks belying me, I do not fear being either accused or reproached. I had no sooner made an end of reading this Letter, than that I made her this an∣swer.
I Confess, Madam I have had failings in my lifetime, for I am a man, and still young; but I never had a worse than that last Night. It is not to be excused Madam, and tho your sentence be never so severe, it can be but what I have deserved: I have killed, I have betrayed, I have committed sacriledge; for all these Crimes you need only seek out punishments, if you please, my Death, I will bring you my sword; if you only condemn me to be whipt, I will come naked to you in my shirt; Remember Ma∣dam, that I failed in Power, not in Will; I was like a Brave soldier who finds himself with∣out Arms when he should engage: I should be extreamly puzzel'd Madam, to tell you from whence this prov'd; perhaps it happend' to me as it does to those whose stomack is gone when they expect to eat most, perhaps the force of Imagi∣nation consumed the force of Nature. See what it is, Madam, to be so Charming. An Or∣dinary Beauty who should not have troubled the Course of nature, would have been better enter∣tained. Adieu, Madam, I have nothing more to say to you, but that perhaps you would pardon me what is past, if you would give me the opportunity of doing better herafter, to which purpose I only demand till to morrow at the same hour as yesterday.
After having sent by one of my Footmen these fair promises to Madam d' Olonne's Lacquis, who waited for an answer at my House, I went home, and not doubting, but that my offers would be kindly received, I resolved to take all imaginable Care of my self: I bathed and was rubbed with Essen∣ces, I eat new laid Eggs and Artichoaks, and then drunk some Wine; I walked a while in my Chamber, and then went to Bed without Manicamp. My Head was so full of the design of repairing my fault that I shun'd my Friends as I would have done the Plague. I got up the next day brisk both in Body and mind, I dined be∣times, and eat what was Provocative, but as little as I had done at Supper; and having spent the Afternoon in preparing my little Equipages of Love, I went to Madam d' Olonne's House, at the same hour as the time before. I found her upon the same Bed, which made me immediately appre∣hend that it portended me some ill Fortune; but in a word, having encouraged my self as much as I could, I cast my self at her Knees. She was half undrest, and held a Fan she played with. So soon as she saw me she blusht a little, without doubt re∣membring the late affront she had received
and Quentine being retired, I placed my self by her upon the Bed. The first thing she did was to put her Fan before her Eyes, and that having rendred her as bold as if there had been a Wall between us both. Ah! Well, said she to me, poor Paralitick, are you come here a compleat Man to day? Ah! Madam answered I to her, let us talk no more of what is past: And thereupon thundering into her Arms, I kissed her a thousand times, and begged she would let me see her naked: after a little resistance that she made to augment my Desires, and to affect Modesty, which becomes a Woman so well, rather than out of any distrust she had of her self, she let me see all I had a mind to. I saw a curious, white, plump and the best proportioned Body in the world. After that I fell again to embra∣cing her, we already made a noise with smacking and Bussing, our hands already clasped in one another, expressed the ut∣most tendernesses of love; already the mix∣ture of our loves had made the union of our Bodies, when she perceived the sad pickle I was in. It was then that seeing I continued to outrage her, she thought of nothing but vengeance; she called me all manner of ill names, she there attended me
with the greatest violence imaginable. For my part without making either Prayers or Complaints, knowing what I had deserved, I went home in a fury and having put my self to Bed, I turned all my choler against the cause of my Disgrace. Fury then seiz'd me, patience me forsook A Razor in my hand, enrag'd I took, But my designe I found was all in vain, Being the Author of my shameful pain. All in a fright, and quite froze up with fear, Some wrinckles of it only did appear. And towards it's Center seem'd to crow'd, I thought, And thus for refuge in my Belly sought. So that not being able to do any thing, the rage I was in made me talk to my self much to this purpose. Ah! Traytor, what hast thou to say, infamous part of my self, and really shameful Member, for it would be very ridiculous to give thee an o∣ther name? Tell me, have I ever obliged thee to use me in this manner? and make me receive the cruellest Affronts in the World? to make me abuse the favours that are done me? and being but two and twenty make me have the infirmities of old
Age? while that Choler made me speak thus. My Eyes towards Heaven I then did ghastly turn, My cruel Fate I did lament and mourn; I saw that all reproaches were in vain To talk to it, to rocks was to complain. I spent the Night in mortal Agonies, I knew not if I ought to write to Madam d' Olonne, or surprise her by an unexpected Vi∣sit: at lenght after having been a long-time considering, I chose to do the last, at the hazard of finding an obstacle to our plea∣sures; but I was so happy as to find her a lone, just as it grew dark. She had put her self to Bed as soon as I was gone from her; At my Coming into her Chamber I told her, Madam, I come either to dy at your feet or give you satisfaction, I begg you would not be in a rage, I know what I have merited. Madam d' Olonne, who feared as much as I did such an other mischance as those that had happned to me, took care not to daunt me with reproaches; on the con∣trary she told me all that might re-establish in me a good opinion of my self which I
had almost lost; and faith, if I was enchanted, as I told her, two dayes before I broak the Charme, the third time you may imagine, added the Count de Guiche, that she called me no ill names at parting, as she had done the other times: This is the state of our Intrigue, which I begg you would seem to be ignorant of: Vinevil having promised him he would, they parted, the Count de Guiche went to the Countess of Fiesque's House, to whom amongst other things he said he had no thoughts of Madam d' O∣lonne. This Gallant's Intrigue had not continued long with his new Mistress when Marsillac discovered it, tho he had so little sence, and she had taken all imaginable care to deceive him; but jealousy that serves in stead of cunning, made him discover in her less eagerness for him than was usual. Insomuch that having made her some Mo∣dest Complaints in the beginning, and af∣terwards more sharp ones, seeing at length they did not at all restrain her, he resolved to revenge himself at one blow, both of his Rival and his Mistress. Whereupon he gave his friends, Madam d' Olonne's Let∣ters, and desired them to show 'em in all Companies. Mademoiselle d' Orleans ha∣ted
the Count de Guiche extreamly. He gave her the Letter the Count had written to his Mistress, in which he had spoken ill of the Queen and the Duke of Orleans. The first thing the Prince did was to show the Duke of Orleans the Count de Guiche's Let∣ter, thinking to animate him so much the more against him, for that she knew that Prince had had a great kindness for him: however that Prince was not in so great a passion as she hoped he would have been, and contented himself with telling Pequelain that his Cosin was ungrateful that he had never given him reason to talk of him as he did, and that all the resentment he should have of it was, to have no longer the same esteem for him he had had; but if the Queen knew after what manner he had talked of her, she would not certainly have so much moderation as she had. The Princess not be∣ing well pleased to see his Royall highness so favourable, to the Count de Guiche, re∣solved to tell the Queen, and having ac∣quainted one of her Confidents with her design, the Marshal of Grammont came to hear of it. He went and beseeched her not to ruine his son; she promised him she would not, and kept her word. This Princess was haughty and did not easily pardon
People, who had not for her all the respect her illustrious Birth and extraordinary Me∣rit obliged all the World to; but when she was once perswaded they loved her, no∣thing was so good natured as she. While that the Marshall and his Friends were endeavouring to stifle the Noise that Marsillac had made with the Count de Guiche's Letter, Madam d' Olonne was known to show this for the breaking of a Marriage that made Marsillac's fortune. You do not think, Madam of the con∣straint I am in, I am forced to go two or three times a Week to visit Mademoiselle de Rochegayon, to talk to her as if I loved her, and to this purpose must spend that time I ought only to employ in seeing, wri∣ting and thinking of you: and in what Condition soever I may be, it would be a great trouble to me to be obliged to keep company with a Child: but now that I live only for your sake, you may very well imagine that it is to me the cruellest of Tor∣tures: that which makes me take patience n some manner, is that I hope to revenge my self on her by marrying her without loving her, and after that seeing more nearly the difference there is between you and her I shall love you all my life time, yet
more if it was possible than I do at present. This at first surprized all the World: Thitherto indiscreet Gallants had only been found, and never Mistresses: They could not imagine that a Woman to revenge her self of a Man she no longer loved, would help one in that manner to convict herself. This indiscretion had not however the effect that Madam d' Olonne had promised herself: Monsieur de Liancourt, Mademoiselle de la Rochegayon's Father, knowing that Madam d' Olonne was desirous to incense him a∣gainst Marsillac, answered those who spoke to him of that Letter, That were it not for offending God, Marsillac could not do better than apply himself to gain the Heart of so beautyful a Lady as Madam d' Olonne, that this was not the first time that Wives were spoke ill of at Mistresses Bed-side: But as the passion Men had for her, was more voilent than that they had for others, it did not usually last so long: As for exam∣ple, that of Marsillac was not so fixed to Madam d' Olonne, and he still loved Made∣moiselle de la Rochegayon. So that Madam d' Olonne did not spoil Marsillac's For∣tune, as she hoped to have done; and only confirming what he had said of her; sh deprived her friends of the means of vin∣dicating her.
Things being in these termes and the Count de Guiche remaining Master in ap∣pearance, Madam d' Olonne went one Evening to the Countess of Fiesque, she prayed her to make her acknowledgments to the Abbot Foucquett for some service she pretended to have received from him, and to exaggerate very highly the obligation she had to him: But the Abbot being one of the principal Personages of this History, it is requisite to describe how he was made. The Abbot Foucquett, the Treasurers Brother, was originally of Anjou, his Fa∣mily were Gown-men till this Man made his Fortune, and then as Noble as the King. His Eyes were blew and lively, andsome Nose, a great Forehead, a pointed Chin, the form of his Face was at, his Hair was a bright brown, his shape was ordinary, and his meen base; his Conduct in the World was quite contrary to his profession, he was active ambitious, nd haughty towards People; he did not ove, but the most ardent and best Friend hat ever was; he had engaged himself in n Amourous Intrigue more out of Pride than out of love; but afterwards Love be∣came Master: The first Woman he had made love to was Madam de Chevruese,
of the House of Lorraine, by whom he was entertained with a very great Passion, the other was Madam de Chastillon, who in the Favours she had granted him, had more considered her Intrests than her Pleasures▪ she being one of the most Beautyfull and extraordinary Women of France, it is Con∣venient to make here the Description of her Life. The End.
LOVES EMPIRE, &c. THE HISTORY OF Madam de Chastillon. HER Grace, the Dutchess de Cha∣stillon, Monsieur de Bouteville's Daughter, who was Beheaded for having fought a Duel, contrary to the E∣dicts
of the late King, Lewis the Fourteenth's Father, Wife of Gaspard Duke of Chastillon, had black and lively Eyes, a little Forehead, a handsome Nose, a red Lip, and full Mouth, her Complexion was as she thought fit, but she had usually white and red, she was so Charming when she smiled, that she set all hearts on a flame; her Hair was very black, she was tall, ahd a good Aire, but long, dry, and black hands, her Arms were flat, and of the same colour, which made People draw ill Conclusions of those parts they did not see: She had a loft and agree∣able wit, was insinuating and given to flat∣tery, was faithless, interessed and uncapa∣ble of Friendship; and yet what Experi∣ence soever Men had had of her ill Quali∣ties, when she had a mind to Charm, it was impossible for them to forbear loving her; she had some ways with her that were very tempting, and others that made her be despised by all People; for Money and Honours she would have dishonoured her∣self, and have sacrificed Father, Mother, and Lovers. Gaspard d' Coligny, and since Duke of Chastillon, after the Death of the Marshal his Father, and of his eldest Brother, fell in Love with Mademoiselle de Bouteville;
and being the Prince of Condé fell likewise in love with her, Coligny desired him to break off his Amour, since his Highnesses design was only Gallantry, and he intend∣ed Marraige. The Prince being Coligny's Relation and Friend, could not civilly re∣fuse him his demand; and as his Passion was of a very fresh date, he did not find it difficult to get rid of it: He not only pro∣mised Coligny that he would think of her no more, but that he would serve him in this Affair against the Marshal his Father, and his Relations who opposed it; and indeed not∣withstanding all the Orders of Parliament, and all the Obstacles that the Marshal his Father was able to raise against it, the Prince assisted Coligny so well, then of that Name, but since the death of his Father called Cha∣stillon, that he made him carry away Made∣moiselle de Bouteville, and lent him Twenty thousand Francks for his Maintenance. Co∣ligny carried his Mistress to Chasteau-Thierry, where he Consummated the marriage: From thence they proceeded farther, and went to Steny, a Town of Safety, which the Prince, whom it belonged to, had gi∣ven them, for their abode.▪ whether that Coligny did not find his Mistress so full of Charms as he had fancied in her, or that
Love being satisfied, he had time to reflect on the ill Condition his Fortune was in, or that he feared he had given his Wife the Disease he had, he fell into a terrible Me∣lancholy on the Morrow after his Marriage: And while he was at Steny, his Melancho∣ly continued upon him to that degree, that he was as constant to the Woods as a Sa∣vage. Two or three days after he went to the Army, and his Wife into a Convent of the Religieuses, two Leagues from Paris. It was thither that Roquelaure, knowing the Necessity she was in, sent her a Thousand broad Pieces, and Vinevil two thousand Crowns, which Sums are still owing to them, tho the Dutchess is very rich, and that Money was employed to her own use. Coligny being under Age when he married his Wife, it rendred his Marriage invalid, but being of Age at his Return, a Contract of Marriage was made in the Hostel of Condé before all the young Ladies Relations, and they were afterwards married in Nostre Dame by the Coadjutor of Paris. Sometime after Madam de Chastillon being indisposed, went to the Wells, where she met with the Duke of Nemours, who fell in love with her.
The Duke of Nemours had very white Hair, a handsome Nose, a little Mouth, and of a fine Colour, and was the prettiest shape Man imaginable: The least of his A∣ctions was attended with an unexpressible Grace, his Humour was gay, wanton and toying, and his Will was admirable brisk and quaint. The liberty of seeing one a∣nother at all hours, which Custom has in∣troduced in Places where the Waters are taken, gave a thousand opportunities to the Duke of Nemours of acquainting his Mistress with his Passion: But knowing that an Amorous Intrigue was never better regu∣lated, at least with Ladies we have some e∣steem for, than by making a Declaration by word of Mouth or by Writing: He resol∣ved to speak; and being one day alone with her at her Lodgings, I have been above three weeks, Madam, said he to her, con∣sidering whether I should tell you the im∣pression your Charms have made upon my heart; and when I determined at length to acquaint you with it, it is after having seen all the Difficulties that I can find in this Design: I do my self Justice, Madam, and for that reason I ought not to enter∣tain any hopes. Besides, you have lately married a beloved Lover, and it is a diffi∣cult
Enterprize to remove him out of your heart, and to put my self in his place. However I love you, Madam, and tho you should not to be ungrateful, make use of that reason against me, I confess that it is my Star, and not my Choice that obliges me to love you. Madam de Chastillon ne∣ver had had so much joy as this Discourse gave her. Monsieur de Nemours appeared to her so lovely, that if it had been the Custom for Women to have made Decla∣rations of Love first, she would not have deferred it so long as her Gallant did. But the fear of not seeming modest enough per∣plexed her so extreamly, that she was some∣time without knowing what Answer to make. At length forcing herself to speak for the concealing the disorder that her si∣lence made appear; You are in the right my Lord, said she to him, with all imagi∣nable postures, to believe that I love my Husband very much; but give me leave to tell you, that you do your self wrong in being so Modest as you are: And if I was in a Condition to acknowledge the kind∣ness you have for me, you would see that others esteem you more than you do your self. Ah! Madam, replyed the Duke of Nemours, it is in your power, Madam, and
only in yours, to make me the most hap∣py and most esteemed Man in France. He had hardly finished these words, then that the Countess of Maure came into the Cham∣ber, before whom it was requisite to change Conversation, tho these two Lovers did not change their thoughts; Their distra∣ction and disorder made the Countess of Maure judge that their Intrigue was much more advanced than it really was, and for this reason she was preparing to make a ve∣ry short Visit, when the Duke of Nemours prevented her. The amorous and discreet Prince well knowing that he acted but an ill part before such a sharp-sighted Woman as the Countess of Maure was, went out, and being got home, he wrote this Letter to his Mistress. I Leave you, Madam, that I may be more with you then I was; the Countess of Maure observed me, and I durst not look upon you; and she being cunning, I was even afraid that my Affection would discover me; for in short, Madam, it is so well known that People must eye you when they are in the same pace, that those that do not are suspected of some Design. If I do not see you at present, Madam, at least it is not perceived that I am in love, and I
have the liberty of acquainting you only with it. How happy should I be, Madam, were I able to perswade you, to the point it is, and how un∣just would you be in that case, Madam, if you had not some kindness for me. Madam de Chastillon was very much per∣plexed at the receipt of this Letter; she knew not whether she had best be cruel or kind. Kindness might gain the heart of her Lover, and Severity his esteem, and both might disgust him. At length she resolved to do what was most difficult, as being most honest: And notwithstanding all that her heart inspired her with, she chose rather to follow the counsel of her Reason: Where∣fore she made the Duke no Answer; and as he came on the Morrow into her Chamber, Are you come again my Lord, said she to him, to commit some new Offence? because my hu∣mour and looks are easie and soft, you think there is no more to do than falling on: And if your esteem is only to be purchased by rudeness, set that value on it as to constrain my self for some time: Yes, my Lord, I shall be angry, and I perceive I must be so with you. These last words were as a Thunder-clap fallen upon this poor Lover; tears came into his Eyes, and his tears spoke much better for him
than all he could have said. After having been a moment without speaking, I am infinitely grieved, Madam, answered he her, to see you thus in anger; and I wish I was dead since I have displeased you. You shall see, Madam, that in the Vengeance I am resolved to take of the offence you have received, that your interests are much more dear to me than my own; I am going so far from you, Madam, that my Love shall no longer importune you. This is not what I require of you, interrupted that fair One, you may still stay here, without displeasing me. Cannot you see me without telling me you love me, or at least without writing me it? No, no, Ma∣dam, replyed he, it is absolutely impossi∣ble. Well then, my Lord, I consent that you see me, replyed Madam de Chastillon; but observe well all that I do for you. Ah! Madam, interrupted the Duke, throwing himself at her feet, if I have adored you when you were so cruel, judge what I shall do when you are kind: Yes, Madam, be pleased to guess at it, for it is impossible for me to express the sense I have of it. This Conversation did not end as it began: Madam de Chastillon dispensed herself from keeping all the rigour she had promised her∣self,
and if the Duke of Nemours had not great Favours, at least he had hopes of be∣ing beloved. In confidence of this he was no sooner got home, then that he wrote this Letter to his Mistress. AFter having told me, Madam, that you consented I should see you, since it was impossible for me to see you without telling you that I love you, or at least without writing it, I ought to write to you in confidence that my Let∣ter will not be ill received: However, I tremble, Madam, and Love that is never without fears of displeasing, makes me imagine, that you may have changed your mind within these three hours: Do me the favour, Madam, to inform me by two Lines. If you knew with what ardour I desire it, and with what transports of joy I shall receive it, you would not judge me unwor∣thy of this Grace. Madam de Chastillon had no sooner recei∣ved this Letter, then that she made this An∣swer. WHy should I have changed my Mind, my Lord? but my God, how pressing you are! Are not you satisfied with knowing your power, and must you needs triumph likewise over anothers weakness? The Duke of Nemours received this Let∣ter
with such a joy, as put him almost out of himself, he kissed it a thousand times, not being able to forbear reading of it. In the mean time the Passion of these two Lovers augmented every day; and Madam de Chastillon, who had already yielded up her heart, no longer defended the rest, but on∣ly to render it the more considerable by the difficulty. In short, the time of taking the Waters being passed, they were to part, and tho they both returned to Paris, they both imagined they should not see one ano∣ther again with so much Conveniency as they had done at Bourbon: In the view of these Difficulties their Farewel was very moving! The Duke of Nemours assured his Mistress more by his tears that he should ever love her, than by the things he said to her; and the constraint that Madam de Chastillon used not to weep, had the same ef∣fect in her Lover: They parted very sad, but deeply perswaded that they would love one another passionately, & that they should ever do so. They seldom met the rest of the Autumn, because they were observed; but etters passed often between them. In the beginning of Winter, the Civil War which begun to break forth, obliged the King to leave Paris something surprize∣ingly,
and retire to St. Germains. At that time, the Marshal, Coligny's Father, hap∣pened to dye, and the Prince of Condé, who was then the Cardinal of Mazarine's right Arm, obtained the Patent of Duke and Peer for his Cosin de Coligny. The Troops coming from all parts, the City was blocked up; the Court however did not seem very sad, and the Courtiers and Soul∣diers were over-joyed at the ill posture of Affairs; the Cardinal only, whom they might ruin, concealed part of them from the Queen, and all from the young King, whom when they talked to of War, it was only to acquaint him with the defeats of the Enemies, and the rest of the time they a∣mused him in Plays that were sutable to hi Age: Amongst other Persons with who he loved to play, the Dutchess of Chastill held the first rank; and hereupon Benscrad made this Sonnet under her Husband' Name. Chastillon keep your Charms For another Lover, Tho you stand with open Arms, And keep a mighty Pother. The King's too young to quench the Fires Of such an eager Beauty.
How can such raging hot desires Be still'd by Minority. In these little Playes the Duke of Ne∣urs did not lose his time, they ever fur∣nished the Dutchess and him with occasions of giving one another testimonies of their love; and by the same degrees that the passion of these two Lovers augmented, their prudence did the Contrary: it was obser∣ved that at a Play called the Bohemien they placed themselves opposite to one another, and were always whispering, and that when one was blind-folded, the other ood so as to be caught; to the end that he hand in seeking to know who it was that as taken might have a pretext to feel every where: In short there was not one of these Plays but what furnished them with the eans of tickling their amourous fancy. The Duke of Chastillon, whom the know∣edge of his Wife's humour obliged to ob∣erve her, saw something of an Intrigue etween the Duke of Nemours and her; Glory more than Love made him receive his discovery with an extreame Impatience. e spoke of it to one of his best Friends, who sharing his grief as deeply as possible, ent and told the Dutchess of it. The
service that I have devoted, said he, to the Family of his Grace your Husband, obliges me to come and give you an advice which is of Consequence. Beautyfull as you are, Madam, it is impossible but that you must have adorers, and as certainly your intentions being good, you have not so strict a raine over your own actions; most Women who envy you, and Men jealous of the Glory of the Duke your Husband, give an ill interpretation to all you do. My Lord your Husband, himself has perceived that your Conduct, which tho it were more imprudent than Criminal, does not faile however to do you an injury in the World, and trouble him: you know how haughty he is, Madam, and how much he would fear to be ridiculed upon that point: I give you notice of it, and humbly beseech you to take care; for if by relying too much upon the clearness of your Conscience, you should be too negligent of your Reputation, his Grace may come to such Violences against you, as would not leave you in a Condition to make appear to him your innocence. What you tell me, Sir, answered Madam de Chastillon, ought not to surprize me; my Lord Duke began be∣times to accustom me to his Caprichio's: On the day after our Wedding, he fell into so furious a jealousy of Roquelaure, who had helped him to carry me away, that he could not conceal it;
and yet he could never have had less reason than at what he gave him; and now again I find that he renews his suspicions, and yet I cannot devine of whom it is: All that I can say is, that I doubt whether his mind would be at rest, tho I were in the Countrey and saw none but my Domesticks. I shall not come to further parti∣culars with you, Madam. I even know not whether my Lord Duke aimes at any one, when e tells me he is satisfied with you; but you may upon what I have told you take measures for your Conduct. And thereupon having taken leave of her, he left her under terri∣ble disquiets. She immediately gave notice of all this to the Duke of Nemours, and they resolved together that they would con∣strain themselves more than they had thitherto done. In the mean time the Prince of Condé, was wholly taken up in Contriving how to reduce the People of Paris by Famine, to deliver the Parliament, that had pro∣mised a sum to those who would bring the Cardinals Head, fancyed that the taking of Charenton would much advance this Success, which Clanle guarded with five or six hundred Men: he reassembled part of the Quarters, and with a thousand Men, at the head of whom Gaston of France, the
King's Unkle, and Lieutenant General of the Regency, would needs place himself, he came to Attack Charenton in three places. As the Retrenchments at the Avenues were but bad, it was not difficult for the King's Troops to force them. But the Duke of Chastillon, who commanded the Attacks under the Prince was wounded in the belly with a Musket shot in the Burrough, of which he dyed the Night after. The Prince regretted him extreamly, and his grief was so violent that it could not last. By what had passed you may judge that the Dutchesses Affliction was not very great, and you may judge it much better by what shall happen in the sequel; however she wept, she tore her Hair, and made appear the Appearances of the greatest Despair i∣maginable, the Publick was so deceived, that this Sonnet was made upon his death. Just as the Court the Honours did prepare That Chastillon had merited by his Arms, Death did deprive us of this Conquerour, And snatch'd him from the midst of great A∣larms. How great was, fairest Dutchess, your Despair, When you had lost all hopes of his return,
All must have wept who saw you tare your Hair, Or else their Hearts with Love did ever burn. In such a sad Estate, so strange surprize Never Alcionne, nor Artenise Of Fate with so much reason could complain: You sigh, you weep, but all's, alas in vain. The Duke of Nemours, who was better informed than the rest of the World, was not astonished at Madam de Chastillon's af∣fliction: He timed his business so well, that the excess of grief had altered in that poor despairing fair One, and was so earnest with her to grant him Enjoyment, that the fear she had had of her Husband, had hindred her from allowing him during his life, that she made an Assignation with him on the day of his Burial. Bordeaux, one of her Women, who fancied that the Duke's death would ruin the Fortune of Ricoux, who sought her in Marriage, was under a real Affliction; insomuch that when she saw the Duke of Nemours upon the point of recei∣ving the least Favours from her Mistress, on a day that the most dissolute constrain themselves, the horrour of this action re∣doubled her grief, and without going out of the Chamber, she disturbed the plea∣sure
of those Lovers by her sighs and by her ars. The Duke well-seeing that if he not appease this Woman, he should not have for the future in his Amour all the sweetness that he wished for, took care to comfort her, at his going out, and told her that he was sensible of the loss she had of the Duke; but that he would be a Friend to her, and take care of her Fortune as the deceased had done; and that she should find as much good will in him as she had done in the other, and perhaps more power; and that till he could do something considerable for her, he desired her to receive Four thou∣sand Crowns that he would send her on the morrow. These words had so much virtue that Bordeaux wiped away her tears, and promised the Duke to enteresse herself for him as long as she lived; and told him that her Mistress had all the reason in the World not to spare any thing for the giving him marks of her Love. On the Morrow Bordeaux had the Four thousand Crowns which the Duke had promised her, and since that time she served him preferably to all those who would not give her so much. The Peace being made, in the beginning of the Spring, the Court returned to Pa∣ris. The Prince, who had newly freed the
Cardinal out of a dangerous business, sold him his Services at a very dear rate, that he had done him in that War. The Cardinal was not only unable to perform what he daly demanded of him; but was not able to support the Insolence with which he de∣manded Favours: The Government of Pont de Letreht, that the Prince had forced from him for his Brother in Law the Duke of Longueville, contrary to the intention of the Court, and the boldness with which he had exacted from the Queen that she should see Gersé, after the confidence he had had to write an Amorous Ticket to her Majesty, made the Cardinal at length resolve to free himself from the tyranny he was under, under pretext of revenging the Contempt that was had of the Royal Authority; he communicated this Design to the Duke of Orleans, who remembred his Exempt's bro∣ken Staff by the Prince, and who for that and the jealousie of his great Merit, had reasons to hate him; and the Cardinal let∣ting him know that Riviere, who governed him, was the Prince's Pensioner, he made him give his word that he would conceal this Affair from his Favourite. The Prince of Condé, the Prince of Conty, and the Duke of Longueville their Brother in Law, were
took into Custody in the Palace where the King then lodged: In the mean time Monsi∣eur Thurenne, who for the Engagements he had with the Prince of Condé, had reason to fear being taken, and who besides was enraged against the Court for the Principa∣lity of Sedan, which his Family was depri∣ved of, withdrew to Sthney, where Madam de Longueville arrived presently after, and the Prince's Officers cast themselves into Bellegarde; Madam de Chastillon applyed herself to the Princess Dowager, and enga∣ged the Duke of Nemours her Lover in her Interests. Sometime after that the Princes were in Prison. The Princess Dowager had leave to go stay at her Cosins Madam de Chastillon's. A Priest called Cambiac, who had intro∣duced himself to Madam de Bouteville's, by the means of Madam Brienne, was sent to Madam de Chastillon by her Mother; he had not been there long, but that he governed her, insomuch that he interposed between her and the Duke of Nemours. This Com∣merce giving him occasion of having great Familiarities with Madam de Chastillon, he fell in love with her, and to that degree, as to faint away as he was saying Mass. The Princess Dowager falling into that fit of
Sickness, which she died of, Cambiac, who had acquired great Credit with her, em∣ployed it in favour of Madam de Chastillon: He procured her a hundred thousand Crowns worth of Jewels, and the Lord∣ship of Marlou for her life, which was worth two thousand pounds a year. The Duke of Nemours, whom the cares of Cambiac for Madam de Chastillon had something a∣larm'd, was quite jealous at the News of the Princesses Will. He did not believe that it was easie to resist such considerable Service; and though he could not blame his Mistress for having received them, he was enraged that she was obliged for them to a Man whom he considered as his Rival. And he was not mistaken; for what Cambiac had done had cost that fair One Favours; for though she loved the Duke of Nemours best, she loved Riches best of all. How∣ever, as she had no longer occasion for Cam∣biac after the Princesses death, it was not difficult for her to set her Lovers mind at rest, by turning off that poor Priest. The Coadjutour of Paris, and Madam de Chevreuse, who had been in the Plot of seiz∣ing the Princess, finding that the Cardinal became too insolent, caused the Duke of Orleans to take it into consideration, and re∣presented
to him that if he contributed to the Liberty of the Princess, he would not only be reconciled with them, but would engage them altogether in his Interests, be∣sides the design of weakning the Cardinal's Authority, which gave ombrage to the Party called la Fronde, every one had still his particular Interest. Madam de Chevreuse would have had the Prince of Conty, for whom the Court had demanded a Cardinals Cap at Rome, to have married her Daugh∣ter; and the Coadjutour would be sub∣rogated to the nomination of the Prince. It was upon this promise that the Princess of Condé and Conty gave under their hands to Madam de Chevreuse, that she and the Coadjutour endeavoured to free them out of Prison. The thing having succeeded as they had projected; and the Cardinal him∣self having been constrained to leave France, the Prince had no moderation in his new Prosperity, and this obliged the Court to entertain new Designes upon his Person. He withdrew immediately to his House at Saint Maure, and sometime after to Mon∣rond, and from thence to his Government of Guyenne. The Duke of Nemours follow∣ed him, and Madam de Longueville, who was with her Brother, being taken with his
Merit, had so much Complaisance for him, that this Prince, tho very much in love else∣where, could not resist her; but yielded through the weakness of the Flesh, rather than the inclination of the heart. The Duke of Rochefoucault, who had been for three years the beloved Gallant of Madam de Lon∣gueville, saw the Infidelity of his Mistress with all the rage that can be had in such like Occasions. But she being full of a great Passion for the Duke of Nemours, was not at all careful to please her ancient Lover. The first time that she saw the Duke of Ne∣mours in private, she asked him in the most passionate moment of the Assignation, what had passed between him and Madam de Cha∣stillon: The Duke having answered her that he had not had any Favour: Ah! I am un∣done, said she to him, since in the Posture we are in at present, you have the power to conceal the truth. This Commerce did not last long, and the Duke of Nemours not being able to force himself to pretend love where he had none; and you may imagine that the Prin∣cess, who was nasty, and had an ill smell with her, could not conceal her ill Quali∣ties from a Man, who was infinitely in love elsewhere. These Disgusts did likewise further the Journey that the Duke of Ne∣mours
was to make into Flanders, to bring  Succour of Strangers to the Princes Party: But the real cause of his impatience was, to see Madam de Chastillon again, whom he e∣ver loved more than his life; whereupon he passed through Paris, where he saw her a∣gain, and put her into that wretched Con∣dition that may be called the Shipwrack of Widows. When she perceived her misfor∣tune, she sought for the means to be freed from it. Des Fougerets, a famous Physician, undertook this Cure, and while he had her in hand, the Prince of Condé, returned from Guyenne to Paris, and brought la Rochefou∣cault with him. The Prince had lively Eyes, a Hawks and sharp Nose, hollow lean Cheeks, a long Face, and the Physiognomy of an Eagle, frizled Hair, his Teeth were ill set and na∣sty, a careless Aire, had but little care of his Person, but was well shaped; his Wit had a great deal of flame, but was not ex∣act, he laughed much and disagreably, his Genius was admirable for War, and parti∣cularly for Battails. On the day of Battail he was mild to Friends, and fierce to Ene∣mies: He had an unparallel'd neatness of Wit, force of Judgment, and easiness of Expression; he was Roguishly inclined, but
had Faith and Probity in great Occasions: He was naturally insolent and without re∣gard, but Adversity had taught him how o live. This Prince finding himself dispo∣ed to fall in love with the Dutchess, La Rochefoucault helped still to inflame him by the great desire he had of being revenged on the Duke of Nemours. Rochfoucault perswa∣ded him to give her the Propriety of Mar∣u, which she had only the usu-fruit of, tel∣ling him that Madam de Chastillon was youn∣ger than he, and that this Present would only injure his Posterity; and that a Lord∣hip of two thousand pounds a year, more or less, would neither render him richer nor poorer. When the Prince fell in love with Ma∣dam de Chastillon, she was in the hands of Des Fougorests, who made use of Vomits to free her of those ill Circumstances. The Prince, who was continually at her Bed∣de, asked her what her Sickness was; she old him that she believed she was poyson∣ed. This Lover being extreamly grieved to see his Mistress in danger of her life, told the Apothecary, who served her, that he would cause him to be hanged: This poor man not daring to justifie himself, went and told Bordeaux, who was married to Ricoux,
that if he was pressed too much, he would ell all. In short, the Remedies had the ef∣fect that they had promised themselves: And shortly after this Cure, the Prince having given her Marlou, Madam de Chastillon was not ungrateful, but she only gave him the usu-fruit of what the Duke of Nemours had the Propriety. However, Rochefoucault took full Vengeance of the Duke of Ne∣mours, and gave him displeasures by so much the more cutting, that he had not the pow∣er to cure himself of his Passion, as Roche∣foucault had done of that he had had fo Madam de Longueville. Besides Rochefou∣cault, Vinevil was likewise the Prince's Confident, who in serving him with his Mistress, endeavoured likewise to be be∣loved himself. Vinevil was the President d' Ardiers Brother, of a pretty good Fa∣mily in Paris, had a pleasing Face, much Learning, and was a well-bred man: Hi Humour was pleasant and Satyrical, tho ver fearful; this had often brought him into trouble; he was undertaking with Women▪ and that made him almost always successful▪ he had had an Intrigue with Madam de Mon bazon, Madam de Movy, and likewise wit the Princess of Wittembergh: And this la Gallantry had so embroiled him, with t
late Duke of Chastillon, that without the Prince's protection he would have suffered some Violences, and Chastillons hatred for him, had sufficiently disposed his Wife to love him. But let us leave Vinevil for some∣time, and return to the Duke of Ne∣mours. His Jealousie so transported him, that ha∣ving one day found the Prince at Madam de Chastillon's whispering with her, he all scratched his hands without perceiving what he did; and it was one of his Servants who made him take notice of the Condition he had put himself in. At length, not being able to suffer the Prince's Visits to his Mi∣stress, he desired her to go for some time to her Country House. She loving him ex∣treamly, and not thinking that a short ab∣sence would cool the Prince's Passion, grant∣ed him his request; and likewise promised him to turn off Bordeaux, who had quitted his Interests for to be for those of his Rival. Madam de Chastillon was not long in the Country; and at her Return, the Duke of Nemours was jealous to that degree, that he was twenty times upon the point of causing the Prince to draw; and he would at length have been overcome with this Temptation, had it not been for the Duel he fought with
his Brother in Law, in which he lost his Life. Madam de Chastillon, who of twenty Lo∣vers she had favoured in her life time, had never loved any so much as the Duke of Nemours, was really grieved for his death. One of her Friends, who brought her the News of it, told her at the same time, that it was requisite that she should get out of one of Monsieur de Nemours his Valet de Chamber's hands, a Cabinet full of her Let∣ters. She sent for him, and upon the pro∣mise she made him of giving him five hun∣dred Crowns, she got the Cabinet from him, but the poor Fellow could never get any of the Money. As for the Prince, what obligation soever he had to the Duke of Nemours, jealousie had so disunited them, that he was very glad of his death. Glory as well as Love had caused so much Emulation between them, that they could not bear with one a∣nother; and this is so true, that if the Prince had had a mind to have taken all the Precautions necessary to hinder the Duke o Nemours from fighting, he might have pre∣vented the Duel. One thing more which made appear that there was more of Glory than of Love in the Prince's Heart, was tha
a moment after the death of his Rival, he hardly loved Madam de Chastillon any lon∣ger, and contented himself with keeping measures of Civility with her, to make use of her upon occasion, and when he should think convenient. And indeed at that time, the Cardinal thinking that she governed the Prince, sent the Great Provost of France to her, to offer her from him an hundred thousand Crowns ready Money, and the Place of Superin∣tendant of the future Queens Family, in case she would oblige the Prince to grant the Ar∣ticles he desired, and abandon the Count d' Oignon, the Duke of Rochefoucault, and President Viole. During the Negotiation of the Grand Provost, an Officer of the Guards, called Mouchette, negotiated like∣wise on the Queens part with Madam de Chastillon; but she, seeing that she could not perswade the Prince to do the things that the Count desired, sent the Queen word that she counselled her to grant the Prince all that he should desire of her, and that afterwards her Majesty would know well e∣nough how to deal with a Subject, who ta∣king advantage of the disorder of the Af∣fairs of his Master, had forced from her shameful Conditions, and such as wer
prejudicial to her Authority. At that time, the Abbot Foucquett having been taken by the Enemies, was brought to the Palace of Condé; he had a very sharp Conversation with the Prince, but on the morrow things began to cool, and some days after the Treaty of Peace was renewed with him. As he was a Prisoner upon pa∣rol, and that he went every where he had a mind to, he made some Visits to Madam de Chastillon, believing that nothing could be done with the Prince but by her interpo∣sition; and it was in those Visits that he fell in love with her. Vinevil governed then Madam de Chastil∣lon pretty peaceably; Cambiac was retired since that the Prince was in love, and that the Duke of Nemours was dead, and this had very much diminished the Prince's Pas∣sion; insomuch that some days after having been constrained to retire into Flanders by the accommodation of Paris, he was upon the point of departing without taking leave of Madam de Chastillon, and when at length he went to see her, he was but a moment with her. The King being returned to Paris, the Abbot Foucquett fancied that if Madam de Chastillon stayed there, he should have Rivals
upon his back, who might be preferred be∣fore him; insomuch that he perswaded the Cardinal to send her away, saying that she would every day set on foot a thousand In∣trigues against the Interests of the Court, which she could not do elsewhere; and this obliged the Cardinal to send her to Marlou: The Abbot Foucquett went thither as often as he could; but there were in her neigh∣bourhood two men who made her yet more frequent Visits; The one was my Lord Crofts an Englishman who had hired a House near Marlou, where he usually kept his Equipage, and where he came to ly some∣times, and the other was Digby Earl of Bristol, Governour of the Isle of Man: These two Noble men fell in love with the Dutchess; Crofts was a peacable Man and addicted to Pleasures, and Bristol was aughtly, brave and full of ambition. When that Cambiac had seen the Prince go out of France, he had made his appli∣cations to Madam de Chastillon; insomuch that he stayed with her at Marlou; and as he was not so much afraid of the Abbot Foucquet or of Bristol, as of the Prince, he freely told Madam de Chastillon his Sen∣timents of her carriage with all her Lovers. She, not being willing to be contradictd
in her new designs, and particularly by a Party concerned, took his Remonstrances very ill; insomuch that things growing daily worse and worse between them, Cam∣biac at length retired grumbling, and as a Man that ought to be feared. Sometime after he wrote a Letter without a Name, and with a forged Hand, in which he gave her notice of the ill they talked of her in the World. She suspected however that this Letter came from him, because he sent her word of things, that no body but she could know of. At length Madam de Chastillon learning from several parts that Cambiac railed against her, she desired madam Pisieux, whom she was very well acquainted with, and who had a power over him, to withdraw some Letters of Consequence that he had of hers, which Madam de Pisieux promised her to do, and at the same time sent word to Cambiac to come to her at her House at Marins near Pontoise. It is to be observed that since that Cambiac was gone from Madam de Chastillon, she had made a thousand Com∣plaints against him to my Lord Digby. This Lover, who only thought of pleas∣ing his Mistress, and who ruined himself in expences for her sake, did not stick at
promising her a Vengance that should cost him nothing, and wherein he would find his particular interest: He took the time that Cambiac being at Marine, was one day on Horseback to go abroad, and having seized him with five or six Troopers, he sent him to Marlou. Madam de Chastillon knowing that Lovers that had been well treated ought never to be offended by halves, was much perplexed at the manner that Cambiac was now used, and perceived that no Body would be suspected but her; she was very ill satisfied with Digby, and would have sooner pardoned him the Death of Cambiac than the seizing him after this manner: But in short, not being able to undo what was done. I am extream∣ly grieved, said she to him, at what has now happened to you, I perceive that the Impertinent who has done you this Affront, would make you suspect me, by sending you to my House; but you shall see by the resentment I shall have of it, that I have no share in this Voilence; In the mean time, Sir, if you have a mind to stay here, you are Master; if you think fit to return to Marine, you shall have my Coach, you need only Command it. I know, Madam, answered Cambiac to her coolly, what I ought to think of all this; I give you
thanks for the offers you make me; I shall return on Horseback if you think fit: God, who will defend me from the attempts of the wicked, will have care of me to the end. And having spoke these words he went away in a pett, and returned alone to Marine. He was no sooner arrived there than that he and Madam de Pisieux wrote these two Letters to one of their Friends at Paris. A Letter from Cambiac to Monsieur de Brienne. YOu will be much surprized when you shall have learnt the adventure that has happen∣ed to me; but to tell you the occasion of it, I must acquaint you with severall particulars that happened before, as that Madam de Chastillon sent hither to oblige Madam de Pisieux to come to her House, in order to the obtaining of me certain things she was desirous having. Madam de Pisieux, as you know, wrote to me; and you likewise know that I undertook the journey the same day that I arrived; Madam de Chastillon sent la Fleur, to know if I was here, and on the Morrow a Man unknown under false Colours, came to ask me, and know if I would return seddenly to Paris. Yesterday I departed from hence at four a Clock; being an hundred Paces
from Pontois, after having passed the River, I was invested by six Horsmen, with their Swords in their hands, at the head of whom was my Lord Digby. He told me immediately, that if Madam de Chastillon would have done me justice, she should have caused me to receive a hundred stabs, but that I should fear No∣thing. I shall tell you without any Bravado, that I acted very briskly in this encounter, and that I did nothing in this Affaire that was un∣worthy; he used me very civilly, and after ha∣ving dined, he conducted me himself to the foot of Marlou, and then sent me with four Horsmen to make satisfaction to that worthy person; she seemed to be displeased at this acci∣dent, and was really so at the haughtiness with which I spoke to her, which made her com∣prehend that it was the worst thing she had ever done. I returned to Marine, to tell Madam de Pisieux the treachery that Madam de Cha∣stillon had done her as well as me. She has all the resentment that a person of her Qualisy, Honour and Courage ought to have. You see this is something an extraordinary accident, I conjure you let me know your opinion of it, and what course you think I ought to take; you per∣ceive I suppose that I ought not to rest satisfied, since that this base person has written to Ma∣dam de Pisieux, to conjure her to obtain of me
to stifle my resentment, by assuring me that she knew nothing of all this. The answer that has been made her, is worthy of the generosity of Madam de Pisieux. I am resolved to stay three or four days here, to have leizure to think of what I have to do, and to hinder my self from attempting any thing that I may repent of: Besides, to vent One's self in Complaints, is but a feeble revenge, and I have a design to do o∣therwise if I can. I impatiently long to hear from you, and am wholly yours. A Letter does not permit me to give you a very particular ac∣count; I shall do it when I see you. Farewel. July the 18th, 1655. Madam de Pisieux's Letter to Monsieur de Brienne. I Have too great a share in the Adventure of Monsieur de Cambiac, not to add one word of my Hand to the Relation he has given you by his; there is not a Circumstance but what is surprizing, and the best that can be thought of me in this occasion is, That they have had but little Consideration for me; for according to all appearances, I ought to have a share in so worthy an Action: The truth is, that the of∣fended
justifies me sufficiently, since he retired into the same place where the Snare was laid for him. All my study is at present so to carry my self, that I may not be transported with a just Anger, which I shall entertain all my life time, to make appear that I was a Friend sufficiently useful to Madam de Chastillon. You know my Name and my Courage, I have ever spoke to you with sincerity enough; I moreover add, that I make profession of a very austere Christianity, and that I design to serve my God and my Ma∣ster without Art and without Deceipt. These Foundations laid, I shall not be wanting in any thing that Resentment and Justice can permit me. Oblige me with imparting this to Monsieur de Aubigny, and to no others: This will be no ill Entertainment for the Princess Palatine, which I give you leave to tell it to. I do not believe that Cambiac's Crime of returning to his Duty, by the means of the Bishop of Ami∣ens, nor mine for having concealed him, were great enough to occasion so ill an Accident. I shall come on purpose to Paris to discourse my Friends in particular, and you in the first place. I cannot hold in this little word of Revenge, Madam de Chastillon is not forgotten when an occasion is offered to speak of her: I wish you happiness, I am too angry to have any to day.
In a short time after these two Letters were sent, Cambiac returned to Paris, and no longer kept any measures with Madam de Chastillon; he railed at her in all Companies, and that he might fully glut his Vengeance, he showed the Queen all the most extrava∣gantly passionate Letters of Madam de Cha∣stillon, the modesty of the History does not permit them to be repeated; but by the most civil Fragment we follow, the rest may be judged of. In several parts she let Cambiac know, that he might talk of her as he pleased, but that it was more generous in him to speak well of her than otherwise; that when a Woman lay at the mercy of People, as she did at his, they might make an ill use of the opportu∣nity; and that what a poor Woman had to do in those Encounters, was to suffer and to be silent. In another place she let him know, that notwithstanding all she did, she still loved him, and that though she was preparing to make a general Confession at Easter, there was nothing therein which concerned him. The Queen was much surprized at Ma∣dam de Chastillon's Extravagancy in her Let∣ter, however she was not sorry at the con∣tempt it brought upon her; and when that
she had learnt the Insult that had been done to Cambiac, she made a great noise of it, and said publickly, That since People were so ill treated, who returned to do their du∣ty, the King would know how to do them justice. When my Lord Digby came to see Ma∣dam de Chastillon, after what had been done to Cambiac, he was astonished that he only received reproaches from her, instead of the thanks that he expected. When I let you know, said he to him, my being displeased with Cambiac, it was not meant that you should use him as you did: And it is easie to see that in this fine Action you considered your self more than you did me; but I shall now be careful of my Interests, and neglect yours. Digby would have excused himself upon his Intentions, that had been good, and seeing that not∣withstanding all that he said to her she was not pacified, he likewise fell into a pet; and Madam de Chastillan fearing by losing him to lose a Protectour and a Lover, soothed him up, and desired him to consider at another time, that he ought to ruin quite, or dis∣semble Injuries with such people as Cam∣bias.
While that Digby began to fall in love with Madam de Chastillon, my Lord Crofts, who in the time the Disorders of England, had followed Charles into France, had taken a House in the Neighbourhood of Marlou; and leisure, conveniency, and the insinua∣ting ways of Madam de Chastillon, had in∣flamed this Lord's heart with love; but as he was of a milder disposition than the Earl, his Passion had not made such progress as the Earl of Bristol's. Things were in these terms, when that the Abbot Foucquett, seeing that his Affairs did not advance with Madam de Chastillon, made use of this Stratagem to hastem them: He had learnt that Ricoux, Brother in Law to one of Madam de Chastillon's Women, was concealed in Paris, where he had Cor∣respondence with them for the Prince's In∣terests; he sent so many People in quest of Ricoux, that he was taken and carried to the Bastille. The Abbot Foucquett having caused him to be examined, he accused Ma∣dam de Chastillon of several things; and a∣mongst others, of having promised him ten thousand Crowns to kill the Cardinal, and said that she had already given him two thousand beforehand upon that account. The Abbot Foucquett suppressed these In∣formations,
and caused others to be given, by which Ricoux still confessed that he was at Paris with design to kill the Cardinal; but did not accuse the Duchess of having a∣ny hand in this Conspiracy: And all that he said against her was, That she kept Corre∣spondence with the Prince, and received a Pension of Four thousand Crowns from the Spaniards. He shewed these last Informa∣tions to the Cardinal, and the first to Ma∣dam de Chastillon, by which having, as may be imagined, extreamly terrified her, He told her he would save her, if out of ac∣knowledgment she would give him the least marks of Love: Madam de Chastillon, who feared death more then all things, did not stick to satisfie the Abbot Foucquett, but resisted just as long as was necessary to make him value this last Favour. The Abbot Foucquett his whole thoughts were now, how to love his Mistress; and to that end he cau∣sed her to leave Marlou one night, and car∣ried her into Normandy, where he made her change her Abode every day, disguised sometimes like a Gentleman, sometimes like a Religious, and sometimes like a Fry∣er. This lasted six Weeks, during which the Abbot Foucquet went and came from Court to the place where Madam de Chastil∣lon
was: At length he procured her an Am∣nesty, when Ricoux had been Executed, and caused her to return to Marlou, where she was not long in repose; for she cast her Eyes upon the Mareshal d' Hocquincourt, as well for the Advantages she might draw from him by the Posts he held upon the Somme, as to free her from the tyranny of the Abbot Foucquett, who began to become insuppor∣table to her. Charles Marshal d' Hocquincourt had black sparkling Eyes, a handsome Nose, a little Forehead, a long Visage, and black frized Hair, and his Shape was very fine: He had but little Wit, and yet was cunning by be∣ing very distrustful; he was brave and ever in love, and his Valour served him instead of Wit and good Carriage amongst the La∣dies. Madam de Chastillon knowing him by▪ Reputation, fancied that he was a pro∣per Person to commit the Follies she had occasion for. Monsieur de Vignacourt, a Gentleman of Picardy, her Neighbour, was the Person she employed to him. Where∣upon the Marshal having agreed with Vigna∣court, that at his going to Command the Army of Catalonia, he would see her as he passed thorow Marlou, as if Chance had occasioned this Interview. The thing hap∣ned
as it had been projected, and Madam de Chastillon took Horse to go to Conduct the Marshal two Leagues from Marlou. On the way, she related to him the sad Cir∣cumstances of her Fortune, desired him to be her Protectour, flattered him with the Title of the Refuge of the Afflicted, and the Resource of the Miserable. In short, she so inspired him with Generosity, that he promised to serve her with and against all, and even gave her his Table-Book, in which he gave order to the Governours of Towns and Places to receive her and hers, as often as she had occasion. This Interview was discovered by the Abbot Foucquett, who seeing the Marshal d' Hocquincourt upon the point of returning to Court, judging his and Madam de Chastillon's Neighbourhood dangerous for his and the Courts Interests, perswaded the Cardinal to remove her to the Frontiers of Picardy, and caused an Or∣der to be sent her to go to her Dutchy. As Madam de Chastillon was on her Journey, she met with the Marshal d'Hocqiuncourt at Mon∣tarquis, with whom she renewed the Mea∣sures she had taken six Months before, and after having mutually given one another, he positively words to protect her against the Court, and she hopes to grant him one day
marks of her Passion. They parted, The Marshal went to find out the King, and she to her Dutchy, where she passed the Win∣ter, during which the Marshal d' Hocquin∣court, and the Abbot Foucquett, who being the most difficult Patron to be satisfied, im∣patiently supported the Interviews that pas∣sed between the Marshal d' Hocquincourt and Madam de Chastillon, and the Commerce she kept with him. To excuse herself, she told him that the Marshal used his endea∣vours with the Cardinal that she might have Bordeaux again, who was taken from her, and to obtain of him for herself, leave to return to Court: She added, That she could have wished she might not have been indebt∣ed for those Favours to any other than him∣self, but that she was willing to spare his Credit for Affairs of greater moment. What perswaded the Abbot Foucquett that the In∣trigue between the Marshal did only con∣cern the Court, was that in the Spring she returned through his Intercession, first to Marlou, afterwards to Paris and Bordeaux with her. During the Mareshal's Campaign in Catalonia, the King of England, whom the misfortunes of his Family obliged to stay in France, and who had found the Dutchess much to his mind, saw her at Marlou in the
little Journeys he made to my Lord Crofts's his House; and this Commerce had inspired this Prince with so much love for her, that he resolved to marry her: Crofts perswading his Master to satisfie her at any rate, upon the promises that Madam de Chastillon had given this Lord that he should enjoy her, in case he would contribute to the making her Queen: And indeed she had been so, if God, who took care of the Fortune and Reputati∣on of that King, had not amused Madam de Chastillon with a foolish hope, which made her fail of so fair an Occasion. Charles King of England had great black Eyes, his Eye-brows were thick, and met together, was of a brown Complexion, a handsome Nose, a long Visage, his Hair was black and curled; he was tall, and fine∣ly shaped; he had an austere Presence, and yet loft and civil more in good than in ill Fortune: He was brave, that is to say, that he had the Courage of a Souldier, and the Soul of a Prince: He was a great Wit, and loved Pleasures, but yet he loved his Duty more: In short, he was one of the greatest Kings in the World: But however, tho Na∣ture had gifted him with admirable Ad∣vantages, Adversity, that had been his Go∣vernour,
was the principal Cause of his ex∣traordinary Merit. The Prince at his leaving of France, had shown, as I have already said, very little consideration for Madam de Chastillon; but having known the value that the Spaniards set on her, by the Pension they had given her, and the Credit that she had at the Court of France, by the means of the Abbot Fouc∣quett, was reinflamed for her: And his Pas∣sion was so violent, that he wrote to her the most passionate Letters in the World, and amongst others, this was intercepted that he wrote to her in Cyphers. THo all your Charms should not oblige me to love you, my dear Cosin, the pains that you take for me, and the persecutions you suffer for being in my Interests, and the hazards where∣in this exposes you, would oblige me to love you as long as I live; Iudge then what all this together can do upon a hear▪ which is neither insensible nor ungrateful; but judge likewise of the alarms that I am continually in for you. The exam∣ple of Ricoux makes me tremble, and when that I consider that what I have most dear in the World is in the hands of my Enemies, I am in disquiets that never give me rest. In the name of God, my poorest Dear, do not longer hazard
your self as you do; I should choose rather never to return into France, than be the cause of your having the least apprehension: It is for me to expose my self, and by a War put my Affairs in such a posture, as that they may treat with me; and then, my dear Cosin, you may aid me with your Intercession; and in the mean time, as e∣vents are doubtful in War, I have one sure way to pass my life with you, and yet engage our In∣terests to one another more than they have hi∣therto been. Do not believe that the Princess is an invincible obstacle to this; people break through much greater, when they are as much in love as I am. In this part, my dear Cosin, I give no bounds to my Imagination, nor to your Hopes: You may push them as far as you please. Farewel. The hopes that Madam de Chastillon had upon this Letter of marrying the Prince, made her think of refusing the offers of the King of England; hereupon she consulted one of her female Friends in Bordeaux's pre∣sence. She, whose Husband was with the Prince, told her Mistress that she was mad once to think of marrying a shaddow of a King, a Wretch who had not wherewith to live, and who in making her to be laughed at, would ruin her in a little time, that if
it was possible, contrary to all appearances in the World, that he should one day reco∣ver his Throne, she might very well believe that being weary of her, he would be di∣vorced from her upon the pretext of the inequality of Condition: Her Friend told her on the contrary, that her madness was to marry the Prince who was married, and whose Wife was in health, that persons of the Quality of the King of England might be sometimes under ill Fortune, but that they could never be in that extream necessi∣ty so common to private Persons: That it was fine for a Lady to live a Queen, tho she should live unhappy; and that she ought ne∣ver to refuse an honourable Title, tho she was only to bear it upon her Grave. As for you Mademoiselle, turning towards Bordeaux, you have reason to talk as you do to her Grace, considering only your own interest; but for my part, who only consi∣der her Graces, I tell her what I ought to say. Madam de Chastillon gave them thanks for the kindness they showed her, and told them that she would take time to think of their Reasons before she came to a Resolu∣tion. Se was not willing to give a more positive Answer before her Friend in an Af∣fair she was ashamed she should choose what
was contrary to her advice; In the mean time there came Notice from several parts to the King of England of the Life of Ma∣dam Chastillon, and of her present Con∣duct with the Abbot Foucquett. Never any Man that had the least sense of Honour, did lose his Reason so much as in the beginning of his Passion to marry a Woman without Honour. The King of England went from the Neighbourhood of Marlou as soon as He had learnt all these news, and would not hazard, by seeing Madam de Chastillon, a Conflict that might be doubtfull between his sences and his Reason. Madam de Chastillon was not then sensible of the loss she had: the desires and hopes she had of marrying the Prince rendered all other things indifferent to her. Madam de Chastillon being returned from her Dutchy to Marlou in the be∣ginning of the Spring, through the inter∣cession of the Marshall d' Hocquincourt, and sometime after to Paris, he did not find her ungratefull for this favour. This little service and the promises he gave her of kil∣ling the Cardinal and putting his Places into the Princes hands, touched Madam de Chastillons Heart to that point, that she
granted enjoyment to the Marschal. The Summer passed in this manner during, which the Abbot Foucquett who perceived this Commerce, was often under strange dis∣quiets; and he had done at that time what he did afterwards, if Lovers did not love to deceive themselves, when they are ei∣ther to quit or condemn their Mistresses. The Winter after, the Duke of Candale at his return from Catalonia, seemed to be in love with Madam de Chastillon; The Abbot Foucquett allarum'd at so dangerous a Rivall, caused Boligneux to desire him to cease his persuit. The Duke of Candale be∣ing at that time really in love with Madam d' Olonne, and had only engaged himself with Madam de Chastillon to make her serve for a pretext, easily granted the Abbot Foucquett's Request. But as with this Mi∣stress Lovers were as an Hydra, of whom one head was no sooner cut off, but that an other sprung up in the room, la Feuil∣lade took the place of the Duke of Candale; The Abbot Foucquett who knew it immedi∣ately, spoke himself pretty sharply of it to la Fuillade, who whether that he fancyed that his Rival being beloved he should not succeed in his Enterprize, or whether that his blooming Passion left him all his Pru∣dence,
he did not judge it Convenient to incurr the hatred of so violent a Man; wherefore he did not persevere in that Amour. The Marquess de Cozuvres had not so much Complaisance as Feuillade had, he continued to see Madam de Chastillon maugre the Abbot Foucquett; but as he had neither Fortune nor Merit enough to touch her Heart, she only made a Conquest of him, and only kept him in play to inflame the Abbot Focuquett, and oblige him to renew his Presents, and let him know that she had Persons of Quality on her side who would not suffer her to be misused. Where∣fore the Abbot was forced to bear with this Rivall but he vented his Choler upon poor Vinevil; who was one of the first Lovers of Madam de Chastillon, beloved, a Man of good Sense, and whose Wit was to be feared. The Abbot Foucquett gave the Cardinal to understand that it was dan∣gerous to leave him at Paris; insomuch that the Cardinal seeing only through the Abbots Eyes, sent an order to Vinevil to go to Tours till further order; and he not being suffered to take his leave of Madam de Chastillon, wrote her this Letter on the last of October 1651.
HOw desirous soever you seem to be that I should make you a Visit, I fancyed that the little pleasure you took in the last, I should do much better to abstain; since that indeed your coldness deprives me of the joy, that I received at other times in seeing you: for the truth is, I am perswaded that I ought not to pretend to any share in your Favour, nor your Confidence; the engagement you are under, does not permit you to consider any thing besides, and that you are necessitated to be wanting in what you owe by essential obligations; I am likewise of Opinion that you would take it more kindly to forget you altogether, than to remember you on this occasion; and that you willingly approve of my abandoning your person and your Interest. And yet Madam, I do not pretend that you should lose me quite, because I am very sure, you will be very glad to find me again one time or other, tho you despise me at present: I will serve my self as much as the knowledg of the pre∣sent Circumstances you are under will suffer, pre- and the Friendship I have promised you, which makes me that I cannot dissemble that all hu∣man kind talk most disadvantageausly of your Conduct, and that you are become the perpetual Theme of all the Conversations of the time. They describe your Engagement to be the most pittyful
and abject that a person of your Quality was ever Concerned in; and your friend is said to exercise over you a tyrannical Empire, and more especially that he causes all to be discarded that come near you, and that he even threatens those whom he is told are his Rivals, as he has done Feuillade; and I pass over in silence se∣veral particulars of his private Visits which are sufficiently known. Do but consider, Madam, f the prejudice that your Reputation receives from this Commerce; and make reflection upon what you are, and upon what he is who has depri∣ved you of your Honour; for the Credit and Consideration he procures you are not very ho∣norable, and they are false lights which reflect upon you, rather to offend you than to give you  lustre. Ah! Madam, if the poor deceased had but the least sence, they would scratch their way out of their Graves, and come and approach you with so shamefull a dependance, but I do not believe that you are concerned for the memory of them, fear the living, who sooner or later will be informed of your Conduct and will doubtless behave themselves according∣ly. I do not represent all these things to you out of a motive of jealousie; for I assure you I am not infected with a Passion so afflicting and so useless as that. If I was transported with love for you I should vent my self in Invectives,
which would do you irreparable Injuries, and I should revenge my self of the wrongs you do me with so much Ingratitude. If I had no love for you, I should railly as well as others: but in what concerns you I keep my self in a Medi∣ocrity, which gives me a mute grief for the blindness of your Conduct, which at length will bring you into the worst of troubles, if you have not a care, and let your self be governed by your prudence without expecting events. To morrow I shall go towards Tourraine, where∣fore I take my leave of you, Madam; If yu take kindly the advice I give you I shall continue to love you; if ill, I shall endeavour to get rid of a Principle that is the cause of it: In the mean time I doe not demaund any good Offices for my Concerns, but only that you would hinder ill ones from being done me, and you will oblige me in so doing. Notwithstanding Vinevil's Banishment, The Abbot Foucquett was no more at ease than he was before, Madam de Chastillon making him mad every moment; but that which disquieted him most was the Intrigue between her and the Marshall d' Hocquin∣court. This had rendred her so haughty that she had often treated the Abbot Fouc∣quett as if she had not known him.
During these passages the Marshal de Hocquincourt finding himself pressed by Madam de Chastillon to perform the pro∣mises he had made her, which not being willing to do, he gave notice to the Car∣dinal of all that he had promised Madam de Chastillon, by one of his Gentlemen, who seemed to betray him, and at the same time caused the same notice to be given to the Abbot Foucquett by Madam Calvoisin, the Governour of Roye's Wife. This peice of Cunning had the effect, that the Marshall had promised himself; the Cardi∣dinal was alarum'd, and to break of so dan∣gerous an Intrigue caused the Marshal d' Hocquincourt to be treated with. The Ab∣bot Foucquett for his part, having had the information from Calvoisin, desired the Cardinal that he would cause Madam de Chastillon to be took into Custody, and put in such a place where she might not ave any Correspondence till that he should think fit to restore her to her liberty. The Cardinal having given his consent, the Abbot Foucquett caused Madam de Chastillon o be seized on at Marlou, and conducted with one of her Women to Paris, where he caused her to be brought in by Night, and lodged her at one de Vaux's House in
Poitow-stret. On the morrow after her ar∣rival, the Abbot Foucquett took a Note under her hand by order from the Cardinal, and directed to the Marshal d' Hocquincourt, by which she desired him to come to an accomodation with the King, and not to think any longer of the Prince or of her, because it might endanger his Life; & as some days before she was taken she had agreed with the Marshal, that in case they hap∣ned to be taken into custody, and that Letters were exacted from them, contrary to the measures they had taken together, they should give no Credit to them if they were not written with a double C. Which she did not do in this Letter, but she did in an other which she wrote at the same time to the Marshal; by which she let him know that he should remain firm in the first reso∣lution that he had taken of serving the Prince, and of delivering up his Places to him; which the Marshal never▪ intended, and had only promised Madam de Chastil∣lon that he would, that he might obtain fa∣vours from her, and to procure advantages from the Cardinal, which he could not have without making himself be feared; he suppressed the Letter of intelligence, and sent that to the Prince which the Abbot
Foucquett had caused Madam de Chastillon to write to him, by which knowing that she was in danger of her life, he sent him word to make his peace with the Court, pro∣vided he got Madam de Chastillon released out of Prison. The Cardinal believing the Marshal to be really in love with Madam de Chastillon, and that he would give all that he should demand of him to set her at liberty, would have deducted upon her account an hundred thousand Livers, out of the hundred thousand Crowns they had agreed of together: But the Marshal would not consent to it, and yet that she might not think him a cheat, and to keep some measures with her still, he would not put his places into the Cardinals hands, till he knew that the Dutchess was set at liber∣ty; insomuch that to satisfy him in that point, they deceived him, and sent the Dutchess to the fathers Oratory to shew her self to a Gentleman he had sent on purpose for that end; with whom she was free, after which she returned to her prison, where she was eight days longer. During the three weeks that she was a Prisoner in Pitu∣street, the Abbot was not so free as she, he became daily more and more smitten; for as with the liberty of going and coming
he likewise deprived her of that of deceiv∣ing him; he found her a thousand times more lovely than before. Besides the Dutch∣ess being willing to recover his esteem that she migh procure being set at liberty, used him after such a manner as was capable of melting the heart of a Barbarian, and had a thousand kindnesses and Complyances for him: and she seemed to put so entire a Confidence in him, that he could not for∣bear beleiving that she would never depend again on any Body but him. Things being in this Posture, the Abbot surprized a very kind Letter, that the Dutchess wrote to the Prince of Condé. This grieved him so extreamly, that in reproaching her, he would have poisoned himself with Quicksilver from behind a Looking-glass; but beginning to find himself ill, he lost the desire of dying for a faithless one, and took Theriaque which he usually carried about him to secure himself from Enemies, which the employ he had about the Cardinal procured him daily. Except going where she pleased, the Dutchess passed her time very pleasantly in the pri∣son; The Abbot treated her with all man∣ner of Delicacies, and made her daily very considerable Presents in Knacks and Jewels;
he went from thence at two a Clock in the Night, and came again at eight in the Morning, thus was he with her eighteen hours in four and twenty. It was impossible but that the Cardinal must know where the Dutchess was, and this is pleasant that this great Man, who decided the Fate of Europe, should go halves with the Abbot Foucquett in an amourous secret: I beleive that the reason he had to pprove this Commerce was, that know∣ing the Dutchess to be Intriguing, he chose ather she should be in the Abbots hands, whom he was sure of, than in an other; and besides the Abbot keeping her in a Chamber, nd absolutely dishonoring her thereby, he as glad that the Prince of Condé her Cousin and lover, might receive thereby n extraordinary mortification. But at ength the Marshal d'Hocquincourts' accom∣modation being made, upon Condition that he Dutchess should be released out of pri∣son, she was to be let at liberty. They ent her to Marlou, where some time after he worst accident imaginable happened The Abbot Foucquett and she had agreed ogether, that every Saturday they would mutually return the Letters they had writ∣en to one another all the week long, and
that he would send for them by a Man who should say that he belonged to Mademoiselle Vertus. This Man being one day at Marlou, a footman came thither from the Marshal d' Hocquincourt, with a Letter for the Dutchess, who having writ her answers, and given them to a Chambermaid to de∣liver them to the Bearers, this Woman mistook, and gave the Abbot's Man the answer that her Mistriss sent the Marshal, and to the Marshal's Lacquie the Pacquet designed for the Abbot. It is easie to imagine in what allarms the Dutchess was so soon as she knew the Mi∣stake, and particularly when it is known that in the Letter, which she wrote to the Abbot, besides a thousand kind things, there was also a long Chapter against Ma∣dam de Bregi, whom she hated, because she had naturally the Charms of Body and of mind which the Dutchess had only by Art▪ It is certain thet the Dutchess had ever en∣vied her and was never able to pardon he Merit. In an other place, she railed a∣gainst my Lord Mountague, and almost i every part of it made the most biting raille∣ries imaginable upon the Marshal. And when she thought of the Abbot's Letter which she had sent to hi, wherein ther
were tendernesses and transports of love, which might be good to a Mistress, but which usually appear very ridiculous to the indifferent, and that all this was in the hands of a haughty and a laughed at Rival, she was almost mad: The Abbot for his part was in no less pain. As for the Marshal so soon as he had seen all the Ab∣bot's Letters, and those that the Dutchess wrote to him, he judged that he might be ne day obliged to restore them her out of is weakness to her, or through the desires f her Friends, insomuch that he might e in a capacity to take his revenge on her hen he pleased: He caused copies to be ta∣en of them all, and then went and showed e originals to the Duke of Rochefoucault, o Madam Pisieux, whom he knew to be the Dutchesses Enemies. After that the Abbot ad been one Night at Marlou, he returned o Paris to the Mershals House, of whom e demanded his Letters. The Marshal did ot content himself with refusing him them, ut added all the raillery after his way that e could bethink himself of; while the Mar∣al was thus drolling he held the Dutchess, etter open to the Abbot, who had liever ave been killed, than have suffered his istress to have laine at his Rival's dis∣cretion,
as she did by this Letter, caught hold of it, and tore half of it off, which he went to show to the Dutchess, telling her that the Marshal had burnt the other halfe; but the Marshal being enraged at this enter∣prize of the Abbots, bid him be gone im∣mediately out of his House, and that if some respects did not withhold him, he would cause him to be thrown out of the Window. The Dutchess being sometime after re∣turned to Paris, fancied that to undeceive the Publick of a thousand Particulars, that the Marshal had said of her, it was requisite that she should let People of Merit and Virtue see after what manner she would treat him. In order to which, she made choice of the House of the Marquess de Souches, Great Pro∣vost of France, to whom and his Wife she had a mind to justifie herself more particu∣larly: The Assignation being made with the Marshal, he perceived her design. God keep thee, my poor Child, said he accosting her, How does my little Buttocks do, are they stil very lean? It is impossible to imagine the sad Condition this discourse put the Dutch∣ess in! she was as if she had been stund with a blow upon her head, it made her forget to call the Marshal Fool and Insolent; bu
she fancied that having begun as he did, he would proceed to the most shameful parti∣culars imaginable for her, if she displeased him never so little. The Grand Provost and his Wife looked upon one another, and turning towards the Dutchess, found her with her Eyes towards the ground, but in∣deed she did not change her Colour; but those who knew her did not believe her per∣plexed. At length the Great Provost brea∣king silence, You do ill, said he, my Lord Marshal; Gallant men ought never to quarrel with Ladies, they ought to be thankul to them for the Presents they make them of their Hearts, and ought not to offend them when they refuse it. I grant that, said the Marshal, but when their Hearts are once given, if they change af∣ter that, it is requisite they use civilly those they have loved, and when they droll upon them, they expose themselves to great Affronts. You un∣derstand me, Madam, added he, turning to∣wards the Dutchess, I am sure you believe that I have reason for what I say, but you surprize me with your disorder; you ought to be prepared for such Accidents, since you lay Snares for peo∣ple who revenge themselves. I vow I would not have believed that you had so much Modesty as you have. And in ending this Discourse he went away, and left the Dutchess more dead
than alive. The Great Provost and his Wife endeavoured to bring her to herself; telling her, That what the Marshal had said, had not made any impression upon their minds; however from that day they had no great Commerce with her. A fortnight after the Abbot was obliged to go to the Court, which was at Compeigne; The Dutchess foreseeing the Prince of Con∣dés return into France by the general Peace that was much talked of, and not being willing that he should find her in so shame∣ful an Intrigue for her, resolved to break off after such a manner, as that there might not remain the least appearance of it. In this design she went to the Abbots House, where having found one of his Servants in whom he put most confidence, and asked him for the Keyes of his Master's Closet, saying she had a mind to write him a Letter. This Fel∣low without penetrating further, and only considering the Abbots Passion for the Dutchess, he gave her immediately what she demanded. Seeing herself alone, she broak the lock of the Cabinet where she knew that the Abbot kept her Letters, and not only took them all, but likewise others from the Prince of Condé, which she had sacrificed to them, and went and burnt them
at Madam de Sourches House. The Abbot having found this disorder at his return home, went to the Dutchesses House, and began to threaten to cut off her Nose, and then broke a Christal Candlestick, and a great Looking-glass that he had given her, and went away after having called her a thousand Names. During all this bustle, one of the Dutchesses Chambermaids fancy∣ing that the Abbot would take away from her all that he had given her, laid hold up∣on her Mistresses Cabinet of Jewels, and car∣ried it to Madam de Sourches House, from whence she sent for it again the same Even∣ing, and gave it to a devout Relation of her Mothers to keep. The Abbot having no∣tice of it on the Morrow, went to that De∣vout Womans House, and took it away by force. The Dutchess being informed of the loss she had, was extreamly grieved; but she did not lose her judgment, she em∣ployed people to the Abbot, who had so much credit with him, that he restored the Cabinet; and by the means of this restitu∣tion they were as well reconciled as they had ever been; and this reconciliation was so sudden, that Madam de Bouteville coming the morrow to comfort the Dutchess her Daughter for the accident that had hap∣ned
to her, the Abbot was already with her, who concealed himself in a Closet during the Visit, and heard all the Comedy. Some time after, the Dutchess not be∣ing willing to take alwaies the pains to conceal that she saw the Abbot again; and fancied that since their quarrel was known abroad, their reconciliation ought likewise to be publick: Wherefore she caused all her friends to desire her to pardon the Ab∣bot upon his sollicitation, and at length having made it a point of Conscience, the Mother Abbess, of the Convent of Mercy, a Woman subject to beatifical Visitations, made them see and embrace one another. This Mediation brought the Reverend Mother into some discredit with the Queen and the Cardinal: They fancyed that that she had not so particular a Commerce with God, since she suffered her self to be so easily deceived by Men. However this reconciliation lasted but six Months; The Prince of Condé's return into France coming on daily made the Dutchess apprehend that he would find her under the Abbots Tutorship, and the Ladies de Saint Chaumond and de Feguiers made her so much ashamed of him, that she broak with him upon a pretext of Devotion. It
was very difficult for the Abbot to consent to the Dutchess's design, and would not have done it at an other time; but seeing his Credit very much diminished with the Cardinal, and fearing that the Prince of Condé, who hated him besides, and Boute∣ville, who would revenge the dishonour he had done to his family, might cause him to be stabbed, if he gave the Dutchess the least new Reason of Complaining, he left off Visi∣ting, but not loving her. The End of the Second Part
LOVES EMPIRE, &c. AT that time Madam d'Olonne was gone as I have said, to desire the Countess of Fiesque, to thank in her name the Abbot Foucquett for some pre∣tended Obligation which was properly nothing; but she had a mind the Abbot Foucquett should make Reflections upon the Compliment, and make him Comprehend that when people have thanks returned them for such small things, they are wil∣ling to be indebted to them for the greater Obligations. The same day that Madam d' Olonne saw the Countess, she found the Abbot at Madam de Bonelles, and there she
herself made him the same Compliment: The Abbot, being very desirons to have an Intrigue with Madam d'Olonne, to endea∣vour the curing himself of the Passion he had still for the Dutchess of Castillon, re∣turned her Civilities as obligingly as he was able; and on the Morrow the Countess ha∣ving sent to seek him, and telling him what Madam d' Olonne had desired her to say: I know more than you of that, Madam, said he to her, and I received yesterday Evening marks of acknowledgment from herself: But I would willingly know of you one thing, added he, Whether the Count de Guiche is not in love with Madam d' Olonne; for if he is, I will avoid the Occasion of being so: He has had so much respect for me upon all Occasions, that I should be ridiculous should I play him such a prank. No, said the Countess, at least Ma∣dam d' Olonne and he have each of them told me, that they had not any thoughts of one ano∣ther. If this is true, replyed the Abbot, I be∣seech you Madam, to let Mad. d' Olonne know that you have seen me, & that upon what you have told me in her Name, I appeared to you so trans∣ported with joy, to see how she received what I did for her, that you do not doubt but that I shall be infinitely in love; and thereupon, Ma∣dam,
ask her, I beseech you, what she would do in case I should be so. The Countess ha∣ving given her word that she would, the Abbot went away; and on the Morrow Madam d' Olonne having received a Letter from the Countess, made her this An∣swer. YOu desire to know what course I would take in case the Abbot Foucquett was in love with me; I am not so mad as to tell you; for I am still as much taken with him as I was two dayes agoe. Farewell, la Chastillanne. The Chevalier de Grammont, being come to the Countesses a moment after she had re∣ceived this Ticket, found her in Bed, and seeing a Paper lying by her, he took it. The Countess having redemanded this Pa∣per, the Chevalier restored her another much of the same bigness. The Company that was then in her Chamber, so took her up, that she did not perceive the Chevaliers ro∣guery, who went away almost as soon as he had done. Seeing what it was, it is not to e questioned, but that his joy was extream, o have in hand wherewith to injure Madam ' Olonne, and put the Count de Guiche in a age. He remembred, he had been sacrifi∣ced
to Marsillac, and the disquiets that his Nephew had given him upon the Countesses account, and was very glad he had now an Occasion to torment him. The noise that this Letter made, had all the effect that he could desire; the Count de Guiche was al∣larm'd, and consulted Vinevil; they re∣solved together, that he should speak him∣self of it to the Abbot, and in the mean time he wrote this Letter to Madam d' Olonne. YOu make me mad, Madam, but I love you too much to fall out with you; and perhaps this Carriage may move your Heart more than reproaches; however my resentment must fall upon some body, and I see not one that has incurred it more than the Countess; It was certainly she who engaged the Abbot Fouc∣quett to think of you, to reclaime me to her, or be revenged on me for changing, being in dis∣pair that I had abandoned her; and therefore has raised me up a Rival, who should cause me to be discarded or disgust me from loving you. I cannot think Madam, she will effect either of her designs, and yet I think my self as much obliged to her as if she had brought them to pass, and she is to expect that I will have no longer any regard for her, and that I will use all means imaginable to be revenged. Madam d' Olonne, not being so secure of
the Count de Guiche, but that she appre∣hended the Countess might reclaim him, was willing to embroil them to such a point, as that in all appearance they could not be reconciled; and for that end she had no sooner received this Letter, then that she sent it to the Countess: Which putting her in a rage against the Count de Guiche, she sent for Vinevil to come to her. I desired your company, to tell you that your Friend is an impertinent Fool, and whom I will have nothing more to do with. See the Letter he has newly written to Madam d' Olonne; he complains that I perswade the Abbot Foucquett to en∣gage in an Intrigue with his Mistress, and does not remember that he told me, that he had no longer any thoughts of her. I ask your par∣don for him, answered Vinevil, excuse a poor Lover, who seeing they design to deprive him of his Mistress, knows not what he does, nor whom to have recourse to: As soon as I shall have him recollect himself, he will come and cast himself at your Feet. After some other Discourses, Vinevil went away, and within an hour af∣ter returned with the Count de Guiche, who told the Countess so many things, that she promised to forget his rudeness. On the Morrow the Count having resolved to speak to the Abbot, went to him, and having ta∣ken
him aside, If we had both begun at the same time, said he to him, to be in love with Madam d' Olonne, it would be ridiculous to think it strange that you should dispute her with me, neither should I do it; and I would leave it to herself to decide by Favours the good Fortune of us both. But since you come to di∣sturbe me in an Intrigue, I have been long in∣gaged in before you, give me leave to tell you, that this is not civil, and I desire you to leave me at quiet with my Mistress, without giving me other troubles than those which proceed from her rigours. I am a Friend of Madam d' Olonne's, and nothing else, answered the Abbot, thus you have no reason to complain of me; How∣ever, if I thought the Discourse you have now held to me, was by the advice of People, who had a mind to bring me into trouble, I declare to you I would become your Rival from this mo∣ment. I know why I talk to you after this manner, and you may understand me. The Ab∣bot pretended to speak of Varde his mortal Enemy, and the Count's Friend. No, an∣swered the Count, I know not what you mean; but what I have to say to you is, that being jea∣lous, that Humour has advised me to desire you not to make me any longer so. The Abbot having given him his hand, they parted the best Friends imaginable. Some time after
the Abbot finding Madam d' Olonne at a place where he made a Visit, she took him aside, to impart to him some secrets of small moment, and the Abbot not know∣ing what to say to her, told her his dispute with the Count. I am very glad, said she to him, to see that you, Gentlemen, dispose of me, as if I was your own: Thus I find I am at present the Count de Guiches, since you have made him your declaration that you have no pretences to me. Ah! Madam, answered the Abbot, I would not give you to any Body, if it was in my power to do it; as I love my self better than any one in the World, I would keep you for my self; but upon the suspicions that the Count de Guiche has, that I have a Passion for you, I declare to him that I have no such thoughts, and this betwixt you and me, Ma∣dam, because I trust my good Fortune, for—No, no, interrupted Madam d' Olonne, do not continue talking to me contrary to what you think; you know well enough that you are not so unhappy as you say. The Abbot finding himself so pressed, could not forbear an∣swering, That she knew him better than he did himself; that it being in her power to make King's themselves happy, he should think his Fortune made, if she would assure him of it; and moreover, that the Pro∣mises
he had made the Count, should not hinder him from loving her, when he should see any likelyhood of being beloved. This Conversation ended with so many Favours from Madam d'Olonne, that the Abbot for∣got that he was still in love with Madam de Chastillon, insomuch that he resolved to en∣gage himself without inclination with Ma∣dam d'Olonne; he fancied that by enteres∣sing the Body by Pleasures, he might disen∣gage the Mind, whose Interests are so inter∣woven: And indeed, Madam d' Olonne, whom time was very dear to, did not let the Abbot languish; but as their Corre∣spondence could not last long without the Counts perceiving it, he went to her House to make her his Complaints: Being at her Chamber door, he heard a noise, which ob∣liged him to listen to what it was. He heard Madam d' Olonne saying a thousand kind things to some Body, which increasing his Curiosity, he looked through the Key-hole, and saw his Mistress making as tender Ca∣resses to her Husband, as if he had been a Lover. This did not a little disgust him; he went home in a pet, where having taken Ink and Paper, he wrote this following Let∣ter to Vinevil.
YOu are ignorant that I have discovered a new Lover of Madam d' Olonne's; but what a new Lover, good God! a Lover kindly used, a Domestick Lover: I am not able to bear with it any longer; I newly caught d' Olonne upon his Wife's knees, receiving a thousand Ca∣resses from that faithful One. Happy should I my self betide, If the Beauty I adore Could at length rest satisfied With a thousand Gallants; nay more, I am willing she should have a Friend If there her Lechery would end. But she her Husband does likewise love, 'Tis this that does my Anger move. For in short, my Dear, he is no Husband, he has all the Favours of Gallants; he receives other Caresses besides those which proceed from Duty, and he receives them by day; which is a time pe∣culiar to Lovers. The Count de Guiche being returned on the morrow to Madam d' Olonne's House, referred his reproaching her upon her Hus∣bands account till another time, and thought sit to speak then only of the Abbot Fouc∣quett.
Madam d' Olonne being ever full of Consideration, when she was to lose a Gal∣lant, not so much out of fear of his Vexati∣on, as because she lessened the number, told the Count de Guiche that he was Master of her Conduct, that he might prescribe to her what manner of life he pleased; that if the Abbot gave him umbrage, she would not only see him no more, but if he was willing he should be witness after what rate she would rattle him. The Count, who never durst have asked her so great a Sacrifice, ac∣cepted the Offers she made him: The As∣signation being made to be at my Lord Croft's House the next day; where Madam d' Olonne having no other Company than the Count and the Abbot, spoke to the last after this manner, after having concerted all the Evening before. I desired you, Mr. Abbot, to come hither, to tell you in the presence of my Lord the Count de Guiche, that I do not love you, and that I can never love any Body but him; we were both very willing that you should know it, that you might not plead ignorance: Not that you have hitherto carried your self to∣wards me otherwise than as a Friend; but as you had no design, you have not perhaps taken notice that your Visits were some∣thing
too frequent, and you know tha that is not usually very pleasing to so amo∣rous a Man as the Count, what confidence soever he has in his Mistress. For my part I shall spend my whole life in thinking how to please him: I was willing to make you this Declaration, lest that you without thinking, should bring your self into trou∣ble; I shall be overjoyed to have you for my Friend, but the less commerce we have together, the better it will be. Yes, Ma∣dam, I give you my word, said the Abbot▪ to her, I am very much of the Count de Guiches Opinion, I have passed through all the degrees of Jealousie, and this is not the first time that he and I have discoursed upon this point. I know the promises I made him, and I am sure I have not broken them. The truth is, interrupted the Count, that I cannot complain of you; but as her Ladyship has said very well, that as you have no design, you did not think you did contrary to what you promised me, and appearances are only against you. Well, replyed the Abbot to him, let not this hin∣der you from being happy, for I give you my word that I will not. Her Ladiship designedly but once a Month, but for in∣counters I cannot answer for them; but it
is your part to take securities in that case. After a thousand Civilitiess on all sides, they parted. It will be perhaps wondred at, that the Abbot suffered Rivals so impatiently in his Intrigues with the Dutchess of Chastillon, and was so tractable with Madam d' Olonne; but the reason is, that with the former there was love in the case, and with the latter nothing but Debauche; and that the Body can bear with Associates, which the Heart can never do. Sometime after d' Olonne being informed of the ill Conduct of his Wife, resolved to send her into the Country, as well to hinder her from committing new Follies, as to stifle the Reports which her Presence daily renew∣ed: And indeed, so soon as she was depart∣ed, there was no more thoughts of her; and a thousand other Copies of Madam d'Olonne, which Paris is full of, caused that great O∣riginal to be forgotten in a short time. There likewise hapned an Intrigue, which without being of the nature of Madam d'O∣lonne, did however suppress them for a time. The Count Vivonn, first Gentleman of the King's Chamber, and for whom his Majesty had naturally an inclination, being retired to a House he had near Paris, to
spend the Easter Holy days with two of his Friends, the Abbot le Camus and Manchini this last Cardinals Nephew, and the other one of the Kings Almoners; and having passed there three or four days, if not in a great Devotion, at least in very innocent Pleasures, the Count of Guiche and Mani∣camp, being weary of Paris, went to him. As soon as the Abbot le Camus saw them, knowing them to be very dissolute, he per∣swaded Manchini to return to Paris, and that the next day, for that the World would say there had passed strange things amongst them: And Manchini that very evening declaring this design, Manicamp and the Count de Guiche, proposed to Vivonne to de∣sire Bussy to come and pass two or three days without them, telling him that he was very capable to fill the place of the, other two: Vivonne having given his Consent, wrote a Letter to Bussy in all their names, that he was desired to quit for some time the hurry of the World, to come to them, that they might with the less distraction, give them selves up together to the thoughts of Eternity. But before I pass further, it is fit I describe Vivonne and Bussy. The first had great blew Eyes even with his Head, whose Balls were often half
hid under his Eyelids, and contrary to his intention, made him look languishingly; he had a handsome Nose, a little and full Mouth, a fine Complexion, a ine, great and fair head of Hair; He was indeed something too fat, he had a quick Wit, and a good Fancy; but he studyed too much how to be pleasant; he loved to speak Equivoques, and words with a double sence; and that he might be the more ad∣mired, he often made them at home and started them in the Companies where he came, as if they had been fresh thoughts; he was quickly engaged in Friendship with people without any discretion; But whe∣ther he found them persons of Merit or no, he as suddenly abandoned them; What made his inclination last longest was flat∣tery, but it was to no purpose for a person to be extraordinary, if he did not admire him, he would have had no great esteem for him. As he fancyed that a signe of a good will was a niceness for all works, he found nothing to his mind of all he saw, and usually he judged of Books without know∣ledg and reason: In short, he was so blin∣ded with his own merit, that he saw none in any Body else; and to speak like himself, he had both a great deal of sufficiency, and
a great deal of insufficiency; he was Bold in War, and fearfull in Love: And yet if any body would have believed him, he had his will of all the Women he had attempted; but the truth is he had been de∣nied by certain Ladies, who, till then had never refused any Man. Roger de Rabutin, Count of Bussy, Ma∣jor General of the light Horse, had great sweet Eyes, a handsome Mouth, a something hawkish Nose, an open Face, and a hap∣py Phisiognomy, fair, clear light Hair; His Wit had delicacy and force, Gaity and Mirth; he talked well; he writ exact∣ly and agreably; he was of a soft dispo∣sition; But those, whom his Merit had caused to envy him, had netled him, inso∣much that he willingly made merry with people he did not love; He was a good and regular Friend; he was brave without of∣tentation; he loved Pleasures more than Fortune, but he loved Glory more than Pleasures: He was Gallant with all Ladies, and very civill, and the familiarity he had with his best Friends, never made him wan∣ting in the respect he owed them. This kind of behaviour made it thought that he had a passion for them; and it is certain that he had ever some sence of love in all
the great intrigues he had had, he had been long in the Wars and had done good ser∣vice, but as in this Age it was not sufficient to be of a good Family, to have Wit, Courage, and have done great Services to procure Honours, with all these Qua∣lities, he was got but half way of his fortune; he had not the baseness to flatter those people, whom Mazarine, the Soveraign Dispensour of Favours, put Confidence in, or had not been in a Condition to force them from him, by making him afraid, as most of the Marshals of his time had done. Now Bussy, having this Letter from Vivonne, took Hors immediately, and went to his House: he found his friends very much disposed to mirth, and he, not be∣ing usually a Disturber of Feasts, ordered it so that their joy was altogether Com∣pleat: and accosting them, I am very glad my Friends, said he, to find you disengaged from the World as you are, a particular Grace from God is necessary to work out our salvation: In the hurreis of Courts, Ambition, Envy, Back∣biting, Love, and a thousand other Passions▪ do usually engage the best People in Crimes, which they are encapable of in such Retreats as this, let us save our selves then together, my friends, and as to be pleasing to God, it i neither ne∣cessary
to weep nor to dye of Hunger; let us be merry, my Friends, and make good Chear. This Sentiment being generally approved of, they prepared themselves for Hunting in the afternoon, and gave order to have Consorts of Instruments for the next day: After having hunted four or five hours, these Gentlemen having got themselves a great stomach, eat as heartily as is ima∣ginable: supper being ended, which had lasted three hours, during which the Com∣pany had been in that Mirth which alwaies accompanies a good Conscience, caused Horses to be brought to walk in the Park: where these four Friends finding themselves at liberty, to encourage themselves to have the more contempt for the World, they proposed to rail against all human kind▪ but a moment after Reflection made Bussy say that they ought to except their true Friends from that general proscription; this advice having been approved of by them all, Every one demanded of the rest of the assem∣bly Quarter for what he loved: This being done, and the signal given for the contempt of things here below these good souls begun a Canticle. You may judge that having took this Course, all was comprehended in the Canticle, except those four Gentle∣mens
Friends, but as the Number were but small, the Canticle was great and sharp, insomuch that should nothing be forgot, it would make a Volume: Part of the Night being spent in these rural Pleasures, they resolved to go to rest; Wherefore they left one another very much satisfied to see the progress they had begun to make in Devotion. Vivonne and Bussy being got up earlier the next morning than the others, went into Manicamps Chamber; but not having found him, and thinking he was gone a Walking in the Park, they went into the Count de Guiches Chambers, with whom they found him in Bed: You see My Friends, said Manicamp to them, that I endeavour to make good use of the things you spoke of yester∣day touching the Contempt of the world, I have already Won my self to despise the half, and I hope in short time, except it be my particular Friends, to have no great inclination for the other▪ we often Compass the same and by different me∣thods, answered Bussy to him; for my part I do not Condemn your manners; Every one is saved after his own way; But I shall never take that course to be happy that you do. I am amazed to hear you talk after this rate, said Manicamp, and that Madam de Savigny has not disgusted you from loving of Women; But now you talk
of Madam de Sevigny, said Vivonne, pray you tell us why you broak off with her, for they talk differently; some say that you were jealous of the Count of Lude, and others that you sacri∣ficed her to Madam de Monglas; and no Body has beleived what you both have said, that it was a reason of interest. When I shall have made appear replyed Bussy, that I have been these six years in love with Madam de Monglass, you will beleive that there was nothing of love in the falling out that was lat year between Madam de Sevigny and me. Ah! My Dear, interrupted Vivonne, how should we be obli∣ged to you, if you would take the pains to relate to us an amourous History; But first of all be pleased to give me an account of this Madam de Sevigny; for I never saw two persons agree in their Opinions of her. What you say is de∣fining of her in a few words, answered Bussy, peoples opinions of her do not agree because she is unequall, and that one person alone is never long enough in her favour, to observe the change of her humour; but having known her from her Infancy I will give you a faithful re∣lation.
The History of Madam de Sevig∣ny. Madam de Savigny, continued he, has usually the finest Complexion ima∣ginable, little sparkling Eyes, a flat Mouth but of a fine Colour; a lofty Forehead, a Nose only like it self, neither long nor little, broad at the end, and the same at the Middle, and all this which in particular is not handsome, take it altogether is very agreable: she is finely shaped and yet has no good Aire, she has a handsome Leg, her Neck her Armes and Hands are not well formed, her hair is white and thick, she has danced well, and has still a good Ear, she has an agreable Voice, and understands singing pretty well: as to the outside she is such as I have described her, no Woman has more Wit than she, and very few have so much: she has a diverting way with her, some say that for a Woman of Quality her Character is something too Wanton: In the time I saw her, I found this judgement ridiculous, and I know her Burlesque under the name of gayety; not seeing her at pre∣sent, her Charmes do not dazle me; and I
grant that she is too pleasant: If a Person has wit, and particularly of that kind of wit which will be free and merry, there needs no more than to see her, there is nothing lost with her: She understands you, comprehends exactly your meaning, she divines you, and usually leads you much farther than you think of go∣ing; sometimes you give her a mighty pro∣spect, the heat of pleasantry hurries her a∣way, and under those Circumstances she re∣ceives with joy all libertine expressions, pro∣vided they be finely wrapt up, & keeps pace with her answers, and thinks it for her ho∣nour to surpass all that can be said to her. It is no strange thing that you find not much discretion in a Person of so much fire; those two things being usually incompatible, and Nature cannot work Miracles in favour of her: A brisk Fool takes more with her than a wel-bred serious Man; the gaiety of People prepossesses her, that she shall be judge whe∣ther you understand what she says; the great∣est mark of wit that can be given her, is to admire her. She loves Incense, she loves being beloved, and in order to that she loves that she may reap, she gives praise that she may receive it; she generally loves all men, of what Age, of what Birth, of what Merit, and what Profession soever they are, from the Roy∣al Robe to the Frock, from the Scepter to
the Inkhorn; amongst Men she loves a Lover better than a Friend, and amongst Lovers the merry more than the sad; the Melancho∣ly flatter her Vanity, and the Brisk her In∣clination; she diverts herself with these, and flatters herself with an opinion that her Merit must be great, since she is able to make those others languish. She is of a cold temper, at least if we might believe her deceased Husband, and it was to it that he was obliged for her Vertue as he said; all her heat is in her will. The truth is it makes full recompence for the coldness of her temper; I believe that Conjugal Faith has not that violence if we consider the inten∣tion; it is another thing to speak freely; I believe her Husband clear before Men, but I take him for a Cuckold before God. This fair One being willing to share in all diver∣tisements, has found a sure means, as she thinks, to take her Pleasures without injuring her Reputation in the least: She has contra∣cted Friendship with four or five pretended Lucretia's, with whom she goes into all pla∣ces imaginable; she does not so much con∣sider what she does, as with whom she is: By thus doing, she perswades herself that the ci∣vil Company rectifies all her actions, and for my part, I fancy that the critical Minute, which is usually found with all women when
only a Man and a Woman is together, would soonest be met with her in the midst of her Family. Sometimes she openly refuses a match of publick walking to establish herself in re∣gard of the World in an Opinion of great regularity, and sometime after thinking her∣self safe by so publick a refusal, she will make four or five matches of private walks; she has naturally a love for Pleasures; two things oblige her sometimes to deprive herself of them, Policy and Inequality; and it was for one of those two reasons that she goes some∣times to a Sermon, the nex day after an As∣sembly. With some such publick Actions she thinks to prepossess all the World, and ima∣gines that in doing a little good, and a little ill; all that can be said is, that one producing the other, she is a Civil Woman. The Flat∣terers, which her little Court is full of, enter∣tain her after another rate, they never fail to tell her, that it is impossible to reconcile Wisdom with the World, and Pleasure with Vertue, better than she does. To have Wit, and be of Quality, she suffers herself to be too much dazled with the grandeurs of Court; the day the Queen has spoken to her, & perhaps only asked whom she came with, she will be so transported with joy, and a long time after she will find means to acquaint all those, whose respect she has a mind to pro∣cure,
how obliginly the Queen spoke to her. The King having one Evening caused her to dance, and being returned to her place, which was near me; It must be confessed, said she to me, that the King has great Qualities, I believe, he will obscure the Glories of all his Predecssors. I could not forbear laughing in her face; and answering her, There is no doubt to be made of it, Madam, after what he had now done for you. She was then so satisfied with his Majesty, that I saw her upon the point of declaring her acknowledgment by saying, God bless the King. There are people who only let holy things put bounds to to their friendship, and who would do all for their Friends ex∣cept offending God. These people call themselves Friends to the very Altars: the friendship of Madam de Sevigny has others Limits, that fair one is only a friend as far as the purse; There was never any pretty Woman but she in the World, that disho∣nored her self by ingratitude; she must needs be much afraid of necessity, since to avoid only the shadow of it, she is not ap∣prehensive of shame. Those who would excuse her say that she has too much regard to the Counsell of people, who know what hunger is, and who still remember their poverty: Whether this humour proceeds
from others or from her self, nothing is so natural as what appears in her Oeconomy. The greatest application that Madam de Sevigny has is to seem what she is not; since she has studied that Course, she has already learnt to deceive those who had no great acquaintance with her: but as there are people who have interessed themselves in her more than others, they have unfor∣tunately for her perceived and discovered, that all is not Gold that glisters. Madam de Sevigny is unequal to the very Balls of her Eyes and to her Eye-lids; her Eyes are of different Colours, and the Eyes being the mirours of the Soul, these irre∣gularities are as a mark that nature gives to those who come near her not to rely much upon her kindness. I know not if it is that her Armes are not very handsome, that she is not very tender of them, or that she does not think it a fa∣vour, the thing being so general; but in short who will may take and kiss them, I fancy that it is sufficient to perswade her that there is no ill in it, that she belives they take no pleasure in it. Nothing but Custome can now constrain her, but she will not stick to show it rather than Men well knowing, that having made modes when they pleased Civility is no longer included in such narrow Bounds.
This is, my Dear, the Picture of Madam de Sevigny: her estate which would have been a great help to mine and had belong∣ed to our family, obliged my Father to design I should marry her; But tho I was so well acquainted with her then, as I am at present, I did not answer my Fathers design, certain loose Courses I saw her take made me apprehensive; And I found her the prettyest Creature imaginable to be the Wise of ano∣ther. This sentiment helped me mightily from marrying her; But as she was married a short time after me, I fell in love with her, and the strongest reason that obliged me to make her my Mistress, was that which had hindred me from desiring to be her Husband. As I was her near Relation, I had a very great access to her House, and I saw the vexations her husband daily gave her, she complained thereof very often to me, and desired me to make him ashamed of a thou∣sand ridiculous inclinations he had: I ser∣ved her in this very happily for some time; but at length her Husbands nature being too strong for my Counsels, after some delibera∣tion it came into my head to be in love with her, more through the Conveniency of the Coniuncture, than through the force of my inclination. Insomuch that Sevigny having one day told me that he had passed the
Night before the most agreable imaginably, not only as to himself, but the Lady with whom he had spent it. You may believe, ad∣ded he, that it was not with your Cosin; it was with Ninon. So much the worse for you, said I to him; my Cosin is a thousand times a finer Woman than she, and I am sure if she was not your Wife, you would make her your Mistress. All this may be, answered he: I had no sooner left him then that I went to give him an account of all to Madam de Sevigny. This is a fine thing to brag of, said she to me blushing for vexati∣on. Do not you seem to know any thing of it, an∣swered I, for you see the Consequence? I think you are a fool, replyed she, to give me that advice, or that you take me for one. You would certainly be so, Madam, replyed I, if you do not pay him in his own Coin, or if you should tell him again what I have told you: Take revenge, my fair Co∣sin, I will go halves with you in your Vengeance; for in short, your Interests are as dear to me as my own. Hold, good my Lord, said she to me, I am not so vexed as you imagine: Having met with Sevigny the next day at the Court, he came to me into my Coach; as soon as he was in, I fancy, said he to me, that you told your Cosin what I yesterday acquainted you with of Ninon, because she has hinted something of it to me: I, replyed I, I have not spoke to her; but as she has a great deal of Wit, she has said to me so many
things upon the point of jealousie, that she some∣times hits at the truth. Sevigny being satisfied with so good a reason, fell to disourse of his good fortune with the Ladies, and after having told me of a thousand advantages that there was in be∣ing in love, he concluded with telling me, that he was resolved to be so as long as he lived; and like∣wise that he was so at that time with Ninon, as deeply as it was possible for a man to be; that he was going to spend the Night at Saint Clouds with her, and with Vassé, who gave them a Feast, and which they laughed at together. I repeated to him what I had told him a thousand times, that tho his Wife was discreet, he might at length, by the continuation of his actions, so provoke her, that some welbred Man coming to fall in love with in the time he played her such pranks, she might perhaps seek for in the sweets of Love and in Vengeance, what she would not have thought of in love alone; and thereupon being parted, I went home; and wrote this Letter to his Wife. I Had reason yesterday, Madam, to distrust your imprudence, you told your Husband what I said to you; you may easily perceive that it is not for my own interests that I make you this re∣proach; for all that can happen to me is to lose his Friendship; and you have Madam, much more to fear. I have however been so happy, as to undeceive him; moreover, Madam, he is so
perswaded that one cannot be an honest welbred man without being in love, that I despair of ever seeing you satisfied, if you do not learn to be be∣loved by others than himself; but let not this al∣larm you, Madam, as I have begun to serve you▪ I will never abandon you in the Condition you are in. You know that jealousie has some times more virtue to reclaim a heart than Charms and Merit; I advise you to make your Husband jea∣lous, my fair Cosin, and to that end I offer my self: I have so much love for you, as to act over my former part of your Agent to him, and to sa∣crifice my self likewise, to render you happy; and if he must needs escape you, love me, my Cosin, and I will help you to take your revenge on him by lo∣ving you as long as I live. The Page I gave this Letter to, carrying it to Madam de Sevigny, found her asleep, and as he waited till she was awake, Sevigney arrived from the Country: He having known from the Page, whom I had not given instructions therein, not foreseeing that the Husband was to return so suddenly; having known, I say, that he had a Letter to deliver from me to his Wife, asked him for it, without suspecting any thing, and having read it at the same time, he bid him be gone, and that there was no Answer to be made to it. You may judge how I received him, I was upon the point of killing him, seeing the danger he had ex∣posed
my Cosin to, and I slept not an hour that Night. Sevigny for his part was no more at ease than I; and on the Morrow after the great reproaches he made his Wife, he forbid her to see me, she sent me word of it, and that with a lit∣tle patience all this would be shortly reconciled. Six Months after Sevigny was killed in a Duel by the Chevalier d' Albert, his Wife seem∣ed inconsolable for his death; the reasons she had to hate him being known by all the World, they fancied that her grief was only feigned. For my part, who had more familiarity with her than o∣thers, I did not wait so long as they to speak to her of agreeable things; and presently after I made love to her, but without Ceremonies, and as if I had never done nothing else: She made me one of her Oracle answers, which Women make usually in the beginning, that my Passion was so much at rest, that it made me appear but little favourable, and perhaps it might be so, I know not. Tho Madam de Sevigny had no intention to love, it is impos∣sible to have more Complaisance for her than I had in that Encounter. However, as I was her near Relation on the most honourable side, she made me a thousand proffers to be her Friend, and for my part, finding in her a sort of Wit which diverted me, I was not sorry to be so. I saw her almost e∣very day, I wrote to her, I made love to her after a raillying way, I fell out with my nearest Relati∣ons, to serve with my Credit and Estate those
persons she recommended to me. In short, if she had occasion for all I have in the World, I should have thought my self extreamly obliged to her if she would have given me an occasion of assisting her. As my Friendship was pretty like love, Madam de Sevigny was very well satisfied as long as I did not love elsewhere: but Chance, as I shall tell you in the Sequel, having made me fall in love with Madam de Preey, my Cosin, she did not show me so much affection as she had done, when she thought that I loved nothing but her. From time to time we had little quarrels, which indeed were made up, but which left in my heart, and I believe in hers, such seeds of Division for the first occasion we should both have, and which were even capable to imbitter indifferent things. In short, an occasion being offered, wherein I had need of Madam de Sevigny, and wherein with∣out her assistance I was in danger of losing my Fortune, this ungrateful Woman abandoned me, and did me in Friendship the greatest infidelity in the World. This, my Dear, made me fall out with her, and far from sacrificing her to Ma∣dam de Monglas, as was reported: This Lady whom I had long been in love with, hindred me from having all the resentment which such an in∣gratitude deserved. Bussy having done speak∣ing, Vivonne told him all that was said of the Count de Lude, and of Madam de Sevigny; Was he ever much in her favour? Before I an∣swer
to that, replyed Bussy, it is necessary I give you an account of this Count de Lude. He has a little ugly Face, a great head of Hair, a fine Shape; he was not born to be sat; but the fear of being incommode and disagreable, makes him take such extraordi∣nary care to be lean, that at length he has ef∣fected his design; his fine Shape has indeed cost him something of his health, he has spoil∣ed his stomack in the Summer by the Dyets he has taken, and the Vinegar he has made use of. He is active on Horseback, he dances and fences well, which is brave; he fought very well with Vardes, and they do him in∣jury, when they suspect his Valour, the ground of this slander is, that all the Sparks of his Circumstances, having ingaged them∣selves in the War, he would needs make one Campaign as a Voluntier; but the reason of this was, that he is idle, and loves his plea∣sures; In a word, he has Courage and no Ambition, he has a soft Wit, he is pleasing with Women, he has ever been well used by them, but does not love them long; the rea∣sons that he is so happy in their favours are, besides the reputation he has of being secret, his good Meen, and his being well provided for love Engagements▪ but that which makes him so successful every where is, that he cries when he will, and nothing perswades Wo∣men
so much that we are in love as tears. However whether some mischance has hap∣ned to him in his intrigues, or that these who Envy say that it is his fault they have no Children, he does not much dishonour the Women he has to do with. Madam de Sevigny is one of those for whom he has had a love; but his passion ending then when that fair one begun to make returnes to it; Thus Cross accidents have saved her, their passions could never meet. And as he has ever visited her since, tho without applicati∣ons, it has occasioned the report that he has had to do with her. And tho it is not true, there is great likehood it was so. He has however been the weakside of Madam de Savigny, and the Man for whom she has had the most inclination, notwithstanding the jeasts she had made of it: this puts me in mind of a Song she made wherein she causes Madam de Sourdis who was with Child to speak after this manner. That you have both, I heard it said, Wherewith a Man to Charme and lure; I mean a Man that is well bred And for our Drudgery fit and sure; Not like Him whom I do know, Who never yet the Feat did do, Nor cause the pain I undergo.
No Body in the World is more gay, has more Wit, nor a more agreeable Wit than she; Menage being fallen in love with her, and his Extraction, his Age and his Figure obliging him to Conceal his passion as much as he could, he happened to be one day at her House just as she was going out about some business. Her Woman not being rea∣dy to attend her, she bid Menage come into the Coach with her, and that she was not afraid people should talke ill of it, Menage jeasted in appearance, but indeed was an∣gry; made her answer that he found it very severe to see that she was not satisfied with rigours she had so long treated him with, but that she likewise despised him to the point of beleiving that nothing could be said of her and him. Come in said she to him, Come into my Coach; If you are angry I will make you a Visit at your own house. As Bus∣sy finished these last words, word was brought this Gentleman that the meat was upon the Table. They went to dinner, which having done with the usual merri∣ment they went into the Park, where they were no sooner come, that they desired Bussy to relate to them the story of Madam de Monglas and his Amours, which having granted them, he begun after this manner.
The History of Madam de Mon∣glas and of Bussy. FIve years before Madam de Sevigny's and my falling out, being at Paris in the beginning of Winter, and much a friend to Feuillade and Darcy, it came into all our heads to be in love, and because that we were not willing that our affairs should part us from one another, we cast our Eyes upon all the pretty Women, to see if we could find three who were as much friends as we were, or who might come to be so: we sought a long time without meeting with what we wanted. The Ladies of Mong∣las, Precy and L' Isle were very much friends and very lovely; but as perhaps we should have been troubled to have agreed upon the the Choice, and that the Merit of those Ladies was not so equall, that our inclina∣tions should Carry us to love them equally, we agreed to make three tickets of their three names, and to put them into a purse, and to keep to her that fate should give us in drawing them. Madam de Monglas fell to Feuillade's share Madam de L' Isle to Darcy and Madam de Precy to me: Fortune in this occasion shewed how blind she is▪ for she
did a favour to Feuillade which he knew not so well the value of as I did; but I was for∣ced to be contented with what she had given me: And as I had seen Madam de Monglas but five or six times, I fancyed that the ap∣plications I was going to make to Madam de Precy would efface out of my mind the beginning of a Passion. We thereupon made our Addresses to our Mistresses, la Feuillade having for a Fortnight or three Weeks, made love to Ma∣dam de Montglas by assiduities, resolved at length to make her a Declaration. At first he found her a Woman, who without being too severe, seemed to him so natural an Enemy of Engagements, that he almost despaired of effecting his designs with her, or at least of effecting them suddenly: Yet he was not quite disencouraged, and sometime after he sound her more uncertain, and in short he pressed her so much, and seemed to her so much in love, that she gave him leave to hope being beloved one day: But before I speak further, it is convenient that I describe to you Madam de Monglas and Feuillade. Madam de Monglas has little black spark∣ling Eys, an agreable Mouth, a Nose some∣thing turned up, fine white Teeth, a too lively Complexion, fine and delicate Fea∣tures, and a pleasing turn of Countenance;
her Hair is black, long and thick; she is ex∣tream neat, and the Air that comes from her is purer then that she breathes; she has the fi∣nest Neck imaginable, her Arms and Hands delicately shaped, she is neither great nor little, but of so easie a shape, that it will be ever agreable, if she can save it from the in∣conveniency of too much fat. Madam de Monglas has a quick and penetrating Wit, like her Complexion, even to excess; she speaks and writes with a surprizing Facility, and the most naturally imaginable; her thoughts are often diverted elsewhere in Conversation, and you cannot say to her things of so great Consequence, as to take up all her attention; she desires you some∣times to tell her something she had then a mind to know; and as you begin your Rela∣tion, she forgets her Curiosity, and the fire, she is full of, makes her interrupt you to speak of something else. Madam de Monglas loves Musick and Ver∣ses, she makes very pretty ones her self, she sings the best of any Woman in France, of her Quality; no Body dances better than she, she fears Solitude, she is a true Friend, even to take the part of those she loves with indis∣cretion, and to the very giving them all her Estate, if they have occasion for it: She keeps their Secrets, religiously; she knows
very well how to converse with the World; she is as Civil as a Woman of Quality ought to be: And tho she is not willing to displease any Body, her Civility has more of Pride than Flattery; for which reason she does not gain hearts so soon as several others that are more insinuating: But when they know her sted∣fastness, they apply themselves much more earnestly to her. La Feuillade is not altogether for a Man what Madam de Monglas is for a Woman; their Merits are different; he has however some false Charms, with which the weak are at first dazled, but which never deceives such People as make Reflections; he has blew lively Eyes, a great Mouth, a short Nose, fri∣zled Hair, and something reddish; his Shape is pretty good, his Knees turn inwards, he has too much vivacity, he speaks much, and will alway be pleasant, but he does not al∣ways do what he has a mind to, that is to say, with civil Persons, fancy to the populace and meanest Wits, with whom there needs no more than to have always the Mouth open to laugh or to speak; he is admirable; he has a light wit, and a hard heart, even to ingrati∣tude; he is envious, and it is to him an affront, to be in prosperity; he is vain and haughty, and at his first coming to Court, he had so often told us that he was brave, that he made
a Conscience of suspecting it; however at present we make a Conscience of believing it. I have told you that Madam de Monglas being perswaded that he had a violent Passi∣on for her, gave him hopes of being beloved. Any other than Feuillade would have made of this business the most agreable Intrigue i∣maginable; but he was lodged as I have told you, and only loved by starts; he did enough to heat his Mistress, and too little to engage her. When I told that fair One that he lo∣ved her extreamly, because that Feuillade had desired me before her, to speak for him in his absence, she drolled upon me, and made me observe some parts of his procedure, which destroyed the good Offices I would have done him. I did not fail to excuse him, & not being able to save his Conduct, I justified at least his intentions. We were much upon these terms, Darcy and I with the Ladies of Precy and L' Isle, that is to say, they were willing that we should love them, but indeed we did our Devoir better with them, than Feuillade did with Madam de Monglas; in short, three Months being spent, during which that fair One found herself more en∣gaged by the things I had said to her in fa∣vour of Feuillade, than by the love he had shown her; this Lover was forced to go serve in the Army with a Regiment of Foot he
had. This Farewel made her sensible that she had something more kindness in her heart for la Feuillade then she had thitherto belei∣ved: She let him perceive something of it; but tho it was enough to render a welbred Man happy, it could not shock the severest Vertue. Feuillade at parting made her a thou∣sand Protestations of loving her as long as he lived, tho she should even continue ever ob∣stinately resolved not to make any returns to his Passion; and he and I pressed her so much to give him leave to write to her that she gave her consent. Sometime before his departure, perceiving that the Commerce I had had for my Friend with his Mistress, had the more touched my heart for her, in making me the better ac∣quainted with her, and that the efforts I had made to love Madam de Precy, had not cured me of my budding Passion for Madam de Mon∣glas. I resolved not to see her so often▪ that I might not be divided between Honour and Self-love. As long as Feuillade was at Pris, his Mistress did not take notice that I did not visit her so often as I used to do; but when he was gone, she perceived a Change in my way of living, and this put her in pain, thinking that my retreat was a sign of Feuil∣lade's being become indifferent, and of whom likewise she had not had any tidings since his
departure. Some days after having sent to desire me to come to her; What have I done to you, my Lord, said she to me, that I see you no oftner; has our Friendship any share in your ab∣sence? No, Madam, said I to her, it only re∣spects my self. How, said she, have I given you any reason to Complain? No, Madam, re∣plyed I, I can only complain of Fortune. The disorder with which I said this, obliged her to press me to tell her more▪ How! added she, do you conceal your Affairs from me, whom I let see all I have in my heart? if it be so I should complain of you. Ah! how pressing are you▪ an∣swered I her, is it discretion to force a Secret from ones Friend? ought not you to believe that I should not tell you mine; since I do not tell it you in the Circumstances I am in with you, or ra∣ther ought not you to divine it, Madam, since—Ah! do not proceed, interrupted she, I am afraid to understand you, I am afraid of having reason to be angry, and of losing the esteem I have for you: No, no, Madam, said I to her, be not afraid, I am under those Circumstances you are not willing I should be, and yet I shall not be wanting in my Devoir; but since we are come so far, I will tell you all the rest: As soon as I saw you, Madam, I found you very amiable, and eve∣ry time I saw you afterwards, I thought you more beautiful than the time before; however, I was not yet sensible of any thing so pressing as to ob∣lige
me to follow you up and down, but I was ve∣ry much pleased when I met with you. The first thing which made me perceive that I was in love with you, Madam, was the trouble your absence gave me; and as I was upon the point of aban∣doning my self to my Passion, and of thinking of the means of making it known to you, Darcy, Feuillade, and I, drew lots, whom we should each of us make our address to, of you. Madam de Pre∣cy, and Madam de L'Isle, tho what my heart was sensible of for you, Madam, was yet very weak, I should not have left to chance a thing of that Consequence, if I had not been thitherto ve∣ry lucky; but in short, my Fortune changed in that occasion, for you fell to Feuillade's share, and I should have gained more by having lost all my life time, than in that unhappy moment; all my Comfort was, as I have said, that the applicati∣on that I was going to make to Madam de Pre∣cy, whom I had formerly loved, would root out of my heart what was budding there, but all to no purpose, Madam; you may judge that the Com∣merce that the interest of my Friend obliged me to have with you, giving me▪ the opportunity of knowing you more particularly, and of observing in you admirable principles for Love, I could not get rid of a Passion which your Beauty alone had produced, when Feuillade desired me to serve him; I felt something beyond the joy we have usually in serving our Friends, and I quickly perceived
afterwards, that without designing to betray him, I was overjoyed with being concerned in his Af∣fairs, to have only the pleasure of seeing you more nearly, but at length it put me into terrible pains; this, Madam, has obliged me to see you less fre∣quently, and tho you did not take notice of it, but since Feuillade's departure, it is above a fortnight since I retrenched my Visits. Not but that you must have observed, Madam, that I have served my Friend as I would have served my self, I have sometimes justified him when he was apparently Culpable, and I might if I had had a mind, have ruined him with you without seeming unfaithful, leaving it to be done by the resentment of a thou∣sand Faults which you pretended he committed a∣gainst the Love he shewed you. But I confess that my Duty makes me suffer extreamly in seeing you, and were I out of your sight, it would spare me a great many efforts I make upon you my self: besides, Madam, I would never have told you the rea∣sons of my retreat, if you had not asked me them. Nothing can be more civil, my Lord, Madam de Monglas replyed to me, than what you now do; but you ought to compleat your Duty, and send your Friend an account of all things; that he may not be surprized when he shall learn perhaps by other means, that you hardly ever see me, and that he may not to no purpose rely on your good Of∣fices to me: And thereupon Madam de Mon∣glas having caused Ink and Paper to be brought, I wrote this Letter.
SInce, considering the course I take, the Passi∣on I have for your Mistress neither offends my honour nor the friendship I owe you, I may well without shame acquaint you with it; and on the contrary, I should dishonour my self by conceal∣ing it from you. Know then that I have not been able to see Madam de Monglas any longer with∣out loving her; and that sending for me to day to know the reason of a Retreat, I told her she had Charmed me, but that I might not do any thing that was contrary to my duty, I would see her no more; I thought my self obliged to give you notice hereof; that you might take other measures as to her, and that you might see by the misfortune that has hapned to me of becoming your Rival, that I am not unworthy of your friendship, nor your esteem. Having read this Letter to Mad. de Mon∣glas, Well, Madam, said I to her, is this fair dealing: Ah, my Lord, replyed she, nothing can be more handsome; but th I believe you have the best Soul in the world, it would be very diffi∣cult for you, having a hand in your Rivals In∣trigues, finding a thousand reasons to do one ano∣ther ill Offices, and thinking to take advantages of our fallings out, that you should resist, considering the passion you have for me, the temptation of breeding quarrels between us: And as you are a witty man, you would not find it difficult so to or∣der your business, as that one of us might seem to be faulty, and to lay upon one of us, or upon For∣tune,
the mischance you only were the cause of; & though your Friend should leave off loving me through his own Inconstancy, after what I know of you, I should ever believe, if you concern your self in our Intrigue, that it was by your Artifices: So that you have great reason, my Lord, not to see me any more, and tho I should lose infinitely there∣by, I cannot forbear commending that Action. After some other Discourses upon this Sub∣ject, I went away to dispatch the Letter I had written to Feuillade, and ten days after I received this Answer. YOu have done your Devoir, my Dear, and I am going to do mine; I have more confidence in you than you your self; wherefore I desire you to continue your Visits to Madam de Monglas, and to serve me with her: When persons are so nice upon interest, as you seem to me, they are cer∣tainly incapable of treachery; but tho the Merit of Mad. de Monglas shall have so blinded you, thy you should be no longer able to retire, I should willingly excuse you, upon the necessities there are of loving her when we know her perfectly. With this Letter there was the following one inclosed for Madam de Monglas. I Am not at all surprized, Madam, to learn that you have charmed my Friend, my wonder would be the greater if a wel-bred Man, who daily sees and converses with you, should defend his heare against so much Merit. He sends me word that he
will see you no more, for fear he should yield to the inclination he has for you; and for my part I desire him not to retire upon the assurance I have that he has more force than he imagins, and ho he should not be able to resist any longer, you would not give your heart to a Traytor, having refused it to the most faithful Lover in the world. As soon as I had received these two Let∣ters I went to carry them to Madam de Monglas; but not to injure my friends whose Mistress was very Nice, I efforced all the end of the Letter he wrote to me, from that part where he tells me, that tho the Merit of Madam de Monglas should have so blinded me that I should not be in a Condition to retire, upon the necessity there was of lov∣ing her: When she was well acquainted with, I was afraid she would think, as well as I, that that part was very gallant, but not very passionate. You are in the right answered the Count de Guiche, and not only that part but both the Letters seem to me well written, but show the person indifferent. The sequel, replyed Bussy, will not undeceive you. You must know then, continued he, that Madam de Monglas seeing this scratching, asked me what it was: I told her, that e∣villade spoke to me of an affair of Conse∣quence which Concerned me. Since he is desirous, said she to me, that you continue your
Visits to me, I give you my Consent; but my Lord it is upon Condition you never speak to me of the sentiments you have for me. I will not, since you are so pleased, replied I; Not but that I ought to speak of it, without being suspected by you; for tho I love you more than I do my life, if to a knowledge my love you should despise that of my friend, in ceasing to esteem you, I should likewise cease loving you; The reason why I love you, Madam, is I assure you, not for that you are beautifull, but because you are also no Cocquet. I beleive you, my Lord, said she to me, but since you neither desire nor pre∣tend nothing, love me no longer; for what is a love without desires and hopes? I pretended to Nothing, said I to her, but I hope and I de∣sire: And what can you desire, replied she? I desire, replied I, that la Feuillade should leave off loving you; and that it should be indifferent to you. And in case that should be, said she, should you think to be the more happy? I know not if I should be so, Madam said I to her, but at least I should be nearer happiness than I am. And thereupon I made this Song. Since only loving you I find Does so much pain procure, Me thinks you should be something kind, And moan what I endure, My Rivall does all to me disclose, And me his Confident has chose.
What gave me some Comfort in the Pros∣pect of all the pains that an Amour without hopes is attended with, is that I was upon the Point of having the charge of Major Gene∣ral of the Horse, and that this Charge ob∣liging me to go suddainly to the Army, ho∣nour would Cure me of an unfortunate pas∣sion. Some days before my departure, I was willing to do divers the trouble I had through the violence I used upon my self to Conceal my passion, and for that end I gave Madam de Savigny a very fine and extraordinary treat which you will certeinly be well pleased to have the description of. First, figure to your self in the Garden of the Temple which you know, a Wood, wherein two Allyes cross in the place they meet, there was a great Oval of Trees, on whose Branches a hundred Christal Candle∣sticks were tyed; on one side of this Oval was a magnificent Theater raised, whose De∣coration well deserved to be so lighted as it was, and the lustre of a thousand Wax Can∣dles, which the leaves of the Trees hindred from spreading, rendred so bright a light in that part, that the Sun could not have given more, and for the same reason all a∣bout was so obscure that your Eys were of no use: The Calmest Night imaginable; as soon as the Play was begun it was found very
pleasant: After this Divertisement, four and twenty Violins having played a Consort, played likewise Brawls, Courants, and Country Dances; the Compa∣ny was not so great as it was well chosen; some dan∣ced, others looked upon the Dancers, and others, whose Intrigues were more forward, walked with their Mi∣stresses in the Allyes, where they sported without see∣ing one another. This lasted till day, and as if Hea∣ven had acted in Concert with me, the morning began to appear when the light went out: This Feat suc∣ceeded so well, that Letters were sent to all places of the Particulars of it, and it is still talked of with ad∣miration; some fancied that Madam de Sevigny was in that Occasion only the Pretext of Madam de Precy; but the truth was, I gave that Treat to Madam de Monglas, without daring to tell her so; and I believe that she suspected, without letting me know her thoughts. In the mean time I toyed with her before people, I was ever saying to her a thousand kind things in a drolling way; and I made this Song to a Sarabrand Tune, which you have certainly heard Sung. All those who see you, do you adore, But tho your Eyes do all things charme, It is requir'd you should deplore, And of your Coyness your self disarm. Designs upon your heart I laid To lose my own, I thought was fine; But fair Beliza, I'me afraid Your heart is harder much than mine. You may judge, that having these Sentiments for Madam de Monglas, my Addresses to Madam de Precy, were not very extraordinary: I lived with her with the greatest ease imaginable, and my little eagerness suted extreamly well with her lukewarm∣ness. However, when she begun to suspect that I was
in love with Madam de Monglas, her Passion for me begun to be inflamed: I thereupon admired the Ca∣prichio's of Ladies; they are vexed to lose a Lover, tho they are not willing to love them; but notwith∣standing all this, what Madam de Precy did was not so surprizing, as the Actions of Madam d' Le Isle; I had made love to the first, and it was not strange that she took some interest therein; but for Madam d' Olonne, whom I had never shown any thing but a Friendship to, I cannot sufficiently wonder at the course she took, which was thus: So soon as she suspected my Passion for Madam de Monglas, she used all manner of Artifi∣sices to be perfectly informed of it; she told me sometimes after a drolling way, that I was in love with her; sometimes she spoke well of her; and because I feared she would thereby discover the secret of my heart, I was sufficiently reserved in my Commendati∣ons; at other times she would speak ill of her, and for my part, being willing to acquaint Madam de Mon∣glas, that she was not to rely upon the Friendship of Madam de' L' Isle, having found her in a thousand o∣ther Occasions betraying Madam de Monglas, I set her talk, and gave her a very favourable Audience, to make her believe I took pleasure in it: At length, not being able one Evening to suffer the Rage she was in a∣gainst her, I gave Madam de Monglas notice of it, which occasioned their falling out; and in the Sequel, this fair One had all the reasons imaginable to believe I had a real Passion for her.
The End.
