h2419 e32_14 99858994 111055
A DECLARATION MADE TO THE KINGDOME, BY HENRY EARLE OF HOLLAND. LONDON, Printed for Mathew Walbancke. Anno Dom. 1643.
A DECLARATION made to the Kingdome, by Henry Earle of Holland. I Have not forborne either out of forget∣fulnesse, or guiltinesse, to send forth these Expressions thus publiquelie, though I confesse, they are of a na∣ture, in the which I have so litle dexte∣rity, as, I may rather give advantage, to such as would be ready to seeke it; then satisfaction, to those, that would be pleased to take it. I was willing to take this Nationall Covenant, that bindes up these Kingdomes in such an unity, and in so happy an agreement. And likewise to passe through any tryall, that so may Actions might be laid open, before this discourse, That thereby it might find the more credit. And I do passionatly wish,
that the thoughts and intentions I caryed to Oxford could likwise be soe; Which since they cannot, nor passe by any other Conveyance, to the knowledge of such, as I desire to satisfie, I shall here freely, and faithfully expresse them. Though I have ever, both in my pious duties, and my naturall reason, wished, and endeavoured, to see this Kingdome restored to the comforts, and rest of Peace, yet, was I never such a seeker of it, as to desire to find it, without those blessings, we have endeavoured to procure with it, of Truth, and true liberty, agreeable to the Condition of free, and un∣dejected Subjects; Yet, such were my hopes, I con∣fesse, (made so, by many publique relations, and discourses from Oxford, as they were even, formed into an opinion) That upon a free, and faithfull re∣presentation to his Majesty, of the sad, and deplo∣rable condition of his Kingdomes of England, and Ireland, he might have beene perswaded, to have Offered, even those things, from his owne reason, or Wisdome, that we for our necessity, and Conservation have often, and humbly petitioned him for. And when this was made, not onely possible, but pro∣bable, unto mee; I did conceive my selfe not to bee the unproperest person to represent these things
unto His Maiesty, from a long and neere relation not onely to His Person, but His Councells: Where I may truely say, I have endeavored to oppose all advises, that, I beleeved, could raise any mis∣understanding or division betwixt His Parliament and people. And this, I am perswaded, hath beene apparent in all my actions, and that, very cleare∣ly, (I will not say dangerously) when His Maie∣sty advised with his Counsell, concerning the breaking off the last Parliament, I having ever look∣ed upon those resolutions, as unhappie, and dan∣geous wayes of Governement in this King∣dome. But I shall say no more in this way, since, as it leades towards my selfe, even Truthes, thus looking homeward, may, abroad, be looked upon as vanities; Otherwise, there are many particu∣lars, that would show my Counsells to His Ma∣iestie, and my imployments from him, to have been ever expressed, and governed, with great Fideli∣ty to this Kingdome. These faithfull, and free Councells, made me hope, His Maiesty, with some reason, and ju∣stice, might have reflected, and looked backe upon my usuall advises unto him, and from
thence have given mee encouragement, to have pursued both my Fidelity to Him, and to His Kingdomes, brought to this condition by con∣trary Counsells. Which finding His Maiesty not perswaded to doe, And at that time, such a Ces∣sation concluded in Ireland, as made mee see the streames of Councell dyed in the bloud of many thousand Protestants, massacred in their Martyr∣dome there: And not onely so, But a danger likewise by too many visible circumstances, threat∣ned to our Religion, in this Kingdome. These rea∣sons prevailed straight, both upon my Con∣science, and my Iudgment, speedily to returne unto the Parliament; Streames, though by accident, or by breaches, they may hastily runne, even out of their owne Bosome, yet natu∣rally are they inclined to revert, and to looke backe to their Channells, and long-kept course againe, so was it with me, to returne unto this Great Channell of the Kingdomes safety, the Par∣liament; the Life-streame, that doth encompasse, and hath depth onely, to beare the weight, and to buoye up the honour of this endangered, and distracted Kingdome: Where, I faithfully im∣barque my selfe, to take those Fortunes, that God
shall send mee, either with them, or from them. And no Tempest shall have power to make me repent my Adventure, both of Life, and Fortune with them; Where, though I may bee justly esteemed but as a graine in a ballance, yet the smallest dus;t, adds something to the Scales; And since I have made an uneven step, from the unclearenes of my information, more then from the unfaithfulnesse of my affections, or intentions, I hope, it may be looked upon, and considered, as the Proverbe, that saith, Whosoever stumbles, and falles not, gets rather then looses, ground. And, this ground I professe faithfully to stand, or fall upon, That, I shall choose rather to perish with the Parliament, in their intentions, to main∣taine our Religion, Lawes, and Liberties, then to prosper in the abandoning of the least of them. And this I bind up by the vowes of a Christian, and a Gentleman. This is Printed according to Order.
