L2507 669.f.16[72] 99870270 163225
A List of the Ships taken by the Fleet of the Common-wealth of England, since the late Engagement of the Admirall Trump, neer Dover (contrary to the Law of Nature, and custom of Nations) at the same time that three of their Embassadors were here Treating of Peace, with the Parliaments Answer to the Paper of the Lord Paw, wherein he desired them to propound what they thought reasonable and just to compose the present differences between them and the States Generall of the United Provinces. The Effigies of both the Admirals of HOLLAND. Martin Tromp. Admirall of Holland & West-friesland. Witte Corneliz the With Vice Admirall of Holl: & W: F: The Parliaments Answer to the Paper of the Lord Paw, wherein he desires them to propound what they thinke is reasonable and just to compose the present differences between this Common-wealth, and the States Generall of the Ʋnited Provinces. 1 THat the Lords the States Generall of the United Provinces, doe pay and satisfie unto this Common-wealth, the charges and dammages this State hath sustained, and been put unto by the pre∣parations of the States Generall, and their at∣tempts this Summer; the particulars whereof shall be in due time produced. 2 That upon the payment of the Sum to be agreed upon, as aforesaid, for charges and dam∣mages, or securing the same to the satisfaction of the Parliament, there shall follow thereupon a cessation of all acts of Hostility, and the Ships and goods taken since the late differences shall be released. 3 The two former Propositions being assen∣ted unto, and put in execution, the security for time to come, which the Parliament doth expect, is by both States contracting a firm Alliance, and Constancy of interest for the good of both, which the Parliament of England is willing on their part by all just meanes and wayes to endeavour. The Lord Paw having received these Propo∣sitions, soon after returned this Answer, that he had received Orders from his Superiours, That he should with all speed returne back again, and could advance no further in the said nego∣tiation, and therefore desired to be admitted to take his leave of the Honourable Councell to go over. Sir George Ascue had advice of thirty or for∣ty Dutchmen, homewards bound, with four men of war for their Convoy, hearing they were very neer the narrow, he presently weigh∣ed Anchor with nine Sayle, and stood over the coast of France; some of his headmost Ships came up with the Dutch Fleet, twenty six of them ran directly ashore upon Callis-sands, five we tooke two more we got off from the sands, and burnt three: This Fleet of the Dutch came from Tartadoes in Portugall, most of them Laden with Salt and Oyle. The Names of the Dutch men of warre, taken by Generall Blake in the North, being a Guard of the Fishing Busses. Guns Ball of Rotterdam,—24 Water hound Vice-admirall,—29 Sampson of Anchinsens,—28 Armes of Holland,—30 Noahs arke,—24 Swan of Amsterdam,—28 Adam and Eve,—24 Iohn Baptist,—22 Land of Promise,—24 Sampson,—24 Two of which were Sunk. Antonia of Venice. Armas Medenblicke. An of Amsterdam. Armes of Slaca. Andrew of Gotenburgh. Bareland of Middleborough. Black bury bunch. Bee swarme. Bishop Flushing. Cock and Rosecrance. Chestnuttree of Amsterdam. King David Middleborough. Drinke all. Daniel Flushing. Encreasing Moon. Emans Amsterdam. Eve of Flushing. Faith of Swadan. Fortune. Idem at Plimouth. Idem. Fortune Dolphane. Fortune Flushing. Fortune Middleborough. Hollands Dostruit. Hope Flushing. Hope Amsterdam. Hollands time of Eden. Horse golden. Hope Middleborough. Jacob Amsterdam. John Baptist. Jacob of Harding. Love. Love at Plimouth. Lamb of Camphire. Love of Surdam. Love Amsterdam. Lion golden Harling. Maid of Encusian. Marke. Matthew Rotterdam. Oxe. Oringe tree. Peter Roterdam. Paul Amsterdam. Paul Rotterdam. Peter Housden. Peter of Amsterdam. Prince little. Pincke. Pelican Flushing. Rose. Swan Amsterdam. Golden Star. Swan Rotterdam. Small boat at Gowes. Towne Countrey. Young Tobians Kucusion. Tongues. Prince William. Young Prince Flushing. David Rotterdam. The Great St. Marke. Abraham Offering. Alkmore of Almore. Abraham and Isaac. Armes Flushing. Andrew Dover. Blacklove Flushing. Browne Fish and Fortune. Brown Fish of Adam. Baker at Dover. Black oxe of Stock holn. Black horse Rotterdam. Clump old of Edom. Clump young. Charity of Amsterdam. Cook of Encusion. Charity of Flushing. Coney dicto. Charity Herring Busse. Castle of Huntstood. Childrens plea. Chestnuttree of Bull. Duck of Amsterdam. Dove of Encusion. Elephant Amsterdam. Endraught alias unity. Earle, Amsterdam. Fortune Herring busse. Flying heart. Flower deluce. Fortune Rotterdam hering busse Fortune Rotterdam Plimouth. Fortune of Encusion. Golden Fortune. Gentleman of Holland. George of Harling. Greyhound. George of Middleborough. Gift of God. Huntsman of Brook. Hunter, a Busse. Hopewell a Busse. Hollands town of Encusion. Hope of Middleborough. John of Amsterdam. Jacob of Amsterdam. John Evangelist. King David, Rotterdam. King David of Edom. Linnin-Draper, Amsterdam. St. Laurence, Dover. Love Amsterdam. Man Flushing. May flower. Middleborough. St. Maria. Oldman Horne. Prince Hendrick, Flushing. Peace Rotterdam. Peter Encusion. Prince, Amsterdam. Paul Amsterdam. Pilgroom. Princesse royall. Red Mill, Amsterdam. Rob. alias Black-fish. Red Fortune. Star Rotterdam. Star Wickle. Spotted Dog. Sampson Encusion. Stock-helme. Turke Dover. Water dog of Encusion. Christiana. The North Cooper. Asuerus. Taken by Captaine Pen upon the coast of France, neer Boleigne, having been five years in the Duke of Venice his service, and were bound home for Holland, laden with Rice, Oyl, Peece Goods, Brimstone, Anniseeds, and other rich commodities, which with those taken by Gen Blake, are esteemed no lesse worth then ele∣ven hundred thousand pounds. Also taken by General Blake, 26. August, 1652. Severall Dutch Ships, one of twenty six guns that came from Almat in the bay of Allicant, la∣den with wools, strong waters and salt; likewise one of twenty guns that came from the West-In∣dies, laden with ginger, sugar, tobacco; another of eighteen guns that came from Capode verde, bound for America, laden with hides and Ele∣phant teeth, another of fifteen guns that came from Farnam Buck, laden with Sugar, Brazill wood, another small vessell with the like com∣modity, as also three prizes of wine and salt. Seven men of warre and six fire ships taken by Generall Blake, going to relieve Dunkirk. 17. Sept. Generall Blake took sixteen prizes laden with salt, wine, aquavitae, five of them from Lisbon, one of them worth 100000 l. 21. Sept. 1652. Two Ships from Ginne, their lading was Gold and Elephants teeth, by foul weather were beaten off from their Gene∣rall, and forced into Plimouth. 25. Sept. 1652. The Holland fleet appeared on the backside of the Goodwin, but were that night driven backe by a storme; the twenty six day they appeared and were forst away by ano∣ther storme, twenty seven were forst away the third time the Generall Blake got under sayl, and discovered the Dutch, they had two Admiralls De Witte and Ruiler, with about fif∣ty four sayl of men of war, and some small vessels; our number was pretty equal with them. The event of the fight. Reer Admirall of the Dutch thirty six guns sank, a great Vessell of thirty guns taken, their Reer-Admirall himselfe taken Prisoner, and one Captaine more, three hundred prisoners ta∣ken, one great Frigot of the Hollanders seen to sink; two Dutch Vessels sunk in the night after the fight. One hundred and odde of the Dutch slaine and drowned in the Reer-Admirall; all the Dutch Fleet generally much torne and shat∣tered, one of the Masts, and three of their Ships being shot off by the Great Ship called the Com∣mon-wealth. A Guinne Merchant belonging to Amster∣dam, very richly laden with gold, to the value of 60000l. being boarded by our men, sunk im∣mediately, and about six or seven of our men sunk with her. 20. October, 1652. the Falmouth Frigot took a man of war, and a Merchant Ship la∣den with a hundred eighty eight Chest of Sugar between 30 and 40000 weight of Brazill 1000d. the man of war taken with her, was of more va∣lue then the prize her selfe. 12 October, Our Fleet took fifteen sayl of the Hollanders; by their coulers they seemed to be Sweeds, Hamburgs and Lubecks; but they were found to be Hollanders, most of them came from Fishing. 18. Octob. A Fleet of our Ships comming from Denmark, fel among the Dutch Fisher-men; took fifteen or sixteen Sayle, and besides a Dutch man of warre of twenty guns, about thirteen prizes more, in all about thirty prizes. 20. Octob, Capt. Day, who commands the Warwick hath taken a Hollander of about 100. Tun laden with Stumm wines. 22 Octob. 1652. Marmaduke Frigot brought into the Downs 6 Dutch Ships, laden with wines strong-waters and also some Dollars. London Printed by M S. 1652.
