L3538 E1053_4 99866989 119279
THE King of Terrors METAMORPHOSIS. OR, DEATH Transform'd into SLEEP. A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of Mrs. Elizabeth Nicoll, Daughter to that Worthy, eminently Pious, and Charitable Citizen of London, Mr. John Walter Deceased, and late Wife of Mr. William Nicoll of London Draper. By Thomas Lye Rector of Alhal. Lumbard-street, London. Isai. 26.19. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in the dust. Mark 5.39. The Damsell is not dead, but sleepeth. John 11.12. Lord if he sleep, he shall do well. Nox Exitus est, sed Transitus. Cypr. LONDON, Printed by M. S. for Hen. Cripps, and are to be sold at his Shop in Popes-head-Alley, 1660.
To his Dearly Respected Friend Mr. William Nicoll. Dear Sir, It hath pleased the Lord, of late to do with you, as of old with his eminent Servant Ezek viz To take away from you theEzek. 24.16. desire and delight of your eyes Your dear, dearest Wife, your self in ano∣ther skin, the t'otherAnime divi∣dium med. half of your soul, is gone down to the Chambers of darkness. When I consider, the closeness of your Rela∣tion, the dearness of your Affection, I cannot but grant, the deprivation of such a Wife, to be a sharp dispensation; a bitter cup indeed; But yet it hath this to sweeten it, that 'tis handed out by a wise, soveraign, gracious Father; a God, that doth, and will do, what he pleases, and none can stay his hand, or say unto Him,Dan. 4.35. what dost Thou. And, Sir, give me leave to tell you, I do not, dare not, look on you, as such a piece of presumptuous
clay, as dares give check to your great Pot∣ter. You are none of those proud and impa∣tient Worms, that will turn again, when a God treads either on you or yours, No, but rather, you have learnt good old Eli's Epi∣phonema, 1 Sam. 3.38. It is the Lord; or which is more, with Job, not only to submit unto, but even toJob. 1.21 bless A taking as well as a giving God. It were easie to expatiate. But then, the Gate would be too wide for the City. As there∣fore the Voice to Austin, Tolle & Lege, so I to you, Read, Consider; and in Gods strength endeavour so to improve the Truths herein contained, that it may appear to your Conscience, that you have not so much lost, as parted, only for a time, with the dearly beloved of your soul: and that the time is coming, yea hastning, when you shall happily meet again, and for ever repose your selves in that center of Bliss, the bo∣som of Christ; yea, and so meet, as never to part more. Alh. Lumbard-street, Octob. 29. 1660. Your Affectionate Friend and Pastor, THO. LYE.
To His much Esteemed and Worthy Friend, Mrs. ALICE WALTER. Worthy and Christian Friend. THis Sermon, which was lately preacht to your Ear, is now, at the request and im∣portunity of some Friends, humbly presented to your Eye. I hope by this time, your prudence, faith, patience, have well di∣gested your late just sorrows: and that the ten∣der of these Notes will not cause your Wounds to bleed afresh: They were first intended, and are now offered, as a Lenitive, not Corrosive; to al∣lay, not aggravate, your Griefs. 'Tis true, the All-wise Soveraign of Heaven and Earth, has thought it fit to deprive you (at least for a while) of such eminent enjoyments, as but few Mothers in our Israel are blest with. A pru∣dent, faithful, affectionate, pious, charitable Husband: Another Enoch, for of a truth, he walkt with God: One that was eyes to the blind, feet to the lame; whom not only the lips of the hungry, but the loins of the naked, did bless; a man rich in faith, rich in good works. And two daughters the one, credibly reported, the other known, to me to be so humble, obedient, modest, discreet, devout, that she fully proved her self, the genuine Issue of so precious a Father: a Branch worthy such a Stock: These are now taken from you, whereof the one was your self divided, the others, your self multipli'd. such strokes, when they come single, cannot but sharply afflict us, but when double, tre∣ble, are apt deeply to astonish us. And here me∣thinks, your condition bespeaks us, as once Job his
Friends, Job 19.21. Have pitty upon me, have pit∣ty upon me, Oye my Friends, for the Hand of God hath touched me. We do, we cannot, but pit∣ty you; and how freely could we sit down and min∣gle tears and sighs with you, weep till we could weep no more, but that my Text must be remem∣bred, which strictly forbids, both you and us, im∣moderate mourning for those that are fallen a∣sleep in Jesus; and certainly, without the least strain of charity, we may so conclude concerning your late Relations: they are not dead, but sleep in Jesus: and if so, why may not you reply with Austin concerning Monica, what cause have I to over-grieve for a mother— an husband, daugh∣ters, of whose happiness I am and justly may be so well assured. I need not ask you, whether you lo∣ved them: And could you love them, and not wish they might be perfectly happy? And could they be perfectly happy and not die? and are they dead, and do you, can you, dare you, think them less than perfectly happy? True, your loss is great, but their gain is greater. oh grieve not so much at your loss, as rejoyce at their gain. If you do, and your tears exceed your joys, you will by these bewray a love indeed, but 'tis of your self more than them. Go then, Christian Friend, and since you cannot here enjoy their persons, imitate their graces: live more and more like them, since you cannot, as yet, live with them: and let this cause you to love and long for Heaven so much the more, because so much of your self, even more than half, is there already. Which that you may, as it is the serious advice, so it shall be the ardent prayer, of The Servant of your Faith, and Helper of your Joy. THO. LYE.
THE King of Terrors METAMORPHOSIS. 1 Thess. 4.13, 14. 13. But I would not have you to be igno∣rant, Brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others, which have no hope. 14. For if we believe, that Jesus died, and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with Him. OUR Apostles drift in these words is to prefs his Thessalonians to moder ation of sorrow for those of theirs,Scopt. that were dead in Christ. Grief, (like her sister Passions, being too too apt to passe its bounds, and overflow its chanel) transports the Thessalonians into a great indecency. Whilst they wept as Men, they had almost forgot to act as Christians; The floud of their
tears, had as it were drowned the anchor of their hopes. For a stop and Bay to this uncomely, unchristian Deluge, our Apostle here lets down this holy Floud-gate, in the words of the Text: But I would not have you, &c. In which words, we have a Christian duty gravely propo∣sed,Division. and strongly prest. 1. A Duty proposed, i. e. a mean, a temper, moderation in mourning for the dead. Sorrow for the dead, they might, nay, they ought? Paul prohibits not, but allows, yea elsewhere commands to mourn: But then it must be in mea∣sure, not immoderately. Greive, as men, they may and ought; but then as christian men. Not as men withoutContristamur & nos in no∣stiorum morti∣bus, necessitate amittendi, sed cum sperecipi endi. Aug. hope. Grace destroys not Nature, but rectifies. it. Religion doth not extirpate affections, but only orders and moderates them. 2. The Arguments by which this Duty is prest. And these are taken 1. Ab Inhonesto. Such an immoderate mourning for the dead would speak the Thessalonians, if not grosly Igno∣rant, at least deeply insensible and forgetful of the happy condition of the Saints departed. I would not have youVelim vos scire. Trem. Syr. & AEth. ver sis. ignorant.Or, I would have you know; q. d. did you indeed clearly know, firmly believe, or seriously remember and consider, what you have been taught, nay, and have profest, viz. the thrice happy estate of Believers after this life, you would not, could not, so intemperately bemoan their seeming-losse, whilst you seriously recollect their reall gain. 2. Ab Indecore. Such an immoderate sorrow rather be∣comes an hopeless Heathen, then an hopeful Thessalonian: Sorrow not even as others that have no hopeQ. d. The Heathens indeed, wring their hands, beat their breasts, sigh to the breaking of their loins, bedew, nay fur∣row their cheeks with tears at the Funerals of their Relati∣ons;
and all this because they have no hope of their Resur∣rection to a new and better life. They suppose, they have taken their ultimum vale of their departed Friends, bid them an eternal adieu, that they are utterly extinct, lost and gone, , that they shall never see, or enjoy them more, and so no wonder, if theyLugetur mor∣tuus quem ge∣henna suscipit, quem Tartarus devorat. mourn, and that immoderately. But for you, whose dearest Relations souls are by Angels transported into the highest Heavens, and there install'd free Denizons of those glorious Mansions; nay more, even lodg'd and reposed in the bosom of our Lord Jesus; for such as you, to mourn immoderately, and that for such as these, it would argue an heathenish despair sway'd more in your breasts, then a Christian hope. 3. A qualitate Mortis; Concerning them which are asleep in Jesus. Q. d. And what is this you take so much to heart? Is it that you call their death? Alas you are quite mistaken, their departure hence is not so properly to be termed a death, as, 1. A sleep. What you mistake for a Serpent, is indeed but a Rod. Their death is no more but a sleep, a sweet, silent, refreshing sleep. The Damsel is not dead, butMark 5.32. sleepeth. As our natural sleep is a breathing Emblem of death, so our temporal death is nothing else but a fair resemblance of sleep. The one is a shorter death, the other a longer sleep. And will you, can you grieve immoderately, when you see your dearest Friends, when weary, laid down to rest, and gone to sleep? 2. A sleep in Jesus.  Hellenism. Enallage propo∣suionis: ut & 1 Tim. 2.15. Rom. 4.11. Spanhem. . Belie∣vers at their death fall asleep in Christ. Death it self dis∣solves not that real, spiritual, closest union, between Christ and true Believers: No more then sleep doth that be∣tween soul and body. Being truly ingrafted into Christ, they have saithfully persevered to the end in the profession and practise of the faith, have not left him in life, and therefore Christ will not forsake them in death: They then sleep in Christ. And will you grieve immoderately
to see a Child sweetly fallen asleep in his Fathers armes? 4. A Certitudine Resurrectionis. This their death is a sleep indeed, but not a perpetual, everlasting sleep. Tis not a sleep of eternal death. No. But these that sleep now, shall certainly awaks and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give them life. Christ their head being risen, is the exemplar, pattern, pledge, and will be the cause of their resur∣rection. True, Christ is gone a far journey, but he will come again, and all these. That sleep in Christ will God bring with Him. Having thus Anatomized the whole, I shall only single out one of the parts, and make that, which Paul uses as his third Argument to back his Exhortation, the Basis of my present Meditations; and 'tis this, Observation. A true Believers temporal Death is a sweet and silent sleep in Jesus Christ. This truth I shall explain, confirm, improve. For Explication. Quest. What is it that sleeps in a Believers death? Sol. 1. Negatively. Not his Soul. As the soul cannot Mat. 10.28. die, so it doth not sleep, i. e. after its dissolution from the body, it lies not still without any motion or operation; True in∣deed, such acts of the soul as are meerly Organical, i. e. such as the soul cannot exert but by the help of the body, as seeing, hearing, tasting, &c. these indeed do, and must needs cease. But then there are other acts, which are in∣organical and immaterial, which the soul can put forth of it self, without the least commerce with or asistance from the body. These cease not. As appears; 1. By the Light of Nature. Natures dim eyes have been cleare enough to see this truth. Hence the Platonists resem∣ble the souls being and acting after death, to the distinct being of the Wagoner after the Coach is broken. To the swimming out of the Mariner when the Ship is wrackt
To the creeping out of the Snail when the shell is crusht. 2. By the Light of Reason. What hinders me to con∣clude the being, the quick and lively acting of the soul (that pure, immaterial, and immortal substance) in the Air, in the Heaven, or elsewhere, as well as in the compass of my body? Why should not that soul, that existed without the body before it was created, inspired, infused, as well exist and act after the union of it with the body is dis∣solved? 3. By daily, constant Experience. Do we not find and feel the soul, even whilst in the body, to have its motions, passions, tempers, quite different from, and independent on the body? Is not the soul often cheerful, when that is in pain? Does not the soul often sing, when the body sighs? Have not innumerable Martyrs triumphed in the midst of flames and tortures? Does not holy Baynam tell the Papists, that his flames were no more to him then a bed of Down or Roses? Again, in the deepest and deadest sleep, when sleep with its strongest cords has most strongly bound up all our senses, has not the soul its nimble workings, and most rationalCorpore qui∣escente, anima non dormit, itn etiam anima post mortem. somnus sensus tantùm exc∣teriores occu∣pat non ani∣mam. discourses then? To say nothing of divine Raptures and Extasies, when the body is as it were laid by as useless and uninstrumental to the soul; as appears in paul 2 Cor. 12.2, 3, 4. when Paul's soul had an ear to hear such words as his body could not find a tongue to express: And in John, Rev. 1.16. In a word, in sickness, yea in death it self, when the soul walks in the very valley and shadow of death, in the very act and article of its dissolution, what a fresh vigour does the soul many times put on? How does this divine flame blaze in the very socket? How does it crect and rouse it self, and plainly tells us, that it means not to fall with the body, but only to leave it, as an Inhabitant a ruinous house, till it be repaired? as a Musitian to lay aside his Lute, whose strings are crackt, till it be new strung.
4. By the Light of Scripture. The souls which were under the Altar were not asleep, though their bodies were; for they cryed with a loud voice, &c. Rev: 6.9, 10. In death, the body, that handsome Pile of dust, returns to the carth as it was, but the spirit, the soul, Ista Divinae aurae par∣ticula, returns unto God who gave it, Eccles. 12.7. and to the spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.23. Had the soul of the penitent Thief slept, how could it have been truly said to have been with Christ in Paradice, Luke 23.43. With Christ in Paradice, i. e, in the highest Empyrean Heavens, Acts 3.21. beholding his face in light and glory, John 17.24. Had Paul but dreamt of the souls sleep, he would never have groaned so earnestly to be cloathed upon with his house from heaven, 2 Cor. 5.1, 4. Nor to have had the union of his soul and body dissolved, and the com∣munion with God which he then enjoy'd, interrupted at least, if not broken off, had he not been sure, that immediately on that dissolution, he should be with Christ, Phil. 1.21, 23. Thus Negatively. The soul sleeps not. 2. Affirmatively. The body sleeps, Matth. 27.52. Or, if you will, the state of a Believers death much resembles that of sleep: which leads me to the second thing I promi∣sed: viz. 2. Confirmation. Now I shall prove this point, generally and particu∣larly. 1. More generally. Sleep is the image of death, and death is more then the image of sleep. Lighten mine eyes least I sleep the sleep of death, i. e. Least I sleep Death. i. e. least I die, Psal. 13.3. Our friend Lazarus sleepeth, John 11.11. Our Saviour interprets his own words; Lazarus is dead, v. 14. Many are sickly among you, and many sleep, i. e. are dead, 1 Cor. 11.30. An usual phrase among the Hebrews for being dead, was this, They slept with their Fathers, 1 King. 11.43. 2 King. 20.21. Luke retains the Hebrew form, and
tells us, that Stephen and David gave up the ghost and fell asleep, Acts 7.60. and 3.36. And hence it is that the Saints graves are call'd their beds: They shall rest in their beds, Isai. 57.2. When a Believer dies, he is but gone to bed; gone down from a bed of ivory to a bed of earth; from a pillow of down, to a pil∣low of dust. Hence also both the Greeks and Latines stile the pla∣ces where the dead are laid up and buried,i  Dormitoria. sleeping places: Thus more generally. But 2. More particularly. By spreading before you the Analogy, proportion, resemblance, paralel, that is between sleep and death. A Believers death runs paralel to sleep, in its Antecedent, Concomitant, Consequents. 1. In its Antecedet; or that which usually goes before sleep, and that is Vestium Depositio. When a man goes to sleep, he usuallySomnum ca∣piens vestes exuit. 1  uncloaths, dismantles, disrobes himself. In like manner Peter calls his death, 1 a putting off of his taber∣nacle, 2 Pet. 1.14. Paul stiles it a dissolution of our earthly house of this tabernacle, 2 Cor. 5.1. An un∣cloathing:  v. 4. When a Believer dies, he laies aside, not only the garment spotted with, but even that which is made of flesh. Thus Jubentius and Maximinus—We are ready to lay off the last garment the flesh. 2. In its Concomitant; Or that which accompanies and attends on sleep: and that is, Quictis tranquilitas, Sweet . Orph. de somn. Tu{que} O domi∣tor somne, malo∣run, requies c nimi. Sen. Her. sur. Rest and Repose. When a man goes to his sleep, we say he goes to his rest. So Job 3.13. Now should I have lien still and been quiet; Now should I have slept, I should have been at rest. 'Tis true, rest is more then sleep; Sometimes a man sleeps, when he doth not rest, but is trou∣bled in his sleep; But when rest is joyn'd with sleep, this is perfect sleep. In death a Believer enjoys a perfect rest: A state where∣in Believers lie quietly in their beds of earth, and have not so
much as one waking moment, or distracting dream. Here indeed, those Doves, find no rest for the soles of their feet; but no sooner are they lodged in the Ark of death, but they are at rest. They shallIsa. 57.2. rest in their beds. Now there is a five-fold rest which a Believer enjoyes in and by his temporal death: From labour, from trou∣ble, from infirmities, from sin, and from tempta∣tions. 1. From labour and toil. No working in the Grave: There the servant is free from his master, The poor Isra∣elite from his Egyptian Task-master. No tale of bricks demanded there. There the weary with labour is at rest, Job 3.17, 19. This life is the day of the Saints working. They, as well as their Master, must work while 'tis day. Death is the night of the Saints resting. When the Sun of our Life ariseth, we go forth to our labour until the evening of death, Psal. 104.23. and no longer, for then, they that die in the Lord rest from their labours, Rev. 14.13. This life is a continual motion; death a perpetual rest. Our life is a stormy passage, a tempestuous Sea-voyage, death brings us to a peaceable Port. 2. From troubles, miseries, calamities: And these either publick or private. 1. Publick and National. No warrs, famine, pesti∣lence, no bloody battels, no garments rould in blood, no sod∣ding of the Babe, to satisfie the hunger of the Mother, in the Grave. If a Cloud of blood hover over a Nation; If an Angel on a red Horse be ready to mount and march through a Kingdome; If commission be given to the Sword to eat flesh and to drink blood; the death of a Believer hou∣ses him before the storm. Josiah dies in peace, and sees not all the evil which God will bring on Jerusalem, 2 King. 22.20. The Righteous man is taken from the evil to come, Isai. 57.1. A Believers grave is nothing else but one of Gods privy Chambers, where he is hid from the indignation to come, Isai. 26, 20.
2. Private and Personal. No trouble, no oppression, no persecution, no racks, no strappado's in the Grave, The voice of the oppressour is not heard there, Job 3.18, This life indeed is a cloudy, blustring passage to Gods Jonahs, but death is that Whale, which doth not so properly swallow them up, as carry and convergh them, 'tis indeed, both their Ship and Pilot, to conduct them safe to shoar. Poor Saints, here, they are usually the worlds Gally-slaves: this lower Orbe is to them, but a larger kind of Tunis of Ar∣gier, but they are manumitted there. Their death ransomes them. Here they are at the foot of every bloody Bonner, Gardiner, Nero, Trajan, Dioclesian, Julian: but death sets them out of gun-shot. The rod is taken off their backs, and a palm put into their hands, Rev. 7.9, 14. There Peter no more feares the Crosse, Paul the Axe, James the Sword, Isaiah the Saw, Elijah Jezebel, the noble Army of Martyrs, the Cole-house, Dungeon, Halter, Faggot, Flames. Hence Cyprian when dying, God be thanked for this Goal-delivery: And I. Buisson Now shall I have a double Goal-delivery, one out of my sinful flesh, another out of my loathsome dungeon. 3. From all bodlyHic quot ve∣nae tot morbi. weakness, infirmities, pains, griefs, passions,Diu vivere nihil aliud est, quàm diù torqueri. Aug. miseries. By reason of these, Saints, whilst here, are subject to panting hearts, moistned eyes, blub∣ber'd cheeks: Here usually ashes are their bread, and tears their drink. Here the Saints life is usually so miserable, that 'tis an observation of Hierom, and the resolution of an ancientChristus non ploravit Laza∣rum mortuum, sed ad hujus vi∣tae arumnas ploraevit resus∣citandum Con∣cil. Tolet. 3. Councel, concerning Jesus his weeping over Lazarus, John 11.31. That it was not so much a grief for Lazarus his death, as the consideration of hisChristus non ploravit Laza∣rum mortuum, sed ad hujus vi∣tae arumnas ploraevit resus∣citandum Con∣cil. Tolet. 3. rai∣sing again to a miserable life, that drew those tears from our Saviours eyes. But now, Death wipes every tear from a Believers eye, Rev. 7.17. sorrow and sighing do then fly away, Rev. 21.4. Death is the great Catholicon, panacea, salve for all sores; the reall and lasting cure of all the Saints diseases, maladies, infirmities. So that good man Laverock com∣forted
his fellow Martyr John ap Rice: Come, saith he, be of good comfort Brother; for my Lord of London is our good Physitian; He will soon cure thee of thy blindness, and me of my lameness, this day. 4. From sin: He that is dead, is freed from sin, Rom. 6.7. From their own sin, and from the sins of others. 1. From their own sin; and that both as to its guilt and silth. 1. From the guilt: I mean the sense and apprehension of guilt. Poor Believers, whilst here, many times lie under the stabs and throws of a wounded Concience: their souls stricken through with Gods venemous Arrowes, and made as it were dizy with the wine of astonishment. As they are for∣ced to lye down in sorrow, so they fear they shall rise up in Flames; This was the case of Heman, Asaph, &c. Many, very many of the children of Light, whil'st here, walk in such darkness, Isa. 50.10. But now Death delivers them from this midnight darknesse, brings them into the face and presence, sets them under the beams of the Sun of righteousness, which shall never more be clouded; Not a wrinkle more now for e∣ver to be seen on Gods face, not the least frown on Gods fore∣head, Every score quite blotted out, every debt cancelled, and they no lesse fully, the freely acquitted and discharged, Jeremiah, 31.34. 2. From the raging power; yea, from the polluting, pestring presence of sin. Poor Saints here labour under the intollera∣ble burthen of a corrupt heart, and sinfull life. How was Paul prest, opprest, with that weight, that mountain, the law of his members warring against the law of his mind. This makes him cry out likea forlorn Caitif,  O wretched man that I am, Rom: 7.24. Paul that could re∣joyce in tribulation, could not but mourn under corruption; This was that made the good man cry out, Libera me a malo; hoc est, a me ipso, Domine. This made holy Bradford bewail himselfe, as the living Christians of old, when tied to dead carkasses.
But now when once death comes, it soon knocks off these shackles: takes off these weights, that so easily beset us. As the Martyrs formerly cheered themselves against the rage of their bloody persecutors. Oh brethren, said they, our persecuters are sending of us thither, where we shall never of∣fend God more. Death spares not one Agag alive. Every Canaanite slain. Every Egyptian drown'd. Those corrupti∣ons they have seen to day, they shall see them no more for ever. Death presents them without spot or wrinkles, Eph. 5.27. Totally frees them not only from the power, but presence of sin. The end of their living, is nothing less then the end and period of their sinning. 2. From the sins, and corruptions of others. Here the sinfulness and pollution of the times and places, wherein Saints live, (specially of persons neerly related to them,) makes their lives grievous, and is as it were a Coloquin∣tida in the pot of their sweetest comforts. Lots righte∣ous soul vext with the Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2.8. Rebeccah weary of her life, because of the daughters of Heth, Gen. 27.46. Woe is me, saith David, that I must dwell in Mesech, Psal. 120.5. Oh that I could leave my peo∣ple, saith weeping Jeremy, Jer. 9.2. But now, 'tis not the least part of our happinesse by death, that it brings us there, where there are no ill neighbours. There shall enter in nothing that defiles into those holy Mansions, Rev. 21.27. Corrupt flesh and blood shall not, cannot enter into the Kingdom of God: 1 Cor. 15.50. 5. From temptations, Satans winnowings, buffetings, solicitations to sin. Here, ever and anon a messenger sent from Satan to buffet Saints, 2 Cor. 12.7. Anakims to fight them, Midianitish women to allure them, Satan going about like a roaring Lion seeking whom, and how he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. Here Gods Adam's never without an Eve and a Serpent. In this Egypt Christs Jo∣seph's alwayes dogg'd with the suggestions of a Potiphars wife. But now the death of Saints Brings them into that heavenly Paradice, where there is no Serpent. The great
Dragon, the Accuser and Tempter of the Brethren is cast down thence, and never to be admitted more, Rev. 12.9.16. Here the Saints alwayes wrestling, not only with flesh and blood, but principalities, and powers, and spiri∣tual wickednesses in nigh places, Eph. 6.12. Here, though they ate never totally overcome, yet are they stoutly char∣ged and assaulted: and though 'tis the Saints honour to conquer, yet is it their trouble to conflict: yea, but now death puts the Saints into such a condition, that they are not only without a foyle, but without fighting too. Thus in respect of its concomitant, Rest, the death of Saints may well be resembled to sleep. 3. In its Consequents: which are two: Excitationis fa∣cilitas: & Virium reparatio. 1. Excitationis facilitas. Awaking or rising from sleep. Natural sleep is not perpetual: we sleep and a∣wake again: Psal. 3.5. I laid me down and slept, I awa∣ked. So that though the body lies for a time in the grave, yet it shall awake and rise again. Many, i. e. all of them that sleep in the dust shall awake: Dan. 12.2. Psal. 17.15, Isai. 26.19. John 5.28. Job 19.26, 27. Hos. 13.14. Rev. 10.13. A time coming when the loud Trump shall awaken the sleeping ashes, and those old friends, soul and body, meet and embrace, and never part more. 2. Virium reparatio, renovatio, restitutio. The body, that was sown in weakness, shall be raised in power. It was sown a natural body: it shall be raised a spiritual body; endowed with impassibility, subtilty, agi∣lity, clarity. It is sown in dishonour, it shall be raised in glory, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44. It shall be like unto Christs glorious body, Phil. 3.21. shining forth and sparkling like the Sun in its midday-glory, Matth. 13.43. And thus we have dispatcht the parallel betwixt a Belie∣vers death and sleep. The third thing promised, was the
Application and Improvement of the whole; to which we now address our selves. 3. Application. By way of Information, Exhortation, Dehortation, Conso∣lation. 1. For the Information of our Judgements in four Corollaries. 1. If a Believers death be a sleep, then that Aphorisme of the wise Man appears to be a great truth, Eccles. 7.1. The day of death is better then the day of ones birth. Man is born unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward, Job 7.5. Sparks have a principle in themselves, by which they as∣cend, they need no directing, they fly upward naturally. So 'tis a natural course for man, as soon as he is born, to verge to sorrow. Our birth is nothing else but a lanching forth into a deep Ocean of sin and sorrow, an intrat to act our parts in a Scene of iniquity and misery: Yea, but now a Believers death is his happy Exit and Epilogue; his calmRev. 14.13. Port, and safe Harbour, after all his tollings and tempests. Of this truth, that Mirrour of her Sex, the Lady Jane Grey, discovers a clear conviction, who, being requested by the Lieutenant of the Tower to write her Symbol in his book, before her beheading, wrote thus: Let the glassy condition of this life never deceive thee: there is a time to be born, and a time to die, but the day of death is better then the day of birth. 2. If a Believers death, &c. Hence learn, The infi∣nite power, wisdom and goodness of God, in that he is able and willing to turn the worst of evils, into so great a good: out of the deadliest poyson to make the most soveraign Antidote: to turn a Moses Serpent into a Rod, and with that Rod to work wonders: to fetch honey and sweetness out of the carcass of a Lion: nay, to turn the Eater in∣to meat, Death into sleep; to make that, which in it
self is the greatest loss, to become so great a Gain, Phil. 1.23. to render the King of Terrors, Job 18.14. most amia∣ble, yea most useful: to make that so sweet a blessing, which was threatned, as the saddest curse: to turn an Esau's ma∣lice into courtesie and salutes, his intended stabs into tears and kisses. Verily this is the Lords doing, and it ought to be marvellous in our eyes. 3. If a Believers death, &c. Hence see, the vast difference between an Ʋnbeliever and a Believer in their death. Death to an unbeliever is Poena peccati; so threat∣ned, Gen. 2.17. so inflicted, Rom. 5.12. Their end is destruction, Phil. 3.19. Death comes fiercely to them, pulls them by the threat, like a grim Serjeant, arrests and summons them to hell, where after ten hundred thousand years scorching and yelling in flames, their pain is never the nearer to its period. No time gives them hope of abating; yea time hath nothing to do with this eternity; where they shall be ever dying, but never die: where Di∣vels, who were here ready to tempt them, when graceless, to sin, are as ready to pursue them, now damned, with torments. 'Tis true, their bodies sleep indeed for a while, but 'tis as Sampson in Dalilahs lap, ready to be given up as a prey to the Philistins: as Sisera in Jaels Tent, the hammer and nail ready to be set to the Tem∣ples: or as Peter slept between his cruell Keepers: bound they are and lockt up in their graves, as in a strait and loath∣som prison, a doleful, disconsolate dungeon, where they lie re∣served in the chains of darkness, until the judgement of the great day, Jud. 6.7. But now the death of a Believer is quite another thing. To them 'tis instar dulcis somni. Death comes mildly and sweetly to the m, like an humble Page, with a courteous in∣vitation to a feast of glory, and proffers its service to lead and conduct them to it: Be not afraid, saith death, though my countenance be stern, my hand is soft, though my pangs seem grievous, yet the rest I bring is sweet. To others I am death, to you only a sleep, and such a sleep as God
gives his Beloved, Psal. 127.2. That which is a Grave to others, is a Bed to you, Isai. 57.2. where your bodies shall lie, as Christ did in his grave, with a guard of Angels, John 20.12. Believers are delivered from the sting, though not from the stroke of death: If death be a Ser∣pent, to Saints 'tis a Serpent without a sting: it has left its sting and teeth and all in the sides of Christ. Hence it is that we hear the Apostle sounding out his Io tri∣umphe, and find him treading on the neck of his vanquisht enemy, playing on the hole of this Aspe, and with an holy kind of Sarcasm, flouting at it: Oh death where is thy sting? 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57. Thus we see a vast difference; the unbeliever dies howl∣ing; the Believer singing: the one takes death for a gulf of sorrow, the other for a port of safety. The one sighs because stript for a scourging, the other sings, be∣cause he layes off his cloaths to go to bed and sleep after his toyle. 4. If a Believers death be a sleep in Jesus: Hence con∣clude, That even death it self dissolves not the strict union that is between Christ and a Believer.Aug. de Civ. Dei. All the faithful, though dead, are yet the living members of Christ Jesus. As in Christs death his soul and body, though severed each from other, remained united to the Deity; so in death, Believers souls and bodies still remain united unto Christ, Rom. 8.38, 39. Though Abraham, Isaeac, Jacob die, yet God is still their God, Matth. 21.31, 32. The Relation of God to them, is as strong when dead, as when living. Though dead to men, yet they were not dead to God. Sleep, though it chains up the senses for a time, yet it dis∣solves not the union between soul and body; Nor does the sleep of the Spouse break the marriage knot, be∣tween her and her Bridegroom: the union that is betwixt Christ and Believers out-lives death. Death indeed may and doth triumph over the naturall union betwixt body and soul, but cannot in the least either dissolve, or weaken the mysticall union betwixt the soul and Christ.
Let Believers live, and they live, from, for, and in Christ: and let them die, they do but sleep in him. Thus for Information. 2. Exhortation. Is a Believers death no more then a sleep? Then Be∣lievers, 1. Be not afraid of death. Your death, Believers, is a sleep, a sweet sleep, Eccles. 5.12. and should the la∣bouring man be afraid of a sweet sleep? No, but rather resolve with David, though you walk in the valley of the shaddow of death, yet there to fear no evil, Psal. 27.3. I disswade not from a naturall, or from a spiritual fear of death. The one is allowed, the other necessary. He is no man that doth not fear death. Beside the pain, Na∣ture must needs shrink at the thought of parting; and he acts not the Christian that doth not so fear death, as to mind and prepare for its certain, and yet most uncertain On-set. I only disswade from that base, cold, cowardly, carnal fear of death, which makes the whole life, no∣thing else but a living death, whichFurer est ne moriare, mori. kills men daily, because they must once die, and keeps them under perpe∣tual slavery and bondage, Heb. 2.15. To drive this Naile home I would only offer these few Considera∣tions. 1. Such a slavish fear, better becomes a Pharaoh and his Magicians, then Israclites and Believers. 'Tis no won∣der to see their courage fall, when once the cry of death is in their Houses, Exod. 12.29, 30. This Basilisk may well affright those Enchanters and Mountebanks: But a Moses, an Israelite indeed, may take it by the tayle, han∣dle it, and turn it into an harmless wand, yea into a rod, budding with glory and immortality. 'Tis true, theDar. 5.15, 6. Caldean Tyrants face may look pale and grisly, stam'd with the colour and fear of death: Those hands, which not long since lifted up his massie
Goblets in scorn and desiance of the God of Israel, may well hang down, when death writes him a letter of summons, to appear that night, before a most strict and supreme Tribunal. I do not wonder at Lewis the eleventh his strait charge to his servants, when once they saw him sick, never once to name that bitter word Death in his eare. Well may these fear Death, that know him but as a Pursui∣vant sent from Hell. But that is not your case Belie∣vers. 2. Consider: How cheerfully have Gods people, your fellow souldiers, lookt death in the face. Paul so farre from fearing, that he earnestly pants and longs after a dissolution, Phil. 1.28. How sweetly doth good old Simeon chant out his Swan-like song; his Dom ns nunc dimittis? Luke 2.29. How familiarly doth holy Moses hear of his end: 'tis no more betwixt God and Moses, but go up to Mount Nebo and die, Deut. 32.50. Had he been invited to a feast, it could not have been in a more sweet compella∣tion. No otherwise then to other Prophets, Go up and eat, or sleep. It has been no harsh news to Gods Children, to hear of their departure. To them death hath lost its horrour through Acquaintance. That face, which at first seem∣ed ill-favoured, by often viewing is grown out of dislike. Saints that have had such intire conversation with God, are not afraid to go to him. Hence that of Ambrose: I have not so lived, that I am ashamed to live longer, nor yet fear I death, because I have a good Lord: And that of Hilarion to his soul: Egredere, Anima, egredere: Get thee out my soul, away, thou hast seventy years served Christ, and art thou now afraid of death? 3. Whilst there lurks in the breast this slavish fear of death, the least piece of this leaven is enough to soure the whole lump of all our joyes and comforts. The least dram of this Coloquintida will marr the rellish of all our sweets, and make us cry out, there is death, death, death, in the pot. This little fly, will soon taint, our whole box of Ointment. On these and such like Acceunts Believers may
be strongly armed against the uncomely, slavish fear of death. But that is not all. This truth calls yet for a more raysed and noble temper; screws up Believers to an higher Cue. Viz. 2. Is your death, Believers, a sleep, so sweet a sleep, 'tis not enough for you not to fear, it becomes you to be willing to die, to desire to be dissolved, Phil. 1.23. To groan earnestly to be uncloathed, that you may go to rest, 2 Cor. 5.1, 4. Let it not be said of you that you are dragg'd and haled to your graves, as of the foolish rich man, Luke 12.20.x ': vehementius ab invito fla∣gito Causab. This night, thy soul shall be taken from thee. Go not as a Swine, but as a Lamb, to the slaughter. Resign thy soul without a forcible entry, Be a Voluntier in death. Be not prest to it. Death, which is the Atheists fear, should be the Christians desire. Yet here observe, this desire of death must not spring from a pet or passion, meer∣ly out of a taedium of living; as a sick man desires to change his bed, meerly out of weariness of, and discon∣tentment with his present condition. Death may not, must not be desired, out of impatience under, or distrust of Gods Providence, Job 3.3.7.15. Jer. 20.74. Jon. 4.3. No nor yet to avoid the labour and duty of our callings. To be weary of living on such accounts, argues not Christia∣nity, or a more raised frame, but pride, peevishness, cowardli∣ness, slug gishness of spirit. But, (this grand condition alwayes understood, viz. with submission to the will of God) it hugely becomes a Christian, considering the weight of his sins here, and of his glory hereafter, that death delivers from the one, and ushers in∣to the other, withPhil. 1.23. Paul, to desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. And that on a double account. 1. There is nothing here, that can invite or deferre our stay. Alas what is there here but darkness of ignorance, distempers of passions, complaints of estates, fears and sense of evil, hopes and doubts of good, ambitious rackings, covetous toylings, envious underminings, restless desires,
all vanity and vexation of spirit, Eccles. 1.1. many worlds of discontent in one. Why then should we linger and han ker after a continuance in this Baca of teares, and not de∣sire rather to enter into our Rest? Shew me a man that ever truly knew, what life was, and was loath to leave it, and ile in him shew thee, a prisoner, that blesles himself in his fet∣ters, a slave that likes his chains and gally. 2. There is all that in a Believers death, that may tempt and inflame his desires. 'Tis that to a Believer, which a night of rest is to the weary Labourer, 2 port to the wea∣ther-beaten Mariner, freedom to the fetter-gal'd Prisoner, the marriage-day to the loving Spouse, the day of coronation to the king. Why then should not a Saint conclude with Vid Bressius: Oh that my soul had the wings of a Dove, to fly and make hast to that mountain of God, and Paradice of eternal pleasures: Or with that aged Father in Austin, who when his friends, endeavouring to comfort him on his bed of sickness, told him, they hoped he should recover, an∣swered: If I shall not die at all, well: but if ever, why not now? Oh then, Believers, pant after an holy and an happy dismission: never cease tutoring and screwing up your souls, till, in Gods strength you can resolve, that if you might die to day, you would not choose to live till to morrow. Never think your souls in an hail condition, so long as you are 10th, to think of dying. Take this only comfort, from the prolonging of your dayes, not that you live long, but that you are in a sphear of doing your own and others souls more good, and bring∣ing your God more glory. And because the quelling of the slavish fear of death, and rendring of a Believer willing to depart, is a business of such grand concernment, give me leave to prescribe a dire∣ction or two: viz. 1. If ever you desire, that death should not be your fear, but gain, and so desirable: be sure to make Christ your life. This was Pauls method, Phil. 1.21, 23. He that would sleep in Jesus, must live to him. Labour to be acted by the Spirit of Christ, and the immediate fruits thereof, viz. faith, love,
filial fear, as thy principle, Rom. 8.14. Gal. 2.20. steer by Christs word, as your Compass, your Rule, Canon, Gal. 6.16. Level at Christs glory, as your highest end, 1 Cor. 10.31. Our life, as it gives way to death, so it must make way for it. As the tree falls, so it still lies: and as it stands, so usually it falls. If ever we hope to sleep sweetly in death, we must walk fruitfully in life. 'Tis the sleep of a labouring man that is sweet, Eccles. 5.12. To live holily is the only way to die happily. Mark the upright man, and behold the just, for the end of that man is peace, Psal. 37.37. 2. Fix your eyes on the death of Christ. Christ by his death hath wholly routed, yea conquered death. Christ precious bo∣dy lying in the grave hath sweetly perfumed that house of corruption. Christ by his death hath cut off all deaths suc∣cors. Whereas death borrowed its sting from sin, its strength from the law, and curle of God, Christ hath disarm'd them all of their destroying, killing power, 1 Cor. 15.56. So that now, as he falsly, thou mayst say truly, the bitterness of death is past. 3. Act and exert Faith to the uttermost. Quartan Agues are not so much the shame of physick, as the fear of death is of all natural skill and valour. This is Faiths proper evil, Faith alone professes this cure, undertakes it, and performs it throughly. Faith is that, that can turn fears into hopes, sighs into songs, tremblings into exultings. Faith singles out this Giant as her chief prize, and grapples with him, not as a match, but as a vanquisht underling, sets her foot on the neck of this King of Terrors. Faith concludes, that a Christ hath taken all the poyson out of the cup of death, and made it an whol∣som potion of immortality to his people: so that now their death, is nothing else but the funeral of all their sins, cares, and sorrows, and the Resurrection of their true joys and comforts. 3. Is a Believers death a sleep? Be exhorted to that high and Honourable duty, of serving your generation before you fall asleep. So did holy David, Acts 13.36. write after his Copy.
4. Is a Believers death no more then a sleep? Adore and bless the infinite mercy and goodness of the Lord Jesus, who by his death hath quite pluckt out the sting of death, and soaltered both its name and nature. That which was once, a grim death, is now to you nothing more then a sweet sleep. 5. Is a Believers death a sleep? Oh then prepare for death. Sleep steals, and creeps upon us unawares, so does death. To day therefore, while it is called to day. Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou knowest not what a day may bring forth, Prov. 27.1. Thou wilt repent to morrow! But what if this night thy soul should be taken from thee? Luk. 12.20. Hast thou not heard of fishes taken in an evil net, and of birds that are caught in a snare? so are the sons of man snared in an evil time, when it falleth suddenly upon them, Eccles. 9.12. To this end 1. Live in a constant and seriousGaena Dami∣tiani sunebris, Et; AEgytiorum Sceletus inter pocula. meditation of ap∣proaching death. This was that which Meses so earnestly plies the Throne of Grace for. Psal. 90.12. So teach us to number our dayes, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. Plato's Philosophy in this was true Divinity, The whole sum of a wise mans life is the commentation on his death. Not every sleet and stitting flash, but a frequent, deep, and sixed Contempla∣tion. This was that, which saved the soul of the young Prodi∣gal, who for several dayes, an hour together, sixt his eyes and thoughts on the ring with a deaths-head, given him by a friend on that condition. Ortelius reports of some people, that they thought this duty so necessary, that they used the bones of dead men, instead of money: that death might be continually in their eye. Those sunera Pacuri are of remark in story. He was used every night to be carried to his cham∣ber, as to hisSie ordinan∣dus est dies omnis tanqua vitam consum met, Seu. grave: and the word at the close of the so∣lemnity was . 2. Look not on death at a distance; as that that shall come certainly, but as that, that may comesuddenly. Look on every day as thy last. Do not as those, that have set dayes of truce and peace, in which they hang up their Armes a rusting, and
do not watch their beacons. But rather as those, that live in perpetual hazard of war, and of the enemies inroad. Have all things in daily readiness for service, at half an hours warning, on the least alarm. Stand as it were centinel; with musket loaded, match lighted, piece cockt, ready to discharge. Live not one hour in insidelity, or impenitency. Dare not to sleep a minute, who can tell, but then the Bridegroom may come and take thee, as he did the foolish Virgins, napping, Matth. 25.5, 6, 13. Thy Lord comes, not only in a day, but in an hour thou thinkest not of, therefore watch alway, Matth. 24.44, 50. 3. By way of Dehortation. Is a Believers death only a sleep? Then mourn not immoderately for them that are fallen asleep in Jesus. Remember, I beseech you, you neer Re∣lations of our now deceased Friend, mourn not immode∣rately, she is fallen asleep in Jesus. This is our Aposiles great drist in the Text, to disswade his Thessalonians from immode∣rate grief for their dead Relations, and that on this account, because they were only fallen asleep in Christ. It is indeed an indispensable duty, to be really affected with, and afflicted for, the death of holy men; who knows no what lamentations were taken up for good old Jacob, Gen. 50.16. for holy Hezekiah, 2 Chron. 32.33. for precious, hopeful Josiah, 2 Chron. 35.24, 25. Who hath not heard of Elisha's Epitaph, my father, my father, the Horsemen of Israel, and the Chariots thereof, 2 King. 13.14. Nurse Deborah bu∣ried under Allon-Bacuth, an oak of weeping, Gen. 35.8. and charitable Dorcas covered with tears, as she covered others with cloaths. Act. 9.39. Tears for the dead are their just . dofun∣elorum justa. dues. If ever grief be seasonable, it becomes a funeral. Grieve then we may, and must, but not immoderately; our sorrow must have its just check, and due temper, and that on these accounts. 1. Such an immoderate grief, would give too great an occa∣sion to the Gentiles to traduce us. When they see us bewayle those as utterly lost, whom we profess to live with God.
Spei nostra, ac fidei prevaricatores sumus. Simulata, ficta, fu∣cata videnter esse, quae dicimus. Cypr. 2. Such an immoderate grief is contrary to the example of our holy predecessours. Saints that have gone before us have set us bounds to their sorrows. So did Abraham for his dear∣est Sarah,Intimated by a small Caph in Lib∣cothah. Geu. 23.2, 4. So did Josoph and his brethren for their father Jacob. True, they mourned with a great and ve∣ry sore lamentation, but then it lasted but ten dayes, Gen. 50.10. Though the Egyptians indeed mourned for him seventy dayes, v. 3. Not that the Israelites were lesse kind, but more Christian-like in their sorrows. And David too, though a man as it were made up of strong affections, sets limits to his griefs, 2 Sam. 12.23, 24. Though in Absolom's case he forgat him∣self. Which yetNon or∣barium doluit sed quia nove∣rat in quas panas, im∣pia, adultero & parricidalis anima rapere∣tur. Aug. Austin endeavours to excuse. 3. Such an immoderate grief is direclly contrary to Gods Revealed-will. The Israelites might not cut themselves, not make any baldness between their eyes for the dead. Both, testimonies of the Heathens immoderate sorrow, Deut. 14.1. and our Saviour intimates his dislike of the Jewish Minstrels, which were used for the increase of sorrow, at funerals, Matt. 9.23, 24. as knowing that, in that case, our affections needed not so much a spur, as a bridle. 4. Such an immoderate grief is thwart and contrary to the blessed estate and condition of Saints departed. Is it fit to grieve immoderately for those that are preferred hence to heaven? Suppose them, whilst here, as well as earth could make them, what is earth to heaven, gold to glory, the enjoyment of the whole creation, to the fruition of a Creator? Why then should we blubber our cheeks, and say of them as Jacob of Joseph, They are devoured, when as they are gone to be Lords in Egypt. Non Lugendus qui moritur, sed desiderandus, Tert. Saints departed, are fitter objects for our desires, to be with them, then of our sorrows, for being for a while deprived of them. Too deep aNon ac∣cipiendoe sunt hic airae vestes quando illi ibi instrumenta alba jam sump∣serum. Cypr. black becomes not us below, while we consider, that they walk in whites above. If it was our joy to see them sanctified, it should be our triumph to know them saved.
Lastly, by way of Consolation. How does this Doctrine drop like the dew, or rather like an Honey-comb. You hear, Believers, that your death is a sleep. Nothing more. Hold up therefore your hands that hang down, strengthen the feeble knees. Remember, 1. Your death is a sleep. Whilst here you are very apt to complain of many a vexing day, of many a restless night. O know there is a time shortly coming, when you shall lie down quietly in your beds of earth, and not be disturbed in the least, either with one waking moment or distracting dream. When once the curtains of darkness are drawn about you, you shall never open your eyes more till the morning of Eternity dawn, and break forth in lustre on you. Behold, to your everlasting comfott, death it self is even embalmed to you, and clothed in such soft language, that you may scent a perfume, and discover a beauty in it, and 'tis no more a death, but a sleep only to you. 2. 'Tis a sleep, that is accompanied with rest and quietness: An undisturbed Rest. A port, an haven of Rest, and how wel∣com should that be to a sea-sick weather-beaten Seaman? How dessrable, how acceptable should death be to a soul long tost in the waves of this world, sick of its own sinful ima∣ginations, and tired with external temptations. Here alas, there is no Palace so high, or Tower so strong, that can keep diseases and infirmities from your bodies, cares, fears, tempta∣tions from your souls: yea but your death puts you into such a Cittadel, whose walls are so many cubits high, that no Sena∣cherib can shoot an arrow into it; its strong gates and bars exclude all enemies, all annoyances. None from without can storm it, none from within can betray it. 'Tis such a Castle as affords a perfect tranquility to all within it, Rev. 14.13. 3. 'Tis a sleep in Jesus: To whom departed Saints are still united; and whilst Christ your Head is above water, you need not fear a drowning. When you depart hence from your Friends Armes, you do but ascend to your Saviours more close embraces. No sooner shall your souls lay down the clay of your body, but they shall be seated under his Altar, Rev.
6.9. Under his special protection, which is such a perfect San∣ctuary, as no Avenger of blood, can there either arrest, or disturb you. 4. 'Tis a sleep, and that in Jesus, and therefore you shall and must rise again. If Christ the head be risen, the body shall not alwayes sleep. 'Tis the Apostles grand comfort in the Text, and his Argument, 1 Cor. 15.20. These bodies of yours in death, are not lost, but laid up only, Job 19.26, 27. and as man lies down in weakness, sleeps and riseth up in strength, like a Giant refresht with wine. So a Believer, like a grain of corn, dies indeed, but 'tis that he may spring up in more lustre, beauty, fruitfulness. John 12.24 As by sleep our bodies are refresht, so by death our bodies shall be resin'd. These bodies of yours, which are laid down in corruption, shall be raised in glory. That skin which is now wrinkled, shall one day shine; this dust shall be glorious, this base and vile body shall be transformed and made conformable to that glorious Standard, viz. Christs Body. These course mate∣rials, this lump of red earth, shall be laid to mellow in the earth, till it be fit to be made more then a China-dish, even a vessel fit for the great Masters use, a Cabinet fit to receive a glorified soul. Think not therefore much to loose a little ver∣milion red, a mixture only of flegm and sanguine, for this, you shall gain a radiant and resplendent luster; in comparison whereof, the most accomplisht beauty on earth would look but like a meer deformity. Death will not so much consume, as calcine your bodies: sever the dross from the silver, the ore from the gold, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43. when you fall, it shall not be said of you as of him. Died Abner as a fool? or as a Beast? No, but as aCombustus senex tumule procedit adul∣tus, consumens dat membera rogus. Phenix, out of whose very ashes there springs another more lively and vigorous. Wherefore comfort one another with these words, And be not ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are asleep, &c. FINIS.
