M2099 E271_11 99870849 123245
COLASTERION: A REPLY TO A NAMELES ANSVVER AGAINST The Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce. WHEREIN The trivial Author of that Answer is disco∣ver'd, the Licencer conferr'd with, and the Opinion which they traduce defended. By the former Author, J. M. Prov. 26. 5. Answer a Fool according to his folly, lest hee bee wise in his own conceit. Printed in the Year, 1645.
COLASTERION: A Reply to a nameless Answer against the Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce. AFTER many rumors of confutations and convictions forth comming against The Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce, and now and then a by-blow from the Pulpit, featherd with a censure strict indeed, but how true, more beholding to the au∣tority of that devout place which it borrowd to bee utterd in, then to any sound reason which it could oracle, while I still hop'd as for a blessing to see som peece of diligence, or lerned discretion come from them, it was my hap at length lighting on a certain parcel of Quaeries, that sek and finde not, to finde not seeking, at the taile of Anabaptistical, Antinomian, Heretical, Atheistical epithets, a jolly slander, call'd Divorce at pleasure: I stood a while and wonder'd, what wee might doe to a mans heart, or what anatomie use, to finde in it sincerity; for all our wonted marks every day fail us, and where wee thought it was, wee see it is not, for alter and change residence it cannot sure. And yet I see no good of body or of minde secure to a man for all his past labours without perpetual watchfulnes, and per∣severance. When as one above others who hath suffer'd much and long in the defence of Truth, shall after all this, give her cause to leav him so destitute and so vacant of her defence, as to yeild his mouth to bee the common road of Truth and Falshood, and such fals∣hood as is joyn'd with the rash and heedles calumny of his neigh∣bour. For what book hath hee ever met with, as his complaint is, Printed in the City, maintaining either in the title, or in the whole per∣suance, Divorce at pleasure? Tis true, that to divorce upon extreme necessity, when through the perversnes, or the apparent unfitnes of either, the continuance can bee to both no good at all, but an into∣lerable
injury and temptation to the wronged and the defrauded, to divorce then, there is a book that writes it lawfull. And that this Law is a pure and wholsom national Law, not to be with-held from good men, because others likely anough may abuse it to thir pleasure, can not bee charg'd upon that book, but must bee enterd a bold and impious accusation against God himself; who did not for this abuse withhold it from his own people. It will bee just therfore, and best for the reputation of him who in his Subitanes hath thus censur'd, to recall his sentence. And if, out of the abundance of his volumes, and the readiness of his quill, and the vastness of his other imploi∣ments, especially in the great audit for accounts, hee can spare us ought to the better understanding of this point, hee shall bee thankt in public, and what hath offended in the book, shall willingly sub∣mitt to his correction. Provided he bee sure not to come with those old and stale suppositions, unless hee can take away cleerly what that discours hath urg'd against them, by one who will expect other argu∣ments to bee perswaded the good health of a sound answer, then the gout and dropsy of a big margent, litter'd and overlaid with crude and huddl'd quotations. But as I still was waiting, when these light arm'd refuters would have don pelting at thir three lines utterd with a sage delivery of no reason, but an impotent and wors then Bonner∣like censure to burn that which provokes them to a fair dispute, at length a book was brought to my hands, entitl'd An Answer to the Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce. Gladly I receiv'd it, and very at∣tentively compos'd my self to read; hoping that now som good man had voutsaft the pains to instruct mee better, then I could yet learn out of all the volumes which for this purpos I had visited. Only this I marvel'd, and other men have since, when as I, in a Subject so new to this age, and so hazardous to please, conceal'd not my name, why this Author defending that part which is so creeded by the people, would conceal his? But ere I could enter three leaves into the Pam∣flet, (for I deferr the peasantly rudenes, which by the Licencers leav, I met with afterwards) my satisfaction came in abundantly, that it could bee nothing why hee durst not name himself, but the guilt of his own wretchednes. For first, not to speak of his abrupt and bald beginning, his very first page notoriously bewraies him an illiterat, and arrogant presumer in that which hee understands not; bearing us in hand as if hee knew both Greek and Ebrew, and is not able to
spell it; which had hee bin, it had bin either writt'n as it ought, or scor'd upon the Printer. If it bee excus'd as the carelesnes of his de∣puty, bee it known, the lerned Author himself is inventoried, and summ'd up, to the utmost value of his Livery cloak. Who ever hee bee, though this to som may seem a slight contest, I shall yet conti∣nue to think that man full of other secret injustice, and deceitfull pride, who shall offer in public to assume the skill, though it bee but of a tongue which hee hath not, and would catch his readers to be∣leeve of his ability, that which is not in him. The Licencer indeed, as his authority now stands, may licence much; but if these Greek Orthographies were of his licencing; the boyes at School might reck'n with him at his Grammar. Nor did I finde this his want of the pre∣tended Languages alone, but accompanied with such a low and home-spun expression of his Mother English all along, without joynt or frame, as made mee, ere I knew furder of him, often stop, and con∣clude, that this Author could for certain bee no other then som me∣chanic. Nor was the stile flat and rude, and the matter grave and so∣lid, for then ther had bin pardon, but so shallow and so unwary was that also, as gave sufficiently the character of a gross and sluggish, yet a contentious and overweening pretender. For first, it be∣hooving him to shew, as hee promises, what divorce is, and what the true doctrine and Discipline therof, and this beeing to doe by such principles and prooffs as are receav'd on both sides, hee performes neither of these; but shews it first from the Judaical practice, which hee himself disallows, and next from the practice of Canon Law, which the Book hee would confute, utterly rejects, and all Laws depending theron; which this puny Clark calls The Laws of England, and yet pronounces them by an Ecclesiastical judge: as if that were to bee accounted the Law of England, which depended on the Popery of England; or if it were, this Parlament hee might know hath now damn'd that judicature. So that whether his meaning were to inform his own party, or to confute his adversary, instead of shewing us the true Doctrin and Discipline of Divorce, hee shews us nothing but his own contemptible ignorance. For what is the Mosaic Law to his opinion, and what is the Canon utterly now antiquated, either to that or to mine? Yee see already what a faithfull definer wee have him. From such a wind egg of definition as this, they who expect any of his other arguments to bee well hatcht, let them enjoy the
vertu of thir worthy Champion. But one thing more I observ'd, a singular note of his stupidity, and that his Trade is not to meddle with Books, much less with Confutations. When as the Doctrin of Di∣vorce had now a whole year bin publisht the second time, with many Arguments added, and the former ones better'd and confirm'd, this idle pamslet comes reeling forth against the first Edition only; as may appear to any by the pages quoted. Which put me in minde of what by chance I had notice of to this purpos the last Summer, as nothing so serious, but happns oft times to bee attended wih a ridiculous ac∣cident, it was then told mee that the Doctrin of divorce was answerd, and the answer half Printed against the first Edition; not by one, but by a pack of heads; of whom the cheif, by circumstance, was intima∣ted to mee, and since ratifi'd to bee no other, if any can hold laugh∣ter, and I am sure none will guess him lower, then an actual Serving∣man. This creature, for the Story must on, (and what though hee bee the lowest person of an interlude, hee may deserv a canvasing,) transplanted himself, and to the improvment of his wages, and your better notice of his capacity, turn'd Solliciter. And having con∣vers'd much with a stripling Divine or two of those newly fledge Probationers, that usually come scouting from the University, and ly heer no lame legers to pop into the Bethesda of som Knights Chaplain∣ship, where they bring grace to his good cheer, but no peace or be∣nediction els to his house; these made the Champarty, hee contri∣buted the Law, and both joynd in the Divinity. Which made mee intend, following the advice also of freinds, to lay aside the thought of mi-spending a Reply to the buzze of such a Drones nest. But find∣ing that it lay, what ever was the matter, half a year after unfinisht in the press, and hearing for certain that a Divine of note, out of his good will to the opinion, had takn it into his revise, and somthing had put out, somthing put in, and stuck it heer and there with a clove of his own Calligraphy, to keep it from tainting, and furder when I saw the stuff, though very cours and thred-bare, garnisht and trimly fac't with the commendations of a Licencer, I resolv'd, so soon, as leisure granted mee the recreation, that my man of Law should not altogether loose his solliciting. Although I impute a share of the making to him whose name I find in the approbation, who may take, as his mind servs him, this Reply. In the mean while it shall bee seen, I refue no occasion, and avoid no adversary, either to main∣tane
what I have begun, or to give it up for better reason. To begin then with the Licencer and his censure. For a Licencer is not contented now to give his single Imprimatur, but brings his chair into the Title leaf; there sits and judges up or judges down what book hee pleases; if this bee suffer'd, what worthles Author, or what cunning Printer will not bee ambitious of such a Stale to put off the heaviest gear; which may in time bring in round fees to the Licen∣cer, and wretched mis-leading to the People. But to the matter: he approves the publishing of this Book, to preserv the strength and honour of Mariage against those sad breaches and dangerous abuses of it. Belike then the wrongfull suffering of all those sad breaches and abuses in Mariage to a remediless thraldom, is the strength and honour of Mariage; a boistrous and bestial strength, a dis-honourable honour, an infatu∣ated Doctrine. wors then the salv jure of tyrannizing, which wee all fight against. Next hee saih that common discontents make these breaches in unstaid mindes, and men givn to change. His words may be apprehended, as if they disallow'd only to divorce for common discon∣tents in unstaid mindes, having no cause, but a desire of change, and then wee agree. But if hee take all discontents on this side adultery, to bee common, that is to say, not difficult to endure, and to affect only un∣staid mindes, it might administer just cause to think him the ufittest man that could bee, to offer at a comment upon Job; as seeming y this to have no more true sense of a good man in his afflictions, then those Edomitish Freinds had, of whom Job complains, and against whom God testisies his anger. Shall a man of your own coat, who hath espous'd his flock; and represents Christ more, in beeing the true husband of his Congregation, then an ordnary man doth in beeing the husand of his wife, and yet this representment is thought a cheif cause why Mariage must bee inseparable, shall this spiritual man ord∣narily for the increase of his maintenance, or any slight cause forsake that wedded cure of souls, that should bee dearest to him, and marry another, and another, and shall not a person wrongfully afflicted, and persecuted eevn to extremity, forsake an unfi, injurious, and pestilent mate, ty'd only by a civil and fleshly covnant? If you bee a man so much hating change, hate that other change; if your self bee not guilty, counsel your brethren to hate it; and leav to bee the supercilious judge of other mens miseries and changes, that your own bee not judg'd. The reasons of your licen't pamflet, you say
are good; they must bee better then your own then, I shall wonder els how such a trivial fellow was accepted and commended, to bee the confuter of so dangerous an opinion as yee give out mine. Now therfore to your Atturney, since no worthier an adversary makes his appearance, nor this neither his appearance, but lurking under the safety of his nameles obscurity: such as yee turn him forth at the Postern, I must accept him; and in a better temper then A∣jax, doe mean to scourge this Ramme for yee, till I meet with his Ʋ∣lysses. Hee begins with Law, and wee have it of him as good cheap, as a∣ny hucster at Law, newly set up, can possibly afford, and as imper∣tinent; but for that hee hath receiv'd his hansel. Hee presumes also to cite the Civil Law, which, I perceav by his citing never came within his dormitory, yet what hee cites makes but against him∣self. His second thing therfore is to refute the advers position, and very methodically, three pages before hee sets it down; and sets his own in the place, that disagreement of minde or disposition, though shewing it self in much sharpnes is not by the Law of God, or man, a just cause of divorce. To this position I answer, that it lays no battery against mine, no, nor so much as faces it, but tacks about, long ere it come neer, like a harmles and respectfull confutement. For I confess that disagree∣ment of minde or disposition, though in much sharpnes, is not alwaies a just cause of divorce; for much may bee endur'd. But what if the sharpnes bee much more then his much? To that point it is our mis-hap wee have not heer his grave decision. Hee that will con∣tradict the positive which I alleg'd, must hold that no disagreement of minde, or disposition, can divorce, though shewn in most sharp∣nes; otherwise hee leaves a place for equity to appoint limits, and so his following arguments will either not prove his own position, or not disprove mine. His first Argument, all but what hobbles to no purpos is this. Wher the Scripture commands a thing to bee don, it appoints when, how, and for what, as in the case of death or excommunication. But the Scripture directs not what measure of disagreement or contrariety may divorce; Therfore, the Scripture allows not any divorce for disagreement. Answer, First I deny your major, the Scripture appoints many things,
and yet leaves the circumstance to mans discretion, particularly, in your own examples; Excommunication is not taught when, and for what to bee, but left to the Church. How could the Licencer let pass this childish ignorance and call it good. Next, in matter of death, the Laws of England, wherof you have intruded to bee an opiniastrous Sub advocate, and are bound to defend them, conceave it not enjoyn'd in Scripture, when or for what cause they shall put to death, as in adultery, theft, and the like; your minor also is fals, for the Scripture plainly sets down for what measure of disagreement a man may divorce, Deut. 24. 1. learn better what that phrase means, if shee finde no favour in his eyes. Your second Argument, without more tedious fumbling is breifly thus. If diversity in Religion, which breeds a greater dislike then any na∣tural disagreement may not cause a divorce, then may not the lesser disagree∣ment: but diversity of Religion may not; Ergo. Answer, First, I deny in the major, that diversity of Religion, breeds a greater dislike to mariage duties, then natural disagreement. For between Israelite, or Christian and Infidel more often hath bin seen too much love: but between them who perpetually clash in na∣tural contrarieties, it is repugnant that ther should bee ever any ma∣ried love or concord. Next, I deny your minor, that it is comman∣ded not to divorce in diversity of Religion, if the Infidel will stay: for that place in St. Paul, commands nothing, as that book at large affirm'd, though you over-skipt it. Secondly, if it doe command, it is but with condition, that the Infidel bee content, and well pleas'd to stay, which cuts off the sup∣posal of any great hatred or disquiet between them; seeing the In∣fidel had liberty to depart at pleasure; and so this comparison avails nothing. Your third Argument is from Deut. 22. If a man hate his wife, and raise an ill report, that hee found her no virgin, if this were fals, he might not put her away, though hated never so much. Answer, This was a malicious hatred bent against her life, or to send her out of dores without her portion. Such a hater looses by due punishment that privilege, Deut. 24. 1. to divorce for a natu∣ral dislike, which though it could not love conjugally, yet sent away civilly, and with just nditions. But doubtles the Wife in that for∣mer case had liberty to depart from her fals accuser, lest his hatred
should prove mortal; els that Law peculiarly made to right the wo∣man, had turn'd to her greatest mischeif, Your fourth Argument, One Christian ought to bear the infirmities of another, but cheifly of his Wife. Answer, I grant, infirmities, but not outrages, not perpetual de∣fraudments of truest conjugal society, not injuries and vexations as importunat as fire. Yet to endure very much, might doe well an ex∣hortation, but not a compulsive Law. For the Spirit of God him∣self by Solomon declares that such a consort the earth cannot bear, and better dwell in a corner on the house top, or in the Wildernes. Burdens may bee born, but still with consideration to the strength of an ho∣nest man complaining. Charity indeed bids us forgive our enemies, yet doth not force us to continue freindship and familiarity with those freinds who have bin fals or unworthy toward us; but is con∣tented in our peace with them, at a fair distance. Charity commands not the husband to receav again into his bosom the adulterous Wife, but thinks it anough, if hee dismiss her with a beneficent and peace∣full dismission. No more doth Charity command, nor can her rule compell, to retain in neerest union of wedloc, one whose other gros∣sest faults, or disabilities to perform what was covnanted, are the just causes of as much greevance and dissention in a Family, as the pri∣vate act of adultery. Let not therfore under the name of fulfilling Charity, such an unmercifull, and more then legal yoke, bee padlockt upon the neek of any Christian. Your fifth Argument, If the husband ought love his Wife, as Christ his Church, then ought shee not to bee put away for contrariety of minde. Answer, This similitude turnes against him. For if the husband must bee as Christ to the Wife, then must the wife bee as the Church to her husband. If ther bee a perpetual contrariety of minde in the Church toward Christ, Christ himselfe threatns to divorce such a Spouse, and hath often don it. If they urge, this was no true Church, Purge again, that was no true Wife. His sixth Argument is from the 5 of Matthew 32. which hee ex∣pounds after the old fashion, and never takes notice of what I brought against that exposition; Let him therfore seek his answer there. Yet can hee not leav this Argument, but hee must needs first shew us a curvet of his madnes, holding out an objection, and running him∣self
upon the point. For, aith hee, f Christ  cause but adul∣tery, then all other causes as frigidity, inous mariage, &c. are no causes of divorce; and answers that the speech of Christ holds universally, at hee intended it namely to condemn such divorce;  was groundlsly pra∣ctiz'd among the Jews, for every cause which they thought sufficient; not checking the law of consanguinities or ainities, or forbidding other cause which makes mariage void, Ipso facto. Answ. Look to it now you be not found taking fees on both sides, for if you once bring limitations to the universal words of Christ, an∣other will doe as much with as good autority, and affirm, that nei∣ther did hee check the Law Deut. 24. 1. nor forbid the causes that make mariage void actually; which if any thing in the world doth, unfitnes doth, and contrariety of minde; yea, more then adultery, for that makes not the mariage void, nor much more unfit, but for the time, if the offended party forgive; but unfitnes and contrariety fru∣strates and nullifies for ever, unless it bee a rare chance, all the good and peace of wedded conversation; and leaves nothing between them enjoyable, but a prone and savage necessity, not worth the name of mariage, unaccompanied with love. Thus much his own objection hath don against himself. Argu. 7. Hee insists, that man and wife are one flesh, therfore must not separat. But must bee sent to look again upon the 35. pag. of that book, where hee might have read an answer, which hee stirrs not. Yet can hee not abstain, but hee must doe us another pleasure ere hee goes; Although I call the Common Pleas to witness, I have not hir'd his tongue, whatever men may think by his arguing. For be∣sides adultery, hee excepts other causes which dissolv the union of beeing one flesh, either directly, or by consequence. If only adultery bee excep∣ted by our Saviour, and hee voluntarily can adde other exceptions that dissolv that union both directly and by consequence, these words of Christ, the main obstacle of divorce, are open to us by his own invi∣tation to include what ever causes dissolv that union of flesh, either di∣rectly or by consequence. Which, till hee name other causes more like∣ly, I affirm to bee don soonest by unfitness and contrariety of minde. For that induces hatred, which is the greatest dissolver, both of spiritual and corporal union, turning the minde and consequent∣ly the body to other objects. Thus our doubty adversary, either directly, or by consequence yeilds us the question with his own mouth,
and the next thing hee does, recants it again. His eighth Argument shivers in the uttering, and hee confesses to bee not over confident of it, but of the rest it may bee sworn hee is. St. Paul, 1 Cor. 7. saith, that the married have trouble in the flesh, ther∣fore wee must bear it, though never so intolerable. I Answer, if this bee a true consequence, why are not all troubles to bee born alike? why are wee suffer'd to divorce adulteries, de∣sertions, or frigidities? Who knows not that trouble and affliction is the decree of God upon every state of life? follows it therfore, that though they grow excessive, and insupportable, wee must not avoid them? if wee may in all other conditions, and not in mari∣age, the doom of our suffering ties us not by the trouble, but by the bond of mariage; and that must bee prov'd inseparable from other reasons, not from this place. And his own confession declares the weaknes of this Argument, yet his ungovern'd arrogance could not bee disswaded from venting it. His ninth Argument is, That a husband must love his wife as himself, therfore hee may not divorce for any disagreement, no more then hee may se∣parat his soul from his body. I Answer, if hee love his wife as himself, hee must love her so farre as hee may preserv himself to her in a cherfull and comfortable man∣ner, and not so as to ruin himself by anguish and sorrow, without a∣ny benefit to her. Next, if the husband must love his wife as himself, shee must bee understood a wife in som reasonable measure, willing, and sufficient to perform cheif duties of her Covnant, els by the hold of this argument, it would bee his great sin to divorce either for adultery, or desertion. The rest of this will run circuit with the uni∣on of one flesh, which was answer'd before. And that to divorce a relative and Metaphorical union of two bodies into one flesh, cannot bee likn'd in all things to the dividing of that natural union of soul and body into one person, is apparent of it self. His last Argument hee fetches from the inconveniences that would follow upon this freedom of divorce, to the corrupting of mens mindes, and the overturning of all human society. But for mee, let God and Moses answer this blasphemer, who dares bring in such a soul endightment against the divine Law. Why did God permit this to his people the Jewes, but that the right and good which came directly therby, was more in his esteem, then the wrong
and evil which came by accident. And for those weak supposes of In∣fants that would be left in their mothers belly, (which must needs bee good news for Chamber-maids, to hear a Serving-man grown so pro∣vident for great bellies) and portions, and joyntures likely to in∣curr imbezlement heerby, the ancient civil Law instructs us plentiful∣ly how to award, which our profound opposite knew not, for it was not in his Tenures. His Arguments are spun, now follows the Chaplain with his An∣tiquities, wiser if hee had refrain'd, for his very touching ought that is lerned, soiles it, and lays him still more and more open a conspicu∣ous gull. There beeing both Fathers and Councels more ancient, wherwith to have serv'd his purpos better then with what hee cites, how may we doe to know the suttle drift that mov'd him to begin first with the twelfth Councel of Toledo? I would not undervalue the depth of his notion, but perhaps he had heard that the men of Toledo had store of good blade-mettle, and were excellent at cuttling; who can tell but it might bee the reach of his policy, that these able men of deci∣sion, would doe best to have the prime stroke among his testimonies in deciding this cause. But all this craft avails him not; for seeing they allow no cause of divorce but fornication, what doe these keen Doctors heer but cut him over the finews with thir Toledo's, for holding in the precedent page other causes of divorce besides, both directly, and by consequence. As evil doth that Saxon Councel, next quoted, bestead him. For if it allow divorce precisely for no cause but fornication, it thwarts his own Exposition: and if it understand fornication largely, it sides with whom hee would confute. How∣ever the autority of that Synod can bee but small, beeing under Theo∣dorus, the Canterbury Bishop, a Grecian Monk of Tarsus, revolted from his own Church to the Pope. What have wee next? The Ci∣vil Law stufft in between two Councels, as if the Code had bin som Synod; for that hee understood himself in this quotation is incredi∣ble; where the Law, Cod. l. 3. tit. 38. leg. 11. speaks not of divorce, but against the dividing of possessions to divers heires, wherby the maried servants of a great family were divided perhaps into distant Countries, and Colonies, Father from Son, Wife from Husband, fore against thir will. Somwhat lower hee confesses, that the Civill Law allows many reasons of divorce, but the Cannon Law decrees otherwise. A fair credit to his Cause; and I amaze me, though the fancy of this
doult bee as obtuse and sad as any mallet, how the Licencer could sleep out all this, and suffer him to uphold his opinion▪ by Canons, & Gregorian decretals, a Law which not only his adversary, but the whole reformation of this Church and state hath branded and rejected. As ignorantly, and too ignorantly to deceav any Reader but an unlern∣ed, hee talks of Justin Martyrs Apology, not telling us which of the twain; for that passage in the beginning of his first, which I have cited els-where, plainly makes against him: So doth Tertullian, ci∣ted next, and next Erasmus, the one against Marcion, the other in his Annotations on Matthew, and to the Corinthians. And thus yee have the List of his choice Antiquities, as pleasantly chosen as yee would wish from a man of his handy Vocation, puft up with no luck at all, above the stint of his capacity. Now hee comes to the Position, which I sett down whole; and like an able text man flits it into fowr, that hee may the better come at it with his Barbar Surgery, and his sleevs turn'd up. Wherin first hee denies that any disposition, unfitness, or contrariety of minde is un∣changeable in nature, but that by the help of diet and physic it may be alter'd. I mean not to dispute Philosophy with this Pork, who never read any, But I appeal to all experience, though there bee many drugs to purge those redundant humors, and circulations that commonly im∣pair health, and are not natural, whether any man can with the safe∣ty of his life bring a healthy constitution into physic with this de∣signe, to alter his natural temperament, and disposition of minde. How much more vain, and ridiculous would it bee, by altering and rooting up the grounds of nature, which is most likely to produce death or madnes, to hope the reducing of a minde to this or that fit∣nes, or two disagreeing mindes to a mutual sympathy. Suppose they might, and that with great danger of thir lives and right senses, alter one temperature, how can they know that the succeeding dispositi∣on will not bee as farre from fitnes and agreement? They would per∣haps change Melancholy into Sanguin, but what if fleam, and cho∣ler in as great a measure come instead, the unfitnes will be still as dif∣ficult and troublesom. But lastly, whether these things bee change∣able, or not, experience teacheth us, and our Position supposes that they seldom doe change in any time commensurable to the necessi∣ties of man, or convenient to the ends of mariage. And if the fault b in the one▪ shall the other live all his daies in bondage and misery
for anothers perversnes, or immedicable disaffection? To my freinds, of which may fewest bee so unhappy, I have a remedy, as they know, more wise and manly to prescribe: but for his freinds and followers (of which many may deserv justly to feel themselvs the unhappines which they consider not in others) I send them by his advice to sit upon the stool and strain, till their cross dispositions and contrarieties of minde shall change to a better correspondence, and to a quicker ap∣prehension of common sense, and thir own good. His second Reason is as heedles, because that grace may change the dis∣position, therfore no indisposition may cause divorce. Answ. First, it will not bee deniable that many persos, gracious both, may yet happn to bee very unfitly marryed, to the great di∣sturbance of either. Secondly, what if one have grace, the other not, and will not alter, as the Scripture testifies ther bee of those, in whom wee may expect a change, when the Blackamore changes his co∣lour, or the Leopard his spots, Jer. 13. 23. shall the gracious therfore dwell in torment all his life, for the ungracious? Wee see that ho∣liest precepts, then which ther can no better physic bee administerd to the minde of man, and set on with powerfull preaching, cannot work this cure, no not in the family, not in the wife of him that Preaches day and night to her. What an unreasonable thing it is that men, and Clergy-men especially, should exact such wondrous chan∣ges in another mans house, and are seen to work so little in thir own? To the second point of the position, that this unfitnes hinders the main ends, and benefits of mariage, hee answers, if I mean the unfit∣nes of choler, or sullen disposition, that soft words according to Solomon, pacify wrath. But I reply, that the saying of Salomon, is a Proverb frequently true, not universally, as both the event shews, and many other sen∣tences writtn by the same Author particularly of an evill woman, Prov. 21. 9. 19. and in other Chapters, that shee is better shun'd then dwelt with, and a desert is preferr'd before her society. What need the Spirit of God put this chois into our heads, if soft words could alwaies take effect with her? How frivolous is, not only this dispu∣ter, but hee that taught him thus, and let him come abroad. To his second answer I return this, that although there bee not easi∣ly found such an antipathy, as to hate one another like a toad or poison, yet
that there is oft such a dislike in both, or either, to conjugal love, as hinders all the comfort of Matrimony, sears any can bee so simple, as not to apprehend. And what can be that favour, found or not found in the eyes of the Husband, but a natural liking or disliking, wherof the Law of God, Deut. 24. beates witnes, as of an ordnary accident, and determins wisely, and divinely therafter. And this disaffection happning to bee in the one, not without the unspeakable discom∣fort of the other, must hee bee left like a thing consecrated to cala∣mity, and despair without redemption? Against the third branch of the position hee denies that solace, and peace, which is contrary to discord and variance, is the main end of mariage. What then? Hee will have it the solace of male, and female. Came this doctrin out of som School, or som stie? Who but one forsak'n of all sense and civil nature, and cheifly of Christianity, will deny that peace contrary to discord, is the calling and the general end of every Christian, and of all his actions, and more especially of mariage, which is the dearest league of love, and the dearest resemblance of that love which in Christ is dearest to his Church; how then can peace and comfort, as it is contrary to discord, which God hates to dwell with, not bee the main end of mariage? Discord then wee ought to fly, and to pursue peace, farre above the observance of a civil covnant, already brokn, and the breaking dayly iterated on the other side. And what better testimony then the words of the instituti∣on it self, to prove, that a conversing solace, & peacefull society is the prime end of mariage, without which no other help, or office can bee mutual, beseeming the dignity of reasonable creatures, that such as they should be coupl'd in the rites of nature by the meer compul∣sion of lust, without love, or peace, wors then wild beasts. Nor was it half so wisely spokn, as some deem, though Austin spake it, that if God had intended other then copulation in Mariage, he would for Adain have created a freind, rather then a wife, to convers with; and our own writers blame him for this opinion; for which and the like passages, concerning mariage, hee might bee justly taxt of ru∣sticity in these affairs. For this cannot but bee with ease conceav'd, that there is one society of grave freindship, and another amiable and attractive society of conjugal love, besides the deed of procreation, which of it self soon cloies, and is despis'd, unless it bee cherisht and ie incited with a pleasing conversation. Which if ignoble and
swainish mindes cannot apprehend, shall such merit therfore to be the censurers of more generous and vertuous Spirits? Against the last point of the position, to prove that contrariety of minde is not a greater cause of divorce, then corporal frigidity, hee enters into such a tedious and drawling tale of burning, and burning, and lust and burning, that the dull argument it self burnes to, for want of stirring; and yet all this burning is not able to expell the frigidity of his brain. So long therfore, as that cause in the position shall bee prov'd a sufficient cause of divorce, rather then spend words with this fleamy clodd of an Antagonist, more then of necessity, and a little mer∣riment, I will not now contend whether it bee a greater cause then frigidity, or no. His next attempt is upon the Arguments which I brought to prove the position. And for the first, not finding it of that structure, as to bee scal'd with his short ladder, hee retreats with a bravado, that it deservs no answer. And I as much wonder what the whole book deserv'd to bee thus troubl'd and sollicited by such a paltry Solliciter. I would hee had not cast the gracious eye of his duncery upon the small deserts of a pamflet, whose every line meddl'd with, uncases him to scorn and laughter. That which hee takes for the second Argument, if hee look better, is no argument, but an induction to those that follow. Then hee stumbles that I should say, the gentlest ends of Mariage, confessing that hee understands it not. And I beleev him heartily: for how should hee, a Servingman both by nature and by function, an Idiot by breeding, and a Solliciter by presumption, ever come to know, or feel within himself, what the meaning is of gentle? Hee blames it for a neat phrase, for nothing angers him more then his own pro∣per contrary. Yet altogether without art sure hee is not; for who could have devis'd to give us more breifly a better description of his own Servility? But what will become now of the busines I know not; for the man is suddenly takn with a lunacy of Law, and speaks revelations out of the Atturneys Academy, only from a lying spirit: for hee saies that where a thing is void, ipso facto, there needs no legal proceeding to make it void. Which is fals, for mariage is void by adultery, or frigidity, yet not made void without legal proceeding. Then asks my opinion of John a Nokes, and John a Stiles; and I answer him, that I for my
part think John Dory, was a better man then both of them: for cer∣tainly, they were the greatest wranglers that ever liv'd, and have fill'd all our Law-books with the obtunding story of thir suits and trials. After this hee tells us a miraculous peece of antiquity, how two Ro∣mans, Titus, and Sempronius made feoffments, at Rome sure, and levied Fines by the Common Law. But now his fit of Law past, yet hardly come to himself, hee maintains, that if Mariage bee void, as beeing neither of God nor nature, there needs no lgal proceeding to part it, and I tell him, that offends not mee; Then, quoth hee, this is no thing to your book, beeing the Doctrin and Disciplin of Divorce. But that I deny him; for all Discipline is not legal, that is to say juridical, but som is personal, som Economical, and som Ecclesiastical. Lastly, if I prove that contrary dispositions are joyn'd neither of God nor nature, and so the mariage void, hee will give mee the controversy. I have prov'd it in that book to any wise man, and without more a doe the Institution proves it. Where I answer an Objection usually made, that the disposition ought to bee known before mariage, and shew how difficult it is to choose a fit consort, and how easie to mistake, the Servitor would know what I mean by conversation, declaring his capacity nothing refin'd since his Law-puddering, but still the same it was in the Pan∣try, and at the Dresser. Shall I argue of conversation with this hoy∣d'n to goe and practice at his opportunities in the Larder? To men of quality I have said anough, and experience confirms by daily ex∣ample, that wisest, sobrest, justest men are somtimes miserably mista∣k'n in thir chois. Whom to leav thus without remedy, tost and tem∣pested in a most unquietsea of afflictions and temptations, I say is most unchristianly. But hee goes on to untruss my Arguments, imagining them his Maisters points. Only in the passage following, I cannot but admire the ripenes, and the pregnance of his native trechery, endeavouring to bee more a Fox then his wit will suffr him. Wheras I breifly men∣tion'd certain heads of Discours, which I referr'd to a place more pro∣per according to my method, to bee treated there at full with all thir Reasons about them, this Brain-worm against all the Laws of Dis∣pute, will needs deal with them heer. And as a Country Hinde som∣times ambitious to shew his betters that hee is not so simple as you take him, and that hee knows his advantages, will teach as a new
trick to confute by. And would you think to what a pride hee swels in the contemplation of his rare stratagem, offring to carp at the lan∣guage of a book, which yet hee confesses to bee generally com∣mended; while himself will bee acknowledg'd by all that read him, the basest and the hungriest endighter, that could take the boldnes to look abroad. Observ now the arrogance of a groom, how it will mount. I had writt'n, that common adultery is a thing which the rankest Politician would think it shame and disworship that his Law should countenance. First, it offends him that rankest should signi∣fy ought, but his own smell; who, that knows English, would not understand mee, when I say a rank Serving-man, a rank petti-fog∣ger, to mean a meer Servingman, a meer and arrant petti-fogger, who lately was so hardy, as to lay aside his buckram wallet, and make himself a fool in Print, with confuting books, which are above him. Next the word Politician is not us'd to his maw, and therupon hee plaies the most notorious hobbihors, jesting and frisking in the luxu∣ry of his non-sense with such poor fetches to cog a laughter from us, that no antic hobnaile at a Morris, but is more hansomly faceti∣ous. Concerning that place Deut. 24. 1. which hee saith to bee the main pillar of my opinion, though I rely more on the institution then on that. These two pillars I doe indeed confess are to mee as those two in the porch of the Temple, Jachin and Boaz, which names import establishment, and strength; nor doe I fear, who can shake them. The exposition of Deut. which I brought, is the receav'd Exposi∣tion both ancient and modern, by all lerned men, unless it bee a Mon∣kish Papist heer and there: and the gloss which hee and his obscure assistant would perswade us to, is meerly new, and absurd, presuming out of his utter ignorance in the Ebrew, to interpret those words of the Text, first in a mistakn sense of uncleanness, against all approved Writers. Secondly, in a limited sense, when as the original speaks without limitation, some uncleannes, or any; and it had bin a wise Law indeed to mean it self particular, and not to express the case which this a cute Rabbie hath all this while bin hooking for. Wherby they who are most partial to him, may guess that somthing is in this doc∣trin which I allege, that forces the adversary to such a new & strain'd Exposition, wherin hee does nothing for above foure pages, but founder himself to and fro in his own objections, one while denying
that divorce was permitted, another while affirming, that it was per∣mitted for the wives sake. and after all distrusts himself. And for his surest retirement, betakes him to those old suppositions, that Christ a∣bolisht the Mosaic Law of divorce; that the Jews had not sufficient know∣ledge in this point, through the darknes of the dispensation of heavnly things; that under the plenteous grace of the Gospel, wee are ty'd by cruellest com∣pulsion, to live in mariage till death, with the wickedest, the worst, the most persecuting mate. These ignorant and doting surmises, he might have read confuted at large, eevn in the first Edition; but found it safer to pass that part over in silence. So that they who see not the sottishnes of this his new and tedious Exposition, are worthy to love it dearly. His Explanation don, hee charges mee with a wicked gloss, and al∣most blasphemy, for saying that Christ in teaching meant not always to bee tak'n word for word; but like a wise Physician administring one excess against another, to reduce us to a perfet mean. Certainly to teach thus, were no dishonest method: Christ himself hath often us'd hyperbolies in his teaching; and gravest Authors, both Aristotle in the second of his Ethics to Nichomachus, and Seneca in his seventh De Beneficiis. advise us to stretch out the line of precept oft times beyond measure, that while wee tend furder, the mean might bee the easier attain'd. And who-ever comments that fifth of Matthew, when hee comes to the turning of cheek after cheek to blows, and the parting both with cloak and coat, if any please to bee the fler, will bee forc' to recommend himself to the same  though this ca∣tering Law-monger bee bold to call i wicked. Now note another pretious peece of him; Christ,  hee, doth not say that an unchast look is adultery, but the lusting alter her; as  the looking unchast∣ly, could bee without lusting. This gear is Licenc't for good rea∣son: Imprimatur. Next hee would prove that the speech of Christ is not utter'd in ex∣cess against the Pharises, First, Because hee speaks it to his Disciples, Matth. 5. which is fals, for hee spake it to the multitude, as by the first vers. is evident, among which in all likelihood were many Pha∣rises, but out of doubt, all of them Pharisaean disciples, and bred up in their Doctrin; from which extremes of error and falsity, Christ throughout his whole Sermon labours to reclaim the people. Se∣condly, saith hee, Because Christ forbidds not only putting away, but
marrying her who is put away. Acutely, as if the Pharises might not have offended as much in marrying the divorc'd, as in divor∣cing the maried. The precept may bind all, rightly understood; and yet the vehement manner of giving it, may bee occasion'd only by the Pharises. Finally, hee windes up his Text with much doubt and trepidation; for it may bee his trenchers were not scrap't, and that which never yet afforded corn of savour to his noddle, the Salt-seller was not rubb'd: and therfore in this hast easily granting, that his answers fall foule upon each other, and praying, you would not think hee writes as a profet, but as a man, hee runns to the black jack, fills his flagon, spreds the table, and servs up dinner. After waiting and voiding, hee thinks to void my second Argu∣ment, and the contradictions that will follow, both in the Law and Gospel, if the Mosaic Law were abrogated by our Saviour, and a compulsive prohibition fixt instead: and sings his old song, that the Gospel counts unlawfull that which the Law allow'd, instancing in Cir∣cumcision, Sacrifices, Washings. But what are these Ceremonial things to the changing of a morall point in houshold dutie, equally belonging to Jew and Gentile; divorce was then right, now wrong; then permitted in the rigorous time of Law, now forbidd'n by Law eevn to the most extremely afflicted in the favourable time of grace and freedom. But this is not for an unbutton'd fellow to discuss in the Garret, at his tressle, and dimension of candle by the snuffe; which brought forth his cullionly paraphrase on St. Paul, whom he brings in, discoursing such idle stuff to the Maids, and Widdows, as his own servile inurbanity forbeares not to put into the Apostles mouth, of the soules conversing: and this hee presumes to doe beeing a bayard, who never had the soul to know, what conversing means, but as his provender, and the familiarity of the Kitchin school'd his conceptions. Hee passes to the third Argument, like a Boar in a Vinyard, doing nought els, but still as hee goes, champing and chewing over, what I could mean by this Chimera of a fit conversing Soul, notions and words never made for those chopps; but like a generous Wine, on∣ly by overworking the settl'd mudd of his fancy, to make him drunk, and disgorge his vileness the more openly. All persons of gentle breeding (I say gentle, though this Barrow grunt at the word) I
know will apprehend and bee satisfy'd in what I spake, how unplea∣sing and discontenting the society of body must needs be between those whose mindes cannot bee sociable. But what should a man say more to a snout in this pickle, what language can be low and degene∣rat anough? The fourth Argument which I had, was, that Mariage beeing a Covnant, the very beeing wherof consists in the performance of un∣fained love and peace, if that were not tolerably perform'd, the Covnant became broke and revocable. Which how can any in whose minde the principles of right reason and justice are not cancell'd, de∣ny; for how can a thing subsist, when the true essence ther of is dis∣solv'd? yet this hee denies, and yet in such a manner as alters my assertion, for hee puts in, though the main end bee not attain'd in full measure: but my position is, if it be not tolerably attain'd, as through∣out the whole Discours is apparent. Now for his Reasons; Heman found not that peace and solace, which is the main end of communion with God, should hee therfore break off that communion? I answer, that if Heman found it not, the fault was certainly his own: but in Mariage it happns farre otherwise: Somtimes the fault is plainly not his who seeks Divorce: Somtimes it cannot bee discern'd, whose fault it is: and therfore cannot in reason or equity bee the matter of an absolute prohibition. His other instance declares, what a right handicrafts man hee is of petty cases, and how unfitt to bee ought els at highest, but a hac∣ney of the Law. I change houses with a man; it is suppos'd I doe it for mine own ends; I attain them not in this house; I shall not therfore goe from my bargain. How without fear might the young Charinus in Andria now cry out, what likenes can bee heer to a Mariage? In this bargain was no capitulation, but the yeilding of possession to one an∣other, wherin each of them had his several end apart: in Mariage there is a solemn vow of love and fidelity each to other: this bargain is fully accomplisht in the change; In Mariage the covnant still is in performing. If one of them perform nothing tolerably, but instead of love, abound in disaffection, disobedience, fraud, and hatred, what thing in the nature of a covnant shall bind the other to such a perdu∣rable mischeif? Keep to your Problemes of ten groats, these matters are not for pragmatics, and folkmooters to babble in.
Concerning the place of Paul, that God hath call'd us to peace, 1 Cor. 7. and therfore certainly, if any where in this world, wee have a right to claim it reasonably in mariage, tis plain anough in the sense which I gave, and confess'd by Paraeus, and other Orthodox Divines, to bee a good sense, and this Answerer, doth not weak'n it. The other place, that hee who hateth, may put away, which, if I shew him, he promises to yeeld the whole controversie, is, besides, Deut. 24. 1. Deut. 21. 14▪ and before this, Exod. 21. 8. Of Malachy I have spo∣k'n more in another place; and say again that the best interpreters, all the ancient, and most of the modern translate it, as I cited, and very few otherwise, wherof perhaps Junius is the cheif. Another thing troubles him, that mariage is call'd the mystery of Joy. Let it still trouble him; for what hath hee to doe either with joy, or with mystery? He thinks it frantic divinity to say, It is not the outward continuance of mariage, that keeps the covnant of mariage whole, but whosoever doth most according to peace and love, whe∣ther in mariage or divorce, hee breaks mariage lest. If I shall spell it to him, Hee breaks mariage lest, is to say, hee dishonours not mariage; for least is tak'n in the Bible, and other good Authors, for, not at all. And a particular mariage a man may break, if for a lawfull cause, and yet not break, that is, not violate, or dishonour the Ordnance of Mariage. Hence those two questions that follow, are left ridicu∣lous; and the Maids at Algate, whom hee flouts, are likely to have more witt then the Servingman at Addlegate. Whereas hee taxes mee of adding to the Scripture in that I said, Love only is the fulfilling of every Commandment, I cited no parti∣cular Scripture, but spake a general sense, which might bee collect∣ed from many places. For seeing love includes Faith, what is ther that can fulfill every commandment but only love? And I meant, as any intelligent Reader might apprehend, every positive, and civil commandment, wherof Christ hath taught us that man is tho Lord. It is not the formal duty of worship, or the sitting still, that keeps the holy rest of Sabbath; but whosoever doth most according to charity, whether hee work, or work not; hee breaks the holy rest of Sabbath least. So Mariage beeing a civil Ordinance made for man, not man for it; hee who doth that which most accords with charity, first to himself, next to whom hee next ows it, whether in mariage or di∣vorce, hee breaks the Ordinance of mariage least. And what in Re∣ligious
prudence, can bee charity to himself, and what to his Wife, either in continuing, or in dissolving the mariage knot, hath bin al∣ready oft anough discours'd. So that what St. Paul saith of circum∣cision, the same I stick not to say of a civil ordinance, made to the good, and comfort of man, not to his ruin; mariage is nothing, and divorce is nothing, but faith, which worketh by love. And this I trust none can mistake. Against the fifth Argument, That a Christian in a higher order of Preist-hood, then that Levitical, is a person dedicat to joy and peace; and therfore needs not in Subjection to a civil Ordinance, made to no other end but for his good (when without his fault hee findes it impossible to bee decently or tolerably observ'd) to plunge himself into immeasurable distractions and temptations, above his strength; against this hee proves nothing, but gadds into silly conjectures of what abuses would follow, and with as good reason might declaim against the best things that are. Against the sixt Argument, that to force the continuance of mari∣age between mindes found utterly unfit, and disproportional, is against nature, and seems forbidd under that allegorical precept of Moses, Not to sow a field with divers seeds, lest both bee defil'd, not to plough with an Oxe and an Ass together, which I dedue'd by the pattern of St. Pauls reasoning what was meant by not muzzling the Oxe, hee ram∣bles over a long narration, to tell us that by the Oxen are meant the Preachers: which is not doubted. Then hee demands, if this my rea∣soning bee like St. Pauls, and I answer him, yes. Hee replies that sure St. Paul would bee asham'd to reason thus. And I tell him, No. Hee grants that place which I alleg'd, 2 Cor. 6. of unequal yoking, may allnde to that of Moses, but saies, I cannot prove it makes to my purpos, and shews not first, how hee can disprove it. Waigh, Gentlemen, and consider, whether my affirmations, backt with reason, may hold bal∣lance against the bare denials of this ponderous confuter, elected by his ghostly Patrons to bee my copes-mate. Proceeding on to speak of mysterious things in nature, I had oc∣sion to fit the language therafter, matters not for the reading of this o∣dious fool, who thus ever when hee meets with ought above the co∣gitation of his breeding, leavs the noysom stench of his rude slot be∣hind him, maligning that any thing should bee spoke or understood, above his own genuine basenes; and gives sentence that his confu∣ting
hath bin imploy'd about a frothy, immeritous and undeserving dis∣cours. Who could have beleevd so much insolence durst vent it self from out the hide of a varlet, as thus to censure that which men of mature judgement have applauded to bee writ with good reason. But this contents him not, hee falls now to rave in his barbarous abusive∣nes; and why? a reason befitting such an Artificer, because he saith the Book is contrary to all human lerning; When as the world knows that all, both human and divine lerning, till the Canon Law, allow'd divorce by consent, and for many causes without consent. Next he dooms it, as contrary to Truth; when as it hath bin disputable among lerned men, ever since it was prohibited: and is by Peter Martyr thought an opinion not impious, but hard to bee rfuted; and by Eras∣mus deem'd a Doctrin so charitable and pious, as, if it cannot bee us'd, were to bee wisht it could; but is by Martin Bucer, a man of dearest and most religious memory in the Church, taught and maintan'd to bee either most lawfully us'd, or most lawfully permitted. And for this, for I affirm no more then Bucer, what censure doe you think, Readers he hath condemn'd the book to? To a death no less infamous then to be burnt by the hangman. Mr. Licencer, for I deal not now with this caitif, never worth my earnest, & now not seasonable for my jest, you are re∣puted a man discreet anough, religious anough, honest anough, that is, to an ordnary competence in all these. But now your turn is, to hear what your own hand hath earn'd ye, that when you suffer'd this nameles hangman to cast into public such a despightfull contumely upon a name and person deserving of the Church and State equally to your self, and one who hath don more to the present advancement of your own Tribe, then you or many of them have don for them∣selvs, you forgot to bee either honest, Religious, or discreet. What ever the State might doe concerning it, suppos'd a matter to expect evill from, I should not doubt to meet among them with wise, and honourable, and knowing men. But as to this brute Libel, so much the more impudent and lawless for the abus'd autority which it bears, I say again, that I abominat the censure of Rascalls and their Li∣cencers. With difficulty I return to what remains of this ignoble task, for the disdain I have to change a period more with the filth and venom of this gourmand, swell'd into a confuter. Yet for the satisfaction of others, I endure all this.
Against the seventh Argument, that if the Canon Law and Divines allow divorce for conspiracy of death, they may as well allow it to avoid the same consequence from the likelihood of naturall causes; First, hee denies that the Canon so decrees. I Answer, that it decrees for danger of life, as much as for adultery. Decret. Gregor. l. 4▪ tit. 19. and in other places: and the best Civi∣lians who cite the Canon Law, so collect, as Schneidewin in institut. tit. 10. p. 4. de divort. and indeed who would have deny'd it, but one of a teprobate ignorance in all hee meddles with. Secondly, hee saith, the case alters, for there the offender who seeks the life, doth implicitly at least act a divorce. And I answer, that heer nature though no offender, doth the same. But if an offender by acting a divorce, shall release the offended, this is an ample grant against himself. Hee saith, nature teacheth to save life from one who seeks it. And I say she teaches no less to save it from any other cause that endangers it, Hee saith, that heer they are both actors. Admit they were, it would not be uncharitable to part them; yet somtimes they are not both actors, but the one of them most la∣mentedly passive. So hee concludes, Wee must not take advantage of our own faults and corruptions to release us from our duties. But shall wee take no advantage to save our selvs from the faults of ano∣ther, who hath anull'd his right to our duty? No, saith hee, Let them die of the sullens, and try who will pitty them. Barbarian, the shame of all honest Atturneys, why doe they not hoiss him over the barre, and blanket him? Against the eighth Argument, that they who are destitute of all mariageable guifts, except a body not plainly unfit, have not the cal∣ling to marry, and consequently married and so found, may bee di∣vorc'd, this, hee saith, is nothing to the purpose, and not fit to bee answer'd. I leav it therfore to the judgement of his Maisters. Against the ninth Argument, that mariage is a human society, and so cheifly seated in agreement and unity of minde: If therfore the minde cannot have that due society by mariage, that it may reasona∣bly and humanly desire, it can bee no human society, and so not with∣out reason divorcible, heer hee falsifies, and turnes what the positi∣on requir'd of a reasonable agreement in the main matters of society, into an agreement in all things, which makes the opinion not mine, and so hee leavs it.
At last, and in good howr we are com to his farewell, which is to hee a concluding taste of his jabberment  in Law, the flashiest and the fustiest that ever corrupted in such an unswill'd hogshead. Against my tenth Argument, as he calls it, but as I intended it, my other position, that Divorce is not a thing determinable by a compul∣sive Law, for that all Law is for som good that may be frequently at∣tain'd without the admixture of a wors inconvenience; but the Law forbidding divorce, never attains to any good end of such prohibi∣tion, but rather multiplies evill; therfore, the prohibition of divorce is no good Law. Now for his Atturneys prise: but first, like a right cunning and sturdy Logician, hee denies my Argument not mattering whether in the major or minor: and saith, there are many Laws made for good, and yet that good is not attain'd, through the defaults of the party, but a greater inconvenience follows. But I reply that this Answer builds upon a shallow foundation, and most unjustly supposes every one in default, who seeks divorce from the most injurious wedloc. The default therfore will bee found in the Law it self; which is neither able to punish the offender, but the innocent must withall suffer; nor can right the innocent, in what is cheifly sought, the obtainment of love or quietnes. His instances out of the Common Law, are all so quite beside the matter which hee would prove, as may bee a warning to all clients how they ven∣ture thir busines with such a cock-braind Solliciter. For beeing to shew som Law of England, attaining to no good end, and yet through no default of the party, who is therby debarr'd all remedy, hee shews us only how som doe loos the benefit of good Laws through their own default. His first example saith, It is a just Law that every one shall peaceably enjoy his estate in Lands or otherwise. Does this Law at∣tain to no good end? the Barr will blush at this most incogitant woodcock. But see if a draft of Littleton will recover him to his sen∣ses. If this man having Fee simple in his Lands, yet will take a Leas of his own Lands, from another, this shall bee an Estoppel to him in an Assise from the recovering of his own Land. Mark now, and register him. How many are there of ten thousand who have such a Fee simple in their sconse, as to take a Leas of their own Lands from another? So that this inconvenience lights upon scars one in an age, and by his own default; and the Law of enjoying each man his own, is good to all others. But on the contrary, this prohibition of divorce is good
to none, and brings inconvenience to numbers, who lie under into∣lerable greevances, without thir own default, through the wicked∣nes or folly of another; and all this iniquity the Law remedies not. but in a manner maintains? His other cases are directly to the same purpos, and might have bin spar'd, but that hee is a tradsman of the Law, and must be born with at his first setting up, to lay forth his best ware, which is only gibbrish. I have now don that, which for many causes I might have thought, could not likely have bin my fortune, to bee put to this under-work of seowring and unrubbishing the low and sordid ignorance of such a presumptuous lozel. Yet Hercules had the labour once impos'd upon him to carry dung out of the Augean stable. At any hand I would bee ridd of him: for I had rather, since the life of man is likn'd to a Scene, that all my entrances and exits might mixe with such persons only, whose worth erects them and their actions to a grave and tragic deportment, and not to have to doe with Clowns and Vices. But if a man cannot peaceably walk into the world, cut must bee infested, somtimes at his face, with dorrs and hotsflies, som∣times beneath, with bauling whippets, and shin-barkers, and these to bee set on by plot and consultation with a Junto of Clergy men and Licencers, commended also and rejoye't in by those whose par∣tiality cannot yet forgoe old papisticall principles, have I not cause to bee in such a manner defensive, as may procure mee freedom to pass more unmolested heerafter by these incumbrances, not so much regarded for themselvs, as for those who incite them. And what de∣fence can properly bee us'd in such a despicable encounter as this, but either the slp or the spurn? If they can afford mee none but a ri∣diculous adversaty, the blame belongs not to mee, though the whole Dispute bee strew'd and scatter'd with ridiculous. And if hee have such an ambition to know no better who are his mates, but among those needy thoughts, which though his two faculties of Serving∣man and Solliciter, should compound into one mongrel, would bee but thin and meager, if in this penury of Soul hee can bee possible to have the lustiness to think of fame, let him but send mee how hee calls himself, and I may chance not fail to endorse him on the back∣side of posterity, not a golden, but a brazen Asse. Since my fate ex∣torts from mee a talent of sport, which I had thought to hide in a napkin, hee shall bee my Batrachomuomachia, my Bavius, my Ca∣landrino,
the common adagy of ignorance and over-weening. Nay perhaps, as the provocation may bee, I may bee driv'n to curle up this gliding prose into a rough Sotadic, that shall rime him into such a condition, as instead of judging good Books to bee burnt by the executioner, hee shall be readier to be his own hangman. Thus much to this Nuisance. But as for the Subject it self which I have writt, and now defend, according as the opposition beares, if any man equal to the matter shall think it appertains him to take in hand this controversy, either excepting against ought writt'n, or perswaded hee can shew better how this question of such moment to bee throughly known may re∣ceav a true determination, not leaning on the old and rott'n sugge∣stions wheron it yet leanes, if his intents bee sincere to the public, and shall carry him on without bitternes to the opinion, or to the person dissenting, let him not, I entreate him, guess by the handling, which meritoriously hath bin bestowd on this object of contempt and laugh∣ter, that I account it any displeasure don mee to bee contradicted in Print: but as it leads to the attainment of any thing more true, shall esteem it a benefit; and shall know how to return his civility and faire Argument in such a sort, as hee shall confess that to doe so is my choise, and to have don thus was my chance. The End.
