N512 E388_4 99862003 114150
THE PARLIAMENT OF LADIES. OR Divers remarkable passages of Ladies in Spring-Garden; in Parliament Assembled. Together with certaine Votes of the unlawfull Assembly at Kates in Coven Garden. Vespre Veneris Martis: 26. 1647. Ordered by the Ladies in Parliament Assembled, That their Orders and Votes be forthwith Printed and publi∣shed, to prevent such misreports and scandals, which either malice, or want of wit, hightned with snoffes of Ale or stayned Claret may cause, in the dishonour of the said Votes and proceedings in Parliament. Ja: Kingsmill Clar. Parliamen. The second Edition corrected by the originall, unto which is added a Sup∣plement of some further proceedings in the said Parliament. Pinted in the yeare 1647.
THE PARLIAMENT OF LADIES: OR Divers remarkable passages of Ladies in Spring-Garden in Parliament Assembled. THE Rattle-headed Ladyes being Assembled at Kates in the Covent-Garden, and having spent some time in choosing of their Speaker, it having been objected against the Lady Duches that she had used beating up of quarters, and other usuall sports, too frequently with Prince Rupert; they at last resolved upon the Lady Issabella Thinne, ho∣ping thereby that these acts might have the greater influence up∣on the Kings Majesty. First, They tooke into consideration their owne businesse, & voted, that no round head should dare to come into any of their quarters. Secondly, that on the contrary, none of the members of the Cavelliers doe cohabit in any of the Round heads quarters, or pay any contributions to them, by way of benevolence, or lone, &c. Thirdly, that thanks be given to the Lady Mountague, Tenhar Craven &c. for their curtisies and favours shown to the distres∣sed Caveliers beyond the Seas. Fourthly, ordered here upon that the said Ladyes, together with the Lady Standhoppe, have leave to sell, give away, or o∣therwise to dispose of their french commodities, without pay∣ing Excise or custome.
Fiftly, that Mistris Phillips be forthwith sent into France from this House, to the Lord Mountague, to acquaint him how his Lady is negotiated, with the members of both Houses. Sixtly, that Ms. Cramlin for the Protestants, and Ms. Wibourn for the Papists, be appointed Messengers to attend the House, and that they have the title given them, of Messengers of the Chamber. The said Ladyes in Parliament Assembled doe declare; That by their first Votes of this day, they doe not in any way intend to exclude from their quarters, that part of the House of Peers, which voted the bill for maintenance of the Army, out of doors, in that the said Lords are understood to be wel-affe∣cted, and not Round-heads; whilst these things were in agitation, in comes a Seargiant from the House of Ladyes, at Mistris Chips assembled, in the name of which, he pronounceth this an unlawfull Assembly, (a junto, a Mungrill Parliament) command∣ing them to confine their Votes and themselves to their own Houses, there to continue during pleasure. Hyde Parke, St. James Parke, Spring-Garden and Kates, in anywise notwithstanding. This put their Lady ships into a great disorder, and more con∣fusion then if they had been taken, with their gallants, by each of their Husbands, which is the cause we heare no more of this Parliament, The Ladyes wel-affected (being as you heard, at their house in Spring Garden) spent some time in the choosing of their Spea∣ker, and the major part pitched on the Lady Holland; shee desired to excuse herselfe, alleadging her Husbands desersion, and in∣treated that al her right might be conferred on the Lady Carlile, but the said Lady being not thought fit to be trusted, the Lady Exeter, was named, but it was objected by the Lady Hypslay, that the said Lady was a Delinquent, and had formerly carried supplies to the King; pretending likewise that her Husband, Sir Iohn Hypslay, was much damnified in his estate and offices by the
said supplies, but the Lady Salesbury comming in, this dispute soone ended, and the Chaire was conferred on her, neminae Con∣tradicentae Shee immediatly named Mistris Peele Messenger to attend the House, and the Lady Norton, together with the Lady Stapleton; to be door-keepers, with order to keep all out but Members, this was by all assented unto, notwithstanding some exceptions were taken at the slownesse of Mistris Peeles pace, it being aggrevated by one, that shee went slower then the Masters of the Chancery, when they goe on messages. Then their Lady-ships took into consideration in the first place, the difficult cases that might fall out in the businesse of their House, ordered that Master Docter Wetherborne be sent from Holland, Master Davison from Paris to be Assistants to this House, Ordered likewise that Master Dr. Hinton and Master Chamberline be also Assistants, that so with greater secresie and ease there Lady ships might be helped out with their most trou∣blesome and pressing affaires. The House then adjurned till the day following, where being met accordingly, the first businesse was to send the aforesaid Messengers, to the unlawfull Assembly at Kates; next falling upon their votes in Particular Declared; That part of their Order to be an absolute breach of the pri∣viledge which forbids Caveliers to enter into the Round-heads quarters, and accordingly Ordered that the said shee-Cavil∣liers shall within two dayes depart this City and come not with∣in twenty miles of the line of Communication: And farther Or∣dered, that no malignant Lady presume to walk in Spring Garden after twelve a clock at night, upon any pretence whatsoever. Nixt their Lady-ships took into consideration the great num∣ber of Malignants and Delinquents, and Ordered, that there be a Committee for composition, to meet at the La. Kents, for Prote∣stants, and at the Lady Lakes, for Papists.
This day complaint was brought in against Sir Henry Blunt Knight, for publishing an hereticall and dangerous Doctrine, viz That it is better to side with and resort to common Women then Ladyes of Honour: upon nature deliberation, thereof the Ladyes with much indignation sent for him, who being come, and hear∣ing his accusation read, was commanded to with draw during this  the Lady Foster and offers to the conside∣ration of the House, the dangerous effect of this opinion, what it might produce if it e suffered to spread among the people, to the utter decay of Trade, as also of the particular Committee of Rhenish wine, in the most parts Cheese-cakes, and sillbubs, whereby the profit of this House will be greatly deminished. This speech was received with great applause of the whole House, and the said Sir Henry Blunt was called in the second time, who being commanded to kneele, refused, alleadging that the House was no lawfull judicature, but appealed to all the Com∣mons of England and Wales; which suspended all proceedings therein for a time. The House considered in the next place, that divers weak per∣sons have crept into places beyond their abilities, and to the end that men of greater parts might be put into their rooms, they ap∣pointed the Lady Midlesex, Mistris Dunch, the Lady Foster, and the Lady Anne Waller by reason of their great experience in Sol∣diery in this Kingdome, to be a Committee of Tryers for the businesse. The House being ready to ajourne, there came newes of a quarrell between two notorious members of this House Mi∣stris Harris, and Mistris Dunch, much good councell was given them to agree, and unice against the common enemy, their Hus∣bands, and it was at length ordered that these should be reconci∣led, and Tom Temple to put up his blade. The morning following they tooke into consideration all the severall garrisons of the Kingdome, what were to be kept and what not: And ordered:
First, that Northamton be continued a Garrison, and that the Lady Sunderland be requested to take the command of it on her; notwithstanding the selfe-denying Ordinance. Secondly, Ordered that an English Garrison be put into Car∣lile, to prevent a forraigne Enemy getting into possession there: of; as is to be feared by reason of some secret intelligence had by the French Imbassodor in that place. Thirdly, that Lychester, Newport, and Malbrough, and all other that are either old fortifications, or otherwise uselesse be forth∣with slighted. After this they tooke into consideration the standing forces in this Kingdome, with their severall entertainments, and Ordered; First, That the Lord Francis, Master Slings by, Master Tuston, Master Antum, have pay allowed them continually, that they shall be provided to draw forth in service at the least warning. Secondly, that Colonell Cooke, Master Henry Haward, of Berkes, and Master Nevell, have free quarter only. Thirdly, that the Prince Electer, Prince Griffeth, and Master Glascock hence-forth pay their quarters. Ordered that by adition to their first Vote, that Sir Iohn Mor∣ley, be forth with paid for his service to the House, notwithstand∣ing his Delinquencie, but so that if he shall break out any more, he shall be errecoverably put into the exceptions. Ordered that all such forces as shall be disbanded, shal be sent for Ireland, or otherwise disposed out of this Kingdome. Their Lady-ships were then informed, that a Messenger then waited at the doore, from the House of Commons, and Sir Peter Wentworth, and Master Bainton, who brought it, being let in, they found it was for the relief of maimed Souldiars, their Ladyships referred them to the Lady Peeterborough, to consider? what relief was to be given them, to whom they joyned Mistris Howard, sometimes a maid of Honour, shee having purged her selfe of her Malignancy.
This day the House received reports from the Committee of complaints, and first, against the Prince Elector, who was ac∣cused that he was not secret in his trust to this house, but berai'd them in their service, by acquainting Prince Griffeth with his his main designe, and soin stead of doing their businesse, did his own; next against Prince Griffeth, that by treachery he gained neare the workes, and then by a storme tooke a fort that would have yeelded upon reasonable conditions. This was urged much against him by the Lady Herbe and the Lady Sidley, the consideration of this busines was put of till another time, and al∣so another accusation against the said Prince, that he had deser∣ted his imployment both brought in by the Lady Barrington. The next was an accusasion against the Lord Rich (the righth onourable) by the Lady Mary Cockyn, Alias Cullen who pretended that shee had been plundered by the said Lord, to the valew of two thousand pounds, of jewels and other commodi∣ties, but it being alleadged by the Lady Warwick, that it was done to one that had bin a Cōmander against the Parliament, the accusation was cast out. Then the House ajourned till the next day. The first businesse this day was the report from the Com∣mittee of Tryers, who named in the first place, the right honou∣rable the Earle of Denbeigh, to be a man of extraordinary abili∣ties and parts, whereupon it was ordered that his Lord ship be commander in chiefe of all the standing forces of this King dome, and that his head quarters be in Andover, untill the House have some other need of his Forces. Ordered that the Lord Cambaen, in regard of his large tal∣lent, have a favourable composition at the Lady Kents. Ordered that Sir Ambrogio a Politicke Italian be had in re∣membrance, for his extreordinary payns to content this House, and that when the affaires of this Kingdome be setled, he be put into the Duch office, and in the mean time, being what he
had before did not content him, that he be satisfied out of Mis. Hils arreares which are forfited to the State for some  of hers This businesse being over, up stands the Lady Middlesex the zealous and wel affected Lady Mildmay, and moved that a pub∣licke Fast might be appointed for imploring, for mens constant affections towards this House, and also to stop the contagious in∣fection and itching humours that are now crept in among us and likely to over spread us all if not timely stopt, the motion was imbraced, and Master Osbestone some time Prebend at Pe∣ters Westminster, together with Doctor Sibbald, Pastor of , Clarkenwell, mentioned to preach before the How.  one Cor∣nelius, brought in an accusation against the Doctor , for one il-affected to the present government, having preached lately in his house in a Tub, where upon he was rejected, and the Lady Kinsington desired that Master Sal might be sub∣stituted in his , of whose great parts and able perfor∣mances shee had long experience, which presently was assen∣ted unto by all. Their Ladyships in the next place took  consideration the great decay of Cattle and other Beasts in the Kingdome, during this unnaturall Warre, thought the fittest means for a remedy, to be their Ladyships sending (as they did) to the Commons to in∣treat them that some of their members might joyne with their Ladyships to consider of the said businesse, they presently named La. Gray, and the H. C. the L. Gray her Husband, to be a Com∣mittee, to debate the fittest meanes multiply and increase the said Beasts to whom they gave these instructions. That  be intreated and the  of this House therein used, to returne to his Concubine here, notwithstan∣ding his wife be alive at  because  hath not that urgent necessity of multiplying Beasts as this Kingdom hath.
That they shall intreat all, or the most part of the Morleys in England, and all other men of that shape, to marry. That all such men who have vowed, whether Prisoners, or Free men, never to cut their beards till his Majesty comes to London, be incouraged therein. The House then taking into consideration the sale of Delin∣quents estates, Ordered, that Master Harrington: for his good service, have the E. of New castles baggage, and also that the Lady Devonshire have Worchester house, notwithstanding the Votes of the Houses at Westminster, in favour of the Earle of Salsbury, that her Ladyship may be present with lesse trouble at her many and serious negotiations with the  Commissioners. This day a Petition came from the Lady Stanhoppe, humbly desiring that shee might be received into their House, pretending that shee was wel-affected, but it was urged to the contrary, that shee affected, it was true, but a Scotish affection m'd with a French, could never make her a more affected Lady; it was farther alledged, that the said Lady had been in armes un∣der Colonell Slingsby, but some friends answered in her be∣halfe that it was under which Master Slingsby who was ordered to be kept for this House, and so the debate was put off till ano∣ther time. A motion was then made for putting down of playes, where∣upon the Lady Munmouth desired it might be explained what playes were meant, for as much if they should put down the game at In and in, it would prove much to the prejudice of their House, as also to Master Young, who had deserved well of her Ladyships, but answer being made, Stage-playes were only un∣derstood, shee declared shee would concurre with the House in that, now Sir John Suckling was dead, but truly shee lik'd his play well. After this it was moved by the Lady Crompton, that a thanks∣giving day might be appointed for the recovery of the right
honourable the Earle of Pembrooke, which was consented unto, and Master Caudry was desired to preach, and be defired to sing the Psalme in English and not in Hebrew. Ordered that thanks be given Master Robinson for hid vout prayer, that the said Lord might once more clime one My-hill. The House then appointed Commissioners to goe to his Ma∣jesty; viz. The Lady of Oxford, and Stamford, together with the Lady May, to move His Majesties heart to give a reall assent, that so an happy union may follow. This day they passed an act of oblivion to the Lady Delksh, the Lady Scot, the Lady Aubigne, and Mistris Ray, for their Delin∣quency in the Enemies quarters. Soon after the Lady Norton, door-keeper of the House, com∣plained of Sir Robert Harlow a member of the House of Com∣mons, for attempting to deface her, which hapned thus, the said Lady being a zealous Independant, and so one of the Saints, and Sir Robert having found out that shee was likewise painted, hee pretended that shee came with his Ordinance of Idolatry, Saints Crosses, &c. But some friends of the Lady door kee∣per, urging on her behalfe, that none did ever yet attempt to adore or worship her, shee was justified, and the House then de∣clared that if any person by vertue of any power whatsoever, pretended to be derived from the House of Commons, or any other Court, shall goe about to impeach, hinder, or disturbe any Lady, from painting, washing, or adorning her selfe to the best advantage, as also from platting, of her hair, or vesting of Teeth, that, that act is a great breach of the priviledge of the House, and that the offenders shall be proceeded against accor∣dingly. In the last place, their Ladyships being to adjourne for some weekes, desired first, that a main point in divinity might be de∣sided, viz. what is meant by the word (Due benevolence) In the new Testament, and in order there-unto they sent to the Mini∣sters
of the Assembly, intreating them to make some declaration concerning the same, the Messengers found the Assembly bu∣sie about their own affaires, indevouring to bring that text (lesse the Sonne least he be angry) to prove Presbytery, but understand∣ing their Ladyships request, they left it, and fell presently upon debate of the said (Due benevolence) which I doe not intend to set downe particularly, it being not to be found in the La. journall, only I heare, that Master Obediah Sedwicks opinion was, that if a man had been absent from his Spouse any time, that then the conjugall tye, obliged him to solace her now, and anon too, and that is to say twice in the compasse of a naturall day, and it being alleadged no rule can be made for it, it depending upon mens severall constitutions and healths, it was declared by them that all and evey man coupled in the bond of Matrimony and wedlock, he is ingaged to content his Mate and fellow feeler, as often as the strength of his body will permit. Their Ladyships having received this Decree, desired them to make it (Iure Divine) and to publish it, that so no Husband in the Country may pretend ignorance, whereupon their Holiness made this insuing Cannon. Die Iovis 25. Mar. 1647. It is by these presents Decreed and declared to all the world, by the Counsell called and met at Westminster in the Kingdome of great Brittain, that all men who have, or shal take upon them the state of Matrymony, are by their vowes and by the sense of holy writ, oblidged to comfort and comply with their Wives as oft as their strength of body will permit and give them leave, and though they should pretend that it stood not with their, af∣aires, that they be oblidged thereunto notwithstanding, this we enjoyne and command in the Kingdome, under penalty of being debarred the Sacrament, of which wee hope to have the Mo∣nopoly. Adonira. Bifield Scribe.
The day following in the evehing this Decrees be∣ing brought to their Ladyships, they ordered that the Speaker of their House should give thankes to the mem∣bers of the Assembly of Divines, for their great care and paines in reforming of this Kingdome, and in particular for this present Declaration, and Ordered these their Votes should be printed, and so they adjourned till far∣ther time. Dies Ʋeneris 8. Aprilis 1647. This day there was a commotion in the house, by rea∣son of a disorder in the City, occasioned by a rumor of Dooms-day, which the people did beleeve was at hand, and that the World was now ending, because it hath met with its beginning, for Adam and Eue, were seen both in one person, and whereas Eue was once taken out of Adam, Adam was now seen struting out of Eue. The House fearing what issue this monster and the multitude might bring forth, and doubting a generall insurrection, doubled all their Guards, and desired the timely assistants of their deer Sisters of Scotland, where∣upon the Lady Fowler, Madam Grey, and Ms. Hamlen were sent to, to draw up all their forces, and put them in order, to receive the first charge, in case any were seen to advance. The Forces of the City under the command of Mall Cutpurse, and Mall Sebran, two very able Members, were
appointed to guard the House, who being there placed with pipes in both theirmouthes, with fire and smoake in a very short time, had almost choaked both the pas∣sage and the Pass ngers. But on the sudden they were furiously assaulted, and although Madam Sebran kept stoutly to her post, yet she was faine to fall back at last, and lye at her open guard giving entrance to the Assailant, who carlesly passing their whifflers, suddenly entred the House, and put al∣most all to the squeake. The Speaker being somthing more manly then the rest, opposed her selfe to this intruder, demanding from what place? upon what businesse? and who shee was? (for as yet the Phantome apearred more like Eve then Adam) that had contrary to the rules of the House, thus publickly thrust her selfe into their secrets, and com∣manded her immediattly to with-draw, but she answe∣red that shee entred upon her own right, being as good a member as any there, and that most of them knew shee had alwaies stood stiffe in the businesse (being in action) when they were but in consultation, and her name was Madam Swivalshe-met Hungerford. The very sight of this Madam with a Dildoe, toge∣ther with the noise of her name, put the House into a∣great silence, and some began to whisper an adjourn∣ment, but twas not thought fit, to leave one of such
extraordinary parts (of whom Anny-seed Robbin was but a Type) absolutely unsatisfied, especially all the Try∣ars acknowledging her abilities, and many other La∣dies openly declaring in her behalfe. VVherefore for the present after a publike acknowledgment of her pregnent services, it was ordered by reason of the affright that the City had been in, that now shee should on∣ly go visit, and show her selfe to the Alder∣mens wives, and immediatly after should fol∣low a publike thanksgiving for their daugh∣ters happy delivery. FINIS.
