O216 E422_29 99859967 112071
AN OULD SHIP CALLED AN EXHORTATION To continue all Subjects in their due Obe∣dience, or the reward of a faithfull Subject to his Prince. To the Bishops and Clergy. To the true Nobility. To the Civil Magistae. To the true and faithfull Subject. What a faithfull Subject is? The discription of Loyalty. New Riged by a Well-wisher, to his Prince and Countrie, never more need to be set forth to Sea▪ then in these distracted times. Behold your King THE ILE OF WAIT Printed in the Yeare 1648
To the Reverend Bishops, and Clergie, FOr asmuch as your Eclesiasticall office is given you from God, as the next Principall members (under the head) to governe the Common wealth of this misticall bodie: And that their is required at your hands an Extraordinarie dutie touching the Function of the soule. Let mee entreat you to be as vigilant as the five wise Virgins, having oyle alwaies in your lamps, against the Bridegrome comes forth of his Chamber, your office is the soul of the Laitie, the heart of Government, and the very Epitome of all obedience, from you as the Moone boroweth her light of the Sunne, all infriour ministers take their Order of perfection, let then your doctrine be pure, and sted∣fast like Moyses Bush, that alwayes burned but never Consumed: your preaching in Season, and out of Season, and your Conversation as spotlesse as the sa∣crifice of urtles. You best know what plentie of Manna hath rained in Israel, and how many omer full every man ought to gather: be not any of you the first that gather more then is commanded, and in mistrust of Gods be∣nefits in fct the whole Land with the vice of Avarice. You ought rather to be like Pelicans in the wil∣dernesse, who in tender love peck the blood from their
Breast to feed their young one: you see with your vi∣sible eye; how wonderfull Almightie God, hath al∣wayes preserved the Kings Majestie, from the snares of his manifould Enemies. And in you principally lies the sacrifice of thanks giving, it is you that ought to daunce before the ta∣bernacle,Num 17. 8. v. and to go with the people to the Arke of the Covenant: that your righteousnesse may bud like A∣rons ro, it is you that ought to flie forth from this tossed Arke, and like the doue, bring the olive branchGen. 8. 11. of peace in your mouths, and tell the pople, that if they returne God will be their God; and send a truce to their distressed soules by you his Ambassadors: Fly not to Tharsis, when you are sent to Niniveth, least devouring destraction attend you, nor with the man of God goe not out of the way, Least a Lion tare you in peices, but still be conversent with the Lord, thatExod. 34. 30. your faces may shine with Moses, when he came from the mount, and bring the Image of Gods glory to the People in your foreheads: you must beare, with AronExod. 38. 3. the brest plate of Judgment upon your hearts, there must be graven upon your forefronts, holinesse to theEd. 35. 39 Lord, and your sounds must be heard when you goe into the Holy places before him: So shall yee stand like Mount Sina, never to be removed, and your Gol∣den candle stick shine in the Temple of the Lord re∣member the charge your Mr. Christ gave to his ser∣vant Peter, binding him three times, above all things by his fervent love and the deare affection he bare to his Mr. to feed his sheep; to be with Paul, the faith∣full Ambassadors of Jesus Christ, as though God did
besech you through us; we pray you in Christs-stead,2 Cor. 5. 2. that ye be reconciled to God, with Paul, likewise toPhil. 3. 14. be an example of life and doctrine as in these words and follow hard toward the marke, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Iesus, let us therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded, if ye be other∣wise, God shall reveale, even the same unto you. Ye areMat. 15. 13. most Reverent, the salt of the earth, which wanting sa∣vour is to be troden under foot; yee are the light of the world a Ciy that is set on a hill cannot be hid, let your light therefore shine that they that see your good workes, may glorifie your father which is in Heaven. This unworthy to councell so grave advisements, as if the body should instruct the soule, I only like a traviler in his pilgrimage, seeing a King go out of his way, tell him there is a better, a more perfect and a straighter: so referring you to your masters reward who hates a hidden tallent, I beseech that God, whoExod. 13. 21. guideth Israel by day in a pillar of cloud, & by night in pillar of fire, to direct your earthly bodies and spirituall soules to his service, Amen. To the true Nobility of this Realm. TO yee Right honourable, that are the props and supporters of a Kingdom, that like Atlas should beare the weight of heaven one your shouldiers, give me leave to stretch forth the atires of my heart, and as in these tempestious times, unite yourselves togeather in peace like one body, obedient to one principall
head, in the worthy member the heart, the Monarch seate of our Microcosmos, should be your residence, within whose center as in a Princes Court, are diverse receptailes for you to inhabit in, then as branches ex∣tending from the lofty Cedar▪ being sed by one root, doe notwithstanding cherish one another wih their naturall sap: so like the true stock of Nobility▪ discen∣ded from your worthy ancestors, be you combined in a conjunction of unseperable aide, that the body of the tree may be comforted in so happy an Issue, and in the proudest blast of conspiracy, keepe you still unre∣movable, be you like faithfull Mardocheus, spotles in your waies, when traytors like proud Haman shall pe∣rish in their own complos▪ For if you please to peruse our Histories, both Eclesiasticall and prophane, yee shall find that never traitor to his native Prince, but had his reward threefold returned into his wicked bo∣some, and though it hath pleased God somtimes to suffer them, (the cause best known to his sacred plea∣sure) to bring to passe their hatefull purposes: yet as a woe pronounced to them by whom such evils come, their mischiefe hath not past without great mischiefe reguerdond, their is none of your honourable society, but knowes that treason is the devider and seperater of all good things, and a fatall disjoyner of perfection, bringing with it ruin, and the mercilesse substitutes of war, where one the contrary, obedience is the finewes of the State, and glewes the hearts of Nobility togea∣ther, like one indivisible substance, and as the seaven leane ine in Pharaohs dreame, devoured the seaven far, yet themselves not the fatter: so stands it with treason,
like a cormerant, it devours all: yet is it self the better by nothing. What greater paterne of misery can there be, then a Kingdom devided in it self, it is like the dan∣gerous Eclipse of the Sunne: nay like the unnaturall seperation of heaven, that brings all danger and de∣struction, no plague of Egypt comparable to that mise∣ry, for Civill discention is the gate to let in ruin, and foraine invasion, it is like a wedge of Iron, that entring into an oake, dissevers both sides in severall peices, and makes them both fit for the fire. The flourishing State of Rome was devoured by that Monster, and all tranquility swallowed up at a bit by that hidious Leviathan, it is like the blind Mole, that loveth still to be mischievously labouring, tosseth up her own destruction. Let then, Right honourable, that acceptable sacri∣fice of your hearts be offered to our gracious Sove∣raign:, which far exceeds the externall offices of fai∣ned affections, who with an eye of vigilancy will, no doubt, regard your vertues, and like the cheerefull comfort of the Sun with his blessed countinance, make your young blosoms come to pleasant fruit, and bring the fruit by comfortable warmth to full maturity. By this meanes, shall your Phenix live still, and you be made most happy in his fresh renewing, God so di∣rect your hearts to worke in you unfained loyalty to his sacred Majesty, and deadly hatred to self devou∣ring treason, Amen.
To the Civill Majestrates, the Lord Majors, Mr. Majors, and their She∣riffes of London, Yorke, Newcastle, Carlile, and other inferiour Officers. THe naturall care and loyalty, your Ancestors have ever borne to their Soveraigns, since their first flourishing time, both in peace and warre, hath in ages past, (as deedes worth Registring) been Recor∣ded: for it is manifest when Princes, that heeretofore have governed, have held their Reigns with a more se∣vere hand, then in our times (God be thanked) yet they have without repining willingly sustained, as giving place to time, to fortune, or both. And as in all dange∣rous commotions, they have made apparent their for∣ward loves and loyalties, to their Prince and native Country, so it were to be wished, that you that are their successour, would follow their examples, and with aperfect resolution, and vigilant care, unite your selvesin love together, and lend your helping hand, when occasion shall serve, to restore our to much wronged Soveraigne to his Rights again; for their is no other Balsom, will heale the wounds of our long languishing and bleeding Country, if so you do, you shall find your Soveraigne like a carefull mother, with Hester, be ready to offer himself for his people, and with Iudeth to dread no danger to preserve his own Nation.
The Titants Dioclesian Nero, and Phalaris, who most blodily dived into the bowels of their friends and subjects, were obeyed both in love and feare: though their Tyrany extended to all licentious and uncivill proceedings, how much more ought yee, having a most Christian Prince o govern yee, that tenders the Prick∣ing of yourfinger, more then a wound from his own hart to prosecue his Pincely thoughts and pure integrety, I am constrained to urge this as a thing which cannot be two often mentioned; considering the craftie and many subtill of the disloyiall Saduccs in these times, and strive as much as in them lyeth, to bribe and turne the hearts of his highnesse loving subjects, against him, (as the Divell which sheweh darnell amongst the best wheat) with counterfit shews and deceitfull practi∣ses, or like the craccoldaile in Niclus, which weeps like a Child till she allure some passenger, and then re∣turning in the nature of her ugly shape, her hunger bitten Paunch, and presently devours of such pestife∣rous sstuffe are all glozing siccophants that guild their pretences (to keep the counterfit unspied) with such false suggestions▪ carrying neither honesty, reason, or truth, but like the divells that entred into the heard of Swine, when they cannot have libertie or li∣cence to do one mischiefe, covet to enter into another; so their mallice may be set on worke, but to withstand such I know your civill Iudgments are able if your minds were willing: Herein you ought the rather to be thorowly con∣firmed, seeing how God hath from the begining of his Majesties reigne, defended him against all manner of
envious assaults, and laid their owne evill, upon the wickednesse of their owne heads. This should make you (methinks) chary to disco∣ver to your dread Soveraigne, any mischeife lurking like Poyson of▪ Aspes under their lips, call to mind his Majesties gratious Proclamation; wherein he hath declared himselfe, and now sheweth it to the world to be more carefull of your wellfaire then his own (I should thinke) you seeing the abuse and slavish servilitie that your native Country is brought unto by your disobedience should stir you up to gaine what is lost, and England, nay O English men where have you lost your hearts of loyaltie? or what is become of your eyes, that you see not, your selves oppressed with such tedious burthens and clogges, as to be constrained to pay tribue both for your appetile and sustinance, your King imprisoned in the Isle of Wight, your Prince forced to live in an∣nother Kingdom, nay more what can be worse, all these things are by our fellow subjects, which in all righr should be our servants, but now they are become our Lords, and taskemasters, for they which will trample their head under their feet, will not use the bodie other wayes, all these things and many more well wayed, we cannot say otherwise, but it is a thorow Deformation both in Church and State. This as one servant in affction, advising even as you would have your soules lft upon high, and your coffers inricht on earth: as you looke to have your War-houses fild ful of Godsblessing, to have your wine good, and your ale fat; once againe I stirr you up, like
a flame that is quickned with blowing, to have God obey your Prince, and do good for your Countrie so shall his proudest enemies dye at his feet, and ye be made worthy Instruments like (a Tower of Marble) to defend his sacred Majesty, whom God continue with long health and prosperous life. Amen. To the true and faithfull privet subject both in the North and South parts of this Kingdom; my deare Coun∣treymen, whose loyalties to their Prince and Countrey will never be forgotten. AND now beloved Countreymen to you in ge∣nerall, that carry with you the full Currant of affection, the swiftest streame of deepe guiding love, not to be revented or turned back by the vehement op∣position of my resisting wind, to you as to the open marke; whereto my heart leavile her pretended aime, being the upshot of my exhortation, I send this my friendly Councell, like as a Citie well fensed about with impregnable walles: so ought ye to be in time of domisticall rebellion or forraign invasion; ye are the maine Battaile, the strength and trust of this King∣dom, and to you belong a chiefe trust in the required renovation, as his highness may well be compared to
the apple of our eye, which naturally (by reason it is tender unto us) we have most care: so ought ye to joyne your whole bodies, goods, Armes, Leggs, Feet, and hart, to protect his Royall person, without secret grudging, private muttering, or uncivil contro∣versie. Ye ought to be like stedfast Rocks in the sea, to af∣front every storme, and to withstand (without mut∣tering) the most bitter blasts, that either winter or foule weather can afford. To conclude, I beseech God in his infinite mercy stir up your deare affecting love to His Majesty; mercy hath alwayes sitten at his Right hand, and honoured about him like a continuall Hand-maid, mercy is the wedding King, that like unspotted Virgine, hath (mar∣ried him to our Saviour) and hath setled his highnesse the faithfull president of his true Church, wherein may his Maj. continue many happy dayes, to the glory of God, and the comfort of his faithfull loving sub∣jects. Amen. VVhat a faithfull Subject is: A Good subject, next to the diadem that a dornes a Princes head, is the chiefest Ornament that de∣cores his dignity; he is the precious balme that an∣noints his browes, and is never to the hart, then his Scepter to his Right hand, as sweet in his nostrills as the groves of Gillead, and more precious in his ight
then Solomons yourythorne covered with purest Gold. His heart is clothed with peace, like mount Olivet, & his eyes as harmlesse as the sight of a Dove: his tongue sounds like the Harpe of David: and his lips deliver the happinesse of loyalty: his eares are the pr∣talls that receive understanding and all perfection from thence is conducted to the hart: his hands are readie to fight the batailes of the Lord, and his feet shining the steps of blood, are bent alwaies to walke in the paths of innocencie, thus excellent in the sight of the Prince shines a faithful Subject, more gorgeous then the Ephod of Aron: and more sumtuous then Solo∣mon in all his Royalty, who so is this to this his Prince and Countrie, the Lord will prosper him, and he shall be blessed in everlasting generation: and for one of these benefits he receives in earth, he shll have a million in Heaven, for one of these perfections he partakes of in this world, numbers above number, shall attend him in the world to come: And his Prince shall thus pray for him, and blesse him: As Solomon did his Subjects. And the King turned his face and blessed all the Congregation of Israell, and said blessed be the Lord God of Israell, who spake with his mouth to David my Father, and hath with his hand fulfilled it. And though my selfe may say with Isaiah, I am a worme, and no man; yet (I spake it in despite of vaine glorye) I would with all my hart as an Isaac in the hands of Abraham, serve as a Sacrifice, to doe my Prince, and Countrie good: for sure hee cannot bee
a true servitur of God, that is not a faithfull (subject to his Prince, neither would I Iudge my filicity i this world Answerable to that, if once my soule might be Imployed to please my Prince, and benefit my Country. For all the offices, of Humanity depend only up∣on these Principall performances, for I know by that meanes there comes a Blessing from a farr, a reward full of joy, which none else are worthy to obtaine, which reward I hartely pray the great Rewarder of all to send to the true, loyall, and Faithfull Subiects: of England and so wih one voyce proceding from one unity of heart, let us all say Faithfully, (GOD SAVE KING CHARLES:) AMEN. The Discription of Loyalty. ABove the Clouds where sprangled troopes of Starrs, Adorne the precious bosome of the Skye: Where heavenly peace abandons breaking Jars, And all the Consort that is tun▪ on high: Send forth their delicat melodious sounds, That makes those Christall vaults with joy abound. With in the bright, Imperiall orbe of rest, Where soules of Saints one Goulden alters sett: And in the Lambes sweet breath are only blest, Where thousand Graces millions more beget:
His Loyalty in thrnd in blessed Chaire: Most gorgeous in attire, most heavenly faire. About her head, the Swift wing Cherubines, hover their silver Pinions in her eyes: And the sweet spheares with glorious seraphins, Vpon her shining brow with blisse arise: No stormie Cloud can vail her beauteous face, Because their burnes the holy lamp of Grace. Truth richly clothed in whight ornament, stand at the right hand of this happy Saint. from whom the words of Righteousnes are sent, whose cheerfull hopes by envie cannot faint. But as the Daughter to the Highest power; She sits defended in a strong built Tower: Vpon her left hand hope her anker wayes, One whom her dear successe doth still attend. Nor doth shee feed her servants with delayes, But they that one her sacred state depend. with bountious hand shee gives such rich reward, as vading fame hath neither seene nor heard: And as great Michaell with the Dragon fought About the chosen Moses sacred boes: So she contends with trayors that have sought, To touch the hearts of Gods annointed ones. And like the Archangell gives them all the foile. That lift their hands a Princes life to spoile.
POSTSCRIPT▪ To his Noble Colonell the Right Honorable Sir. Thomas Glm Colonell Generall Governor of York Commander in cheif, of West∣merland, Comberland, Northumberland▪ and the Citie of Car∣lisle, and lastly, Major Generall to his Majestie and Go∣vernor of Oxford, the true patern of Loyaltie. Sir, I Have ever accounted in gratitude, to be not only the greatest, but the ugliest monster in nature, according to that Ingra∣tum Si dixeris omnio dixeris, wondring at the most sort of men, which in this our age doe live, that they take so little regard of it, and not rather, altogether shame and abhor it, but when I perti∣cularly muse of some, as of my selfe I find that either oppertunity will not alwayes serve, or abillitie in most do want, to those that carrie willing minds or answerable in deeds, and concerning my selfe; of whch is now my drift dispare, I have often feared least of di∣vers hereof I would as guiltie be noted, and of many to whom I have been grealy beholden▪ justly condemned, but of note more then of your Honour: which to me for som years together, you have been pleased to bestow upon me many noble favours, the whilst I was under your command, wherefore having gotten some fit occation, I thought not to pretermit the same, but therein to view my mind and poore ability, wherein I may doe your honour any service, I doe here present, small I say in respect of answering any benefit re∣ceived, but great and pretious in regard of the matter therein con∣tained; I having been an eye witnesse of your Honours actions for his Majesties cause, and knowing what great paines and adventures you have undertaken for the defence of it, being alwayes a good account to your Master, as a just steward ought to doe, your loyall action which England is not ignorant of, hath imbolden me to present this small worke to the eyes of the world under good protection, (not to gaine A populer applause) but to hinder as far as in me lyeth; the trampling soe pretious a Iewell, under the feet of such swine which wallows in the myre of thse our times. I take leave of your Honor, wishing you all happinesse in this life, and in the world to come Eternall Felicities. This is the prayers of one of your Honours Cap∣taines, who wil be alwayes readie to observe your command vale. FINIS.
