o998 e555_17 99864096 116315
Oxonii Lachrymae, Rachell weeping for her Children. Or, a Patheticall RELATION OF The present Grievances of the late fa∣mous University of OXFORD. Where∣in you have Her unjust sufferings manifested. The Authours of Her miseries Characterised. And. The ejected Loyalists nominated. Presented in a Letter from an Oxford Schollar (not yet exil'd) to his friend a Gentleman of Grayes-Inne. LONDON, Printed in the year, 1649.
SIR, VVHen the Roman Senate held consultation how to rid their Country of the subtil Carthaginian, that had fretted like a canker the beauty of Italy; Fabius upon the motion to make war in Africk, thought it agreeable to nature, first to defend their own, before they attempted other mens possessions; when Peace is establisht in Italy, then let War be set on foot in Africk; First let us be without fear our selves, ere we go about to terrifie others: This sage advice Scipio could by no meanes digest; but vigorously pursu'd those hot-brain re∣solutions which vain-glory and ambition had suggested unto him; ever oppo∣sing his Motto to the Senators arguments; Plas animi est inferentiquam propul∣sants injuriam. Such Scipio-like Hero's our Land affords, whose implacable malice to their Neighours hath over-topp'd the affection they owe unto them∣selves, and made them neglect the procurement of their own safetye to effect the utter ruine of their brethren. Of this sort those petty Nimrods, which stile themselves our Reformers, are not the meanest; who transported with fury (mistaken by the vulgar for holy zeale) have lately endeavoured to dis-inherit the Muses, and brought an odium upon our chast Mother, for that she some∣times fostered such spurious Bratis. These like Erostratus, must needs have their names recorded to posterity, though purchas'd by the destruction. of Church or Ʋniversity. They measure every mans cloth by their own yard, and because the Loyalists conscience is not so cheverill as to yeild unto their cursed Proposals, they have a Minando minnemur wherewith to curd him; and if he remaine obstinate (as they terme it) a Resolved upon the Question to ca∣shire him; This is the Method wherein they have moulded their hellish de∣signes, and proceeded without fear or wit, to the raising of what ever was Re∣ligious or Learned amongst us: onely this we see some few Pillars (by indul∣gence) remaining, which yet are made useless for supportation, and stand as bewailed Monuments of a once stately Fabrick; nor can we think they will be of long continuance, sithence their White Boyes flock hither a pace with Spades and Mattocks of silver to clear the Foundation. Oh what a glorious building are they now erecting I Yes sure, anther Babel for the honour of their Dignities, wherein nothing but The and Bohu, is like to have its habita∣tion. I have not an expression adequate to their iniquity, nor can I refer you to a Parralell of their villany; for indeed, the honour of our Reformers depen∣ding upon the Superlative degree, hath sought out Projects beyond equality. By what I have now hinted, you may partly guesse at our desolations since your departure, and how unanimously we have adhered to our just and
well grounded Principles you are not ignorant. The vertue we make use of in qualifying our affliction, may happily one day serve to moderate our feli∣cities. However, I am most assured, we shall remain constant even amongst publick ruins, and that Fortune cannot bereave us, of what she never could be∣queath unto us. But I have deteined you too long from what you were pleas'd to request of me: to wit, an account of those which could not be frighted into Disloyalty, and have suffer'd banishment for this their resolution. I shall therefore by the way point our unto you the comicall Actors of our Tragedy, and in fine referre you to the Catalogue. First then, The Leader of this joviall Crew is Mr. Reynolds, the mock Vice-Chancellor, and in him you may behold into what extremities Ambition can drive her thirsty Favourites, by suppressing the better faculties of the soul, and setting such unbridled motions on foot as carry men headlong into most desperate attempts. This is that  which not long since hung in aqui∣librio, and waited only for a grain of successe to turn the scales. Loath he was to nauseat his reputation by actions, so much repugnant to his professions, till baited with Cheynell's execration of his detestable neutrality, and Pem-brook his proffer of the Imperiall Chaire. So thus being centred, he rests in quiet, and protests (if Episcopacy revive not) to remain immovable; herein much resembling the Lyon, which being found by hunters in a Cave, will ra∣ther dye in the place then quit it, for shame that he was caught in so dis∣gracefull a Refuge, and therefore his property is thus expreft, Ingredieudo coecus, exeundo protervus. Next him in dignity comes Sir Nathaniel Brent; a pre∣cious Gentleman indeed, of incomparable valour, that would adventure to to lift the Moon out of the spheare, if she should continue in it five weeks without changing. Me thinks he acts his part like wavering Varro, transacting businesse for Pompey in Spaine, who quickly un-loaded himself of that fidelity he vowed unto himself, so soon as he had Intelligence that Caesar was master of the field: Or just like the Weather-Cock, whereof there is no other use, but indicare regnantem. You may easily compute the rise of his Apostacy, by the down-fall of the High Commission Court, and his Great Master, and thus Ex corruptione  pessimum generatur. His Crown, some think, is very well prepared to ma  Bowling-Alley; but for my part, (with submission to the ju∣dicious) I conceive, 'tis much better fitted for a Kettle-Drum, to incite Captain Cheynell and his Curasiers, when eminent designes do call them upon duty; For if we believe that greatest sounds proceed from vacuity, I know no im∣pediment why it may not be super-excellent for this service. Not farre behind him appears Dr. Wilkinson, or the two legged Crow, A great Coxcomicall Nin∣ny, as fit to regulate an Ʋniversity, as able to rule his Wife. Yea, this is her
principall chamber-Clerk. who for surenesse ever duplicates his fiat, Amen Amen, Kare. And no mervell hee's so ready to perform double duty, sithence she rewards him so fally with plumb-pottage, and Sugar-sops. You would think this Athenian Owle, another Aristotle if you should face him; but Barba Phi∣losophum is very fallible, and many (you know) have more haire then wit. He was better imploy'd when he epitomized Zaharell at length, and taught him to contradict himself in Manuscript. At this Gander's heels followeth a Wor∣thy of fewer yeares, but more Hypocrisie, Mr. Harris of Hamwell. And in him you may see avarice accompanying the covtteous to his grave. He holds Pluralities incompatble in another, but hath a trick to preserve them in him∣self. Benifies he possesseth well nigh a dozen, but alas! good man, (take his Apology to) he receives not above half the profits, which makes him envy Grimool that Argus of Brasen-Nose) his happinesse, who tells him, 'tis true, he has title but to one Personage though he enjoyes the benefits of many. After him comes hog-rubber Rogers creeping. This is Golledge the Tub-man's Corporall, or the New-Inne Scar-crow, the very man that was in Fe with his Physician for granting him a Dispensation from preaching at St. Maries. But oh the Soueraign operation of a Sanctified Canon-ship, which has unty'd his tongue, and makes him (once a quarter) confute Bellarmin with admirable Stoliditie. Yea, this is mine Host Gaius, the spirituall Babboon, good for no∣thing we can discover, but to be baited, that his Swoat may serve for Cundle-grease to light the black Junto in Sir Nathaniel's Parlour. Hard at this Simple∣ton's heels marcheth a Zealot, (as you may discern by his flaming nose,) the thrice noble Franke Cheynell. This, this is the man of mettell, steel to the back, Dictator perpetuus the Chair-man virtually at every Session, whose  goes for canonicall, and strikes his Vice-Chancellour-ship as mute as a marble Niobe, A mad-sparke, indeed, who (not long agoe) was whipt into his wits, and therefore thinks to persecute the honest party into obedience, to dance his Galliard. This is Michael Oldsworth, elder brother pro tempore, which led the Lord Wise-acre by the bill ad placitum, and read an Orthography Lecture to his unworthinesse in Wadiam Celledge Hll. He would fain be stiled Malleus H∣reticorum, the Orthodox Divine  who for a while disorg'd whole Anathemat's against the Independent Vermin, as he terms them▪ but now the Tortes retreats into his shell; Oh how labours he to stay their hands, with a present, and stop ther mouths with a Capon-leg! But surely Mr. Kelsay and his Creatures are more spirituall then to be allured with such carnall temptati∣ons. In brief, this is the grand Archimedes, (who if successe should second his designes) would shew you in a trice the Antipodes of Church and State. Of this holy Sandrim Rabbi, Wilkinson (now Vice (alias vicious) Presidet of
Magdalen Colledge) brings up the Reare. This is the quondum dormouse sneaking under Pauls, now Cheynell's stout second in every Combate. He can willingly dispense with a cap or congey to gaine a Proselite, and affects treading softly to procure an opinon of cordiall integrity: But, Antipater intus pur∣puratus, his tumours and ebullitions are sound arguments of rottennesse. Nor can we much admire that he is so viperous to our common Mother, for that he ws lately so unnaturall to his dying Father; who dehorting him from these unjust and malicious practises, had this answer with indignation return'd; Sir, alas, you are in your dotage and must be pardon'd. This is one amongst the six Apostles which presseth our Academicks to lay aside their parts and reason, where himself (in St. Maries) afforded us a pattern; who having provided a discourse upon this text (1 Tim. 2.4.) Who would have all men be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth; for his more methodicall proceeding, did thus divide it, viz. into an universall Affirmative, and a particular Negative. A piece of Logick, which (I conceive) would have sounded harshly, but that at present it is very much in fashion. Now Sir, it being inconsistent with the honour of those Grandees to go with∣out Attendants, I shall therefore add their Appeadies or chief Gentlemen to the train, and they are two; the one is Langley, a Novice,Oh w canno move whee this  &c. run so giddy in his wheels, that he usually stuffs his Pulpit-peece with rare hyperbolicall Non-sence; and this, that we may the more admire him, and indeed we doe. But if further you should trace his steps into his haunts, and there see him dance the Cana∣ries, or cut his Capers amongst his Doxies, you would straitwaies conclude him of the Pembrochian-line, or (which comes neare it) that most of what he is, hath sunke into his heels. The other is Cornish, the same that disturb'd the memorable Disputations at the Scruple Office in St. Peters Oxon; and for this he is elected Cannon of Christ-Church, and Probationer-Reformer. In truth, a worthy tautologicall Dvine, witnesse his remarkable expression of Sapson his destroying the Philistins. And he pulled the House down upon all and some, and some and all, and all and some together. I have some thing else to say concerning him, but I forbeare, because I am informed, Mrs. Carnish (to say no more) is a Christian. Thus have I presented our Gallants to your view, It remains therefore that I satisfie your desires in the last particular, which (in order) I have here set down for your perusall.
Loyallists expell'd out of Christ Church Colledge. Magdalen Colledge. Dr. Fell, Deane, Dr. Hammond Canon. Dr. Payne Canon. Dr. Morley Canon. Dr. Iles Canon. Dr. Gardiner Canon. Dr. Mayne. Mr, Terrent. Mr. Howe Mr. Dorell Mr. Townsan Mr. Alestree Mr. Carick Mr. Wareing, junior Mr. Staninough. Mr. Dolbin Mr. Hill Mr Smith Mr Hilman Mr Hill jun. Mr Whitehall Mr Jackson M Lowther Mr I. Luellin Mr Ʋnderood Mr Byans Mr Norgate Mr Conopeus Mr Weaver Mr Littleton Mr Nicholas Mr Love Mr Caryll Mr Heath Dr Oliver President. Mr Foreman Mr Lawe Mr Drope Mr Taylour Mr Clutterbook Mr Pierce Mr Holding Mr Chyles Mr Drake Mr Browne Mr Nicholson Mr Serle Mr Yerbury Mr Exton Mr Horne Mr Alexander Mr Duncomb Steward Mr Slade Cook Mr Stonehouse Mr Nurse Mr Worthington Mr Coppinger Mr Philips Mr Bartlet Mr Jones Mr Drope jun. Mr Collis Mr Drury Mr Sympson Mr Duston Mr Langton Mr Clay Mr Diggle Mr Harris Mr Floud Mr Dale Sen. Mr Pennington Mr Cletherow Mr Palmer Mr Oates Mr Bayley Mr Web Mr Hobs Mr Bowles Mr White Mr Eman Mr Heath Mr Jeanes Butler Mr Taylour Butler Mr Tonchin Butler Mr Hearn Cook Mr Chibnall Mr Wake Mr Drope natu min. Corpus Christi Colledge. Dr Newlin President. Mr Stratford Mr Sanderson Mr Clarkson Mr Shute Mr Deane Mr Betts Mr Halsted Mr Kind Mr Jackson Mr Clarke Mr Teagle Mr Metford
Mr Stapleton Mr Glover Mr Stamp Mr Immings Mr Parker Mr Felman Mr Newlin Bible Clerk. Mr Seamer Manciple. Mr Hill Cook. Mr Price Cook. Mr Parne Butler. Mr Bowden Porter. Mr Speeding Mr Wrench Mr Barker Mr Dutton Mr Heywood Mr Samwayes Mr Eales Mr Chidley Mr Sucton Mr Lydall All Soules Colledge: Dr Sheldon Warden Mr Barker Mr Fisher Mr Midleton Mr Boham Mr Newman Mr Dorell Mr George Mr Smith Mr Baldwin Mr James Mr Birkenhead Mr Napier Mr. Crofts Mr Hollingsworth Butler. Mr Griffin Cook. St. Johns Colledge. Dr. Bayley President Mr. Croocher Mr. Creed Mr. Wallwyn Mr. Tilsley Mr. Goad Mr. Winard Mr. Hitchins Mr. Slater Mr. Pemble Mr. Osbaston Mr. Taylor Butler. Mr. Ray Butler. Dr. Edwards Dr. Wild Mr. Miller Mr. Jennings Mr. Aston Mr. Jennings, jun. Mr. Mewes Mr. Buckeidge. New Colledge. Mr. Gardiner Mr. Lucas Mr. Barker Mr. Rowlondson. Mr. Beesley. Mr. Baynham Mr. Dummer Mr. Holloway Mr. Blague Mr. Coles Mr. Hobbs Mr. Price Mr. Marshall Mr. Gillingham Mr. Bowman Mr. Turpin Mr. Withers Mr. Complin Mr. Robinson Mr. Alexander Mr. Aileworth. Excester Colledge. Mr. Tozer Mr. Berry Mr. Bidgood Mr. Polewheele Mr. Poindexter Mr. Barbon Mr. Teage Mr. Webber Mr. Handing. Cook: Brazen Nose Colledge. Mr. Eaton Mr. Ʋde Mr. Rowson Mr. Burges Mr. King Mr. Roberts Mr. Byram Mr. Church Mr. Panter. Queenes Colledge. Mr. Pearson. Mr. Gibson Mr. Pitt Mr. Musgrave
Mr. Buchanan. Mr. Tarne Mr. Wilkinson, since A∣postatizd. Mr. Farer Mr. Brathwaite Mr. Grigg Mr. Fletcher. University Colledge. Dr. Walker, Master. Mr. Walker Mr. Watkins Mr. Silvester Mr. Stone. Oriell Colledge. Mr. Duncomh. Mr. Sanders. Mr. Chamberlane Mr. Shelden Mr Bonch. Wadham Colledge. Dr. Pites Warden. Mr. Pyne Dr. Sugg Mr. Strangewayes Mr. Atkins Mr. Michaleson Mr. Hues. Mr. Thomas Mr. Daker Merton Colledge. Mr. Owen. Mr. Broad. Mr. Lee. Dr Turner Mr Graves Trinity Colledge. Dr Potter President. Mr Radford Mr Skinner Mr Bainger Mr Poundell Mr Ettrick. Jesus Colledge Dr Mansell Principall. Mr Flower Mr Hues Mr Evans Mr Wilkins Mr Price Mr Penry Mr Basset Balioll Coledge. Dr Lawrence Master, ba∣nished himself by resig∣nation, for feare of expul∣sion. Mr Fielding Mr Clement Pembroke Colledge. Mr Whittack Master. Mr Bowles Lincolne Colledge. Mr Webberley To conclude, since you are so desirous to understand the Occurrences a∣mongst us I shall take every opportunity to satisfie your request, and to this end shall forthwith send you a Cutalogue of those whose pollicy (as they terme it) hath shuffled out their Loyalty, and induc'd them to keep their nests by detestable complyance, and in the interin subscribe my self Yours to serve you. Philanax Anonononi▪ FINIS.
