p1444a 45097891 171470
The People of SCOTLAND's Groans and Lamentable Complaints, Pour'd out before the High Court of Parlia∣ment. THE People of Scotland, most Illustrious Patriots, like Children in a great measure depriv'd of the Kindness and Protection of One of their Parents, have Recourse to you as the Other. When one Parent is dead, or un∣der a moral Incapacity of performing Their part, if the Other prove un∣natural or negligent, the Poor Children must unavoidably be Undone. The People of this Kingdom, whom you Represent, have been depriv'd of the Benign Influences of our Kings these 100 years. Our Neighbours having the Political Fathers of our Country, under their Command, are so far from leaving them at Liberty to Treat Us as Subjects and Children, that they have from time to time made 'em Treat Us like Enemies; but never more than at present, as is obvious to all the World, to Our great Loss and Dishonour. We have no other Remedy left Us then, most Noble Representatives, but to prostrate Our Selves at Your Feet, and to throw Our Selves into your Arms, as those of Our Other Parent, humbly imploring, nay Conjuring You by all that is Sacred, and by the Honour of the SCOTTISH Name, that You▪ would not suf∣fer this Ancient and Gallant Nation to be so much Contemn'd and Injur'd. We beg of You to consider, how Our Soveraignty and Freedom is Violated, Our Laws trampled upon, and our Trade interrupted; how Our Brethren have been Star∣ved and made Slaves, Our Colony deserted, and Our Ships burnt and lost A∣broad; whilst Our Petitions have been rejected, Our Company baffled, Our People Famish'd, Our Metropolis burnt, and slames of Division kindled amongst Us at Home. We intreat You to consider, how they that ought in Kindness, nay in Gratitude, to have let Us had Provisions for Our Money, whilst they enjoyed Plenty, and ought to have Protected Us with their Ships, since We are under one Sovereign, and have lost so many Men in their Service by Sea and Land, suffered Us to die for Want, and would not let Us have the Use of Our own Friggots, that were built at Our own Charge. We must beg You to take into Your most Seri∣ous Thoughts, how Your own Authority hath been trod under Foot, Your Acts Violated, Your Address slighted, and the Company of Your Establishment Op∣pos'd and Oppress'd. We pray You to Remember, how Promises made You to advance Our Trade, have been broke; how those to Our Company have been falsified; and how English Ministers have had Private Orders to act contrary to those Promises. We beseech You to Remember, how a Petition for delivering from Slavery, Gentlemen Related to so many of Your Families, &c. was slight∣ed and oppos'd; How Our Liberty of a National Petition for Calling You to∣gether, Most Illustrious Representatives, to Redress Our National Grievances, was invaded and traduced: How Your Meeting has been unreasonably adjourn∣ed from time to time, tho the Bleeding Honour and Interest of Our Nation call'd aloud for a present Remedy. We beg of You with Tears, as You tender the Honour and Welfare of this Ancient Kingdom, to undeceive His Majesty, who by His Answer to Our Com∣missioners seems to have been inform'd, that Your Sentiments, and those of the Na∣tion express'd in Our Petition, would not be the same. We hope you will consider the Dishonour put upon your Selves, by the effectual Answers given to the Addrresses of a Neighbouring Parliament, whilst yours is un∣regarded; and that you will assert the Liberties of this Injur'd Nation, against the
Insolence and Oppressions of Ungrateful Neighbours: Consider the Noble At∣chievements of our Ancestors, in defience of our Freedom and Honour. May it never be said, we are so much degenerated, as meanly to part with those Jewels which they purchased for us with the Price of their Blood. And much less, that those who falsly reproached us with selling our King, should have just grounds to tell us, that any of our Representatives sold our Country. Let not this Na∣tion, that they could never Conquer by their Swords, be ingloriously subdued by their Money. We must leave it with You, most Noble Patriots, to take Care, that no such Judas's bring a perpetual Infamy upon the Parliaments of Scotland. May the very Aspect of your August Assembly prove their Bane; may it force them to confess their Treasonable Crime, in betraying our Blood and Honour; may they after∣wards go to their deserved Place; and may their Posts be fill'd with Honester-Men. We must in the last place humbly beseech You, to prevent our being further impoverish'd and enslav'd, by a standing Army in time of Peace. We have the same Love for our Country that our Ancestors had, and are as willing to defend it as they, without mercinary Troops. Let us all be Arm'd and Disciplin'd as they were, and then we shall soon make good our Motto of Nemo me impune Lacesset: Our fore-fathers did wonders without standing Armys, and that we have not lost our Native Courage, is evident from what our undisciplin'd Men did, both here and in Ireland, since the Revolution. Let not a Nation then, who formerly spread the Glory of their Arms al over Europe, be dispirited under the Bondage of a Foreign Court. Let not that Blood, that formerly us'd to gather Lawrels in the field of Battle, and rais'd the Honour of our Country, be so prodigally spilt in Quarrels of other Nations that make us such Ingrateful Returns. May Heaven inspire Your August Assembly with proper Methods to deliver us from being Oppress'd at home and Despis'd abroad. May you be Bless'd to improve the present Opportunity of so doing, which if lost the like is not to be again expected; And as you have had the Honour to begin and advance our Deliverance, may you have the Glory to Compleat it, and to ren∣der your Memory Sacred to all succeeding Ages.
