R1110 E472_3 99865011 162410
THE REPRESENTATIONS AND Consultations of the Generall Councell of the ARMIE at S. Albans. WITH Severall Propositions to the L. Generall, from the Officers of divers Regiments of the Army, about the present settlement of the Kingdome. ALSO A DECLARATION OF His Excellency Thomas L. Fairfax, concerning the KINGS Majesty, and the present proceedings in the Treaty at the Jsle of Wight. With the Demands of of the Souldiers which guard His Majesty and the Commissioners in the said Island, when the Treaty is ended: And a Copie of his Excellencies Letter thereupon. London: Printed for R. A. 1648.
Severall Papers of the daily proceedings of the Generall Councell of the Army, some Speeches made by the Officers, and the Lord-Generalls Declaration to assist the King and Parliament in such an a∣greement as shall be concluded between them. THe first day of the meeting of the Generall Assem∣bly of the Army being Tuesday the 7. of this in∣stant, his Excellency and many of his chiefe Officers met in the Church at S. Albanes, and after prayers for seeking a blessing upon their assembling together, and a Sermon, they debated on certaine Papers formerly pre∣sented to the Lord-Generall in the name of some parti∣cular Regiments of the Army, but nothing concluded on this day, for the time of their sitting on these affaires was not long, and severall Officers not yet come to the Head-Quarters. Wednesday, 8. Nov. the Generall Councell of the Army was fuller then the day before, and it was agreed that the matters first insisted on should be the quartering of the Army in such a way, as might affoord most ease to the Countrey; and for that it is impossible that with∣out pay an Army should not be burdensome to the pla∣ces
where they quarter, they hold it necessary to consi∣der of certain Proposalls for ascertaining the pay of the Souldiery. 2. The Officers of the Army expressed an exceeding great sense of the losse of Colonell Rainsborough, and thought fit that inquiry should be made about that wic∣ked murder, and that justice should be done therein. Novemb. 9. Some Speeches were made by divers Of∣ficers of the Army, expressing, that they apprehended a designe of stopping of pay for the Army, on purpose to cast an Odium upon them, and render them the more burdensome, and lesse usefull to the Kingdome: And notwithstanding the great care of the Committee and Treasurers of the Army, and the cheerfull readinesse of most Counties for the payment of Assessements, as those where they now quarter do affirme, neverthelesse the private Souldiers are necessitated to take Free-quarter for the present, which is very irksome unto them to be so burdensome to their friends, neither are those wid∣dowes who lost their husbands in the last ingagement, or in the first service, and children that lost their parents, sufficiently provided for, but are for want of maintenance reduced to great extremities, even to beggery, having not sufficient provision for their subsistence, and future livelihood. There be also some Papers from Commissary Gen. Ire∣tons Regiment and others of the Army, (besides their late Petition to the Lord Generall) to be considered on, wherein they set forth that no certain Provision hath been made for the payment of their dearly earned wages by the expence of their blood and often hazard of their lives, nor any thing yet perfected for their future security
for things done, as Souldiers in relation to the warre which the exegincy thereof hath compelled thereunto, the want whereof they cannot chose but be very sensible of, when they consider the many sad examples of bitter and rigorous proceedings at Law against souldiers for acts done in order to the promotion of the Parliaments service. Novemb. 10. further time was spent in debate on the present affaires of the Kingdome, and particularly con∣cerning the setling of a firme peace, and divers speeches were made by Colonells of the Army, declaring, that they desire nothing more then to see this Kingdome re∣stored to a flourishing condition in peace and amity, and that the hearts of King and people may be knit together in a threefold cord of love; some things were also mo∣ved concerning the former Proposalls, and bringing Delinquents to triall, it hath been also desired, that those who indeavour to render his Excellencies Army odious by aspersions, and thereby to deprive them of that ho∣nour which they so dearly bought, and to incense the Kingdome and Souldiers against them, may be procee∣ded against according to justice. Novemb. 11. a Petition was read at the Generall Counsell in the name of the Officers of Col. Kich his Regiment, and severall others of the Army with the re∣presentations following: viz. 1. That speedy and impartiall Justice may be executed upon all the fomentors, contrivers, and actors in the first and late Warre. 2. That inquisition be made for the bloud of Col. Rainsborough. 3. That the supreme power may be declared and
determined, that the want thereof may not be the ground of future (as it hath been of these former) Warres. 4. That a period be set for this present Parl. to end as soone as may be with safety, and provisions made for fu∣ture Parliaments to meet certain without Writ or sum∣mons. 5. That rules may be set down between the people and their Representatives. 6. That Lawes may be made in things civill to bind all men, so that no man in case of offence, may be freed from that Law whereunto another is subject. 7. That all those common grievances and desires in our Declarations of June 14. and June 23. 1647. and ex∣pressed in the London Petition, be speedily granted and redressed. 8. That present Provision be made for the Constant pay of the Army. 9. That the arrears due from the 15. of January, may be paid off, before we be Commanded to pay Quarters, and that there may be no other abatement from Officers and Souldiers for free Quarter, then according to the rates set downe in the Ordinance of Parliament, of the 24. day December last. 10. That the Country may be paid for our free Quar∣ter, according to the Deduction out of our pay out of their Assessements. 11. That in as much as the Assessements fall short to pay the Army. That therefore there may be Additionall supplies monethly out of the Estates of the old and new Delinquents, that there be no more Tax or Charge to the Commonwealth.
12. That fotthwith an Accompt be called for from all persons, that have been betrusted with any thing for the State, that the Kingdom may be satisfied therein. 13. That the Deanes, and Chapters Lands may be given to pay the Souldiers Arreares, seeing the Parl. have gi∣ven away the Delinquents Estates that should have done it. His Excellency the Lord Generall hath also declared as followeth. That he may not be the dissatisfaction of his friends, the sub∣ject of his Enemies malice, and the suspition of many in the Kingdome, he shall in faithfullnesse and clearnesse declare, that no worldly thing is so deare unto him, as the compleat set∣ling of the liberties and peace of the Kingdome, and that he will proceed to such things as may give most hopes of Justice and righteousnesse to flow down equally to all, without any o∣verture tending to overthrow the government of the King∣dome, and that he will cleerly commit his stock or share of inte∣rest in this Kingdome, into the common bottome of Parlia∣ments. And when his Majesty shall give his concurrence to what is tendred, and what else shall be proposed by the Parlia∣ment, necessary for procuring the Righs and Liberties of the People, his Excellency will (to the utmost of his endeavours) maintain and defend his Majesty and his Parliament in that just long desired Agreement. And whereas it hath been sug∣gested, or suspected, that the proceedings of the Army have been to overthrow Presbyterie, or hinder the settlement there∣of, and to have the Independent Government up, he doth clearly disclaim and dissavour any such designe.
His Excellency the Lord Gen. FAIRFAX hath sent a Letter to the Committee for the Army in these words. HAving had a meeting of divers Officers of the Army, apprehend their generall sad Resentment of the many pressures now lying upon the Kingdom, in particular, that of free Quarter, whereby they (and the Souldiers under their Command who have faithfully served their Generation) are even a burden to themselves, because they are so much to the poor Countrey, which is the more grievous to them, because they have generally paid their Taxes, and yet the Army not enabled to pay their Quarters, or provide themselves necessa∣ries against the injury of the approaching season. I hoped ere this we should have received some good fruit of your last be∣ing with us, the matters then agreed, being of such publike concernment, and so much requiring expedition. I desire you to improve your utmost endeavour for a quick dispatch in pro∣viding effectually for the premises to prevent those ill conse∣quences which otherwaies delay therein may produce. I request you to communicate this to the House: so hoping to heare speedily from you, I remaine Your very assured Friend, FAIRFAX. FINIS.
