S1019j R229967 99895751 153303
royal blazon or coat of arms I R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT A PROCLAMATION Anent Linen-Cloth. Agust 1688 IAMES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, to  Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch as by the 43 Act of the first Session, first Parliament of King Charles 2, of ever blessed Memory, All Merchants and others whatsoever, are discharged to Transport out of this Kingdom any Linen-Yarn, and all Weavers are discharged to make any Linen-Cloth of the price of 10 ss. Scots the Ell or above, under the breadth of an Ell and two Inches: And by the said Act, it is Statute and Ordained, that all Linen be taken up by the Selvege, and not by the Rig, and that all Linen-Cloth be bleetched without Lime, under the respe∣ctive Penalties contained in the said Act: As also, by the 12 Act of the 3d Parliament of K. Charles 2, the Act above-mentioned is Ratified and Approven in all points: And it is further Ordained, that all Linen brought to the Mercat for publick Sale, be made up of Pieces, and Half-Pieces, and that the Piece contain 24 Ells, and the Half-Piece 12 Ells, and that it contain not an Ell more or less, under the pain of Confiscation thereof, as at more length is contained in the said Act. And it being Our Royal Intention to Encourage Manufactories within this Kingdom, and particularly to bring the Linen-Cloth unto Cre∣dit Abroad, to the great and undoubted Advantage of the Nation; Therefore, We with Advice of Our Council of Trade, Do hereby Revive the saids two Acts, in all the Heads and Articles thereof; And that the famine may take better effect in all Time coming. We do hereby Ordain the Burghs of Innerness, Elgin, Bamff, Aberdene, Monross, St Johnstoun, Dundee, Comper, u∣nerkeithing, Kirkcaldie, Stirling, Linlithgow, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Dumbartoun, Air, Irwine, Wigtoun, Dumfreis, Jedburgh, Kelso, Peebles, Hadingtoun, and Dumbar, to Erect an Office in their respective Towns, and to place a Man therein for measuring and taking notice that all Linen-Cloth be made conform to the Laws above-written in all points, and that the said Office be kept open from Eight of the Clock in the Morning till Twelve, and from Two till Six at Night; and for that effect, Ordains all Per∣sons that Trade in Linen, to bring the same to any of these Offices they shall think fit, and being there tryed, and found sufficient, to have the Town Seal put upon each end of the Cloth, for which the said Measurer is to have 8 Pennies Scots for the whole Piece, and 4 Pennies Scots for the Half-Piece; and in case the said Cloth, having the Town Seal, shall be found narrower, or shorter, or any part of the Piece courser than another, or otherways than is prescribed by the Acts above written, then and in that case, the Town shall be obliged to pay to the Buyer, three times the price of the Cloth. And We do Require and Command, the Burghs above-mentioned, to Erect such Offices within their respective Towns, betwixt and the first of November next, under all highest pain, and the Neglecters and Disobeyers to be lookt on as Contemners of Our Royal Authority. And further, We do here∣by give Liberty and Allowance to all other Burghs as shall think fit to Eect such an Office within their respective Towns to do the famine, betwixt and the first of November foresaid with Certification, if they omit the doing thereof betwixt and that time, they shall Tyne and Amit the Priviledges thereof in time coming. And whereas by the Act of Parliament above-mentioned, Li∣nen-Cloth under the price of 10 ss. Scots is not ordained to be made of the breadth above-written, notwithstanding that much Cloth of less breadth is exported: Therefore We with Advice foresaid, Ordain all Linen Cloth above 8 ss. Scots an Ell, to be of the breadth and length above-written. And lastly, We Ordain, that all Waiters, Surveyers, and others, take particular Inspection on all Linen-Cloth to be exported furth out of this Kingdom after the said first of November, and make Seizure of all such as shall want the Seals above-written, the half whereof so seized shall belong to the Apprehender, and the other half to be brought in to Our Council of Trade for Our use. And that Our Royal Pleasure herein may be known, Our Will is, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and all other places needful, and there in Our Royal Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make Publication of Our Pleasure in the Pre∣misses, that punctual Obedience may be given thereto, and none pretend Ignorance. Given at Edinburgh, the Fifteenth day of August, One thousand six hundred and eighty eight Years, and of Our Reign the Fourth Year. Per Actum Dominorum Concilii Commercii. Ro: Maine Cls. Concilii Commercii. GOD save the KING. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, Anno DOM. 1688.
