S1511 99895947 153554
CR HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms LETTERS OF INTERCOMMUNING Against several Persons declared Fugitives for not compearing to answer for CONVENTICLES, &c. CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, To Our Lovits, Macers or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting; Forasmuch, as upon the twenty fifth, twenty seventh, twenty eight, twenty ninth, and thirty days of July▪ one thou∣sand six hundred and seventy four years, the Persons under-written, were at the Mercat Crosses of Edin∣burgh, Haddingtoun, Lanerk, Cowper, Perth, Dumfermling, Stirling, Glasgow, and Linlithgow, successive and respective orderly denunced Our Rebels, and put to Our Horn, by vertue of let∣ters of denunciation raised, used and execute at the instance of Our trusty and well beloved Councellor Sir John Nisbet of Dirletoun Knight, Our Advocat, for Our interest, for their not compearing personally before the Lords of Our Privy Council upon the sixteenth day of July, 1674. to have answered and underlyen the Law, for their keeping, and being present at House and Field-Conventicles, at the places following, and convocating people thereto, Viz. At Enderask, Edmonstoun-Chapel, Volmet, Corstorphine, Megdalen-Chapel, Borthwick, Kirklistoun, Gladsmure, Torwood, Pitscottie-mure, Ravensheuch, Kinkell, Balmerino, Falkland, Collessie, Peth-head, of Kirkcaldey, Kinneswood, Glenveal, Sanfoord, Moonsey, Dumfermlin, Dundee, Pattenwyme, Lathons, Eastbarns, Dumfries, and other places, or ane or other of them, or near to them: And for contemptuous invading, and intruding themselves in the Pulpits, and Churches of Crawmond, Forgund, Kirkmahoe, and others, in the moneths of Apryl, May and June, on thousand six hundred and seventy four; Contrare to the Laws and Acts of Parliament made there-against, in manner at length, specified in the principal complaint raised against them thereanent, Viz. Mr. James Kirktoun, Mr. Alexander Lennox, Mr. John Rae, Mr. David Hume, Mr. Edward Jameson, Mr. Robert Lockhart, Mr. John Walwood, Mr. John Weir, Mr. Andrew Donaldson, sometime in Dalgettie, Mr. Thomas Mcgill, Mr. James Wedderburn, in Cowper, Mr. Thomas Dowglas, Mr. Francis Irving, Mr. Alexander Bartrim, and Mr. Alexander Wilson; As the Letters of Denunciation duely execute and registrate, conform to the Act of Parliament produced in presence of Our Privy Council bears: At the pro∣cess of the which Horn, the forenamed persons, have ever since lyen, and continued, taking no regard thereof; nor of Our Au∣thority, and Laws; And are encouraged to continue, in their Rebellion, by the resett, supplie, and intercommuning which they have with several of their friends and acquaintances, to the high contempt of Us, Our Authority, and Laws. OUR WILL IS herefore, and We charge you straitly, and command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye passe to the Mercat Crosses of Edinburgh, Haddingtoun, Linlithgow, Lanerk, Cowper, Perth, Dumfermling, Stirling, Glasgow, and other places needful; and thereat in Our Name and Authority, command and charge all and sundry Our Leiges and Subjects, that they, nor none of them presume nor take upon hand to resett, supply, or intercommune with any of the foresaids persons Our Rebels, for the causes foresaids; nor furnish them with meat, drink, house, harbour, victual, nor no other thing useful, nor comfortable to them; or have intelligence with them by word, writ, or message, or any other manner of way, under the pain to be repute and esteemed airt and part with them, in the crimes foresaids, and pursued therefore with all rigor, to the terror of others: Requiring hereby all Sheriffs, Stewards, Bailies of Regalities and Bailiries, and their Deputs, and Magistrates of Burghs, to apprehend and commit to prison any of the persons above-written, Our Rebels, whom they shall find in their respective ju∣risdictions, according to justice, as you will answer to Us thereupon. The which to do We commit to you, conjunctly and seve∣rally, Our full power; by these Our letters, delivering them by you duely execute, and indorsat again to the Bearer. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the third day of August, one thousand six hundred seventy and six years, and of Our Reign, the twenty eight year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. Al. Gibson, Cl. Sti. Concilii. God save the King. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty: Anno DOM. 1676. CUM PRIVILEGIO.
