S2130 E303_4 99861095 113223
A LETTER SENT TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE LORD DIGBY, FROM SIR BARNABAS SCVDAMORE GOVERNOR OF HEREFORD, Concerning the late Siedge of the CITTY OF HEREFORD. OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the Vniversity. 1645.
MY LORD, A Numerous and Active Army closely besieg∣ing us hath rendred me, and those engaged with me, (in regard of perpetuall duty, without reliefe of Guards for five weeks together) incapable of presenting your Lordship with an exact Relation thereof; I can therefore hint it only for a better Mercury. The Offi∣cers, Gentry, (whereof I shall send a List) Clergy, Citizens, and Common Souldiers, behaved themselves all gallantly up∣on their duty, many eminently; to particularize each, would be too great a trespasse on your Lordships more weighty af∣faires. Briefly beleeve me (my Lord) the walls of their vali∣ant breasts were all strongly lined with Courage and Loyalty. On the 30th of July, I sent out a Party of 20 Horse over Wye-bridge, who discovering their Forlorne-hope of Horse, charged them into their maine Body; and retreated in very little disorder, and with losse only of one Trooper, (taken Prisoner) some of the Scots falling. Immediatly after this, their whole Body of Horse faced us, about ten of the Clock in the morning within the reach of our Cannon, and were wel∣comed with our mettall; good execution being done upon them, their Foot as yet undiscovered. About halfe an houre after, I caused a strong Party of Foot (seconded with Horse) to line the hedges, who galled them in their passage to the
Fords, after whose handsome retreat, I began to ensafe the Ports, which I did that night. In the morning, appeared their Body of Foot, and we found our selves surrounded. I injoyn∣ed the Bells silence, least their ringing, which was an Alarme to awaken our devotion, might Chime them together to the execution of their malice. For the same reason, I stopt our Clocks, and hereby though I prevented their telling tales, to the advantage of the Enemy, I my selfe lost the punctuall ob∣servation of many particulars, which therefore I must more confusedly represent unto your Lordship. Before they attempted any thing against the Towne, they invited us to a Surrendry, and this they did by a double Sum∣mons, one from Leven, directed to me; the other from the Committee of both Kingdomes (attending upon the affaires of the Army) sent to the Major and Corporation: but we com∣plyed so well in our Resolutions, that our positive Answer served for both Parties, which was returned by me to their Generall. This not giving that satisfaction they desired, they began to approach upon the first of August, but very slowly and mo∣destly; as yet intending more the security of their owne per∣sons, then the ruine of ours: but all their Art could not pro∣tect them from our small and great shot which fell upon them. Besides this, our men galled them handsomly at their severall Sallies, over Wyebridge, once beat them up to their maine guard, and at another demolisht one side of St Martins Steeple; which would have much annoyed us at the Bridge and Pal∣lace; this was performed with the hurt only of two men, but with losse of great store of the Enemies men. When they saw how difficult the Service would prove, before they could compasse their designes by force, they made use of another Engine which was flattery. The Major and Aldermen are courted to yeeld the Towne by an Epistle, sub∣scribed by six of the Country Gentlemen, very compassionate and suasory: but upon our refusall to stoup to this lure, they were much incensed that they had been so long disappointed, and having all this while continued their line of Communi∣cation,
they raised their Batteries, commencing at Wyebridge, from whence they received the greatest dammage, but in∣stead of revenging that losse upon us, they multiplied their owne, by the death of their much lamented Major Generall Crafford, and some others that fell with him. This provoked them to play hot upon the Gate for two dayes together, and battered it so much, (being the weakest) that it was rendred uselesse, yet our men stopt it up with Wooll-sacks and Tim∣ber, and for our greater assurance of eluding their attempt, we brake an Arch, and raised a very strong Worke behind it. The Enemy frustrate of his hopes here, raiseth two seve∣rall Batteries, one at the Fryers, the other on the other side of Wye River, and from both these, playes his Ordinance against the corner of the wall by Wye side, but we repaire and line our walls faster then they can batter them, whereupon they desist. About the 11th of August, we discover a Mine at Frein-gate, and imploy workmen to countermine them. When we had stopt the progresse of that Mine on one side of the Gate, they carried it on the other; which we also defeated by ma∣king a Sally-port: and issuing forth did break it open and fire it. About the 13th, they raise Batteries round about the Town, and make a Bridge over Wye River. The 14th, Doctor Scudamore is sent by them to desire ad∣mittance for three Country Gentlemen, who pretended in their Letters to import something of consequence to the good of the City and County, free leave of ingresse and egresse was allowed them, but being admitted, their suggestions were found to us so frivolous and impertinent, that they were dis∣misd, not without some disrelish and neglect: and the said Doctor, after they were past the Port, comming back from his company, was unfortunately slaine by a shot from the Enemy. About the 16th, they discover the face of their Battery against Frein-gate, with five severall gun-ports, from hence they played foure Cannon joyntly at our walls, and made a breach, which was instantly made up; they doe the like on the other side with the like successe.
The 17th, a notable Sally was made at St Owens Church with great execution, and divers Prisoners taken with the losse only of one man, at which time little boyes strived, which should first carry Torches and Faggots to fire their works, which was performed to some purpose, and so it was at the same Sally-port once before, though with a fewer number, and therefore with lesse execution. And I may not forget to acquaint your Lordship with those other foure Sallies, made by us at the Castle to good effect, and what emulation there was between the Soul∣dier and Citizens, which should be most ingaged in them: Now their losse of Prisoners, slaughter of men, and dis∣honour of being beaten out of their works, which they found ready to flame about their eares if they returned presently in∣to them, had so kindled their indignation, that presently they raysed Batteries against Saint Owens Church, and plaid fierce∣ly at it, but to little purpose, which they so easily perceived, that from the 20. unto the 27. there was a great calme on all sides, we as willing to provide our selves, and preserve our ammunition for a storme, as they could be industrious or mali∣tious to bring it upon us: yet I cannot say either side was Idle; for they ply'd their Mine at Saint Owens, and prepared for Scaling, we countermined, imploy'd our boyes by day and night to steale out and fire their Works; securing their retreat under the protection of our Musquetiers upon the wall, and what our fire could not perfect, though it burnt farre, and suffocated some of their Miners, our water did, breaking in upon them and drowning that which the fire had not consu∣med, and this saved us the pains of pursuing a mine, which we had sunk on purpose to reader theirs in that place ineffe∣ctuall. The 29th, Leven (a mercifull Generall) assayes the Towne againe by his last offer of honourable conditions to surrender, but he found us still unrelenting, the terror of his Cannon, making no impression at all upon our Spirits, though the bullets discharged from them, had done so much against our walls: this (though some of their chiefe Commanders
were remisse and coole at the debate and some contradicto∣ry) drives their greatest spirits into a passionate resolution of storming. And to that purpose August 31th, and September. 1. they prepare Ladders, hurdles, and other accommodations for the advancing their designe, and securing their persons in the at∣tempt, and played very hot with their Cannon upon Bysters gate, and the halfe moon next Saint Owens gate, intending the morrow after to fall on, presuming as they boasted, that after they had rung us this passing peale, they should present∣ly force the Garrison to give up her Loyall Ghost, but the same night His Majesty advancing from Worcester, gave them a very hot alarum, and drawing a little neerer to us, like the Sunne to the Meridian, this Scottish mist beganne to disperse, and the next morning vanished out of sight. My Lord, I should give your Lordship an accompt of the valor of our common Souldiers and Townesmen, that would hazard themselves at the making up of breaches (to the astonishment of the ene∣my, till their Cannon played between their leggs, and even the Women (such was their gallantry) ventred where the Musquet bullets did so, and I should acquaint your Honour, what frequent alarums we gave them by fire-balls, lights up∣on our Steeple, by Dogs, Cats, and outworne Horses, having light Matches tyed about them; and turned out upon their works, whereby we put the enemy in such distraction, that sometimes they charged one another; this recreation we had in the middest of our besiedging: and one morning, instead of beating Reveillie, we had a crye of Hounds, in pursuit after the traine of a Fox about the Walls of the Citty, so little were we dismaied at the threats or attempts of them. I may not forget one remarkable peece of Divine Providence, that God sent us singular men of all professions, very usefull, and necessary for us in this distresse, and so accidentally to us, as if they had on purpose been let downe from Heaven, to serve our present and emergent occasions: as ilfull Miners, ex∣cellent Cannoneers, (one whereof spent but one shot in vaine throughout the whole Siedge) an expert Carpenter, the
only man in all the Country to make Mills, without whom we had been much disfurnisht of a meanes to make Powder, (after our Powder-mill was burnt) or grind Corner that pro∣vidence that brought these to us, at last drove our Enemies from us, after the destruction of foure or five Mines, which since appeares to be their number, the expence of 300 Can∣non shot, besides other Ammunition spent with Muskets, the losse by their owne confession of 1200, and as the Coun∣try sayes 2000 men, we in all not loosing about 21 by all Casualties whatsoever. Thus craving your Lordships pardon for my prolixity, I take leave and rest Your Lordships most humble servant, BER. SCUDAMORE. For the Governour of the City of Hereford. SIR, OƲr appearance before you in this posture, is for no other end, but the setling of truth with Peace in England, with∣out the least desire to shed the bloud of any Subject in it, our by∣past actions may be a sufficient evidence hereof; Therefore is to Summond and require you to deliver up that City unto me to be kept for the use of His Majesty and the Parliament of England: whereunto, if shall be so wise and happy to condescend, you may have Conditions honourable and safe, but if otherwise worse Councell shall so farre prevaile with you, as to contemne this offer, I am perswaded all the World, and you also, will acquit me of the manifold inconveniences which will undoubtedly ensue upon your refusall. Consider hardly of your owne Condition, and of these now under your charge, whose bloud will be laid upon your ac∣compt, and returne an Answer within three houres after the re∣ceipt of this, unto me. So sent at the Leaguer before Hereford, this last day of Iuly, about ten of the Clock in the forenoone. LEVEN.
For the Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of Hereford, these. Gentlemen, WEE the Commissioners appointed by the Parliament of England, to reside in the Scots Army, foreseeing the great Miseries and Calamities that are likely to ensue to this City of Hereford, in case the Summons sent by his Excellency the Earle of Leven, shall be refused by the Governour; Have thought good to give you timely advice to use your uttermost en∣deavours, that a positive and satisfactory Answer may be retur∣ned thereunto, least that by a wilfull delay or refusall, you bring utter ruine and destruction, not only to your selves, but to all that are with you, which will not lie in the power of any to prevent. From the Leaguer before Hereford, Iuly 31. 1645. Your Loving friends, Iohn Corbett. Edward Baynton. William Pulfrey. Humfrey Salwey. My Lord, I Am not to give up the Kings Garrison upon any Summons or Letter, neither shall it be in the power of the Major or other to condescend to any such Proposition made unto him; I was set in here by the Kings Command, and shall not quit it but by speciall order from His Majesty or the Prince. And with this resolution I shall persist in Hereford, this last of Iuly, 1645. B. SCUDAMORE. May it please your Honour, WEE whose names are subscribed, having a great de∣sire for the good of Citty and County, and seeing the present great distresse that is like to ensue both to Citty and County, have thought fit to present these to your Honours con∣sideration,
and to give you to understand, That if it please your Honour to admit us with safe Conduct into and out of the Citty, to impart some matters unto your Honour, which we hope may be conduceable for the good of Citty and Countie, we will with your honours approbation, addresse and present our selves unto your honour: and so humbly desiring your honours speedy answer with our respects we rest At your Honours Command, Herbert Westfalling. Roger Hereford. James Newton. From the General's Quarters 14. August 1645. To the Honourable the Governor of the Citty and County of Here∣ford, these present. For the Right worshipfull the Major and Aldermen, and the Citizens of Hereford, these. Right worshipfull and loving friends, OƲr earnest desire to prevent the effusion of much Christian bloud, which must unavoydably be spilt, if the City should be forcibly entred, and the consideration that a number of Religi∣ous and Innocent Persons are likely to suffer with the rest, whose bloud, if spilt through your obstinacy, will be required at your hands, hath caused us to beg that favour from his Excellency and the honourable Commissioners of both Kingdomes, that these our advice & desires might be sent unto you, hoping that our neernes in bloud to many, our familiarity and friendship with most, some of us being knowne even unto all, may obtaine Credit with you, at least with as many, who love either themselves, their Families, or tender the glory of that great God whom they pretend to serve; That you would seriously consider the heavy burden which at this time by reason of so great an Army lies upon the adjacent Coun∣ty, to the great prejudice of divers of your neere friends, and some of your owne Familios, which at last, if your obstinacy con∣tinue,
will fall heaviest upon your owne selves: That you would not too long be flattered with the conceit, that Conditions may be had any time: That you would not give credit to those who by false suggestions keep you to their obedience, and make you the unhappy Instruments to effect their hellish designes, tending both to your owne and the Kingdomes destruction▪ But that whilest Mercy may be shewen to you, you would embrace it, whilst future subsistance is remaining for your selves and the Country, you would submit your selves and City to the obedience of the King and Parliament: and in so doing, you shall preserve your Lives and Goods from the rage of the devouring Sword, your Country from approching Famine, and be assured you have no Enemies here, longer then you are enemies to your selves and the Common∣wealth; your inability to hold out against so Puissant an Army, we well know, and if you will credit us, (who have, and must live amongst you) Reliefe you can have none. We are so much the more earnest with you, by how much the more (if obstinately you withstand the Patriots of your Country) we know your Condi∣tion desperate, we have done our duty as friends to you; God grant it worke so farre upon your hearts, as that you may be friends to your selves, and for your guidance, you shall have the dayly prayers of Your loving friends, Ed: Harley. Tho: Seaborne. Franc: Pomber. Io: Herring. Io: Style▪ Eusbare Hardwike. For the Governour of Hereford. SIR, BY a former addresse, I made knowne unto you the constant desires and resolutions of this Army to shun the effusion of bloud, and to preserve Cities and Families from desolation; And for that end did invite you to a peaceable Surrender of that City for the use of His Majesty and the Parliament of England, upon Conditions honourable and safe, whereby they might enjoy the fruits of a setled Peace, which other Garrisons that have been in the like Condition now doe: whereunto upon grounds best known
unto your selfe, you thought it not then fitting to condescend; Ne∣verthelesse, that I may convince you of the Realities of your de∣sires and resolutions before mentioned, and of your owne guilti∣nesse of all the bloud-shed misery and desolation, which your obsti∣nacy may draw upon the Persons, Families, and Estates of that People who are now under your charge, I have hereby once more resolved to renew my former offer, expecting your Answer against to morrow morning by six of the Clocke, assuring you, that if the opportunity be not laid hold of, but rejected, the like will not be offered unto you, by Your friend LEVEN. Leaguer, 28. August. 5 a Clock in the afternoone. To the Right Honourable the Earle of Leven, Generall of the Scottish Forces. My Lord, FOr your favourable proffer to the Inhabitants of this City, I shall returne their thankes and resolution, that they intend to suffer with me, and I shall not suffer alone, for the effusion of bloud, I am sorry to think of it, that two Ʋnited Nations should so much differ, having paid once well for Scotlands friendship. My Lord, I am resolved to endure all Mines and Stormes which shall be made against this place, and doubt not by Gods assistance to rend∣er His Majesty a good account of it, the which by my endeavours, I shall maintaine to the last, and remaine Your Lordships Servant, B. SCUDAMORE. 29. Aug. 1645. FINIS.
