S4572A 45578450 172366
SOME REASONS Humbly offered to the MEMBERS of the House of Commons, WHY The Bill that is before them, for making the People called QƲAKERS solemn Affirmations in the Pre∣sence of God, to be as valid and effectual in all Courts and legal Proceedings as Swearing, they being subject to the pains of Perjury, in case any of them affirms falsly. Ist. BEcause it will be a Means for the equal distribution of Justice, to and among all their Majesties Subjects of what Perswasion soever, in that none will have advantage over their Fellow Subjects outward Estates, for their differences in matters of Conscience. Secondly, It will be a Means for the Impartial Discovery of the Truth in all Cases of Controversie, because thereby Men of tender Consciences, will be made capable of evidencing their Knowledge in the matter depending. Thirdly, The Government will have the same security, and all Parties concerned in Suites at Law, will have the same Remedy upon them that Evidence without Swearing, as upon them that Swear. Fourthly, It will be a Means to facilitate the Work of their Majesties Judges, Justices and Commissioners, and of bringing Controversies and Suits to a speedy Issue. Fifthly, It will most effectually answer and agree with the Act, which ex∣empts dissenting Protestant Subjects from the Penalties of certain Laws, and with the King's Declaration of ease to tender Consciences Also it is to be considered that this moderation to Persons scrupling to, Swear, hath had good effect in our Neighbouring Countries, as above one hundred years experience hath manifested. On the 26th day of January, 1577. Guilliaume de Nassou Prince of Orange and G. Brant's History of the Reformation in the Low Coun∣tries, part 1. p. 587, 588. Statholder of Holland, Zealand, &c. with the Consent of the Governour and Coun∣cil, sent his Mandate to the Magistrates, commanding (on behalf of the Minists who refused to Swear in any Case) That their Yea should be accepted and taken instead of an Oath, they being subject in case of falsifying the Truth to the Pains of Perjury. In the year 1593, Prince Maurice Son of the former Prince, with the consent of the States gave forth a Placate or Mandate in behalf of the said Minists to the same effect, which is observed by all Magistrates through∣out their whole Government to this day; as appears by the Act of State made this present year, 1690. for the raising the hundreth Penny in which, in that Paragraph relating to the discovery of Estates, next unto, the words Solemn Oath, are these words Printed [as concerning the Minists, they shall declare with true Words instead of an Oath, which shall be holden of the same effect and value as a corporal Oath.] And further it appears by the Warrants of Assesment made by vertue of the said Act, in which the same Words in behalf of the Minists are again Rehearsed.—So that both in respect of raising Taxes, carrying on Suits, or determining Controversies, no difficulties nor obstructions do appear by their not Swearing. And we doubt not but if you please upon the Consideration of the Premises, to consent to the said Bill, you will live to see the good effects it will have in this Kingdom, and that it will tend to the Service of the Government, the increase of Trade, furtherance of Justice and Tranquility of the Subject.
