S4857 E603_5 R205812 99865074 165650
A SPEECH MADE To the Declared King of SCOTS, BY ONE OF HIS CHAPLAINS AT HIS Departure from Breda, to take Shipping, with several Rules and Di∣rections how to behave himself to∣wards the People. ALSO, The last newes from Sea, touching a great Flemish Fleet with the King of Scots, and the Duke of Buckingham, their putting in at the Isle of Jersey; together with In∣telligence from Scotland, and the Isle of Silly. LONDON, Printed for J. C. and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange, and without Cripplegate, 1650.
A Letter from the Hague, touching the King of Scots, his taking leave of the Prince of Orange, and his Sister the Dutchies Dowager of Orange, and his Captains and Servants: SIR, ON Wednesday last the tituler King of Scots took solemn leave of the Prince of Orange, (his Brother in Law) and his Sister, there were many expressi∣ons, and real tokens of love and affe∣ction between the King and the young Prince; but (as some observed that stood by) what past between the Prince of Orange and him, favoured much of complement and outward shew. At Breda he took his farewel of many of his old Servants, (having en∣tertained new according to the late agreement in the Treaty, his Chaplains being also to stay behind; one of them made a Speech, the Copy whereof is here in∣closed. These solemnities over his Highness and the
Duke of Buckingham departed together, and its thought they went to Schevering to take shipping, either for Scotland or some other place, his intentions for the first had been without question, had there not come newse before his departure, of the proceedings of Montross in Scotland, which put him into a great Delema, which way to steere his course, some perswading him to go to Denmark, and others to one of the Islands next unto England; which way he goes, a short time will give you knowledge. Hague 6. Jan. 1650. A Speech delivered to the King of Scots, by one of his Captains, when he took his leave at Breda, ult May 1650. May it please your Majesty, IF persons descended of a Kingly race, desire to en∣joy the Patrimony which was their Ancestors, they ought to seek it not by tyrannical wayes, but by means proportionable to the intentions of them who laid those rich foundations; for he that is of a royal race, to enter into his inheritance, the wayes of wisdom and vertue, are ever the most assured, and most honoura∣ble, and none are fitter to be of that List, then men of science, conscience, courage, and fidelity, parts belong∣ing to the ornament, support, and maintenance there∣of; and these seconded by the prerogative of antiqui∣ty, (which age and time bestowes upon them) are the main pillers whereby royalty subsisteth. To descend of royal blood provoketh to virtue, and therefore
Christ chose not to descend of the Tribe of Benjamin, which was the least, but of the Tribe of Judah which was the greater, and according to his example no man ought to boast himself discended of noble ancestors, without imitation of their virtues, and to presume no more then to discend of noble and royal Parents, is a thing most vain; for Marius the Consul saith, that he doth inherit very little which doth not inherit the ver∣tues of his predicessors. And as your Majesty ought to follow by example the vertues of your Ancesters; so on the contrary to avoid and shun their vices, you ought not onely to forbear to do injuries, but to re∣venge them, for that which in the vulger sort of people is called wrath, in your Majesty will be named pride: As ought therefore as you shall confer with your own Conscience, and remember from whence you came, you will never be troubled for the offences you have smoothered, but for the injuries you shall revenge, for the pardoning of injuries, doth give great content to a noble spirit; but the desire of revenge is a continual torment, and many times it happeneth, that seeking to revenge a small injury, the party returnes much more injured, and before satisfaction can be obtained, there may arise other new injuries. My self and ma∣ny others must now take leave of your Majesty, and have not wherewith to serve you further then by our prayers, which shall ever be for your height of hap∣piness, not onely in this World, but that Kingdom which is eternal, and fadeth not away.
A LETTER FROM PLYMOƲTH. SIR, AMongst the variety of Intelli∣gence which floweth at this time in these parts, it is lawful to be ignorant of somewhat. That which I chiefly desire to inform you of is, that which we have lately received by some Ships that came into this Harbor. As for the fight at Sea, about which I wrote unto you in my last: here is not a∣ny full account given thereof as yet. It is be∣lieved, that if any Ship were then taken, it was not English; for the fight being within sight of the Isle of Wyght, if it had been a Friend of ours, she might have run ashore before the Enemy could have boarded her;
but that which is spoken of amongst us, is the sight of a Fleet of ten Sayle of lusty Flemish Ships, which were lately discerned to sayle towards the Isle of Jersey, two dayes since, which are supposed to be a Guard for the Prince, but whether Vantrump were there in person, is not certainly known, though the Ships are conceived to be of his Fleet, and if the Prince were there, the Scots may yet look for their King, and when they see him, bid him gued morning for all day; but its likely he is come to consult with Hopton, and o∣thers of the first Edition, whose advice hath had but slender success, when they had better Cardes, and if by the vent (as most common∣ly it is) the thing propounded be adjudged good or evil (though much more might be said thereof) what rational man can think that any great matters wil be enterprized by those at this time, which (as Plutarch saith) want plenty of young mens launces, and old mens councels, and money which gives mo∣tion to the rest. If the declared King of Scot∣land be landed in Jersey, surely he wil send word to his Subjects there, that the Parlia∣ments ships ride so thick on the Northern
Seas, that he could not find any passage through them, which peradventure wil very well satisfie their greedy desires, as to that point, but whether he comes to them or not, their design must go forward. Greenvil lives in the Isle of Cilly, upon fish, and what else the Irish Pirates bring him, the Island not af∣fording sufficiency of it self, to sustain the In∣habitants without supplies by Sea: neither do we hear of any increase of forces come lately to him thither. Plymouth 10. June, 1650. FINIS.
