T1333 E733_2 R206896 99865990 118249
To all the FAITHFUL SERVANTS OF Jesus Christ, Especially to such as labour in the WORD AND DOCTRINE, THROUGH ENGLAND AND WALES. LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Ralph Smith, at the Bible in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange. Aprill 12th 1654.
To all the FAITHFUL SERVANTS OF Jesus Christ, Especially to such as labour in the WORD and DOCTRINE, THROUGH ENGLAND AND WALES. Dear Brethren, THere being nothing under Hea∣ven of greater importance, then the preaching of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, you can∣not but be very sensible of what weight and concernment it is to take a right e∣stimate of all that offer themselves, and to passe a due approbation of such only, as Christ himself would have admitted to that
great employment. A great part of which service in this Nation, the Lord by his Provi∣dence hath cast upon us, and is by us under∣taken, as with much fear and trembling, so with a deep sense, that the effectual accom∣plishment therof will much depend upon the Testimonials exhibited to us, concerning the holy and good Conversation of such as seek for approbation from us. Wherfore consider∣ing how easily and frequently abuses creep into businesses of this nature, partly through the endeavours of those who are ill-deserv∣ing, and partly through the non-attendance of others, who are better minded. For the prevention of any such miscarriage, we have thought it our duty, hereby humbly & earnestly to beseech all the people of God throughout the Land, who shall send any Cer∣tificate to us, that they would not take things upon the opinion and report of others, but (according to the good provision made in the Ordinance, designing us to this Service) to certifie their own personal knowledge and experience, so as neither any, whom God accepteth; may want the testimony of his servants, nor any be recommended by them whom he disalloweth; lest guilt be contract∣ed
by you, to whose testimonials so much is referred, as that through carelesness or par∣tiality therein, very unworthy men may un∣awares be admitted, to the dishonour of God, the prejudice of his Cburch, and the utter frustrating of the pious intentions of our Governours; and we also be accounted blame-worthy, if through your misinforma∣tion, way being made for our mistakes, we should at any time act amisse. This we are, and shall be more liable to,  reason of the difficulty of our making discovery in a short time of several mens graces and gifts, in so full and ample a manner as would be desired for just satisfaction, without the faithful help of such as having been observers of them, and conversant with them, do more fully know, not only the tenour of their do∣ctrine, but the constant course of their lives. It being a much more easie thing to be able to describe what a godly man should be, then to be one indeed. Nor may we doubt, but there are some men, who having first willing∣ly deceived themselvs by a false apprehension and perswasion of their own condition and estate in grace, will think it easie to deceive us, by giving a false account of that condi∣tion.
But as such shall do well to consider, that he who trieth the Spirit is not mocked, neither can any thing be hid from his eyes, and that they must undergo another kinde of Test then this slender scrutiny of ours, when the secret of all hearts shall be laid open, and brought to light. So our Brethren may likewise please to consider what opportuni∣ty is put into their hand by this Addresse made unto them for the avoiding of such mistakes, and e inconveniences which may follow upon them through their neglect; besides the blot which will deservedly stick to them, not only for the present, but with posterity and succeeding times, forasmuch as the Certificates now exhibited will appear upon Record. For the prevention whereof, we humbly conceive and hope, that this friendly and brotherly intimation will be accounted seasonable, and by the blessing of God, be found useful for the successeful car∣rying on that work which we have in hand. And therefore, Dear friends, and much belo∣ved in the Lord, give us leave again, earnest∣ly to beseech you in the bowels of Jesus Christ, as you tender the Honour of the great God himself, whose servants we all
are, the precious soules of his people, pur∣chased by the blood of his Son, the advance∣ment and propagation of his Gospel through all the parts of this Land and Nation, wher∣unto we belong, so to lend us the joynt as∣sistance, both of your fervent prayers and due infortions, that hereby the work may be carried on more prosperously, and we more encouraged to attend it. Signed in the Name, and at the Request of the Commissioners for Approbation of publick Preachers, by FRANCIS ROƲS. JOHN ARROWSMITH. WILLIAM GOFFE. STEPHEN MARSHALL.
