T1511 669.f.25[44] 99871051 163849
TO THE KINGS most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Address of the NOBILITY and GENTRY of the County of DORSET. Most Gracious Soveraign, WE cannot but with all Humility and Thankfulness Admire and Adore the Infinite Mercy, and Immediate Goodness of Almighty God, when we seriously consider, how beyond all humane expectations and endeavours he hath by his gracious Interposition only of his own Power and Wisdom, thus miraculously and without Effusion of bloud Restored Your most Excellent Majesty in Honour and Safety to Your Throne and People; our hearts here∣by and the hearts of all Your most Loyal and Obedient Subjects that were formerly filled with longings and prayers for Your Majesties safe return, are now revived and enflamed with most earnest desires to serve and obey you, and therefore we most humbly and heartily tender to the gracious acceptance of Your most Sacred Majesty the most affectionate, loyal, and obedient hearts of all those whose names are subscribed, who will according to the bounden duty with the greatest chearfulness that may be, and with the hazard of of their Lives and Fortunes be alwayes ready to advance Your Majesties Service, and to maintain Your Crown and Dignity. God Almighty grant Your Majesty long and prosperously to Reign over us, that this Land, the Church and Kingdom may flourish and grow great again, as in those happy dayes of that Glorious Martyr Your Royal Father, and Your Grandfather of ever Blessed Memory: And that you may van∣quish and overcome all Your Enemies, these are, and ever shall be the daily Prayers and the faithful Endeavours of Your MAJESTIES most humble And most dutiful Subjects John Strode Sheriff. Earl of Lichfieled. Lord John Digby. Sir Anthony Ashly Cooper Baronet. Sir George Morton Baronet. Sir Gerrard Napper Baronet. Sir John Strangwayes Knight. Sir Francis Fulford Knight. Sir Ralph Banks Knight. Knights of the Shire for the County. John Fitz-James Robert Coker Esquires. Giles Strangwayes Thomas Freak Humphry Weld John Norton John Tregonel the Elder Joh. Tregonel jun. John Tregonel of Auderston John Strangwayes John Hunham George Pit Thomas Fowns Robert Culliford William Okedon John Rives of Dave∣neth Robert Lawrence Nathaniel Napper Edmund Hull Delaine Hussey John Rogers Edmund Uvedal John Turburvile Henry Butler Bullen Ryves Robert Seymour Arthur Radford George Ryves sen. Thomas Baynard George Fulford John Rives William Thomas William Frampton Esquires. VVollie Miller Edward Hooper Matthew Davies George Brown Thomas Philips Will. Constantine Thomas Fitz-James Henry Fitz-James John Trenchard Edmund Hawles Francis Morton John Laurence Oliver Laurence Edmund Hull jun. John Strangwayes Robert Napper Maximilian Mahun Francis Mahun Robert Mahum William Mahum Thomas Hussey George Hussey John Freak James Gould Robert Freak Henry VVhitaker George Savage Robert Basket VVilliam Churchil VVynston Churchil VVilliam Collyer John Jefferies VVilliam Filcoll John Henly VVil. Fantleroy se. VVil. Fantleroy ju. John Abington John Oldis Henry Hastings Bruerton Ancetil John Harding John Colzer Georg Groy John Pawlet William Gardner James Baker Esquires. Richard Bishop Humphrey Bishop John Gould Anthony Ettrick John Gallopp Samuell Pitt Edward Pitt John Mitechel Thomas Meggs Thomas Thorenacks William Chaldicott Richard Swayne Rich. Swayne junior William Swayne Humphrey Bishop John Samwaies John Pawlet George Rives junior Thomas Turbervile Ham. Ward Doctor of Physick. Will. Okeden sen. Robert Heveing John Doleing Robert Erenly William Fillwill Gent. Amos Fulford John Laurence Breven Laurence Edward Laurence Hen. Carrant senior Hen. Carrant junior George Okeden Joseph Hussey John Bennet William Bowles George Barber James Gould George Turbervile Henry Constantine Giles Lockett Edward Malcott Ferdinando Burly Th. Thorneacks jun. Andrew Buckner Gent. John Ironside Henry Thovehult John Abarove Richard Frampton George Frampton John Mniford Jacob Taylor Francis Chaldicott Jo. Butler of Hauly Peverell Meggs Hubert Arnold Henry Arnold Laurence Harris Christopher Pitt William Weare Robert Lewen Robert Leven junior Giles Stagg William Russell William Russell of Kingston Thomas Gillingham Andrew Ettrick Giles Lockett John Strode George Strangwaies John Bishop John Child George Gould John Gould Nicholas Gould George Stile Robert Napper jun. Audely Gray Henry Gray Nich. Strangwayes George Daubery John Miller John Loope Thomas Loope Will. Chamberlyn Will. Fantleroy jun. Simon Eggerdon William Eggerdon John Coker Luke Coker Gent. James Giar Thomas Arnold Richard Fulford William Bennet Edmund Lane Edmund Chaffin Robert Hoddmott Robert Bonie Thomas Speed John Cutler Edward Guy Thomas Frampton Thomas Basket Philip Roots Richard Jolliff Nicholas Fill Roger Thague Philip Nicholas Henry Lewen Edmund Laving Edmund Dirdo William Young Thomas Pitt Henry Rives Robert Fry Francis Fry Henry Bower Christ. Willoughby Edmund Frampton Thomas Loop George Arnold Thomas Arnold Arthur Langford John Ernly John Kerly, John Childe senior Laurence Harris Nathaniel Gould VVilliam VVake Robert Pitt Robert Palmer Samuel Palmer Edward VValcot The above written Address was presented to his Sacred Majestie at Whitehall the 12. day of June, 1660. by the Earl of Litchfield, Sir Anthony Ashly-Cooper, Sir John Strangwaies Colonel John Fitz-James, Colonel Coker Knights of the said Shire, Colonel Giles Strangwaies, with divers other of the above-named persons of Honour and quality; His Majesty expressing his most gracious acceptation thereof. LONDON, Printed for R. Clavel at the Stags-bead in St. Pauls Church-yard, MDCLX.
