T2567 E121_21 R2619 99872118 124541
A True and Perfect RELATION OF THE TAKING OF A GREAT SHIP at Yarmouth, October 4. Sent from the Queen out of Holland to the Kings Majesty, wherein was ten pieces of Ordnance, 50. Barrels of pow∣der, and 100. and 50. Commanders, as it was informed to the House of Commons, October. 6. Also Her Majesties Letter to the King, Read before the Committee, October the sixth, which letter was ta∣ken in the said ship at Yarmouth. Likewise the manner of Master Hothams taking of Keywood Castle in Yorkshire, since the agreement of the laying down of Arms in that County. With the In∣structions from the House to the Lord Willough∣bie of Parham, to aid and assist the said M. Hotham against the Earle of Cumberland. October 7. Prinred for H. Blake, 1642.
A TRUE RELATION OF The taking of a ship sent from the Queen out of Holland to his Maiesty, October the 4. ON Thursday the sixth of October, a packet of Letters was brought to the House of Commons, & from thence referred to the close Co∣mittee for the defence of the Kingdome, which came from Yarmouth, and came out of Holland from the Queen which were intercepted in this manner, viz. The Queen of England having bought a ship with her own money, sent the same over into England with ten pieces of Ordnance, and forty or fifty bar∣rels of powder, and a hundred and fifty Cavaleers
which were to land at New Castle, and from thence to be conveyed to his Majesty, the King of Great Britain. But when the said ship cme neere to New-castle, she was driven in at YARMOVTH by a contrary wind, and when the Cavaleers that were in the said ship perceived that there was no remedy, but that they must come into Yarmouth, where they knew they should be searched, and all their intentions made frustrate, they began to bethink with them∣selves, that it was better to drovad all their Letters, then to put it to the hazzard of having all their Se∣crets come to light, And thereupon they agreed, that they would sink their Packet of Letters in the Sea, before they came to Land, And for the better effecting of this, they put into the packer two or three bullets, and so threw them into the Sea, which being perceived by a Fisherman that was in a small boat neere to the ship, the said Fisherman dived after it into the Water being well acquainted with the depth of the Waters in that place) and took up the said Packet of Letters, and presented them to the Governours of Yar∣mouth. VVhereupon the said Governours immediately resolved to send them to the Honourable Court of PARLIAMENT the great Councell of this King∣dome, which was this present day being the sixth of this instant month of October presented to the house of Commons, the worthy Members of the said House gave order and Command, that they
should be referred to the close Committee, which was accordingly performed, and at the opening of the same, there was one Letter sent from the Queen in HOLLAND to the Kings most excellent Maje∣sty, as followeth. That her Maiesty intends to be in England very speedily, having fourteen of the Hollan∣ders ships ready provided for her conduct into ENGLAND, together with divers other Let∣ters, the particulars whereof are not as yet known. It was also informed to the House, that the said ships and the Cavaleers, and other provi∣sion of Warre that were in the said ship were seized upon at Yarmouth, and there detained custody, untill they receive further Directions from the Parliament, This is the true and perfect Relation that came to both Houses upon Thursday, being the sixth of October.
A true Relation of Master Hothaws taking of Keywood Castle. THis day Newes came to the House out of Yorkeshire, that Master Ho∣tham disclaimed any consent or a∣greement to the Articles of a peace be∣tween the Earie of Comberland and the Lord Fairefax and the rest of the Gentry of the County of Yorke: And that for said agreement Master Hotham with his Forces tooke the Town of Selby, and hath stopped the passage of all boats to Yorke, and taken a strong Castle called Keywood, belonging to the Bishop of that Diece, and resolves to maintaine his Majesties Pretogative, the Rights and Priviledges of Parliament, the Lawes of the Kingdom and the Liberty and propriety of the sub∣ject
according to the Instructions sent un∣to them of that County from the Parlia∣ment, he being of opinion, that the Arti∣cles agreed upon are prejudiciall to the whole Kingdome, and of that County in particular, and that no one County ought to withdraw themselves from the com∣mon cause, bue to aime with the Parlia∣ment in the defence of the Kingdome, and with them to labour by all good meanes to procure a generall peace and protection from the King, for all his subjects with both the Houses of Parliament, have by many humble Petitions desired by His Majestie but cannot yet obteyne. And according to the Parliaments De∣claration, if they should suffer any parti∣cular Counties to divide themselves from the rest of the Kingdome, it will be a meanes to bring all to tuine and destruct∣ion, and therfore the said Mr. Hotham is ready with those forces that he brought with him from Hull to assist the Parlia∣ment in this cause which newes was very
acceptable to the House, in regard that they had voted the said agreement to be void, because it was destructive to the peace of the Kingdome, and agreed that the L. Willoughby of Parham in Lincl¦shire, should make all the speed he could possible to aid and assist Mr. Hotham and the rest of the County of Yorke that are well affected to the proceedings of Parlia∣ment against the Earl of Comberland▪ for the setling of the peace of that County. FINIS.
