t2482 e271_2 99870863 159457
A True and Full RELATION Of the manner of the Taking of the TawnE and CASTLE of SHREWSBƲRY. With the CONDITIONS On which the Castle, and Fort at Frankvill, were surrendered. AS ALSO, A List of the Names of the severall Commanders, Officers, Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, and others, that were taken Prisoners. Printed according to Order. March 4th London, Printed by J. R. for Christopher Meredith, at the signe of the Crane in Pauls-Churchyard. 1645.
SIR, SHould we not publish Gods good∣nesse unto us, it would be an Ar∣gument of high ingratitude, and render us to the world unworthy of so great a Mercy. For it hath pleased God of his goodnesse, after a whole yeers travell, and three moneths strong labour, by the care and industry of our vigilant and active Com∣mittee, to hand into the World a Blessing; for which, all that are well-affected unto the welfare of this Church and Kingdom, will rejoyce. On the 21. of this instant, by order of the Committee, there were drawn out of the Garrisons of Wem, Morten-Corbet, and Stock, 250. Foot, and 250. Horse. From our good Friend Sir William Brereton, we were assisted with 250. Foot, and 350 Horse, of the Staf∣fordshire Forces, under the Command of Co∣lonell Bower: All the Foot, being by order from the Committee, put under the Com∣mand
of Lieutenant Colonell Rinking, an able Souldier; who for his disereet mana∣ging this businesse, deserves much honour; our Horse were commanded by Colonoll Mitton: Things being thus ordered, we march∣ed towards Shrewsbury, which is a very strong Town, well Walled, and compassed about with a navigable River, in the form of an Horse-shooe; the neck of Land at the open∣ing of the Horse-shooe, being not a Bow shot over, in which stands (on the East-side on the top of an high Hill) a strong Castle, the River running directly along, close under the side of the Hill: From the North-West-side of the Hill, there runs a strong Wall, and a great Ditch to the River, on that side: Not∣withstanding the strength of the place, we were not discouraged, but marched on, and came to Shrewsbury about three of the clock on Saturday morning: And now how to get over the Work, was both dangerous and diffi∣cult, being so strongly Palisado'd, well for∣tified; we therefore in a little Boat, that was provided for the purpose, conveyed eight Carpenters up the River, and landed them
within the Enemies Brest-work, under the Castle-Hill, on the East-side were the Sen∣tinels, after some pause, gave fire upon them, but they soon sawed down so many of the Pallasadoes, as gave our men free passage. The first that stormed, were fourty Troopers dismounted, with their Pistols, and about as many Firelocks, which were led on by one Master Huson a Minister, Captain Willers, and Lieutenant Benbow; after these followed some other Muskettiers along Severn side, under the Castle-Hill, and neer Sir. William Owens house, entered the Town; after these, marched 350. Foot more, under the command of Lieutenant Colonell Rinking: These ha∣ving gained the streets, part marched to the Market-place, who after some exchange of shot, gained the main Court of Guard there, the rest marched to the Castle-foreward-gate, which within one quarter of an hour was gained, the Gates opened, the Draw-Bridge let down, at which, our Horse under the Command of Colonell Mitton, and Colonell Bowyer, with the Gentlemen of the Commit∣tee entered. It was now about break of day
the scriks in the Town was such strange kinde of Cock-crowing, as (I beleeve) you never heard the like. Being thus entered, the Castle and a strong outwork at Frankvill held out, but by twelve of the clock, the Castle was de∣livered upon these conditions, That the English should march to Ludlow, but the Irish to be delivered up, which we shall hang with Authority: The strong Work at Frankvill was surrendered up upon bare quarter. And thus it pleased God of his great goodnesse to deliver so strong an hold into our hands, with the losse onely of two Common Souldiers, we cannot be sufficiently thankfull, for it is a place of great concernment; And now many honest people are delivered out of an Egypti∣an slavery. For this brief accompt of our last Action, I desire you to accept of, as an earnest of his engagements, which is Salop, Feb. 22. 1644. Your friend to serve you.
I Have sent you here enclosed, a List of such prisoners as were found at the writing here∣of: Its good sport to see how we Ferret these Foxes out of their Holes every day. SIr Michael Ermley, Knight, and his Bro∣ther. Sir Richard Lee, Sir Thomas Harris, Sir Henry Frederick Thin, Knights and Baronets. Sir William Owen, Sir John Wilde, Senior, Sir John Wilde, Junior, Sir Thomas Lystor, Knights. Francis Thorns, Herbert Vaughan; Thomas Owen, Edward Keinaston, Robert Ireland, Rich-Trevis, Thomas Morris, Arthur Sanford, Robert Sanford, Pellum Corbett, Thomas Jones, Esquires. Lieutenant Colonell Edward Owen. Major Francis Ranger. Doctor Lewyn, Doctor Arnwey. Raynsford, William Lucas, John Cressey, Thomas Collins, William Long, Pontsbury Owen, Henry Harrison, Captains. John Pay Feodary, Cassey Benthall, Edward Talbat, Richard Lee, Edward Standley, Francis
Manwaring, John Bradshaw, Edward Littleton, Peter Dorrington, Thomas Barker, John Wita∣cares, Joseph Tayler, Francis Sanford, Richard Gibbeons, George Manwaring, Charles Smith, Gentlemen. Edward Palmer, Matthew Whitwick, En∣signes. Vincent Tayler, Thomas Dew, Humphrey Davis, Richard Broyn, Serjeants. Nicholas Proud, Clerk. Master James Lacon, Master Lendall, Moses Hotchkis, George Bucknall, Corporals. Patrick Lawpaid, Irish, and 49. other prisoners. The reason why we found no more Com∣manders was, because Prince Maurice had drawn them out for his Design at Chester. FINIS.
