T3018 E147_8 R22535 99871779 156673
Maij 14. A True RELATION OF THE PRESENT STATE OF IRELAND, VVith the victorious proceedings of the Protestants against the Rebells there: being sent in a Letter to a Merchant of note in London, Maij 13. LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Allen in Popeshead Alley, Anno Dom. 1642.
A True RELATION OF THE PRESENT STATE OF IRELAND. Sir, LIttle Newes is to be expected, but God be blessed it is good: Eight dayes since Lord Lisle, Lord Dygbie, and the Lord Folliat went to∣wards Castle Goshel, where the Ladie Dygbie was besie∣ged by the Rebels; and Sir Charles Coot
accompanyed them from the Naas; they were not 500. in all that went, which Castle they relieved, hanged many of the Rogues, from thence they came to Trim, in the way tooke Phillips Towne, burnt it, and the Navan, relieved more Castles by the way, tooke Trim, and abide there still; a Garrison of a 1000. Foot, and 500, Horse will be put there. It is a Towne of great consequence, sixe Castles in it, all this while there was not 500. Men of ours, and they saw above a 1000. of the Rebels, 6.7. or 800. in a place, in some places 1500. and not daring once to oppose our men, but runne away and gaze afarre off, Deere-like; this we must not attribute to the strength of man, but God must be glorified in it. Last Saturday the Newrie was taken by the Lord Conway, and the Scots, joyning to∣gether, without losse of one man, after they had been before it two or three dayes: for they were not willing to fight for feare of de∣stroying the English Prisoners, which the Rebels had in the Towne; at last they yeelded the Towne upon condition, what I know
not, and all the Prisoners are freed; the chiefe Sir Edward Treers, Sir Charles Point, Cap∣taine Smith, and many others, who have in∣dured much sorrow. Sir Con. Mac. Genis was the chiefe of the Rebels there. Now God be thanked the way is cleare in a manner betwixt this and Carickfargus. Some came from the Newrie this day, which is 44. miles, burnt Carlingford, which is 5. miles from the Newrie, and the Rogues are beaten in all places where they are met withall. If we had now Men and Money here, I verily beleeve this Summer would be an end of this Rebellion, except it be some strag∣ling Rogues in Bogges and Woods. I pray God send us good News from you, and for the present I cease. Sir Charles Coot was not here since he went first out, doth continue at the Naas, where he doth fortifie and make Forts, and at the first put out a Proclamation that all the Irish that were left there should depart the Towne in 24. houres, else be hanged. He hath many there at worke, Spinners, Glovers, Weavers, Knitters,
Tanners, and all kind of Trades, and all things is plenty there, abundance of Cattill, two quarts of Milke a penny; and he makes the Souldiers worke duely, and gives them 6 pence a day for their worke, besides their pay; hangs and kills all that he meets, of the Rebels. May 4. 1642. FINIS.
