T2976 669.f.6[80] 99871123 160941
A TRVE RELATION OE THE LATE BATTAILE Before WORCESTER, taken on Sunday last, Sept. 25. by a Gentleman of the Innes of Court, (now in his Excellences Armie) from the mouthes of Master Nathaniel Fynes, and many other Commanders who were in the said Skirmish, and sent up to Master PYM. VPon Thursday, the 22. of September, our Forces being ten Troops of Horse, under the command of Colonel Browne, Commander in chiefe, also six Colours of Dragooners, being in number a∣bout foure hundred, came within a mile and a halfe of Worcester, on the South-west side there∣of, where we made good a passage at a bridge over the River Teame, and drew up our Horse up∣on the Greene, on the left hand of the River, where we abode till Friday about foure of the clock, in expectation of some strength, either from Gloucester-shire, or else from my Lord Generall. Then there came a Messenger with a false Alarum from the enemie, informing that Sir William Belfoard, Lieutenant Generall of the Horse, was drawne up on the further side of the City, and required us in his name, that when a Canon should be shot off, which should be the signe of their on-set, then we should fall on, to make good some nearer passages, to stop the enemies flight, which was expect∣ed, but this was the enemies plot, to get us into a straight way. Presently after this, some Dragooners on the enemies part appeared, in opposition of whom, Colonel Browne sent out some from us, which begun the skirmish, which Colonel Sands (who commanded all the Horse) hearing, was then earnest to fall on, but Captaine Nathaniel Fynes, and Captaine Wingate desired rather a stay till the Peece of Ordnance was discharged, but his answer was, that the present was the Captaine Wingate prayed him not to mistake them, their affection to the service was as his, onely they desired to proceed advisedly. Neverthelesse Colonel Sands was so extreame earnest to march, that the Captaines condescended, onely stayed to sing a Psalme. Before which was ended, in the last Division, Colonel Sands marched over the passage, where onely could goe foure abreast, till we came into the lower part of the field, in the upper whereof, the enemie was placed in Battalia, whom we could not discover till we came to the top of the hill, up which Colonel Sands made such haste, that we were forced to gallop. Then we made all possible speed to dispose of our men in order, but before the first five of our Troops could be drawne up, the enemie advanced close to us, and both sides discharged both Carbines and pi∣stols, and was resolutely performed by both, and presently fell to the sword, and charged one through another, and Colo∣nel Sands broke couragiously (though dangerously) into the left wing of the enemie, being seconded by his Front, but had his Cornet killed. The Colonel himself did fight very valiantly, was much wounded, and taken prisoner, but the rest of his Troop, too many of them being swearing, ill disposed fellowes, ran away, however we still maintained the field with courage. At our first on-set we apprehended but some five troops of the enemies Horse at the most; we conceived they had onely the Forces that formerly kept in Worcester, but afterwards it appeared Prince Robert and Prince Maurice were both come to them that very day, and brought eleven Troops of Horse, and some six or seven colours of Dragooners, in all a∣bout sixteen hundred that they brought, besides the Worcester Forces. Which supplyes comming on so unexpected to them, occasioned us somewhat disorderly to retreat to our passage, which notwithstanding we were so much over-match∣ed, we in despight of them made good, and forced them to retreat three times, and killed twenty of their men dead upon the bridge, besides many in the field, which they have conveyed away. We have lost some twenty five, and that I am con∣fident is the most: of them Serjeant Major Douglis was one, also one Captaine Berry; the rest are well come off, and there is some hope of Colonel Sands recovery, whom the enemy have left in Worcester, from whence they are fled. Captain Win∣gate on our side is taken prisoner, and in a most barbarous manner is made to ride through the townes before the enemy, na∣ked, in their flight to Ludlow. They reviled our men in the fight, calling them Parliament dogs. We took divers of their men prisoners; And some of ours whom they carryed into Worcester, and there left, have informed us, that Prince Robert and Maurice are both wounded, and some of their choice Commanders slaine, whose death they bemoaned. They expect∣ed ten-fold greater advantage by their stratagems then God gave them; though if we had been but prepared for them, and not under so many disadvantages, we had been visible victors. However they have no cause to boast. And one of our Priso∣ners sayes, that Prince Robert swore a great oath, that the Round-heads (to give them their dues) are valiant fellows, and came on roundly. FINIS. Printed at London for T. Ʋnderhill. Sept. 30. 1642.
