t3040 e612_9 99863641 115851
A TRUE RELATION OF THE Routing the Scotish ARMY near Dunbar, Sept. 3. instant: The Particulars of the Fight, Num∣bers slain, and Prize taken. With an exact List of the Names of the PRISONERS. Certified by Letters from the Head-Quarters of the Army, Septemb. 4. Also the Lord Generals Proclamation concerning the Prisoners and wounded men left in the Field. Imprimatur Joh: Rushworth. London, Printed by John Field, Sept. 9. 1650.
A TRUE RELATION OF THE Routing the Scotish ARMY Near Dunbar, Sept. 3. instant. SIR, ON Saturday, August 31. the Army marched to Haddington, where in the night time the Enemy attempted with a Party of mounted Musketiers to come near the Town-walls, and there made a volley of shot, which our men per∣mitted, until they had received them within shot; and then our Foot, being of Colonel Fairfax's Regiment, and himself leading them up, fired, and sent them back in a full career; we lost not one man, Captain White of Colonel Fleetwoods Regiment, had his Horse shot under him, and himself bruised. The Ene∣my
my left two dead behinde them, besides what was hurt. On Sunday, Sept. 1. The General march'd the Army o Dunbar, the Enemy march'd about two miles di∣stant in the Rear; his Excellency drew out the Army into the Field close by the Town, and the Enemy flanckt us upon the Hills on the right hand, where they lay all night within a mile of our Army; they sent a Party to possess the Pass at Copperspeth, to cut off correspondency betwixt us and Berwick. All Monday, Septemb. 2. our men stood in Batta∣lia in the Field, we could not go up to engage the Enemy by reason of the Hills, nor would they come down to give us battel; but that night it pleased the Lord wonderfully to look upon us, not onely in a happy Deliverance, but a singular and glorious Vi∣ctory: a Party of ours advancing to gain the wind of the Enemy, were discovered by a Party of theirs who came to alarm us; but notwithstanding (through the Lords great mercy) after above an hours dispute at the Pass, upon the Road-way between Dunbar and Berwick, our men obtained their end, possessed the Pass, whereby we might with ease come over with our Army, which was prosecuted so effectually, that a∣bout break of the day on Tuesday morning both Ar∣mies were engaged; out Horse and Foot charged them so resolutely upon a steep Hill, that they stood onely two shocks, and soon left their Train; the Foot threw down their Arms, and both Horse and Foot ran se∣veral ways, some towards Copperspeth, but the great∣est part towards Edenburgh; we pursued them as far
as Haddington, killing and wounding them all the way: There were above 4000 slain upon the place, and in the pursuit, about 10000 taken Prisoners, most of which are wounded; many of note and quality taken, the Lord Liberton, Lieutenant General Lums∣den, and many more, of whose names, and the names of the Officers of note taken, a List is enclosed as was given in to the Marshal General; there are more brought in hourly: Their word was, For the Cove∣nant of Faith; ours, The Lord of Hosts: And in∣deed, this is the Lord of Hosts his own doings, and it is marvellous in our eyes; The Lord of Hosts was above the Covenant: We took all their Train, being 32 Pieces of Ordnance, small, great, and leather Guns, all their Foot Colours, besides Horse; there are already brought in near 200 Colours, Horse and Foot, all their Arms, Tents, Bag and Baggage; this is a just judgement upon the Enemy, who the day be∣fore having taken about 30 of Col: Prides men, who being to possess a House between our Army and theirs, & not seconded by those appointed to bring them off; the Enemy killed three of them, and wounded all the rest after Quarter given: The Lord Generals Regi∣ment of Foot this day led the Van, and charged the Enemy with much Resolution, and were seconded by Colonel Prides men, who were even with some of them for their cruel usage to their fellow Soldiers the day before; we lost not Forty men in the whole In∣gagement, and no Officer that I can hear of but Ma∣jor Rooksby, who dyed of his wounds the next day; Captain Lloyd of Lieutenant General Fleetwoods Re∣giment
sorely wounded, Major General Whaley had his Horse shot under him the first charge, himself slightly wounded, his Regiment charged through the Enemies whole Army, and back again with little loss: Major Straughan was in this Fight and charged des∣perately; Lieutenant General Lesley's Servant was taken; there were of note of the Enemies killed that we already hear of, Colonel Gilbert Kerr, Colonel Gray (formerly an Adjutant General in our Army) and Lieutenant Colonel Croxon. We took from all their Foot short skeans and long knives (such as the Irish use) to stab a man when they come within him. Dunbar, Septemb. 4. 1650.
A List of the Scots TAKEN PRISONERS Near Dunbar, Sept. 3. 1650. THe Lord Liber∣ton. Lieut: Gen: Sir James Lumsden Lieut: Gen: of Horse. The Lord Grandison. Sir John Brown. Colonel Sir William Douglas. Colonel Gurdon. Lieut: Colonel Walter Hamilton. Lieut: Col. Wallis. Lieut: Col. Lesley. Lieut: Col. Murray. Lieut: Colonel Henry Malwin. Lieut: Col. Forbus. Lieut: Col. Whalthrop of Horse. Lieut: Col. Dunbarre. Lieut: Col. William Hamilton. Lieut: Col. Dundasse. Lieut: Col. Alexander English. Lieut: Col. Craford. Majors. Henry Carmihil. James Cranston, of Horse. George Moat.
George Forbus, Refor∣mado. William Jeremy. George Steward. James Bickerton Ad∣jutant Gen. of Horse. George Cample Scout master General. Mr. Gallespy Minister. Mr. John Wangle Mi∣nister. Mr. Alex Jeffery of the Committee of Estates Mr. Tho: Jeffery Ma∣jor of Aberdeen. Captains of Foot. Belon James Sterline. Francis Nue. Agree. Sibbald. Alex. Montegreff George Halliburton Tho: Brown Bonner William Murray James Scot William Rutherford James Maculray Hugh Montgomery James Aiken George Smith John Mackihellan Robert Mackihellan Hugh Madole George Pingle Robert Scot Alexander Wood Robert Hamilton Tho: Gray Robert Adamson Robert Duncan Robert Mancanla Walter Scot Matthew Creshton
James Steward William Douglas Walter Lesley Wanchop, of Horse James Borthock Daniel Murray John Murray William Burton James Camil Capt. Roger Hamilton Capt. Robert Wood Capt. William Blayre Capt. Rob: Anderson. Lieutenants of Foot. James Cunningham James Blackwood Patrick Marnal Henry Cunningham Lancelot Car John Macknight John Hume John Gourdon George Cunningham George Weare Henry Eston Nichola Cowston Alexander Steward William Petre Norman Lesley William Gladston Robert Hamilton Gen: Mackburn Robert Strahan Richard Allen James Mackbey George Disset James Nichols John Car Thomas Mennib William Sims Alexander Car James Twede William Leich James Suiers John Moor
Andrew Kenner Baily John Rich John Camel William Knocks Thomas Anderson Lancaster Car James Monnorgome Thomas Car James Twede James Armer James Smer Andrew Kenner Jo: Camel John Steward Allen Osborn John Wilson Walter Wanhop Patrick Warberton William Ingles Alexander Gourdon Samuel Gourdon Lancaster Harkenson Robert Rankin Cha: Colemine John Rawson Andrew Guiler George Totterson Thomas Hutchen John Emnes John Skew John Hunter John Markdoughal Andrew Drumon George Moale Francis Scot Alexander Kiff John Markdoughil George Lesley William Livery John Denant William Elliot Geo. Windram Cornet. Thomas Collerwood Cornet. Patrick Lindsey Cor∣net.
Captain William Bris∣bon, of Horse. William Cunningham Cornet. James Maxwel Cornet Jam. Denham Cornet. James Bruse Lieut: of Horse. John Magel Cornet. Walter Steward Cor∣net. John Hay Cornet. William Danrimple Captain of Foot. Captain Charls Kerk∣patrick. C. Nich: Lawson. Cornet Ja: Magavile. Cornet John Brown. Cornet Alex. Michel. Quartermasters of Horse. Tho: Richinson. William Fabus. Ensigns of Foot. Kilpatrick Walter Mac Doghal William Sanckle George Jack Hartley Gud William Carnetuss Thomas Wallis Andrew Myan James Bennet John Linsey Andrew Hanna Thomas Pringle Robert Hamilton James Delap John Gunny John Edwards Col: Camel Heatly Robert Ray Gilbert Hurral James Musket William Simple Robert Ogleby
Robert Williamson William Lesley Ersbield Shields Robert Habern William Scot James Edmaston Robert Lawson James Newen Andrew Bathick George Elphenson John Hindise Henry Whittle Andrew Donnalson David Kenede John Camel Dunkin Kemel Cornelius Engles Patrick Calion William Mawod Henry Kerkelrik Alex: Chalmers George Crime James Rede John Somervil John Abenille John Clark Alexander Breme William Chapman John Muckin Alexander Spence John Mark Thomas Thompson John Dixon John Smith Alexander Johnson William Egger David Grant George Guyle John Wallis John Kemen Thomas Anderson James Brewse William Mamblan James Carmihil William Walsin William Anderson James Dunbarre James Calderwood
Hugh Rey Thomas Bayde David Beed Robert Craw George Calley James Rutherford Walter Scot Walter Steward Robert Henne James Facquer James Marmath Henry Ackman John Weare John Brown-Lee David Bisket George Hinderson John Blacketter Alexander Michil Alexander Baily Robert Wallwood John Watson William Greere John Crawford William Wilson John Dunbar Samuel Gurdon John Munins John Cunningham William Staolm Alexander Guthery John Hunter Adam Luckey Andrew Mayrey Robert Macktellon Robert Gerne John Mackews James Brotherston William Gentry Edward Sincler Andrew Brede Robert Hunter John Gray. Sergeants Henry Muckerry Alexander Sibbet Gilbert Gray
James Ellis Collin Gardner John Axenhead John Hogg William Watson John Mackwel James Lyel James Coddel John Morris Adam Kerk Captain Robert Ru∣therford, of Foot. Captain John Car, of Foot. The whole Number of Officers and private Soldiers taken, Ten thousand. Four thousand slain. Thirty two pieces of Ordnance of all sorts. Two hundred Colours, Horse and Foot. All their Arms, Tents, Bag and Baggage.
The Lord Generals Proclamation con∣cerning the wounded men left in the Field. FOrasmuch as I understand there are several Soldiers of the Enemies Ar∣my yet abiding in the Field, who by reason of their wounds could not march from thence: These are therefore to give notice to the Inhabitants of this Nation, that they may and have free liberty to repair to the Field aforesaid, and with their Carts, or any other peaceable way, to carry the said Soldiers to such places as they shall think fit; provided they meddle not or take away any the Arms there; and all Officers and Soldiers are to take notice that the same is permitted. Given under my Hand at Dunbar. Sept. 4. 1650. To be Proclaimed by beat of Drum. O: CROMVVEL.
