T3528 669.f.11[102] 99863648 162754
Two Prayers fit to be used in these times by all that love Peace & Truth. 1. A Prayer for the King to be said twice a day at least. O Lord God, infinite in power, by whom the Thrones of Kings are established, and their persons made sacred; take (wee beseech thee) into thy immediate and divine protection, thine Anointed Servant, the King, that no sacrilegi∣ous prophane hand may come neere to touch him; in all his wayes let thy Spirit guide him, and thy holy Angels pitch their Tents about him; And though he bee deprived of all earthly Councellours, doe thou continue to be his Coun∣cellour from Heaven; comfort him in his troubles, defend him in his dangers, support him in his Cause: Blesse him in the comfortable fruition of his Royall Consort the Queen, in the safe returne of the Prince, in the prosperity and welfare of the rest of his Royall Progeny, and in the confusion of all those that rise up against him, and indeavour his privation in these blessings. Shew som token upon Him for good, even now O God, when the sonns of violence are in the highest of their pride, when they have conspired and banded themselves together, to seperate those whom thou hast conjoyned, to levell those whom thou hast not made common, to pull downe him whom thou hast exalted, and to root out that Religion which thine owne right hand hath planted. Defeat their purposes, O thou preserver of men, and let not their mischievous imaginations any longer prosper, but blast all their counsels, wither away their power like grasse scorched with the Sunne; Bow down at last their stiffe neckes and obdurate hearts, to a desire of that peace which hath so long been an abomination to them, that this miserable Nation may no further pursue their owne ruine, and take pleasure in shedding their owne bloud; but being by so many bitter punishments made sensible of thy anger, for this unnaturall division, may at last bee reduced within their first obedience, to the glory of thy Name, the vindication of our defamed Religion, the joy of our afflicted King, and the happinesse of this yet bleeding Kingdome; And confirme all this to us. O Lord, by the merits, and through the mediation of thine owne deare Sonne Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 2. A Prayer for the ending of these present Troubles. O Most just and powerfull Lord God, to whom vengeance belongeth, wee cannot but acknowledge, hat the manifold miseries which have befallen us, are the due reward of our deeds, and that we have deserved, that the things which belong to our peace should still be hid from our eyes; for when of thy owne free mercy thou wert pleased to grant us a long time of plenty and prosperity, more then thou gavest to any of the Nations that are about us, wee became weary of our happinesse, and by our ingratitude pulled upon us these Judgements which now threaten desolation to this late flourishing Kingdome, and since the time of our affliction thou hast given us space to repent, and we repented not, iniquity hath still more and more abounded; as heretofore thy mercies did not allure us, so now thy judgements have not humbled us to a serious consideration of our misdemeanours. Now (O Lord) we finde our selves intangled and wearied by our owne counsels, the troubles of our heart are inlarged▪ our iniquities and the punish∣ments which attend upon them, are a burden too heavy for us to beare. And therefore in the anguish and bitternesse of our soules we returne unto thee, (in whom alone is our helpe) to have respect unto the prayers of thy servants. O shut not thy loving kindnesse in displeasure, let not thine anger burne against the sheep of thy pasture, but binde up the breach of this people; let the sighing of the Prisoners come before thee; behold the teares of the distressed Orphanes and Widdowes, and of all such as are oppressed, and have no Comforter. How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou forbeare to command deliverances? Remem∣ber thy tender mercies which have been ever of old, and save us as thou hast done heretofore: Remember thy promise of deliverance to those who call upon thee in the day of trouble; And when the bloud that hath beene shed by oppression calls aloud for vengeance, O then hearken unto the voyce of thy Sonnes Bloud, which speakes better things; Behold the Lambe of God, who was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities: And to this end, regard the sincerity of thine Anointed, maintaine thine owne Cause, and preserve unto him that power which thou hast given him; binde his soule in the bundle of life, let mercy and truth preserve him, and let his Throne be established for ever before thee. Blesse them that are peaceable and faithfull in the Land; and as for those that have risen up against him, we beseech thee to melt and mollifie their hearts to the entertainment of compassion and love; reclaime them to obedience, lay not their sinne to their charge, but guide tdeir feet into the way of peace: Give to those that have done wrong the grace to repent; and to those that have suffered wrong, mindes ready to forgive: And if any shall be averse from Peace, O thou that art the wonderfull Counsellour, turne their wisdome into foolishnesse, confound their practises, and let their mischiefe returne upon their own heads. And when thou hast vouchsafed to give us that tranquility which we beg at thy hands, give us grace to embrace it with all thankfulnesse, to obey our Goveruours, to live at unity among our selves, evermore blessing thy glorious Name, which is exalted above all blessing and praise, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Printed in the Yeare, 1647.
