T3435 E393_31 R201609 99862109 160319
TWO DECLARATIONS, The first from Newmarket, concer∣ning the Kings most Excellent Maje∣sty. The second from St. Albanes, a∣greed upon by the Officers and Soldi∣ers under Command of his Excellen∣cy Sir Thomas Fairefax. Wherein is set forth the Resolution of the Army, concerning the disposall of his Majesties Royall Person? together with their desires concerning his Highnesse the prince of Wales. London, Printed for R.W. 1647.
A Declaration of the Proceedings of the COMMISSIONERS. SYR, THE various reports that have been spread abroad of late, concerning the present businesse betweene the Parliament, the City, and the Ar∣my, and the dubious Relations that have beene made of it, have not only ravsed the expectations of people to know the certainty of it, but also possest their mindes with many jea∣lousies and feares; as if, the warres being ended with the Malignants, wee should have divisions o∣pend among our selves, that may breake out into a new warre, which is nothing else but the secret working of Malignant spirits, or persons of such fortunes that have found better advantage of warre then they could of peaceable times. But there were never more pretenders to truth then in this age, nor ever fewer that obtayned, or made care and Conscience to use it in their words or deedes. And though it be no easie matter in such variety of Relations to deliver exactly to the world the present proceedings, without an e∣xtraordinary intelligence; Yet I shall impart so much of the truth and reallity of late passages, as shall give satisfaction to indifferent Readers,
and a counter-cuffe to all Malignants that vapour and ruffl in the expectation of new broiles. Wee hope shortly that the noyse of warre, and all the miseries that follow it, will bee removed farther from us, and that Peace, and her bles∣sings shall come in the roome; for without que∣stion there is like to bee a sweete and happy ac∣comodation of things betweene the Parliament, the City, and the Army, whereby the expectati∣on of all the Enemies of our Peace and Safetie, of the honour and glory of this Kingdome will be frustrated. For certaine knw this, that the head Quarters of the Army is still at St. Albans, and the Gene∣rall there too: No talke of drawing to a Ren∣dezvouz neerer London, as some would have it; all is very peaceable in the Army, and the una∣nimity betwixt the Officers and the souldiers to bee admired; not any stop of trade or traffique to or from the City of London, in any part of the Army in any kinde, as some have falsly sugge∣sted; Their inclinations too, and desire of a well grounded Peace, is apparent by their desire, that during the debate and transaction of this busi∣nesse between the Parliament and the Army, the Parliament would not suffer any new forces to be raysed within this kingdome, or any forces to be invited or admitted out of any other kingdome to this, or any thing else to be done that may car∣ry the face of a new warre, or of preparations thereunto, which may endanger or interrupt the
present proceedings to the settlement of the Li∣berties and Peace of this kingdome. Severall Petitions from the Counties or Hert∣ford, Essex, Norfolke, Suffolke and Bucking∣ham, much to this purpose; That apprehending a necessity for the suddaine furtherance of all law∣full meanes which may conduce to the removing their Countries and the kingdomes grievan∣ces, this their present addresse unto his Excellen∣cy was not so generall as otherwise it might have beene; yet they were confident they might fully discharge their Countries reall and high esteeme of his Excellencies unwearied and faithfull en∣deavors for the kingdomes Peace. And if his E∣xcellency should farther please to improve his ut∣most interest in the honourable Court of Parlia∣ment, for the crowning of his former atchieve∣ments, with the future freedome of this Nation, that they and their posteritie should acknowledge him; and if any, disaffected to the common good, should endeavor by meanes hereof to render his Person or Army odious to the Parliament or kingdome, that they could not but looke upon that as an injury of a common concernment, and them as enemies to the publique Peace, and that none should be more ready to bring such to their legall and just deserved censures then themselves, who had in this Petition (they humbly presented unto him) subscribed themselves both his Excel∣lencies and the Kingdomes faithfull Servants. The Generall hath received order for the re∣movall
of his Majesty to Richmond, and Col∣lonell Rossiter, with his Regiment, is to attend and guard his Majesties person, that so the Pro∣positions agreed upon by both kingdomes may be speedily presented to his Majesty, for the set∣ling of a safe and well grounded Peace. Some say his Majesty is entertayned by the Ar∣my honorably and with all freedome, some say the contrary, but I rather encline to the first: They say likewise that hee is advanced towards London; others, that hee is still at Newmarket, very pleasant and merry, but yet very carefull and solicitous for setling the kingdome in peace and quiet, being very sensible of the forepast mi∣series, and preserving the Peace of the kingdome above his owne Rights, therein shewing himselfe a right gracious Prince, and a true Father of his Countrey. Her Majesty and the Prince are weary of France, hoping shortly that all breaches will be made up, and desiring to bee for England, God send them and us all a happy meeting and union again, that as men of one Country and one Religion, we may bee like wise all of one Heart and one Minde. There was a Letter June the nineteenth came from the Commissioners with the Army atten∣ding his Majesty, That they had sent to Sir Tho∣mas Fairefa, to know his answere to the votes of both Houses, concerning the disposall of the per∣son of his Majesty to Richmond, and was com∣municated by a Messenger from the Lords to the
House of Commons. His Majesties own Coach is sent unto him, to accomodate him for his re∣movall. The Papists conceive great hopes now of ad∣vancing their Cause againe, on what grounds I cannot see, unlesse those little Foxes, the subtle Jesuites, the common Incendiaries of Christen∣dome, that creepe up and downe in corners of this Land, have by their slie practices so much influence upon the severall parties as to set them in a combustion. They cry aloud, Downe with us, Downe with us, even to the ground; and their bloody zeale is such, that they could bee content to lose their owne Lives in the common ruine, Looke to them. But God forbid that such eminent Parties as the Parliament, City, and Kingdome should be incensed, or engaged one against another to their Countries ruine, who all of them have already so highly merited of their Countrey in preserving and vindicating her anci∣ent Liberties. It is certaine that the Souldiery of the Army are generally for a composure of all things in love and so doubtlesse it will bee. God preserve his Royall Majesty, and unite us all in Peace with Love; and scatter all those like dust in the winde, that seeke to divide us.
Another Copy of a Letter. SIR, HAVING such a fioportunity by this Bearer, I thought it meete to represent un∣to you these ensuing Lines; but by reason they are not yet come to the full growth and maturity, I shall therefore give you the heads of a Decla∣ration, now in Dispence and drawing up by the Officers and Souldiers, under commaund of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairefax at St. Albanes. 1. They Declare their desires to have the Kings Ma∣jesty stated in his Royall Throne at Westminster, as formerly, and his Royall Posterity provided for with Honor and Safety. 2. That a Message may be speedily sent to his High∣nesse the Prince of Wales, with an invitation from both houses of Parliament for his return to England, 3 That Justice may be speedily executed & the pri∣viledg of Parl. & the Liberty of the subject maintaind. His Excellency hath lately received a Message from Newmarket wherein his Majesty doth de∣clare his concurrence to the Parliaments votes, & his great willingnes to goe to Richmond with the Commissioners, his Majesty conceives that to be a ready way to put a period to all the distractions within this kingdom. Concerning which the Ar∣my hath had a long deate, both by the Officers and Agitators of the Army, but hath not fully concluded of it as yet. By the next you shall heare farther from St. Albans June 22. late at night. Your Frend & Kinsman, THO. ALLEN.
