T469 R232922 99898073 133437
The Impartialest Satyre that ever was seen, That Speaks truth without fear, or flattry, or spleen: Read As you list, commend it, or come mend it, The Man that pen'd it, did with Finis end it. LONDON, Printed in the Yeare, 1652.
The Impartialest Satyre, &c. DIvine Ʋrania, ayd my feeble pen, My Saviour and my Soveraign both were men: Th'one God & man (before the world appointed) The other Gods man (both the Lords Anointed) The one the Lord of Glory, and Eternall, Th' other a glorious Lord (by Grace Supernall.) One was by Judas for a small sum sold, The other for much Silver, Coyn, and Gold: The Jewes knew not (for had they) sayes the Story, They had not crucifi'd the Lord of Glory: 1. Cor. 2.8. But sure the Scots did know He was their King Which they did sell, and to destruction bring. Our Saviour, at his bitter suffring passion, Upon his Crucifiers had compassion, When his tormented spirits, near spent did pant, He pray'd for them, declar'd them ignorant, To this effect Father (I beg and sue) Forgive them. for they know not what they doe: These blest words, for curs'd Jewes were soveraign plaster, Christ pray'd not for those Knaves that sold their Master; Their Bargain was not casuall, or by chaunce, Nor can they any way plead ignorance: For what He was, they all did know right well, They knew He was their King that they did sell: The ignorant accursed Jewes Sanedrim, Were not so guilty of selfe-knowing sin. Great Pontius Pilate, on's Tribunall Throne, To judge (his Judge) th' Eternall three in one: He did not know who then our Saviour was, Yet did corrupt unwilling censure passe.
He was a Heathen, and from him was hid Such knowledge that he knew not what he did. Pilate had full Authority and Power From Great Tiberius, Romes high Emperour, But no Records, to memory can bring That Subjects er'e had power to sell their King: Scotch murdered Kings, large Histories have fil'd: But Charles the First, was first sold, to be kill'd. One hundred eight Kings Scotland had beside, And fifty eight of them untimely dy'd; Beheaded, poyson'd, murdred, slain, and starv'd But sold for slaughter (none like Charles was serv'd:) Therefore when Christ (the Judge) shall all decide, Jewes shall (before those Scots) be justifi'd: Our Saviour said unto the faithlesse Jew, You knew not me, be gone, I know not you. And he'l say to the perfidious Scot, Depart from me for now I know you not. You sinn'd against your consciences, you knew to You sold him, whom was your obedience due to; To whom you plighted had your faiths and troaths, By Protestations, Covenants and Oaths: Such Knaves, said they, would to the Vineyard go, But then the Rascals consciences said no; You swore to him, and him againe forswore, Once, twice, and thrice, and thrice, and three times more I seeme too long upon this Theame, but yet Something remaines, which I must not forget: As Judas sold his Master for a price, He did as you did, for base Avarice: He had but 30 pence (as some declare) Some cursed Scots, had each a greater share. A King with Grace endow'd, with Vertue crown'd, You sold him for two hundred thousand pound, Which mony was not justly shar'd, they say, The strong'st got all, the weak went fooles away: That when the mighty Knaves had each his Fleece, The poor Rogues had not 15 pence a peece.
That Mony was the price of Bloud, indeed Of Royal Bloud, which makes three Kingdomes bleed; And sanguine swords o're runs you like a floud, Like Jewes Aceldema, a field of bloud. Nor was th' intention of Iscariot. So bad as was the meaning of the Scot; For Judas sw his Masters Miracles, Heard his Divine Precepts and Oracles: He saw him (with his mighty wod) appease And calme the tempest of fierce winds and seas. Mat. 8.26. He saw him likewise on the water walke, To raise the dead, and make the dumb to talke, The blind to see, the lame go, the deafe heare, Fiends disposlest, and Leopers cleansed cleare; He saw five Barly Loaves, and two small Fishes Were for five thousand people plenteous Dishes. He saw the Jewes would take him, bu their power Could not, till his appoynted time and houre: John 7.30. When as the Nazarites (through want of Grace) Would cast him from a Rock, or some high place: Then Judas saw a Miracle was wrought Luke 4.28. By scaping from them, when his life they sought. All these things Judas saw, and more then these, He therefore went unto the Pharisees To take their mony, and his Master sell: Supposing Christ would free himselfe right well By Miracle, as he had done before, This is probable to be the intent of Judas. Believing that he could escape once more; But Scottish Jewes, and Judasses did know Their Master, no such Miracle could show; They knew he could not scape, and that his beeing Was sad condition'd, and too fast for fleeing: Christ could have scap'd away. but Charles could not, Which proves the Scots worse then Iscariot. And Judas did an honest trick or two, More then the false King-seling Knaves will doe: He brought the mony back, and did repent, Confesse he had betray'd Bloud Innocent:
Abhorring of his crime and ill got pelfe, And (in despaire) repenting hang'd himselfe, His satisfactious penitence was such, That those false Scots will ne're do halfe so much. The money they againe will never bring, Nor stretch'd their Weasands in the fatall string. JUDAS repented, and to hanging went; But they'le be hang'd before they will repent. My raging Satyr is yet rationall, The fury of it is not Nationall, Though men are all defil'd with sins contagion, God hath his owne in every Land and Region. 'Mongst Jewes, great numbers were Believers, when Our Saviour suffered for the sins of men. And sure there's many an honest Loyall Scot Whose Consciences this Crime did never spot; Therefore they are rash Fooles, and they doe doat all, That lay the blame upon the Nation totall. There's many noble Scots have bravely bled, Who Honour'd liv'd, and dy'd in Honours Bed, Whose Fame shall (many an Age) out live their lives, Whose valours scarcely had Superlatives. And thousands still are living at this day, That do make conscience what they do or say, This black aspersion cannot justly fall, To scandalize the Nation generall: But Scotland harbours many a crafty Fox, Of GEORGE BUCHANANS faction, and JOHN KNOX, Their dainty Doctrine, at Geneva brew'd, Hath made stark mad the misled multitude, That their Opinions as fast grounded be, As Squirrils when they skip from Tree to Tree. Therefore 'tis thought the fault's not in the Scots, 'Tis their Religion that hath made 'em Sots: It is their piping hot, fire new Presbytery; (Keep from it, touch it not, it will besquitter ye) And if it had been the Almighties will, I wish (in Scotland) they had kept it still,
For wheresoe're it comes, it mischiefe brings The spoyle of Nations, Kingdomes, and of Kings, Of Peace, and on the sacred Tribe of Levi Their mad-brain'd Tyranny lies too too heavy. They, and the Levites of New Englands brood, Have made old England drunk with English bloud, And with a shew of holinesle and zeale, They have destroy'd our Church, lives, Lawes, and Weale; And as (by them) we are thus deeply wounded, So they (by wounding us) are quite confounded, Enslav'd and conquer'd, ransack'd, and Captiv'd Of Lawes, of Liberties, and love depriv'd. Thus is Gods Judgement fall'n upon their heads, As it will do on all that so mis-treads. Thus I have done with Scots, I cold begin With English Jewes, which neare as bad have bin: But I love cleanlinesse, and do detest That Fowle that is so Fowle, to Fowle his Nest. Yet is a Knave a Knave, do what he can, Let him be Grecian, or Barbarian, In England, Scotland, Ireland, France and Spaine, And in Wales too, there may be Knaves in graine. The Eye of mortall man did never ken A Nation that breeds not false-hearted men; But though the most are bad, yet every where Some honest men are scatter'd here and there. And as th'are thickly sown and thin come up, So they drink deepest of afflictions Cup. A Rascals Heaven is here, and here's his Love, A good mans Hell is here, his Heaven's above: A vertuous man sowes seeds of goodnesse here, And Faith assures Hope Fruits eternall there. And now of London some few lines Ile write, And then my Satyre bids you all Good Night. THe yeare full sixteen hundred and two score, King C. from Scotland came, and never more Was flatt'ry us'd with great magnificence, The City London entertain'd their Prince;
Mark how the cursed Jewes Hosanna cry'd, When Christ into Jerusalem did ride; With boughs they deckt their doores, and in their street, They threw their garments trampled under feet: These flattring duties then those Jewes did show, To whom both Heaven and Earth obedience owe; Yet few dayes after their malicious strife Did Crucifie our glorious Lord of life. Much like to this was Londons fading flame Of love, when Royall C. fom Scotland came, They rung the Bells, and bonefires were consum'd; Thousands were sick with healths, and th'aire perfum'd With Cannons thundring war, and Chimnies reak: Yea all that heart could think, or tongue could speak, By flattring Loyalty was then exprest, With th'entertainment of a mighty Feast. This dd brave London do, yet pray but note, In three dayes after they would cut his throat; For thousands of them did like Fiends conjoyne To spend their lives, their soules, their goods, and coyne, And many a Thimble, Bodkin, and a Ring, They offer'd up to sacrifice their King: Oh faithlesse trust! accurs'd with flattry varnisht, Like to a rotten Sepulchre new garnisht. My Satyre, against all doth not complaine In London, many thousands do remaine, Who are couragious, wise and pollitick, And to their principles do stoutly stick, Who never made their wealth the means to buy Their owne and every mans calamity, Who are no weathercocks or woodcock Widgeons. To be of any none, or all Religions, Who did the former Government obey, And to be rul'd (by this) do not gainsay: Who patient take their Lots as they do fall, And constant, humbly, give God thanks for all. In London many such now living be, But very few of them are known to me. FINIS.
