T64 E891_5 99863557 115762
A Lamentable REPRESENTATION of the Effects of the present TOLERATION. ESPECIALLY As to the increase of Blasphemy and Damnable Errours by the Liberty of Teach∣ing and Printing of them, to the great Damage of RELIGION, and the provoking the Lord JESUS to destroy the present Government, and to inflict Ruine and Desolation upon these NATIONS. Together with a Proposal of some good Work for Christian Legislators. Humbly laid at the feet of His Highness the Lord PROTECTOR, and every Member of the High Court of PARLIAMENT. By a Friend of true Reformation, and his Native Countrey. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Thomas Underhill at the Anchor and Bible in Pauls Church-yard, 1656.
TO His Highness OLIVER Lord PROTECTOR, AND THE Knights, Citizens and Burgesses convened in PARLIAMENT at Westminster. High and mighty Sirs, THese things hereafter following con∣cern you above all men in the world; the reward from God of good Laws against evil, and for the promoting of goo, shall be the Law makers, besides their share in the common benefit of them. The sin of not making good Laws against sin will be yours, and all the sins that shall be committed by others for want of
such Laws will be yours, and therefore also a larger share in the common calamities ensuing, if having opprtunity you notwithstanding on it the same. And how often doth God punish a people for the sins of their Rulers? How then can I hold my peace (being convinced that to speak is my duty) and yet love God, You, or my Countrey? Almost every individual man of you, when occasion is offereed, being apart among your friends (I presume) approves of most of the things moved for in these papers. Oh that God would keep those evil spirits out of your Assem∣bly that may hinder you, being met together, to speak them thrice over into a Law, that may be heard all the world over; and that may sufficiently evidence that in England we have a Christian Protestant Protector and Parliament. Certainly, the sincere promoting of Christs interest is the surest bulwark to a Nation What Princes, Govern∣ments, People, did God ever destroy, but he upbraided them, or might have done, with falsness to him and his interest? I move no for persecuting the Godly, the Sons of Zion, the Generation of the Righteous, but for the punishment of apparent evil doers, that are Gods and your enemies, at least that they may be hindred from rui∣ning the souls of others mention not small matters, but such as consist not with Godliness in the same subject, nor with the peace and welfare of Church or State. Shall such be tolerated? The Letter from the General meeting of Officers at James's to all the Souldiers, Jan. 28. 1652. profess their desire of protection in worship to be given only to all the truly godly, they plead for none else. If the Laws against prophane swearing and Sabbath-breaking be good, the you would do well to make Laws against other, as great or greater breaches of the first Table, or else repeal the former. What shall, what can men say or think, if
the Protector and Parliament meet, and fit, and rise, and part without acting for Christ against Hell and Rome, in such a time as this, when the powers of both are set upon destroying us with damnable Doctrines and Divisions? If holy Jewel, Cartwright Raynolds Whitaker Per∣kins, Preston, Ball, Dod, Sibs of Old England, and Cotton and Hooker of New should rise from the dead, and see what abominations are allowed of in this Land; with what a torrent, Blasphemy, Errour and Prophaneness runne over these Nations without any effectual controll, they could not but question, What men govern'd Eng∣land; of what Nation of what eligion they were of; And what was become of the children of those who through their Ministry were principled with sound Judg∣ments and Zeal for God. Most honoured Sirs, Shall I fancy this attempt of mine bold and dangerous? No, for it's Duty and ser∣vice to you. However I conceive a man is not capable of suffering in a better Cause; I have great hopes that the great God (in whose hands are the hearts of Kings and Rulers) is so dealing with the heart of the Lord Protectors Highness, and the members of the Parlia∣ment, that they will not speak a word for the interest of the grand enemies of mankinde, but readily own and promote any motion that so nearly tends to the advancement of the Interest of Christ, to the fur∣therance of the Gospel; And that God hath brought you together at this time to be the repairers of our breaches. Blessed be God for the great mercies his people enjoy under, and by means of the present Government; The Lord incline you to make up what is wanting. I have not let a word fall of disapproving your joyning toge∣ther as one, in acting for the Civil Welfare of the
present Government, and of these Nations, against all the enemies thereof, whether domestick or forreign; My fear of Gods blasting all such endeavours, if these greater things be neglected, put me upon this attempt. I pray unto God that you may approve your selves Nur∣sing Fathers to his people under you, and that you may not suffer wicked Nurses, pretending to be feeders of Souls, to give them poyson in stead of the sincere milk of the Word. Your Remembrancer at the throne of Grace U.T.
A Lamentable Representation of the Effects of the present TOLERATION. I Am not ignorant or insensible, how strange the thoughts, and different the expectations of men will be at first sight concerning the Contents of these few following pages: But I am not in the least solicitous how to please any, but profit all: I come not with the fictions of distempered brains, or to promote any of the parties of this divided Age, but in the words of Truth and plainness to propound matter of Universal concern∣ment to all the Inhabitants of these three Nations of Eng∣land, Scotland, and Ireland, who have any love to the King∣dom of Christ on Earth, and have any hopes of being re∣ceived into his Kingdom of heaven, that have any bowels of affection towards the souls of their Countreymen, or the little children of their loyns (especially the great ones, The Lord Protector, the Parliament, the Councel of State, and the Commanders of the Army) all that are not given up to such ignorance and heedlesness in observance, as not to see the present evils, and the danger we are in of Gods destroying us, or that like Gallio regard not these things. O that they would consider what a lamentable Condition these Nations are in, not only in respect of the present evils that are upon us, but also of the symptoms of utter ruine to the present Government, the Laws of the Land, and true
Christianity it self, besides some sweeping plague or other from the hand of an angry God upon so wicked a people, and set themselves, every man in his place, to stand in the gap, to keep off the miseries that are coming upon us. Who of us can plead ignorance of the Popish Design, laid long since, of procuring great Divisions among us, by Jesuites and other Emissaries of Rome, to the end we may destroy one another, or be unable to resist a forreign Pow∣er; also that men may be brought thereby to question their Religion, slight the Ministry and Learning, the Bulwarks thereof under God; and to take us off from the Scripture, under pretence that it's a dead letter, not the Word of God, unable to determine matters of faith, that so we may seek for a standing Judge without it, which Antichrist is well content shall be every mans own fancy (though in op∣position to the clearest Scripture-evidence) coloured over with fine names (as the voice of Conscience, the Light of Christ within, Christ in us, the Spirit in us, the teachings, yea the immediate teachings of the Spirit within us, the teachings of God) untill the number of those who have thus lost their Religion be so great, the fallibility and deceit∣fulness of their Judges (every mans own fantasie) and con∣trariety one to another, so obvious, as that there will be a necessity of imbracing the decision of some visible standing Judge as an infallible Dictator, by all those so deluded, as afore-said, who have left upon them any considerable sense of a God, a Heaven, and a Hell for men after this life, but have lost the true Rule and Judge, and so the means and way to escape the one, and get to the other; Which of you can be ignorant of this Design, and how vigorously it hath been carried on, and yet is, unto great success without any considerable suitable opposition? In the late Kings dayes Popery was so abhorred, and Ar∣minianism likewise, and the later the more, because suspe∣cted to be a bridge to the former, that to put a stop to both, was the greatest inducement that prevailed with the genera∣lity of the sincerest Proessors of Christianity in the Land, to take up Arms, and venture their Estates, Lives, and all
that was dear to them under the Banner of the two Houses of Parliament. And before that warre, how were the very beginnings of those evils banded against in several Parlia∣ments, to the no small detriment of many worthy Patriots, from the Court and Canterburian party? But alas, what were those small seeds of Errour to our harvest of Blasphe∣my! Oh the wofull success that the envious man hath had in his sowing the Tares of Blasphemy, Errour, and ill Man∣ners in the field of this Commonwealth, while the Husband∣men have been asleep! So great hath been the falling off to the Blasphemies and Heresies of Papists, Socinians and Quakers, and to the contempt of the Ministry and Ordinances of our Lord Jesus Christ within these seven years last past, that should the contagion of those plagues continue to infect persons of all ranks and Sexes a few years longer after the same rate of success (and probably it will much more, or some other Judgement befall us in stead of it, if yet the Magistrate lay it not to heart) It will no doubt endanger both Ministry and Magistracy, the Oracles of God, and the Laws of the Land; Who may not but see that the growth of Errour, and Division thereby, threatens another bloudy Warre, both from home and abroad? And if the men of these abomina∣tions should prevail, either by Vote or Sword, then fare∣well Englands hoped for happiness. Our long Reforming Commonwealth will prove Pagan, or at the best Popish, for Quakers and Socinians are scarcely deserving the name of Christians, and if they be out-witted the Jesuite will wear the Laurel. That the Enemies of Religion do thus encrease, is plain; For the men almost of every Countrey can tell how they swarm, & are so bold as to meet by hundreds and thousands, labouring to infect all they come near, compassing Sea and Land, and sparing no cost, that they may gain Proselytes. The Socinians publish their Blasphemies, and teach them openly in their Assemblies, and so do the Quakers. I went once to the meeting at Glasiers-Hall in Thames-street, where a great company was assembled, and from my coming into
them for a quarter of an hour, there was not one word spoken by any, but such hideous, inharmonious howlings, groanings and skreekings (the like I think not to be heard, except in Hell) filled mine ears, that I could not but con∣clude that they were possessed with Devils, and in some fear I began to give back but (Reason and Scripture having shewed me before I came, my Gods approbation of my com∣ing thither in order to an endeavour of suppressing such service of Devils) by saith I received strength from my Lord to stand to it; then one advanced upon a bench, and spake very wickedly, teaching the people, That the Scri∣pture was not the Rule, but the light within them that was in every man that came into the world, and that our Mini∣sters were Ignorant, Carnal, Deceivers, &c. And af∣ter I had endeavoured to undeceive the people, I left them. If any would with their own eyes (who yet have not) be∣hold the whorish fore-head of these times, that have with∣out shame bid defiance to God and man, blasphemed both divine and humane Majesty, belied the Truth, and scoulded with the Messengers of the Lord with most hellish language, they may cast an eye upon the two Beacons fired by those honest, moderate Stationers, who took not the least notice of Presbytery, Anabaptism, or Independency, as such, and yet were waspishly barkt at by some from whom better car∣riage might justly have been expected. These two peeces will shew them, that in two or three years backward from the time of their publishing of them, so many Popish Books in English had been printed and published in Eng∣land, and printed in London of their knowledge, as amount∣ed to by a rational computation thirty thousand, and pro∣bable it is that the number was as many more; since which time I have seen eight and twenty several sorts of Popish Books, which were not named in the Beacons fired, being some Devotional, others perswading to Popery, as full of Errour and Superstition, as Popish Books use to be, all printed within the space of these three or four years last past or thereabout, in the English Tongue, and of my
knowledge in England, and consequently in London, I be∣ing one of them that dare profess themselves to know what Prints are of England, and which not, and reckoning to each Book an Impression of fifteen hundred, which is an ordinary Impression, the whole number of the Popish Books printed in the said time, Q. Whether here be not too short reckon∣ing? I think it is rather se∣venty two thousand in all. whereof these eight and twenty are a part, amounts unto fourty four thousand. And it being so difficult for me to get the sight of such Books, its probable there have been as many more printed and pub∣lished. The Names and Contents of these eight and twenty Books, I forbear specifying, lest by my light some should be guided to buy them, that may catch much hurt by them. And if I should have set down the Names and Contents of every Popish, blasphemous, and otherwise ungodly Books that hath come abroad within these two last years, it would make this Representation too large, either for me to write, or any man to reade that hath not more time, or business of less concernment than my self, or those to whom it is chiefly intended. They publish their Blasphemies and Errours in printed Pamphlets, which they disperse all these Lands over, in such abundance, as is incredible almost, every week bringing forth several Chapters of an Anti-Bible, much worse than the Turkish Alcharon, which probably are printed, or paid for after they are printed by a General Bank; for such is the contrivance, that those that are sold, are sold cheaper than Books ever used to be sold these many years, and ma∣ny hundreds, if not thousands of many of them gi∣ven away, and left at houses, by Agents which they have in every County, to perform both the one way of disper∣sing, and the other, by sale and gift, with indefatigable di∣ligence, suitable enough both to the Devotion and Policy of the Grand Juncto of Jesuites, who (we may rationally judge) as they project and counsel these courses, so do they like well these proceedings, and say, Ha, ha, so would we have it. I do not doubt but it can be proved, that this last year, there came forth in Print two Books every week one with
another, that are either Blasphemous, Heretical, Seditious or Obscene (having a direct tendency to un Christian and uncivilize all the Youth of the Land) besides many Popish Books; and supposing that but a thousand of a sort were printed (as no doubt we may allow so many to each Impression, for though it may be but five hundred of some of them were printed, yet fifteen hundred of others of them, and some of them have been printed two or three times) the number then of such Books as were printed this last year amounts to 104000, which is twice the num∣ber of what Bibles have been sold in that time in all these three Nations. And by this (were there no other demon∣stration) it is manifest that the increase of Quakers, and other Antichristian and Anti-magistratical persons, is very great, and no less is the danger from them, which indeed is the greater, by how much the less they are feared. or by how much the more they are slighted. Can les, be expect∣ed than open opposition (by force of Arms) to Magistra∣cy and Ministry from such men, when their number and advantages shall concur, who generally so slight the one, as not accounting it fit for so much honour, as a Cap or Ti∣tle of civil respect doth signifie, and malign the other so much, as the names of enemies of God, Heathens, Baals-Priests, Murtherers, Sorcerers, Witches, Conjurers, Devils, Aegyptians, Sodomites, Fire brands of Hell, &c. do imply? The Books of the Quakers are so well known, that any may easily be informed what their Opinions and Blasphe∣mies are, many of them (as well as Socinians, Seekers, Le∣vellers) are set down in the Second Beacon Fired, I shall only name the drift of one Book, which came forth this Year 1656, and sold very much, entituled, A Cloud of Witnesses, That Christ Jesus is the Word of God, and not the Bible, which is called the Scriptures, made by Henry Clark, and printed by Giles Calvert; in which blasphemous Book there is a great shew of Argumentation, managed with no small craft and subtilty to make out the thing undertaken, also reviling and jeering the Ministers for calling it the word
of God, when they take their Text out of it, or quote it for the proof of any thing they deliver: The words of the Book are these, Pag. 3. lin. ult. But the blinde Guides, the Priests of England, that preach for Tythes, Hire, Gifts and Rewards, they do teach the people, and say, Hearken to the Word of the Lord, as it is written in a Chapter and a verse. Pag. 6. lin. 28. Do not hearken any longer to the blinde Guides, the Priests, which crie, Lo here, Hearken to the word of the Lord, saith one, as it is written in the Chapter and the verse; Lo here, saith another, Hearken to the Word of the Lord, as it's written in this Chapter, and this verse: See here, saith one, it is written in this Chapter and this verse: See here, saith another, as it's written in this Chapter and this verse. But they are false Prophets riss up to seduce, if it were possible, the very Elect, but saith Christ, Go not forth, believe them not, the Kingdom of Heaven is within you, the Law is written in the heart. And with half an eye one may see the Spirit of Rome and Spain guiding this Authours paw, which because it cannot deprive us of our Bibles here, as it doth the people of those Dominions, hath alwayes labour∣ed by throwing lies and slanders upon it, to work us to such a disesteem of it, as voluntarily to disown it: For Pag. 3. lin. 32. he tels us. That since the first giving of the Scriptures forth, they have been translated by private Interpreters into many Languages, and the many Languages have several Co∣pies of their private Interpretations, with some words added to, and some words left out. To these great evils may be added, the Atheism, Igno∣rance, Prophaneness, Beastiality, Rebellion (against Su∣periours) of so great a part of the people in England, both old and young, farre exceeding the wickedness of former times, which if let alone, England will prove a fruitfull nursery of Traitors, Murtherers, Beggars, Thieves, and hereby we shall bring down wrath from Heaven upon the Land. It is reported by our own Countreymen that have travel∣ed in other Lands, That England is by strangers noted to be as infamous for uncleanness, as Venice it self.
The Causes of all this wrath of God poured out upon the Land (for to be given up to such wickednesses, or for a Land to be defiled with such abominations, are judgements as well as sins) is next to the policy of Hell and Rome, The sins of the Land. I. The sins of every individual person, either in reject∣ing the Gospel, and easie yoke of Christ, despising his Em∣bassadours, or not being zealous in promoting Piety and Truth in our selves and others, in opposition to lukewarm∣ness, and fond indulgence toward those over whom we have Authority, or in whom we have any interest, or not mourn∣ing for the sins of others which we could not prevent, or in not being thankfull for mercies received, both Personal and National, and fruitfull in good works under the enjoy∣ment of them. Upon this occasion, I shall name one famous mercy, which I fear most men have not seriously laid to heart, and been thankfull unto God for; sure I am, he hath been very little publickly praised, though it was a publick mercy, and as great a one to these Nations as the Deliverance from the Powder-plot. After the late King was cut off and the long Parliament dissolved, there was a strange Linsey wolsey mixture of men of several interests, and different Opinions, woven toge∣ther in a new fashioned Parliament; The major part we feared (and justly) were enemies to the Ministry, Univer∣sities, and to all Magistracy too that should not reside in themselves or their party. The Government was unsetied, and the hearts of all sober, intelligent Christians filled with fears of sudden ruine to true Religion, from that Assembly; Some being known enemies, and most of the rest no known friends, the then General also thinking meet for a time to conceal which side he would take. The better (I should say the greater) half of that Parliament being resolved to put down the very Office of the Ministry, take away Tythes, and the Revenues of the Universities, enlarge the Toleration (for ought we know) unlimitedly. At which time, setting aside the General, the Scales were even, nay
rather worse, for the worst end was the heavier; And was not this a sad time of imminent danger? Had they all uni∣ted, or the one half of them but headed, we had been ru∣in'd, except preserved by a miracle. At this time there wanted nothing but the removal of the General, or his clo∣sing with the Antichristian crue: But this time of Extre∣mity was Gods Opportunity; God divided our Enemies, and engaged the heart of the Lord General to joyn with that Par∣ty which made a good profession of Love, and Reality of Af∣fection to the Ministry, their Maintenance, and the Uni∣versities, who took an opportunity, though they were the minor part, if the House had been full, to break up that Meeting, to their perpetual Honour, and so we were deli∣vered; The Lord pardon our unthankfulness for this great Deliverance, and make us Thankfull for the future, and our children after us. II. The sins of the Supreme Magistrates in suffering too much their Children, their Family, the People under their command, to do what they list, in these respects, contrary to the end of Government Certainly, the Magistrate doth (at least) interpretatively allow of these evils, while he omits by good Laws to reform these things, or so lisps that he cannot be understood. I shall here presume to assert, 1. That there is either no Law against Blasphemy and Heresie, or else the Law is so dark and questionable, that it's taken for granted, by most that are chiefly concern'd, that there is a Universal Toleration, except of publick Mass. 2. Nor any Law or Ordinance in Force against the licen∣tiousness of the Press. 3. Nor against any mans being and doing almost what himself will in matters of Religion, Every man may learn Gods Word, or not learn; Hear it, or not hear it; Go to Church, or stay at home; Professe the Truth, or hold forth Errour, or neither.
Of Blasphemy and Errour. As concerning the first: It is true, that there is an Act of Parliament of August 9th, 1650. against the Blasphemies of the Ranters, which alone hath quite vanquished all that way and manner of Blaspheming, by the dread of it, though scarce ever any person suffered the penalties of it; A HAPPY ACT IT WAS. And it is as true, That there is an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons of the 2d of May, 1648. very full against the Socinian Bla∣sphemies. But the Instrument of the present Government, seems to repeal that Act, and that Ordinance, and all other Laws whatsoever that lay restraint upon men, as to their Opinions, and the professing of them, if any other were in being at the making thereof. The words of the Instrument are these, ARTICLE XXXVII. That such as professe Faith in God by Jesus Christ (though differing in Judgement from the Doctrine, Worship and Disci∣pline, publickly held forth) shall not be restrained from, but shall be protected in the Profession of the Faith, and Exercise of their own Religion, so as they abuse not this Liberty to the civil injury of others, and to the actual Di∣sturbance of the Publick Peace on their parts: Provided this Liberty be not extended to Popery or Prelacy, nor to such as under the Profession of Christ, hold forth and pra∣ctise Licentiousness. And ARTICLE XXXVIII. That all Laws, Statutes, Ordinances, and Clauses in any Law, Statute, and Ordinance to the contrary of the aforesaid Liberty, shall be esteemed as null and void. So that if any man should prosecute a Blasphemer upon either the fore-said Act or Ordinance, or upon any other Law (if any were in force at the making of the Instrument, as it's believed there was none) all would depend upon the
Judgement of the Court (where the Cause is tried) of the sense or extent of those words in the Instrument, viz. Art. 37. Such as professe Faith in God by Jesus Christ: And pro∣vided this Liberty be not extended to Popery, &c. Nor to such as under the Profession of Christ hold forth and pra∣ctise Licentiousness. And though it may be the opinion of one Judge and Court, that it is not the intent of the Instrument to repeal any Law, or clause of a Law against Blasphemy, yet it may not be the opinion of another, but the clean contrary. Besides, it is a great Question, Whether an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons be in force, and did not ex∣pire with the Parliament that made it? Which was one of Biddle's Pleas. It may charitably be presumed, that the Lord Protector his Highness, did doubt, whether the Sessions of Peace for London, would in the Case of John Biddle adjudge the fore∣said Ordinance of May 2d, 1648. (upon which he was in∣dicted) to be in force, notwithstanding the Instrument of Government, and that therefore he the Lord Protector did with the Advice of his Councel remove Biddle by a special Warrant from Newgate, before Judgment, unto the Isle of Silly, there to be kept close-prisoner (to hinder him from infecting the people with his damnable Opinions) notwith∣standing the Petition of his Disciples and Abettors (styling themselves to be of such and such a Church) for his enlarge∣ment. And because I have mentioned Biddle's Case, I think it not amiss to give this brief Accompt of him and it, that any that desire it may know what's become of him, and his Tryal. On June 28th, 1656. John Biddle engaged himself in a Disputation in Pauls before many hundreds, with a weak man (just as the Devil would have it) upon this Thesis, Jesus Christ is the Almighty, or most high God; Where Biddle was the Opponent; and indeed very learned, witty and zealous he was to baffle all that heard him out of their Christianity: The day being spent, that day seven-night
was appointed to carry on the Dispute in the same place, to the heart-cutting of some that dearly love our Lord Jesus, who carried in an Information of the whole unto his High∣ness and the Councel of State, humbly begging, that the said Bidle, or any others, might not be suffered to propa∣gate his or their Blasphemous Assertions against the Sonne of God our Saviour, or his Laws, and Statutes, the holy Scriptures. Whereupon the Councel sent an Order to Sr Christopher Pack, Lord Maior of London, to cause Biddle to be apprehended, which was honestly done by the Mar∣shal of the City, and thereupon a City-Officer was sent to acquaint the Honourable Councel, that Biddle was appre∣hended, and to know their further pleasure in the Case, who returned such an answer as gave encouragement for the pro∣secuting of him at the Common Law: Whereupon the Ordi∣nance of the 2d of May, 1648. entituled, An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons for the punishing of Blasphemies and Heresies, was pitcht upon as the only Law in force that would reach him, if any, for other Law against Blasphemy none could be found (since the way of Convicting a Blas∣phemer by Bishops was at an end) except that against the Ranters, which would not reach him. And according to that Ordinance process was made, one being bound to pro∣secute, did exhibit these two Indictments against him. London ss. At the Gaol Delivery of Newgate, holden for the City of London, at Justice-Hall in the Old Bailey, London, On Wednesday the fifth day of September, In the Year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred fifty and five. London ss. THe Jurors for the Lord Protector of the Common∣wealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, &c. upon their Oaths do present that John Biddle of London Gent not having the fear of God in his heart, nor the Laws of Eng∣land any whit regarding, the four and twentieth day of March, In the Year of our Lord, One thousand six hun∣dred fifty and five, at London, That is to say, in the Parish
of Gregories, in the Ward of Faringdon within London aforesaid, out of his Devillish minde and Imagination, falsly, willingly and feloniously, did devise, compose and write a certain Heretical and Blasphemous Book, entituled, A two fold Catechism, The one a Scripture-Catechism, the other, A brief Scripture Catechism for Children. In which said Book, amongst other things, the said John Biddle then, that is to say, the said four and twentieth day of March, in the said Year of our Lord, one thousand six hundred fifty and four, at the Parish and Ward afore-said, falsly, Devil∣lishly and Feloniously did write, put, assert, affirm and maintain, That God is not present in all places, doth not know and for knw all things; That the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, are not one Eternal God; That Christ is not God equal with the Father; That the Godhead and Manhood of Christ are not several Natures; That the death of Christ is not meritorious in behalf of Believers. And the same Book afterwards, that is to say, the said four and twentieth day of March, in the Year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred fifty and four, there with the said Errours, Heresies and Blasphemies aforesaid therein con∣tained, falsly, willingly, devillishly and feloniously, did imprint and publish, and caused to be imprinted, and pub∣lished, with the intent to spread abroad within this Com∣monwealth of England, the Errours, Heresies, and Blas∣phemies aforesaid, to the high Dishonour of Almighty God, to the great Danger of the growth and spreading of Heresie and Blasphemy within the Commonwealth of Eng∣land, in Contempt of the Laws of England, against the Form of an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assem∣bled in Parliament for the publishing of Blasphemies and Heresies, made, published and set forth on Tuesday the se∣cond day of May, In the Year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred fourty and eight, and against the Publick Peace, &c. SADLER.
London ss. At the Gael-Delivery of Newgate, holden for the City of London, at Justice-Hall in the Old Bailey, London, On Wednesday the fifth day of September, In the Year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred fifty and five. London ss. THe Jurors for the Lord Protector of the Common∣wealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, &c. upon their Oaths do present, that John Biddle late of London Gent. not having the fear of God in his heart, nor the Laws of England any whit regarding, the eight and twentieth day of June, In the Year of our Lord, One thousand six hun∣dred fifty and five, at London, That is to say, in the Parish of Faiths, in the Ward of Faringdon within London aforesaid, by Teaching publickly in the presence and hear∣ing of very many people, then and there present, Unlaw∣fully, Willingly, Obstinately, Devillishly and Feloniously did maintain and publish, That Jesus Christ is not God; And that Jesus Christ is not equal with God the Father; To the high Dishonour of Almighty God, to the great Danger of the growth and spreading of Heresie and Blas∣phemy within this Commonwealth of England, in Contempt of the Laws of England, against the Form of an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assem∣bled in Parliament for the punishing of Blasphemies and Heresies, made, published and set forth on Tuesday the se∣cond day of May, In the Year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred fourty and eight, and against the Publick Peace, &c. SADLER.
The Bils being found by the Grand Inquest, the Tryal began, Witnesses ready; Among whom an eminent and worthy Gentleman of Publick Place was one, to evidence, That a Book which he brought with him from the Parlia∣ment Records, that contained all the Blasphemies charged upon him in the first Indictment, was that very individual Book, which he owned at the Barre of the last Parliament, as published by him. The Indictments were read, Biddle with much ado was prevailed with to plead, and obtained leave of the Court to put in his Exceptions to the two Bils of Indictment, ingrossed in these words, London ss. At the gaol-delivery of newgate, holden for the City of London, at Justice-Hall in the Old-Bailey, London, on Wednesday the fifth day of Septem∣ber, In the Year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred fifty and five. Exceptions taken by John Biddle Gentleman, Prisoner at the Barre, to two Bils of Indictment preferred against him, grounded upon an Ordinance, entituled, An Or∣dinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, for the punishing of Blasphemies and Heresies. Dated Die Martis secundo Maii, 1648. First, The Prisoner saith, That the said Indictments are insufficient, both in Matter and Form. because they are grounded upon an Ordinance of Parliament, which is not binding longer than the Parliament sitteth, and that Parlia∣ment is long since dissolved. Secondly, There is nothing of obstinacy expressed in the Indictment, without which, though the Ordinance were of force, there is no Offence against it. Thirdly, The Ordinance, if it were of force, doth direct the offender to be indicted the next Gaol. Delivery, and there∣fore this being the second Gaol-Delivery after complaint and imprisonment, the Ordinance is not pursued by elapsing the time prefixed.
Fourthly, Though the Ordinance were admitted to binde after the Dissolution of the Parliament; Yet the same Parliament, did after the said Ordinance, viz. the ninth of August, 1650. make an Act against the same Opinions as are mentioned in the Ordinance, and therefore, if cause were, the prisoner may be proceeded against upon the Act, but cannot be proceeded against upon the said Ordinance, which was precedent to the Act, and intended by the Parliament to expire with it self. Fifthly, That although the said ordinance had not expired with the Parliament that made it; Yet by the 38th Article of the Instrument of Government, the same Ordinance is made and esteemed as null and void. Jo. Norbury, Moses Keling, John Biddle. SADLER. This the Court having received, adjourn'd the further Trial of the Cause, untill the next Sessions after: But two days before the said next Sessions, his Highness the Lord Pro∣tector (possibly upon the ground before specified) by a special Order, took him out of Newgate, and sent him by a party of horse to the Isle of Silly, where no doubt he is kept a prisoner. IN the second place, as to the Licentious Liberty of the Press, it may be affirmed, That there is no Law sufficient to prevent the Printing and Publishing of Blasphemous, He∣retical and Obscene Books, which I shall make out, as fol∣loweth, After the Decrees of Star-Chamber for regulating of the Press were null'd, the Lords and Commons put forth an Or∣dinance, June 14th, 1643. and therein ordained, That no Book, Pamphlet, Paper or Sheet be Printed, Bound, Stitcht, or put to sale by any person or persons whatsoever, unless the same be first approved of, and Licensed under the hands of such person or persons, as both or either of the Houses of Parliament shall appoint, and in the same Ordi∣nance
did authorize certain persons to make diligent search in all suspected places, for such scandalous, unlicensed Books, Papers, Pamphlets, and all other Books not entred in the Register-Book of the Company of Stationers, or not signed with the Printers name, and the same to seize and carry away to the Stationers-Hall, there to remain at the dispose of both or either of the Houses of Parliament, and to apprehend the persons imployed about them. Afterward the Ordinance of Lords and Commons of Septemb. 28, 1647. Ordained these penalties on the Makers, Printers and Publishers of any Book, Pamphlet, Treatise, Ballet. Libel, Sheet, or Sheets of News, except the same be Licensed, viz. Upon the Maker 2lb, or fourty dayes imprisonment. Upon the Printer 1lb, or twenty dayes imprisonment, and the Presses to be broken in pieces. The Bookseller 10•, or ten dayes imprisonment. The Hawker or Pedler to lose all the Books, and to be whipt. Thus far the business grew better and better. But Septemb. 20. 1649, the Parliament did enact, That whoever shall Write, Print, Publish, Sell or Uter, or cause to be Made, Printed or Uttered any Scandalous or Libellous Books, Pamphlets, Papers or Pictures whatsoever, shall be pu∣nished, viz. The Author 10lb, or fourty dayes imprisonment. The Printer 5lb, or twenty dayes imprisonment, and his Press broken in pieces. The Bookseller 2lb, or ten dayes imprisonment. And repeals the penalties in the Ordinance, 1647. Not at all enjoyning the Licensing of Books, as the former Or∣dinances did, except only new books concerning the Parlia∣ment and the Army.
The Differences between the former Ordinances of Parliament, which are repealed, and the Act of Septemb. 20. 1649. The Ordinances. 1. Provided, That nothing should be printed under a penalty, that was not first Licensed. 2. The Ordinance did ap∣point Licensers for all Books. 3. The Ordinance made the not Licensing of a Book to be as a Judgement upon it, that it was a breach of the Law to print it, so that no man could plead igno∣rance. 4. The Ordinance per∣mitted no Books whatsoever to be printed, untill Licensed, though they had been entred (though indeed none in those dayes were entred that were not first Licensed.) The Act. 1. The Act provides un∣der a penalty, that only no News-Books be printed with∣out Licence. 2. The Act appoints none, for any but News-Books. 3. The Act allows of the Printing and Publishing of any thing that shall not prove in the Judgement of the Councel of State, or two Justices of Peace, faulty, so that it fals out often, the Printer, Bookseller or Wri∣ter of a Book cannot certain∣ly tell, whether his action in Writing, Printing or Publi∣shing of a Book be unlawfull, untill it be so adjudg'd by the Councel of State, or two Justices of Peace, after the fault is committed. 4. The Act permits all Books whatsoever to be printed, if they be but entred in the Stationers Register-books, without any Licence, except News-books, and ac∣cordingly Books are now en∣tred, and not Licensed.
Whence I infer, 1. That there is no Law in force for the sufficient hindering of the Printing of Blasphemous, He∣retical and Scandalous Books. If it be said, That the Councel of State, or the Justices mentioned in the said Act have power to hinder by judging a Book scandalous, &c. The Answer is, It is acknowledg'd that they have, but they will not, they cannot leave their great imployments to repair to all Printing Houses every week or oftner in their own persons, and there stay and read all Books that are to be printed, and pass an orderly judgement upon each, which they must do, if by the Acts in force they will hinder the printing of such Books, and this as it never was done, so is it impossible to be done. 2. That the late Orders of his Highness the Lord Prote∣ctor to Major-General Barkstead, and others, to put in exe∣cution the Acts and Ordinances against Blasphemous, Here∣tical, and Sndalous Books, are altogether ineffectual, as to the suppression of them, there being no such Acts or Or∣dinances indisputably in force. And now I am come to the third and last thing, which is, That there is no Law against any mans being and doing almost what himself will in matters of Religion, and the con∣cernments of his soul, he may learn the Principles of Reli∣gion, or live in Ignorance, hear Gods Word, or reproach it, and the Ministers thereof, yea and teach his children to revile them, go to Church, or stay, and fuddle, or sleep at home, and teach all that are under him, or near unto him to be like himself, miserable Atheists, slaves to the Devil, the world and the flesh, ready to sink into hell continually, and do not know or consider of it; whence it comes to pass, that millions of persons seldom have the Word of Salvation preached unto them, they perish for want of knowledge, all manner of wickedness spreading and growing like weeds that are let alone. Among all sorts of people, rich and poor, young and old, who are prophane, seditious and uncivil? but those of them for the most part that have no Teacher, but blinde, wilfull, conceited Self: Who are Blasphemous and
Heretical, and Prophane? But those who either had not good Teaching, or if they had, yet were at Liberty whether they would learn, or no: Whence is it that so many are so busie in contriving and forming of parties and factions, yea in plotting Rebellion, and the disturbance of the Publick? But because they are not trained up in Christs school, and im∣ployed in learning the principles of Religion, the will of Gods Commands and Promises, yea compelled to hear and set themselves to learn, that so their minds may be better exercised, and through Gods blessing their hearts wrought upon to be both good Christians and good Sub∣jects. And for ill manners, Who are the unruly crue, that have no command over either their tongues or hands, and that put the Magistrate to such great trouble to keep men from ruining each other? but untaught people for the most part; What a vast charge do such people put the Land too, to keep them quiet, and the innocent from being wronged by them? Whereas if all persons were compelled to be under the rule of some good Teacher or other, How easily might (as we may hope through Gods blessing) one quarter of the Ma∣gistrates and Officers of the Land that are, govern the people, or the same number that are, govern them with one quarter of the trouble? Oh that these miserable men were more piied than they are! Many have taken compassion on the poor Indians in New-England, and with the concurrence of the Magistrate do use means for their conversion (a blessed work that deserves the praiers and furtherance of all Gods people) and must the ungodly Christians of Old-England, be negle∣cted and cast off the mean time? Are those Indians more dear to us then the men of our own Land, and of our own bloud and bone? The Lord put it into the hearts of all the Lords people, both Magistrates, Ministers and others, to pity poor ignorant ungodly ones, as well as take care of those that are religious; thereby will God be honoured, souls sa∣ved, the Land blessed, themselves comforted, when they shall, perceive how God hath enlarged their hearts desire af∣ter the advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.
An Humble Proposal of the Remedies of the forementioned evils, and some more good work for a Parliament. That Laws may be made, I. AGainst speaking or printing the Blasphemies mention∣ed in the Act of August 9. 1650. and in the Ordi∣nance of May 2. 1648. which were chiefly made against the Blasphemies of the Ranters and Socinians. II. Against the Blasphemies and Errors of the Quakers. III. Against reviling the Ministry and Ordinances of the Gospel. IV. Against the printing or publishing any Book or sheet in print (at least Divinity) that is not first Licensed by such fit men, as by Authority shall be appointed for that end. V. Against Ministers delivering the Sacrament to the grosly ignorant and scandalous. To the Encouragement of the Ministry and furtherance of the Gospel. I. By confirming the Ordinances of his Highness for the ejecting of scandalous and insufficient Ministers. II. And the Ordinance for the dividing and joyning of Parishes, where need is. III. To impower some in every City and Market-Town in England, where the common Tythe of the place is not sufficient to maintain the Ministry of the place, to revise, correct and augment the Parish-rols of the rates set up∣on each house for the Maintenance of Ministers, that there may be an equality, and a sufficiency, and a stand∣ing Power to rate men according to their houses or e∣states, by some Rule or other. The Reasons of that motion are these. 1. Most Parishes in London, and other Market-Towns, consisting of Merchants, Shop-keepers and handy-craft Tradesmen, who hold no Lands, are sufficient easily to main∣tain a good Minister, and many of them two, or three, or four, the want is hearts, or a Law to order it so. 2. Many Parishes have, through the Malignancy, care∣lesness
and death of their Officers quite lost their Tythe-Roll, so that nothing can be recovered by Law. 3. Where Tythe Rols are and can be proved ancient and good in Law, yet there, many houses upon new foundations are not assessed at all, and many houses through the altering, bigning and lessening of houses are very unequally rated, insomuch that many houses of 10lb per annum, are rated at more than other houses of 30lb per annum; and many a man that is worth but a hundred or two of pounds in mo∣ney, debts and ware, rated at as much as some others that are worth twice so many thousands of estate in the same kinde. 4. By this means many very great Parishes may be divi∣ded into more Parishes, and have means enough for Ministers to them so divided, whereas now the means is but enough to maintain one. 5. In one considerable City of this Nation, and it's pro∣bable it is so in many more Cities and Market-Towns there is no Tythe-Roll at all, but all are at liberty, to give any thing or nothing, whereas if all were rated, Then 6. A great part of the Augmentation-money, which is a blessed Gift, might be saved, or disposed of to such other places, that being Impropriate, or otherwise unable to maintain a Minister, are in great need of an Augmentation. III. A Law to compel all persons whatsoever that are in health, to hear two Sermons of Gods Word every Lords Day from some approved Preacher or other, except such as shall be allowed by a Justices Licence to stay at home to dress meat, or to look unto children or sick persons. For surely God would have men compell'd to hear that Word, whereby he useth to make men willing to be saved. Oh bles∣sed Severity, that drives undone men and women to hear tenders of grace and mercy from an offended God, that for∣ces them from the very brink of Hell! How can sinners be∣lieve in Christ, unless they hear him preached? Without knowledge the heart cannot be good, and where there is no vision the people perish. The Officers of the Army in their Letter, from a general
meeting at Jameses, Jan. 28. 1652. to all the Souldiers of England, Scotland, and Ireland, Profess, That it is a duty very much incumbent upon them by all lawfull wayes and means to endeavour the procuring, That the Gospel of Jesus Christ may be dispensed to all the people of this Commonwealth. It was wor∣thily said of them. And no doubt but the Lord Protector, and the Parliament, do believe that the same duty is much more incumbent upon them, I know they will say so. The great Question is, When may it be said, that his Highness and the Parliament have by all lawful wayes and means endeavour∣ed that all might hear the Gospel? Is providing able, pious Ministers all they can do? Ile tell a Story, A godly Citizen of London took to be his Apprentise an ignorant prophane Lad out of the Countrey, as void of Christ and grace, and of divine knowledge, as any Heathen; His Master was very instrumental in procuring to the Parish where he lived a Spi∣ritual Soul-searching Minister, to his more than ordinary cost, much hoping that God would bless it to the new mould∣ing of his Servant, he tels him, what good means he had provided for him, if he would go and make use of it, and after he had gone once or twice, alas poor boy, his heart was opposite to such holy matter, as preaching and praying, so he would come no more there; The Master questioned, Whether he had done all that was incumbent upon him to∣ward the conversion of his servant, and resolved, that to command and compel him constantly to hear the Minister, was his duty, which was done accordingly, and the Boy was converted, and became a very godly man, and ever after praised God for that good providence. What Christian can or will blame this Master? The Officers of the Army in their Garisons (I am sure at the Garison of Jameses) do compell their Souldiers to hear the publick Sermons that are in those Garisons, even all ex∣cept some Anabaptists, that (give cause to believe) do scru∣ple it, as to theological Legality, and they are permitted to go to hear elswhere. And how smartly have I seen the souldiers caned unto the Sermons in Westminster-Abby. A pious work it was to drive dreaming idle sots to the receipt of their
pay, if I may so allude, or rather of an Alms to keep them from perishing. It is a good example for all in Authority, from the greatest Prince and Parliament, to the meanest Ma∣ster or Parent. And I hope there is sufficient reason to look upon his Highness the Lord Protector, as the chief appointer of such Discipline in the Army, and then he will not deny it in the Commonwealth. Object. This is against Liberty of Conscience: No such matter, it's against Liberty of being as bad as men will, but not against their Liberty of being as good as they will. If nei∣ther Anabaptist, Presbyterian or Independent Minister will serve them, their Consciences are not tender in any sense, but seared, Papists and Jews excepted; And how can it be against their Consciences, or any others, to hear a Sermon or an Oration only, of what Doctrine soever, where a pro∣fession of their assent is not required, untill from inward conviction they do it willingly? Indeed they had more to say against it, if they were compelled to be at our worship of God, or Sacrament, where it is supposed all say Amen, to what is said or done. IV. A Law to compell all Persons, if it may be; if not, then all under such an Age (for if Gods servants cannot have what they would, they must be thankfull for what they can get, better some be looked after then none at all) to learn a good Catechism, and to attend upon the Minister of the Congregation to which they belong, if a Member either of an Independent or Anabaptist Church, otherwise upon the Minister of the Parish where they live, if there be one approved of there, at such time and times, as the Mi∣nister shall either visit them, or send for them, and give him an account of their learning and progress in the mysteries of the Gospel, and submit to his teaching and instructing of them, so often as he shall take the pains to deal personally with them, that so Ministers may be encouraged to do that, which probably would do a world of good to millions that now reap but very little benefit by their Ministry. Without all controversie the Devil and the Pope will rage at these two last things, if they were done, and then they must needs
be well-pleasing to God, and his righteous seed, that de∣sire nothing more in subordination to Gods glory, and in conjunction with their own happiness, than the conversion of sinners; Yea, it would be a greater mercy to this Com∣monwealth, than the gaining an hundred millions of gold from that grand enemy of our Nation and Religion the Spaniard. And thus having cast in my poor Mite toward the repair of the Temple, I desire that what I have writ may be looked upon but only as the work of a Remembrancer, to those, who, I hope, will do all these things in their own way, me∣thod and time, according to the wisdom which Almighty God hath given them, and the piety which he and his ser∣vants expect from them. And in regard I plead for no par∣ticular interest, but the general interest of Protestants, which lieth in these two things, The increase of their number, and their Liberty and Agreement, I cannot but promise my self, if not acceptance, yet pardon from my Governours for what weaknesses shall be found among these overflowings of my love to Jesus Christ and his Kingdom, to whom I have made my prayer, that he will be pleased to direct and enclne the Lord Protector and the Parliament to do in the premisses in such wise as may be answerable to their Allegi∣ance to his Majesty, who is the King of Kings, and Judge of all, even God blessed for evermore, To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, three Persons, but one God, be everlasting Thanksgiving and Obedience. Amen. FINIS.
