V549 R203881 43077738 151851
THE CORRUPTION OF MINDE. DESCRIBED. In a Sermon preached at Pauls the 24. day of June. 1655. By RICHARD VINES Preacher of Gods Word at Laurence-Jury, London. 2 COR. 2. 17. We are not as many which corrupt the Word of God, but as of sincerity, but as of God speak we in Christ. LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper at the Sun over against St. Dunstans Church in Fleet-street.
The Corruption of Minde DESCRIBED. 2 Cor. 11. 3. But I fear lest by any meanes as the Serpent beguiled Eve by his subtilty, so your mindes should be cor∣rupted from the simplicity that is in Christ, or  towards Christ. AS the mother of Christ truly was, so the Church of Christ may be truly called  (as Clem. Alex. saith) a virgin mother. The fruitfulness of her womb to bring forth children unto God. The fulness of her breasts to bring them up un∣to God, speak her a mother.
The simplicity of the faith, chastity of worship, sincerity of love, integrity of life, speak her a virgin. Christ answers the type of him the high Priest, Levit. 21. 14. A widow or a harlot, he shall not take, but he shall take a virgin to wife. And therefore it is the scope of the Gospel-Ministers whom God sends (as Abraham did his servant with Commission to procure a wife for his son)  to fit and treat a match to espouse chaste virgins unto Christ, ver. 2. Which scope if we do but carry in our eye, and aime at in our Ministery, we should avoid the too much used folly, and imbrace the successfull foo∣lishness of Gospel-preaching. We may justly ask the cause of our Apostle his feare, lest this Corin∣thian virgin should become a Thais; for unjust sus∣pition is a kind of slander to chastity: and the que∣stion is, how the Apostle could say, I am jealous; for the virgin was not espoused to him, but Christs Ministers are but the spokes-men, the , treating for Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 10. they neither sowe nor mowe for themselvs, there∣fore he takes off the doubt in that expression, I am jealous over you , with jealousie of God. And he gives the reason; The first Adams Eve was corrupted from her virgin righteousness, and so may the second Adams espoused virgin (the Co∣rinthian Church) be corrupted from the simplici∣ty that is in Christ. Eve by the Serpent which was Satanae leno, the Devils pander. The Corin∣thians
by such Preachers as he describes to be , 2. Cor. 2 17. Corrupters of the Word, as hucksters by their mixtures do jugulare vinum, adulterate the viginity of good wine. In these words you may consider two things: 1 The object of the Apostle his fear. 2 The instance or example, whence he draws a similitude, shewing the way and meanes of ac∣complishing that he feares. 1 The thing he feares is the corruption and constupration of this espoused virgin, which cor∣ruption he describes, 1 By the seat of it, the minde,  lest your mindes be corrupted, for the foul vessell corrupts the purest liquor, corruption begins in the minde, as they say the fish begins to stink at the head, and we know defluxions from the head corrupt the vitals and lower region. 2 The term a quo is the simplicity or chastity that is towards Christ, which they had before, and which is required in them that are espoused to Christ Jesus, who are then corrupted, when they generate and deviate from their simplicity of faith and worship; for, we cannot say of any of these virgins espoused to Christ, as was said of that vir∣gin, the mother of our Lord, that before they came together, she was found to be with child by the holy Ghost. 2 The instance or example made use of for describing the way of corrupting the minde from the simplicity that is in Christ, is the first and an∣cientest
example in the world, lest by any meanes as the Serpent beguiled Eve, &c. This part of the Text contains the sicut and sic the As, So, and there are foure things in it. As the Serpent, that is, Satan in his instrument; for the Devil appears not in his own colours, the Serpent doth not alwayes weare the same slough or skin, the Devil sheaths himself in a fit case for his purpose, for he is  unsociable with man; therefore hath his ministers, ver. 15. deceit∣ful workers, false Apostles, and these instruments he puts on, he tempts the proud by, ye shall be as Gods, the sensual by the promise, liberty, & some by ostentation of holiness; for, there is a Pharisaical, a monasticall, a superstitious holiness, a holiness of mans making, he tempts Christ by Peter, Come be∣hinde me, Satan. 2 The Serpent beguiled the woman Eve, for the woman by the Serpent, the man by the woman, the stronger by the weaker vessel, the husband by the wife; as the Angler takes the small fish by a worm, and then that small fish taken doth become a bait for the greater fish; so it is said of his agents they lead captive silly women, they deceive the hearts of the sipmle, Rom. 16. 18 3 The way of the Serpents deceiving the wo∣man, was by corrupting of her minde, see its the Apostles observation, 1 Tim. 2. 14. that not the man, but the woman was deceived, because she be∣lieved that God had enviously set them in a lower Orbe than they might be in, if they eate of the
fruit of that tree of knowledge. 4 This deceiving of the woman was by subtilty, as it appears by many respects, wherein the serpent prevaricated the words of God, and perverted their meaning, this subtilty or , Cogging of the dice is ascribed to deceivers, Eph. 4. 14. The sum is, The Gospel-state of the Church is called a new Creation: I create a new heavens and a new earth; in this new creation God hath set forth another A∣dam Jesus Christ, out of this Adam dying, as out of the first sleeping, God hath formed a Church, this Church is espoused to the Lord Christ, as Eve was to the first as a chaste virgin, and there are Serpents now, as there was one then, that attempt the corrupting of the virginity of this Church; and therefore saith the Apostle, But I fear, &c. From the first part of the text, the thing feared, I take up two Doctrines. 1 The simplicity that is in Christ, is to be holden untainted. 2 The corruption of the minde is the cause of devia∣tion, or recess from that simplicity. I begin with the first. The virgin chastity of the soul espoused to Christ Jesus, which loves not to be painted with any Fucus of meretricious gaudiness, simpleness or simplicity in vulgar speech, and sometimes in Scripture sounds towards foolish credulity or want of wit. But in the true notion of the word it signifies a
freedom from composition, and so we call the sim∣plicity of Gods being, which is without all com∣position. Most commonly it is a freedom from mixture of heterogeneal things which might adulterate puri∣ty. In Doctrine unlearnedness, in faith unfai∣nedness in love sincerity, in worship chastity, in life and conversation integrity, do make up that we call simplicity of Christ, which I shall com∣dendiate into these three. 1 Simplicity of Doctrine. 2 Of Worship. 3 Of life. 1 The simplicity of Christ was personal; for be∣ing in the form of God, he emptied himself, and took on him the form of a servant, Phil. 2. 6. Official, in the acting of offices of his Priest, Pro∣phet, and King, in great simplicity. Doctrinal, in the preaching of the Gospel. Conversionall, in the deportment of his life. But now I speak of the simplicity of his Do∣ctrine, the Doctrine of the Gospel which is a miste∣ry that exceeds in glory, 2 Cor. 3. 9. and which the Angels stoop down to pry into, and yet is in con∣tempt as foolishness with the wisdom of this world that wch is a quintessence above al clementary lear∣ning, and transcendent above every predicament, hath been entertained with Stand thou here, or sit under my footstool; whereas that which the Apo∣stle calls vain Philosophy, and ,
science falsly so called, hath been entertained with Sit thou here in a good place. The Doctrine of which you are born, is called , incorruptible sad, and which you are nourished by, is called , sincere milk, which denotes simplicity. Christ for righteousness, Christ for a root on whom the branches do live dependingly, for the root beares them, and derivingly, for the root feeds them is the sum of this doctrine. Here is no mixture of Jewish rites, as if we would look for Christ in that manger wherein he lay when he was a babe; the bird is now hatcht, and the eggshel lies empty. Here is no corrival of mans works to spoile this simplicity, there remains no place for them, as they are meritorious, for that sets them in the chair of Christ; nor as they are motives of God to justifie, for that sets them in the place of free∣grace, nor as conditions of the Covenant, for that sets them in the place of faith, but as they are fruits of holiness, for that sets them in their own place, assigned to them by this Doctrine. 2 Simplicity of worship, which is called spirit, and truth Job. 4. 23. not Judaicall and shadowish, not Samaritan & idolatrous, but spiritual and inward. The Apostle calls the Jewish types, which were rich, beggarly Elements, we have them in the rich plainness of the Gospel. In matter of wor∣ship, that of Austin is the truth, and Socrates had seen it before, colendus est quomodo se colendum prae∣ceperit, as himself hath commanded.
Those that were mint-masters of worship, used to feign correspondence with some deity, that un∣der that reputation they might vend off their de∣vices. God must stamp that worship as shall be cur∣rant, man is apt to indulge his eye in Gods wor∣ship; It's the hardest thing (saith one) to leave our eye and fancie behind us (as Abraham did his ser∣vants, when we go up into the monnt to sacrifice.) The spiritual part of religion, is the hardest part. If we look into Justin Martyr, and see how the dresse of worship was changed, by degrees we shal finde, that it became at length quasi reductus in Ecclesiam Judaismus, unbecoming the purity of this virgin. 3 The simplicity of life; It was an excellent testimoniall subscribed by the Apostle his con∣science, 2 Cor. 1. 2. that in simplicity and godly sincerity, we have had our conversation in this world. The form of godliness, is but a Mathematicall body, consisting of lineaments onely: Religion is practicall and alwayes married to honesty and righteousness towards men; religious dishonesty is worse than a Christian married to a Heathen; in the times we live, that saying is too true, univer∣sus mundus exercet histrioniam, all men almost dis∣guise and act parts. Men either make it a stalking horse to their own game, a footstool to their ends, a covert of gold
for their filthy designes, or lodge it onely in the cock-loft of a cold brain, and not in the warme room of affections. And the simplicity of Christ, is broken into a multiplicity of senses and wayes. Let this Point for use recommend to Ministers and people both the simplicity of Christ. 1 To the Ministery; for though this be not a place to teach them, yet it is a place to teach you what to say, and what to expect of Archippus, vi∣delicet the simplicity of Christ both in the matter and manner of the delivery of this Doctrine. 1 Simplicity for the matter of the Doctrine, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, saith he that had sitten at the feet of Gamaliel; for (though that of Justin Martyr be true, , All truth spoken by Plato or Aristotle is ours, and that which is true in Phi∣losophy; is true also in every place; yet) it is of the seed of the Word, quod Christus nascitur in corde auditorum. We must set bread before hungry souls, and not be like the School-men, that set men upon gnawing hard stones. All learning may be spent upon the simplicity of the Gospell. In breaking down strong holds, meeting with subtilty of mens hearts, raising up the dejected Spirit prostrate under sin, counter-mining the methods and stratagems of the Devill, and you will finde that the old Adam in mens hearts is too hard for young Melancthon, and who is sufficient for these things?
2 Simplicity for manner of delivery for painted glasse is more gaudy, but cleer glass transmits more light, the rule is to clothe spiritual things with spiritual words 1 Cor. 2. 13. Its vain oile that's spent in strong lines, that hang together, as sand without time, standing together as letters in the Hebrew, one not touch∣ing another. Let a crucified Christ be preacht in a crucified Phrase, and though you preach not with embroide∣ry of silver and gold, yet surge & ambula, if you make the hearer arise and walk, its farre the better. It is not , to divide the Word a right (a word taken from culling up of the sacrifices) to shred the intrals into mince meat, or to put the text to death and torment, so as to make the peo∣ple eat the flesh with the blood; Keep the true pat∣tern of wholsom words. The People Are exhorted to hold fast this threefold simpli∣city of Christ in Doctrine worship, and conver∣sation. In Doctrine; All Scipture centers in, and looks to Christ, both Old Testament and New as the Cherubims to one another, and both to the mer∣cy seat; he was then swathed up in types, he is now unvaled in a rich plainnes of the Gospel, those precious stones which God promises to build his Church, Isa. 54. 13. Do all come but to this, All thy children shall be taught of God.
In worship, spirit and truth are better than Jeru∣salem and this mountain, therefore be satisfied in simplicity of Gospel-sacraments, which as Duples∣sis observs, have been made by men, the port-gates of superstition and curiosity, because the eye hath somewhat to do in them, as corruption began at the tree in Paradise, and came in by the eye. In life, that your voice be not onely smooth, and hands rough; for practical holiness is the life of religion, else we may have golden heads, and feet of clay. To conclude, let it be our joynt aime, the sim∣plicity that is in Christ, and be not too indulgent to your ears, which hath sometime been the vani∣ty of hearers of those Sermons at Pauls, coming hither for Jewels to hang in their ears, rather then for wholsom Bread. Let not the tree of Knowledge be preferred be∣fore the tree of life, lest when you come to die, you cry out with Craesus, Solon, Solon, who had before time taught him of blessedness without regard. There is such multiplicity of opinions, that most men count it impossible to reduce the swarm into one hive, especially because men usually lay so much weight, every man upon his own opinion, not considering that the kingdom of God consists not in meat and drink, but righteousness and peace and joy in the holy Ghost, Rom. 14. 17. Hence it is that one unchurches another, and unchrists an∣other, & solos credit habendos esse deos quos ipse colit, as the Poet anciently leaves the question about the bigness, distance, motion of the Sun, to Mathe∣maticians,
thou mayest have as much benefit by the Sun, as they that altercare about them. Above all things lay not the foundation of your communion in the agreement one of another with you in all your private opinions, that's a principle that will divide the Church in semper divisibilia, that makes the foundation of the house of the twig of a tree, not of the body. And peradventure, as there are not two of a hundred of one face, so not of one opinion in all things extrinsecal, nay haply, saith a learned man, not Peter and Paul. Certa sunt in paucis, (saith Tertullian) fundamen∣tals are few, they that make too many of them, make the fewer Christians, if a man hold fast the simplicity of Christ in Doctrine, worship, life; though not admitted into your fellowship, yet they will be in your Communion through Christ, whether you will or no. Doct. 2d. The Corruption of the mind is the cause of deviati∣on, or recess from the simplicity that is in Christ. This Point gives occasion to entreat of the cor∣tuption of the minde; the word  sometimes signifies plots, devices, 2 Cor. 2. 11 ordinarily the reasonings, apprehension, judgement, the leading faculty of the soule, which is the subject and seat of this corruption. This is not meant of natural corruption, which
is a part of original sin, for it is the corruption of Gospel-truth formerly received, especially do∣ctrinall corruption: and therefore the Apostle ha∣ving said; Christ, the same yesterday, to day and for ever; presently adds, Be not carried away by di∣vers and strange Doctrines, Heb. 13. 9. The Text affords me three things, for the o∣opening of this Point. 1 The corruption of minde here feared, is of them that have received the virgin truth; a sad thing that they that blossom so faire, should be blasted or cankered; it is not corruption of life he feares, but of minde; many are tainted in their intellectuals, that make a fair shew in morals; the Apostle prophesies of a time that will come, That men will not indure sound doctrine (they will not imbrace, nay, they will not indure it) but will turn away their eares from the truth, and be turned to fables, 2 Tim. 4. 3. 2 This corruption of minde is to be feared, both by Ministers for the flock, and also by parents and masters, yet there are few, as wofull experience shews us; and therefore young men, and unballast are negligently suffered without bridle to rush in∣to the infection, as if it was nothing to have the le∣prosie in the head, to make ship wrack of faith, to corrupt the simplicity of Christ to beare that fear∣full brand, 2 Tim. 3. 8. men of corrupt mindes, reprobate concerning the faith, The light of the bo∣dy (saith out Saviour) is the eye. If that be single, the whole body is full of light; if evill, the
bed is full of darkness, the minde is the Pilot or Steers-man, and if we weigh truths at a false beame, we may take and mistake the most despe∣rate errour for the most precious truth. 3 The first point or step of recess and of devia∣tion from the simplicity of Christ, is the corrupti∣on of minde, how many stairs do men fall? how many floores high, untill they fall even into Athe∣isme, from a zealous profession? A reprobate mind is the punishment of a corrupt mind, Ro. 1. 28 They did not like to retein God in their knowledge, therefore God gave them over to a reprobate minde: therefore we had need to keep principles pure; for the cloud, that at first showes, but like a mans hand may suddenly overspread the whole heaven. The causes of this corruption of minde, are these and such like. 1 The minde being the upper region, is corrup∣ted from the lower region, passions, lusts, interests by ends, do bribe the minde to be advocate for errour, and mis-biasse the judgement; the staffe that is streight of it self, seems crooked in the wa∣ter, by refraction of the species, or duplicity of the medium; and we know that our eye or brain is di∣stempered by suffusions of choler, &c. from a foule stomack. 2 Ungroundedness in the truth, betrays the minde to deceit and errour; and empty barne is soon blown down; oh, that our people were so
ungrounded in Catechistical doctrine, which is in∣deed the reason, that they are an easie prey to all kinde of Sectaries, and do cedere occupanti (as I may say) fall to the first occupant. 3 A meer notion, which is like light without heat, a winter-snow, a thing without sense, and feeling of any powerfull operation, and work of truth upon the heart is but a slender guard from this corruption of the minde; a man without much adoe recedes from barren notions; he that feels the warmth and power is not easily changed; they did not receive the truth with love of the truth, and therefore God gave them up to effi∣cacy of errour, 2 Thess. 2. 10. 4 A satiety or dislike of saving doctrine: when novelty is preferred, because it's new, and ancient truth, like an old Minister, now adayes is lesse re∣garded; the stomack is crude and queasie, and so relishes trash better then wholsome food. 5 The letting loose of wilde reason to dispute out faith; reason is but a Dwarf, too low to be∣hold Christ, except it climbe into the fig-tree, and go let sober men be content with that which is so frequently said, It's written. 6 Pride of knowledge is very dangerous; the an∣cient pride is this, and the Apostle thus expresses it, Eccles. 2. 18. being vainly pufft up in his flesh∣ly minde. 7 Unsuspitious credulity of others eminent in appearance of holiness, doth at unawares enwrap
many well meaning men: The Novatians would not admit lapsed men to communion. The Do∣natists would not beare with mixture in their Churches as they pretended; both these sorts of men did bear a plausible shew of holinesse in their opinions; but God doth not approve a holinesse of mans making; for that which is indeed holi∣nesse must have upon it Gods superscription. Use. For the Use of this Doctrine, let me bespeak you in the words of S. Peter, Epist. 2. Cap. 3. Vers. penult. Take heed, lest being led away by the er∣rour of the wicked, (or of lawlesse men) ye fall from your own stedfastnesse. This Caveat I might en∣force upon you from divers Topicks or places; as namely, the dangerousnesse of this disease which seizes on the head, from whence (as saith the Greek Proverb) the fish doth first begin to be corrupted, as also from the easinesse of being infected, and from the difficulty of the cure: but having spoke enough of the first of these, I will onely use a few words concerning the two latter. 1 It's as easie to be infected, as it is for sheep to catch the rot by feeding in rotten pastures; and our experience shews us, that one that angles with such baits, catches more fish in a week, than preach∣ing of Christ, and the simplicity of him will catch in some yeers, for errour hath something in us, as he that gave the reason for the faster growth of
weeds than sweet herbs, said that the soile was na∣turall mother to the one, and but step-mother to the other. 2 There is no simplicity of truth, a multiplici∣ty of errour; the streight line between point and point can be but one; the oblique lines, many; therefore it is easie to hang upon one tenter-hook or other, that look so many and even contrary wayes. 3 Errour is many times more specious to our shal∣low, proud, corrupt reason, than the truth of God, whose depths and mysteries cannot other∣wise be answered, then with, Tu quis es? 4 The mint-masters of errour do usually fashion their doctrines to flesh-pleasing, and man-pleasing; ye shall not easily finde that false prophets did preach the burdens of the Lord, but rather as Peter observes, 2 Pet. 2. 19. they promise liberty, which is so taking a thing, that looking humane∣ly, we may wonder that Christ preaching repen∣tance, self-deniall, the crosse, should gain any. So much for the easiness of being infected; then next a word for the difficulty of the cure. 1 The cure is difficult, because men are hard to be convinced of the sin and falshood, if with zeal & open profession they have maintained it; there∣fore they in the Council of Trent (as the history relates) would hardly be drawn to admit of any
recess from their former errours, ne viderentur er∣rasse, lest they might seem to have erred, and so weaken the credit of all they held before, as the crack made in Ice, useth to runne further, then where it is first made. But if in punishment upon them that receive not the truth in love, God do give men up to efficacy of errour, or do otherwise recompence their errour, by delivering them up to vile affecti∣ons and lusts, Rom. 1. 27. who shall then pull off that fearfull seal of God, that seals them up in stu∣pidity, and under a reprobate minde. 2 Therein men are great lovers of their own fancies; Amat quisque quod a se repertum est, no mother but loves her own babe. 3 A conceit that errors of minde are not sin, as morall sins are, but there are diseases of the head, as well as seated in other parts. And certainly, these capitall distempers do great prejudice to practicall holiness, being like suckers that bear no fruit, but do divert and draw away the sap from the fruit-bearing branches. So much for the first part, the object of the fear, lest the mindes of the Corinthians should be cor∣rupted from the simplicity of Christ: the second part is the resemblance of false teachers to the ser∣pent, and this manner of beguiling Eve by subtil∣ty, lest as the serpent, &c. From which words the Point is obvious. Doct. 2. As Eve was beguiled by the subtilty of the serpent,
so are mens mindes corrupted by false teachers from the simplicity of Christ; False Doctors; Satanae lenones, saith one, they are Satans instruments, as the serpent was, the Devil his Pandors, worsting to the deflowering of Christs espoused Virgins. The wisdome of the serpent is commanded and warranted to Gods people, the subtilty of the serpent is found in these subverters of the chastity of Doctrine; I cannot, I may not spend any time in this point, for I have no sand left; onely ob∣serve, 1 That the defection, the corruption of men principled with pure doctrine is feared. Gospel∣principles are not so much to be scanned by curio∣sitie of reason, as received in simplicity of faith 2 The Apostle alledges the most ancient exam∣ple of corruption of minde that is in the world; that which men call New Light is many times but some exploded errour furbisht up, and old wayes are but acted once again. There is properly no new truth, but there may be new discoveries. 3 What a sharp comparison doth he use to re∣semble false teachers? unto the devil his first in∣strument used by him; and therefore let no man temeraciously say, they are holy men, they aime at more refined degree of holinesse then others: for it's no wonder, saith the Apostle, that if Satan be transformed into an Angel of light, his Ministers also be transformed or disguised, as the Ministers of righteousnesse.
4 The Serpent took Eve at the beginning, and subtilly ravisht her of her integrity, we must look to our selves; it's the usual time to set upon us in our infancy of knowledge, either to disgrace the truth newly brought to light, or to displant it be∣fore it do take root. 5 That corrupters come with subtilty, and have their slights, Ephes. 4. 14. they come with good words, Rom. 16. 17. they beguile with enti∣cing words, Col. 2. 4. they speak lies in hypocrisie: 1 Tim. 4. 2. they can wear the rough garment, and sheeps cloathing. Their subtilty may be observed in the Serpen∣tine which they imitate. 1 The serpent set upon the weaker sex, and the Apostle saith, they lead captive silly women. 2 They are subtil in being modest at first, mi erroris sunt verecunda, Hath God said, Gen. 3. sa the serpent, the deceiver begins with queries rath then down-right assertions. 3 They will take their rise from Gods Word, and rather wrest then deny it, as the serpent here perverted those words, the knowledge of good and evil, to another sense and meaning. 4 They promise magnificent and great things, they promise them liberty, saith Peter. 2 Pet. 2. 18. Ye shall be as gods, saith the serpent, what great bub∣bles are usually spoken of glory, joy, familiarity with God, &c. 5 They comply with mans pride, with self, &c. and fit the bait to the fish. They allure through
the lusts of the flesh, &c. 2 Pet. 2. 18. 6 They draw a man from practical obedience un∣to extrinsecal, and meer empty speculations (for the theorie is pleasant and easie, but the truth is bitter 7 They bring points of faith, to thebar & test of cap∣tious reason: God in the prohibition of this tree, had shewn much arbitrariness of will, to make probati∣on of mans obedience, & therefore they ought not to have been arraigned coram non Judice, as neither the cleer points of faith. The time puls me by the eare, and therefore for close, as deceivers have the Serpents subtilty, so get you the Serpents wisdom, and if I were to prescribe prophylacticks or preservatives I would exhort you, 1 To hold the head, and so to fortifie the vitals from this epidemick infection, Col. 2. 19. 2 To pursue practicall doctrine, solid meat, and let alone these sweet meats; the tree of knowledge is fair to look on, the tree of life better to feed on. 3 Affect not things above the Word, a holiness, a zeal, a knowledge, above what is writ∣ten: Eve went some what further then Gods Word gave warrant when she replied, neither shall ye touch it: so there are many will say, This is the holier way, this is the better, not having any Word for it. 4. Avoid the house of infection, the Fowlers net, From such turn away, saith the Scripture, if the wo∣man will confer with the Serpent; you see what comes on it, it's the itch and pride after novelties that exposes us to temptations. FINIS.
