W2754 E84_18 99873324 155650
Peace, and No Peace: Or, A Pleasant Dialogue Betweene Phil-eirenus, A Protestant, A lover of Peace. And Philo Polemus, A Separatist, An Incendiary of War, Sutable to the times. By Rchard Williams. Master in Arts of the famous University of Cambridge, and Preacher in London at Saint Martins Vintrey. Psal 123 6,7. Oh pray for the eace of Ierusalem, they shall prosper that love thee. Peace be withn thy wa and plenteousesse within thy Palaces, saith Phil-eirenus. Psal. 48.22. No peace saith my God to the wicked, saith Philo-Polemus Phil-eirenus begins. WEll met good brother Philo-Polemus, you are very early here this mor∣ning, you looke very cheerfully! Me thinks the alacrity of your coun∣tenance divines some sudden Accomodation between the King and His Parliament. What newes at Westminster, Is it Peace? Phil-Pol. I saw indeed a pretended Petition for Peace (this day) with great ac∣clamations presented to the High Court of Parliament by the City Cavellero deceiving and deluding many Orthodox Schismaticks, fostered & countenanced by a company of upstart malignants, that never contributed any thing to the Par∣liament, but have been averse to all proceedings: And because the wisedome of the Parliament had agreed upon an Order for the sessing of the twentieth part of every mans estate towards the charge of this war, these malignants therefore (ha∣ving no resolution to ruine themselves) have raised a party within the City among themselves, that so they might save their estates, and contribute nothing to the
publicke weale: that although there may be something comprised in the petition, hat (in these distracted times) may be tollerable; yet in that it proceeded from the Academicke malignants at Oxford, even that alone is sufficient to make it con∣temptible. Phil-eirenus. Thou seemest to me [Brother Philo-Polemus] to be too censo∣rious and prejudicate of the actions and intentions of other men. What though the religious, loyall, and true-hearted Protestants, in and about the Cities of Lon∣don and West minster (in these deplorable times) have petitioned for an accommo∣dation of peace, does it follow therefore that they are malignants? Nothing lesse: For if you rightly understand the terme [Malignant] you shall easily find that it fetches its derivation from malus and ignis, an evill fire; so that Malignant and In∣cendiary seeme to co-incide in one, as twins borne at one conception, speaking one and the selfe same thing: it must of necessity therefore be granted, that the God of peace having descended into our hearts, which moved us to carry the pe∣tition for peace in our hands hoping ere long (by the propitiousnesse of Heaven) to bring the Olive-branch of peace in our mouthes [the long wished for accom∣modation between our gracious King and his grave Senate] that we are cleate from that scandalous and malicious aspersion of Malignants or sncendiaries, broa∣ched by those who wish ill to Syon, that are professed enemies to the peace and tranquillity of our Jerusalem, that aime at nothing more then the overture and subversion of the wholesome Doctrine and discipline of the Church, and the finall extermination of a quiet and peaceable government from the very bounds and borders of the kingdome, sayling from the calme Ocean, the still waters, the Chrystall streames of the sacred and eternall Word of God, so long professed and maintained by the Protestant Tenets, exposing themselves to the dangerous shelves of schisme and sedition, dashing upon the rocke of their owne pride and presumption, being tossed up and downe with the variable wind of every aery doctrine, and delighting to plunge themselves in the troubled waters of schismati∣call perturbations. Let such perverters and disturbers of the peace as these, be branded on their fore-heads with the ignominious name of [Malignants] to po∣sterity; may the distempers that they are hatching in the publicke weale be reta∣liated in a perpetuall distraction upon themselves; may the mischiefe they con∣trive against the Lord and his Anointed fall upon their owne pates; may they be Vagabonds upon the face of the earth, and let God scatter the people that delight in war. Philo-Pol. Patience a while [Good brother Phil-eirenus] you seeme to taxe me of too much censoriousnesse (I suddenly giving up my verdict upon the actions of other men) and you your selfe fall to execrations; the remedy proves worse then the disease, your admonitions are turned into Anathema's; you seeme to reprove me of one errour, being guilty of a greater: But (waving those cursed execrations,
as not having any reference to us, or any of the brethren, (who are the onely elect and chosen people of God) I must tell you (brother) you have overslipt the maine force and binge whereupon the strength of the Argument turnes, viz. The petiti∣oners for peace must of necessity be very malignant, because their factious and se∣ditious Petition was first drawne up at Oxford, the contagion of whose malignan∣cie is spread five miles about the University, where ere the Cavalieroes foame out their infection breath, this Petition was sent hither to breed distraction in the City, and fostered by a company of malignants that never contributed any thing to the Parliament for the maintenance of the Cause, but have been averse to all proceedings. Phil-eir. Not too hasty [Good brother Philo-Polemus] let no rash or unadvised imputation be cast upon that famous University; it is not the place that makes the thing malignant, but the thing the place; for there is no place so good, but it may participate of evill, and there is no place so evill, but some good may proceed from it. Shall I contemne a resplendent Diademe, because happily it may be cast upon the ground? Shall I scorne a transparent Diamond, because I find it in a con∣temptible dunghill? Shall I make no estimat of most precious and Orientall Gold, because it was raked out of a miry and lothsome channell? Wee'le grant, the foun∣taines may be corrupted, the Universities themselves stained with Arminianisme, and other erroneous Principles (being fallen from their Originall Purity) yet shall there no good thing come out of Nazareth? Or shall that which is the ravishing joy of Angels, the sweet consociation of men, the inseparable glew that settles and unites States and Kingdomes in the firme conjunction and bond of peace, be counted contemptible, because it fetches it's Originall from an University? No∣thing more ridiculous! I have observed the Bees gathering honey from Hem∣locke, Hellebore, most venomous and poysonous herbs. I have knowne an Alcu∣mist extract some precious distillation from the basest minerals: And it is the ob∣servation of Philosophers, that the purest gold is most abundant, that growes in a barren and unfruitfull soyle: For my part, I am so far from conceiving, that the greatest good may not be extracted from the greatest evill, that I would willingly embrace wholsome admonition, though it were fecht from the bottomlesse pit of hell; But I know (brother) what makes your rancour swell, 'tis the very name of an University then which nothing amongst the vulgar is more contemptible; as the saying goes, Scientia non habet inimicum, nisi ignorantem, Knowledge hath no greater enemy then ignorance, there seemes to be a mortall enmity, a secret anti∣pathy, between the sublime knowledge of a well grounded Academian, and the incomparable ignorance of a mechanicke Divine: so then were there nothing more distastefull in the petition of peace, then that it proceeded from the Univer∣sity, I perceive you would like it well, it were dangerous to foster it here in the City, away with it, 'tis infected with learning.
Philo-Pol. Truly [Brother Phil-eirenus] 'tis confest what you have a leadged is very materiall: For we having such an illumination of the spirit, and that in an abundant manner, have we any reason then (except it be in the society of wo∣men) to descend to carnall knowledge? Being carryed by the spirit into the wil∣dernesse of Prayer, is there any sence we should confine our selves to an Univer∣sity Petition? Besides, what congruity or agreement can there be between light and darknesse, between Christ and Belial, between a constant Separatist, and a backsliding Protestant? What peace (alas) can be expected, whilest the whore∣dome of the Romish Church is yet dispensed withall amongst us? The prophane Lyturgy still babled out by the P. of Baal? The conjuration of the Letany, by the Magicke of infernall Doctors, still tor∣menting us? The abominable Idolatry of the Crosse in Baptisme, still afflicting us? Nay, the Lords Prayer it selfe (notwithstanding the extemporary supplications that are composed by the help of the spirit) frequently used (by the Canturburian Masse-priests) in most Assemblies. Phil eir. Wherein (Brother Philo-Polemus) doest thou conceive the whore∣dome of the Romish Church principally consists, which you say is as yet dispen∣ced withall amongst us. Philo-Pol. In this especially, that the Prelaticall party (notwithstanding these times of through Reformation) still retaine in their Synagogues that prophane cu∣stome of wearing surplices, which (indeed) are nothing else but the remnants of Idolatry, the rags of superstition; and (as my wife very learnedly and zealously opened the case unto me the last night) they may justly be called the contamina∣ted smocks of the Romish whore. Phil-eir. Herein thou art mistaken (Sweet Brother) For our Ministers weare them not as the rags of Idolatry, but as the Robes of Sanctification; and if you rightly understand that place of the Revelations, that the Saints are said to be clo∣thed in white garments, you must of necessity conclude, that it is very commen∣dable for the Clergy to weare the white vestments of purity in the Church Mili∣tant here, that they may be invested with the shining robes of glory in the Church triumphant hereafter. Philo-Pol. You speake so much out of reason (Good Brother Phil-eierenus) that I have neither sence nor reason to beleeve what you say; for we worke by faith, not by sight; Away then with all Academicke Divines, those Mercurials of Reli∣gion, that stand condemned of the high Treason of Learning, that stand upon Phi∣losophicall observations, Logicall conclusions, reason, sence, and I know not what; As if the Dictates of Reason the Demonstration of sense, or such like distractions, were surable to piety and divine Illuminations. We are bound in conscience (in an holy zeale) to speake in outragious spleene against the Lyturgy of the
Church, which is generally condemned, even by our most perspicuous, sage and Orthodox Corch-men, feeling Pelt-makers, and upright Chimney-sweepers: Nay, it is growne contemptible to our feminine Divines, whose squinting eyes are scornfully turned another way, as not daring to looke upon such prophane∣nesse. It is a Papanish and Miscrean terme, I would sooner endure the Alcoron amongst the Turks, then the Liturgy amongst Christians, it is a difficult word, and in my shallow apprehension, either Greeke, or Latine, or both: you are a good lin∣guist (brother) let us heare your opinion. Phil-eire. It is a word composed of both, and if you rightly understood it (deare Brother Philo-Polemus) you would a atedomething of your censure, the Li∣turgy is a word compounded of Li a Latine word, which signifieth strife, and  a Greeke word, which signifieth a worke, put them together, and you shall find Liturgy to be nothing else but  Lit, A worke of strife or contextion. Philo-Pol. Wretched man! that have been brought up in ignorance all my time; had I knowne the Liturgy had been interpreted, A worke of strife and divi∣sior, I should willingly have embraced it long before; for I (with the rest of my Brethren of Amsterdam) love, like the  called Scolopendra, to swim up and downe in troubled waters and Salamander-like delight to live in the fire of con∣tention: well (Liturgy) for thy works sake) I shall have the better opinion of thee hereafter. Goe and prosper. Phil-eire. Well then, avoiding this Liturgy, as a thing whereof we are abso∣lutely ignorant, uncapable, and undeferving; Let the Letany speake for it selfe, me thinks you seeme to lay an imputation upon that, whilest you call it, The conjura∣tion of the Letany, by the magicke of infernall Doctors still tormenting us? What di∣stractions there? What disturbance of the publicke Peace? Phil-Pol. Me thinks (Brother Phil-eirenus) I heare some hideous noise in the ayre, the violence whereof offendeth my chaste eares, like a clap of thunder that breaks through the clouds, or that dreadfull roaring of Lyons from their dens, or rather the bellowing of the Buls of Basan, when I heare them roaring aloud in Westminster, and other Cathedrals (though Pauls by the wisedome of the now Lord Maior is shut up for feare of further infection) in those conjuring termes, By thine agony and bloudy sweat, By thy Crsse and Passion, By thy precious death and buriall, By thy glorious Resurrection, and Ascension, &c. It would make patience it selfe impatient, and admiration it selfe stand amazed to heare such horrid pro∣phanenesse? Can there be a greater disturbance of the peace and unity of the Church then this? Phil-eirer. I think thou art beside thy selfe, (brother Phllo-polemus) much ig∣norance hath made thee mad: Can the violence of Prayer, wherewith wee pierce heaven gates, and approach neare the Pavilion and throne of glory, be without execrable profanenesse termed conjuration? or can the fervency of our
supplication, intimated here by the often repetition thereof, By thine agony as bloody sweat, by thy crosse and passion, &c. (without the grossest injury offered to that sacred performance) be termed the disturbance of the Churches peace? Philo-pol. Truly (brother) you have given me good satisfaction in this point, such as I could never receive from my brethren of Amsterdam; enough of that: But there is one thing more that plunders my braines, wherewith I'le torment your patience, and crave your resolution upon the question. Phil-eiren. Let me pry into the secret crannies of your conscience, let me know the scruple that so much perplexeth your pericranium; and I will resolve you with as much discretion as I have done the former. Philo-pol. That which most distempers my zeale, and gives an ill farwell to my devotion (which is very small) is that clause at the last gaspe of the Letany, Give peace in our time O Lord, with which I well hoped the Letany would have expired, but contrary to expectation it is revived. Phil-eiren. I see what straine you are of now (Philo-polemus) you appeare in the right colours, you are of your father the Devill, that blood-thirsty fiend; an hereticall Schismaticke, a Jesuited Anabaptist, a chip of that old block-head Browne your ghostly Father, whose fashion is faction, Mr Will. rowne an Essex Gentleman, the Author of this Sect, from whom ever since they were cal∣led Browaists. whose Religion is Rebellion, whose Patrimony is Parricide, your Sanctuaries are turned into places of Butchery, your Acade∣mies into Aceldama's, setting your pious resolutions upon im∣pious and bloody designes! Away with such bloody incen∣diaries and fomenters of war, these fire brands of hell, My soule sit not thou in their Councell; Peace be in our time O Lord: Peace, the swee∣test monosyllable in the world, the breath of our nostrills, the joy and Crowne of our lives, the sweet solacing haven of all perturbations. Philo-pol. The day is yours, I am forced to yeeld you have the better of it, my Phil-eirenus, I see it is as possible somtimes to prevaile by strength of argu∣ment, as by the assistance of the Spirit; for this tricke alone I shall have the better opinion of humane learning while I breath; the first thing I undertake shall be to make my selfe capable of Reason and Common sense. But there is one scruple more that crosses my mind, which is, The abominable idolatry of the Crosse in Baptisme still afflicting us, which is nothing else (as I conceive) but a Rellick of Romish Superstition, the Mark of the Beast, the signe and character of the Purple Whore. Phil-eiren. It is confessed (brother Philo-polemus) that this Ceremony, in signing the children with the signe of the Crosse, fetches its originall from the Church of Rome: for in the reigne of Constantine the Great, who had the re∣nowne to be called the first Christian Emperour, the Generall Councell conclu∣ded, that in defiance of Pagans, Turkes, and Infidels, the Children of Christians
and believing Parents should bee signed with the signe of the Crosse; which Crosse was their Banner, that put courage and magnanimity into their hearts, when they marched against their enemies: hence it came to passe, that in pro∣cesse of time this laudable custome was translated from the Romans to the Bri∣tans, when children are baptised to signe them with the signe of the Crosse; which (though opposed by the schismaticall faction) is still continued amongst the orthodoxe Divines, not savouring of any Romish superstition, but only as an outward signe of their inward Profession: Aug. l. 3. de Baptif. which made an holy Father cry out in extasie and admiration of this laudable Ceremony, Non oc∣culte loquor, sed fronte gero, I speak not privately, or secretly, as though I were ashamed of my selfe or my Profession but I have something to shew for it, I carry it in my forehead, as the banner of my Lord and Master, where with I will fight manfully against the Flesh, the World, and the Devill. I confesse the Crosse in Baptisme makes nothing to the essentiality of the Sacrament, indiffe∣rent in it selfe, but being imposed by authority of the Church, I cannot tell how I should excuse the necessary use thereof. Now because such is the frontles impu∣dence of the Anabaptistical party that they dare affirm there is no pregnant proof in Scripture of this commendable Ceremony, to their eternall shame let them look upon that place in the Revelations, Hurt not the earth, nor the sea, nor the trees, untill we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads, Rev. 7.3. which though it be principally meant of the spirituall and mysticall, viz. an inseparable union and knitting of our hearts to Christ by faith, yet the allusion is made (ac∣cording to the most learned Expositors) to the sealing of infants in holy baptisme with the signe of the Crosse. Now to those that have in their infancy bin signed with the signe of the Crosse, and humbly acknowledge it to be a Badge of Chri∣stianity, it is the seale of the ever-living God; but to those that have been signed there with, and terme it the idolatrous Crosse, to such it is the mark of the Beast: which I rather beleeve, because it proceeds from bestiall and sensuall ignorance. Therefore (deare Brother) be not ashamed of that Crosse, which is the renown of Christians, but if thou gloriest in any thing, let it bee in the Crosse of Christ lesus. Philo-Pol. Well (Brother Phil eirenus) thou hast almost perswaded me to be a Christian. Phil-eire. I would not only you (My Brother) but all the Separatists likewise that ignorantly oppose the Doctrine and discipline of the Church of England, were not almost, but altogether converted (as thou art) from their Anabaptisticall and Atheisticall Tenets: But me thinks I reade some other doubt in thy forehead as yet unresolved, tell me what it is. Philo-Pol. Truly you have convinced me of such manifest absurdities, and alpable contradictions already, that what I supposed to be the greatest, is now
the least, and scarse worth any scruple at all; but that I may be fully resolved of a Quaere's before, It is this: Why is the Lords Prayer so frequently used among us, since every one cannot say; Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them the trespasse against us. Phil-eire. To this I answer, because it is an expresse command of our Saviour, When ye pray, pray thus, from which no man can be priviledged or exempted; so that he which comes into the Sanctuary with a malicious intent against his neighbour, is not fit to pray at all; but if any Prayer, let him use the Prayer of Pray∣ers, that lively patterne of all Coelestiall Contemplations. Philo-Pol. Is it not lawfull to use any other forme of Prayer besides the Lords Prayer? Phil-eir. Yes, you may according to your severall occurrences and necessities, so the sense be not dislonant from it, & that (avoiding prolixity, and long Pharisaicall Prayers) you come as near the concisenesse of our Lords Prayer as you can, in breathing out your soule (as the custome was in the Primitive times) in short Ejaculations to Heaven. Philo-Pol. No better time then now: Since none of these things which I have mentioned, can be any Obstruction to Peace, and Prayer is the onely meanes to obtaine it, since we are so sweetly reconciled each to other, let us pray for the peace of Ierusalem. Philo-Polemus, and Phil-eienus conclude in Prayer. OH thou that are the God of Peace, and makest wars to cease in all the world: First, (we beseech ther) send downe into our hearts that Peace which passeth all Ʋn∣derstanding, and then (sweet Iesu) worke an happy union between our Gracious King, and His Loyall Parliament, that under him we may live a quiet and peaceable life here, and this life ended, we may be entertained into that soule-ravishing peace and eternall secu∣rity in the highest Heavens. Amen. Ianuary 2. 1643. I Have perused this DIALOGVE, entituled Peace and no Peaece, and find nothing therein contrary to faith or good manners, and thinke it fitting to be printed and published. Iohn Sidenham. FINIS.
