1328.7 99893120 182261
A most excellent Godly new Ballad: ing the manifold abuses of this wicked world, the intolerable pride of people, the wantonnesse  women, the dissimulation of flatterers, the subtilty of deceiuers, the beastlines of drunkards, the filthinesse of Whoredome, the vnthriftines of Gamesters, the cruelty of Landlords, with a number of other inconuenciences. To the tune of Greene-sleeues. God Lord what a wicked world is this, euery man doth liue amisse, o regard of conscience is, rely the more is the pittie. therefore, good people all, spéedily for mercie call, God may blesse both great and small, in euery Towne and Citty. Few men do feare the Lord of might, and who regards his word aright, They come to Church but for a sight, and surely the more is the pitty. Amend, &c. Pride doth beare so great a swaie, no man but monsters goe by the way, Dressing themselues in foolish array, and surely the more is the pittie. Amend, &c. Wantonnesse walkes in euerie place, that modesty dares not shew his face: Discretion counted a foole in this case, and surely the more is the pitty. Amend, &c. Flattery is friended gallanty, and beares his countenance verie hie. VVhose lips are taught to cog and lie, and surely the more is the pitty. Amend, &c. Plaine truth is driuen out of towne, and flattery florisheth in renowne Deceit doth walke in a garded gowne, and surely the more is the pitty. Amend, &c. Cruelty créepes in euery place, hatred beares a friendly face, And slander séeks his neighbours disgrace, and surely the more is the pitty. Amend, &c. Idlenes walks in euery coast, yet flaunts it in brauery with the most Which kéepeth Tiborne as hot as a toast: and surely the more is the pittie. Amend, &c. ion lieth sicke in asweat, nton children must not be beate, wilfull when they be great pitty. Whoredome is counted a youthfull sport, greatly pleasing the letcherous sort, Not caring whither their soules shall resort, and surely the more is the pitty. Amend, &c. The gaming houses who will shun, where tripping vice do daily run, Till all their wealth from them be won? and surely the more is the pittie. Amend, &c. And few will learne in reasons schoole, which way they may their vices coole, But cals good counsell doting foole and surely the more is the pittie. Amend, &c. Vsury weares a veluet coate, by cutting of his brothers throate, Which without gaines will not lend a groat. and surely the more is the pittie. Amend. &c. The Land-lord with his incomes great▪ doth set his house in such a heat, The Tenant is driuen to lie in the stréet▪ and surely the more is the pittie. Amend, &c. Couetousnesse hath taken such root, to call and crie there is no boote: Although the néedy dy at their foote and surely the more is the pittie. Amend, &c. Charity now is choaked with care, pittie is caught in cruelties snare, And mercy exilde both naked and bare, and surely the more is the pitty, Amend, &c. The Father being of gréedy kinde, doth force his daughter against her mind To marry where she may substance find, and surely the more is the pitty. Amend, &c. What life is led betwéene them twaine, when one the other doth disdaine? Their end must néeds be griefe and pai and surely the more is the pittie. Amend, &c. But laying all these things awaie, remember well your dying day, And how you shall consume to clay, if you be wise and wittie, Amend, &c. FINIS. At London printed by R. B.
