16862.1 99884206 182966
The deceased Maiden-Louer. Being a pleasant new Court-Song to an excellent new tune. Or to be sung to the tune of Bonny Nell AS I went forth one Summers day, To view the Meddowes fresh & gay A pleasant Bower I espide, Standing hard by a Riuer side: And int a Maiden I heard cry, Alas theres none ere lou'd like I. I couched close to heare her mone, With many a sigh and heauie grone, And wisht that I had been the wight That might haue bred her hearts delight But these were all the words that she Did still repeate, none loues like me. Then round the Meddowes did she walke Catching each Flower by the stalke, Such as within the Meddowes grew, As Dead-mans-thumb & Hare-bel blew And as she pluckt them, still cri'd she Alas theres none ere lou'd like me. A Bed therein she made to lie, Of fine greene things that grew fast by, Of Poplers and of Willow leaues, Of Sicamore and flaggy sheaues: And as she pluckt them still cri'd she, Alas theres none ere loud like mee. The little Larke-foot, sheed not passe, Nor yet the flouers of Three leaud grasse With Milkmaids Hunny-suckles phrase The Crows-foot, nor the yellow Crayse, And as she pluckt them still cride she, Alas theres none ere loud like me. The pretty Daisie which doth show Her loue to phoebus bred her woe, Who ioyes to see his chearefull face, And mournes when he is not in place. Alacke, alacke, alacke, quoth she Theres none that ever loues like me. The flowers of the sweetest scent, She bound them round with knotted Bent And as she laid them still in bands, She wept she waild, and wrung her hands Alas, alas, alas, quoth she. Theres none that euer lou'd like me. False man (quoth she) forgiue thee heauen As I do wish my sinnes forgiuen: In blest Elzium I shall sleep, when thou with peiurd soule shalt weepe: Who when they liued did like to thee, That lou'd there loues as thou dost me. When shée had fild her apron full Of such sweet flowers as she could cull, The gréen Leaues serud her for her Bed The Flowers pillowes for her head. then down she lay, nere more did speak alas with loue her heart did breake. FINIS. Printed by the Assignes of Thomas Symcocke.
The Faithlesse Louer. To the same Tune. VVHen I had seen this Virgins end, I sorrowed as became a friend, And wept to see that such a maid, Should be by faithlesse loue betraid, But woe (I feare) will come to thee, That was not true in loue as she. The Birds did cease their harmony, The harmlesse Lambes did seem to cry: The Flowers they did hang their head, The Flower of Maidens being dead, Whose life by death is now set free. And none did loue more deare then she. The Bubling Brooks did seem to mone And Eccho from the vales did grone: Dianaes Nimphs did ring her knill, And to their Queene the same did tell: Who vowed by her chastitie That none should take reuenge but she. When as I saw her corpes were cold, I to her louer went and told, What chance unto this Maid befell, Who said, Im glad she sped so well, D'ée thinke that I so fond would be To loue no Maid but onely she: I was not made for her alone, I take delight to heare them mone: When one is gone I will haue more. That man is rich that hath most store: I bondage hate I must liue free, And not be tide to such as she. O Sir remember then (quoth I) The power of heauens all seeing eye, Who doth remember vowes for got, Though you deny you know it not: Call you to minde this maiden free, the which was wrōgd by none but thée Quoth he I haue a loue more faire Besides she is her Fathers heire: A honny Lasse doth please my minde, That unto me is wondrous kinde: Her will I loue and none but she, Who welcome still shall be to me. False minded man that so would proue Disloyall to thy dearest Loue: Who at her death for thee did pray, And wisht thee many happy day. I would my Loue would but loue me, Even halfe so well as she loud thée. Faire Maidens will example take, Young men will curse thee for her sake: Theyle stop their eares unto our plaints, And call us deuils seeming Saints: Theyle say to day that we are kind, To morrow in another minde. FINIS. Printed by the Assignes of Thomas Symcocke.
