20183 99884374 183079
The Praise of a pretty Lasse: OR, The Young mans dissimulation: Else hee would not disgrace A Maiden in such fashion, To the tune of, Bank's Game. YOung men and Maidens, to you Ile declare, I loue my Loue, and she loueth me: Yet toke Goddesse will I her compare, And yet she is pretty indifferent faire; With ô my Love ô, there is none doth know how I doe love thee. She is not blacke, nor yet is she browne, I loue my Loue, and she loueth me: But to her Portion, she hath thirty pound, Besides all this, she hath an old blacke Gowne: O my love ô, there's none &c. She is not great, nor yet very small, I loue my Loue, and she loueth me: She's a yard and a halfe in the waste, that is all, Her flesh will preserue her hard bones from a fall: O my Love ô, &c. Her Haire is as blacke as is any Crow, I loue my Loue, and she loueth me: Her good conditions there's no man doth know, For she neuer came where as any did grow: O my Love ô, &c. She hath a Nose in the middst of her face, I loue my Loue, and she loueth me: And that standeth brauely vnto her owne grace, I dare say a better ne're stood in that place: O my Loue ô, there is none doth know how I doe love thee. Her Chéekes are fat, and faire for to see, I loue my Loue, and she loueth me: They with her Eyes wondrous well doe agrée, She is a braue bonny Lasse louely and frée: O my Love ô, there's none doth know how I doe love thee. She hath soft Lips, and sound ones they are, I loue my Loue, and she loueth me: You may kisse your fill, and neede not to spare, For there is no danger of wearing thrid-bare: O my Love ô, &c. She hath a Chin, and a chopping one, I loue my Loue, and she loueth me: She might spare half on't for her that hath none; But now her long Chin, I will let that alone: O my Love ô, there's none &c. Her Necke doth shine like a Chimney stocke, I loue my Loue, and she loueth me: When she her Casket of Pleasures vnlocke, I am caught as the Miller did catch his Mare Brock: O my Love ô, &c Her downy Breasts are swingers indéed, I loue my Loue, and she loueth me: She may carry them on her shoulders for need, O she's a braue Lasse we want more of her bréed; With ô my Love ô, there is none doth know how I doe love thee.
The second Part, To the same tune. HEr shoulders I think, they are a whole yard square, I love my Lov & Lov & he loveth me: Shl brave out her labour ou need not to fear, Give me such a Lasse that is able to beare. O my love O, there is none doth know How I doe love thee. Like wise she hath good lusty strong Armes, I love my love and shee loveth me: They are able to attend her body from harms, To set forth her praises it me much concernes, O my love O, there is none &c. He hand like  shoulder of Mutton appesres, I love my Love and shée veth me: But I would not have he f about mine ears, my love ther is no Lasse that dares, O my love O, there is none &c. She hath strong post legs her body to beare, I love my Love, and shée loveth me: She need dread no failing, that she doth not feare But if that you throw her, shéel show you a Beare O my love O, there is none &c. Her fine daintie Foot is of the fourteens, I love my Love, and she loveth me: And I can tell you that completely it seemes, I must speak her prises cause love is between's, O my love O, there is none &c. If I should marry with one that were proud, I love my Love and she loveth me: Shee would desire more then can wel be alowd, From such haughty creatures my selfe I will shrowd, O my love O, there is none &c. And if I should marry with one that is faire, I love my Love, and shee loveth me: Perhaps Cornuing might fall to my share, And so she might work me unto much dispare, O my love O, there is none doth know how I doe love thee. And if I should chance to wed one that is small, I love my Love, and shee loveth me: Then shee is not able to doe ought at all, And yet shéel be apt to scold and to brall, O my love O, there is none &c. If I should chance for to marry a scold, I love my Love, and shée loveth me: Then I must alwayes by her be controld, And then my libertie would be quite sold, O my love O, there is none &c. Well, I my choise of the first meane to kéepe, I love my Love, and shée loveth me: For shee will be quiet when she is asleepe, And our affections are setled deepe: O my love O, there is none &c. Thus to conclude, you that heare my Song, I love my Love, and she loveth me: When I am wedded Ile praise my wives tong, But then it never shall doe me once wrong. With O my Love ô, there is none doth know How I doe love thee. Printed at London by M. P. for F. Groue, neere the Sarazens Head with∣out New-gate.
