B3906 R170738 52211709 175440
THE GARDEN OF ZION: Wherein the life and death of godly and wicked men in Scrip∣tures are to be seene, from Adam unto the last of the Kings of Judah and Israel, with the good uses of their life and death. In this Garden consider and take heed, The fragrant flower growes hard beside the weed. A precept for the right use of this Booke. ove these who have their race in Gods fear runne, t rogues as rockes in sea, see that thou shunne. Printed at GLASGOW, by George Anderson, 1644.
TO THE HIGH, AND MIGHTY MONARCH, OUR DEAR AND DREAD SOVERAIGNE, CHARLES, By the Grace of GOD, King of great Britaine, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, all Peace and Happinesse. Most gracious Soveraigne, YOur MAJESTIES so loving acceptance of my former workes, pre∣sented to You the day before Your corronati∣on, emboldens me againe to intreat for Your Patronage, countenance, and gracious aspect towards this little piece of poesie full of most fruitfull matter.
In it Ye may clearely see the lives of most remarkable men in Scripture, and with them the lives of all the Kings of Judah and of Israel, with the uses which wee should make either of their life or death. Note.Such things are needfull to bee considered by all men, but chiefly by Kings whose actions for the most part (whether good or bad) are put in Chronicles, the Registers of time, ad futuram rei memoriam; Where after ages beholding, what hath been done in such and such a Kings reigne, will freely, without fear, give out their verdict, concerning either their vertues or their vices, so that, while the memorie of the just shall be blessed,Prov. 10.7. the name of the wicked shall rot. But mens sayings are of little mo∣ment, the God above with whom is no respect of persons will one day before the eyes of all the world,Act. 10.34. in a most open view let it be seene what
every man hath done in his life: be∣fore his judgement seat all flesh that day must compeare. In all the lives of the Kings of Ju∣dah and Israel, observe that the sinne of Idolatrie provocked GOD most: The basest idole of the world is the Idole of the Masse, a god of dowe,Ezek. 22 3. . which goeth to the draught: The Hebrews call idols Gilloulim, that is muck or doung: Beware of that new god of bread,Dij ster∣cores. for if it get place in Your Majesties Dominions, Yee need never looke for a sound and so∣lide peace, according to that saying, of Deborah, They choose new gods,Judg. 5.8. then war was in their gates; the Ark and Dagon will not faile to fight; Consider well these words, and make use of them for Your good, as Yee would wish to have the Lords blessing upon Your government. O whence hath come such a fear∣full blood-shed in all Your three King∣domes? Whence is all this bloody war?
the maine cause is, the new Go the idol of the Masse set up in Chappell,1 Kings 11.7. hard beside Gods Temple like that high place which Solomo builded for Chemos, the abomina¦tion of Moab, in the hill that wa before Jerusalem, directly for against Gods house which hee ha builded, for which doing afterwar the Lord made a rent in his King¦dome, whereof his posteritie got th least part. O happie shall Your Majestie bee, if with good King Josiah Yee rene the Covenant of the Lord in all you Dominions, and put away the idola∣trous Priests, and take avvay all th high places, vvith all the monument of idolatrie, that so all your Domi∣nions may be pleasant and fruitfull, like the mount of Olives, vvhich for idolatrie lost its name,2 Kings 23.13. and vva called the Mount of Corruption. O vvhat a contentment to GOD vvho made you a King! O vvhat
a comfort to all your good subjects! O vvhat a good and vvhat a glory to your self! that it bee said in all ages following, that King CHARLES, (like a pearle in a ring) hath beene a blessed Josiah among all the Kings of Britaine. Novv the Lord God of Gods blesse your Majestie, and make You a Defender of the Faith, as well in trueth, as in title, that in the great day of the LORD, vvith David, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, and other gracious Kings, yee may stand before the Son of man, that great King, vvho hath vvritten on his thigh, The King of kings,Rev. 19.17. and Lord of lords. From GLASGOW, the 28 of MAY, 1644. Your MAIESTIES most humble sub∣ject and servant, M. ZACH BOYD.
TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE CHARLES, Prince of Walles. GOD who hath made your High∣nesse a Prince, shall by his grace, as we hope, one day make you a king, yea and more, which shall be like a rich Diamond on the top of your crowne, A DEFENDER of the Faith: It is now time for you to begin to be busie, to learne to stirre the rudder, before Yee be made a pilot, to undertake the great charge, even the government of three king∣domes: For this great, worthy and weighty worke, Yee have great need to be wise, but so it is,Prov. 1.7 that the feare of the LORD is the beginning of wisedome; All other wisedome without this, is but follie. It was a good saying, that King Da∣vid said to Prince Solomon his sonne, If thou seeke him,1 Chro. 28.9. he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever: The best
way to learne your Princely Lessons, to consider well the life and death of ki who have ruled among Gods people, wh vertues and vices are set downe by G own pen, to be followed, or else to avoided. For such ends I have penned this poe of most mens lives in Scripture with  best uses I have beene able to make th of, which heere I dedicate to your H¦nesse in all humilitie, as being my M¦mite. Accept of this little with my bl¦sing, an old Servant of GOD, n drawing neere my threescore. From GLASGOW, the 28 of MAY, 1644. Your Highnesse m humble Servant Mr. ZACH. BOYD.
A WATCHWORD TO THE GENERALL ASSEMBLIE. Right Reverend, OUr Schooles and Coun∣trey are stained: yea, pe∣stered with idle Bookes; your children are fed on fables, love songs, badry Ballads, Hea∣then husks, youths poyson: It much concerneth you to see to this, and carefully to banish out of the land all the names of the Pagan gods and goddesses, which (as God hath expreslie told us) should not be taken in our lips:Psal 16.4. These words of God in Exodus are very con∣siderable,Ezo. 23.13. In all things that I have
said to you; bee circumspect,  make no mention of the names other gods, neither let it be he out of thy mouth. Seeing this by God him self required, it lyeth upon you to ¦daine, by the visitors of School that all these monuments of id¦latrie be removed, and that o such Bookes have place, that m help children to know GO and Christ his Son,Iohn 17. which is  Eternall. From GLASGOW, the 28 of MAY, 1644. Your humble servant Mr. ZACHARY BOYD
PRAYERS TO GOD FOR HIS ASSISTANCE IN THIS WORK. 1. AT Thee JOVAH this work I will begin, Inspire mine heart, and also guide my pen: Teach me to teach, and to publish the story Of thy most great workes, to thy praise and glory: ouchsafe on me in thy mercy a look, hat with thy praise I may embosse my book: y heart anone shall godly matter frame, thou shalt glade it with thy glowing flame: shine on me with thy bright countenance, nd make thy beams through my bowels to glance, , let not from me thy good sprit depart, hat with thy Saints I here may act my part. 2. O Mighty GOD, who all things underprops, Refresh mine heart with thy cleare silver drops, ke Zion hill, in a faire May morning angled with dew, that I thy praise may sing: purge my soul, my drossie sprits refine, ne empty breast fill with thy breath divine: onceive in me, and after bring to birth erses most sweet, which I may warble forth; ouble thy sprit on me, LORD, I thee call, jah like let mercies mantle fall: y verse begot in paine, and borne in pleasure, t them containe of thy praises a Treasure.
Grant unto me that in my sacred layes I may expresse the glory of thy wayes, O blessed Lord, who hearts and reines dost try, Make thou my thoughts to soare, and cut the sky; My musick meene accept, and with a look Of mine incense receive this little smooke: The widowes mites get thy more large report, Then Hecatombes of the richest sort. O Lord of love, my soul with mercy fraught, And take in good part this poore Char-coale draug All foggie mists, and sable clouds expell, That I thy praise unto the world may tell: Reveale to me Salvations sacred things, Seal'd in the Casket of the King of kings. O Jesus Christ, be thou my sure refuge, Who bare the doome of that Italian Judge. 3. O gracious God, now teach me to compile An usefull work; with grace now steel my stile, That whosoever reads this book he may Reape profite, I comfort, thou praise for ay. The use of this Booke. COnsider this who dost these verses read, Heer is a Garden, both with flowre and weed The pleasant Rose here smelleth fragrantly, The stinking Hemlock thou may also see: Heere learne; with godly, godly be in life, Ahorre all these who have beene men of strife: Example good follow, but shun abuse; By Gods wisedome of all these men make use.
THE GARDEN OF ZION. ADAM. Earth. THis is the man who after sea and land Was made of Earth by great JEHOVAHS hand: In his nostrils He breath'd the breath of life, And of a rib Hee form'd for him a wife: ithin this clay immortall life He placed, f he by sin had not himself disgraced: By divine favour He gave him a pledge, True holinesse, which was His own image: He in great love did choose him as His heir,
And made him of so foule a masse so fair His great VICE-ROY: yea, His beloved Son, Perfect and peerlesse, even a Paragon. But, Oh alas, he did not so abide, But lost this image by his foolish pride, And unbelief, whereon (as on a rock) He made shipwrack, a senselesse sottish block; That learned Tree, the Tree of good and ill, Abusde by man, did mankinde spoile and spill: When he was well, content he could not sit. But lost us all by a forbidden bit; The lofty wife, and the crafty Serpent, For Adams fall were Satans instrument: The sprite apostat residing within, That speckled beast, with smooth damask skin The simple sexe deceived craftily, Assuring her with GOD equall to be: Poor Adam chiefly by her lost his life, Who was his Phoenix, Sister, Daughter, Wife: The earth therefore for pleasant fruits and corne Brought nothing foorth but nettles, thistles, thorne When man did look of fruits to get a feast, The briers and burs did bristle up their breast: The LORD on man no meat then would allow, Till first the sweat should bubble on his brow. He who before was holy, meek, and wise, A fool by sin, was thrust from paradise,
A glorious Park, wherein (without all tearm) He might have dwelt, if he had pay'd his Farm. But now disgrac'd for disobedience, To dwell in Eden he hath not licence: The tree of life to him may not affoord Her fruit; A Cherub boasts him with a sword: Nine hundred, and als thirty years he lived, mmortall first, at last for sin he died. Thus he whom satan by sin did deceive, A slimy Burgar was laid in his grave. The Use. When thou hast sinn'd, beware thy selfe to hide, n Adams fall behold the fruits of pride, Of strong made weak, of wise become a foole, Gods character cancell'd with griefe and doole, Great sweat of browes, no rest untill our bones, e cooped up in a cold heap of stones: h that our sense as the spiders could be, Which starts as soone as stirres the buzzing flie, Within her web; Oh that we could begin o feele, to hate the least approach of sin.
EVAH. Living. ISHAH of man was after call'd EVAH, From life by ADAM direct'd by JOVAH She of a rib was made the first woman, Who by her pride brought many woes to man Mans other self, his love, his help, his wife, With the serpent was cause of all the strife: For such a fault, her poor condition Was paine in birth and great subjection: But heere her comfort in her greatest need, The womans seede shall bruise the serpents head: The Son of Marie, Jesus Christ our Lord, 'Twixt God and man shall make a blest accor The Use. Let EVAHS fall vaine vvomen terrifie, And teach them all to love humilitie: Blest be her seede vvho us restor'd againe, And of our sins unreel'd the snarled skain. CAIN. Possession. FIrst borne of man, name from possession, A sacrificer by profession:
hy browe did fall with an envious eye, ecause the Lord prefer'd Abel to thee: hou of Abel a bloody murderer ecamst, who should have beene his best keeper: ecause his blood doth cry aloud to me, hou on the earth a vagabound shall be. The Use y Cains madnesse thou may clearely try What monsters lurke in the sinne of envy: inne soone is done, but after comes the smart, vagabound, all trembling at the heart, en sinne in secret, but God keeps account his exchequer how their sinnes do mount. ABEL. Vanitie. THou second Sonne, thy name is vanitie Thy Hebrew name did so foretell to thee: hy cruel brother through envy and strife thy faire youth bereft thee of thy life: ods holy worship thou didst not neglect, thy service JEHOVAH had respect: hough in thy youth of death thou trod the path t still thou lives renowned for thy faith.
The Use. It is no wonder by envie and wrath To see just men unjustly put to death, Most blest is he whose heart base slimy he Surmounting, towards his creature leaps: Strive vvith Abel to dwell above the o Whose restlsse dance no stop at all disturbs Be like Abel that yee abode may make, In shineing robs above the Zodiack. LAMECH. Diminished or depauperat. THou bragging LAMECH of vaine Cains To boast and kill thou didst thy self sola Thou fear'd not God, nor shamefull infami Of all thou first liv'd, in polygamie: Foole with two wives thou led a sinfull life ZILLAH the shaddow, but ADAM the wife The Use. In these hardly great courage shall yee fi Whose words are brags, and vaine bubb vvind:
he deepest floods do run most quietlie, ith silver streames to carry to the sea; ut naughty brookes in broken streames do gush, nd roaring dovvne the horned cliff do rush. SETH. Set or appointed. NOw welcome SETH, for ADAM a third Son, Set and appointed to fill ABELS roome, hy godlinesse did many soules refresh, f thee came Christ, our Lord after the flesh. The Use. od rich in comforts can his Saints relieve, f he take one, he can another give: f crosses come vvhich do our comforts marre, od can anone send joyes to ease our farre. ENOCH. Sorrovvfull. O Deare to God with sorrow in thy name, Thy heart was griev'd to see the worlds shame:
While CAINS race provoked God right sore, Thou walk'd with God, and so was seen no m The Use. Learne heere thy life, at Gods service to spe An holy life brings to an happie end: Balam may vvish the righteous death to But, he profane, that day shall never see. METHUSELAH. Emission dart or death. THy name is death, emission, or dart, By it ENOCH foretold the worlds smart As some esteeme the last yeere of thy life, God with a flood did end this worlds strife: To longest life of all thou didst attaine Nine hundred yeares thou liv'd and sixtie nine The Use. Let all men learne their few years well to spe For longest life at last will have an end: He who strouts now, in grave shall soone be co What is mans life but a tale that is told?
NOAH. Rest or comfort. SOn of LAMECH, Son of METHUSELAH, Thou for GODS comforts called was NOAH: he LORD said LAMECH cursde hath sea and land, This Son shall be a resting for our hand: n this mans time the bad and faithfull seed To mariage most vilely did proceed: While all men spoil'd were with corruption, This man was just in his generation: God with his comforts did his soul refresh, When he intended the end of all flesh: Thy vertues, NOAH, I can not expresse, Thou wise preacher, herauld of righteousnesse: Whil'st in the deep all others death did suffer, Thou safely lived in an Ark of Gopher. Thy self, thy wife, also thy children three, With their three wives were in that house of tree: The haughty streame this house did high exalt, Which at the last on Ararat did halt The Rav'n, the Dove, NOAH did forth command, Two scouts to spy if there was any land; At last the Dove (to tell him of reliefe) Brought in her mouth of an olive a leafe.
When floods were past, by Gods mercy divine, NOAH began to plant a pleasant vine. But (Oh) that great herauld of righteousnesse, Was plunged in most filthy drunkennesse; Against JEHOVAHS great commandement, He voide of sense, lay naked in his tent: Nine hundred and als fiftie yeeres he liv'd, Just in two worlds, at last by death bereav'd. The Use. Let good men learne all sins alwayes to shu And not to staine a life that's well begun: Fy oh, alas, that for a drinke of wine This great Herauld (whose vertues bright d shine) Should have forgot his GOD so spedilie, VVho had him sav'd within his house of tree Fy, that he should have blotted his good na By lying naked in his tent with shame, Before the face of his three children deare, VVhose life should them have taught the Lor to feare: Behold how sone the life of the godlie, VVith sin (as with a damp) may darkned b
f one fault let not drunkards make a safeguard, r once drunke makes not man to bee a drunkard. SEM. JAPHET. Fame. Beautie. SEM, Son of NOAH, first in dignitie, The noble Jew hath his descent from thee: hy Godlinesse, thy Glory, and thy Fame y JOVAHS pen are written in thy name: APHET, Beautie, thou hast the second place o dwell with SEM the LORD GOD grant thee grace: wo blest Brethren, right noble was your fact: n cov'ring NOAH yee turned your back: ight worthy Sonnes, eternall is your fame, n modestie yee hid your fathers shame. The Use. eere children learne your parents to respect; God shall you blesse, and all your wayes direct, And you preserve, that no man do you wrong, n earth he shall your happy dayes prolong.
HAM. Hote or black. HOt as hells fire, coal-black, even like t devill, Profane villain, taught onely to do evill; O cursed HAM, thou full of wickednesse, Because thou spy'd thy fathers nackednesse, Because his shame thou scorned with thine eye Servant of servants thou shalt ever be, The Use. Curs'd is that sonne that ever he was born That sets himself his parents for to scorne An Elf, not man, he called well may be Who takes delight his parents shame to se NIMROD. A Rebell. NIMROD thy name is as much as rebell, Whom some esteeme cheef builder of Ba This man of HAM (as holy writs record) A mighty hunter was before the LORD.
The Use. on this earth thou be a mighty man, eware with Nimrod to play the tyran. hough men set up most high and stately towrs uch Castles will not keep them from GODS showres. ABRAM. Father high. ABRAHAM. Father of a multitude. BEhold the Sonne of ancient TERAH, The faithfull husband of godly SARAH: This Father high, was first called ABRAM For multitude turn'd into ABRAHAM: Looke up, said GOD, and count these starr's most hie, Of thy Children such shall the number be: Be perfect, walk in my commandement, I mind with thee to make a Covenant: When Amraphel was King of great Shinar, The mightie Arioch, King of Ellasar,
Chedorlaomer of faire Elam King; And Tidal Prince, of Nations did bring A great Armie, with boast against Bera King of Sodom, as als against Birsha; Gomorrahs King, and Admahs Shinab stout, Who armed with great forces then came out; And als against the Zehoims Shemither, And Belahs Prince came all these Kings togeth In bloody war, these foure Kings against five Came to the fields, and in battell did strive; But Sodoms men were forc'd to turne the back Their foes some kill'd and some captives did ta Among whom was LOT nephew of ABRAM Who to help Sodom unto battell came: When ABRAM heard this, he in continent Did cry for armes, and to the Battell went With his servants, three hundred and eightee Who in his house well trained up had beene: He among these (as a stout Generall) Did rout his foes, and LOT rescu'd, and all His goods, and captives which they tooke awa He back againe did bring without delay; Then met him (by a providence divine) Melchisedeck, who brought him bread and wine And blest him, after he had given that feast, For Salems King he was, and the Lords Priest: Unto him ABRAM in that blessed day
With chearefull heart the tithes of all did pay; But as for spoile nothing I will he said est SODOME say, I ABRAM rich have made. The Battel of Abraham, against Amraphel, King of Shinar; Arioch, King of Nations, wherein he rescued his bro∣ther Son Lot, who had beene taken prisoner by them. This Paraphrase was made in verse by the Prince of English Poets, JOSHUA SYLVESTER. ABRAM perceiving now the Army neer, By their own Fires; 'gan thus his Troups to cheer: Souldiers (said he) behold, this happy Night Shall make amends for that dis-astrous Fight Was fought in Siddim, and acquittance cry,
For Sodom's shame, and Lot's captivitie: adorn'd Me thinks, already Victory With Bowes, and Blades, and Casks, and Cro return'd From th' Enemie, on our triumphant spears Erecteth Trophe is far more rich then theirs: Me thinkes, already on our glistring Crests, The glorious Garland of the Conquest rests; Our way to vertue lyes so smooth and plain, With painelesse Honour, and unvent'red Gain This hoast, you see, is not the valiant Troup That stript Gomorrha, and made Segor stoop; That Jordan, Inde, and Euphrates admire; But a foule Heard of Swine wall'wing in m Regard them as they are, not as they were: See but their sloath, do not their number fear: He that's asleep is dead, and he that's dead Bites not (they say): What have we then dread? Why stay we, Lads? already down they are. Their throats be naked, and their bosoms bare, Their lives lie prostrate heer at our command; And Fortune cals but for your helping hand. Come, follow me: rather, the Lord of Hoasts (Terror of Tyrants) who through all the Coasts with a trough Of all the Earth confoundeth All worldly power, and brings mens plots nought:
Come (happy Troup) follow with one accord h'invincible brave Standart of the Lord. This said; eft-soons I wot not what a grace, What divine beam reflected on his face: or as in March, the Serpent, having cast is old foule skin, crawls from his hole full fast, isses, and stings, and stares us in the face, nd (gold-like) glistring, glides along the grasse: o Heav'n enspires fresh vigour in each part, His blood renews, his heart doth take new heart, martiall furie in his breast there boyls, His stature seems more taller then yer-whiles, Youth paints his cheeks with Rose and Lilly Dies, A lovely Lightning sparkels in his eyes; So that his gallant Port and gracefull voice Confirms the faintest, makes the sad rejoice. Then, on the Camp he sets, where round about Lie mingled Carrs, and Horse, and Men that rout: Rest seizeth all; (and wanting what is fed) The fire it self slept in his ashy bed. Th' Hebrews the-while laid-on on back or brest, Or arm, or side, according at their rest To th'ground had bound them: and those lives bereft The which Death's Image in an Image reft. Heer, one beheaded on a Trunk of Pine,
Pours-out at once his gore, his ghost, and wi The full Helm hops, and with a voice confuse Murmurs, as if it his fell Fate accused. Another, taken by inchanting sleep, Mid Pots and Cups, and Flagons, quaffing de Doth at a wound, given in his rattling gorge The Wine againe in his owne Cup dis-gorge. Another, while ingeniously he playes Upon his Lute some passing-pleasing Layes, Sleep seales his eyes up with a gloomy cloud▪ And yet his hand still quavers light and lowd But, at the last it sinks, and, offring fair To strike the Base, strikes but the empty aire His soul descending to th' Infernall Coasts, Goes to conclude his Song unto the Ghosts: Dolefull it was, not for the Argument (For't was of Love) but for the sad event. Another wak'ned with those lowd alarms, Starts-up, and groapeth round about for arms Which, ah too soon he findeth, for his part: For a keen poignard stabs him to the heart. Like as a Tigress, having with the gore Of Buls and Hiefers made her spots the more And pav'd a Plain with Creatures mangled lim Views on each side her valiant stratagems, Treads on the vanquisht, and is proudly-sad, That no more Foes, nor no more Maw she ha
Th th' Hebrew stalking round-about the slain, raves (but it boots not) and would very fain hat those dead bodies might their ghosts re-gather, r that those mountaines would produce him (rather) ome Foes more wakefull, that more manfully blood-drown'd Valleyes might his valour try. Amor's three sons did no lesse slaughter make; bram for zeale, they but for furies sake: his nails a Souldier with his Sword to th'ground; hat, at a blow, th' heads of two Heads discrownd. his underneath a Chariot kils the driver: hat, lops off legs and arms, and heads doth shiver. The Tents already all in blood do swim, ushing from sundry Corps, from severall lim. brief, so many ravening Wolves they seem, ithin whose breast, fierce Famine biteth keen, ho softly stealing to some fold of Sheep While both the Shepheard and his Cur doth sleep) urbush their hungry teeth, tear, kill, and prey pon the best, to eat and bear-away. Yet, at the length, the vanquished awake, nd (re-ary'd) the Victors under-take; utting the three proud Amorites, to flight, ho but for Abram, had bin routed quite.
Sleep, sleep (poor Pagans) sith you needs dye, Go sleep again, and so dye easily, Dye yer ye think on death, and in your Drea Gasp-out your soules; Let not your dazled b Behold the hauock and the horrour too Of th' Execution, that our Swords shall do Hacking your bodies to heaw-out your breat Yer Death, to fright you with a thousand dea Said Abraham: and pointing every word With the keen point of his quicke-whirled sw (As swift in doing, as in saying so) More fiercely chargeth the insulting Foe, Than ever storm-full cloud, which fed  water's Thin moist-full fumes (the snowy mounta daughters) Showr'd heaps of hail-shot, or pour'd flood rain. On slender stems of the new tender Grain: Through bloud, and blades, through danger, and death, Through mangled Corps and carrs he traverse And partly in the shock, part with the blowes He breaketh in through thickest of his Foes, And by his travell topsi-turneth then The live and dead, and half-dead horse and
is bright-keen Fauchin never threats, but hits; or hits, but hurts; nor hurts, but that it splits ome privie postern, whence to Hell (in Post) ome groaning Pagan may gap out his ghost: e all assayls, and him so brave bestow's, hat in his fight he deals more deaths than blows. As the North-winde, re-clearing-up the front f cloudy Heav'ns, towards the South doth hunt he showr's that Austers spungie thirst exhales ut of those Seas that circle Orans wals: o where-so-e're our Hebrew Champion wield is war-like weapon and his glistring shield Whose glorious splendor darts a dreadfull light) ll turn their backs, and all be-take to flight: orgetting Fame, Shame, Vertue, Hope, and all heir hearts are don, and down their weapons fall. , if that any be so strangely-stout s not to faint, but bravely yet hold out, as! it boots not, for it cannot stop e victory, but hast his own mishap. ut in what Fence-schoole, of what Master, say, ave Pearl of Souldiers, learn'd thy hand to play at so sundry weapons, such passados, ch thrusts, such foyns, stramazos, and stoccados? en of that mighty God, whose sacred might
Made Heav'n and Earth (and them so bra bedight) Of meerely nothing: of that God of Powr Who swore to be thy Target and thy Towr: Of that high God, who fortifies the weak, Who teacheth his, even steely bowes to break Who doth his Childrens zealous hearts inflam But daunts the proud, and doth their cou tame. Thy Sword abates th'armed, the strong stout; Thou cleav'st, thou kill'st: The faint disar rout, The lightning of thine eyes, thy voices thunde And thy stern dreadfull port confounds wi wonder: Death and Despair, Horror and Fury fight Under thine Ensignes in the dismall Night: Thou slayest this, and that thou threat'st as m This thou pursu'st, that thou disdain'st to touch In brief (thou blest Knight brave) thou q at once Valiant and vile, arm'd and unarmed ones. Heer, thine even hand (even in a twinck trice) In equall halves a Pagans head doth slyce: Down on each shoulder looketh eyther half,
o gaze upon his gastly Epitaph, lines of blood writ round about him fair, nder the curtain of his parted hair. eer, through a Jerkin (more than Musket proof) ade twelve-fold double of East-countrey Buff, lean through and through thy deadly shaft doth thrill gyants bulk; the wounded hulk doth reel: he head behind appears, before, the feathers: nd th' Ethnick soul flies both waies out togethers: eere thou dost cleave, with thy keen fauchins force, he Bards and Breast-plate of a furious Horse, o sooner hurt, but he recoyleth back, riting his fortune in a bloody track: hy barbed dart, heer at a Chaldee flyes, nd in an instant lardeth both his thighes, hile he (blaspheming his hard stars and state) ops (Like a Pie) in stead of wonted gate. Now LOT (the while) escapt from ELAMS hands, ree from the burden of his yron bands; ith just revenge retorts his taken wrong, is feet grow swift, his sinews wexen strong, is heart revives; and his revived heart upplies new spirits to all and every part.
And as a wilde and wanton Colt, got out Of some great Stable, staring scuds about; Shakes his proud head and crest, yerks out heels, Butts at the ayre, beats on the humble fields, His flying shadow now pursues amaine, Anone (amaz'd) flies it as fast againe, Againe beholds it with self-proud delight, Lookes on his legs, sets his stiffe taile right, And neighs so loud to Mares beyond the Moun That with the noyse the neighbour hills re sound: So, one while Lot sets on a Troop of Horse, A band of Sling-men he anone doth force, Anone he pusheth through a Stand of Pikes, A wing of Archers off anon he strikes, Anone he stalks about a steepfull Rock, Where some, to shun deaths (never shunned stroak, Had clambred-up; at length a path he spyes, Where up he mounts, and doth their Mount sprise: Whence, stones hee heaves, so heavie and huge, That in our Age, three men could hardly bouge Under whose weight his flying Foes he dashes,
Ad in their flesh, bones, stones, and steele hee pashes: metimes he shoots, sometimes he shakes a Pike, hich death to many, dread to all doth strike. me in the breast he wounds, some in the backs, me on the hanch, some on the head he hacks, heaws downe all; and maketh where he stood Mount of bodies in a Moat of blood. At length the PAGANS wholly left the place. en both Sides ran; these chased, those to chase: ese only use their heels; those heels and hands: ose wish but a fair way: these that the sands ould quickly gape, and swallow quick to Hell emselves that fled, and them that chc't so, fell: ese render nought but blows, those nought but blood: oth sides have broak their ranks: pel-mel they scud; hoakt-up with dust, disordered, dis-aray'd: either Command, Threat, nor Intreat obey'd.
Thou that (late) bragdst, that thy wh Wormly brave Could dry-foot run upon the liquid Wave, And on the sand leaving no print behinde Out-swifted Arrows, and out-went the Win With a steel Dart, by ABRAH'M stifly sent, Art 'twixt thy Cuirace and thy Saddle slent: And thou that thrice, neer Tigris silver source Hadst won the Bell, as best in every Course, Art caught by LOT, and (thrild from side side) Loosest thy speed-praise, and thy life beside. It seems no Fight, but (rather as befals) An execution of sad criminals: Who-so escapes the sword, escapes not so His sad destruction; or, if any tho Escap't at all, they were but (few at least) To rue the fatall ruine of the rest: For th' Uncle and the Nephew never lin, Till out of CANAAN they have chec't th clean: Like to a Cast of Falcons that pursue A flight of Pigeons through the Welkin ble Stooping at this and that, that to their Louve (To save their lives) they hardly can recove
ABRAHAM after feasted Angels three, Whom SODOMS cry brought from the Heavens hie; ile he with GOD was walking in the way, SODOM, GOD thus in him self did say, m this good man I will no more conceale whole purpose: to him I will reveale. s is mine earand SODOM to destroy, their vile sins I can not heare the cry: RAHAM at this speach began to plead, r to save these that godly were indeed, spake for SODOM in humilitie, d brought the great GOD to ten from fiftie: t LOT alone was found; therefore in ire. D burnt these villains with a brimstone-fire: hile to this man GOD promisde a reward: hold, said he, such things I not regard: hat shall I do with great heaps of riches? hat wilt thou give since that I go childlesse? hat comfort have I to be heere or there? his ELIEZER, he must be mine heire. ot so, said God, I speake the veritie, s Stars in number so shall thy seed be: irst unto him wilde ISHMAEL was borne, ho was cast out both for his pride and scorne; ut after him came ISAAC at the last, Son after SARAHS custome was past:
GOD for ABRAHAMS faith to exercise, Commanded him his Son to sacrifice: He suddainly (with timber, fire, and sword, Went to obey his great Creators word: While he did lift his hand to bring the stroake Spare, spare, cry'd GOD, thine only Son ISAA Thy faith to me hath shown what I would w Give me the Ram that caught is in the bush: Because heere God did ABRAHAM solace, IEHOVAH-JIREH called was the place: After that SARAH ended had her life, He took KETURAH for to be his wife; To her children he gave gifts for partage, But for ISAAC reserv'd the heritage: At last he di'd, after that he had beene Of yeers a hundred, threescore and fifeteene The Use. Learne heere of good Abraham not to feare To give to GOD what is to us most deare: He was renown'd both for his workes and fai Let all men strive to walk in the same path. That they at last may get a heavenly crowne, And with Abraham at Table sit downe.
SARAI. My Mistresse. SARAH. Mistresse of a multitude. MY Mistresse Sarai, Sarah multitude, The letter (H) a promise doth include: en thou was untill thy customes past, great JOVAH brought Isaac at the last: en GOD did speake thou leugh behinde the doore, s was thy fault, thou was reprov'd therefore: er thy Smiling Smelling of thy scorn, D made thee laugh after Isaac was borne: s grave matron in house the most time spent; ere is Sarah? behold her in the tent: Kiriatharbah Sarah sick and pale, ast by death laid down her mortall vale. The Use. women all both old and young heere learne, love their tent more then the wine taverne: is most seemely that when any come seek them, then they finde them at their home:
The whoores marke is, as Solomon h try'd, Within the house her feet do not abide. ISHMAEL. God shall heare. ABRAHAMS Son, which Hagar first bear, Doth signifie that God the Lord shall heare: In younger yeares to scorne thou soone began To persecute, to live like a wild man: Cast out, said Sarah, this fool full of rage, For with Isaac he shall have no partage. The Use. Take heede, O Youth, bee not like this  lorne, Who wanting grace eartly began to scorn: Fyon vaine man, who to scoff slily slips VVith mouth awry, and his wide yavvni lips, No surer signe to be burnt vvith hells fire Than on this earth to sit in scorners chire.
ISAAC. Laughter or joy. BEhold and see, Isaac a joyfull name, Which brings laughter to all that heare the same, r from his loins (as Scripture doth record) me JESUS CHRIST, our onely KING and LORD. D was his fear, he liv'd a holy life, o concubine; Rebeccah was his wife: s first Son Esau, by his venison id still conquere his best affection; t great JOVAH, by Jacobs Kids did move im to bestow the blessing on his love: o blesse Esau he doth what he best can, t his blinde eyes can not discerne the man: is hearing eare soone Jacobs voice did know, ut the Kid-skinnes said sure, this is Esau: e living long after his eyes were lost, ld full of dayes at last gave up the ghost. The Use. o be profaine, to ravell eke forbeare, earne of good Isaac the great God to fear:
Too many luske in sloath and lose that gai At first they wex, at last they do but wain Let us therefore our false hearts sift so neer That of such guilt, the Lord may hold us cl In good Isaac this comfort men may finde That good men may be dumb, or deaf, or bl REBEKAH. Fat, lustie. REBEKAH fat, and in body lusty, A wife for Isaac pleasant to the eye Bethuels Labans fathers brothers love Her heart to stay from Isaac could not move: Heare now, said they, the Damsells yea or no; I will, said She most gladly to him go. Shee meeting Isaac in the evening tide, Under a vaile her comely face did hide; She lighted down with most hearty submission Her vaile declar'd her most humble subjection She feared GOD, She loved the right path, Her soule abhor'd the vile idoles of Heth: The Sprite of GOD her holy heart did move, To like the Lad, whom GOD himself did lo Isaac lov'd Esau; She lov'd Jacob best, The man whom GOD allowed to be blest:
wonder how a woman this could finde herein Isaac God seer was so blinde. The Use. hold how GOD to baser will reveale, hat which he will from cleare seers conceale: is graces where he likes do spring and sprout, ost free he is else where to send them out: he weakst vessell he for his service n steele and strengthen, without prejudice. ESAU. Made, perfected. BEhold ESAU made perfect like a Lade, Of greater strength, not weakly like a Babe: his great strength a passage he did finde, nd left poor Jacob at his heels behinde: ed he was; now heare the exposition, holerick cruell without all compassion: he red Dragon to all did signifie, hat rednesse is a signe of crueltie: hile other babes are borne both smooth and bare, ll of him was like mantle of haire:
What others say, from you I will not hide, The Greek translateth all like a rough hide: This man profane, as is in Scripture told His birthright spent, yea, it for potage sold: This Belly-god to his eternall shame From red potage got Edom for his name: Hated of GOD, profane in all his cariage, With godlesse Heth he matched in his mariag He liv'd a Prince, sojourning in Mount Seir He turn'd his back upon his fathers fear. The Use. Beware with Esau for an earthlie thing For back or belly, to losse the blessing: Better it is in open field to ly, Quiv'ring for cold no cov'ring but the sky Pinch'd with famine like a pale feeble wig Then for this earth Gods good blessings to sli JACOB. The heele. HEere is the man so called from the heele, Who for wrestling was called Israel Belov d of GOD, as soone as he began,
Prince with God, that should prevaile with man: e youngest twin, beloved of his mother, t for GODS grace dsdained of his brother: hen he blessed perceiv'd his brothers eye arkling with fire, to Laban he did flie: lodge at home for him it was not safe, past Jordan a poore man with his staffe: this journey he lighted on a place z, called Bethel, because of GODS grace: ladder there he saw in his good dreame, ose top did reach unto the Starrie Heav'n: this ladder the Angels Sprits of love ent down and up, JEHOVAH stood above; m thence he spake to Iacob in his dreame, m thy GOD, who am the GOD of Hav'n; s land shall thee and als thy children feede, will give to thee and to thy seede: ill thee blesse with great posteritie; all the earth in thee shall blessed be: ile this wrestler who in wrestling did weep, rd thus GOD speak, he wakened out of sleepe, heart trembled, and pale was all his face said afraide, how dreadfull is this place? mble all, most fearfull is this dreame: is Gods house, this is the gate of Heav'n:
At last he came unto the land of Padan, Where for a space he served uncle Laban: In faith and truth he serv'd with all his migh Spent with dayes heat, and with the frost night: For labour Laban did his daughter sell, But blear'd Leah he gave for fair Rachel; To serve seven yeeres the bargan had made, For beautie; but the bleare eyes came to bed: Jacob at last to make all oddes even Resolv'd for Rachel to serve other seven: Of Labans service at last he wearie, With both his wives constrained was to flie; Then uncle Laban hotly him pursu'd. But great IEHOVAH his servant rescu'd: GOD came to Laban in the night, and said, Take heede to speake to Jacob good or bad: My daughters to Jacob was Labans word, Are like poore captives taken by the sword: What hast thou done? wherefore didst thou flee? In so doing thou hast done foolishly: Behold one thing, which meriteth the rods, Thou art a theefe, why hast thou stolne my gods? Why hast thou thus of my love made a rent? Behold they are stolne and hid in thy tent:
From tent to tent, last he came to Rachel, But where thy were these dumb gods could not tell; At last Laban no more would Iacob grieve, But to returne, resolv'd to take his leave: For Rachels sake and Leahs he did gant To make with Iacob a sure Covenant: Of many stones they made a goodly heape Upon the which they did together eate: This heape of witnesse by godly Jacob n Hebrew tongue was called GILEAD: ut this great heap in words of SYRIA ABAN called Jegar Sahadutha: fter kissing, and blessing for a space. is children, LABAN return'd to his place. hen this was past, behold ESAU with boast, ut God did meet his servant with an hoast: hen this was done, the great God eternall restled with Jacob long in Peniel: hey strove all night unto the light of day, ow let me go to JACOB God did say: o, said JACOB, a blessing first appoint o me, whose thigh thou hast thrust out of joint: hy name, said God, hence ISRAEL shall be; revaile with man, thou hast prevail'd with me▪ ehold now Esau with foure hundred men, ehold also the love of these brethren;
Behold JACOB seven times hee bowes knee; ESAU him meets, and kisseth lovingly: They weepe, they kisse, in others armes goe, ESAU content, will be no more a foe. Is this feare past, a new sorrow doth come His dear Dinah defil'd by Hamors sonne: How his two sons did make his name to stin By Sichems blood, it hurts my heart to think He purg'd his hose of all idolatrie, Their idole gods he hide under a tree: As he did passe f'om Ephrath to Bethel, Death came and tooke from him his fair Rac From this sorrow having a little breath, Behold another by his fathers death: REUBEN his sonne defiled had his bed As though with bread, he was with sorr fed. This prickt his heart, and this his bowels sm When he did see good JOSEPHS bloody coat This holy man so toss'd with griefe and strife, Past so the few and ill yeares of his life. At last on bed most ready for to die, To all his sonnes he left a Legacie; To some reproofs, to some comforts most sw When he had done, he gathred up his feet.
The Use. serve how God of twins can one forsake, d th' other choose, ev'n for his mercies sake: one he did love, because it did him please, th' other he abhorr'd to cast his eyes, hated infant, an abhorr'd Esau. efore that ever this worlds light he saw. Jacob learne to get thee hastilie rre from an Esaus wicked companie, ith staffe in hand, where God shall thee direct, r wicked men most hurtfully infect. Jacob learne when thou begins to pray, wrestle well, and not let God away ll he thee blesse, though it were all the night; cob prevail d not till the day vvas light: Jacob learne, if thou a Laban serve, ost vvatchfully his goods all to preserve; hough he churlish have not to thee regard, hou shalt not faile to get the LORDS revvard. earne heere to look for sable clouds of grief, fore death bring full and finall releefe.
REUBEN. See a sonne. HEre see a Sonne, for REUBEN is his na With vile incest, he did himselfe defame Because his sinne was grievous in Gods sight, Of th first-borne this REUBEN lost the right LEVI, Judah, and JOSEPH, for his spot, His Crown, portion, and als his Priesthood go Because he weept with a repenting eye, Let Reuben live, (said MOSES) and not die. The Use. Great losse by sin yet if we can repent, The LORD in mercy shall make up our rent: Beware of sin, flee farre from it anone, Lest that thou heare, thy dignitie is gone. SIMEON. Hearing. BEcause the LORD did LEAHS prayer heare She call'd him SIMEON when She did hi beare: In MOSES writs so fa as they us tell, Of his brethren he was the most cruell.
H heard not GOD, nor yet good JACOBS voice, shed much blood he gladly did rejoice; get of SICHEM his cruell intent, vilely did abuse GODS Sacrament, any reading hardly can I try, hy MOSES blessing the rest, past him by. The Use. ere learne in wrongs thine anger to asswage, ODS pen doth curse all sinfull wrath and rage; t men beware either to do or think, t which may make their parents name to stinke. LEVI. Joining. BIrth of Children in husbands breasts doth coine ew love, which makes their tender hearts to joine: r this chiefe cause, as in the historie manifest, LEAH call'd him LEVI; mong these tribes this LEVI was the priest,
With Vrim Tummim on his holy breast: Because he bare the Sword of crueltie, His race in JACOB scattred was to be. The Use. Learne this before to doe ill thou begin, Divide and scatter are the fruits of sin: The sins of men great Tribes do spoile a spill, For this cause sorrowes them pinch pierce, thrill: If we feare GOD, hee such griefs shall presse; Yea, kill our cares, and calme stormes distresse. But if we joine with Levi to shed blood, To rage and roare, as men in a mad moo Wee shall at last with confusion be cloathe Wrapped in shame, dispersde, despisde, and thed. JUDAH. Praise. THis is the King, the great God will him rai This is the man whom his brethren shall praise
e shall be LORD, his shall be the Kingdome, ntill the time that great SHILOH shall come: his is the man enrich'd with gifts divine, eth white with milk, and als eyes red with wine; oth grave and wise he was, as may appeare, that his speach made for Benjamin dear: is was his fault from vice he was not pure, e lay with TAMAR, masked like a whoore. The Use. et men heere learne, who have received grace, feare, to faile, and fall into disgrace: men be loose, when as they should be chest, hey may at last, fall into vile incest. ZEBULON. Dwelling. THis is the sixt, a rich and good dowry, Said LEAH, JACOB now will dwell with mee: is younger sonne then ISSACHAR, and yet e was before him at the blessing set, rich merchant appointed for to be, stately ships sailling on the deep sea.
The Use. Observe heere how the great Jovah comman Some to be King, some Priest, and som Merchands. ISSACHAR. An hire. FIft Sonne of LEAH thy name is a hire, Great rest and ease were chiefly thy desire: When rest and ease to thee were brought  passe, Betweene two burdens, thou crouch'd like an asse. The Use. Take heed, beware, this is a great disease, To loiter and to seeke our carnall ease. DAN. Judgement THe mightie God his peoples cheefe refuge Hath set apart this DAN to be a JUDGE: His enemies he shall pull downe and slay, Mighty by wiles, an Adder in the way:
teeth in heeles of horse he fixeth fast, ill flatlings the rider fall at last. The Use. at good for God we cannot doe by might, e must performe it by a holy slight. GAD. A troup, an armie. AD in thy name is both troup and armie, Yet for a space thou shalt distressed be: time shall come when thy dangers are past, t thou thy foes shall overcome at last. The Use. re not to see good men goe under foot, last the bad shall perish branch and root. ASHER. Blessing. VVOrthy ASHER, I can not passe from thee, name containes blesse and felicite:
None shall be able thy blessings to spoile, Thy bread is fat, thou dips thy feete in oyle. The Use. Heere learne that Jovah riches doth besto On some, making their Cup to overflow. NAPHTALI. My wrestling. VVHile I behold this wrestler in my mi I see him swift, light-footed, li a Hinde; When in Battell he prevailed by Swords, In praise to GOD he gave right goodly Words. The Use. Heere learne when GOD in war gives vict With goodly words to praise him thankfull JOSEPH. Adding. I Adde to speak of JOSEPH the first borne, Of faire RACHEL, whom grace did mu adorne:
This is the Lad, consider well and try, or dreams, and coat the object of envy: rom doing ill his brethren could not fit, ast Master Dreamer now into a pit: y Reubens mercie (this poore Isralite) as drawne out, and sold to an Ismalite; fter by GODS assistance Singular, n Egypt he was sold to Potiphar, that land (by GODS mercy and great might) e found great favour in his Masters sight; are in beaute he was and chastitie, s vile Mistresse on him did cast an eye; ut no propins could him allure or move, o yeeld unto that most vile strumpets love; ecause of this, by a sort of trason, haste JOSEPH was cast into a prison, herefore a space he did abide much griev'd y dreams againe he shortly was reliev'd: y the first Dreame he restor'd the Butler, ut by the next he hanged the Baker: y so doing he conquer'd a great name, o that Pharo was moved with his fame: he ears of corne, and kine, both fat and leane, ade Pharao seeke the meaning of his dreame; hough many there in learning did excell, et none but JOSEPH could the meaning tell; hen was he high lift up to dignitie,
The voice of all was ABRECH, bow the When he had to this honour great attain'd His father and his brethren he maintain'd: At last his father on the bed of death, Pow'd out this blessing with a holy breath. JACOBS Blessing for JOSEPH. TO thee, JOSEPH, my heart did muccline, Thou art the bough of a most fruitfull Vine: His brethen, Mistresse, causers of his smart Like bloody Archers sorely griev'd his heart: But faith his bow and armes of vertues stro Abode in strength these enemies among: It was not his strength, but the arme of Go The hands of the mighty God of JACOB: Blessings below, and heav'ns blessings sureli Blessings of breasts, and wombe belong to th God shall not faile my blessings to fullfill, Sure shall they be unto the outmost hill; Eternall blessings shall come with geat speed Like glorious garlands for to crown thine hea Father ISAAC gave great blessings to me, But greater blessings I shall give to thee.
The Use. hough many sorrowes godly hearts do wound, et at the last great comforts shall abound: hough men to prison go, and to the stocks, tossed be, as ships among great rocks, r be so greev'd, that they can not a little, v'n but get leave to swallow dovvne their spettle, et if on God their faith shall fix its eye, hey with Joseph a good outgate shall see. BENJAMIN. Son of the right hand. AT thy bitth Rachel was in hard labour, Therefore thy name was son of my dolour, t thy birth JACOB his deare RACHEL lost, hen thou wast borne, she yeelded up the ghost: ot sonne of sorrow JACOB did command, hee to be cal'd but sonne of the right hand. ow BENjAMIN come hither unto me, hat thou may heare what thy blessing shall be: hou strong in war thy fiercest foes shall foile, irst overcome, and last divide the spoile.
The Use. Without children Rachel she vvould but Hovv brittle are such pleasures heere yee In this blessing let all men learne thus fa That it is God that makes men stout in MOSES. Dravvn out. THis Sonne of AMRAM, and of JOCHEB Gods good people through many danled; When he was borne he was a goodly child, In all his life he was both meeke and milde; From drawing out at first he got his name, His vertues after spread abroad his fame: With JOCHEBED three months he did abid For PHAROS fear she durst him no more hid Poore mothers bowels heere behold and ma She made for him of Bulrushes an Arke: She made great haste, and stirred well her tim The Arke with pitch she dawbed, and with sh Thus was good Moses set upon the River, In a poore Boat without an Oare or Ruther: While proud Nilus her brinks did overflow, This young Boat-man could neither stirre nor ro
Judge ye what griefe poore Jochebed did feele hile she thought of the Nilus Crocodile: hen Moses thus did ly among the rush, ing Pharos daughter came her self to wash mong the flags, the Ark she did espy, herein babe Moses did weep bitterly. las, said she, with great compassion, his is some Babe of th' Hebrew Nation: soone as Miriam heard this good saying, e ready was an Hebrew Nurse to bring: en Pharos daughter earnst'ly did desire chebed nurse, and she to pay the hire: When he was growen, one day he did espy man of Egypt smiting bitterly Israelite, both with his foot and hand, oses him slew, and hid him in the sand: t afterward he perceiving two other, Israelite, even smiting his own brother; th' one he said, God doth not this allow, ou art perverse in smitting thy fellow. ho made thee Judge? answ'red this perverse man, ilt thou me kill as thou didst th' Egyptian. is matter (said MOSES) is come to light, refuge is to save my life by flight: n MOSES from the land of Egypt fled, to the land of Midian, where he fed,
The flock of JETHRO in a painfull life, Who gave to him his ZIPPORAH for wife: In this meane time (as by GODS word we se PHARO the tyran of Egypt did die; Gods people then their burdens did bemone, God with respect did heare their sighs and gro As MOSES fed the flock at Mount SINAH, There in a fire appear'd the great JOVAH: The fire the bush did burne, but not consume VVith shooes on feet MOSES did then pres For to draw neere; he heard this divine soun Pull off thy shoes, for this is holy ground; I am the great Almighty Lord he said, To look on God then MOSES was affraid: I have said God with much compassion Seene of my people the great affliction: On Israels back the burdens deep furrowes Have made, and now I pittie their sorrowes Go to that Tyran with thy little rod, And tell that thou art sent from the great Go How shall I goe? said MOSES, I thy name Know not, if thy people enquire the same: Say thou, said God, by my commandement I AM THAT I AM hath me surely sent. Oh, said Moses, they will not believe me, Where will they say, did GOD appeare to the They shall, said GOD, know that I have thee
ast downe thy rod, and lo it a serpent; gaine behold a rod it shall become: nother signe shall be in thy bosome: t in thine hand and see it white as snow, d whole againe, that they may clearely know at thou by GOD Almighty hast beene sent, d what thou dost is by commandement. as, said Moses, my words hardly flow, er both my speach and als my tongue is slow. are not, said GOD, let not that cause thee griefe rme the speach, I make thee dumb and deaf. , said Moses, mine heart I cannot frame, go this earand to speake in thy name: en GOD with Moses in great anger chod, on a mouth shall be, and thou as GOD: as afterward these noble brethren two ent on, and stood before the great Pharo: mmanding him with great authoritie, free GODS people from captivitie: cause that this King thus hardned his heart, ten great plagues his Kingdome felt the smart. The ten plagues of Egypt contained in five Latine verse. ma rubens unda, Ranarum plaga secunda, e culex tristis; post Musca nocentior istis
Quinta pecus stravit; Authraces sexta vit; Post sequitur grando, post Bruchus dente fando; Nona tegit solem; primam nec at ultima pro The ten plagues of Egypt in English verse. Blood first, then frogs, and third the l filthie; Fourth after all these came the noisom flie, The fift upon the beasts vvas the murrai Sixt lothsome boiles breakeing foorth vv great blaine; Seventh haile, eight locusts, and the nin darkenesse; Last on the first borne both death and dist In other verse. Blood, frogs and lice, a mixed svvarme Murraine that beasts annoyde; Boiles, haile, locusts and darknesse thick; The first borne all destroyde.
VVHen this was done, MOSES with his armie ent with all hast towards the deep red sea; ere Israel enrich'd with great butin, gainst MOSES began so to mutin; n both sides mountaines, and the sea before, hold PHARO behind us to devore: Moses now the cause of our distresse, ou hast us brought to die in wildernesse. and still, said Moses, stay your passion, d ye shall see the Lords salvation: retch out thy hand, said God, over the sea, d by thy rod devided shall it be; en Moses his hand of strong faith out-stretched, an East wind the deep sea was divided: hen Israel this great comfort had found, mong waters they walked on drie ground: e mighty Lord made way unto them all, e waters were on every side a wall; hen with an armie PHARO them pursu'd, ut (overwhelm'd with waves) they were subdu'd; y let us flee, said they, and turne the heeles; ut great JOVAH tooke off their charet wheeles. ODS Isra'l had (in all this fearfull tide) Cloud for sconce, and als a Fire for guide:
At last Isra'l saved both lesse and more, Saw Pharos hoast dead upon the Sea shore; Then Moses with the people spake, saying, A song of praise to JOVAH let us sing. The Song of Moses at the red Sea. I Will novv sing unto the Lord, for he hath gloriously Triumphed over all his foes, novv drovvn'd in the red Sea; 2 The Lord he is my Strength and Song, and my Salvation; I gladly vvill prepare for him an habitation. 3 With frothy deepths God covered them, this work he did alone. His heavy wrath did presse them so, they sanke down like a stone. 4 Thy right hand, O Lord, is become most glorious in great power: Thine arme, and thy right hand thy foes have novv dasht all to povvder.
5 Thou hast thy foes now overthrown in great excellencie: hou sentest foorth thy fearfull wrath, that they consum'd might be; And with the blast of thy nostrils the waters gathered there; he floods stood upright as an heap the deepths congealed were: The en'my said, I will pursue, them will I overtake, will divide the spoile, my lust on them novv vvill I vvreake: It is novv time to dravv my Svvord, them vvill I all destroy: purpose novv to make an end, and this shall be my joy: But thou, O Lord, vvith thy great vvinde, most fearfully did blovv: hey sanke as lead in vvaters deep, the vvaves did overflovv: Who is like unto thee, O Lord, amongst the greatest gods? ho is like thee so glorious so mighty by thy rods?
11 Thou stretchedst out thy strong right h Earth swallowed them wholly; In mercy thou led foorth thine owne whom thou hadst bought dearly: 12 The people all shall heare of this, and they shall be afraide; The indwellers of Palestine with grief shall be dismaide; 13 The Duks of Edom all amaz'd, with Moab tremble shall, The indwellers of Canaan, shall melt away and fall. 14 Both feare and dread shall fall on them by strength of thine army; Ʋntill Isra'l passe over, they still as a stone shall be: 15 Thou strong shalt bring them in, and them in thine holy place, Even in thy sanctuary, O Lord, establish'd by thy grace: 16 The Lord shall reigne for evermore, most like a mighty King; For he on Pharo and his host the loftie waves did bring,
17 But as for his deare Israel, in bottome of the Sea: tweene two walls of waters deep they went both sure and dry. Miriams song at the red Sea. THen Miriam the Prophetesse, the sister of Aaron, anced with women skilfully, playing Timbrels upon. And Miriam thus answerde them, praise God most joyfully; or he the rider and his horse hath drown'd in the red Sea. AFter all this Isra'l in wildernesse, Of Shur by thirst did suffer great distresse: hat shall we drink? said they, ah shall we die? hen Moses cry'd, and GOD shew'd him a tree: ith this tree Moses direct'd by GODS sprite, t Marah made the bitter waters sweet: rom thence to Sin he did the people lead
Who did murmur because they wanted brea There God the Lord did feed that numb hoast With sweet Mannah, round, small as the frost: Againe for thirst Isra'l at Rephidim, Did murmur against the great God of Heav' Then God his servant Moses did command, To smite the rock with his rod in his hand; For chiding, striving, heere with great Iovah, The place was call'd Massah and Meribah; God by Moses his people did protect, In that great battell against Amalek, His heavy hands Aaron and Hur did stay, By his prayers Isra'l prevail'd that day: By his prayers they got the victory. He built the Altar Jehovah Nissi. At Horeb, where before he did keep sheepe, Iethro him brought his wife and children eke: When Iethro had to him counsell imparted, To his owne land from Moses he departed: Then Moses went up to God on Sinai, Who did direct him, all these words to say, What I have done in Egypt yee did see, On Eagles wings I bare you tenderlie: Now therefore if yee will obey my voice, Above all people ye shall be my choise;
Priests to me, ye shall be a kingdome, treasure deare, an holy Nation. at said, Moses, a man filled with grace, id all these words before the peoples face: en all the people answ'red him unto, that the Lord hath spoken we will doe; e to, goe to, to Moses God did say, pare Israel to morrow and to day, the third day with glory and renown, fore Isra'l I minde for to come downe; ke heed for if man, or heast that have breath, t touch the mount they shall be put to death: any touch, the mount they shall be then ot throw, or stoned whether beasts or men: t to come up to them it shall belong, hen they shall heare the Trumpet sounding long: the third day thundrings and lightnings past, e cloud and Trumpet made them all agast; en smoak and fire on SINAH for a space, cended as the smoak of a furnace; en all the people trembled fearfully, a the mount SINAH quaked all greatly: en God came down whom MOSES heard and saw, d in two Tables wrot his fierie Law: hile MOSES was upon the mount with God, ey made a calf as if they had beene mad,
Of Egypts spoile to make it they were bold, Even of Gods gifts, they had no other gold They ate, they dranke, and then rose up to p Behold thy gods foole ISRAEL could say; Go get thee downe, said God to MOSES th For thy people are rather beasts then men: Let me alone, intreat not for this fall, For in furie I will consume them all: Oh, said Moses, why doth thy wrath wax Against Isra'l, thine heritage and lot? Think on Abraham, Isaac, and Isra'l, On thy people let not thine anger fall: While this grief Moses in his heart did feele The Lord in hast repented of the evill: Then Moses swiftly from the mount went do And brought with him the worthie sonne of While he and Moses from the Camp were far Good Joshuah said I heare a noise of war; But old Moses with his discerning eare, Said not, but voice of singing do I heare; When he came neere and saw that filthie blot, A golden idol, not Gods childrens spot, He brake Gods Tables in his kindled ire, The golded Calf he burnt into the fire; He ground it small, and straw'd it in their dri That they an idole, not God might it think: Then Moses wroth, unto the Levits cri'd,
every man his sharpe sword by his side: e through the camp, your brethren gorre and slay, at the great God you all may blesse this day: en the Levits these wicked men had slaine, to the mount Moses return'd againe: God be said, alas while I behold, a'l hath made unto them gods of gold: ve mercy, Lord, with eyes of pitie looke, don, or else me blot out of thy Booke: w goe, said God, as I shall give thee grace, duct Isra'l unto my promis'd place; aite my time, when once I shall begin, visit; they shall suffer for their sinne. ter this MOSES, faithfull, full of grace d great desire, to see the Lords sweet face; HOVAH good to hear him was not slack, spare his life he let him see his back. What verse, what pen can paint this great Divine, hose face JOVAH made with his face to shine? ith God on SINAH fourtie dayes he past, l this time he kept a most solemne fast: here of JOVAH whose wisedome doth excell, e learn'd the Laws which he taught Israel, him God most excellent gifts did give, e was the meekest that on earth did live:
Of yeeres he liv'd a hundred and twentie, Without weaknesse and dmnesse of the eye: Because at MASSAH he fail'd in his faith, Of CANAAN he might not tread the path: To climb NEBO the LORD did him comman That he might see from thence the holy land. When this was done this man of GOD did die In MOAB land, where GOD did him burie: Before or after came none in his place, Who knew JOVAH so clearly face to face. The Song of Moses before his death. THE PREFACE. O Pleasant heavens that are above, with diligence give eare; And I will speake; O earth below, the wordes of my mouth heare: 2 My doctrine shall drop as the raine, my speach as dew shall passe; As small raine on the tender herbe, and showres upon the grasse.
3 Because I surely will publish the blest name of the Lord: greatnesse therefore to Gods name, ascribe with one accord. I. PART. HEE is the rock, his worke perfect, all his wayes judgement be; God of trueth, and without sin, most just and right is He: They have corrupt themselves, their spot is not the spot alwayes his children, they are perverse, a race of crooked wayes. Ʋnwise people! doe yee the Lord thus requite? is not He y father buyer? hath he not made and establish'd thee? Remember ye the dayes of old, yeeres past consider well: ke thy father he will thee shew, thy Elders will thee tell. When the most High for nations did heritage divide;
Sufficient bounds for Israel, he wisely did provide; 9 For the Lord for his portion hath his people without blot; Jacob is his inheritance, appointed as by lot; 10 He found him in a desert land, and waste wildernesse, hee Him led, instructed, and him kept, as th' Apple of his eye. 11 As an Eagle stir's up her nest, fluttreth her young upon, Her wings doth spread, and taketh them to carry them thereon, 12 So the good Lord alone did him lead in all wayes safelie, And there with him was no strange god in all that company. 13 He made them ride on Canaan high, that he th' increase might eat; He made him sucke honey and oyle, that were in rocks most sweet: 14 Butter of kine, and milk of sheepe he gave to every man,
ith fat of Lambes, and also Rams, of the bread of Bashan. e gave them goats vvith the fat of Kidneyes, of Wheat right good; nd thou didst of the svveet grapes drink the pure Wine, red like blood. II. PART. BƲt Jeshurun vvho should have beene most righteous, did kick: ou art exceeding vvaxed fat; thou art also grovvn thick. ou covered art vvith fatnesse, then His Maker he forsook, nd of his sure salvations rock no care at all he took. With strange gods they provoked Him unto great jealousie; ith great abominations they mov'd Him to be angrie. They sacrificed unto dev'ls, to gods whom they not knew, hom your fathers did never fear, because they were but new.
18 Thou art unmindfull of the Rock that did thee once beget, And the Lord God that formed thee thou did'st alwayes forget. IIII. PART. AND when the Lord saw it, he did ahhorre them all anone: Because of the provokeing of both Daughter, and of Son. 20 He said, I will my face from them hide, and I will now see Their end, they are a froward race, in whom no faith can be. 21 With that which is not god they have me mov'd to jealousie, They have me to anger provok'd, with their great vanitie: I them also to jealousie, with such as are no flock, Will move; them to anger with fooles, I surely will provoke. 22 For in my wrath fire kindled is, such as no tongue can tell;
t shall not cease alwayes to burne, even to the lowest hell: And shall consume the earth with her increase, poor mans desire, And the foundations of the mount shall surely set on fire. 3 A heap of mischiefs upon them I certainly will send; also upon them in wrath mine arrovves vvill novv spend. 4 They shall consumed be and burnt, vvith paine of hunger great; nd suddainly shall be devour'd, vvith a most burning heat: nd vvith bitter destruction I vvill als on them thrust he teeth of beasts, vvith the poyson of serpents of the dust: The svvord vvithout, terrour vvithin, shall destroy, and not spare, e young man, virgin, the suckling, vvith the man of gray haire: I said, I vvould into corners them quickly scatter, then
I would make their rememberance to cease from among men; 27 Were it not that I the great wrath fear'd of the enemie; Lest their vaine adversaries should behave themselves strangly, And lest that they (puft up with pride) should say these wordes right soone, Our hand is now high, and the Lord hath not all this work done. 28 For they are a vaine nation, of wholesome counsell voide: Neither in their hearts foolish doth understanding abide. 29 O that they were wise, so that they this clearely understood; That they would now their latter end consider for their good. 30 How should but one a thousand chase, and two als put to flight Ten thousand, if their Rock had not then sold and shut up right? 32 For their rock in no way is as our Rock that is mightie,
ee seeke no other this to judge but our owne enemie: 2 Of Sodom and Gomorrahs field their vine I truely call, heir great clusters are most bitter, their grapes are grapes of gall. 3 Their wine is Dragons poison, which from these grapes doth distill, And is the deadly venime of most cruell Aspes that kill. 4 Is not this wickednesse laid up in store, there to abide, And seal'd up among my treasures, like that which one doth hide? IIII. PART. TO me belongeth vengeance, and recompence for their crime, Their wicked foot shall surely slide in due appointed time: For their day of calamitie is surely neere at hand, And the things that shall come on them make haste, and shall not stand;
36 For the Lord shall his people judge, and for his folks repent, When he sees all their power gone, and altogether spent: 37 And he in his great wrath shall say, Where are their gods of might Their rock in whom they trusted much? they come not now in sight. 38 Which ate fatlings, and wine off'rings in drinke did not reject, Let them rise up, and with their strength you help, and als protect. 39 See now that I am he, even I no god there is with me: I kill, I also make alive, I wound, and heal safely; Neither is there among the gods any, by Sea or Land, That by their strength deliver can out of my mighty hand: 40 For I my hand unto the Heav'n do now lift up and heave: In signe that I this great oath make, for ever as I live.
41 If I my glitt'ring Sword whet, and judge in severitie, will surely reward vengeance, to my foes that hate me: 2 I will mine arrowes in my wrath, which is now kindled sore, Make drunk with blood (and my Sword shall their filthie flesh devore.) nd that with the blood of the slaine, and of captives that be, rom the beginning of revenge, upon the enemie. 3 Rejoice yee nations with his folke, for he who doth not change, Will the blood of his servants dear most speedily avenge; And to his adversaries will render a vengeance full; And to his land and his people will be most mercifull. The Use. He who desires like good Moses to be In all Gods house, let him serve faithfullie:
He who vvith Moses vvould be a Divine, Must speak vvith God untill that his face sh None is so good but he vvill get assaults, Love Moses vertues, but flee from his fault To circumcise his Son he did delay, At Meribah he also vvent astray; At these vvaters he failed in his faith, For vvhich he might not tread in Canans pa See vvhat it is to sin against the Lord, Who Moses sin to spare vvould not accord; God hateth sin in best men, as yee see, Though they be dear as th' apple of his eye. AARON. Prince of praise. THis Prince of praise was Moses brother Elder then MOSES, the space of three y These brethren two were men of great reque MOSES was King, but Aaron was the Priest He was design'd such by the Almond rod; Mouth to MOSES, to him Moses as God: When God by him as high Priest was ador'd, His body was with these garments decor'd: A girdle, mitter, and a broidred coat,
ob, an Ephod, and a rich breast-plate, ith URIM TUMMIM an excellent thing, s incense censer in his hand did hing; elve precious stones on his breast were without, lls, Pomegranats his Ephod hang about, on his brow there was a plate of gold, aring these words, HOLINES TO THE LORD: the Holy of Holys thus he stood, fore the Lord with a bason of blood: nce in his life (alas) he playd the foole hen he the Calf form'd with a graving toole, fter he saw it, this he added more e rashly built an Altar it before: ecause at MASSAH he fail'd in his faith, f Canaan he might not tread the path; ripe off his garments, put them on his Son, or he in office no more may remaine: pon mount HOR death him of life bereaved, ho fourtie yeares in wildernesse had lived. hen God him tooke from this earths miserie, f age he was an hundred twentie three: his holy man, most upright in his wayes, as after death lamented thirty dayes. The Use. Most happy he who hath his breast within, hat which without was sealed by Tummim.
Let no man a vaine people for to please, Doe that which may the mighty Lord disple MIRIAM. Bitternesse. THis MOSES sister daughter of AMRAM▪ From bitternesse was called MIRIAM; Elder then Moses at the river side, She watcht the Boat wherein they did him At the red sea when MOSES men among Did daunce, with women she had als her so She did her selfe in godly words expresse, With gifts adorn'd, she was a Prophetesse; She had her faults in her most holy life, She greeved MOSES by her words of strife She with ARON the ill quarel began, For ZIPPORAH the Ethiopian. Tush tush, said they, hath God spoken on By MOSES, and not by us as plainely? This Moses heard, but being very meek, From God in wrath he no revenge did seeke But God in wrath (when he these things did Unto them cri'd, Come out, come out ye three, Though I my wrath against you have delay'd, To greeve Moses how were ye not afraide? proud in heart, inferiour in place,
you by dreams, to him I speake by face: hen GOD had showne how they had gone astray, kindled wrath and rage he went away: en this was done; behold a great sorrow, RIE became leprous white as the snow: er her flesh was consum'd by the Lord, ses did pray, and then she was restor'd: cause God was provoked by her sinne, died in the wildernesse of ZIN: nsider heere two brethren, and MARIE, pointed guids for Israel to be: cause by sinne they stirred up Gods wrath, Canaan they might not tread the path: on HOR, Moses at NEBO steep, y in Zin by death did softly sleep. wildernesse AMRAMS three children deare eir life did finish in the fourtie yeere. The Use. ost godlie hearts vaine pride doth whiles assault, ey live not heere, that live without a fault: th carefulnesse let men and vvomen try, t in their hearts no place bee for envy.
BALAK. A Robber. BALAAM. A Devorer. After that Isra'l in battell fighting Had overcome strong Og of Bashan K BALAK king of Moab, son of ZIPPOR, Sent men for Bala'm the son of BEOR, Who dwelt in Pethor; to him they did say Behold from Egypt, in battell aray, A people is come, who is most mighty, In number great for to fight against me: Come now therefore, I pray thee, without Curse Israel that so I may prevaile, For this I wot, that he whom thou shalt ble Shall be blessed, and curs'd whom thou curse; So the Elders, that were of Moab land, Departed with great rewards in their hand They came unto BALAAM, and thus spake Unto him the words of their King BALAK He said to them, Lodge heere this night su I shall you tell what the Lord saith to me; And God came unto BALAAM, and said, What men are these that doe with thee abi And Bala'm said to God, Balak surelie The son of ZIPPOR hath sent unto me,
Bhold, saith he, from Egypt a great band souldiers that cover all the land, me curse me them, peradventure I shall able for to overcome them all: d God said to BALA'M, Thou shalt not goe th them, thou shalt not curse the people so, r they are bless'd; BALA'M in the morning se up, and went to BALAKS men, saying, e Princes of King BALAK get ye now o your owne land; for to go with you e mightie Lord will not give leave to me, en the Princes of Moab most early se up, and unto their King BALAK went, d said, BALA'M for thy commandement, th no wise care; hee (proud of his wisedome) ainely refuseth with us for to come; d Balak sent againe by the same way inces that were more respectfull then they; ho said to him, Balak, son of Zippor, ith great desire hath us all sent thee for: bids us say, Let nothing I pray thee ee hinder from now coming unto me: will promote thee for thy great wisedome, herefore to curse this people shortly come; hen to Balaks servants Bala'm most bold, id, If Balak of silver and of gold,
Would his house full me give, I not therefore Could go beyond the Lords word, lesse or m Yet all this night heere tary, I you pray, That I may know what more the LORD will And GOD came unto Balaam at night, And said to him, What was most just and rig If these men come againe for to call thee, Rise up, and als go with them speedilie; But yet the word that I shall to thee say, That shalt thou do most carefully alway; And Balaam rose up in the morning, And on his asse went unto Moabs King; But Gods anger was then incontinent Kindled, because he with these Princes went And the Angel of the great God that day, For adversarie stood there in the way; Thus on his asse he rode Balak unto, And his two servants were with him also; And the asse saw the Angel of the Lord In the way standing, with a glistring Sword; And the asse turn'd aside out of the way, And went into the field without delay, And Balam smote the asse with great disdaine To turne her soone into the way againe: But the angel of the Lord in great wrath, Of the vineyards stood in a narrow path, Which on both sides was fenced with a wall,
when the asse (for fear ready to fall) the Angel of the Lord in the way, till the Wall she did without delay sh Balams foot, then he inflamed hote, th staffe in hand the asse in fury smote. en the Lord op'ned the mouth of the asse, o said to Balam, What is my trespasse? y dost thou strike? What have I done to thee, at thou hast so me smitten these times three? n Balam said unto the asse, surely cause thou hast in the way mocked me: ould there were a Sword in mine hand still, r now I would in wrath thee surely kill. en said the asse, Am I not thine alway, which thou hast ridden ev'n to this day? as I before wont so to do to thee? y, said Balam, thou didst not so to me: en Balam's eyes the Lord without delay 'ned, who saw Gods Angel in the way, ith his sword drawen; then he in the same place w'd down his head, and fell flat on his face: en said the Angel, For what great trespasse st thou these three times thus smitten thine asse? hold I went out for to withstand thee, cause thy way is perverse before me;
Thine asse a beast did well for thee provide, She fearing me, turned three times aside: Unlesse she had from Me thus turn'd away, I had her sav'd, and had slain thee this day. Then Balam said, I have the LORDS comman Broken by sin; for that thou heer didst stand I did not know: Now therefore without let, If thou be wroth, back soone I will me get. No said the Angel unto Balam then, Now take thine own will, and go with the men But only speak that which I speak to thee, So Balam went towards Balak quickly. When Balak heard this, he incontinent To meet Balaam to a city went Of Moab land, in borders of Arnon, Which is the outmost coast lying alone: Then Balak said unto Balam, Did I Not send for thee, to call thee by and by? Wherefore came thou not at the first to me? Am I not able for to honour thee? And Balam said to Balak, I a man Am come unto thee, to do what I can: Have I now power any thing to say, What GOD me bids that shall I speak this day: Then Balak went anone with Balaam, And quickly to Kiriath-Huzoth they came; There Balak oxen did offer with sheep,
He sent for BALAM whose science was deep: The morrow after BALAM came quicklie To Baals high places, that he might see From thence of GODS ISRA'L the utmost part, That by his curse that whole people might smart; And Balam said unto Balak, Build me Heere sev'n altars, and prepare heere quicklie Seven oxen faire, and seven fat rams also; Balak as Balam had spoken, did so; And Balak and Balam off'red quicklie On each altar for sacrifice to be, A Bullock and a Ram; Then Balam spake Unto this King, that called was Balak: Stand by thy burnt off'ring, and I will go, Peradventure GOD will come me unto, And give counsell: what he shall shew to me I will without failing all tell to thee. Then Balaam unto an high place went, And the Lord there met him incontinent; Then he said, I sev'n altars did prepare, And there have off'red; now to me declare, What I shall say to Balak Moabs King, Then GOD put in his mouth this word, saying, Returne unto Balak, and thus boldlie To him thou shalt speake this message from me; Then he return'd when he thus understood, And went to Balak who with Princes stood.
And he tooke up his parable and said, Balak the King, This charge on me hath laid From Aram I have beene brought by this Kin Out of the mountaines of the East, saying, Come curse me Jacob, and Isra'l defy, Whom God hath not curst, how him curse shal For from the top of the rocks I him see, And him behold from the hils that are hie: Loe this people in a great number throng Shall dwell alone; and nations among Shall not be reck'ned; who can count or tell The dust of Jacob, or fourth of Isra'l? Let me the death of the righteous man die, And let my last end like unto his be. And Balak said unto Balaam soone, What meanest thou? What hast thou to me do Mine enemies to curse I did take thee, Behold thou hast them blessed most surely. Then Balaam said, Think not this uncouth, For I must speake what God puts in my mouth Then Balak said, I pray now come with me Unto a place, from whence thou may them The out most part thou shalt see and no more, Come and curse me them all from thence thefore.
He brought him to the field of ZOPHIM land, To PISGAS top, whether God did command: MOSES to go the promisde land to see, That so after that sight MOSES might die. There Balam said to Balak, Stand heere by Thy burnt off'ring, untill that quickly I Do yonder meet the great Almighty Lord, And the LORD met Balam, and put his word In Balams mouth, and likewise said that day, Returne againe unto Balak, and say, When Balam came unto Balak the King, Behold he there stood by his burnt off'ring; There with him were Princes of MOAB land, Then Balak said, Now let me understand What the LORD GOD in this perplexitie Hath both reveal'd, and spoken unto thee: And he tooke up his parable and said, Rise up Balak, and heare an answere made: Thou Son of Zippor hearken unto me, The Lord is not a man that he should lie, Nor the Son of man that he should repent, To say one thing, and after to relent. Hath the Lord said, and shall he not it do? Hath he spoken, and shall he it not to Perfection bring? Behold I now must blesse, God hath blessed, and I can not reverse;
In Jacob he hath not iniquitie Beheld, neither at any time hath he Seene perversenesse in all Isra'l about, God is with him; among them is a shout Of a King; God from Egypt land forlorne Them brought; He hath as of an Ʋnicorne The strength, surely where God is still pres Against Jacob there is no enchantment; Neither against the Lords most deare Isra'l Can divination once prevaile at all: According to this time it shall be thought, And said of Jacob, what hath the Lord wro Behold the people shall rise up anone, As a great Lion and a young Lion Lifts up himselfe and lyes not downe again, Ʋntill he eat and drink blood of the slaine; And Balak said unto Balam that day, Neither them curse nor yet blesse I thee pray Told I not thee, said Balaam unto Balak, all that GOD saith, that I must doe. Yet Balak said unto Balam that day, Come now with me I do thee heartly pray; I will bring thee unto another place, Peradventure thou wilt from God get grace, That thou may'st for my poor Kingdomes de
Powre on them all a heavy curse from thence. Then King Balak brought Balaam anone, To PEORS top that looks to JESHIMON; And Balam said unto Balak, Build me Heere sev'n altars, prepare right speedily: Heere sev'n bullocks, and sev'n fat rams well fed, And Balak did as Balaam had said: There were off'red a Bullock, and a Ram, On each altar they did performe the same; And when Balam saw that it pleas'd the LORD, To blesse ISRA'L, he did no more accord, As heeretofore to go incontinent, For by his art to seeke for enchantment; But he perplex'd in Sprite with great distresse, Did set his face toward the wildernesse; Then Balaam his eyes aloft lifting, Saw ISRAEL in his tents abiding According to their Tribes; GODS Spirit anone With this parable came Balam upon. Balam the Son of Beor hateing lies Hath said, even the man who hath op'ned eyes, He hath said which heard the LORDS words truely, Which saw the vision of the Almighty, Falling into a great trance, but having His eyes open to discerne every thing;
How good thy tents are Jacob who can tell, And thy fair tabernacles, O Israel? As the valleyes all spread forth do abide, As greene gardens by the fair rivers side, As ligne-aloes which is of sweetest smell, As besides waters Cedars high and tall; Out of his buckets be shall powre indeed, The waters and in great waters his seed, And his King higher then Agag shall be, And his Kingdome shall be exalted hie: God brought him out of Egypt land forlorne, He hath the strength as of an Ʋnicorne; Hee shall eat up all those that are his foe, And break their bones, and pierce them thro also: With his arrowes he couched he lay downe, As a Lion, and as a great Lion, Who shall him stirre up? he that shall thee ble Is blessed, and cursed that shall thee curse: Then Balaks anger kindled with despight Wa 'gainst Balam; together he did smite His hands, saying, I called thee surely, For to curse, but thou hast blessd these times thre Therefore now flee unto thy place and lot, I thought thee to great honour to promote; But lo the Lord in this hath not beene slack,
n wrath he hath from honour keept thee back. And Balam said unto Balak, This thing Spake I not to thy messengers, saying, If Balak of silver and gold also Would me his house full give, I cannot go Beyond the great Gods will in any kind, For to do good or bad of mine own mind; But what it shall please the great God to say To me, that I will speak without delay: And now I to my people go quicklie, Come therefore and I will advertise thee, What this people (most blessed) shall alwayes Doe to thy people in the latter dayes; And he took up his parable anone, And said thus wise, Balam of BEOR sonne Hath said, and the man who doth hate all lies, Who hath at all times cleare and open eyes, He hath said, which hath heard Gods word truelie, And knew als the knowledge of the most Hie; Which of th' Almightie saw the vision, Falling into a trance with eyes open; Though not at this time, yet I shall him see, Though not nigh, I behold him shall clearlie; Out of Jacob there shall come a starre bright, Out of Isra'l a scepter with great might,
Shall rise and corners of Moab annoy, And all the Children of Sheth shall destroy, And Edome a possession shall be, Seir also shall be for his enemie, A large possession, and Israel also With courage great, right valiantly shall do Out of good Jacob shall come he that shall Have great and large Dominion over all, And shall by his great power Almighty, Destroy him that remains of the city: And when on curs'd Amalek he did looke, He deep thinking his parable up tooke, And said strong is thy dwelling place surely; Thou putt'st thy nest in a rocke for safety; Neverthelesse the Kenite wasted shall, Be till Ashur, thee carie captive all; And he tooke up his parable, saying, Alas who shall live, when the Lord this thing Shall do? and ships with threatning and wi boast, Shall come in numbers from the Chittim coa And shall afflict Ashur and also Eber, And he alwayes sure perish shall for ever: So Balam rose up, and without delay Went to his place: als Balak went his way.
Whether Balam did go, it's not certaine, But for his wicked counsell he was slaine, By ISRAEL as MOSES did command, In their journey towards the holy land. The Use. Let Prophets heere learne not for gaine or ease, To seeke Princes by ill counsell to please; For if in this sort they the Lord offend, They vvith Balam shall get a fearfull end. CALEB. As heart. CALEB his name was Heart which did not faile, He was the spy who encourag'd ISRA'L, With JOSHUAH; the other ten afraide, By ill report the Lords people betray'd: Behold heere written for their blot and shame, Of all these ill spyes every man by name, Shammah, Shaphat, Igal, and Gaddiel, Palti, Sethur, Gaddi and Ammiel, Nahby, Gevel; These were the ill spyes ten, Who did cast down the hearts of ISRALS men: But stout CALEB, descended of Judah, And of EPHRAIM godly JOSHUAH,
The trembling hearts of ISRA'L did comfort, To have courage they did them all exhort: For this cause of all ISRAEL these two, Got leave from GOD to Canaan to go. The Use. The man that would have heaven for his reward, In Gods battels must not be a Coward: He who is sent a matter for to try, For no respect must deal unfaithfully. JOSHUAH. A Saviour. THou worthy man, first called OSHEAH, By MOSES wast called JEHOSHUAH, Type of JESUS, a Saviour by command, Thou ledst Isra'l unto the holy land: This Son of NUN, stout, was full of wisdome, For MOSES had laid his hands him upon: From SHITTIM he sent two men secretly, To view the land, and Jericho to spy; Though King and Laws to do such things forbid, Rachab these spyes close in her chamber hid, Not fearing thing that could to her befall, By a coard She let them downe from the wall:
After good Joshuah all these things had done, He went to Jordan from Shittim anone. When the Priests feet in that river did stand, JORDANS passage became like the dry land: There twelve stones were for a memoriall Set; Other twelve were pitched in Gilgal, For to declare to all posteritie What GOD had done by his hand Almighty: Then good Joshuah, with great affection By knives began the circumcision; Then Manna ceas'd; An Angel did appear To Joshuah who was GODS servant deare: What art thou, said he, friend or fo, with boast? A friend, a friend, the Captaine of Gods host, The Angel said; I am not for offence, I bear the Sword for thee and thines defence: Go to beseege the citie Jericho For great Canons, Trumpets of Ram hornes blo: Down down their walls with power I wil bring, Let all beware of the accursed thing: When JOVAH these walls had brought to the ground, Amongst Isra'l a cursed man was found: Achan the theef provokeing GOD to ire, First was stoned, and after burnt with fire: In GODS good will this thief made such a crack, That Isral's host at Ai did turne the back;
When by his death the LORD began to be Content; the men of AI began to flie: Then GODS people in furie and in ire Entred the Citie, and set it on fire: After that JOSHUAH had burnt this Citie, The King of Ai he hanged on a tree: The Gibeonites hearing of this report To save themselves found out this crowned sport Get clouted shooes, old bottels, garments rent, Old mouldie bread, that we a covenant May make with ISRA'L, for we are afraid, That by their force our countrey be destroyd. Then ISRA'L made with them a sure accord, Neglecting to seeke counsell from the LORD: When all was known. ISRA'L began to grieve, But for their oath they suffred them to live: Now cursed be ye, base hewers of wood, Drawers of water for the house of God, Such shall ye be, such shall ye be eachone, Said JOSHUAH to these of Gibeon. When this was done five Kings of Cananites, With ire conspir'd against these Gibeonites, Because without their knowledge and consent They had with ISRAL made a covenant: Then JOSHUAH to help poor GIBEON Chased these Kings along to Bethoron: The LORD himself for to crush all their bones,
Threw downe from heav'n on this armie great stones: Till all was done the Sun in Gibeon Stood still, and als the Moone in Ajalon, That JOSHUAH full victory might have; Five Kings he tooke, and closed, in a cave: After he had fulfill'd his victorie, He took them out and hang'd them on a tree: To keep Isra'l from strife and anger hote, He did divide to them the land by lot. When all was done when death and grave were near, He spake ISRA'L that they the LORD should feare; Serve him in trueth, serve him in fear, said he, All idole gods cast far away from thee: The people all with one voice did accord To passe from idols, and to serve the LORD: This man of GOD (before his life was spent) With Gods people made a sure Covenant In Shechem: there he raised up a stone, For a witnesse of all was said and done: At last this man of blessings manifold Went from this earth fivescore and ten yeeres old. After his death (this man of great account.) With grief was buri'd on Ephraim Mount.
The Use. Worthy Captaine, who will not thee commend? A godly life makes ay a godly end. Who fights for GOD, with never fading baye Shall have his Temples trimmed, and with laye Men and women his praises shall extoll, His name famous shall be in Jovahs roll. THE GARDEN OF ZION: The Judges. 1. Othniel: 2. Ehud: 3. Shamgar. 4. Barak. 5. Gideon: 6. Abimelech: 7. Tolah. 8. Jair. 9. Jephte: 10 Ibsan: 11. Elon: 12. Abdon. 13. Samson: 14. Micah: 15. Eli: 16 Samuel. 1. OTHNIEL The time of God. WHen divers had afflicted Israel, In a fit time the Lord sent Othniel: By him great things in his lifetime were done, Come of Kenaz good Calebs brother Son: In Kiriath-sepher for vent'ring his life.
Caleb him gave his faire Achsah to wife: King Chusan Rishataim he supprest, By him Israel fourtie yeers had rest. The Use. In greatest troubles and in dangers prime, The Lord will send comfort in fittest time. 2. EHUD. Excellent. WHen Isra'l sin'd, Moab with Amalek Were rais'd by GOD, his people to correct: But when they mourn'd, and cryed to JOVAH, He sent them Ehud first Son of Gerah: This man left handed was of Benjamin, His sharp dager he hid his cloathes within With sword at side, with present in his hand He went to Eglon, King of Moab land; He said, O King take heed, give ear to me, I have from God a great message for thee: When he heard that, he rose out of his seat, With one stroke Ehud ended the debate: While thus Eglon did wallow in deaths shade, The dirt came out, the fat inclos'd the blade: By him the host of Moab was supprest, After Isra'l had fourscore yeers of rest.
The Use. Here learne that such a rare and single fact Is not set downe in Scripture for an act, To teach men thus this Ehud to follow: Each man to stob the Lord doth not allow. 2. SHAMGAR. Throwing downe. THis Shamgar was a man of great renown, With an Oxe-gaod six hundred he th down. The Use. Heere learne that great is our eternall God, Who can save us either by sling or goad, 4. DEBORAH. A Bee. BARAK. Lightning DEare DEBORAH thy name a honey Bee, Who can expresse the praise that's du thee? A Prophetesse sweet thou was in thy life,
A Judge in ISRA'L, though for sexe a wife. In her time Jabin ISRA'L had opprest Captaine Sisera, did them sore molest: Then DEBORAH at God the Lords command Said to BARAK, JABIN into thine hand I will deliver by mine arme mighty; Be stout, and doubt not of the victory. Oh said BARAK, he is a mighty fo, Go thou with me, if not, I will not go: I will, said she, now surely go with thee, But unto thee, this no honour shall be. Up, up, now BARAK, said stout DEBORAH, Take courage for with us is great JOVAH; In that great day the LORD in ISRA'LS sight Put Siserah with all his host to flight: He fled to Jahel; there hid with a vaile, She pierc'd his temples with a bloody naile: According to DEBORAHS prophecie A wife, not BAKAR, got that victorie: When the great GOD had wrought out this great thing, DEBORAH BARAK then began to sing. The Song of DEBORAH and BARAK. PRaise ye the LORD for th'avenging, of his own Israel:
When the people offred gladely themselves unto Battell. 2 Heare Kings and Princes, I, even I will sing unto the Lord; Ʋnto the Lord God of Isra'l I will praises afford. 3 Lord, when thou went'st from Seir, when thou did march from Edom land, The Earth trembled the Heav'ns dropped, the Clouds they did disband: 4 The Mountaines melted from before the Lord God Eternall: Even that Sinai from before thee, Lord God of Israel. 5 In Shangars dayes, Son of Anath, in the dayes of Jael, The high wayes were unoccupied, they went in by wayes all, 6 The indweller of villages in Israel did cease, Ʋntill that I Deborah rose a mother to make peace. 7 They chose new gods, then in their gates was warre; was their a shield,
Or speare among fourty thousand in all Israels field? 8 My heart to Isral's Governours is, that vvith one accord Offred themselves most willingly to Battell, blesse the Lord. 9 Speake ye that ride on white asses, In cheefe rulers aray; And yee that sit in judgement, and that travel by the way; 10 And yee the poorest of the land, whose tread was still to drawe Waters, who for fear of Archers did greatly stand in awe: Yee from this feare delivered Gods great workes magnifie, Who hath given justice and traffiique in village and citie. 11 Awake, awake, awake, awake, Deborah sing anone, Arise Barak, and lead captive thou of Ahinoan Son. 12 He that remaines he made to rule ov'r the Nobilitie
Ov'r the people; the Lord me gave rule over the mighty. 14 Of Ephraim 'gainst Amalek there was a root worthie; Also among this great people Benjamin after thee; From Machir of Manasse came governours goodly men, To this service came Zebulon, scribes that handle the pen: 15 And the most mighty Princes of strong Issachar that day Were with Deborah in the field, ev'n Issachar I say; Also Barak to the valley sent on foot, did depart, For the divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts of heart: 16 Why would not thou from the sheep folds go for to act thy part? For the divisions of Reuben were great searching of heart. 17 Beyond Jordan Gilead abode, and why did Dan remaine
In ships? Asher on the Sea shore in his breaches sought gaine: 18 Zebulon and Naphtali were armed with speare and shield: Their lives they jeoparded in the high places of the field. 19 The Kings of Cana'n came, and fought, Jabin for to maintaine: In Tana'ch neere to Megiddo, but thereby did not gaine. 20 The clouds and wind'gainst Sisera did fight from the heav'ns hie: The Stars in their courses also fought most couragiouslie. 21 The river Kishon, even Kishon did sweepe them all away; O thou my soule, thou hast dovvntrode great strength vvithout delay. 22 Then vvere the strong horse hoofs broken in great rage and furie, By the means of the pransings, even pransings of the mightie. 23 Curse yee Meros most bitterly; yea curse,  the Angel:
Because against these foes they did not help the Eternall: 24 The Wife of Heber Jael shall blest above Women be: She shall be blest above Women, in the tent most surely: 25 He asked vvater and she gave him milke of svvet relish, She also vvisely butter brought foorth in a lordly dish, 26 She vvith a hammer and a naile smote Sisera indeed; VVhen she had pierced his temples, she did smite of his head: 27 He bovv'd and fell, and lay dovvne, h at her feet hovv'd and fell: VVhere he bovv'd there he fell downe dead at the feet of Jahel. 28 Sisera's mother looked out at vvindovves, and did cry Through the lattesse vvith joy of heart, to these that passed by, VVhy is his Charet so long d coming? VVhat is the let?
VVhy tary thus the most svvift vvheeles of his princely Charet? 29 VVhen her vvise Ladies heard these vvords, they did not long defer, To give answer, yea to her selfe she return'd this answer, 30 Have they not well sped in battell? have they not all also Parted the prey to every man a Dam sell or two? To Sisera a most rich prey, who did his strong foes foile A colour d prey of needle work, for these that take the spoil; 31 So let thy foes perish, O Lord, but who with heart upright Love him, let them be as the Sun going foorth in his might. After these forces were by God represt, Gods Israel had fourtie yeers of rest. The Use. Heere we may learne, how Gods great Majestie, Can by a wife obtaine a victorie.
5. GIDEON. Cutting off. GReat GIDEON, my verse now come to th A cutting off thy name doth signifie: The great God in mercy sent thee a man, To save Isra'l from cruell MIDIAN: This son of JOASH, in Isra'ls distresse Was threshing Wheat besides his owne Wi presse: To him an Angel said, with great favour, The Lord is with thee, thou man of valour: Alas, O Lord, (moved with grife) said he, That God is with us; Oh it cannot be! Where are the wonders our fathers us told? By Midian we crosses manifold Do suffer; oh our miseries they scoff, The Lord in wrath his people hath cut off. To him said God, Now go in this thy might, Against these men thou shalt for Isra'l fight. O Lord, said he, what power can I have, Wherewith I may thy people ISRA'L save? In MANASSEH my familie is poore, My fathers house such paines can not endure. Goe to, goe to, said God, do what thou can, I shall thee help to smite them as one man.
If thou, O Lord, said GIDEON wouldst me To fight, a signe first I desire to see. According to this godly mans desire, God by his staffe from the hard rock a fire Brought forth, which did consume incontinent Both flesh and broth, and caks GID'ON present: When he thus saw, he trembling, said, Alas, Gods Angel now I have seene face to face. Feare not, said God, let nothing trouble thee, I give thee peace, thou surely shalt not die. Then he an altar did build without cease, JEHOVAH-SHALOM the Lord God send peace. When this was done, which was his great renowne, Baals altar with great zeal he threw downe: Because he fear'd his foes that were of might, He not by day, but did it in the night. When this was done, the city all agast Unto JOASH his father quickly past; Bring out thy Son that vile villaine quickly, Soone bring him out, for he shall surely die. Then Joash said, Your brags are but scorning, He shall be kill'd while it is yet morning: Who darre for BAAL onely speak a word? If he be God, now let him plead by sword: Therefore JOASH from such pleading did call His godly sonne by name JERUBBAAL.
Then MIDIAN with AMALEK in ire With an great host against him did conspire: With deaw and drienesse the Lord on the fleece Encouragd him from battell not to cease. Then JOVAH said, The men that are with th Be too many to give you victorie; Who so is fearefull, and of courage bad, Let him returne now from Mount Gilead: When Gideon stout these words proclamed, t Returned twentie and two thousand men: Then ten thousand were in Gods host that day, Yet is the Haost too many, God did say: Go to the waters see what lapers be These are the men that I will send with thee: Three hundred men lapped upon the brink, But all the rest bow'd downe their heads to d This being done, behold one did proclaime Unto his fellow in the host a dreame: A barley kake, said one, tumbled our tent; Another said, this a fearfull rent, Our mighty army shall both faint and fall Before GIDEON, called JERUBBAAL: When Gideon heard the telling of the dream Hee worshipped the mighty God of heaven: Then with all hast his host he did command Trumpets pitchers, with lamps to take in ha When I the Trumpet blow, then blow each o
ry, Sword of the LORD and of GIDEON: hey brake pitchers, the lamps in their left hand; hey blew Trumpets as GIDEON did command, hile Isra'l did these Princely Trumpets blow, ery mans Sword was against his fellow: he Lord himselfe that great Battell did fight, hen all MIDIAN were turned to the flight: hile they this armie hotely did pursue, hey OREB ZEEB two great Princes slew: nto his hand likewise great JEHOVAH eliv'red ZEBAH and stout ZALMUNNAH he flesh of SUCCOTH, and PENUEL in feare, ter this done with sharpe thornes did he teare: ut he at last, forgetting the great God, f rich earerings made an idole Ephod: f lawfull sons he had threescore and ten, And ABIMELEH of a concubine. The Use. Heere for a space men may GODS cause defend, And yet at last with idoll Ephods end: Blest is he vvho serves GOD with heart entire, And like the Sun about Heav'ns Bandeleere Galopping still, doth not faint in his race, With Gods children that tread the paths o grace
6. ABIMELECH. My Father King. MY Father King, ABIMELECH thy Doth signifie; a bastard full of shame: This villaine full of fearfull crueltie, Upon one stone did kill nine and fiftie: Of his brethren in number like a hive, Onely JOTHAM the youngest left alive: He with silver vaine men and light did hire, Against his brethren he did thus conspire: His mothers friends of SHECHEM he did b Who with the house of MILLO made him K Then JOTHAM went unto Gerizim hill, And cried down this pricking parable, The trees went forth on a time to annoint A king; the Olive first they did appoint: The Olive then said, Nothing I doe lake For crownes I will not my fatnesse forsake: Then with one voice they said to the fig-tree, Come thou, and now receive the dignitie: The fig-tree then said, Nothing I do lake For crowns I will not my sweetnesse forsake: Then all the trees the crowne like a propine With one consent offred unto the Vine: The Vine tree then said, Nothing I do lake,
For crownes I will not my liquour forsake: Then all the trees did to the Bramble bring The crowne, who was content for to be King. Well said the Bramble, well I you allow, Come now and put your trust in my shadow. If not, let fire come from the Bramble soone, Of Lebanon the Cedars to consume. Well, well, said Jotham, O unthankfulnesse, Soone have ye forgot my fathers kindnesse; His life for you he did adventure far, And now of his children ye murdrers are: Ye Shechem, Millo, lewdly did conspire; Yee for such things shall be consum'd with fire. When Abimelech reigned had yeeres three The Lord to punish his great crueltie, Sent an ill Sprite betwixt him and Shechem, Who helped him to murder his brethren: Then Gaal with other Shechemites stout, Desir'd that Abimelech should come out: Then he anone came out most furiously, And Gaal chasde even with all his armie: The citie Sechem he sack'd for their fault, He slew their men, and sowed it with salt: From Zalmon he brought branches in his ire, With these he set their strongest towre on fire: In that strong hold of the city Sichem, He in his rage did burne a thousand men,
From thence this tyran with a speedy pace Went and encamped against fair Thebez: The people all, sore trembling in that houre, With all their might fled unto their high towre ABIMELECH (approaching in his ire) Went neere the doore for to burne it with fire▪ While them to yeeld he thought for to constrai With a milstone a woman brake his braine. Fy, fy, young man, said he, me stob and stay Lest by a woman I die shamefully: While he was thus in a most shamefull smart, The youth obey'd and thrust him through th heart. The Use. Let all men heere consider well and see, VVhat is the end of too great crueltie: What Jotham said it is now come to passe; Vengeance at last comes, though vvith a slo pace. 7. TOLAH. Crimsin. O Worthy Tolah, no war in thy time Defil'd the land with crueltie or crime: GOD who the portion to all Princes measures,
Made him on smooth surges of seas of pleasures To saile: He with meeknesse and mildnesse rather Then with rigour did govern as a father. In the Scriptures we clearly learn this far, He was come of the tribe of Issachar: A godly Judge, he ruled in GODS fear, He judged Isra'l three and twentie year: On Ephraim Mount they buried Tolah, Where men had laid the corps of Joshua. The Use. Happie is he who dies with a good name, Though volumes be not written of his fame. 8.. JAIR. Shining, enlightned. BEhold heer Jair, whose vertues divine Do sparkle bright, and gloriously shine; A Gileadite, he ruled in GODS fear The holy people twentie and two year. This worthy man of children had no lack, For thirtie sons him follow'd at the back: He thirtie cities, as GODS word doth say, Had, Havoth-Jair cald unto this day: At last, after his dayes were spent and gone, This worthy Judge was buried in Camon.
The Use. Heer leare how Jovah, in his great mercie, Can blesse a man with great posteritie. 9. JEPHTE. From patach vvhich signifieth, to open or dravv a Svvord. THis Jephte was a mgihty man of war, Drawing of swords in his name he doth be Old Gilead this stout Jephte begot Unlawfully, upon a vile harlot. When Gileads sons began for to grow stout, They (hating Jephte) anone thrust him out. Depart from us, said they, now speedily, A harlots son, no heritage for thee. Then Jephte from his cruell brethren fled, And went in haste into the land of Tob. In this time Ammon did molest Isra'l, For this cause for stout Jephte they did call. Now Jephte said, Ye seek me in distresse, While ye suffer for your great wickednesse. Behold, said they, We come again to thee, That 'gainst Ammon thou may our captain be. If, said Jephte, ye will make me your head, Unto battel gladly will I proceed.
So be't, said they, If otherwise we meane, The great JOVAH be witnesse us betweene. Then Jephte sent messengers with command, To tell Ammon not to destroy his land: But after speaches past both to and fro, To battel both parties resolv'd to go, Then GODS Sprite came on good Jephte quickly, Reveng'd on Ammon he resolv'd to be. If, GOD, said he, the victory will allow Against Ammon, I make a solemn vow, If to my house I shall return in peace, What first me meets shall be a sacrifice: Or if not, I most gladly do accord To consecrate it wholly to the LORD. This said, Jephte went foreward in great might Against the children of Ammon to fight: To him that day the LORD great favour shew, His foes with force he stoutly overthrew. While he returned from the victory, His daughter dear with timbrels merrily Came to meet him; to this she was not slow. Alas my daughter, thou hast brought me low Said good Jephte, I can not now go back, I must perform the vow which I did make. My father dear, said she, Now do to me What thou hast vow'd perform to the most Hie; Only two moneths suffer me alone,
That I may my virginitie bemone. What she requir'd her father did allow, When that was done he performed his vow; Not that he slew her (as some think falsly,) But to GODS service her virginitie Did consecrate, How can men thus surmise, That good Jephte made such a sacrifice? Paul in his writs unto the Hebrews saith, He was a man renowned for his faith: How could he make a sacrifice divine, If he at first had met a dog or swine? Durst a man, who was both faithfull and good, Bring to GOD that which chewed not the cud? And now at last, mens rashnesse to arreist, If she was slain, tell me, who was the Priest? In Jephte this I chiefly disallow, That with Alas he did perform his vow. After this battel, Ephraim in ire Against Jephte with forces did conspire; But Jephte stout, with great numbers of men In great haste took the passage of Jordan: There Ephraim who did the war denounce, By Shibboleth, which they could not pronounce, In the battel their foes were knowne to be, Sibboleth then made many men to die. In that battell the cause of greefe and woe, Ephraim there lost thousands fourtie two.
Then faithfull Jephte at the last deceased, After he had Gods Isra'l six yeares judged, The Use. Heere vve may learne that bastards may get grace, In faiths faire roll this Jephte had a place. 10 IBSAN. The father of a buckler. AFter Jephte IBSAN of Bethlehem, Was judge; this man had threescore of children. At last he died, as in Scripture appeares, When he Israel had judged seven yeares. The Use. Happie is he who dies with a good name, Though volumes be not written of his fame. 11 ELON. Strength courag. THen came ELON from the ZEBULONITS, Who ten yeers well judged the Israelits.
The Use. Happie is he who dies with a good name, Though volumes be not vvritten of his fame. 12 ABDON. Worke service. AFter ELON ABDON sonne of HILLEL, Eight yeers did judge the tribs of Israel, The Use. Happie is he who dies with a good name, Though volumes be not written of his fame. 13 SAMSON. Little sunne. AFter Israels darknesse fourty yeers, In great bondage this little Sunne appeares: He was son of MANOAH a Danite, A great comfort for the poore Isralite; Before his birth his mother was barran, In griefe without the comfort of children: At last to her an Angel did appeare, Who said to her, Thou shalt conceive and beare A sonne, no rasor shall come on his head,
For he shall be a Nazarite indeed; A man for GOD, set a-part from the womb, Who Isra'ls foes shall send unto their tomb. Then the woman said to her husband, See A man of GOD hath appeared to me: He seem'd to me a man of noble fame, Most angel-like, he told me not his name: He said unto me when he did appear, Behold a son thou shalt conceive and bear; No rasor shall at all come on his head, For he shall be a Nazarite indeed. LORD, said Manoah, Let the man of GOD Now come, and tell us what with this young lad We have to do, for we are ignorant, That we may follow thy commandement. The LORD him heard, the Angel came anone, And told them both all that was to be done. Then Man'oah said, I pray thee now tary, Till we in haste prepare a kid for thee. I am a sprite, said he, I eat no bread, With sacrifice unto the LORD proceed. What is thy name? said Manoah, tell me: It is secret, said he, now let it be. When he heard thus the Angel him forbid, A meat-offring he offred for a kid Unto the LORD; as the sacred story Tels us, the Angel did most wondrously:
Behold th'angel who had the secret name, Of the offring ascended in the flame. Alas, said he, unto his worthy wife, We have seen GOD, we shall both losse the life. No, not, said she, we need not for to fear, Because GODS Angel to us did appear: If to kill us this had been his earand, He had disdain'd the offring in our hand. Then young Samson the Sprite of GOD began At times to move in the great camp of Dan; At last he did require a Philistine For wife, which he at Timnah had new seen: His parents to this could not well accord, For they knew not that it was of the LORD; While he to Timnah went, a beast did roar, As though he would the young Samson devore; But he anone him pulling by the beard, Rent him, as though he would have rent a kid. The LORD did this who made the sea and land, For young Samson had nothing in his hand. Returning after to his wife he sees In the dead Lion a fair swarm of bees; The honey comb most sweet he took to eat, For this to him (in mister) was for meat. When Philistines his feast began to taste, Then he this riddle did propone in haste, Out of the eater, said he, came there meat,
Out of the strong came that which was most sweet. Seven dayes they had at this riddle to guesse, But the meaning thereof could not expresse: With furie great they were puft up in rage, Because they saw they were to losse their pledge Of thirtie shirts, and thirtie garments dear, These great charges they had not will to bear. Then said they all unto strong Samsons wife, If we these cloaths losse, thou shalt losse the life: Entise him soone, the doubt try by request, Why should we losse so much at his fair feast? Then did she presse him by day and by night, Untill he had declar'd his riddle right. Then said these men, in words not to be long, Sweet is the honey, and the lion strong. Then said he, With my heifer have ye plow'd, Who hath unto you my dark riddle shew'd Then GODS good Sprite this strong man came upon, Who in his strength went down to Askelon; Thirty Philistins he kild in that place, Whose garments pay'd for his riddels disgrace. Then his fair wife her father took him fro, And gave her to his friend who was his fo. Then he bethinking how he might revenge This wrong, he did three hundred foxes range, Knut tail to tail, with a burning fire-brand,
Which did consume the cornes upon the land. When all was known, the Philistins in ire Burnt the Timnite, and Samsons wife with fire, This is no mends, yet aveng'd will I be, Said Samson, I will smite them hip and thigh. The Philistins (who did like lions ramp) In JUDAH LEHI soon did pitch their camp. What means this war? to them Judah did say; To binde Samson with ropes and thongs, said they Then of Judah went three thousand anone To Etams top, where was the strong Samson: To him they said, What hast thou brought to passe We all will smart for this thy great trespasse. To these men I have done no wrong, said he, I did to them as they have done to me. We will thee binde, said they, with cords and bands: After, we will put thee into their hands. Swear to me, said he, by GOD that made all, That ye your selves will not upon me fall. Truely, said they, thy blood we must not spill, Thou needs not fear that Judahs men thee kill: But unto this we with one voice accord, To binde thine hands fast with these two new coar Then when his foes saw him bound at Lehi, For joy they cry'd, and shouted mightily. Upon him then came a Sprite from the LORD,
With great power hee brake both bands and coards: When he himself did thus shake in his ire, His bands became like flaxe burnt in the fire. When GOD had this great work thus brought to passe, Strong Samson found the jaw-bone of an asse: No sword he had, no other weapons then With that asse-bone he slew a thousand men: After this battel sore troubled with thirst, Upon his eyes he felt of death the mist: Thou hast me helped greatly, LORD, said he, Oh suffer not me now for thirst to die: Then GOD did cleave of the jaw the hollow, From this bone soone great waters out did flow; Because that bone by GOD was made a Well, Samson that place Enhakore did call. The Word signifieth, the Well of him that called or cryed. SAMSON in Gaza went to an harlot, His foes it heard, and they in anger hote, Laid wait for him in their great strength & might, Resolv'd they were to kill him in that night: But he the gates of their Gaza did take, With the two posts and barre upon his back:
He thence them cari'd to fair Hebron hill, Thus the Gazits could not strong Samson kill. Againe Samson in Sorek land did love Delilah fair, who dayly would him move With her fair words, decit and flattery, To tell wherein his greatest strength did ly; First withs, then coards, then with the web and To her such answers thus he did begin; But at the last (for which he suffred smart) He unto her revealed all his heart: A Nazarite, said he, from my youth-head I have been; no rasor upon mine head Hath come; If any cut mine hair from me, Like other men I surely weak shall be. When she saw that Samson had thus reveal'd, That which from her he had so long conceal'd, The Philistins she spake, and cald apart; Come now, said she, for I know all his heart. Then these proud lords came up in a great band And brought to her much money in their hand. Then she him made upon her knees to sleep, And from his head his seven locks she did swee Up, up, said she, arise Samson quickly, Behold the strong Philistins be on thee. I will arise, said Samson, and me shake As heretofore, of strength I have no lake. But, Oh, Samson this did not understand,
That GOD the LORD had left him in their hand. Then these proud men (bitter like angrie bees) Took poor Samson, and put out both his eyes; With hard fetters of brasse they did him bind In a prison, as horse they made him grind. Soon after that his hair began to spring, These lords him brought to Dagons house their king. Dagon, said they, the god of sea and land Hath now inclosed Samson in our hand: Then all the people greatly did rejoice, And praised Dagon with a joyfull voice: Then all merry and glad they did exhort To call for Samson for to make them sport. When he was come; Lad, take me by the hand, Said he, Lead me where the pillar doth stand, Upon the which the house is founded sure, That I thereon may lean my body poor. The house was full, three thousand on the roofe, To see Samson of sporting give a proofe Then Samson pray'd unto the Lord with cryes, Now grant me, Lord, a revenge for mine eyes: Twixt the pillars (with his left hand and right) He pull'd them downe, by great JEHOVAHS might: Such was the end of his dayes full of strife, At death he slew mo then he slew in life.
The Use. Heere wee may learne; yea, clearely wee may se That cruell men are met with crueltie: Heere is a lesson for to guide our life, Not to reveale great secrets to a wife. 14 MICAH. Who is like the Lord. THe word of God most clearely doth reveale How MICAH did his mothers silver steele; Yea, which was worse, and did merite the rods Of it he made graven and molten gods: A Teraphim he had, and an Ephod, And so became Apostate from his God, A wandring Levite he hir'd for his Priest, His house for idols he made like a beast. Now I know well that God will do me good, Said MICAH, who was most foolish and rude: The LORD will lodge both in mine house and breast Because I have a Levite for my Priest: In these dayes (which was a most fearefull thing) n all Isra'l was neither judge nor King. he DANITS then seeking inheritance,
Came to the house of this Micah, by chance; His Levite and his silver gods they tooke: When this was done MICAH began to looke, To run, and cry aloud after the men, In number five come from the tribe of DAN. What aileth thee? said they; What and wherefore? My gods, said he, are stoll'n, what have I more? Let not thy voice now be heard us among, Said they, lest ill fellows upon thee throng; It may fall out that if we come to strife Both thou and thine this day may losse the life: Thus foolish MICAH, Priest, and gods that day Did losse; and so the DANITS went their way. The Use. Let all men learne in Gods excellent schools Who worship idols are most brutish fooles. Of the Levite and his Concubine. IN these dayes, (which was a most feareful thing) In all Isra'l was neither Judge nor King: In these ill dayes what man could it endure? A Levite had a wife that play'd the whoore. She not fearing the terrours of JOVAH, Ranne to her Father dwelling in JVDAH:
Foure whole moneths with him she did rema Her husband went to bring her back againe: There he with his father in law abode Where chearefully he was most welcomed: From day to day he sought to turne againe, But by his father was urg'd to remaine: At last the fift day (after all was done) Hee went away well neere the afternoone: Then parted he with his wife and servant, They neere to JEBVS, found the day far spen The servant said, In JEBUS let us lodge, The Levite said, To do such things I grudge; We will not turne aside to that citie, We will not lodge with these that strangers be We will passe over unto GIBEAH, For there we trust is the fear of JOVAH. When unto GI'BAH they were thus n come The Sunne in his Horizon was gone downe: Then he went in, and sat downe in a streete, But no man there with kindnesse did him gree At last an old man (lifting up his eye) Come from the field, did there perceive t three. Whence come ye? said he, Whether will yee We goe, said they, the house of God unto From BETHLEHEM; we have both bread  wine,
If thou us lodge, we shall take none of thine. Then said that old man, Peace be now with thee, Welcome, thy want shall all lie upon me: As they were eating with their hearts merrie, Behold the vile villaines of that city Swarm'd in numbers, of most vile rogues a rout, The old mans house they compassed about: Bring forth the man that came into thine house, Cry'd they, of him we will make carnall use: This vice so vile with words I can not name, Behold in Isra'l of SODOM the shame. The old man said unto them most gravely, I pray you cease, oh cease from this folly; This man is come under my house shadow, Such great vilenesse the Lord cannot allow: His wife, my daughter, (if so be it must) Abuse, with man abhorre to spend your lust. But for all this these men could not forbeare, Raging in lust, such words they would not hear. When this was done, and all remeed was past, The Levite brought to them his wife at last: These vile villains not trembling at Gods sight, In their mad lust abus'd her all the night. When darknesse past, the cleare spring of the day Appear'd, then these vile villains went away, Then she whom they had handled like a whoore In the dawning fell downe dead at the doore:
At last the man op'ning the doore, behold Her fall'n downe dead, her hands on the thshold, Then to her thus lying her Lord did say, Up up, let us make ready for the way. While he looked that she should rise with spe Behold his wife upon the threshold dead: When the man saw what then was come to pa He tooke the corps and laid it on his asse: When he her brought unto his house at home, He with a knife cut her through flesh and bon That the dead parts the wrong might clearly te Twelve parts hee made and sent through ISRAEL: They that this saw, said, A sinne of this kinde We have not seene, advise and speake your min Then all the land (for this great sin much grieve From end to end at MISPEH were conveened In number clearly (set downe by GODS pen) They there were foure hundred thousand fo men: There the Levite, in anguish and distresse, At their desire declard the wickednesse. This heard, they all with one consent began To go to work, to arise as one man: Then said they all (kindled with anger hot) To the battell we will go up by lot
Against vile Gib'ah, to fight bitterly, That they may smart for their unheard folly. First through Benjamin speedy posts they sent, That Gib'ahs men might suffer for their rent: We seeke no more but when ye heare us then, Ye send to us these vile and wicked men: But Benjamin in a most foolish rage, With mouth awry scorned the whole message; Twentie six thousand they in armour bright Prepar'd in Battell 'gainst Isra'l to fight: From Gibeah in that armie were then Expert in war seven hundred chosen men; Left handed strong who to fight would not spare They with their sling stones well could hit an haire: Against all these the Israelites had then In readinesse foure hundred thousand men: They went to GOD first to seeke his counsell, To know which of them first should give Battell, To them this answere came from great JOVAH, Unto the Battell first shall go Judah: Then Israel right stoutly did begin, To go to battell against Benjamin; And they againe (all in armour full bright) Prepar'd them selves against Isra'l to fight, Brave warriours all glistring with harnesse, Threw downe that day Isra'l with great distresse: Twentie six thousand joined with some few
Unto Isra'l twentie two thousand slew. To GOD againe they went to seek counsell If they should give to Benjamin battell. Go up, said GOD, your anger to fulfill Go up, why not? if so it be your will. The second day came Israel to fight Against Benjamin, but were put to flight: Of that great armie of Isral's children Destroyed down were eighteene thousand men. Then Israel perceiving at the last Great numbers nought, they ran to GOD by fas They weeped sore and powred out their heart, Then GOD was moved for to take their part: Up, up, said God to war I you command To morrow I will put them in your hand. On the third day Israel did begin A bloody battell against Benjamin At the first meeting (which was with furie) Of Isral's brave men were then slaine thirtie. Then Benjamin uplifting his proud crist, Cri'd they are smitten down as at the first: Then Israel by GOD himself made wise, Said, Let us flie and draw them to high wayes; At Baal Tamar, they all in good array, Prepar'd themselves to fight stoutly that day; Liers in wait came out of hole and bore, Ten thousand chosen made the battell sore;
The LORD Captaine this great host did command, Therefore Benjamin that day could not stand: Before, behinde Israel did them hew, Twentie five thousand and five score they slew. The Use. See what is lust, consider how therefore Were slaine sixtie, five thousand, and five score: Let men also (when they their armies send) Heere learne not on great numbers to depend. THE GARDEN OF ZION. RUTH. Watered. WIth famine prest these persons went anone, Elimelech Naomi with Mahlon, And Chilion their sons from Bethlehem. To MOAB land that they might their remaine,
ELIMELECH Naomis best beloved At last by pale death was from her removed: Then her two sons their hearts for to rejoice, Of RUTH and ORPAH made their onely chois But in their mariage this was a great spot, These women were from the incest of Lot: For Moab was (against all divine order) His mothers sonne and also his owne brother: After ten yeares in mariage were past, These two young men both died at the last: Then poore Naomi deliv'red from dread, Hearing how God had given to Isra'l bread, Said to Orpah, and Ruth her daughters dear, Goe to your owne, for I must hence retire: The Lord in mercy deale with you kindlie, As ye have dealt with the dead and with me: The Lord in mercy work all to your best, That with your husbands each of you finde rest; Then kissing them, they weeped bitterlie, They said surely we will returne with thee: Naomi said, My daughters turne again, For now with me ye can no more remaine. The Lord mo sons on me doth not allow, Which I for husbands might give unto you: Then all did weepe, then Orpah tooke her le But to NAOMI RUTHS heart fast did cleave: Not so Naomi said, Behold Orpah,
Best thou returne with thy sister in law: Intreat me not, said Ruth, I pray humblie For to returne from following after thee: Both going, lodging, people, and our God Shall all be one; with thee mine whole abode I mind to make; to live and die indeed With thee I minde, and als to be buri'd: From thee I will by no meanes now depart, Nothing but death on earth shall us two part. When she her saw so stedfastly persist, She said to Ruth to speake more I desist: Then they two went with little meanes with them Unto her city called BETHLEHEM: Unto her many came where she abade Is this Naomi? each to other said. No more that name, said she, belongs to me, Call me Marah, because God bitterlie Hath dealt with me, the LORD hath more and more Against me wrought and hath afflicted sore: Beside her dwelt Booz a wealthie man, A neere and deare friend of her dead husband: The barley harv'st was, Ruth desired then, In great mister some ears of corne to gleane. She went to fields, God did direct her chose, She came unto the reaper of Booz:
When Booz knew Ruth the Moabitesse, His melting heart did pitie her distresse: Then did Booz speake friendly to her heart, See from this field that thou do not depart: When thou gleanest abide neere the women, Concerning thee I shall direct the men That they thee touch not; when thou art a thirst, Go to the vessels, and take of the best: After that Ruth had such great fovour found, She bowed humbly even unto the ground, Saying thou art a rich man high in place, And  a stranger in thine eyes finde grace. Then Booz said, It hath been shown to me, How kind thou hast beene unto Naomi: The LORD of love who doth all things remark, Reward thee full and recompence thy worke; Then loving Booz, in things of all sort, Left no thing undoone that might Ruth comfort: Both meet and drink she got, while she did gleane, Booz handfulls the reapers did ordaine To leave of purpose, that for coming foorth Shee might returne home with some thing of worth; When she had eaten, she put up a part, Which shee brought home with a most loving heart
Unto Naomi, who blest the most Hie Who had made her to finde such charitie: Then said Naomi, I will do my best, Eor thee my daughter to seeke out a rest: I trust my hope shall take some good effect, Wash thee therefore and do as I direct: Though thou be Ruth a silly widow poor, Feare not to go unto his threshing floore: When he hath ended both to drinke and eat; Marke where he lyes, last uncover his feet; Waite well thy time, and after lay thee downe, And he will tell thee what is to be done: As Naomi her daughter had informed, All was by Ruth so in due time performed. Then Booz to bed with a merry heart Went, after Ruth past softly to her part: She well resolv'd, not fearing hurt or scorne, Lay down with Booz neere an heap of corne: At midnight houre when his first sleep did passe, He was afraid, and wondred who it was: Who can this be? Who art thou, then he said, I am said she even Ruth thine owne hand maid, I come to thee in all humilitie My neere kinsman now spread thy skirt on me; Then Booz said, the Lord his blessing send To thee whose kindnesse in the latter end To me an old man now doth most appeare,
Courage daughter thou need'st no thing to feare▪ Thy praise is high above the common pitch, Who seeks not young men whether poore or rich And now, daughter, see what thou most desires For I will doe each thing that thou requires: In this city i'ts known to every man That thou art a good and vertuous woman: The Lord he knowes thou art to me full deare, But know this, there is a kinsman more neere; If he refuse and the neere match forsake, I promise heere to wife I will thee take. When Booz after did that man require, His answere was, that match I not desire Then Booz having ended all the strife Made choise of Ruth for to remaine his wife: A little after all these things were done, God blessed Ruth who bare to him a sonne: His name OBED, to many joy did bring, He was grand father to David the King. The Use. Heere learne that Christ, who of all men w best, Did come of Ruth who was from Lots incest: Heere learne how God exalts the basest things, From this poore gleaner did spring many King▪
THE GARDEN OF ZION. The Bookes of Samuel. ELKANAH. The Lord is jealous. THere was a man of faire mount Ephraim, Whom Scripture calleth Elkanah by name: His Hebrew name clearely doth signifie, For some great thing JEHOVAHS jealousie: Two wives he had Peninah and Hannah, Yeerely he went to worship JEHOVAH In Shilo, where the Arke of GOD did stand, For so to do the LORD did them command; Peninnah proud because of her children Provok'd Hannah, because she was barren: To her she was even like a trapping net,
Seeking alwayes to make her heart to fret. While her husband perceiv'd her grief and sma With these good wordes he did comfort her he Why weepest thou for want of fair children? I to thee shall be better then sons ten: Then Hannah in great bitternesse of heart Went to Shiloh, from GOD to ease her smart; In her prayer she weeped bitterly; She vow'd this vow unto the LORD most hie; O LORD of Hoasts, if thou now wilt indeed Looke on the grief of me thy poor handmaid, If thou wilt give to thy servant a Son, He shall be thine the rasor shall not come Upon his head; he all his dayes shall be A faithfull servant consecrate to thee; While she continued in prayers divine Priest Eli thought she had beene after wine: How long said Eli wilt thou drunken be? Arise, arise, and put thy wine from thee: My LORD, said she, do not so of me think, I am not drunk with wine nor such strong drin In my great grief, in anguish with great smart Before the LORD, I have powr'd out my hear Let not, my LORD, this thought in thy heart fa That thy handmaid is one of Belial: From GOD I have been seeking some reliefe, Who hath an eye to my complaint and grief.
Then Eli said with great affection, The great GOD grant thee thy petition: When this was said the woman went her way, She eat her meat, her face was fill'd with joy: The son she sought from great GOD eternell, From her asking was called Samuel: This son her chear'd against Peninnahs strife Unto the Lord, she lent him all his life. The Use. Let us learne heere our vaine pride to represse, And not to grieve these that are in distresse. Let us learne heere to judge in charitie, Of others plungd in great adversitie. Let us learne heere when ought doth us dismay, To run to God and humbly him to pray. The Song of Hannah. MY heart rejoiceth in the Lord, my horn exalt did he: My mouth is greatly now inlarg'd, for his goodnesse to me:
2 There is none holy as the Lord, there is none beside thee: There is no rock that is like God, our God the Lord most hie. 3 Talke no more proudly as ye do, speake not with arrogance; For all our deeds the Lord doth weigh, in his sacred ballance. 4 The strong bowes of the mighty men are broken all at length; And they that stumbled now, are girt with force and divine strength. 5 They that were full in plentie have hir'd out themselves for bread: And they that were in great distresse, from God have found remeed. 6 The Lord by his strong arme doth kill, and he also doth save: He lifteth up, he bringeth downe unto the stinking grave. 7 By his power he doth make poore, and also maketh rich;
He bringeth low, and raiseth up unto a certaine pitch. 8 He bringeth up out of the dust the poore from the dunghill, To Princes seats; the strong pillars of earth he makes stand still. 9 He will keepe the feet of his saints, the wicked in darknesse Shall all bee silent, none by strength shall prevaile more or lesse. 10 These fooles (who do reject the Lord) shall soone be broke to pieces; With thunders shall he trouble them, though they be great as Princes. and strength give to his King: His horne shall fill with holy oyle, and make him long to reigne. 15. ELI. My God. IN Isra'l Judge and Priest was old ELI; My God his Hebrew name doth signifie:
He had two sons Hophni and Phineas, Who did against the Lord greatly trespasse; With greede and whooredome, a most filthie vic They made all men contemne Gods sacrifice. Their father Eli in his words too smooth, Preferr'd to God his sons in his reproof: Therefore the Lord resolv'd them all to kill; By fall, in Battell, he their blood did spill: For Elis fault the Lord gave him this check, He from his seat did fall and breake his neck: As for his sons (who in vice did excell) They lost their life in a bloody battell. The Use. By Father Eli let all fathers heere, Learne not to love too much their children dear▪ Let Levits learne heere not to do or thinke That which may make Gods sacrifice to stinke. 16 SAMUEL Asked of God. Here is a Saint the, Son of good Hannah, Asked of God the most high Jehovah: He was a man of a most holy heart, He from the womb for God was set apart: When he was young, and Elis eyes were dim
The Lord in Silo did appeare to him: Foure times he cried unto him Samuel, Before he knew that it was th' Eternall: To him the Lord there great plagues did reveale, Against Eli which he did not conceale. My plagues, said God, I will upon him spend, When I begin I als will make an end: Him will I judge, and his two sons most vile, Against his house I will my wrath reveale: After all this young Samuel went to bed, Fearing to tell t' ELI what God had said: The morning come, said Eli to Samuel, What God hath said see that thou now me tell; But if thou faine if that thou doe not so, God so to thee doe, and much more also. Then good Samuel told to him every whit, Nothing from ELI did he keep secret. When this old Eli clearely understood, It is the Lord said, he, what seemes him good Now let him do against both me and mine, Against his sentence I will not repine, What SAMUEL said to ELI, more or lesse, Upon ELI it shortly came to passe. Then it was showne clearly by th' Eternel That Samuel was for to judge Israel. The proud Philistins in his time came out Against Isra'l; he put them to the rout:
He cri'd to God, and God by thunder heard, The Philistins under their feet he troad; To shew his thanks, to tell what God had done, In the same place he wisely set a stone; A stone of help, for to declare Gods fame Eben-Ezer in Hebrew was its name. In his old age, when he was full of dayes, His bribing sons did not walk in his wayes: Then all the people greeved with this thing, Cri'd with one voice, Now let us have a King; For now Samuel is old, and full of dayes, His bribidg sons doe not walk in his wayes; Then God directed SAMUEL how to say, That Isra'l had rejected God that day. Go to, go to, hearken unto their voice, Give them a King according to their choice; Be plaine with them, and hide from them n thing, Shew them clearely the manner of the King; To war, to till, to reape, in every point Of hard service your sons he will appoint; Of your daughters, who walk with lofty look He will make Bakes and vile sluttish cooks; Your fields and yards, which are the most ple¦sant, He will take and give to his owne servants: The tenth of your sheep and seed he will crave,
Your stout young men to his worke will hee have: In all this bondage ye shall howl and say, Alas; but God shall not you hear that day: But all this speach to them no change could bring No not, said they but we will have a King, As this people rebelliously would have A King, so GOD a King unto them gave. When this was done Samuel did testifie, Before all ISRA'L his integritie. Now I am old, said he, see my gray head, I have been with you from my young childhood; Now heere I am, I gladly do accord, Witnesse against me heere before the LORD: Be plaine I pray you, and now hide no thing, For heere we are in presence of the King: Whose Oxe? whose Asse have I by wrong pos∣sessed? By violence whom have I once oppressed? What bribe tooke I therewith to blinde mine eye? If it be so, now let you testifie: Then said they all (as they well understood) We know nothing in thee but what is good: No man we know hath beene opprest by thee, No bribe was able for to blinde thine eye: God be witnesse, said he, and understand,
That now ye have not found ought in mine hand▪ After this said, he did them terrifie With fearfull thunders, piercing through the skie: The people then to him (quakeing) did say, We have sinned, to JOVAH for us pray. Fear not, said he, but comfort to you take, For his people the LORD will not forsake: If ye cry to him, he will hear your voice, For he of you hath onely made his choice; As for me I will not leave off to pray For you; I will als teach you the good way: Onely take heed, and serve the Lord with fear, So ye his goodnesse shall both see and hear: But if, ye carelesse, do the wicked thing, Ye shall be consum'd, both ye, and your king: After SAMUEL (though he was old and gray) The proud King Agag in Gilgal did slay: He was a man faithfull in every point, Before his death two Kings he did anoint. The Use. Let Judges learne by Samuels historie, To take good heed that no bribe blinde their eye.
THE GARDEN OF ZION. The Kings. SAUL. Seeking. THis Son of KIS from seeking hath his name, His life with vice he stain'd, his end with shame: When he began his calling was but base, Before his Crowne he sought his fathers Asse; When at the first from the stuffe he came out, Then the people with their voice made a shout; The wordes they said in their lovely shouting, Were, that the Lord would safely keep the King: About this time Nahash the Ammonite Against Jabesh made war with great despite;
Then Iabesh said, Spare us, and let us be, A Covenant we will now make with thee; But cruell Nahash burning in a rage, By no fair words could his great wrath asswage, No friends, no friends, said he, now will we be, Except we first now thrust out your right eye: Seven dayes they sought an answere for to give They sent to Saul, that he might them relieve. Then Saul armed with companies out three Threw Ammon downe with a great victorie: Saul by this valour was confirmed King, Then all the people desir'd him to reigne: When he was King, even in his second yeere, The Philistines with forces did appeare; They of Charets strong thirtie thousand were, Six thousand foot also prepar'd for war: But Israel, which was cause of great fear, Disarmed was without both Sword and Spear: The Philistines triumphing them above, Did craftily from them all Smiths remove: Yet for the Forks, Axe, Coulters, Goads, this while To sharpen them the Hebrews had a file: When Saul this saw, he greatly was afraid, In caves and rocks the people did them hide: Then Saul, in fear not waiting on Samuel, The seventh day off'red to GOD in Gilgal.
Then Samuel angry with his foolish haste, Made both his eares to tingle with this blast, Thou hast rebell'd, thou hast done foolishlie, Thy Kingdome no more shall abide with thee: Then Jonathan went after secretly, Between Bozez and Seneh, two rocks hie; To his servant he said, Let us pursue, God can us save by many or by few: Before we go, by this we will them try, If while they see us they shall say, Tary, Then will we stand; but if their words be so, Come up to us, untill them will we go. They said, Come up, and that by way of mock, Whē this was heard they both did climb the rock: In that conflict, with Philistins children, Stout Jonathan did there slay twentie men: Terrours from GOD his foes hearts made to shake All th' Hoast trembled, the very earth did quake; The LORD in armes glist'ring did fight that day, He made his foes like snow to melt away; The LORD of Hoasts, by his great power and might, Made these his foes one 'gainst another fight. When th' Isralits of this mercy heard tell, From holes and bores they rushed to Battell: These who before for fear themselves did hide, Stoutly their foes did beat both back and side;
They fought like Lions but anone a jar, A fasting oath the victory did mar; They durst not eat, and therefore faint and few, They could not throughly their strong foes pursue; While Isra'l thus did faint for fault of meat Jonathan of a hony comb did eat: Assoone as he had taste of that honie, His sprite reviv'd, enlightned was his eye: What he did then it was by ignorance, For he knew not his fathers ordinance: But when the matter he did understand, He said, My father hath troubled the land; For want of meat mens hearts so weakened be, That they can not pursue the victorie. Still fight, said Saul, and do all that ye can, Spoile and destroy, of them leave not a man; But first to GOD to seeke response they went, To see what should be his sacred intent; But God in wrath, for ought that they could say, Would not make answere to Isra'l that day. Go to, said Saul, there is some man of sin; By Divine lot, I trust I shall him finde: Give perfect lot, said Saul to GOD, I pray, That we may see by what great sin this day Thou hast beene griev'd, though it my Son should bee,
Stout Jonathan, he shall now surely die. Then curiously Saul seeking out this spot, Upon Jonathan fell the Divine lot Tell, tell, said Saul, tell me what thou hast done, Prepare for death, for thee mercy is none: Alas, said he, I hungry wanting meat, In a faire wood of hony combs did eat; That which I did was done ignorantlie, Behold Jonathan must now surely die: No more, said Saul, thou hast broken the oath Of great JOVAH, prepare thy self for death: What? said Isra'l, shall stout Jonathan die? Who hath for GOD now fought so valiantly? As God liveth, who ever lives indeed, No thing shall aile the least haire of his head. Thus the people walking in the right way Good Jonathan they did rescue that day. Then unto Saul went godly Samuel. To him from GOD this message did he tell: Remember now how Amalek laid wait For Isra'l by the way in his great strait; Now go and smite, and utterly destroy Beast, Man and Maid, unto the suckling Boy, When this was said, King Saul with all his might Against Aamalek stoutly went to fight: He slew these men, and tooke Captive the King, With him best beasts he sav'd alive; which thing Acted by him 'gainst Gods Commandement,
The faire kingdome of Isra'l from him rent; Then Samuel said, Where is Agag the King See ye in haste that Tyran to me bring: When he was come he hew'd in pieces all Agag the King before GOD in Gilgal. After this sin the LORD to Samuel said Go and anoint for King the herd David: Because for Isra'l he ventur'd his life Against Goliah, he got for his wife Michal Sauls daughter; that great victorie Brede in Sauls breast displeasure and envie: This soulesse Saul, by Doegs villenie, Was mov'd to slay at Nob with crueltie Fourescore and five servants of the great GOD, Who for armour had but linnen EPHOD, Because to David, in hunger and need, They had vouchsav'd some peece of GODS shew-bread: At divers times Saul fill'd with rage and strife, Hunted David like a flea for his life; Whiles like a Lion, cruel he did roar, Enrag'd at DAVID whiles like a wild boar: He did him hunt most like a bloody hound. Who cannot rest untill his prey be found: But God at last, to make of him an end, A great armie of Philistins did send: The Philistins at Shunem were gath'red,
Isra'ls armie in Gilboah pitched: When Saul that hoast of Philistins did see, He trembled all, his heart did quake greatly: Then he in feare unto the Lord did cry, But God to him no answere would reply, Neither by dreames, by URIM, or Prophet, When Saul saw this, his heart within did fret, If God will not, the Divell I will desire, To help, said he, of him I will enquire. There is a witch which doth at Endor dwell, Said they, She can all secrets to thee tell. Then Saul went to that wicked wife by night, Desiring her to bring to him in sight Whom he should name, who ever was the man, Then unto him thus answerd the woman Right well thou knowst no sprit familiar Is now approv'd; make not for me a snare: As God liveth, said Saul, now or this thing Thou shalt not smart: Tell mee whom I shall bring. Up unto thee, said she, now to me tell; Bring up to me, said he, old dead Samuel: When the woman perceived this dead man Arise from grave, to tremble she began; She said to Saul, Thou hast deceived me, That thou art Saul I know now certainly: Feare not, said Saul, no ill to thee I meane, Declare me plainely all that thou hast seene,
I have, said she, now perceiv'd a strang thing Gods wonderfull from the earth ascending. What is his forme? said Saul, now tell to me, A mantled old man, said she, I now see When the woman these things to Saul did tell He then perceiv'd that it was Samuel: He having all things in such order found, He bow'd himself, and stouped to the ground, Then Samuel said, Why hast thou troubled me? I am, said Saul, distressed heavily; God hath me left and answeres me no more, To seek thy help I am constrain'd therefore. In vaine, said Samuel, comest thou to me, Who can be friend where God is enemie? The Lord at first of thee for King made choise, But (thou stubborne) would not obey his voice: 'Gainst Amalek to do the Lords command, Therefore the Kingdome is rent from thine hand; Thy foes shall fight, thine hoast shall fall and flee Thou and thy sons the morne shall be with me. Then Saul afraid, fell straight way all along Upon the earth, the witch and men among: No strength in him, in him there was no might, For he had fasted both the day and night. When this was done, the witch prepared meat She brought it to him and mov'd him to eat: Behold anone the Philistines armie
Ready to fight, as Isra'l was to flie: The Archers shot, the battell went full sore, The shafts did flee, their rage did more and more Increase; then Saul to his servant did say, Draw out thy sword, and quickly now me slay; Take courage, do, let not this trouble thee, Though thou me spare, yet will I surely die; My feare is, that th'uncircumcised band Come and abuse me vilely with their hand: But the servant (who his Prince fear'd and lov'd) To kill the King by no words could be mov'd. Then Saul with rage and godlesse furie prest, With his own sword did peirce through his own breast. Jonathan, Abinadab, Malchishuah Sauls three sons with Saul fell on Gilboah: The Philistins after finding Saul dead Upon the mount, they cut from him the head: The body of that stout and valiant man They fastned to the strong wall of Bethshan; Among the rest this was the sharpest rod, His armour bright unto their idol god Ashtaroth they brought with great pomp and glory, As though their god had given them this victory. When Jabesh heard what to dead Saul was done, With one consent they all armed right soone,
The bodies of Saul and of Jonathan They pulled downe from the walls of Beth∣shan: To save them sure, with fire they did them burne Seven dayes they fasting for their death di mourne. The Use. This history to all men well may tell, That none shall speed that seeks the divels coun∣sll; He is most sure that God relyes upon, All other things will shrink and sinke anone. Men for a time may their sad hearts solace With sound of harp, which soone will have no place, If Kings with Saul of Gods word make no count, He will them meet upon Gilboah mount: These who care not their lives for to amend, Do often come unto a tragick end: The LORD to each man his owne worke re∣payes, And makes him finde according to his wayes. If men be gracelesse though never so great, God shall anone set others in their seat:
So at the last they shall get shame and losse, When God shall crowne these men whom they did crosse. DAVID. Beloved THE spirit of God begins my heart to move, To sing of David whom he Lord did love: When God him sought to make him Isra'ls King, He was an herd, keeping the ewes with young: Of Jesses sons he was the least and last, As by the story is most manifest: When God his servant Samuel did appoint To goe, and one of Jesses sons annoint; The first he saw was Eliab faire in face, This said Samuel is he who by Gods grace Should be the King; No, not, this shall not be Said God, for God seeth not as men doe see: The outward barck men see of countenance, But Gods bright eye through all the heart doth glance. Abinadab Shammah he would not chuse David he tooke, the rest he did refuse: When he rudie came, the Lord did appoint Samuel with horne of oyle him to annoint: When that was done, Gods spirit came him upon, He hated Saul and left him his alone:
When God from him had his good sprit of grace Remov'd, the divell came quickly in his place; He sore troubled, thus to his men did say Provide a man that cunningly can play: I cannot pray, the divell will not depart, My cheefe comfort must be by Musicks art; A man with harpe to warble let me finde That he the divell may drive out of my minde: Then David came who warbling did his best, The divell departed, then Saul got some rest: After all this the Philistins with boast Against Isra'l came with a mighty host: Among the rest a man of Gath Goliah A champion contemning great Jehovah, Came forth with boasting a most mighty man Whose height was six great cubits with a span: Both up and downe he thus armed did passe With coat of male and with helmet of brasse, Graves on his legs, a target he betweene His shoulders had, his speare was like a beame Of a weever; One with a shield before Went; this strong man all Isra'l troubled sore: He cri'd aloud to all Isra'l that day In vaine set ye your battell in aray; Let one man come and fight me hand to hand What part prevails, they shall the rest command; If ye have hearts or hands I shall soone try,
All Isra'ls host this day I do defy: On all Isra'l thus he did rub disgrace All men did flie, but none durst turne the face, Untill David encourag'd from above, This question to the armie thus did move, What shall be done to him who shall stoutly Kill this vile dogge that doth our God defy? He, then said they, who shall performe this thing, Shall have for wife the daughter of the King: Let no mans heart, said David, now him faile, I will now answere his foolish appeale; I tremble not for all his strength and might The Lord gives heart, I him resolve to fight: Alas, said SAUL, thou greatly hast to feare, Thou art a youth, but he a man of warre: Not, said David, I have experience, I am acquaint with GODS strong assistance; He made me kill a Lion and a Bear, What needs me now this Philistine to fear? Go to, said Saul, GODS blessing go with thee, With coat of male, and helmet armed be Thou must; my Sword also gird by thy side, That thou his stroaks the better may abide: David thus armed all from top to toe, Said with such things to fight I can not goe: Off with his harnesse, his staffe in hand he took, In scrip five smooth stones chosen from the brook,
With sling in hand, in a courage divine He stoutly went to fight the Philistine: Then great Goliah came down to the field, Armed with brasse, before him a great shield was borne; he lofty with a most proud look Disdain'd David, scarce notice of him took; This thing is strange it seems to me uncouth, That in Isra'l there is none but this youth, Faire and ruddy, small token of courage, To fight against a giant full of rage: What art thou lad, what meanest thou to doe, Am I a dog that so thou com'st me to With staves and stones? a dwarfe most unworthie, By all my gods now cursed must thou be: Come hither heard thy stones and staves now yeeld, Thy flesh shall go to the beasts of the field: Thou shalt well know that I am not a beast, I minde to make thy flesh for foules a feast. Words are but winde, said David, I not fe Thy sword or shield, or yet thy brasse or spear; I come to thee, in the most mighty name Of great JOVAH, whom thou hast thought t shame; Cease from thy brags, no more to boast proceed, I shall thee smite and from thee take the head,
Thou shalt soone know, and others shall it tell, That there is a great God in Israel: The Lord God saveth not with spears or swords, I feare nothing, the Battell is the Lords. This said, David with a courage divine, Ran in all haste to meet the Philistine With hand to bag, from thence he tooke a stone, Which pierc'd Goliah through both flesh and bone: The stone with force throwen sanke in his forehead, Then like an Ox to ground he fell down dead. Then David ran with great courage divine, And stood upon that beastly Philistine; Him treading downe with feet he made great speed, With his own sword from him he cut the head: When the Philistins saw their man of might This way mangled, they tooke them to the flight, Thus wanting courage, they both fled and fell, Affrighted much for the men of Isra'l: Last David after Goliah was dead, To Jerusalem brought this monsters head: In the way met him these songs of women, For Sauls one thousand David hath slaine ten: From that day and forward Saul did him eye, Having his heart stuft with rage and envie:
Then Saul devised how to make him fall, A bloody dowry he sought for Michal: An hundred foreskins to David, said he, Of Philistins thou shalt bring unto me; I seeke no more, no more dowrie I crave, Do this, and thou Michal for wife shalt have, By these his wordes which seemed to be faire, He aim'd to draw David into a snaire: But stout David brought in a bloody strife, Two hundred foreskins, and so wan his wife: All these great things fild Sauls heart with envie, Davids applause kindled his jealousie; His wrath like fire in fewell did increase When he did hear of Davids good successe; From secret wrath to open felonnie He went pursuing David cruellie. For this David to Achish in Gath fled, There he as mad the spittle on his beard Let fall; in this most pitifull estate Forced like fools he scrabled on the gate. From thence to Keilah, from Keilah he past To Ziph, where he almost by Saul was lost: At Engedi, where he revenge might have, He spar'd Sauls life, inclosed in a cave: In wildernesse having provision small, He was refused by churlish Nabal: Of all Sauls house the worthy Jonathan
Of Davids comforts onely was the man: David at last fled to the land of Gath, Untill God had puld Saul away by death; His death (which would have made another glad) Made him to sigh and many teares to shed. The lamentations of David for the death of Saul and Jonathan. ALas my heart, said David, doth disdaine These vile villains, who have unto us Slaine The Royall blood, the beautie of Israel; How they are fall'n beware in Gath to tell, Or Askelon; let no man heare your voice, Lest the daughters of Philistins rejoice. O Gilboa, now cursed must thou be, Let neither deaw nor raine fall downe on thee: For there thee shields of men armed with might, Were cast away like men that could not fight. There Saul fell downe upon that cursed soile,
As though he had not been annoint with oyle: Saul and Jonathan, two men most mighty, Your bow and sword returned not empty: Saul and Jonathan in lyfe were lovelie, They in there death would not divided be: The Eagles, Lions, both in strength and flight, Were overcome by these two men of might. O daughters worthy the name of Isra'l; Let floods of teares now bubble out, and fall For worthy Saul, whose purpose was still set, To deck with gold and cloath you with scarlet: It greeves my heart to think, or yet to tell How these mightie did fall in the battell: O Jonathan! I must most weep for thee, For thou a friend and brother was to me. Thy love to me was more then love of men, Yea it did passe the best love of women. Of Davids Reigne. OF Davids reigne clearely I will record; Who was faithfull, beloved of the Lord, When Saul was slaine, and Jonathan was dead, The Crown of Judah was on Davids head In Hebron set: Then he sent to Jabesh,
And thanked them for their loving kindnesse, For taking downe from the walls of Bethshan The bodies of Saul and of Jonathan: In this meane time, which did great troubles bring, Abner annointed Ishbosheth as king: Joab for David was then cheefe captaine Against Abner, who Sauls house did maintaine: In that armie Abner began to say, Let the young men now sport, and rise to play. Content, said Joab, then twelve on each side Arose to fight, each man anothers head Caught in his hand, and then most cruelly His sharp sword thrust in his brothers belly: That day betweene Judah and Israel Was first a skirmish and then a battell; A battell great, last Abner in that fight Was beaten sore, he sav'd himselfe by flight: While he did flie, Asahel did pursue. But Abner straited swift Asahel slew: Though Abners armie was in good aray Good David got the victory that day: Though David was these great troubles among, Yet by Gods arme he dayly was made strong: Stout Abner who did Ishbosheth defend, Unto David revolted in the end; After this man by Joabs treachery
Was slaine, which moved David bitterly To weep and mourne, while of it he did heare, Last he himself mourning follow'd the biere: Alas, said he, with sorrow and great doole, Did valiant Abner die as doth a foole? This great breach now can be made up hardly, The sons of Zerviah be too strong for me. Then Baanah and Rechab did conspire, To slay Ishbosheth for to winne a hire; These bloody men him stobbed on his bed, And after that with haste to Hebron fled, Where David was; they thought to have good speed, When they to him offred Ishbosheths head: As God liveth, said David, who hath me Redeemed out of all adversitie, Yee shall be slaine, by a most fearfull death, I shall you both take away from the earth; Come out young men, cut off their hands and feet, And hang them up, a judgement for them meet. Then all Isra'l with one voice consenting, Appointed David there captaine and King: When he was crown'd of yeers he was thirtie, His reigne continued the space of fourtie; First seven in Judah, after he did beare His faire Scepter for three and thirty yeere: He tooke Jebus, who thought, as they were bold,
That blind and lame might surely keep their hold. When the Philistines heard that he was King, A great armie against him they did bring, At Baal-Perazim he them overthrewe, With great slaughter these Philistins he slew; Their idols there they left their hearts desire, Which David tooke, and after burnt with fire: Yet came againe the Philistins like bees, Whom David smot at the Mulberie trees: When rest was come he prepar'd speedily, To have Gods Ark lodg'd in his owne city; Of good duetie he did neglect no part, He did prepare for it a new made cart: While it was driv'n by Ahio and Uzzah, Great mirth by all was made unto Jovah: Timbrels and harps, cymbals and psalterie With Cornets sweet made pleasant melodie: While all was joy, behold anone a jar, A fearfull breach, which all their mirth did mar; It was both sore and suddain with terrour, For God there smote Uzzah for his errour: The Levits shoulders for to bear the Arke Ordained were, and not an oxen cart: The Levits might, as the Lord did command, It carie, but not touch it with their hand: At this great breach good David sore afraide, Both Arke and Cart in this journey he staide;
In Obed-Edoms house he did it place, Which in three moneths it did fill with grace: When David heard of such grace and goodness To his City he brought it with gladenesse; He was so glad, that in all Isra's sight He danc'd before the Lord with all his might: To be more nimble in his dance to God He was girded with a linnen Ephod; As they came neere unto Davids citie, Michal beheld all with a scorning eye: When all was done, with gladnesse manifold, David returned to blesse his houshold: Him Michal met, and scorningly did say, A beast, a foole, a vaine fellow this day Thou hast thee showne; this was her bitter word, What reck? sad he, it was before the Lord: Thy taunting speach doth not sinke in my minde, The Lord me hath preferr'd to thee and thine: From holy zeal I will not now refile, I purpose yet to be more base and vile: Though thou me scorne, and speake so tauntinglie, By men and maids I shall hence honour'd be. After great warres when David had got rest, To build a house for God he thought it best: In house of Cedar, said he, I now dwell
But onely Curtains are for th' Eternell: What shall I doe? to Nathan did he say, Go to, said Nathan, do without delay; But God to Nathan the next night did tell, That in an house as yet he would not dwell, But afterward should come a man of fame, Who richly should build an house for his name: A son of David, whom he would correct, If he should sin, but not as Saul reject: When David heard Nathan from God thus say, With heart and harp he did both praise and pray. After this done by an courage divine, He boldly went and smote the Philistine; From them he tooke Metheg, and als Ammah, For with him then was the great JEHOVAH. After he had subdued the Philistine, He smote Moab and measur'd with a line: He after that smote the King of Zobah, Being assisted by the great JOVAH. After he strong routed the Syrian hoast, Who came against him with great brags and boast: King Toi hearing of his courage divine, Sent to him Joram with a rich propine: At last he did consecrate to the Lord, Both spoile and presents conquer'd by his sword: To Mephibosheth in his great distresse
For Jonathan he shew him great kindnesse. After all this his servants courtesly, He sent to Hanun comforters to be, For Nahash death; but that fool could not sp He cut their coats, and made their buttocks bare; This als he did more for a greater scoff Of all their beards the half he shaved off: These men for shame could not lift up their fac But on David redounded the disgrace: When King Hanun did ponder well and think He said this fact in Davids nose doth stinke: Before he know, we will make an armie, To overthrow both him and his partie: But David wise did to his captains tell, That all should be prepar'd for the Battell. That day JEHOVAH (who is most mighty) Gave unto David a great victory: Both Syria and Ammon, with their might, That day by Isra'l were put to the flight. David as yet remaining in his rage, 'Gainst Ammon, their towne Rabbah did besie He sent Joab unto it for captaine, But he himself in great ease did remaine At faire Salem; while he did there abide, It came to passe, about the evening tide, He rose from bed, and to the roofe he went, Where he forgot the Lords commandement:
With foolish heart, and with a rolling eye, He did perceive Bathshebahs great beautie: Goe to, said he, you woman to me bring, Make haste, for whats unlawfull for a King? While David thus burning in lust did say, Some vile servant was ready to obey: She brought to bed, by the King was defil'd Anone after she found her self with child: Then in all haste she sent unto the King, To see how he might wisely hide that thing: Behold, thought David, a scandale and blot Will soone break foorth, except I cloake this spot, I see no way to hide from all the land This secret sin, but by her own husband; If he come home, and once but with her ly My sin is hid, hence no man shall it try; Some servant goe, tell to Joab quicklie That he in haste send Uriah to me: Then Joab soone him sent; when he was come, With fair sweet words David made him welcome How Joab did at him he did inquire, If all did goe after their hearts desire; Then David said, I thinke it now most meet, Thou goe to thy house, and there wash thy feet; But these faire words the man not caring for, Abode without, and sleept at the Kings doore: After that David to Usiah said,
Man, with thy wife why didst thou not abide? Uriah said, The Arke, and Israel, Joab and Judah right well I can tell Abide in tents, during this time of strife, And should I now goe to sport with my wife? I will not goe, as thou livest O King, I will not go, I will not do such thing. When David heard this, he found out a wile With drunkenesse Uriah to beguile, That being drunk the war he might forget, And so go to his wife without all let: But God above this thing did so provide, At the Kings doore this man did still abide. When David saw that for ought he could say, To touch his wife this poore man did delay; Then wickedly to thinke he did begin, How by his blood he might then cloake his sin: Bring pen and inke, said he, to me right soone, When he is dead who shall know what is done? His strange letter to Joab this did tell, Set this man in the front of the Battell: When at skirmish in danger ye him see, Retire with speed, that he may surely die: This David wrot: He wanting Gods true fear, Made Uriah his death with him to bear. Then Captaine Joab, too too ready bent; To pleasure Kings in their commandement,
Tooke this poor man with cruell craft and slight, And set him where most valiant foes did fight, Where men of Rabbah fiercely to Battell Came; there they fought, and there Uriah fell. When David heard this, he said, All is well, My secret sin no man shall now reveale: After Bathshebah, by mutuall accord, Became his wife, which displeased the Lord. Then God to him his Prophet Nathan sen To let him know that God was miscontent: By parable he did himselfe expresse, A holy wile to make David confesse His filthie fact, and for it sore to weepe, Who whole nine months in his vile sin did sleep. Then said Nathan, there was in one city Two men, the one in richesse was mighty, The other poore; the rich upon his ground Had herds and flocks, wherein he did abound. But the poore man (save an ewe lamb) had nought, Which he in strait with his poore meanes had bought, And nourished with diligence indeed, With his children he dayly did it feed; Of his owne cup it dranke, and of his meat Such as he had it welcome was to eat;
Yea in his bosome sweetly it did lye, And was to him as daughter by and by. But O behold! unto the rich mans Inne, A traveiler came to abide therein; The naughty rich man (his flocks for to spare) Caught the poor lamb, it kil'd for to prepare Meat for that man, for him it he did dresse, What think ye, Sir? should he not this redresse▪ Then Davids wrath raging against the man, Sore kindled was, he said unto Nathan, As God liveth, who liveth most surely, That beastly wretch for that vile fact shall die: And unto that yet I will adde this more, The Lamb fourefold he shall quickly restore: This I ordaine, no man it shall repeale, It seemely is that Kings for God have zeale. Then unto David said Prophet Nathan; Even thou thy self, O King, thou art the man, Thou wouldst for God seem to have zeal and love▪ Thou hast done that which heere thou dost re∣prove: Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, I unto thee this hard message will tell: Ov'r Isra'l King I made thee for to be, Out of Sauls hands I safe deliv'red thee, Thy Masters house (with thy Masters Kingdome)
I gave to thee, his wives in thy bosome I made to lye; yea, I most liberallie Both Isra'ls house and Judahs gave to thee; If in thine eyes that too little had beene, I would moreover unto thee have given, Even such and such things; great renowne and fame, Which I bestow on these that feare my name: Why hast thou beene so foolish and unwise, As Gods precepts thus to tread and despise, Most wickedly to do evill in his sight To seeme godly, and yet to use such slight? Poore Uriah the Hittite (in a word) Thou cruelly hast killed with the sword; Thou first defil'd, and now hast tae'n to wife His deare ewe-lamb, and reft him of his life: Thou lives secure, as though no ill were done, Thou hast him slaine with the sword of Amon. Now after sin shall surely come the smart, Hence from thine house the sword shal not depart Because by blood, and vile adulterie, Two scandals great, thou hast despised me: Thus saith the Lord, who is most righteous, I will against thee out of thine house Raise up much evill, I will before thine eyes Even take thy wives; and give them for to please Thy neighbour, who with them shall openly
Before the Sunne in beastly manner lye: These most vile sins in secret thou hast done, But this before all Israel and the sun Shall be; see what shall be in end thy luck When for such sinnes such sorrowes thou shal truck And so exchange, that for thy filthie lust Thou shalt still smart, untill thou turne to dust: Ev'n as a bird, greev'd in a wierie gail, Doth lowring droop, and hang the wing an taile, Even so shalt thou the rest of all thy time Perplexed be, for thy most bloody crime Then David pierced through the very heart, Of his folies began to feel the smart; He was so lively touched for his sin, That how to speak, or how his speach begin, He doubted much, whiles this, whiles that did sound Within his breast, his thoughts did him confound At last with teares his mouth utt'red this word, I have, alas, sinned against the Lord: By my fleshly, and most uncleane desire, I like a swine have wallow'd in the mire: I like a beast have not well understood What guiltinesse comes by shedding of blood: Heere in thy presence, to thy Holinesse,
Against my self my sin I do confesse: These bloods, alas, are ever in presence, They weigh down sore upon my conscience: How can I hence before thee lift my face, Who have profest, and yet practisd disgrace? Against thee who me from the ewes did take, And of a sheepheard me a King did make? Most justly may thy wrath, with loudest raps. Ev'n through my heart thrill roaring thunder claps. But oh, O Lord, forget my hainous sin, Take mercies kyes, and let my soul come in, Though I have sinn'd, yet will I still beleeve, That thou in mercy wilt my sins forgive. Then Nathan said, The Lord thy sinnes surelie Hath put away, fear not, thou shalt not die. From death eternall I will thee protect, But justice willeth that I thee correct: Thy sinne therefore I will visit in hast, Ev'n blood for blood, for adulterie incest: Thou shalt not faile to feel a greevous smart, For from thine house the sword shall not depart: Because thy sinne hath caused blasphemie, Therefore thy Sonne shall now most surely die, When Nathan was departed to his house Then God the Lord who is most righteous, Did strike the child with great and sore sicknesse,
Then David God besought in his goodnesse, That he would not remove the child by death, For this he fasting lay upon the earth; The Elders came, and urged him to eat, But he would not refresh himself with meat. When it was told him that the child by death Removed was, he quickly rose from th' earth, He wash'd himself, and chang'd his countenance, To the Lords house he went with diligence, From thence to his owne house; there he sought meate, They gave him bread, and he began to eat. What thing is this? then did his servants say, While thy childe liv'd, thou did both fast and pray; But when the child was knowne for to be dead, Thou rose from earth with courage to eat bread? Then answ'red he, While the childe was alive, I did then pray that God would let him live: But now h'is dead, God would it so to be, I know he will no more returne to me: After his death Bathshebah bare a son To David▪ who did call him Solomon: But Nathan sent from the great JEHOVAH, Changed his name unto Jedidiah: A man of peace, beloved of the Lord, Of both the names the clear sense doth afford.
In this meane time the great GOD JEHOVAH, Remembred what had beene done to Ʋriah: Then his threatnings began to take effect, Great plagues were sent David for to correct: Amnon defil'd his dear sister Tamar, For this Absalom Amnons life did mar: This man who did excell in great beautie, In Hebron made a lewd conspiracie, To slay David, both his father and King, That after he upon his throne might reigne; He not ceasing from this ill work begun, His fathers wives defil'd before the Sun: He wanting the true feare of th'Eternell, 'Gainst his father fiercely went to battell. At Bahurim that vile rogue Shimei, Like a cur dog did raile most bitterly, Crying, Come out, thou man of Belial, A bloody man, thou shalt now pay for all; The Lord at last (who is most wise and good) Hath upon thee returned all the blood Of King Sauls house, in whose stead than dost reigne; Thy son shall rule, thou shalt no more be King, The LORD hath plagued thee with shame and griefe, Behold thou art taken in thy mischief. Then stout Abishai, son of Zerviah,
Davids sister, not knowing that JOVAH Made David smart, said, Why should this dogg dead So curse th King? I will take off his head: He said to David, Let me go anone, That for his fault I may fall him upon. But David knowing the minde of JOVAH, Said, What, with you the sons of Zerviah Have I to do? Let him now curse he said, For upon him the LORD this taske hath laid, That he David should curse, who then shall say, Wherefore hast thou vile man so done this day? Yea, more David unto Abishai said, A greater grief upon my heart is laid, Behold the son of my bowels is come To seeke my life, and to take my Kingdome; How much more may this beastly Benjamite Do what he doth, with a despightfull sprite? Seeing I am so wronged by my Son, I pray you all to let this man alone: Let him curse still, touch him not with you hand, For what he saith it is by GODS command; It may be that God with compassion Will looke upon my great affliction, And that he will (though he a space delay) Requite me good for his cursing this day.
Then Davids armie ready with great might Prepar'd themselves 'gainst Absalom to fight; When David view'd the march of his armie, He said to Joab and Abishai, Deare friends, I pray, deal gently with my Son, Deal gently with the young man Absalom. When this was said, their was a skirmish rude By the two armies made in Ephraim wood, Like a great wind, boistrous with stormy puff, Men fought in spight with mutuall counterbuff: That day Joab with Judahs brave children Of Isra'l slew downe twentie thousand men: The people was sore scatt'red in the wood, Which did devoure more people then the sword. There Absalom a Rebell, and a Foole, Among the rest was riding on a Mule; By his long haire a branch caught him that day, There he did hing when the Mule went away: Then Joab with his three darts came anone, And thurst them through the heat of Absalom. Then Cushi came and cri'd, Tidings, O King, To the great God now praises may thou sing, The LORD of Hoasts in Battell most mightie Of all thy foes hath now avenged thee. Then David troubled, said unto Cushi, Is Absalom the young man in safetie? Then Cushi said, Let all thy foes indeed,
Be like Absalom who is surely dead. When David heard this, wounded was his heart, From sight of men quickly he did depart To an high chamber, for to mourne alone The tragick death of his deare Absolon: His sorrow such was in his wounded heart, That forc'd he was to weep and go apart, With teares of grief doubling, My son, my son, He wish'd his owne death had sav'd Absalon. For Davids murder and adulterie, Shebah arose who was son Bichri, A Benjamite, he with sterne countenance Most proudly said, Now what inheritance Have we in David? Let us make a rent, Let every man returne unto his tent. So Isra'l did with this son of Bichri, But Judah clave to David heartily: Then David said to valiant Amasa, Assemble me the brave men of Judah: Then he went out Captaine of that armie, Jaob him met with heart full of envie Cov'red with smiles; his right hand made a wound Which all his bowels shed out to the ground; Then Amasa in mids of the high way Bath'd in his blood did thus wallow that day. This done, Joab pursued speedily After Shebah, who was son of Bichri;
When Joab came to the city Abel This Shebahs head was throwne downe from the wall; When these of Abel had perform'd this thing, Joab in haste returned to the King, When all his foes were round about supprest, To sing to GOD due praises he thought best. Yet once againe Gods wrath 'gainst Israel In Davids time upon this people fell; He stirr'd by Satan, would know in his pride How many men in his land did abide; To Joab he gave this direction, Who liked not the Kings commission, But yet obey'd; the Kings word did prevaile, Therefore he went and numbred Israel; In Isra'l were eight hundred thousand men, Five hundred thousand Judah their brethren In number were: Of all, as saith Gods word, Were thirteene hundred thousand that drew sword: When this was done, then Davids heart him smot, Gods wrath therefore was shortly kindled hot; Alas, O Lord, said he, now pitie me, For I confesse I have done foolishly; When David did arise in the morning, The prophet Gad this word to him did bring, Advise and chuse one of these judgements three,
If seven yeeres of famine shall trouble thee; Or if thou wilt three moneths chuse and take, Before thy foes to flee and turne the back; Or if thou wilt have this great patience, Three dayes to hazard on the pestilence. When David saw the Lords wrath thus appeare, Hee said to Gad, I am in a great feare; Yet in Gods hand I pray thee let me fall, For his mercies are over his works all: Then JEHOVAH in wrath to strike began, And kill'd of Isra'l seventy thousand men; To Jerusalem then the Angel went With sword in hand, but God he did repent, Him of the evill; Th' Angel he did command To sheath his sword, and so to stay hs hand: Then Gad from God to David thus did say, Reare up an Altar to the Lord this day. Let this Altar be set for JEHOVAH, Where is the treshing floore of Araunah Then David (as JEHOVAH did command) Did buy the floore, and in Araunahs hand He laid thirty shekels silver for price, And there to God offred his sacrifice. When this was done, and David was wax'd old, Absaloms brother ADONIjAH bold, Helped by JOAB and ABIATHAR, In his great pride made a most fearefull jarre,
A goodly man he was, and faire in face, But proud in Sprit a man of litle grace, David him spilt, he would not him displease, Him to reprove at all times he did cease, Puft up by Joab in vaine aspring, He thought no more but surely to be King After David; these three, Nathan, Zadok, Benaiah for Solomon undertooke With Bathshebah; David without delay Declard who should Israels Scepter sway After his death; The man who shall alone, Said he be King is my son Solomon When time drew nigh that good David should die, He Solomon charged most carefully; I go, said he, the way of all the earth, I must shortly walk in the path of death; Be strong therefore, and shew thy self a man, And keep the charge of the Lord as thou can: Walk in his wayes, keep his commandements, His testimonies, and als his judgements; So shalt thou prosper both by sea and land, All shall go well that thou shalt take in hand: Remember well how Joab greeved me, When he slew Abner with great treacherie, And Amasa, and how the blood of war He shed in peace, when no cause was of jar,
And how he put the blood of Abner sweet In the vile shooes that were upon his feet? I know thou canst thy self wisely behave, Let not his hoare-head in peace go to grave: Unto Barzillais sons shew great kindnesse, For they were kind to me in my distresse. Behold with thee the cursed Shimei, Who curst me sore in my calamitie; To him (humbled) I sware by the great Lord, I will not put thee to death with the sword; Because he was so fierce in my distresse, Therefore take heede thou hold him not guiltlesse I know thou canst thy self wisely behave His hoary-head with blood bring to the grave: So David with his fathers sleept softly, And after buri'd was in his city. The Use. By David learne what after sin remaines, The fruits of sin are sorrowes and great paines, By David learne, if thou hast gone astray, To turne to God and walk in the right way. By David learne to teach your children deare, How in their time they should live in GODS feare:
Too many speak of Davids filthie fall, To shroud their sins, and so to make them small: Too many to their vile lusts licence give, As though to rot were the way to revieve; But few there be that weigh well in their heart, How greatly David for his sins did smart. SOLOMON. Peaceable, who is at peace with all men. GODS Sprit begins to move my pen anone, To draw some lines concerning Solomon; A worthy man, most excellent in fame, At home abroad; from peace he had his name: Good Nathan (sent from the great JEHOVAH) Changed his name unto Iedidiah: To change this name the LORD did Nathan move, To testifie that he the child did love. When on his throne he was by good JOVAH Established, to him came Bathshebah From Adonijah causer of much strife, That he might have faire Abishag to wife: Well well, Solomon said, I know that thing, Aske also for him that he may be King: Consider well, and hearken what I say,
Adonijah surely shall die this day. Benaiah come, and hearken to my word, Vaine Adonijah now kill with the sword: To Abiathar the Priest said the King, I will not now these stroaks upon thee bring Which thou deserves, because thou had a part In troublous times of my deare fathers smart; Thou with my foes against me was too stout, Therefore thou shalt from thy place be thrust out To povertie; thy race shall beggars be, Thus was fulfil'd Gods word against Eli. When Ioab heard of all was past and done, Unto Gods house in feare he fled right soone; There, as the practice of some had him taught, Of Gods altars the hornes with hands he caught: Then Benajah directed by the King Went unto him with these few words, Saying, Thus saith the King, Thou Ioab thou must come foorth, It is not seemly for a man of worth Unto the hornes of Altars for to flee, No not, said Ioab, heere I minde to die: Then Benajah brought the King word againe, That Ioab would at the Altar still remaine: Then said the King, Go fall upon him, fall, For the two Captains famous in Israel (Abner, Amasa men of dignitie)
Did kill, and boutcher by his treacherie; Now let their blood returne upon his head, But peace shall be on Davids house and seed: Then Benaiah to Joab in distresse Came, and him kill'd, and in the wildernesse In his own house him buri'd; In short space Captaine Benaiah was put in his place. After, because of Adonijah jarre, Zadok was Priest in roome of Abiathar: Then for Shimei the King in all haste sent, And gave to him this strait commandement, To build and dwell in faire Salem anone, But if, said he, thou passe the brook Kidron To go abroad, Let this be knowne to thee, None shall thee save, for thou shalt surely die: Three yeers after he forgetting this charge, Did seeke his servants with a licence large; Hee past thee brook, and the Kings charge forgot Therefore with death stout Benaiah him smot: Remember now, said the King to Shimei, How thou my father revil'd bitterly: Thy wickednesse shall come upon thine head, But I and mine shall be blessed indeede. After he thus had slaine these men of strife, King Pharos daughter he took for his wife: He loved God, and with his heart him fear'd, In Gibeon the Lord to him appear'd
In dreame by night: to him in great mercie The Lord said, Aske what I shall do thee: Then Solomon unto the Lord did say, Great kindnesse hast thou showne to me this day; Thou hast me chosen for Gods people King, That I with wisedome may them rule, and reigne I am a child, who am but to begin, I know not how to go out or come in: Of my desirs this is the cheefest part, That thou would give an understanding heart To me thy servant, by thy grace made glade, Whereby I may discerne twixt good and bad. When God this heard, he rested well content, He said unto him at this Parliament, Thou hast not asked riches or long life, Nor yet revenge against the men of strife Thy foes; but hast desired a wise heart, To rule my people well in ev'ry part, Therefore both riches and honour to thee Will I now give, with wisedome in plentie; If thou godly will walk in Davids wayes, In great mercy I will lengthen thy dayes: By him in sleep these things were heard and seen, When he awoke, Behold it was a dreame. Then came two harlots, who before him stood, Each one striving to make her cause seeme good,
Behold O King, said one; Wee two women In one house were deliv'red of children: I bare a son; after it came to passe, Three dayes after that she delivered vvas: Wee vvere in house (as seem'd) vvithout danger, For in the house vvith us vvas no stranger: Behold, O King, her childe dead in the night By her ov'rlaid, then cunningly with flight She rose from bed, and vvith great treacherie Came to my bed, and stall my son from me. Alas, O King, What heart can this abide? For my sweet son, this dead lump at my side She laid; when I arose my son to feed With my two breasts, behold he was cold dead: Judge yee, O King, how great then was my smart, When his cold lips did touch me neere the heart; But when the light more clearely let me see, I saw I was jugled with treacherie: The dead child is hers, but the living mine, Thou the whole matter as Judge now define. But, Oh, the other, with tears in her eyes, Said, All she saith is full stuffed with lies:
Believe her not, she hath a brasen brow, She can right vvell false lyes as truth avow; Let not thine heart incline to take her part, Though in her speach she hath now the forestart; A judge must know he hath an ear and ear, That after one the other he may hear. Alas, O King, the Lords vvisedome divine Doth clearly knovv the living son is mine. The other said, I am not such a beast, Anothers childe to bring up on my breast; If this my son vvere dead, and hers living, I vvould not of him novv make a changling; His dry dead bones should dearer be to me, Then her son living full of rare beautie. While thus the two reason'd before the King, The King did cry, a sword now to me bring; When it was brought, the King said so and so With sword the living childe divide in two: No man such doubts can now discusse by art. Divide, divide, let each one have her part: When this was said, and ready to be done, The mothers bowels yerned upon her son; My Lord the King, let not this sword now fall Upon my childe, but to her give it all: Not said th' other, the judge must now define,
Let it be cut, and so not mine nor thine. Then said the King in words both wise and milde This is the mother, give to her the childe: When all Isra'l this wise judgement did hear, Their hearts were mov'd King Solomon to fear. This man was great, and full of Majestie, Great pleasure was his orders for to see: Some were his Scribes, and others were Recor∣ders, Some rul'd the Hoast, some were his Priests by orders, Some officers, and some ov'r the tribute Were set; and also some did distribute, Some Officers; twelve moneths in the yeer, Twelve men did serve; each man a month entire Provided for the King and his houshold, The best victuals for uses manifold: His house by day, as Gods word doth reveale, Spent fourescore ten measures of floure and meal; Ten Oxen fat, and twenty from Pastures Were for his house, each foure and twenty hours; An hundred Sheep, with Harts and fallow Deer, Roe-buck and Foules for each day of the yeer Appointed were; such was the Majesty, Of Solomon, who was wise and mighty; He for Charets had fourtie thousand stalls Of Horses fair, and as the Scripture tells,
Twelve thousand Horsemen skilfull and mighty, Were for the glory of his Majesty: In all his time the GOD of peace JOVAH, Made peace from Dan, even to Beershebah: To him GOD gave with great largenesse of heart Much understanding in all sorts of art; He was more wise then Ethan and Chalcol, Then Heman Darda the sons of Mahol: Of godly proverbs three thousand he spake, A thousand and five songs were at their back: Of trees he spake ev'n from the Cedars tall, Unto the Hyssop that springs from the wall: Of beasts, of foules, he spake of creeping things, Of fishes als, whose vertue profite brings To mortall men, whose health and nourriture, Depend much on the secrets of nature: Then great Monarchs from all the earth did come, To get from him some lessons of wisdome. Then Hiram hearing Solomon made King, From Tyre he sent men congratulating, That Davids Son was set upon the throne, Of Davids friends he was a speciall one. Then Solomon to Hiram did declare, How David could not in a time of warre, Build for the Lord a house of Majestie, Adorned with rarest things of beautie; But now, said he, on every side is rest,
Therefore to build for God I think it best; From thee Hiram the Cedar and the Fir Must now be had; thy servants must now stir Their time and serve, for none can skill to hew Timber like these of Sidon where they grew: Then Hiram glad of Solomons designe, Offred to do at his desire each thing; My men, said he, these trees unto the sea Shall bring, and my houshold furnish'd by thee With food shall be; this shall be our bargaine, Unto the end all things shall so remaine: Then to Hiram he gave of victuall good, Twentie thousand measures of wheat for food With twentie measures of oyle pure each year, These two did make a league for peace and war. When this was done wise Solomon did then, Raise a levie of thirtie thousand men; To Lebanon ten thousand were by course Sent each moneth, to provide for Gods house; To beare burdens threescore thousand and ten He had; with these were fourscore thousand men, Who on the mountains were for him hewers, Besides other many cheefe officers: Three thousand and three hundred did beare rule, Over the rest who wrought with workmans tool; They all busie, each man wrought in his course, To cut, to hew, to square, to build Gods house;
The length thereof threescore, the breadth twen∣tie, Were of cubits, the height thereof thirtie; All things before were so wisely prepar'd, That in building no sound of toole was heard. Then was that house with pomp and Majestie Adorned so, that it was faire to see: The Oracle spangled with golden sparres, Was like the heav'n imboss'd with twinckli starres: For Gods presence it seem'd to be a shrine, From end to end, with glory it did shine. The Ark was there of gold and shittim wood, The Cherubins princely upon it stood: This type of Heav'n with beauties manifold, From top to ground was burnished with gold: From end to to end, from the base to seeling, Seven yeers were spent in that painefull buildin When all was finish'd, Solomon that day, Both bless'd the people and to God did pray. Solomons Prayer. O God the Lord, who art most rich in grace, Hearken all prayers made towards th place;
If any man 'gainst his neighbour trespasse, Then hear in heaven that justice may have place; If by their foes Isra'l oppressed be, Then heare in Heav'n, and help them speedilie: When heaven is shut up, and there is no raine Then heare in Heaven, a helper then remaine: If thou shalt scourge with pest blasting, mildew, Then heare in heav'n when Isra'l to thee sue: What ever plague be in thy peoples heart, Then heare in Heaven and help them in their smart. When poore sinners shall heere thee come unto, Then heare in Heav'n, frankly forgive and do: If strangers come for heere to seeke thy grace, Then heare in heav'n thy pleasant dwelling place: If thy people heere 'gainst their foes compleane, Then heare in heav'n, and their good cause maintaine; If sinners cry repenting from their heart, Then heare in heav'n and ease them of their smart. Thus Solomon this precious houre did spend, n blessing, praying, so he made an end. When this was done, in the dedication Of Gods house, he made a great oblation,
Of Oxen great, twenty thousand and two, An hundred thousand and twenty also, Of sheep he offred at this great service, Which was a great and royall sacrifice. The Queene of Sheba hearing of his name, Which through the earth was exalted with fame, Came with great pomp hard questions to move, That she thereby his great wisedome might prove: But he all doubts that then were in her heart Resolv'd clearely before she did depart: When she his glory did right well consider, Her sprite within did faile her altogether: When she reviv'd was from her wondring sowne, She high extoll'd Solomons great wisedome. Now doe I know, said shee, most perfectlie, The truth of these things which I heard of thee: I heard great things of thy most glorious name, But thy presence doth far surpasse thy fame: Most happy are thy men and most happy Are thy servants that may thee heare dayly; Blessed be God, the great God eternall, Who hath thee made the Prince of Israel: Then Shebas Queene before she tooke her leave, To him rich stones, spices with gold did give; And he againe gave unto her richly, Great things of worth most precious and coastly;
He was enrich'd with blessings manifold; He made two hundred targets of fine gold; Three hundred shields of beaten gold he made, Which in his house of Lebanon were laide; He also made a Throne of yvorie, And ov'rlaid it with fine gold most richlie; Six golden Lions on each side were set, A Lion placed was at every step: His drinking vessels were all of pure gold, He was enrich'd with blessings manifold: In wealth all Kings on earth he did surmount, In his time silver was in no account; Silver like stones, Cedars like Sycomore Were base and vile, yea so were more and more. But oh alas, what could this wise man move, Women of Moab and Edom to love? With Pharaohs daughter, women of Ammon, He had with Hittits, women of Sidon; Women also he had, concerning such In mariage the Lord forbade to touch, Seven hundred wives, three hundred concubins He had for pleasure; but oh by this meanes, When he was old his wisedome did depart, These wives from God did turne away his heart: The true worship of God he did reject, His heart was not like his fathers perfect; As though he had not learned in Gods schoole,
With goddesses and gods he play'd the fool: He serv d Ashtoreth and also Milcom; These were the chief idols of Solomon Whith Chemos, for which he made an high place With great contempt before the Temples face; This also was the rage of Solomon, He served Molech th'idol of Ammon: He wise in youth, did in his old folie Follow his wives in their idolatrie. For this cause God in wrath did him despise, As unthankfull unto whom clearly twise He had appear'd; I will, said God, surely For thy great sins rend the Kingdome from thee; Because thy father me sought in his wayes, This great rent I will not make in thy dayes; But after thee thy Son shall feele the smart, And yet I will for Davids sake a part Of the Kingdome of Isra'l sure reserve, That in his house a lamp I may preserve. Then God to punish his idolatrie, Stirr'd up Hadad for an adversarie To Solomon; another call'd Rezon, A great armie of men gath'red anone: Hadad and Jeroboam stout also, Unto Solomon did procure much wo: At last he di'd after he had fourtie Yeers liv'd, in peace and great tranquillitie.
Papists do doubt and make a question, If Solomon obtain'd salvation; That which them moves unto this hard sentence, The Scriptures speak not of his repentance: But let such know his repentance was true, As his Sermons Ecclesiastes shew. 2 Sam. 7.14. Yea, God himself unto his father dear This promise made, which takes away all fear: If this thy Son commit iniquitie, With rods and strips I will him most sharplie Correct, and chasten, for to vexe his heart, But my mercy shall not from him depart, As from King Saul, who forsaking my path, From his Kingdome was cast away in wrath. The Use. Let him that would shunne all idolatrie, Flie farre from such that with it spotted be: Where is the man that should not fear to fall, When he thinkes what befell this Cedar tall? This is the best when man hath gone astray, With Solomon to returne to Gods way.
THE GARDEN OF ZION. Of the Kings of Judah. PROV. 25.5. Take away the wicked from before the King, and his throne shall be stablished in righ∣teousnesse. 1. Rehoboam. 2. Abijah. 3. Asa. 4. Jehosha∣phat. 5. Jehoram. 6. Ahaziah. 7. Joash. 8. Amaziah. 9. Uzziah, or Azaria. 10. Jotham. 11. Ahaz. 12. Hezekiah. 13. Manasseh. 14. Amon. 15. Josiah. 16. Jehoachaz. 17. Eli∣akim, called by Necho Jehojakim. 18. Jehoja∣chin. 19. Mattaniah, called by Nebuchadnez∣zar, Zedekiah.
A Prayer. O Thou great GOD call'd I AM THAT I AM, Of all my verse be thou the chiefest theame; What is my heart but a confused Masse, A wilde Chaos, untill thy sprite a space There move it self, and upon this gulf brood Thoughts far beyond the reach of flesh and blood: O drench my heart in Zions sacred springs, And lead my hand to write of Judahs Kings; And of their life and death such uses make, That all thereby may good example take Their vice to shun, to follow their vertue, To learne thereby our lives for to renew. O sprite of grace, come with thy gentle gales, Maugre envie with thy breath fill my sailes; Now spread my Canvas, and als guide the Helm, And smooth the Seas, lest that they overwhelm My brettle Boat, which now among great Kings Is come to search their good and bad doings. Come help me Lord, and make no more delay, The tide for none (but thee alone) doth stay.
1. REHOBOAM. Enlargeing or delaying the people. THen all Isra'l conveened in Shechem, To choose with haste their King Rehoboam: There the people with one mouth to him said, Thy dead father great burdens on us laid; If thou our yoke will make light and easie, With one consent we thy servants will be: Then said the King, From me three dayes depart, Then shall yee know the purpose of mine heart: Then said the King unto the old and wise, Consider well, give counsell and advise, What to this people thinke yee best to say? Yee men of age, now tell me I you pray; Then these grave men to speake so did begin, This people now with faire words thou must win, If thou to them a servant be this day, To thee good subjects they will he for ay. After this said, he turned to the youth, To heare what counsell should come from their mouth. What? what? said they, what? what is this saying?
Darre proude people speake thus unto their King? Of thy deare father, how darre they complaine Who now is dead? to hear such words disdaine; Frowne with thy brow, speak unto them roughly, That thy least finger thicker now shall be Then were his loines; Tell what is in thine heart, In speach most plaine, and so let them depart. This young counsell the young King pleased best, To him the third day they came all in hast; Now let us heare, said they, thy good answere, Be plaine with us, no longer it deferre. Then with a frowne, as youth did him direct, He them beheld, and did their sute reject: What? what? said he, what meaneth your say∣ing? How darre yee thus speake to your Lord and King? Of my father how darre yee thus complaine, VVho is now dead? your speaches I disdaine: The least finger that is in my bodie, Then all his loines were, thicker hence shall be. When Isra'l heard this answere from the King, Then with a noise they all had this, saying,
What? what portion, or what inheritance Have we in David? or vvhat maintenance Ovve vve to him? novv David in this rent, See to thine house: O Isra'l to your tent. This matter was from the great JEHOVAH, As was foretold by Prophet Ahijah: When he his cloaths into twelve peices rent, Then Jeroboam of that new garment Got pieces ten, the Prophet keeped two, Which did declare that the rent should be so; That Jeroboam ten tribs should command, But two as Lamps, for Davids house should stand, In this great grudge the King Rehoboam, Sent unto them his servant Adoram A man for tribut; but with staffe and stones, They in their great wrath did crush all his bones: When this young King the peoples rage did see, He in his Charet speedily did flee; So ten tribs did rebell without delay, Against the house of David to this day, In this mans time, King of Egypt Shishak, All the treasures of gold away did take, Which Solomon had richly made of gold, In the Temple with carvings manifold: The shields of gold, with rich treasures that day, Shishak the King did carry all away. Thus was the Temple spoiled by Shishak,
Who gold and treasures all away did take: Behold how soone golds glory doth decay, See how rich treasures glaunce and passe away: This man whose Mother was of Moab land, Seventeene yeers King in Salem did command. The Use. By this young King, more young in wit then age, Let all Kings learne to shunne a peoples rage: If they would wisely manage their affaires, They must regard the counsell of gray haires. 2. ABIJAH. My father God. HEere Abijah his fathers Son in sinne, As he did end ill, so did he beginne: He did not that, which Gods Word did direct, His heart with God the Lord was not perfect: When warre arose he unto the Lord sought, 'Gainst Jeroboam he a Battell fought; Foure hundred thousand were with Abijah, Eight hundred thousand were against Judah, For Jeroboam; In the fields were then An armie of twelve hundred thousand men. Then Abijah, standing on Zemaraim, Which is a part of faire mount Ephraim:
VVith a loud voice cri'd unto Israel, VVhy come ye foorth against me to Battell? VVhat God hath join'd, why go ye now to seve For the whole land the Lord hath given for ever To Davids house, without a let or halt, This was made sure by Covenant of salt: Yet Jeroboam, Solomons servant, Doth what he can to breake this Covenant; Gathred unto him are men of Belial, Who are novv come to provoke to Battell: And novv ye think the Kingdome to vvithstand, VVhich should remaine sure in Davids sons hand; VVith you is a great multitude of men, VVith golden Calves of false Jeroboam: Have yee not cast out the Priests of the Lord, That for vile gaine yee might with one accord, Make unto you Priests that vvould take in hand, To serve strange gods that vvere from other Lands? But as for us, the Lord vvith us vvill be, VVho have vvith us the Priests, sons of Levi, VVho morne and even vvaite upon all service Enjoyn'd by GOD, the dayly sacrifice: VVe with our heart keep the charge of the Lord.
But ye have him all left vvith one accord: Behold hovv God is vvith us for Captaine, His Priests vvith Trumpets to sound an alarme Against you; VVherefore novv vvith one accord Conveene yee thus, to fight against the Lord? Leave off, leave off, proceed no more this vvay, For your armie shall not prosper this day. But Jeroboam free of feare and doubt, Judahs armie did compasse all about: When Judah saw them compass'd in Battell, They with strong prayers cri'd to th' Eternall: The Priests began with their Trumpets to sound, Judah did shout, Which made th' Echos rebound: Then God arose to shew himself by might, He Jeroboam put unto the flight: The flight was fierce, bloody was the Battell, Five hundred thousand that day to Isra'l Were kill'd; But Judah prevail'd by and by, Because with faith, they to the Lord did cry: Thus Jeroboam curbed in his wayes, Recov'red not strength in Abijahs dayes: But Abijah wax'd more and more mighty, With fourteene wives, he begat sons twenty: Because he was not perfect in his wayes,
Of his Kingdome the Lord shortned the dayes: He in his wayes walked not uprightly, Therefore his great pomp lasted but years three: The Use. Ill Kings from Thrones by a successive svvay, Like chaffe by vvind shall soone be driven avvay. 3. ASAH. Healing. BEhold a King most glorious like the Sun, Whose end was good, whose life was w begun; A man of health is he who strives to please The Lord, and doth what is good in his eyes; This worthy King with holy jealousie, Brake downe the Altars of Idolatrie Set up for strange gods; he the high places, With groves cut downe, and brake the images: With great zeale he commanded all Judah, To do the Law and turne unto Jovah; Because the Lords Law he did not forget, The Kingdome was long before him quiet. At last ZERAH, the Ethiopian, Came with an host of a thousand thousand: ASAH the King thus troubled very sore,
Conveen'd five hundred thousand and fourescore: Thus fifteene hundred thousand men that day, With fourscore thousand in Battell aray Were set; Then Asah cri'd unto the Lord, That in that strait his help he would afford; Help us, O Lord; help us, O Lord, said he, Thou canst well help with few or with many; Against this host we now goe in thy name, Make now our foes to turne their back with shame; When God this heard, he rose in anger hot, And with his sword this huge armie he smot: His wrath like waters, wheesing out did foyle The proud Zerah; then Judah got their spoile. When this was done the Prophet Azariah, Was sent from God for to meet King Asah; God is vvith you, said he, vvhile ye vvith him, His love with you most ready to confirme, If yee forsake him, he will forsake you now, If yee seek him, he will be found of you: Be strong therefore, Gods service much regard, For God the Lord your good work shall rewad. When Asa heard these words, he tooke courage, The idole gods he did destroy with rage: From Ephraim, Manasseh, and Simeon, Unto Asa, many did flock anone.
Then with one minde they were glade and con∣tent, To make with GOD the LORD a Covenant, By God they sware in a most sol mne oath, That man, woman, great, small, should die the death, Who should refuse the living God to seek, Who to his Saints is mercifull and meek: Then all the people with their whole desire Did seeke the Lord, as Asa did require; They sware to God with shouting and Trumpets, With singing voice, and also with Cornets: They seeking God, beleev'd, and did not doubt, And he unto them gave rest round about: When this was done this worthy King Asah, From being Queene his mother Maachah Remov'd, because vaine idols she did love, She had set up an idole in a grove: This idole he did cut, and stamp upon, With fire he burnt it at the brook Kidron. When this was done Ba'sha King of Isra'l, Did build Ramah to make Asah to fall; But Asah quickly, sent to Benhadad For help, which in the Lords eyes did seeme bad: For this doing, the Prophet Hanani, Him told that he had done most foolishly: What hadst thou, said he, to doe with Syria,
To hire their help? Did not the great Jovah Make thee subdue the Ethiopian host, With the Lubims, who in their pride did bost? Gods eyes throughout the earth run to and ro, To manifest his great might so and so: He is ready with great power to smite, The foes of these who towards him perfite Are in their heart: Because in this right far Thou hast failed, hence foth thou shalt have warre. When Asa heard these words of Hanani, A fierie wrath did kindle his furie; Take this villaine, said he, this Blials son, Now bind him fast, and cast him in prison: Moreover he some people in distresse, Without mercy severely did oppresse; In his old age diseased in his feet, To Medecins to seeke he thought more meet, Then to the Lord, who health and happinesse Hath ready for his servants in distresse: Though diverse faults bee seen in this mans wayes, Yet with the Lord his heart was all his dayes Perfect, as the first book of Kings doth tell, Written by the scrib of God Eternell: He sway'd the Scepter years one and fourtie; Though Kings be gods, yet as men they must die.
The Use. Our brightest life is like the Moone with spot, Where is the life that is without a blot? 4. JEHOSHAPHAT. The judgement of the Lord. NOw fill mine heart LORD with thy glowing flame, Raise up my Spirit and verses in me frame Worthy the praise of good Jehoshaphat, Whom good Asa, King of Judah begat: As in his name, as Scriptures do record, So in his life the judgement of the LORD Unto all men most clearly did appare: That man is wise whose heart the LORD doth feare. This godly King did serve GOD in his dayes, Because he walked fast in the first wayes Of David; he to Baalim not sought, But idols worship with great might downe brought; He willing did what GOD did him command, Therefore the Kingdome stable in his hand Was made by GOD; then Judah to him brought,
Most rich presents, which they had dearly bought: His heart encourag'd was in the Lords way, High places, groves, with zeal he took away: When he was rich and in honour highly, With Ahab he did joine affinitie, With him to go to battell he was mov'd, For which he was deservedly reprov'd By good Jehu, the son of Hanani, Who said, to him, Should'st thou help th' un∣godlie? VVhat didst thou meane, to bee by thought or word, In league or love with them that hate the Lord? Consider well, and now take heed and see, For wrath from God is posting upon thee, Thee to correct, but not thee to confound, Because in thee good things the Lord hath found: The idole groves thou hast taken away, Thy heart thou hast prepar d to seeke alway The mighty Lord in great sincerity, Therefore the Lord vvill not depart from thee. To the Judges he gave commandement, To take good heed, because in the judgement The Lord was with them: Doe now what yee can, Said he to them, for yee judge not for man,
But for the Lord, If him ye do rgard, He shall not faile you richly to reward; Judge uprightly, beware of shifts and drifts Respect not persons, reject bribs and gifts Which blind the eye; but let Gods holy fear Be upon you that so yee may forbeare To doe like these who with Horse leaches sing, To their clients, these doubled words, Bring bring; This counsell that the Judges from him gat, Was worthy of the name of Joshaphat, Which signifies Gods judgement most clearly, In my judgement by way of prophesie. After this done with zeal, behold anone Against Josaphat, Moab, and Ammon A multitude, great from beyond the Sea In Hazazon-Tamar call'd Engedi Conveen'd, to fight in a bloody Battell Against Josaphat who to th'Eternell Had his refuge; while he was thus agast, He sought the Lord and did proclame a fast: Then all Judah with one heart did accord, From all cities to go and seek the Lord: Good Josaphat troubled with fear that day, Before Judah thus to the Lord did say, Art thou not God in heaven, who rulest all?
Art thou not he who is God eternall? Hast thou not strength and great might in thine hand? Where are the forces that can thee withstand? Art thou not God who didst before Isra'l, Drive out thy foes by thine arme eternall, And gav'st their lands from a most loving minde, Ʋnto the seed of Abraham thy frind? Thou art a Lord both strong and righteous, Thou promised vvhen men unto thine house Should come to thee in great trouble and feare, That vvith great speede thou vvould them help and heare: And novv behold, both Moab, and Ammon, VVith these of Seir, minde thy Judah anone For to invade, and their lands to make bare, Though at thy vvill vve did them save and spare. And novv, O Lord, consider and regard, Hovv vvith despight as foes they us revvard; Our forces faint, Our foes are most mightie; But this comforts; Our eyes are upon thee. Then Judah all with wives and children dear.
Before the Lord stood in a trembling fear. Then on Jahaziel son of Zechariah, A divine Sprite came downe from Jehovah, Who said, All Judah and Josaphat King, Hear novv glade tidings vvhich I to you bring From great Jovah, vvho said you neede  feare, For I for you shall fight in all this vvarre. When King and people had these comfor found, They bow'd their heads with face unto  ground; The Levites high their singing voice did raise, They stood all up the living God to praise; They rose up early in the morning light, To go to battell in their armour bright; Now as they went Josaphat stood, and said, Heare me, O Judah, now beleeve in God, Beleeue so, that no doubt make you once whisper, Beleeve his Prophets, so shall yee all prosper. When this was said, the singers with gladnesse Did praise the beautie of his holinesse. Then God most mighty in Battell arose, Who set ambushments round about his foes; He made each one another for to slay, The Lord himself the battell fought that day:
Gods arme it wrought, and not fortune or hap, ot one of all their armie did escape; fter that God had given them thus the foile, is people were enricht with their great spoile; ost rare jewels among the dead that day hey found, yea more then they could bear away. When this was done, with Trumpets, and with Harps, They came to Salem with great joy of hearts, And thanked God, the great God Eternell, Who had strongly their foes foil'd in Battell: Thus the realme was quiet without shout Of warre; to them God gave rest round about: But after this Josaphat did purloine, In that he did with Ahaziah joine, Who was a King perverse in Israel, Even Ahabs Son hated of th'Eternall: Who awlesse, lawlesse, 'gainst the Lord did rage, With him he ships made for a long voyage To Tarshish; But the Prophet Dodavah Came to Josaphat from the great JOVAH; Because, said he, thou hast fal'n in such slips, The LORD himself hath broken all thy ships. When he began he was of age thirtie And five, thereafter he reigned twentie And five; Of all he lived yeeres threescore, A Godly Prince, who did Gods law restore.
The Use. If Princes would have peace, and foile th foes, Let them in feare to serve the Lord rejoice: If Princes would enjoy prosperitie, Let them abhorre all profane companie. 5. JEHORAM. High LORD. HIgh LORD in name, but base in cariage, For he his brethren all slew in his rage; In great mischief and strife he spent his life, For he had Ahabs daughter to his wife. Then came to him writings from Elijah, Who was the Prophet of the great JOVAH, Because, said he, with vile idolatrie, Thou hast thy selfe defiled filthilie, Because with furie, rage, and great disdaine, Most cruelly thou hast thy brethren slaine; Who in Gods wayes had their heart more perfit Then thine; therefore with sore plagues I wi smite
Both thee and thine; A plague without all doubt, hall from thy belly thy bowels thrust out; ight yeeres hee did reigne; then great plagues conspir'd is death; he died, but was by none desir'd. The Use. Take heed, O Kings, make not your men to grone, If ye would have men your death to bemone: hese who in lewdnesse both end and begin, hall beare the scars of wounds made by their sinne. 6. AHAZIAH. Possession of God. LL mothers Sonne, son of the wicked race Of ill Ahab, nothing he did possesse Gods grace, but contemning th' Eternell, e walked after the wicked counsell f Ahabs house, which did him sore annoy, or him with it stout Jehu did destroy: e went with Joram for to take his part gainst Jehu, for which he felt the smart:
For sins against God he could not forbeare, Therefore his Kingdome lasted but a yeere. The Use. Let all men learne that sin is not a sport, It ends our dayes and cuts our honours sho Let these here learne who are made Kings grace, To chuse their wives of good and godly race. 7. JOASH. The fire of the Lord. VVHen Athaliah did see that her Son King Ahaziah was by Jehu slaine, She rose in rage, her whole force to imploy, The Royall race of Judah to destroy: When she in furie cruel did conspire Against Judah, then Joash from that fire By God was sav'd; his Father Sister deare, Jehoshabeath did hid him in that feare: This good woman wife of Jehojadah, Was appointed by the great Jehovah To save this Prince in these times of great fea This Priest him hid the space of whole six year
Jehojadah at last did him foorth bring, By force of armes he Crown'd and made him King. When Athaliah heard how all was done, Shee rent her cloaths, and said, Treason, treason: When this was said, up stood Jehojadah, The Priest of the Almighty JEHOVAH, Captaines, said he, have this vile woman foorth Of Gods house ranges, though she by birth A Kings daughter now take her in disdaine, Without the temple let her now be slaine: When all things ord'red were in this estate, They slew her at th'entring of the horse gate; Then all were moved by Jehojadah, To make a Covenant with great JEHOVAH; Then the people went with all diligence To Baals house, for to exact vengeance; They brake it downe, his Altars they down threw With Images; Mattan the Priest they slew: They offred burnt offrings, and Psalmes did sing, That done, upon a Throne they set the King: Of seven years old before he was a man Of strength and wit, Joash to rule began: He was a man well set for Jehovah, During the dayes of good Jehojadah; He in great zeale made all to contribut, Great meanes which he at last did distribut,
For to prepare the house of great Jovah, Which had been spoil'd by vile Athaliah; Who to break downe Gods house did well allo The spoile she did on Baalim bestow. After this Hazael, King of Syria Tooke Gath; to the Citie of Jehovah, He set his face to compasse it in round, To make a breach, and bring it to the ground; But Joash fearing such forces that day, Gave him the treasurs; so he went away: As long as Joash had Jehojadah, He uprightly did walk with Jehovah, But after this most worthy man was dead, Who for his worth, with the Kings was buri'd, Joash the King, with Princes of Judah, Did leave the house of the great Jehovah; Unto their sins they were most foolish slaves, Who like heathens did serve idols and groves. Yet he to them his holy Prophets sent, To teach them his divine commandement; Against them they did testifie sincere, But they unto their words would not give eare▪ Then the good sprit of the great Jehovah, Came upon the Prophet Zechariah, Jehojadahs son, who stood up and said, To the people, Thus saith th' Almighty God, Why doe ye thus the Lords precepts transgresse
Why sin ye still stoutly without regresse? ee cannot prosper; because yee have now orsaken God, he hath forsaken you: hen wicked men commanded by the King, t Zechariah stones with spight did fling: his man of God they slew with one accord n the faire court of the house of the Lord; hus Joash king, killing Zechariah, orgot the kindnesse of Jehojadah; e not remembring what that man had done or him in straite, but after kill'd his son; When he was dyeing this was his desire, ord looke upon it, and also require. After this fact neere the end of the year, oash with his men were troubled with feare, he Syrian armie in number but small, pon his hoast with great fiercenesse did fall, Who 'gainst Joash did execute judgement, or his transgressing Gods commandement. After this King Joash in great sicknesse Was left, because in blood he did transgresse: is owne servants who at his table fed ere, cruelly did kill him on his bed: ne of these servants had this name Zabad, he others name was call'd Jehozabad; f seven years old a childe by Jehovah ade King, he raign'd fourty years in Judah:
Because Gods Prophet he slew cruelly, God suffred not him in Kings graves to lye, The Use. He who for good with an unthanfull heart Shall render ill, ill never shall depart From his house; A murdrer though a gre King, The Lord with blood unto the grave shall brin 8. AMAZIAH. The strength of the Lord. THis Amaziah as the historie Declareth, did reigne yeers nine and twen That he did good we have in holy write, But in Gods sight his heart was not perfite: These men he slew who had his father slaine, But by Gods statutes spared their children: Against Edom he three hundred thousand, Of Judahs men had ready at command; A hundred thousand he of Israel, Did hire with him to go unto Battell; But from the Lord a man came to the King, Who him discharg'd Israels men to bring
Unto his host, for God with Israel, Said he, is not, The Lord in this battell Will not thee help; If thou them with thee take The Lord he shall both thee and thine forsake: Then Amaziah unto him did say, An hundred talents, these men have this day Receiv'd from me; Who shall these now restore? The Lord, said he, will render thee much more: Then Amaziah did command these men, Who not of Judah, but Irsa'ls children To turne back soone, and to their home returne, For which much wrath in their bosome did burn: Then this King stout with Judahs men alone, Ten thousand smot of the men of Edom; Ten thousand als this King did leave alive, Whom he by valoure did cary captive; These he did bring to the top of a rock, He threw them downe, their bones in pieces brok: But Fy, fy, fy, this most unthankfull King, Their idol gods unto Judah did brng: He bow'd before these things that had no sense, And als unto them he did burne incense: Wherefore the anger of the great Jovah, Sore kindled was against Amaziah; He sent to him a Prophet for to tell, That by idols he had greev'd th' Eternell; Why hast thou, said he, sought of other lands,
The gods which their owne people from th hands Could not rescue? Where is respect and fear? Then said the King, I charge thee to forbeare; To speak such words thou base man hast no plac Be silent lest they smite thee on the face. Well, said the Prophet, at thy commandeme I shall forbeare, and shall remaine silent, For now I know the great God Eternell, Thee will destroy for hateing his counsell. Then to Joash King second from Jehu, This Amaziah with great brags said now, Come let us see each other in the face That we may fight, for peace hath no more plac Then Joash scorned this Kings great follie, As a Thistle a cartell to a tree Should send, whose strength under a wilde bea foot, Is troden downe, in top and als in root: Lo thou hast smitten Seir Edoms great hoast, Thus thy proud heart thee lifteth up to boast; Abide at home, cease from such vaine follie, Why shouldst thou fall and als Judah with thee But Amaziah these words would not heare, To go to Battell he would not forbeare: It came of God, most wise and most mighty,
Him to give ov'r unto his enemy; ecause after his foes he had ov'rcome, e sought after the idols of Edom. hus these two Kings did fight in good aray, ut Amaziah was routed that day: n that Battell he was taken alive, or all his boast he was Joash captive, his Joash spoil'd the house of great Jovah, nd carried all unto Samariah. ast Amaziah by conspiracie, as slaine in Lachish with great felonnie. The Use. Though Kings be strong and in Battell mighty, hey can not stand that love idolatry. 9. UZZIA. The strength of the Lord: called also, AZARIAH. The help of the Lord. FRom help and strength this great King had his name,
For God by help and strength did spread his fa As long as he sincerely sought the Lord, His greatest foes could not resist his sword: God helped him against the Philistines. Against th' Arabians and the Mehumins; His name did spread to Egypt gloriously, For he in God was strong exceedingly: He fortifi'd Salem with towres and walls, With great charges he digged many wells, An armie of three hundred thousand men, He did maintaine his countrey to defend; But he made strong, forgot Gods instruction, His heart was puft up to his destruction, For like a Priest by a fearfull offence, He went to Temple for to burne incense; But Azariah the Priest with courage, Withstood the King in his folie and rage; Cease, cease, said he, cease from this great fence, It is for Priests to offer Gods incense; Goe out, goe soone out of this sanctuary, Dshonour thou shalt have by this folly: Then Uzzia a censer in his hand Took, to burne incense 'gainst the Lords co¦mand; Then the great Lord him smote in the forehead With leprosie, then all the Priests with speede
Did thrust him out, and he himself to flie Made hast, because the Lord with leprosie Him smitten had; for thus going astray He liv'd leprous untill his dying day: All his lifetime to his great grief and smart, He dwelt a leper privately apart. The Use. Let Kings heere learne in their pride and folly, Not to meddle with Jovahs Sanctuary. 10. JOTHAM. Fatherlesse. JOtham during his fathers leprosy, Did in Judah as King the Scepter sway; He gave his minde to do that which was right, And pleasant in the great Eternells sight; He builded much; After in warre anone By force of armes he subdu'd strong Ammon; He prospered well, he was in vertues rare, For he his wayes before God did prepare: Twentie five yeeres he was when he began To reigne, sixteene he did reigne in Salem. Thus di'd Jotham of age one and fourty, And buri'd was in Davids faire city.
The Use. The King that would wisely his Scepter sway, Before the Lord let him prepare his way. 11 AHAZ. Possessing. THis vaine Ahaz who understood no right, Did that which was most wicked in GOD sight; He not regarding in heart th'Eternell, Did walk in the ill wayes of Israel: He images set up for Baalim, Likewise in Hinnon incense was by him, Burnt with his children in a fearfull fire, To grieve GOD with Heathen he did conspire: He was most bent unto idolatry, On the high hils, and under the green tree: Because he did contemn the LORDS command The LORD him gave into his enemies hand; The Syrians first, after these of Isra'l Him overthrew; thus fearfull was his fall. Then valiant Pekah from the Syrian land Slew in Judah of men six score thousand: Also Israel (in a fearfull way)
Two hundred thousand captives took away: Likewise Philistins with profane Edom Against the land in divers places come; Thus the great GOD who to vengeance is slow For Ahaz sins brought Judahs kingdome low: This wicked man when he was vexed sore, With divilish spight did sin yet more and more: The Scriptures plainly point at his trespasse, While they thus say, This is that King Ahaz. This fool unto the false gods sacrificed Of Damascus which had him sore displeased: Because, said he, the gods of Syria Hath helped them, they shall be my Jovah: The Temple doors he shut up in fury, And gave himself to vile idolatry, Both in Salem, and also in Judah He set idols in contempt of Jovah: Thus this ill man in wickednesse did die, Therefore with Kings they would not him burie. The Use. Kings who their land staine with idolatry Shall often meet with wo and miserie.
12. HEZEKIAH. The strength of the LORD. THis godly Son of most wicked Ahaz Did fear the LORD, he most religious was; This noble King, a most worthy Divine, In Judah land did reigne yeers twentie nine; In his first yeer the doors of GODS house fair He opned, and the breaches did repair; The Priests and Levits, which seem'd to him m meet, He together gath'red to the East street: Hear me, said he, Now your selves sanctifie, All filthinesse from th'holy place cary: Our ill fathers have most vilely trespassed, The divel them hath with wicked wiles copassed; They have forsaken God, and gone astray, Their faces from him they have turn'd away, The Temple doors they have shut up about, The clearest lamps of God they have put out; Ʋnto the Lord they have burnt no incense, They have not car'd what manner of offence They did to him, therefore Gods heavy wrath Came on Judah, treading that wicked path,
Because they scornd the Lords commandement, o trouble, hissing, and astonishment e them deliv'red; for hating his word ur dear fathers have fallen by the sword; And which greatly augments our miserie; ur sons, daughters are in captivitie. ow let us make a covenant I pray ith God the Lord, that he may turn away rom his fierce wrath; cast off all negligence, or yee are set to serve, and burn incense. Then the Levits were gath'red carefully To cleanse GODS house from all impurity: All th'uncleannesse within GODS house anone They cary'd out, and cast it in Kidron. When they had cleansed things of every sort, To Hezekiah they made the report; Then this good King in great zeal rose early, And gath'red the Rulers of the city: This good King and they all with one accord Went up in haste to the house of the LORD: Divers offrings they offred to JOVAH, For the kingdome, the temple and Judah: Levits with cymbals, harps, and psalterie, The Priests with trumpets made sweet melodie: The people did worship, and singers sing, Trumpets founded so that the house did ring;
This did continue GOD did it commend, Till the burnt offering was brought to an end; When the Trumpets most holy consecration, Was finished, the people great oblation, Did offer gladely with a most free heart, The Priests, the Levites, each man did his part; So the service of GODS house pleasantly, Was then in order set most suddenly: Thus Hezekiah after all repar'd, Rejoic'd in God who had his men prepar'd, Then this good King by Gods divine counsell Ordain'd Judah and also Israel: To keep passeover for great JEHOVAH, At Salem from Dan to Beershebah; The posts in hast with letters from the King, Went through all parts for to declare this thing: The summe was this that all men then shou mourne, For their trespasse and to the Lord returne: If yee, wrote he, turne to this Lord of grace In wrath he will not from you turne his face: But Ephraim and Manasse forlorne, Israels men, did laugh these posts to scorne; Yet of Aser and of Manasse came Divers, to worship the LORD at Salem: The hand of God in Judah was mighty, To give them one heart with sinceritie,
To celebrat that great Jehovahs feast, hey all obey'd the greatest and the least; ut in Israel numbers foolishly, d beene carelesse themselves to sanctifie; t this good King did pray for them anone, e good Lord, said he, pardon ev'ry one, ho doth his owne heart prepare sinceerely, hough according to Jovahs Sanctuary e not cleansed; This the Lord did please, ho heal'd the people of their sore desease; ea more Isra'l without all wearinesse, id keepe the feast that day with great gladnesse, hole fourteene dayes that feast which was holy bserved, was in Salem Gods city: he King and Princes did give much cattell o the people of Judah and Israel; nce Solomon the son of David King, as not in Salem ever seene such thing: Then all the Priests and the Levits arose, nd blest the people both with heart and voice; hey pray'd to GOD with words filled with grace, heir prayer came unto Gods dwelling place: When this was done by these of both nation, hey all intended a reformation; hey cut the groves, the images they brake, he Altars and high places they did sacke;
That done, Isra'l in a good motion, Return'd quickly to their possession. Then the Priests course the King with dilige Ordred, and als provided maintenance, For that great work that preachers of the wo Might have courage in the Law of the Lord; The people willing corne, wine, oyle holy, With tiths of all did bring aboundantly. Thus Hezekiah did throughout Judah: Good, right, and truth before the great Jovah He wrought; such was his great sincerity, The Lord he sought with all his heart truely. Then Sen'cherib King of Assyria, With great forces entred into Judah; When Hezekiah thus perceived them Resolv'd to fight against Jerusalem, Then he this counsell from his Princes tooke, Who the waters of fountaine and of brooke Will'd him to stop, and so their host to scatt Why should our foes, said they, with whol water Refreshed be? So for his own defence Both darts and shields he made in aboundan The broken walls up to the towres he rear'd, In Davids city he Millo repair'd: Captains of war he gath'red to Salem, And thus he spake comfortably to them,
Be strong, let not Senacheribs armie, ith their great number your heartes terrifie; ith him the armie of flesh, the Eternell to help us and to fight our Battell. After he had these comforts on them prest, e people all upon his words did rest: nnacherib after this sent some men, om faire Lachish unto Jerusalem. Vile Rabshakeh thus railed in his pride, hereon trust yee? Into what hole abide ill yee? Now try and als well examine, yee will die by thirst and sore famine: t not your King trusting in his JOVAH eceive you; Is not he Hezekiah, ho Gods Altars and high places destroy'd ath, that one Altar in Salem imploy'd Might be? Be wise, regard not his command, ow yee not what unto all peoples land My Master hath done; What Gods of Na∣tions, uld save their people in such vexations? All these gods folks I overthrew at length, ho is your God that I should fear his strength? herefore in time consider and percieve,
Lest that your King vvith vaine vvordes f deceive. The people all in silence and in doole, Did heare these wordes of that blasphem foole. Then Eliakim the son of Hilkijah, Reported all unto Hezekiah, Who hearing this was in great grief and smart, He rent his cloathes and with his clothes h heart: Unto Esay the Prophet he did send, Men in sackcloth his answere to attend. These men unto the Prophet said truely Of trouble, rebuke, and of blasphemy This is a day; the children to the birth Are come, but there is no strength to bring forth Of Rabshakeh it may be God will heare, The railing word which he voide of all feare, Sent from his Master King of Assyria, Did vomit out against the Lord Jovah. O man of God thy duety doth thee bind. To pray for these that are now left behind. When these words came unto the Prophets eare, He said let not your good Master now feare;
God in the Heavens most bright in Majestie Hath clearly heard that vile rogues blasphemie. ehold, saith God, I in my wrath at last pon that man will send a fearfull blast f terrour great, he shall a rumour hear, Vhich shall his bones and bowels shake with fear; ome he shall go, trust and believe my word, n his own land he shall fall by the sword. After Rabshakeh had against JOVAH hus railed, he unto the strong Libnah id go, where his Master in brags most stout ith his armie encamped round about. This King again sent to Hezekiah en to revile with other words JOVAH. Let not, said they, O Hezekiah King, hy God deceive thee with this vaine saying, am the Lord the mighty God Jovah, shall you save from all Assyriah. ast thou not heard and understood clearly, ow these great Kings have wasted utterly All lands? None could escape their mightie hand, d now shalt thou before their forces stand? zan, Haran, Kezeph and Thelasar, th strong Eden, they have subdued by war.
VVhere are the Kings of Hena and Ivah Of Hamath, Arpad? Tell Hezekijah, Where is the King of Sepharvaim strong? Who could them match their gods or K among? When this vile letter full of blasphemie Was read, the King to Gods house speedilie Went up; to summe the matter in a word, That vile letter he spread before the Lord: Then Hezekiah made to th' Eternell This prayer, saying, O God of Isra'l, Which now dwellest betweene the Cherubines Thou art the Lord alone of all Kingdomes; With great mercy, O Lord, bow downe th eare, And with regard my humble sute now heare Consider how with wordes sharpe like a good, Thy have the name pierc'd of the living Go Most true it is and easy to enquire, That they false gods have burnt into a fire For these gods no gods were, but vvorke hands, Dead vvood, and stone are gods of other la Therfore, O Lord, vve thee beseech humbly, Save us novv from that tyrants cruelty:
hat all the Kingdomes of the earth anone, May knovv that thou the great God art alone. Then the Lords Prophet faithfull Isaiah, ent to the King even good Hezekiah his comfort, Thus saith the God of Isra'l, hen in thy prayer thou didst to me call, hee did heare; Concerning him that day, his is the vvord that God the Lord did say, he virgin, the dear daughter of Zion, hee hath despised and laughed to scorne; rusalem hath novv most tauntingly ith great disdaine shaken her head at thee: beastly man! vvhom hast thou novv nick∣named? ou knovvest not vvhom thou hast so bla∣sphemed; ainst vvhom thy voice and eyes novv canst thou tell st thou lift up? Even the God of Isra'l; thy messengers both in thought and word, sphemously thou hast reproch'd the Lord; people deare thou hast boasted with threats, em to destroy with numbers of charets; ou hast boasted that thou their Cedars tall
Shall cut untill they to the ground shall fall Because thou hast of men great assistance, Thou hast in number put thy confidence: When before thee many did melt like snow Not thou, but I these men did overthrow: Thou overcame neither by Speare or Shiel But I them made like the grasse of the fiel Like the green herb or grasse on the house t Or corne blasted before it be growne up: But thy abode and comming against me Thy pride and rage is known most certainly Because thy tumults to mine eares come up. Therefore into thy proud nose now a hooke I will put, als my bridle in thy lips, Thy vaine glory shall suffer an Ecclipse: Though now thou boast and bragge with furie, Thou shalt turne backe and flee most s fullie: But as for Judah it shall surely spring, And pleasant fruits in plenty shall foorth Gods foes the truth of this saying shall f The Lord of hosts shall doe it by his zeale As for that vile, and vaine blasphemous
Aainst this City he shall doe nothing t may it hurt, no arrow he shall shut, em to him shall not be for a But: en this is done, yee shall Jehovah thank, 'gainst Salem no man shall cast a bank: n home againe with shame I will now send my right hand this City shall defend. hat same night the mighty Eternell, in all haste send an armed Angell, o in one night slew at the Lords command, hundred fourescore and als five thousand; en they arose in the morning early, old like doung their dead bodies did lye: Then this vaine King who scorned th' Eter∣nell, urn'd with shame in Niniveh to dwell; shortly after it thus came to passe, t God him punish'd for his vile trespasse; Nisrochs house, which ended all the strife, owne two sons bereav'd him of his life. Some dayes after the good King Hezekiah s sicke; to him the Prophet Isaiah me with this message, Thou shalt surely die, ow thine house in order speedilie. Then he his face turned unto the wall, d thus he said unto the Eternall:
Remember, Lord, how I have before thee Walked in trueth and great sinceritie: Remember now in my great grief and smart, How I thee have serv'd with a perfect heart Remember, Lord, how I with all my might Have done that which is pleasant in thy sigh While thus he spake and added speaches m Good Hezekiah did weep very sore; The LORD him heard, and his Prophet c back, And sent him for this lease of life to make; Tell Hezekiah, that worthy Captaine, That he yet King fifeteene yeeres shall remain Thy prayer heard have I and seene thy teares, I will tee heale, therefore lay down thy fear Yea more to thee this promise I will make, I will this citie save for mine owne sake: Then the Prophet in this time full of toile, A lump of figs laid upon the Kings boile; So for the well of Judahs common wealth, The King by GOD restored was to health. The King unto the Prophet thus did say, How shall I know that I on the third day Shall to GODS house goe, and his service see? What shall the signe be? now tell thou to me Well said the Prophet, choise novv as please,
the Sun back or foreward ten degrees hall goe; For to goe forevvard said the King o see shadovves, it is no vveighty thing, et the Lord novv, for his great mercies sake, Make the shadovv by his might to turne back: hen the Prophet as he desired said, nd GOD him heard according as he prai'd. he Sun went back with his swift sweating Horse ull ten degrees as one that hath remorse: When on his journey going like the wind, e him bethinks his purse is left behind; hen back againe he wheeles most speedilie, hus went the Sun, as men that day might see: ials went false and, Forrests shadowes black, Wondred to see themselves turne and goe back. Then Berodach-Baladan of Babel ing, sent to him letters thus for to tell How glade he was of all his peace and wealth, nd that he was fully restor'd to health. But Hezekiah in pride of his heart Did that shortly which did procure his smart; Unto these men of Babel foolishly His silver, gold, spices, armour did he Then shew; yea, all the treasures that he had, n his vaine pride before their eyes he laid. Then came againe the Prophet Isaiah, With this new message from the great Jovah;
He said to them, what said these men to thee? What's in mine house, said he, I let them see: Among my treasures all there is nothing, Which these men sent from the great Bab King, Have not now seene; Well, well, said Isaiah, Heare a message from the great JEHOVAH; All thy treasures gath'red unto this day, By Babels men shall be cari'd away: Thy dearest sons that shall issue from thee, In Babels court they base Eunuchs shall bee. Then to the Prophet said Hezekiah, Good is the word that thou brings from Jovah▪ I looke for mercy from my God alwayes, Let peace and trueth he stable in my dayes. Last Hezekiah who all his life did fear. The Lord his God, sleept with his fathers deare▪ In the chiefest sepulchre of David, This worthy King was with honour buri'd. The Song of Hezekiah. IN cutting off of my short dayes, I said I shall now goe
Ʋnto the grave; I am depriv'd of my few yeares also: 2 I said, I shall not see the Lord in the Land of living, I shall behold man no more with these that have heere dwelling: 3 Mine age is parted and remov'd among trouble and strife Like sheepheards tents, I have cut off like a weaver my life. He with sicknesse will cut me off, what ever I pretend; From day ev'n unto night wilt thou of me soone make an end; 4 I reckned till morning that as a Lion so surelie He will my bones break; Of me thou wilt make an end speedie: 5 Like a poor cran in great distresse or a troubled swallow So did I chatter; I did mourne as doth the simple dove: My eyes do faile with looking up, and very dimmed be▪
O Lord I am oppressed sore, now undertake for me: 6 What shall I say? He spoken hath, and als hath done no lesse: I shall go softly all my yeeres in my soules bitternesse. 7 In all these things is the life of my Sprite; they that believe Do live by them; Recover me, and so make me to live. 8 Behold for a desired peace I had great bitternesse: But thou in love hast sav'd me from the pit of rottenesse; For thou who of afflicted men dost ever notice take: In thy great mercie all my sinnes hast cast behinde thy back. 9 For grave cannot thee praise, and death can not celebrate thee; They that goe to the pit can not hope for thy trueth surelie. 10 The living, the living he shall, praise thee, as I this day;
The fathers shall to their children make knowne thy truth alway. 11 The Lord was ready me to save, therefore we with accord To the string'd instruments will sing in the house of the Lord. The Use. f Kings shall serve the Lord with all their heart, n great trouble the Lord shall take their part: But this the Lord of heav'n can not abide, hat hearts of Kings be lifted up with pride. 13. MANASSEH. Forgetting. JOseph comforted by Gods great mercy, Which made him quite forget his misery, From such forgetting he his first born Son Called Manasseh, so for such reason, t may be this King, at first got his name, He in his life was stain'd with sin and shame; ike heathen men, void of Gods feare and grace,
He in folie did build up the high place, Which his father commanded to destroy, He did it build with chearfulnesse and joy; As though a God had not beene in Isra'l, He madly rear'd up Altars for Baal; He made a grove and with much folly driv'n, He gave worship unto the host of Heav'n; Observing times and using inchantments He did despise the Lords commandements: He als provoking the Lord unto ire, Made his own sons to passe through burning fi He dealt with wizards, and sin worthy death He did, which did God much provoke to wra In his folly worthy the name of rage, He set in Gods house a most vile image: This man practisde more vile abominations, Then were done by profane heathen nations: Who by the force of the great Eternell Destroyed were before his Israel: At last the Lord, full of compassions, Abhorred such abominations. Because this man, said he, hath plaide foole, Defiling Judah with his vile idole, Behold I bring such troubles and such feares Which shall cause tingle all the hearers ear
r such doings wherein is no relish, rusalem now wiped (like a dish) all be; In red war their foes shall them foil, hey shall to them become a prey and spoil, r since from Egypt I brought them the way hat was most right, they ever went astray. Manasseh more in his furie most rude, Salem did shed much innocent blood: While Manasseh did not regard Gods check, rong Babels captaine took him by the neck mong the thornes, and him with fetters bound, o the Lord did this vile man much confound: Yet when he was in great affliction, e ran to God with supplication, efore the Lord he much humbled his heart, e pray'd to God who heard him in his smart, nd helped him, and brought him back againe rom Babel for in Salem to remaine. Then Manasseh did by experience ost surely know that God was his defence; hen was his heart inflamed with gods love, e all strange gods with idols did remove; ll strange Altars he brake downe speedily ith zeal, and cast them out of the city: t last this King who to God gracious eturned, was buri'd in his owne house.
The Use. Let sinners learne for no sinne to despaire; No sin there is, but God can it repaire: For witchcraft, blood, and vile idolatry, Manasseh humble did obtaine mercy. 14. AMON. Faithfull, true. THis wicked man of two and twenty year Began to reigne; He voide of all Gods fe Did reigne two years; God made his Kingdo short, Because he made of wickednesse a sport: He with Manassch in his wayes was bad, But did not with Manasseh turne to God. At last against this King unrighteous His servants rose, and slew him in his house: After this done, the people all in ire Did kill these men who did his death conspir The Use. Let Kings beware of sin to make a sport, For many sins doe cut their honours short:
t parents learne to feare to goe astray, r their children often follow their way: t Subjects learne to feare their Kings to kill, r other shall not faile their blood to spill. 15. JOSIAH. The fire of the Lord. BEhold Josiah; consider a part, The fire of Zeale cleare burning in his heart: ght years he was when he upon the Throne gan to sit; he reigned thirty one: e did with God most constantly abide, om Davids wayes he turned not aside: hen he was come to eighteene years of age ough young in years, he was both grave and sage: He sent scribe Shaphan to Priest Hilkijah, at the silver for the house of JOVAH th'red at doores, as GODS word did com∣mand, ight be shortly put in the workemans hand: Then to Shaphan said the Priest Hilkijah, ave now found in the house of JOVAH ods Law-book; Then Shaphan tooke it with speed;
And with great joy and gladnesse it did read. After Shaphan this book did with him bring, And it in haste did read before the King: When he the words heard of that Testament, For greef and sorrow the King his cloaths rent: Then diverse men by him were set to looke, To try right soone the meaning of the Booke: A great wrath, said he, is against us kindled, For our fathers against God have rebelled: Then at the last the good Priest Hilkijah, With others went to Prophetesse Huldah; This woman in a Colledge at Salem Did dwell; with wisedome she said unto them; Thus saith the great Lord God of Israel Ʋnto the man that sent you, yee shall tell, Behold I will bring ill upon this place, Th'inhabitants I will greatly disgrace; All the plagues I will send without remeed Which good Josiah in that Booke did read; My wrath against this place shall kindled bee, Because of their most vile idolatrie; But go and tell the good King Josiah, This message from the mighty Lord Jovah, Because thou had a trembling tender heart, And for such sins did often weepe apart, Because when I did speake against this place;
Thou rent thy cloaths with teares drenching thy face, hold thou shalt now this great comfrt have, peace thou shalt be gath'red to thy grave; ough dayes be coming full of miseries, ore they come death shall close up thine eyes; ter these men heard such words of comfort, ey to the King the message did report. Then Josiah with the men of Judah ent up unto the house of great Jovah, th him there were the Priests and Prophets all, ere als the people were both great and small; them he read the Lords booke ev'ry word, ich had been found in the house of the Lord: n this good King who Gods word understood serve the Lord hard by a pillar stood: with the people all with one accord, d make a Covenant there before the Lord: Gods presence all ill wayes they forsooke, lling to doe according to that Book: Then the King in the name of great Jovah mmanded soone the high Priest Hilkijah, th other keepers whether great or small, ring quickly the vessels made for Ba'l for the grove, out of Gods Temple faire,
That he GODS house might cleanse and al paire: When this was done in the field of Kidron, He in great zeal there them did burne each on And to fulfull the word of th'Eternell, The ashes he did carry to Bethel; Vile Priests there were who with idolatrie Defiled had both Temple and Citie: To Sunne, Moone, Planets and als to Baal They sacrificed, and to Heavens host all: These vile men, he desiring God to please, In his great zeal put downe, and made to ce The grove also which was idolatrous, The King with speed brought out from the L house, At Kidron he it burnt and stamped small To small powder, and cast that powder all Upon the graves of these who foolishly Had beene defiled with idolatrie. The Sodomite far from Gods house he dr And these who did weave hangings for the g He with the rest Topheth defil'd anone, Which was in the vile valley of Hinnon, So that no man thereafter durst aspire To make his Son for Molech passe the fire. Thus he persisting as he had begun, Tooke the horses which were given to the Su
By Kings of Judah, which made Priests to mourn, The Suns Charets he in a fire did burne. He did beat down and break most speedily, The Altars which in vile idolatie, Manasseh, Ahaz, when they God forsooke, Did build; the dust thereof in the base Brooke Of Kidron he did cast; High places vile or Ashtoreth, Chemosh, Milcome, defile e did; That bad Abomination, ard at mount Olives, mount of corruption, Which Solomon did build in Israel, Whereby he much provocked th'Eternell, as by Josiah destroy'd speedily, ch was his zeal for the great Gods glory. This good King als the images brake then e cut the groves and with the bones of men e places fill'd; the Altar at Bethel, Jeroboam made who mov'd Isra'l sin, he brake downe, it to dust he drove, d stampt it small, and also burnt the grove. The King turning him self at last did spy, vers Sepulchers wherein dead did ly: ke up these bones, said he, in his great ire, on this Altar burn them all with fire: w do for God who doth my crowne uphold, this long since by God hath beene foretold: Then said the King, come now, and tell to me,
What title is among the graves I see? The men of that city said to the King, Heere lyes the Prophet which message did b That great Jovah, the God of Israel, Should do such things to th' Altar of Bethel: Then said the King, this man whom GOD love, Let him alone, see no man his bones move. Likewise this Prince sent from the great VAH, Reform'd the cities of Samariah. Their Priests he slew with his sword in his ir And on their Altars their bones burnt with fir Then King and people all with one accor A great Passeover did keep to the Lord, The like whereof before had never bene Among the Kings, or yet the Judges sene; Yet more, the workers with familiar sprits, With wizards, idols, and all idle rits He spied out, and wholly put away, Thus he Gods house reform'd without delay Unto the Lord this King just and upright With all his heart, with all his soul and migh Turned himselfe, in great zeal more and mor He had no match, after or yet before: But oh alas, the great wrath of Jovah, Could not be turn'd from the sins of Judah;
Manasses sins both cruel and unkind, ld not go out of great Jehovahs minde. will, said God, withdraw now my great love m all Judah, them now I will remove of my sight, as I did t' Israel, Salem als like judgements I will tell; wrath 'gainst it here plainly I declare, ugh I had said my name shall ay be there. hen good Josiah King after all this ne with his men to fight at Carchemish, inst Necho of Egypt land the King, o did with him a mighty armie bring; ho to him Embasadors did send, ell him that he came not for this end, hurt Josiah either neere or far, others at whom he intended war: d hath him sent, therefore now let him passe: afterward thou smart for thy trespasse: hou Necho in this Gods warre annoy, Lord is with him who shall thee destroy. ut for all this Josiah with Necho olv'd to fight him neere to Megiddo: n he disguised came to that Battell, Archers shot and there Josiah fell: n said the King, sore wounded I this day Battell am, have me therfore away: e desir'd so they this wounded King
From the battell unto Salem did bring In a Charet; There this good man he died, There he also was with his fathers buried. After his death all these that did sojourne In Judah, did for him lament and mourne; Yea for his death the Prophet Jeremie, With words of greefe lamented bitterlie. The Use. Behold, O Kings, who minde to please Jova Of zeale a patterne was this good Josiah: This man by halfes did not idolatrie Reforme, but purged all most perfectly: High places, groaves, images, idols vaine Hill Altars he did cut, break, and disdaine 16. JEHOACHAZ. The possession of God. JEhoachaz Son of good Josiah, Was after him crowned King of Judah; He fear'd not God, he in Jehovahs sight, Follow'd the trace of wayes that were not r Him Phar'oh Necho King of Egypt land Tooke, and with fetters strong at Riblah band
Wee yeeres of age he was and als twentie, en he was crown'd and reign'd but moneths three. The Use. Kings here learn not in their sinnes to sport angers God, who cuts their honours short. 17 ELIAKIM. called also, JEHOJAKIM. GOD ariseing. Fter that Necho King of Egypt land, Deposed had by strong and mighty hand oachaz, he sent for Eliakim, ose name he chang'd into Jehojakim; s was the second son of Josiah, o by Necho was made King of Judah: age this King was eighteene yeeres and seven en he began; he reigned but eleven; fear'd not God, he in JEHOVAHS sight low'd the trace of wayes that were not right: n his dayes Nebuchanezzar the King Babylon, Jehojakim did bring o bondage; in this uncouth slaverie,
He was a servant the space of yeeres three: But afterward, as th' historie doth tell, He turned and against him did rebell: But for the sins of the Kings of Judah He got no help from the great JEHOVAH: For the great sins done by their wicked hands, Against Judah the Lord sent troups and bands From Syria, from Moab, and Ammon, And also from the land of Babylon; These he did send against Judah to fight, For to remove Judah out of his sight; For the great sins by King Manasse done, The Lord in wrath would not the land pardon Last by Nebuchanezzar he was found, Who straitly him in most strong fetters bound To Babylon to carry him that day He thought surely, but died by the way. Of his great faults we have the historie In twentie two chapter of Jeremie; He was a man full of unrighteousnesse, His eyes and heart were but for covetousnesse Oppression, blood, and also violence, Did most vilely staine the hands of that Prince Therefore concerning King Jehojakim, Thus said the LORD, None shall lament for This at the last shall surely come to passe, He shall with shame be buri'd like an Asse;
e shall be drawne and cast foorth filthily, eyond the gates of Salem Gods city. The Use. et Kings beere learne for God their life to spend, A sinfull life brings to a shamefull end. 18 JEHOJACHIN. The preparation, or strength of GOD. THis wicked man called Jehojachin, Follow'd the trace of ill Jehojakim is foolish father: He had these names three, ehojachin, Jechonias, als he honias was called; When he began o reigne he was of eighteene yeeres a man, In his time Nebuchadnezzar quicklie rom Babylon did send a great armie: erusalem, in great furie and rage, hese men of Babel stoutly did besiege; t last the King Jehojachin came out ith mother, servants, princes him about; hus this ill man in th'eight yeere of his reigne,
Was taken captive by great Babels King: Who with his rascals most unrighteous, Did carry thence the treasures of GODS house He also rageing in wrongs manifold, Cut in pieces the rich vessels of gold, Which had beene made by wise King Somon, In Gods Temple of these he left not one: Ten thousand captives from Judah that day, With crafts-men, smithes, he carried all away The poorer sort by his pride and disdaine Were onely suffred at home to remaine: Jehojachin with Mother, Wives that day, And officers were carried all away. 'Gainst this ill man the Prophet Jeremie, Gods fearfull judgements declared plainly; As I live, said the Lord, though Coniah Son of Jehojakim King of Judah, Were neare and deare as signet on the hand, Yet would I pluck him thence, so that to stand Before my face this vaine and naughty fool Shall not have strength, like a broken idol: O Earth, earth, earth, give eare and heare  word, For I that speakes am the Almighty Lord; Write him chidelesse, a man of no vertue, This Jechoniah shall not have issue;
Tis is enacted qy the great Jovah, e of his feed shall be King in Judah, The Use. Kngs follow their wicked fathers trace, e Lord them shall pluck shortlie from their place, he King who with Coniah playes the foole, in Gods eyes like a broken idole. 19. MATTANIAH. The gift of GOD. He after was by Nebuchanezzar King of Babylon, called, ZEDEKIAH, The righteousnesse of GOD. THis was the third son of good Josiah, Jehojachins Uncle; the great JOVAH e did contemne; he humbled not his heart, hen Jeremie from God spake him apart: 'Gainst Babels King he falsly did rebell,
Who made him sweare by the great Eternell; Gods word to him gives this reprofe and chec His heart he hardned and stiffned his neck; Therefore in the ninth yeare of his ill reigne, God sent to him the host of Babels King, Who 'gainst Salem pitched with courage stout And built strong forts against it round about: Two years that seege continued hardly, At last famine prevail'd in the city: It to defend, in it was no more might, The men of war from it did flee by night: The King himself, who stood out long in vaine, At last did flee by the way of the plaine; Him the Caldees pursu'd with feet of Roe, And overtooke him neere to Jericho; Him they did bring unto the faire Riblah, There they judgement upon Zedekiah Did give; yea his sons there before his face These villains slew without mercy or grace: When that was done, in their most cruell spo That this poore King should have no more cofort By sight of eyes, they this devise did find, To put his eyes out, and so make him blind; Because against the Lord he did trespasse, His foes him bound with strong fetters of brass The ninteenth year of Nebuchanezzar,
Nebuzaradan his captaine from farre me with great forces, he with rage and ire ds house and the Kings palace burnt with fire: is Babylonish army strong and stout ake downe the walls of Salem round about: us that city with all that there was found, ith GODS house als was brought unto the ground: ebuzaradan in Judah left then ely vine dressers, and poor husband men. e men of might with all their wealth that day t of their land were carried all away. The Use. hen King or people thus live voide of grace, he Lord shall them soone remove from their place: ho want Gods help, their foes shall soone them foile, em captives take, and their rich treasures spoile: r Judahs sins the mighty Lord that day ng, Crowne, Scepter, and carried all away: r their trespasse he would not them defend, t of their Kingdome made a tragick end:
Behold how this people of great renowne, Were spoil'd at last of Liberties and Crowne: They angred God, they did his Prophets scorne, Therefore no Jevv did sit on Judahs Throne. Let Kings heere learne vvho are set in high place, That Kingdomes stand not by mens strength, but grace: Let Kings heere learne hovv for their sinne anone God brings to nought their Scepter, Crovvne, and Throne.
THE GARDEN OF ZION. Of the Kings of Israel. 1. Jeroboam: 2. Nadab: 3. Baasha: 4. Elah: 5. Zimri: 6. Omri: 7. Ahab: 8. Ahaziah. 9. Joram: 10. Jehu: 11. Jehoahaz: 12. Jehoash: 13. Jeroboam: 14. Zechariah, last of Ichus race: 15: Shallum: 16. Menahem: 17. Pekajah: 18. Pekah. 19. Hoshea. A Prayer. O Well of life, novv shovv thy golden source A silver pipe make my heart for its use: In holy tearmes make me the praise expresse, Which is most due unto thy holinesse;
I beg thy light and grace for to diserne, That teaching others, I my self may learne. Ecclipse me not like the Coach of the Moone When it is black, but turne my night to Noone: My brest, O Lord, vvith sacred verses fill, Which I may vvrite vvith a most nimble quil. Of Judahs Kings, as vve have understood, Many vvere bad, but fevv alas vvere good; But Isra'ls Kings thy vvord them All doth blame, Not one of them did truely feare thy name, They vvith idols thy vvorship did abuse, Of their ill lives teach me to make good use. 1. JEROBOAM. Contending or striving vvith the people. THis wicked man at first but a servant To Solomon, did scorne Gods Covenant: This Son of Nebat stinketh filthilie, His name is rotten by idolatrie: None Like to him in Scripture I can find, For none as he made Gods if a'l to sin: At first Solomon, for his industrie;
This young man set up in a high degree, For his valour and for his brave courage, Of Josephs house he gave to him the charge; But after that, the Prophet Ahjah Did clearly shew from the great Jehovah: That Jeroboam ten Tibes should command, But two as Lamps for Davids house should stand; Because Solomon by idolatrie, To a great wrath had provok'd the most hie: When Solomon heard that he should be King, He sought by death such honours downe to bring: But he to the King of Egypt anone Fled, and was there untill King Solomon Did end his dayes; then after he came back, From Egypt King who called was Shishak. The Isra'lits assembled at Schechem, To Crowne with pomp the young Rehoboam, By Jeroboams instigation, Were mov'd to make for relexation sute to him, who answ'red them roughly, Therefore according to the Prophecy Of Abijah, ten Tribs were quickly rent rom Davids house, then they incontinent, onsid'ring what strength they had of men, o Jeroboam sent of their brethren im for to Crowne soone King of Israel, his purpose was from the great Eternel:
When Rehoboam was come to Salem, An hundred fourescore thousand chosen men He gath'red for in a bloody Battell, To fight against the house of Israel; By force of war this ill advised King, Thought well the Kingdome backe againe  bring: But then unto the Prophet Semajah, There came a word from the great Jehovah Who said to Rehoboam and his hoast, It is not time either to fight or boast; Let not now Judah against Israel Come for to fight in a bloody Battell; This matter is from the Lord righteous, Let ev'ry man therefore turne to his house: Then they GODS word did hear with hu heart, And so they all returning did depart. Then Jeroboam Shechem and Penuel Most Princely built, and als in them did dwell He proud in sprit, said these words in his heart, I feare at last that Davids house depart From me and mine, to turne unto their Lord, And so me kill in furie with the sword; If they go up for the great GODS service, To do at Salem dayly sacrifice:
Then Jeroboam with his bad counsell, Two calves of gold made against th'Eternell: It is too much, said he, for you to goe Vp to Salem; both paine and cost also It is to go so farre to th' Eternell; See heere more near thy gods O Israel: Of these two calves in Bethel he set one, At Dan another which brought down his Throne Thus did this vile man his Kingdome begin With dead idols, which thing became a sin: Before these calves the people speedily, Did worship with most vile idolatrie; He vile houses of hie places did make, And base Priests that were not of Levis stock: On Bethels Altar which was great offence, He sacrificed and als burnt incense. While this he did, behold anone a jar, A man from GOD thus cri'd Altar, Altar; hus saith the LORD a childe of Davids house, osiah King a man most righteous, He in a zeale and godlie jealousie, hall such Priests bones most cursed burne on thee: ee now a signe, the Altar shall be rent, he ashes shall be powred out and spent.
When Jeroboam heard from th' Eternel, What this man said 'gainst th' Altar in Bethel, From the Altar he did put forth his hand, Saying lay hold on this man I command; But GOD dri'd up the arme of this profane, So that he could not pull it in againe; GOD rent th' Altar and ashes powred out Then the King trembling, who before was stout▪ Said to GODS man, a man of gift and grace, Pray thou for me, and now intreat Gods face, That he to me my hand would now restore; When he did pray, it became as before. Then said the King, I will thee now reward Come home with me; but he did not regard All the Kings gifts; for the halfe of thine hous Said he, I will not in this untimeous Time go with thee, a man voide of all grace, I will not eat neither drink in this place; For no request to go I will accord, For so it was me charged by the LORD. At this same time as Scriptures to us tell, There dwelt an old Prophet at this Bethel; His sons him told what great things had bee done By the Prophet at Bethel; then right soone To them he said, now saddle me mine Asse; He rode thereon, and to him where he was
Under an Oake, sitting softly he came nd said to him, tell me if thou the man f GOD art, whom the great LORD JEHOVAH, nt to our King from the land of Judah. I am, said he; Come home said he with me, efresh thy self with meat and be merrie: o said, Gods man, this thing I may not do, will not eat nor yet thy house goe to; rom GODS precept I may not go astray, must not eate nor returne by the way hat I came first; But thou must not do so id the old man, a Prophet I also m as thou art, an Angel to me spake, hat unto mine house I should bring thee back. While they at Table were eating gladely, he Sprite of GOD made the old Prophet cry, nto the Prophet who came from Judah, hus saith, the LORD, ev'n the great Jehovah: ecause thou hast rebell'd, this message have ith thy fathers thou shalt not lye in grave. When this was said, GODS man he went away, n his journey a Lion by the way im met and kill'd, but so it came to passe, e did not eat the man nor yet the Asse Whereon he rode: Behold men passing by, nd seeing this came, unto the city,
Where the old man was who at this report, Was moved much and did his sons exhort To bring his Asse, that he might ride and see, To know the trueth of all that historie: When he came there, both Lion and the Asse Were standing neere the dead Prophets carcase He the dead corps upon his Asse did lay, And with great grief brought it to the city; There as a childe lamented by his mother, He mourned, and said; Oh, Alas my brother Then said this old man to his sons apart, The mighty Lord this tells me in mine heart, What this Prophet hath said against Bethell, Shall all be done by the great Eternell: When I am dead see that ye then me lay, In this same grave wherein Gods man doth ly Now Jeroboam with his healed hand, Did not regard what Jovah did command; Base Priests he made even of the basest sort, He set them up GODS people to exhort; Who did desire, he did them consecrate For Priests, though villains and most reprobate Yea he himself a King voide of all grace, Became a Priest to serve at an high place; These were his great sins a most shamefull thin Which cut him off from ruling more as King:
Thus voide of honour of glory and fame, He liv'd and di'd with a most rotten name. Then Jeroboam sent to Ahijah His wife, to know if his son Abijah Then sick, should live or die; then she thus wise Before that blinde man did her self disguise: At this same time the word came from JOVAH, Which said unto the Prophet Ahijah, Behold now coming Jeroboams wife, To aske of thee concerning her sons life; This know in time, take heede and now be wise, For when she comes she will her self disguise; When she shall come her doubts for to discusse, Then say to her in my words thus and thus. When Ahija heard the sound of her feet, Then coming in, he spake as he thought meet; Come in thou wife of Jeroboam vaine, What mean'st thou some other thy self to faine? Hard tidings for thee are from th'Eternell, Goe and them quickly to thy husband tell: Thus saith, the LORD, who rules both Land and Sea, For as much as I have exalted thee; And of a Servant hath made thee a Prince Ov'r my people, yet hast thou ever since, By thy vaine pride and vile idolatrie,
Done evill above all that were before thee; Like basest men who do the LORD forsake, Thou hast me cast proudly behinde thy backe: Therefore, I Lord, who am most righteous, Shall bring much evill on Jeroboams house; From him I will cut off both great and small, Not leaving one to pisse against the wall: I will the remnant of his house destroy, As a doung hill which men carie away: These of his loines who die in the city, Shall by vile dogs be rent most cruelly; If any fall among the fields most faire, Food they shall be to the Fowles of the aire; Arise woman, to thine owne house get thee, For when thou enters into the Citie Thy childe shall die, for him Isra'l shall weepe, And him burie that he ingrave may sleepe; Because in him, as God hath said the word, There is some good thing found toward th LORD: Moreover God for his glory and praise, A worthy King in Israel shall raise, Who Jeroboams wicked house that day, Shall all cut off and sweepe like doung away:
But what? Even now the Lord who is perfite, As reeds in water shall Israel smite: Because they heard not what he did command, He shall them roote up out of this good land; He shall them all scatter beyond the river, Because by groves they stirred up his anger. When this was said to Jeroboams wife She rose and went to Tirzah, but the life Of her young child, was then ended most sure, When she came to the threshold of the doore: They buri'd him and mourned as Jovah, Had said before by Prophet Ahijah. When Jeroboam years twenty and two Had reign'd, he died a man of sin and woe. The Use. Let Kings heere learne that the great GOD most hie, Shall root them out, if with idolatrie They staine his land; though for a time forborne They be, at last none shall sit on their Throne Sprung from their loines; the Lord shall them deface, Both root and branch shall be cut from their race.
2. NADAB. A Prince or willing. WHen Jeroboam most wicked was dead, Then Nadab his son reigned in his stead, Ill fathers son who walked in his way, At Gibbethon Baasha did him slay: Ill fathers son of a most wicked race, He sway'd the Septer but for two years space. The Use. Let all men, chiefly Kings, heere learne and What are the fuits of vile idolatrie; Such in Gods love have rarely roome or place GOD pulls them downe and soone roots out th race. 3. BAASHA. A doer. Baasha smot Jerobo'ms house with death, To him he left not any that had breath: Thus Jeroboam for his great trespasse, By Baasha shortly was made childelesse;
Though thus he did these wicked children slay, He walked still in Jeroboams way: To him Jehu the son of Hannani, From GOD was sent to tell him this plainely, I have exalted thee out of the dust, My people hath beene subject to thy lust; Thou hast walked in Jeroboams way, Therefore the Scepter thou may no more sway; With Jeroboam I Baashas race, Will cleane root out, and will wholly deface; To Dogs and Fowles his children shall be meat, They in the fields and cities shall them eate: Last this ill man after he had twenty And foure years reign'd, he in GODS wrath did die, The Use. To punish sin and not reformed be, Is but a fruit of pride and vaine glory: Let all these who mens manners would reforme, Ʋnto GODS will their owne life so conforme.
4. ELAH. Strength. AFter Baasha came his son Elah, Who governed Israel in Tirzah; While with Arzah hs steward he did feast, He drank himselfe more drunk then any beast: While Elah was in drunkenesse filthie, He killed was by his servant Zimri: This filthie man to sobernesse a foe, All his glory enjoy'd but poore years two. The Use. Beware to make of sin a play or sport, It ends our dayes, and cuts our honours short. 5. ZIMRI. A cutter. THis ill servant after his Master slaine, Did sway the Scepter and with great disdai Destroyed all the house of Baasha, As Jehu had declared from JOVAH: He kill'd his friends and al hs kinsfolk all,
He left not one to pisse against the wall: The people hearing what in great furie, To King Elah had beene done by Zimri, Therefore against him with greef and disdaine, They Crown'd King Omri a most brave Captain: He with an armie then came speedilie, And in fair Tirzah besieged Zimri: When Zimri saw all these men so conspire, He in his palace burnt himselfe with fire: He for a Crowne walked in bloody wayes, And yet his Kingdome lasted but seven dayes. The Use. Death of ill men the living doth exhort To feare the Lord, and not in sin to sport: Let subjects learne who have grace or reason, For no respect to have hand in treason. 6. OMRI. Measure, or handfull, WHen the most part had Crowned KING Omri; Halfe of the people did follow Tibni; But the most part set Omri on the Throne So Tibni died, and Omri reign'd alone,
Twelve yeeres he reign'd; this ill King fro Shemer. Samariahs hill for two talents silver Did buy; On this hill he built a citie, Which from that Shemer he ordain'd to be, Called Samariah which great citie still, Hath name from Shemer owner of that hill. But this Omri wax'd wicked more and more, Yea, he did worse then all that were before; Both King and Captaine wicked in his dayes, He walked in all Jeroboams wayes: This Omri di'd by the hand of JOVAH, And buried was in his Samariah. The Use. Let Kings heere learne not to sinne more an more, Lest they waxe worse then all that were before. 7. AHAB. Beloved. THis Son of Omri wicked more and more, Did worse then all the Kings that were be∣fore:
When he was once advanced to be King, o him it seem'd to be but a light thing; o walk in Jeroboams wicked way, ut also he would farther go astray. Ethbals daughter who was of Zidon King, aine Jezabel for wife he did home bring: ith her vile gods forsakeing th'Eternall, e like a beast went and did serve Baal; e made a grove, he GOD provoked more, hen all the Kings of Isra'l did before. In his dayes Hiel building Jericho, aid ground and gates with much sorrow and woe; On Abiram the first borne and Segub, The ground and gates a great judgement did rub. When Ahab was lying in wickednesse, God sent Elijah to preach great distresse gainst the land: This said he from the Lord, No dew, no raine, according to my word These yeers shall be, Then God said to this man, Goe hide thy selfe at Cherith neere Jordan; hou of the Brooke shalt drinke vvaters most fresh, Ravens ordain'd have to feede thee with flesh; And so he went, and so the Ravens did bring Both bread and flesh, at morne, and als evening. A little after the brook was dri'd up,
So that Elijah could not drink or sup. Then came to him a word from th' Eternel To Zarephath of Zidon goe and dwell, Obey my word which is not false or vaine, A widow there shall surely thee maintaine: So he arose to Zerephath to go; When he was come, Elijah found all so As God had said, Behold a poor widow, Gath'ring some sticks with much grief and row; To her he said fetch me a drink I pray, Of water, with some bread without delay. As GOD lives said she I have not a cak But an handfull of meale which I must take With oyle in cruse, and with sticks speedilie It dresse, and with my son it eat and die. Then to that widow, good Elijah said, Take courage now thou needst not be afraide; But see that first for me thou dresse a cake, And after for thee and for thy son make, For thus saith, the Lord, God of Israel, The poore handfull of meal in thy Barrell, Shall not be spent, nor yet the cruse of oyle Shall faile, till raine hath made a fertile soil Then she in hast prepar'd for Elijah
Both cake and oyle; as the word from Jovah Had said, both meal and oyle did last alwayes, hereof these three persons eat many dayes. After these things, this womans son fell sick, ll breath was past, then she began to seek lijahs help, what I to doe with thee, ave man of GOD, said shee, that thou from me y son should take, and for a sore vengeance. hould call my sin now to remembrance? ive me thy son, to the widow said he rom her bosome unto a loft quicklie, e cari'd him, and as the sprit him led, e laid that child softly on his owne bed, nto the LORD he cri'd what hast thou done? las, O LORD, why hast thou slaine her son? hen this was said upon the child times three, stretch'd himselfe and cried mightily to the LORD, O LORD, I humbly pray, store the soule unto this childe the day. The Lord from hearing then could not refraine, t sent the childs soul into him againe: en Elijah the living child brought low, om the high loft and to the poore widow stor'd her son, who said to Elijah, w do I know that thou art from Jovah, d that the word of the LORD in thy lips. rueth unfained withou lies or slips.
It came to passe, then after many dayes, GOD to Elijah walking in GODS wayes Came, thus and said, now go to Ahab King, For I now raine upon the Earth will bring When GOD these words spake unto Elijah, A sore famine was in Samaria: In this famine by drougth Ahab the King, With Obadiah, for their beasts saving, Went through the land seeking brook and fo¦taine, For with water the poor beasts life maintaine: Ahab this way, but Obadiah tooke, Another way to seek fountaine and brook. As Obadiah walked in the way, Behold Elijah who met him that day: When he him knew he fell upon his face, And said art thou Elijah? By GODS grace I am said he; go and to Ahab tell, Elijah is heer from the Eternell. Alas, said he, what have I done this day, That now for thee, King Ahab should me slay There is no Kingdome there is no countrey, Whether my LORD hath not sent to seeke t And when they answred that thou wast  heer, He tooke an oath and deeply made them sw
That they thee found not; now thou say'st go tell Ahab, my LORD, the great King of Israel, Behold Elijah is come here surelie, But oh Alas, assoone as I from thee Am gone, Gods sprite vvill carry thee avvay, And then in rage King Ahab vvill me slay: I speake the trueth, no lie is in my mouth, I thy servant fear the Lord, from my youth▪ Was it not told thee hovv from Jezabel, I hid the Prophets of the Eternel? With bread and vvater their life I did save, An hundred men by fiftie in a cave; And novv thou say'st goe to Ahab and tell, Elijah is heere from the Eternel. No, said, Elijah as God lives I say, To Ahab I will shew my self this day. As soone as King Ahab saw Elijah, With great contempt he said to him Aha, Art thou the man that troublest Israel? Not I, said he, but thou vvho th' Eternell, Hast novv forsaken vvith thy fathers house, To follovv Baal in a vvicked course: Therefore novv send and unto mount Carmel, Gather to me the men of Israel, The false Prophets eight hundred and fiftie,
See that they als unto me gath'red be; Then Ahab sent unto all Israel, And gathred all these Prophets to Carmel. Then by the people Elijah well seene, Said, how long two opinions betweene, Thus will ye halt? If GOD, be GOD, allow Him for to serve, if not, Baal follow. When hee these wordes spake with great codence, Among the people there was deep silence: Elijah said, Gods cause I will maintaine, For the LORD here I only one remaine, But Baals Prophets a great number be, Heere they are foure hundred men and fiftie: Give two bullocks the true GOD to enquire, Let him be GOD who shall answere by fire. When the people that saying understood, All with one voice they said the word is goo Then Elijah to these Prophets did say, Chuse an bullock and dresse it first this day For ye be many, begin to enquire, If your god can-now aswere you by fire. Then they did take and there dresse a Bullo They cri'd aloud, and on their breast did knoc From morne to evening, they did not forbeare To cry Baal, but Baal could not heare: No voice was heard, nor any answere made,
On the Altar they leapt as they were madde. At noone Elijah them began to mocke, Now cry aloud, now your breasts dump and knock He is a god, either he is talking, r he his foes fiercely is pursueing, r in a journey, or most fast asleepe hat he may heare, now to him cry and weepe. They cri'd aloud, and cut themselves with knives nd lancets, als with perrell of their lives; ut when midday in such jangling was past ithout answere; Then Elijah at last, aid to the people, come neere me right soone; hen they came neere, to see what should bee done. Gods Altar he repair'd with courage stout, e made a large trench the Altar about; ill foure barrels with water, then said he, nd with it drench the sacrifice quicklie; gaine, againe, yea third time do the like, ill it passe ov'r the trinches highest dike: hus did they all, which was ordain'd by him. hey made Altar and trench with water swim: Then said Elijah, O GOD, of Isra'l, et it be knowne that thou art th' Eternal;
Let it be knowne that thou art GOD and LORD And that these things I have done at th word; Heere me O LORD, heare me now I the pray, That this people may surely know this day That thou art God, who do'st them all maintai And that thou hast their heart turn'd bac againe. Whn this was said, from the great Eternel, A sacred fire downe from the high Heav'ns fell This fire fall'n downe for the great GODS svice, Did with all hast consume the sacrifice; The wood and stones, with dust it did consume, The trench water it licked up right soone; When this was done all men on face afraide, The LORD is GOD, the Lord GOD t cri'd. Then said Elijah, take these Prophets vile; See none escape, see that none you beguile: Then they tooke them, and Elijah anone, Did slay these Priests downe at the brooke shon. When this was done good Elijah did say To King Ahab, I have good news this day;
Go eat and drink my word it is not vaine, heare a sound of aboundance of raine: o Ahab went up, to eat and to drink, ut Elijah in himself thus did think, will go up to the top of Carmel o see some signe of raine from th' Eternel. Then he went up, and there, as might be seene, Cast himselfe downe and put his face betweene His knees, and said, to his servant goe see, f thou can spy some clouds upon the Sea: Then he went up at the Prophets saying, And turned back, he said, There is nothing; even times againe to goe he did command, At last he saw a cloud like a mans hands. Then said Elijah go without delay, And to Ahab this from Elijah say, Now get thee down and thy Charet prepaire, Before the raine, as long as it is faire: n the meane time heav'ns black with clouds and winde, Powr'd downe great raine before and als behinde. Then Ahab rode and went to Jezreel, Elijah als strength'ned by th' Eternel Did gird his loines, and before Ahab ran, Ahab in Coache, but Elijah foot man: Thus the Prophet of the great Eternel,
Before the King did run to Jezreel. Then to Jezabel Ahab every word, Did tell plainly how that Elijahs sword Had slaine her Priests, not having spared one, And that besides the cursed brooke Kishon: Then Jezabel this hard message did send To Elijah, so the gods me defend, For thy ill prats, and for thy bloody crime, Thy life shall passe the morrow at this time. When he heard this, he in great fear arose, His heart trembled and could not well repose: He in all hast went to Beershebah, Which is a part of the land of Judah; He left his servants there in his distresse, A dayes journey he went in wildernesse; There set downe under a Juniper-tree, He did request the Lord that he might die; I am not better then my fathers dear, Said he, now take my life from all this fear. As he did ly under the Juniper Right fast asleepe, to him there a dinner An Angel brought to refresh him with meat; He touched him, and said, Arise and eat: As he awoke, behold a cake of bread Was on the coales, and a cruse at his head Of water good; Then Elijah to eat And drink began, and after fell asleep.
The second time the Angel came againe, ho did for him a new dinner ordaine; rise, said he, and eat now speedily, ecause the journey is too great for thee: ee what great care the good Lord had that day, hat Elijah should not faint by the way: hus he arose to eate and drink quickly, this foods strength he walked dayes fourty, nd fourtie nights, till to the mount of God, oreb he came where he made some abode. While he was there lodged in a poor cave, he God of heav'n who takes delight to save is servants, said, to his Elijah dear, hat now Elijah? What now doest thou heare? My heart, said he, hath beene verie jealous; or the great God who is most righteous: ll is now lost, all thy servants away re taken, now they seek me als to slay; oe foorth, said God, and stand upon the Mount; hee will I teach all dangers to surmount. Behold at first a boistrous mighty winde, hich brake the Rockes and all that it could finde: After the winde rageing came an earthquake, hich made Horeb from end to end to shake:
After the earthquake came a burning fire, But in these three was not the Lords desire; He was not there; After came a small voi Where to abide, the Lord did much rejoice: When Elijah heard this voice full of grace, He in his mantle wrapped all his face; He went out and stood before Jehovah, Who said, what do'st thou now heere Elijah? My heart, said he, hath been very jealous For the great God who is most righteous, Thine Altars, Prophets, and thy Covenant, Throwne downe and slaine they have with gr contempt, And als forsaken; thy servants away Are taken; Now they seeke me als to slay: Goe, said the Lord, returne to Damascus, And when thou comest to that desert, thus Anoint Hazael King of Syria, And Jehu for Isra'l, als Elisha For Prophet in thy roome, these all anoint, For so these things to be I do appoint: For the great sins acted by Israel, 'Gainst them shall come the sword of Hazael Whom he shall spaire, the mighty man Jeh
all with his sword all into pieces hew; any from Jehu escape away, hem shall the sword of good Elisha slay: t know Elijah for all thou heares and sees, ven thousand who have not bowed the knees, ave me left who have not done amisse, r once so much to give Baal a Kisse. When this was done, from Horeb Elijah, parted soone and found out Elisha; hen he him saw with his twelve Oxen yoke wing, on him quickly he cast his cloak: en he left all and ran most speedilie, ter Elijah, saying, now let me, e that which to do can not be amisse, t me my father and my mother kisse: d then I promise most assuredlie, ith all mine heart to follow after thee: e back againe, delay not, goe right soone, id Elijah, for what now have I done? is done Elisha came incontinent, nd with Elijah he went as servant. Then came Benhadad strong from Syria, ith thirty two Kings 'gainst Samaria: s messengers he unto Ahab King, to the City sent with this saying; us saith Benhadad, who darre now repine,
Thy Silver, Gold, Wives, Children all a mine: To him Ahab answ'red, my Lord, O King, What hast thou said, it is a true saying; For I am thine and all that I can have, Grant me friendship no other thing I crave. When Benhadad these words of courtesie Did heare, his heart was lifted up proudly, His messenger he back againe then sent, Unto Ahab with this commandement; I will to morrow my strong servants send, Who all thine house shall search from e to end: What in thine eyes is most pleasant that da They in their hands shall carie all away. Then Ahab spake his Elders with great grief See how this man now seeketh a mischeefe: My silver, gold, my wives, children, freely, I offred to him, who doth as ye see: Then the elders with such words not conten Said to Ahab, beware to give consent, Regard him not; Then Ahab made report, To the messengers in words of this sort; What the King first desired, it unto I soone yeelded, but this I cannot doe. When the messengers had made their report
Unto Benhadad in words of thss sort, hen Benhadad sent backe unto the King, His servants soone with these words of threatning: The gods do so to me and more also, f for the people that with me shall go The dust of all Samarias Citie, Shall now suffice for them handfulls to be. Then Ahab answ'red tell yee now your King We will not yeeld for all his great threatning, Let not him that girdeth on the harnesse. So boast himself as free of all distresse. When they report made of all this saying, Benhadad with his Kings were then drinking nto his tent: To his servants that day, He said be now all in Battell aray; When this was heard, his strong men speedilie Did rank themselves against that fair Citie: Behold anone a Prophet from the LORD, Who did King Ahab comfort with this word, Thus saith the Lord, this host without delay, will deliver in thine hand this day: Though Benhadad now boast much of his sword, hab shall know that I am God the Lord. Then Ahab said, by whom shall this be done, he man of God gave him this answere soone;
By the young men of good worthy Princes, Who mighty are among the Provinces, Then said, Ahab, tell me from th' Eternell, Who shall among us order the Battell? To that the Prophet shortly did reply, Even thou who art the Lord of the city: Then Ahab call'd the young men him unto Who were numbred two hundred thirtie two The host it self which Ahab did command, In number all were but poor seven thousand. When these brave men went to battel noone, Benhadad drunk was in his pavillion With thirtie two Kings, who this most did th How their bellies might be filled with drink: Then the young men of the Princes that day, Before the rest went first in their aray. When Benhadad the King of Syria, Heard that these men were from Samaria, He said, whether they be for peace or warre Take them alive, but to slay them beware. When this was said, armie against armie Began to fight, but Syria to flie Made hast; That day poor Israel with few, Benhadads great host bravely overthrew: To King Ahab the Prophet came againe, And said, mark well, my counsell not disdain
or surely at the returne of the yeer, enhadad will with a new armie stir: Then Benhadads servants to him did say, heir gods are gods of hills, therefore now they e stronger then we, let us in the plaine gainst them fight, and they shall soone bee slaine: Doe this als if thou wouldst prevaile this day, ake heede and take these drunken Kings away, nd put Captaines with order in their place, shalt thou soone thy strongest foes deface: Make up an armie like that which thou lost. haret for charet, horse for horse to post, nd runne them downe in some field that is plaine, hen shall we see their armie foil'd and slaine. It came to passe at the turne of the yeere, hat Benhadad to fill mens hearts with fear, ame with an host of charets and of men, nto Aphek against Isral's children: ke little Kids Isra'l was in aray, ut Syrians fill'd the countrey that day. While all in order were fet for battell, man of God came unto Israel,
And said, GOD saith because the Syr boast, That GOD on hills can onely help your host▪ It shall be seene that such words are but v For as on hills so am I in the plaine, For good successe this day, I give my wor And yee shall all know that I am the LO Then these two armies fill'd with co much, Did sev'n dayes one against another pitch: In the seventh day, they joined the Battell; An hundred thousand that day by Isra'l Of Syrians were slaine, the rest did flie Unto Aphek, and there in that citie Upon twenty sev'n thousand men a wall, Fell with great noise, which killed great small. Then Benhadad who durst no more abide, Came to the citie for himselfe to hide In some chamber, there his servants did say, Our foes by force have much prevail'd day, But vve have heard vvhich comfort t brings, That mercifull are all Israels Kings; Let us quickly seeing there be such hopes
ut on sackcloth, and bind our heads vvith ropes, nd go to Abab vvith humilitie, eradventure that King vvill pardon thee. As they had said, so quickly in these hopes ey got sackcloth, and bound their heads with ropes: en to Ahab adorn'd with Majestie, ey came with these signes of humilitie, King, said they, let there be no more strife, ore Benhadad from thee doth beg his life. hat? Said the King, is your Master not dead? ell him that he my brother is indeed: bring him forth that novv I may him see, d that he may in Charet ride vvith me. Then Benhadad said to Ahab therefore, thee the Cities I will now restore, hich my stout father tooke from Israel, thy brave Captaines to thee may well tell. hen said Ahab this Covenant this day all betwixt us; So he sent him away. Then came a Prophet with his owne accord, ho to his neighboure in words of the Lord, id smite me soone, I pray thee now smite me, hat? Said the man, wherefore should I smite thee?
Because said he, thou wouldst not now obey GODS voice by me, a Lion shall thee slay: So as the Prophet said it came to passe, A Lion slew him for this his trespasse: Then the Prophet another found quickly, And as before said to him smite thou me: Then he not slack, quickly a weapon found, And did him smite which made a bloody woun Thus the Prophet sore wounded went away, And waited on King Ahab by the way: He thus disguisd with ashes on his face, Did cry to Ahab passing by that place, Thy servant went out into the Battell While there I was, this unto me befell; Behold a man turning himselfe aside, Who brought a man unto me, and thus said Keep me this man, for if he be missing, Then for his life, thy life shall be the thing Which shall be ransome; or surely deliver Without delay, a full talent of silver: But as thy servant busie was, anone This captive man away from me was gone. When this was said, then said to him the K Now thou thy self hast decided the thing; Of that matter speak thou no more to me,
Thus hast thou done, so shall thy judgement bee. When that was said, the Prophet in that place, Hasted and took the ashes from his face: hen did the King discerne there most clearely, hat this man was come with some Prophecy. hen said the Prophet, Thus saith GOD the LORD, ecause thou hast rebell'd against my word, ecause thou hast let goe out of thine hand, man whom I to destroy did command, cause that thou refused to do this, hy peoples life, and thine shall go for his: en King Ahab went to his house heavy, hich then was in Samarias city. After these things it befell in that place, at good Naboth hard by Ahabs palace, d a vineyard which was in Jezreel; is man his vineyard was desir'd to sell Ahab King who offred him money, a vineyard better then it could be. But this answere to Ahab he did tell, e LORD forbid that I to thee should sell, at which I have for mine inheritance m my fathers, and not by hap or chance. Then Ahab to his house return'd heavy,
And laid him downe upon his bed sadly; He turn'd away his face in his sick bed, He freted so that he would eat no bread: But Jezabel his wife came him unto, Arise said she, I know well what to doe: Do'st thou not rule the Kingdome of Isra'l? Art thou not King over both great and small Arise and eat and also be merrie, For Naboths vineyard I will give to thee. So to the Elders she in Ahabs name, Sent Sealed letters a fast to proclame; Set Naboth soone, said she, in some h place Among the people? set before his face, Two wicked men who may witnesse this thin That Naboth hath blaspheem'd GOD and King: When that is done, him carie out quickly, Him stone with stones that he may surely di Then the Elders ill Judges without grace, Condemn'd Naboth to be ston'd in that place▪ When he was dead they sent to Jezabel, For to tell how all the matter befell; When she this knew, she unto sick Ahab Did cry arise, for now Naboths vineyard
in thy pow'r go take possession, ho darre controll a great Kings action? When AHAB head that poore Naboth was dead, e went unto his vineyard with great speed. or of the same to take possession, ho darre controll a great Kings action? Then the Lord spake to Elijah saying, Arise goe downe, to meet Ahab the King; ehold how he in his great wickednesse, gone poore Naboths vineyard to possesse, eake unto him by my direction, ast thou killed and als possession ast taken now? Where thou hast Naboth good illed with stones, there dogges shall lick thy blood. Then said Ahab to Elijah quickly, ast thou me found, O thou mine enemy? ea, said Elijah, for with all thy might, hou hast thee sold to do ill in GODS sight: ehold I will bring fearefull plagues on thee, hee will I spoile of all posteritie, hem will I slay that pisse against the wall, oth him that s shut up and left in Isra'l:
Behold also for thy vile bloody spot, Thine house like that of the son of Nebat Shall be brought downe, or like to Baasha, Whose race was rooted out by Jehovah. The LORD also spake this to Jezebel, The dogs most vile shall her in Jezreel Eat; Ahabs children shall destoyed be By soules in fields, by dogs in the city. Among the Kings which govern'd Israel, None was like Ahab who himselfe did sell To work mischiefe, in the course of his life, To this he was by Jezebel his wife Most stirred up; he like a raging foole, Did give himselfe to Amorits idol. When Ahab heard these words of Elijah, Which threatningly he spake from Jehovah; He rent his cloths, and put sack on his flesh Then he with meat would not himself refresh, This King did lye in great humilitie In sack, also a mourner went softly. Then came the word from the great Jehova Unto his faithfull Prophet Elijah, To whom he said, Behold how before me, Ahab the King in sackloth most humblie, Doth lye and fast, I promise for this thing, In his lifetime judgements I will not bring;
ut because I am a GOD righteous, My plagues after shall come upon his house. Then Israel living without all feare, or three yeers space was free of bloody warre ith Syria; The third yeer it befell, saphat came to the King of Isa'l: ven King Ahab who to his servants said, now ye not well that Ramoth in Gilead ours by right, and yet we care no thing, to rescue from the great Syrians King? To Josaphat, Ahab said so and so, ilt thou O King, to Ramoth with me go, fight against the Syrian armie? th horse and man at thy service shall be, id good Josaphat: But this I desire, at thou this day at the Lords word enquire. Then King Ahab gath'red together there, s false Prophets the matter to declare; them, he said, now give me your counsell, 'gainst Ramoth I shall goe in Battell: up, said they, for so God doth command, ho shall surely shute Ramoth in thine hand. Josaphat said, yet farther I desire, there not heere of whom we may enquire, Prophet of the Lord besides? yet one ere is, said Ahab, Micajah the Son Imlah, whom I hate, for he for me,
Hath never good in all his prophesie. Josaphat said, Let not the King say so, We heard the rest, we will heare him also. Thus Ahab sent for Micajah that day, To heare also what he to them could say: Then these two Kings sate in great dignitie, Each on his Throne adorn'd with Majestie, In the entrance of Samarias gate, Waiting upon Micajah the Prophet; Before he came the Prophets pleasantlie, Unto these Kings did good things prophecie, Zedekiah Son of Chenaanah, With hornes of yron, said, Thus saith Jehovah, With these yron hornes, this I now give for doome, The Syrians host thou shalt push and consume; So likewise all the Prophets then by order Said unto him, Goe to Ramoth and prosper; The warre is Gods and good is thine earand, The Lord shall Ramoth put into thine hand. He that was gone for to call Micajah, Said unto him, Behold from Jehovah, All the Prophets speake good with one acco Ʋnto the King; So also let thy word Be like to theirs, be not too strict and rude, But to the King speake thou that which is good. Then him answer'd the Prophet Micajah
s God liveth what unto me Jovah, his good Sprite at this time shall reveale, hat from King Ahab I shall not conceale. When he was come the King said so and so, Micajah tell if we to Battell go all against Ramoth, or shall we forbeare? hat is thy minde? Let me an answere heare. Go and prosper, said, Micajah in scorne, od in thine hand shall that people forlorne, eliver now; speake trueth I thee adjure, id Ahab, for I cannot scorne endure. hen said Micajah the trueth I will tell, pon the hills I saw all Israel, As wandring sheepe that have not a sheepheard: hen this I saw then the Lord to me said, hese have no master, this is mine advice, hat every man goe to his house in peace. ehold said Ahab, to Josaphat King, id I not rightly conjecture this thing, hat this Micajah in his prophecie, ould say no good in what concerneth me? hen said Micajah, heare now thou therefore, the Lords Prophet yet will tell thee more; saw the Lord sitting upon his Throne,
Before him there all heav'ns host came anone: Then said the Lord who best among you all, Can move Ahab for to goe up and fall At Ramoth? One said this, another that, At last came foorth, a spirit, a reprobate, Who stood before the mightie Lord, and sai I take in hand that I shall him perswade. Then said the Lord, unto that Spirit wherewi With many lyes, said he, I will goe foorth And him deceive; Goe foorth, said GO doe so, Thou shalt perswade him and prevaile also. But Zedekiah Son of Chenaanah, Went neere and smote the cheeke of Micajah Which way, said he, the Sprite of God from me, A Prophet went for to speake unto thee? Then said Micajah for thy boast and pride, The day shall come that thou thy selfe shalt hi In inner chambers close, Then said the King, Take this Micajah and soone do this thing; Put this fellow into some vile prison, And feede him with bread of affliction, And water als untill I come in peace From the Battell; This well me now do please, Said Micajah, for if thou come safelie
Frm that Battell the Lord hath not by me ken at all; This is most sure I tell, rken O people and consider well. o the King Ahab and Josaphat both, th their great Armie went up to Ramoth: n Ahab King resolved by advise, he Battell he did him selfe disguise; he had said unto Josaphat King; on thy robes in time of the fighting. he King of Syria had his thirtie two, taines commanded, saying, so and so; that ye fight neither with great nor small, e onely with the King of Israel. When the Captaines Josaphats rich clothing see, they thought he had been Isra'ls King: n they aside turned with all their might, inst Josaphat with forces to fight. hen King Josaphat with a mighty shout, ong his foes in danger cried out; en the Captaines in that bloody Battell, that he was not the King of Isra'l, y turned back and quickly went him fro, eek Ahab, who was their cheefest foe. hen at a venture a man drew a bow, hurt Ahab with a deadly arrow; n said Ahab to him who his coch drave wounded, if thou my life can save
Delay no more, with diligence make hast, And carry me aside out of the host. So Ahab died, and in Samaria, Was buried as the Prophet Micajah Before had told, who it well understood; They wash'd the coch, the dogges did lick blood. The Use. Let Kings heer learne to shun ill company, A Jezebel stain'd with idolatry: Let Kings heere learne GODS Lawes fo regard, Ahab did losse his Crowne for a vineyear Let Kings heere learne GODS Micajah heare, And not to base Placebos to give eare. 8. AHAZIAH. The possession of GOD. THis wicked son after Ahab was dead, In wickednesse did unto him succeed: He like his father did worship Baal, And so provok'd the great God Eternal.
A few dayes after a great greif befell, ng Ahaziah through a lattesse fell om an high chamber, whereby he made sick. om Ba'lzebub his life and health did seeke. Then an Angel sent from the great Jovah, id to his Prophet faithfull Elijah, ise go up and the Kings servants meet, d say unto them in these words most meet, it not because that in all Isra'l ere is no GOD, that thou go'st to Baal? w therefore heare that which the LORD hath said, ou shalt not therefore come downe from thy bed: hen this message Elijah had imparted, went his way and from these men departed. Then messengers unto the King came back, ho said unto them why are ye so slack, to returne from the way I you sent, om Ba'lzebub who onely can content troubled heart? Then answer'd they the King, man us met who sent us back, saying, tell your Prince who hath you foolishlie, t to idoles wherein is no safetie, it not because that in all Isra'l,
There is no God that thou go'st to Baal? Now therefore heare what the Lord God  said, Thou shalt not therefore come downe from  bed. What man was he that came you up to mee Said Ahaziah both troubled and sick: He was, said they, a man old and hoary, Who bade us turne and no longer tarry: This hoary man who did us thus enjoine, A leather girdle had about his loines: The man that is clothed with that habite, Is most surely Elijah the Tishbite: Then did the King a Captaine of fiftie, Send unto him sitting on an hill hie; They said, Thus saith the man that beares crowne, Thou man of GOD see that thou soone c downe. Elijah said, if man of God I be, Let fire come downe and thee and thy fiftie Consume and slay; with these wordes fell fire, Which did as good Elijah did desire, Againe the King a Captaine with fiftie, Sent to Elijah commanding quicklie
r to come downe, as had been said before, ese words they spake to fright him more and more; ey said, Thus saith the man that beares the Crovvne, ou man of GOD, see that thou soone come dovvne. Elijah said, if man of God I be, t fire comedowne, and thee and thy fiftie nsume and slay with these words fell a fire, hich did as good Elijah did desire. He sent againe a Captaine of fifty, ho came and at Elijahs feet humbly d supplicat that he his favour might nd, that his life might be deare in his sight. Then said th' Angel Elijah now go downe, are not the face of him that beares the Crown; en he arose and went unto the King nd said, This is the mighty Lords saying; as much as thou to Baalzebub st sent, a disgrace on the LORD to rub, erefore I tell thee what GOD unto me th said in wrath, is it not certainly? it not because that in all Isra'l ere is no GOD, that thou unto Baal uld send? Therefore from thy bed certainly
Thou shalt not come downe but shalt surely Thus after two yeers that he bare the crowne, Unto the dust by death he was brought downe The Use. Let all men learne in sicknesse and distre To trust in God who ever good successe, Grants unto these that upon him depend Who do not so, shall feel it in the end: Hear this who with shit children in your a Run to witches, to stithies, salves, and cha 9. JEHORAM. The highnesse of GOD KIng Ahaziah after him had none, Who in Isra'l succeeded to his Throne; But Jehoram his brother in that day, Sat on the Throne and did the scepter sway: Of this man who did from the LORD depart With an arrow Jehu did pierce the heart: He was son of Ahab and Jezebel, A race much hated of God Eternel.
The Use. t all Kings heere learne not to go astray, they in peace would long their scepter sway; Kings from GOD in their folly depart, D arrowes hath vvherewith to pierce their heart. ELIJAH. The mightie Lord. Jorams reigne Gods word in history, nserts concerning Elijah worthy. When to take up Elijah in his minde e Lord had purpose by a great whirlewinde: en Elijah the Prophet from Gilgal ent with Elisha, and to him did call, d said, Here tarry, for the Eternel, th me ordain'd for to go to Bethel: sha said, As the great God doth live, no request will I Elijah leave: en these two Prophets of the Eternel, gether went down unto faire Bethel: s of the Prophets there to Elisha, d, Knowst not thou thy Master Elijah,
Shall from thine head be pull'd away this day? I know, said he, hold ye your peace I say. Als Elijah, said to Elisha so, I pray thee tary, for to Jericho The Lord hath sent me, I must him obey, But as for thee thou shalt do well to stay: Elisha said, as the great God doth live, For no request will I Elijah leave: When they were come unto fair Jericho, The Prophets sons said to Elisha so, Hast thou not heard that thy Master this day, From thee by God should be pulled away? Yea I it know, said he, most certainly, Hold ye your peace, and hencefoorth let me b Elijah said to Elisha his man, Now tarry here, for God me to Jordan Hath sent: As the most mighty Lord doth live Said Elisha, I minde thee not to leave: When Elijah this matter thought upon He yeelded then, and so the two went on: There fiftie men who then all Prophets were, Stood ov'r against for to view them a farre. There Elijah with Elisha his man, Most gravely stood hard by the flood Jordan: Then Elijah tooke his mantle anone, With it by faith he strooke the flood upon;
y this the waters they divided found, that these two went ov'r on the dry ground. When they the Jordan together had past, ijah said to Elisha at last, ke now what thou desires I doe for thee, fore by God I be lifted on hie: ou hast me serv'd with respect and regard, e what thou wouldst have now for thy reward. Elisha said, this is my sute to thee, t thy good Sprite be doubled now on me; hen Elijah heard Elishas saying, e said, thou hast now asked a heard thing; everthelesse, if thou shalt then me see, hen the great God shall take me up on hie, shall be so unto thee as thou would; t not, if then thou canst me not behold. It came to passe as these two went on still, hold a signe the promise to fulfill; cording to good Elishas desire, ere appeared a faire charet of fire: ith great horses which parted them that day, Elijah in whirlewinde went away: When Elisha had seene all that befell, father, father, charet of Isra'l, d their horsemen he thus aloud did cry, t he him saw no more after that day. Then Elisha for grief incontinent
Tooke his own clothes and in two pieces rent▪ Last after this, the Prophet Elisha, Tooke up the mantle of good Elijah That fell on him; and so went back anone, And stood besides the bank of the Jordan; With that mantle he smote the waters deep, Which both above, and beneath back did creep For Gods servant to make a ready way, That good Elisha might passe through that day. When the Prophets that were at Jericho Saw Elisha, they all said so and so, Behold the sprit of faithfull Elijah Doth rest upon his servant Elisha; These came to meet him with all diligence, And bow'd before him with great reverence. Behold, said they, there be with us fiftie Strong men of worth, let them goe we p thee, And seeke thy Master, least peradventure The Sprite of God who had of him the cure Hath taken him, and hath him cast upon Some high mountaine, or low valley alone. Then said Elisha, your zeal I commend, But my advise is that ye shall not send: From their purpose he could them not reclam They urged so that he did blush for shame:
Therefore he said, if it be your will send, ey sent therefore and three dayes to an end id seek, and seek on valley and mountaine, t nothing found, and so return'd againe: hen to Elisha they at Jericho me with report, how they both to and fro d wandred; to them Elisha did say, old you that before ye went away. The Use. t Prophets learne vvho serve the great Jovah, follovv the footsteps of Elijah: spar'd not great Kings, but did them rebuke, hen they Jehovah most leudly forsooke: ost Kings are slaine by the vile flatterie, base fellowes, who walk not uprightly: t all Elijahs that walk in GODS way, oke for GODS coch to carie them away. ELISHA My GOD salvation. Hen Elisha sojourn'd at Jericho, The men of that city came him unto,
Who said, behold a place that is pleasant, But the water is nought, and good ground sca Then said Elisha bring me a new cruse, Put salt therein whereof I may make use; When this was done, he went forth to the spri Of these waters, and cast the salt therein: And said, Thus saith the mighty LORD, I have Healed these waters as yee may perceive; Henceforth no death or any barren land Heer shall be seene, for so doth GOD comman Then Elisha from thence went to Bethel, As he did go this Tragedie befell: Some children came out of Bethels city, Who said unto the Prophet tauntingly, Go up thou bald head, go up thou bald-head, He turned back and cursed them with speed. Then from the wood came Bears incontinent, Who fourtie two all into pieces rent: From thence to faire Carmel went Elisha, And from Carmel unto Samaria. Now Jehoram ill Ahabs second son, In Samaria did sit on the Throne; He did much ill in great Jehovahs sight, Yet not like Ahab; for this which was right He did; Baals image he put away, To which Ahab his father went astray: But Jeroboams sins he could not leave,
o these idols his foolish heart did cleave. In this time Mesha who of Moab King as a sheepmaster, who much sheep did bring Ahabs dayes, when once Ahab was dead, is man rebell'd against the Royall seed. en Jehoram the King of Israel, saphats help desired in Battell gainst Moab; He said with horse and man gainst Moab I will do what I can or thee and thine, Thus the King Jehoram, ith Josaphat, and the King of Edom ent to that war; three Kings in company, esolv'd to fight against Moab stoutly, id of seven dayes journey fetch a compasse, t had no water for man, horse, or asse; as, said Joram, it is great pitie at we three Kings by Moabs great armie ould be destroy'd; Then Josaphat did say, there not heer some good Prophet this day? Behold, said one, the Prophet Elisha, hich water on the hands of Elijah id powre; Then said Jehosaphat the King, pleaseth me to heare of that saying; or a good man he is in work and word, et us him hear, for with him is the Lord: these three Kings went downe to Elisha know what he would say from Jehovah.
Then good Elisha to Jehoram King, These words of wrath had unto him saying, To speak to thee I have no great desire, Go to thy fathers Prophets and enquire: Were it not that I did regard surelie Jehoshaphat, I would not look on thee: But now that I what is to come may tell, Bring unto me a most cunning Minstrell. When he did play, then soon it came to pass That on Elisha the hand of GOD was; Then said Elisha make ditches quickly, In great aboundance in this faire valley. Thus saith the LORD, yee neither w nor raine Shall see, and yet the ditches of the plaine Shall be filled with water, that yee may Both yee and all your cattell drink this day This thing is light, GOD may it soone c∣mand, The Moabites he shall put in your hand; And yee shall smite ev'ry fenced citie, And als yee shall fell downe evry good tr Yee shall also their wells of water stop, That in their thirst they receive not a drop; As he had said, so water came anone,
Wth abundance by the way of Edom. When Moabites heard that the Kings that day re come to fight, they in their best aray, th armour bright then all stood in the border, s for Battell these men were set in order. When Moabites rose in the morning soon, old the Sun upon these waters shone; e Sun beames made these waters to seeme red, e Moabites said surely it is blood; e Kings surely have one another slaine, e spoile for us now safely doth remaine: en they came to the Camp of Israel, e Israelites upon them fiercely fell, hat they fled from Isra'l speedily, o did them chase unto their own countrey; eir cities fair they did beat down at last, on their fields each man a stone did cast of his sling, and stopped every well, eir fairest trees also they did down fell. When Moabs King saw the Battell too sore t him, he tooke seven hundred men therefore, break even throw unto great Edoms King, finding that he could not do that thing; eldest Son he tooke before them all, hom for an offring he burnt on the wall; is eldest Son belong'd to Edoms King,
Whom Moab had as Captive in keeping. When Edom saw, that for to save his Son Isra'l would not breake up that siege right so He in his heart being full of fury, Against Isr'al return'd to his country. Then a certaine poor afflicted widow Came to Elisha with grief and sorrow, Saying, My husband a Prophet is dead, Thou know'st right well that he the LO indeed Did feare; And now alas the creditour Is come to take my two sons at this hour, To be bond men; To her with great pitie Elijah said, what shall I do for thee? Tell me, said he, what hast thou in thine ho A pot of oyle, said she, who had no spouse. Goe, said Elisha, and vessels borrow From thy neighbours, yea borrow not a few▪ When thou comes in, then shut the doo hinde, For Gods blessing on that oyle thou shalt find When she her pot in these vessels did powre, All the vessels were filled in that houre; When all was sought there were no vessels m In all the house, the oyle did stay therefore: How all was done she to the Prophet told,
o did appoint all the oyle to be sold, ay debt of the first and readiest, after that to live upon the rest. After all this it fell upon a day, t to Shunem Elisha had his way, ere was a woman full of charitie, him constrained her guest for to be; so it was as oft as he did passe them, he entred and no stranger was. Then said she to her husband lovingly, s man of God which often passeth by a good man; to us a matter small ill be for him to build on the wall hamber, with a table stoole, a bed, d candlestick; If such a guest be fed o our house, it shall be found our best, so we do the LORD vvill blesse the rest. So it fell that Elisha on a day, to this house of Shunem made his way; en said he to Gehazi his servant, s Shunamite call thou incontinent, hen she was come and did before him stand, earnestly did desire t'understand, hat thing he might for her great care procure, th King Captaine whereof she might be sure. Among mine owne people, said shee I dwell,
Thou need'st not King, nor yet the Capta tell Of mine estate; At last said Gehazi, This is the point, this is the veritie, She hath no child in all her rich houshold To be their heire, and als her Lord is old. Then said Elisha about this season, Of time of life thou shalt embrace a son; Then said she to him, Oh now do not lie To thine handmaid, but speake the veritie; So it befell that at the same season She did conceive, and after bare a son. When he was growne it fell upon a day; That this young child with his father to play Went out among reapers, at last he said, Unto his father, oh my head, my head; His father dear said to a lade shortly, This sick child now to his mother cary; When she him got, she set him on her knee, About the noone sicknesse made him to die: Then she went up and laid him on the bed Of Elisha, the dear servant of God, On him she shut the doore and went away, And to her husband thus and thus day say; Send me I pray a young man with an asse, That to Elisha I may shortly passe; Why wilt thou go, said he to her, I pray,
is not new Moone, nor yet sabbath day; Yet let me go, said she, all shall be well, er asse she sadled, and came to Carmel nto Elisha, so it came to passe, hen he her saw, wondring what matter was, e said anone to servant Gehazi, he Shunamite behold, what can this be? o run and meet her from this mount Carmel, nd know of her if all at home do well; ll well, said she, then at Elishas feet e fell downe there, and then began to weepe; Then Gehazi came fast to thrust away he Shunamite in great distresse that day; et her alone, said Elisha, behold reat grief of heart, which GOD hath not me told. She said, did I desire a Son to have? id I not say, see thou me not deceive? Then said Elisha unto Gehazi, rd up thy loines, and take my staffe quicklie, e that no man thou salute by the way, or do no thing that may procure delay; hen thou art come with speede unto the place,
See that this staffe thou lay on the ch face; But the mother would not leave Elisha, For so she sware by the great Jehovah: Then she arose, Elisha did follow, All for to stint the Shunamits sorrow. Then Gehazi the staffe upon the face Of the childe laide, but during all that space Was neither voice nor yet any hearing, Wherefore he turn'd to Elisha, saying The childe is not awak'd, there is no life; Then Elisha came with that worthy wife; And saw the childe laid dead upon his bed, Then to them all the good Elisha said, Retire your selfe and let me here alone Be with the childe, then they retir'd anone, Then Elisha with zeal began to pray, He went up als, and upon the childe lay; He mouth to mouth, and eyes to eyes did joi And hands to hands, and stretch'd him upon The young dead childe, there without h harme Then the young childes flesh anone wa warme: Then he return'd and walked to and fro, And on the childe he stretched him also.
hen at the last the young childe seven times neesd eyes were opened, and so was reviv'd: calling for the Shunamite anone, a said to her, Take up thy Son: n she went in and full of comforts sweet, downe at the Prophet Elishas feet; bow'd her self humbly unto the ground, ling swetly for her great comforts found. fter Elisha came unto Gilgal, great dearth which troubled great and small, on the great pot said he to make meat, t the sons of the Prophets now may eat; en the servant heard these Elishas words, went and of a wild vine gathred gourds, lap full which he shred into the pot, at these herbs were that servant then knew not; en the Prophets these herbs began to eat, cryed out that death was in their meat; Elisha bad his servants bring meal, ch put in pot they did no more death feel. hen Naaman great Captaine of the host Syria, who would have spar'd no cost e helped of his vile leprosie, rn'd of a maid, who by captivitie in his house, that in Samaria
There was a Prophet called Elisha Who could him help, and heale most perfectlie Of his disease of wofull leprosie. Then said the King of Syria, Go to, I will now send a faire letter unto Jehoram King, who guideth Israel, Then the man went, and tooke with him of al Best things; Of silver he tooke ten talents, Six thousand pieces of gold, of rayments Ten changes, and so brought unto the King, The Kings letter containing this saying, Behold therewith I have sent unto thee Naaman to be heal'd of leprosie. When King Jehoram heard this letter read, He in amazement this utt'red and said, Am I a God to kill or make alive? Who in best Physick can so deeply dive? Wherefore now see, it is easie to tell, That he now seekes against me a quarrell. When Elisha had heard how that the King Had rent his clothes, he sent him this saying, Be not amaz'd, let him now come to me, And he shall know that a Prophet surelie Is in Isra'l; So to Elishas doore Naaman came, and stood there it before, With horse, charets, in pompe and dignitie, Then a servant Elisha sent quicklie
With this message, goe to the Jordan fair, nd sev'n times wash thee in the water there, o shall thy flesh againe come unto thee, hou shalt be cleane, and that most perfectly. But Naaman was wroth, and went away, nd said, Behold, I thought the man this day ill surely come and pray unto his GOD, And touch the place and cleanse me of this rod; ana, Pharpar right well I can tell, e better rivers then these of Isra'l: May I not wash in them, and so be cleane? us he turned and all in rage was seene. Then came to him his servant thus saying, My father, if the Prophet some great thing d ordain'd thee, wouldst thou not have it done? much rather when thou thy health so soone y have by washing in water softlie? sh and bee cleane, hee saith no mere to thee. t that wise word great Captaine Naaman, waded was soone to wash in Jordan;
His flesh like childes flesh was then cleare seene To be restord, so Naaman was cleane. Then he return'd with all his companie, And stood before Elisha, who did see What God had done, then said Na'man behold, I this in heart will all my lifetime hold: And now I will heer in thy presence tell, In all the earth but onely in Isra'l There is no GOD; Therefore heare t saying? I pray thee take from me now a blessing: What? said Elisha no blessing I crave, Of thy presents nothing I will receive: And though he urged and request did make, Yet Elisha his present would not take. Then said Na'man, Elisha I pray thee, Let two Mules burdens of earth unto me Be given, for hencefoorth I heere give m word, To quite all stranqe gods for to serve th LORD: In this thing the LORD thy servant p∣don, If I hencefoorth in the house of Rimmon,
Bow downe my selfe vvith my Master and King, he LORD pardon thy servant in this thing: Then said Elisha goe in peace this day, Thus he departed and so went away. But Gehazi did from his Master slide, After the man he went to get a bribe: will said he some earand to him make; will now run and some what of him take, When Naaman saw the man thus running, He lighted downe and said? What is the thing That thou desir'st? What now? Are all things well? All well, said he; My Master bids thee tell, Behold even now there be come unto me From Ephraim mount two young men most worthie, Sons of the Prophets, let them from thee have art of the present, nothing more I crave, But of good silver onely one talent, And with that als two changes of raiment. Then said Na'aman take two talents for one, Them with the raiment he soone laid upon Two of his servants, who bare them before Gehazi, who fearing his Master sore, Tooke the base bribe, and sent them backe quick∣lie,
For so he thought to hide his villanie. Then he went in and stood before his Lord, Who said to him, now tell me in a word Whence comest thou? Tell me what thou, h done; Thy servant went no whether said he soone: Fy man, said he, went not mine heart w thee, When the man turn'd againe so speedilie? From his charet to meet a craftie knave Who ran after a shamefull bribe to crave: Is this a time, money, garments, to seeke, Oxen or sheep, vineyards or servants eke Behold therefore Naamans leprosie To thee and thine shall cleave most speedilie: When this was said, that men GODS f might know, That villaine went out, leper whit as snow. Then the Prophets unto Elisha said, We can not well in this strait roome abide, Let us we pray thee go unto Jordan, And there a great beame shall by ev'ry man Be cut, that we GODS servants in Isra'l May have a place wherein that we may dwel
en said Elisha make ready to goe; en said one, thou with us must be also, will, said he, and so with them he went, nto Jordan, where they incontinent id cut downe wood, but as one did downe fell beame, his Axe head in the water fell: hen the man cri'd with great grief and sorrow, as Master this axe I did borrow. Elisha said, I will thee now solace, in Jordan thou canst point the right place here it did fall; Which when he shew to him, e by a sticke made the axe head to swimme: o Elisha asswag'd his great sorrow, y rendring th' axe which that man did borrow. Then Syrias King against all Israel, tended war by his servants counsell, such and such, a most fit place said he, ncampad shall my greatest forces be, hen Elisha unto Jehoram King, nt speedy message to warne him faying, ke heed that thou now passe not such a place, or there in waite are foes thee to deface; hen Jehoram hearkning this counsell wise, id save himself, there more then once or twise. For this the King of Syrias heart was sore roubled, his servants he did call therefore,
And said unto them, can no man me tell Who traitours us to the King of Isra'l? Then said one, O King thinke not so I pray, For what in thy bedchamber thou do'st say, That Elisha can most perfectly tell To Jehoram the King of Israel. Goe said the King, spye mee where is t man: Behold, said they, he is now in Dothan; Therefore the King sent thither with great boast Of horses charets, a most mighty host; Then came these men by night who were m stout, And compasse did the city round about; When Elishas servant was up earely, Behold an host did compasse the city; Then he all trembling did speak so and so, Alas, good Master, how now shall we do? Then said Elisha, thou needst not to feare, For moe with us then with these men be hee Then Elisha unto the Lord did pray, That God his eyes would open in that day, When GOD him heard as he did then desire, His servant, horses, and charets of fire, Did on the mountaine then most clearly see, About Elisha for guard and safetie. Then Elisha most bold in all distresse,
ntreated God to smite them with blindnesse: nd so he did; Then Elisha did say o these blind men, this is not the right way; f ye would the straight path unto these take hom ye now seek, follow me at the back; ut he them led unto Samaria; hen to the Lord said Prophet Elisha, pen the eyes of these me, n I thee pray, hat they may see where they remaine this day: hen God op'ned their eyes and they did see, hat they were in Samarias citie. Then Jehoram as his heart did indite, Cri'd Elisha my father shall I smite? Sall I them smite? No, said Elisha, spare For all these men now Gods prisoners are: Would'st thou these smite, whom thou by sword or bow Hast taken captive? would thou that allow? Set rather bread and water them before, That they may eate and drink, and come no more To fight with us; so as GODS man did say The King he did, and these men went away. After Benhadad King of Syria, Came with an host against Samaria: The siege was sore, great als was the famine, An Asses-head which rarely hath been seene, For fourescore pieces of silver was sold,
Doues doung was deare, what one small kabb could hold, Cost there at that time no lesse then twenty Pieces, such was the dearth in that citie. Then Joram King upon the wall passing, Heard a woman cry, Help my LORD O King; If GOD, said he, help thee not in distresse, I cannot by Barne-floore, or yet winepresse: Yet, said the King, tell me what aileth thee: This woman, said, she in fraud said to me, We hunger sore, give us thy son for meat The day, and after we my son shall eat. At her desire my poore son we first boil'd But on the nixt day, she false me beguild; She hid her sone; this is a true saying, This makes me cry, help me my O Lord O King When the King heard these wordes of gre sorrow, He rent his clothes, these who did him follow Beheld and saw what cloths he had within, Even base sackcloth neerest unto his skin, Then said Joram, the LORD do so and more To me, if that Elishas head therefore Shall stand on him; Elisha in his house Did sit when Joram, most unrighteous, A messenger sent swift from him before,
But ere he came, Elisha grieved sore, id to the Elders, See this murth'rers seed ath sent a man to take away mine head, hen he cometh, let him no entrie finde, ere with a sound his Master feet behinde: en came the man with this blasphemous word, e will no longer waite upon the Lord; his ill from him is, he will no help send, e need not look that he us now defend. Then said Elisha, heare from Jehovah o morrow in the fair Samaria, oth flowre and barley in a great cheapnesse all be for to relieve this great distresse. Then said a Lord on whose hand lean'd the King, his Prophet tells us a most scornefull thing; hough GOD Heav'ns windowes by his arme mightie hould open wide, this thing it could not bee: hen said Elisha, thou shalt see that meat, ut God of it shall not give thee to eat. While Samaria was in this estate, oure leprous men were lying at its gate; ch to other said in perplexitie,
If vvee sit heere; vvee vvill not fail die; Now let us goe unto the Syrian hoste; Men pinch'd vvith hunger must not mens boast: If they alive us save, then shall we live, If they us kill, to be vvell vvee believe; Then they rose up in the twilight most faire, They to the camp came but found no man the For the great Lord the Syrians in his boast Had troubled sore with noise of a great host: For certaine, said they, the King of Isra'l Hath hired Hittits and Egyptians tall, To come upon us wherefore they that day Troubled arose, in hast and went away: They left their tents their horses and their And als the camp, and all that therein was. When these lepers came to the Syrians ca With joyfull hearts they all both ate and dra When that was done these foure incontinen Did carry thence both silver and raiment: What they desir'd none did them there forbi They got riches, and in the ground it hid; Then each man said, This is a day of grace, We do not well for this to hold our peace In good tidings; If we to morning light
y, some mischiefe will upon us light: w therefore come that we may go and tell Kings household, what the great Eternel h done for us: Then to the city soone y went, and told perfectly was done. When the King heard this, he arose by night, d said, This is but policie and slight; se men do know that we be much hungry, refore to draw us from our strong city, y hide themselves, that when we are come out, ey may surprise and compasse us about. Then said one, let five horse men goe and view, see if what the lepers say be true; ese five men, as the King did them allow, ent on horse back the Syrians to follow; ey follow'd them unto the faire Jordan, ong the Syrians there was not a man ho had a heart or hand to fight that day; r hast their clothes and armes they cast away. When the Messengers returned and told, hat God had done by mercies manifold, e people went and their rich tents did spoile, us God himself did that day Syria foile: Elisha had spoken of cheapnesse, f flowre and barley, so it came to passe.
But that great Lord who doubted in his h The plentie saw, but of it did not taste; For while the people went out in a spate To get vivers, they trode him in the gate. Then said Elisha to the Shunamite, Goe from thy place to another more meet; For the LORD surely will for whole ye seven Afflict Israel with a sore famine: Then she arose at Elishas command, And sojourned in the Philistines land. At seven yeeres end she returned and said Unto the King, Oh pitie thine handmai My house and land cause novv to mee store; Grant mee mine ovvne, O King I crave more. In this meane time the King with Gehazi Did talke and say, Now briefly tell to me, What great wonders the mighty LORD JOV Hath wrought by thy good Master Elisha; As Gehazi all such things was telling, Behold the woman comes before the King, Whose Son he had restored unto life, Then said Gehazi, behold here the wife, And this her Son whom by the Lords power,
Elha did from death to life restore. When the King heard the womans petition, t she might have of all restitution; Officer he sent who went therefore, d unto her, her whole rents did restore. Then to Damascus came good Elisha, d Benhadad, the King of Syria, ng then sicke, one came to him and told, od Elisha the man of GOD behold hither come; Then unto Hazael, e Syrian King his minde did freely tell; to the man, said he, and in thine hand ke him a present, for so I command; is also try, for so it doth me please, I recover shall of this disease. Then Hazael with a most rich present to Elisha went incontinent; urty Camels burden Hazael thus, ought to Elisha from rich Damascus; ho said, Benhadad King of Syria, th sent Hazael to thee Elisha try, if now to tell him it the please, he recover shall of this disease. Go, said Elisha, to Benhadad say, o recover most certainly thou may, owbeit the Lord hath clearely shewed me, hat at this time King Benhadad shall die.
When this was said, he set his countenanc On Hazael, on him his eyes did glance With piercing looks; then in a sorrow deep Good Elisha the man of God did weep: Then Hazael said, I proy thee me tell, Why weeps my Lord? Alas for Israel Said Elisha, for I now clearely see What great mischief shall to Isra'l by thee Be done; their strong holds thou shalt s fire, Their young men slay, thou shalt in rage ire Their children dash, thou shalt als their w With child rip up; when this was all said, Hazael said this is a hard saying, Am I a dogge that I should do such thing? Then to him said the Prophet Elisha, GOD saith, thou shalt be King of Syria? Then he came to Benhadad speedily, Who said, what said Elisha unto thee? He told me, said he, that thou should'st recov Of this disease, so he did not discover What he had heard; shortly it came to passe That he a thick cloth spred upon his face; So after Benhadad the King was dead, His servant Haza'l reigned in his stead. After Elisha had anointed King
u, who downe ill Ahabs house did bring ehus sons time who call'd was Joash, ha fell in a deadly sicknesse, en to Elisha came Joash the King, o said these words over his face weeping, y father, my father, whom Isra'l ir strong Charet and Horsemen well did call. Then said Elisha, take to thee a bow; d arrowes als on shooting to bestow: en he did as Elisha did command, ha put his hand upon his hand; en the window and now shoot a shot, d Elisha, so the King, as by lot, ected well, did shoot; This sharp arrow, d Elisha, to thee declares that now, is is the arrow of Gods deliv'rance m Syria, whereon he shall vengeance ke by his might; Againe unto the King sha had this Prophetick, saying, ke now thine arrowes, and smite on the ground, r in Gods eyes Isra'l hath favour found: en he smote thrise, but afterward did stay, r this Elisha most wroth said that day, five or six times thou hadst well the ground itten, thou hadst a full victory found ainst Syria, who do you much despise,
Whereas thou shalt smite Syria but thrise. Then God by death Elisha tooke away, And Israel was invaded that day By Moabits; they bearing a dead man, Afraide by troops, to Elishas grave ran, And let him downe; As soone as he the shee And bones did touch, he stood upon his feet. The Use. Let Prophets learne by Elishas practice, Plough and Oxen to quite for GODS servi Who serves the Lord, hee great advant hath, Advantage both in life and als in death: Let Prophets learne by Elishas desire, A doubled sprit of grace for to require: Silver and gold at last men shall disdaine, And shall confesse that grace is onely gaine. 10. JEHU. Subsisting or advanced. WHen Elisha an young man did appoint, To go with oyle Jehu for to anoint,
Te young man went to Ramoth Gilead, d did all, as good Elisha him bade; hen hee there came, the Captaines were sitting, en he to Jehu addressd this saying. To thee O Captaine I have an earand, hich thee to tell Elisha did command; en he arose and went into an house ith this young man, who with oyle precious d him anoint, subjoining this saying, ou art by GOD appointed to be King: e bloody house of Ahab thou shalt smite, r his great sins of malice and despite, e blood and whooredome of vile Jezebel all be avenged by the Eternell, r the whole house of Ahab shall perish, OD shall leave none against the wall to pisse: is house shall be, saith the great Jehovah, ke Jeroboams or like Baasha: ikewise in the portion of Jezreel, he dogges shall eat the flesh of Jezebel, r her vile sins, and her most bloody furie, hen shee is dead none shall her carcase bu∣rie:
When this young man had thus all these t said, The doore he op'ned, and with speed he fled When this was done, one said unto Jehu Wherefore to thee came now this mad fellow Then said he, this mans communication Yee well know, I need no more expression. All is most false, said they, which thou do Now tell us truely what thou heard'st this I will not faine, said he, but will you tell, He me anointed hath King of Isra'l. When these men heard of Jehu this sayin They trumpets blew, and cri'd, Jehu is Kin So Jehu King 'gainst Joram did conspire, To Jezreel he in wrath hot like fire Rod in charet for there Joram to slay With Ahazia, who was come that day, To see Joram who there cured his wounds, Made by Hazael fighting in his bounds. Then on a high tower in faire Jezreel Stood a watch-man, who to the King did I clearely see a huge great company, Then Joram said take an horseman quickly And send to meet them; to them let him Is it for peace that ye come so this day? When he thus said, stout Jehu in a rage Said, turne behinde me, a most sure presage
bloody warre: The watchman this seeing ow all appear'd, declar'd unto the King. Yet once againe a horseman to them send, id King Joram, that what these men intend e may now know, then went that second man, ho one horseback to Jehus armie ran, d said, whether peace or war intend yee? him Jehu als said, Turne behind me: en said the watchman in words true and plaine, came to them, but commeth not againe; hink I see Jehu son of Nimshi, r in driving he doth drive furiously. Then Joram said, make shortly ready now, at in our charets we against Jehu y goe; Then Joram armed went anone th Ahazia his own sisters Son g of Judah he went to that Battel, d met Jehu in the plat of Jezre'l ere Naboth died; When Joram saw Jehu, cri'd aloud, Is it peace for us now? What peace, said he, as long as Jezebel, ne ill mother with whooredomes doth rebell, l als witchcrafts? Then Joram turn'd quickly Ahaziah, and said, treachery Then Jehu drew a bow in anger hote, Jehoram betweene the armes he shote:
The piercing arrow went out at his heart, And he anone sanke downe in his charet. Then said Jehu to Bidkar his Captaine, Take up this corps, and cast it with disdaine On Naboths field: When we did serve Ahab We heard by God this burden on him laide; Surely, said God, I have seene yesterday The blood of Naboth: In this plat repay I will that murder, in that plat of ground Let him be cast, that the Lord may be found Both just and true; When Ahaziah King This slaughter saw, he in his heart fainting, With all his might in his charet did flie, And Jehu after follow'd him quicklie; To smite him, als his servants he did spurre With cryes, who smote him going up to Gu Which is by Ibla'm; he to Megiddo Did flie anone, and there he died also. Then Jehu came with haste to Jezreel, Where was the witch, and vile whoore Jezeb When she it heard, she then painted her face, And tyr'd her head with folies in that place: She looked out, and said unto Jehu, Had Zimri peace who his own Master slew? Then Jehu lifting up his face unto The window, said, who is on my side, who To him three Eunuches looked out anone,
them he said, see that ye throw her downe; d so they did, so that then from the wall r sprinkled blood on the Horses did fall: ere King Jehu in zeale and anger hot eene Jezebel quickly troad under foot. When he was come in for to eate and drinke, Jezebel he began thus to thinke; e see now this cursed woman, said he, r she is a Kings daughter verily, e burie her; they went at his commands, t onely the skull, feet, palms of her hands ey found; the greedy dogs got all the rest; en Jehu heard this, he esteemed best thinke of that which Propet Elijah d threatned from his Master Jehovah. In the same place of pleasant Jezreel, e dogs shall eate the flesh of Jezebel, rvile carkase as doung upon the field all be, no faird or force shall there it shield; hile her dead bones scattred in Jezreel all be, none shall say; This is Jezbel. Thus this ill wife of wicked King Ahab, st Queene, last queane, a vile and dirty drab, as to the dogs by the Lord given for meat, ho did her eat, except skull, palms, and feet. In Samria King Ahab had then
Of sons that were in count threescore and ten; Then Jehu wrote to these of Jezreel, And Samaria, see if ye expell My forces can; Of Ahab take a Son, And see if ye darre set him on the Throne. They at these wordes were then exceeding lie Afraid, and said, it were to us folie To fight a man, whose force and mighty hand Two great Kings were not able to withstand; Therefore the Rulers sent unto Jehu, Saying, We are thy humble servants now; What thou desirest, now command and say, With one consent we will Jehu obey. Then Jehu wrote to them of the citie, If ye be mine and will hearken to me, Take the Sons of Ahab and Jezebel, And send their heads to me in Jezreel: Threescore and ten Sons of Ahab they slew, Their heads in baskets they sent to Jehu: What they had done, men told unto the King, Who said, lay them in heaps till the morning: So Jehu King direct'd by th' Eternel, Slew all that Ahab had in Jezreel, Both all his great men, his kinsfolks and Priests None would he save for prayer or requests. Then from Jezreel Jehu went away,
to Samaria there he by the way d meet comeing Ahazias brethren, them he said, who, or what sort of men e ye? said they, we are of Royall blood, e are come downe, so it seems to us good, ndly to se the children of the King d them salute, we meane none other thing. Then said Jehu, take all these men alive, ho are in number thirty seven and five; ey to obey the precepts of Jehu, d take them all, and at a pit them slew. After Jehu did meet Jehonadab, ho was the Son of one, called Rechab; him he said; Is thine heart right with me, mine with thee? He said, it is truely; en said Jehu, give to me now thine hand, ter my Coch as King I thee command; w come, said he, according to my word, d see what zeal I have had for the Lord. Then Jehu came unto Samaria, the direction of the great Jovah; Ahabs race he left not one at all, ho after him did pisse against the wall: us he fulfill'd the words of Jehovah, hich he before did speake by Elijah. Then Jehu by a goodly stratageme, th'red the people, and said unto them,
Ahab served but with a little touch Great god Baal, but I will serve him much; Therefore to me gather the Prophets all, That I with them may serve the god Baal; Let none be wanting at this gods service, For I for Baal have a sacrifice. Let this be done, see that ye me believe If any come not, he sure shall not live, But Jehu all this did by subtilty, That Baals service he might utterly Destroy; Jehu commanded to proclaime, That he a great assemblie did ordaine. Then Baals men, his service to defend, Came to his house, which they from end to en Did fill; when Jehu saw them all present, Unto a servant he gave commandment, To bring foorth the vestments for all quickly From Baals house, where Baals men onely Could claime a roome: When Baals men beg To sacrifice, King Jehu did ordaine, Fourescore of men who stood armed withou To goe and slay, and compasse them about; If any, said he, of these ye let goe, Your life surely shall be for his also. Then the stout Captaines at King Jehus w Did smite these men with the edge of the swo And cast them out and to the city went,
Tere they from Baals house incontinent ught the images, which they in great ire breake and burne in the midst of a fire: ey Baals house brake downe without delay, ich a draught-house they made unto this day; us Jehu strength'ned by the Eternel, stroyed Baal out of Israel. Then to Jehu the Lord made a promise, cause he had 'gainst Ahab done service, at the fourth man that should come of his race, ould sit as King and rule into his place: t to walk justly Jehu tooke no heed, r his vaine heart was not upright indeed; Ahabs slaughter he did greatly faile; r what he did was not in holy zeale r Gods glory; but for commendation, r Throne, Scepter, and vaine ostentation: zeal he seem'd to do for th' Eternel, d yet did still worship calves at Bethel last Jehu with his fathers softlie id sleep deaths sleep, and in the faire citie f Samaria, after his last breath as buried; a way for all the earth.
The Use. Let Kings heere learne when they with for and might Doe serve the Lord, to have an heart u right; If serving God men have another aime; Their vaine glory at last shall end with sham We may heere learne in Jehus historie, That all is not zeal that seems zeal to be: Men may do much, as fight, preach, good m save, And yet for all be but a painted grave. The use of Jezebels death. Let Queenes heere also learne by Jezebel, With vaine idoles not to greeve th Eternel▪ For he there bones with Jezebels can dash, And unto dogs also can give their flesh. 11. JEHOAHAZ. The possession of God. THis Jehus son God to the Throne did brin Who seventeene years of Israel was King
Though God him set up by his power and might, t he did that which was ill in his sight; eastly man, by the calves of Bethel, th Jeroboam he the Eternel d much provoke; Als in Samaria ere stood a grove, which greeved Jehovah; r this the anger of the Eternel as kindled much against all Israel: Hazael and also Benhadad rr'd up to plague this people that was bad. Then Jeho'haz unto the Lord did pray, ho heard his sute, and that without delay, r God was moved with compassion, hen he did see their great oppression: man was found by the hand of Jovah, ho took from Isra l the yoke of Syria; or this Kings sins God made his forces small, ftie horsemen with ten charets for all, en thousand foot he had, a most poore King, is men were made like the dust by threshing. The Use. et Kings heere learne that vile idolatrie a great foe to all prosperitie: King and Subjects doe what is unjust,
Their Thrones and States shall threshen b to dust. 12. JEHOASH. Burning or distrusting. THis second man from grand-father Jehu, Did wicked Kings in wickednesse follow▪ This man, as by the historie appeares, In Samaria did reigne sixteene yeeres: He Amaziah in Battell alive Did take, and als led him away captive: After, he spoil'd the house of great Jovah, And cari'd all unto Samaria: He ceased not from Ieroboams sin, But like a foole rashly did walk therein: In Samaria after his last breath He buri'd, was, a way for all the earth. The Use. Let Kings here learne who would in memrie Have good report, to shunne idolatrie: Let Kings heere learne that spoilers of Gods house Shall not long after have state prosperous.
13. JEROBOAM. Contending or striveing with the people. THis was the third from grand father Jehu, He did ill Kings in wickednesse follow: his Jeroboam Ieroboams sin id well allow, and also walk'd therein: ccording to the word of great Jovah, hich he did speake by the Prophet Ionah; e did restore Israels coast and gaine, rom Hamath unto the sea of the plaine, or the Lord saw Isra'ls affliction as very bitter, and had compassion; or at this time none was shut up or left, oor Israel of all help was bereft. he Lord said, Not that he from under heaven Would wholly blot out his owne Isra'ls name, ut would them save, as it then came to passe y Ieroboam the Son of Ioash; his man, as by the historie appeares, id reigne the space of fourtie and one yeeres. The Use. et Kings heere learne that vile idolatrie, mong vertues ressembles a dead flee:
Such may doe good and seeme to have G favour, But this dead flie sends out a stinking sav 14. ZECHARIAH. The rememberance of the Lord. HEere Zechariah last of Iehus race, Who on the Throne of Israel had place▪ He fear'd not God, for he wicked in heart, From Ieroboams sins did not depart. At last Shallum in rage and furie hot, Before the people Zechariah smot: He six moneths did reigne in Israel, When that was done by Shallums hand he fel The Use. Let Kings heere learne that sin is not a sport, It ends their dayes, and cuts their honours sh 15. SHALLUM. Peace, Prosperitie. THen Shallum King who was Son of Iabe Came to the Throne by his great wicked
A full moneth he did the Scepter sway, Then Menahem this murderer did slay. The Use. Let Kings heere learne that sin is not a sport, It ends their dayes and cuts their honours short. Who for to rise make other men to fall, Shall rush downe shortly like a trott'ring wall: Let Kings heere learne that conquest is not good Which is obtain'd by shedding humane blood. 16. MENAHEM. A roarer. THen Menahem with the sword smote Tipsah, And also the coasts thereof from Tirzah, Because to him they op'ned not their gates, All that he found in all these bounds and feats: With sword this Roarer smote most cruelly, Of the women he did cut the belly Where children lay; He most wicked in heart, From Ieroboams sins did not depart.
At last came Pul the great Assyrian King, Against the land great forces he did bring: Then Menahem great summes to him did pay, So Pul with all his forces went away; Ten yeeres he did reigne, and after by death This King he went the way of all the earth. The Use. Let Kings beware to staine their memorie With vile murder, and blood of crueltie, To kill women it is most inhumane, In such doings is neitheir glore nor gaine. 17. PEKAJAH. The opning of GOD, or brought out by GOD THen Menahems son, called Pekajah, Began to reigne in faire Samaria; He fear'd not GOD, for he wicked in heart, From Jeroboams sins did not depart. Then Pekah the son of Remalia, A captaine stout, did against Pekajah Conspire, whom he without mercie or grace Did with the sword kill in his owne palace,
ith Argob Arieh and other fiftie, f Gileadites who felt his crueltie. The Use. t Kings here learne that sin is not a sport, ends their dayes, it cuts their honours short; to their children they seeke glore or gaine nlawfully such things shall not remaine: Menahem could looke hi of his grave, kajah might say. Nothig now I have all thy conquest: Thus it is not good, come to Thrones by shedding humane blood. 18. PEKAH. Open. Fter that Pekah the Son of Remalia, Had with the sword slaine the King Pekajah, force of armes, this wicked man anone, d then usurpe Israels Crowne and Throne: is murtherer was most profane in heart; m the vile idoles he would not depart, ich Jeroboam at Bethel and Dan d set up; At last the King Assyrian,
Tiglath, Pilezer with an armie strong Tooke Kedesh-Hazor, Galile, Jion, Abel-Beth Ma'chah of faire Naphtali, The bravest men he in Captivitie Cari'd away unto Assyria. At last Hoshea the son of Ela, Against Pekah made a conspiracie, He wounded Pekah, so that he did die: Thus King Pekah most cruell and profane, In the yeere twenti f his reigne was slaine. The Use. Let Kings heere learne, whose charets are th swords, That they shall reckon for their deads  wordes: If they usurpe Crowne, Scepter, or the Thr The LORD shall come with great venge anone: As Peka slew Pekajah to be King, So Hoshea that Pekah downe did bring: Killers of men rarely this favour have From GOD to goe in peace unto t grave.
19. HOSHEA. A saviour. IN Ahaz twelft yeere King of fair Judah, Began to reigne this man, son of Elah: ow Israel were come to their last cast, f all their Kings Hoshea was the last: e served not Jovah with all his might, ut foolishly did evil into his sight; et was he not so vaine, nor yet so vile s other Kings had beene in Israel. At last came up, against this Hoshea, halmanezer King of Assyria nto this King Hoshea a servant ecame; To him he gave costly presents, ut afterward to be free of this foe, e messengers sent to the mighty So ng of Egypt: Then Shalmanezer soone d shut him up, and bound him in prison: hus Hoshea, a man of Elahs line, d sway the Scepter the space of years nine. At this same time Isra'l was gone astray, ey were profane, not caring for GODS way; ey vainly feared gods that were no GOD, herefore God scourg'd them with th' Assyrian rod;
Yea more this vile people with all their mig Did secretly these things that were not right: They built High places in ev'ry citie, They like the Heathen with idolatrie Provok'd the LORD yea like most foo fooles, They tooke pleasure to serve most vile idols. Yet 'gainst Isra'l the LORD did testifie, And said, Isra'l yet returne unto me From your ill wayes; if my name ye will fe Yee yet to me shall be a people deare. But from their ill wayes they would not part, Their neck they stifned and hardned their he In their mad course they follow'd vanitie, Running themselves in vile idolatrie; Molten images, calves, and groves they made, Heav'ns host also, as though they had beene ma They did worship, and for to hast their fall, They did oppoint great service for Baal: Yet further to provoke the Lord to ire, They made their children to passe through fire: For these their sins the LORD by his great mi All Israel remov'd out of his sight Heere for the sins of vile idolatrie, Yee see the end of Isra'ls Monarchie:
gs of Israel heere did end their race, ause they were profane and voide of grace. The Use. Prince and people meditate Gods law, to provoke see that they stand in awe: Kings pride 'gainst him stiffen their necke, ir Crownes, and Thrones, and Scepters hee will breake: Nations against the LORD be stout, will both King and people als root out: mightie LORD great Jovah hath said this, ee sinne, yee and your King shall perish. A WATCH WORD, Concerning the fourty and one Kings that did reigne over GODS people. et Princes learne by these one and fourty How rare it is both good and Prince to be: s most cleare that it is a heard thing, be both good and honou'rd as a King; eed, lust, and pride, do cogge most easily, emselves in hearts poison'd with flatterie.
THE GARDEN OF ZION. The Booke of Ezra. A Prayer. WHen night on men dumb silence sha distill, When wearied bones them selves wit sleep do fill, When gloomy darknesse husheth every thing, Then let thy sprit verses of vertue bring Into my mind, well stored with thy gra e, Which may the hearts of worthy men solace: While nights blacke mantle covreth a gre part,
t thine Aurora shine bright in mine heart: hen depths appeare where through I cannot ride, thy great Barge me togh against the tide. In Babylon thy people years seventie, ere we arid much with long captivitie; pon them thou of thy wrath had the flashes rought, and had burnt their Temple Towne to ashes; ut thou who never thy people forsook, ith mercies eyes at last did on them look. These verses LORD now through thy strainer passe, And make them cleane as is the clearest glasse, hat by them may appeare even to the least, ow thou by Ezra, who was scribe and Priest, eclared hast how good Zorobabel, ho in great vertue highly did excell, ebuilt the Temple, and how by a jar ods peoples foes that worthy worke did mar Cyrus time, untill Darius King nto the cope oedain'd the house to bring.
EZRA An helper. CHAP. 1. AFter that Salems Temple had li long Burnt in ashes, and the Jewes h among Their foes beene captives, GO made Cyrus King Of Persia, to care for rebuilding Of Gods fair house, for this occasion, He causd publish a proclamation. When this was heard these who before di mourne, With joy in hast provided to returne: Then to Sheshbazzar in a plenteous store, The Temples vessels Cyrus did restore. Chap. 2. OF the people returned three thousand, Six hundred and thirty with ready hand To build the house, which burnt before had been,
Of Priests there came a thousand and seven teene, f Levites were a hundred thirty nine, ith Nethinims all with courage divine, ith them servants of Solomons children, l for to build were well prepared then. he Priests which could not shew their pedigree, ere not permitted in priests place to be: he Tirshatha who did the rest command, ould not permit that any tooke in hand. hat any should of holy things make feast, ll with Urim and Tummim came a Priest. he whole number were fourty two thousand, hree hundred threescore Jews from Babels land, sides servants and maids for service given, ere seven thousand three hundred thirtie seven, ith horses seven hundred, six and thirty, ith mules two hundred five and als fourty: eir Camels were foure hundred thirty five, ith them they did six thousand asses drive, ith seven hundred and also twentie more e rich all freely offred to restore he house of GOD and build it in his place, hey all offred as GOD gave them the grace: thousand dramnes of gold without delay, e thousand pound of silver they did pay;
A hundred Priests garments they did prepare, Which their courage in building did declare. Chap. 3. THen first of all came Prince Zerubabel, With Jeshua Priest for the Eternel, They for the Lord a faire Altar did reare, To offer to him who was Isaks feare; Their willingnesse clearely for to declare, To offer then they in no way did spare: The workmen well rewarded were no slack, Each man his charge did gladly undertake: When the foundations of Gods house were cast, Some had great joy; Others were all agast, And weeped sore, even these who first had seene What glory in Solomons works had beene: Of joy andd weeping such was then the noise, That hardly could one well discerne the voice. Chap. 4 VVHen this great worke begun was  Gods grace Then wicked men anone it to disgrace Rose up by craft, deceit and policie, Offring them selves with them builders to be; But not accepted, they in open way
em for to hinder proudly did essay: shlam, Mithridath, Tabeel, and Rekum, e Chancelor, and Shimshai Scribe did come gether, and against Jerusalem Artaxerxes they wrote letters then, ewing that stubborne Jews who were proudly bellious, were rebuilding their city: en quickly back the King to them did write, at they the work anone should interdite; en ceasd the work untill the second yeare Darius King, who Persias crowne did beare. Chap. 5. Hen Zerubabel and Shealtiel both, Whom GOD with vertue from above did cloath, ey by Haggai and als by Zecharie ing stirr'd up, did with all industrie t forward the great work they had in hand; he rest obey'd, and they did well command: tnai and Shether-boznai were their foes, hinder them they did a letter close, d sent it to Darius Persias King, ewing that Cyrus had done the like thing; d now they this of Darius did desire, hat he of Cyrus decree would enquire,
Who would not suffer this great house to be Rebuilded, because of their mutinie. Chap. 6. THen Darius the King made a decree, That in the house of rolls a search should be, Made by his servants with all diligence, And there was found within the Medes Province A roll, wherein was written a record, Which did containe the decree word by word Which Cyrus made, Gods house for to restore, The height whereof should be cubits threescore, The breadth as much; and the expenses shall, From the Kings owne house shall be taken all. When Darius found this enrolled decree, He it confirm'd and ordaind all to be Provided, so that they should nothing want, Which might them help either to build o plant. But yee Tatnai and Shetherboznai see, That to this great work ye no hinder bee, Also I have made a decree most fast, That who soever alter this word past, The timber from his house shall be pull'd dow And shall be set up, and he hang'd thereon:
And that the greater feare mens hearts may fill, is house for this shall be made a dounghill: nd God that hath his name causd there to dwell, estroy shall all Kings and people that shall ut to their hand to Alter or destroy his house of GOD, who doth me now employ or this great work, for this I a decree ave made, let all be done right speedilie: hen this was heard the Jews with diligence id build, and the King did pay the expence: They prosp'red much through the sweet prophecie f Haggai, and likewise of Zacharie. In the sixt year of Darius the King, he Jews GODS house unto the cope did bring, he Priests having this good occasion, id keep the feast of dedication, nd the Passeouer with joy and gladnesse, or God had looked on their sore distresse And made them joyfull, for he turn'd the heart Of Darius, great kindnesse to impart, o the builders which he did still extend, Untill that great worke was brought to an end. Chap. 7. NOw in the seventh year of the happy reigne, Of Artaxerxes of great Babel King,
Ezra the Scribe, with his most cunning speac Came from Babel to Salem for to teach Gods people, where this good man found an Gods gracious hand there to be him upon: For Ezra had prepared well his heart, To seeke and search Gods law in every part: He Gods statutes and judgements als did pre Unto Israel both by workes and speach. Unto Ezra great Artaxerxes King, Commission gave that he with every thing Needfull for Gods house should be furnish'd w This Ezra got under the Kings broad seal: The King with his counsellers did agree Both gold and silver to give most freelie For that effect; The King als did ordaine That what silver scribe Ezra could obtaine, From People, Priests, all should be by and by Imployed for God, rammes and lambes to buy For sacrifice, and what should be wanting, Should all be furnish'd by Darius King, Who did with speede his Treasurers command To have all such things ready in their hand, Even Silver, Wheat, and Salt, and Oyle,  Wine, To be for God from the King a propine, For why, said he, Should God wrath fearful bri Against the realme or against the King?
When this was done, Ezra rejoic'd greatlie, at God had mov'd the King to beautifie s house in Salem, and that he in end s mercy to him richly did extend: en said he, I was streth'ned mightilie, the hand of the Lord was upon me. en I did gather out of Israel o go with me, ev'n men which did excell. Chap. 8. Hen diverse from Babel with Ezra went, Men who in vertue were most excellent: en to the river that to Ahana oth run, they were all gath'red by Ezra: ere we abode in tents ev'n three dayes space, t could not finde any of Levis race. ter we had both Priests and people view'd, erefore to diverse I would have it shew'd, at they for Gods house should then quicklie bring en that were wise, and fit for ministring. Then by the good hand of the Lord our God, ey brought unto us men of knowledge good e sons of Mahli, the sons of Levi, number eighteene with other twentie. en I proclaim'd a fast there, said Ezra,
Even hard besids the river Ahava, That we our selves there where me may abod Might sore afflict before th' Almighty God, To seek of him a way with diligence Both for our selves, our sons and our substanc For I thought shame to seek from the King the A band of Souldiers, and als of Horsemen Us to protect against our foes, for I Had to the King uttred this speach boldly, The hand of GOD will surely their part ta That do him feare; But these that him forsak And with profane walk in the wicked path, They surely shall feel the dint of his wrath; So we besought the Lord with hunmble fast, And he intreated was of us at last: When this was done, Ezra great quantitie Of silver gold, and fine copper quickly Causd to be weighed to the Priests, and them He ordain'd all to bring unto Salem. On the twelft day of the first mon'th Ezra, Departed from the river Ahava, That we unto Jerusalem might goe, GOD by his hand us sav'd from every foe. So we unto Salem came in safetie, Wherein the Temple we did clearly see The silver gold well weighed, then anone, We did deliver our commission
Unto the Kings Livetenents whose abode as on this side of the river; of God he house they did most carefully prepare, hereby they did their diligence declare. Chap. 9. Hen Ezra was kindled with holy rage, Because the people had in mariage ken the daughters of a wicked race, e holy seed, thus did themselves disgrace; among these most wicked Nations, ey follow'd their abominations; t let the commons of the people passe, e great Princes were chiefe in this trespasse. When I this thing did hear I quickly rent th greefe of heart my mantle and garment: oni'd I sat downe, my heart did bleed, e haire I pluckt both off my beard and head; Then came to me numbers with one accord, o with their hearts did truely fear the LORD, ey greeved were for their wicked practise, te astoni'd till even sacrifice: en I arose up from my heavinesse, ing my mantle in my sore distresse t with my garment; then upon my knees ll downe, and to God did lift mine eyes,
Spreading my hands out to his Majestie, And said, O God, to lift my face to thee I am asham'd, for even over our head Our sins are greatly increased indeed, And our trespasse against thy holy name, Up to the Heav'ns is growen up to our shame: Since the dayes of our fathers we have seen, That we in great trespasse have surely been Unto this day, and for our sins have we, Our Kings, our Priests been to captivitie, And spoile deliv'red, and to shame of face, As we this day do feele with great disgrace. And now the Lord to us with sorrowes prest, A little space hath made grace manifest, That we escape might danger and disgrace, And get a naile in his most holy place, That so our God might lighten cleare our eyes, And in our bondage give a little ease: For we who are Gods chosen heritage, Among our foes were captives in bondage; But God to us extended hath mercy, Even in the sight of Kings, who mightily In Persia rule, that he so by this thing, Might unto us even give a reviving For to set up GODS house with buildin faire, And desolations thereof well repaire,
nd so in Salem, and als in Judah, get a wall from the great JEHOVAH. And now our GOD, alas what shall we say r we thy precepts have despisd this day, d cleane forsaken, for in lustfull rage ith the heathen we have in mariage fil'd our selves, in our trespasses we fore thy face at this time stand guiltie. Chap. 10. VVHen Ezra thus did pray and weepe right sore, d cast himselfe downe the LORDS house be∣fore: en Jehiels son, called Shechaniah, answere soone, and said unto Ezra, have trespassd against the LORDS command, have espousde the strange wives of the land, for all this we truely heere may tell, t touching this, there's hope in Israel. herefore now let us make without delay h GOD a Cov'nant, for to put away h all the wives and children most forlorne ch of these wives have hitherto been borne, e Ezra for this matter to thee ngeth; also we with thee will be:
Be of courage, and do as ye now hear, Then rose Ezra, and made Isra'l to swear, That they should do according to his word Then Ezra before the house of the LORD Rose, and quickly into the chamber went Of Johanan, where he was miscontent For their sins, who had beene cari'd away, He ate no bread, no water in that day He drank at all, and they proclaim'd quickly, Unto the children of captivity, Through all Judah and Salem, that together They should themselves for this good purpo gather: Then within three dayes (as they did ordaine) They greatly mourn'd for their sinnes, and fraine. Then Ezra Priest stood up, and als did tell, By wives yee have increasd sins in Isra'l, Therefore unto your fathers God confesse, To do his pleasure see that ye professe; Sever your selves from the men of the land, And from strange wives; Then all did ta in hand; While they heard Ezra speaking thus that day, That as he said, they gladly would obey: That GOD might turne away his anger hote, Which kindled was by such a filthie spot:
They gave their hands, that they would put away heir wives, and being most guilty that day; s God ordained, so it came to passe, ramme they offred for their great trespasse. The Use. eere learne, that though GOD with great miserie, fflict his Church in long captivitie, et at the last before that they be shent of the evil will surely him repent; Zerubbabel (with his precepts school'd) can raise up Jerusalem to build; r manners good he can finde out a scribe, learn'd Ezra wise precepts to prescribe, ee wil not want, if it then needfull be, good Haggai, and faithfull Zacharie: a Cyrus his ordinance recall, Darius he for to build the wall n raise, who by a most constant decree ll furnish all that thereto needfull be: See how the LORD can wisely with a beck, A winke, a vvord, the greatest things direct.
THE GARDEN OF ZION. The Booke of Nehemiah. A Prayer. THy workes are wondrous, as all men m see, Thy Phoebus bright careering on the sky Comes foorth pompous, like a Bridgroom light, Thy starres like nailes of gold decore the nigh Thou sends thy winds justing among the clouds, They roare they stirre the bubbling wa floods:
What god, O GOD, can be compar'd to thee' ho art great Ruler both of land and sea? rant unto me that in my sacred layes, may expresse the glory of thy wayes. By Zerubabel thou thy Temple faire ebuilt; by Ezra thou didst well repaire hat was amisse in manners; last of all, y Nehemiah thou made up the wall f fair Salem; O make us all to feel ithin our hearts such burning holy zeal. NEHEMIAH. The consolation of the Lord. Chap. 1. AS I was in Shushan there came to me One of my brethren, called Hanani, With certaine men of Judah, of whom I hat was the state of the poor Jewes did try, hat had escapt from among dangers great, nd which of the captivity were left. And they againe together said to me, he remnant left of the captivitie e in reproach, and great affliction,
And Salems wall is also broken downe. Our foes most fierce (who 'gainst us did co¦spire) The gates thereof have all now burnt with fir It came to passe, when I these words did he From great mourning I could no more forbea While that my heart greev'd to and fro w driven, I did both fast and pray, the GOD, of Heav'n: I said, O LORD of Heav'n I beseech thee Great and terrible that keepeth mercie, And Covenant for them that do him love. And keep the precepts of the Lord above, Unto thy servant give attentive eare, That thou thy servants prayer well may heare, Which before thee I pray both day and night, Israels sins confessing in thy sight. Not onely so, but oh, alas, both I And als my fathers house have sinn'd greatly: Against thee wee have most corruptly dealt, For which great grief and sorrows we have fe Thy statuts and thy most righteous judgement We have not keept, which thou by thy servant Moses did give, Remember I pray thee, What thou in justice and als in mercie Spake by Moses, saying, If yee transgresse, I will you scatter, but if yee confesse
Humblie your sinne, and returne timeously o me, I will you gather most quickly, our enemies also I will defame, nd will you bring where I will set my name. Now these are thy most faithfull servants, and eople, whom thou by thy Almighty hand edeemed hast, O LORD my GOD, now grant, n eare attentive unto thy servant, nd to thy servants prayer now give eare, ho thy great name alwayes desire to feare: hat I intend now prosper, I thee pray, hat I may find thine assistance this day; the sight of this man me mercy grant, or I cupbearer was the Kings servant. Chap. 2. THe twenty year of Artaxerxes King, I his cupbearer, wine to him did bring; his presence I had not beene before, s I was then in great sadnesse; wherefore he King himself thus looking on me, said, hat aileth thee, and why art thou so sad, eeing with sicknesse thou not troubled art? This nothing else is but sorrow of heart.
When by the King these wordes were to  said, Then I anone was very sore afraid: When at this time fear made my lips to quiver, Unto the King I said, King live for ever, Why should I not be sad and all agast, When the city of Salem lieth wast, The place of my fathers sepulchres deare, Its gates are burnt, from greefe who can forbeare? Then said the King to me, See what is best, For what dost thou now greeved make request? Then lifting up my heart I did soone pray Unto the Lord, and to the King did say, If it the King please, and if thy servant Have in thy sight found favour, to me grant, That I be sent unto Judahs citie, That it anone may builded be by me. Then said the King, the Queene als sitting b For how long shall be this thy great journey? And when wilt thou againe to us returne? Now set a time, it keep, and not adjourne; When I this heard, I set to him a time, To let me go the King did well incline. Moreover I said to the King humblie, If it the King shall please, let soone to me Letters be given for them that do govern Beyond the river, that they well may learn,
That thy will is for th'honour of JOVAH, hat they convey me over to Judah: lso a letter to get I thought best o Asaph, the keeper of the forrest, hat he timber should give for beams quickly, o make the gates of palace, house, city. hat I did seek that did the king command, ccording as on me was GODS good hand: hen I beyond the river came quickly, ving Captaines which the king sent with me. When Sanbalat the wicked Horonite, d Tobiah the servant Ammonite eard of it, it them greev'd exceedingly, hat any sought the good of GODS City. So GOD (who me did save in all my wayes) ought me to Salem, where I was three dayes, the night tyme, when sleep sad on men falls, went, and viewd the ruine of the wals. Thereafter I the Jews did all invite build the wals, and that even in despite all their foes: Ye know, said I, what's past, rusalem GODS City lyeth waste: a, what our greatest foes did most require, e wals are down, the gates are burnt with fire. en I to them declared most clearly, w that the good hand of GOD was on me; d how the king (before I did depart)
Spake to me words which did comfort my hea Let us rise up, and build couragiously, So GOD their hearts made stout, and hands read But when that Sanballat the Horonite, And Tobiah the servant Ammonite, And Geshen the Arabian did hear, They at our work began to laugh and gyre, And us despise; what is this great doing Said they, Will ye rebell against the king? Then unto them I most boldly did say, The God of Heaven will prosper us this day: Therefore we now his servants will arise, And build; but you who Gods servants despise, In Gods Salem have no memoriall, You have no portion, yea no right at all. Chap. 3. IN this Chapter we have the names of all These who did build fair Salems broken wall. Chap. 4. BUT after when that wicked Sanballat Heard that we did so build the wall, and th We courage had, he (wroth with indignation) Did scoffe and mock the whole Jewish nation:
Before his brethren, and of Samaria, e armie, he said, laughing with Ha, ha, hese feeble Jewes, what? Will they fortifie emselves? Or what? Will they most foolishly sacrifice? Will they even in a day d all this work? Will they revive, I say, e stones out of their bruised rubbish heape, hich are all burnt? Now was the Ammonite obiah by him, who said scornfully, l that they build will fall down by and by: that a Foxe but leap upon their wall, e shall it break down, and make all to fall. Heare, LORD, how wee despised are indeed, nd their reproach turn upon their own head; nd make them all at last a prey to be, en in the land of their captivity; nd cover not their great sins lesse or more, r thee to anger the builders before ey have provocked, so we did anone ild all the wall, till all was fully done. But when Sanballat and Tobiah vain, ith Ammonits, Arabians profane, nd Ashdodites that Salems wall did hear as builded, they had both great wrath and fear, herefore together they did all conspire, go and fight against Salem in ire,
And so to stop the work; Neverthelesse We unto God did pray in our distresse: Likewise (because of their malice and might) We set a watch against them day and night. And Judah said, The strength of bearers all Is much decay'd, and for to build the wall We are not able for such quantity Of rubbish, as ye all may clearly see. Then said our foes, Before they be aware We shall them slay, and so their work shall mat From all places the Jews came, and us told, Even unto ten-tymes, that our foes most bold With great forces provided would not fail To come, and us with fury to assail. Therefore to save the people from these fears, I armed men set with bows, swords and spears: Then to the Nobles and Rulers I said, Of these vain men see yee be not afraid; Remember God, and armed in his sight For your brethren, and sonnes, and daughte fight. From that time was their counsell brought t nought, Half of my servants in the work well wrought; The other half against dangers and fears Held bows and shields, and habergeons & spears
And other weapons which they best could finde, Judahs house the Rulers stood behinde: with one hand the builders in that fear d work, and with the other held the spear; each builder had his sword by his side, e Trumpeter hard by me did abide. Then to the Nobles and the People all aid, The work is great, and on the wall e far asunder building do remain. erefore in time let us wisely ordain, at in what place yee shall the trumpet hear, e then to us with all haste shall draw near: e fear not mens malice, or yet their might, r God the Lord himself for us shall fight. Thus we labour'd and half did hold the spear, om morning light till the stars did appear: kewise I told that I it best did judge, at every one with his servant should lodge ithin Salem, that they the day-time might bour, and be to us a guard by night: none of us all put off our cloathing night or day, but only for washing. Chap. 5. AMong the People then was a great cry, Because they were opprest by usury,
Which made them lands and houses all morgag Then Nehemiah in fury and rage Reprov'd the Nobles for such usury, He against them set a great assembly: He said, We have redeemed our brethren The Jewes, which were sold unto the Heathen; And will you even sell your brethren? Or shall They unto us be sold, and made slaves all? When they heard this, they all did hold their peace, They found nothing to answer in that place. Unto them all I boldly said also, It is not good truely what ye now do; Yee should fear God, and shun iniquities, For the reproach of Heathen enemies; I likewise might exact of them money, Let us now all leave off this usury: To them their lands, vineyards, houses this day, And olive-yards, wine, corn, restore, I pray. Then said they all even without any more, Unto our brethren we will all restore. Then did I call the Priests, and made them swe That they should do as they had promisde heer. Moreover I thus shook my lap, and spake, So from his house GOD every man shall shake, And from his labour, that doth not truely Perform this point, GOD shall him make empty.
en all said AMEN, and did praise the Lord, e people did according to their word. Moreover I these twelve years governour Judah have not for my hard labour en the bread due to these of my place, t that I should GODS work marre or disgrace, t these who had governed before me, the people were chargable truely, ey taken had both Silver, Wine, and bread, a their servants bare rule ov'r them indeed, did not I, such things I would not hear, cause that I the Lord resolv'd to feare; also I for all that did befall, ntinu'd in the work of Salems wall: my Table a hundred and fiftie of Isra'l with heathen ate daily: ly an oxe, with six sheep for my fare, th dainty foules my servants did prepare: ce in ten dayes all sorts of wine with speed ey brought to me, yet I did not the bread the governour eat, for in that age on the people was heavy bondage: cording as I have done uprightly this people, now my God think on mee,
Chap. 6. THen Sanballat, Geshem and Tobiah, With all our foes who were against Jovah, Perceiving that GODS favour so did reach, That we the wall had reared, and no breach Was left therein, they quickly sent to me, That in the plane of Ono speedilie I should them meet, in some village thereby, But they mischeefe intended by and by. Then I to them did quickly send saying, A great work now I am surely doing, So that to come to you I have no leasure, For why should GODS work cease while I g thither? After this sort, four times they sent to me, And as before I answer'd them quickly. Then Sanballat his servant did command, The fifth time with a letter in his hand To come to me, it open bare this thing; That I intended alwayes to be King, And that I did Prophets to preach appoint, That all Judah should me for King annoint. Then unto him I sent with this saying, Thou speakest false, sure there is no such thing These things thou hast sure from no other pa But from thy self feigned by thine own heart,
uch false purpose these men did undertake, hat at the worke they might our hands make weake: ow therefore Lord we intreat thee at length, o fortifie our hands now by thy strength▪ I afterward came unto Shemajah, ho seemed to direct me from Jovah; et us, said he, In the Temple this day s hide, for they will come us for to slay ven in our house; therefore for this purpose ithin GODS house we will our selves inclose nd shut the doores of GODS house, for they will the night season come thee for to kill. While he these speaches crafty did conceive, at the last began for to perceive hat GOD had not him sent, but that indeed his Prophesie was bred in his owne head: r Tobiah and Sanballat in ire, r this ill purpose dd him basely hire e to affright, that I should so begin do, and by this meanes to fall in sinne, d that they might raise up an ill report d me reproach, with all these of my sort. God think on Tobiah, Sanballat hose workes are evil, and who do lewdly prat; Noadia false the Prophetesse, th other Prophets who in great distresse
Would have me put, now also think upon; For their deceit let them all smart anone. In twenty fifth day of the mon'th Elul, In fifty two dayes finish'd was the wall: When this was heard and seene by our en'mies, They were all much cast downe in their own eyes, For they at last perceived well and thought, That this whole work of our great GOD wa wrought. Moreover then the Nobles of Judah Sent many letters unto Tobiah And he to them, for in Judah, forlorne And wicked men had then unto him sworne And he to them, for he was son in law To Shechaniah the son of Arah, Also his son then called Johanan, Had mar'd the daughter of Meshullam, Also they did his good deeds before me, Report that I to wrath might kindled be, What wordes I spake they made him them  heare, And Tobiah wrot for to cause me feare. Chap. 7. IT came to passe, that when fair Salems wall Was builded, and the doores were set up all,
When the porters and all the singers sweet, With Levits were appointed as was meet, to my brother called Hanani Over Salem, then gave the charge quicklie, As also to the good Hananiah, Who was faithfull and did feare great Jovah, said unto them, See they not forgot That Salems gates untill the Sun was hote Should not be op'ned, and that carefully Both day and night they should watch the cty. Now the city indeed was large and great, But the people were very few in it; The houses als were not in every part Well builded; then my GOD put in mine heart, To gather all the Nobles for to see, To reckon evry mans genealogie; So we found out the Register anone Of them which first came out of Bayylon, Habajahs sons were put from the Priest-hood, Because that they by Register make good Could not to shew their right genealogie, So they no more as Priests might reckned be. The governour then said as was most meet, That holy things these men no more should eate, Till their stood up at last a faithfull Priest, With Ʋrim and with Tummim on his breast. At this time the people were lesse and more,
Fourty two thousand three hundred threescore, Besides these were servants numbred rightly Seven thousand three hundred seven and thirty, They had of men two hundred fourtie five, And women who to sing sweetly did strive: The Tirshatha at these occasions, With others gave right large oblations. So God forgetting their iniquities, Made Israel to dwell in their cities. Chap. 8. THen the people gathred from every tribe, Came all unto Ezra the Priest and scribe, Desireing h m that he would take in hand, To read and make them for to understand The law of God, So Ezra stood to read And to expound, the people all gave head; And that he might be better understood, He stood upon a Pulpit made of wood. Ezra there standing did blesse the Lord then, The people all answ'red, Amen, Amen; With lifted hands, their heads they bowed dow And dd worship, with faces to the ground. Then Jeshuah, Hodijah, and Bani, With others read Gods law book distinctly, And gave the sence in each difficle thing,
And causd them to understand the reading. Then Nehemiah the Tirshatha great With Ezra, Levites who the people taught, Said to the people, Now with one accord Rejoice, this day is holy to the Lord; See that to mourne or weep yee stand in aw, For all did weep when they did heare the Law. Then said he to them as he thought most meet, Goe eat the fat and also drinke the sweet: Send portions, let nothing now be spared, To help these for whom nothing is prepared: Be not now sory, but rejoice at length, For that the joy of the LORD is your strength. Thus the Levits with their most holy skill, So taught the people that they all were still, Now hold your peace to them there they did say, Neither be greev'd, for holy is this day. Then all the people, as they thought most meet, Did go away both for to drink and eat, And to send portions, and to make great mirth, Because they had heard GODS word of great worth. Then gathred were upon the second day, Numbers to hear what Ezra scribe would say, Both Priests, Levits, and people in a band, Came unto Ezra for to understand
The law of GOD; then found they that Isra'l In booths of branches once a year should dwell▪ And that they should with diligence the same In all the cities of the land proclame. So all the people for to shun reproof, As Ezra bade, made booths upon the roof Of their houses, and some made in the street, Some in GODS court, as they thought fit a meet. Since Joshuas dayes Isra'l had not done so Then all rejoic'd, as was enjoin'd to do The people then forgetting their distresse, Were filled all with joy and great gladnesse. Then Ezra wise, a worthy man indeed, In the book of Gods law did dayly read; Seven dayes the feast they keeped; the eight da Was most solemne, that done, they went away. Chap. 9. NOw of this mon'th in the twentie fou day, The children of Isra'l without delay Assembled were with sackcloth and fasting, And earth upon them a signe of mourning; Then from all strangers Israels holy seed Did separate themselves, and did indeed Confesse their sins before the Lord right soone,
And als the sins which their fathers had done, hen as they were directed by GODS grace, ith reverence they stood up in their place: ne fourth part of the day they read Gods law, nother fourth part they confessd with awe heir greevous sins, and that with one accord, hat done, in feare they worshipped the Lord. Then on the staires the Levites by and by, o standing up unto the Lord did cry: hen other Levits said with one accord, tand up, and blesse for ever yee the Lord, hy glorious name for ever blessed be, hich is extoll'd above blessings most hie; hou, even thou art the mighty Lord alone, y thee the Heav'ns, the Heav'n of Heav'ns were done ith all their hoste, the Earth and all that be herein, with what doth swimme in the deep sea, hou by thy power dost preserve them all, hey at thy feet to worship thee downe fall. Thou art the LORD who diddest choose Abram rom Ʋr of Calde, whom thou Abraham Didst call after, and foundest most surely,
His heart to be most faithfull before thee; With him in mercy (thou being conten) Made a most sure and solemne Covenant, To give the land of wicked Cananits, Of Hittits, and the profane Perizzits, And Ammorits, and Girgashites by grace, To these who should be of Abrahams race; What Thou hast said Thou hast performed now, For in all things most righteous art thou. The troubles of our Fathers thou didst see, And heardst their cry, even hard by the  sea, And shewedst signes and wonders to Pharo, And on his servants, and people also; For Thou didst knowe how that they de proudly Against them, so a Name Thou didst g Thee, As clearely it appeares to us this day, Yea, before Thee we must confesse, a say, Thou before them the red sea didst divide, So that the waves were walls on every side,
hey stood up straight as thou diddest command, hat thy people might walke one the dry land. s for our foes, thou didst them all anone nto the deepes throw downe as a great stone. Moreover thou them leddest in the day, ven by a cloudy pillar; thou the way hem shew by night, by a pillar of fire hou didst them guide as their hearts could dsire. Thou camest dawne with great pompe and with might Ʋpon mount Sinai and from heav'ns most bright hou spak'st with them and gav'st them right judgements rue Lawes, good statutes and commandements, And madest them thy sabbaths understand, And statutes Laws ordain'st by Moses hand; And from the heav'n gav'st bread to them hungry And from the rock gav'st drink to them thirsty, And promisedst that they should sure possesse The land, which thou had by thy Holinesse Sworne them to give; but they dealt most proudly As our fathers, and hardned most stifly
Their necks, so they wicked stood not in a They hearkned not unto thy blessed Law; They stubburnly refused to obey, The great wonders which they saw every d They did forget; their necks as in a rage They hardned, and to turne to their b¦dage They made a Captaine in rebellion, But thou art a God ready to pardon, Most gracious, and unto anger slow, Of kindnesse great, which rich doth overfl Yea more, when they a molten Calfe  made, And in great rage most wickedly had said, This is thy GOD which from Egypt broug thee, By this they did the Lord provoke highly: Yet thou in mercy them in their distresse Forsookest not, even in the wildernesse, The cloudy pillar with darknesse by day Them from their foes did hide, while i the way Of the red sea they march'd; in the da¦night
fiery pillar went before with light. hy good Sprit also unto them thou gave, u didst provide that they might Manna have meat; in thirst (when they thee did provoke) ou gavest water from the flinty rock: fourty years thou in the wildernesse stained, so that in greatest distresse ey lacked nothing, they fear'd not the cold, all that time their cloathes did not waxe old; more, in this GODS mercies did excell, their marching their feete did never swell: ou gav'st them Kingdomes, and they did possesse th Sihons land, and Ogs in wildernesse, ou did them blesse and multiplie their seed, s Starres in Heaven that were above their head: fter they had past through the wildernesse, e promisde land thou made them to possesse; ou in their hands gave these Kingdomes and Kings,
And made them Masters for to rule all things Within these bounds and also to command Their strongest cities, and their fattest land: They did possesse houses full of all goods, Vineyards, and wells digged and Oliveyards, And pleasant fruit trees in great abundance, Which God apponited for their maintenance; So they did eat, they filled with fatnesse, They lusty did delight in thy goodnesse. Neverthelesse they (disobedient) Rebell'd proudly 'gainst thy commandemen Behind their backs they did reject thy Law, To slay thy Prophets they stood not in aw; Because against them they did testifie, That from their ill wayes they might turne  thee, But they wicked by their transgressions, Against God wrought great provocations. Therefore (for their greevous iniquities) Thou them delivere'dst to their enemies, Who them did vex with much trouble and feare, Yet when they cri'd, thou from heav'n didst the heare
According to thy manifold mercies, ou gav'st them saviours from their enemies em for to save; but when prosperitie, nd rest they got they rebell'd against thee; herefore in wrath thou left them in the hand f cruel foes, whom they could not gainstand, et when returning they cri'd unto thee, hou hard'st from Heav'n their grones of miserie, By frequent rods thou mad'st them stand in awe, hem for to bring againe unto thy Law, et they dealt proudly, and refus'd to heare hey sinned still 'gainst thy judgements severe, ith hardned neck the shoulder they withdrewe nd would not hear, nor yet their life renew: et many yeers thou didst them still forbeare, ea and reprov'd, yet would they not give eare; herefore in wrath thou gav'st them in the hands f the most cruell people of the lands: everthelesse for thy great mercies sake, hou utterly them wouldest not forsake,
Now therefore, LORD, who art great a mighty, Who Cov'nant keepest in thy great mercy, Let not this greef seeme little thee before, That on our kings, princes, and priests lyes sor Als on our prophets, fathers, people all, Not sparing any either great or small, Since the tyme of the strong Assyrian kings, Vnto this day such is the case of things. Howbeit in all that is upon us brought Thou art most just, and truely hast done nought But what is right, and full of equity, But we, alas, all have done wickedly; Neither our kings, our princes, or our priests Did keep thy law, or yet care for thy hests, Or hearken unto thy Testimonie, Wherewith thou didst against them testifie, For in their kingdome they would not thee serve, But still profanely from thy law did swerve. Behold we are servants, alas, this day, And for the land that thou didst give for ay To our fathers, the fruit thereof to eat, Behold in it, as drudges we must sweat; It yeeldeth much increase unto the kings,
Whom over us thou hast set for our sins, Ov'r our bodies they domination have, And cattell, they us at their pleasure slave: Thus we afflicted are in great distresse, Because of this we all both more and lesse A Cov'nant sure both make and write it well, And to it set our Priests and Princes seal. Chap. 10. NOw these that sealed were Nehemiah The Tirshatha, son of Hachaliah nd Zidkijah, with Priests Levits Porters, nd singers, als Nethinims with others, Who having knowledge to their brethren clave, nd made an oath that they should so behave hemselves wisely, to walk in the Lords Law, nd that to sinne they all should stand in aw. We also vow'd by counsell grave and sage, either to take nor give in mariage, ut to abhor the people of the land, o do the same we made a solemne band: so we did ordaine without delay, ot to permit markets on sabbath day; nd that also we would leave the seventh yeere, nd from exacting of debts would forbeare,
Also we did ordaine to charge yearly, Our selves with the third part of good money Of a shekel, this was for the service, Of GODS owne house made for his sacrifice. Then we cast lots Levites and Priests among, For the wood offrings, which then did belong Unto GODS house, on his Altars to burne, According as GODS law ordain'd by turne: Likewise to GODS house we ordain'd to bring, The first fruts of all trees and every thing, The first borne of our children and cattell, We year by year brought unto th'Eternel, With first of all things that Levits could crave, The tithes in all wherein we tillage have. Chap. 11. THen they ordain'd the tenth man of Isra'l, To come and in Jerusalem to dwell, Of the people nine parts they did ordaine, In other Cities to dwell and remaine: The people blessd all these who willingly Offred to dwell in Salems fair city. Chap. 12. HEre are the Priests, Levits of Israel, Which came up with worthy Zerubabel:
Heere is als the hie Priests succession Recorded, with the dedication Of Salems walls, the office of the Priests, Appointed for to keep the Solemne feasts. Chap. 13. WHen we unto GODS Law gave audience, We found it written that for no pretence The Ammonite or Moabite should come For ever in Gods congregation, Because they met not Israel with bread, But hired Bala'm against them indeed, That he them should blast with bitter cursing, Which God by grace turn'd into a blessing. It came to passe now when they understood The law, they did the mixed multitude From Israel so sever and disperse, That they with them should have no more commerce. Then Nehemiah caused speedilie Cleanse all the chambers, which were set to be Prepared for Tobiah by th' hie Priest Eliashib, who at his earnest request Being alli'd to him, then did prepare A great chamber, a great shame, even there where
The Levits laid, incense and tithes of corne, And wine, and oyle, which thitherto we borne: For this greeved was good Nehemiah, Who cast foorth all the stuffe of Tobiah. Moreover he perceiving the Levits, Whose charge was for the ceremonious rites Defrauded of their wonted portion, Had with the Rulers great contention. Hee said to them, Fy on you, how can yee Make GODS house thus through extreame poverti To be forsaken by the Levits, who By your vile greed are wronged so and so? After that done, he a man full of grace, Made the Levits to returne to their place. Then all Judah soon brought the tith of con And the new wine, and oyle were also borne, With diligence unto the treasuries, Which brought to Levits great commodities; Treasurers likewise Nehemiah try'd, Shelemiah Priest and als Zadok the scrib, And of Levits Pedajah, and Hanan The Son of Zaccur, of these every man Was counted faithfull; these did distribute What cheerefully others did contribute. Then Nehemiah said, Remember me, Concerning this O my GOD graciously,
And wipe not out my good deeds, I thee pray, Which I have done for my GODS house the day. In these dayes said the good Nehemiah, saw others in the land of Judah Who on the Sabbath, wine presses did tread, Who brought in sheaves and their Asses did load; Others wine grapes, and burdens great did lay, Upon beasts backs, and on the Sabbath day Them brought to Salem, and cornes openly Did sell, but I gainst them did testifie. There men also dwelt who brought fish from Tyre, With divers wares which were costly and deare, And on the sabbath these men most profaine, Made their markets in GODS Jerusalem. Then with the Nobles great men of Judah did contend for the great Jehovah; What evill is this yee doe then did I say That yee profaine thus the LORDS sabbath day? Against the LORD did not your fathers thus, And did not our GOD bring all this on us, And on this cite? yet ye bring more wrath On Isra'l by profaining the Sabbath. It came to passe tat when I did remarke That Salems gates began for to be darke Before the sabbath, then I did command That all the gates should by my servants hand
Be surely shut, I straitly charg'd that they Should not be opned till the sabbath day Was fully past, and so for this effect I at the gates some of my servants set, And them directed most straitly, that they Should not permit upon the sâbbath day Men to bring burdens, so my servants wise Made the merchands for to lodge once or twise Without the wals, then did I testifie Against these men and said for certaintie, Why lodge yee thus about the wall, profain? Assure your self if yee do so againe, On you most vile I will lay hands therefore, From that tyme on sabbaths they came no more. The Levites I ordain'd without delay, To keep the gates, even for the sabbah day. Concerning this, my GOD, remember me, And spare in the greatnesse of thy mercie. I saw then Jewes who marri'd of Ashdod Wives, and of Ammon, and els of Moab; Their children spake half in the Ashdods speach, But of Hebrew they could not speake a which, Then with them I severely did contend, And did them curse, and of them in the end I also smot some whom I did not spare, In wrath also I plucked off their haire, And by the Lord I made them for to sweare
Saying, yee shall not give your daughters dear Ʋnto their sons, nor yet their daughters take, Nor with them shall yee any mariage make, Did not Solomon one of Isra'ls Kings, Against the LORD sinne greatlie by these things? Among many none was like unto him, Outlandish women yet him causde to sin: Will yee then with this ill defile your lives, Even to transgresse by marying strange wives? And then one of the sons of Joiada, Son of Eliashib hie Priest of Jovah, Sanballats daughter mari'd wickedly, Therefore in haste I chased him from me: Remember them, my GOD, because that they Thy holy Priest-hood have defil'd this day. Thus I them cleansed from the wickednesse Of strangers, and then in their businesse The priests and Levites I did well appoint Precise to keep their wards in every point, Both for the first fruites, and offring of wood, Remember me, O my GOD, now for good.
THE USE. By Zerubabel, GOD in his mercy, Did build the Temple and Salems city By Ezra scribe even to his lawes conforme, The peoples manners he did well reforme, And which indeed was not a comfort small By Nehemiah he built Salems wall. See how the Lord his mercies doth inlarg By imposing to every man his charge; That so his Church may on this earth endur Divers he ordaines its well to procure: Some to do this, and some that, at his wi Which his favour demonstrates and his skill As he makes birds by pleasant quaverings, Like nimble Thumbs, which strike on dive strings, Renew their note and in diversitie Rejoice mans heart with a sweet melodie, Even so the Lord, with divers gifts doth dec That he thereby his people may protect And beautifie, and so them may advance, From under the Bushell of ignorance: See how God doth his divers comforts seal Both for the church, and als the commonwell.
THE GARDEN OF ZION. The Booke of Esther. A Prayer. Now must speak of Ahasuerus King, And of Haman, who on a tree did hing, And likewise of the godly Mordecai, Who for the well of Gods church did apply His heart, for to her happinesse procure, That she from danger might abide most sure; Of this good Esther with goody intent Was by God made a blessed instrument. Now come, good God and with thy breath divine nspire mine heart, my drossie sprits refine,
Powre in my breast thy sacred divine powrs, And teach me how to spend my painfull hours. ESTHER. Hid. Chap. 1. IT came to passe that Ahasuerus King, When he was in the third yeere of his reign Did make a feast unto all his Princes, And his servants, Rulers of Provinces; There he in pompe and royall dignitie Did shew the honour of his Majestie: This feast to shew of his glory the rayes, Did last an hundred, and als fourescore dayes: After this feast, he to the people all A banket made, both unto great and small, In Shushan faire, which was the Kings palace There many subjects did themselves solace, With eating, drinking, merrinesse and playes, This feast did last the whole space of seven daye Both white and greene, and blue hangings we then Fastned most sure, with cordes of fine linnen, And costly purple to the silver rings, Pillars of marble, and such other things; The beds were of fine silver and of gold,
Which were most pleasant alwayes to behold; ichly upon a pavement they stood f red, blue white, and als black marble good: gold vessels they drink unto them gave abundance, as much as they could crave. he law of drinking was none did compell; or so the King had well appointed all is Officers, who did no more require ut that each man dranke after his desire. Also Vashti the Queen, women did bring o feast with her, in the house of the King: the seventh day as Ahasuerus was errie with wine, even as it came to passe hat he ordained (without lesse or more) hat Eunuchs should bring Vashti him before, ith the crowne royall, full of dignitie, o shew unto the Princes her beautie; or she was faire; But Vashti did refuse, o come unto the King who wroth did use reat rigour for her disobedience, ecause they thought it drew in consequence: hese of the Princes who were the most wise hought by this deed that women would despise heir husbands, when of it once they should heare, nd that the basest would no more forbeare, herefore of this let there be a decree gainst the great pride of the Queen Vashti,
Seeing she hath contemn'd the royall state Of Ahasuerus, let her whole estate Be given unto some other speedily, Who shall by all be esteem'd more worthy; That all women by her may stand in aw, Let this decree be written for a law, Which publishd through out the Empire all, Shall make wives honour husbands great an small: After the Princes had heard this saying, They it approv'd, so likewise did the King, So letters were sent that all men might heare, That each man in his owne house rule should be Chap. 2. After these things when Vashti was away, The Kings servants at last began to say, Let fair young virgins be sought for the King, And be committed to egas keeping, And let the maid which plaseth the kings eye, Be placed Queene in stead of proud Vashti: When this was said, anone with the saying, In every point well pleased was the King. Now in Shushan there was a certaine Jew, The son of Jar, as the Scriptures shew, A Benjamite, his name was Modecai,
He from Salem had been carri'd away o Babylon, in the captivitie, With Jechoniah there captive to be: his man Hadassa which was good Ester, His Uncles daughter brought up, and als bare he whole charges; he for her daughter took, When she was orphan he her not forsook. It came to passe at last when the decree Was heard, that Ester was brought to Hegai Who keept the women, he anone Esther Most fair in face to others did prefer: Ester as yet most wisely did not shew, That she by nation was a virgin Jew, As she directed was by Mordecai, She strave in all things humbly to obey. The custome was these maids to purifie, The space of twelve months, that they thus might bee Well for the King prepar'd, as was thought meet, With oyle of myrre, and other odours sweet; But above all the rest Esther got place, For in the Kings sight she obtained grace, So that he set the Crowne upon her head, For Vashti he did make her Queene indeed. Then the King made a feast to his Princes, And a release als to the Provinces:
And royally gave gifts of every thing, According to the great State of the King. In this meane time the worthy Mordecai Sate in the Kings gate, waiting every day: Esther had not yet shewed her kinred, Nor her people, as Mordecai indeed Had charg'd, for she respected Mordecai, As a daughter she him still did obey. While Mordecai thus sate in the Kings gate, Two chamberlens men given unto debate, Bigthan, Teresh, of these that kept the door, Who did intend to take the King; therefore Mordecai knowing what by them had beene Plotted against the King, soon told the Queen, And Esther wise did then declare the same Unto the King in good Mordecais name. When inquisition was made speedily, It was so, and they hang'd were on a tree; And in the book of Chronicles this thing All this was written even before the King. Chap. 3. AFter these things the King of Persia Did raise Haman, son of Amedatha The Agagite, and him advanced high Above all the Princes that were him with:
ll the Kings servants not to give offencé, id bow to him, and give him reverence: ut Mordecai (who did him not allow) efused alwayes unto him to bow. or this Haman (incensde with great fury) tended to destroy most speedily oth Mordecai and all his nation, ecause he made not due submission. In the first moneth, the moneth Nisan, the Kings twelfth year, before proud Haman, hey cast Pur, that is, lot from day to day, ow that they might the Jews all sweep away. Then Haman said to Ahasuerus King; ake heed, and hearken unto my saying; eer is a people that stands not in aw, roud, and perverse, who keepe not the Kings law: herefore it hurts the profite of the King, hat they within thy bounds have abiding: it shall please the King them to destroy, will ten thousand talents surely pay f good silver, and give it speedily, o these that have charge of the treasury. Then thus perswaded Ahasuerus King, continent took from his hand his ring, nd said to him, Take these folk speedily, nd do with them, as seemeth good to thee.
Then letters from the King anone were sent, To all Provinces for the same intent, That all the Jews without faile in one day Should from the earth like doung be sweept aw The posts went out, and runnig made great hast To execut what Haman had purchast: The King and Haman then drank merrilie, But poor Shushan was in perplexitie, Chap. 4. WHen what was done, was seene by Mordec He rent his cloaths and bitterly did cry, He put on sack-loth with ashes, and went, And to the Kings gate came incontinent: In every province then was great mourning Among the Jews, with wailing and fasting: Yea thus perplexed, many night and day In vilest sack-cloth and in ashes lay. When Esthers maids thus Mordecai had seen▪ Clothed with sack, they told it to the Queene, Who greeved much, unto Mordecai sent, To change his sackcloth with costly raiment: But he the same from their hands would no take. Then Esther wondring why he thus did make So strange with her, she for Hatah did call,
hat he should know what was it great or small, hat greeved had the heart of Mordecai, that he did weare sackcloath day by day. So Hatah went to him unto the street f the citie, even before the Kings gate; nd Mordecai him told with great annoy, hat Haman minded the Jews to destroy; e gave him als the copie of writing, f the decree seal'd by the Kings owne ring, hat he unto Esther might shew the same, hat she might know what evil her foes did frame, nd that she should go quickly to the King, o make request for to prevent this thing, Hatah came with diligence that day, nd told Esther the words of Mordecai. Then Esther sent Hatach to him againe, o speake these words, she wise, did him ordaine; he Kings servants and people all doe know, hat the Kings Lawes most strict doe not allow, hat to the inner court come great or small, t such as those for whom the King shall call; othing but death for him who is so bold, As to approach except the King out hold
His golden scepter, thereby to give leave To come to him; none but such after live. But I have not beene call'd unto the King These thirty dayes; tell Mordecai this thing And they againe did tell to Mordecai, The words which Esther unto them did say. Then Mordecai commanded this answere Quickly for to be given to Queene Esther, Think not with thy self I tell thee for new That thou escape shalt more then other Je For if at this time thou dost hold thy peace, Enlargement shall come from another pl Ʋnto the Jewes, but thou most certainly With thy fathers house shalt destroyed be: Who knowes but thou by providence divine, Art to the Kingdome come for such time? When this was told, then bade the g Esther To Mordecai soone returne this answere, Goe quickly, and well gather every man, Among the Jewes present within Shushan, And fast yee for me the space of three day I also and my maids will fast likewise,
And so to goe I will not stand in aw Ʋnto the King, though not after the Law: To get good speed now from my heart I wish, But if I perish, then let me perish. So what Esther commanded, Mordecai Resolved well to do it by and by. Chap. 5. IT came to passe after on the third day, That Esther richly cloath'd without delay, In th'inner court of the Kings house then stood, When Ahasuerus King this understood, To shew both his favour and her surety, His golden Scepter he held out quickly; So Esther drew neere, and with diligence Touch'd the top of the Scepter of the Prince, What wilt thou Queene Esther, then said the King What is thy request now in any thing? It shall be given, to ask now boldly come, I will it give, though halfe of the Kingdome. Then Esther said, If it shall please the King, I onely seeke, ye grant me this saying, Let the King and Haman together come To the banket I have prepar'd for him.
Then the King said, at the banket of wine Unto Ester, what is that sute of thine, And thy request? unto me boldly come I will it give, though half of the Kingdome. Then said Esther, This onely sute I bring, If I have found in the sight of the King Favour, let the King and Haman quickly, Come to my feast which shall prepared be; Then the morrow as the King shall thinke best, I shall plainely shew what is my request. Then went Haman foorth from the King th day Joyfull and glad, but when he Mordecai Saw in the Kings gate, that he up not stood, With indignation kindled was his blood. Neverthelesse proud Haman did refraine Himself, untill he returned againe Unto his house, where he incontinent For his wife Zeresh and for his friends sent, And Haman told them of the great glory Of his riches, and children, which many In number were, he told als every thing, Wherein he had been honour'd by the King, Who had (in signe and token of his love) Promoted him the Princes all above. Yea moreover said he the Queene Esther, Made a great feast, whereat none at all were,
Except the King and I, and to be plaine, To morrow invited I am againe, Yet all this glory availes me nothing, As long as I see Mordecai sitting At the Kings gate; Then said Zeresh his wife And all his friends, we shall soone end this strife; Let a gallous of fifty cubits hie, For Mordecai right soone prepared be: Speake to the King to morrow, and anone Let Mordecai be hanged thereupon, Then merrily go to the feast; this said, Well pleasd Haman, and he a gallous made. Chap. 6. ON that same night Ahasuerus the King Could not get sleep, he caused to him bring The Chronicles, that they the same might read, Before the King; thereto he took good heed; There it was found written that Mordecai, Had told how two vile traitours did betray The King, Bigthana and Teresh they were Two Chamberlens the keepers of the doore, Who sought on Ahasuerus for to lay Their hands; this was reveal'd by Mordecay, What honours for this got he? said the King, he servants said, For him is done nothing.
In this meane time, Haman without delay, Was come to Court to cause hang Mordecai: Then said the Kings servants unto the King That Haman stood in the court; in him bring Said Ahasuerus, who to Haman said, What gifts shall be given, or what honours laid Upon the man on whom the Kings delight Is to bestow honour with all his might? Now proud Haman thought in his lofty heart That to him the King would this all impart, Thus he answ'red, let the apparell deare, Which Ahasuerus useth for to weare Be brought, with horse on which he King doth ride, Let als the Crowne be set upon his head, And thus in pompe let him even by the hand Of some great Prince be cloath'd, then let command Be given, that he most humbly with all speed Bring him on horseback, and through the street lead, And then proclame the rider there before, Thus shall it be done without lesse or more, Unto the man whom the Kings Majestie Delights to honour with great dignitie, Then said the King unto Haman, Make haste, Now take my horse, and my apparell best,
s thou hast said, And do to Mordecai, et nothing faile, do all without delay. Then Haman took th' apparell and the horse, aving within his heart greef and remorse, s the King had ordain'd, without delay, Haman did each thing unto Mordecay, efore whose face he did proclaime this thing This is the man in whom our Prince, and King Hath his delight, and bids tell at this houre, That his delight is this man to honour. Then Mordecai to the Kings gate return'd, But Haman hasted to his house and mourn'd, Having his head cov'red in signe of greefe, nd told Zeresh his wife, and these who cheefe Were of his friends, what did to him befall, Then said to him, his wife and als friends all, f Mordecai be of the Jews a man efore whom thou hast fall'n, doe what thou can, Against him surely thou shalt not prevaile, ut shalt before him still fall without faile: While they did speake, the chamberlens in haste Came to bring Haman unto Esthers feast, Chap. 7. SO King and Haman came with Esther Queene, The second day at me banquet of wine,
And the King unto Esther said againe, What is thy request? Now with me be plaine, Conceale nothing, to ask now boldly come, I will it give though half of my kingdome. Then Esther Queene answ'red, and said th thing, If in thy sight I have favour, O King Found, let my life now be given unto me And my peoples, for we ordain'd surelie To be destroy'd are, and als to be slaine, So that none of us alive should remaine, If they us for bondmen and bond women Had sold, we all had keeped silence then, Although in so doing the enemie, The Kings domage could not repaire rightly. Then said the King unto Queene Esther soone Who? Where is he who durst such thing presume For to atchieve? Then said Esther quickly, This is Haman our wicked enemie Then Haman when he had the matter seene Was sore afraide before the King and Queene, Then from the banket wroth when this was done The King arose, into his garden soone He went; then Haman stood to make request To Esther for his life; for fear opprest His heart, because he saw that an evill thing, Against him was determin'd by the King.
The King return'd found Haman on the bed, Of Esther fall'n, then to him the King said, Will this Haman now also force my Queene, Even in the house as heere now may be seene? As the King this word had said, With disgrace, The men arose, and cov'red Hamans face. Then Harbonah a servant to the King To Ahasuerus said, Think on this thing: Behold this Haman made for Mordecai A gallowes high, even of cubits fifty, Whereon he minded to hang him anone, Then said the King, soone hang him thereupon, So was Haman hang'd on a gallowes hie, This did the Kings wrath fully pacifie. Chap. 8. ON that day the great King Ahasuerus Unto Esther the Queene gave Hamans house, Then Mordecai was brought unto the King, And Ahasuerus gave to him his Ring, Which he to Haman had giv'n, in that day, Ov'r Hamans house Esther set Mordecai. Then Esther after Haman most perverse Was hang'd, did sute his letters to reverse, Which could not be, but to Esther this thing,
Was granted by Ahasuerus the King, Ev'n that the Jewes themselves might well defend 'Gainst the malice which their foes did intend: So the posts rode, and publish'd the decrees, Permitting Jewes to kill their enemies. Then Mordecai, soone went out from the King, Who unto him had given his royall Ring With apparell of blew, and white, and Crowne Of purest gold, with garments hanging downe Of fine linnen, and als of purple made, Then the Citie of Shushan was most glade. Then had the Jewes both light and great gladnesse, With great honour, and joyfull merrinesse, In all places whether the Kings decree Did come, the Jewes there had prosperitie, With joy, gladnesse, a feast, and a good day. Then many people did without delay Even become Jews, who then did much excell, For of the Jews the fear upon them fell. Chap. 9. IN the same day which Haman did ordaine, That all the Jewes in each place should bee slaine,
The Jewes strengthned, great forces did command, So that none of their foes could them withstand, Yea more the Rulers helped them right well, Because the fear of Mordecai then fell Upon them all, thus the Jews, in a word, Their enemies smot with stroke of the sword, In the palace of Shushan the Jewes then, Slew and destroyed there five hundred men With ten sons of Haman, Parshandatha, Dalphon, Aspatha, and als Poratha, Aridatha, Parsmashta, Arisai, Adalia, Vaiezatha, Aridai, All these the Jews did slay, they gave command, That on the spoile they should not lay their hand. Unto Esther the King he said againe, The Jews in Shushan have destroy'd and slaine Five hundred men, and Hamans sons, ten Princes, What have they done in the other Provinces? But yet tell me what's thy petition, What would thou further, and it shall be done? Then said Esther, If it shall please the King, Unto the Jews in Shushan grant this thing, To do the morrow also speedilie, Even according unto this dayes decree, And let Hamans ten sons now for his sake,
Be hang'd on the gallowes which he did make: When this the King did heare, he did anone Command right quickly it so to be done: Then according unto the Kings decree, Hamans tens Sons were hanged on a tree, Thus all the Jewes that were then in Shushan, Gath'red themselves together every man, On the fourteenth day of Adar, they then At Shushan quickly slew thee hundred men, All these the Jewes did kill, but gave command That on the spoile no man should lay his hand: While other Jewes this matter understood, Themselves they gath'red and right stoutly stood For their lives, and had rest in all the land, And of their foes slew seventie five thousand; But as did others so likewise did they, None of them all laide hands upon the prey. The Jewes then the thirteenth and fourteenth day Did consecrate to feasting and to play: But these at Shushan with these other two, Did consecrate the fifteenth day also, As a day of both feasting and gladnesse, To praise the LORD, who sav'd them from distresse. The Jewes who in villages did remaine, The fourteenth onely for this did ordaine,
To be a day of feasting and gladnesse, Even a good day of shewing great kindnesse One to aother, this did Mordecai, Write to the Jewes who gladly did obey; To stablish this among them neere and far, That the fourteenth and fifteenth of Adar Should yeerely keepe well in their memorie, Because that they them from their enemie Did rest, so that from sorrow that blacke day, Was turned unto feasting and to play, And sending portions one to other, and Gifts to the poor who had nothing in hand. Then with courage the Jewes did undertake, As they had then begun, there was no lake; As Mordecai had written they did all, Because Haman to put the Jewes in thrall Devised had to cast Pur, or the lot, That he them might destroy in anger hote: But when Esther came to the King with speed, Hamans device he ordain'd on his head For to returne, and that he should quickly, With his ten sons be hanged on a tree. For this the Jewes after did not forbear, Two dayes of Purim to keepe every yeer, Yea that thereafter these two dayes indeed, Should never perish from them and their seed.
Then Esther the Queene and als Mordecay Dd write agane for keeping of that day, For to confirme all that they did ordaine; And that none of them should these dayes p¦fane, But should remember how GOD by and by Did see their fastings and als heard their cry: These matters of Purim were by decree Confirm'd, and written in a book clearelie. Chap. 10. THen Ahasuerus the King did command, To lay a tribut upon all the land, And als upon the Isles of all the sea, The like tribut he ordain'd for to be: The noble acts of his reat power and might, And Mordecais greatnesse in all mens sight, Are they not written well with other things, In Chronicles of all the Persian Kings? Thus Mordecai exalted most highlie Unto the King was then next in degree, e sought the wealth of his people indeed, He likewise did speake peace to all his seed,
THE USE. Heere learne how that the LORD in great mercie, Rescues his Church in great adversitie; When all things seeme to be destroy'd and gone, Then doth the Lord for help rise up anone: Though troubles great the Church greeve day by day, GOD at the last can raise a Mordecai; And though Haman, who GODS folks death doth seal, Be high the day, on the top of the wheele, And in his fury like a Boare doth range For to devore, GOD can soone make a change In Princes hearts so that from high degree They shall such bring, and hang them on a tree: See here how GOD his Church can well defend, And brings his foes unto a tragick end.
ADVOCATES' LIBRARY EDINBURGH
THE SECOND VOLUME OF THE GARDEN OF ZION: Containing the Bookes of Job, Proverbs, Ecclesia∣stes, and Song of Songs, all in English Verse. By M. ZACHARY BOYD. GLASGOW, Printed by George Anderson, 1644.
To the most Royall Lady, ELIZABETH, His Majesties only Sister, Princesse of Palatine of Rhine, &c. MADAME, THE Tops of high Trees are mightily shaken by the windes, while the lower branches suffer a more gentle wagging; the thunder-bolts smie oftest upon the tops of eepest rocks, while the base valleyes enjoy a lme in a gentle gale. Your HIGHNES, very eminent both in race and Place, hath felt this in your time,  much as any other of the land: As for the rticulars, divers are big, like Habbakuks vi∣n, which was in so great letters,Hab. 2.2. that men ight run, and read the same. I know none in Scripture, except CHRIST, ho hath beene more put to the proof of pati∣ence
then holy Job, his calamities were gre he was brought very low, but GOD at last, ¦ter he had humbled him, blessed his latter e more than his beginning:JOB 42.12. The Lord mak so with your Highnes, when all those stor are past, your end with the Righteous shall Peace.PSAL. 37.37 Let it please your Highnes to take in part this little mite of my Muse, with blessing, and most fervent prayers to GOD, soveraigne Comforts to cure all your Cros and to wipe the teares of troubles from  Eyes: Your Comfort is like the Prophets ¦sion, Though it tarry, waite for it, beca it will come,HAB. 2.3. it will not tarry. From GSASGOVV the 30. day of September, 1644. Your HIGHNES most humble Servant, M. ZACHARY BOYD.
THE GARDEN OF ZION. The Booke of JOB. A Prayer. O Son of GOD, who from thy veines didst powre Ʋpon the Crosse that mostred crimson showre, To save lost man, me with thy Sprite inspire, And in my breast kindle a sacred fire: Conduct my pen, cleanse both mine hand, and heart, That I thy Priest may safely touch thine Arke: Teach me to tune the glory of thy Name, How thou by Job did Sathan foully shame,
Though he with an insatiate furie fell Did go about him, for to quaile and quell, As thou favour to my Heroicks shew, So for these Lyricks thy Graces renew. JOB. Sorrowfull, or Hated. INUZ a Man cald Jo there was, both perfect, and u right, Who feared GOD, and d eschew evill even with all h might: 2 And in that place where he did live in great prosperity, By mariage were born to him seven sons, and daughters three. 3 His substance was seven thousand Sheep; and Camels thousands three, He also had five hundred yoke of Oxen most lusty.
Five hundred Shee-asses he had, rich both in men and beast: So that he was the greatest man of all those of the East. 4 His sons did in their houses feast, yea, every one his day; They cald their sisters there to eat, and drink with them alway. 5 It was so when their feasting dayes were gone about quickly, Job did them sanctifie, and rose up in morning early. For each he offred sacrifice, fearing his sons greatly That they had curs'd GOD in their hearts, thus did good Job dayly. 6 Now it befell upon a day, when Angels in a throng Before GOD did present themselves, Satan came them among. 7 Then the LORD unto Satan said, whence comes thou? he anone, From going to and fro on earth, from walking up and down. 8 Then the LORD unto Satan said, Hast thou considred well
My servant Job, there's none like him, that on the earth doth dwell. A perfect and an upright man, like unto whom are few: One that the mighty God doth feare, and doth evil still eshew. 9 Then Satan in his malice great, to God this answere brought, It is no wonder that so be, doth Job feare God for nought? 10 Hast thou not hedg'd him and his house, where he may safe abide? Hast thou not hedged all about, he hath on every side? Thou hast by thy grace infinite, blest the work of his hand, And his substance is mightily increased in the land. 11 But now put foorth thy hand, and touch what he hath in each place, And he will most despitfully even curse thee to thy face. 12 All that he hath is in thy power said God, on him onely Lay not thine hand; so Satan went out from the Lord quickly.
3 There was a day, when his children (who were indeed numbrous) Were eating, and wine drinking in their eldest brothers house. 4 At that time came a messenger, unto good Job and said, Th' oxen were plowing, and th' asses, were feeding them beside. 15 The Sabeans have them all spoil'd, thy servants they have slaine, And I onely escaped have to tell to thee the same. 16 While he yet spake another came, and said most certainly, The fire of the Almighty GOD, is fall'n from the heav'ns hie. It sheep and servants hath burnt up, and they consumed be, And I onely escaped am, alone for to tell thee. 17 While he yet speaking was, there came another who did tell, The Caldeans made out three bands, and on the Camels fell. Yea they them cari'd have away, and thy servants have slaine,
And only I escaped have; for to tell thee the same. 18 While he thus spake, another said, Thy sons and daughters all Did eat, and als drink wine into their eldest brothers hall. 19 But O behold what did befall, a most fearfull distresse, There came a strong and mighty winde, even from the wildernesse: The house four corners it did smite, which on the young men fell: They are all dead, and I alone escaped am to tell. 20 The Job arose, his mantle he rent, and did shave his head; He down upon the ground did fall, and worship did with speed. 21 Then said he in his grief and smart, Out of my mothers womb I naked came, and shall return als naked to my tomb. The LORD hath given, and als the LORD hath taken all away: The LORDS great name be blessed still for ever and for ay.
2 Yet worthy JOB most patient in all this misery id not offend, nor charge his GOD with rigour foolishly. Chap. 2. ANother day the sons of GOD came themselves to present Before the LORD, Satan also among them there he went. 2 Whence comes thou? GOD to Satan said, then Satan answred soon, From going to and fro on Earth, from walking up and down. 3 Hast thou considred JOB, said GOD, that there is none him like, One that feares GOD, and evil eschewes. perfect, and upright eke? Behold, how still he holdeth fast even his integrity, Although that him for to destroy thou (without cause) mov'dst me. 4 Then Satan the LORD answerd soone, JOB hath felt little strife: But skin for skin, all that man hath will he give for his life.
5 Put foorth thine hand, his bone and flesh touch, and in little space He even out of all patience will curse thee to thy face. 6 And the Lord unto Satan said, Behold, and now perceive He in thine hand given over is, but see thou his life save. 7 So from the presence of the Lord, Satan went up and downe, And smot poore Job with painefull boiles, from the sole to the crowne. 8 Then a potsheard to scrape himself, he tooke all desolate, Thus he perplexed in his mind among the ashes sate: 9 Then said his wife, Retain'st thou still thine old integritie? What meanest thou, O foolish man? now curse thou GOD, and die. 10 But he againe said unto her, his witlesse wife to schoole, Thou speakest now thou knowes not what, thou speakest like a foole. Shall we receive good, and not evill at the hand of the LORD?
n all this did not holy Job, with lips sinne in a word. 11 Now when Jobs three friends heard of all this evill and great disgrace That came on him, they every one did come from his owne place: The Temanite, Eliphaz, and als Bildad the Shuhite, And Zphar also joyn'd with them, the wise Naamathite: For they together had all made appointment of one sort, To come, and mourne with their deare freind, and him for to comfort: 12 But when they did lift up their eyes afarre, they him no more Did know, they lifted up their voice, and weeped very sore. And every man his mantle rent, while thus they had it riven: They sprinkled dust upon their heads toward the highest heaven. 13 So seven dayes without speaking wordes, and seven nights they down sate Upon the ground, for they did see his grief was very great.
Chap. 3. THen op'ned Job his mouth anone, and in greefe cursd his day, And answ'ring with a wounded heart, Job thus began to say, 3 Cursd be the day that I was borne, and let the night like have That it was said, my mother did me a man childe conceive. 4 Let that day be darknesse alwayes, let not GODS eye divine Regard it, neither let the light upon it ever shine. 5 Let darknesse it and shadowes staine, let a cloud stedfastly Dwell on it; let the blacknesse of the day it terrifie. 6 Let darknesse seaze upon that night; to the dayes of the yeare Let it not come, nor numbred be, with moneths by men heere. 7 Let that night in all times to come, be solitarie still, Let no voice at all come therein, that is glade or joyfull.
8 Let them it curse with all their heart, that use to curse the day ho are still ready to raise up their great mourning alway. 9 Let the starres of its twilight be darke, let it looke for light ut have none; neither let it see the faire dayes dawning bright. 10 Because it of my mothers womb shut not the doores closely, Nor in the dayes of troubles great hide sorrow from mine eye. 11 Why died I not even from the womb, which compassd me about? Why did not I give up the ghost, when from it I came out? 12 Why did the midwives gentle knees me at my birth prevent? Or why the breasts that I should suck gave milk for this intent? 13 For now both still, and quiet I should have been for my best; I should have sleeped in the grave, then had I been at rest. 14 With Kings, and also counsellers, men of the earth most rare,
Who in places most desolate did build their houses faire. 15 Or with Princes who glistring gold had in their treasures still: Who their houses adorned well, with silver fine did fill: 16 Or as an hid untymly birth, I surely had not beene, As infants in their mothers wombe, which light have never seene: 17 There cease alwayes the wicked men, From troubling the opprest; And there from toile and carking care the weary be at rest. 12 The prisoners there together rest, they not at any houre Do heare the voice which doth proceed from the great opressour. 18 These that be small, and also gerat, even there together be; And the servant for toilsome taske is from his master free. 20 Wherefore is light given unto him that is in miserie, And life upon the earth to them that in soul bitter be?
21 Which every day do long for death, but it comes not therefore; nd dig for it, even more then for hid treasures and great store. 22 Which doe exceedingly rejoice, and alwayes gladnesse have, n their greatest afflictions, when they can find the grave. 23 And why is light given to a man, whose way is alwayes hid, nd whom the Lord hath hedged in, and from evill will not red? 24 For my sighing before I eat, doth come and me about, y roarings loud like waters great are largely powred out. 25 For that which I still greatly fear'd, is come now upon me, nd that whereof I was afraid, is to me come surelie 26 In safety I was not alwayes, nor yet still had I rest, was far from all quietnesse; yet troubles me opprest.
Chap. 4. WHen this was said, then Eliphaz the Temanite that day Did forme an answer, and to Job after this speach did say. If we assay to speake with thee, as friends, and so be bold, Will thou be greev'd? But who from words can well himselfe withhold? 3 Behold thou hast instructed well diverse in numbrous bands, And thou by thy most wise comforts, hast strengthned the weak hands. 4 Thy words have well upholden him that was in miseries Straight falling, and thou strengthned hast the weak and feeble knees. 5 But now it is upon thee come, thou faintest more and more, It now thee toucheth in the quick, and thou art troubled sore. 6 This is thy fear, and confidence, which now is made to hop, The uprightnesse of all thy wayes, and even thy strongest hope.
Who ever perish'd innocent, remember I thee pray? O! where was ever the righteous man cut off in any way? Even as I have seen surely they that plow iniquity, nd sow the seed of wickednesse, the same reape certainely. They perish by the blast of GOD, as by a bloody war, nd by the breath of his nostriles they all consumed are. 10 The roaring of the Lion and the voice of Lions fierce, nd als of young Lions thee teeth are broken with disgrace. 11 The old Lion doth perish for lack of his prey and food, nd the stout Lions Whelps anone are scattred all abroad. 12 A thing unto me by the Lord was brought most secretly, little thereof by mine eare received was surely. 13 In thoughts that come most strangely from, the visions of the night:
When deep sleep falleth upon men, depriv'd of sense or sight. 14 A panick fear then came me on, I then began to quake, With this fear was a trembling, which made all my bones to shake. 15 In this meane time appear'd a sprite, which passd my face before, The haire of all my flesh stood up, for I was troubled sore. 16 It stood still there most stedfastly, but what did then concerne The visage, and the forme thereof I could not well discerne. An image was before mine eyes, there was a deep silence, And I did clearly heare a voice speake these words in this sense, 17 Shall any among mortall men, more just then the Lord be? Or shall a man whom GOD hath made, yet be more pure then he? 18 Behold in his servants most deare, whom he with graces large Endewes, he trusts not, his Angels with folly he doth charge.
19 How much lesse on all such that dwell in base houses of clay Whose ground is dust, which crushed are before the moth alway. 20 From morning to the evening they are certainly destroy'd, They perish still without regard, which they can not avoid. 21 Doth not their great excellencie, in them still go away, And so without wisedome like fooles, go to their dying day. Chap. 5. CAll now if there be any that will surely answere thee, To which of the Saints wilt thou turne thy selfe to justifie. 2 For wrath from the Almighty God the foolish man doth kill, And envie slayes the silly one, without wisedome or skill. 3 I have seene taking root anone, the foolish without grace, But in a moment suddenly I cursd his dwelling place,
4 His children far from safety are, they are crush'd in the gate, There is none to deliver them before the judgement seat. 5 Whose harv'st the hungry eateth up, for their poor maintenance, Even from the thornes, the robber als devours their whole substance. 6 Although affliction from the dust to come be not once found, Neither do troubles great also even spring out of the ground. 7 Yet poor man unto trouble great, and fearfull miserie Is alwayes borne, most like the sparks that still upward do flee. 8 I unto the Almighty GOD, would seek with all my heart, And unto GOD would I commit my cause in every part. 9 Which great things and unsearchable, by his arme Almightie Doth work, and things most marveilous which without number be. 10 Who gracious upon the earth for watring giveth raine,
nd also water sends upon the fields of all the plaine. 11 Hee in his wisedome sets on high men of most low degree, hat those which mourne to safety may at last exalted be. 12 The devices of crafty men he disappointeth wise, o that their hands can not performe their wicked enterprise. 13 He by his wisedome takes the wise their craftinesse among: nd the counsell of froward men is cari'd all headlong. 14 They in their course with darknesse meet, in the dayes time of light, And wandring in the noone day groop, as in the darkest night. 15 But he well saveth from the sword, the poor of all the land, And from their vile blasphemous mouth, and from the mighties hand. 16 So the most indigent and poor hath hope in misery, And the great GOD doth stop the mouth of vile iniquity.
17 Behold whom the Lord God corrects he sure is most happy, Therefore the chastning not despise of him that's Almighty. 18 For he makes sore, and bindeth up, he woundeth, but the hole He closeth up, his hands againe do perfectly make whole. 19 In troubles six, by power great, he shall deliver thee: Yea in seven also by no evil thou shalt then touched be. 20 In famine he shall thee redeeme from death, and in a word, In war he shall thee save even from the power of the sword. 21 From the scourge of the wicked tongue thou safely hid shalt be: Thou need'st not feare destruction when it comes suddenly. 22 At famine and destruction thou safe shall laugh alway: The raging beasts upon the earth thee shall not once afray 23 For with the stones of all the field thou in a league shalt be
he beasts which in the field remaine shall be at peace with thee. 24 Thou shalt know that thy Tabernacle shall alwayes be in peace. Thy dwelling place thou visit shalt and from all sin shalt cease. 25 Thou shalt know also that thy seed in all the land about hall be great and thine off spring as grasse that from earth doth sprout. 26 Thou to thy grave at last shall come in a full age most like A shock of corne that commeth in in his season all ripe. 27 Loe this we have search'd; it is so; That it well understood May be by thee now heare it well, and know it for thy good. Chap. 6. THen Job replyd, Oh that my greef were even now throughly weigh'd, And my suffrings together were all in a ballance laide. For they should be of greater weight then the sand of the sea,
Therefore my wordes are swallow'd up, that they no more should be. 4 For of the great Almighty God the arrowes are in me, The poison whereof doth my sprit drink up most speedily. The fearfull terrours of the Lord, against me every day, Like squadrons in an army great set themselves in aray. 5 The wilde Asse doth he lowdly bray, if he hath grasse his fill, Or lowes the Ox, as in great greef, if he hath fodder still. 6 Unsavory things without relish, who without salt can eat? In whites of egges who can finde taste, that they should be for meat? 7 The things that in my plenty great my soul refusd to touch, Are still now for my dainty meat, while I for sorrow crouch. 8 Oh that I might have my request! and God would grant to me, In his mercy the thing that I long dayly for to see.
9 Even that it would now please the Lord me to destroy as dead, nd that he would let loose his hand, and cut me off with speed. 10 Then should I yet have comforts sweet, in mine integrity, Yea, I my self in sorrow would harden most constantly. et him still strike and never spare, for this I know right well he words of the most Holy One I never did conceale. 11 What is my strength that I should hope, among such grief and strife? What is mine end, even that I should prolong my wretched life? 12 Is my great strength the strength of stones, which doth not quickly passe? Or (as I may here well subjoine) is all my flesh of brasse? 13 Is not my sprituall help in me well fixed even alway? nd shall I say that wisedome is quite driven from me away? 14 To the afflicted pitie should be from his friend most deare.
Shew'd, but of the Almighty GOD he doth forsake the feare: 15 My brethren have deceitfully dealt as a brook alway, And as the streames of brookes they do most quickly passe away. 16 Which blackish are by reason of the yee both hard and firme, Which in cold seasons cover it, the snow is hid therein. 17 What time againe they do wax warme, they vanish with disgrace When it is hote, they are consum'd ev'n out of their owne place. 18 The paths of their way at the last are turn'd aside; also They perish quickly, and in haste they all to nothing go. 19 The troopes of Tema looked still with an attentive eye, The companies of Shebas men did waite for them surely. 20 Because they hoped had, they were confounded all with shame, Yea, they ashamed greatly were, when they all thither came:
21 For now ye are nothing at all, as may be tuely said Ye see clearly my casting downe and ye are sore affraid 22 Did I say ever unto you in my necessitie Vnto me bring, or give rewards of your substance for me? 22 Or that ye should from th' enemies hand most strong deliver me Or me once from the hand redeeme of these that mighty be? 23 Teach me, and I will hold my tongue, and no more of you crave, And cause me for to understand wherein I erred have 25 How forcible are the right wordes which do proceede from love? But as for you tell me what doth your arguing thus reprove. 26 Doe ye imagine to reprove wordes and the speaches find Of one that is most desperate, which are light as the winde? 27 Yea, yee doe proudly overwhelme the poore and fatherlesse
And also for your friend yee dig a pit of great distresse. 28 Now therefore be content in mind and also look on me, For unto you it's evident, if I do faine or lie, 29 Returne I pray you, let it not be still iniquitie; Yea turne againe; my righteousnesse, is in it most furelie. 30 Is there transgression in my tongue when I such things rehearse? Can not my taste wisely discerne the things that are perverse? Chap. 7. IS there not one appointed time for man on earth to goe? Most like the dayes of an hireling, are not his dayes also? 2 As a servant the shadow doth, desire most earnestly, As an hireling looks for reward of his work constantly. 3 So am I made for to possesse the months of vanitie,
And nights that are most wearisome, appointed are for me. 4 When I lye downe into my bed, I often this do say, When from this place shall I arise? and when shall it be day? full of tossing to and fro am troubled all the night, And this continues ever still, untill the day be light. 5 My flesh with vile wormes clothed is, and clods of dust also, My skin is broken, and become most loathsome me unto. 6 My dayes go swifter in their course, then weavers shittles slide, They quickly without hope are spent, and do not fix'd abide. 7 Remember that my life is wind, in all things heere mine eye, Of any good that's heere below shall no more ever see. 8 The eye of him that hath me seene, shall hence see me no more, Thine eyes upon me fixed are, and I am not therefore.
9 As the great cloud consumed is, and vanish doth away, So he that goes downe to the grave, shall rise no more for ay. 10 He shall no more returne unto his house, or yet his race, Nor yet shall any more he be acknowledg'd by his place. 11 I will therefore in anguish great no more my mouth refraine, I in my soules great bitternesse most surely will complaine. 12 Am I like an unruly Whale, or like a boistrous sea, That thou shouldst need to set a watch, to watch thus over me? 13 when I say in my great distresse, whereby I become faint, My bed shall comfort me, my couch shall well ease my complaint. 14 Then thou with night dreames most fearful dost skare and trouble me, And through appearing visions dost still me terrifie 15 So that my poor afflicted soul, in all this toile and strife,
Doth chuse strangling, and death also; yea rather then my life. 16 I loth it, I would not alway thus live in miserie; et me alone, for all my dayes are very vanitie. 17 What is man that thou shouldest him in whole, or yet in part hus magnifie? and that thou shouldst upon him set thine heart? 18 And that thou shouldest visit him, in favour by and by ach morning, and him narrowly at every moment try? 19 How long wilt thou not from me Lord depart? nor me alone t, untill I my spittle may a little swallow downe? I sinned have, what shall I doe unto thee now or then? thou! who the preserver art even of all mortall men. hy hast thou in thine anger set me, as a marke 'gainst thee? that I even unto my selfe a burden seeme to be?
21 And why dost thou not pardon me my great transgression? And take away th' iniquitie that lyes my soul upon? For in the dust now shall I sleep, and in the morning me Thou with great diligence shall seek, but I then shall not be. Chap. 8. THen Bildad the Shuhit did say unto poore Job, How long 2 Wilth thou thus speak? How long thy wo shall be like winde most strong? 3 Darre thou be bold for to affirme, that the Lord doth subvert The judgement? Or th' Almighty God doth he justice pervert? 4 If thy children 'gainst him have sinn'd, and he without delay For their transgression in his wrath hath cast them all away: 5 If thou unto the Lord betimes would'st in humilitie Seeke, and make supplication, ev'n unto th' Almightie:
6 If thou were pure, and upright, sure he would for thee awake: Thy righteous house most prosperous he would not faile to make. 7 Though thy beginning was but small, And pinch'd with great distresse; n mercy yet thy latter end, he greatly should increase. 8 I pray thee of the former age enquire and do not spare; And of their fathers to the search see thou thy selfe prepare. 9 For we are but of yesterday, and nothing surely know; Because our dayes on earth do passe like shades, we know not how. 10 Shall they not in their wisedome great thee teach well by their art? nd utter still most worthy words, even out of their owne heart? 11 Can the greene rush without the mire, or moisture well up grow? Or can the flag grow up, and spring where waters do not flow? 12 While it yet in his greenesse is, and not cut downe alway
Before all other herbs it doth even wither quite away. 13 So are the paths of all these men, that the Lord God forget, So of all hypocrits the hope shall perish without let. 14 Whose vaine, yea, and most foolish hope shall be cut off quicklie; Whose idle and unconstant trust like spiders webs shall be. 15 He shall then leane upon his house, but it shall not stand sure, He shall with both hands hold it fast, but it shall not indure. 16 He is most greene before the Sun, his branches all about In his faire Gardens pleasantly. with buds and bloomes shoot out. 17 His rootes about the heap are wrapt, and of stones see the place: By force of their owne moisture they through rubbish have increase. 18 If he destroy him from his place, then shall it him deny: I with mine eyes have not thee seene, shall it say by and by.
19 Behold of his way this the joy from such things still doth flow, ut of the earth even surely heere shall others lately grow. 20 Behold a good and perfect man God will not cast away, either will he in mercy help the evill doers alway. 21 Till he with laughing from great joy thy mouth in mercy fill: nd like wise satisfie thy lips, with great rejoicing still. 22 They that thee hate with wicked hearts, with shame shall clothed be he place where wicked men do dwell, shall come to nought surelie. Chap. 9. THen holy Job answ'red, and said, this to be truth I see: But how should man who is perverse with God thus righteous be? If he in rigour and in wrath with him would once contend; can not answere him unto one point of a thousand.
4 In heart he is wise, and in strength is most mighty indeed: Who 'gainst him hardned hath himselfe, and after hath come speed? 5 Which greatest mountaines doth remove, and they know not surely: Which overturns them in his wrath, so that they cease to be. 6 Which shakes the earth out of her place, most like a rolling ball And the strong pillars makes thereof for feare to tremble all. 7 Which by his power infinite commandeth the bright sunne; So that at morne he riseth not he seales the starres anone. 8 Which by his mighty arme alone doth spread out pleasantly The azurd heav'ns, and treads upon the great waves of the sea. 9 Which Arcturus and Orion (that raging stormy youth) Makes with the Plaiades, and there faire chambers of the south. 10 Which doth by his Almighty hand great things past finding out,
Yea, and great wonders numberlesse. in all the world about. 11 Lo! he goes by me, so that him I by no meanes can see: He doth passe on also, but well hee's not perceiv'd by me. 12 Behold he takes away, who can him hinder? Who also, Will unto him this boldly say, What mindes thou now to doe? 13 His anger God will not withdraw, which makes his foes to droupe The proudest helpers that can come must under him all stoup. 14 How much lesse by my wisedome small, him answere well shall I To chuse my words out, and with him the strongest reasons try? 15 Whom, though I were most righteous, yet answere would not I: But I would supplication make to my judge by and by. 16 If I had call'd, and he had given to me an answere choice; Yet would I not beleev'd that he had hearkned to my voice.
17 For with a temptest rageing sore he fiercely breaketh me, And als my wounds without a cause he doth still multiplie. 18 He will not suffer me my breath to take in great distresse, But in his furious rageing wrath me fills with bitternesse. 19 If I do speake of force and strength, lo! he is strong indeed, And if of judgemnt, who shall set for me a time to plead? 20 Mine owne mouth sure shall me condemned if I me justifie; If I pleade perfect, he me will prove most perverse to be. 21 Though I were perfect, yet I not would in a way unwise My soul know for to justifie, my life I would despise. 22 This is one thing, therefore I it said in my great annoy, The erfect and the wicked man GOD doth alike destroy, 23 If that the scourge most suddenly men on the earth doth stay;
trials of the innocent he will laugh, sport, and play. The earth is giv'n unto the hand of these that wicked be; e judges faces there he cov'rs, if not, where, who is he? Now swifter then a post my dayes (as well is understood) ey suddenly doe flee away, and so they see no good. As swiftest ships before the winde they passed are away; d as the Eagle in the aire, that hasteth to her prey. If I say, I will my complaint forget, that I may sport, ill leave of my heavinesse, and so my selfe comfort; I of my sorrowes am afraid, with griefe my heart is spent: now that thou in judgement wilt not hold me innocent. If I be wicked, Why doe I then labour thu in vane? If with snow water I me wash, and make my hands most cleane.
31 Yet shalt thou in the ditch me plunge, and all my cleannesse marre, And mine owne clothes me so defil'd, shall surely me abhorre. 32 For as I am, hee's not a man, that I incontinent Should answere him, and we should come together in judgement, 33 Nor any dayes man yet there is betwixt us to command, That might by his authoritie upon us lay his hand. 34 Let him in his great mercy take his rod away from me; And let not his most dreadfull feare me greatly terrifie: 35 Then would I with great boldnesse and not feare him also; But oh! in this most troublous tyme it is not with me so. Chap. 10. MY soul of my life weary is, on me I my complaint Will leave: I will in bitternesse speak of my soul all shent:
I boldly will say unto GOD, See thou condemne not me: ew me wherefore thou dost contend with me so bitterly. Is it good that thou should'st oppresse? and the work of thine hands espise? And on the counsell shine of the most wicked bands? Are thine eyes flesh or seest thou as a man on earth doth see? Are thy dayes as the dayes of man, or yeares as mans dayes be? That after mine iniquitie and sin thou dost enquire: Thou knowst that I not wicked am; who can save from thine ire? Thine hands have made and fashion'd me, in all parts for the joy f these who were my parents deare; yet thou dost me destroy. emember now, I thee beseech, that thou me (as thou canst) f clay hast made, and wilt thou now bring me againe to dust? Hast thou not in my mothers womb me powred out surely?
Ev'n as the milk, and like the chease, thou hast als crudded me: 11 Thou hast me cloth'd with skinne and and for my sure defence, Thou me with bones and sinewes both didst as with remparts fence. 12 Thou hast me life and favour als given, as I may observe: Thy visitation doth my spirit at all times safe preserve, 13 And these things thou hast in thine heart, ev'n hid most secreetly, I doubt not, for I clearely know that all this is with thee. 14 If I do sin against thy law, then well thou markest me, And thou wilt not once me acquit from mine iniquitie. 15 If I be wicked in my wayes, then wo to me indeed; If I be righteous yet will I not once lift up my head. In this my greef I surely am full of confusion, Thereore thou in thy mercy see my great affliction.
16 For it upon me day by day doth more and more increase, hou huntest me from place to place, even as a lion fierce. 17 Thy witnesses thou dost renew 'gainst me, on me thy wrath hou dost increase; changes and war are still against me both. 18 Wherefore then hast thou from the womb me brought foorth? oh that I p given the ghost had, and had not been seen by any eye. 19 I should have beene as though I had not beene, yea I should have none been caied from the womb, unto my resting grave. 20 Are not my dayes upon the earth? then for thy mercies sake ease, and me suffer that I may a little comfort take, 21 Before I go, whence I shall not unto the livings path eturne, even unto darknesse black, and the shadow of death. 22 A land of darknesse as darknesse and of deaths darkest night,
Where order is not to be seene whereas darkenesse is light. Chap. 11. THen Zophar the Naamathite, said, Should not such wordes be Answer'd; and should a man of talk himself thus justifie? 3 Should thy lies make men hold their peace though thou hath got a name, And when thou mockest, shall no man upon thee bring great shame? 4 For thou hast said my doctrine's pure, and cleane als in thine eye: 5 But O that GOD with open lips would now speake against thee. 6 And that he would his wisedome great make thee well to observe: Know therefore that GOD lesse exacts then thy sins doe deserve. 7 Canst thou by a most curious search finde out GOD in thy minde, Or unto a perfection great, canst thou th'Almighty find? 8 It is as high as higest heav'ns, what canst thou doe? It's low:
ea deeper then the deepest hell, what of it canst thou know? Its measure's longer then the earth, and broader then the Sea; 10 If he cut off, gather, shut up, what can his hinder be? 11 For he vaine men doth know right well, He sees their wickednesse: Will he not then consider it, to punish such excesse? 2 For vaine and foolish man would seeme to be most wise in heart: hough man upon this earth be borne, like a wilde Asses colt. 3 If thou thine heart prepare, and stretch thine hand to him humbly, 5 If wickednesse be in thine hand; let it not dwell with thee: 5 For then shalt thou lift up thy face. which shall be without spote; ea thou most stedfast shalt be then, and shalt not feare a jot, 6 Because thou shalt thy miserie For ever and for ay orget, and it remember as the floods that passe away.
17 And thine age shall be clearer then the noone day, that's most bright, Thou shalt shine foorth clearly, thou shalt be as the morning light. 18 And thou shalt be secure, because there is hope which is best: Yea, thou shalt dig about thee, and in safety take thy rest. 19 Also thou shalt lye downe secure from all adversitie; None shall affright thee, many shall make their sute unto thee: 20 But the eyes of the wicked shall faile, even till they be lost; They shall not scape, their hope shall be as giving up the ghost. Chap. 12. ANd Job answ'red and said to them, in great perplexitie, 2 No doubt but yee the people are, wisedome with you shall die. 3 But I do understand as well as any of you all; Yea, who knowes not such things as these, though of a judgement small?
I am like one by neighbours scorn'd, who upon God doth call, e answreth him; the just upright is laugh'd to scorne by all. He that is ready with his feet to slip, he is most sure, s lampes despised in the thought, of these that leave secure. The robbers houses prosper still, and they that God provoke o live secure, into whose hand God puts a wealthy stock. But ask the beasts, and they anone shall thee teach most clearelie, d the foules fleeing in the aire, and they als shall tell thee. Speak to the earth, and it surely shall teach thee lessons rare, e fishes also of the sea shall unto thee declare. Who knowes not that the hand of God hath wrought all of this kind? In whose hand is the living soul, and breath of all mankind. Doth not the eare try words, and als the mouth taste meat alwayes?
12 With th'Ancient men great wisedome is, and skill in length of dayes. 13 In wisedome great and strength also he highly doth excell, He both hath understanding great and excellent counsell: 14 Behold he breaketh downe, and it cannot be built againe, He doth shut up, and truely there can be no opening then 15 Behold the waters he withholds, and they anone grow dry, He sends them out, they all the earth do turne ov'r by and by. 16 With him is strength and wisedome great these who most simple be That are deceiv'd, deceivers als all wisely ruleth he 17 He counsellers spoil'd leads away, and judges fooles doth make 18 The bond of Kings he looseth soone, and girds their loines with sack. 19 He Princes spoiles, and overthrowes the mighty men alway: 20 The trusty speach, the ageds skill he doth remove away.
21 Upon the princes of the earth he powres contempt at length; And of the great and mighty men he weakneth all the strength. 22 He deepe things out of darknesse great discov'reth by his might, The blackest shadow he of death d bring out to the light. 23 T nations he doth well increase, and by him they are slaine, The nations he doth all enlarge, and straitneth them againe. 24 The heart of cheefest people he on earth doth take away; And makes them erre in wildernesse, where there is not a way. 25 They heere and there grope in the dark, where there appeares no light nd he them (like a drunken man) makes stagger by his might. Chap. 13 MIne eye hath all this seene, mine eare hath heard, and understood What ye know, I doe know the like, not under you in good.
3 I unto the Almighty speak, and reason with him would, 4 But yee are all Physitians vaine, to forge lies ye are bold. 5 O that yee all would hold your peace, your wisedome it should be, 6 My reasoning, and pleadings of my lips hear patientlie. 7 Will you for God speak wickedly and talk deceit in end? 8 Wll ye accept his person thus? will yee for God contend? 9 Is it good that he should you search? to mock him are yee set? 10 He'll you reprove, if secretly ye persons do accept. 11 Shall not his great excellencie, with dread you all afray, 12 Your remembance like ashes is your bodies are of clay. 13 Now hold your peace, that I may speak, and come on me what will, 14 Why in my teeth take I my flesh hazarding life to spill 15 Though he me slay, yet will I trust in him, even more and more,
ut I mine own wayes as I can maintaine will him before. 16 He shall be my salvation, for hypocrites surely hall not with their vaine shewes once come before his Majestie. 17 My speach that ful of matter is, with diligence now hear, nto my declaration als see that ye all give eare. 18 Behold now I by wisedome great my cause even most wisely ave ordred, I know that I shall be justified thereby. 19 Who is he among mortall men, that will well plead with me? or if I now be dumb, I shall give up the ghost surelie. 20 Onely do not two things to me, and I will not me hide; 21 Withdraw thine hand, let not thy dread make me now sore afid. 22 Then call thou and I answere will, or els answere thou me, 23 How many are my greevous sins reveale thou unto me.
24 Why dost thou hide from me thy face as if thy foe were I? 25 Wilt thou thus breake a tossed leafe, and pursue stubble dry? 26 For thou against me bitter things dost write, which is uncouth, And mak'st me alwayes to possesse the great sins of my youth. 27 Thou putt'st my feet als in the stocks, and look'st to all my wayes Thou sett'st a print upon the heels ev'n of my feet alwayes; 28 And poore man in his best estate is as a rotten cloth Consumed all, as garments are all eaten with the moth Chap. 14 POore man that of a woman weake upon the earth is borne, Is of few dayes, he is also with troubles rent and torne. 2 He doth come foorth, ev'n like a flowre and is cut downe againe, He as a shadow flies away, and doth not long remaine.
3 And dost thou so on such an one full of infirmitie, Thy clear eyes open, and me bringst into judgement with thee? 4 Who can a clean thing heer on earth by his great power alone Bring out of that which is unclean? no not, there is not one. 5 Determined his dayes are all, and months numbred with thee, His bounds thou hast appointed, that he can not passe surely. 6 In thy great mercy turn from him, that heer well rest he may, Untill that (as an hireling) he accomplish shall his day. 7 For if a tree be cut, there's hope that it againe will sprout; And that the tender branch thereof will not cease to bud out. 8 Even though the root thereof on earth waxe old, and so be found: Yea more, and that the stock thereof even die into the ground. 9 Yet through the sent of water fresh it will most quickly bud;
And there bring foorth most pleasant boughes, like plants beside a flood. 10 But on earth poor man wasts away, and after that must die, Yea man he giveth up the ghost when that is, where is he? 11 As overflowing waters great faile from the deepest sea, And floods decay, and at the last from running become dry. 12 So man lyes down, and doth not rise, Till the heav'ns be no more, They not awake, shall nor be raisd out of their sleepe therefore. 13 O that thou wouldst in mercy great me hide in grave at last, That thou als wouldst me secret keep untill thy wrath be past. That thou wouldst in thy wisdome als appoint m speedilie A set time fo my life, and so at last remember me. 14 If men die shall they live againe? this should seeme very strange: The dayes of my appointed time I'll waite till come my change.
15 Thou shalt call, and I answere will, as thou shalt me require, Thou to the worke of thine owne hands will have a good desire. 16 Dost thou not number all my steps and watch well ov'r my sin? 17 My transgression is in a bag seal'd, thou it sow'st therein. 18 The mountaines falling come to nought, and moulder all away, The hardest rock removed is, out from its place and stay. 19 The waters still do weare the stones, thou washest quite away These earthly things, and thou destroy'st the hope of man alway 20 Against him still thou dost prevaile, and he anone is past, His countenance thou changes, and him sends away at last. 21 His sons come unto honour great, and he it doth not know: Likewise he doth not once perceive when they are brought down low. 22 But as long as is fish on eath shall bear his soul about
The soul within shall mourne, the flesh shall have great paine without. Chap. 15. THen Eliphaz the Temanite said, Should man wise in minde 2 Speak vainly, and his belly fill with the barran east winde? 3 Should he thus with such iddle talk, and words that are most rude Go reason, or with speach wherewith he sure can do no good? 4 Thou casts off feare, by prayer als on GOD thou dost not call, 5 Thy mouth speakes ill, and thou dost choise the crafty tongue withall. 6 Not I, but thine own wicked mouth condemnes thee certainly, And which is more, yea thine owne lips against thee testifie. 7 Art thou the first man that was borne, and made the hills before? 8 Gods secrets hast thou heard? and dost esteeme thy wisedome more? 9 What knowst thou, which we do not know or yet not understand?
10 With us are all the aged men the gray-heads of the land. 11 Gods comforts with thee are they small? are secret things with thee? 12 Why doth thine heart thee cary, and at what doth winke thine eye? 13 That thou against th' Almighty God, thy spirit turn'st so and so, And lettest such most foolish words out of thy vaine mouth go? 14 What is man that he should be cleane himself to justifie? And he which of a woman borne, that he should righteous be? 15 Beold no trust he in his saints doth put for all their might, Yea, the most clea and azurd heavens are not cleane in his sight. 16 How much more loathsome, and more vile is man, as ye may think, Who all sorts of iniquitie as water still doth drinke? 17 I'll shew thee, heare, I will declare, even that which I have seene, 18 Which wise men from their fathers told, so hid it hath not beene.
19 To whom alone the earth was given; that therein they might dwell, No stranger did among them passe, either to buy or sell. 20 The wicked man doth all his dayes travell with paine not good, To the oppressour of his yeares the number is well hid. 21 In his years is a dreadfull sound, in his prosperity The destroyer shall surely come upon him suddenly. No meanes can make him to beleeve, that he out of daknesse Shall once returne, the sword it waits for him in great distresse. 23 For bread he wandreth, saying thus, Where is it in the land? He knowes that the day of darknesse is ready at his hand. 24 With trouble he shall be afraid and with much anguish so, Gainst him they shall prevaile as Kings, that unto battell goe. 25 For 'gainst the God of heav'n above he stretcheth out his hand,
And 'gainst th' Almighty he himself doth strengthen in the land. 26 He with a dsp'rat violence upon the LORD doth run: Even on his neck the bosses thick of his bucklers upon. 27 Because his face he covreth wel with fatnesse, even so that He collops maketh on his flanks, which are both great and fat. 28 He dwells in cities desolat, and where no man can stay, In houses ready to become great heaps of stone and clay. 29 He impovrish'd, all his substance shall not continue long, His fare and large estate he shall▪ not on the earth prolong. 30 From darknesse he shall not depart, the flame shall soone up dry His branches, surely by his breath he shall go soone away. 31 Let not him trust in vanitie, who being voide of sense Deceived is; for vanitie shall be his recompense.
32 Before his time it shall be cut, his branch shall not be greene, 33 As th'Olive he hall cast his flowre, as unripe grapes the vine. 34 For multitudes of hypocrites sure desolate shall be; And fire shall soone consume the tent of all base briberie. 35 They mischief in their heart conceive, and bring foorth with much guile Great vanity: their belly doth prepare deceit the while. Chap. 16. THen Job anone him answerd thus, 2 I have heard how befall Many such thins, most naughty now comforters are yee all. 3. Shall words of winde, and vanitie at last have not an end? What is this that imboldens thee, such answers to intend? 4 I could well speak, if your souls were even in this my souls stead: Against you I could heap up words, and shake at you mine head.
5 I with my mouth would strengthen you for your aid and releef; The moving also of my lips should well asswage your grief. 6 Though I do speak, my grief is not asswadged any way: And though in silence I forbear, what am I easde thereby? But now He hath me weary made, in great perplexitie: In wrath thou hast made desolate even all my company. 8 With wrinkles (as a witnesse) thou hast fild me in disgrace: My leannesse in me rising up beares witnesse to my face. 9 He that me hates in wrath me tares, his teeth still gnashing be Upon me, this my cruell fo sharpneth his eyes on me. 10 They gaped have, they smitten als have me upon the cheek, With great reproch they gathered were against me calme and meek. 11 GOD in wrath hath delivered me to the ungodly band,
And of the wicked hath me turn'd, ev'n over in their hands. 12 I was at ease, asunder he hath broke me; by the neck He hath me ta'en and shaken sore; and set me for his marke. 13 His archers do me compasse round, my reines asunder all He cleaves, and doth not spare; he powres out on the ground my gall. 14 With breach upon breach at all times he breakes me all along: He fiercely doth upon me run, most like a gyant strong. 15 I sackcloth on my skin have sowd, which makes my heart to burst: The horne of all my strength I have defiled in the dust. 16 Great weeping in my troubles sore my face defiled hath; And on mine eye-lids still abides the shadow dark of death. 17 This is not for iniquitie, wrought by hands all impure, For I take head to all my wayes, my prayer it is pure.
18 O earth! if I thus guilty be, then cov'r thou not my blood; et not my cry come unto thee, for to be understood. 19 Now also ths I know right well, behold my WITNES true Dwells in the heav'ns, and my RECORD on high himself doth shew. 20 My friends in mine affliction great me all do mock and scorne. ut unto God mine eye powres out hudge teares both even and morne: 21 O that one might with God on earth for men thus plainly plead; s one that pleads for one that is his neighbour good indeed. 22 When some few years upon the earth are quickly come and gone hen at last shall I goe the way whence I shall not returne. Chap. 17. COrrupted is my breath, my dayes extinct are certainely, he graves also are now prepard, and ready made for me.
2 Are there not proud and wicked men, that at me mock their fill; In such provoking vaine, doth not mine eye continue still? 3 Lay downe a little, put me now in surety well with thee, Who is he among mortall men that will strike hands with me? 4 For thou from understanding good hast hid their heart; thou shalt Them not (according to their mind) to dignitie exalt. 5 He that unto his dearest friends vaine flattery can speak, Of his children the eyes shall faile, when they in want shall seek. 6 He as of babbling people vaine, a by-word hath set me, And to my foes in former times a tabret made to be. 7 By reason of my sorrow great, mine eye is dimme also; My members as a shadow are all fill'd with greef and wo. 8 Men upright shall astonied be at this, and (which is meet)
The innocent himself shall stirre against the hypocrite. 9 He that is given to righteousnesse, shall als hold on his way; And he that hath cleane hands shall be made stronger every day. 10 But as for you all foolish men, do ye returne, and now Come, for I cannot finde at all one that is wise with you. 11 My dayes in vanitie are past, for which I greatly smart, My purposes are broken off, even the thoughts of mine heart. 12 My day of joy they changed have into the greef of night, 13 Because of such a darknesse great they have made short my light. 14 I have unto corruption said, and to the wormes that crowle, My father and my mother you, and sister will I call. 15 And where is now my hope? As for my hope who shall it see? 16 They to the pit shall go when in the dust we resting be.
Chap. 14 THen Bildad the Shuhite did say, How long now will it be, 2 Ere you end all your words? Mark well, and after speake will we. 3 Wherefore are we as brutish beasts thus counted all the while? And still reputed in your sight as naughty men and vile. 4 In anger hote he tears himself, shall the earth with disgace Be left for thee? And shall the rock remov'd be from its place? 5 The brightest light of wicked men shall surely be put out, Yea, and the sparkle of his fire shall not shine him about. 6 The light within his Tabernacle shall by judgement divine Be darke; his candle shall with him be quench'd, and never shine. 7 The steps of all his greatest strength shall straitned be most fast▪ And his own counsell still perverse shall quickly downe him cast.
8 For he by his owne foolish feet is cast into a net, And so he rashly walkes upon a snare that's for him set. 9 The grin that is laid downe for him, shall take him by the heele; And robbers by their violence against him shall prevaile. 10 The snare for him is in the ground laid, both by night and day; And for him a deceitfull trap is still set in the way, 11 Great terrours shall on every side him fearfully affright, And shall even drive him to his feet, with a most speedy flight. 12 With pinching hunger ever shall be bitten all his strength, And ready shall destruction be even at his side at length. 13 The greatest strength it of his skin shall swallow lesse or more, Yea, even of death shall the first borne his greatest strength devore. 14 His confidence out of his tent shall cleane be rooted out,
And it shall bring him to the King of terrours round about. 15 It in his tent shall surely dwell, because its none of his: Upon his habitation shall brimstone be scattred thus. 16 His roots which seem'd great sap to have, shall be dried up beneath, His branch above shall be cut off together from the earth. 17 From the earth his rememberance shall perish with great shame, And he among men in the street shall not have any name. 18 He from the light that shines on earth shall be to darknesse driven, Out of the world he shall be chasd from the morne to even. 19 He neither son nor nephew shall among his people have, Nor any in his house to dwell when he goes to the grave. 20 They that come after him shall be astonied at his day, As they that went before him were affrighted sore alway.
21 Surely such are the dwellings of the wicked wanting grace, Of him that doth not know the LORD, this is the very place. Chap. 19. THen Job answer'd, and said to them; how long (as with sharp swords) 2 Will ye my soul thus vexe, and cut in pieces with your wordes? 3 These ten times ye reproached have me greatly to defame, That you your selves make strange to me, you are not touch'd with shame. 4 And be it so indeede that I, have err'd, once and againe, Mine errour truely with my self doth constantly remaine. 5 If ye indeede against me will your selves thus magnifie; As als against me my reproach plead most despightfully. 6 Know now that GOD hath overthrowne me without any let; And in my great distresse he hath me compass'd with his net.
7 Behold out of my greevous wrong I doe cry by and by, But am not heard; no judgement is, though I aloud do cry. 8 He hath sure fenced up my way, that I it cannot passe, And he also hath darknesse black even set in all my paths. 9 He hath me of my glory great cleane striped all indeed, And he also the royall Crowne hath taken from mine head. 10 On each side he me hath destroy'd, as ye may clearly see: My surest hope he hath also removed like a tree. 11 He also kindled hath his wrath against me by and by, And also counteth that to him an enemie am I. 12 His troups together come, and up their way against me raise, My Tabernacle round about to compasse is their praise; 13 He hath my brethren from me far put, as ye now may see;
And mine acquaintance dearest all estranged are from me. 14 My loving kinsfolke failed have in my necessitie, And my familar friends most dear have all forgotten me. 15 They that dwell in my house, my maide me for a stranger right Do all account, and so I am an aliant in their sight. 16 My speciall servant I did call, and he no answere gave, I did intreat him with my mouth that comfort I might have, 17 My breath unto my wife is strange, though I alwayes did make My sute, that she should rest content, even for the childrens sake. 18 Yea, young children me did despise, me as a mock to be, I in displeasure soone arose, and they contemned me: 19 My most familiar inward friends they did abhorre me all, They whom I most lov'd turned are against me, great and small.
20 My bone unto my skin and flesh doth cleave exceeding fast; I am escaped with the skin ev'n of my teeth at last. 21 O ye my friends, have pitie now on me, whom thus ye see, For the hand of th'almighty GOD hath greatly troubled me. 22 Why doe ye persecute, as GOD not with my flesh content; 23 Oh that my wordes were writen now! Oh that they were in print! 24 That they were all most clearely grav'n, even with an yron pen, And lead, that in the rock for ay they might be seene by men. 25 I know that my REDEEMER lives, that at the latter day He shall then stand upon the earth, his scepter for to sway. 26 And though after my withred skine my body, wormes quicklie Should all destroy, yet trust I still GOD in my flesh to see. 27 Whom I shall see even for my self, and mine eyes shall behold,
And not another; though my reines be all consum'd as old. 28 But yee should say, why persecute wee him upon the ground? If we the maters root could see, he guiltlesse should be found. Chap. 20. THen said Zophar Namaathite, my thoughts with great distaste, 2 Cause me therefore to answere thee, and for this I make haste. 3 I of my most shamefull reproach have surely heard the check, And my sprit that well understands, me to answere doth make. 4 Dost thou not of long time this know, by great experince, Since man was placed on the earth, to have his residence, 5 That wicked mens triumphing short incontinent is past; And that the joyes of th'Hypocrite but for a moment last?
6 Though his excellency to heaven do mount up by and by, And though his head even reach unto the high clouds of the sky, 7 Yet like his owne doung he for ay shall perish certainly: They which have seene him brave before shall say, Now where is he? 8 He as a dreame shall flee away, he shall not come in sight, He shall be chasd away, even as a vision of the night. 9 The eye also which him clearly saw, shall him no more know; Nor yet shall his place any more behold him heere below. 10 His children shall then seek to please the poor, even more and more: Yea, he these ill extorted goods, with his hands shall restore. 11 His withred bones are full of sins, of youth defil'd with lust, Which surely shall lie downe with him in grave, among the dust. 12 Though wickednesse, to be abhord, be in his mouth most sweet,
Though he under his tongue also hide it as dainty meat. 13 Though he it spare, and not forsake, but in mouth keep it still; 14 Yet his meat in his bowels is turn'd into aspes gall. 15 He riches swallowd downe hath, and shall vomite them againe, Out of his belly cast them out GOD shall with great disdaine. 16 Of aspes the poison he shall suck, him vipers tongues shall slay, 17 Of hony, butter, brookes, and floods he shall not see for ay. 18 That which he greatly labour'd for he surely shall restore, Doe what he can, it swallow downe He shall not any more. According to his substance shall his restutition be: And he shall not rejoyce therein, as in prosperitie. 19 Because he hath forsaken, and opprest the poor alway, And houses which he builded not, by force hath reft away.
20 Surely he in his belly shall not quietnesse then have, Hee of that which he most desir'd nothing at all shall save? 21 There shall none of his daintie meat be left, even lesse or more, For his goods which he up did heap, no man shall looke therefore. 22 In fulnesse he and plentie much in fearefull straits shall be, The hands of wicked men shall come upon him suddenlie. 23 When his great bellie fill he would GOD shall upon him cast, And raine on him his furious wrath, while he is eating fast. 24 He from the yron weapon shall flee, which he sure shall feele; He shall fiercely be striken through, even with a bow of steele. 25 Its draw'n, and from the body comes the glistring sword anone Most fiercely comes out of his gall; terrours are him upon; 26 All darkenesse in his places shall most secretly be hidde,
A fire not blowen by force of men shall him consume with sppeed. What ever he does, or yet intends, with him it shall go ill: That which shall be left in his tent shall be destroyed still. 27 The heaven shall all his sins reveale, gainst him shall rise the earth, 28 His goods and increase shall depart in the day of his wrath. 29 This is the wickeds portion all, from God in every point; And als the heritage which God unto him doth appoint. Chap. 21. BUt to Zophar Job answered then, what is now said by me: 2 Heare and consider, and let this your consolations be▪ 3 Now suffer me that I may speake a little as I can, And after that I spoken have then may ye still mock on. 4 As for me, my complaint to man is not made as ye see,
If it were so, why should my sprite not greatly troubled be? 5 Mark me, and be astonish'd, and your hand on your mouth lay; 6 When I remember this, I am with feare afraide alway. 7 Wherefore live wicked men, and als become old with great might 8 Their off-spring is establish'd fast and their seed in their sight. Gods heavy rod is not on them, their houses stand most fast 10 Their bull genrdeth and faileth not their cowes their calves not cast 11 They like a flocke their little ones send foorth, their children dance; 12 With tymbrell, harpe, and organes sound they cheare their countenance. 13 In wealth they spend their dayes, to grave they go without delay, 14 Therefore they bid the LORD depart, and will not know his way. 15 What is th'Almighty that we should take care him for to serve? What profite is to pray to him that he would us preserve?
16 Lo, for all that into their hand their good things yet not be, The counsell of all wicked men let it be far from me. 17 The candle of the wicked man how oft is it put out? How oft comes their destruction, and sorrowes round about? 18 They like the withred stubble are before the winde alway, And as the chaff, that stormy blasts doth cary all away. 19 God his iniquitie layes up, even for his children all; In justice he rewardeth him, and it well know he shall. 20 His eyes shall his destruction see, which shall make him to shrinke; He of the wrath most surely shall of the Almighty drinke. 21 For after him what pleasure hath he in his house alwayes, When as his moneths are cut off in the midst of his dayes? 12 Shall any man GOD knowledge teach, that hid things he may see?
Is he not he that judgeth those that are exalted hie? 23 One being wholly at his ease, in his full strength doth die: 24 His breasts of milk are full, his bones with marrow moistned be. 25 Another in soules bitternesse with joy eats not at all, 26 They shall alike lie downe in dust, the wormes them cover shall. 27 Behold your inward thoughts I know and which ye wrongfully Devices ill imagine still, in great wrath against me; 28 For yee say, Where is of the Prince the house? Yea, more us tell, Where are these great and wicked men, and where now do they dwell? 29 Have ye not asked carefully them that go by the way? May yee not all most easily their tokens know alway? 30 That wicked men reserved are unto the day of death, They all shall surely be brought foorth, unto the day of wrath.
31 Who shall in fury to his face plainely declare his way, And who shall him what he hath done deservedly repay? 32 Yet after all shall he be brought unto the stinking grave, And in the tomb his residence he constantly shall have. 33 The valley clods shall unto him be sweet, all lesse or more Shall draw to him, as numbers great are alwayes him before. 34 How then do yee most foolishly me comfort now in vaine, Seeing that in your answers all great falshhood doth remaine? Chap. 22. THen Eliphaz answered anone, 2 Can man unto God be So profitable, as the wise is to himselfe surely? 3 To th' Almighty pleasure is it, that righteous thou remaine? Or that thou mak'st thy wayes perfite, is it unto him gaine?
4 Will he thee with sharp words reprove, for any fear of thee? Will he with thee in judgement wroth thus enter furiously? 5 Is not thy sin so great, that it in greatnesse doth surpasse, And wicked deeds ev'n infinit wherein thou dost trespasse? 6 For from thy brother thou a pledge hast taken sure for nought, And strip'd the naked of their cloths, for which they sore had wrought. 7 Thou to the weary hast not given water to drinke in need, And from the hungry man also thou hast withholden bread. 8 But O! as for the mighty man, who highly did excell, He had the earth, and th'eminent in it did richly dwell. 9 Thou widowes poor hast sent away, which now most empty be, And of the fatherlesse the armes have broken been by thee. 10 Therefore snares are thee round about, feare sudden troubleth thee;
11 Much waters cov'r thee, Or darknesse, so that thou canst not see. 12 Is not GOD in the height of heaven, whence he doth all things see? Behold, and als consider well, the Starres how high they be. 13 And yet thou say'st, How doth the LORD all things know and remarke? Can he by wisedome great discerne, even through the cloud most darke! 14 Thick clouds above so cover him, that he can nothing see: And in the circuit of the heaven he walketh gloriouslie; 13 In wisedome hast thou not deserv'd the course that GOD of old Hath wont to take of these that are in wickednesse most bold? 16 Which out of time by GODS great wrath were cut downe as they stood. Whose foundation was overflowne as with a mighty flood. 17 Which proudly said unto the LORD, from us quickly depart: What can from us th' Almighty doe, to help us in our smart.
18 Yet all their houses with good things, he hath made full to be, But counsell ill of wicked men is far away from me. 19 The righteous men that live on earth it see, and are most glad, And th' innocent them laugh to scorne, in their destruction sad. 20 Whereas our substance permanent stands both by night and day Not cut downe, but what rests to them the fire consumes away. 21 Thy self now with him in thy wayes acquaint most carefullie, And be at peace, for sure thereby much good shall come to thee. 22 I pray thee from his mouth receive the law in every part, And see that thou lay up his wotds in th' inward of thine heart. 23 If to th' Almighty thou returne, thou shalt be built for ay, Iniquitie thou from thy tent then shalt put far away. 24 Then as the dust thou shalt the gold, even lay up by and by,
The gold of Ophir as the stones which in the brookes do lye. 25 Yea, the almighty (by his power) thy sure defence shall be; And as for silver thou shalt have of it a great plentie. 26 For then in the Almighty thou shall by his saveing grace Have thy delight, and unto GOD shalt glade lift up thy face. 27 Thy prayer thou shalt unto him make with great zeale alway, And he thee heare shall, and thou shalt to him thy vowes all pay. 28 Thou shalt a thing decree also, and it establish'd all To thee shall be; upon thy wayes, the light shine clearely shall. 29 When men are cast downe, then thou shalt there's lifting up, well say; The humble persone save he shall by his great power alway. 30 For the sake of the innocent he will an Island save, If that thy hands were such, thou might from God like freedome have.
Chap. 23. THen Job answer'd to Eliphaz, even to this day my mones Most bitter are, my stroke it is more heavy then my grones. 3 O that I knew where I him might finde in this wretched state! That with all boldnesse I might come even to his justice seat. 4 My cause before his Majesty I would well order still: My mouth with arguments also I would most gladly fill. 5 The wordes I would most surely know, which he would answer me, And understand what he would say in miserie to me. 6 Will he against me with his power in wrath begin to plead? No, but he would in mercy great put strength in me indeed. 7 There with him then the righteous might to dispute be most free: So thus for ever from my Judge I should delivered be.
8 Behold I foreward goe, but he is not there as I crave: I also backward go, but I him can not then perceive. 9 On the left hand where he doth work, but him I not behold; He hides himself on the right hand, that I him see not should. 10 But he the way that I do take most clearly doth behold; And when he hath well tryed me I shall come foorth as gold. 11 My foot his steps most constantly, hath held, also his way I keeped have, and have not once from it declin'd away. 12 I from his precepts start not back, which are both grave and good; His words I have esteem'd more then my necessary food. 13 But what he hath once in his minde, who can him turn therefro? And what his soul desireth once even that he doth also. 14 For he performes the thing that is appointed still for me,
And many such things are with him after his owne decree. 15 Therefore I at his presence great am troubled very sore When I consider, I of him afraide am more and more. 16 For God by his most blessed hand doth soften all my heart, And the Almighty troubleth me with painefull greefe and smart. 17 Because before darkenesse I was not cut off in my place, And that he had not cov'red well the darknesse from my face. Chap. 24. VVHy seeing times not hidden are from th'almighty alwayes, Doe they that wicked know him not yet see his judgements dayes? 2 Some the fix'd land marks doe remove, and take away indeede Their neighbours flocks with violence, and stil upon them feed. 3 The asse of the poore fatherlesse they quickly drive away,
The widowes oxe, they also take, for pledge, as for a prey, 4 The needy they out of the way where they did still abide Did turne, the poor together they themselves closely did hide. 5 Behold even as the asses wild in deserts wandring so, They rising early for a prey foorth to their work do goe. The wide and howling wildernesse (as is well understood) For them and for their children als doth yeeld a dayly food. 6 Their neighbours corne upon the field with violence they reape, Their vintage als they wickedly do gather in a heape. 7 They cause the naked without clothes to lodge in their owne hold So that they in a storme have not a cov'ring for the cold. 8 With showres of mountaines high they are thus wet in every place, For want of shelters they are forc'd the hard rocks to embrace.
9 The fatherlesse they from the breast do pluck, as in a rage, And of most poor distressed men they cruell take a pledge. 10 They him spoild of his garments all cause naked for to go, And from the hungry they the sheafe do take away also. 11 Which oyl within their walls do make, and their wine-presse with paine Do tread, and yet do suffer thirst and nothing thereby gaine. 12 Out of the city men do grone, and wounded soules do cry, Yet for this to them God layes not their folly by and by. 13 Against the light they do rebell, while they themselves would hide, The wayes thereof they do not know, nor in its paths abide. 14 The murdrer rising with the light; doth kill by great mischeef; The poore and needy; in the night he is a common thiefe. 15 For the twilight th' adultrers eye doth still waite in his place,
No eye, saith he, shll now me see, disguising all his face. 16 In darke throw houses they do dig, which they well by their sight, Had marked for them in the day, they brutish know not light. 17 As deaths shaddow the morning is to them from GODS great wrath; If one them know▪ they surely are in terrous even of death. 18 He curs'd on earth, like waters swift doth quickly passe away, Of vineyeards with great plenty blest he not beholds the way. 19 Great drought and heat, snow waters cold do most quickly consume, So doth the grave, these who are bold, to stain their life with sin. 20 The womb wherein he was conceiv'd shall him forget anone; The filthy worm that creeps on earth shall sweetly feed him on. He afterward sure shall no more by men remembred be; All wickednesse shall at the last be broken as a tree.
21 The barren that beares not, he doth most cruelly intreat, And to the widow doth not good before his judgement seat. 22 The mighty also with his power he drawes with wrath and strife, He riseth up with lofty lookes, no man is sure of life. 23 Though it be given him for to be in safety, where alwayes He rests secure; yet are his eyes even still upon their wayes. 24 They for a little while on earth exalted are most hie, But they anone are alwayes gone and made of low degree. Out of the way as others are, they are remov'd with scorne, And suddenly are all cut off, like tops of eares of corne. 25 If this be not as I do say, who boldly darre come foorth, And by his words contend to make my speach of nothing worth?
Chap. 25. THen answred Bildad the Shuhite, and thus he spake quicklie, 2 Dominion and fear with him are, he doth make peace on hie. 3 The armies which he doth command, by none can numbred be; Upon whom doth not his fair light arise most pleasantlie? 4 How then with God be justified can man, who is forlorne? Or how can he be cleane that is even of a woman borne? 5 Behold even up unto the Moone, and it not shineth bright; Yea more the glistring starres above are not pure in his sight. 6 How much lesse man that is a worme, should he be reput so? Or yet the son of man likewise, which is a worme also? Chap. 26. BUt Job answred incontinent, how thou the weake at length
Now helped hast? How savest thou the arme that hath no strength? 3 How hast thou counseld him at last, who surely is unwise, And clearly hast declard the thing even truely as it lyes? 4 To whom hast thou uttred such words of foolish vanity; And whose sprite with great gifts adornd did once proceed from thee? 5 Dread things from under waters deep are form'd, and who there dwell? 6 Destruction is not cov'rd, nor hid, before him is the hell: 7 The North laid ov'r the empty place, he wisely doth extend: He this hudge earth without a prop on nothing doth suspend. 8 The waters in his thickest clouds he bindes incontinent; And yet the cloud which seemes so weak them under is not rent. 9 By his great strength he holdeth back the fair face of his throne, And upon it most wondrously he spreads his cloud anone,
10 He compass'd hath the waters great, with bounds them to defend, Untill that both the day and night shall come unto an end. 11 The mountaines high which (pillar like) uphold the heavenly roofe, Do tremble, and astonish'd are at his angry reproofe. 12 Ev'n with his power most excellent he doth divide the sea, By understanding through the proud he smitteth valiantly. 13 By his Almighty Spirit he hath the heav'ns adorn'd also, His hand the serpent formed hath, which crookedly doth goe. 14 Loe these are but some parcells of his wayes that are supreme, But little is that portion all that we doe heare of him. But who among all mortall men can understand the thunders Of his great might, which doth the earth fill with most fearfull wonders:
Chap. 26. MOreover yet afflicted Job, in greevous troubles laid, Continued as he did before his parable, and said, 2 As lives the Lord, who taken hath my judgement clean away, And th'Almighty who vexed hath my greev'd soul every way. 3 While breath, or GODS Sprite shall be in my nostrils all the while: 4 My mouth not wickednesse shall speak, nor yet deceit or guile. 5 No, GOD forbid that I should you once minde to justifie; Untill I die I will not quite mine own integrity. 6 My righteousnesse I still hold fast, and will not let it go; My heart shall not me while I live with this reproach also. 7 As the most wicked on the earth let th'enemy to me Be, and these that against me rise as the unrighteous be.
8 For what hope hath the Hypocrite, though he a wealthy prey Hath gained by his guile, when GOD shall take his soul away? 9 Will GOD in Heaven incline his ear once for to hear his cry, When trouble great shall fiercely come upon him by and by. 10 In th'Almighty will he himself with joyfulnesse delight? Or will he alwayes call on GOD, by day or yet by night. 11 I by the mighty hand of GOD will teach you and reveale; That which with the Almighty is I will not now conceale. 12 Behold! and now consider well, it ye your selves have seene: Why are ye then thus vaine, as they who ever fools have beene? 13 This is the wickeds portion all which he from GOD shall have, Oppressours shall this heritage from th'Almighty receive. 14 If multipli'd his children be, it's for the sword indeed:
His offspring begging still shall not be satisfi'd with bread. 15 These that after remaine of him shall buri'd be in death; And for disgrace his widowes shall not weepe for him on earth. 16 Though he make rayment as the clay, and silver heape as dust, 17 The godly shall the silver get, his robes shall cloth the just. 18 If he build houses faire, it is but lke the naughtie moth, He shall at last consume his house, as it doth fret the cloth. His house also is like a booth, which keepers set up soone And in the turning of an hand againe is pulled downe 19 The rich man shall anone lie downe, but shall not gathred be, Hee opneth clearely both his eyes, but after where is he? 20 As waters great so terrors doe take hold on him with might, A tempest great him steals away in darkenesse of the night.
21 Th'east winde away him caries still, as by a fearefull chace, And he departs; and as a storme him hurles out of his place. 22 For GOD in his fierce fury shall great weights upon him cast; He shall not spare, most faine would he out of his hand fle fast: 23 Men at him shall still clap their hands, in signe of great disgrace They all combin'd with great disdaine shall hisse him from his place. Chap. 28. SUrely there is a wealthly veine for silver that doth shine; There is also a place for gold where they from drosse it fine. 2 Iron out of earth with labour great is taken, and anone The brasse into a purer masse is molten out of stone. 3 To darknesse he wise sets an end, and well he seacheth out Perfection all; and makes good use of hid Mines all about
4 He so disposeth of the floods that they flow by and by, Againe by his almighty power they become wholly dry. 5 As for the earth, its surface doth yeeld bread for mans desire, And under it there mater is combustible for fire. 6 The stones thereof are als the place of Saphires in great store, Abundantly among the dust it hath the golden ore. 7 There is a path unknow'n to fooles, not seene by vultures eye; 8 The lions whelps have not it trode, the lion pass'd not by. 9 His hand upon the rockes he puts, with sledge he slents them downe, The steepest mountaines by the rootes he als doth overturne. 10 Among the flintie rocks he doth great rivers soone cut out, His eye sees every precious thing in all the land about. 11 The floods (that they not overflow,) he bindeth with his might,
The thing that is most secret hid he bringeth foorth to light. 12 But whre shall wisedome now be found? where is its dwelling place? 13 Its price men knowes not; of the earth it is not on the face, 14 Its not in me the gulfie depth doth most clearlie confesse; It's not with me als sith the sea, yea neither more nor lesse. 15 For gold, that is most precious, it can not gotten be, Nor silver for the price thereof shall weighed be surelie. 16 It can not so be valued well with gold of Ophir deae, With the most precious Onix stone, or with the Saphire cleare. 17 The gold and Chrystall can not als with it equall compare: Th'exchange of it shall not be for fine golden jewels rare. 18 No mention of the corall shall, or yet of pearles be made For wisedomes price is farre above the Rubies glauncing red.
19 No Ethiopian Topaze shall it equall here or there; The purest gold in furnace fin'd with it may not compare. 20 But whence is then that wisdome comes, where's understandings place? 21 Since it from all the livings eyes, and fouls hath hid its face. 22 Death and destruction in their speach do alwayes say the same: We only thereof with our ears have heard the noble fame. 23 GOD by his wisdome great thereof doth understand the way, He well doth know the place thereof where it abides for ay. 24 For he unto the farrest ends, of earth looks with his eyes, What is under the cope of Heaven He it most clearly sees. 25 He makes the weights for stormy windes, according to his pleasure, The waters also which run deep he weigheth all by measure. 26 When for the rain by wisdome great He made a sure decree:
And for the Thunders lighning als a way appointed he. 27 Then did he see it, and declare, and so did clear all doubt. He it prepared wisely and it fully searched out. 28 And unto man at last he said, Beholds GODS only fear Is wisdome, and to cease from ill is understanding dear. Chap. 29. MOreover in his mourning Job to speak made no delay: In parable he did proceed, and thus began to say. 2 Oh that I were as in dayes past, when GOD preserved me! 3 When his lamp on mine head did shine, and I did walk safely. 4 As I was in the former dayes, before my youth was spent, When of the LORD the secret was well seene upon my tent. 5 When the Almighty by his grace was yet even still with me;
When all my chldren with great joy I round about did see. 6 When I my steps with butter wash'd, without labour or toile, And as the rock (as in a showre) powr'd out rivers of oile. 7 When I did through the citie go, and went upon my feet Out to the gate, when I prepar'd my seate even in the street. 8 The young men saw me excellent, and under this pretence Did hide themselves; the ag'd stood up, to beare me reference, 9 The Princes talking did refraine, that they might understand My wise discourse, and on their mouth they all did lay their hand. 10 The nobles likewise held their peace, and which was a great proof, Of my wise wordes, the tongues of all did cleave unto their roof. 11 When that the ear of man me heard it surely me did blesse, And when the eye me saw also, it gave to me witnesse.
12 Because I did deliver these who poore to me did cry, The Orphans, and him thar had none to help him by and by, 13 Blessings of such as ready were, to perish came on me, And I did cause the widowes heart to sing most joyfully, 14 I righteousnesse anone put on, which (as a glorious gowne) Me cloth'd; my judgement was a rob, and a most stately crowne. 16 I as the most cleare seeing eyes unto the blind became, And als in humane charitie I feete was to the lame; 16 I was a father to the poore, in all the land about The cause which I not understood with care I searched out. 17 The jawes of wicked men I brake, and gave them all the foile, And with a mighty arme did pluck out of their teeth the spoile. 18 Then in my fond conceite I said, I shall die in my nest,
My dayes as sand I'le multiply, and after goe to rest. 19 Out by the waters blooming faire my root was spread anone, And all the night the pleasant dew lay still my branch upon. 20 My glory was still fresh in me, as all did understand; And als the bow of my great strength. renu'd was in my hand. 21 Unto me men most wise gave eare, to heare what I would tell, They waited well, and silence keept, when I did give counsell. 22 After that they had heard my words they spake no more againe, My speach upon them dropped all, as doth a pleasant raine. 23 As for the raine that fruitfull is, they for me did abide; As for the latter raine their mouth they op'ned very wide. 24 If I did laugh on them, then they beleev'd it not at all; They were afraid to cause the light of my visage to fall,
25 I sat as cheefe, I choose their way most meekly without boast; I dwelt even as a King, that is amid an armed hoast. And as a wise man that in time his comforts sweet powres out, Amide thse who for greef of minde are mourning him about. Chap. 30. BUt now these young ones me deride, whose ragged fathers I Would have disdain'd even with the dogs, of my flock to set by. 2 Yea of their hands whereto the strength could ever profite me In whom old age all perish'd was as all might clearly see? 3 For want and famine desolate they were; they did flee fast To wil fernesse in former times, most barran all and waste. 4 Who mallowes hungry do cut up, by bushes heer and there, And have no other thing for meat but roots of Juniper.
5 From among men they were driven foorth as men given to mischief; They cry'd aloud all after them, even as after a thief. 6 To dwell in the unpleasant clifts of valleyes like vile slaves; And in the shelters of the rocks, or shadows of the caves. 7 Among the bushes lying they in misery did bray: They under nettles gathred were together every day. 8 They of vain fools the children were, yea, of men of no name Most base, then earth they viler were, to owne them men thought shame. 9 And now their song am I become, and by-word of disgrace, 10 They me abhor, they flee from me, and spit even in my face. 11 Because that he hath loosde my cord, and me afflicted sore; They have the bridle now let loose, not sparing me before. 12 Upon my right hand rise the youth, my feet they push away
The wayes of their destruction great they 'gainst me raise alway. 13 Most bitterly they marre my path, they most backward indeed Set foreward my calamitie, of help they have no need. 14 As a breaking of waters wide they all come upon me; They in the desolation great did roll themselves fiercely. 15 Upon me terrours turned are, my soul pusue do they Even as the winde; my welfare als as clouds doth passe away. 16 And now my Soul is powred out with terrours manifold; The dayes of great afflction now on me have taken hold: 17 In the night Season are my bones all pierc'd in me and prest, My sinewes all are shrunk with paines, that they can get no rest. 18 By the great force of my disease my garment which is hote Is changd, about it binds me as the collar of my coat.
19 He hath by a great violence me in a deep myre thrust, And I distressed am become like ashes and like dust. 20 I cry to thee, but thou dost not me hear in grief ensnaird, When I stand up to look for help thou dost me not regard. 21 Now thou art cruell also turnd unto me in the land, Thy self gainst me thou dost oppose with strong and mighty hand. 22 Up to the winde thou lifts me up, and on it makes me ride: Thou so dissolves my substance all, that nothing doth abide▪ 23 For I do this most clearly know, that thou, LORD, me wilt bring To death, yea to the houses that set for the living be. 24 Howbeit his hand unto the grave Hee'l not stretch by and by▪ Though they in his destruction great continually should cry. 25 For him that in great trouble was did I not weep right sore?
Was not my soul in misery much grieved for the poor. 26 When I good things did well expect distresse came me upon; And when I waited for the light there darknesse came anone. 27 My bowels boiled with great paine, they rested not surely; The dayes of great affliction als most swift prevented me. 28 I griev'd without the light of Sun went mourning by and by, And in the congregation great with anguish I did cry. 29 A brother I to dragons am, with owles I do abide, 30 My bones are burnt with scorching heat, black is my withred hide. 31 To mourning also turned is my harp that was most sweet; My organ turn'd is in the voice of them that sadly weep. Chap. 31. A Covenant sure then with mine eyes most carefully I made
Why in great foly thus should I even thinke upon a maid? 2 For what portion of GOD is there appointed from above? Or als' inheritance is there from the Almighties love? 3 Is not destruction ordain'd to these that do wickedly? Strange punishment is als for these that work iniquitie. 4 Doth he not with his clearest eyes perfectly see my wayes? He als with observation strict my steps counts all my dayes: 5 If in my foolishnesse I have ev'n walk'd in vanitie, Or if unto deceit my foot hath hasted wickedly. 6 Then let me in an ballance even be weighed narrowly, That the Almighty God may well know mine integritie. 7 If my step turn'd hath from the way, and my heart did believe
Mine eyes, and if unto my hand the least blot once did cleave; 8 Then let me sow my precious seed in all my fields about, And let another eat; yea, let my race be rooted out. 9 If that my heart by women hath (as by a snairing baite) Deceived been; or if I at my neighbours door laid waite; 10 Then let my wife by recompence unto another grinde, Let others als on her bow downe even in my sins own kinde. 11 For this is a most hainous crime, a great iniquitie Which righteous judges should correct with great severitie. 12 For it a fire consuming is to wast ev'n round about All mine increase which I enjoy it would anone root out. 13 If I als did despise the cause of manservant, or maide,
When they in any humour hote with me contention made. 14 What shall I do when that the LORD against me up shall rise, And when he visits what shall I to answer enterprise? 15 Did not he that made me, him make, as all may understand, And did not one within the womb us fashion with his hand? 16 If I by rigour have the poor withheld from their desire, Or of the widow poor the eyes have causde to faile or tyre; 17 Or if my morsell mine alone I eaten have apart, So that the fatherlesse thereof not eaten have a part. 18 For from my youth the fatherlesse was well brought up with me, The widow from my mothers womb I guided carefully. 19 If I for want of clothing warm have any perish seene, Or any poor distrest, that had without a covering beene:
20 If his loins have not blessed me to keep me from all harm, If by the soft fleece of my sheep he was not then made warm: 21 If I against the fatherlesse have once lift up my hand, When I my help even in the gate did see and understand, 22 Then rotting from my shoulder-blade let fall mine arme anone: Yea more I say, even let mine arme be broken from the bone: 23 For from GOD the destruction great a terrour was most sure, By reason of his highnesse great I could it not indure. 24 If I have made the gold my hope in any exigence, Or have said to the finest gold Thou art my confidence: 25 If I rejoic'd, because my wealth was great as such and such, Or yet because at any tyme mine hand had gotten much, 26 If I beheld the shinning Sunne to worship with his light,
Or yet the Moone, fair in the sky, with glory walking bright, 27 Or that my heart entised hath been secretly thereby, Or that my mouth hath kissd mine hand on such for to rely. 28 This als were an iniquitie, which Judges should remove; For I thus should denied have the God that is above. 29 If I at the destruction great of him that hated me Rejoic'd, or yet lift up my self at his great miserie: 30 Or have I suffred once my mouth with libertie to sinne By wishing fearefull plagues and curse unto his soul within. 31 If the men of my tabernacle yea said, Not oh that we Had of his flesh! Such are his wrongs he can not satisfie. 32 The stranger surely did not lodge in open street alway; My doores I opned unto these that travail'd by the way.
33 If I my great transgressions als did cover craftily, As Adam, and did closely cloak my vile iniquity: 34 Did fear of many or contempt of men me terifie, That I keept silence and not went out at my doores straitly? 35 O that one among mortall men could happily be found Who would me heare, and of my words consider well the ground. That the Lord God would answere me, this is my cheefe desire, And that my foe would wickedly to write a booke conspire. 26 I it upon my shoulder would most gladely take and beare; And as a crowne upon mine head I dayly would it weare. 37 Of all my steps the number I would unto him declare, I as a Prince would goe to him and all my wrongs repaire. 38 But if my land for my misdeeds against me cry amaine,
Or that the furrowes als indeed likewise thereof complaine. 39 If I once of the fruits thereof, without money made use, Or yet have caused wickedly their life the owners losse. 40 Let pricking thistles grow in stead of most excellent wheat, And cockle even most noisome weeds for barley be my meat▪ Heere Job did pause. Chap. 32. SO these three men to answere Job incontinent did cease, Because they hopelesse saw that he was righteous in his eyes. 2 Then of the wrath of Elihu sore kindled was the flame, This Buzite son of Barachel was of the race of Ram; Against poor Job he was in rage, because his words implyd That he himself more then the LORD even alwayes justifyd.
3 Against his three friends kindled was his wrath, because they had No answere found to him, and yet they had condemned Job. 4 Now Elihu had waited long, In his great modestie Till Job had spoken, because they were elder all then he. 5 When Elihu saw that these three, to answere Job surceast, His wrath then with a burning zeal was kindled in his breast; 6 Then answred he, and said I am right young, and ye are old, Wherefore to shew to you my mind I durst not well be bold; 7 I said within my heart that dayes were fit to take the speach, And that the multitude of yeares should surely wisedome teach. In man indeed a sprit there is, but that he things can sift With understanding good, it is of GOD a speciall gift. 9 They surely are not alwayes wise who are great in the land,
Nor yet doe these that are of age good judgement understand: 10 Therefore I at the last did say, Now hearken unto me; I also mine opinion will unto you shew freely. 11 Behold I for your words did wait, I gave good ear alway, While by your wisdome yee profound did search out what to say: 12 Yea, unto you I did attend even as unto a Prince; But none of you could answer Job, or yet his words convince. 13 Lest yee should say, We have now found great wisdome as a crown, GOD by his strong and mighty arme, and not man thrusts him down. 14 Now he hath not his hauty words directed against me: Nor yet mine answer unto him shall with your speaches be. 15 They altogether were amaz'd, they answerd me no more; They being all thus in the dumps left off to speak therefore.
16 When I had waited long with grief, (for they all could not speak, But stood still, they like naughty fools their answer had to seek) 17 I said unto them, At the last I answer will my part, I also mine opinion all unto you will impart. 18 For I am full of matter wise, as clearly yee shall see; The sprite that lodgeth me within it now constraineth me 19 Behold as wine my belly is, which can not get a vent; Like bottels new it ready is to be in pieces rent. 20 I will now speak, so that I may thereby refreshed be: My lips anone I open will, and answer speedily. 21 I humbly pray you let me not mens persons now accept, Nor let me flattring give to men the titles of respect. 32 For flattring titles surely I unto men can not give:
If I did so, my maker would me not permit to live. Chap. 33. VVHerefore I pray thee Job now heare me with attentive head, And hearken well unto the words that from my mouth proceed. 2 Behold, I surely now my mouth have opned at the last, In my mouth spoken hath my tongue, and told how things are past. 3 Of my hearts perfect uprightnesse my words shall surely be, And als my lips great knowledge shall even utter most clearly. 4 The sprite of God who makes all things by his strength made me hath, And the Almighty hath to me given life even by his breath. 5 If thou by thy great wisedome canst me answere lesse or more, Stand up now, and well set thy words in order me before. 6 I am according to thy wish, even in Gods stead the day
I also am as others are form'd of the dust and clay. 7 So for my terrour thou needst not greatly affrighted be, My hand be well assur'd shall not upon thee heavy be. 8 Thou in my hearing spoken hast, which I have heard clearly, 9 I am without transgression all, no sin there is in me. 10 He doth against me quarrels pick, he counts me for his fo; 11 He in the stocks doth put my feet, he marks my paths also. 12 Behold in this thou just not art, to thee now well I can Make answer; this I may affirm, GOD greater is than man. 13 Why dost thou this most foolishly against him contend and strive: For of his matters he a count will not to any give. 14 For God speakes once, yea twise, yet man perceives not what is said, 15 In dreame, or vision, or deep sleep, or slumbrings on the bed.
Then opneth he the ears of men, and doth instruction seale, 17 That he may stop men from his worke, and pride from man conceale. 18 His soule and life he from the pit, and sword doth safe maintaine, 19 He chastned is upon his bed, his bones all suffer paine. 20 So that his life through troubles great abhors his bread to eat, His soul also doth still refuse to take most dainty meat. 21 His flesh consumed is away, that it cannot be seene, His bones that were all hid, stick out his body is so leane. 22 In this meane time his troubled soul drawes neer unto the grave, And his life likewise unto these that still destruction crave. 23 If with him be a messenger on choise of a thousand, To shew to man his uprightnesse and make him understand. 24 Then he is gracious unto him, and saith anone him save,
From going to the pit, for I a ransome now found have. 25 Then than a childes flesh certainly shall fresher be his flesh, Unto the dayes of lustie youth he shall returne afresh. 26 He shall then pray, and GOD to him shall favour shew, and he Shall see his face with joy; to man hee'l render righteouslie. 27 He lookes on men, If any say I have sinn'd grievously, And als the right perverted have, but did no profit see. 28 He from the pit his soul will save, his life shall see the light, 29 Lo all these things the Lord with man workes often by his might. 30 To bring back from the pit his soule for to enlightned be, 31 Marke well O Job, heare, hold thy peace, and I will speake to thee. 32 If thou canst speak me answere, for I would thee justifie 33 If not, me hear, and hold thy peace, and I will now teach thee,
Chap. 34. YET Elihu still speaking, said, 2 Ye wise men, sage, and grave, Now hear my words, give ear to me all yee that knowledge have: 3 For mans ear well all words doth try, as the mouth tasteth food; 4 Let us choose judgement unto us, and let us know what's good. 5 For Job hath said most foolishly, I righteous am alway; And GOD the good right of my cause hath taken clean away. 6 Should I against my right once lye? he with a curelesse wound Hath striken me, and yet for that no crime at all is found. 7 What man in all the earth like Job, himself so overthinks, Who wilfully void of all sense great scorn as water drinks? 8 Which is companion unto these that work iniquitie; And in his carriage walketh with men that most wicked be.
9 For he hath said, it profits not a man to be upright, That he with the Almighty GOD should still himself delight. 10 Therefore ye wise men hearken now, all wickednesse far be From GOD, and from th'Almighty that he do iniquitie. 11 Eor he the work of every man most justly will repay, And shall cause every man to find according to his way. 12 Yea, surely GOD not wickedly will do in whole or part, Nor yet will the Almighty once his judgement wise pervert. 13 Who ov'r the earth hath unto him the weighty charge imposd And who but he by his great power the world all hath disposd? 14 If he upon man set his heart in fury and in wrath, If he shall gather to himselfe his sprite and als his breath. 15 All flesh that dwells upon the earth together perish must,
And mortall man shall turne againe unto his former dust. 15 If thou now understanding hast heare and hearken to me 17 Shall wicked rule, and shall the just condemned be by thee? 18 Beseems it to say to a King by way of great disdaine Thou wicked art; to Princes als yee all are most profaine? 19 Then how much lesse to him that can not Princes proud endure, And who in justice not regards the rich more then the poor? For they indeed are all alike the work even of his hands, And therefore that which is for both, he wisely still commands. 20 They soone shall die, the people shall be vex'd at midnight and The mighty men shall taken be away without a hand. 21 For on mans wayes his eyes are still, his going he doth see, 22 The shadows dark can not these hide that work iniquitie.
23 For he more then the right on man will not lay with his rod, That he in judgement enter should with the Almighty GOD. 24 By multitudes he strongly shall in pieces break the great, And pull them down, and in their stead most quickly others set. 25 Therefore he knoweth well their works, and he them in the night Doth overturne, so that they are destroyed out of sight. 26 He strikes the wicked openly, because that they did swerve, And would not any of his wayes with conscience well observe. 28 So that unto him of the poor they cause soone come the cry, And he the cryes of troubled men doth hear still by and by. 29 When quietnesse he gives to man, who then dar be so bold To grieve him? When he hides his face who can him then behold? Whether against a nation all, It be done publickly,
Or onely it against a man be done most privatly. 30 That the most wicked hypocrite should not the Scepter sway, Lest that the people foolishly ensnared be alway. 31 It surely meet is to be said unto the LORD therefore I chastisement have borne, offend I will not any more. 32 That which I see not teach thou me that I hence may refraine, If I have done iniquity I will not doe't againe. 33 Should it be after thine owne mind? whether that thou doth chuse. He will it surely recompence or whether thou refuse. And not I, I may well affirme even whether lesse or more, What dost thou know most perfectly see thou it speak therefore. 34 Let men of understanding good unto me plainely tell, And let him hearken who alwayes in wisedome doth excell.
35 Without knowledge Job spoken hath and that most foolishly, Without all wisedome were his words, as all may hear and see. 36 That Job be tri'd unto the end this is my cheefe desire, Because that for most wicked men his answers did conspire; 37 Eor he to sin rebellion ads even while he feeles the rod, He claps his hands, and multiplies his words against the Lord. Chap. 35. YEt Elihu moreover said, 2 Think'st thou this to be right. That thou dost say my righteousnesse then God appeares more bright. 3 For thou saidst, what advantage will it unto thee now be, And profit what shall I then have, if from sin I be free? 4 To thee and thy companions now this answere make will I, 5 Look to the heavens, see and behold the clouds high in the sky.
6 What do'st thou vaine man him against if thou be given to sin, If thou transgressions multiply, what dost thou unto him? 7 If thou be righteous in thy wayes, what to him dost thou give, Or from thine hand, what what doth he, at any time receive? 8 Thy wickednesse may hurt a man that is like unto thee, Thy righteousnesse to sons of men may alwayes helpfull be. 9 Because of great oppressions they do make th' oppressed cry; By reason of the mighties armes they cry out by and by. 10 But none among them all doth say, where is the GOD of might, My maker who most graciously gives songs even in the night, 11 Who teacheth us most carefully, and hath us wisedome given More thn to all the beasts on earth or yet the foules of heaven? 12 There they do cry but none at all gives eare or yet takes head,
Because of ill men who in pride most wickedly exceed. 13 Most surely foolish vanitie by God shall not be heard, The almighty who is above, sure will it not regard. 14 Though thou say thou shalt not him see, yet he is alwayes just, Therefore see that with all thine heart thou alwayes in him trust. 15 But now because it is not so, God in his anger hot Hath visited; yet in great strait poor Job this knoweth not: 16 Therefore doth Job most foolishly open his mouth in vaine, Without knowledge he multiplies words while he doth complaine. Chap. 36. ELihu yet proceeding said, a little suffer me, 2 And I will shew that I have yet to speak for th' Almighty. 2 I will my knowledge fetch from far, like a most learned scribe
And to my Maker righteousnesse I surely will ascribe. 4 This I may well say for a trueth, my words false shall not be, He that in knowledge perfect is, is alwayes still with thee. 5 Behold the Lord most mighty is, he no man doth despise, Most mighty he is in great strength and als he is most wise. 6 The life of wicked men he not preserveth by his might, He in his justice doth alwayes give to the poor his right, 7 From righteous men he just doth no withdrawe his eyes anone, But with Kings high in dignitie they are upon the Throne. Yea, he by his Almighty power doth them establish fast, And they high unto dignitie exalted are at last. 8 And if they be in fetters bound, and cords most like a slave, 9 Then he their works and sins doth shew, that rhey exceeded have.
10 To discipline there eare also he opneth most wisely, And them commands that they returne from their iniquity. 11 If they obey and serve him thus, and that unto the end, Their dayes they in prosperity and yeers in joy shall spend. 12 But if they will not him obey, they by the sword surely Shall perish all, and they likewise as fooles shall surely dye. 13 But hypocrites who most abhord, are men of double heart, Still heap up wrath; they cry not when he binds them till they smart. 14 They die in their most lustie youth as often may be seene, Their life is among Sodomites of all men most uncleane. 15 The poor man he delivereth well in trouble and debate Their eares also he opneth wide in his oppression great. 16 Even so would he thee from the place of straitnesse great made free,
And the rest of thy table rich, of fatnesse full should be. 17 The judgement of vile wicked men thou hast fulfill'd surely, GODS judgement and his justice als they take now hold on thee. 18 Sith wroth he is, beware that he with stroakes take thee away, Then shalt thou not delivered be, though thou great ransome pay. 19 In such a case will he esteeme thy great riches at length? No not the finest gold, nor all the forces of great strength. 20 See that thou not desire alwayes, to see the dismall night, When people poor are in their place cut off by men of might. 21 Take heed, see that thou not regard most vile iniquitie; For rather then affliction thou, this chosen hast surelie. 22 Behold GOD highly doth exalt, even by his power supreme; His understanding is so great, that none can teach like him.
23 Who among the most mighty hath enjoined him his way? Or who dar say to him, Thou hast most lewdly gone astray? 24 Remember that thou magnifie, his work which men behold, 25 It is so cleare, it may be seene both by the young and old. 26 Lo, GOD is great we know him not, in all the land about, Nor can the number of his yeeres, be fully searched out. 27 For he the drops of water makes, to become very small; According to their vapours they do make the raine to fall. 28 Which the clouds in the firmament, do cause drop down apace, And upon man aboundantly, distill in every place. 29 Also the spreading of the clouds can any understand; Or the noise of his Tabernacle, set up by his own hand? 30 Behold his gloriou lght on it he spreadeth most brightlie,
And by this meanes he cov'reth all the bottome of the sea. 31 For he by them the people doth judge as he thinketh meet, In plenteous aboundance he gives unto them all their meat. 32 With clouds he cov'reth all the light even by his power divine, He by the cloud that comes betwixt, forbiddeth it to shine. 33 The noise thereof concerning it doth shew its furious rage, Concerning vapours such also the cattell oft presage. Chap. 37. AT this also with inward fear my heart doth all this space Even tremble still, and troubled fore is mov'd out of its place. 2 Hear of his voice attentively, the great noise all about, And als the rumbling sound that of his sacred mouth goes out. 3 He mighty under the whole heaven directs it wisely foorth,
And als his lightning bright unto the ends of all the earth. 4 After the lightning seene a sound, doth roar most dreadfully; He thundreth high even with the voice of his excellency. And he the raine and thunder als, by his strength will not stay; When his voice is among the clouds by night heard or by day. 5 GOD with his voice most wondrously doth fearfull thunder send; Great things he surely doth which we can not well comprehend. 6 He to the snow gives a command to cover all the plaine, The same to do he doth appoint the small and mighty raine. 7 The hand of each man he seals up, that men his works may know: 8 Then go the beasts unto their dens, and rest in places low. 9 Out of the chambers of the South the whirlewind cometh foorth; And cold, which chilleth every thing, proceeds out of the North.
10 Even by the breath of God the frost is given at his command, The breadth also of waters great is straitned by his hand. 11 He gathreth vapours and them makes thick clouds by his great might To labour much; he scattreth als his cloud that is most bright. 12 And by his counsels that are wise it turn'd is round about, That they may do what ever he bids even all this world throughout. 13 He quickly causeth it to come, by a most firme decree, Whether for rod, or for his land, or else for great mercy, 14 O Job now hearken at the last to all that I have said, Stand still and now consider well. the wondrous works of God. 15 Knowst thou when God disposed then by his wisedome divine, And causd the great light of his cloud most brightly for to shine? The ballancings dost thou well know of clouds both great and small.
The wondrous workes of him who still, perfectly knows things all? 17 How thou thy garments thee upon to be right warme dost find, When he the whole earth quiet makes, by force of the south wind. 18 Hast thou with him by thy great power spread out the spangled skie Most strong, and as a looking glasse that's molten by and by? 19 Teach us now by thy wisedome great what we shall say to him, For order we our speach can not we are so dark and dim. 20 Shall it be told him what I speak? of this he hath no need; If any speak amisse he shall be swallow'd up indeed. 21 And now the bright light in the clouds men do not clearly see, But the wind with great force doth passe and cleanseth them quickly. 22 Most from the North fair weather comes most clear as is the gold, With GOD is wondrous Majestie, more bright by manifold.
23 Concerning the Almighty God, we can not him find out, He excellent in power is, in all the land about. In judgement and in justice als he plenteous doth excell, So that he will not sore afflict men, whether great or small. 24 Therefore men feare his Majesty, yet he for their desert Doth not respect these men on earth, who are most wise of heart. Chap. 38. AT this time the Almighty Lord to Job an answere made Out of the blustring whirlewind, and after this maner said. 2 Who is this that presumptuously doth counsell overcloud, With darknesse thick, by foolish words not having knowledge good? 3 Now like a man gird up thy loines, for questions now of thee I will demand, See if thou can an answere make to me,
4 Where wast thou when I of the earth the ground-stone did lay fast? Declare to me if at this time thou understanding hast. 5 Now tell me if thou knows, thereof who laid the measures out? Or who upon it stretched hath the line even round about? 6 The faire foundations all thereof I pray thee whereupon Fastned are they? Or who of it did lay the corner stone? 7 When as the morning stars above together sweetly sang, And all the sons of GOD for joy their shoutings highly rang. 8 Or who shut up the sea with doors that flowes the earth about, When it brake foorth, as if it had of the womb issu'd out? 9 When I the cloud its garment made by my most mighty hand, And darknesse thick for it also to be a swadling band: 10 And also for it did break up the place of my decree,
And wisely set both barres and doores for it alwayes to be, 11 And said, Thou shalt come hitherto, but shalt no further stray, And heere thy proud and lofty waves thou shalt not faile to stay. 12 Hast thou the morning since thy dayes had ever at thy beck? Or hast thou at his wonted place the day caus'd spring to breake? 13 That it take hold might of the ends of all the earth about? And that the wicked might from it be quickly shaken out 14 By GODS hand it is turned all, as to the seale the clay, And as a garment good they stand, in most pleasant aray. 15 And from the wicked men their light is even with holden all, And the hie arme of lofty ones shall then be broken small. 16 Hast thou entred into the springs of the most rageing sea? Or hast thou searched all the shelfs, that in the great depth be.
17 Unto thee all the gates of death have they wide op'ned beene? Or of deaths shadow black the doores hast thou most clearly seene. 18 By thy wisedome hast thou perceiv'd the breadth of this great ball, Even of the earth; declare it now if thou dost know it all. 19 Teach me also, where is the way where the cleare light doth dwell; And as for darknesse where's the place, thereof, if thou can tell. 20 That thou shouldst take it to its bounds above or yet belowe, And that the paths unto its house thou perfectly shouldst know. 21 Because in that time borne thou wast, perfectly know,st thou it? Or yet because the number of thy dayes is very great. 22 Hast thou into the treasures great of snow even entred well, Or hast thou seen the store house of the hard congealed haile. 23 Which I for me, have well reserv'd against the tyme of jarres?
Against the day of battell and the day of fearfull wars. 24 Canst thou where the light parted is the way by wisedome find? Which on the earth by violence doth scatter the East wind? 25 Who hath the water spouts also divided for the raine, Or yet the way for thunder claps whole sound doth roare amaine? 26 To cause it raine upon the earth where no man is at all; Yea on the wildernesse wherein is neither great nor small? 27 To satisfie the desolate and waste ground of no worth, And to cause buds of tender herbs most pleasant to spring foorth. 28 If that the raine a father hath if thou canst, to me shew, Who among all begotten hath the pearly drops of dew? 29 Out of whose womb did come the yce can thou a reason render, As for the hoary frost of heaven, who at first did it gender?
30 The mighty waters flowing deep, are hid as with a stone, The face of all the deep through cold is frozen all anone. 31 Of pleiades the influence canst thou bind with thine hands, Or of the winter Orion, canst thou well loose the bands? 32 Canst thou bring foorth the Mazzaroth, twelve signes in their seasons, Or canst thou well Arcturus guide with his faire glistring sons? 33 Of heaven thee ordinances all knowst thou perfectly well? Canst thou set its dominion all upon the earth by skill? 34 Canst thou lift up thy voice unto the clouds that are most hie, That in abundance waters great may come and cover thee? 35 Canst thou by thy great strength also the fearfull lightnings send, That they may go and say to thee, we all thee heere attend? 36 Who is he that great wisedome hath put in the inward part?
Or who hath understanding given unto mans foolish heart? 37 Who in wisedome the clouds above, with skill well number may: Or of the high heavens who can once the running bottels stay, 38 When as the dust upon the earth doth into hardnesss grow, And fast to together cleave the clods, when all is dry below? 39 Wilt thou even for the Lion fierce take paines to hunt the prey, Or th' appetite of lions young to fill without delay! 40 When they most craftilie do couch in dens most wide or strait, And in the covert hid abide, for there to ly in waite? 41 Who for the Raven provides his food? When his young still do cry Unto the LORD, for lacke of meat they wander by and by.
Chap. 39. KNowes thou the time when the wilde goats, and als the wanton hindes, Bring foorth their young and tender calves according to their kindes? 2 Canst thou the moneths number that they in their time fulfill; Concerning times that they bring foorth, hast thou perceiv'd with skill? 3 They bow themselves, then they bring foorth their young ones round about, When that's done by GODS providence, their sorrowes they cast out. 4 Their young ones are in liking good, they prosper well and store With corne in plenty; they go foorth and to them turne no more. 5 Who hath the wilde asse free sent out, or who hath loosde his bands? 6 Whose house to dwell in I have made the wilde and barren lands. 7 He scornes the Cities multitude when they do make a noise; The crying als he not regards even of the drivers voice.
8 The range of the high mountaines great his pasture is well seene, He heere and there doth quickly search for every thing that's green. 9 Will th' Unicorne with all his strength stoupe down thee to obey? Or will he come unto thy cribe to feast upon thy hay? 10 Canst thou well the strong Unicorne with his band bind straitlie In furrow? or the valleis will he harrow after thee? 11 Wilt thou of him presume alwayes, because great is his strength, Or wilt thou to him in this thought thy labour leave at length? 12 Wilt thou beleeve him that he will bring home to thee thy seed, And it together to thy barne will bring home with all speed? 13 Gave thou the goodly wings unto the Peacoks that are fair, Or wings and feathers of great worth unto the Ostrich rare? 14 Who layes her egges, and leaves them in the earth as in great trust
In stead of hatching with her wings, she warmes them in the dust, 15 That feet of beasts may crush them all of that she makes no reck, Or that the wild beasts running there them may in peeces breake; 16 She hardned is against her young not fearing they be slaine, As though they were not hers; no feare, her labour is in vain. 17 Because GOD hath deprived her of all wisdome of heart, Nor yet he understanding will unto her once impart. 18 Yet with her wings and feete also she doth so nimby skip, That she the horse and rider both is able to out stripe. 19 Hast thou given also to the horse his strength that's full of wonder, Or hast thou clothed all his neck with a most fearfull thunder? 20 Canst thou him as a Grashopper affright well in his way, Of his nostrils the glory great is terrible alway.
31 He in the valley proudly pawes and glorys in his strength, He goes most boldly on to meet the armed man at length. 22 He mocks at feare, als he is not affrighted by a word, He is not mov'd for to turne back, even from the bloody sword. 23 The quiver ratleth with great din against him in the field? The gl ttring speare doth als appeare, there likewise is the shield. 25 With fiercenesse and most furious rage he swalowes up the ground, He is so fierce he not beleevs that its the trumpets sound. 25 Amongst the trumpets with Ha Ha! he chearefully doth laugh, For he the battell long desir'd, then smelleth a farre off. He heares the thunder joyfully of captaines that doe cry, And likewise of the souldiers fierce the shouting by and by. 26 Doe Hawkes flie by thy wisedome, and their wings stretch to the south.
27 Mounts th'Eagle up at thy command and makes her nest on high? 28 She still abides upon the rock, and on the ragged cliff, The craggie places of the rocks, which are both steepe and stiffe. 29 From thence she clearely seeks her prey even wlth a courage bold; And her bright eyes that are most quick a farre off doe behold. 30 Her young ones also greedilie them selves for to maintaine Doe suck up blood; and there is she where lying are the slaine. Chap. 40. MOreover yet GOD said to Job, 2 Shall he that doth contend With GOD, him teach? he that reproves let him answere in end. 3 Then answer'd Job the LORD, and said, 4 Behold, what shall I say? I am most vle, upon my mouth my hand now will I lay, 5 Once have I spoken but I will not answere thee indeede:
Yea twise alas, but surely I no further will proceed. 6 Then the Lord answ'red unto Job, after his speach was laid, Yea out of the whirlewind he spake, and thus to him he said; 7 Gird up thy loines now like a man; I will demand of thee, And thou who art so full of wit declare now unto me, 8 Wilt thou my judgement disanull, and condemne wilt thou me, That thou in all thy words and deeds most righteous may be? 9 Hast thou poor man a mighty arme which is like unto mine? Or canst thou thunder as I doe even with a voice divine? 10 With Majestie most excellent, now deck thy selfe the day, With glory and with beautie als see thou thy selfe aray. 11 The rage of wrath cast thou abroad as in a high alarme; And when thou seest a man that's proud abase him with thine arme,
12 Look on the proud man, and him soon bring low with great disgrace, And quickly with thy foot tread down the wicked in their place. 13 In dust them hide, and also binde their faces in the grave, 14 Then will I say that thy right hand is able thee to save. 15 Behold now and consider well the Behemoth which I Made with thee, he doth eat the grasse as oxen by and by. 16 Loe now his great and mighty strength is in his loines surely, And his force in the navill is even of his big belly. 17 His mighty taile he whisks about, as stiffe as any Cedar The sinewes of his stones also, are wrapped altogether, 18 The bones of his great bodie are as pieces strong or brasse, His bones are like the yron barres, they in great strength surpasse. 19 He is the Cheef and Master-piece, of the almighty LORD,
He that him made can when he please even kill him with his sword. 20 Surely the mountaines foorth his food do bring him every day; Where all the beasts in open fields most wantonly do play. 21 He under the fair shady trees lies safely in his dens, In the close covert of the reeds, among the pleasant fens. 22 The shadows of the branches green do ov'r his body passe; The willowes of the running brook on all sides him compasse. 23 Behold a river without hast with his wide throat he drinks; That he the Jordan can draw up into his mouth he thinks. 24 He doth it take even with his eyes, which seeme to be most fierce, He with his nose through strongest snares most easily can pierce. Chap. 41. CAnst thou with strong hookes well draw o the great Leviathan,
Or draw him by the tongue with cords out of the Ocean? 2 Canst thou an hooke put in his nose, and make him stand in aw; Or canst thou with a pricking thorne him bore even through the jaw? 3 Will he to thee much prayer make, or speak soft words to thee? 4 Or with thee make a Covenant sure, or yet thy servant be? 5 Wilt thou with him as with a bird begin to sport and play? Or wilt thou for thy maidens als him bind by night or day? 6 Shall the companions of his flesh a banket rich prepare: Shall they his great and lusty joints among the merchands share? 7 Canst thou his skin that is most thick, with barbed yrons fill: Or his great head with sharp fish speares to pierce hast thou the skill? 8 Lay hands on him, remember well the battell very sore, If this thou do, with him thou shalt not meddle any more.
9 Behold his hope that would him kill is altogether vaine: For at his sight men are cast down, and can not rise again. 10 None is so fierce as to be bold to stirre him with his hand; Who then is able by his power before me for to stand? 11 Who hath prevented me, that I his debter should repay? What under is the cope of Heaven is surely mine alway. His parts or yet his power I will not conceale or hide, Nor his comely proportion all even as it doth abide. 13 Who of his garment glorious well discover can the face, Or who with double bridle can come to him in his place? 14 Who can the wide doores of his face well open with his key? His cruell teeth are round about most terrible to see. 15 His scales, his pride together are shut close as with a seale,
So neer they are together, that twixt them none air can feele. 17 Together they so joined are, and stick so, that therefore They by no force of strength once can be sundred lesse or more. 18 By his neesings a light doth shine, as hath beene often try'd: His eyes are like the bright eye-lids even of the morning tyde. 19 Out of his mouth go burning lamps, and sparks of fire most hot: 20 Out of his nostrils goes a smoak, as from a seething-pot. 21 His fyrie breath doth kindle coals, when he doth with the same Out of his mouth send speedily a hote consuming flame. 22 In his great neck remaineth strength, no work can him annoy, Thus paines and sorrow him before are turned into joy. 23 The flakes of his flesh joined are, no thing can them divorce, They are so firme, that they can not be mov'd by any force.
24 His heart is as a stone most firme, who could it clearly finde, Yea, hard as a Mils neather-stone, which is laid for to grind. 25 The mighy (when he riseth up) afraid are mightily, By reason of such breakings they themselves do purifie. 26 The sword of him is broken soone that fiercely layes him at: The like befals to dart and spear, and unto the breast-plate. 27 He alwayes lightly doth esteeme the yron as the straw, No more for brasse then rotten wood he fierce doth stand in aw. 28 The arrows keen shot from the bow can not him put to flight, The sling-stones are in his account most like the stubble light. 29 Darts as the stubble counted are, for them he hath no fear: He with disdain still laugheth at the shaking of the spear. 30 Sharp ragged stones are under him, he spreads on mire and dirt
Sharp pointed things, which once his skin not able are to hurt. 31 He like a pot doth make the deep to boile, as it were hot, He makes the sea as ointment als all seething in a pot. 32 Where he hath past in greatest deepths he leaves upon the streames A shining path, so that to all the Ocean hoary seemes. 33 Upon the whole earth heer below sure there is not his like, He is so made that trembling fear can not upon him strike. 34 He doth behold all other beasts as no thing him beside: He is the great and mighty king of all the sons of pride. Chap, 42. AFter that JOB heard this discourse most full of gravitie, He to the LORD this answer made, and said to him humbly, 2 I know that thou canst every thing do whether great or small,
And that no thought can once from thee witholden be at all. 3 Who is he? Yea I am the man, Who thought my self too holy; I hid Gods counsell wise and good; by reason of my foly. 4 Hear I beseech thee, and I will speake, and demand of thee, What I desire of thee to learne declare thou unto me. 5 I often of thee have heard by the hearing of the eare, But now I see thee with mine eye, ev'n by thy grace made cleare. 6 Wherefore I doe my self abhorre, and now with full intent In vilest dust and ashes both I humbly do repent. 7 And it was so that after GOD these wordes to Job had said, To Eliphaze the Temanite the LORD thus answere made, I wroth am with thee and thy friends, for ye the thing that's right Not spoken have, as righteous Job my servant most upright.
8 Therefore take Rammes, and bullocks als which are both fat and faire, And soone unto my servant Job see that yee all repaire▪ A burnt offring bring for your selves, for this to GOD is due, And Job my servant fervently shall alwayes pray for you. For surely will I him accept, lest in my justice strict I for your folly at the last some judgement great inflict. Because yee have not spoken so discreet in every part, What's right of me, as Job hath done, with a most upright heart, 9 So Eliphaze the Temanite, and the Shushite Bildade, And Zophar the Naamathite did as the Lord them bade: Also the Lord in mercy great (when this was done and past) Considered Job, and cheaefully him did accept at last. 10 When for his friends he pray'd the Lord did heale his greefe and sore,
He unto JOB gave twise as much as ev'r he had before. 11 Then came to him his brethren all, his sisters and his kin, And others all who had before of his acquaintance bin. With him they bread ate in his house, and they did him bemone, And gave him comfort of the ills that GOD brought him upon: Each man also incontinent did give as he best could A peece of money, and also an earring of fine gold. 12 So that the LORD in mercy great unto JOB did extend His gifts in the beginning great, but larger in the end. For he had fourteene thousand sheep, and camels six thousand, A thousand yoke of oxen, als shee asses at command. 13 Of Children JOB had at the last seven sons, and daughters more In number three, so did the LORD his family restore.
14 The first he called Jemima, and Kesia next the same, Then Keren-happuch after her was als the third by name. 15 In all the land no women were as Jobs daughters so faire, Among their brethren Job them gave inheritance most rare. 16 He after this an hundred yeers did live, and als fouttie, And saw his sons, and his sons sons the fourth genealogie. 17 So Job at last deceas'd when he unto old age was come, And after he was full of dayes he went to his Long-bome. The Use. LET men heere learne that no thing heere is sure; Who's rich the day, the morrow may be poor.
Let men heere learn not to feare Satans rage, For God his own doth compasse with a hedge: If he permit great troubles by and by, Our patience they are but sent to try: When wee are spoil'd, let this bee still wish, That patiently in all the Lord we blesse. When wee see men deepe plung'd in troub sore, Let us beware them to condemne therefore; It is for man a great temerity Him to condemn whom God doth justifie. At last heere learne, though godly men a grace Do suffer whiles, At last their end is Peace FINIS.
THE GARDEN OF ZION. The Booke of the PROVERBS. A Prayer. GReat Wisdomes Hall heer (as I think) I see Embroidred all with Divine-Tapestrie: Heere Solomon hath Proverbs grave and wise, None but vain fools such wisdome can despise. Now great Jehovah, with thy Heavenly fan Blow up my breast, that I may gravely scan These weighty words, and their sense wisely reach
Which Jedidiah thy servant did preach: Now clear my sky, even like Mantle blew, How I may pen these Proverbs to me shew: Within my heart now make thy Sprite divin To work, as doth in Caskes the finest wine, Which by some chink, if it get not a vent, Blowes up the bung, or doth the Hodghead rent. As thou hast set me thy help before, Reveale thy self to me yet more and more. CHAPTER I. The Preface. THe Proverbs that are words of weight of the wise Solomon. Who was the king of Israel, and of David the son. 2 Their use is wisdome for to know, & good instruction reach, To understanding words perceive, which men discretion teach. 3 Th'instruction wise for to receive in all humilitie,
Of wisdome, justice, and judgement, and als of equitie. 4 To give unto the simple folk a divine subtilty, Unto the young man knowledge, and discretion good thereby. 5 A wise man will hear, and also his learning will increase: A wise man shall attaine unto wise counsels more or lesse. 6 To understand a proverb, and th'interpretation mark, The weighty words of the wise als, their sayings that are dark. The beginning of the Proverbs. 7. GODS fear is the beginning of knowledge that maketh wise, But wisdome and instruction all fools wickedly despise. 8 My son, hear the instruction of thy father, stand in aw: And of thy mother dear see that thou not forsake the Law.
9 For they of grace an ornament shall be unto thine head, And they shall be about thy neck as chains most rare indeed. 10 My dear son, if to wickednesse vile sinners thee entise, Consent thou not, but from their course abstain, if thou be wise. 11 If they say, Come with us, Let us lay wait for humane blood, Let us now lurk for these that be both innocent and good. 12 Let us them swallow up alive, as doth the greedy grave: Even like to these that go to pit, from which none can them save. 13 We shall all precious substance finde, as in a fertile soile; We also in great plenty shall our houses fill with spoile. 14 Among us now cast in thy lot, and care not for a curse; Let us rejoice, and let us all have only but one purse. 15 My son, walk thou not in the way with them, but them disdain,
From their path full of wickednesse see thou thy foot refrain. 16 For their feet do most swiftly run to that which is not good, And make great haste, for by all means to spill and shed much blood. 17 By the sight of the net well might the foolish bird be taught, But she intent upon her food is heedlesly then caught. 18 And for their own blood they lay wait, and others think to slay; And while they lurk thus privily, their lives they still betray. 19 So are the wayes of every one that greedie is of gaine, Which of the owners takes away the life that is profane. 20 She who the Fathers wisdome is, doth cry aloud without; Her voice to me she in the streets doth utter with a shout. 21 She in the chief place of concourse even in the gates and way Doth cry, She in the city doth these words most wisely say,
22 How long will yee simplicity thus love without all skill, And ye scorners delight to scorn, and fools hate knowledge still? 23 Turn you at my reproof: behold into you I will powre My Sprite, I will make known my words unto you every houre. 24 Because I called have, and yee refus'd to understand, And no man hath regarded once when I stretch'd out my hand. 25 But ye proudly have set at nought my counsell grave and wise, And would hear none of my reproof, but did it all despise. 26 I als at your calamitie to laugh will not forbear, I will you surely scorn and mock all trembling in your fear. 27 When your fear and destruction great shall come as a whirlewinde, When anguish and distresse shall come your hearts with grief to binde. 28 Then shall they cry, but I will not them answer when they call,
They shall me earely seek, but they shall not me find at all. 29 For that they hated knowledge, which aboundeth in GODS word, And foolishly refusd to chuse the true feare of the Lord. 30 They fooles would none of my counsell, which might have made them wise, They all the words of my reproofe most proudly did despise. 31 Therefore of their owne way they shall the fruit eat ever still, And their divices naughty all with folly shall them fill. 32 For the eyes of the simple shall them slay, and much annoy, And the prosperitie of fooles shall quickiy them destroy. 33 But who so hearkneth unto m he shall most safely dwell▪ And shall be quiet all his life, from all the fear of ill. Chap. 2. MY dear son, if thou wilt receive my wise words reverently,
And if thou my commandment als wilt surely hide with thee. 2 So that thou now thine ear unto GODS wisdome still incline, And most humbly thy heart apply unto wisdome divine. 3 Yea, if thou after knowledge good dost cry, as for thy choice, And understanding for to get high liftest up thy voice. 4 If thou with care for her dost seek, as for the silver fine; And for her as for treasures hid to search thou dost encline. 5 Then shalt thou rightly understand of the LORD GOD the fear, And finde the knowledge of the LORD, which to all should be dear. 6 For the LORD who is mercifull, doth richly give wisdome; Knowledge and understanding both out of his mouth do come. 7 He sound wisedome lay'th up for these that doe live righteously, He is a buckler unto them that doe walk uprightly:
8 Of his most just judgement the paths he keepeth every day, And of his Saints that serve him, he preserveth well the way. 9 Then righteousnesse and judgement als thou shalt well understand, With equitie; and als the path wherein thy foot shall stand. 10 When worthy wisdome entreth in thy well prepared heart, And knowledge pleasant to thy soule doth in no time depart▪ 11 Discretion shall preserve thee well from danger all that be, And understanding from the LORD most safely shall keep thee. 12 Thee to deliver from the way of the man that ill brings, From the pernicious wicked man that speaketh froward things. 13 Who foolishly leave and forsake the paths of uprightnesse, For in their foly great to walk in the wayes of darknesse. 14 Who do rejoice for to do evill, and that with all their might,
And in the wickeds frowardnesse have pleasure and delight. 15 Whose wayes are crooked knowing not what is streight uprightnesse, And they in their most wicked paths are full of frowardnesse. 16 Thee from the strange woman to save, more dangerous then swords, From the stranger which flatt'reth much with her deceitfull words. 17 Which the guide of her youth forsakes, who still should be her love: And doth forget the Covenant all of her great GOD above. 18 For her most vile house doth incline unto the doores of death And to the dead all slaine by sinne directly is her path. 19 None of these all returne againe, who foolishly are bold To go to her, nor of the paths of life doe they take hold. 20 That thou most constantly may walk with good men in the way, And of the righteous keep the paths, and feare to goe astray.
21 For the upright shall dwell in lands which shall thee well maintain, And these that be perfect in heart shall still therein remaine. 22 But wicked men shall be cut off from all the earth about, And the transgressours of GODS law shall be all rooted out. Chap. 3. My deare son, looke that thou my law do in no way forget, But see that my commandments all thou keep with all thine heart. 2 For length of dayes they shall to thee adde with a happy life, And Peace and Plenty wonderfull far from debate and strife. 3 Let not Mercy and Truth forsake thee; binde them to thy neck: Write them upon the table of thine heart which they shall deck. 4 So shalt thou most sweet favour finde, and an excellent light Of understanding good, and that both in GOD and mans sight.
5 Trust in thee LORD with all thine heart, well purged and made cleane, And unto thine owne wisdome see that in no way thou leane. 6 In all thy wayes acknowledge him who shall thee still protect, And thy paths through all dangers he shall safely all direct. 7 Be thou not wise in thine own eyes, take heed unto thine heart: The mighty Lord see that thou fear, and from all ill depart. 8 It shall be to thy navill health, and more then that alone, It wattring and moistning shall be even marrow to thy bone. 9 With thy substance honour the Lord even whether more or lesse, And with the first and rarest fruits of all thy blest increase. 10 So shall thy barns be filled with plenty of corne most fine: Thy presses als abundantly shall burst out with new wine. 11 My son, the chastening of the Lord see that thou not despise:
Nor yet of his correction good be weary any wayes. 12 For whom the Lord loves he corrects, as he it thinketh right; Even as a father doth his son in whom is his delight. 13 Most happy is the man that doth Gods heavenly wisedome find, And he that understanding good gets for to cleare his mind. 14 For the rich merchandise thereof is better manifold Then silver, and the gaine thereof then is the finest gold. 15 She then Rubies more precious is which high esteemed are, And all the things thou canst desire may not with her compare. 16 In her right hand the length of dayes abide as in their seat; And in her left hand also are riches and honour great. 17 Her wayes are wayes of pleasantnesse, which mens heart do solace, And which should much stirre up our hearts, ev'n all her paths are peace.
18 She is a tree of life to them that on her hold do lay, And ev'ry one that her retaines is happy ev'ry way. 19 The Lord by wisdome founded hath the earth, and made it sure, By understanding he the heavens hath stablish'd to endure. 20 By his knowledge are broken up the depths that are not few, The lofty clouds GODS charets high drop downe the pleasant dew. 21 My son, let them not from thine eyes by any way depart, See that thou keep discretion well, and wisedome sound in heart. 22 So shall they be unto thy soule, as life thee to protect, They likewise shall not faile to be as grace unto thy neck. 23 Then thou protected by the Lord shalt safely in thy way With courage walk, so that thy foot not stumble shall alway. When thou lyes downe, thou shalt not be afraid by danger deep;
Yea thou most safely shalt ly down, and sweet shall be thy sleep. 25 Let not thy heart be sore afraid of any sudden fear, Nor of the desolation great when it doth come right neer. 26 For GOD of thy sure confidence shall alwayes be the root, From being taken in a girn he shall keep well thy foot. 27 Withhold not good from them to whom it's due, as by a band, When as to do the same it's in the power even of thine hand. 28 Say not unto thy neighbour, Go, and come againe to me, And I to morrow will it give; when it thou hast by thee. 29 Against thy neighbour any way see thou devise not ill; Since that he doth by thee alwayes ev'n most securely dwell. 30 With any man without a cause strive not in any terme: If so be that he innocent hath done to thee no harme.
31 Vaine oppressours envie thou not, who do poore men abuse, And see that thou be very ware none of their wayes to chuse. 32 For an abomination great the froward is alway Unto the Lord; but his secret is with the righteous ay. 33 GODS curse upon the wickeds house shall bring it all to dust, But he most plenteously doth blesse the dwelling of the just. 34 Surely he in his wrath doth scorne, the scorners to their face, But unto men of humble hearts he alwayes giveth grace. 35 The wise shall all inherit still great glory in their name, But the promotion of all fooles shall be nothing but shame. Chap. 4. YEE children of a father hear the teaching wise and learn'd, And to know understanding good with diligence attend.
2 For I to you give doctrine wise, that ye may stand in aw, And walk in mine obedience, and not forsake my law. 3 For ev'n I was my fathers son, his pleasure and delight, Yea tender and beloved well in my dear mothers sight. 4 He taught me als, and said to me, let thine heart now beleeve My words; als my commandements all keep well that thou may live. 5 Get wisdome, understanding get most heavenly and divine, Forget it not, and from my words see that thou not decline. 6 Forsake her not, and so she shall most safe preserve thee still, Love her with all thine heart, and she shall keep thee from all ill. 7 Wisedome, as all men well may know, in cheefest place is set, Therefore get wisdome, and with that good understanding get. 8 Exalt her high, and she shall thee promote in every place,
To honour great she shall thee bring when thou dost her embrace. 9 She shall to thee an ornament of grace give lovingly, A crown of glory sure she shall deliver unto thee. 10 Hear, O my son, consider well, and hear now lovingly My words, and the years of thy life shall blest and many be. 11 I have thee taught in Wisdomes way, and that with all my might: I also have thee straightly led in pathes that are most right. 12 When thou shalt go, thy steps shall not be straitned sore at all; And when thou runnest thou shalt not once stumble for to fall. 13 Take fast hold of instruction still, let her not go away; Keep her with all thine heart, because she is thy life alway. 14 Of wicked men see that the path thou enter not into; And in the way of livers lewd see that thou never go.
15 Avoid it well with all thine heart, be wise, passe not it by, Turn from it with all diligence, and quickly passe away. 16 For they sleep not except they have mischief done great or small, And their sleep soon doth passe away, till they cause some to fall. 17 For they the bread of wickednesse eat with all diligence, And drunkards like they glut and drink the wine of violence. 18 But the path of the Just is as the shining light alway, That shineth more and more unto the clear and perfect day. 19 The way of wicked men is as the darknesse of the night; At what they stumble more or lesse they brutish know not right. 20 My son, with diligence attend unto my words divine, Unto my wholesome sayings see that thou thine eare incline. 21 By carelesnesse from thy two eyes let them no time depart,
But keep them as a treasure rich in the midst of thine heart. 22 For unto these that do them finde, they give life, and refresh The hearts of men, and are also even health to all their flesh. 23 Keep thy heart with all diligence from wickednesse and strife, For as a fountaine out of it the issues are of life. 24 Put far away from thee a mouth that's froward and averse From words of grace; put far from thee the lips that are perverse, 25 Let still thine eyes look right upon the things that they do see, And let thine eye-lids be direct'd straight to look before thee. 26 The path of thy feet ponder well, that thou may still walk sure, And also let thy wayes all be establish'd to endure. 27 Unto the right hand, nor the left turne not, for wrath or love, From the evill workes of wicked men see thou thy foot remove,
Chap. 5. MY son, with diligence attend unto my wisedome now, And to my understanding als thine ear incline and bow. 2 That thou mayest discretion good in heart wisely regard, And that thy lips may knowledge keep, above all watch and ward. 3 For of a strange woman the lips as hony drop and boile, Her tongue and mouth much smoother are then is the finest oile. 4 But as the woormwood bitter is, so her end in a word Most bitter is, yea sharp is it as a two edged sword. 5 Her filthie feet go down to death, which doth mans life expell: Lest any be deceiv'd thereby her steps take hold on hell. 6 Lest thou should weigh the way of life, the same for to allow: Her wayes are still so moveable, that thou canst not them know.
7 Therefore, ye children, now my voice well hear with all your heart, And from the wise words of my mouth see that ye not depart. 8 Remove thy way right far from her, vile and unrighteous, And take good heed that nigh the doore thou come not of her house. 9 Lest to these thou thine honour give, who are great foes to thee, And the time of thy yeeres to these that fierce and cruell be. 10 Lest strangers with thy richest wealth be filled plenteouslie: And thy most painefull labours all in strangers houses be. 11 And that thou a vaine fool at last to grieve and mourne begin; When thy flesh and thy body both consumed are with sin. 12 And say, Oh how instruction good have hated I unwise, And how did my most foolish heart such sweet reproofs despise? 13 And the voice of my teachers all would not obey or hear:
Nor to them that did me instruct would I incline mine eare. 14 Amidst the Congregation great most foolishly almost In all ill which did compasse me, I perish'd was and lost. 15 The waters of thine owne cisterne drink thou aboundantly, And waters out of thine owne well that runne most pleasantly. 16 Spare not thy fountaines full, but them all largely still disperse, To let thy rivers flow in streets, see thou be not averse. 17 Let them be onely for thy self, and such as fear the Lord, But unto strangers wicked men nothing at all afford. 18 Let thy fountaine which is for thee, be bless'd with heart and voice, And with the dear wife of thy youth with gladnesse great rejoice. 19 Let her be as the Hind and Roe which pleasantly do move, And let her breast thee satisfie, still ravisht with her love.
20 My son, why wilt thou ravish'd be, thy self for to solace With a stranger, and her bosome in thine armes to embrace? 21 For all mans wayes are still before the eyes of th'Eternall: And in his ballance wisely he pondreth his goings all. 22 The wicked shall be taken with his own iniquitie: And with the coards of his own sins he shall fast holden be. 23 He shall without instruction sure come to his dying day, And in his foly great he shall for ever go astray. Chap. 6. If thou, my son, be for thy friend, as surety for to stand: If with a stranger by promise thou striken hast thine hand. 2 Thou with the words of thine owne mouth art snared by and by, Thou with thine owne wordes taken art, which thou canst not deny.
3 Do this, my son, and save thy self, when thou art in the hand Of thy friend, humble then thy self, make sure I thee command. 4 Beware that thou in any wayes unto thine eyes give sleep; Or suffer slumber day or night on thine eye-lids to creep. 5 Thy self deliver as a Roe from hunters hands quickly; And as a bird als from the hand of these that foulers be. 6 Thou Sluggard loit'ring on the downs, whom good men should despise; Go to the Ant, consider well her wayes, and then be wise: 7 Which having none among the rest her guider for to be: ea, which hath none to rule at all, or yet to oversee. 8 In Summer with wisdome her meat she doth right well provide, nd carefully doth gather all her food in the harv'st tide. 9 How long wilt thou sleep and ly still, O sluggard most unwise,
When wilt thou from thy slumber, and thy drousie sleep arise? 10 Yet wilt thou say, A little sleep and slumber doth me please, A little folding of the hands, to sleep and be at ease. 11 So shall come fast thy poverty. do what thou may or can, As one that travails, and thy want as doth an armed man. 12 A naughty person which can not in good things do or talk A wicked man that hates the Lord, with froward mouth doth walk. 13 He winketh with his wily eyes, he speaketh with his feet, He with his fingers fals doth teach such lyes as he thinks meet, 14 Much frowardnesse is in his heart, he mischeef doth devise Continually, he doth discord both sow and enterprise. 15 Therefore most sudden upon him shall his calamitie Come, shortly shall he broken all be without remedie.
16 These six things doth the Lord God hate, from which we should depart, Yea, an abomination great sev'n are unto his heart. 17 A proud look, and a tongue also, in lying understood, The wicked and the cruel hands, that shed much sakelesse blood. 18 A heart that doth most wicked things with a full aime and drift, And also feet that to mischeef in running be most swift. 19 A false witnesse that speaketh lies, before the face of men, And him that craftily doth sow discord among brethren. 20 Thy dear fathers commandments all my son keep, and in aw See that thou stand, and not forsake thy loving mothers law. 21 Bind them most sure continually Fastned upon thine heart, And ty them fast about thy neck, that they thence not depart. 22 When thou shalt goe, it shall thee lead, and sleeping shall thee keep.
And it shall talk with thee when thou awakest out of sleep. 23 For the commandment is a lamp, the law is light as day; And reproofs of instruction good are of our life the way. 24 To keep thee from the wicked wife, and safely thee preserve From flatt'ring of a woman strange, which maks mens hearts to swerve. 25 After her beauty fill'd with faird in thine heart never lust, Nor let her twinkling eye lids once thus take thee under trust. 26 For by a whoore a man is brought to a poore piece of bread, And the adultresse for his life will hunt with all her speed. 27 In his bosome can any man take such a kindled fire? And shall not all his cloths be burnt with such a vaine desire? 28 Can any man securely goe on burning coales with heate? Can such a man so save him self that he burn not his feete?
29 So he that to his neighbours wife doth go to make a rent, What ever he be that doth her touch shall not be innocent. 30 A theefe that steels his neighbours goods men do not so despise, If hunger move him to such things, when they doe him surprise. 31 But if he be found, he restore which is most righteous, Shall seven fold more, he shall give all the substance of his house. 32 But who adultry so commits with her that is a wife, He is a foole; he that it doth destroyes his soule and life. 33 Wounds and dishonour shall he get, GOD shall him so repay; And his shamefull and vile reproch shall not be wip'd away. 34 For jealousie is of a man the rage, he not therefore In the day of his vengeance great will spare thee lesse or more: 35 He wroth, no ransome will regard, for to make up that rent
Yea though that thou give many gifts, will he so rest content? Chap. 7. MY dear son, keep thou well my words, which thou dost hear from me: And also my commandments all lay thou up now with thee. 2 With care keep my commandments well, and happy live thereby, And also keep thou well my law as th' apple of thine eye. 3 Upon thy fingers bind them fast, and let them not depart, Most carefully write them upon the table of thine heart. 4 Say unto wisedome in these words, Thou art my sister dear, And understanding also call thy kins-woman most neere. 5 That they thee from the woman strange, more dangerous then swords May keep, yea from the stranger which doth flatter with her words. 6 For at the window of my house attentive as I went,
I did behold and constantly I look'd through the casement. 7 Behold among the simple ones among rhe youth abide A young man I discerned well of understanding void. 8 He through the street her corner neer passing without delay, Unto her house that leads to death most quickly went the way. 9 The times he went, the evening was, when it is the twilight, And also at another time in the black and dark night. 10 Behold a woman there him met in harlots vile attire, Subtile in heart to catch the youth, and kindle his desire. 11 This is her fashion, she is lowd, and stubborne, full of pride, With her servants within her house her feet do not abide. 12 Now she without, now in the streets prepares for youth a baite, At every corner shamlesly she lieth still in waite,
13 So she caught him, and did him kisse, their hearts for to solace; And then at last she said to him, with a most shamelesse face, 14 With me I have Peace-offrings now, with all sorrows away To GOD I payed have my vows most perfectly the day. 15 Therefore with diligence I came foorth for to meet with thee; And now behold I have thee found who art full dear to me. 16 I have my bed with cov'rings deckt of tapestrie that's mine, With carved workes and linnen clean, of Egypt good and fine. 17 My bed I well perfumed have, As I may now thee tell With Myrrhe, Aloes, and Cinamom which have the sweetest smell; 18 Come let us take our fill of love and each other embrace, Untill the morning with loves sweet, let us our selves solace. 19 For the good man is not at home, nor yet in the countrey,
He for his worldly businesse is gone a long journey. 20 He taken hath a bag with him, of money for his way, And afterward he will come home at the appointed day. 21 With much fair speech she caused him to yeeld without remorse, With the fair flattring of her lips at last she did him force. 22 As an oxe to the slaughter goth, he go'th with her straight way, Or as a foole unto the stocks correction to essay. 23 Till a dart through his liver strake, as a bird to the snare Makes haste, not knowing that such things men for its life prepare. 24 Unto me now hearken therefore ye children for your well, And now attend unto the words, which my mouth shall reveale. 25 Let not thine heart by foolishnesse, decline unto her way, In her paths most pernicious see thou goe not astray.
26 For she right many hath cast downe, who wounded, not againe Could rise; yea many strong men als, have thus beene by her slaine. 27 Her house is most pernicious, it is the way to hell, A going to the chambers downe of death that's eternell. Chap. 8, MOst worthy wisdome for mans well aloud doth she not cry? And understanding als put foorth her sweet voice by and by? 2 She in the top of places high most openly doth stand, Yea in the places of the paths to make men understand. 3 Unto you all yee men of worth, with my words do I call, 4 And my voice to the sons of man directed is with all. 5 Yee simple wisedome understand, and yee fooles, lest yee smart, With diligence see yee be of an understanding heart.
6 Heare for I of things excellent will speak with all my might, And all the op'ning of my lips shall be of things most right. 7 For my mouth shall most constantly speak truth, and shall not slip, And wickednesse shall not at all proceed once from my lip. 8 All the words that come from my mouth are still in righteousnesse No froward thing there is at all in them, or yet perverse. 9 They are all plaine to him that hath an understanding mind, They are also all right to them that wisely knowledge find. 10 Care not for silver, but receive instruction manifold, And carefully for knowledge seek, more then the choisest gold. 11 For wisedome Rubies is above, and all the things most faire That may by men desired be can not with it compare. 12 I wisedome with prudence alway do dwell most pleasantly,
And of inventions knowledge find, that grave and wittie be. 13 The feare of God is for to hate evill, pride, arrogancy, And the evill way and froward mouth doe I hate all greatly. 14. Counsell is mine, and wisedome sound, as men shall know at length: I understanding am indeed, I have no lake of strength. 15 By me the mighty Kings do reigne, who sit on benches hie, And mighty Princes in their place do justice als decree. 16 By me the Princes rule with might, and Nobles by my grace, Even all the Judges of the earth from me receive their place. 17 I with my heart do love all these that have a love to me, And these most surely shall me finde that earely seekers be. 18 Continually I have with me both honour and richesse, Yea riches dureable that are, and also righteousnesse.
19 My fruit is better then the gold, yea then fine gold that glitter, My rev'nue als is far above, the fine and choicest silver. 20 I all men that resort to me lead in the righteous way, In the midst als of judgments paths, that they go not astray. 21 That I may cause all these that do me love and honour still Well to inherite wealth; and I will all their treasures fill. 22 The mighty Lord possessed me with mercies manifold, In the beginning of his way, before his works of old. 23 From everlasting I set up was by his mighty hand, From the beginning of all things or ever there was land. 24 I was brought foorth when were no deepths▪ even flowing on the ground, When no fountaines there were which did with water great abound. 25 Before the mountaines setled were, before the hilles of worth,
Yea, even from all eternitie I was indeed brought foorth. 26 While as the earth and pleasant fields the Lord that's wise and just Had not yet made, nor highest part of all the worlds dust. 27 When I prepar'd the heav'ns I was there in my holy place, When he a compasse set upon the depths excellent face, 28 When he established above the clouds, as in a heap, When he strengthned by his strong arme the fountaines of the deep. 29 When to the sea he gave decree not for to passe a point His precepts; when he of the earth the ground stone did appoint. 30 Then I by him as one brought up with him was; every day I his delight was, and did joy before his face alway. 31 Rejoiceing in these parts of earth, which were indwelled then, And my pleasure and cheefe delights were with the sonnes of men.
32 Now therefore hearken unto me, ye children, young in dayes, or they indeed most blessed are that wisely keep my wayes. 33 Be wise, and good instruction als be most glade for to hear, And see that thou do not refuse unto it to give eare, 34 Blest is the man that heareth me, and watcheth at my gates, nd of my doores waits at the posts, as poor men in such seats. 35 For who so findeth me, doth find life which is greatest gaine, nd he of the LORD GOD above much favour shall obtaine. 36 But he that against me forlorne himself to sin doth move, Much wrongs his owne soul; yea all they that hate me, death do love. Chap. 9. VVIsedome her faire house builded hath, which seemly is to see, She hath hew'n out her pillars seven as ornaments to be.
2 She killed hath the beast; she hath mingled her costly wine: She furnish'd hath her table rich with dainties good and fine. 3 Her maidens that attend her she hath sent foorth by and by, Upon the highest places of the citie she doth cry. 4 Let simple men turne hither in, and that without delay, And as for him that wanteth wit she to him thus doth say, 5 Come eat of my most blessed bread, as I do you command, And drink of the wine which I have well mingled with my hand. 6 All these that foolish be forsake, that happy so thou may Live a blest life, and also goe in understandings way. 7 He that reproves a scorner gets shame to himselfe and spot, And he that wicked men rebukes, doth get himself a blot; 8 To shunne all hatred see that thou a scorner not reprove,
But a wise man rebuke, and he will thee most surely love. 9 Give to the wise instruction good, and he will wiser be, Teach a just man, and he increase in learning will by thee. 10 GODS fear is the beginning of wisdome that maketh wise, The knowledge of the holy is ev'n wisedome sound alwayes. 11 For thy dayes in great mercy shall be multipli'd by me, nd the years of thy blessed life shall sure increased be. 12 If thou be wise thou shalt be wise for thy selfe; this now heare, ut if thou scornest, thou alone the smart thereof shalt beare. 13 A woman that is clamorous, and troubleth all the land, e simple is, and nothing knowes, as she should understand. 14 For at the doore she of her house sits idly on a seat, the high places which are of the city large and great.
15 To call the simple Passengers to make them go astray, When for their worldly businesse they go right on their way. 16 Who so is simple let him turn now hither for to sit; And also she doth say to him that wanteth sprituall wit, 17 The stoln waters of carnall lust are delicate and sweet; And bread in secret corners are most pleasant for to eat. 18 But he knows not that there the dead are, though the Lord it tell, And that her mad and foolish guests are in the depths of hell. Chap. 10. A Wise son to his fathers heart doth cause joy and gladnesse, But to his mother dear a fool brings grief and heavinesse. 2 The treasures of great wickednesse no profite bring to man, But righteousnesse deliv'reth sure from death that's pale and wan.
3 The Lord will not let good mens souls both famish and decay, ut he the goods of wicked men in wrath doth cast away. He that with a slack hand doth deale anone becometh poor: t of the diligent the hand enricheth men most sure. He that in Summer gathreth, is a wise son worthy fame, t he that sleeps in harv'st, is sure a son that causeth shame. Great blessings are upon the head of men without offence, t the mouth of the wicked is cov'red with violence. The memory of the just man who lives without a spot st blessed is; but sure the name of wicked men shall rot. The wise in heart commandments good receive well one and all; who is in his foolish talk prating fool, shall fall. He that walks upright, walks surely not to be overthrown,
But he that doth pervert his wayes shall to his shame be known. 10 He that so winketh with the eye doth sorrow cause and grief, But he that is a prating foole shall fall into mischief. 11 The mouth of him that righteous is, is a faire well of life, But violence cov'reth the mouth of all men given to strife: 12 Hatred, which is a bitter root, doth strife stir up and move, But on the other part all sins are cov'red well with love. 13 In the lips of the man that's wise wisdome doth still abide; But rods are for his back that is of understanding voide. 14 Wise men knowledge lay up with care which unto them is dear; But the mouth of the foolish is unto destruction neer. 15. The rich mans wealth, which doth abo is his most strong citie; And the destruction of the poor is their own povertie.
16 The labour of the righteous man to life attaines in end, But the fruit of the wicked sort to sin doth alwayes tend. 17 He that doth keep instruction good, of life is in the way; But he that doth refuse reproof doth erre, and go astray. 18 He that with vaine and lying lips his hatred evill doth hide: And he that utt'reth slanders false in folly doth abide. 19 In many words there wanteth not great sin that doth arise, ut he that can his lips refraine may well be called wise. 20 The just mans tongue like silver choice is when it cometh foorth, ut the heart of a wicked man is sure of little worth. 21 The prudent lips of righteous men (as ye may clearly see) oe many feed; but wicked fooles for want of wisdome die. 22 Gods blessing maketh surely rich, of nothing he hath neede,
With it no sorrow he at all or grief doth adde indeed. 23 Unto a fool to do mischief it is but thought a sport, But a well understanding man hath wisdome to exhort. 24 The wickeds fear shall come on him swift as a glaunce of fire; But surely well shall granted be the righteous mans desire. 25 The wicked like a whirle-winde is, which soone doth passe away, But the man that is righteous still is founded sure alway. 26 As vineger is to the teeth, and smoak unto the eye, So is the sluggard unto them whose messenger is he. 27 The fear of GOD it doth prolong the good mans happy dayes, But of the wicked man the yeers shall shortned be alwayes. 28 The hope of righteous men shall be both joy and gladnesse all, But ill mens expectation sure shall perish great and small.
29 The way of GOD is strength unto the upright man surely, But for them shall destruction be that work iniquity. 30 The righteous man shall never be removed with disgrace, But wicked men upon the earth shall have no dwelling place. 31 The mouth of just men wisdome doth bring foorth without all doubt, But of the froward man the tongue at last shall be cut out. 32 The lips of him that righteous is know what is fit to say, But of the wicked folk the mouth speaks frowardnesse alway. Chap. 11, TO GOD abomination is a ballance false and sleight, But a just weight it is alwayes at all times his delight. 2 When pride doth come with lofty looks then shame comes by its side, But wisdome with the lowly still doth constantly abide.
3 The upright mens integritie shall them guide with great joy, But the perversnesse of the bad shall surely them destroy. 4 Great riches do not profit much in stormy dayes of wrath, But righteousnesse the godly man deliv'reth sure from death. 6 The perfect man directed is ev'n by his righteousnesse, But transgressours shall taken be in their owne naughtinesse. 7 When by death is a wicked man removed far away; His expectation perish shall, his hope shall all decay. 8 The righteous man deliv'red is from trouble and from dread, And the perverse for all his wiles shall come into his stead. 9 An hypocrite with his vile mouth his neighbour doth destroy, But through knowledge the just man shall deliv'red be with joy. 10 When it goth well with righteous men the city shall rejoice,
And when the wicked perish, then there is a shouting voice, 11 By blessings of the Upright man the city is well known o be extold; by wicked mouths it quite is overthrown. 12 A man that is of wisdome voide his neighbour doth despise, ut he his peace doth hold that is of understanding wise. 13 A tale-bearer that breadeth strife mens secrets doth reveale, ut he that's of a faithfull sprit the matter can conceale. 14 Where no counsell is to be found the people poor do fall, ut where good counsellers abound their safety is for all. 15 Who for a stranger surety is shall surely for it smart, d he is sure that suretyship doth heat with all his heart. 16 A gracious woman that is wise retaineth honour sure, nd strong men also richesse get which long time do endure.
17 The man that's mercifull with good his own soul doth refresh: But he that cruell is alwayes doth trouble his own flesh. 18 The wicked work deceitfull works but he that doth regard To sow the seed of righteousnesse shall get a sure reward. 19 As righteousnesse doth tend to life, so he that under wrath Pursueth evill, pursueth it even unto his own death. 20 A froward heart the LORD abhors, but such as are upright In all their wayes, before his face are surely his delight. 21 Though hand in hand joine, wicked men shall not go well away, But the seed of the righteous shall deliv'red be alway. 22 As of fine gold a jewell fair is in a vile swines snout; So is a woman fair which is discretion all without. 23 The desire of these that do walk into the righteous path
Is good; but th'expectation all of wicked men is wrath. 24 Some scatter and do yet increase, some more then's meet withhold: But it doth tend to poverty as well men may behold. 25 The lib'rall soul shall be made fat where ever it shall go, And he that watt'reth well, shall be watt'red himself also. 26 He that for gaine withholdeth corne; the people curse him shall, But blessing shall be on the head of him that doth it sell. 27 He that seeks good procureth still much favour with wisedome, But he that seeketh a mischief unto him shall it come. 28 He that doth in his riches trust, shall get a fearfull fall: But righteous men even as a branch with beautie flourish shall. 29 He that his owne house troubleth still, inherit shall the wind, The fool a servant to the wise, himself shall surely bind.
30 The fruit of righteous men is good, who can it well despise? It is a tree of life, and he that winneth souls is wise. 31 Behold the righteous in the earth shall get a recompence, Much more shall wicked sinners get for all their fair pretence. Chap. 12. VVHo so doth love instruction good he knowledge loves also, But he that hateth a reproof like a bruit beast doth go. 2 A good man hath Gods favour great who will not him contemne, But a man of devices ev'll he surely will condemne. 3 A man establish'd shall not be by his owne wickednesse, But the root of the righteous shall not be mov'd more or lesse. 4 A woman to her husband good is as Crownes set with stones But she that maketh him asham'd brings rotting in his bones.
5 The thoughts all of the righteous man are right in GODS conceit, But counsels all of wicked men are fraud and meer deceit. 6 The words of ill men are to lie in waite for blood alone, But the mouth of the upright shall deliver them anone. 7 The wicked men are overthrown, and are not to be found, But the house of the righteous man shall stand fast on the ground. 8 A man shall be commended much, as men shall find him wise, But him that is perverse in heart all good men shall despise. 9 He that despised is, and hath a servant, is indeed Much better then who honour doth himself, and lacketh bread. 10 The righteous the life of his beast regardeth neer and far; But the most tender mercies of the wicked cruell are. 11 He that his land doth till shall be well satisfied with bread,
But he that followeth persons vaine is void of wit indeed, 12 The wicked of ill men the net desire most earnestly, But the root of the righteous men yeelds fruit aboundantly. 13 The wicked by words of his lips is snared round about, But he that in his wayes is just, of trouble shall come out. 14 A man by the fruit of his mouth with good shall filled be, And of his hands the recompence shall rendred be surelie. 15 The way of fooles in their owne eyes seemes to be just and right; But who to counsell good gives eare is onely wise aright. 16 A fooles wrath kindled as a fire is well known presently, But he that is a prudent man doth cover shame wisely. 17 He that alwayes doth speak the truth, doth shew foorth righteousnesse, But a fals witnesse in his words doth still deceit expresse.
18 There many be that do speak like the pearcing of a sword, But the tongue of the wise truely is health in every word. 19 The lip of truth for ever shall establish'd be most sure, But a tongue lying doth but for a moments space endure. 20 Deceit is in the heart of them that forge ill to annoy, But to the counsellours of peace is gladnesse great and joy, 21 No ill shall happen to the just, which may procure his greef, But the men wicked and perverse shall fild be with mischeefe. 22 The lying lips are to the Lord abomination right, But they that truely in their wayes doe deal, are his delight. 23 A prudent man his knowledge great conceals in quietnesse, But the hearts of the foolish men proclaime their foolishnesse. 24 The good hand of the diligent shall beare rule over all,
But the man sloathfull in his wayes shall under tribute fall. 25 While heavinesse is in the heart, it maketh it to stoop, But a good word it maketh glad, and so no more doth droop▪ 26 The righteous then his neighbour is more excellent alway, But the way of the wicked doth seduce them every day. 27 The sloathfull man he rosteth not which he took at his chase, But the wealth of the diligent is good in every place. 28 In the blest way of righteousnesse is life for great and small, And in the fair path way thereof there is no death at all. Chap. 13. A Fathers good instruction sure a wise son well doth hear, But scorners unto wise rebuke will no wayes give their ear. 2 By the fruit of his mouth a man shall for a recompence
at good things, but the sinners soul shall still eat violence. 3 He that his mouth keeps, keeps his life that it may sure abide, But he shall perish who his lips perversly opneth wide. 4 The sluggards soul desireth much, and hath nothing to spend, But of the diligent the soul shall be made fat in end. 5 5 righteous man doth alwayes hate, and lying lips doth blame, But he that's wicked loathsome is, and comes at last to shame. 6 Sure righteousnesse keeps him that is upright in the good way, ut wickednesse doth overthrow the men that goe astray. 7 There is that maketh rich himself, yet hath no thing to spend, here is that als himselfe makes poor, yet is found rich in end. 8 The riches of the wealthy man are of his life most dear he ransome, but a sharp rebuke the poore refuse to heare.
9 The faire light of the righteous man rejoyceth every one, But of the wicked man the lamp shall be put out anone. 10 By pride onely (that is most fierce) great strife the land doth fill, But with the well advised man is wisdome ever still. 11 Wealth purchased by vanitie shall suddenly decrease, But who by labour gathreth well shall in great wealth increase. 12 Deferred hope makes sick the heart, with lingring and delay, But when desire is come, it is a tree of life alway. 13 Who so the word despiseth, shall destroyed be surely, But he that the commandment feares shall well rewarded be. 14 Of life a fountaine is the law of him that's wise in heart, And likewise from the snares of death in great hast to depart, 15 Good understanding in affaires doth favour give alway,
But hard and full of trouble is of transgressours the way. 16 The man that surely prudent is with knowledge wisely deales; But in his wordes and workes a fool his folly soone reveales. 17 A messenger that wicked is doth fall into mischiefe, But a faithfull ambassadour is health for mans releefe. 18 Both shame and poverty shall be to him that doth refuse nstruction; but he that regards reproofe, shall honour chuse. 19 Desire accomplish'd is most sweet unto the soul and heart, ut foolish men abhorre alwayes from ill for to depart. 20 He that with wise men walketh, shall be surely wise anone, ut a companion of the fooles shall be destroy'd and gone. 21 Much ill doth sinners still persue, but to the righteous sort ood at all times surely shall be repay'd to their comfort.
22 A good man an inheritance to his children doth leave, But sinners wealth is laid up for all those that justly live. 23 Much food assuredly is in the tillage of the poor, But there is that destroyed is for want of judgement sure. 24 He that doth spare his rod, doth hate his son, that seemes most dear, But he that loveth, him betimes to smite will not forbear. 25 The righteous eats, and satisfied, his soul doth know no scant, But of the wicked men at last the belly sure shall want. Chap. 14. EAch woman wise doth build her house right wisely she commands, But who's foolish doth pluck it downe ev'n with her owne two hands. 2 He that walks in his uprightnesse feares God and so is wise, But he that in his wayes perverse is, doth him still despise.
In the mouth of the foolish is a scourge and rod of pride; ut wise mens lips shall them preserve, so that they shall not slide. Where Oxen not remain to work the crib is clean at length, ut much increase alwayes abounds even by the Oxes strength. A faithfull Witnes fearing God he will be loath to lie; ut a witnesse perverse and false a lyar still will be. Scorners seek wisdome, but to them God doth it not reveale, ut knowledge easie is to him that understandeth well. Go quickly from the presence of a fool, thee from him save, hen of knowledge in him the lips thou dost not well perceive. The wisdome of the prudent is to understand his way, ut of vaine fools the foly great deceit is every day. Fools in their rage do make a mock at sin, as at a sport,
But there among the righteous all is favour of each sort. 10 Mans heart knows his own bitternesse, which doth him most annoy, A stranger also not at all doth meddle with his joy. 11 Their house shall sure be overthrown who wickednesse fulfill, But the upright mans dwelling place shall bud and flourish still. 12 There is a way which seemeth right to man, but in great wrath The end thereof are unto him the fearfull wayes of death. 13 In laughter oft the heart is fild with sorrow and distresse, And last, the end of all that mirth is grief and heavinesse. 14 The back-slider in heart shall be even fild with his own wayes, A good man shall be from himself contented all his dayes. 15 The simple every word believes that vain men to him tell, But he that is a prudent man looks to his going well.
16 A wise man fears, and from all ill doth carefully depart: ut the mad fool doth rage, and is most confident in heart. 17 He that is soon to anger mov'd doth deal most foolishly, nd a man of devices bad he hated still shall be. 18 The simple in his foolish wayes inherite folly shall; ut these that prudent are in heart are crownd with knowledge all. 19 The ill in heart before the good are forc'd to bow the knee; nd wicked men even at the gates of righteous crouch we see. 20 The poor even of his neighbour neer is surely hated much, But many friends do still resort about him that is rich. 21 Het that his neighbour doth despise, a sinner great must be: But he that mercy on the poor hath, happy sure is he. 22 These that devise ill and mischief do they not erre unwise?
But both mercy and truth shall be to them that good devise. 23 In labour all and diligence there profite is in end, But the vaine talk of idle lips to penury doth tend. 24 The wise mens crownes their riches is, which them doe much adorne, But the great foolishnesse of fooles declares them all forlorne. 25 A witnesse true delivereth soules from great peplexities, But who in heart a witenesse is deceitfull, speaketh lies. 26 In the feare of the mighty Lord is a strong confidence, His children all shall have a place in danger for defence. 27 Of life a fountaine surely is the Lords feare in the heart, From the most cruell snares of death in wisedome to depart. 28 A numbrous people doth right well the Kings honour advance, But in the want of people is destruction to the Prince.
29 He that is slow to wrath he is of understanding great ut he high folly doth exalt that hastie is of sprit. 30 A heart that's sound from fraud and guile the life is of the flesh, ut envie is the rottennesse of bones that are not fresh, 31 He that the poore man doth oppresse, his maker he most sure eprocheth, but who honours him hath mercy on the poore. 32 The wicked in his wickednesse is driven away by wrath, ut he that is a righteous man strong hope hath in his death. 33 Wisedome rests in the heart of him that doth well understand, ut what is in the midst of fooles is knowne to all the land. 34 A nation by its righteousnesse exalted is with fame, ut sinne is a most vile reproch to any peoples name. 35 The Kings favour is great indeed for servants that are wise,
But against him that causeth shame in wrath he shall arise. Chap. 15. AN answere soft with wisdome great fierce wrath doth turne away, But grievous words that give offence stirre anger up alway. 2 The good tongue of the wise man still doth knowledge use aright, But the mouth of fooles foolishnesse powres out with all their might. 3 The eyes of the Almighty Lord are sure in every place Beholding ill, and als the good for blessing or disgrace. 4 A tree of life sure is the tongue that wholsome words doth teach, But wickednesse that is therein is in the sprit a breach. 5 A foole his fathers teaching doth most foolishly despise, But he that a reproof regards most prudent is and wise. 6 In the house of the righteous man much treasure is and store,
7 But in the wickeds revenewes Is greefe and trouble sore. 8 The Lord abhors the sacrifice of men that wicked be, But the prayer of upright men is his delight surelie. 9 The Lord who holy is and just abhors the wickeds way, But who goe after righteousnesse he loveth them alway. 10 Correction to him grievous is that doth the way forsake, And he that foolish hates reproof shall die with shame and lake. 11 Hell and destruction are before the LORD, how much more then Are patent to his eyes of fire the hearts of mortall men? 12 A scorner one that him reproves doth hate and als despise. He is so foolish that he will not goe unto the wise. 13 A glade heart makes the countenance ev'n chearfull more and more, But by the sorrow of the heart the sprit is broken sore.
14 The heart of him that understands, doth knowledge seek indeed; But the mouth of vain fools also on foolishnesse doth feed. 15 The dayes of the afflicted are evill, and of no request, But he thats of a merry heart hath a continuall feast. 16 Much better is a little with the true fear of the Lord, Then treasure great which is with grief, and vexing trouble stord. 17 Much better is a dinner of hearbs joind with love and mirth, Then is a stalled ox most fat, and hatred still there with. 18 A wrathfull man strife stirreth up, and lets not men get ease, But he that is to anger slow doth wisely strife appease. 19 The wayes of him that slouthfull is, as hedge of thornes remaine, But the way of the righteous man is made both smooth and plaine. 20 A father is made wondrous glad by a son that is wise,
But he that foolish is in heart his mother doth despise. 21 To him that without wisdome is great foly is his joy, But uprightly he walks who wise his wits doth well imploy. 22 Great purposes do fail when they good counsell are without, But stablish'd they by numbers are of Counsellours about. 23 By th'answer of his mouth a man hath joy well understood: A spoken word in season due sure is exceeding good. 24 The way of life is high above to him that wisedome hath, That so he may right speedily depart from hell beneath. 25 The proud mans house God will destroy that it may not endure, But of widowes the border he establish will most sure. 26 The Lord abhors the thoughts of these that constant are in ill, But the words of the pure in heart are words most pleasant still.
That man his own soul troubleth much that greedy is of gaine, But he that doth hate bribes and gifts shall sure alive remaine. 28 The righteous heart doth studie still to answere every houre, But the mouth of the wicked sort still ill things out doth powre. 29 Unto all such that wicked are the Lord will not come neere, But of all these that righteous be, the prayer he well doth hear. 30 The light of th'eyes doth still rejoice the heart, and it comfort, And als the bones are all made fat, even with a good report. 31 The eare that the reproofe of life, doth hear well and obey, Delighteth much for to abide among the wise alway. 32 He that instruction doth refuse, his own soul doth despise, But he that humbly hears reproof gets understanding wise. 33 Gods fear is the instruction good of wisdome most surely,
Before the time that honour come is true humility. Chap. 16. THe preparation of the heart in man both night and day, nd als the answere of the tongue is from the Lord alway. 2 All the wayes of a carnall man in his own eyes are clean, ut God doth weigh the sprits which are of him most clearly seen. 3 Unto the Lord commit thy works, that they may well endure: nd he the thoughts shall of thine heart establish still most sure. 4 The Lord most wisely for himself things of all sort hath made, st a for the day of great distresse the wicked and the bad. 5 The Lord abhors the proud in heart, what ever he think or say: hough hand join hand, unpunished he shall not be alway. 6 By Mercy and Truth wickednesse is purged from the heart;
And by the true feare of the Lord men from all ill depart. 7 When a mans wayes reformed well the mighty Lord doth please, He maketh even his enemies all to be with him at peace. 8 A little thing with righteousnesse is better in Gods sight, Then revenewes both great and large obtain'd against all right. 9 The heart of man that prudent is his way may well devise, But all his steps directed are by God both good and wise. 10 A divine sentence in the lips of the King oft is found, His mouth well rul'd transgresseth not in judgement good and sound. 11 A just weight, and the ballance als unto the Lord belong, The weights all of the bagge his work are all the earth among. 12 Abomination unto Kings to practise wickednesse It is; for stablish'd is the Throne most sure by righteousnesse.
13 The righteous lips that shunne all lies of Kings are the delight. nd they do much respect and love him that doth speak aright. 14 The wrath of Kings most surely is as messengers of death, t he that prudent is and wise will pacifie such wrath. 15 In light of the Kings countenance life doth alwayes remaine, s favour als is as a cloud ev'n of the latter raine. 16 Much better then the gold is it to get wisdome divine, nd to get understanding then the silver that is fine. 17 The high way of the upright is from all ill to depart; t that wisely doth keep his way, preserves his soul and heart. 18 Pride got'h before destruction still among both great and small, nd likewise doth an hauty sprite before a shamefull fall. 19 Humble to be it better is with these that lowly be,
Then to devide with lofty men the richest spoile we see. 20 He that his matters wisely guides, shall alway find good speed, And who so trusteth in the Lord he happy is indeed. 21 The wise in heart in all their wayes, most prudent call they will, Likewise the sweetnesse of the lips increaseth learning still. 22 A well of life unto the wife, is wisedome most surelie, But of fooles the instruction all great folly semees to be. 23 Of the wise man the prudent heart his mouth doth wisely teach, And maketh learning of all sorts unto his lips to reach. 24 Words pleasant are as hony combs unto the soule most sweet, And also to the bruised bones for health they are most meet, 25 There is a way which unto man seemes right, but in Gods wrath The end thereof which fearfull is, the ill wayes are of death.
26 He that doth labour, doth it all for him self for to have, For his mouth in necessitie the same of him doth crave. 27 A man ungodly in his wayes digs up ill with desire, And in his lips set on mischeefe there is a burning fire. 28 A man that hath a froward heart discord doth sow and strife, nd whisperers do sep'rat soone the cheefest friends in life, 29 A man that's given to violence, his neighbour doth entise, nd leadeth him into the way of wicked and unwise. 30 He shuts his eyes things froward to devise, a great trespasse; e moves his lips with fraud and guile and bringeth ill to passe. 31 The hoary head a fair crowne is of glory and riches, it be well and wisely found in wayes of righteousnesse. 32 He that's to anger slow, excells the mighty all among,
And he that rul's his speach him that doth take a city strong. 33 The lot is cast unto the lap, as at peradventur, But the disposing all thereof is of the Lord most sure. Chap. 17. A Morsell dry much better is and quietnesse of life, Then houses full of sacrifice with great debate and strife. 2 A wise servant shall over rule a son that causeth shame, And shall inherit them among who brethren are by name. 3 The fining pot for silver is appointed by and by, And furnace for the gold, but God the hearts of men doth try. 4 A wicked doer to fals lips attentively gives head, A liar als doth give his eare to naughty tongues indeed. 5 Who mocks the poore his maker doth reproch most shamefully,
e punish'd sure shall be that is glade at calamity. Childrens children a blest off-spring, of old men are the crowne, And fathers als of children are the glory and renowne. 7 Speach excellent becometh not the men that foolish be, Much lesse becometh it a Prince, with lying lips to lie. 8 A gift in his eyes that it hath is as a precious stone, Whethersoever it doth turne it prospreth well anone. 9 He that transgressions covreth close most wisely seeketh love, But he that matters doth repeat doth friendship soon remove, 10 Into a wise man a reproofe to teach him entreth more Then strips into a foolish man in number to five score. 11 A wicked man in all his wayes rebellion seeks onely, Therefore against him shall be sent men with great cruelty.
12 Let a Bear robbed of her whelps a man in fury meet, Much rather then a ramping fool in his most rageing heat. 13 Who so rewardeth ill for good, at last shall feel the smart: For ill at any time shall not once from his house depart. 14 Strife new begun is as when one to water gives a way, Therefore leave off contention all before ye go astray. 15 He that the just man doth condemne, and wicked justifie, They both abomination great are to the LORD surely. 16 A wealthy fool by all his baggs, doth surely hope in vaine: To get wisdome, since he hath not a heart it to attaine. 17 A wise and worthy friend alwayes, doth love most constantly, And like wise a dear brother is borne for adversity. 18 A man of understanding voide most rashly striketh hands,
nd in the presence of his friends goes into sureties bands. 19 He that doth love debate and strife, doth love transgression; And he that proud exalts his gate, doth seeke destruction. 20 He that hath a most froward heart, doth finde no good at all, And he that hath a tongue perverse into mischief doth fall. 21 He that begets a fool, it doth unto his grief and smart, The father als of furious fooles no joy hath in his heart. 22 A merry heart doth good alwayes, like medicine most sweet, But all the bones are dryed up even by a broken sprite. 23 Out of the bosome craftily a man profane in heart, Doth take a gift that he the wayes of judgement may pervert. 24 Wisdome is alwayes him before that understanding hath, But of a fool the eyes are in the ends of all the earth,
25 A fool unto his father is great grief and als distresse, And unto her that bare him he is also bitternesse. 26 To punish the just and upright, it seemes not good to be, Nor yet to rashly Princes strike, for right and equitie. 27 He that hath knowledge spareth much his wordes with wise intent, And he that understanding hath, hath a sprite excellent. 28 A foole when he doth hold his peace is counted wise by men, When man is silent, he is thought a man of knowledge then. Chap. 18. A Man who through desire to learne, doth set him self apart, Doth seeke and intermedle with wisdome with all his heart. 2 In understanding any way a fool hath no delight, But that his heart discover may it self in all mens sight.
3 Wheresoever the wicked come, then comes contempt quicklie; And upon mans face comes reproach with great ignominie. 4 The words of a mans mouth are as deep waters every way, And the well-spring of wisdome is a flowing brook alway. 5 It is not good the person of the wicked to allow, And that for in judgement corrupt, good men to overthrow. 6 A vaine fooles lips enter into contention great and small, And his mouth full of naughty wordes, for strokes doth quickly call. 7 A fooles mouth his destruction is, his lips that can not spare o speak idly, are of his soul a most deceitfull snare. 8 Talebearers words are even as wounds, and they down quickly go, nto the bellies in most parts, all fill'd with grief and wo. 9 He that lives slouthfull in his work, not caring to come speed;
Is brother unto him that is a waster great indeed. 10 A strong towre is the name of GOD, both unto rich and poor: The righteous man doth run to it, and is most safe and sure. 11 The rich mans wealth is his refuge, and city of defence: And as a wall in his conceit which is voide of all sense. 12 Before destruction come on man, his heart is most hauty: And also before honour come is true humility. 13 He who before the matter heard doth quickly answere frame, It is most certainly to him both folly great and shame. 14 The sprite of courage will sustaine a mans infirmity, But who is strong to bear a sprite, that deeply wounded be? 15 The heart of him that prudent is doth understanding get; And to seek knowledge of the wise, the ear is alwayes set.
16 The gift of man doth make a roome for him in every place: And him before great men doth bring without shame or disgrace. 17 He that in his owne cause is first, doth seeme most just to be, ut after him his neighbour comes him searching narrowlie. 18 The lot doth cause contentions all to cease in ev'ry heart; etweene the mighty of the earth the portions it doth part. 19 A city is more easy winne, then brethren in their jarres: nd their contentions are most like the strongest castle barres. 20 The fruit of a mans mouth well shall his belly satisfie, nd with the increase of his lips, he shall well filled be. 21 In power of mans tongue alwayes, is death and life most sweet: d they that love it with their heart, the fruit thereof shall eat. Who findes a wife, a good thing findes even help and pleasant gaine,
And of the mercy of the Lord great favour doth obtaine. 23 The poor man in his want doth use intreaties most humbly, But the churle rich in worldly wealth doth answere him roughly, 24 A man that friends hath, must himself unto them friendly shew Then any brother closer sticks a friend that's fast and true. Chap. 19. THe poor is better that doth walk in his integritie, Then he that is in lips perverse and seemes a fool to be. 2 That the soule without knowledge be it is not good or meete, And he doth sinne in many wayes that hasteth with his feet. 3 The foolishnesse of vaine proud man perverteth all his way, And his hard heart against the Lord in rage doth fret alway. 4 By great wealth many friends are made which helpeth in our smart.
But from his neighbour dear the poor is alwayes set apart. 5 A man that is a witnesse fals shall not unpunish'd be, And he also shall not escape that vainely speakes a lie. 6 A Princes favour many will most humbly still entreat, And all men are a friend to him that gifts oft giveth great. 7 The poore mans brethren hate him all, much more goe far away is friends; he them pursues with words who wanting are alway. 8 He that gets wisedome surely doth his owne soule dearly love, He that doth understanding keep, shall find good from above. 9 A false witnesse indeed shall not unpunish'd be alway, And he that speaketh lies most false shall perish and decay, 10 Delight a vaine and foolish man beseemeth not at all; Much lesse a servant rule to have ov'r Princes great or small.
11 The great discretion of a man, his anger doth delay: And a transgression to passe ov'r his glory is alway. 12 As roaring of a Lion fierce, so a Kings wrath doth passe: But his favour most gracious is, as dew upon the grasse. 13 To his father a foolish son is great calamity; And the contentions of a wife, do drop continually. 14 House richesse are th'inheritance which fathers do afford, But he that hath a prudent wife, her hath even from the LORD. 15 Men into slumber and deep sleep are cast by slouthfulnesse: A soul that's idle suffer shall both hunger and distresse. 16 He that keeps the commandment well, his own soul keeps safely, But he that doth despise his wayes, undoubtedly shall dy. 17 He that hath pitie on the poor, unto the Lord doth lend:
nd that which he hath given will he in payment to him send. 8 While there is any hope thy son ev'n chasten by and by. et not thy soul him spare at all though he aloud do cry. 9 A man of great wrath punishment shall suffer and sustaine, or if thou him deliver, yet thou must doe it againe. 10 Hear wise counsell, and also good instruction soone receive, hat so thou in thy latter end may'st alwayes wisdome have. 11 In a mans heart that is profound devices many be, everthelesse the counsell of the Lord shall stand most free. 12 Of a man worthy the desire his kindnesse is most sure; d better then a lyar is a man though he be poore. The fear of the Almighty LORD to life doth alwayes tend, e that it hath is satisfi'd, no ill shall him offend.
24 In his bosome a slouthfull man doth hide his hand in vaine, And will not so much as it bring unto his mouth againe. 25 A scorner smite, and simple men will sure beware therefore: Also reprove the wise, and he will be wise more and more. 26 He that doth wast his father and his mother chase away, Is a vile son that causeth shame, and brings reproach alway. 27 My son I counsell thee to cease th'instruction for to hear, That causeth men alwayes to erre, from wordes of knowledge dear. 28 A wicked witnesse judgement all doth scorne both lesse and more, And the mouth of the wicked doth iniquity devore. 29 Judgements severe for scorners are prepared by Gods hand, And sore stripes for the back of fooles, that nothing understand.
Chap. 20. WIne is a mocker and strong drink is raging great alwayes, nd whosoever is thereby deceived is not wise. As roaring of a Lion so is of a King the fear, Who him provokes to wrath doth sin 'gainst his own soul most dear. It for a man an honour is to cease from strife quickly, ut every foole of knowledge void, therewith will medling be. The sluggard will not plow because of cold showres that down fall, herefore in harv'st time shall he beg, and have nothing at all. Counsell is in the heart of man, like waters deep surelie, ut one of understanding good will draw it out quickly. Of men the most part will proclaime each one his own goodnesse, ut who can by his wisdome finde, a man of faithfulnesse?
7 The man that is just wisely walks in his integrity, His children deare are after him a blest posterity. 8 A King that sitteth in the throne of judgement just alway, With his owne eyes all wickednesse doth scatter cleane away. 9 Who can in truth affirme and say, my heart I have made sure, Cleane from all sort of wickednesse, I from my sin am pure? 10 Weights diverse and such measure als though they much gaine afford, They both abomination are alike unto the Lord. 11 Even a young child is knowne by that which he doth in mens sight. Whether his work be good and pure and whether it be right. 12 The eare that is inclin'd to heare, and als the seeing eye, The Lord hath even made both of them by his hand for to be. 13 Love not long sleep lest that thou come to poverty with speed,
Thine eyes open and thou shalt be well satisfied with bread. 14 The merchand saith it's nought it's nought when he desires to buy, But when from thence he is away he boasteth by and by. 15 Of Gold and Rubies men esteeme, but the lips that can say The words of wisdome, are indeed a jewell rare alway. 16 His garment take that surety is even for a strangers sake, And of him for a woman strange see that a pledge thou take. 17 Bread that is gotten be deceit unto a man seemes sweet, But afterwards his mouth shall be with gravell fil'd for meat. 18 Each purpose well establish'd is by counsell good and wise, And when thou mindest to make war do it with good advice. 19 Who bearing false tales goth about, mens secrets with great slips Revealeth; therefore haunt him not that flattreth with his lips.
20 Who so his father curseth or his mother dear, most sure His lamp shall be put out anone in darknesse most abscure. 21 An heritage may at the first be gotten hastilie, But out of doubt the end thereof shall no way blessed be. 22 Say not when thou provoked art ill recompence I will, But waite on God and he shall sure thee save from danger still. 23 Weights diverse are unto the Lord abomination all, And a false ballance is not good with either great or small. 24 Mans goings all are of the Lord, who ordreth them alway, How can a man then understand to walk in the good way? 25 It is a snare to him that doth the holy things devore, And after his vowes for to make enquirie strick therefore, 26 A King that cunning is and wise, can ill men scatter well.
nd for a just judgement also bring over them the wheele. 27 The sprit of man Gods candle is which shineth in our hearts, of the belly searcheth still ev'n all the inward parts. 28 Mercy and truth most safely do preserve the King alone, y mercy to his subjects all upholden is his Throne. 29 Of young strong men the glory great is their great strength indeed; nd of old men the beautie is the gray and hoary head. 30 The bluenesse of a wound surely, the ill doth cleanse away, of the belly th'inward parts stripes still do purg alway. Chap. 21. THe Kings heart in the hand of GOD is as a river still, le doth it turne by his great might whethersoever he will. The way or work of every man in his owne eyes is right.
But the LORD pondreth well the hearts, by his wisdome and might. 3 To do judgement with upright heart, and als to do justice, Is more acceptable unto the LORD then sacrifice. 4 A haughty look disdaining men, a proud and lofty heart, And plowing of the wicked men is sin in every part. 5 All the thoughts of the diligent, tend unto plenteousnesse, But every one that hastie is to want and to distresse. 6 The getting of great treasures by great lyes, a vanitie Is tossed to and fro of them that seeke death foolishly. 7 The robbery of all wicked men shall quickly them destroy, Because judgement aright to do, they do refuse alway. 8 The way of men it froward is and strange in good mens sight. But as for the man pure in heart, his work is good and right,
9 Of the house top in corners high it better is to dwell, hen in a wide house with a wife, whose words are brawlings fell. 10 The wicked man desireth ill which still is in his minde, No favour in his cruell eyes his neighbours poor can finde. 11 When punish'd is the scorner vaine, the simple doth perceive; And when the wise instructed is he knowledge doth receive. 12 The righteous man the wickeds house considreth and doth know, But GOD the wicked for their sin doth quickly overthrow. 13 Who at the poor mans cry doth stop his eares with heart that's hard, He also in his grief shall cry, but shall not then be heard. 14 A gift that is in secret given doth anger pacifie, And in the bosome a reward makes wrath away to flie. 15 It is a great joy to the just, judgement to do justly,
But great destruction for them is that worke iniquity, 16 The man that wandreth from the way of understanding plaine, Shall in the congregation of the dead alwayes remaine, 17 He that too much his pleasures loves shall certainly be poor, And he that loveth wine and oyle shall not long rich endure. 18 A ransome for the righteous man the wicked man shall be, And the transgressour for the man that walketh uprightlie. 19 A man may in the wildernesse with more contentment dwell, Then with a woman hauty that is most contentious still, 20 The wise mans house rich treasure hath and oyle aboundantly, But a man of a foolish heart it spends up needlesly. 21 He that so after righteousnesse and mercy with his minde Doth follow, righteousnesse and life and honour als shall finde.
22 A wise man doth the city scale of men of great renowne, And the strong confidence thereof unto the ground casts downe. 23 Who so his mouth and als his tongue can wisely keep from strife, That man his soul doth safely keep from troubles in his life. 24 Who proud in sprit doth deal in wrath shall hear these words of shame, A proud and haughty scorner als is his most shamefull name. 25 The slouthfull mans desire will not him surely faile to kill, For his hands full of idlenesse refuse to labour still. 26 He all the day long greedily doth covet in his heart, But he that is a righteous man spares not, in any part. 27 Of wicked men the sacrifice abhorred still we find, How much more when he bringeth it with a most wicked mind. 28 A false witnesse that loveth lies shall perish certainly.
But he that hears well what is said, doth speak most constantly. 29 A wicked man hardneth his face do what ye can or say, But as for the upright in heart, he doth direct his way. 30 There is no wisdome among men, nor counsell great or small, Nor knowledge which against the LORD, can well prevail at all. 31 Against the day of Battell the horse is prepar'd with speed, But safety from such dangers great is of the LORD indeed. Chap. 22. A Good name rather is to be chosen then manifold Riches, and loving favour more then silver and fine gold. 2 The rich and poor together meet for so it doth befall, But the Almighty LORD, he is the maker of them all. 3 A prudent man the ill forsees, and hides himself wisely,
ut simple men passe on and are sore punish'd by and by. By humblenesse and also by the GOD of heavens true fear, re riches great and honour both, and life which is most dear. In the way of the froward man, are thornes and snares laid deep; He surely shall be far from them that doth his soul well keep. 6 Traine up a childe in the way that he should go with his heart, And when he's old, he surely will not from it once depart. 7 The rich high ov'r the poor doth rule who must him still attend, And he that borrowes fervant is unto him that doth lend. 8 He that iniquity doth sow, shall reap but vanity; And the rod of his anger shall at last fail certainly. 9 He that hath an eye bountifull, shall blessed be most sure; For he abundantly doth give his bread unto the poor.
10 Cast out quickly the scorner, and contention shall be gone, Yea, bitter strife and als reproach shall surely cease anone. 11 He that the purenesse of the heart, doth love with heart and minde, For the grace of his lips most sure, the King shall be his friend. 12 The eyes of GOD do well preserve all these that do him know But of transgressours he the words, doth alwayes overthrow. 13 The slothfull man saith in this way, in wordes that are but vaine, Without there is a Lion I in the streets shall be slaine. 14 The mouth of a strange woman is as a deep pit or gin, The man abhorred of the LORD, shall surely fall therein. 15 Unto a childes heart foolishnesse is fastly bound alway, But the rod of correction soone, shall drive it far away. 16 He that the poor molests to be even rich incontinent,
And he that giveth to the rich, shall surely come to want. 17 Bow down thine eare and hear the words of these that speak wisely, And unto knowledge all thine heart, see that thou well apply. 18 For it is a most pleasant thing, if thou them keep in thee, They sure withall even in thy lips shall right well fitted be. 19 That thy trust may be in the LORD, I have to thee this day. Made clearly known and manifest even unto thee I say. 20 Have I not writen unto thee, things that be excellent, In counsels and knowledge also, and that with good intent? 21 That of the wordes of trueth I might thee make the certaintie To know, that thou mightst answere well to them that send to thee. 22 Robbe not the poor because he is a man of poor estate, Nor yet him that's afflicted sore oppresse thou in the gate.
23 For the LORD GOD will surely plead their cause, his wrath shall boile The foule of those that spoiled them, he will not faile to spoile. 24 With angrie men no friendship make which may procure thy woe, And likewise with a furious man at all thou shalt not goe. 25 Lest thou incline thine heart to learne his wayes that are not faire, And so by walking in his wayes get to thy soul a snare. 26 Be thou not one of them that hands strike unadvisedly; Or of them that not taking heed for debt even sureties be. 27 If thou hast nothing for to pay through thy great povertie, Why should he take away by force thy bed from under thee? 28 The land marke that most ancient is see thou it not remove, Which thy fathers in former times have set for peace and love. 29 Seest thou a man that's diligent, before Kings he most sure
hall stand; he shall not stand before men base mean and obscure. Chap. 23. VVHen thou before a ruler high dost sit downe for to eat, ee that thou with attention still consider well his meat. Take good head, yea unto thy throat faile not to put a knife, f thou be given to appetite for base things of this life. Be not desirous thou of his sweet dainties for to eate, or whatsoever they seeme to be they are deceitfull meat. 4 With carking care and painefull toile not laboure rich to be, From thine owne wisdome that is vaine see that thou cease quicklie. 5 Set not thine eyes on riches, which them make wings certainly, They as an Eagle flee away most swift even to the sky. 6 The bread of him that niggard is see that thou do not eat,
Beware that thou in any way desire his dainty meat. 7 For he is as he thinks in heart, both eat and drink, saith he, But yet for all his pleasant wordes his heart is not with thee. 8 The morsels which with great delight before him thou didst eat, Thou shalt them vomit up, and so shalt loose thy wordes most sweet. 9 See that thou speak not in the eares of fooles that are not wise, For they the wisdome of thy wordes will certainly despise. 10 See thou the old land marke set down, remove not more or lesse, And enter not into the fields of the poor fatherlesse. 11 For he that their Redeemer is in power is mightie, He who is a most righteous Judge, shall plead their cause with thee. 12 Thine heart unto instruction good, see that thou well apply, And als thine eares unto the wordes of knowledge by and by.
13 From the young child correction wise withhold not lesse or more, or if thou beatst him with the rod he will not die therefore. 14 Thou shalt him beat even with the rod, though he it cruell call, And so his soul deliver shalt even from the lowest hell. 15 My son most dear if so thine heart in all thy life be wise, My heart even mine, then alwayes shall most merrily rejoice. 16 Yea more my inward reines shall still rejoice with all their might, When thy lips well advised shall speak such things as be right. 17 Let not thine heart at any time, the sinners great envy, ut all the day long strive to be in Gods fear by and by. 18 For surely the prosperitie of wicked men shall end, But thy hope shall not be cut off what ever thou intend. 19 My son whom I desire to teach, heare thou without delay,
Be wise in every thing and guide thine heart in the right way. 20 Amongst wine-bibbers be thou not thy self for to refresh, Nor yet among the riotous men, that eaters be of flesh. 21 For drunkards and the gluttons shall sure come to povertie, And drousinesse shall cloath at last, a man with rags surelie. 22 Unto thy father humbly still well hearken and behold, And not despise thy mother dear, when she is weak and old. 23 See thou buy trueth, but sell it not as ignorant and rude, And wisdome and instruction als, and understanding good. 24 The father of the righteous man shall greatly joy receive, And he that a wise child begets of him much joy shall have. 25 Thy father and thy mother shall be glad with heart and voice, And she that bare thee in her womb shall heartily rejoice.
26 My dear son give to me thine heart, that I may it preserve, nd let thine eyes attentively my workes and wayes observe. 27 For a vile whoore most surely is a deep ditch of distresse, nd a strange woman is also a pit without regresse. 28 She also crafty lies in wait, as one doth for a prey, nd she transgressours among men increaseth every day. 29 Who hath woe, sorrow, strife, and who hath babling wanting ease? Who causelesse wounds hath, and who als hath rednesse of the eyes? 30 They that long tarry at the wine, and so their time do spend, hey that mixt wine still seek and of their drinking make no end. 31 Upon the wine of colour red beware to set thy sight. When it gives colour in the cup and moves it self aright. 32 It at the last even serpent like most venemous doth bite,
And stingeth like a cokatrice the fruit of wines delite. 33 Thine eyes strange women shall behold which are from good averse, And thine heart thus deceived shall things utter most perverse. 34 Yea thou shalt be as he that lyes in the midst of the sea, Or as he that lyes on the top of masts that too strong be 35 They have me striken shalt thou say and yet I was not sick; They beat me but I felt it not, I it againe will seeke. Chap. 24. AGainst ill men see thou be not envious any way, Nor yet desire to be with them by night or yet by day 2 For their hearts onely studie still destruction sore and grief, And their lips full of fraud and guile, talk onely of mischeef. 3 Through wisedome great and excellent an house is builded sure,
By understanding it is well establish'd to endure. 4 And also by great knowledge shall the chambers more or lesse Be filled with all precious and the most pleasant richesse. 5 A wise man in his strength is strong, yea, as is seene at length, A man that is of knowledge great increaseth still his strength. 6 For thou by counsell wise shalt make thy warre; also in the Great number of good counsellers there alwayes safety be. 7 Too high is wisdome for a foole who doth all wisedome hate, He senslesse opneth not his mouth to speak words in the gate. 8 He that deviseth to do ill, and to vex men with greef, Shall surely be call'd to his shame a person of mischeef. 9 The least thought of all foolishnesse is sin, and also when A man a scorner vaine becomes he is abhorr'd of men.
10 If thou a man faint in the day of great adversitie, Thy strength and thy courage also seeme very small to be. 11 If to deliver men from death, thou alwayes do disdaine, And carelesse be for those that are ev'n ready to be slaine. 22 If thou dost say we know it not he that doth weigh the heart, Doth he not it consider well and that in every part? And he that keeps thy soul doth he not know it certainly? Shall he not render to each man as his deservings be? 13 Because that hony fine is good, see that of it thou eat, And also of the hony comb which to thy taste is sweet. 14 So shall the knowledge excellent of knowledge ever be, Unto thy soul most precious all when it is found by thee Then there shall be most certainly a rich reward that day,
o that thy expectation shall not be cut off alway. 15 Against the righteous lay not wait, O man void of all grace, When thou hast power even in thine hand spoile not his resting place. 16 For a just man seven times doth fall and riseth up againe, But wicked men shall in mischeef both fall and there remaine. 17 Rejoice not when thine enemie fierce in miserie doth fall, And let not when he stumbleth downe thine heart be glad at all. 18 Lest that it sore displease the Lord, when he such things shall see, And from him turne away his wrath to bring it upon thee. 19 Because ill men advanced are, thy self in no way fret, Nor yet be thou envious at the wicked mans estate. 20 For to the ill man no reward there shall be round about, The candle of the wicked shall in darknesse be put out.
21 My son the Lord fear and the King both mighty in revenge, And see thou meddle not with them that still are given to change. 22 For their fearfull calamitie, most suddenly shall rise, And who the ruine of them both to know shall be so wise? 23 These things also belong unto the wise well understood, To have respect of persons it in judgement is not good. 24 He that unto the wicked saith, thou art a righteous seede, The people him and nations shall curse and abhorre indeede. 25 But unto them that him rebuke, shall surely be delight, And a good blessing als shall come upon them day and night. 26 Each good man sure shall kisse the lips with honour and respect, Of him that answeres wisely can aright in wordes direct. 27 Thy worke without prepare and make it for thee in the field,
And afterwards when that is done, thine house right wisely build. 28 Against thy neighbour without cause see thou no witnesse be, With lying lips let none at all deceived be by thee. 29 Say not I will do unto him as he hath done to me, Surely according to his worke, it shall now rendred be. 30 By the bare field of slouthfull men, I with attention went, And by the vineyard of the man that is voide of judgement. 31 And lo, all was growne ov'r with thornes and nettles had the face Thereof cov'red; and the stone wall was down in every place. 32 Then I saw and considered well it as I did perceive And did look on it; and also instruction did receive. 33 A little sleep and slumber als the sluggard well can say, A little folding of the hands to sleep while it is day.
So thy most fearfull poverty shall come do what thou can As one that travails, and thy want as doth an armed man. Chap. 25. THese also are the Proverbs of wise Solomon surely, Which good King Hezekiahs men did copie carefully. 2 It is the glory of the Lord things secret to conceale, But a Kings honour is to search and matters to reveale. 3 Great is the deepnesse of the earth, and so the height of heaven, The heart profound of Kings is als unsearchable to men. 4 From the fine silver take away the dirtie drosse and rude, And for the finer shall come foorth a vessell pure and good. 5 From before the King take away men given to wickednesse, And most surely his throne shall be stablish'd in righteousnesse,
6 In a Kings presence put not foorth thy self most foolishly, And likewise stand not in the place of these that great men be. 7 For it is better that men say come to a higher place, Then in the Princes presence to be put downe with disgrace. 8 Goe not foorth hastily to strive. lest in the end with blame Thou know not what to do when thee thy neighbour puts to shame. 9 With thy neighbour debate thy cause, as fitting is and meet, And unto any other man reveale not a secret, 10 Lest he that heareth it thee put to shame without delay, And so thy shamefull infamie turne not from thee away. 11 In season good a speach discreet that spoken is fitlie, Like apples is of gold that in pictures of silver be. 12 As gold earerings and ornaments of gold most fine and dear,
Even so is a reprover wise on an obedient eare. 13 As cold snow in the heat of harv'st is to the reapers flesh, So doth a faithfull messenger his masters soul refresh. 14 Who of a false gift so doth boast as one both proud and vaine, Is like unto the clouds and wind that void are of all raine. 15 By long forbearing is a Prince perswaded, and anone, A soft tongue als with meeknesse great doth wisely break the bone. 16 Hast thou found honie? eat enough but let the rest remaine, Lest thou therewith be filled much and vomit it againe. 17 See that thou from thy neighbours house withdraw thy foot swiftly, Lest of thee weary at the last he hate thy company. 18 A man that beareth witnesse false against his neighboure dear, Is like a hammer and a sword, an arrow, or a speare.
19 To trust in trouble in a man, not faithfull in each point, s like a broken tooth in jaw, and a foot out of joint▪ 20 As one in cold takes cloths away, as vineger among The nitre; so is he that sings to heavy hearts a song. 21 If hungry be thy fo, him give of thy bread for to eat, And give him if he thirstie be for drink water most sweet. 22 For thou upon his head shall heap the coales of burning fire, And the Lord God shall thee reward, even to thine hearts desire. 23 The north wind with a mighty gale doth drive away the raine, So doth an angrie countenance backbiting tongues restraine. 24 It better is in corners high of house tops to abide, Then with a woman brawling still in a house that is wide. 25 As cold waters do much refresh a thirsty soul, so are
Good newes which unto men alwayes, come from a countrey far. 26 A righteous man that falleth down before the wicked traine, Is as a corrupt filthy spring, and a troubled fountaine. 27 It is not good for health of men much hony for to eat, So als their own glory to search, for men it is not meet. 28 He that is weak and hath not ov'r his own sprite rule at all, Is like a city broken down that is without a wall. Chap. 26. AS snow in summer, and as raine is in a harvest day, So great honour for foolish men, not seemely is alway. 2 As birds and swallowes flie away but not returne againe, So the curse causelesse shall not come on such for to remaine. 3 A whip for horse, and for the asse which is both slow and slack
bridle, and a rod prepar'd is still for the fooles back. According to his foly not answere a fool at all, st thou also be like to him and so in foly fall. According to the foly of fooles answere thou likewise, st he puft up in his conceit him self think to be wise. He that a message to direct by a fooles hand doth think, like one that cuts off his feet, and so doth dammage drink. The men that in their legs are lame, can not go equally, is a parable in the mouth of such as foolish be. As he that not considering well, a stone binds in a sling, is he that gives honour to a fool in any thing. As thornes go up in drunkards hands, which cannot them discerne, is a parable in the mouth of fooles that can not learne.
10 The great God that all things hath form'd by his hand that is hie, Doth both reward the fool and these that great transgressours be. 11 As a vile dog returneth to his vomite filthily, So to his foly doth a fool returne most speedily. 12 Seest thou a man in his conceit, that seemeth wise to be? There is more hope in any fool then in him is to see. 13 A sloathfull man that will not work, saith there is in the way A Lion, yea in all the streets a Lion is alway. 14 As doth the doore upon his hings now turning here, now there, So doth the sloathfull on his bed which doth his meanes empaire. 15 The sloathfull in his bosome hides his hand; it with great paine Doth grieve him much even from his mouth to bring it back againe. 16 The sluggard in his own conceit doth wiser seeme to be,
Then seven men that can render well a reason most wisely. 17 The passer by that medleth with strife which doth not belong o him, is like one that doth take a dog by the eares long. 18 As a mad man in furie great who sure no judgement hath, Who casteth with great violence firebrands with arrowes death. 19 So is the man that by deceit his neighbour doth extort, nd after saith, without remorse am I not but in sport? 20 Where no wood is, the burning fire there goeth out quickly, where no talebearer there is the strife doth cease to be. 21 As coales are unto burning coales and wood to flamming fire, als to kindle strife it is a wicked mans desire. 22 The wordes of a talebearer are as wounds, and they do go own in the bellys inner parts, with miserie and wo.
23 The burning lips and wicked heart, how ever it be most closse, Are like a potsheard which is well covered with silver drosse. 24 The man dissembleth with his lips that doth another hate, Within him as a treasure he doth still lay up deceit. 95 Believe him not at all when he dissembling speaketh fair, For seven abominations then within his heart there are. 26 Whose hatred alwayes by deceit, is covered more and more, His wickednesse shall sure be shew'd th'assembly all before. 27 Who so by fraud doth dig a pit, shall surely fall therein, And he that als doth roll a stone, it will returne on him. 28 A lying tongue hates all these that afflicted are thereby, And a mouth flattering worketh sure a ruine by and by.
Chap. 27. N what shall on the morrow be boast not in any way, or what changes thou dost not know may fall out in a day. 2 Let mouths of other men thee praise, but let thine silent be, et strangers speake, but let thy lips be closely keept by thee. 3 A stone is heavy, and sand is weighty like the lead, ut a vaine fooles wrath then them both more heavy is indeed. 4 Wrath is most cruell, anger als brings courage by and by, ut who is able by his strength to stand before envy? 5 Rebuke open hath power great, mens sins for to remove, Though it seeme harsh, it better is then any secret love. 6 The wounds all of a worthy friend, most faithfull are alway, ut kisses of an enemy are deceitfull every way.
7 The soul that's full doth loath at last the hony comb to eat, But to the soul that hungry is a bitter thing is sweet. 8 As a bird foolish from her nest doth wander a great space, So is a man that carelesly doth wander from his place. 9 Perfume and ointment doth rejoice the heart and cheare the minde, So doth the hearty counsell from the sweetnesse of a friend. 10 Thine owne friend and thy fathers friend forsake thou not also, In trouble to thy brothers house see that thou cease to go. For better is a neighbour neere, in the time of our smart, Then he that is a brother call'd, but is far off in heart. 11 My son, be wise and make my heart most joyfull for to be, That I may have to answere him that proud reprocheth me. 12 A prudent man forseeing ill, him hids till it be past,
t these that simple be passe on and punish'd are at last. 13 Take his garment that strangers for is bold to be surtie, nd take a pledge of him that for a strange woman will be. 14 He that flattring with a loud voice his friend doth earely blesse, shall be by a prudent man ev'n counted for a curse. 15 On all sides water dropping in a very rainie day, a contentious woman are alike in every way. 16 Who hideth her the wind also from blowing hide he may, d the ointment of his right hand which doth it selfe bewray. 17 As yron sharpneth at all times the yron or the steel, kind man the countenance of his friend sharpneth well. 18 Who so the fig-tree keepeth fast he on its fruit shall feed, he that on his master waits shall honour'd be indeed.
19 As in the water clear alwayes face answreth unto face, So the heart of a man to man in every time and place. 20 Hell and destruction are not full but still do cry to bring; So mans eyes are not satisfied with any worldly thing. 21 As fining pots for silver are and furnace for the gold, So is a man unto his praise as men may well behold. 22 Though in a morter thou a fool among wheat shouldest bray, Yet will not his great foolishnesse from him depart away. 23 Be diligent to know right well of all thy flocks the state, And to thy heards most carefully both earely looke and late. 24 For riches though greatly desir'd are not for ever sure, To every generation doth the crowne alwayes endure. 25 The hay appeareth and also the tender grasse so faire,
d herbs upon the mountaines high are gathred all with care. 6 The wooll of lambs are for thy clothes which is a good device, d the goats skipping up and downe are of thy field the price. 7 And thou shalt have goats milk enough even for thy dayly food, or thy houshold, and for the life even of thy maidens good. Chap. 28. THE wicked when no man pursues doth flee to a strong hold, But all the men that righteous are, are as a Lion bold. 2 For the transgression of a land, men many Princes see; But by wise men the state thereof shall sure prolonged be. 3 A poor man that most greedy doth oppresse the poor and small, s like unto a sweeping raine which leaves no food at all. 4 These that forsake the law do praise and wicked men commend,
But such as carefull keep the law with them alway contend. 5 Evill men do not perceive at all the judgement of GODS hand, But they that dayly seek the LORD, do all things understand. 6 Much better is the poor man that walks in his uprightnesse, Then he that is perverse in heart though he swimme in richesse. 7 Who well doth keep the Law of GOD, is a son that is wise, But he that likes the riotous men his father doth despise. 8 He that his substance doth increase by gaine unjust, most sure He shall it gather for the man that pitie will the poor. 9 He that from GODS Law turnes his ear and will not hear gladlie, His prayer abomination vile unto the LORD shall be. 10 Who makes the righteous go astray, he shall with great distresse Fall in his own pit, but the just shall good things still possesse.
11 The rich man in his own conceit is wise without all doubt, ut the poor that well understands doth clearly search him out. 12 When righteous men with heart rejoice, great glory is to see, ut when ill men to honour rise, then good men hidden be. 13 He that cov'reth his sins, shall not well prosper in his dayes, ut who shall them with heart forsake. shall mercie have alwayes. 14 Most happie he that feares alway, GOD shall send him relief, ut he that hardneth still his heart shall fall into mischief. 15 As is a roaring Lion, and as is a ranging Bear, over a poor people doth a ruler ill appear. 16 A Prince that wanteth wit, is an oppressour in his wayes, ut he that hateth covetousnesse shall well prolong his dayes. 17 A man that by his violence doth any person slay,
By justice shall flee to the pit, see that no man him stay. 18 Who so in life walks uprightly, that man he surely shall Be saved; but he that in his heart perverse, at once shall fall, 19 He that painfull his land doth till shall of bread have plentie, But he that followes persons vaine, shall come to povertie. 20 A faithfull man shall still abound with blessings permanent, But he that hasteth to be rich shall not be innocent. 21 To have respect of persons, it is ill both more and lesse, For for a peece of bread that man will certainly transgresse. 22 He that makes hast for to be rich hath doubtlesse an ill eye, And thinketh not that him upon shall come great povertie. 23 He that a man rebuketh, shall after more favour get, Then he that falsly with the tongue to flatter still is set.
24 Who so his parents robs and saith, it is no fault at all, The same of a destroyer we may the companion call. 25 He that is of a hauty heart stirres up debate and strife, But he that puts his trust in God, shall be made fat in life. 26 He that doth trust in his owne hat most foolish is surely, But he who wisely so doth walk shall well delivered be. 27 He that doth give unto the poore shall not have any lake, But he that hids his eyes shall have great curses on his back. 28 When wicked ones do rise, men hide themselves most secretly, But when they die the righteous folk increase aboundantly. Chap. 29. HE who reprov'd often his neck doth harden stubbornly, Shall suddenly be all destroy'd without all remedy.
2 When good men have authoritie the people all rejoice, But when the wicked rule doth beare then is a mourning voice. 3 Who wisdome loves he joyfull makes his fathers countenance, But who with harlots still abides doth spend his whole substance. 4 The King that's wise by judgement doth establish well the land, But it is overthrowen by him that hath a bribing hand. 5 A man that with his flattring wordes his neighbour still doth feed. He for his feet in all his wayes, a net doth surely spread. 6 In the transgression of ill men there surely is a snare, But righteous men sing and rejoice with joy and gladnesse rare. 7 The righteous man considreth well the poor mans cause apart, But wicked men to know it once regard not in their heart. 8 Men scornefull bring a city in a fearfull snare alway,
But wise men through their wisdome great do turne all wrath away. 9 If wise wen with a foolish man into contention fall, Whether he rage or yet he laugh there is no rest at all. 10 The blood thirsty doth hate the man, that upright is in life, But the just man contrarily seeks to preserve his life. 11 A foolish man doth utter all his mind most foolishly, But a wise man till afterwards it keeps in cunningly. 12 If eare to lies a ruler give, which do mens names defame, His servants all to slanders als their tongues will surely frame. 13 The poor and the deceitfull man by the LORDS power divine Together meet; the LORD on both doth make his sunne to shine. 14 The King upright in all his wayes that judgeth faithfullie The poore, his throne for evermore shall sure establish'd be.
15 Rods and reproofs great wisdome give, but which is worthy blame, A foolish childe left to him self his mother brings to shame. 16 When wicked men are multiplied transgression doth increase, But righteous men shall see them fall in danger and distresse. 17 Correct thy son, and he shall give thee rest both day and night, Yea, prudent he unto thy soul, shall surely give delight. 18 The people where no vision is do perish speedily, But he that well th law doth keep, most happy sure is he. 19 Servants corrected will not be by wordes, that men can say, For though they well do understand, yet will they not obey. 20 A man most sudden in his wordes, and hasty dost thou see? There is more hope of any fool nor of him there can be. 21 He that a servant from a childe up brings too tenderly,
Shall at the length have him most sure, as his own son to be. 22 An angry man doth strife stir up with a most troubled sound, Men furious in transgressions great, do alwayes still abound. 23 A mans own pride shall bring him low under his neighbours feet, But honour shall uphold alwayes, the man of humble sprite. 24 Who so is partner with a theef, his own soul hates alway, He doth hear men urg'd with great oathes and doth them not bewray. 25 The fear of man doth bring a snare, but who for to endure In safety, trusteth in the LORD, he shall be safe and sure. 26 The Rulers favour many seek which may them help afford, But the judgement of Judges doth depend upon the LORD. 27 The man unjust abhorred is by the just man alway, The wicked is even loth'd by him, that's upright in the way.
Chap. 30. WIse Agurs words son of Jakeh, even the sweet prophesie; The man spake unto Ithiel, and Vcall certainly. 2 Surely I am more brutish then all other men can be, And understanding of a man I have not as ye see. 3 I neither wisdome good did learne which wise men well do teach, Nor yet to holy knowledge I am able for to reach. 4 Who hath ascended up to heaven? Or who from thence againe Descended hath? Who in his fists the winde makes to remaine? Who waters in a garment hath bound fast for to endure? Who all the ends hath of the earth established most sure? What is the name of such a man whereby thou dost him call, And what is his sons name also, if thou canst clearly tell?
5 Ev'ry good word that doth proceed from God is cleane and pure, He unto them that trust in him a shield is firme and sure. 6 See that thou adde not to his words lest that he thee reprove, And thou be found one who is set most wicked lies to love. 7 Two things have I with all mine heart required Lord of thee, Denie me them not I thee pray before the time I die. 8 Take vanitie from me and lies, give me not povertie, Nor richesse; feed me with the food convenient for me. 9 Lest I full, thee deny and say, Who is God in disdaine? Or lest I be poore, and so steele and take GODS name in vaine. 10 Unto his master a servant accuse not least he thee Curse bitterly, and thou at last be guilty found to be. 11 There is a generation that their father dear do curse:
And being fill'd with wickednesse, there mother do not blesse. 12 There is a generation als that in their eyes are pure, And yet their filthinesse not wash'd doth still in them indure. 13 There is a generation als how lofty are their eyes, And their eye-lids are lifted up through their great pride and ease. 14 There is a generation als whose teeth are as a sword, And their jaw teeth as knives most sharp, oppressours in a word. 15 The base horseleach hath daughters two which give give still do cry, Three things they are; yea, foure which ye can never satisfie. 16 The grave, also the barren womb, the earth that is not full Of water, and the fire that doth cry for more fewell still. 17 The eye that mocks his father and refuseth to obey His mother, Ravens and Eagles it shall picke out for a prey.
18 There be three things indeed which are too wonderfull for me: Yea, there be foure which I my self know not with certaintie. 19 The markes that in the way appear of Eagles in the aire, The serpents way when it upon a hard rock doth repaire, The way als of a sailing ship in the midst of the sea, A harlots way to spoile a maide of her virginitie, 20 Such is the way of her that is a vile adulteresse, She eats and wips her mouth saying, I do not wickednesse. 21 For three things is disquieted, the earth both far and neere, Yea, and for foure which it can not be able for to bear. 22 For a servant when he doth reigne, and troad men under feet, And als a fool when he is fill'd with good and dainty meat, 23 For a woman that's odious, a poor husbands distresse,
And likewise an hand maid that is heire to her owne mistresse. 24 There be foure things upon the earth, which are of little price, But by the great Gods providence they are exceeding wise. 25 The Ants a people are not strong which in the earth repaire, Their meat they in the summer time with diligence prepare. 26 The little conies in the fields are but a feeble folk, Yet they most cunningly do make, their houses in the rock. 27 The locusts in their armies all have no King that commands, Yet go they foorth in order good, even all of them by bands. 28 The spider with her crooked hands doth heere and there take hold, And to abide in palaces of great Kings she is bold. 29 There be three things upon the earth, which go right orderly, Yea there are foure in number which in going are comely.
30 A Lion which among all beasts is strongest for a prey, nd for all these that him gainstand, doth not turne once away. 31 A gray hound with great speed and als a hee-goat and a King. gainst whom by the force of men, there is no uprising. 32 If thou in lifting up thy self, hast done things foolishly: f thou hast thought ill, lay thine hand upon thy mouth quickly. 33 As churning of milk butter brings, and wringing of the nose Brings blood, the forcing so of wrath brings forth both strife and noise. Chap. 31. THe words of good king Lemuel all the worthy prophecie, That his dear mother did him teach, that he might prudent be. 2 What my deare sonne? And what the son which I with paine did beare Into my wombe? And what the son of all my vowes most deare? 3 To woman vaine give not thy strength which shall thee much annoy,
Nor yet thy wayes to that which doth the mighty Kings destroy. 4 O Lemuel it is not for Kings as thou may wisely think, Nor yet for Princes foolishly strong wine to bibe and drink. 5 Lest that they drink and then the law forget, and als pervert The judgement of these men that are afflicted sore in heart. 6 Give thou strong drink unto him that is in great greef and smart, And also wine unto all these that be of heavy heart. 7 Let him drink well, and then forget his poverty therefore, And so remember in his mirth his poverty no more. 8 Thy mouth still open for the dumb even whether neer or far, Ev'n in the cause of such that to destruction ordain'd are. 9 Thy mouth with wisedome open well, and judge thou righteously, The cause of needy men and poor plead thou most faithfully.
10 Who on earth can a woman find, both vertuous good and wise? he richest Rubies all above, is her excellent price. 11 Of her husband, the heart in her doth trust without all toile, o that he furnish'd well in all shall have no need of spoile. 12 She loving him most heartily, and fleeing from all strife, ill do him good still and not ill ev'n during all her life. 13 She seeketh wooll and also flax, and that most carefully, nd early with her hands and late she worketh willingly. 14 She like the ships of merchands is, which still procure much good, e well directed, from a far brings safely home her food. 15 She riseth als while it is night, and wisely giveth meat To her houshold, a portion als for all her maids to eat. 16 A field she doth consider and it buyes for fear of want;
With the fruit of her hands she als a vineyeard well doth plant. 17 Her loines she girdeth well with strength her self for to addresse Unto her task, she maketh strong her armes for businesse. 18 She doth perceive her merchandise to be good in mens sight, Her candle burning her before doth not go out by night. 19 Her hands unto the spindle she most carefully doth lay, Her hands also the distafe hold, and so doth passe the day. 20 Her hand unto these that be poor she stretcheth out richlie, Yea, more she reacheth foorth her hands to these that needie be. 21 For her houshold she of the snow is not afraid at all, For with scarlet her houshold is well cloathed great and small. 22 She cov'rings to her self doth make of richest tapestrie, Her clothings of the finest silk and costlie purple be.
23 Her husband in the gates is known by such attire most net, hen he among the Elders doth sit in the judgement seat. 24 She diligent the linnen fine doth make and als it sell, e likewise doth fine girdles give unto the merchands all. 25 Strength and honour her clothing are, such is her great wisdome, nd she by these her comforts shall rejoice in time to come. 26 She with wisdome op'neth her mouth, which makes all stand in aw, d in her tongue governed well, of kindnesse is the law. 27 Unto the wayes of her houshold she wisely lookes indeed, d being busie eateth not of idlenesse the bread. 28 Her children rise up, and her call most blest in all her dayes, er husband also well content, he praiseth her alwayes. 29 Much daughters have most vertuously done as men well may tell,
But thou indeed them all above most highly dost excell. 30 Deceitfull surely favour is and beautie is but vaine, But a woman that feares the LORD, her praise shall still remaine. 31 Of her hands give her of the fruit which early work and late, And let her own works with applause, still praise her in the gate. The Ʋse. Let not the words of vaine men with their no Outshrill the precepts of Gods divine voice, But set thy heart their meaning for to finde, And lay them up till brimefull be thy mind While Wisdome thus stoups down poor ma teach Most wise Proverbs that we their sense may re Let us still learne and carefull act our part, That wisdomes words may get place in our he Fy, what a shame to hear in wisdomes schoole Such lessons wise, and yet remaine a foole! They double stripes are worthy who may finde
his glorious light, and yet are beetle blinde. Away with these who in most furious fits ith earthly dregs do drench their wanton wits. ch oft them selves most wise of all do deeme ike mummers which are not that which they seeme. eer wisdome learne and strive for to be wise, hese grave proverbs see that thou not despise, hat thou thereby may learne to flie from sin, ven Satans cobweb and his deadly gin, herein he holds, and doth als divers pull craftie meanes the simple for to gull. fiery wrath shall make the Crowes and Pyes ck out the pride of Childrens scornefull eyes, ho Mothers precepts lightly still set by, A vengeance sure most heavy by and by all come on these, who proverbs good and wise d precepts grave shall foolishly despise: thou thy dueties well would learne and see, his precious Pandect hold before thine eye.
THE GARDEN OF ZION. The Booke of Ecclesiastes. A Prayer. OF Wisdomes precepts how to guide o wayes We have last sung in our most sacred layes; Now come Jovan my heart strings put in To warble how all things under the Sun Which heer in greatest estimation be, Are nothing als but very vanitie: All things below have an uncertaine seat, See how Boats slide where ploughs did slic late
And ploughs now till where Boats before did slide, nder the welkin what can fast abide? Heere climbs one, there on the top of the wheele Another stands, anone up goes his heele And down his head, then shuffled his designs All topsie turvie upside downe God brings; ome are most base, and some with toll and tax, et up on hie, do break poor peoples backs; ome hunts for this, and some for that, at last Death all away doth cary with a blast: hen where is man, and where are his designs? Lord draw our hearts far from such naughtie things To keep thy Law in doing what we can, For this the duety is of every man. Now by thy grace both purge our heart and heade From dirtie darnell sins vile cockleweede, That while we hear of vaine things the discourse Without a curse we may run out our course.
CHAP. I. THese be the weighty words wise of preacher Solomon, Who was King in Jerusalem and of David the Son. 2 All vanitie of vanities the Preacher saith truelie Yea, vanitie of vanities, all is but vanitie. 3 What profite hath a man of all his labour here begun, Which he with a most carking care doth take under the Sun? 4 One generation among men away doth quickly slide, Another generation comes, but th' earth doth still abide. 5 The sun also ariseth and he goeth down quickly, And hasteth to the place where he at morning rose earely. 6 From South to North the wind doth go, it whiles continualy, According to its circuits it doth turne againe quickly.
7 The rivers all run to the sea, the sea yet is not full; Unto the place from whence they come returne they thither still. 8 Man can not utter how all things are full of labour here, With sight th'eyes are not satisfi'd, nor with hearing the ear. 9 The thing that hath beene is which shall be, and that which is done Is that which shall be, and there is no new thing under Sun. 10 Is there a thing whereof it may be said, see this is new, It hath already beene before of old time with some shew. 11 No remembrance of former things there is, nor shall there be Of things to come with these that shall come after us quicklie. 12 The preacher I who cunningly in preaching did excell, Was in the faire Jerusalem king over Israel. 13 I gave my heart by wisdome to search all things that are done,
By such paine God doth exercise men here under the Sun. 14 Under the Sun I have seene all the workes that done there be, Behold all is vexation great of sprite and vanitie. 15 That which is crooked can not be by men againe made straight, And that which wanting is, can not be numbred once aright. 16 I pensed, saying, I am come to great estate and more Have gotten wisedome, then all they that have been me before. Yea my heart by the LORD inspir'd, in every exigence Of wisedome, and of knowledge had a great experience. 17 I gave my heart wisedome to know, and to know madnesse eke And foly, I saw that this was vexation of the sprite. 11 For in much wisdome surely is much grief and heavinesse, And he that groves in knowledge great doth sorrow als increase.
Chap. 2. In mine heart said, now go to with mirth I prove will thee, ake pleasure therefore; and behold this als is vanitie, I deeply pensing in my thoughts of laughter said it's mad, Of mirth like wise I did affirme that it is vaine and bad. I in my heart did further seek to give my self to wine, nd to lay hold on folly great, ev'n by wisedome divine. ll I might see what was that good for sonnes of men alwayes, hich under heav'n they all should doe, dureing their painfull dayes. I made me great works, I did build me houses pleasantly, planted also with great paines me vineyards as ye see. I made me pleasant gardens and ochards with flowers and roots, also planted trees in them even of all kinds of fruites.
6 I made me pooles of water deep, as though they had been seas, To water therewith pleasantlie the wood with goodly trees. 7 With silver I did servants buy, and also maidens faire, I had borne also in mine house in vertue servants rare. I had possessions great also of cattell lesse and more, Above all these that did excell in Salem me before. 8 Silver and gold I gath'red als with great dexteritie, And the peculiar treasure of Kings and Provinces hie. Men singers and maid singers I, and the delights of men, With instruments most musicall of all sorts got I then. 9 So I increased more then all that in Salems city Were me before; my wisdome als remained still in me. 10 And whatsoever thing that was desired by mine eye,
did it not keep back from them that they it should not see. y heart I not with held from joy, for my heart did rejoice all my labour; and this was my portion and my choice. 11 Then did I look on all the workes that my hand had wrought so, d on the labour that I had much labour'd for to do. ehold vexation of the sprite and vanitie was all nder the Sun, there surely was no profite great or small. When this was done, I speedily my self did turne againe, sdome and madnesse to behold, and als mans foly vaine; or what can do the man that comes after the mightie king, en that which hath already been done, even the self same thing. Then did I see that wisdome did all folly far excell, s far as light doth darknesse black, when it doth it expell.
14 The wise mans eyes are in his head, but men of judgement small Walk all in darknesse, One event doth happen to them all. 15 Then I anone said in my heart, when I this thing did see, As it doth happen to the fool, so hapneth it to me. And why was I more wise then they, who were thought fooles to be? Then I againe said in my heart this als is vanitie. 16 For there no more remembrance is of the wise, no thing differ, Then of the fool that nothing knowes, all is forgot for ever. Seeing that which is at this time, shall be in latter dayes Forgot, And how as foolish men, likewise do die the wise? 17 Therefore I hated life because all work under the Sun Is grievous; yea, is vanitie, and a vexation. 18 Yea, I did hate my labour all, which I below did see,
Because I should leave it to him that should come after me. And who by his intelligence, can know whether he shall man be unto wisdome given, or one of judgement small: t of my painfull labours all he shall the master be, that I have he shall command, this als is vanitie. Therefore thus pensive in my minde, I went about with care, all the labour which I tooke to cause my heart despaire. For on the earth there is a man, whose labour seemes to be wisdome and in knowledge great and als in equitie. t shall he leave it to the man who labour'd not a white, his also is a vanitie, and a great ill of sprite. For of his labour what hath man that may content his heart, herein he hath under the Sun sore toil'd in every part.
23 For all his dayes are sorrowes great travaile and greef surely, Yea his heart rests not in the night, this als is vanitie. 24 There is no better thing for man, then eat drink and the good Of his labour well to enjoy, as from the hand of God. 25 For who among the Princes all hath power great more then I To eat? Or who can heerunto more hasten by and by? 26 Fr God doth give unto the man, that doth himself imploy In good, he gives him wisdome and great knowledge with much joy. But he to sinners travel gives to gather and up heap For good men; This is vanitie, a vexing of the sprite. Chap. 3. TO every thing surely there is a season set to be, And to each purpose is a time, under the heav'n most hie.
2 There is a time for to be borne, and als a time to die, A time to plant and to pluck up things that now planted be. 3 There is a time also to kill, a time to heal the slaine, There is a time for to break downe, a time to build againe: 4 A time to weep, a time to laugh with chearfull countenance, There is a time also to mourne, and a time for to daunce. 5 A time for stones to cast away and gather them againe, Time to embrace, and also from embracing to refraine. 6 A time to get, a time to losse, nothing stands at a stay, There is also a time to keep, and time to cast away. 7 A time there is to make a rent, and to sow for to seek, A time there is to keep silence, and als a time to speak. 8 A time to love, a time to hate, each time it hath its place,
A time there is for fearfull war and als a time for peace. 9 He that doth work with greatest paines what is his profit sweet, In that wherein he labours much with painfull toile and sweate? 10 The travaile which GOD gives to men, I have seen with mine eyes, For such is his good pleasure still men so to exercise. 1 The LORD who in all wisedome is most excellent and prime, Hath by his hand made beautifull each thing in i'ts owne time. He also hath the world set in their heart all about, That none of all the sons of men, GODS great work can find out. 12 I know there is no good in them, but for man far from strife, With all his heart for to rejoice, and do good in his life. 13 And that each man should eat and drink. and als enjoy the good Of all his labours on the earth, it is the gift of GOD.
14 What ever God doth, that I know shall even for ever be, No thing put to nor yet from it can taken be surely. And God by his Almighty hand It worketh lesse or more, That all men with a great respect should still fear him before. 15 That which hath been is now; and that which is to be hath beene, And God requires that which is past, which men have heard or seene. 16 More I of judgement saw the place that there was wickednesse, And that iniquitie was in the place of righteousnesse. 17 The bad and righteous God shall judge I said then in mine heart, or for each purpose is a time, and als for every worke, 18 I in mine heart of mens estate, said, God might easily hem manifest, and that they might themselves see beasts to be. 19 For that which all the sonnes of men befalleth, doth befall
Unto the beasts; even one thing doth befall unto them all, They all have one breath; as the one so doth the other die, Above a beast they have no place, for all is vanitie. 20 All things below unto one place do go as is most plaine, All of the dust are, and also all turne to dust againe. 21 Who knowes the sprite of man that goes even upward to the heav'n, And the sprit of the beasts that is unto the earth down driv'ne? 22 Wherefore I see now that there is no better thing for choice, Then that a man in all his workes should constantly rejoice. For that is even his portion all, alloted for to be. And what shall be done after him who shall bring him to see? Chap. 4. SO I returned in my sprite, and did consider soone,
All the oppressions great that are heere done under the sunne. Behold the teares of men opprest, no comforter they had, Their spoiling foes sure power had great, but they had comfort bad. 2 Wherefore the dead I praised much, that were already dead, Yea more then all the living which are yet alive indeed. 3 Yea better then both they he is which hath yet never been. Who the ill work done under sunne, as yet hath never seene. 4 Againe I did consider well, and carefully remarke, All travaile undergone by man, and also every worke; For this man of his neighbour is crossd greatly with envy, This is vexation of the sprite and also vanity. 5 The fool his hands folding will not work for to winne his meat, Therefore he pinch'd with poverty, is forc'd his flesh to eat.
6 Much better is with quietnesse an handfull that is meet, Then both hands full with travell and vexation of the sprite. 7 Then I returned speedily to see all that was done, And I saw a great vanitie, that was under the Sun. 8 Ther's one alone, and there is not a second or another; Yea, he is so alone, that he hath neither childe nor brother. Yet still he labours, and can not for whom he labours tell, This also is great vanitie, yea, it's a sore travell. 9 Together in societie two better are then one, Because they have a good reward for all their labour done. 10 For if they fall the one will lift his fellow, but much wo To him that is alone, for when he falls, none helps him so. 11 Againe if in a stormy time two shall together ly,
Then they have heat; but how can one be warmed by and by? 12 And if against him one prevaile, on this he may rely Two shall withstand; a threefold cord men break not easily. 13 A poor and wise childe better is then an old foolish King, Who will no more by counsell good admonish'd be to reigne. 14 For out of prison he doth come to reigne in high degree, But th'other in his kingdome borne comes all to povertie. 15 The living which walk here below, I did perceive indeed, All walking with the second childe, that shall stand is his stead. 16 Th'inconstant people have no end of all that was before, These that come after shall not please, this is vexation sore. Chap. 5. WHen thou go'st to the house of GOD, as children to the schooles,
Then keep thy foot, hear rather then give sacrifice of fooles. For they in their great foolishnesse consider not wisely, That while they do that outward work, they do iniquity. 2 See with thy mouth thou be not rash, thine heart let it not be Swift for to utter any thing, before GODS Majestie For GOD is in the Heaven above, and thou with little shew Art upon earth, therefore let all thy wordes be wise and few. 3 A dreame comes through the multitude of carefull businesse, A fools voice is well known when he doth many words expresse, 4 When unto GOD thou vow'st a vow, defer it not to pay, For he no pleasure hath in fooles, so pay without delay. 5 Not to vow it far better is, then that thou every day Should make fair vowes unto the LORD, and them neglect to pay.
6 Permit not once thy mouth to cause thy flesh for to trespasse, Nor yet before the Angel say, that it an error was. Wherefore should GOD be at thy voice provok'd thee to annoy, And after the work of thine hands in wrath thee to destroy? 7 For in the mltitude of dreames and many words there be A number great of vanities, but fear thou the most Hie. 8 If thou th'oppression of the poor and judgement false dost see, And justice in a Province als, let it no marvell be; For he that then the higest is higher, without delay Regardeth such things, and there be some higher even then they. 9 The profit of the earth below, moreover is for all. The King is served by the field, ev'n whether great or small. 10 He that loves silver, silver shall him not once satisfie,
Nor he that loveth great increase, this als is vanitie. 11 When goods upon this earth increase for wealth or yet for meat, They also much increased are who all such things do eat: And what good to their owners is among all companies? Thay onely have this that they may behold them with their eyes. 12 The work-mans sleep it is most sweet, though he eat lesse or much, But plenty great doth mar alwayes the sleep of him that's rich. 13 There is a sore ill which I have, perceiv'd under the sun, Ev'n riches for the owners kept to their great hurt therein. 15 But these riches by travell ill, do perish in the land, And he begets a son, and there is nothing in his hand. 15 As he came from his mothers womb, so without all delay, He naked shall returne, nothing he cary shall away.
16 This is a sore ill that as he came, even so shall he go, That gaine hath he that for the wind he labour'd so and so? 17 All the dayes of his life also he doth in darknesse eate, nd he much sorrow hath and wrath when he is griev'd and sick. 18 Behold what I have seene; It's good for one to drink and eat, nd take part of that GOD hath giv'n, to be his portion meet. 19 This is GODS gift when of riches man learnes to make good use, d of his portion eats, and in his labour doth rejoice. For so his dayes in mirth do passe, and seeme most short to be, GOD him answreth in the joy of his heart chearfully. Chap. 6. UNder the Sun there is an ill, which often now and then ve seen common for to be, among the sonnes of men.
2 A man to whom the Lord hath given wealth, honour, and richesse, So that he wants not for his soul, all that he would possesse, Yet God him not the power then gives, to eate thereof gladly, But strangers it do eat; This is disease and vanitie, 3 If that a man yeers many live, and children much beget, So that the dayes even of his yeares be in a number great If his soul be not fil'd with good, and als not buied be, I say that an untimely birth, much better is then he. 4 For he comes in with vanitie, and in darknesse departs, And his name shall still cov'red be with darknesse in all parts. 5 Moreover he hath not the sunne seene, nor knowne any thing; This more rest then the other hath, whose heart much greef doth wring. 6 Yea though he live a thousand yeares, twice told in a long space.
et hath he seen no good at all; all go unto one place. 7 Of poore man all the laboure great, is for his mouth even stll, nd yet his appetite most large nothing can ever fill. 8 For what have wise men heere below, then the most foolish more? What hath the poor that knowes to walk the living here before? 9 Of the eyes better is the sight, then wandring thoughts can be; his of the sprite vexation is and also vanitie. 10 That which hath been already nam'd is well known man to be, With him he can not well contend, that stronger is then he. 11 Since that there be so many things, that vanitie increase, hat is poor man bettred thereby, on the earth more or lesse? 12 For who doth know what's good for man in this life to the end, e dayes of his vaine life which he doth as a shadow spend.
For who can by his art or skill, unto a man well tell What shall be after him, though he in wisedome great excell? Chap. 7. A good name is more precious sure then ointment is alway, And betrer is the day of death then is a mans birth day. 2 Far better it is for to goe where men do dayly mourne, Then to resort unto the house, where men feast turne by turne. For of all men that is the end who dwell in any part, And he that on the earth doth live, will lay it to his heart. 3 Sorrow, then laughter better is, for by a count'nance sad, The heart of man that it beholds is much more better made. 4 The hearts of wise men from the house, of mourning go not foorth, But the heart of these that be fooles is in the house of mirth.
5 It better is to hear rebuke, and learne in wisemens schooles, Then for a man at any time to heare the song of fooles. 6 For as the crackling of dry thornes, beneath pots seemes to be, So is the laughter of the foole, this als in vanitie. 7 Oppression surely maketh mad a wise man in each part, And bribes and gifts do so corrupt, that they destroy the heart. 8 The end of things much better is then their beginnings be, And patient men be better then the proud that looke so hie. 9 Beware of anger; in thy sprite, to hast it is not best, or in the bosome of all fooles great anger still doth rest. 10 Say not, wherefore were former dayes, then these now better be; For who concerning this enquires, he doth not prudently. 11 If with a rich inheritance great wisedome also be,
It's good; by it there profit is, to them that right do see. 12 Wisedome and money a defence are mens lives for to save, But knowledge surely giveth life to all them that it have. 13 Consider well the work of GOD, for who by his great might Can that which he hath crooked made, againe make to be streight? 14 Be thou most joyfull in the day of thy prosperitie, But well consider in the time of great adversitie. God th' one against the other hath set wisely in their kind, Ev'n for this end that after him, nothing vaine man should find. 15 All things that are heere under sunne I with attentive eye Have seene clearely even in the dayes of my great vanitie: There is a just man that is lost even in his righteousnesse, Als wicked men prolong their life, in their great wickednesse.
16 Be not thou too too righteous, nor yet in a vaine toy Be overwise, why shouldest thou, in this thy self destroy? 17 Be not als wicked overmuch, nor yet too foolish be; Why shouldest thou before the time, thy self make for to die? 18 It good is that earely in time, of this thou should'st take hold, Yea from this to withdraw thine hand see that thou be not bold. For he that in the feare of God, doth dayly on him call, Shall have in all things successe good and shall come foorth of all. 19 Wisedome the wise doth strengthen more then ten men that excell In mighty strength, which pleasantly in cities fair do dwell. 20 For on the face of all the earth, no man can finde or see, A man that's just or that doth good, or that of sin is free. 21 Als take no heede unto all wordes, that by men spoken be,
Lest that thou hear thy servant griev'd with curses cursing thee. 22 For often als thine owne heart knowes, that thou in great distresse Provoked, others cursed hast and that with bitternesse. 23 All this I have by wisdome prov'd, I said also surely, I will be wise grave and discreet, but it was far from me. 24 That which is far from us remov'd and deep exceedingly, Who can by wisdome finde it out where ever hidde it be? 25 I did apply mine heart to know, and to search round about, And wisdome, and the reason of things weighty to seek out, And als of folly for to know clearly the wickednesse, Even of the foolishnesse of men and of their great madnesse. 26 And bitter more then death I finde the woman whose vaine heart Is snares and nets, her hands as bands, to catch in every part:
Who so in GODS good favour is, shall from her speedily Escape most safe, but sinners shall even by her taken be. 27 Behold, the preacher wisely saith, this have I found anone To weigh and finde out the account even counting one by one. 28 Which yet my soul with diligence, doth seek and als essay All meanes to get it, but can not it finde by any way. One man among a thousand I have found and understood, But sure among all women kinde not one I have found good. 29 Loe this onely well found I have, that God without all doubt Man hath made upright, but they have inventions vaine sought out. Chap. 8. WHo is the wise man on the earth? who hath understanding To know th'interpretation good, of any doubtfull thing?
A mans wisdome doth make his face most gloriously to shine, And of his face the boldnesse shall unto a change incline. 2 To keep the Kings commandments all, I now do counsell thee, And that because of the great oath, which should observed be. 3 Goe not with speed out of his fight, from every ill thing cease, For he doth whatsoever things his minde content and please. 4 Where the word of a great King is, might is there to affray; What dost thou now in this or that Who dar unto him say? 5 Who so keeps the commandment fast, shall surely feel no ill, A wise mans heart the judgement and the time discerneth well. 6 Because the time and judgement als by man not by and by Observed are, therefore on him comes a great misery. 7 For for to know the things to come, he doth not so excell
In wisdome great, when it shall be who among men can tell? 8 There is no man that any strength hath to retaine the breath, He likewise hath no power at all when comes the day of death. Of weapons there no casting is, or in that war discharge, Nor yet ill men shall wickednesse a any time enlarge. 9 This have I seene under the Sun, and clearly understood, Some time a man ov'r others rules against his proper good. 10 Such a great man I have well seene with great pompe laide in grave, So taken he was from his seat, forgotten like a slave. 11 Because GOD wrath not executs 'gainst wicked speedily, Therefore mens hearts are fully set, to do most wickedly. 12 Though hundred times a sinner sin, and death him still forbeare, Yet sure it shall be well with them who GOD do truely feare.
13 But wicked men shall not be so, nor shall prolong their dayes Which as a shadow are; because they feare not GOD alwayes. 14 There is upon the earth below, done a great vanitie, Unto just men it happens as to these that wicked be. Againe there be most wicked men, to whom befals surely, According as to righteous folk, this als is vanitie. 16 Then mirth I did commend because mans cheef thing under sunne, Is to eate, drink, with merrinesse, untill this life be done. For of his labour that with him, shall all his dayes abide, Which GOD upon him doth bestow under the Heav'ns most wide. 16 When I did wisedome seek to know, and things on earth to see, There were who neither day nor night, did sleep once with their eye. 17 Then I beheld the work of GOD, that no man by his minde,
The worke that is done under sunne can clearely all out find. Chap. 9. FOR all this I well in mine heart considered to declare, That righteous and wise with their workes in GODS hand surely were. No man upon the earth below, doth either lesse or more Know love or hatred by all that, which is heere him before. 2 All things alike do come to all there is one event sure, Both to the good and to the cleane and to him that's impure. To him that sacrificeth als in fervent zeal most hote, And likewise to him that profane als sacrificeth not, As is the good of godly life, so is the sinner both, And he that sweareth most profane, as he that feares an oath. 3 This is an ill all things among, though they be great or small.
Under the Sun, even that there is one event unto all. Yea, als the hearts of sonnes of men are full of ill indeed, They live in madnesse, after that they go unto the dead. 4 For unto him that liveth heere there is hope more or lesse, For better far a living dog then a dead Lion is. 5 The living know that they shall die but dead both great and small Know nothing, they have no reward they are forgotten all. 6 Their love, hatred and envie als is perish'd quite away, Of all that's done under the sunne, no portion more have they. 7 Now go and eate thy bread with joy and with a merrie heart. Als drink thy wine, for God thy workes accepteth in good part. 8 Let all thy garments which thou weares be alwayes white and cleane, Let not thy head at any time lake ointment that hath beene.
9 With thy deare wife see all thy dayes thou live most joyfully, For that thy portion in this life is most assuredly. 10 What thing thine hand shall find to do, it do with all thy might, For neither work nor wisdome is in graves all void of light. 11 I did returne and saw below, the sonnes of men among, That to the swift is not the race, nor battells to the strong, Nor bread nor riches nor favour, unto wise men of skill. But time and chance unto them all do happen ever still: 12 For man also most ignorant, knowes not his time that's set As fishes all, that taken are in a deceitfull net, And as birds that are caught in snares, so are the sons of men Snar'd in an ill time when it falls most quickly upon them. 13 This wisedome worthy of respect have I seene with mine eye,
Under the Sun, such was its worth, it seemed great to me. 14 A little city with few men there was, and against it A great King came and it besieg'd, and built his bulwarks great. 15 There was in it a poor man found, who by his wisdome great Did save the city, yet no man remembred him a white. 16 Then said I wisdome better is then strength; neverthelesse The poor mans wisdome is despisde, and his wordes more or lesse. 17 In quiet wise mens wordes are heard as in most learned schooles, More then the cry of him that rules among the lofty fooles. 18 Then warriours weapons better is wisdome that bringeth joy, But one sinner that wicked is, much good will soone destroy. Chap. 10. DEad flies do cause the ointment best of Apothecarie,
To send foorth even a savour vile stinking most filthilie, So doth a little foly als, most shamefully disgrace. Him that for wisdome and honour among men hath a place. 2 As the right hands of any men to worke most nimble be So is the wise mans heart, but hearts of fooles like left hands be. 3 Yea also when he that's a foole, walkes by the way anone, His wisdome failes that hee's a fool, he saith to every one. 4 If the sprite of the Ruler great shall rise up against thee, eave not thy place, for yeelding doth offences pacifie. 5 There is an ill under the sun which I have seene indeed, As an errour which surely from the Ruler doth proceed. 6 Foly is set in dignity, which is a great disgrace, While these who truly able are do sit in a low place,
7 I have on horses servants seene, and after I anone Have Princes seene as servants base walking the earth upon. 8 He that for others digs a pit, shall surely in it fall, And who so breaketh down an hedge, a serpent bite him shall, 9 Who so removeth stones, shall be hurt therewith by and by; And he that cleaveth wood, shall be endangered thereby. 10 If that yron be blunt and he do not the edge well whet, Then must he quick put to more strength; but wisdome must direct. 11 Except the serpent venemous by charmes inchanted be Sure bite he will, a babler vaine no better is then he. 12 Of a good wise mans mouth the wordes are gracious; but the lip Of one that is a babling fool, himself will swallow up. 13 While he begins to speak, his wordes are but meere foolishnesse,
Likewise the end of his discourse is nothing but madnesse. 14 A fool is fill'd with wordes, no man can well tell what shall be, And what then shall be after him, Who can him tell surelie? 15 Fooles do themselves with labour great even weary every day, Because they do not know so much as the broad cities way. 16 Woe unto thee, O wretched land when childish is thy king, And thy Princes as gluttons eat early in the morning. 17 Blest art thou land when thy King is come of a noble race, And thy Princes eat soberly, for strength not drunkenesse. 18 By slothfulnesse the building all most quickly doth decay, And through great idlenesse the house it droppeth through alway. 19 A feast sure is for laughter made, and wine makes merry men, ut money answ'reth constantly all things both now and then.
20 See that the King that rules the land thou curse not in thy thought, And likewise curse thou not the rich to thy bedchamber brought: For a bird of the aire the voice, shall cary by and by. That which hath wings the matter shall tell even as it doth ly. Chap. 11. UPon the waters cast thy bread, and spare it not alwayes, For thou shalt sure it finde againe, though after many dayes. 2 To seven or eight a portion give and that most liberally, For thou know'st not what hindrance soone upon the earth may be. 3 If that the clouds of heaven above be filled well with raine, They for the fruits upon the earth emptie themselves againe. If towards south, or yet the north, at last shall fall the tree, In the same place where it doth fall, there also shall it be.
4 He that too strict observ's the wind, shall not well sow his seed. He that too strict regards the clouds, shall sheaves not reape with speed. 5 The sprites way thou know'st not, nor how bones in the womb do grow, Even so thou not the workes of God who maketh all, dost know. 9 When it's morning then sow thy seed, upon thy labour'd land, And in the evening time also with hold thou not thine hand. For whether this shall prosper well or that, not understood It is by any, who can tell if both alike be good? 7 Truely the light is sweet and als, a pleasant thing it seemes, Unto the eyes for to behold the sunnes faire glistring beames: 8 But if a man live many yeeres, and in them more or lesse Rejoice, let him remember well the dayes of great darknesse; For they unpleasant surely shall in a great number be,
All that which comes under the sun is very vanitie. 9 O young man in thy youth rejoice, and let thy heart thee please, Walk in the wayes of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes. But know thou this assuredly that even for every thing, God in his justice thee at last will into judgement bring. 10 Therefore all sorrow from thy heart see thou remove quicklie, Put ill away, for childhood and youth are but vanitie. Chap. 12. THy Creator remember well, in youth while the ill day Is not come, nor the yeares draw nigh when thou shall surely say, In all such things under the sun, no pleasure I at all Have in my heart, I loth such things yea whether great or small. 2 While the Sun, light, or yet the Moone, or the starres in their traine,
Be not darkned nor yet the clouds returne after the raine, 3 In the day when the keepers of the house as in palsie Shall tremble, and the strong men shall themselves bow faintingly. The grinders then shall cease to be, as mouldred all away, And these that out at windowes looke als dark'ned be alway. 4 And in the streetes the doores shall be shut when the grinding sound Is low, he at the chirp of birds shall rise from sleep unsound. His sprits also shall be so dull, that he shall nothing know, The daughters all of musick then, shall be brought very low. 5 Of high things they shall be afraid, and feares als in the way Shall be, and als the Almond tree shall flourish white alway. Desire shall faile, a grashopper a burden shall be so, Because man dies, the mourners then about the streetes doe go.
6 Before als that the silver cord be loosed at the length, Or that the golden bowle at last be broken with its strength. Or that the pitcher broken be, even at the maine fountaine: Or yet that broken be the wheele that's hard by the cisterne. 7 Then shall the dust returne to earth, as it was most vile dust, Then shall the sprite returne to God who gave it at the first. 8 Even vanitie of vanities, the Preacher well doth call The things that are on earth below, yea vanitie is all. 9 Because the Preacher wise was, he did teah the people still, Yea he gave good heed, and sought out wise Proverbes with great skill. 10 The Preacher sought to find out wordes acceptable to heare, What written was it was upright, words to the truth most neere. 11 Wise words are like to goads and nailes, by preachers fastned well,
Which from one shepheard are all given who doth the same reveale. 12 By these my son admonish'd be, of makeing bookes no end There is; much study als the flesh with wearinesse doth spend: 13 Let us now heare the end of all feare God, and as thou can His precepts keep, for sure this is the duety all of man. 14 For God in judgement every work most clearly shall reveale, With every secret thing also yea whether good or ill. The Use. LET Men heere learne where all may clearly see Vnder the Welkin all but vanitie: Heer tears in eyes, and fears in heart as house With many sorrows have their Rendevouz: Of earthly things the vast confused crowd Is now or then all cov'red with a clowd; Though men on Thrones advanced have their Seat,
All's nought except they be as Good as Great; Loke not to see beneath the Firmament. A state of life that heer gives full content; A dying still is in poor queasie man, His life at longest is but like a span; It like a Post doth passe even in a streame, And is anone forgotten like a dreame; Gods holy Law is only pure and plain, In life and death Christ is our only gaine: Let us heer learn in time to turn our back, On vanitie, and quickly it forsake: With bended knees and als with broken hearts, Let us be carefull that we in all parts May fear the Lord, and dayly on him call For this to do, it is the end of all. All other thoughts are surely vile and vaine, A brood most base even of a burly braine: Who so profane this earthly glory seeks, Shall losse his life among such crooked creeks: O happy he who hating vanitie, Doth rest content Gods pensioner to be; Not careing for the leeks and garlick fell, Th' Egyptian hotch potch which Gods Israel Preferr'd to Man their whilom-Angels food,
Admir'd at first but well not understood hile it most sweet like Coriander round, like hoare frost did ly upon the ground: heav'n above is onely rest, below he Trump of war doth still Tantara blow. reat troops of ills as long as we are heere, ill vex us still betweene both faith and feare; t O when this our dismall time is past, o all the godly joy shall come at last: et us therefore returne to God with speede rom vanities, and see that we take heede, seeke the best part, that we by his grace, ike crawling Ivie may the Lord embrace; et this our care be in these latter times, rofession bare serves but to cloake our crimes.
THE HOLY SONGS OF THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENT: Dedicated to the Royall Lady Mary, his Majesties Elder Daughter, Princesse of ORANGE. By M. Zacharie Boyd. Printed at Glasgow by George Anderson, 1645.
To the Reader. I As yet have known none that in poesi hath turned all the song of Scripture, except Theodore Beze, who hath done it very acurately in the French tongue; I the Song of Songs, and the Songs of Mos Deborah, Hannah, Ezekiah, Mary, Simeo and Zechariah and divers others, be so he¦venly as all may see, it were to be wish that in the Church they had place to be sun with the Psalmes of David, unto the whic they are not inferiour.
TO THE MOST ROYALL LADY MARY, His Majesties Elder Daughter Princesse of ORANGE. MADAME, IT was the saying of a KING,PROV. 18 16. a mans gift maketh roome for him before the great; If there were no other way but by gifts, I should come behind and not before, how ever it be, as S. Peter said to the creeple at the Temple gate called Beatifull, Such as I have I give, yea;Act. 3.6 and that with a willing minde.
In dayes of mourning, we must t forget our spirituall mirth; Chri precept is that we rejoice ever more Women more then men are incline to singing,1 THES. 5.16. as daylie practise dot shew; when David returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, it is said, that the women came out o all the cities of Israel singing,1 SAM. 18.7. Sa hath slaine his thousands, and Da¦vid his ten thousands; no mention is made of men singers. If your Highnesse desire spirituall recreations in hly songs, I have heere tuned the Song of Songs in the first place, and not without reason,  being so called by excellencie: Ʋn it are subjoined the other cheefe songs contained in the Old and New Testa∣ment, as they ly in order: The Apostle S. James hath given this precept,JAM. 5.13. COL. 3.16. I any merry? Let him sing; S. Pau ordaines that we sing with grace i our hearts to the Lord; In anothe place, he willeth that we be filled wit
the spirit, and that wee speake to our selves in Psalmes, and Hymnes,EPHES. 5.19. and Spirituall Songs, makeing me∣lodie in our heart to the Lord. The Lord grant your Highnesse such happinesse, that yee may have many joyfull dayes to awake your glory, that yee may chearfully sing the praises of the LORD. Your Highnesse most humble servant, Mr. Zachary Boyd. From Glasgow the 20 of March, 1645.
THE GARDEN OF ZION. The Song of Songs. A Prayer. O Great Jovah, who art the Prince of m Renew thy grace for to encheere my pen To praise thy name, good matter now endite Make me thy Scribe this love Song for  write A Song of Songs, Let not thy vertue fal To stirre me up to be thy Nightingale, That now and then in my most busie dayes, With streins unwonted in sweet sugred layes
I may expresse some of that sacred Love, That thee to take the Church for spouse did move, To wooe her with such wordes of heavenly art, That would even melt the hardest marble heart. While I this love Song put in Poesie, Make thou my heart to fall in love with thee: Let us not once with badry songs defile Our lips, like these who to their vomite vile Do dayly turne; O make us now afresh, To hate the garment spotted with the flesh▪ That I this Song of Songs may sweetly sing, Make me to sip of thy immortall spring, That Christ, who did both hell and death de∣stroy, May still the Antheme be of all my joy.
THE SONG OF SONGS, Which is Solomons. CHAP. I. The Church speaketh to Christ. LET him me with the Kisses kisse of his mouth most divine, For thy great love most cer¦tainlie far better is then wine. 3 Because of thy good ointments smell, as ointment most sweetly Thy name is powred foorth, therefore the Virgins do love thee. 4 O draw me with the cords of love, we after thee will run;
The King he hath brought me unto the chambers of his Inne. We will be glade and als rejoice in thee, and also we, Thee will remember more then wine, the upright all love thee. 5 Though I be black I comely am, O Daughters of Salem, As tents of Kedar, and as the curtaines of Solomon. 6 Look not on me because that I most blackish seeme to be, Because the Sun hath with his beames long looked upon me. My Mothers children angry were with me, they keeper made Me of their vineyards, but I not did keep mine owne vineyard. 7 O thou whom my soul dearly loves, I pray thee tell me soone Where thou dost feed, and where thou mak'st thy flock to rest at noone. For why should I be any way as one that turnes aside, By flocks of thy companions all where ever they abide?
CHRIST. 8 O fairest One, if thou not know, foorth by the footsteps go Of thy flock, feed thy kids beside the sheepheards tents also. 9 I have compared thee my Love unto a companie Of horses in Pharos charets, which strong and lustie be. 10 Thy cheekes are comely all with rowes of jewels manifold, Thy neck richly adorned is with finest chaines of gold. 11 I and my Father will thee make of fine gold borders good, We also thee richly adorne will with the silver stude. The Church. 12 While the King who in Majestie most highly doth excell At table sits, my spiknard then sends foorth thereof the smell. 13 My welbeloved is of myrrhe a bundle unto me; All the night long betwixt my breasts with pleasure lie shall he,
14 My deare beloved is alwayes most excellent to me, As clusters of Champhire are in vineyards of Engedi. CHRIST. 15 Behold thou art most faire my Love, even with most rare beauties: Thou art I say exceeding faire, and hast pure chast Doves eyes. The Church. 16 Behold thou my beloved deare, art faire and still hast beene, Yea, pleasant above others all, our bed is also greene. 17 The glorious beames of all our house are of the Cedar trees, And of the pure and polish'd firre are made our galleries. Chap. 2. CHRIST. I Am the most sweet smelling Rose, that growes on Sharon field, And als the rarest Lillie which the fattest valleyes yeeld.
2 As among pricking thornes and briers appeares the lillie rare, So is among the daughters all, my love perfectly faire. The Church. 3 As th' Apple tree, among the trees of the wood thick and throng, So likewise my beloved is the sonnes of men among. 4 Under his shadow I sat downe with great delight in hast, And his fruit which most pleasant is was sweet unto my taste. 4 He brought me to the banket house, his sprit so did me move, His banner that was over me, was altogether love. 5 O stay me me now, with flagons and with apples that are sweet Me comfort, for I surely am of love exceeding sick. 6 His left hand in a loving way, is fast under my head, And his right hand embraceth me most lovingly indeed.
7 By Roes and Hindes, O Salems maids, I charge you that ye cease, Either to stirre or yet awake my love untill he please. 8 Behold my dear beloveds voice, he comes most speedilie, Upon the mountaines leaping and skipping on hills most hie, 9 Hee's like a Roe or a young Hart, he stands behind our wall, He looketh foorth and shewes himself ev'n through the lattesse all. 10 My Welbeloved said to me, rise up without delay, My love and als my faire one now make hast and come away. 11 For lo past is the winter all with its most stormy blast. The raine also which spoiles the wayes is over gone, and past. 12 The flowres on earth do now appeare, the birds do sweetly sing, The Turtle in our land is heard, as in a pleasant spring. 13 The fig-tree her green figs puts foorth Vines tender grapes alway.
Most sweetly smell, Arise my love my faire One come away 14 O my deare Dove, that art now hide in the clifts of the rock, Even in the secret places of the staires where thou dost lurke. Let me now see thy countenance, and let me thy voice heare, For sweete is thy voice, and also thy countenance is cleare. 15 Take us the foxes, yea take als foxes that little be, That spoile the vines, for tender grapes our vines have as yee see. 16 My Welbeloved sure is mine, and I am his indeed, Among the lillies smelling sweet he pleasantly doth feed. 17 Untill day break and shadowes passe, turne my belov'd and be Thou like a Roe, or a young Hart on Bethers mountaines hie. Chap. 3. BY night on my bed carfully I sought with all my minde
Him whom my soul loves; I sought him but I him could not finde. 2 I will now rise and go about in streets of the city, And in the broad wayes will him seeke whom my soul loves dearly. I sought him very carefully and that with all my minde, But though I sought him night and day, yet could I not him finde. 3 The watchmen that still go about the city, then found me, To whom I said, Have ye him found whom my soule loves dearly? 4 It but a little was that I from them did passe away, But I him whom my soul doth love did finde without delay; I held him, and would not him let go till, I quickly had Him to the house, and chambers brought of her that me conceiv'd. 5 I charge you Salems daughters by Roes and Hinds, that you cease Either to stir or yet awake my Love untill he please.
6 Who's this that like pillars of smoke, comes out of wildernesse Perfum'd with frankincense and myrrhe, and merchants powders als? 7 Behold his bed which far above doth Solomons excell, About it of most valiant men are threescore of Isra'l. 8 Expert in war they all do hold swords in their hands most bright, Each man his sword upon his thigh, because of fear by night. 9 King Solomon in his great pomp himself did make a bed, A charet which of Lebanon was of the choicest wood. 10 Its pillars were of silver, and its bottome was of gold, The covering was of purple fine, most rich for to be hold. The midst thereof most gloriously, well paved was with love, For the fair daughters of Salem as it them did behove. 11 Go foorth with admiration great ye daughters of Zion,
And with respect and reverence behold King Solomon. With crown wherewith his mother crown'd in his espousals day, And in the day his heart was fill'd with gladnesse great and joy. Chap. 4. CHRIST. BEhold my love thou art most faire, most fair is all thy skin, The pure and chast eyes of the Dove thou hast thy lockes within; Thy haire thy outward ornament doth shine and glister clear Even like a flock of goats that from mount Gilead do appeare. 2 Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep, that are even shorne perfite, As when they from the washing come they are both cleane and white: Each one of them most fertile is and bear twins in a throng, Not one that is of all the flock is barren them among.
3 Thy pleasant lips are alwayes like unto a scarlet threed, And when thou speak'st then all thy speach is comely still indeed: Thy temples als within thy lockes do blush so modestly, That of Pomegranates they a peece most surely seeme to be. 4 Thy neck is like King Davids tower built for an armory, Wherein a thousand bucklers hang, and shields of men mightie. 5 Thy two breasts full of dainty food are like two Roes indeed Young that are twines, which well among the pleasant lillies feed. 6 Untill the day most clearly break and shaddowes flee from hence, I'll get me to the mounts of myrrhe, and hlls of frankincense. 7 My Church, my Love, thou art all faire, and so thou seemes to me, Thou art so washen and made cleane, there is no spot in thee. 8 My spouse with me from Lebanon, from Lebanon with me
Come, looke from tops of Amana, Shemir and Hermon hie; Come from thy persecutors all, even from the Lions dennes, And also from the Leopards that haunt the high mountaines. 9 My sister spouse my heart thou hast ravish'd; thou hast my heart With one of thine eyes ravish'd, with one chaine upon thy neck. 10 How faire's thy Love my Sister Spouse! how better much then wine! And the smell of thine ointments sweet then spices good and fine. 11 Thy lips my spouse as th' hony comb drop, hony milk alone Under thy tongue, thy garments smell most sweet as Lebanon. 12 My sister spouse a Garden is, which is inclosed well, A spring shut up, a fountaine als whereon is set a seale. 13 Thy pleasant plants an orchard are of Pomegranats most faire, With pleasant fruits the Champhire sweete, with spiknard that is rare.
14 Spiknard, Saffron, and Calamus, and Cinamon, and tree Of frankincens, Myrrhe, Aloes, with spices cheefe that be, 15 A fountaine for to water well the gardens all anone, A well of living waters and faire streemes from Lebanon. The Church. 19 O Norrh wind quickly now awake, and come thou South about, Upon my Garden blow that so its spices may flow out. Let my beloved come at last, into his Garden sweet, That he there even most chearfully his pleasant fruites may eat. Chap 5. CHRIST. I Am into my Garden come my Spouse and Sister wise, I gathrd have my pleasant Myrrhe, with my delicious spice;
eaten have my hony comb, and drunk milk, wine, gladly; Now eat O friends, drink, O belov'd, yea drink aboundantly. The Church. I sleep securely, but my heart doth wake both night and day, t is the voice of my Belov'd which knocking thus doth say, My Sister, Love, Dove, undefild, now open to me right, or my head and locks filled are with dew drops of the night. I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on a while, washed also have my feet, how shall I them defile? My Welbelov'd put in his hand by the hole of the door, nd for the love of him were then my bowels moved sore. I rose at last to open to my Welbeloved one, nd then my hands most fragrantly, did drop with myrrhe anone:
My fingers with sweet smelling myrrhe also did richly drop, Which in aboundance fell upon the handles of the lock. 6 To my Belov'd I op'ned then, but my Belov'd anone Withdrawen himself had far away, and from the door was gone: My soul fail'd when he spake, I him sought, but I not surely Could finde him, when I call'd he gave no answere unto me. 7 The watchmen that did go about the city, there me found, They smot me most despightfully, and did me deeply wound: These who did keep the walls thereof by night and als by day, From me with great despight and rage my vaile soone tooke away. 8 I charge you daughters of Salem if my Belov'd yee finde, That yee him tell, that of his love I am sore sick in minde.
Strangers enquiring for CHRIST. 9 O fairest among women, what is thy Beloved more, What is he more then others are that thou dost charge so sore? The Church. 10 Both white, and rudy, my Belov'd is, as I understand, He beautifull the cheefest is even among ten thousand; 11 His head is as the finest gold, his lockes they bushy are, And also black even like a Rav'n his youth-head to declare; 12 His eyes are as the eyes of Doves that by the rivers sit, Well washed with the whitest milk and also fitly set; 13 His cheekes are as the spices bed, as sweet flowres that excell, His lips like Lillies droping sweete of pleasant myrrhe do smell. 14 His hands as goldrings are set with the Berill richly made,
His belly as bright yvory is with Saphires overlaid. 15 His legs as Marble pillars are on golden sockets set, His count'nance is as Lebanon, as Cedars high and great. 16 Most sweete his mouth is, yea he is most lovely altogether, This my Belov'd and this my friend is, O thou Salems Daughter. Chap. 6. Strangers enquiring for CHRIST. WHether is thy Beloved gone of all women most faire? Or whether is he turn'd that we may seeke him, now declare? The Church. 2 Into his garden my Belov'd gone downe is, for to eat In gardens faire, to the spice beds, to gather lillies sweet. 3 My Welbeloveds I am all and my Belov'd most rare
Is also mine; he feedes among the lillies white and faire. CHRIST. 4 Most beautifull my Love thou art as Tirzah, and comely As Salem, and most dreadfull as with banners an army. 5 From me thine eyes now turne away, for they me overcome, Thy haire is as a flock of goats that from fair Gilead come. 6 Thy teeth are as a flock of sheep which go from washing throng; Each one beares twins, and there is not one barren them among. 7 Thy temples als within thy lockes do blush so modestlie, That of Pomgranates they a peece most surely seeme to be. 8 Though threescore of fair Queens there be, and Concubines fourscore, And virgins als them to attend, yea without number more. 9 My Doue my undefiled is but one, She the most rare,
Her mothers onely One, and cheef choice of her that her bare. The daughters of the land her saw and blessd her heartily; Yea, the Queenes and the Concubines they praised her highly. 10 Who is she that as morne lookes foorth, faire as the Moone and clear Even as the Sun, and Armies as that dreadfull banners bear. 11 To the Nutgarden I went down, the valley fruits right good To see, to see als if the Vine and Pomegranates did bud. 12 Or ev'r I was aware, my soul with love to thee all prest, Like Charets of Aminadab, made me to make great hast. 13 Returne, returne, O Shulamite, returne, returne to me, That we with great gladnesse of heart, may looke now upon thee. What will yee in the Shulamite with great contentment see? Even such a sight as if it were two Armies companie.
Chap. 7. O Princes daughter how pleasant with shooes thy feet now are, The joints of thy thighs jewels seeme wrought by some workman rare. 2 Thy navell like round goblets is which want not liquor sweet, Thy belly as with lillies set, is like a heap of wheat. 3 Thy two breasts the two Testaments, which all thy children feed, Most pleasant are like two young Roes, which comely are indeed. 4 Thy stately neck is as a tower of whitest yvorie, Like fishpooles in Heshbon thine eyes, that by Bathrabbim be. Thy nose is comely as the tower of Libanus most rare, Which toward Damascus doth looke in stately forme and faire. 5 Thine head on thee is Carmell like, als of thine head the hair Is purple like, the King is held in galleries most rare. 6 How fair and beautifull my Church, how pleasant to my sight
Art thou to me alwayes, O Love for pleasure and delight! 7 This thy most goodly stature is like unto a Palme tree, And thy breasts like two clusters of Grapes that well filled be. 8 I said, I unto the Palme tree to go up will be bold, I will of the fair boughs thereof with all my force take hold. Now also shall thy breasts all be as clusters of the vine, And of thy nose the pleasant smell like apples good and fine. 9 And like best wine thy mouths roofe is for my belov'd sweetly, That goes down causing sleepers lips to speak most graciously. The Church. 10 I surely my beloveds am whom I love tenderlie, And his desire though not deserv'd, is alwayes towards me. 11 Come my beloved Saviour now, let us together go Foorth to the fields; in villages let us now lodge also.
12 Let us get up with diligence to the vineyard early, Let us now see if that the vine doth flourish pleasantly. Whether the tender grapes appear, and the Pomegranates bud, There will I surely give my loves to thee both fair and good. 13 The mandrakes smell, and at our gates all pleasant fruits now be, Both new and old, which I laid up, O my belov'd for thee. Chap. 8. The believing Jewes. O That thou my blest Saviour now wert as my brother neer, hat sucked hath the breasts of her who is my mother dear! When I should finde thee heere without, I would with gladnesse thee ost loving Kisse, even so that I should not despised be. I would thee lead with all my heart, and foorth I would bring thee,
Into my loving mothers house, thereto instructed be. I gladly would thee cause to drink of my well spiced wine, And of the fair Pomegranates juice, which pleasant is and fine. 3 Under my head in lovely wayes his left hand laid should be, And his right hand most tenderly, likewise embrace should me. 4 O daughters of Jerusalem, I charge you that ye cease; To stir up or awake my Love, and that untill he please. CHRIST. Who is this from the wildernesse, that comes up by and by, And thus on her Beloved doth ev'n leaning still rely? It is my Church I thee did raise up from the Apple tree, Thy mother there thee did bring foorth, she brought foorth that bare thee.
The beleeving Jewes Me as a seale set on thy heart, and on thine arme set me, or love as death, and as the grave most strong is jealousie. ven burning coales of hotest fire are the coales of the same, Which kindled have a vehement and a most piercing flame. True love can not be quench'd at all, by waters flowing downe, or yet can floods of troubles great by any force it drowne. f any largely of his house would give the substance all t utterly contemned should be both by great and small. We have a little sister which no breasts hath lesse or more, What shall we do even in the day she shall be spoken for? CHRIST. If she continue firme and fast, like to a mighty wall,
A silver Palace build on her we altogether shall: And if she be even as a door to give eare to my words, We will most safely her inclose with finest Cedar boards. The beleeving Jewes. 10 I am a wall, my breasts also like towers are on the ground, Then was I in his eyes as one that had his favour found. CHRIST. 11 At Baal-Hamon a vineyard king Solomon had set, The vineyard unto keepers he for profite then had let: Each one of these his servants for the sweet fruit of the vine, A thousand pieces was to bring of silver good and fine. 12 My vineyards fruits are all for me, but thou O Solomon Must have a thousand, and the rest the farmers live upon.
13 Thou that in Gardens dwellest faire and livest in Gods feare, ompanions hearken to thy voice, cause me it als to heare. The Church. ake haste my Welbelov'd, and be thou like unto a Roe, to young Harts, that on the mounts of spices quickly go. THE SONG OF MOSES AT THE RED SEA: After GOD had drowned Pharao and his whole hoast. EXOD. 15. vers. 1. Will now sing unto the LORD, for he hath gloriously Triumph'd, he horse and rider als hath throwen into the Sea. The LORD he is my strength and song, and my salvation sure,
An habitation I for him most gladly will prepare. My fathers GOD, he still hath been and that in every part; I him therefore will now exalt, and that with all my heart. 3 The Lord who hath a mighty arme is as a man of war, The Lord most surely is his name, well known both neer and far. 4 He Pharos charets and his hoast hath cast into the Sea, In the red Sea, even drowned all his chosen Captaines be. 5 With frothy deepths GOD cov'red them, this work he did alone, Into the bottome they did sink, even as a heavy stone. 6 Thy right hand is become, O LORD, most glorious in great power, Thine arme and thy right hand, thy foes, have dasht even all to powder. 7 Thou hast thy foes all overthrown in great excellencie, Thy wrath thou sent'st foorth, which consum' them as the stubble dry.
8 And with the blast of thy nostrils the waters gath'red there, he floods stood upright as an heap, the deepths congealed were. Th enemy said, I will pursue, them will I overtake, will divide the spoile my lust upon them will I wreak. In my wrath most fierce will draw my sword them to annoy, y mightie hand with fearfull plagues, shall surely them destroy. 11 Thou didst blow with thy boistrous wind, the sea them covr'd indeed, hey in the mighty waters all sank downe as heavy lead. 12 Who's like thee LORD among the gods? who's glorious like to thee holinesse, and fearefull praise, and wonders done by thee? 13 Thou in thy fierce wrath stretchedst out thy right hand with great strength, he earth opning her mouth did then all swallow up at length. Thou in thy mercy hast led foorth thy people bought by thee,
Thou in thy strength them to thy house hast guided lovingly. 14 The people all shall heare of this, and they shall be afraid; The indwellers of Palestine with grief shall be dismaide. 15 The Duks of Edom all amaz'd, with Moab tremble shall, The indwellers of Canaan shall melt away and fall. 16 By thy great Army feare and dread shall heavy on them fall, They as a stone still shall be till thy people passe ov'r all; O LORD, till that thy people all passe ov'r with courage fine, Which thou by thine Almighty hand hast purcha'd to be thine, 17 Thou strong, shalt bring them in, and them plant in thy holy place, Ev'n in thy pleasant Sanctuary establish'd by thy grace. 18 The LORD shall reigne for evermore most like a mighty King, 19 For he on Pharo and his house the lofty waves did bring.
But the children of Israel all who did the LORDS command, They in the mids of all the sea went safely on dry land. Miriams Song at the red Sea. THen Miriam the Prophetesse, the sister of A'ron, Did daunce with women thankfully, and Timbrels plaid upon. And Miriam thus answer'd them , praise GOD for now hath he riumph'd; He horse and rider als hath throwne into the Sea. The Song of Moses, a little before his death. DEUT. 32. vers. 1. THE PREFACE. O Pleasant heavens that are above, with diligence give ear And I will speak, O earth below the wordes of my mouth hear.
2 My doctrine shall drop as the raine, my speach as dew shall passe, As small raine on the tender herb and showres upon the grasse. 3 Because I surely publish will the blest name of the LORD, Yee greatnesse to our GOD therefore, ascribe with one accord. The first Part. 4 He is the rock, his work's perfite his wayes all judgement be, A God of Truth, and without sin most just and right is He. 5 They have corrupt themselves, their spot is not the spot alwayes Of his children, they are perverse a race of crooked wayes. 6 Unwise people do ye requite the Lord thus? Is not He Thy Father, buyer? Hath he not made and establish'd thee? 7 Remember ye the dayes of old, yeeres past consider well; Thy Father aske, he will thee shew, thy Elders will thee tell.
8 When the most High to nations did th' inheritance divide, When he the sons of Adam all did separate beside, He by his wisdome set the bounds of all the people then, According to the number of his Israels children. 9 For the Lord, for his portion hath his people without blot, Jacob is his inheritance appointed as by lot. 10 He found them in a desert land and wast wildernesse; He Him led, instructed, and him keept, as th'apple of his eye. 11 As th'Eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttreth her young upon, Her wings doth spread, and taketh them to carry them thereon. 12 So the good Lord did him alone lead in all wayes safely, And no strange god there was with him in all that company. 13 He made them ride on Canaan high, that he th'increase might eat,
He made him oile and hony suck, from flintie rocks most sweet. 14 Butter of Kine and milk of Sheep, he gave to every man, With fat of Lambs, and also Rams, of the breed of Bashan. He gave them Goats with the fat of Kidneyes of wheat right good, And of the sweet Grapes thou didst drink the pure wine red like blood. The second Part. 15 But Jeshurun who should have beene most righteous, then did kick, Thou waxed art exceeding fat, thou art growne very thick. Thou cov'red art with fatnesse; then his maker he forsooke, And of his sure salvations rock no care at all he took. 16 With strange gods they provoked him unto great jealousie, With great abominations they him angry made to be. 17 They sacrificed unto devils, to gods whom they not knew,
Whom your fathers did never feare, ev'n gods that were but new. 18 Thou art unmindfull of the Rock which thee once did beget, And the Lord God that formed thee, thou didst alwayes forget. The third part. 19 And when the LORD saw it, he did abhorre them all anone, Because of the provoking great of Daughter and of Son. 20 He said, I will from them my face hide, and I will now see Their end; they are a froward race in whom no faith can be. 21 With that which is not GOD they have me mov'd to jealousie, o anger they have me provok'd with their great vanitie: them also to jealousie, with such as are no flock Will move; to anger them with fools I surely will provoke. 22 For in my wrath fire kindled is, such as no tongue can tell,
It shall not cease alwayes to burne ev'n to the lowest hell; It shall consume the earth all with her increase, mans desire, And the foundations of the mount shall surely set on fire. 23 Upon them of mischeef a heap I certainly will send, I also upon them in wrath, mine arrowes now will spend. 24 They shall consumed be and burnt with paine of hunger great, And suddenly shall be devour'd with a most burning heat: And with bitter destruction, I will also on them thrust The teeth of beasts, with poison als of serpents of the dust. 25 The sword without terrour within destroy shall, and not spare The young man, Virgin, Sucklings als, with the man of gray haire. 26 I said I into corners would them quickly scatter, then I would make their rememberance to cease from among men;
27 Were it not that I the great wrath fear'd of the enemie, Lest their vaine adversaries should behave themselves strangly. And lest that they puft up with pride, should say these words anone, Our hand now high is, and the LORD this work all hath not done. 28 For they all a vaine Nation are of wholesome counsell void, No understanding good at all in them doth still abide. 29 O that they were wise, so that they this clearly understood, That they would now their latter end consider for their good. 30 How should but one a thousand chase, and two als put to flight Ten thousand, if their Rock had not them sold and shut up right? 31 For their rock in no way is as our rock that mighty is, We none but ev'n our enemies seek, for to be Judge of this. 32 Of Sodom and Gomorrahs field their vine I truely call,
Their clusters great most bitter are. their grapes are grapes of gall. 33 Their wine is Dragons poison, which from these grapes doth distill, And is the cruell venime of vile Aspes that men do kill. 34 Is not this wickednesse laid up in a great store with me, And up among my treasures als ev'n sealed secretlie? The fourth Part. 35 To me belongeth vengeance, and recompence for their crime, Their foot shall slide assuredly in due appointed time; For their day of calamitie is surely neere at hand, And the things that shall come on them Make hast, and shall not stand. 36 For the Lord shall his people judge, and for his folks repent. When their great power hee sees all gone and altogether spent. 37 And he in his great wrath shall say, where are there gods of might,
Their rock in whom they trusted much? they come not now in sight. 38 Which ate fatlings, and wine offrings, in drink did not reject et them rise up, and with their strength you help, and als protect. 39 See now that I am he ev'n I no god there is with me; kill, I also make alive, I wound, I heal safely. here be not one among the gods by sea, or yet by land. hat by his strength deliver can out of my mightie hand. 40 For I my hand unto the Heaven, do now lift up and heave signe of a great oath, and say, for ever as I live. 41 If I my glistring sword whet, and judge in severitie, vengeance surely will reward to my foes that hate me. 42 I will mine arrowes in my wrath (which is now kindled sore) ake drunk with blood) and my sword shall their filthie flesh devore.)
And that with the blood of the slaine, and men that captives be, From the beginning of revenge upon the enemie. 34 Rejoice ye nations with his folk, for he who doth not change, Will the blood of his servants dear most speedily avenge. And to his adversaries will a vengeance render full, And to his people and his land will be most mercifull. THE SONG OF DEBO∣RAH, AND BARAK: After the Victorie against th armie of Jabin King of Canaan who reigned in Hazor, whose Captaine was Sisera, whose head was cut off by Jahel, the wife of Heber. JUDGES 5. vers. 2. PRaise ye the LORD for th'avenging of his own Israel so,
When as the people willingly did to the battell go. Hear Kings and Princes, I, even I will sing unto the Lord; nto the Lord God of Isra'l, I praises will afford. Lord when thou wentst from Seir, when thou didst march from Edom land, he Earth trembled, the Heavens did drop, the clouds they did disband. The Mountaines melted from before the Lord God Eternell, en that Sinai from God before, the God of Israel. In SHAMGARS dayes son of ANATH, in the dayes of JAEL, e high wayes were unoccupi'd, they went in bywayes all. The indwellers of villages, in Israel did cease, ntill that I DEBORAH rose, a mother to make peace. They chose new gods, then in their gates was war; was there a shield spear fourty thousand among, in city or in field?
8 My heart to Isra'ls Governours is, that with one accord, Offred themselves most willingly to Battell, blesse the LORD. 9 Speake ye that ride on Asses white, in Rulers chief aray, And ye that sit in judgement, and that travell by the way. 10 And ye the poorest of the land, whose trade was still to draw Waters from wells, Of Archers ye did greatly stand in aw. Yee from this feare delivered, GODS great workes magnifie, Who hath traffique and Iustice giv'n in village and citie. 11 Awake, awake, awake, awake, DEBORAH sing anone, Arise BARAK and lead Captive thou of AHINOAN son. 12 Him that remaines he made to rule ov'r the Nobilitie, Ov'r people als; the LORD me gave rule over the mighty. 13 Of EPHRAIM, gainst AMALEK there was a worthy root;
And after thee, stout BENjAMIN, among thy people great rom MACHIR of MANASSE came governours goodly men, o this service came ZEBULON scribes handling well the pen; 15 And the most mighty Princes of strong ISSACHAR that day Were with DEBORAH in the field, ev'n ISSACHAR I say. here BARAK to the valley sent on foot, did soone depart; or the divisions of REUBEN there were great thoughts of heart. 16 Why from the Sheepfolds wouldst not thou go for to act thy part? or the divisions of REUBEN were searchings great of heart. 17 Beyond JORDAN GILEAD abode, and why did DAN remaine ships? Asher on the sea shore sought in his breaches gaine. 18 ZEBULON, and NEPHTALI stout were arm'd with Spear and Shield, hey jeoparded their lives all in high places of the field.
19 The Kings of CANA'N came and fought, JABIN for to maintaine, In TANAH to MEGIDDO neere, but thereby did not gaine. 'Gainst SISERA, the clouds and wind did fight, from the Heav'ns hie, The bright starres in their courses als fought most couragiouslie. 21 The river KISHON, ev'n KISHON did sweep them all away; O thou my soul, thou hast downe troad great strength without delay. 22 Then the strong horsehoves broken were ev'n with their strongest bones. By the meanes of the pransings great of the most mighty Ones. 23 Curse yee MEROS the Angel said, yea curse them bitterly, Because they did not help the Lord, 'gainst these that were mighty. 24 JAEL the wife of HEBER shall blest above women be, Above women she shall be blest, in the tent most surely. 25 He asked water, and she gave him milk of sweet relish,
She also wisely butter brought foorth in a lordly dish. 26 She with a hammer and a naile smote SISERA indeed; When she his Temples pierced had, she did smite off his head. 27 He bow'd and fll, and lay downe, he at her feet bow'd and fell; Where he bow'd there he fell downe dead at the feet of JAHEL. 28 SISERAS mother looked out at windowes, and did cry hrough the lattesse with joy of heart to these thar passed by, Why taries his Charet so long? What hinder doth it let? Why tarie thus the wheeles most swift of his Princely Charet? 29 When her wise Ladies heard these wordes, they did not long defer o give answer; yea, to her self she return'd this answer. 30 Have they not well in Battell sped, have they not all also, arted the prey to every man, a damosell or two?
To SISERA a wealthy prey, who his foes strong did foile; A colour'd prey of needle work for these that take the spoile. 31 So perish let thy foes, O Lord, but who with heart upright Him love, let them be as the Sun, when he goes foorth in might. The Song of Hannah, whic She sang to GOD when Sh had borne Samuel, after long barrennesse. 1 SAM. 2. vers. 1. MY heart rejoiceth in the LORD, my horne exalt did he; My mouth is greatly now inlarg'd, for his goodnesse to me. 2 There is none holy as the LORD, there is none beside thee, There is no rock that is like God, our God the Lord most hie. 3 Talk no more proudly as ye do, speak not with arrogance;
For all our deeds the Lord doth weigh in his sacred ballance: The strong bowes of the mighty men are broken all at length, d they that stumbled, now are girt with force and divine strength. They that were full in plentie, have hir'd out themselves for bread, d they that were in hunger great securly ceasd indeed, e that was barren and contemn'd hath borne sev'n great and small, d she that many children hath is waxed feeble all. The LORD by his strong arme doth kill, and he doth also save; lifteth up, he bringeth downe unto the stinking grave. By his great power he doth make poore, and also maketh rich, bringeth low, and raiseth up unto a certaine pitch. He raiseth up, out of the dust the poor from the dunghill,
He lifts the begger and him sets on Thrones with Princes still; For the strong pillars of the earth unto the Lord belong, And he by his great power hath set the world all them upon. 9 He of his saints will keep the feet, the wicked in darknesse Shall all be silent, none by strength prevaile shall more or lesse. 10 These fooles who do reject the Lord, shall soone be broke to pieces; With thunders shall he trouble them though they be great as Princes. The Lord shall judge the earth below, and strength give to his King, The horne of his anointed, he shall high exalt so reigne.
The Song of David, which he sang to give thanks, after that Nathan had promised him be∣nefites and blessings, but chiefly the Messiah to come of his seede. 2 SAM. 7. vers. 18. O LORD my God, now who am I that thou on me hast thought, What is my house that thou in love, me hitherto hast brought? This was but small Lord in thy sight; thou of thy servants house ast spoke for a great while to come, as thou art righteous: his truely Lord, a mercy great I clearly now do see, fter the maner of a man, this seemes no way to be. And what can David more to thee, for this thy goodnesse say? or thou Lord God, who art most hie, thy servant know'st alway.
4 For thy wordes sake thou hast now done according to thy heart These things, to make thy servants all thee know in every part. 5 Thou Lord art great, like thee is none, no God is thee beside, According to all things that we have heard on ev'ry side. 7 What Nation one in all the earth, is like thy people dear, Even like Isra'l whom God redeem'd, that he might them acquire, To get a name and do great things for thy most holy land, Before thy people which from Kings redeem'd are by thy hand? 8 For to thy self thou hast confirm'd Isra'l to thee for ay A people; and thou art become their Lord and God alway. 9 What of thy servant and his house, thou hast Lord spoken now, As thou hast said, it by thy grace establish and allow. 10 And let thy name be magnified for ever and for ay;
Te Lord of Hosts is Isral's God, let all the people say, nd let the house of thy servant David, for evermore e by thy mercy and thy might establish'd thee before. 11 For thou Lord God, the Lord of hostes, the God of Israel, nto thy servant hast reveal'd, thy mercies that excell. will thee build an house thou saidst, therefore I have this day, und ev'n this prayer thus in my heart, unto thee for to pray. 12 And now, O Lord, that God thou art, and thy wordes be most true, nd thou this goodnesse promisde hast, unto thy servants now. Therefore be pleased for to blesse thy servants house alway, hat it may so continue still, before thee fast for ay. or thou O Lord, in mercy great hast spoken it to me, ow let the house of thy servant for ever blessed be.
The Song of Isaiah, Conce¦ning the vineyard, wherein Gods people is reproved for their barrennesse in good workes, notwith∣standing of all the paines were taken by the Prophets. ISA. 5. vers. 1. TO my belov'd, I my belov'ds song will now sing with skill, My welbelov'd a vineyard hath in a most fruitfull hill. 2 He it did fence, and gathred out its stones at every houre, He planted it with choisest vine, and in it built a Towre. He als made a vine presse therein, and look'd it should bring foorth Good grapes, but foorth alwayes it brought wilde grapes of nothing worth. 3 O ye indwellers of Salem, and Judahs men alway, Betwixt my vineyard and me now judge justly I you pray.
4 What could I unto my vineyard, do more then I have done? While I for good grapes looked still, it brought wilde grapes alone. And now go to I will you tell, what to my vineyard I Will do, I will the hedge thereof away take by and by. Then shall it all be eaten up, I will break down its wall, nd it by wilde beasts of the field, shall down be troden all. I also now will lay it wast, it shall not pruned be or digged; but men briars, and thornes, anone come up shall see. also by my divine might, the clouds all will command, That they shall neither day nor night raine down upon the land. For of the Lord the vineyard is the house of Israel, And Judahs men his pleasant plant, which others should excell. And he for judgement looked well, but O then by and by
Oppression, als for righteousnesse, but O behold a cry. A Song of thanks, for the mercies of GOD. ISA. 12. vers. 1. I Will thee praise, O Lord, though tho with me most angry wast, Thine anger is now turn'd away, thou me comforted hast. 2 Behold and well consider; God is my salvation sure, I will still trust, and not afraid now will be lesse or more. For the great Lord, Jehovah is m strength and als my song, He my salvation is become, to him it doth belong. 3 Therefore out of salvations welles, yee shall your selfe imploy, Fine water in aboundance great to draw al wayes with joy. 4 Then shall ye say praise ye the Lord, and call upon his name,
His workes among the pople shew, and high exalt his fame, Unto the Lord sing thankfully for he hath things of worth Done by his mighty hand, this well is know'n in all the earth. Cry out and shout with a loud voice, yee that indwellers be Of Zion, Isra'ls holy one is great in midst of thee. A Song, inciting to confidence in God. ISA. 26. vers. 1. WEE have a city all made strong, the Lord salvation will Appoint for to be mighty walles and bulwarkes ever still, The glorious gates now open that the Nation void of sin, Which constantly the truth doth keep, may freely enter in. Thou wilt him well preserve and keep in perfect peace to be,
Whose mind is still upon thee stay'd, because he trustes in thee. 4 For ever in the Lord trust yee, for yee shall feele at length, That in the Lord Jehovah is an everlasting strength. 5 For he brings downe dwellers on high; the lofty city low He layes, it to the ground he brings even to the dust below. 9 The foot shall basely tread it downe even the foot of the poore. And the steps of the needy als shall ev'n the like procure. 7 The justs way all is uprightnesse, thou upright in thy wayes, Of the just in the ballance thou dost weigh the path alwayes. 8 Yea in thy judgements way, O Lord, we waited have for thee, Our soules desires unto thy name and thy remembrance be. 9 I with my soul have constantly desir'd thee in the night; Yea with my sprite I early will thee seek with all my might.
or when thy judgements in the earth us teach for to discerne, hen all the worlds inhabitants Gods righteousnesse will learne. 10 Let favour great be shewed still unto the wicked man, et for all that he righteousnesse will neither learne or can; v'n in the land of uprightnesse unjustly will he deale, nd of the Lord the Majestie behold no way he will, 11 Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they all refuse to see, ut they shall see against their will though they do close their eye. ecause thy people they envye, asham'd they shall be sore, ea the fire of thine enemies all shall quickly them devore. 12 Lord thou wilt ordaine peace for us, this still is in our thought; or thou in us hast all our workes ev'n by thy finger wrought. 13 O Lord besides thee other lords have rul'd us to our shame,
But by thee onely will we all make mention of thy name. 14 Hence foorth these wicked shall not live who are now dead and slaine, They at last all deceased are, they shall not live againe. Therefore thou visited hast them, and them destroy'd alway, And als hast made their memorie to perish quite away. 15 The Nation well thou hast increasde, thy glory shineth forth; Thou hadst remov'd it far unto the ends of all the earth. 16 Lord when they were in trouble, they did visite thee anone, They powr'd out prayers when thy rod was heavy them upon. 17 Most like a woman at childe birth, who in her pangs doth cry, So have we Lord been in thy sight distressed by and by. 18 We great with child have been in paine, and have brought forth the winde, To help out friends or foes defeat, no strength at all we finde.
19 Thy dead men shall most surely leave, together well they all ith my dead body even revive, and als arise they shall. e that in dust dwell now awake, for thy dew is indeed s dew of herbs, and als the earth shall cast out all the dead. 20 My people come, now enter thou, while as the time is fit, nto thy chambers, and with speede the doores about thee shute. here for a little moment hide thy self far from the blast, ntll the indigation great be safely over past. 21 For lo, the Lord out of his place doth come most speedily, o punish all the men on earth, for their iniquitie. The earth shall als disclose the blood, that in it did remaine, And shall no more the meanes afford, to cover close her slaine.
The Song of Hezekiah, afte GOD had healed him of his sicknesse, and promised unto him fifeteene yeeres of life. ISA. 38. vers. 10. IN cutting off of my short dayes, I said, I shall now go Unto the grave; I am depriv'd of my few yeeres also, 2 I said that in the livings land the Lord I shall not see, I shall no more see man with these that heere indwellers be, 3 Mine age is parted and remov'd by troubles and great strife Like sheepheards tents; I veaver like have ev'n cut off my life. With sicknesse he will cut me off what ever I pretend, From day ev'n unto night wilt thou of me soone make an end. 4 I rekned till morning that as a Lion so will he
Break all my bones; from day to night thou'l make an end of me. Like a poore Cran in great distresse, or a troubled swallow, o did I chatter; I did mourne as doth the simple Doue. My eyes do fail with looking up, and very dimmed be, O Lord, I am oppressed sore, now undertake for me. 6 What shall I say? he spoken hath, and als hath done no lesse, shall go softly all my yeers in my souls bitternesse. 7 In all these things is of my sprite the life; they that believe Do live by them; Recover me, and so make me to live. 8 Behold for a desired peace I had great bitternesse, But thou in love hast sav'd me from the pit of rottenesse; For thou who of afflicted men dost ever notice take, In thy great mercy all my sins, hast cast behind thy back.
9 The grave can not thee praise, and death can not thee magnifie, They that go to the pit can not, in hope rest well on thee. 10 The living, yea the living shall thee praise as I this day; The fathers to their children als, shall teach thy truth alway. 11 The LORD was ready me to save, therefore we with accord, To the string'd instruments will sing, in the house of the LORD. The Song of Jonah, Con¦taining a Prayer and Thanks for his delivrance out of the belly of the Whale, wherein hee had beene three dayes, and three nights. JONAH 2. vers. 1. I Cry'd to God and he me heard, out of hells belly I Did cry aloud, and thou my voice even heardest by and by.
2 For thou hadst cast me in the deep, in the midst of the Sea, e flouds me compassd, and thy waves did all passe over me. Then said I, I out of thy sight am cast with great disdaine, t to thy holy Temple I will surely look againe. Ev'n to the soul the waters did me compasse with all speed, e deepth me closde about, the weeds were wrapt about my head. To the bottomes of mountaines steep I went down speedily, earth for ever with her barres, did alwayes compasse me; hast thou from corruptions pit, by mercies me upon, ord, my God and Saviour dear, my life brought up anone. The Lord, I did remember when my soul thus within me faint; into thy Temple came my prayer ev'n unto thee. hey that do lying vanities observe in any way,
Their owne mercy most foolishly they do forsake alway. 8 But I to thee with thankfull voice, will sacrifice afford, What I have vow'd, I minde to pay; salvation's of the Lord. The Song and Prayer of H¦bakkuk, wherein he declaret his trembling at GODS Majestie, and also the confidence of his faith, while the Caldeans afflicted GODS people. HABBAK. 3. vers. 2. O Lord God full of Majesty, I thy servant have heard Thy speach in wordes of gravity, and I was sore afraid. 2 In midst of yeers revive, O Lord, thy work and ever still Make known; als in thy burning wrath remember mercy well. 3 From TEMAN and from PARAN mount came God the Holy one,
His glory cov'rd the heavens, his praise was all the earth upon. His brightnesse was as light, he had Hornes coming from his hand, here was the hiding of his great power which none did understand. Before him went the pestilence, and hoat coales at his feet; He stood and measur'd all the earth, as it did seeme most meet. e did behold and also drove asunder nations all, nd th' everlasting mountaines were scattred both great and small: he hills perpetuall in their place did humbly stoup and bow, His wayes are everlasting all, as we do clearly know. Of Cushan in affliction great I saw tents great and small, he Curtaines of the Midian land, did also tremble all. Was the Lord God displeased much against the Rivers clear? as thine anger incensed thus, 'gainst Rivers far or neer?
Against the sea was thy wrath so that thou didst fiercely ride, Upon the horses and charets that safety might abide? 9 Thy bow all naked quite was made, that men there might beleeve Thou sware unto the Tribes: thou didst the earth with waters cleave. 10 The hills thee saw and trembled all, the water passed by, The deep his voice did utter, and lift up his hands on hie. 11 The Sun and Moon stood in their place, even at thine arrowes clear, They at the light went, and the shine of thy most glittring spear. 12 Thou furious didst march through the land in indignation great, Thou also didst the heathen thresh, even in thine anger hot. 13 For thy peoples salvation thou went'st foorth without all fear, Even for salvation of great worth, with thine anointed dear. Out of the wicked house didst thou with power great wound the head,
Discov'ring the foundation all unto the neck with speed. 14 Thou by thy hand Almighty of his villages the head, Even with his staves did strike anone, with fiercenesse great indeed: They came out all as a whirlewind, and that to scatter me, Their joy was all as to devore, the poor most secretly. 15 With thine horses which were most strong thou didst walk through the Sea, Even through the heap of waters great, as men did clearly see. 16 My belly trembled when I heard, and at the voice anone My lips quiv'red, and rottenesse did enter in my bone. I trembled in my self that I might rest in dayes most sad, When he comes to the people, he with troupes them will invade. 17 Though the figtree not blossome shall, nor fruites in Vines shall be, The labour of the Olive fat, shall fade most certainly,
The fields shall not yeeld any meat, the flock shall from the fold Be cut off, and there shall no head in stalles be young or old. 18 Yet will I in the mightie Lord rejoice in every part, In the Lord God my Saviour dear, I joy will with my heart. 19 The Lord God is my strength, and will make my feet swift to be Like Hindes feet, and will make me walk upon my places hie. The Song of Marie in the house of Zacharias, after Elizabeth had told her, that at her salutation the childe in her wombe had leaped for joy. LUKE 1. vers. 46. MY soul now all with gladnesse fill'd the LORD doth magnifie, My sprite rejoiced hath in God a saviour still for me.
2 For he regarded hath of his handmaide th estate so small, For loe all generations sure, shall hence me blessed call. 3 He strong, hath done great things to me, and holy is his name, Who still him feare, his mercy great shall alwayes be on them. 4 He hath great strength shew'd with his arme, the proud he in all parts Hath scattred, in the vaine conceits of their most foolish hearts. 5 He hath put downe ev'n from their seats these that most mighty be, And also he exalted hath these of a low degree. 6 The hungry well he filled hath with good things evry way, These who are rich and wealthy he hath empty sent away. 7 In remembrance of his mercy he holpen hath indeed His servant Isra'l, as he spake t' Abraham and his seed.
The Song of Zacharias wher his mouth was opened, after he had been nine moneths dumb for not believing the Angel Gabriel, who from God had promised him a Sonne. LUKE 1. vers. 68. LEt the LORD God of Israel for ever blessed be, For visited his people all and als redeem'd hath he. 2 And of salvation he for us hath raisd up gloriously Ane horne in worthy Davids house who serv'd him faithfully. 3 As he spake clearly by the mouth of his dear Prophets all, Which since the world began have beene ev'n whether great or small. 4 That we should from our enemies all be saved in each part, And from the hand of all these men that hate us with their heart▪
5 The mercy promisd to performe unto our fathers, and is holy Cov'nant made with us to make alwayes to stand. Th' oath which he to Abraham sware that he to us most deare ould grant that we safe from our foes might serve him without feare. Yea serve him in all holinesse and righteousnesse alwayes, ot for a little space of time, but ev'n for all our dayes. And thou child of the highest shalt be call'd the Prophet rare, or thou before the Lord shalt goe his wayes for to prepare. Thou knowledge of salvation shalt unto his people give, y the remission of their sins which he will all forgive. o Ev'n through the tender mercy of our God most prone to grace, hereby the DAY-SPRING from on high hath shew'n to us his face. 1 To give light unto them that sit in darknesse and deaths shade,
Into the way of holy peace, our feet alwayes to guid. The Song of Simeon: After he had long looked for the Con∣solation of Israel, he at last moved by the Holy Spirit, went to the Temple, and there finding the babe Christ, he took him up in his armes, and blessed GOD, and said, LUKE 2. vers. 29. NOw letst thou in thy mercy great, thine old servant O LORD, At last by death in peace depart, according to thy word. 2 For after many dayes at last mine eyes though now worne dimme, Thy consolation sure and fast have with great comfort seen. 3 Which thou O Lord most lovingly, ev'n by thy saving grace, Prepared hast aboundantly before all peoples face.
4 A precious light to lighten all the Gentiles far, and neer, d als the glory of Isra'l that is thy people dear. This Song of Simeon, is alwayes sung in the French Church for conclusion, after they have received the Sacrament of the LORDS Supper. The use of all the Songs. THE songs of Larks, Linots, and Nigh∣tingals Compard to these, are but like naugh∣ty tales, hich in our ears deserve to have no place; hese divine songs sad hearts do well solace, nd fill with joy: yea, and with capering foot ake souls to rise, and dance where they did sit ithin our breasts, like John at Marys voice, hich made him leap, and chearfully rejoice. To sing such songs let us our selves inure, ill that we dance above the starry floore, nd sing to Christ the Hallelujahs sweet, here Sunne and Moone are pav'ment for our feet,
Far from the words of a most vile infection, Which slute the body, and als slave th'affection Oh that we could from vain words heer forbear Till of our life be ended the Career: Fy on vile men, whose badry songs a blot, Defile the air come from their filthy throat. Fy on these who in vanities do swim, Who dance and leap, and hold out any lim With nimble fet-locks; but have not a word Of holy songs to laud and praise the Lord: Such want a heart Christs love for to remark▪ They can not sing, or dance before the Ark. But as for us, away with fleshly love, And beastly songs which Gods word doth reprove Vaine idle words which in these latter dayes, Are made the subject of mens sweetest layes; Let Christ the fairest all the Saints among Be still the matter of our daily Song; Let all our Ditties runne upon this string, Let hearts and Harps in him rejoice and sing; What is amisse, let us it hence remove, That we may sing of Christ our life and love. FINIS.
Some few Christian Precepts. WHat God the gives take in good part, cease other to devoure, Like Alexanders glutton net whose Kingdome Kinged foure. When thou triumphs, not lofty be but think upon a crosse, or who the day is set on hie may soone his laurell losse. Take heed in time and learne to fear, the great Almighty God, Who made Denis a King to beare for Scepter Pedants rod. Remember how that Prince of Spaine, who for Europe did breath, By Gods Almighty hand was slaine ev'n by a louzie death. Remember how some in their pride Gods heavy hand did feele, Their head on neck could not abide. off chopt with whiffing steele.
6 Think still on death for time doth slip though it seemes but to creep, Man heer is as at sea, his ship still sailes, though men do sleep. 7 While wind doth serve, embark, be wise to meet all haps before, When death shall cut thine enterprise, then thou shalt row no more. 8 Take time in time, for wind and tide will in a moment turne, We heere sure will not long abide, and gone, will not returne. 9 Looke not heer for true happinesse, the place of our exile, A bare and barren wildernesse, where we live all this while. 10 Look on thy body as on clay, the soule is stuffe more fine, A substance which weares not away a blast of breath divine. 11 Luske not in sloath, seeke not thine ease, Moths gnow cloaths in a chest, Swords also rust within their sheeths, and so do souls in rest. 12 Manure thy heart with diligence, and it in sow good seed,
But still beware of negligence, for earely grows the weed. 13 All idlenesse disnatures wit, but travell makes it quick, Do nothing that disableth it by force or yet by trick, 14 With constant eye still Christ behold, and on him still repose, As with the Sun the Mary gold, doth open still or close. 15 When death us summons to go hence, we should not be dejected, For from the same no more the Prince then Carters is protected. 16 Our life's a web of small and grosse, this is us giv'n for doome; That sorrowes are as threeds a Crosse in this our earthly loome. 17 Let us abhore ambition content with that we have, In grave in one condition are King, Earle, Sir and Slave. 18 This earth is like a Chesse-board where some leap some limp anone, Kings, Pawnes, Knights, Aphens heere and there stand; yet there wood is one.
1 TIM. 1. vers. 17. Now unto the King eternall, immortall, invisible, the onely wise GOD, be honour and glory, for ever and ever, Amen. Errata. IF any of these verses go not so smoothly as thou wouldest, know that I have tyed my self verie straitly to keep still the wordes of the Scripture: Some escapes there be in the printing, at some times a syllable more, and some are lesse then should, but the judicious Reader may easily take the matter up: Pag. 272. Davids house is put for Isra'ls house, Pag. 142. bribidge for bribing, Pag. 265. qy for by, Pag. 330. day say for did say, Pag. 364. trotring for totring, &c.
