C495A 51617746 175163
THE ADDRESSE OF Don Alfonso de Cardenas Lord Ambassadour for the King of SPAIN TO THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMON-WEALTH OF ENGLAND, As also a true ACCOMPT OF THE Totall Overthrow of Prince Ru∣perts Fleet by General Blake at Carthagena in the Medeterranian Sea. Prited is Edinburgh by Evan Tyler,
THE SPEECH OF THE Lord Ambassadour of Spain, to the Parliament on Thursday, the 26. of December, 1650. THe King, my Master, being desirous to shew to the World how great is the Affection, and Good will, with which on his part hath alwayes been continued a sincere and secure Friend ship with the English Nation, and to give hereof a royall and conchad¦ing proof; It hath seemed good unto him to quallifie for the acknowledging this State, whose Authority and Soveraignty resides in this Parliament of the Common-Wealth of England, and to write by way of Credence on my behalf, this Letter the which I here present. And his Catholique Majesty being the Greatest and First King of Christendom, hath thought fit to oblige this Common Wealh, by being also the First, who should make this Acknowledgement by me his Ambassadour, and quallified to this effect, being moved hereunto, only out of good will, which in Spain hath ever been con∣served toward this Nation, and out of a naturall pro∣pension, whereunto his royall minde inclines him, to continue, establish, and Close up a good Friend-ship with this Common-Wealth. And I have speciall Order from the King, my Master, to declare as from him, the lively resentment, that un∣happy
Accident of Anthony Ascha, Resident of this Common-Wealth ed him , and to lay open what his Majesty hath done in prosecution of the Cause, against those who were guilty of his Death, in which they have proceeded on the part of his Majesty and his Mi∣nisters to do, not obely all that the Lawes and Customs of those Kingdoms permits to be done in the like Cases, but have also exceeded by those particalar demonstrati∣ons and diligence they have used, as well with the Ec∣clesiasticall Judge, to make him declare in point of Ap∣peal, they are not to enjoy the benefit of the Church; as with the Seculat, to the end nothing may be omitted in execution of the Chastisement, which the highest rigour of Justice permits; And he will not draw off his Hand un∣till he bring the businesse to an End, for which reason, so much care is had of their Persons, that being as they are in a Common Gaole, he hath herein for greater Se∣curity, put Guard upon them: In all which, and what is doing, I doubt not but it will be shortly declared, that the Case could not be pressed more, if the dead Person e a Prince, Heire to the Crown of Spain; All which ht to assure the Parliament of the Care and Appli∣on had to give it full satisfaction in this point, as is  desired may be given in whatsoever else shall hap∣pen; An which are Effects of a secure Friendship and good Correspondence, such hath been the entertainment and Shelter, which in the Havens of Spain, was given to the Ships of the Navy of this Common-Wealth; The which shall be continued with that fidelity, they have hitherto found in all his Majesties Havens: where he hath also given Order, that neither Prince Rupert nor his Ships be admitted, for having failed at Veles Malaga in point of that reverence and respect due to his Majesties Standard, the which set up in the Fort and Castle gave security to the English Merchant Ships, as the Parlia∣ment will understand more at large by the Relation which was sent me, and I have thought fit to Com∣municate.
The King of Spains Letter to the Parliament of England. PARLIAMENT OF THE COM∣MON-WEALTH OF ENGLAND. We have received three Letters, not at the same, but at severall times from you; the one whereof gave Credit to Anthony Ascham, whom you nominated your Resident in this our Court; the other came unto Us by means of Robert Blake Admirall of your Fleet lately, the third was sent by Don Alfonso de Car∣denas our Ambassador there: Wherein you grieve at the expected Accident of the aforesaid Resident, and with∣all earnestly entreat, that such as have committed the Fact be punished: Certainly you will have clearly understood from our Ambassador (and the same do I again command him to make known unto you) how much that Accident did displease Us, and so he will further lay open unto you what We have thereupon Commanded to be done, least such a like Accident unpunished, may prove a future bad Example: And when as the said Don Alfonso de Carde∣nas shall have manifested unto you more at large this our minde, nothing will remain to be said, whereby to Im∣print in you an Assurance of this Affection of our Will, with whch we will take a Care of whatsoever may con∣cern you: And for this reason your Admirall, Souldiers, and Ships have found, and shall hereafter finde that shel∣ter in our Havens which is fit, and we Commanded to be given unto them: Concerning which and whatsoever else shall occur to be said, We desire you to give entire Credit unto the aforesaid Don Alfonso de Cardenas resting se∣cure of our good Will, and most certain Friendship. Given at Madrid, 2. December 1650. Philip.
A true Accompt of the totall Over∣throw of Prince Ruperts Fleet by General Blake at Cartha∣gena in the Mediterranean Sea. TOuching the advice you have of Prince Ruperts being in the Streights it is very certain; for about twenty dayes past, Prince Maurice his Brother arrived at Thollone with the Marmaduke, which they took coming from Russia, he left Prince Rupert by him∣self off Mayork, having lost the rest of the Fleet  Cape Sagat; they were in all seven Ships, and intended for Thollone, but since Prince Maurice his arrival, al∣though the rest have been daily expected, yet no news of them, which makes them begin to doubt what is become of them, and indeed not without some reason, although they know nothing of it: For two dayes past here arri∣ved a bark from Genoah, who brings news of a great Fight that hath been about Cape Sagat between the Eng∣lish Frigots and Prince Ruperts; they report of six Ships sunke and one taken, but of which side not yet known, that they have met it is most certain: From Barcelona this last Post came advice of fifteent Parliament Ships that were arrived at Carthagena, and that they had fought with Prince Rupert, and sunke the Admirall and Vice Admiral, of which we expect to hear further by a Ship that s to come in hourly from Allegant. At this day instant is come newes for certain that Prince Ruperts Fleet, was at or neer Carthagena, where they fell upon them, and have sunk, burnt and taken them all; whether the Prince himself in Person be amongst them it is
not known, but here is no newes of him, and therefore do believe he is with the rest. Prince Maurice is left in the Swallow 11 Thollone, who intended for Villa Franke, and not to go forth any more; and therefore now we hope there will be less dan∣ger for poor Merchants Ships then before▪ For the French there is onely two Ships abroad, and no news of them, so it is thought the English Ships have also met with them: There are four or five more that are Arming at Thollone, but cannot be ready this six weeks or two moneths, and when they shall have beard what is be∣come of their Associates, I beleeve they will give over their designe, knowing General Blake to be so neer them. Prince Maurice attempted to take the Daniel of London going into the Ports of Thollone, but the People of the Country hindred him, and told him plainly, that he should not think to spoil the Trade of the Country. Marcellia December 20. 1650. FINIS.
A more particular and full  of the  of P. Ruperts Fleet, from  Commander of  of the States Ships under Generall Bke. SInce the sending home of the Sugar Pries taken  Portugall, with Captain  our R Admial,  the return of General Potham; there were remaining th us of the Parliamnts Ships seven S, viz. The Leopard,  Evoction Elabeth, Phenix, and Con∣an. Warwick: On the 26. of October, we took near the Streights mouth one of  King of Frances men of War with 6. brss Guns. Th  had intelligence that Prince Rupert with hs  ws two dayes since before Ma∣liga: The thirtth of Ober we came to Maliga, and there heard tht  toward Allegant, and had burnt four Eglish Ships at  Malliga and thereabouts; we staid not two hours but made after him. The 2. of November, be∣tween Cape Sagat and Cape de Paulo we took another French  ith 20 Guns: The  vve took the Rowbuck one of  Cape de Paulo, being a Ship of 24. Guns. The 4 of November, the John of our Fleet being ready to lay aboard the Black Prince of P. Ruperts Fleet, being a Ship of 2. Guns she run ashore 3. leagues to the East of Carthagena, and there fired and blew up her self. The  of November, four more of Ruperts Ships run ashore in the Bay of Carthagena for fear of our Ships, and there are all cast away and bilged, having not a Mast standing. The 9. of November Generall Blake set sail to seek for the remainds of Ruperts Fleet, being now only two Ships, viz The Swallow and the Reformation and left me in the Bay of Carthagena with the John and two Fnch Prizes to attend the K. of Spains Answer, concerning the Guns, Ammunition, &c. belonging to those of Ruperts Ships that run ashore. This day the Viceroy of Murcia was aboard the John, and signified to me, that I should have all that could be saved, for the use of the Common-wealth of England. The King of Spain hth also written a Letter to our Generll,  spect to him and our Fleet. Charles Salnsall. From
