h3552 53981533 180253
THE HUMBLE PETITION Of the LORD MAYOR, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London in Common Council Assembled, as it was Presented to His Majesty In Council at Windsor, upon Monday the 18th of June 1683. Together with the Lord Keepers Speech. Published by His Majesties Special Command. SHEWETH, THat Your Petitioners are most heartily and lly sy for the Mis-Government of this Your City of late Years, whereby the Ci∣tizens have fallen under Your Majesties Displeasure: Which oc∣casioned a Quo Warranto to be brought against them; Ʋpon which Judgement hath bee Pronounced for Seizure of their Liber∣ties and Franchises into Your Majesties Hands. That Your Petitioners are deeply sensible of, and thankfully acknowledge the great Favour of this Opportunity of Application to Your Royal Grace, vouch∣safed them by means of Your Majesties not Requiring Judgement to be immediate∣ly Entred thereupon. And now considering this our distressed condition, we humbly cast our selves at Your Royal Feet, Imploring Your Princely Compassion and Grace to be extended to this Your Ancient City, most humbly begging Your Majesties Pardon for all our Offences. And we do in the Name of our selves, and all the Citizens, humbly ten∣der, and Pray Your Majesty to accept the most Solemn Promises and Assurances of Constant Loyalty and Obedience to-Your: Majesty, Your Heirs and Successors, and of our Regular and Dutiful Administration of Your Government of this City for the future: Wherein we submit our selves to Your Majesties good Pleasure, and humbly beg Your Ma∣jesties Commands and Directions: Which we will with all Humility and Thankfulness Obey. And Your Petitioners shall ever Pray, &c. After the Reading of which Petition, The Lord Mayer, Aldermen, and Citizens were Commanded to withdraw; and being again called in, the Lord Keeper spake to them as followeth.
My Lord Mayor, I Am by the Kings Command to tell you, That He hath considered the humble Petition of the City of London, where so many of the present Magistrates, and other Eminent Citizens are of undoubted Loyalty, and Affection to His Service, That for their sakes His Majesty will shew the City all the Favour they can reasonably desire. It was very long before His Majesty took Resolutions to question their Charter: It was not the Seditious Discourses of the Coffee-Houses, the Trea∣sonable Pamphlets, and Libels dayly Published and Dispersed thence into all Parts of the Kingdom; the Outragious Tumults in the Streets, nor the Affronts to His Courts of Justice could provoke Him to it. His Majesty had Patience until Disorders were grown to that height, That nothing less seemed to be Designed than a Ruine to the Government both of Church and State; For the Factious Party were not content with the Practice of these Insolencies, but endeavoured to have them publickly counte∣nanced by the Magistrates, and for that end in all Elections they stickled to Chuse the most disaffected into Offices of the greatest Trust in the Govern∣ment, and carried themselves with that Heat and Violence, that it was a Ter∣ror to all sober and discreet Citizens; and the City was so unhappily di∣vided into Parties, That there was no likelihood it could return to good Or∣der, so long as the Factious retained any hopes of procuring the Election of Magistrates of their own Party, for their Impunity. It was high time to put a stop to this growing Evil. This made it Ne∣cessary for His Majesty to enquire into their Abuse of Franchises, that it might be in His Power to make a Regulation sufficient to Restore the City to its former good Government. It was not for Punishment, but meerly for the Good of the City that He took this Course. And now the King hath obtained Judgement in a Quo Warranto, it is not His Intention to Prejudice them, either in their Properties or Customes. Nay, lest the Entring a Judgment upon Record might have Consequences Fa∣tal to them, His Majesty was so tender of them, That He caused Mr. Attor∣ney to forbear the same at present, that the City might have some time to consider their own Condition. My Lord, I must needs say, The City hath not been well advised to defer their Ap∣plication to His Majesty thus long, even till the Court hath Pronounced Judgement; It had been done with a much better grace, if it had been more early. His Majesties Affection to the City is too great to reject their Suit for that Cause. But for that Reason you will have the less time to Deliberat upon the Par∣ticulars the King doth require of you. And indeed, There will be little need of Deliberation; For His Majesty hath resolved to make the Alterations as few and as easie, as may be consistent with the good Government of the City, and Peace of the Kingdom. They are These;
His Majesty Requires your submission to these Regulations; THat no Lord Mayor, Sheriff, Recarder, Common Serjeant, Town Clerk, or Coroner of the City of London, or Steward of the Burrough of South∣wark, shall be capable of, or admitted to the Exercise of their respective Of∣fices, before His Majesty shall have Approved them under His Sign Manual: That if His Majesty shall Disapprove the Choice of any Person to be Lord Mayor, and signifie the same under His Sign Manual to the Lord Mayor, or in default of a Lord Mayor, to the Recorder or Senior Alderman; The Ci∣tizens shall within one Week proceed to a new Choice: and if His Majesty shall in like manner Disapprove the second Choice, His Majesty may, if He so please, Nominate a Person to be Lord Mayor for the ensuing Year. If His Majestie shall in like manner Disapprove the Persons chosen to be Sheriffs, or either of them, His Majestie may appoint Persons to be Sheriffs for the ensuing Year, by His Commission, if He so Please. Nevertheless, the Elections of these Officers may be according to the ancient Ʋsage of the City, with these Restrictions. The Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen may with leave of His Ma∣jestie, displace any Alderman, Recorder, Common Serjeant, Town Clerk, Coroner of the said City, and Stewart of the said Burrough. Upon Election of any Alderman, if any of the Persons that shall be pre∣sented to the Court of Aldermen by the Ward shall be adjudged unfit, upon such Declaration by the said Court, the Ward shall proceed to the Choice of other Persons in the room of such  ∣ed: and if the said Court  disapprove such Second Choice,  appoint any others in their room. The Justices of the Peace to be by the Kings Commission, which His Ma∣jesty will grant according to the usual method, unless upon Extraordinary Occasions, when His Hajestie shall think it necessary for His Service. These Matters are to be Settled in such manner as shall be Approved by His Majesties Attorney and Solicitor General, and Councel Learned in the Law. My Lord Mayor, These Regulations being made, His Majestie will not only Pardon this Pro∣secution, but Confirm your Charter in such manner as may be Consistent with them. The City should Look upon this as a great Condescention on His Majestes part; it being but in the Nature of a Reservation of a small part of what is already in His Power by the Judgment: and of those things which will Conduce as much to their own Good and Quiet as to His Service. If the City should Look upon it with another Eye, and neglect a speedy Complyance, yet His Majestie hath done His part, and Demonstrated His Affection to the City, by giving them this Opportunity. And if there shall be any heavy Consequence of this Judgment, which it will behove you well to Consider, The fault will lie at their Doors, in whose power it now is, to bring this Affair to a happie Conclusion.
My Lord Mayor; The Term draws toward an end, and Midsomer-day is at hand, when some of the Officers use to be Chosen, whereof His Majestie will Reserve the Ap∣probation; Therefore it is His Majesties Pleasure that you return to the City, and Consult the Common Council, that He may speedilie know your Reso∣lutions hereupon, and accordingly give His Directions. That you may see the King is in Earnest, and the Matter is not capable of Delay, I am Commanded to let you know, He hath given Order to His Attorney General to Enter Up Judgment on Saturday next, unless you pre∣vent it by your Compliance in all these particulars. FINIS. Edinburgh, Re-printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printed to H most Sacred Majestie; Anno DOM. 1683.
