j893 99887183 181891
The Jolly Gentleman's FROLICK: OR, The City Ramble. Being, An Account of a young Gallant, who Wager'd to pass any of the Watches, without giving them an Answer; but being stop'd by the Constable at Cripple-gate, was sent to the Counter, afterwards had before my Lord Mayor, and was Clear'd by the Intercession of my Lord Mayors Daughter. To a Pleasant New Tune. GIve ear to a Frollicksome Ditty, of one that a Wager did lay He'd pass any Watch in the City, and never a Word he wou'd say But, Dal, derra, rarra, &c. The Constable spake to his Watch-men, brave Boys, it is my Delight, And Orders have for to catch Men, who Ramble too late in the Night. The Humour, &c. The Streets do Eccho, we hear, Boys, with Mad-men coming along; My Staff is ready, ne'r fear, Boys, we'll make 'um alter their Song. The Humour, &c. Stand, stand, says the Bell-man, the Constable now come before, And if a just Story you tell, Man, I'll Light you home to your own Door: The Humour, &c. This is a very late season, which surely no Honest Men keep, And therefore 'tis but just reason, that you in the Counter should sleep. The Humour, &c. (Sad.) Take away this same Fellow, and him to the Counter convey, Although his Frollick is mellow, he something to Morrow will say. The Humour, &c. (Sad.) Open the Gate, make no scorning, take Charge of your Prisoner there, And we will soon in the morning, appear before my Lord Mayor. The Humour, &c. (Sad.) A Bottle of Claret I'll fill, Sir, some Ppes of Tobacco, beside. And if that it now be your will, Sir, a Bed for you soon we'll provide. The Humour, &c. This Frollick soon Eccho'd the Prison, the Debters his Garnish would have; Without demanding the reason, whate're they-requir'd, he gave. The Humour, &c. The Constable soon the next day, Sir, this Comical matter to clear, The Gentleman hurrys straightways, sir, before my Lord Mayor to appear. The Humour, &c. My Lord, give ear to my Story, while I the truth do relate, The Gentleman standing before ye, was seiz'd by me at Cripple-gate. The Humour, &c. (Sad.) I nothing could hear but his Singing, wherefore in the Counter he lay, And therefore this morning I bring him to hear what your Lordship will say. The Humour, &c. (Sad.) Come Friend, the Case does appear now, that you was in a Mad Fit, I hope that you may be clear now, since Sleep has restor'd you your Wit. The Humour, &c. (Sad.) This Gentleman sure is Distracted, he's over-heated his Brain, Since he thus silly has acted, to th' Counter I'll send him again. The Humour, &c. (Sad.) A Prison sure it will tame him, and bring him soon to his Sense, There's nothing else can reclaim him, from this his notorious Offence, The Humour, &c. (Sad,) O then bespake my Lord's Daughter, and for him did thus Interceed, Dear Father, you'll hear that hereafter, this is but a Wager, indeed. The Humour, &c. Therefore be pleased, kind Father, to hear one word more of me, And shew to me so much favour, this Gentleman may be set free. The Humour, &c. Well, Daughter, I grant your Petition, the Gentleman home may repair, But yet 'tis upon this Condition, of paying my Officers there. The Humour, &c. Come Sir, your Fees we require, you free'd are now by the Court, And all that we do desire, you'll find out some other new Sport. The Humour, &c. Thus seeing he might be Released, if he his Fees did but pay, He then was very well pleased, and so went Singing awa, The Humour, &c. Printed for C. Bates, at the White-Hart in West-Smithfield.
