L1934 R179686 53299148 179896
PROPOSALS For the Printing of a BOOK of William Leybourn's, Author of the late Cursus Mathematicus, and of divers other Mathematical Tractates, Who hath now by him a Miscellaneous Manuscript ready for the Press, which he intends to Entitle Pleasure with Profit: It Consisting of RECREATIONS of divers kinds, viz. Numerical, Geometrical, Mechanical, Optical, Astronomical, Horometrical, Crytographical, Statical, Magnetical, Automatical, Chymical, Historical, Published for Ingenious Spirits to make farther Scrutiny into these (and the like) Sublime Sciences; and to Divert them from following such Vices, as Youth (in this Age) are too much inclin'd. THis Book, when Printed of a good Letter, will contain above One Hundred Sheets, with near Two Hundred Cutts. And as he hath already Published his Two last Trea∣tises, viz. Dialling, Plain, Concave, Convex, Projective, Reflective, Refractive, &c. And Cursus Mathematicus, by way of Subscription; he now again offers this to all Lovers of Laudable, Pleasant, and Profitable Recreations. And to the end that This may come to Publick View in his Life-time, he presents the fol∣lowing Overture (for the Promotion of it) to all Masters, Heads, Provosts, Fellows, Scho∣lars, &c. of both Universities. — To all Publick and Private Schoolmasters, Ushers, and Scholars under them — To all Gentlemen of Inns of Court or Chancery — And to all other Private Gentlemen of what Degree soever. PROPOSALS as followeth, viz. I. THe Subscribers to give Thirteen Shillings and Six Pence for each Book in Quires; whereof Six Shillings to be paid at the time of Subscription, and Seven Shillings Six Pence at the Delivery of the Book. II. To Encourage all Persons that shall Contribute to the procuring Subscriptions for Six Books, they shall have a Seventh Gratis. III. All who intend to assist in the Advancement of this Useful Work, are desired to send in their Subscriptions with all speed unto the Persons here under-named, where Printed Re∣ceipts shall be given them; and if they arise to any competent Number, the Book shall be finish'd by Midsummer next. The Undertakers are Dorman Newman, at the King's-Arms in the Poultrey. Richard Baldwin at the Oxford-Arms in Warwick-lane. Iohn Dunton at the Raven in the Poultrey.
The CONTENTS. Recreations Numerical, Treating of NUmbers in general. Comparative Arithmetick. Arithmetical, Geometrical and Musical Proportions. Arithmetical Theorems. The Golden Rule, Single and Compounded. The Increase of Men, Sheep, Swine, Corn, &c. Changes in Bells, Voices, Musical Instruments, Letters, Figures, &c. Arithmetical Versifying, or to make Hexameter and Pentame∣ter Latine Verses, deduced from five or six of the Nine Digits. Enigmatical Problems, and other Numerical Devices. Geometrical, Consisting of Definitions, and Practical Problems. Conclusions performed without Compasses. Longimetria, or Measuring of Heights and Distances. Geodecia, or Measuring of Land, with and without Instrument. Geometrical Arithmetick, in all its Rules. Trigonometry, in all the Cases. Astronomy, in several Solar and Astral Principles. Geography, in distances of Places. Optical, Containing Several Problems relating to Colours. Directions how to draw the Figure of any thing, as of Man, a Bird, a Beast, &c. Choice Perspective Experiments and Conclusions. Astronomical, Treating of A Brief View of the Principles of Astronomy. The Circles of the Sphere, and their uses. The two Principal Hypotheses, viz. Ptolomean and Co∣pernican. Objections against the Copernican System briefly answered. The Ptolomean System maintained; by H. P. Some of the strongest Arguments (by way of Objection) the Maintainers of the Ptolomean System bring against the Copernican System; with the Answers the Coperni∣cans give unto them. Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, and the Causes of them, &c. Schemes or Types of the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, both Ptolomean and Copernican. The Passions, Magnitudes, Motions, Distances of the Pla∣nets and Fixed Stars. General Rules, for many good Uses, deduced from the Moons Mean Motion. The Constellations of Fixed Stars, giving an Account of their English, Greek, Hebrew, Arabick, Chaldee, Syriack, Persian, Latin, Turkish, &c. Names; and of the princi∣pal Stars in each of them; and of the Via Lactea. And also the Poetical Fables, alluding to these Asterisms; shew∣ing how they came to be placed in the Heavens; and at what time of the Year any of them will be upon the Meridi∣an at Midnight, whereby they may be easily found in the Heavens. The Rudiments of Astronomy put into plain Rhyme: By J. Palmer. Horometrical, Shewing how To make Horizontal, Vertical, and direct Reclining Dyals in all Latitudes. Tables for that purpose. From an Horizontal Dial, to deduce all other Dials. From a Point (or Gnodus) placed at all Adventures. From a Hole in a Glass Window. By help of a Trigon, to insert the Equinoctial, Tropicks, and other Signs and Parallels of the Suns Course upon all sorts of Sun-dials; also the Arimnths, Almicanters, &c. To make Dials whereby to find the Hour by the Sun in the Day-time, and by the Stars in the Night. Stars several ways. Of Instrumental Sun-dials and Nocturnals. Mechanical, Treating of Trochlea, the Pulley. The Inclining Plain. Cuneus, the Wedge. Axis in Peritrochio, the Wheel, Crain and Capstern. Cochlea, the Screw. Vectis, the Leaver. Archimedes his Cochlea, or Water-Screw, and how a Per∣petual Motion hath been attempted to be performed thereby. Engines for moving of Great and Heavy Bodies. Engines of War used among the Ancients. Automata or Self-movers, by Air, Wind, Water or Springs. The Magnificent Works of the Ancients. The Time, and Number of Men employed in the Building of some of these Magnificent Works. The Height of several Obelisks, Steeples, Pyramids, Pillars, and other Monuments in the World, according to our Eng∣lish Measure. Such Admirable Pieces of Work, as have been made by seve∣ral Eminent Artists both Ancient and Modern, and some in our present Age. Statical, Treating of The Art Statical. The Ballance. The Ballance of Signeur Galileo Galilei, for the Discovery of Mixt Metals, and of other Irregular Bodies, in respect of Magnitude and Ponderosity. Statical Theorem. The Comparison of several Metals in Quantity and Weight. The Roman and English Foot. Weights; and the Ancient Roman and our English compared. The Weight, Worth, Magnitude, &c. of several Metals, Waters, and other Liquids. Foreign Weights and Measures compared with the English. Statical Experiments. Automatical, Treating of The making of Clocks, Watches, and other Movements. Pendulums, and their Vibrations. The Equation of Time, and a Table thereof. Rules for the true adjusting, and right managing of Pendu∣lum Clocks, Watches, &c. Magnetical, Discoursing of The Magnet, or Load-stone. The Attractive Virtue of the Load-stone. The Sympathetical and Antipathetical Property of the Load-stone. The Cutting or Dividing of Load-stones. Finding of the Poles of Load-stones. An Essay of a Perpetual Motion by Load-stones. Magnetical Inclination. Megnetical Experiments. Crytographical, Discovering Several ways used by the Ancients for their secret Conveyances. Several other ways, for secret Conveyances; as By Common Letters of the Alphabet as they are. By the Alphabetical Letters transposed. By an Astronomical Alphabet. By Knots upon a String. By Juices, Liquors, &c. Chymical, Discoursing of Artificial Representations. Of the Fire of Vestals. The Philosophers Tree. The Reanimation of Simples. The Representation of the Great World. A Perpetual Motion. The making of Gold. Incombustible Flux. Subterraneous Lamps. Historical, Treating of The first Authors of divers Inventions. The Measures and Proportions of the Members of Mans Body. Men or Giants of Prodigious Stature. Dwarfs, Pigmies, or Men and Women of Lower than or∣dinary Stature. Monsters and Prodigious Births. Artificial Monsters. The Length of Age which Men lived in former Times, shortly after the Creation; and of others of later date. These PROPOSALS are to be had of any of the three Undertakers. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Dunton at the Raven in the Poultrey, 1693.
