s1463 53981727 180354
J R royal blazon or coat of arms ACT Of Privy Council, for discovery of those desperat Rebels, who lately committed an Attack upon some of His Majesties Forces, and rescued one Houston, a declared and notorious Traitor. Edinburgh, the twenty second day of June 1688. THe Lords of His Majesties Privy Council having notice of an Attack made upon a party of His Majesties Forces, who were conveying one Houston, a declared Rebel, Prisoner to the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, by His Majesties special Command; in whose march, several of the saids Forces were killed, and others desperatly wounded: They having therefore thought fit, that full and exact Search, Inquiry and Tryal should be made in the said matter, both as to the Actors, Abaters, or Hounders out of the saids desperate Rebels, that they may be brought to condign punishment, and for preventing thelike villanies in time coming, Have directed Letters to the Sheriffs of Air, Lanerk, Renfrew, and Niths-dale, or their Deputs, to Call and Conveen the Nobility, Free-holders, Heretors, and Indulged-Ministers, to Meet and Conveen the twenty much day of June instant, at the Head-burgh of the said respective Shires, and Stewartry: As also, the Sheriff of the Shire of Wigtoun and Stewart of the Stewartry of Kirkcudbright, or their Deputs, to Call and Conveen the Nobility, Free-holders, Heretors, and Indulged-Ministers of the said Shire and Stewartry, to Meet and Conveen at the Head-Burghs thereof respective, upon the sixth day of July next: Do therefore expresly Require and Command, the Noblemen, Heretors, Free-holders and Indulged-Ministers foresaid, within the saids Shires and Stewartries, to Meet and Conveen at the days and places respective above-written, and then, and there to give obedience to the said Letter, as they will be answerable at their highest peril. And to the end these Presents may be made known, to all persons concerned therein, The saids Lords Ordain the Macers of Privy Council to pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and Messengers at Arms, to pass to all other places usual, and make publication hereof, that none may pretend ignorance. Extracted forth of the Records of Privy Council, by me COL. McKENƷIE, Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD Save the KING. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, 1688.
