S3944 52614945 176182
depiction of the death of Prince Rupert of the Rhine's (1619-82) dog 'Boy' at the battle of Marston Moor (1644)
Sometimes white, and sometimes black, this Devil doth appear: And oftentimes did her affright, but she her God doth fear. depiction of a woman with a peacock, holding a mirror depiction of a man
A Strange and Wonderful RELATION OF MARGARET GƲRR of Tunbridge, in Kent; SHEWING, How she was Afflicted WITH DEVILS AS ALSO, How they entred into her, and spake in her and tempted her to Kill her self; and how she was taken up by Devils and Witches and was flying in the Ayr. Also, the marvelous Cures done by Dr. Skinne in these three Counties, Viz. Sussex, Surrey, and Ken the like strange Cures hath scarce been done or hea of. If any doubt the truth of these things, most, or a the people in the aforesaid Counties will testifie the v¦rity of these things, which was done by Iohn Skinner, of Westram, in Kent, Student i Physick and Astrology. Printed for I. W. I. C. W. T. and T. P.
Here followeth a most True and Certain Relation of the fearful and lamentable Condition of Margaret Gurr of Tunbridge, the Words that she spake, o were taken from her mouth, Verbatim as she spake them. I Margaret Gurr, Servant to Mr. Chri∣stopher Elderidge in the Parish of Tun∣bridge in Kent, had two Devils appeared to me about Ten of the Clock in the Forenoon, one Sunday the 17th day of Iuly, 1681. One of these two Devils seemed to be in Gray Cloath∣ing, and the other in Black: The black Devil was of little Stature and short, the gray Devi was of stout thick squat Stature; they both can behind the Table that was in the Room. The gray Devil would have me Hang my self with Clock-Lines that was in the Room; then the Devil told me, That if I would not Hang my self with the Clock-Lines, I should put or thrust Knitting-Needles in my Ears, and so destroy or kill my self that way.
On the Wednesday following, being Iuly the 20th, 1681. This day I lay down on my Bed to take my rest, and there came the Gray Devil to me and lay down on the Bed by me, and he took me by the Wrists and Hands and held them so very fast, that I could not wag nor stir them; and he griped and scrouged them so hard, that they swelled and aked all the day afterwards. This gray Devil Snoar'd as if he had been asleep by me all the while, and I would have risen but he would not let me; and as soon as it pleased God that I had power to wag or stir my self, this horrible Imp or Devil vanished out of my sight, and then I was in good ease: Then I went down the Stairs to go about my work as well as I could, then was I soon taken with a most grievous pain in my Neck, and all the hinder side of my head being terribly pull'd, and fearfully torn; these pains held me all the Afternoon: then there came and appeared to me the black Devil, in a most horrible and frightful shape, while I was in this extream pulling and tareing pains; he said not one word to me then, but stared in my face, and to he Vanished, and as soon as he was gone away, my pains were abated. Then the 4th day of August, 1681. This day I was taken very sick; then came the
black Devil to me in a most ugly shape, and he entred my body and spoke in me, wishing sad Wishes, with most ugly Shreiking noises, and Roaring out Curses in me, and said to me, Curse and Sweat as I do, and Wis such Wishes as I do, and you shall be well▪ Then again the 5th day of August 1681. This day there came unto me a Witch▪ and she entred into me also, and spake in m with most hideous and strange Noises, saying unto me, Be as I am, and you shall be a well as ever you were in your Life, and g about your business as well as ever you di and I would not have you go to Doctor Ski¦ner that Devil for help, nor take none of h Physick. This 5th day of August she continu speaking in me continually, saying; Do  I say, and do as I would have you, and  as I am, for I am a Witch, a Witch,  I am a Witch, do as I say and be as  am, and you shall be well. Thus she c¦tinued speaking in me all day, and all t day I was in a most lamentable pain in  Limbs, with shakings and tremblings,  always when I went to Prayers, I  tempted not to Pray, but Curse and Sw and my Mouth was strangely drawn a ¦side, that I could not speak to Pray,
open my mouth, nor could I shut my mouth when it was open; but my mouth sometimes was shut up, and at other times held wide open. August the 6th day, 1681. This day as I went to fetch some Pails of Water, I was tcht up with the Devils, and was carried out with them, flying in the Air. Doctor Skinner told me I should Pray when  was tempted, but I was over-power'd d over-perswaded by them, and yielded to em, and then was I the second time fly∣g in the air; but when I could Pray and  not yield to these Temptations, then I  pritty well, and in good ease, when I membered Doctor Skinners words. Aggain the Witch spoke in me with so loud, sudden, and fearful a voice, that I was eamly affrighted, and in a most lamen∣e manner I trembled and shoke: She d out in me with a most doleful voice, ing; Go you not to that Devil Doctor ner for help, for if you do, I am utter∣ e. While I was in the Chamber with the  Devil, there was most strange voices  down the Stairs by my Master and ts, viz. Great Lumberings and Clatter∣ as if the Chairs and Stools had been
thrown about the Chamber, as if the whole House had been falling down, so that it frighted them, and all the whole Family, In∣somuch that had not I been speedily Cured, my Master and Mistris and all the whole Fa∣mily must have been forced to have left the House. My Master and Mistris often went to Pray∣ers with me, and Prayed for me often, yet all did no good, so that at the last I was got to such a pass, and so carried up and down with the Devils and the Witch, that there was continual Noises and Voices speaking in me, and I was always moveable, viz. never in peace nor quietness, either standing, sitting, or lying, nor could my Master and Mistr ever be at quiet, but in fear; so with my strange actions and amazing frightful looks, they were always Terrified; But with the Blessing and help of God, Doctor Skinner cast out the Devils and Witch out of my body; and also Cured me of the Scurvy and Gout, and all within the compass of twelve days, in which time with a Physical, Natural, and other means used, I was perfectly restored to my former Health; neither hath those De∣vils ever attempted to meddle with me since, but I now continue in Health both of Soul, Body, and Mind, and I have a very fresh,
lively, and chearful Countenance, and am very well. Moreover, Here is to be Noted, the wonderful Blessing and love of God to me, his poor Handmaid, That before this great affliction was laid upon me, I knew not any Letters in the Bible or Testament, but since my enduring this heavy punishment, (or Hell upon Earth) I can now learn my Book, and am wonderfully delighted in Reading and spending all my spare time in Prayers, and meditating on the word of God. For I was for the most part of my life much given to Prayers, and would often pray when I was alone and had leasure, so that it was not for any vicious and wicked life that I have led (as it is well known to all that know me) that the Lord laid these fore Afflictions upon me, but, I hope for my good; knowing that Those whom the Lord loveth he Chastizeth; So that my trust may be always in the Lord my God, and my loss may henceforth become my gain; for to my great comfort, I can now read the Divine word of God, which before I could not. All the while I was in this desolate condition, my Brothers nor any of my Friends came not neer me, but all forsook me, they hearing how I was tempted and tortured with Witches and Devils above a hundred times to Curse and swear in my Prayers, before the Devil appeared to me: so that now I am well, my own Brother will as
soon as he sees the at a distance, be gone out of my sight, and not speak a word to me, being still afraid of me, so that I have no comfort from them, Hebrews 12.6, 7, 8. But having under∣gone the Rod of Gods Correction here now in m Youth, I take courage, hoping that as I gro in years, to grow in Grace, as David did wh he said, (Psalm 119.71.) It is good that have been afflicted, that I might learn th Statutes. Psal. 34.19. Many are the afflicti∣ons of the Righteous, but the Lord deliver them out of all. Therefore let none think  hard to be Tempted, seeing that our Lord an Maker (Mat. 4.5.) was Tempted and carr about of Devils as well as I; The Servant  not greater then his Lord. To Conclude, I desire all good People  consider their latter end, and be fervent in Pra lest they enter into Temptation; Therefore  ought to be armed with Patience, 1 Pet. 1.  Ephe. 6.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Ia 1.8. for the manifestation of the truth of the things I have hereunto set my hand, Tunbridge in Kent. Margaret Gurr. In the presence of these four Witnesses Namely▪ Christopher Elderidge and his Wife, and A¦ry Marlot, and William Tully.
Here followeth a Relation of a Male Servant, about 17 Years of Age, who was possest with a De∣vil in the shape of a Grey-hound. HEnry Chouning, living in the Parish of Hadlaw in Kent, had a servant-Boy about the age of seventeen years; he was much inclin'd to read the Scriptures, and lively enough, and a ood-Servant, and healthy: his Master sent m out in his ground, where he had not been ing, but there appeared unto him a Spirit in depiction of a bucolic scene
the form of a Grey hound, which made towards him, and spoke, saying, You must go into Vir∣ginia; it said no more, but vanished; the Bt, immediately went home and told his Master of what he had seen, but he came home in a great fright, and as it were amazed, and looked very strangely, after that he grew worse and worse, and after a strange manner he would six his eyes, and was extream melancholly, and his Speech began to fail, all People supposing him to be un∣der an evil Tongue or bewitcht, the Boy grow∣ing worse and worse, they were resolved to look out for help, for they fear'd the Boy would make away with himself, and they were much trouble thereat. His Master hearing of the many Cures I h done, brought him over to me, and after I h examined the business and well consider'd of it▪ I found he was possest with the Devil, for h was as it were in amaze, and his eyes were al¦ways fixed in his head, and I had much ado to get him to speak a word, but by my urging o him, he did confess that he was tempted in hi mind, and was led on and tempted to strange things, as to go to Sea, and matters that he was not able to mention; so that when I right∣ly understood his condition, and how and afte what manner he was taken, and his temptation did increase upon him, I understood what the
means must be that must relieve him, and gave order for the putting up of Medicines, for the means must be speedy, or else it cannot be per∣formed: he was very willing to take or make use of any means, and I ordered his Mother to come to me the next week, or when he had made use of those things; so she did, and brought me news he was much amended, to the admiration of many that heard how it was with him, with those that came to me at Tunbridge, marched to inquire how he did? He said then he was not at all troubled, but onely with a pain in his bel∣ly, so that he had something more sent him, and by Gods help was made perfectly well in 18 days time, neither hath any thing attempted to trou∣ble him since in the least: when I got the Boy to spake, (which was with much ado) his Speech was not according to a natural speech of his bo∣dy, but as if something did make a noyse within him, or as if he spoke through the Nose (as we call it) for it was not his own speech, but the Spirit or Devil within him, that tempted him also, and told him many strange things: The Boy seemed to amend while he was in the room with me, for when he went away with his Ma∣ster, he could talk and speak much better, and was abundantly more lively. I undertook the Cure at a price, as by bargaining with his Master for what I should have, taking one half of the money
in hand, and the rest I was to have when I had done the Cure and cast out the evil Spirit or De∣vil out of him, and at the fourth nights end, or Master came and payed me for the Cure, for the Boy was as well as ever he was. Here followeth Two Won∣derful and Miraculous CURES which was (by the help of God) per∣formed by me in a short time. MR. Woldredge, living at West-Chitt¦ington in Sussex, his Daughter Susan h the Evil in her Eyes, and a great Rheum an inflamation followed it: she had been with other before she came to me; her father came over an asked my advice, I told him she would be wel and bid him go home; so he did, but soon after h Daughter was in extream misery with swelling and raging pain in her Eye, insomuch that th thought certainly she would have lost her Eye▪ but on a sudden it began to mend, and was  better and better; her father came again, and sent her a Purge with some other matter, a she was in a short time made perfectly well, a
er since, being six ears or abouts; her friends much rejoyced nd well rewarded me. A Woman in West-Grunstee, in Sussex, this Woman had the Evil in her Throat, and hear∣ing of my Cures, did desire one Goody Arch∣poll to pray me to meet her at Ashington-Fair, so I did, and talked with her, to at that time I had noght to give her, but did order her to come over, and she did promise she would; but I did ear no more of her; so I did order Goody Arch∣poll to inquire why she did not come, so she did, and the Woman said she had no need, for she sound her self begin to mend from that same time, and was now perfectly well: and the truth of this same Relation, the aforementioned Go∣ Archpoll in Sussex can testifie. One Goody Halle at Seavenock in Kent, had  most lamentable pain in her head, neer her Eye, ike to make her distracted, for she was in lamen∣ble pain night and day, and could never be at rest; she had been with many Doctors, and took uch Physick of them, but did no good: she ame to me, and was at ease immediately, and  Cured from that time: I sent her home with some Medicines, and now she remains in ound and perfect health. FINIS.
