S5913A 47012664 174630
Strange News from WESTMORELAND. Being a true Relation of one Gabriel Harding, who coming home Drunk, struck his Wife a blow on the Breast and killed her out-right; then did he forswear the evil Deed which he knew himself guilty of. Likewise how a stranger did come to the House cloathed in Green, the people that were eye witnesse said it was an Angel. Likewise how the Stranger or Angel did give Sen∣tence upon the man for killing of his Wife. Also how Satan did break the mans Neck that did forswear himself; and the Stranger or Angel did command Satan to hurt none else, and to va∣nish: which being done, there was a pleasant Harmony of Musick heard to sound: Then did the Stranger cloathed in Green, take his leave of the people; whereof the chiefest in the Parish desired it might be put in Print, and have hereunto set their Hands. To the Tune of, In Summer time. Attend good Christian people all, Mark what I say both old and young, Unto the general Iudgement Day I think the time's not very long. A wonder strange I have t' relate, I think the like was never shown, In Westmoreland at Tredenton, Of such a thing was never known. One Gabriel Harding liv'd of late, As may to all men just appear, Whose yearly Rent by just account Came to five hundred pound a year. This man he had a vertuous Wife, In godly wayes her minde did give; Yet he as rude a wicked wretch As in this sinful Land did live. Such news of him I will relate; The like no mortal man did hear, 'Tis very new, and all so true, Therefore good Christians all give ear; One time this man he came home drunk As he us'd, which made his Wife to weep, Who gently took him by the hand; Saying, Dear Husband lie down and sleep. She lovingly took him by the arm, Thinking in safety him to guide; A blow he struck her on the Breast, The Woman straight sunk down and dy'd. The Children then with mournful cryes They run into the open street, They wept, they wail'd, they wrung their hands To all Christians that they did meet. The people then they all run forth, Said, Children why make you such moan? O make you haste unto our house! Our dear Mother is dead and gone: Our Father hath our Mother kill'd The Children they cryed out than, The people then they all made haste And laid their hands upon the man. He presently deny'd the same, Said, from guilty Murder I am free, If I did that wicked deed he said, Some Example I with be seen by me. Thus he forswore the wicked deed Of his dear Wives untimely end: Quoth the people, let's conclude with speed That for the Crowner we may send. Mark what I say, the doors fast shut, The people the Children did deplore; But straight they heard a man to speak, And one stood knocking at the door. One in the house to the door made haste, Hearing a man to knock and call, The door was opened presently And in he comes amongst them all.
The second Part, to the same Tune. BY your leave good people then he said, May a stranger with you have some talk, A dead woman I am come to see; Into the Room I pray Sir walk: And in the Room where as he stood, He was of such a comely grace Their hearts were all a ravished With the sweet complexion of his face: His eyes like to the Stars did shine, He was cloathed in a bright Grass green; His cheeks was of a Crimson red Of such a man was seldom seen. Unto the people then he spake, Mark well these words which I shall say, For no Crowner you shall send, I'm Judge and Jury here this day: Bring hither the man that did the deed And bololy hath deny'd the same, They brought him into the room with speed To answer his wicked deed with shame. Now come O wicked man quoth he With shame before thy Neighbours all, Thy body thou hast brought to misery, Thy soul into a deeper thrall. Thy full delight was drunkenness, And leud Women, O cursed sin, Blasphemous Oathes, and Curses vile A long time thou hast wallowed in: Thy Neighbours thou would'st set at strife And alwayes griping on the Poor; Beside thou hast murdered thy Wif, Alack what salve will cure thy sore. Thy Family within thy house Food thou wouldst grudge continually: O wicked man, thy self prepare! A fearful death thou'rt sure to dye. Fear nothing good people then he said, A sight presently will appear; Let all your trust be in the Lord, No harm shall be while I am here. Then in the Room the Devil appear'd, Like a brave Gentleman did stand: Satan, quoth he that was the Iudge, Do no more then thou hast command: The Devil then in an ugly shape, He danced round about the Hall, Which made the people much afraid He had such fearful looks withal. The Devil then he straight laid hold On him that had murdered his Wife, His neck in sunder then he brake, And thus did end his wretched life. The Devil then he vanished Quite from the people in the Hall, Which made the people much amaz'd, Yet no one had no hurt at all. Than straight a pleasant melody Of musick sweet was heard to sound, It ravisht the hearts of those stood by So sweet the Musick did abound. Now quoth this gallant man in green, With you I can no longer stay, My love I leave, my leave I take, The time is come I must away. Be sure to love each other well, Keep in your breast what I do say, It is the way to go to Heaven When you shall rise at Judgement Day. The people to their homes did go Which had this mighty wonder seen, And said it was an Angel sure, That thus was cloathed all in green. And thus the news from Westmoreland, I have related to you o're, I think it is as strange a thing As ever man did hear before. Here are the Names of some of the chiefest men that live in the Parish. Christopher Rawly, Esquire, James Fish, Gent. William Lisle, Gent. Simon Pierce, Ambrose Whit, Oliver Craft, Robert Ford, Tho∣mas Clifford, Yeomen. George Crawly, Peter Vaux, Philip Cook, Francis Martin, George Horton, Husbandmen. Abraham Miles. London, Printed for E Andrews, at the White Lion near Pye-Corner.
