18507.73 S94222 [ocm]72799749 184110
The 27. of August. MANSFEILDS ARRIVALL IN THE DVKEDOME of BRABANT, and is alreadie come on this side Bruxelles, Burning, Spoyling, and Ran∣soming the Countrey. Also Gonzales comming towards him with great Forces, with the rest of their Proceedings. With the destruction of Spinola's Forces before BERGHEN op ZOOM; As also the marching of the English Forces of the Regiment of the Lord VAVS from Antwerpe to Bergen, with the number of them. Likewise, a true Relation of the Proceedings and Circumstances, touching the Royall Coronation of the most illustrious, most mightie Princesse, Lady Eleonora, Empresse of Rome, Queene of Hungaria, Arch-dutches of Austria, and Dutches of Mantua. Moreover, the straite Besieging of Mamora by the Hollanders, with the invasion made by the Protestant Grisons vpon the Coun∣trey of Tyroe, and the obtaining of great store of Cattell. Lastly, the couragious Sally made by the Garrisons in Glatts, vpon the Emperialls; with the delivering vp of Hagenaw to Leopoldus; As also Klingenbergh to the Emperour. LONDON Printed by I.D. for Nicholas Bourne and Thomas Archer, and are to be sold at their Shops at the Exchange, and in Popes-head Pallace. 1622.
MANSFEILDS ARRIVALL IN THE DVKEDOME OF BRABANT, and is alreadie come on this side Bruxells, Burning, Spoyling, and Ransoming the Country. From Rome the 16. of Iuly. FRom Constantinople is writ∣ten, that the Spahie com∣mit daily great insolen∣cies, and divers murthers, and that lately there were sundry great persons put in prison, looking daily for more, which are like∣ly to take an ill end. The great Turke, with some of his principall officers la∣bour hard to take the matter vp, and to bring all to quietnesse, and to the same effect, he goes many times openly by water to recreate himselfe also, and shewes great liberalitie, by throwing of coyne amongst the people. The Astronomers and South-sayers doe Prog∣nosticate great shedding of blood in the Moone of Haban (as they call the same) and beginnes in Iune.
The Iewes likewise being much threatned, doe hide their goods. The King of Spaine hath graunted his brother the Cardniall of Toledo, to keepe a Court, and hath appoynted for him sixe principall officers, eyght groomes, and made the Marquis of Esse his Stu∣ward. There are made over for Flanders 400000. Crownes. And for Millane 100000. Crownes. The Marquis Pinello, walking with a Knight, and his men, through the Cittie of Naples, one ac∣companied with a Lay Fryer came to them, and would haue shott the Knight with a Pistole, but he mis-tooke his marke and escaped, but the Lay Frier was taken by the servants of the said Marquis, and being carried into the Pallace of the Popes Nuncio, he sent presently divers officers to his Sell, where they found one Paulus Ambrosius of Cremona, which likewise being an enemy vnto the sayd Marquis, was apprehended. And they found there instru∣ments fit for thirtie persons to coyne withall. The lay brother, offers to reveale great matters, if they will saue his life. From Hagenaw in Alsatia the 23. of Iuly. This day is our garrison of Count Mansfeild departed quite from hence, to ioyne with his Ar∣mie, having taken certaine men of note and abili∣tie, as likewise some rich Iewes, and desire 120000 Duckets for their ransome. By Letters of the twentie sixe, from the same Towne is written in this manner. We hoped after the departure of Mansfeilds forces to liue a little at rest, but we haue gotten a new garrison of the Arch-Duke Leopoldus, and though wee suffered them
peaceably to come in, yet wee feare they will take from vs what is leaft by the former. From Rome the 23. of Iuly. The Viceroy of Naples, hath dismissed the souldiers that were in the Gallyes of the Pope, sayling to Messina. Likewise the Counsell is agreed by consent of the King of Spaine, with the Ambassadour of Ve∣nice, The Shippe called the Moone, taken the last yeare, with all the wares that were in the same; and haue begun to doe it alreadie, but many pee∣ces of cloath are spoyled, and the things lost, the Duke of Ossuna is to make good. The Duke of Modena, hath resigned his Govern∣ment vnto his eldest Sonne, and prohibited the wearing of Pistols, vpon paine of death, with many other things. The Duke of Savoy hath sent one of his Secre∣taries towards Valisuna, to leavie certaine Compa∣nies of Souldiers: At the other side the Governor of Casal in Montferat hath dispatched twentie thou∣sand men towards Trino, to rayse certaine Forts in those places, and increased the Garrison of Casal aforesaid. There are likewise seene certaine Horse of the Duke of Savoy vpon the Fronters of Vorcelli. From Avignon are marched eyght hundred Soul∣diers, with eyght Peeces of Ordinance towardes Languedoc, against the Protestants, and the King hath besieged Nimes, with the same. The Duke of Guyse, hath commaunded at Mar∣silia certaine Galleys, and Ships, to be made ready against the Rochellers. Don Octavio di Arragona, is
sayled from Sicilia, with 7. gallies against the Turkes. Wee vnderstand heere, that a Turkish Basshaw, of the late strangled Turkish Emperour, being twenty Gallies strong, is ioyned with the Cossacks neere the blacke Sea: which combining together, doe great hurt vnto the Turkes, and robbe them as farre as Adrianople. From Venice, the 22. of Iuly. The Duke of Mantua, hath 3000. foote, and 600. horse in readinesse, which are to be sent to the fronters of Monferat, and he gets dayly more ayde from Florence, being the great Duke of Flo∣rence, appoynted by the King of Spaine, to appease all commotions of Italie, to which purpose hee is to maintaine 4000. men, and the Duke of Vr∣bino, as likewise he of Parma, every one 3000. men, in time of warre. From Venice, the 29. of Iuly. The Grisons having recovered Engadine, are passed the Mountaynes, and haue invaded the Countie of Tyroll, and driven a great number of Cattell from thence; whereupon the Arch-Duke Leapoldus prepares to resist them. The Governour of Millane, hath promised par∣don to the Spanish forces; that are fled from Vel∣toline, if they will be inrolled againe within a fort∣night, the other that will not doe the same shalbe slaine, and killed, wheresoever they are found. Letters of Genua, relate the Arrivall there, of the Venetian Ambassadour from Spayne, and that hee brings newes, that Mamora, is very straitely besiedged by the Hollanders, and Mores of Barbary,
and that it will be shortly surrendied, vnlesse they get speedily ayde. The Montafoner haue made a league with the Grisons, reseruing their liberty, and are called the fourth confederation. But Captaine Pianta holding with the Enemies of his Coun∣trey, hath burned of late diuers places in Engadin. From Vienna the 27 of Iuly. Yesterday is the Coronation of the Em∣presse at Edenburgh happily solemnized, and the Diet (as wee vnderstand) ended, so that wee hope to see the Emperour here next Saturday. The Empresse going to the Church, wore her owne Crowne, and the Palatine of Hungary his. And the Emperour and Empresse went both afterwards with their Crownes adorned to the Imperiall Pallace, from whence the Crowne of Hungary wat shewne to the people, and from thence they went to the Counsell house of the Towne, where was a Feast prepared, and a Maskeacted. The 22. of this moneth are heere passed by seauen Companies of the Regiment of Saxony, going to the siege of Glatz. The 23. of the same moneth, is heere the Church of Saint Michael robbed of he Pictures, siluer Images, and guilded Crucifixes, and other ornaments.
From Prague the 28. of Iuly. Those of Glatz haue lately againe gotten one thousand Cattels, and great store of Salt and other Prouision in their walls, and slaine 100. men of the Imperials, and strengthen them∣selues daily. Likewise there are secretly leauied Souldiers in Silesia, and are mustred neere Frankford at the Riuer of Oder, and to the same effect are here diuers horses bought at great rates, and sent out of the Countrey. Those of Klingenbergh are still of the same re∣solution, viz. They will not surrender the Towne, vnlesse they be assured that they shall depart with their Baggage, Armes, displayed Ensignes, and burning Matches, and haue a conuoy to conduct them safely at Glate: where∣by it seemes that they are not very desirous to surrender the place. From Prague the 2. of August. The nine and twentieth of Iuly are arriued heere, the Lord Frederick Gelhern, one of the priuie Counsell of Silesia, and the Lord Isaack Slackher. Treasurer of the said Countrey, the Count Lichtenstein (Deputy of the Emperour in Bohemia) hauing sent for them, to be better
instructed of certaine affaires in that Countrey, and thereupon to giue them directions. It continueth still that diuers of the Lords, Gentry, and Magistrates, shall be cited and ac∣cused by the Procurator, or Sollicitor of the Emperour, how they will speede God knowes. Klingenbergh is surrendred of late vpon cer∣taine conditions (which we hope to receine by the next Messenger) and the Imperialists haue put Garison in the same. And the same forces which lay before it, besides those in Morauia and Austria, are to goe with all speede before Glatz, to vse all possible might and meanes to take it. For that Garison within doth not onely rob and pillage all the way to∣wards Kenings graitz, and there about, but like∣wise taketh all the graine in those parts from the Countrey people. From Burdeaux the 16. of August. The low Countrey Merchants which are Subiects of the States of the vnited Prounces, and are now resident heere, haue petitioned vnto the Court, that seeing they were dayly abused both by words and deedes by certaine persons, it would please the same to remedie it by her Authority. Whereupon the Court hath taken them in the safegard and protection of the King, prohibiting all and euery one not
to wrong them, neither by words or deedes, declaring that hee that shall contrauent the same, shall forfait one thousand pounds ster∣ling, besides charges and dammages, which are to be payed. This Proclamation is published and affixed at the vsuall places. From Bergen vp Zome this 17. of August. The Marquesse Spinola intending to take very earnestly in hand the siege of Bergen vp Zrme, hath written to Antwerpe for more Ordi∣nance: Hee is likewise busie to raise certaine Sconses betwixt this Towne and Antwerpe, to lodge in times of necessity, and principally in the night the connoyes with munition, and prouant, seeing the Garisons of the States, doe many times annoy the same. And lately certaine Souldiers of Captaine Deuenter lying within Gorkem, haue taken eleuen horse of the Spanish Campe before this Towne, and brought them prisoners into their Garison. Euery thing growes in the Enemies campe daily more deare and deare, a Canne of Becre cost foure Stuyr, a pound of Butter 14. Stuyr, a pound of Cheese sixe and eight Stuyr, which causeth many from thence to come to vs, who haue euery thing good cheape, and in great abundance in the Citie.
We Fortifie daily our outworkes and walles, and raise also diuers Batteries against the Ene∣my, sparing at neither side their Gunoowder, which causeth diuers on both sides to be hurt. From Antwerpt the 16 of August. Since your departure from hence there hath beene many and often assaults made by this side vpon the Forts and halfe Monnes of the Ene∣mies at Bergen vp Zome: But the Souldiers that came from thence, and haue beene themselues in the Fight report indifferently thereof, some saying they haue taken in the halfe Moone, o∣ther reporting the contrary, some reporting they had it, but were beaten out of it forwant of Powder, their Bandiliers being all shot out, others say they had it but durst not stay in it for fear that it was vndermined, so that it seemes they haue it not. But souer it is a miserable thing to see those two last Cnuoyes that are come from Bergen, whereof the one came the last weeke with at least 300. men some say 400. or 500. some whereof haue lost their Armes some their Legs, and others surely wounded, the rest very weake and sicke, whereof within three dayes 40. of them dyed. And yesterday came a Conuoy with Foure or fiue hundred in the like case, so that the Easterling house is made a Guest house, wherein is already Foure or fiue hundred Souldiers wounded and
Sicke, all Englishmen and Spaniards, each a part, and in the Guest house is as many Wal∣lons and Dutch. It is so pittifull a thing to see them come so wounded that I am not able to write you. This day the English Souldiers of my Lord Vaus are gone to the Leaguer, a great part of them I perceiue are of this Religion, and with this Conuoy is gone 8. pieces of Ordnance each drawne with 18. Horses. There is about 400. Souldiers runne away, and yesterday is 38. of them taken, which are all chayned, and led this day with the Conuoy to the Leaguer where it is reported they should be executed. The Boores come daily from farre with their Houshold-stuffe and Corne, flying with feare to this place for safety; so that the Packhousen, art here hard to be had, and the yards of the linnen Whitsters by the Easterling House, and other the like places within the walles of the Citty, serue now for Barnes to put their Hay in, what I haue writ you in this former part of my Letter, if you were heere your selfe, you might be an eye witnes there of aswell as my selfe. Yesterday the Enemy tooke about Pit 30. of our Horsemen on the High-way. I thinke if many of our Englishmen were in England a∣gaine they would bee better aduised, before they would come hither to take Bergen in. But I referre the further relation of such, of them as
shalbe able to get for England again to report it. The number of those English Soldiers which are gone this day with the Conuoy to Bergen, is as is said about 15. or 1600. men, but of bet∣ter sort then those you saw at your being heere. The opinion of taking Bergen is diuers, some thinke within two Monthes, others not in a yeare, & some suppose it will neuer be taken in. Some that came thence with Conuoy af∣firme that 3. dayes past, this side shot through the Church as they Preached and did much hurt, which was done vpon this occasion. That whereas this side lost many men, in seeking to take in the Sconce or halfe Moone, and that in the same place, the other side lost diuers men also, a Truce was made in the said place, for each side to fetch their Dead from thence: But when this side came to fetch theirs, the other side shot at them, which they did in regard that some of this side did vndermine in the meane time in that Quarter or place, while the other came and fetcht their Dead. I might write you many particulars of both Captains and Ensignebearers of English, Itali∣ans, Wallons, and others, all worthy men brought dead from the Leaguer to this Towne, some to friends houses, and some to the Easter∣lings house, whereof I my selfe haue seene some whose Names are made knowne, but other of greater Houses haue had their names concea∣led,
and are suncke by Night, some at Bregard, some at the Deminicans, some at the Gray Friers Minne brothers, and some at other places. From Middleburgh the 17. of August. Captaine Klenter of Amsterdam, hath a great while shot against the Viceadmitall of Duynkir∣ken, but hee got yet at last his wished Port of Disynkerken aforesaid. A Pirate out of North Holland, sayling with a Turkish Pirate to try their Fortunes vpon the Coastes of Spaine, did loose one another, and the Hollander got afterwards a rich Spanish Ship, whereupon he sayled to Holland. But be∣ing met by the aforesaid Turke he set vpon him, and being become Maister of his Ship, he told him that he was his friend, and loued him dear∣ly, but that the Prize was a great deale dearer vnto him. The Prince of Orange gathers his Army at Harwynen, betwixt Bommell and Gorkin, and the Gates were commaunded to bee shut at Dordrocht, and at the Ferries they had charge to land none, on the side of the Citty. It seemes that hee hath an enterprize in hand. His Excellency himselfe lyeth yet neere St. Hertgenbosh. Count Henry of Nassaw about Reas. And Count Henry vanden Lergh at Goch.
A Post newly arriued here in London on Fry∣day night last, being the 23. of August, brings certaine newes, That comming from the Palati∣nate towards England, as hee passed thorow Bra∣bant, he came thorow Mansfields Army, lying on this side Bruxels, not farre from the same place which Graue Henricke of Nassau inuaded lately: here hee saw Mansfield with seuen or eight thou∣sand horse, burne and spoyle the Countrey ex∣ceedingly: but still where hee commeth, hee first sheweth them this courtesie, that those Cities, Townes. Villages, or any rich particular Gentle∣men, or any others, that will ansome themselues and goods vpon reasonable summes, he lets them rest quietly: but contrariwise, those that will not, he giueth the ordinarie spoyle to his souldiers, and hee taketh most of the coyne to himselfe. Likewise here was then newes, that Gonzales comming towards him with great speed, being sent for by the Arch-Duchesse, hee is almost al∣readie there, so that there will be shortly some great bickering betweene them: this is certaine, that Mansfield was in treatie with the French King, but it was alwayes thought his end was, but to get some opportunitie; which now is come to light. It is thought, hee will take the spoyle of the Countrey, before Gonzales com∣meth, or any resistance can be made against him, hee alreadie hath obtained great summes of mo∣ney: all his footmen he hath left with the Duke of Brunswicke, a little beyond Bruxels. This in∣cursion
of Mansfield, made vpon Brabant, if Gon∣zales commeth not the sooner, must of necessitie either make the Marquesse Spinola suddenly re∣moue his siege from Bergen vp Zome, or other∣wise enforce Graue Henrick Vandenberg to leaue the frontiers of Gilderland, who now lyeth about Wesel: so by this meanes the Prince of Orange, who is constrayned now to attend him, and to keepe all those Forces in a manner idle for the safetie of his Countrey, may then put those For∣ces to a better vse. Concerning the Marriage of the Emperour: First, his Imperiall Maiestie and the Empresse going vnto the Church of the Franciscane Fryers, they were accompanied by diuers Am∣bassadors, besides the Nuncio of the Pope, and diuers Lords and Ladies walking all in very good order: After many of them followed the Marshall, who carried the Sword before the Em∣perour, who being arrayed in in an Imperiall ha∣bit, was adorned with his Crowne, and had his Scepter in his right hand, and the Globe of the Empire in his left. Before the Empresse, who followed them close, went the Palatine of Hun∣garie, with the Crowne of the said Kingdome, the Lord Esterhasie with the Scepter, the Lord Setsy with the Globe of the Kingdome afore∣said, besides a Bishop, who carryed her Maiesties Crowne: The Ladies of the Court, and the Maids of Honour, being all richly attyred,
and adorned with precious Stones, came imme∣diately after. Secondly, as soone as both Maiesties were en∣tred into the Church, they kneeled downe be∣fore the high or principall Altar. Whereupon the Arch-bishop holding a Booke before his Maiestie, hee continued his Prayers for a while, being still adorned with his Habite, Crowne, Scepter, and Globe aforesaid. And from thence he went to the Quire (where a Seat was prepared for him) kneeling there likewise downe. But the Empresse remayned still kneeling vpon the first place; where, at the beginning of the Seruice, were diuerse Ceremonies vsed, and Musicke heard: afterwards the Epistle being read, the great Letanie was sung; during which, shee lay with her face downewards vpon two pillowes of Cloth of Gold, before the Altar aforesaid. The e ended, the Lord Arch-bishop anoynted er before shee rose, betwixt her elbow and hand, as likewise her cheekes. Thirdly, the Ceremonies being finished, the Empresse went away, being conducted by her Steward, the Lord of Didrichstain, besides o∣ther Lords, as likewise her shee Steward, the Countesse of Portia, and diuerse Ladies of her Chamber: But shee came presently backe to the Altar, arrayed in Cloth of Siluer, being adorned also with a rich Chaine and a Medall. Before her went the Lord Setsy, with the Globe of the King∣dome of Hungarie; the Lord Esterhasie with the
Scepter, and the Palatine aforesaid with the Hun∣garian Crowne: shee followed them with her owne Crowne, being set vpon her head by ano∣ther Hungarian Bishop, which is very richly ador∣ned with Pearles and precious Stones, and very artificially made. Afterwards, the Lord Esterhasie gaue the Archbishop the Scepter, the Lord Setsy the Globe, the Palatine the Crowne; and he gaue her Maiestie the Scepter in her left hand, the Globe in the right, and the Crowne hee set vpon her right shoulder, and during the time that the Angelicall Salutation was sung, shee kept the same: afterwards they were taken from her a∣gaine, and layd vpon the Altar; whereupon was sung Te Deum laudamus, and the Empresse hauing her owne Crowne vpon her head, and the Hun∣garian Scepter in her right hand, and the Globe in her left, was conducted to her ordinarie Seat in the middle of the Quire, where a Theatrum was erected, and adorned with rich Tapistrie and Hangings of Cloth of Gold. At the left hand his Maiestie continuing kneeling in his prayers, without changing his Imperiall habite, the Marshall aforesaid kept his Sword, and two other Lords the Globe of the Empire, and the Scepter. The Ceremonies, besides the vsuall Rites and Customes finished, the Emperour and Empresse were conducted backe to the Pallace by the Lords aforesaid, both Spirituall and Tem∣porall, as well Hungarian as German, besides the Ladies, their Maiesties being both still attyred in
their habites, and their traine going in good or∣der, as before: where there was prepared a state∣ly Banquet for all these Guests, as well Hungar iuns as Germans. During the Coronation, a Citizen, who clombe vpon the Crosse of the Steeple of the Church aforesaid, flourished an Ensigne, stan∣ding vpon the same without falling, and the same was likewise afterwards done by diuers Germans and Hungarians; and amongst them, a German Souldier put all his clothes from his backe vnto his shirt, being vpon the same. The Emperour, with the Empresse, sate first downe at the Table: at the right hand tooke the Popes Nuncio place; after him, the Spanish Em∣bassadour; then, the Embassadour of Mantua, at the left hand; besides the Archbishop of Hungaria, and the Palatine aforesaid. At this Banquet were diuers Hungarian Lords atten∣ding; and amongst other the Lord Esterhasi, the Lord Setsy, and the Count of Achot. The Ban∣quet being ended, they went to the Councell-House of the Towne; where, in the presence of both Maiesties aforesaid, and the most part of the principall Lords of Hungarie and Germanie, besides the Ladies of both Nations, was for the space of seuen houres great reuelling and dancing, with much ioy, and great respect performed. FINIS.
