s1000 [ocm]69648886 185049
BY THE COMMISSIONERS For Visiting and Regulating the Ʋniversities, and other Affairs, relating to the Ministery in SCOTLAND. THE Commissioners of Parliament of the Common-wealth of England, (being carefull to promote Piety and Learning, and to settle a godly and peaceable Ministery through this Nation, who may make it their onely work, sincerely to preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ) Have Constituted and Appointed Richard Dean Esquier, Major-Generall of the Army, George Fenwick, George Smyth, John March, Andrew Owen, Edward Mosley, Richard Saltingstall, Samuel Disbrowe, and Edmund Syler Esquiers, or any three, or more of them, to be Visiters of the Universities, Colledges, and Schools of Learning in Scotland; By vertue whereof, they do hereby Declare and Publish, That they intend (Godwilling) in convenient time, to alter and abolish all such Lawes in the same, as shall be found inconsistent with the Government of the Common-wealth of England, or the Union and Incorporation of England and Scotland, and to frame and make others in their room. And they do hereby Declare, That all Acts and Proceedings, since the fourth day of February last, made and done by any Persons, pretending to have power of Visitation in the same; are, and shall be null and void: And that they will remove out of them, such Person or Persons, as shall be found scandalous in their lives and conversations, or that shall oppose the Authority of the Common-wealth of England, exercised in Scotland, and place others more fitly qua∣lified in their rooms. And further, they shall and will remove all and every Minister and Ministers, through this Nation, from his and their Place and Places, that shall be found scandalous in his and their life and conversation, and take care, that other fit Persons be put in his and their Place and Places; and in all other Places, that are, or shall be vacant: And shall also hear and determine all Causes, relating to the Maintenance of the Ministers, or others, as aforesaid. And they do hereby further Declare, That for the better executing their Power, according to their Commission, They intend (Godwilling) to sit on Monday the seventh of this instant June, at Edinburgh, in the Parliament-House there, and to continue their sitting every Monday fortnight following; where they shall be ready to receive all Complaints, and to hear and determine all Causes concerning the Premisses: Of which, they desire all good People of this Land to take notice. Given under our Hands at Edinburgh, this fourth day of June, 1652. Geor. Smyth. Sa. Disbrowe. Ed. Syler. A. Owen. Jo. March. Edw. Mosley. Printed at Leith by Evan Tyler, Anno Dom. 1652.
