13142.5 S113025 99848266 176854
✚ A TRVE Declaration of the Honorable Victorie obtained by the French King in winning of Noyan, and ouerthrow of the Duke de Maine his Forces. Performed this present moneth of August, 1591. Published according to the Copie sent into England to the Lord Ambassadour for France. SIC CREDE printer's device consisting of an eagle carrying one of its young in its talons, used by Thomas Scarlet (1590-6) (McKerrow 277) LONDON Imprinted by Thomas Scarlet, for Thomas Nelson, and are to be solde at his shop ouer against the South dore of Paules.
A DISCOVRSE WRITTEN from the French Kings Campe, lying before Noyan, the viii. day of August, Anno 1591. THE town of Noyan being be∣legur'd by the kinges Maiestye, was con∣strained to great ex∣tremitye: for the re∣liefe wher of, the L. Vicount Tauanes set forwardes towardes the the said towne, and came thither in the night season, accompanied with foure hundred horse, and about fiue hundred footmen: Yet such was his bad successe in his pretence for succouring the town of Noyan, that his whol power was broken, slaine, discomfited, and ta∣ken
prisoners: and more then that, to the great griefe of the Leagers, himself was taken priso∣ner, and in the assault sore wounded. This newes being brought to the forces of the Leaguers, caused the Duke D'Aumaule to resolue an attempt for his releasement: and thereupon hauing assembled about fiue hun∣dred horse, came and made his generall assem∣bly in the towne of Han, which is not aboue four leagues from the sayde Noyan. From whence, on the seuenth of August, hee sent three hundred of his best horse to the fight, to∣gether with a company of Harquebuziers, who went before, and the sayd Horsemen lin∣gered behind in a village, not farre from the rereward, who soon after set forward, and gaue a charge vpon the quarter of the Kings light horse, where they were well receaued. With him there came to the said alarme, the Lords of Largue, and of Lawney, his brother, with their companies, who are of some force. These ioyntly ioyned with the light horsemen, greatly strengthned the forces of the leaguers. Neuerthelesse, after many charges, and sharpe assaults geuen on either part (the Kings side al∣wayes hauing the greatest likelihood of victo∣rie) both the companies began to retire. At which retire came in that valiant soldier
and honourable man at armes, the Lord Baron of Biron, who albeit that he was not accom∣panied with aboue twelue of his own men, yet the Kings forces supposing he had brought in some store of fresh soldiers, so soone as they once heard him named, took a wonderful and vnspeakable courage, and seeing him in the midst of them, they gaue a fresh charge vpon the enemie, in such sort, and with such force, that they did driue the enemie euen into the gates of Han, from whence they had issued. To whom there was also comming a new succor, and fresh supply of men, who perceiuing the euill successe of the rest, returned in the fore∣frunt, so that some of the kings maiesties forces followed them euen into their barriours. This fight was great, for there were at the least twelue seuerall charges and assaultes ge∣uen, in which there was some store of armed men slaine on the enemies side, with diuers of their Captains. Among whom was slayn Don Francisco of Gueuara, the best captain of light horsemen that the king of Spayne had in the low Countreys. The Lieutenant to the sayde Francisco de Gueuara, was also slayn outright. It is supposed that the Lieutenant to the Go∣uernor of Han was also taken and slaine, with sundrie other of great account.
The Lord of Long-champ, one of the best and most aduenturous Captaines, is also taken prisoner, with aboue fourscore men at aimes of account, and diuers Leaders, and Lieute∣nants of the horsemen: who all confesse, that they were hardly bestead, hotly encountred and assaulted by men of courage, and great va∣lour. Yea this ouerthrow cost them deare: for there was taken and slaine of the enemies a∣boue fifteen hundred horse, who were not of the worst, but of their chiefest horse and hors∣men. On the Kings Maiesties side there was slaine about a dossen horses, which were of his light horsemen. Amongest whom the Mar∣shall of the companie was slaine: his death is greatly bewayled, forasmuch as he was a man of great valor, and wonderfull courage. The Duke de Maine arriued on the seuenth day of August, at the towne of Han, with all troupes of horsemen which he could gather: Of whom it need not be doubted, but that hee is of the opinion to recouer this losse, and to speed better then the rest of his chief captains did before him. Wherein if it may please God he fayle in his opinion, and obteine but the like successe, his forces would shortly be weak∣ned, and his faction for the most parte con∣founded.
This one thing is worthy the noting, that all men are now more willing to goe against him and his troupes, then they were against those that came first. And it may very well be, that sith the Duke de Main is not content with the two first losses and conflicts which hee re∣ceiued, that the next may worke some greater effect: for it was likely (being then so neere to∣gether as they were) that they should hardly part againe without comming neerer in viewe and battel one of the other. In the meane space the Kings Maiesty lost no time about the siege of this towne: For on this day, being the seuenth day of August, the Canon beganne to play vpon a Church that standeth in the midst of the suburbs, which to∣gether with a great ditch, did strongly defend the same: wherby it is not found much weaker then the towne: the taking whereof could not but minister great occasion of aduauntage, wherof the Kings Maiestie was in good hope. Neuerthelesse, he was coustrayned to leaue of and to restraine the forraine power which came vnto him from Germanie and England, who in most honourable sort are entered the Realme. The Church aforesaide hauing receiued the force of the Canon, which played vpon it from morning vntill three of the clocke in the
after noone, had by that time a great breache made into the same: By meanes whereof, the Church was soone taken by a fierce assault made by the French and English companies. In which breach there was slayne about the number of thirtie enemies, besides whom there was to the number of fourty and fiue, that were retired into the vaultes of the sayde Church, who yeelded themselues vnto the mercie of the Kinges Maiestie. And there∣vppon hee immediately graunted them their liues, and likewise liberty to depart with bag and baggage. The assaultes of the towne, and winning of this Church, was the meanes for taking the Suburbs, and therefore a thing preiudiciall to the towne, not onelye in respecte of the anoyance which the Kings forces did offer the enemie: but also for the men of war that were there slayne, of which the towne was but meanely and slenderly furnished at the time of their yeelding. His Maiestie is aduertised that Rosue, who ledde the Duke de Maine his army towardes Lorraine, is returned towards Laon, to which place the Duke is gone to ioyne with him, to the ende that they together might succour the said towne. By meanes wherof, there is likelihood of a great battaile and conflict very
shortly to be geuen to the Duke de Maine, the rather, in respect that his Maiestie, and all the Nobilitie about him, stand very resolutely in his defence. The Composition ensuing was concluded on the seuenteenth day of August, 1591. VPon the seuenteenth day of August, 1591. the Lord of Ville, commander in Noyan, as wel for himselfe, as for all the Gentlemen, Sol∣diers, and other Inhabitantes of the sayd Town, hath promised to yeeld the said town of Noyā into the king his hands, vpon munday next following by Noone, together with all the artillerie, the Munition for warre, and victuals, which at that present time was therein: vnlesse that on the morrow (being Sunday) sometime of the day, the Duke de Maine doe giue his Maiestie battaile, and so raise his siege: or at least, that the Duke de Maine doe put in a thousand men by force, to succour the said Towne of Noyan, that then the said Lord of Ville, the Gentlemen and Cap∣taines, with their armour, horses and baggage, and the Souldiers with their weapons and horse, shall depart, and the Inhabitants (doing their dueties,) shalbe receaued into the Kings fauour, and intreated as his other good Subiects, that dwell and remaine in his other Townes. That the said Lord of Villes mother, may freelye remaine in the said Town, and enioy her goods, vpon perfourming the submission of loyall fidelitie as is accustomed of all his loyall Subiects.
Item, that if any of the Inhabitants of the sayde towne be desirous to depart, that they shall lawfullye depart among the men of warre. That the said Lord of Ville shalbe permitted to sende the Lord of Broully to the said Duke of Maine, to aduertise him of the premisses, and that the King shall safe conduct him to that effect. To the accomplishment of the premisses, the saide L. of Ville hath also promised to deliuer for Hostages, to his Maiestie, the Lorde of Rieulx, the Abbot of Genlis, with four of the chiefe of the Towne, such as his Maiestie shall choose. All which persons his Ma∣iestie doeth promise vpon performance of the former conditions, to deliuer. His Maiestie also graunteth to sende two Captens into the Towne, to see and keepe them during the said time, from labouring to the contrarie. Geuen the xvij. of August. 1591. Signed HENRIE. And vnderneath. RVZE. Ville de Rieulx. La Chautrie. Browly. VPon the xix. day following, the saide composition was put in effect as is afore∣said, and his Maiestie hauing aduise that the enemy retired vpon la Fere, presently resol∣ued to depart after midnight with xij. hundred horse and foure hundred harguebuziers on horsebacke, the Lord Marshall of Biron being of the troupe, to the end to crosse and meete with the enimie by the waie betweene la Fere and Loan, and to charge him in the march:
there was great apparance, had the aduice bin true. Herevpon his Maiestie returned the sayd Lord Marshall, and retained with himselfe on∣ly sixe hundred horse and the saide harguebu∣ziers, and so marched toward Han, where the Duke of Maine remained yet with his sayd ar∣mie, where his said Maiestie stayed almost two houres in battel in his sight within canon shot, whereof there weresome shot discharged with out anie losse, neither woulde there issue anie person, except one cornet of horsemen, which had the riuer of Some before them. Thus the Duke chose rather to abide this shame, than to seeke to reuenge the first. Euen against the towne there was also a Corps de gard of Spa∣niards, who were displaced by eight Gentle∣men that alighted. On another side there were some twelue that aduentured too farre, whom four Gentlemen (of whom Sir R. Williams was one) pursued, and made them turne their faces, except one of the chiefest, that belonged to the duke d'Aumal, who remaineth prisoner. His Maiestie on the twentieth of August marched toward Gisors, there to receaue the right honourable Earle of Essex, and so imme∣diately to ioyne with the great power of Ger∣manes, who are already entred into Fraunce, by Gods grace to work some great effect, with the ayde of the honourable, warlike, and for∣ward Leaders, and Gentlemen of England.
THE EPILOGVE. THis former discourse (gentle reader) is not forged or fained, as some perhaps for malice will pecuisly report: neither is it fetched from flying and fabulous letters, ordinarie reports on the Ex∣change, or published vppon rash warrant, as some, I know, will not stick to vtter: but the same is set forth for such credit as cānot be disproued, being agreeable to the intelligence sent from his Maiestie into Eng∣land, to the Lord Ambassador for Fraunce. And although the same bee not published with such elo∣quent phrases as some newes which hath lately beene published, yet will I assure you (if both were examined by the wisest) that this is of more trueth, and without error, notwithstanding that much trueth was pro∣mised, and little found but vntrueth. For reformatiō wherof, be assured there is sufficient order taken, that no newes whatsoeuer, shall hereafter passe in print, but that which is certain, and knowen to be true. Besides this, you shall very shortly haue published the good successe which the Lord Prince of Countie hath had in another part of Fraunce, in the behalfe of the French king: where he hath put a great num∣ber of the Leaguers to the foyle. The maner of which
battaile shalbe particularlie published, being transla∣ted out of the French printed Copie, with his Maie∣sties owne letter sent vnto the said Prince of Countie, together with the honourable letter of Sir Roger Willyams, in the behalfe of his Countrey, sent vnto the Collonels and Captaines of Paris, challenging them to the combat, in respect of some false rumors giuen foorth by them against English companies, which therin is plainely layd open.
