13685 S104009 99839750 4199
In s'Graven Haghe Ten huyse van Henricus Hondius, anno 1637. map of Breda drawn by Henricus Hondius BARONNIE VAN BREDA inset map of the barony of Breda
A BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF BREDA, and the Barronie thereof, represented in this mapp aboue. THis Cittie is a Land Towne, situated in a most plea∣sant place vpon two Riuers, the one called the Marck, the other the A, from whence the name thereof is deriued. For the A spreading it self at the broadest in it, is called Breed A, that is, Broad A. This Riveret runing into it, doth strengthen the Towne exceedingly, by feeding & filling the moate with water, and within the Towne doth dis∣charge it selfe into the Marck. Jt is girt about with a thick, high, and a lofty wall, having rowes of Oakes, Elmes and other trees growing vpon it. The circuit of it is 4000 Geometricall paces at 5 foote, which make some three English miles in com∣passe, hauing twelue hundred Houses in it, a goodly Markett place, and a faire Church, with a Lofly steeple 362 foote high. The Castle lies vpon the Marck with a goodly moate about it seuered from the Towne, a stately Orchard, and a Garden for pleasure like a paradice, with a curious Maze, a fine prospect, Fountaines, and other rarities in it. Moreouer, it is strongly fortifyed with 13 Royall Bulwarkes, fiue large Hornworks, a broad & a deepe moate in some places 200 foote ouer, diuerse Ravelings Halfe-moones and a Coun∣skarfe, which J will delineate by Figure and Letter. The Figure 1. Js the Castle Bulwarke, Hom-worke and Rave∣ling vpon which Count Harrie Governour of Frizeland runn his Approach. 2. Js Spite-Mansfeilds Bulwarke. 3. The Bosch-Port-Bulwarck with the Horne-work and Raveling. 4. Maurice Bulwarke. 5. Martins Bulwark with the Horne-worke. 6. Nassaws Bulwarke. 7. Ginnekens-Port-Bulwarke and Horne-worke vpon which his Highnesse quarter Approached. 8. Notes Bulwarke. 9. The Water-miles. 10. Hollands Bulwarke. 11. Barnevelts Bulwarke. 12. Anwerps-Port-Bulwark, and Horne-worke vpon which Count William ran his Approaches. 13. Lamberts Bulwarke. 14. The new Bulwarke. 15. Heragiers Bulwarke, all these having Ravelings on the otherside of the moate and Counterskarfe. The Description of the seige, without and the seuerall quarters A. His Highnesse quarter consisting of English, French Wal∣lons and Dutches. B. Count Williams quarter at the Hage. C. Count Harries quarter Lord Gouvernour of Fryzeland at Tetering. D. Coronell Varicks quarter neere Terheyde. E. Lieutenant Coronell Boshuysens quarter. F. The Wallons quarter on the other side of the Marck. G. Count Solmes his quarter. H. The Lord of Brederodes quarter. I. Coronell Ferens his quarter. K. The Damme, where the Marck was stopped by his High∣nesse quarter. L. The two first small Redoubts to keepe in the Enemie vpon Ginnekens way into Breda. N. The first Batterie, where the French and the English began their Approaches, the one on the right, and the other on the left hand. N. The French Approach. O. The English Approach. P. A great Battery of 12 half Canon. Q. A second Batterie of 8 Peeces. R. A third Batterie called the French Battery of 4 Peeces. S. The Mast, or Pine-wood through which the line of Cir∣cumvalation rann. T. The Fort Papenmutch. V. The Riveret A, betweene Papen-mutch the crowne worke, and the stone bridge. W. Count Williams Approach from the Hagh. X. Count Williams first Batterie made against Antwerpes Poort and Bulwarke. Y. Count Harries Approach and Batterie vpon the Horne∣worke and Raveling before the Castle. Z. The House of pleasure taken in by Count Harrie. aa. This Arrable Lands. bb. Low meddow grounds ouerflowne. cc. The Pan-house and way towards Getruydenberke. dd. The high way towards Turnehout. ee. The high way towards Hooghstrate. ff. Js Rysbergen, where the Cardinall Jnfante quartered. gg. Heusenhout, or the way by which the Enemie marched through our gards when they departed. hh. The House of Knaverie moated. ii. The States lodging. kk. The black dyke.
