15117.7 S103207 99838964 176869
THE LITLE GARDEN OF OVR B. LADY. Or, diuers practicall Exer∣cises in her Honour. VVritten in Latin, by the R. Father, Francis de la Croix, of the So∣ciety of IESVS. And translated into English. ornament IHS Permissu Superiorum. 1631.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL HIS MVCH HONOVRED LADY, THE LA. E. M. MADAME, THE true Deuotiō wch your Ladiship is knowne to haue all∣wayes borne vnto the B. Virgin MARY (together
with the many courtesies You lately shewed me, farre beyōd my deserts) hath emboldened me to present this little GAR∣DEN of our LADY (beset with most fragrant, and odoriferous Flowers) vnto you: wel knowing the Noblenesse of your Mynd to be such, as will accept of a meane guift, wher better ability doth want in the giuer; as ha∣uing no other way wher by to manifest the high
Estimation, and most faythfull Obseruance, wherewith he abounds towards You. Into this GARDEN may you often, & confi∣dently enter, both for your spirituall & corpo∣ral Exercise. A GARDEN it is, most pleasant, and plāted with the Flowers of all celestiall Delights. And if at any time your Lad. Pchance to be dist∣racted through worldly Cares, or other busines,
retyre hither with speed to recreate your wearied Mynd and Senses, with the Variety, and sweet Ayre thereof. Walke throgh the same dayly & diligently. Cō∣pose for your selfe a No∣se-gay of sweet smelling Flowers. Heere gather a Rose of Loue & Confi∣dence: There a Lilly of entyre & sincere Deuo∣tion: Heere a Violet of humble reuerēce & sub∣mission. There a Mary∣gold
of perfect Imitatiō of the B. Virgins vertues And as the industri∣ous Bee, in sucking Ho∣ny out of Flowers, doth with no lesse Wisdome then Discretion, choose what is most fit and apt for her artificiall Buil∣ding; so may your Ladi∣ship imitate that proui∣dent, & laborious Crea∣ture, in selecting, amōgst so great variety, what shall be most fit for your spirituall Edifice.
I will not be ouer trou∣blesome with a lōger E∣pistle, since the Boūty of your good Nature assu∣reth me, aswell of a gra∣teful Acceptance of this mean Offer; as of a care∣full Imitatiō of the ver∣tues wch the ensuing Gar∣dē doth liuely represent. In confidence wheof, I rest, very respectfully, Your La.Ps euer deuoted seruāt in Christ IESVS. I. Wo
THREE INSEPA∣rable companions of De∣uotion, towards the Sa∣cred Virgin Mary. The first, is Diligence, and Feruour. THAT the B. Virgin is not to be honoured ne∣gligently, slouthfully, & only for fashion sake, is cleere & euident; yet, that the fier of our loue, and deuotion may dayly be more feruēt towards her, behould beer three principall reasōs taken
out of the 86. Psalme, which by frequent meditation may be cast into this flame, as fuell to main∣taine it. The first reason why me ought with feruor to honour the B Vir∣gin, is her Excellency, the which is by the Psalmist expressed vn∣der the Type of the Temple of Hierusalē in these words: Her foundations are in the holy mountaines; our Lord lo∣ueth the gates of Sion, more then all the Tabernacles of Iacob. Out of which words, Do∣ctors do cōmonly inferre, that the first, & least grace that was be∣stowed vpon the Bl. Virgin in the
first moment of her Conception, was greater thē he greatest that euer any man or Angel receiued. They say also, that our B. Lady did cōtinually increase the grace with she had receaued, yea dou∣bled the same. From whence some no lesse piously, then probably dis∣coursing, do conclude, That her grace and glory alone, is more perfect thē that of all the Saints and Blessed togeather, and conse∣quently more esteemed, and belo∣ued of God, then all other pure creaturs whatsoeuer. Wherfore if honour & reuerence must an∣swere in proportion vnto the Ex∣cellency; who cannot easily gather
from hence that our Bles. Lady is more to be honored & loued, then all the Blessed togeather? Cast now the eye of your Vn∣derstanding vpō the whole world, & consider euery kingdome, Pro∣uince, Citty, and Village, how greatly, by how many, & in what manner, aswell priuately as pub∣lickly the Angells, Apostles, Mar∣tyrs, Confessors, Virgins, and the rest of Blessed are honoured; and after that your haue well pondered, and admired the same, & making one masse of them all, O how great will it seeme to be? and verily, if the B. Virgin may lustly challenge vnto herselfe far
greater honour & reuerēce then all that; how feruent then, how ready, how enflamed, how many winges of Deuotion ought you to haue, how many heads & hands, to adore and honour her, as you ought? Her, I say, whome the B. Trinity so much honoureth; how much more ought you (poore wor∣me and abiect Creature) to ho∣nour? The Second reason, why we should honour and reuerence our B. Lady with feruor is, because she is the Mother of God; the which the Prophet Dauid tou∣cheth in these words: Glorious thinges haue bene sayd of
thee, O Citty of God. Psal. 86 Do you desire to know what glorious thinges may, & ought to be sayd of her, whome God hath chosen for the Citty, in which himselfe meant to dwell, to wit his B. Mother? First this title of Mother of God, giueth vnto the Bles Virgin a dignity in some sor infinite. Secondly it declareth her woderful merits at the hands of our Sauiour Christ whome as aener and louing Mother she most louingly brought vp, cloathed, cherishd, defended, forsooke not vntill death, and euen buried his dead body with vnspeakable care and lous. What honour therefore
doth she not deserue at our hāls, who so much honoured our Sa∣uiour Christ, our Father, & the Loue of our Hart? Lastly, the prerogatiue of the Mother of God, comprehen∣deth her innumerable merits to∣wards all mankind. For when the Sonne of God came to take humane Nature vpon him, then should the world haue receyued him with great reuerence, and opē armes of Loue, it should haue gone out to haue met, and imbra∣ced him with the feruent loue of the Seraphims, with the beauty of the Cherubims, with the variety of the Vertues and Thrones: but
such was the blindnes, ingrati∣cude and vnworthynes therof, as that it despised & reiected him, and as much as lay in it, euen a∣bandoned that necessary, and so long desired worke of our Re∣demption. Yet you, O most Bles∣sed Virgin Mary, you only amōgst all the world, enflamed with Charity like the Seraphims, in Wisdome like the Cherubims, by your Humility & purity did pre∣sent your selfe a most gratefull Throne vnto Almighty God, and with the fragrant odour of your Vertues, did so temper the vn∣sauoury stench of sinne, which had made the world so abomi∣nable
to the Sonne of God, as that you allured, yea drew him downe from heauē to earth; most officiously lēding your bowels vn∣to men, to receiue him, your armes to imbrace him, your tongue to praise him, and finally euen your selfe wholy to serue him perpetu∣ally for them. And to omit other merits of the B. Virgin towards men; as also her many seruices exibited in their behalfe vnto the Sonne of God, let vs weigh what S. Ber∣nard sayth of her only consent in the conceyuing of the Sonne of God. (Homilia super Mis∣sus est.) You haue now heard
(sayth he) O Virgin the tydings sent from heauen (to wit, that you are chosen to be the Mother of God) the Angel expecteth your answere, for it is time that he re∣turne vnto him that sent him. And we likwise. O Lady, expect a word of commiseration: for behold the price of our Redemp∣tion is offered vnto you; if you giue your consent, we shall be forthwith set all liberty. This humble supplication, O pious Vir∣gin, the dolefull Adam, with his miserable progeny cast out of Pa∣radise, doth presēt vnto you. This is the humble request of Abrahā, of Dauid, and of the other Holy
Patriarches, your Progenitors, who dwell in the region of dark∣nes, & in the shaddow of death. This the whole world prostrate at your feet doth expect. And not without cause, seeing that vpon your word dependeth the comfort of the miserable, the redemption of the captiue, the ransome of those that are condemned, and fi∣nally the health, and welfare of all the Children of Adam, that are of your stock. Thus S. Ber∣nard. O how glorious thinges, & with what feruor of affection haue byn sayd of you, and here∣after ought to be vsed by vs, O Citty, O Mother of God!
The third cause that ought to styrre vs vp to Feruor, in honou∣ring our Bles. Lady is her infinite Mercy towards all mankind: For (as the Psalmist sayth in 86. Psal.) The habitatiō in you, is as it were of al reioycing. Verily of all; and why reioy∣cing, but for the manifold bene∣fits which she dayly heapes vpon vs? In so much that I may boldly & truly say with S. Bernard: Let him be silent, O B. Vir∣gin, in the prayses of your Mercy, whosoeuer he be, that hauing called vpō you in his distresses, can truly say, that you haue bin wan∣ting
to helpe him. And be∣cause there is none such to be found, therfore let none be silent, but all ioy full and feruent; let them honour the Lengh of her Mercies, with a perpetual deuotion; the Breadth with all kind of excellent Prayses; the Height with most diuine worship; & the Depth with a most profound reuerence. But of the benefits & Mercyes of our B Lady, we shal speake more afterward.
The second Companion, is Constancy. THere is to be pondred also another thing in thes words of the Psalmist: The habita∣tion in you, is as it were of all reioycing. Psal. 86. The habitation (sayth he) such as is that of Cittizēs, not an aboad of some few houres, or of one day, as that of Pil∣grims is wont to be; to giue vs to vnderstand, that the flouds of heauenly graces and delightes, are wont to be deriued vnto such only, as are constant in the ho∣nour of our B Lady and do per∣seuere in piety towards her. For
those who honour or salute her as it were in passing by, and make themselues as passengers only and strangers in her seruice, & do neglect their exercises of Deuo∣tion begun towards her; besides that they are liable vnto the pu∣nishement due to their incōstan∣cy, they incurre also the Displea∣sure of the Mother of God, as may be gathered by the exam∣ples following of two (otherwise most deuout vnto the B. Virgin, and also Saints) who were shar∣ply reprehended by our B. Lady for their slacknes & negligence in their wonted exercises of reue∣rence and deuotion towards her.
The first of these was one Her∣man, who was so inflamed with deuotion towards the B. Virgin, that therfore he deserued to be admitted of her for her Spouse, giuing him the Name of Ioseph. This man, through many busi∣nesses, and wordly cares being di∣stracted in recyting his accusto∣med Hymnes, and office of the B. Virgin, and growne more negli∣gent in her seruice; our B. Lady one day met him, not beautifull as she was wont, but with an old withered, and wrinckled face: Behould, sayd she, I appeare such a one as I now am become with thee. Where be now those times
in which thou didest so often make mention of me, salute me, and prayse me? Art thou not a∣shamed to be so remisse & negli∣gent in this point? Is my remem∣brance with thee now growne old? Hermā by this sweet corre∣ction renewed his first feruour. [Surius in eius vita. 5. A∣prilis.] The other was Thomas a Kempis (whose name is fa∣miously knowne to all) to whome our B. Lady once appeared, being yet a youth and going to Schoole at Dauen try in Gelderland, & was very angry with him for omitting his accustomed deuo∣tions vnto her, refusing to im∣brace
him, as she did his other schoole-fellows. [Spec. Exem. dist. 10. n. 7.] The third Companion, is Discretion. TO the end that Constan∣cy in honouring of our B. Lady may be obserued, the which so greatly she desyreth, and is so necessary for the reaping of fruit; it is requisite to adioyne a third Companion of Deuotion, to wit, Discretion, which setteth downe a rule, and order vnto the Exer∣cises of Piety, that neyther too many thinges togeather, nor yet too hard, or not agreeing with our state of life, be vndertaken:
for which cause our deuotions are somtimes performed which an∣xiety, little gust, and ouer much hast, & finally are often through tediousnesse wholy omitted. And this is the cause, why so many Exercises are hereafter set downe, in such plaine manner (for we only meane to shew the practise, and proue the same by some few Examples,) to the end, that euery one may make choyce of such as are most fit for himselfe, distributing them into diuers times some for euery day, some for Sundayes & holy dayes, others for more principall & so∣semne Feastes.
THE TABLE OF Chapters. THE I. BED. NOt to go rashly, and without recollection to prayer. C 1. To commit our office of saluting the B. Virgin to the Angells. Cap. 2. To honour the sacred Name of Mary. Cap. 3. To salute her Image. Cap. 4. To go on Pilgrimage to her Chur∣ches. Cap. 5. To reuerence all things that be∣long vnto her. Cap. 6. To honour her by often bending
our knees. Cap. 7. By prostrating our selues & kis∣sing the ground. Cap. 8. To deny nothing lawfully, and prudently asked in her Name. Cap. 9. To dedicate all our purposes vn∣to her. Cap. 10. THE II. BED. TO stirre vp affection to the B. Virgin, by contemplating her Perfections. Cap. 1. By remembrance of her Mercyes and benefits to vs. Cap. 2. A renewing of our Loue, & de∣uotion vnto her. Cap. 3. An Exercise of Loue & Confidē∣ce in the B. Virgin. Cap. 4. Effects & signes of true Loue to∣wards her. Cap. 5. 6. & 7.
THE III. BED. HOw to commit our selues to the protection of the B. Virgin. Cap. 1. How to dedicate our selues in speciall manner vnto her, Cap. 2. & 3. To deuote our selues vnto her, by entring into Religion. Cap. 4. THE IV. BED. OF the Aue Maria, or Ange∣licall Salutation. Cap. 1. Of the Corone, or Rosary of the B. Virgin. Cap. 2. The second manner of saying the Rosary. Cap. 3. The third manner. Cap. 4.
Of the Office of our B. Lady C. 5. Of her Psalter, Letanyes, & Office of her Couception Cap. 6. How to obserue the Saturday in her Honour. Cap 7. Of honouring the Feasts of our B. Lady. Cap. 8. THE V. BED. The generall practice of imitating the B. Virgin. Cap. 1. The first help, is to representin our mind her Vertues. Cap 2. The 2. help, is to purpose truly to imitate her. Cap. 3. The 3. help, is a particular Exa∣men of our selues. Cap. 4. The 4 help, is to implore her ayd and assistence often Cap. 5. How to begge any thing four
B. Lady. Cap. 6. Of her contemplation of heauenly things. Cap. 7. Of her deuotion towards the Sa∣crifice of the Masse. Cap. 8. Of her receauing the B. sacrament. Cap. 9. Of labouring with her hands, and corporall exercise. Cap. 10. Of her eating, and bodily Refe∣ction. Cap. 11. Of her repose & sleeping. Ca. 12. Of her Purity. Cap. 13. Of her Chastity. Cap. 14. Of her Pouerty. Cap. 15. Of her Humility, Modesty, Pa∣tience, & Obedience. Cap. 16. Of her charity towards her Neigh∣bour. Cap. 17. Of her Loue to God. Cap. 18.
OVR B. LADIES LITLE GARDEN. THE FIRST BED, planted with Violets. From whence may be gathered diuers Exercises of Reueren∣ce, and Submission; whereof the Violet is a Token. THe acts of Reue∣rence (chiefly in∣ternall) towards the B. Virgin, cō∣taind, in the first Bed; as all
the Acts of Loue which are deliuered in the second, are the principall, & as it were the ground & foundation whereon the Exercises fol∣lowing do rely. For if one, eyther with litle or no Re∣uerence at all, or without due attention, or only for fashiō sake, & rather of cu∣stom then deuotion, should make his prayers and offer his Exercises vnto the Bl. Virgin; he should neyther winne her fauour, not reape that fruite which they are knowne to haue gathered by these exercises by whose example the thinges fol∣lowing are cōfirmed. Let it
therefore be the first, and chiefest care of him, who hath deuoted himselfe vn∣to the seruice of the B. Vir∣gin, to be alwayes conuer∣sant in some practises of re∣uerence and loue, in which more ordinarily and fami∣liarly he may exercise him∣selfe. CHAP. I. The first Exercise of Reuerence towards the B. Virgin, is not to go rashly, and without recol∣lection to prayer. AS often as you shall goe to make your Prayer vnto our B. Lady, and re∣peate
her prayses, to the end you may performe the same with due reuerence; before you beginne it shal∣be good to recollect your selfe a litle, and (all other cogitations layed a side) weigh well with your selfe, whither you goe, what to do, & with whome you are to speake. Surely you go to salute her who is the Mo¦ther of God, the Queene of Heauen and earth, who sitteth full of Maiesty in a Throne of Glory, enuiro∣ned with the Quiers of An∣gels; with how great reue∣rence and attention then, should you, a poore and
vile worme, appeare in the presence of such a Queene? That you may therfore make this recollectiō more easily, and without yrke∣somnes, it is expedient you haue in readines some short Versicles which you may vse before you beginne to say your Beades, Office of our Lady, or other prayers; as for example this: Ah, let my lips sing, and display, The B. Virgins prayse this day. which is found in the be∣ginning of that most aun∣cient litle office of her Im∣maculate Conception; or
this which is the beginning of the Hymne, made by S. Casimire. Do thou, my Soule, early and late, Prayses to the Virgin con∣secrate. Or els this, which is com∣mōly vsed by the Church. Grant me, O Virgin, thee to prayse, Agaynste thy foes, giue strength alwayes. This kind of recollection doth S. Ignatius Founder of the Society of IESVS set downe in generall termes, when in his booke of spiri∣tuall exercises he teacheth, that such recollection is ne∣cessary
to be made before all kind of prayer. CHAP. II. The second Exercise of Reuerēce towards our B. Lady, is to cō∣mit our Office of saluting her, vnto the Angels. IT will be noe small testi∣mony of true reuerence and submission, towards the Virgin Mother, if re∣membring your owne ba∣senesse, & considering her excellency, you accoumpt your selfe as most vnwor∣thy of her great presence, & do make your recourse
vnto the Angels, begging and crauing of them that they would be pleased to discharge your duty in this so high & noble seruice of saluting, & earnestly pray∣ing vnto the Queene of Heauen. Turning your selfe ther∣fore to your Angell Guar∣dian, beseech him earnestly by that immense goodnes and mercy of our Lord, by which he was giuen vnto you for a Gouernour and Keeper, and by his father∣ly loue and continuall care ouer you (well knowing your vnworthines & lacke of vtterance) that himselfe
who both for the grace of his vertue, and ornaments of glory, is most gracious in the sight of the B. Virgin, and withall most eloquent and expert in that Angeli∣call office which you com∣mit vnto him, would salute our B. Lady in your behalfe with al-beseeming reuerē∣ce, & deuout affection, and obtaine for you all that he knoweth necessary, as well for your profit in vertue, as for the eternall weale, & saluation of your soule. Make also your humble supplication vnto the Ar∣changell Gabriell, that he would vouchsafe in your
name to salute the Mother of God, once againe with the very same words, with that reuerence & loue, de∣monstration of ioy, con∣gratulation, and like affe∣ctions, as he then felt with∣in himselfe, & which he vt∣tered, when being sent on that Embassadge from the sacred Consistory of the Bless. Trinity vnto Naza∣reth, to report vnto the Virgin Mary the first and happy tidinges of the In∣carnation of the Sonne of God. In the meane while, supposing you see & heare the Archangell Gabriell, & your Angell Guardian sa∣luting
the Bless. Virgin in your behalfe, you shall do well to offer, in the deuou∣test manner you can de∣uise, vnto the same Virgin, their submission and reue∣rence, as proceeding from your selfe; their words as if they were your owne, and the most true interpreters of your hart and mynd. S. Gerard of Pannonia Bi∣shop & Martyr hauing ere∣cted an Altar in Honour of our Blessed Lady, caused a syluer Censar to be pla∣ced before it, and ordayned that two Venerable men should attend both day & night, only to prouide,
that Incense were neuer wāring in the Censar. [Sur. in his life 24. Septem.] Now if you being moued with the like zeale of Honour vnto our B. Lady do com∣mend your prayers to the Angels (who are sayed in holy Scripture to carry a Censar, for the discharge of that duty) you may be assured, that their kindling the incense of your praiers with the flames of their earnest deuotiō, will make them soe gratefull & odo∣riferous vnto that Heauē∣ly Queene, that she with manifold benedictions wil abundantly accōplish your
requests. To the practise of this deuotion those very figu∣res, shapes, diuersity of for∣mes that dayly appeare in the ayre, might serue vs for a sufficient incitement, by which we may euidently gather not only with what promptitude, and constan∣cy the Angels imploy thē∣selues in the seruice of the B. Virgin, but also in how many, and what kind of offices they endeauour to serue her. In so much as that demaund of the Pro∣phet Jsay 6. may fitly be applyed vnto the: Qui sunt isti, qui vt nubes volant? who
are those that flye like vnto clouds? Not only because by their feruor, speed, and promptitude in these fun∣ctions they surpasse the swiftnesse, or to speake in the wordes of holy Scrip∣ture, the flight of the clou∣des; but also as the clouds to perform the will of God doe in diuersity of formes often visibly shew them∣selues to men, some thick some thinne, some plaine and smooth, others rough and gathered into heapes like rockes; others resem∣bling high mountaynes, with flockes of sheep gra∣sing thereon; and some∣tymes
also they represent gulfes, whirlpooles, Crow∣nes, battayles, raynebowes and such like spectacles: Euen so, the Angels atten∣ding on our B. Lady, and seeking to aduāce her Ho∣nour and Reuerence, do according to their offices, assume vnto themselues di∣uers shapes. One while they seeme as chiefe Peeres of her Court, and enuirone her throne and Chayre of State: other whiles they appeare like armed men, deuided into squadrōs rea∣dy to guard her person, & fight for the defence of her honour. Somtymes as Exe∣cutioners
of the diuine Iu∣stice they draw their wea∣pons to strike the heretical Blasphemers of her sacred Name. One while like ste∣wards, and Houshoud-ser∣uants, as when they admi∣nistred meate and drinke vnto the B. Virgin herselfe while she liued in the Tem∣ple of Hierusalē before she was espoused to S. Ioseph; and in tyme of necessity likewise they often assist those that are her deuo∣ted seruants. They often like curious painters haue artificially expressed in co∣lours the feature of her body, beauty, and comli∣nesse
of her countenance; Oftē with melodious har∣mony haue they resoūded her prayses, sometimes like vnto Maisters of Ceremo∣nies, by diuers acts of de∣uotion & Reuerence, haue they taught how mē addi∣cted to her seruice should more religiously worship her. Lastly like vnto Mai∣sters of Requestes do they represent, with most hum∣ble, entire submission, our prayers vnto her, this being theyr speciall charge, in which they be dayly im∣ployed. Most memorable exāples of all these things might be alleadged, if they
were not frequent in Hi∣stories. CHAP. III. The third Exercise of Reuerence is, that we ought to honour the must sacred NAME of Mary. THis Reuerence may be practised diuers wayes. 1. By neuer vsing rashly the sacred Name of Mary, but as it were reuerētly cō∣cealing the same, say, the B. Virgin, the mother of God our B. Lady, or the like; and so doing you shall imi∣tate the Archangel Gabriel who for the reuerence, and
respect he bare vnto that sacred Name, forbare to pronoūce it at the first, say∣ing only, Aue gratiaplena, Hayle full of grace: yet af∣terwardes beholding the greatnes of her humility, & that she was somewhat disturbed with wordes of such commendation, he then pronoūced the same, Ne timeas MARIA, Feare not Mary &c. 2. By vncouering your head, or bowing downe the same, by bending your knees when you heare that sacred Name pronounced. For (as a deuout Contem∣plant speaking vnto the B.
Virgin sayd) the most Holy Trinity hath bestowed on you a Name which next af∣ter the Name of your Bl. Sonne, is to be honoured aboue all Names; and that in your Name all knees do bend (as is manifest) both of those that are in heauen, on earth, & in hell; & euery toung cōfesseth the Grace, the Glory, and Vertue of this most holy Name. [lib. Contemp. de Virg. Ma. c. 5.] S. Gerard, whome we mentioned before, instru∣cting the Hungariās in the Christian faith, willed them that they should in cōmon talke, seldome vse the pro∣per
Name of the most B. Virgin, but in familiar cō∣ference should call her, La∣dy; and if by themselues or others the Name of Mary should by any chaunce be vttered, that thē they shold bow their heades, or bend their knees &c. 3. You shall much honour and reuerence the Name of the B. Virgin, if when you eyther write, paint, or en∣graue the same, you endea∣uour to do it curiously, comely, & deuoutly, both with externall & internall Reuerence. [Canis. lib. 1. de B. Ʋirg. c. 1.] For if euer any mortall
creature had a Name, re∣nowned, delectable, gra∣cious, which for the wor∣thynes & excellency therof ought to be written, read song, paynted, or engrauē, it is the Name of the most sacred Virgin Mary, which indeed most worthily de∣serueth to be placed be∣fore euery ones eyes, to be sounded in their cares, and engrauen in their harts, & by euery one publikely & priuatly, with the greatest deuotion to be vttered. To the exercise of this deuo∣tion & reuerence, the holy Angels by their examples inuite vs, who haue often
written this Name in gold siluer, and diuersity of most rare colours; sometimes by it selfe, sometimes con∣ioyned with the Venerable Name of IESVS; someti∣mes also with a part of the Angelicall Salutation. It is a knowne history which we read of an ould souldiar, who after lōg ser∣uice in warre became a Ci∣stercian Monke, where he begā so to imprint the An∣gelicall Salutation in his hart (which Prayer only by reason of the slownesse of his wit, he was capable to learne) as that he was accu∣stomed euery moment al∣most
to repeat the same a which deuotion of his how acceptable and pleasing it was vnto the B. Virgin, did then most manifestly ap∣peare when after his depar∣ture out of this life, there sprung forth of his graue, yea out of his mouth, a litle tree, in euery leafe where∣of was writen, with letters of Gold, the sacred Name of Mary, with the begin∣ning of the Angelical salu∣tation: which wee may vn∣doubtedly belieue was per∣formed by the handes of Angels. [Tho. Cantipra. l. 2. apum. c. 29. p. 9.] This very Name, as di∣uers
Histories do recount, hath byn oftē painted with a heauenly Pencill, & wri∣ten by the hand of Angels, in garments, in flowers, & in the ayre it selfe. Take therefore, in this singular deuotion, those celestiall Citizes for your directors and maisters. Imprint this Name with the most amia∣ble Name of IESVS in the Center of your hart. Let your hart be in charity a Rose, in purity a Lilly, in humility a Violet, in desire of heauenly things, a Hya∣chinth. Let it be marked with these names IESVS, MARIA, your only repose
and comfort. Then shall you be like the flower which displaieth his leaues to the rising sunne, when euery morning shaking off drowsy sleepe, you turne your soule to God the foū∣taine of light, & the sunne of Iustice; opening it by manyfould thankes, dila∣ting it more & more with desires of pleasing him, and confirming it with strong & resolute purposes of ne∣uer more offending him: which if you seale vp with these most fragrant Names IESVS and MARIA, your hart, being made a true flower of sweet-smelling
deuotion, will breath out an odour most acceptable to God, his most sacred Mo∣ther, & to the holy Angels & Saintes in Heauen. And likewise when in the Eue∣ning, like vnto the flower, shutting it selfe at the set∣ting of the sunne, you shall silently consider all things passed that whole day, and pondering euery thought, word, and deed, shutting vp within the Center of your hart these most sweet Names, IESVS, MARIA, then shall you enioy a pea∣cefull security, and a secure happinesse. 4. It will be also an ar∣gument
of especiall Reue∣rence towardes this sacred Name, to recite those fiue Psalmes or Hymnes whose first letters make the Name Maria. These are, Mag∣nificat. Ad Dominum cùm tribularer. Retribuc Jn con∣uertendo, & Ad te leuaui. Or these, Magnificat. Aue Regina caelorum. Regina cae∣li. Jnuiolata, & Aue Ma∣ris stella, being the most pious, and singular inuen∣tiō of a holy man of the or∣der of S. Benet. This exer∣cise did S. Joscius a Monke of admirable piety, of the Monastery of S. Bertin in S. Omers, obserue dayly li∣uing,
and being dead com∣mended the same to all po∣sterity. For after his death fiue Roses of rare beauty did spring from his head. One out of his mouth, (wherin the Name Maria was written in letters of gold) two out of his eyes, and other two out of his eares: which Roses not on∣ly all the Religious that were then liuing in the mo∣nastery, but also the Bishop of Arras, the Clergy and all the whole Citty & Coun∣trey that then flocked thi∣ther, did with amazement behold. [Ʋincent. Bellonac. Spec. Hist. l. 7. c. 116. An.
Domini 1163.] O Blessed Mary, most mercyfull, most benigne! Place your most amiable Name as a signet vpon my eyes, that being preuented with the benedictions of your sweetnes, I may be re∣freshed by the light of your mercyes. Place it vpon my eares, that being secure of your protection, I may not feare in that terrible day of iudgment to heare the dreadfull sentence which shall be vttered against the damned. Place it also on my mouth, that recreated with the milke of your cō∣soiation, I may both in this
and the next life, with per∣petuall prayses, exalt the Glory, & sweetnes of your Holy Name. CHAP. IV. The fourth Exercise of Reuerēce towards our Blessed Lady, is to Honour her Image. THE deuout Seruant of the Blessed Virgin must first haue an especiall re∣gard that her Image be pla∣ced in some decent & con∣spicuous part of his Ora∣tory: which S. Charles Bor∣romeus of Millan, for his singular deuotiō vnto that
sacred Queene did alwayes most carefully obserue; and amongst other thinges appoynted, that through his whole Diocesse, there shold be placed ouer euery Church doore the Picture of our B Lady. For as that holy Bishop (according to the opinion of S. Bernard) thought there was no place more worthy vpon earth to receiue the sonne of Al∣mighty God then the sa∣cred Teple of his Mothers wombe, nor no place more noble in Heauen then the royall throne which our B. Sauiour bestowed vpon his Mother: so did he iudge
that place fittest for the Picture of the B. Virgin, which for sanctity & wor∣thynes was most eminent. For another reason also, would he haue it placed o∣uer the church doore, ther∣by to admonish all those, who entred to make their prayer, that the best mea∣nes to come to Almighty God, was by the interces∣sion of his Blessed Mother, and that neuer any man is to be admitted into that Heauenly Temple, which doth not loue and reue∣rēce her who is called, The Gate of Heauen. 2. It is behouefull also
that whē you se the picture of this sacred Virgin, espe∣cially if you passe by it, that you make some signe of Reuerēce vnto it, either by putting off your hat, bow∣ing your heade, bending your knee, or the like. This deuotion all true Seruants of our B. Lady haue alwaies diligently obserued: & to let passe in silence many o∣thers, S. Margarite daugh∣ter to the King of Hunga∣ry, passing by any picture of our Lady, was allwayes wont to recite the Angeli∣call Salutation vpon her knees. [Sur. in her life. 28. Ian.]
And for more confirma∣tion of the excellency of this practise of Reuerence, I wil adioyne heere a mira∣cle that happened at Affli∣gem in Brabant in the Mo∣nastery of S. Benet, where there is yet an image of our B. Lady to be seene, which being on a tyme saluted by S. Bernard after his wonted custome, with these words of Salue Maria, Haile Mary; did againe with an intelli∣gible and courteous voyce resalute him with Salue Ber∣narde, God saue thee also Bernard. O most happy, O sublime salutatiō! with the truest and most earnest de∣sires
of our harts to be wi∣shed for. I should easily be∣lieue these two words, as so many darts of loue, to haue so pierced the brest of this mellifluous Doctour, with such sweetnes and heauēly delight, that his hart did leape, & the rest of his bo∣dy exult with ioy, and ten∣dernes of loue. And as the soule of the Spouse did melt at the voyce of her beloued; so was his soule in like māner euen melted when he heard the voice of his beloued Mother. The like testimony of loue may you securely expect from the B. Virgin, if in your car∣riage
towards her, you be∣haue your selfe like ano∣ther S. Bernard. 3. The third manner of honouring the Images of our B. Lady, is, to handle them with Decency & Re∣uerence, imparting kisses of piety, and deuotion vn∣to them, praysing the pi∣ctures, & chiefly her, whom the picture doth represent. Lewis surnamed the pious Emperour, sonne to Charles the Great, when he went a hunting, carried allwayes with him an Image of our B. Lady, and in the middest of the woodes he was wont with great deuotion vpon
his bare knees to make his prayers and supplications before the same. [Canis. l. 5. de B. Ma. cap. 29. 4. Some deuout ser∣uants of hers, vse alwayes to hang about their neckes putting it against their hart eyther her Image, or some medall at their beades ha∣uing her picture on it, or els they inuent some other meanes to be sure alwayes to carry her picture about them. This manner of reueren∣cing our B. Ladyes Image gaue help to a sicke noble yongman, whose cure was desperate, in the cōfines of
Ebora in Spain in the yeare 1593. of which the Annuall letters of the Society make mention. This young No∣ble man by reason of a ve∣hement sicknes, had wāted a good while the perfect vse of his wits, when once being one a tyme left by some chāce alone in his bed without any attendance, he suddenly by the diuels in∣stigatiō, perceauing the chā¦ber free from all company starteth vp, putteth on a doublet in which not long before he had sowed two meddals of our B. Lady, & had hanged another at his necke; which done, he pre∣cipitateth
himselfe out of the window vpon a heape of sharpe stones, falling se∣cure without hurt of bruze The diuel amazed with the miracle who in the shape of a man appeared vnto him, conducted him by the hād to a deepe well, where the distracted man stil obeying him, he caused him first to loose the medall from his necke (as not knowing of the other he had sowed in his doublet) and cast it in∣to the water, and throw himselfe in afterwardes; downe sinks he to the bot∣tome, when as suddēly ha∣uing implored the help of
our Lady, who was alwaies present to affist him, he ap∣peareth to the arme pits a∣boue water sustained by the two medals, vntill succour cōming, and drawing him out of the well, he was re∣stored to his perfect health both of soule and body. 5. Wee may honour also her Image by adorning it with flowers, costly robes, iewels, & with burning of lampes, & wax candles be∣fore it. Which Reuerence though it be in it selfe but small, yet how gatefull the same is to the B. Virgin may be seene by this exā∣ple which here followeth.
The Daughter of a poore Sheepheard feeding her Fathers flocke neere to an old decayed Chappell, wherin yet remayned an I∣mage of our B. Lady all dis∣figured & defiled with dust & filth, did often enter in thither, desirous to adorne and garnish the sayd image with some better orna∣ments. Shee was grieued that the slendernes of her estate, could not corres∣pond with her good desi∣res. Wherefore on a tyme comming thither she decla∣reth her mynd vnto the B. Virgin before the Image, and although her pouerty
could not afford any thing of price; notwithstanding insteed thereof, she dayly offred vp the Angelicall sa∣lutation, with great deuo∣tion for many yeares, vntill at last being taken with a feuer she found how grate∣full the desire of adorning her Image is to our B. La∣dy: for being by the vehe∣mency of her disease al∣most spent, behould our B. Lady accompanyed with 3. troupes of Virgins, (the first of such who all their liues had remayned volun∣tary Virgins, the second, which had vowed chasti∣ty, and the third, which to
the Lilly of Virginity had adioyned the Rose of Mar∣tyrdome) not disdayning the poore mans Cottage, humbly vouchsafed to en∣ter to the sicke mayde, re∣creating her with her Bles∣sed presence, comforting her with wordes of great consolation, and attending the departure of her ho∣ly soule, which she ioyful∣ly receaued into her sacred armes, imbraced it, crow∣ned it with a garlād of glo∣ry, and lastly with ioyes of triumph ascended with it, into heauen. [Spec. Exem∣plor. distinct. 29. Exempl. 118.] Thus ought we to
decke & adorne the Image of our B. Lady whyles we liue, if we will seeke to en∣ioy the like triumph after death. 6. But that Reuerence seemeth especially lauda∣ble when with solēne pom∣pe and procession her Ima∣ge is carried through the Citties. Of this piety and deuotion Ioannes Zemisces Emperour of the East, left a rare and worthy example to all posterity, when ha∣uing vanquished the King of Bulgaria and his Coun∣try, returning to Constan∣tinople caused a most Ve∣nerable Image of the Bles.
Virgin, with the enemyes spoyles layd at her feete, to be carryed in a triumphant Chariot, he himselfe accō∣panying it mounted on a white steed. [Zonaras hist. tom. 7.] The like rare de∣uotion was performed to the Sacred Virgin by Ioan∣nes Comnenus Emperour al∣so of the East, which in the next Bed of Roses we shall recount. There haue bene many Emperors also in the West, which being inflamed with like zeale and emulation, haue cōtended with those of the East in honouring our B. Lady. A most noble
truly, & happy contention, where the Monarches of the world striue to reuerēce the Empresse of Heauen, and Mother of God; where the field appointed for the combat are Temples, the weapons Rosaries, & such like deuotions: where to loue the B. Virgin best, is to conquer; to honour her most, is to triumph. 7. The last Exercise of reuerence to the Image of our B. Lady, is to procure that the like honour & res∣pect be done by others; & also to defend against the Iconoclasts or Image-brea∣kers, Caluiuists, Lutherās,
and all enemies of Images, the reuerence due vnto them; to stirre vp Catho∣likes seriously and feruent∣ly to honour them, by ser∣mons, by priuate Confe∣rence, by good example, by distributing pictures or medals to others, endeuou∣ring by the like meanes to procure, conserue, and aug∣ment piety. As for defending the ho∣nour due to Images S. Iohn Damascene hath left vs a most singular example, who for constantly maintaining by writing and disputation the reuerence due to our B. Lady & her Image, had his
right hād cut of by that fu∣rious Emperour Leo Jsau∣ricus, a professed enemy of Images, but not long after by a strang miracle had it restored, to the same vse as before. To which also may be added that of S. Hya∣cinthus. [Ribad. 16. Aug. in his life.] when as the Tartarians rushing into the Church, he taking the Blessed Sacrament in his hands beganne to fly, and flying heard a voyce of a statue of our Bles. Lady, O sonne Hyacinth, why for∣sakest thou me? Wilt thou thus leaue me to the re∣proach and malice of myne
enemyes? Come, Come, transport me with my sōne to some other place: but he mistrusting his owne strē∣gth alleadged the heauines of it being made of Alaba∣ster: To whom the Image replyed, that he should cō∣fidently vndertake it, and that his strength should be made equall with his bur∣den. Wherupon with teares taking the Image on his shoulders, he perceaued it very light, and comming to the riuer Guarïstin, finding no meanes of passage ney∣ther by bridge nor boate, he made the signe of the Crosse, and trusting in the
protection of the Blessed Sacrament, and the Statue of our B. Lady, hauing spred his cloake on the water, passed ouer safly. A monu∣ment of which Miracle as yet remayneth to be seene. In the other kind, of exhorting Catholickes to the honouring of our La∣dies Image, the singular piety of B. Father Borgia may be a patterne. He being first, Duke of Gan∣dia, afterwardes Religious and the third Generall of the Society of IESVS, a man excellēt for humility, and true contempt of him∣selfe, notable for the guift
of contemplation, & singu∣lar for his affection to our B. Lady, of which he often gaue most manifest testi∣mony, but then especially whē procuring many Ima∣ges to be drawne out ac∣cording to that of S. Lukes painting, which is reserued in the Church of S. Mary Maior at Rome, and had in great honour amongst the Romanes; he sent some to Princes & Persons of great worth, distributed others to all the Colledges then of the Society, that so in al places the glory of our B. Lady might more increa∣se. And Fa. Jgnatius Azebe∣dius
of the same Society of Iesus, & a famous Martyr, most intierely deuoted to the sacred Virgin, being to depart from Rome in the yeare 1570. returning Pro∣uincial into Brasile, carryed with him one of these Pi∣cturs, & being with his cō∣panions intercepted by cer∣taine Caluinist Pirates, his feruour to God & trust in his sacred Mother did with admiration shew it selfe, when managing well the office of a stout Captaine, he tooke the Image in his hāds, exhorted his compa∣nions to dy generously for God; & then couragiously
going forth to meete his enemies, houlding the sayd Image in his hand, & pro∣testing to dye for our Sa∣uiours sake, a Caluinist cō∣tēding by violence to wrest the picture from him, gaue him three woundes in the brest, and one in his head: not being able otherwayes by force to take it from him, he threw him, clasping fast the Image, headlong in∣to the sea; & although the of bodyes of thirty eight his fellowes being all there martyred, did presently sinke, he notwithstanding hauing stretched out his armes in forme of a crosse
was seene with admiration of al, to swimme aboue wa∣ter, as far as the eyes of the behoulders could discerne him, which vndoubtedly was by vertue of the Image he still carryed in his hand. [Jn vita P. Borgiae l. 3. c. 10.] CHAP. V. The fifth Exercise of reuerence towards the B. Virgin, is to honour Places dedicated vnto her. ANother great argument of piety, and Reuerence towards our B. Lady, is to build Churches, and erect
Altars in her honor, which notwithstanding we will omit, because the perfor∣mance of this, is in few mens power; neither do we determine to inferre any particular matter concer∣ning the adorning thereof, for that most of those thin∣ges alleadged in the former Chapter may be reduced to the same point: But by going on pilgrimage, we may honour places dedica∣ted vnto her, and this may be done in two sortes. First by vndertaking Iourneys to remote places, as to the Holy House of Loreto, Mont-serat, Sichem, Foy;
which pilgrimages, with what deuotiō we ought to beginne them, with what vertuous exercises cōtinue them, with what fruite fi∣nish them may be gathered out of Father Richeome in his Booke intituled, The Pilgrime of Loreto. Neyther is it necessary to search farre Countries for examples of piety and de∣uotion in this kind, when not long since we haue be∣held the Example of Alber∣tus the Archduke and Lord of all the Low Countries, who as a patterne to all Princes, for all the con∣tinuall affayres of his Prin∣cedome,
though very feeble by reason of the weaknes of his body, was wōt yearly to spend nyne dayes in visi∣ting our Lady of Sichem, the Infanta his Lady acco∣panying him with the like deuotion; which he perfor∣med also not many mone∣thes before his death, besy∣des other Holy places in Flanders dedicated to our B. Lady, which he had wōt often to visit, & to adorne with votiue tapers, and all sortes of ornaments, per∣forming such actes of piety towardes the B. Virgin, as perhapes few ages can shew the like testimony of deuo∣tion
in so great a Prince. Secondly, we may make our Pilgrimages to some places nere at hand, namely to some Chappell either in the same Towne, or Citty, or not far distant; of which deuotion, because it may be common and practised by all, we wil heere propose two Exercises, which euery one may vse as they will, & as occasion shall permit. ¶ The first manner of visiting places dedicated to our Lady. What is to be done in the Iorney. FIrst you shall take vnto your selfe two Compa∣nions
of this your Pilgri∣mage; on the one side your Angell Guardian, on the other some Sainte, who was famous for deuotion towards our B. Lady: Then shall you implore the assi∣stance of your good Angel in the manner following. I beseech thee, O Angeli∣call spirit, my faithfull kee∣per, that by thy protection I may be securly cōducted in the way of peace, safety, and happynes, and that no wicked temptations may oppresse me. I desire also, that thou beg for me thy poorest Seruant, grace en∣tyrely to serue the Blessed
Virgin in this life, that in the next, I may sing her prayses with thee, for al E∣ternity. Amen. To the other companion you shall say: O Blessed N. most singular louer & wor∣shiper of the sacred Virgin, obtain for me that I by thy imitation may truly reue∣rence and serue that Holy Queene, and by thy inter∣cession may be succoured in all perils, & tribulations of this life. Amen. Secondly. In this Pilgri∣mage, you may take vpon you diuers persons, accor∣ding to the diuersity of cō∣siderations, by which you
meane euery day to stir vp your mind to deuotion, recyting one of the Hym∣nes of the Blessed Virgin: for exāple, on Sunday you shall suppose your selfe the seruāt of our Blessed Lady, bound and obliged vnto her by a iust & strait bond, going to prayse and glorify your most potent mistresse and Queene, and you shall recite the Hymne, Regina coeli; your cōpanion shallbe B. Father Ignatius who be∣ing by apparitiō (in which the B. Virgin visibly repre∣sented herselfe vnto him) called from a secular warre to a more spirituall cōflict,
in the Mount of Serrato, begā his conuersion, dedi∣cating himselfe wholy to the seruice of our Lady, & hanging his sword at her Altar, afterwards his whole and only imployment and endeauours were, to aug∣ment both by himselfe and his sonnes, the honour of our B. Lady throughout al parts of the world as much as possibly he could. [Or∣land. in hist. Soc. l. 1.] On Munday, Imagine your selfe a pilgrime in the world, exposed to a thou∣sand errours and dangers, going to salute your most faithfull Lady. Choose,
with your good Angell, S. Dominicke, to accompany you in the way, whome our B. Lady did with her particuler protection assist, in defending her honour against the Heretikes cal∣led Albigenses, and procu∣ring her greater seruice by teaching the saying of the Rosary. In the way, say the hymne, O gloriosa Domina. One Twesday, suppose your selfe loaden with an infinite weight of sinnes, going to salute your most mercifull Aduocate; in the way recite the Hymne, Sal∣ue Regina, and choose for your Companion S. Ber∣nard,
who speaking (as al∣wayes was wont) most swet∣ly of the Blessed Virgin his Aduocate sayth: Filioli, haec peccatorum scala, haec meae maxima fiducia, haec tota ratio spei meae. My sonnes, this is the ladder, by which sinners must climbe to hea∣uen, she is my greatest confidence, yea the only meanes of my hope. With which inward feeling and affection whilest in the Ca∣thedrall Church at Spire he recited the Salue Regina, being absorpt with heat of deuotion, he kneeled three tymes, in three diuers pla∣ces, at those last words, O
Clemens, ô Pia, ô Dulcis Vir∣go Maria, in the memo∣ry whereof, three plates of brasse, to distinguish those three places, are nayled. On Wednesday thinke your selfe a Scholler, rude and ignorant, yet desirous of true wisdome, going to honour your most wise & learned mistresse: recite the Hymne, Aue Regina caelo∣rum, and let S. Augustine accompany you, who be∣ing placed betweene the wounds of IESVS, and the brests of MARY, as on the one side he was nourished with those ioyfull waters of heauenly doctrine flow∣ing
from the woundes of our Sauiour, so from the other he sucked the sweet milke of eternall Wisdom. On Thursday, imagine your selfe a Spouse without any desert of yours, & one far vnworthy of such a ma∣riage, freely loued & cho∣sen by our B. Lady, going to honour your most beau∣tifull & beloued Espouse. You shall retite the himne, Jnuiolata; & take for your companion S. Joseph, who was the Spouse of the Bles. Virgin, and Foster-father to our Sauiour. On Friday, imagine your selfe full of sores & almost
wounded vnto death, go∣ing to your most mercifull Surgeon, the Mother of our Redeemer, who on this day with the effusion of his owne pretious blood made a salue for our sins. Recite the Hymne, Stabat Ma∣ter dolorosa, and choose S. Francis your companion, who hauing vndertaken in the house of the B. Virgin, by her authority & patro∣nage that holy Institute of Pouerty & abnegation of himselfe, did by her assi∣stance, so constantly perse∣uere therein, arryuing to the top of such perfection, that he was as it were trans∣formed
into our Sauiour crucified, bearing the mar∣kes of his most sacred woū∣des in his body. On Saturday, imagin your selfe as a Sonne dearly be∣loued, notwithstāding you haue often degenerated & run astray, going to ho∣nour your most louyng mother. Say the Hymne, Aue maris stella, and let your companion be S. Iohn the Euangelist, whome our Sauiour, hanging on the Crosse, gaue to our Bles∣sed lady for her Sonne, & to whome also he gaue the Blessed Virgin for his Mo∣ther.
When you shall come to the Church, or Chappel of our B. Lady. HAuing made a low Re∣uerence to the Image of our B. Lady, recyte on your knees the Letanies of Loreto, and also three A∣ues: after the first, recyte this prayer. O most Blessed Virgin, I humbly beseech you, since God the Father by his Omnipotency hath made you most powerfull, that you will be pleased to be present with me in the houre of my death, and to expell all the temptations, and assaults of my mortall
aduersaries. After the se∣cond Aue, say. O Holy Mo∣ther of God, since your sa∣cred Sonne hath endewed you with such knowledg & clarity, that with your splē∣dour the brightnes of Hea∣uen is augmented, enligh∣ten I humbly beseech you, my soule in the houre of my death, and confirme it with the true knowledge of Fayth, that it be not darkened with any mist of errour or ignorance. After the third Aue, say. O most sacred Queene of Heauen, as the Holy Ghost hath in∣fused all abundance of loue into you; so you at my
death distill into my soule the sweetnes of diuine loue, by which all bitternes may be made most sweet, & all heauines ioyfull vnto me. This māner of recyting the Aue did B. our Lady teach vnto Saint Maude, pro∣mising, that if shee dayly obserued it, she would be present with her, at the houre of her death. In your returne from the Chappell. REcyte the Magnificat, Te Deum, or some part of your Rosary in thankes giuing to our B. Lady for the gift of deuotion, vsing
almost the same considera∣tions that you did in your going thither. The Second manner of visiting the Churches, or Chappels of our Lady.—As you goe. FIrst implore the ayde & assistāce of the same cō∣panions which were desi∣gned for euery day, in the precedent Paragraphe. Secondly, consider some iorney vndertaken by our B. Lady whilest she liued on earth; & thē adioyning your selfe vnto her for cō∣panion, endeauour to imi∣tate her modesty, deuotiō & the like vertues, expres∣sed
in that mystery: which that you may the better performe, craue the help of that sacred Queene, by re∣cyting the Letanies of Lo∣reto. Euery day choose these iourneyes according to the order prescribed. On Mun∣day, thinke how the Bles∣sed Virgin went to visite her cosen S. Elizabeth. On Tewsday, cōsider her iour∣ney to Bethleem, where she brought forth the Sauiour of the world. On Wednes∣day, thinke how she wēt to the Temple of Hierusalem, eyther when she presented her litle Sonne IESVS to
his Eternal Father, or when being lost for the space of three dayes, she found him againe with incredible ioy. On Thursday, suppose her going to Christ our Lord during those three last yeares, which he bestowed in preaching the Ghospell. On Fryday, imagine how she followed our Sauiour carrying his Crosse to Mō∣te Caluary. On Saturday, ponder, how after his As∣cension, she went to visite the holy places. On Sunday behould her gloriously as∣sumpted into Heauen.
In the Chappell. YOu shal say your Beades after the manner pre∣scribed in the fourth Bed and 2.3. and 4. Chapters. In your Returne. IMagine the Blessed Vir∣gin returning from those places, whither you accō∣panied her going, namely on munday returning from the house of S. Elizabeth: on Tewsday from Bethlem into Hierusalem, and from thence into Nazareth &c. But on Sunday you are to haue a most pleasant and delectable tast of the most sweet loue, and Motherly
care, with which she im∣braceth her Seruants and Clientes. In the meane tyme whilst you meditate these thinges in your mynd, recyte these fiue Ant-hymns in the ho∣nour of the name Maria, the Magnificat. Aue Regina celorum. Regina celi. Inuiola∣ta. Aue Maris stella. Many haue obtained great fauours & benefits at the hands of our Blessed Lady, by this kind of pil∣grimage, visiting, not of curiosity, but of zeale, and feruent desire of her ho∣nour, places eyther dedica∣ted vnto her, or els famous
for some Image of hers. A∣mong the rest S. Bernar∣dine being a young man, was accustomed to goe dayly to the gate of the Citty of Sienna called Ca∣mulia, & there before the Image of our Blessed Lady seuerently and humbly to bend his knes, and to salute the Mother of God, his be∣loued spouse and friend, as he was wont to call her. Afterwardes this fragrant flower being transplanted from amidst the brambles of the world, into a plea∣sant garden of Religion, so burned with heate of de∣uotion vnto the same Bles.
Lady which by diuers hū∣ble obsequies he declared, that one day the Blessed Virgin visibly represented her selfe vnto him, as he was reciting her Beades, and with a great affability thus spake vnto him: O Bernardine my deuout ser∣uant, I haue bin much de∣lighted with thy piety; for reward of which, I haue obtained of my sonne for thee, the gift of prea∣ching and working of mi∣racles; and assure thy selfe, that at last, with me thou shalt be made partaker in heauen of the eternall hap∣pines. [Pebl. in Stell. l. 2. p.
2. art. 3.] After which time S. Bernardine became most famous, for the gift of preaching, and working of miracles, with diuers other rare gifts bestowed on him by the B. Virgin. CHAP. VI. The sixth Exercise of Reuerence towards the B. Virgin is, to honour all that doth any way belong vnto her. WE ought not only to reuerence her Name, her Image, and places de∣dicated vnto her, but also in particular all thinges which any way do apper∣taine
vnto her, as her Rosa∣ry, her Office, or Psalter, or litle books in which are contained eyther prayers, miracles, praises due vnto her, or the Acts and Ver∣tues of her Blessed life, and to be cōmended to all po∣sterity. Also any thing de∣dicated to her, as oblations or Offerings, or any Mo∣nument erected or set vp in her honour. Lastly her Pa∣rents, Kinsfolkes, and all those that are particularly deuoted vnto her are to be held in great Reuerence & esteeme by vs, because by them the B. Virgin hereselfe hath bene honoured. It is
not necessary to discourse of all particulers, because we may gather out of the ensuing Beds many flowers for this Exercise. Let ther∣fore these two Exāples of the Rosary which now I shall rehearse, suffice for proofe of all the rest. One Antony of the or∣der of S. Francis in Spaine, as he went to Ʋincentia being ouertaken by a great shower of raine, & finding no shelter at hand, put his Rosary on his head, cra∣uing the protection of our Blessed Lady. Scarce had he made an end of spea∣king, but behould a strang
thing, as if his Beades had ben turned into some faire dry roofe, they defended & couered him so, that he passed securely vnto the Citty through all the vehe∣mency of the storme, not touched with the lest drop of raine. [Chron. Min. p. 3. . 1. c. 36. & 37.] Neyther can we omit to recount the deuotion of Alanus a Dominican Friar vnto the Rosary by reason of the often succour which he found in his great di∣stresses, by the vertue ther∣of. For hauing learned that deuotion of S. Dominike, he did allwais esteeme most
highly the Rosary, yea be∣fore his admission into that order, he recited it daily on his knees, and not without fruit euē whils he was a lay man & souldier. And vpon a time being in the warres, and in a conflict against the Hetetikes named Albigen∣ses, and enuironed on euery side by his Enemyes, with great danger of his life, the B. Virgin was seene stan∣ding by him, fighting for him with 150 stones, which throwne by her owne hād, gaue an vtter ouerthrow vnto his foes, making her Client a famous Conque∣rour.
Another tyme the same Alanus suffering shipwrake & being in the midst of the sea tost hither and thither, in most apparent danger of his life, he saw suddenly by the fauour & assistance of the Bles. Virgin a 150. litle hillockes rising aboue the waues, which all in ranke reached vnto the shore, by the which he was safely cō∣ducted to land. A mā might say, that the 150. beads of the Rosary were turned first into so many stones; then into so many hils. But that especially was a singu∣lar testimony of his deuo∣tiō, that not only his mouth
which had oftentimes so piously pronoūced the An∣gelicall salutation, but also his hands which had so re∣uerently touched the Ro∣sary, did shine like Cristall, after his death. [Chron. S. Dom. l. 1. c. 34.] O how mercifull is this B. Virgin who doth reward such small seruices, piously performed by her seruants, with such ample gaine? Of whose benignity, that we may make experience, let vs study how to honour, & esteeme any thing whatsoe∣uer, dedicated to her. But on the contrary side let vs seriously take heed that we
offer no abuse vnto them, or apply them to prophane vses, least we incur iustly the high displeasure of our B. Lady, being well admo∣nished by the example fol∣lowing. In a certayne Sodality of our B. Lady there were two Pennes fayrly decked, ap∣pointed to write the letters Patents, which the fellows of that Sodality going frō one place to another, were always accustomed to car∣ry with thē. One of these Pens a Youth of the same Sodality had secretly stolne who though by inward in∣spirations he felt himselfe
often called to Religion by Almighty God, yet not∣withstanding being entan∣gled with the loue of a cer∣tayne woman, he negle∣cted this vocation. Vpon a tyme determining to write vnto the sayd woman, and hauing taken the stolne penne in his hād, he felt so∣dainly a great blowe giuen him on the eare, and a voy∣ce rebukinge him in these wordes: And darest thou, wicked fellow, by thy vn∣cleane attēpts defile a thing dedicated vnto me? With which blow the youth be∣ing astonished, altered his determinatiō: but the print
of the blow remayned for certayne dayes in his face, shewing that it was a force more then humane which gaue it him. [Bonif. in hist. Man. l. 5. c. 1. ex Bencio.] CHAP. VII. The seauenth Exercise of Re∣uerence to the B. Virgin is, by bēding our knes to giue her the worship of Hyperdulia. THis Honour of Hyper∣dulia, is inferiour, and lesse, then that of Latria, which is due only to God, & yet superiour & greater thē Dulia which is common
to other Saintes: And it is conuenient that it be giuen to our B. Lady by reason of her Excellency. You may practise the same by ben∣ding your knees after the manner following. First standing before an Oratory, or Image of our Bles. Lady, contemplate her sitting in a stately Throne, exalted next vnto her Bles. Sonne aboue all the quires of Angels, full of maiesty, and amongst all Creatures the most excellent. Secondly, obserue how all the Orders of Angels, & Saintes falling before her as to their Queen & Lady,
with great submission, ho∣nour her. Thirdly acknowledging your selfe the most poorest and abiect of all her Ser∣uants, and most vnworthy to be admitted to so noble & glorious a Cōgregation, and so high an Office, yet trusting in her benignity, and clemency, with an in∣ward reuerence, most pro∣foundly, submit your selfe before her, with your armes cast a crosse vpon your breast, or hands ioyned de∣uoutly, & humbly bowing your knees vnto the groūd without vttering a word; of if you had rather speak,
only say, and repeat these two, Salue Maria, or Aue Maria. Fourthly, rising vp a litle after, & recollecting your selfe as before, togea∣ther with all the Court in heauen, bend your knees againe, and againe, as often as discreet deuotion shall suggest. You may commodiously thryce a day repeate this Exercise, in honour of the 15. Mysteries contained in the Rosary. Rising in the morning bend your knees 5. times in honour of the 5. glorious Misteries, the first of which was performed at the time of the Resurrectiō
of Christ our Lord: but you may reuerence those Mysteries, if bending your knees either with your hart alone, or with your mouth also, you say, Hayle Mary whose Sonne rose againe: Hayle Mary whose Son as∣cended into heauen, and so concerning the rest &c. A∣bout Noone, bend your knees againe in honour of the 5. Dolorous Mysteries, the chiefe of which was done about that time, na∣mely the crucifiyng of our deare Lord and Sauiour. At Night before you go to bed, bend agayne your knees in honour of the 5.
Ioyfull Mysteries, whereof the chiefest, to wit the An∣nuntiation, was accompli∣shed as many Authors sup∣pose, at that time. Vpon the solemnity of any Feast of the B. Virgin you may adde one bending of your knee more in honour of the Mi∣stery then celebrated. This Exercise hath byn very familiar and vsuall to many seruants of our Bles. Lady. And Saint Mary of Oegnia did (as we read) so∣metymes in the space of a day and a night, bend her knees a thousād & an hun∣dred times saluting the mo∣ther of God, & perseuered
in this kind of salutation 40. dayes togeather. [Sur. in her life 25 of Iune.] It is recounted that a re∣ligious persō neglecting the like duty to the B. Virgin was sharpely rebuked, who when vpon a tyme through sloth lying in his bed, he omitted the vsuall custome of bending his knees at the signe of the Aue bell, which is giuen thrice a day to re∣new the memory of the Angels saluting the Blessed Virgin, the night following he perceyued in his sleepe the litle bell of the Church to bow it selfe three tymes so low that the very top al∣most
touched the earth, hearing withall a voyce re∣proouing him, and saying: Thou slouthfull fellow, be∣hold how senseles creatu∣res bow themselues before the Blessed Virgin, & thou a reasonable Man negle∣ctest it. CHAP. VII. The eight Exercise of Reuerence to our B. Lady is, to exercise the foresayd acts of Hyper∣dulia by prostrating our sel∣ues, & kissing the ground. YOu may allso vse this exercyse at three tymes as you did the former. First
standing still, without mo∣tion, beholde the sacred Virgin aduāced to the top of the Empyriall heauen in a princely Throne, all the heauenly Court beholding and applauding her, & the most Blessed Trinity crow∣ning her with a Crowne of twelue Starres, which do signify her twelue priuiled∣ges or vertues, and the re∣wards thereof, with which shee is endowed in a most high degree, aboue al other Creatures. Conceaue then a feruēt desire to adde some∣thing allso to this noble triumph and glory of our B. Lady, & to bestow your
selfe wholy in honouring her, & to that end recite this Prayer. O most excellent & most pure Virgin, Mother of God, and our Qneene, be∣hold me the most abiect, & poorest of all your Seruants heere prostrate at your feet I do presēt vnto you these two litle Mites, to wit, my SOVLE and my BODY, to serue and obey you as per∣petuall slaues for euer. I also bequeath vnto you my vn∣derstanding, and my Me∣mory, that I may thinke & meditate on you; my Hart that I may feruently loue you; my Head that it be
bowed in your honour; my Hāds that I may ioyne thē, my knees that I may hum∣bly bēd them before you; my Toūg that it may vtter your praises: lastly my whole Body, that I may prostrate it in reuerence to your Roy∣all Maiesty. Then in presence of all the heauenly Cittizens, as if you were a fellow, or cōpanion among the Bles∣sed, al performing the same with you, recite the lit∣le Rosary, at three diuers tymes, contayning twelue Aues, equally deuided with three Pater Nosters in re∣membrance of the 12. Pre∣rogatiues
of our B. Lady, & after euery Aue prostrating your selfe, kisse the groūd. The manner of deuiding these prayers, is this. In the morning, say in honour of God the Father, the first Pater Noster, who in sight of all the Court of heauen did crowne the B. Virgin his beloued daugh∣ter. Then with the holy Pa∣triarkes salute the Sacred Virgin, saying first an Aue Maria, in honour of her most excellent Fayth, and Hope, since no pure Crea∣ture was euer enriched with greater. The second recite with the Prophets, in ho∣nour
of her sublime Con∣templation. The third with the Apostles, in honour of her most feruent Charity & Zeale. The fourth with the Martyrs, in honour of her Fortitude and Magna∣nimity; and after euery one you may, as is before sayd, kisse the ground. At Noone, recite the second Pater Noster, in ho∣nour of God the Sonne, who crowned his B. Vir∣gin-Mother. Adioyne also 4. other Aues in honour of these foure Priuiledges fol∣lowing: The first with the holy Doctours, in honour of her discretion and wis∣dome.
The 2. with the Priests, in honour of her sanctity. The 3. with Reli∣gious persons in honour of her Pouerty & Obedience. The fourth with Eremits in honout of her solitarines and prayer. In the Euening say the 3d. Pater Noster in honour of God the holy Ghost, who crowned the Bles. V. Mary his Espouse. Adioyne also 4. Aues in honour of 4. other Priuiledges. The first with holy Confessors, in honour of her Patience. The 2. with Virgins in ho∣nour of her Virginity. The 3. with widdows, in honour
of her humility. The 4. with married persōs in ho∣nour of her Fidelity, and Concord in wedlocke. Sometymes insteed of these priuiledges you may meditate vpon these things following. In the Morning, 1. Consider the most co∣pious grace, infused into the B. Virgin in her imma∣culate Conception. In the 2. That high dignity in the angelical Salutation. 3. The ouershadowing of the holy Ghost. 4. The Conception of the sonne of God. At Noone, Consider 1. That shee was a B. Virgin most pure, without any
spot, or blemish of her Vir∣ginity. 2. That shee was a Mother and yet remayned a Virgin. 3. That shee bore our Sauiour in her wombe without eyther waight, or trouble. 4. That shee was deliuered without paine or griefe. In the Euening, Consi∣der 1. The firmenesse of her Fayth, in belieuing. 2. Her profound humility in obeying. 3. Her great dis∣cretion in speaking. 4. Her high perfection in vnder∣taking and following any worke. This exercise is ex∣plicated otherwise in the Mirrour of Examples, & is
called there, The Crowne of our B. Lady, namely when the 3. Paters, & 12. Aues are recited at once in honour of the Priuiledges before mentioned. In commenda∣tion of which Exercise, I must not omit an example set downe in that Booke. Three men going a iour∣ney together, two of them, ouergoing the third, and passing through a wood, fell into the hands of thee∣ues, by whome they being first spoyled of their clo∣thes were afterwards cruel∣ly murthered. The third, who with great piety and constancy was dayly accu∣stomed
to recite this for∣sayd Crowne or Rosary, ignorāt of his fellows mis∣fortune, entred into the same wood, and was sud∣dainly apprehended by the same theeues; and ready to be slayne, he earnestly in∣treated of them, that they would but spare him so long, vntill he might re∣cite that short Rosary. To which they easily condes∣cended. But the B. Virgin mooued with motherly piety, being not able wi∣thout compassion to be∣holde the distressed estate of her afflicted Cliēt, made hast presetly to relieue him
and came vnto him sitting by him in a thron of glory, full of Maiesty, and brigh∣ter then the sunne. On ech side S. Catherine & S. Lucy, the especiall Patrones of this poore man did guarde her. The theeues with sted∣fast eyes beheld al that was done, and did see fallyng from his mouth, at euery Pater noster, a red Rose, and at euery Aue, a pure white one, which by the com∣maundment of our B. Lady S. Catharine gathered vp, & deliuered them vnto Saint Lucy; who bound them on a circle of gould with siluer threed. The garland being
finished, they gaue it to their Queene, who putting it on her Clients head, va∣nished away. Wherupō the theeues, renouncing that wicked course of life, and sorry for their fault, tould their Captiue what they had beheld, and for a testi∣mony of the truth shewed him the Crowne put on his head: whether he was more struken with astonishment of the thing, or rapt with ioy is hard to say, but with a gratefull mynd he ac∣knowledged this benefit of the sacred Virgin, & that he might more fully after∣wardes dedicate himselfe
vnto her, he became a Re∣ligious Man. CHAP. IX. The ninth Exercise of Reuerēce, is to deny nothing which law∣fully, and prudently may be graunted to those who aske it in our B. Ladyes Name. WIth this Exercise, as with a vitall bayte, did the B. Virgin entice Alexan∣der of Hales into the Or∣der of S. Francis, a man fa∣mous for learnīg but more renowned for his rare piety and deuotion towards our B. Lady, of which he gaue an euident argument, when
as he vowed he would ne∣uer deny any thing asked of him in her Honour. [S. Ant. 3. p. hist. 24. c. 8. §. 1.] One day a friar of S. Frā∣cis Order meeting him, & fallyng into discourse of spiritual matters, sayd vnto him: And why do you not leaue a secular life, & in Re∣ligion bequeath your selfe wholy to God? I beseech you, for the honour of the most Bles. Virgin to enter into our Order. Alexander at first was amazed with a Petition so vnexpected, yet calling a litle after his vow to remembrāce, togeather also with the inspiration of
God, who still vrged him, he promised he would per∣forme what was requested, and so for the reuerence & loue borne to our B. Lady he enterd into that Order, greatly gracing the same with the excellency of his learning. Whosoeuer wil seriously labour in the rooting out of any vice or imperfectiō, let him with great diligēce, & fidelity attend vnto this deuotiō; to wit, that in the morning at his vprising let him feruently, & sincerely beg of himselfe, for our B. Ladyes sake to abstaine frō such an imperfection for
that one day: or if he be accustomed to fall often into that imperfection, let him aske but for the space of some few houres. After∣wards that time being spēt, let him demaund it earne∣stly againe for one day, or 3. or 4. houres more, so ab∣staining day by day in this māner vntil by the assistāce of the B. Virgin he shall get a full conquest ouer him∣selfe. And if at any time v∣pon occasion the tempta∣tion do oppresse him more grieuously, let him vrge himselfe more feruently in this manner: What, & wilt thou not heare the B. Vir∣gin
asking, desiring, & be∣seeching thee, to abstaine from this imperfection? By the like practise S. Bernard mooued a Noble man of France to reforme his life. For after applying many other remedies in vaine to recall him from a certayne vice: well, said S. Bernard, if it be so, that you cannot lōg restrayne yourselfe, yet for Almighty Gods sake, for beare for 3. days, which he did. The 3. dayes being ended he vrged him againe that for 3. dayes more he would in honour of our B. Lady abstayne, to which he also agreed. After being
desired to abstaine 3. other dayes in Honour of all the Saints in heauen, he did, & so forth, vntill at last cō∣ming to S. Bernard, he pro∣fessed he would now make no more truce with God Al∣mighty for 3. dayes, but a perpetual peace, being chā∣ged into another man. [De la Puent. t. 3. de perf. Christ. tract. 2. c. 8. ex spec. Exemp.] CHAP. X. The tenth Exercise of Reuerence to the B. Virgin, is to dedicate all our good purposes vnto her. IT is a thing of very great moment, and much auay∣ling
to the attaining of true perfection & eternal salua∣tion, if renewing daily your good purposes & intentiōs before an Image of the B. Virgin, you resigne thē into her most sacred hands, and lay them in her most holy lap, as in a sāctuary; or adde them to her Crowne as so many starres, that so you may the more efficaciously be mooued by this Exer∣cise to the accomplisshing of your purposes by reason of the reuerence & dignity of our B. Lady, & may con∣ceaue a more firme hope of obtaining help from her. To this S. Bern. stirreth
vs vp in his Sermon of the natiuity of our Bles. Lady. Remēber sayth he, to com∣mend whatsoeuer you vn∣dertake to the Blessed. Vir∣gin Mary. And a litle after: Haue (sayth he) a diligent care, that you endeauour to giue that litle which you desire to offer, into the most gratefull and most worthy handes of the Bles. Virgin MARY. Which if you doe, you shall doubtles find the B. Virgin as fauourable to you in this spirituall tra∣ficke, as she was at another tyme in a worldly negocia∣tion vnto a certaine Mer∣chant. [Vincent. Bellouac.
specul. hist. lib. 1. c. 81.] This Merchant hauing borrowed money at Con∣stantinople of a Iew, pro∣missed the payment of it agayne at such a day, vsing our Lady as a witnesse, be∣fore whose Image he made this bargain. Wherfore the Iew remaining satisfied, he tooke his iourney with his money to Alexādria, nego∣tiating there very prospe∣rously. When as now the day was at hand in which the debt was to be payd, & so neere that he could ney∣ther returne by any meanes himselfe, nor sēd the mony by any messēger, what shold
he doe? He vndertaketh a strange course, which was a peculiar deuotion into our B. Lady scarse euer heard of before, suggested vnto him. He closed the mony in a lit∣le Chest, which he sealed with his owne seale, with this inscriptiō: Receyue A∣brahā (for that was the Ie∣wes name) the mony which I borrowed of you. This litle Coffer he put into the sea, a day before the mony was due, hūbly beseeching the B. Virgin, that by her help it might safely be cō∣ducted vnto Constantino∣ple into the Iewes handes. Whē behold the mony be∣ing
miraculously carried through al the seas, arriued to the shore of Constanti∣nople, where the same Iew walking on the banke side receyued it. Neyther heere ceased the myracle, for the perfidious Iew after the re∣ceit of this mony, hid the Coffer, demaunding, after the merchants returne, the debt before the magistra∣tes, and (constrained there∣unto because other testi∣mony was wanting) tooke his oath before the sayd I∣mage of our Bles. Lady that neuer any such mony came to his hands. Scarse had he sworne, but the Image with
a loud voyce in the hearing of all, replyed; Thou lyest, for thou hast receiued both money and box, & hast hid them. The Iew, astonisshed with the wonder & amazed with the nouelty of the thing, confessed his wic∣kednes, & acknowledging the power & mercy of the B. Virgin, became a Chri∣stian. Do you imitate this con∣fidence in our B. Lady, and representing your selfe be∣fore her, make your desires of attaining to perfection. Renew good purposes of amending your life, and ca∣sting of ill habits: and with
greatest reuerence and sub∣mission of your selfe resign all to her, and doubt not, though many obstacles & difficulties oppose them∣selues, but that the Blessed Virgin executing the office of a good Mariner, will di∣rect your good intentions through flouds, rockes, sā∣des and tēpests, conducting them to the safe hauen of a good and prosperous end. With this loue and reue∣rence toward the B. Vir∣gin did holy Father Igna∣tius, as with a most strong seale, signe & confirme his first purpose of altering his manner of life, into a
better course, giuing his Sword as a pawne, & sea∣ling his intentiōs as it were in the motherly bosome of the Sacred Virgin. He did offer also vp into the hādes of our B. Lady the Vowes which he, and his fellowes made at Paris in her Chap∣pel called, The Mont of mar∣tyrs, on the day of her As∣sumption, commending in like manner to her the so∣lemne profession made by himselfe and his fellows in Rome, at S. Paules, within her Chappell. Neyther in∣tended he any thing else, when in the Rules of his Order he interposed these
wordes, [Before the most Blessed Virgin Mary] then that he might leaue it as a document vnto his Sonnes, that as their Vowes, so all their good purposes should be offered vp before the Blessed Virgin, to the end that partly by the reue∣rence and respect due vnto her, partly by the confi∣dence of her assistance, they may be made more ready and cheerefull in bringing them to effect.
OVR B. LADIES LITLE GARDEN. THE SECOND BED, planted with Roses. Wherin diuers Exercises of Loue to our B. Lady are cōtained. BEhold the Rose, the second flower of this Virginall Garden, an Em∣bleme of Loue, which if you gather with such de∣uotion, diligence and con∣stancy as it behooueth; you
may easily compose therof a most faire Garland, fitt both in beauty and odour for the glorious Head of the Bles. Virgin. First ther∣fore striue daily to stirre vp in your selfe as soone as you rise, a tender and sweet affection vnto this glorious Queene, remēbring as well her singular Perfections, & beauty, as her infinite Mer∣cies shewed vnto vs sinners. Which two considerations will serue as fewell, to in∣crease and nourish within your breast the fier of di∣uine loue towards so beau∣tifull a Queene, & so louing a Mother: But least this
heate of deuotion, which you inioy in the morning waxe cold ere night, by reason of many cares and imployments which daily are like to trouble you, you must labour to kindle and quicken the same, by fre∣quēt, though briefer, deuo∣tiōs, as the practice follow∣ing shall instruct you. CHAP. I. The first way to stirre vp Affe∣ction to the B. Virgin, is the contemplation of her Perfe∣ctions and Beauty. YOur cōposition of place shalbe to imagine, that
you see the B. Virgin shi∣ning with infinite beauty, and glory, in the midst of men and Angels, towards whome are directed the af∣fections of euery Saint in particular. Your petition shalbe to demaūd grace of our Lord to perceaue, & tast in some sort, how dearly our Bles. Lady ought to be loued for her rare Pefections, & Beauty. The first Point. Of the multitude, and greatnes of our B. Ladyes Perfections. I Magin you see the Blessed Virgin in the midst of all
creaturs, darting our of her owne hart, as from a bow, innumerable arrows, wher∣of euery one flying a di∣uers way, woundeth a seue∣rall hart. These arrowes are so many perfectiōs of hers, which wounde the behol∣ders of her beauty with loue, to wit, Men, Angels, yea & God himselfe. Thou art all faire, O my beloued, thou art all beautifull, and there is no spot in thee. [Cant. 4.] Void she is from originall, yea and from the very least blemish of actuall sinne; Beautifull in body, faire in soule, pleasing in this life by grace, resplen∣dent
in the other by glory, most excelent & worthy of loue aboue all creatures; because she being first or∣dained, predestinated, and elected before all others, by the mouth of the Hig∣best [Eccles. 24.] was by law of birth-right, by her portion of grace and inhe∣ritance of heauenly glory, preferred by her celestiall Father before all creaturs. Yea whatsoeuer otherwaies is foūd amongst Creatures good, faire, holy, or amia∣ble, all that in a far more ample manner is fully con∣tained in the B. Virgin.
Affections of Loue. WIth this consideration you shall stirre vp in your selfe, affectiōs of loue, reioycing to see your deare Mother indewed with so many perfectiōs, worthy of al honour, praise & loue; in such sort, that if you en∣ioyed the same, she being depriued therof, you would most willingly resigne thē all vnto her againe. With this so ardent charity, was Charles the Sonne of S. Bri∣git enflamed, who receiued great comfort and exulted with ioy, as often as he cō∣sidered the excellent prero∣gatiues
of this B. Virgin, but especially when he re∣membred, how she amōgst all others was chosen by God to be the Mother of his only Sonne; and he did often protest, that he had rather choose to lye in the grieuous torments of hell, for all eternity, thē that the B. Virgin should be depri∣ued, although but for one momēt (if it were possible) of that dignity, in which now she shineth. This was a great expression of loue.
The second Point. Of the exteriour Perfection, and Beauty of our B. Lady. AFter you haue thus in generall be held the ad∣mirable perfection of our B Lady, you may begin by litle & litle to descēd to pō∣der in particular euery part therof. And in the first pla∣ce, remember to consider the excellent beauty which externally proceeded either from the admirable pro∣portiō of her body, or from the exteriour Portraiture of her diuine vertue. Let not that worthy saying of Saint Denis, or rather some
other vnknowne, though most excellent Writer, goe out of your mind, who, in an Epistle to S. Paul, after he had beheld our Bles. La∣dy, sayth thus of himselfe: Eftsoons as I came into the presence of the sacred Vir∣gin, so great a light sud∣dainly enuyroned me exte∣riourly, and fully enlighte∣ned me interiourly, so fra∣grant a smell of all kind of odours abounded in me, as that neyther my vnhappy body, nor my poore soule was able to sustaine the en∣signes of such, and of so great happines. My hart fainted, & my spirit failed,
ouerwhelmed with the ma∣iesty of so great glory; I take God to witnes, who was then present in the Vir∣gin, had not that doctrine which I learned of thee, taught me the contrary, I shold haue belieued that she had bene the true God. So he. If such were the beauty of this Virgin, while she liued yet a pilgrime in this vale of tears, how great may we imagine the same to be, whilst she now triū∣pheth in the kingdome of heauen. Affections of Loue YOu shall make a firme purpose to imploy all∣waies
hereafter the powers of your body and soule, in celebrating the praises of this so glorious and beau∣tifull Virgin speaking vnto her in the words of Blosius, a most deuout Client of hers. [in Prec. pijs endolog. 4.] Haile MARY, Virgin most honourable, Virgin more cleere then the sunne brighter thē the stars, more sweet the balsamum, more ruddy then the Rose, whi∣ter then the Lilly, farre more gratious and comely then can be imagined. Mo∣rouer you shall desire to vse the tongues of all men, and Angels; to play on all kind
of instruments, that so with most pleasāt harmony, you might sound forth both in heauen and earth, honour & renowne vnto the Name of MARY. And for an example or patterne of this tender af∣fection, you may take Fa. Peter Faber of the Society of IESVS, and one of the Ten first Companions of S. Ignatius, who being pre∣sēt at Spire, in a Church de∣dicared to the most sacred Virgin, where he heard E∣uensong sung with as great pompe & celebrity as pos∣sible could be, vpon the eue of our B. Ladyes Assum∣ption
to heauen, & percea∣uing the Altar to be decked with flowers, shining with cādels, adorned with many holy reliques, the wals hūg with Tapestry, the Quiers sounding with variety of musicke, was so rauished with inward ioy, that he be∣ganne to wish all happines vnto those, who had rāked and lighted the candels in such good order, who had adorned the wals with Ta∣pestry, had exposed the sa∣cred reliques, had gathered the musitians togeather: In such affectuous manner did the signes of a mind reioy∣cing in God, and exulting
at the Honour of our Bles. Lady shew it selfe on euery side. [In eius vita.] The third point. Of the internall Beauty of our Blessed Lady. THat you may in some sort perceiue how great the internall Beauty of our Bles. Lady is in very deede, you shall consider first the beauty of a soule free from sinne, & indewed with ver∣tues. So great, sayth S. Ca∣tharin of Siena, is the beau∣ty of a soule, as that if it could be seene with cor∣porall eyes, there would be none who would not most
willingly giue his life to conserue the same, in so beautifull & amiable estate. [Surius in eius vita.] For if all beauty, grace, comelinesse, or amiable∣nesse whatsoeuer that shi∣neth in any creature, as in the Sunne, Moone, stars, Gold, Siluer, Precious sto∣nes, rich apparell, gorgeous Pallaces, rare Gardens, cu∣rious Pictures, or in the ex∣cellent feature and compo∣sition of body, that either is, was, or shall be: If, I say, all the beauty that might be gathered out of all and euery one of these, should be amassed, and put
togeather, to make one beauty, although it seeme it would be almost infinite and incomprehensible, yet would it not parallell that beauty, which the least de∣gree of Grace, (or of any vertue, that commeth with it) imparteth to a Soule. Raise now your mind as high as you shalbe able, & contemplate the beauty of the B. Virgin her soule, en∣dewed not only with one, two, or some few degrees of grace, but with so many and those so great, as that some Deuines renowned as well for piety, as learning, hould, that she had impar∣ted
to her alon, more grace in this life, & glory in the other, thē all the rest of the Saints together; as we sayd before in the Preface. §. 1. Affections of Loue. YOu shall admire & praise these so great and singu∣lar perfections in the most Bles. Virgin, saying: [with Prouerb. 31. vers. 29.] Many daughters haue gathered & heaped vp riches, yet haue you exceeded thē all. You surmount the Patriarkes in Fayth, the Prophets in knowledge, the Apostles in zeale, the Martyrs in pa∣tience, in humility the Cō∣fessours,
and in purity the Virgins. You being decked and trimmed vp with Ie∣wels of inspeakable worth, draw the heauenly Spirits to behould you. You are as it were a most cleere Sunne voyde of Eclipse, a Sunne displaying his beames from earth vpon heauen, & from heauen vpon earth; & euen a Sunne dissoluing the very cloudes of our iniquities. After this, you shall be sorry, that hitherto you haue esteemed so lightly the admirable sanctity of this diuine Virgin and say; O if she with the sweet pē∣sill of her singular mercy
would but with the first ground, or colour of di∣uine grace paynt my soule forth vnto her owne like∣nes! O if she would clēse & adorne it, with such ver∣tues, as might make it acce∣ptable vnto her selfe & her∣deare Sonne! Then do you aspire with burning desi∣res after that true beauty, which only deserueth to be sought for, and this to no other end, but only that you may loue, and be be∣loued of the most glorious and B. Virgin. The Speach or Colloquy. YOu shal adioyne to these Contemplations, & Af∣fections
of Loue, thanks gi∣uing to the most B. Trini∣ty, which hath beene plea∣sed to set forth the most pure Virgin with so many gifts, & rare vertues; which hath enriched her, with so great perfection, & made her amiable in the eyes of all: and therfore shall you also honour Her, euen with the whole powers of your soule & body, prouoking with great and most liuely affectiō, all Creaturs to doe the same. Lastly, you shall beseech the most B. Virgin that she would shoote one only dart of her Loue into your soule, and grant you
this only fauour, that you may liue, and dye her most true, and Faithfull Seruant. Then say, Pater Noster, & Aue Maria. CHAP. II. The second contemplatiō to stirre vp loue in vs towards the B. Virgin, is the remembrance of her mercyes, & benefits to vs. YOur Preamble shalbe the same, as in the former meditation. THE FIRST POINT. Of the greatnes of the mercyes of our B Lady, by reasons he is the Mother of God. THe second incitement to loue the most sacred vir∣gin,
after the cōtemplation or her Perfectiōs & Beauty, is a pious consideration of her Mercy, Liberality, and Care of vs humane creatu∣res. The which that in some sort you may cōceiue how great it is, remember her to be the Mother of God, whose bowells, doubtles were wholy turned into Mercy, since therein shee bare, for nine monethes togeather, Mercy it selfe. Whose hart, & breast were throughly enkindled with the fire of charity, since she often imbraced and foste∣red in her bosome, Fier, & Charity it selfe. She well
knew into what plight the loue of vs lost Sinners had brought euen God him∣selfe her dearest sonne: she heard his words, in which euery syllable, was an ar∣gument of his loue to vs. Lastly she both saw & felt, how great the torments, griefes, & molestatiōs were which he suffered, onely for the redemption of ma∣kind. And is it possible that she should not most vehemently thirst after our good, and saluation, who heard on the Crosse her de∣arest Sonne, though all his body were torne, and man∣gled with whips and scour∣ges,
and his handes & feete pierced with hard nayles, yet notwithstanding (more mindfull of vs then of him∣selfe) cry out, I thirst? For if this voyce of our most be∣loued IESVS, vnderstood by Fayth, and distilled into the eares of the hart by me∣ditation, did mooue and incite those Apostolicall men, those Paules, those Dominickes, those Francis'es those Ignatius'es, those Xa∣ucrius'es to so noble, and heroicall attemps, for the Saluation of their neigh∣bours; what did it not worke in the Bles. Virgin, who in the stage of Mount
Caluary, in that Scaffolde of diuine loue, heard, saw, and euen felt the wonder∣full loue her Sonne bare to mankind? Affections of loue. YOu shall proceede fur∣ther, & beginne to tast, and see how benigne, and sweet our B. Lady is. Then shall you congratulate with her, for her most singular mercy, wherby she is made so deare & acceptable vnto all persons; yea you shalt re∣ioice and cōgratulate with all mankind, that our Lord God hath chosen so amia∣ble a Mother to himselfe,
who also was to be vnto vs the Mother of Mercy. With the sweetnes of this affection, was S. Ber∣nard filled, when he spake vnto the same B. Virgin in these words: We thy hum∣ble seruāts, ô most glorious Queene, reioyce and exult with thee for all the rest of thy Vertues, but for this one we congratulate with our selues: we praise thy Virginity, we admire thy Humility, we honour thy Modesty, but thy Mercy to the miserable sauoureth more sweet: we imbrace thy Mercy more louingly, more often remember it, &
more frequently call vpon it. [Serm. 4. de Assump.] THE SECOND POINT. Of the greatnes, & extension of our B. Ladyes Mercyes. TO the end you may the better conceaue the gre∣atnes of her Mercyes, you must measure thē after the manner of some corporeall substance, taking the lēgth, the breadth, the height, & the depth thereof. The Length may be sayed to be that continuance of her most singular fauours, for so many ages alwaies to en∣dure, euen to the end of the world, as S. Bernard no∣teth,
saying: The length of her Pitty will endure vnto the last day, and neuer be wanting those who shall call vpon it. [Ibidem vbi sup.] Turne ouer the An∣nalls, and rehearse the ti∣mes of our Forefathers, & you shall find no age, no yeare, no month, no weeke, no day, no houre, yea not so much as a moment in which haue not proceeded, as out of a continuall foun∣taine (& shall alwaies prō∣ceed as long as there shall be any distressed person) rare, and notable signes of her mercyes vnto vs. The breadth, may be
called the diuers and mani∣fould extensiōs of her mer∣cyes to all. In so much as S. Bernard in the same place affirmeth, the Latitude of her fauours, to cōpasse the whole world, and all the earth to be full of her mer∣cies. For if we consider the manifold benefits receiued frō her, there will be found no guift, neither corporall nor spirituall, which was not deriued vnto vs, chie∣fly by her meanes. In cor∣porall; she helpeth women in child birth, cureth woū∣des and diseases, defendeth from dangers, granteth vi∣ctories and triumphs vnto
vs. In spirituall; she procu∣reth vs baptisme, helpeth in the defence of chastity, is present in desperation, admitteth religious Fami∣lies into the Church of God, & lastly neuer faileth vs in the houre of death. Wherfore it seemeth to me that these so great mercies of this most sacred Virgin, were not vnfittly expres∣sed by that famous Cloud, which couered the Chil∣dren of Israell from the Ae¦giptiās pursuing thē, which guided them through dā∣gerous wildernesses, both by day and night, which shaddowed them from the
great heate of the sunne, & finally through which God did giue answers, and Ora∣cles. [Exod. 13. & 14.] Affections of loue. YOu shall desire excee∣dingly to see all creaturs most gratefull to her; from whose hands they haue re∣ceiued so many benefits, & that they would keep well registred in their mindes a perpetuall memory therof, endeauoring alwais accor∣ding to their ability, by ser∣uices of reuerence and de∣uotion to requite them. O if you could by all your la∣bours, afflictions, and toils
obtaine, that euen one of so many lukewarme world∣lings would become feruēt & studious in the seruice of this most glorious Queene; how wel should you then haue bestowed your pai∣nes, how worthy a seruice word it be of your labour? Wherfore at least purpose most firmely allwais to de∣fire and effect the same, en∣deauoring to honour her which way soeuer you can, imitating heerin S. Bona∣uenture who burning with this zeale, inuiteth all the iust & holy men, who haue experienced the mercy of our B. Lady, to recioyce, cō∣gratulate,
and render mil∣lions of thanks giuings. [In Psalt.] Exult, & reioyce al¦yee iust in the B. Virgin, in righteousnes of hart prāise her. Approach vnto her, with reuerence and deuo∣tion. Let your hart be de∣lighted in saluting of her. Offer sacrifices of Praises vnto her; and be inebria∣ted with the sweetnes that floweth from her breasts. For shee will send through your harts the beames of her piety, and clarify you with the splend our of her mercyes.
THE THIRD POINT. Of the heigh, and depth of our B. Ladies Mercies. THe height of our B. La∣great Pitty is such, that it cannot possible be con∣tayned in the strait bounds of this world, it penetrates euen to the top of the Hea∣uens, where the most ple∣sant fruite thereof buddes forth, and from whence she shooteth on euery side the bright beames of her loue, & affection. O that we did know, or could for one moment only, behould, with what kind of ioy, exultation, & pleasure she
doth recreate the Citty of God; sending forth the streams of her sweetnes as a most true Arch vpon those happy cytizens of the Ce∣lestiall Hierusalem, whome she recreated with the oint∣ments of her singular mer∣cies, being yet pilgrims in the desert of this world! The depth of our B. La∣mercies descēdeth euen vn∣to Hell it selfe. For this is she, who hath often with∣held infinyte multitude of soules rūning head long in∣to that bottomles pit of damnation, by procuring grace of her beloued sonne for the amendemēt of their
liues. This is she, who put∣teth to flight the roaring lyons of hell, and breaketh their forces, by helping vs against them in tyme of tē∣ptation. Lastly, this is she, who alwais refresheth with the sweet showers of her consolations, the soules in Purgatory; as herselfe re∣uealed to S. Gerirude. Affections of Loue. YOu shall aspire to the kingdome of heauē, that you muy with all the An∣gels, and Saintes lay downe your hart at the feete of the B. Virgin, setting forth her great mercyes, togeather
with the mercies of God, and melting with oue, as often as you shall heare re∣peated the sacted, and holy Name of MARY. You shall also imitate this Mercy of our B. La. by praying, and offering such workes as may satisfy for the soules detained in Pur∣gatory: requesting her first that she will be pleased to free the poore soules from their paines, and help them to heauen, making therby her singular mercyes more knowne, & apparent to all creatures, and increase the number of her Praysers. And truly how gratefull
this is vnto the B. Virg. she declared herselfe vnto John Ximenez, a Coadiutor of the Society of IESVS, who vpon the feast of all-Saints, as he was praying before a picture of the Immaculate conception of our B. Lady for the Soules in Purgato∣ry, being throughly sorry to see the Faithfull liuing, labour no more for the de∣liuering of the out of those exceeding paynes, heard a voyce, crying: Ximenez, Xi∣menez, be mindfull of the soules in Purgatory: by which wordes he was so greatly moued, that vntill his dying day, which was
about 8. years after, he of∣fered vp all his deuotions, prayers, & mortifications, for no other end, but only for their deliuery out of torments. [In vita P. Balta∣zaris Aluarez. cap. 45.] The Speach, or Colloquy. IN the end of this Medita∣tion you shall make your Colloquy thus. First you shall giue thankes to the B. Virgin both in your owne, & all other creatures names, for her exceding great mer∣cyes towards vs. Second∣ly you shal lay downe your owne hart before the hart of our B. Lady, which you
may imagine to lye in the midst of the whole world, wounded and pierced with darts of Loue by the most B. Trinity, by all Angels & Saintes, by the Soules in heauen, Earth, and Purga∣tory: For you are dearly beloued of all. O Mother of God, Mother of men, Desire of the Eternal Hils, Glory of humane nature, & Delight of the world; I desire to offer vnto you a thousand, and a thousand tymes multiplied, all the prayses, congratulations & signes of ioy, all the ditties songes and Canticles that euer any Creature made in
your honour, & with them I also bequeath my selfe most straitly obliged vnto you, by innumerable, and these most iust, titles. This meditation & exer∣cise will be most gratefull to the B. Virgin, and very meritorious also to your selfe, wherin as it were in a great Pompe of all prayses you carry the name of our B. Lady in triumph, as di∣uers Emperours did, ha∣uing obtained by her In∣tercession, Victories ouer their enemies; and in parti∣culer Iohn Comnenus Em∣perour of Constantinople, who after he had, by the
only ayde of the B. Virgin the yeare 1123. vanquisshed, & put to flight the proude Scithians, inuading Thracia with their puislant army, for thankes-giuing to this most glorious Queene, he caused a most sumptuous Chariot to be made, draw∣ne by foure snow-white horses, wherin he did place a faire Statua of the most glorious Mother of God, riding in triumph. The rai∣nes of the horses were ma∣naged by the chiefe Peeres of the Realme, the Chariot was guided by his owne Kinsmen, and he himselfe going on foote immediatly
before, carried a Crosse in his hands. [Nicetas in An∣nal.] Euen so let the Bles. Virgin be honoured, so let her triumph ouer you, shi∣ning with no other pompe then the frequent Exercises of loue, and carried in no other Chariot, then in the seat of your owne Hart. CHAP. III. A Renewing of Lone, and Deuo∣tion towards the most B. Vir∣gin, to be made in the day time by a more briefe Recollection. IT is not sufficient for a deuout Client of our B. Lady only to stirre vp him∣selfe
in the morning by some long meditation to the loue of so noble a Queene, vnles he also labour to renew it hourely by other, though shorter Considerations, all the day following. For which kind of recollection, it will not be amisse to pra∣ctice this Excrcise follow∣ing, in imitatrō wherof you may forme to yourselfe di∣uers others to the same fa∣stion. First therfore laying a side for a while, all other busi∣nesse, and turning to your selfe, you shal be hould with the eyes of your vnderstan∣ding, Saint John Euangelist
with the most sacred Virgin placed at the foote of the Crosse, hearing these words of our Sauiour, (Behould thy Mother,) and fulfilling that which is writiē of him, (And from that very houre the disciple of IESVS re∣ceiued her for his Mother.) Secondly, you shall incite your selfe to imitate Saint Iohn, and from that very houre, to renew your affe∣ction vnto the Blessed Vir∣gen, insisting somewhat the longer vpon these words; (And frō this very houre,) making seauen meditations for the seauen dayes of the weeke.
First therfore, begin with Sunday, and say secretly to your selfe: (From this very houre) wherinso many with filiall loue and affection do wholy deuote, offer, & con∣secrate themselues to this their most louing Mother, singing forth her praises, in heauen and earth. Put your selfe into the midst of them & it is not possible but that the yee of your cold deuo∣tiōs wil therwith be thawed & dissolued. O Seraphicall Flames! ô singular deuotiōs of all the holy Saints & An∣gels vnto the most Blessed Virgin! Where are you? Where are you? Why will
you not send forth at least one only sparke of affectiō vnto vs, who are so dull, so colde, so negligent in cele∣brating the praises of your most glorious Queene! On munday. (From this very houre.) Before which tyme perchāce you haue ne∣uer serued the B. Virgin as it was fitting. Good god! Is it possible, that you haue as yet rendred nothing vnto such a benefactrix! so great a Queene! hauing receiued al∣most euery momēt so many and so great benefits! of so many howers as you haue liued, neuer to haue spent one in the seruice of so deare
a Mother! Why are you so slow? what hinders you, that you do not euen now presently begin to offer, & cōsecrate vnto her serui∣ce, at the least, this very Houre? One Twesday. (From this very houre.) Wherein so many do perish for want of loue and recourse vnto the B. Virgin: thousands perhaps, & thousads in this houre lying on their death beds, being by the iust iud∣gement of Almighty God, to be throwne in the next minute into the bottome∣les pit of Hell: wheras, had they but once craued the
aide of this glorious Virgin they should haue raigned and triumphed eternally in heauen. What a thing is it to be damned eternally? to perish eternally? for al eter∣nity? to lye scorching and broyling amongst the blas∣phemous diuels for al eter∣nity? And how small a la∣bour is it to call vpon MA∣RY, to loue and reuerence her? See that you carefully performe this, euen now, that you may escape the o∣ther. On Wednesday. (From this very houre.) In which on the one side three po∣werfull, and dreadfull ene∣mies,
the Diuell, World, and the Flesh do persecute vs, being naked and vnar∣med: On the other side, the diuine Iustice calleth vs to receiue punishment due vn∣to our sinnes. Wee doubt∣les shalbe ouerthrown with the violence of temptatiō, we shall become a prey vn∣to our enemies, vnlesse our B. Lady do assist vs, vnlesse she make intercessiō for vs. Whosoeuer therefore thou be, that readest this, hauing thy conscience de∣filed with the least mor∣tall sinne, consider and ponder, I pray thee, thy owne estate in this sort fol∣lowing:
Thou being cast out of the protectiō of Al∣mighty God, in the which by grace thou didest remai∣ne before, bereaued of all the faire ornaments both of thy vertues and merits, liker to a beast then a man, and as another Nabuchodo∣nosor feeding with wilde beasts, in the desert of sin∣ne: all the Angels, but chie∣fly thy good Angel, bewai∣ling thy calamity, whose counsells hadst thou fol∣lowed, thou wouldest not now, vnhappy wretch, lye groaning, oppressed with the weight of misery. Thou liuest continually beaten
with the whipps of thy guilty conscience, all alone, forsaken of thy frieds; per∣haps to morrow, perhaps to day, yea perhaps this ve∣ry moment to be cited to the dreadfull Tribunall of the seuere iudge, and canst thou yet liue in this estat? Behold our Bles. Lady, the sanctuary, & refuge of sin∣ners, offering freedome, se∣curity, peace; why the dost thou not fly vnto her? On Thursday. (From this very howre.) In which so many Idolatours, Here∣ticks, blasphemers, and sa∣crilegious Caytiffs, reuile the Name of the B. Virgin,
tread her Images vnder their feet, detest to reue∣rence her; and wilt thou through thy slothfulnes o∣mit to make recompence for their wrongs done vnto her, by louing her euen this very houre, more feruent∣ly; by honouring and wor∣shipping her more deuout∣ly, especially seeing both thy owne, and the Angell keepers of these Blasphe∣mers do demaund, and ex∣pect it at thy hands? On friday. (Frō this very howre.) In which Christ himselfe doth so much de∣sire that thou shouldest re∣uerence his Mother; doubt∣les
thou wouldst haue cō∣sented to Christ, had he in the midst of his cruell tor∣ments which he suffred for thy sake, only demaunded this comfort frō thee, stan∣ding hard by him, that thou wouldst take from hence∣forth his Sacred and Holy Mother to be the ine, yiel∣ding her due reuerēce: what he then asked of S. Iohn, that did he aske of thee, & this very houre yet asketh; and dost thou not consent? Wilt thou not now more truly reuerence her, being demaunded of such an one, at such a time, & with such words, when thou oughtest
of thine owne accord much more adore, and reuerence her? On Saturday. (Frō this very houre.) Wherein the B. Virgin most louingly re∣membreth thee, occupied in thy daily affaires, shee parlieth with thy Angell Guardian, & with others, thy deare Patrons concer∣ning thee: for thy sake she interrupteth her B. Sonne otherwaies imployed: she bestoweth on thee benefits without number; and shall not such motherly care, so tender affection, so constāt charity once pierce thy heart with the most sweet
dart of loue, making thy Soule euen to languish and melt away with the desire of pleasing her? Now, after that for some short space of time, you haue daily considered one of these points, you must first striue to stirre vp in your selfe a desire and pur∣pose all waies to serue the B. Virgin with moie fer∣uour heereafter. Then say either once Auc Maria, or els, this praier ensuing. Ho∣ly Mary Mother of God, and Virgin, I from this ve∣ry houre, and for euer, do choose you for my perpe∣tuall Patronesse and Aduo∣cate,
and take you for my Mother hence forth, com∣mending my selfe & all my affairs vnto your protectiō: wherfore take and receyue me likewise into the num∣ber of your deuout seruāts, and let me, though vnwor∣thy be accoūted your Son∣ne, be fauourable vnto me in all my actions, and for∣sake me not, but assist me in the hower of death. Amen. How much this Exexcise did auayle a wicked Soul∣dier, and notable Robber may worthily appeare: for that the diuell did in hu∣mane shape for the space of fourteene whole yeares
wayte on him, hauing leaue by the permission of All∣mighty God, to breake his necke that very day whe∣rein he should first omit this his holy custome of sa∣luting the most Glorious Virgin. [Spec. Exempl. ex∣empl. 6.] Yea how much the whole worlde should haue needed the shelter of this Exercise, when Christ our Sauiour incensed with wrath & indignatiō against sinners, did brandish, and with threatning shake three speares or Lances, one ouer the haughty neckes of the Proud, another against the greedy bowels of the Co∣uetous,
& the third against those who followed the de∣sirs of the flesh, ready to de∣stroy them all, had not our B. Lady made intercession for the world, at that very instant, and brought forth her two most faythfull ser∣uants S. Dominicke, and S. Francis, who should re∣clay me mortall men from sinne, and bring them to true repentance. [B. An∣ton. 3. p. Hist. tit. 22. c. 3.]
CHAP. IV. An Exercise of the loue, and trust we must haue in our Blessed Lady, when we demaund any thing of her, especially in the tyme of Aduersity. FIrst you shal ponder how our Blessed Lady hea∣ring these words of Christ, (Behold thy Sonne. Ioan. 19.) by which she was or∣dayned the Mother of all men, presently enlarged her bowels, and stretched abroad with her singular charity, the armes of her mercyes to receiue and im∣brace with a motherly af∣fection,
such a company of children, & your selfe one amongst the rest. 2. You may demaund, that she will now in heauen remember these wordes, & that state of Christ, and ac∣count vs her Sonnes, as he was, and as he commaun∣ded her to do, by tendring vs with the same care, as she did him incarnate vpon earth. 3. You shall vnfold all your necessityes vnto her, crauyng help with confi∣dence in her as from a most carefull and most diligent Mother. Then add therto these 7. considerations.
1. Throw your selfe downe, as it were an infant before her feete, with this, or such like prayer. OB. Mary, my dearest Mother, behold me heere, as an in∣fant not able to go, or any way to vp-hold my selfe; & though alltogether vn∣worthy of your celestiall helpe, yet doubt I not to craue, that you will be plea∣sed to shroude me, vnder the armes of your singular protection, as you did your Blessed Infant, and Sonne IESVS. 2. Offer your selfe as an infant al naked saying. O B. Mary my most liberall Mo∣ther,
be hold me your poo∣rest Child, an infāt, bereft of all vertues, exposed to the iniuries of cold, and spiri∣tuall repidity; I do beseech you, that as you did shroud sweet IESVS your Sonne in his swathing bands: so you will be pleased to en∣wrappe me with the swa∣thing clothes of vertue, that I may so obtayne a spi∣rituall heat. 3. Offer your selfe as an infant hungry, seeking his Mothers breasts. O Blessed Mary my dearest Mother, behold me your owne Son∣ne, as an Infant euen star∣ued and void of all food: I
most humbly desyre you, that as you did giue the sweet milke of your breasts vnto your little Infant IE∣SVS for his nourishment: so you would giue vnto me the breasts of your loue, & the milke of deuotion. 4. Offer your selfe as a Child, that is to be spiri∣tually circumcised, and of∣fered vnto God. O Blessed Mary, my most true Mother behold me your Sonne all∣together impure, and the∣refore afraid to approach vnto the most holy Eucha∣rist, least insteed of life I should take iudgement & death; I humbly craue, that
as you did offer sweet IE∣SVS the fountayne of pu∣rity, newly circumcised in the Temple of Hierusalem, vnto the Eternall Father with a payre of Turtle Doues, as a most gratefull sacrifice: so you will also be pleased to offer me your Sonne, vnto the same Fa∣ther, first clensed by con∣digne pennance, by your pious intercession, from all spot & filth of sinne; and with the sharpe edge of mortification circumcised from all my inordinat pas∣siōs, adorned with humble simplicity & loue of God, and vnited to his dearest
Sonne in the holy Eucha∣rist. 5. Offer your selfe as one that is banished, driuen out of his owne country by the fury of his Enemies. O my most potent Mother, behold me your owne So∣ne, whom the diuell, the world, and the flesh labour by all meanes to destroy, crying out for helpe vnto you: I humbly beseech, that as you hiding most wisely your little Sonne IESVS, conuayed him from He∣rods fury, and carried him into Aegypt: so you wilbe pleased, in all chaunces, to guard and defend me with
a Motherly charity, against the force of all my most dreadfull Enemies. 6. Offer your selfe as one wandering out of his way, and say. O my most wise Mother, B. Mary, be∣hold me your most vnwor∣thy Sōne, like a lost sheep, through ignorāce, straying from the right way: I hum∣bly beseech you, that as you did seeke little IESVS being lost, and after three dayes foūd in the Temple, did bring him backe a∣gaine, feeding, sustaining, & nourishing him euen to the thirtith yeare of his age: so you would be pleased to
inquire after me your strayd child almost lost in the er∣rour of imperfection, and bring me backe to the Fa∣therly house of diuine gra∣ce and mercy, instructing & teaching me with your wise precepts, in such sort that I may hereafter become per∣fect in all vertue. 7. Offer your selfe as one being iudged to death. O my most glorious Mo∣ther, behold me your Sōne iudged by the diuine Iu∣stice to death, although vn∣certaine of the time of exe∣cution, yet howerly expe∣cting and searing the same. Therefore as you did ac∣cōpany
your Blessed Sonne IESVS with an vnspeakea∣ble affection of griefe, con∣demned to death for our sakes, & were present with him dying vpō the Crosse: In like manner I humbly beseech you, to assist me with present ayde, and not to forsake me in that last hower of my life. And as you receiued into your bo some the body of your Sō∣ne IESVS, taken downe from the Crosse: so receiue I humbly deseech you, O Blessed Mary, Mother of Grace, Mother of mercy, into those your Motherly armes, my poore soule de∣parting
out of my body. These seauen considerati∣ōs may be deuided into the seauen dayes of the Weeke, adding to the end of ech one the hymne Aue Maris stella. And truly, how great profit this kind of filiall confidence bringeth vnto our soules, may easily be knowne by the example of S. Bernard, to whome for this cause only, our Blessed Lady descended from hea∣uen, giuing vnto him the milke of her owne breasts. From whence, as it is cre∣dible, he sucked that admi∣rable sweetnes, intermixed with piety, which euery
line of his writings doth sauour off. But what shall I say con∣cerning Blessed Stanislaus Kostka a Nouice of the so∣ciety of IESVS, who euen from his infancy nourished in his brest so tender an af∣fection vnto our B. Lady, that he doubted not all∣waies to call her his Mo∣ther, and that with so great feeling of deuotion, & in so louing a manner that he al∣wayes moued exceedingly the standers by to piety. Neyther did our B. Lady omit to shew her Motherly affection many times vnto him, but chiefly when she
placed her little Sonne IE∣SVS in his bed, as he lay sicke, and thereby filled his Soule with comfort, & re∣stored health vnto his bo∣dy, and departing cōmaun∣ded him to enter into the Society of IESVS. CHAP. V. That the often deuout remem∣brance of our B. Lady, is an effect, and signe of true loue towards her. WHere thy Treasure is, there is thy hart sayth the holy Scripture. Where loue is, there is often re∣membrāce of the thing be∣loued.
Hence it commeth, that the true Seruants of our B. Lady, do recreate as it were their minds, with the remembrance and con∣templation of her; & when they see any Image of hers, then do they shew their de∣uotion, by saluting her as present in the same, with these, or the lik words. Haile Mother of beautifull loue of feare, of knowled∣ge, of Holy Hope. Shew your selfe to be a Mother &c. Or else they haue al∣wayes in readines, some other Iaculatory prayer. Of which kind of deuo∣tion S. Philip Nereus had
great store, as for example: O Virgin Mary, Mother of God, pray vnto IESVS for me. O Glorious Virgin, graūt I may alwaies be min∣defull of you &c. Many more like vnto these, had he gathered togeather, to the number of the Beads of his Rosary, reciting them ofte insteed of his Pater No∣sters, & Aue Maries. What we haue sayd heeretofore of shewing reuerence both to other things, and to the pictures of our Bles. Lady, may be reduced vnto this place: for the Reuerence we eated of there, is a fi∣liall duty ioyned with loue
and proceeding from the same. You may adioyne vnto the former discourse that which is recounted in the life of S. Dominicke, con∣cerning the first Friars of that Order, who were all∣waies accustomed to place in their Ceis, our B. Ladyes picture imbracing her little Sonne Iesus, with another of Christ hanging on the Crosse; by the behoulding whereof, their memory might be alwayes styrred vp, and their exteriour sen∣ses gather new spirituall force. [Vita S. Dom. lib. 6. c. 20.]
Moreouer the louers of our Blessed Lady, as if some sweet hony were distilled into their bowels, do re∣ioyce and exult as often as they heare her most Blessed Name: which thing was most ordinary with B. A∣loysius Gonzaga of the So∣ciety of IESVS, who being yet but a child, conceiued so great deuotion towards our B. Lady, that as often as he heard her Name, he seemed to be moued, and begin to melt with a spiri∣tuall feeling of deuotion. [In eius vita lïb. 1. c 6.] And for this cause doth S. Bonauenture cry out not
without reason: O Blessed Mary, how famous is your Name! how can it choose but be famous, seing it is neuer pronounced without some very great profit vnto the speaker? Let your Ber∣nard be witnes of this, who sayth: O Great, O Godly, O Worthy Mary! You cā∣not be so much as named, but you enkindle vs with your loue, nor thought vpō without comfort vnto the minds of your Seruants! You neuer do enter into the gates of our pious affe∣ction, but you are accom∣panied with an heauenly sweetnes, engrafted in you
by the diuine hand. Lastly, all who are truly vigilant in the seruice of this Glorious Virgin, do hourely, when they heare the Clocke strike, recite an Aue Maria in the honour of the Angelicall Saluta∣tion, and the Incarnation of the Sonne of God: for which kind of deuotion Pope Leo the tenth, & after him Paul the fifth, haue graunted a thousand dayes pardon.
CHAP. VI. Another euident signe of Affe∣ction vnto the B. Virgin, is, to speake often of her. THe tongue alwayes spea∣keth out of the aboun∣dāce of the heart: & whose Soule the loue of our Bles. Lady doth once possesse, his tongue doth challenge it, as its owne. For your speaches, most B. Virgin, are sweet in the mouth of them that loue you, there∣fore they often vse them, & with great contentement heare thē vttered by others and vtter them vnto such
as will heare them. S. Ber∣nardine being yet a child was carried with such fer∣uour to talke of Christ, & his B. Mother, that his cō∣panions durst not bring in any other discourse in his presence. [In eius vita.] This also was obserued in B. Stanislaus Kostka a∣foresaid, that although he spake frequently of the B. Virgin, yet he alwaies inuē∣ted new, & those most mag∣nificent Names wherewith be did entitle her, and euer sought the highest degrees to place her in; yea it see∣med oftentymes grieuous to him, that he could not
parallell the excellency of his Iudgement with words, and that he could not in∣uent some higher places to allot her. Neyther would I haue you imagine in this place, that our affection to the B. Virgin must be only decla∣red in priuate meetings; but also in publike Sermons, by setting forth her pray∣ses in great Assemblies, by refuting Heretical blasphe∣myes, and lastly by exor∣ting Catholikes to a more feruent reuerence of her. This deuotion was very profitable vnto a certayne Religious man, a pious and
Godly Preacher, who for the singular affection he bore vnto the Bles. Virgin, was wont to end all his Ser∣mons with the rehearsall of some miracle of hers. This man being at the point of death, was much strengthe∣ned by the assistance and visible presence of our B. Lady, and ouerwelmed with incredible ioy, & iu∣bily of hart, singing the Virgins prayses, the diuels storming in vaine he depar∣ted out of this life into hea∣uen. [Spec. Exempl. d. 7. Ex∣emp. 56.] Nor can I omit the de∣uotion of S. Francis Xauier
to our Bles. Lady, which he shewed in teaching the Christian doctrine in the Indies; for in explicating the Articles of the Creed, and the Ten commaunde∣mets, he vsed this method, that in the end of Euery Precept, he woulde first craue, by reciting the Pater Noster our Sauiours help; but afterwards he caused al the assembly to sing with a loud voyce these words: Holy Mary Mother of God, obtaine for vs grace of thy B. Sonne IESVS Christ, all∣wayes to obserue this pre∣cept. And not being contēt with this admirabe deuo∣tion,
he allwayes did end his Catechisme with a Sal∣ue Regina, whereby the whole company craued the assistance of the B. Virgin. [lib. 1. epist. Xauer. ep. 5.] Out of the same foun∣taine of loue towards our Bles. Lady springeth their piety, who sing forth her prayses and celebrate them aswell by songs and dytties as by other their labours. And truly all posterity may take for a parterne in this kinde S. Casimirus, Sonne to the King of Polonia. This man being very much addicted vnto the B. Vir∣gin, daily on his knees salu∣ted
her with most Excellet and learned verses, made by himselfe, wherin were con∣tayned all the mysteryes of Christ incarnate. [Bellar. de offic. c. 3. in eius. vita.] CHAP. VII. Another euidente signe of Loue towards our B. Lady is, to honour, and reuerence her Friends. FIrst togeather with our Bles. Lady, we ought to loue, reuerence and honour S. Ioseph, whome our B. Lady esteemed as her most chast and dearest Spouse, as most carefull in the educa∣tion
of Christ our Sauiour; and defireth much that he be beloued, and honoured by those who serue her. There is extant a litle de∣uout Office vnto this holy Saint Ioseph, as also many other deuotions, which do require a longer discourse. After him, by order of good consequence, do fol∣low S. Ioachim, & S. Anne, our B. Ladyes Father and Mother; to whom there are many goodly prayers vsed by holy Church, vs witnes∣ses of the affection & reue∣rence our Auncestors did beare vnto them. To conclude, all other
Saints, who for their sin∣gular deuotion haue beene deare vnto our Bles. Lady, ought also to be deare vn∣to vs; and all who loue and honour her, ought likewise to be beloued and honou∣red of vs▪ Of the honour which we are to giue to the friends of our B. Lady, these shall be the signes, & arguments. 1. Among the other prai∣ses of the Saints, to place this as most singular and excellent, that they haue beene great louers of our B. Lady. 2. To honour these Saints with great affection,
beseeching them, that they out of the fornace of their loue to our B. Lady, would send one onely sparke the∣reof into our hearts. 3. To make great esteeme, and to loue, & imitate the piety towards our B. Lady of such as we liue withall, and willingly to conuerse with them, chiefly & prin∣cipally for this cause. 4. To pray often for the deuout Clients of the B. Virgin, and with a great readines of mind to be wil∣ling to help them, as far as lieth in our power, when they stand in need of vs. To these kind of chari∣table
Offices, we are incited by the example of the An∣gels themselues, who loue most intierely the friends of our Bles. Lady, indeauo∣ring to cherish them with their presence, helpe, and consolation: whereof let this example of S. Catharine of Siena giue vs testimony, who euen about the fifth yeare of her age, as often as she eyther went vp, or came downe the stairs of her Fa∣thers house, did kneele at Euery step, and recited an Aue Maria; in which de∣uotion she was often lifted vp aboue the ground by the hands of Angells. [B.
Ant. 3. p. Hist. tit. 25. c. 14.] Neither is this a wonder: for that Virginity is a ver∣tue, which clay meth affi∣nity with the celestiall Spi∣rits, who do admire, loue, prayse, vphold, & promote the beautifull steps of the Virgins daughter (that is, of the Soule, tending to Perfection) in ornaments of reuerence, and loue to∣wards the B. Virgin. And who can consider this affe∣ction of the Blessed Spirits? Who can behold these du∣tiful offices without ho∣nouring the Virgin Mary, and louing her followers? Let vs adde vnto these,
another faire spectacle, no lesse pleasant then pious. S. Mary of Oegnta was accu∣stomed euery yeare to goe in pilgrimage vnto our La∣dyes Church at Oegnia, si∣tuated about some two mi∣les from her howse, and al∣though it was in the very depth of cold winter, yet neuer was she in any case slack to performe that ex∣cellent worke, euen on her bare feete. For the inter∣nall feruour, and heate of her deuotiō towards Christ and his B. Mother, easily banished all the externall cold. Through the sweet feeling of deuotion, the
vsed to shed teares of com∣fort, wherewith her face & garments were largly be∣dewed. She breathed forth hoat flames of feruent as∣pirations, crying out for flowers, to vnderproppe her, euen languishing with loue. The Angells came straight to ayde her; some of them holding her vp by the hands as she wēt; others that she might not go as∣tray in a blind, crooked, & vnknowne way, carryed before her a heauēly light: others when it was need∣full, were ready to couer her head, & to defend her from the snow and rayne;
yea, and brought her home safe againe from the iniury of ayre, wind, & tempests. [Sur. in eius vita.] O what a spectacle was this to be∣hold! How is the feruour of a louing Soule, euen in this life, recompensed with the seruices of so many An∣gels! O hart! O tongue! O affection! O wordes! Goe sigh, runne, fly, vnto our sweetest Loues of IESVS and MARY.
OVR B. LADIES LITLE GARDEN. THE THIRD BED, florishing with Lillyes. Wherin are contained Exercises proper for those, who like vnto Lillies, shining in purity of life, and sincerity of affection, doe after a peculiar manner consecrate themselues vnto our B. Lady. CHAP. I.
How profitable a thing it is, to commit our selues in a spe∣ciall & peculiar manner vnto the protection of our B Lady. MANY things are wont to be offe∣red vp vnto the Mother of God, & committed vnto herpe∣culiar protection and cu∣stody, either by way of cō∣secration, oblation, deuo∣tion, or the like. And to speake of some in particu∣lar, how many Kingdomes, Prouinces, Citties, & other such like places doe we see in these our dayes, to be sollemnly deuoted & con∣secrated
vnto the protectiō of the B. Virgin? And how many also haue we both heard, and read off in for∣mer ages to haue beene of∣fered & dedicated vnto her, with no lesse good successe then cleare testimony of that ancient piety? But to omit others, Ru∣pertus first Bishop of Wor∣mes in Germany prouiding for the eternall Weale of his Country, dedicated all the Dukedome of Bauaria vnto the Mother of God: the fruits of which oblatiō (to say nothing of times past) the present estate the∣reof now so much flori∣shing,
to the great good of the whole Christian Com∣monwelth, doth sufficient∣ly testifie. Constantinople, whose first foūdation was laid vn∣der the protection of the B. Virgin, was in former ti∣mes so famous for the mul∣titude of Churches built in her honour, and celebrated whith so feruent deuotion, that it was commonly cal∣led The Parthenian Citty, that is, dedicated vnto the Virgin. Whiles this title re∣mayned, it neuer left rising vntill it arriued to that height of prosperity, that riches, chiualry, honours,
victory, peace, and aboun∣dance of all things might seeme to haue fixed their feate with the B. Virgin in her Virginall Citty. But af∣ter that the impiety of I∣mage-breakers, & the fury of Scismatikes had extin∣guished that ancient reue∣rence of the Mother of God, all the glory of that Name, and Empire soone vanished away. And the Moone, so often there tri∣umphant, fled from Con∣stantinoples Banners, to the Mahometan flagges, e∣clipsed of her ancient beau∣ty, depriued of her former glory.
It is also an ordinary de∣uotion of Mothers, espe∣cially in childbirth, to giue and dedicate vnto the Vir∣gin Mother, the fruite of their wombe, for the obtai∣ning of a prosperous deli∣uery; of which piety Mar∣garet of Austria late Queen of Spaine, wife to Philip the third, left vnto posterity a very singular example. For when she was neer the time of her trauaile, both she her selfe did with peculiar de∣uotiō pray vnto the B. Vir∣gin, and also caused her whole Family to implore her assistance, & powerfull hand in time of her labour.
Amongst other particu∣lers she commaunded nine dayes prayer with generall processions to be made vn∣to diuers Churches of our B. La. Which nine Masses were solemnly song in her honour. The First of the Immaculate Conception of our B. Lady: the second of her Natiuity: the third of her Presentation: the the fourth of her Annūcia∣tion: the fifth of her Visi∣tation: the sixth of the Ex∣pectatiō of her Childbirth: the seauenth of her Purifi∣cation: the eight of her As∣sumption: and the ninth of the feast of our B. Lady
ad Niues. And in time of her Labour, was song the office of the Childbirth of the B. Virgin, and Natiui∣ty of Christ our Lord. The Queene hauing thus prepared her selfe, was very happily deliuered of a Son∣ne, and not long after ha∣uing caused the infant to be carried with a solemne Procession to a Church of our B. Lady, named, of S. Florentius, there standing before her miraculous I∣mage, she deuoutly presen∣ted him vnto the B. Virgin and gained a copious bles∣sing both for her selfe and her posterity, as experience
at this present doth, and shall in future ages witnesse to postetity both at home and abroad, to the ioy of the whole Church. [In hist. vitae & mortis eius p. 2. c. 10. & 11.] But let vs passe vnto that oblation, which in the en∣suing Chapters we are to treate of. It is euident, that those who in peculiar man∣ner do oblige themselues to be the Clients of our B. Lady, are also in a peculiar manner beloued of her, and do experience her present succour in all troubles & difficulties. Witnes hereof is S. Hermanus whose most
ardent affectiō towards the Mother of God, was car∣ryed away with so violent a streame of diuine loue, that he had no mind either to thinke or speake of any other thing, then of God and his B. Mother. And his Loue at length came to so high a pitch, that one night as he was in prayer, being presented by the hands of Angels before the face of the Mother of God, by their aduise he gaue him∣selfe to be her Spouse (after which affiance he tooke the name of Ioseph) and shortly after experienced what wonderfull care his
most beloued Espouse the V. Mary had of him, not only in matters of great moment, but also in euery occasion, were it neuer so little. As for example: Once whē in his sicknesse he had beene let bloud, he was di∣rected by our B. Lady how he was to lye in his Bed the next night, so that the veine which had been new∣ly closed vp, might not a∣gaine be opened. Another time as he was going to vi∣fit a Cloyster of Nuns, the B. Virgin a little before he arriued there, gaue them warning to entertayne him with all courtesy and kind
nesse. Many more such like examples there be of the loue and care that the Mo∣ther of God shewed to∣wards him, which may be read more at large in the history of his life, in Surius the 5. April. CHAP. II. The first way how to consecrate our selues with peculiar re∣uerence to our B. Lady, com∣mon to all sorts of people. EAuing first made your Confēssion, & receiued the holy Communion vpō some solemne Feast day, & if it may be, on some Feast
of the B. Virgin, you shall place her Image in your Oratory, or in some other decent place of your cham∣ber, and with a full & true intention, cōsecrating your selfe, and all that you haue for euer, vnto the Mother of God, you shall say this prayer on your knees. O most B. Virgin Mary, Mother of God, I N. N. a poore & wretched sinner, though in all respects most vnworthy to be numbred amongste the meanest of your seruants, yet trusting in your exceeding great piety and mercy, and mo∣ued with a great desire of
seruing and honoring you, do heere in presence of the whole Court of Heauen, choose you this day for my peculiar Lady, Patronesse, and Mother: and I doe most firmely purpose, and pro∣mise henceforth to obey and serue you faythfully, and also to procure with my whole power, that o∣thers may do the like. I do therfore most humbly beseech you, O most mer∣cifull Mother, by the most pretious bloud which your sweet Son IESVS hath shed for our sake that you wold vouchsafe to admit me in∣to the number of your
Clients, and to receyue me for your perpetuall seruāt, to be present with me in all my affaires, and obtaine for me grace of your most dea∣rely beloued Sonne, that I may so behaue my selfe in all my thoughts, words, & works, as neuer to do any thing that may be displea∣sing to his eyes, or yours, and lastly to be mindfull of me, in the houre of my death. Amen. From henceforth you shall imagine your Cham∣ber to be a Chappell of the B. Virgin, whome you shall reuerence in her Image as if she were present with you,
not suffering any thing to remaine therein which may offend her sacred eyes. In the morning as soone as you are risen, as also at night before you lye downe to sleepe, with low and humble reuerence you shall aske her blessing, like as good childrē in our coū∣trey are wont carefully to do their Parēts euery mor∣ning & night, saying, The Virgin Mary, with her be∣nigne Sonne, blesse vs. After that you be appa∣relled kneeling downe be∣fore the sayd Image, then shall you say this prayer following. O Blessed Mary,
my good Lady, I recom∣mend my selfe vnto your Blessed protection, & sin∣gular custody, casting my selfe into the bosome of your mercy, both this day, and euery day, and in the houre of my death. I com∣mend also vnto you my Soule and Body. In you do I place all my hope, and consolation. To you do I commend all my distresses and miseries, my life & the finall conclusion thereof: that by your most holy in∣tercession and merits, all my workes may be dire∣cted & disposed, according to your will, and the will of
your most Blessed Sonne. Amen. Alwayes at your going out, and cōming into your chamber, see you salute the said Image, imitating heerin the Courtiers who in their passing to and fro, do neuer omit to make reuerence vnto their Prince. You ought not to vn∣dertake any thing of mo∣ment, hauing not first ac∣quainted the B Virgin Mo∣ther therwich. You shall se∣riously also commēd vnto her, both your priuate and publique affaires; & if any thing do occurre of greater importance; wryte the same
briefly in a paper, and lay it at the feete of the Image. Finally in all your tempta∣tions and difficulties you shall haue recourse vnto her, as to a mercifull, and tender-harted Mother. Examples in Confirmation of such things, as haue beene sayd. THe holy Mother S. Te∣resa doth approue, and much commend this pra∣ctise and deuotion, who being made Prioresse of a certayne Monastery, at her very first entrance into her Office, she cōsecrated both
her selfe, & the whole mo∣nastery to our B. Lady, pla∣cing a fayre Image in the Chaire where the Prioresse was to sit, and offering her the keys of the Monastery togeather with the gōuer∣ment thereof as Superiour, whose place she was only to supply. Which oblatio the Mother of God, not long afterwards shewed to be most gratefull vnto her, For vpon the Eue of S. Se∣bastian, our B. Lady put her selfe visibly in place of the picture, and declared that she tooke indeed vpon her the gouermēt of the house. [In eius vita lib. 3. c. 1.]
It is also recounted by those who haue beene con∣uersant with Father Francis Suarez, a man famous for holynes and learning, that he was accustomed to con∣fer with the B. Virgin con∣cerning all doubts, which occurred in his studies, frō whome he receyued often the solution of many hard and difficile Questions; and he hath beene also seene to kneele downe, and giue her thankes for the same vpon his knees. To these I adde a story which Boniface relateth out of Alanus and Albertus. [l. 4. c. 9. hist. Ʋirginalis.]
A certayne Religious Vir∣gin, named Ioane, liuing in a Monastery somwhat disso∣lute and disordered, vpon a time (according to her ac∣customed manner) being very attentiue in saying of her beads, she saw a letter fal downe from heauen be∣fore her, with this super∣scription: Mary Mother of God, to her daughter Ioane health. The contents of the letter were these. My most deare Daughter, Perseuere constātly in saying my Ro∣sary allwayes as thou hast begun; fly from men, and shun all conuersation with them which may not profit
thee to the attaining true vertue & good of thy con∣science: Beware of sloth, dissolutenes, & idlenes; re∣moue far from thee dainty meates, and curiosity of ap∣parell, and purge thy Cell of some things which are not decent for a Religious woman, and in place therof put the Images of thy Sa∣uiour Christ, & his Saints, & other holy things, whose protection & defence shall preserue thee from all dan∣gers. If thou giue eare vnto me, and performe with due obedience those things which I shal prescribe vnto thee, thou shalt obtaine fa∣uour
of my beloued Sōne, & I will make intercession to him for thee in al thy ne∣cessities. The hand mayd of Christ hauing reade his Letter, was very much encouraged to set forward the honour of our B. Lady with all pos∣sible deuotion, and with all diligence put in execution what was cōmaunded her. Not long after a certaine holy Abbot comming thi∣ther to reforme the said Monastery, according to their former discipline and religious Institute, as he was praying deuoutly for that end, he saw the cell of
the before named Virgin, shining and sending forth radiant beames with an in∣credible lustre, and in the middle of that light, the Queene of heauen enuiro∣ned with a troupe of glo∣rious Angels in whose cō∣pany Ioane the Virgin was deuoutly praying. In the meane time, at the Cell doore without a great mul∣titude of diuels stood ra∣ging, and to make them∣selues more terrible put on the shape of diuers kind of vgly and monstrous beasts: but being all shamefully put to flight by the power∣full commaund of the B.
Virgin, they retyred backe to the chambers of the o∣ther foolish Virgins, dis∣persing thēselues through the whole Monastery, some to one Cell, some to ano∣ther. The holy Abbot was much astonisshed at this vision: but afterward when he had vnderstood of the singular zeale, and deuo∣tion which Ioane the Vir∣gin had towards our B. La∣dy, he caused immediately beades to be prouided and distributed to the other Nunnes, exhorting them constantly to the pious vse therof. Which deuotion whē they had seriously im∣braced,
not long after they all voluntarily submitted themselues to the Rule of their Order. From hence you may learne, what the Mother of God doth expect of those (euery one according to their profession) who haue consecrated themselues vn∣to her, according to the a∣forsayd manner; and how great accoumpt she maketh of that deuotion, and with what a bountifull hand she rewardeth it. Therfore not without cause S. Bonauen∣ture so much commended this kind of deuotion to∣wards the Mother of God
in an Epistle of his which is intituled, Of 25. Memo∣rials, where amongst other deuotions, how to lead a good like, in the 13. Memo∣riall he hath these words: Alwais haue great reuerēce and tendernes of affection vnto the glorious Queene Mother of our Lord, and haue recourse vnto her as vnto a most safe refuge, in all your necessities, dangers & troubles crauing the de∣fence of her perfection; & taking her for your Aduo∣cate: make knowne your petition & suie vnto her, with all deuotion and con∣fidence; because she is the
Mother of mercy, & ther∣fore you must endeauour to shew singular and special reuerence towards her. CHAP. III. The second way of dedicating our selues vnto the B. Virgin, by entring into her Sodality. TO be one of the Sodali∣ty of our B. Lady is no∣thing els, but opēly to pro∣fesse our selues in peculiar maner to be her seruant, & before witnes to commit our selues, and all that we haue vnto her protection. How great the merit, and profit of this kind of de∣uotion is, as also the duties
and exercises towards our B. Lady therto belonging, remayne sufficiently decla∣red by that which diuers haue put out in print about the same. Heere will I only commend three things ve∣ry necessary for the conser∣uation, and increase of that deuotion which all ought to haue at their first en∣trance into the Sodality. 1. That euery morning as soone as they are vp and ready, or if they please whē they are ready to heare masse, they say the prayer of the Sodality, endeauou∣ring to pronounce it with the same intention, desire,
and purpose to serue our B. Lady, and to keepe the rules prescribed of the So∣dality, as they did, when first they were admitted into that Congreation. 2. Also, that in the mor∣ning they make choyce of some one fault or imperfe∣ction which themselues are subiect vnto, and make a firme purpose to abstayne from the same that day: and to offer vp some good worke in honour of the Mother of God. 3. That at night they examen themselues concer∣ning these two points: first about the Prayer which
they recited in the mor∣ning, especially these wor∣des [J do fully determine, and purpose, that I will ne∣uer leaue thee, nor permit any thinge to be done a∣gainst thy Honour by any of those, who are vnder my charge.] whether, I say, they haue fulfilled these words of their deuout and propense affection towards the honour of the B. Vir∣gin. Secondly, whether they gaue abstayned from that fault or imperfection aforesaid, & performed that good worke which in the morning they purposed to doe.
Whosoeuer doth earne∣stly endeauour to put these things in executiō, he shall infallibly find that tender affection of the B. Virgin towards him, which she shewed vnto a certayn dis∣solute, & negligent youth, being for this one respect only worthy of commen∣dation, that he had alwayes great care of his Chastity. This yong man after that he had prodigally spent his patrimony, at length by persuasion of an Vncle of his who had heretofore v∣sed all meanes in vaine to bring him to better life, did determine for a remedy, &
redresse of all his miseryes to recite euery day for the space of one yeare, a paire of beades, or the third part of the Rosary of our Lady. Neither was this done wi∣thout profit: For now he had already shaken of most of the ill company he was wont to keep, and he also abstained from cōmitting any grieuous sinnes. Wher∣fore at the beginning of the 2. yeare he doubled his deuotions, and dayly sayd two paire of beads; and be∣cause the good successe which he had therin raysed vp his hart to a more firme and stedfast hope of obtai∣ning
greater matters, there∣fore the third yeare he sayd euery day a whole Rosary, with no lesse cōstancy then true deuotion. To con∣clude, hauing performed his third yeares taske, and now become another man, of graue, modest, and ma∣ture conuersation, hedid so winne the harts of all, but especially of his Vncle, that he procured him an honest & sufficient marriage. But see what happened vpō the very wedding day, in the midst of the Feast. The yōg man on the sudaine calling to mind, how that being hindered by other affaires
he had not yet offered vp that day his accustomed prayers to the B. Virgin, faining some other excuse, rose from the table, and shutting himselfe vp in his chamber, fell on his knees, & recyted his Rosary with no lesse feeling then fruit of his deuotion. For he had no sooner ended, but the B. Virgin far brighter then the sunne, vouchsafed him avisible sight of her glory, and shewed him 3. garments which she carried fastened to her owne robe; one be∣fore her, and one vpon ey∣ther side, and then sayd vn∣to him: Behould thy salu∣tations
here written in gol∣den letters, with which thou hast diligently ho∣noured me by recyting my Rosary. Thou shalt receiue a reward for the same espe∣cially for keeping thy Cha∣stity entire, by being made partaker of the mariage of the lambe, and that within the space of 3. days. Neither did his deuotion, nor the mercifull promisse of the B. Virgin faile him, for af∣ter 3. days he dyed to the world, and began to liue in heauen. [Cantip. l. 2. Apum. c. 29.] It much importeth vs thē to offer daily to the B. Vir∣gin,
with a firme and con∣stant resolution, some par∣ticular & determinate de∣uotion, and likewise to call our selues to an account therof euery day, but espe∣cially at night, that if we find we haue deferred it vntill then, yet may we at least correct & recompence our negligence by pen∣nance, and if it may possi∣bly be done, euen then to performe our promise.
CHAP. IV. The third way to deuote our sel∣ues vnto the B. Virgin, by entring into Religion. FOr as much as euery Re∣ligious Order may iustly be called, the Family of our B. Lady, be cause they are in a special manner fou∣ded vnder her protection and defence; it is euident that whsoeuer imbraceth a Religious life, doth in the very same act, peculiarly deuote himselfe to the B. Virgin, & is espoused vnto her with the ring of his Vowes, especially the vow
of Chastity. And this is made manifest by the exā∣ple of S. Robert, Founder of the Order of Cistercians, to whose mother, named En∣gardis, being great with child of him, the B. Virgin appeared, with a goulden ring in her hand, and sayd thus vnto her: Engardis, I will haue thy Sonne which thou bearest espoused vnto me with this ring. Engardis when she awaked, with great ioy tooke notice of what she had seene. Ney∣ther was the euent of the thing any other wayes ap∣prooued, then by the en∣trance of her Sonne Robert
into Religion, which vnder the name of espousing was foretould by the Mother of God, euen as she signi∣fyed the Vow of Chastity by the ring of gold. [Plat. de bono stat. Relig. lib. 1. cap. 34. I omit innumerable o∣ther examples, wherby it is euident, that all Religious Families be vnder the pro∣tection of our Bles. Lady. There is iust cause [sayth Platus ibid.] that all Reli∣gious persons should extra∣ordinarily reioice and con∣gratulate amongst them∣selues, that they haue for their Queene and Patro∣nesse
vpō earth her, whome all the Saints in Heauen do adore. For what cā be wan∣ting vnto him who is su∣stayned by such a Virgin, seeing that no euill is to be feared which may not easi∣ly be auerted by her power, no good to be desyred, which cannot easily by her fauour and intercession be obtayned. Therfore all Re∣ligious men and women, ought to apply themselues wholy to the seruice of the Mother of God, in whose Family they liue, as her househould seruāts, or ra∣ther as her children. Let them haue certayne
peculiar Exercises, confor∣mable to their Rule & In∣stitute, by the daily pra∣ctise wherof they may ho∣nour our B. Lady. Let them endeauour to increase, and aduance the loue and reuerence of the B. Virgin, and exhort them to the pious vse of reciting her Rosary, and deuout ce∣lebration of her Festiuall dayes, by frequenting the holy Sacraments, & other such deuout Exercises. Finally, and especially, let them be mindefull daily to giue harty thankes, and be very gratefull vnto the B. Virgin-Mother, for the
singular benefit of their vo∣cation to Religion. An Exercise proper to Religious Persons, by which they giue thanks to the B. Virgin for the benefits receiued frō her, and most especially for the be∣nefit of their Vocation to Re∣ligion. HAuing by way of pre∣amble demaunded ayde of the holy Ghost, you shal place your selfe in presence of the B. Virgin, as if you did behould her enuironed with the Quiers of Angels and all the Saints of your owne Order, looking vpon you with a mild and merci∣full
countenance: And, 1. Consider, & call to mind how many benefits you haue hitherto receiued of the Mother of God; & then deuide them into two parts, wherof one may cō∣taine the benefits bestowed vpon you before your Vo∣cation; the other, of your Vocation, and other bene∣fits which you haue recey∣ued after your entrance in∣to Religion. And this Mo∣therly mercy of the B. Vir∣gin towards you was figu∣red by Rebecca, Iacobs Mo∣ther, who shewed two prin∣cipall fauours to her Sonne from which as from two
fountaynes, all his felicity did flow. For first with great solicitude she procu∣red for him the benedictiō of his Father Jsaac. Second∣ly she secretly cōueyed him out of his owne Country into Mesopotamia to declin the rage of his brother E∣sau, where he marryed a wife, and so became very rich. Euen so the B. Virgin like another Rebecca, a most louing Mother, hath ob∣tayned for you of the Eter∣nall Father a benediction, and other singular fauours, and aboue all the grace of your Vocation. She hath procured also that you de∣parting
out of your Coun∣try, and forsaking all your friends, should enter into Religion as into the land of Promisse, flowing with milke, and hony of conso∣lation, and merits. 2. You shall ponder and weigh all these benefits both according to their multitude, being indeed in∣numerable, and according to their greatnes. And a∣mongst the rest, consider how great that is, that by this your vocation into Re∣ligion, procured by the Virgin Mother, you are made a mēber of that Con∣gregation, in which she is
serued with so much Ho∣nour and Reuerence. Out of which it proceedeth, that all the worship & de∣uotion which is performed towards the Blessed Virgin throughout your whole Order, eyther by themsel∣ues or by their meanes, is as much attributed vnto you as if you performed it your selfe. Therfore you may truly say, I am partaker (O Lady) of the merits of all those who do feare, loue & honour you, eyther in this Religions Order, or out of it, by their labour and in∣dustry. 3. By these Considera∣tions
you shall stirre vp in your self the affections fol∣lowing. You shall humble and cast your selfe downe at the feete of the B. Virgin MARY, houlding your self most vnworthy of so great loue, and fauour. You shal giue her thankes with as great feruour of deuotion as possible you can, for her Motherly care ouer you, & you shall inuite all creatu∣res to accompany you in thankesgiuing; imitating yong infants who do most willingly acknowledg thē∣selues beholding to their Mother or Nurse, for all they haue receiued. But
how may you recōpence so great a Benefactresse? Assu∣redly you must purpose to requite her with a filiall af∣fection, and for euer to do her such seruice, as the same requireth. To this S. Ber∣uard exhorteth vs, saying [sermone de Natiuitate B. Mariae.] Let vs adore the B. Virgin from the very bottome of our hart, with the most inward affections and desirs as we can possi∣bly. For such is the will of him, who will haue vs to receyue all, by the meanes of the B. Virgin Mary; she in all things, & by all mea∣nes prouiding for the mise∣rable:
She strengtheneth our hope; she putteth diffi∣dence to flight; she erecteth our pusillanimity. It will he also very profi∣table to the increasing of this gratitude and loue to∣wards the B. V. to essay, & take as it were a tast by way of meditatiō, of those most tender affections which di∣uers Religious Orders haue had towards that sacred Queene, and in particuler the Order of S. Dominicke, who, hauing vnderstoode that they were seene by their owne Founder S. Do∣minicke, and by a certayne holy Woman, couered vn∣der
the mantle of the Bles. Virgin, and imbraced with the Virginall armes of her loue & peculiar affections, so great was their deuotiō towards her euer after, so enflamed their desire to loue and serue her, so de∣uout and feruent were the prayers they cōtinually sō∣ge vnto her, so exceeding the confidēce & trust they allwayes had in her prote∣ction, so greedy and insa∣tiable the contemplation of her Vertues and Excel∣lencyes, that no humane tongue would be able to expresse. [Jn vita S. Domi∣nick. l. 2. c. 12. and l. 5. c. 6.]
The like vision happe∣ned vnto Father Martinus Gutterus a Spanyard, and a very holy Religious man of the Society of IESVS, who as he was in feruent prayer, saw the B. Virgin shining with vnspeakable beauty, hauing her Robe spread all abroad, & vnder the same the whole Socie∣ty contayned, which she imbraced with a motherly affection, & shrowded vn∣der the winges of her most tender loue & protection. [Hier. Platus l. 1. de bon. stat. Relig.]
OVR B. LADIES LITLE GARDEN. THE FOVRTH BED, adorned with Iacynths. Wherein are contayned certayne Seruices and Dutyes towards the B. Virgin, as if they were so many exercises of a heauē∣ly life and conuersation: of which the Iacynth is a token. CHAP. I. Of the AVE MARIA or An∣gelicall Salutation.
BEFORE all other, this Salutation is most gratefull to the B. Ʋirgin, as her selfe declared to Saint Maude, who being in some anxiety of mynd, what kind of seruice she might exhibit as most acceptable vnto her, she beheld our Blessed Lady bearing in her breast the salutation of the Angell Gabriell, written in golden letters, and withall heard these words: Higher then this Salutation none can euer arriue; nor cā any one more sweetly salute me, then with that accent of [HAYLE] with which
God the Father was plea∣sed to salute me, freeing me by his Omnipotency from all trespasse, and curse of sinne. The Sonne of God with his diuine Wisedome hath also so throughly en∣lightned me, that with the Name of [MARY] as with a most bright & glittering Starre, both heauē & earth do shine. The Holy Ghost by penetrating me with his diuine sweetnes, hath filled me so [FVLL OF GRACE] that euery one who seeketh grace, may by my meanes soone obtaine the same. By these wordes [OVR LORD IS VVITH THEE] are de¦clared
that vnspeakeable v∣nion and operation, which the Blessed Trinity did per∣fect in me, when he conioy∣ned the Substance of my flesh to the diuine Nature in one person; so as God became Man, & man God; I being in that houre made worthy to tast the ioy and sweetnes which no other Creature could experience. And by the wordes [BLES∣SED ART THOV AMONGST VVOMEN] euery Creature with admiration doth ac∣knowledge & professe me to be Blessed, and exalted aboue all. By the wordes [BLESSED IS THE FRVITE
OF THY VVOMBE] the most excellent fruite of my wombe which hath sancti∣fyed euery Creature, is bles∣sed and extolled, for all e∣ternity. [In vita S. Mech∣tildis.] This holy Virgin of Christ afterwards in saying her Beades, was alwayes ac∣customed to adde three A∣ue Maries, for the obtay∣ning of a happy death, of which we haue spoken be∣fore in the first Bed, and 5. Chapter. It wilbe also very profi∣table at all houres of the day and night, when the Clocke strikes to say once the Angelicall Salutation:
to which deuotion certaine Indulgences are granted by the holy Sea Apostolicke, as we haue sayd before in the second Bed & V. Cha∣ter. The custome likewise is deuoutly to be kept, to recite thrice a day, mor∣ning, noone, & night three Aue Maries, according to so many tolles of the bell, adding these vsuall Versi∣cles before euery Aue [The Angell of our Lord. Behold the Handmayd. And the Word became flesh.] in ho∣nour of the principall My∣steries, to wit, The Re∣surrection, the Passion, and Incarnation of our Lord.
CHAP. II. Of the Crowne, or Rosary of the B. Virgin, and of the first manner of saying the same. THat manner of saluting the B. Virgin is very an∣cient and famous, which consisteth of an hundred & fifty Aue Maries, and one Pater Noster before euery decade. Neither is that lesse in vse, which consisteth of 63. Aue Maries, according to the number of yeares, which our Blessed Lady is thought to haue liued on earth, adioyning to euery Decade, one Pater Noster.
The first of these manners, is called the Rosary, both because it is knit together with mysticall Roses, as S. Dominicke the Author ther∣of, is recounted to haue so receiued the same. The lat∣ter is tearmed, the Crown, wherewith, as with a gar∣land, the B. Virgin shewed her selfe adorned, as after∣wards we shal declare Chap. 4. And the Religious Or∣der of the Minimes hath greatly propagated the sa∣me: although the Crowne it selfe is vsually euery where called by the name of Ro∣sary, in regard whereof we wil vse these Names confu∣sedly,
without any regard of distinction. But the thing of grea∣test profit and consolation is, to recite daily, and offer vnto our B. Lady the Ro∣sary or Crowne; the which oblation, that it may be done with more fruit and gust, it is expediēt to season the same with diuers consi∣derations, which are found euery where, in deuout bookes: and heere we will propound three only, as it were fountaines of the rest. The first manner of say∣ing the Rosary, is that, wherin chiefest regard is had of attentiō to the wor∣des,
with some application of the sense to the same; which is very easy, if with discretion the Rules fol∣lowing be obserued. 1. Before you begin, recollect your selfe a little, marking with attention how Noble and Angelicall an Office you are about to performe, and for what in∣tent. 2. Blessing your selfe with the signe of the crosse, begin, with saying one of these Versicles, or the like. Now let my lippes sing, & display. The Blessed Virgins praise, this day.
Grant me, O Virgin, thee to prayse: Againsts thy foes, giue strenght allwayes. Then recite the first De∣cade or Ten, pondering the Consideration next en∣suyng. This being duely performed, say: O mother of God, and Virgin Mary, let all the holy Angells ten thousand tymes, ex∣toll and blesse you. The second decade with the Consideration being also ended, say: Let all holy Pa∣triarches & Prophets twen∣ty thousand tymes extoll and blesse you. After the third say: Let all holy A∣postles
thirty thousand ty∣mes &c. After the fourth: Let all holy Martyrs four∣ty thousand tymes &c. Af∣ter the fifth: Let all holy Confessours fifty thousand tymes &c. After the sixth: Let all holy Virgins, wid∣dowes, and others, blesse and extoll you a hundred thousand tymes. Then reciting the three last Aue Maries; in the first you shall salute the B. Vir∣gin Mary, daughter of the Eternall Father, demaun∣ding the vertue of Fayth, & offering your body to her perpetuall seruice. In the se∣cond you shall salute the B.
Virgin Mary, Mother of the Sonne of God, asking the vertue of Hope, & offering your soule vnto her. In the third you shall salute the Virgin Mary, Spouse of the Holy Ghost, crauing the vertue of Charity, and offe∣ring vnto her whatsoeuer you haue, or by any iust title can lay claime vnto: & after this conclude by say∣ing the Creed deuoutly. When you haue thus en∣ded the Rosary, you may recite the Hymne Aue Ma∣ris stella, with the versicle, and Prayer. Diuers do ad∣de the Psalme De profundis for the dead; Or, Laudate
Dominum omnes gentes &c. These aduertisemens may be common to all the man∣ners of saying the beades; but that with followeth is most proper for our pur∣pose. In saying the first Decade, or Ten. YOu shall imagine all the Aues thereof to be as so many pretious stones, or other ornamets most beau∣tifull to the sight, which are offered to the Mother of God by the handes of your Angel Guardian, for composing a Garland, or
Crowne to adorn her head. Neither doth this conceit want good warrant, as shalbe manifest by the fol∣lowing history, taken out of Dionysius Carthusianus in his first Sermon of the Assumption of our Blessed Lady and 13. verse. A certaine Monke of the Religious Order of Cister∣cians, who had accustomed daily with great deuotion to salute the B. Virgin by reciting the Rosary, when vpon a certaine day all al∣one in his chamber he was paying on his knees his ac∣customed taske, the most deuout Virgin appeared vn¦to
him, shewing him a most beautifull Robe, shining with admirable splendour (except only a little part thereof) being all ouer en∣grauen with Golden Aue Maries, and saying: Seest thou (quoth shee) in what esteem I haue the Aue Ma∣ries, which hitherto thou hast offred vp vnto me? And when this part of the Robe that is vnfinished, shall be adorned also with the like Aue Maries, I will cause thee to enter into the king∣dome of my Sonne, ador∣ned also with comelines, and glory. After the same manner
do you behold the B. Vir∣gin present, whiles you are saying the first Decade, of∣fering those salutations vn∣to her, as if they were so many pretious stones, and rich iewells most pleasing and gratefull to hereyes, & to all the heauenly Court; and you shall most humbly intreate her, that she will vouchsafe to present vnto herselfe, and her beloued Sōne your Soule, first made beautifull with the orna∣ments of graces & vertues. In reciting the second Decade. YOu shall imagine all the salutations to be a most
sweet and gratefull harmo∣ny, like vnto that, which the Angells did sing in the Natiuity of our Lord, and at other tymes when they salute the B. Virgin. To those heauenly Quires con∣ioyne your selfe, and offer vnto her these your salu∣tations, which although thereby rudely vttered and pronounced with a harsh and vnpleasant voice, ne∣uertheles they are of them∣selues most gratefull to the eares of the B. Virgin. De∣maund withall that she will vouch safe, to giue you a more killful voyce in hea∣uen, wherby to soūd forth
her mercies and prayses for euer. In saying the third Decade. IMAGINE, that these Sa∣lutations of the Angell, are as so many most fragrāt Roses, fit for the sight and smell of some great Prin∣cesse. A certayne religious mā of the Order of the Mini∣mes, out of a pious custome did neuer tast meat before he had recited the crown of our B. Lady. But as by na∣ture we are often forget∣full, and do fayle somety∣mes in those things, which he haue before determined
to do; this good religious Man, one day being set downe all the table, as yet fasting, he remēbred him∣selfe of his intermitted cu∣stome. Being much per∣plexed and sad, at last he asked, & obtained leaue of the Suepriour to rise, and without further delay, he went into the Church to say his crowne. He had now wel neere finished the same, when as one of the Reli∣gious was sent to call him away by order of the Su∣periour, who comming in∣to the Church saw the Mo∣ther of God vpon the Al∣tar in a bright shining ma∣ner,
accompanied with two Angels, who receaued from the mouth of the holy man as he prayed, most beauti∣full Roses, and put them vpon the head of their La∣dy and Queene. Moreouer he obserued, that as often as the other pronounced the most Holy Name of IESVS, at the end of the Angelicall salutation, the B. Virgin and the Angells did reuerently bow downe their heads. [Chron. Minim. p. 3. l. 1. c. 36. & 37.] What contentment of mynd, what measure of ioy and heauenly delight, how great affection of loue to∣wards
the B. Virgin, did both these Religious men tast at this spectacle, can∣not be declared: Neyther shall it need, since that whosoeuer shall read these things, wilbe able suffi∣ciently to gather the same of himselfe; and he much more, who moued by this example, shall dayly recite the sayd Crowne of the B. Virgin. Another story not vn∣like to this is recounted in the same place of a certaine Religious Nouice who had receiued from his spirituall Father this document as a most preset remedy against
whatsoeuer tēptations, to wit, that euery day befor he tooke any corporall food he should recyte the Co∣rone of our B. Lady. On a tyme sundry imploymēts imposed vpon him by holy Obedience, did so distract his mynd, as he became vn∣mindfull of his accustomed deuotion. Being set downe at table, and his Superiour aduertised of his errour, commanded him to rise, & go to the Church to per∣forme his deuotiōs. While be obeyed, and was now deuoutly saying the Crow∣ne, an Angell was seene to stād by him, who knitting
togeather vpon a golden thrid ten Roses, and there∣in also inserting a golden Lilly, made a most fayre Crowne, & put it vpon the head of the sayd Nouice, and for testimony of this miracle, from the place, where this deuout & obe∣dient Beadsmā did kneele, for a lōg tyme after a most sweet & fragrant odour of Roses and Lillyes did con∣tinue. Thou therfore, as if thou wert moued with the like spectacle, shalt offer to the B. Virgin these Angelicall Salutations, as so many Roses, giuing a most fra∣grant
smel both to her, the Angells, and thy selfe: and being an humble suppliant vnto her, thou shalt beseech her to vouchsafe, to ob∣tayne for thee the grace to send forth according to the the quality of thy state and condition, the sweet odour of good example, and pre∣tious oyntement of her holy Name. In reciting the fourth Decade. YOu shall heere imagine, that the Angelicall salu∣tations which you recite, are as most sweet hony in your mouth: as a deuout & graue Matrone of Cullen
did experience, who as of∣ten as she sayd the Rosary, felt her mouth seasoned with so gratefull a relish, as that she thought her spittle to be cōuerted into hony. Which thing a certaine An∣choret named Marsilius, li∣uing a Recluse neere to the Church of S. Seuerinus vn∣derstanding, did after her example daily say the Ro∣sary, and after six weekes space that he had so conti∣dued, he felt also that swet∣nes in his mouth whilst he pronounced the sayd Salu∣tations, which did far ex∣ceed all deliciousnes of ho∣ny. [Caesar. lib. 7. c. 50.]
Do you in like manner, tastyng these Salutations, with spirituall gust, declare vnto the Bles. Virgin how sweet her prayses are vnto your thoate, humbly be∣seeching her also, that she will vouchsafe to accept of your praiers, although pre∣sented her in a dish neyther very cleane nor precious, & that she will also be pleased to obtayne for you, the sweetnes of heauenly con∣solations, in respect of which, all earthly things may seeme vnto you vnsa∣uoury.
In saying the fifth Decade. YOu shall thinke with your selfe, that these Angelicall Salutations are as most holy and sacred things, which ought to be touched with reuerence; or as vessels full of precious treasures; or finally as im∣bracings & holy kisses, of∣fered vnto the feet both of the B. Virgin herselfe, & of her little IESVS. That these salutations are most holy appeareth sufficiently since they were annoynted with the oyle of the Ho∣ly Ghost from whose sa∣cred Mouth they were dic∣tated;
& pronounced by the Archangell Gabriel, S. Eli∣zabeth, and the Church his holy spouse. That also they are ves∣sels of pretious Treasures, may be gathered by the vi∣sion axhibited to S. Ger∣trude, who in saying the Rosary, beheld all the An∣gelicall Salutations that she vttered, or rather eue∣ry word thereof, to be as so many golden Crownes, offred vnto the Mother of God out of the treasure of her heart, which she with great cōtent did handle, & made much more esteeme of, then couetous men are
wont of their money. [lib. 4. Reuel. c. 55.] And lastly as the B. Vir∣gin, gaue her little IESVS to be imbraced, by the three Kings, by the sheep∣hearps, by old Simeon, and by many of her deuout Seruants, in sundry appari∣tions as they haue byn say∣ing the Rosary; so do you imagine the same benefit to be now inuisibly giuen vnto you; and testify to the B. Virgin, that amongst all earthly things, nothing is more holy & pretious vn∣to you, then with humility and deuotion to kisse the prints of her feet, & of her
little IESVS, with so many kisses of loue as you vtter wordes in saying the Ro∣sary. You shal also humbly demaūd, that the B. Virgin her selfe would accept of your salutations, as things pretious and worthy of her selfe; and that she would imbrace you, in the armes of her mercy, & make you worthy of the holy kisse of her motherly loue, and fauour. In reciting the sixth Decade. YOu shall imagine, that the acts of your vnder∣standing & will, which you produce in saying the Ro∣sary,
to be as so many fla∣mes most bright, or rather dartes throwen from your hart transpierced with her loue, into the heart of the B. Virgin. Surely it was re∣uealed to S. Gertrude, that the Archāgell Gabriel is so often enlightened with a new brightnes of the holy Ghost, as often as the salu∣tation pronounced by him to the B. Virgin, is renewed & recited. [vbi supra c. 12.] Why then may we not say that these Salutations be Flames, why not Darts, when as we read also, that the holy Mother Teresa, one most addicted to the
seruice of the Blessed Vir∣gin, was by an Angell pier∣ced through with a golden dart of diuine loue? Therefore in saying the sixt Decade of the Rosary, you shall declare vnto the B. Virgin, that these saluta∣tions, as are so many Suns wherwith you desire to be enlightned; as so many fla∣mes of loue wherewith you may burne; as so many Darts, with which your hart being pierced, you may melt away & cōsume. You may also piously de∣maund, that being drawne on by these your seruices although litle and far vne∣quall
to her deserts; she by the plentifull influence of her mercies, will not cease in like manner to exhibite her loue vnto you; especial∣ly that she wilbe pleased to illuminate your mind with the knowledge of her per∣fections & vertues, & woūd your hart, with her loue, that you may remayne faythfull vntill death. In these considerations you may obserue another me∣thode, to wit, that euery one thereof, assigned to euery Decade, may suffice for euery Rosary, and so in this Chapter you haue six diuers manners of saying the Rosary.
CHAP. III. The second manner of saying the Rosary. THe second māner is that, wherin attētion chiefly is giuen to the sense of the words of the Angelicall Sa∣lutation, and of the Pater Noster. And that this atten∣tion may be the easier, let vs cal to mynd that famous miracle, which happened at Rome in the yeare 590. in a solemne procession which was ordayned for auerting the plague, greatly annoy∣ing all Italy. In this proces∣sion was carryed a most de∣uout
and ancient picture of the Mother of God, payn∣ted by Saint Luke, and with such happy successe, that foorthwith in all places, health was obteyned. The Angels were heard singing by all that were there pre∣sēt (whether with greater amazement, or pleasure it is doubtfull) & cōgratula∣ting with the B. Virgin in these words: O Queene of heauen reioyce (Alleluia) because whome you haue merited to beare, (Alle∣luia) hath risen as he sayd (A leluia) whereto S. Gre∣gory being taught by di∣uine instinct, in the name
of all the people, added, Pray vnto God for vs (Al∣leluia.) And shortly after an Angell, who standing vpon the top of Adrians Tower, and shewing him∣selfe to be a iust Reuenger of sinnes committed, ha∣uing allready drawne the sword of Iustice for pu∣nishment therof, was seene to put the same againe into the scabbard, in signe that mercy was obtayned, and gotten for them. [Baron. tom. 8. ann. 590.] Now after you haue fra∣med to your selfe the like imagination; first, consider on the one side, that you
pronoūce the words of the Archangell Gabriell, enui∣roned with a troupe of An∣gels, saluting the B. Virgin now triūphant in heauen, as before he had done in Na∣zareth. Then do you en∣deauour to stirre vp, & ex∣presse in your selfe the same effects of reuerence, gratu∣lation, praise, ioy, and such other like, as the words require. On the other side, you shall imagine S. Elizabeth with all the holy and Bles∣sed men, leading a distinct Quire, and congratulating the B. Virgin with the same applause, loue, ioy, & other
affections wherwith in ty∣mes past together with her holy infant S. Iohn Baptist, whome she carryed in her wombe, she had saluted her in these words: [Bles∣sed art thou amongst wo∣men &c.] and do you imi∣tate her with the same fee∣ling and affection, in pro∣nouncyng the selfe same wordes. Lastly, you shall with the eye of contemplation behold the whole present militant Church, vexed & afflicted with many mise∣ryes & persecutions in this vale of teares, lying pro∣strate at the feet of the B.
Virgin, and imploring her mercy, in like manner as the former History did re∣present vnto you: & in the person of this Church you shall recite the last part of the Salutātion (Holy Ma∣ry, &c.) asking with all humility, comfort & ayde against so many euills, and crauing her wholsome and efficacious intercession for the atcheyuement of all good things; & withall you may present vnto her your owne particular intention. These cōsiderations may for your commodity be so parted and deuided, that in the first two Decades you
may attēd chiefly vnto the sense of the Angels words; In the other two, vnto the wordes of S. Elizabeth: In the last two, to the wordes of the holy Church. And you may begin & conclude this manner, as the former. CHAP. IV. The third manner of saying the Rosary. THis manner also of say∣ing the Rosary is very easie, wherin chiefly Atten∣tion is vsed about the my∣steries of the life of our Sa∣uiour Christ, & his B. Mo∣ther, interlacing withall,
the same after some sort with the former two At∣tentions spoken of before. These mysteries alwayes assigned are fifteene, which you shall deuide in this manner. The mysteries of Ioy (which are the Annuncia∣tion, the Visitatiō, the Na∣tiuity of Christ our Lord, his Presentation, & his fin∣ding amongst the Doctors in the Temple) you may re∣cite on Mūday, Tuesday & Wensday, assigning to eue∣ry decade a seueral mistery. As you recite the same, you shall imagine your selfe to declare vnto the B. Virgin
that mistery which you do contemplate, and to relate the vertues expressed the∣rein, and benefits bestowed vpon vs by the same, by re∣ioycing, thanks giuing, of∣fering your selfe, and what∣soeuer is yours, asking things conformable to the mystery, and commending your particuler intention vnto her. The dolorous mysteries (which are, The prayer of Christ in the Garden, His whipping at the Pillar, His Crowning with thornes, His carrying of his Crosse, and Crucifying) you shall renew euery Friday and Sa∣turday,
after the same man∣ner as you did the Ioyfull, adding therto chiefly af∣fections of Compassion. The Glorious mysteryes (which are the Resurrectiō of our Lord, his Ascension, the comming downe of the holy Ghost, the Assum∣ption of the B. Virgin and her Coronation in heauen) you shall recite vpon Sun∣dayes and Thursdayes, as you did the former, exer∣cising chiefly affections of Congratulation, and desire of the Glory of Heauen. Some deuide the whole life of Christ, and of our B. Lady into two weekes, af∣ter
this manner. On Mun∣day they call to mynd, 1. The Expectation of the birth of the B. Virgin from the very beginning of the world, by how many Ora∣cles the same was promi∣sed; by how many figures represented; and by how many supplications sought for. 2. Her immaculate Cō∣ception. 3. Her holy Nati∣uity. 4. Her Presentation in the Tēple. 5. The yeares of her Childhood, and her vow of Virginity made in her tender age. 6. Her be∣troathing to S. Joseph. On Twesday they consi∣der, 1. The Annunciation
of the Angell. 2. The visi∣tation of Saint Elizabeth. 3. The Natiuity of Christ. 4. The adoration of the Sheepheardes. 5. The Cir∣cumcision. 6. The Adora∣tion of the three kinges. On Wednesday they beare in mind, 1. The Pu∣rification of the B. Virgin, and Presentation of Christ in the Temple. 2. Their flight into Aegypt, and sea∣uen yeares abode there. 3. The remayning of Iesus in the Temple, & his finding there. 4. His childhood, & life vntill thirty yeares of age. 5. His departure from the company of his Mo∣ther,
his Baptisme and fa∣sting. 6. His preaching and miracles. On Thursday, they medi∣tate, 1. The solēne entrance of Christ into Ierusalem. 2. His washing of the Apo∣les feet. 3. The institution of the most B. Sacrament. 4. His prayer in the Gar∣den. 5. His apprehending. 6. That which he suffered in the house of Annas and Cayphas, and S. Peters de∣nyall of him. On Friday they contem∣plate, 1. Christ our Lord led vnto Pilate and Herod. 2. His whipping at the pil∣lar. 3. His crowning with
thornes. 4. His shewing to the people, and the wordes [Ecce homo.] 5. His con∣demnation and carrying of his Crosse. 6. His crucify∣ing. On Saturday they pon∣der, 1. The words of Christ our Lord vttered vpon the Crosse, and chiefly these, (Behold thy Mother, and, Behold thy Sonne.) 2. His death. 3. The great griefe & sorrow of our Bles. Lady. 4. The taking downe of Christs body from the Crosse. 5. His Buryall. 6. The desceding of his soule into Hell. On Sunday, they call to
mynd, 1. The Resurrection of Christ our Lord. 2. His Ascension. 3. The sending downe of the holy Ghost. 4. The rest of our B. La∣dyes life vntill her death. 5. Her triumphall Assumptiō. 6. Her Coronation, and the patronage of all men giuen vnto her. This exercise of medita∣ting the mysteries of Christ our Lord and of the B. Vir∣gin in saying the Rosary, hath beene had in great esteeme, and was constant∣ld practysed by Saint Char∣les Borromeus, that famous Contemplant of our B. La∣dy. [in eius vita l. 8. c. 2.] S.
Bernardinus also of Sienna hath left testifyed, that whatsoeuer Graces, or Spi∣rituall gifts at any tyme he obtayned, came from the deuout remembrace of the Ioyes of our B. Lady, in the honour of which, he dayly recyted her Rosary. [Ineius vita.] But a singular testimony of this deuotion, may be taken out of the Chroni∣cles of S. Francis, where it is recounted, that a certayne Priest, who had accusto∣med dayly to adorne an I∣mage of our B. Lady with a garland of flowers, entred into Saint Francis Order,
where, when as he could not dayly offer his wonted garland vnto the B. Virgin, he thought of retourning backe to the world againe. But the Mother of God full of Mercy, permitted not that her Client should long remaine in errour, but compassed about with a heauenly light, she appea∣red vnto him, and with the beames of her benigni∣ty did she driue away the darke myst of his mynd, commāding that he should not rashly cast from him so great a Iewell of Religious vocation, which now he had vndertakē, least other∣wise
himselfe also, might perhaps afterwards come to be reiected of God, and withall she instructed him, how he should dayly offer to her another garlād more odoriferous and gratefull, cōposed of the fixty three Aue Maries, & seauen Pa∣ter Nosters, in memory of the seauen Ioyes which she tenderly and entirly felt. 1. In the Conception of her Blessed Sonne. 2. When she carryed him in her wombe, and visited S. Elizabeth. 3. In his birth. 4. In the Ado∣ration of the three Kings. 5. In her finding him in the Temple. 6. In his Resurre∣ction
7. When she was as∣sumpted into heauen. So that euery ioy correspon∣deth to euery Decade, and the seauenth to the three last Salutations. This good Religious mā obeyed the admonition & wholsome counsell of the B. Virgin, and from thence forth began to recite day∣ly the Corone, after that methode and manner. A long tyme after (notwith∣out a great miracle) the B. Virgin appeared agayne vnto him being in daunger of his life, no lesse power∣full & benigne a Guardian, then before she had beene a
prudent and wise Mistresse towardes her seruant. For on a tyme, as he trauayled by Obedience with his cō∣panion through a wood, which was much haunted with theeues, reciting the Rosary & meditating vpon of the foresayd Mysteries; the theeues espied him, to∣geather with a most beau∣tiful Virgin, who at euery Angelicall Salutation, ga∣thered from his mouth as he spake a Rose, and with a threed of gold fastened the same to a circle, in manner of a Crowne. When he had ended his beades, and the B. Virgin departed, forth∣with
the theeues came ru∣shing with great violence vpon the Religious mā, in∣quiring of him from whēce that Virgin came, and whi∣ther she was gone. He de∣nyed to haue seene any, as also his companion did the like: at which the theeues were enraged, and ready to kill them. In the meane space they both with very great earnestnes & inward feruour cryed vpon our B. Lady: O Mother of God, ayd and succour vs. And behold the B. Virgin pre∣sently appeared with a glo∣rious company of Angels adornd with that same gar∣land,
and first rebuking the theeues, turned to the An∣gels, and with a cheerfull countenance, said: Lo, with what a beautifull Crowne thi Brother hath adorned me, and foothwith vani∣shed away. Leauing the mynds of the beholders in great astonishment at this incredible motiue and as∣pect, which so moued the theeues to the true vnder∣standing of themselues, & serious conuersion of their liues, that they entred into religion, & became deuout seruants of the B. Virgin. The same also, that this religious mā now spoke of
did accomplish, was no lesse deuoutly performed by S. Thomas of Canterbury, who was accustomed dayly to call to mynd the seauen ioyes, wherwith our B. La∣dy was replenished lyuing vpon earth, & in the pious remembrance whereof he tooke great contentement and sweetnes. Wherefore the Virgin Mother (hauing a desire to transfer his de∣uotion to more sublyme ioyes) appeared and spake vnto him in this manner: Why, O my beloued Tho∣mas, doest thou meditate only vpon those ioyes that I had on earth? cal to mynd
also those, which I now en∣ioy in heauen, which are these. 1. I reioyce, that aboue all pure Creatures I am pla∣ced, next in honour, vnto the most Blessed Trinity. 2. I reioyce for the gar∣land of my vnspotted Vir∣ginity, whereby I far excell all the orders of Angells & Saints. 3. I reioyce, that euen as the Day is replenished with light from the Sun, so the whole Heauēly Court, more abundantly shyning by my beatitude, is reple∣nished with ioy. 4. I reioyce, that all the
Cittizens of that Court do obey and reuerence me, the Mother of their King. 5. I recoice, because myne and the diuine Maiestyes highest Will is one, and the selfe same; and whatsoeuer shalbe pleasing to me, my Sonne will a slent thereunto with most ready, and gra∣cious fauour. 6. I reioyce for the infi∣nite grace, wherwith I was enriched on earth; and for that also, a reward in Hea∣uen is giuen by my Sonne to all those who serue me heere on earth. 7. I reioyce, that not only my glory shall neuer
diminish, but shall conti∣nually be increased, with∣out euer ceasing, to the worlds end, and so conti∣nue for all eternity. When the B. Virgin had vouch∣safed to lay al this open be∣fore the eyes of her belo∣ued seruant, she vanished away, bidding him farewel. And he by these diuine ad∣monitiōs & documents, be∣came much more feruent and deuout towardes so powerfull a Mother. That is also worthy of memory, which the same Author ad∣deth, thereby to styr vp an assured Confidence, to∣wards our B. Lady, in the
harts of men. Neyther is it, sayth the Author, to be omitted, that often tymes the Mother of God appeared to this her faythfull seruant, and with so great bounty shewed her selfe familiar vnto him, that as often as he had any great affaire to manage, so oftē would the most pious Virgin offer vp the same to her Sonne Iesus, vntill she obtayned his petition; and finally brought vnto him the palme of a most glori∣ous Martirdome which he cōstantly offered for the de∣fēce of his church & flocke, in the yeare of Christ 1171.
CHAP. V. Of the Office of our B. Lady. IF your busines will per∣mit, you may dayly, or at least vpon Sundayes & Ho∣ly dayes, say the Office of the B. Virgin, and so do∣ing you shall performe a thing most gratefull vnto her. S. Charles Borromeus had the reuiewing thereof, & brought it to that forme which is now approued, & enriched with Indulgences by the Sea Apostolicke, the which he himselfe was ac∣customed daily to say vpon
knees. (In eius vita.) It is anciently recounted of the first Fathers of the holy Order of Carthusiās, who in absence of S. Bruno suffering great pressures & anxiety of mynd, were very much comforted & encou∣raged by S. Peter the Apo∣stle, who promised vnto them the B. Virgins ayde & assistance, if they would dayly recite her Office in her honour. By which vi∣sion being filled with great ioy and gladnes, they made choyce of our B. Lady for the Patronesse of their Or∣der, reciting daily her Of∣fice in her Honour, & forth∣with
by her assistance were freed from all trouble and griefe of mynd. It is also a thing very fa∣mous, which Cardinall Ba∣ronius doth recoūt to haue happened in the yeare 1159. as touching the Monastery of Gamugi in Italy, the Re∣ligious where of when they had intermitted their pious custome of reciting the of∣fice of our Lady, began to be so afflicted with calami∣ties and incursions of the Band its and Outlawes, that they were induced by Pe∣trus Damianus a holy man & great louer of the B. Vir∣gin to resume agayne their
accustomed manner of re∣citing her Office whereto when they had al agreed, & did fulfull the same, they were by the Bles. Virgins patronage deliuered from their troubles, and clearly vnderstood, how powerfull the same Virgin is, & ready to assist all that do implore her ayde. And that you may recite the sayd Office, with grea∣ter deuotion and benefit, these few thinges you are carefully to practise. First, recollect your selfe a little before the saying of euery Houre, as hath beene sayd touching the Rosary: next
in saying thereof being myndfull of the threefold attention there also expli∣cated, you must attēd vnto the distinct pronunciation of the words, & sense ther∣of, imbracing the same af∣fections that the Psalmes & Hymnes theselues con∣taine. And you may assigne to euery Houre some My∣stery or other, which was done about that tyme, to contemplate on. For example at the Mar∣tins and Laudes (for which the night time is appointed by the Church) you may cal to mynd the Natiuity of Christ; or else his captiuity
and apprehension, which was most sharp vnto him all the whole night long, both in the house of An∣nas and Cayphas. At the Prime you may cōsider his conuenting and accusation before Pilate and Herod, or his Resurrection, & Ap∣parition to the B. Virgin his Mother. At the third, his Scourging and Crow∣ning with thornes (which perchance the B. Virgin herselfe beheld) or else the sending downe of the Ho∣ly Ghost vpon the sayd B. Virgin and the Apostles. At the sixt, his carrying of his Crosse, & crucifying vpon
Mōt Caluary. At the ninth, his words vttered vpon the Crosse, and his death ther∣on. At Euensong, his ta∣king downe frō the Crosse. And at Compline, his bu∣ryall, and the sorrowfull mourning of the B. Virgin. CHAP. VI. Of the Psalter of our B. Lady, Letanyes, and Office of her Immaculate Conception. THe Psalter of our Lady, composed by S. Bona∣uenture, a most deuout, and singular louer of the Bles. Virgin, is all replenished with allurements of deuo∣tion
towards the same glo∣rious Queene. Neyther is there any other manner of saying the same, then hath bene said touching the for∣mer office. Thomas Canti∣pratensis recordeth, how a yoūg maide of seauē yeares old earnestly demaunding of our Lady a booke of her Psalter, obtayned it, and withall the manner how to say the same. [lib. 1. Apum c. 23. p. 2. & 3.] The Letanies of our B. Lady you may recite with a twofold sense and affe∣ction. First, that by rehear∣sing so many Epithetes, & high Prayses, you endea∣uour
to declare the Excel∣lency of the B. Virgin to be so great, as that you cannot sufficiently explycate the same by one or more titles only, nor yet euen by infi∣nite. Secondly, that by re∣peating those Elogies, or prayses, as though they were different and most ef∣ficacious motiues, you shal induce the B. Virgin to giue you a fauourable hea∣ring. But as these Letanies do stir vp great deuotion to∣wards the B. Virgin, so not without great profit & cō∣modity are they vsed by Christians, aswell in things
appertayning to the soule, as the body. Wherefore that godly custome, amōgst many familyes euen of se∣cular persons, is greatly to be commended, in calling togeather at night those of the houshold, to heare the Letanyes daily read in honour of the B. Virgin. Also, the renowned pie∣ty of certaine persons to∣wards our Bles. Lady hath greatly appeared of late, who haue erected a Con∣fraternity among themsel∣ues, that for obtayning a happy death by our Ladies intercession, euery one for himselfe, and for his Com∣paniōs
in this spirituall ne∣gotiation, do euery day re∣cite her Letanyes, adding thereunto the Collect, or Prayer of S. Ioseph her holy Spouse. The little Office of her immaculate Conception is short, & very fit to mooue most sweet affections in the harts of those that dayly say it. And truly how gra∣tefull the recitall thereof is to our B. Lady, she herselfe did sufficiently declare to Alphonsus Rodriquez Co∣adiutor of the Society of IESVS, famous for mira∣cles both aliue and dead, to whom she appeared as he
was saying this her Office, according to his cuustome, (as she had very often done at other times) & gaue him in charge, to cause the same to be diuulged in print. [Jn eius vita.] CHAP. VII. How Saturday is to be obserued with reuerence, in honour of the B. Virgin. BEcause this day is pecu∣liarly consecrated to the reuerence of our B. Lady, you shall likewise obserue the same in a peculiar man∣ner, exercising your selfe in the things following, ha∣uing
first euery Satturday morning cōceyued a firme purpose to fulfill them. 1. You shall that day, vndergoe some mortifica∣tion, eyther by keeping it fast, or obseruing some pe∣culiar abstinence; or by re∣cyting one of our Ladyes Ant-hymnes with your ar∣mes stretched foorth at length, or on your bare knees; or some other like deuotion at your pleasure. Saint Nicolas Tolentinus did vse but onely once on the Saturday to refresh his body with meat, after the imiration of the great S. Ni∣colas. [Surius in ius vita tō. 5.]
Saint Antonius doth re∣count, how that the B. Vir∣gin appeared to S. Thomas of Canterbury, and affoar∣ded him her helping hand in mending his haire-shirt, which in her honour he did weare, not onely on Sat∣turdayes, but at other ty∣mes also very often. [p. 5. t. 15. c. 2. §. 2.] 2. You shall on that day exercise for the Blessed Vir∣gins loue, some worke of Mercy, whether it be cor∣porall, as giuing almes, visi∣ting the sicke &c. Or spiri∣tuall, especially by godly & pious speaches & exhor∣tatiō to stir vp your neigh∣bours
to vertue, & to more feruent honoring of our B. Lady. 3. You may performe also that day some exercise of deuotion, by visiting some Chappell or Oratory of the B. Virgin; which pious custome of many de∣uout Christians hath beene very often approued by mirales from heauen. [Na∣uar Manual. de orat. c. 19. n. 189.] It is reported also, that in the valley of Ronca in Spaine, Angels are accusto∣med euery Satturday, to sing the Salue Regina, at a Fountain there, which for
that cause is called the Foū∣taine of Angels. This peculiar thing that I will now recount, is no lesse gratefull to be heard, then in tymes past, was admirable to be seene. At Constantinople there was an Image of our B Lady, which was couered all the weeke with a veyle, exce∣pting that vpon Friday af∣ter Euensonge, it was all∣wayes miraculously lifted vp, no man touching the same, & was drawne backe from the picture, to the full view of all the Be houl∣ders, & so remained vntil E∣uēsong on Saturday: which
being ended it was drawne againe before the Image, & couered the same as before. [Spinel. c. 29. n. 17.] Who vnderstandeth not by this miracle, that euen from Heauen it selfe, men were inuited to Honour the B. Virgin with peculiar deuo∣tion, specially vpon Satur∣dayes? 4. With diligence, you shall make your recolle∣ction before the Image of the B. Virgin, and exactly examyne, what you haue done the whole week past; whether you haue gone forward or backward, pro∣fited much or little; adding
new desires and purposes against the next ensuing weeke, still committing & commending the same to the Virgin Mother with all confidence & submission. 5. The same day in the Euening you shall examine your selfe, whether you haue performed the thin∣ges which you promised to do that day, in honour of our B. Lady, or no. CHAP. VIII. Of honouring the Feastes of our B. Lady. HOw feruēt, & euen pro∣fuse hath euer bene the
deuotion of the louers of our B. Lady, towards the celebrating of her Feastes with due piety and respect, appeareth many festly out of almost innumerable hi∣stories. Let this one serue insteed of al the rest, which is recorded of S. Margaret Virgin, Daughter to the King of Hungary. This de∣uout Soule (as the Author of her life writeth) whilst on the Vigils of the Nati∣uity of our Sauiour, and the foure Feastes of the B. Virgin, the solemnity of the festiuall day following was denounced in the Cha∣pter House, she alwayes v∣sed
to shew a wonderfull ioy and deuotion, prostra∣ting herselfe on the groūd, and praying, with teares gaue thankes to God. On those Vigills, bread alone was her meate, and water her drincke, tasting no∣thing els all day. Moreouer in all the festiuityes of the B. Virgin, and within their Octaues, she offered vp vn∣to her, a thousand Angeli∣call Salutations, & at euery of them did prostrate her∣selfe on the ground. [In cius vita.] To the end, that with greater deuotion you may pursue & follow this holy
example, with hundreds of others, and obtayne also a more copious reward in heauen, you shall well pon∣der the aduerisements fol∣lowing, and endeauour to put them in practice. 1. First of all, the day be∣fore any Feast of our Bles. Lady, you shall performe the same that we haue cō∣mended in the precedent Chapter to be obserued on Saturdayes. On the Festi∣uall day it selfe, first, you shall recite the whole Ro∣sary, that is to say, three Crownes, after the manner aboue prescribed; & as op∣portunity doth serue, you
shall adioyne therto eyther the Office of the B. Virgin, or her Psalter, or at least her Letanyes. 2. You shall visite some Chappell, Oratory, or I∣mage of hers, & shall put in practise the things which before we haue expressed in the first Bed of this Gar∣den, Chap. 5 3. You shall receyue the holy Communion in the honour of the B. Virgin; and to the end you may more duely and deuoutly performe the same, the E∣xercise set downe in the 5. Bed Chap. 9. will direct and guide you as it were by the hand.
4. You shall reade, or heare read, somewhat of the present Feast, or some∣what treating of the life & prayses of our B. Lady, or at least some other spiritu∣all matter in her honour; & when you haue fit occa∣sion to frame any familiar speach, or talke of her life, your good wil must not be wanting. These are to be obserued generally vpō all her feastes; and these which follow shalbe proper, & pe∣culiar to euery one. On the feast of the Con∣ception of the most B. Vir∣gin, you shal recite the Of∣fice of her immaculate Cō∣ception,
and for the eight dayes following continue to recite the same, so assig∣ning to euery feast an Oc∣taue to be particulerly kept by your selfe, although the Church shal not obserue it. On the Feast of the Na∣tiuity of our Lady, you shall honour the B. Virgins Name, by reciting of the fiue Psalmes, throughout the octaue, in her Honour, beginning with the letters of her Name, spokē of be∣fore in the first Bed, and 3. Chap. On the Feast of the An∣nunciation, you shall fre∣quent, throughout the O∣ctaue,
the exercise of reue∣rence, which we deliuered also in the first Bed, & ch. 7. by exhibiting, by way of many kneelings, the wor∣shippe of Hyperdulia, that is, most high Seruice, or re∣uerence to the B. Virgin. On the Feast of the Visi∣tation, and throughout the Octaue, you shall obserue the Exercise of Reuerence which is mentioned before in the 1. Bed c. 5. by making of some station, or visiting some Chappell or Oratory dedicated to the B. Virgin, after that manner and fa∣shion, which is there pre∣scribed.
On the Feast of the Puri∣fication, you shall practise throughout the octaue, the Exercise, which you haue in the 2. Bed, & 5. Chap. Finally, on the Feast of her Assumptiō, & through∣out the whole Octaue, you shall make some meditatiō or other of the B. Virgin; for which purpose those may serue you which are aboue set downe in the se∣cond Bed, and 2.3. and 4. Chap. And you shall besi∣des, euery day performe the Exercise of Reuerence, which is deliuered in the first Bed, and 8. Chapter.
OVR B. LADIES LITLE GARDEN. THE FIFTH BED, beset with Marygolds. Conteyning the practice of imi∣tating the B. Virgin, wherby those who honour her, do dai∣ly (like as the Marygold doth the Sunne) looke towards the bright beames of her Perfe∣ctions, by a continuall regard of her Vertues.
CHAP. I. The generall Practice of Imi∣tating the B. Virgin. WE are now come vnto the last Bed of this Vir∣ginall Garden planted with Mary-golds, the nature of which Flower is, to looke alwayes towards the sunne following the motiō therof by continuall turning, and displaying it selfe from the East to West. Such is the imitation of the B. Virgin, wherby her deuout louer becomes a follower of a more noble Sunne, I meane the glittering & resplendēt
beames of her Vertues, and Perfections. This flower (if you will follow the aduise of S. Ber∣nard) you must gather con∣stantly & often, who cōclu∣ding briefly in few words, all the former exercises al∣ready treated of, sayth: Thinke vpon Mary, inuo∣cate Mary, let her not de∣part from thy mouth, let her not depart from thy heart: And to the end that thou mayst obteyne the suffrage of her prayer, fay∣le not to follow her exam∣ple. For surely al thy other actes of reuerence, confi∣dece, or loue, how solide or
fect soeuer they be, nay all which thou canst do be∣sids, without this imitatiō, will neyther be pleasing to her, nor profitable to thy selfe. [hom. 2. sup. Missus est. This did the B. Virgin once make known herselfe to a certayne younge man, who though he were de∣uout vnto her, yet was he of a life impure and disso∣lute. To whome she appea∣ring (as he strayed in a vast wood, & was very hungry) brought with her, and set before him very wholsome meate, but in so soule and loathsom a dish, as he chose
rather to starue then touch a bit therof. Whereupon she tooke occasiō to speake vnto him in this manner: Euen such are thy Beades, Offices, and other Exerci∣ses of Piety, which thou daily offerest vnto me; and although in theselues good and sauoury, yet come they from so foule a dish, from a conscience so impure and vncleane, as that their very sight doth make me loath and abhor them. The yong mā instructed by this sight, and sharp admonition, pre∣sently began to amend his life. [Albert. Castell. de Ro∣sario.]
On the contrary the B. Virgin hath at other times declared how much she is pleased, and delighted with the purity, modesty, humi∣lity and other actes of ver∣tue, exercised by those who truly honour her: and how much also she doth fauour & assist them to the attay∣ning of this perfect imita∣tion of her vertues. For vpon a tyme, S. Gertrude of the order of S. Benedict, offering vp her owne pray∣ers, together with the pray∣ers of others who had cō∣mended thēselues vnto her deuotion, the B. Virgin ap∣peared vnto her, apparelled
in a rich garment, all im∣brodered ouer with gol∣den three-leau'd flowers of an admirable fayrnesse and beauty; the mystery of which garment she decla∣red vnto her in thes words: The prayers of all those (sayd the Glorions Vir∣gin) whome you offer vn∣to me are as so many flow∣ers in my garment, which you see, are not all of one fayrnes, because the purer their prayers be, which they offer vp vnto me, the more fayre and flourishing are the flowers which do spring from them; and I in the meane time do adorne
the Soules of them, who pray vnto me and honour me, with as many flowers of vertu, as they do this my garmēt with those of their prayers, and piety. [lib. 4. Insin. diuin. c. 49.] That you may therefore orderly and profitable go forwards in the imitation of the B. Virgin so much desired of her, it will be necessary to obserue this order follow∣ing consisting of foure ge∣nerall heads, as so many instruments, or helps con∣ducing thereunto. 1. To know in what she is to be imitated, and to frame in your mynd a cer∣taine
fayre & excellent pat∣terne of her perfections, on which you may continual∣ly reflect. 2 To conceiue within your selfe, an earnest desire to imitate these her most louely graces, and perfe∣ctions; and also seriously to propose vnto your selfe, a meanes how to arriue the better thereunto. 3. Supposing this your desire & purpose, you shall earnestly lay hād vpon the practice it selfe, & vse a par∣ticuler Examē, as the chiefe help, and furtherance to∣wards the attayning of any vertue whatsoeuer.
4. Lastly, seeing all we can do of our selues, is of no force nor effect, vnles it be strengthened by the di∣uine help & assistance, we must therfore begge most earnestly of the B. Virgin, that she would be pleased to obtaine for vs the imita∣tion of her vertues. CHAP. II. The first help to the imitation of the B. Virgin, is to frame in our mynde a louely represen∣tation of her Vertues. THere be two wayes, by which we may arriue to no small knowledge of the
vertues of the Bles. Virgin. First, by a particuler discus∣sion, and meditation of the mysteries of our Sauiours life, and Hers, which may be done, by exactly cōside∣ring how, and in what man∣ner, she led her life whilst she was a child; how after∣wards when she came to ri∣per years; how she liued be∣fore she was espoused to S. Ioseph; how after her Vir∣ginall mariage with him; & how in her widdowhood. Consider also both her life whilst her B. Sonne was stil on earth, as also after be was departed to heauen; all that she said, al that she did,
& what examples of this or that vertue she hath left vn∣to vs. Secondly, by a diligent informatiō of these things out of the holy Scriptures, Ancient Fathers, and other latter Authors, who haue written in her prayse: all which to omit, I will only set downe one Sentence out of S. Ambrose, which will present vnto vs a certayne liuely imagination of the perfections of Gods holy Mother. Set the Virgi∣nity (sayth he) and life of our B. Lady, as a glasse, be∣fore your eyes, wherein do appeare the true formes &
shapes of Vertue and Cha∣stity; for from hence may you take exāples of good life, where, as in a patterne, the liuely Maister-peece of Vertue, doth instruct you what to amend, what to es∣chew, what to follow. She was a Virgin not only in body but in mynd, whose chast affections were ne∣uer taynted with the least thought of euill. She was humble of heart, graue in words, prudent in mynd, spare of speach, studious of reading, not relying on the vncertainty of riches, but in the prayers of the poore, euer labourious, bashfull in
speach, making God, not man the true Iudge of her thoughts; hurtfull to none, well-willer to all, reueren∣cing her Superiours, not enuying her equals, enemy to boasting, a follower of reasō louer of vertue, mild in her aspect, bashfull in her actions, modest in her gate, comely in her behauiour, & of a most pleasant & dele∣ctable voyce: so that euen the shape of her body, was the Image of her mynd, & the liuely figure of vertue and goodnes. [Ambros. lib. 2. de Ʋirgin.] The like shall your find in diues of the Holy Fa∣thers,
especially S. Anselme Archbishop of Canterbu∣ry, in his booke he wrote of her prayses, to whom he was alway most particuler∣ly deuoted. We are to con∣ceaue in our mynds (sayth he) this perfection of the B. V. to be the most fayre, & loue liest thing that can po∣sibly be imagined, in the liknes of some externall & corporal perfection, which may be sesibly vnderstood by our imagination. As for example, to imagine that you see her Humility, Pa∣tience, and Obedience like so many bright starres shi∣ning in the most Glorious
Virgin. To conceyue inter∣nally in your hearing her Loue, as a delicate voyce, sounding most sweetly in the eares of God. That you smell the sweet perfume of her vertues, and tast the sweetnes of her spirit, re∣plenished with all inward peace, & heauenly delights. So S. Anselme. And truly he could find no more fit and conuenient manner to represent vnto himselfe the internall beauty of her gra∣ces and vertues, & to make them deare & gracious vn∣to vs. Yet hath S. Agnes otherwise expressed them in these words: The Bloud
(sayth she) of my Spouse Christ IESVS, hath beau∣tifyed my cheekes, he hath adorned me as his beloued with a glorious Crowne, & hath betroathed me with the Ring of his Fayth; he hath incircled my necke & right hand with pretious stones; he hath enriched myne eares with pearles of inestimable value; he hath vested we with a golden garmēt; he hath compassed me about with shining and resplendēt iewels; his voyce doth sound sweet musicke to my yeares, I haue tasted milke and hony from his mouth, and he hath shewed
me his incomparable trea∣sures. Thus far Saint Ag∣nes. And if her chastity, her faith, her Hope, her Chari∣ty, Humility, & Fortitude was so louely; how much more amiable may we ima∣gine the vertues of the B. Virgin to haue byn? Almost in the same mā∣ner, (accompanyed with S. Iohn Baptist) did she ap∣peare vnto S. Brigit, giuing her selfe to be seene, or ra∣ther the fayrnes of her ver∣tues to be contemplated, wearing vpon her head a Crowne of seauen Lyllies and seauen Pearles, vnder which her haire hung down
at full length, clothed in a golden garment, and ouer it a Robe of Azure colour. The mystery of which or∣naments were thus explica∣ted vnto S. Brigit, by S. Iohn. The Crowne (sayd he) doth signify the great∣nes of her Empire, and her large Dominion ouer all liuing Creatures. The sea∣uen white Lillyes signify her Humilitaty, Feare, Pa∣tience, Obedience, Con∣stancy, Mildnes, and Pitty. The seauen Pearles, the Ex∣cellency of her Vertues, her perfect Purity, her fayr Comlines, her perspicuous Wisdome, her strong For∣titude,
her resplendāt Cla∣rity, and her most chast Delight; her hayr hanging downe doth signify the pu∣rity of her mynd. The Azure Robe, her perfect abnegation of all earthly things: & lastly the goul∣den Garment, her buring Charity. [Reuelat. c. 31.] Wherfore as often, as you shall cast your eyes vpon a∣ny picture of our B. Lady, or meditate vpon any of her vertues, so often you are to represent her in this manner vnto your mind & render her faire & louely, by saluting her frequently in your hart, turning to∣wards
her, with some sen∣tence taken out of holy Scripture that may expresse the beauty of her vertue. As for example: How faire are you my loue, how faire are you? your eyes are like the eyes of the Doue, and your cheekes to those of the Turttle? You haue wounded my hart my sister, with one of your eyes. I am the Mother of beautifull Loue, of Feare, of Knowledge, and of holy Hope &c. Of which kind you shall find store in holy Scripture.
CHAP. III. The second Help, is to conceaue an earnest desire & purpose to imitate the B. Virgin. THis desire & purpose is easily conceaued from that which went before? for if the vertues which ar in the Mother of God do render her so fayre and lo∣uely, that with the first sight therof, she euen raui∣sheth our eyes, drawing our heart, and affections wholly vnto her; how gra∣cious would the same ver∣tues, if you were indued therewith, (although you
exercised them in a far in∣feriout manner) make you to the Bl. Virgin, and her Sonne, the fountayne of all sanctity and perfection? Be you therfore not only an Admirer, but also a Louer; not only a Louer, but a diligent and con∣stant Imitator of the perfe∣ctions of the B. Mother of God: which she herselfe doth aboue all other things desire of vs, saying: Now therfore my Sonne hearken vnto me; They are Blessed who keep my wayes: Giue eare vnto my discipline, & be wise, & cast it not away from you. Blessed is the
man who heareth me, and who watcheth daily before my doores, & waiteth at the entrance of my gates. (Prou. 8.) And truly if you desire to be called her son∣ne, & be so esteemed; if you would loue & honour her with all sincere affection, hearken then vnto her, take her counsayle & ad∣uise, depart not from her wayes, but alwayes fol∣low carefully the footsteps of her vertues; with which imitation it is incredible, how much the B. V. is de∣lighted, & in what aboun∣dant measure, by her selfe and her B. Sonne, she doth
reward, & blesse euery act of Vertue, euery act of Hu∣mility, Confidence, chri∣stian Prudence, Patience, gratiously behoulding euē the least act of Deuotion done vnto her, most carful∣ly attending it, and aboun∣dantly rewarding the same. This did Saint Gertrude once experience, who lying very sicke in her bed, was much troubled, that she could not say ouer her beads in honour of the B. Virgin, yet she resolued at least, to pronounce, and ponder in her mynd, with all the affection she could, the three first clauses only
of the Angelicall Saluta∣tion, to wit, Hayle Mary, full of grace, our Lord is with thee. Wherupon the B. Virgin presently appea∣red vnto her cloathed in a fayr green garment, which besides other flowers, was imbrodered with six-leau'd Roses, wherof 3. seemed to be of gould, inriched with diuers pretious stones, and the other three leaues were beautifyed with an vnspea∣kable variety of colour. By the first three leaues were vnderstood the three first heads, or branches of the Angelicall Salutation that S. Brigit had pondred in her
mynd; & the other three, adorned with that admira∣ble variety of colour, were to reward, first her so pious affectiō, with which she had saluted his most B. Mother, then her Wisdome, who being vnable, by reason of her sicknes, to recite the whole, had so wisely made choyce of those 3. first par∣cells, on which the whole frame of Praying, did de∣pend; and also her Hope & confidence, in that she did not doubt, but that little deuotion exercised in her sicknes, would be gratefull to God, and his Holy Mo∣ther. [lib. 4. Insin. diuin.
c. 49.] S. Iohn Damascene that singular Honourer of the B. Virgin, promiseth this reward to those virgins who are deuout vnto her. If (sayth he) with a prompt and cheerfull mynd we do eschew all vice, and labour to the attayning of ver∣tues withal our endeauours & affections, making them familiar, and as it were our Companions; the B. Vir∣gin will come frequently vnto vs, replenished withal graces & goodnes: And her Sonne Iesus Christ, the so∣ueraigne King and Lord of all, will take vp his habita∣tion in our breast.]
What these vices be, which especially we should fly and detest, as also what be the vertues, which by i∣mitation of the B. Virgin, we are to plāt in our soules, he setteth downe in this manner. Let vs indeauour (saith he) to make our myndes and memories the Storehouse of the B. Virgin, for that she is a Virgin, and a louer of virgins, pure and a louer of Purity: & if we be chast both in body and mynd, if we auoyd all vncleanes, if we expell all impure & wic∣ked thoughts, if we chase from vs all scurrilous and
obscene speach, hate all rancour of heart, resist all proud thoughts, and lay aside all enuy, debate & ha∣tred, we shall with ease ob∣teyne her grace & fauour. For she is highly delighted with virginall chastity and Purity, she imbraceth peace and quietnes of mynd, che∣risheth charity, mercy, & humility in her owne bo∣some, as her proper chil∣dren, and in a word is most highly offended with any the least vice whatsoeuer. (Orat. 2. de dormit. B. Vir∣gin. Therfore as often, as at any tyme you shall frame in
your mynd any resemblan∣ce of the beauty, & exeel∣lency of the Vertues of the most sacred Virgin, do you presently aspire, with all your soule extended, run with all your heart open to imbrace them, by a liuely imitation; and sighing with desire of loue, say: O ad∣mirable, O louely Mother, when shall I be like vnto you, in such excellent and admirable perfection? Whē shall I cheerfully followe your footsteps, as innume∣rable others of your Lo∣uers haue done, running & euen flying as it were, in the way of perfection, hauing
you for their guide & lea∣der? I am ashamed to haue thus de generated through my sloth. I haue sayd, and firmly purpose, that I will keep your wayes; the which with more the accustomed feruour, by your holy help and gratious assistance, I wil now endeauour to per∣forme. CHAP. IV. The third Help, to the Imitation of the B. Virgin, is a serious and particular Examine. AFter you haue made vse of the former two Hel∣pes, you must apply your selfe to the practise, in
which do cōmonly occurre the greatest difficulties. For perfection is not so easily obteyned as desired, & that for diuers causes, but chie∣fly, and most cōmonly, be∣cause the exercise of Vertue is begun confusedly, and without method, or order; or els, because we vnder∣take more at once then we can well, and solidely per∣forme; wherby it easily falleth from vs, & we soone loose it agayne. Which in∣conuenience may be pre∣uented by an orderly and diligent examine, which is the third Help to the imi∣tation of the B. Virgin, and
consisteth chiefly in these two things: First in the well composing and orde∣ring the matter was take in hand; secondly in the con∣stant keeping of the time in which it is to be put in practise. The matter of this exa∣mine may be sayd to be twofold. The first may be about those actiōs of ours in which we striue to imi∣tate the B. Virgin, exami∣ning ech one particularly & orderly, by themselues; as for example: In seeking to make our meditation in some sort like vnto that of the V. Virgin; in some sort
I say, for so much perfe∣ction as was in her, euen the Seraphims neuer attay∣ned vnto. Or else, by in∣deauouring to imitate her deuotion, in hearing of Masse, Hand labour, or any other corporall Exercise; & so likewise in any other thing. The other may be, con∣cerning the vertues of the B. Virgin, which in their degrees we are to labour to attayne vnto. As for exam∣ple, in making a particular examine of Humility, we are to begin with some one of her actions, & so go on by degrees vnto the rest.
And whē we haue in some sort profited our selues in Humility, we may passe, (obseruing the same me∣thod) vnto other vertues, as fraternall Charity, Obe∣dience, and so vnto the rest; in such māner neuertheles, that we may chiefly insist vpon those which we find most vsefull, and necessary for our selues. To this Examine three seuerall tymes belong. The first is the morning, when we must obserue 3. things. 1. To make a resolution & conceiue an earnest desire of imitating the B. Virgin in such or such an action or
vertue. 2. That we take som signe of remembrance, to put vs in mynd at certaine tymes to renew our good purposes. For example, some short sentence, or ia∣culatory praiet, or the sight of some Image, or as often as we hear the clock strike, or els whensoeuer we shall go out of our chamber, or the like. The 3. is to begge humbly of the diuin good∣nes, we may keep this our our purpose & resolution. The second tyme is at noone whē as we must exa∣mine, 1. Whether we haue performed our morning-purpose. 2. Whether we
haue made vse of the signe of remembrance, which we tooke; & whether we haue noted our defects, or the profit we haue made, com∣paring day by day, week by week, & month by month. 3. We are to conceiue a new purpose for the tyme to come, in confidence of the help of God, and his most B. Mother, whose ayd we are agayne humbly to im∣plore. The 3. tyme is the Eue∣ning when we are to make our Examine, in the same manner as we did before at Noone. And because it helpeth
very much towards the cō∣stant performing of our good purposes, to call thē often to mynd, therfore di∣uers haue vsed sundry mea∣nes & speciall helps therun∣to. S. Hedwigis a Polonian Duchesse, did vse still to weare about her necke an Image of the B. V. to the end that she might be ther∣by stirred vp both to reue∣rence and deuotiō towards that sacred Queene, as also to a feruent desire of imita∣ting her perfectiōs. Which her piety was afterwards made notable by a famous miracle. For at her depar∣ture out of this life, she held
the sayd Image so fast with three fingers of her left hand, that it could by no meanes, or force be taken thence, and so was buryed with her. After 25. yeares her body being to be tran∣slated to another place, was found all cōsumed to dust, except those three fingers which held still the Image of our B. Lady, & her head, which was not only found, whole & vncorrupted, but also full of a most fragrant odour, which like oyle di∣stilled from thence, in great aboundance. [Sur. in eius vita. 15. Octob.] S. Edmund Archbishop
of Canterbury did vse an∣other kind of signe, or to∣ken to put him alwayes in mynd of the vertues & per∣fctions of our B. Lady, and chiefly of her Chastity, which vertue aboue all o∣thers be practised, and had in most high honour & ve∣neration. It was this. After he had, by the instinct of the Holy Ghost, solemnly espoused himselfe to the B. Virgin, in memory of this his betrothed fayth he put a ring vpon the finger of a certayne Image of the Blessed Virgin, and made another most like vnto it which himselfe did conti∣nually
weare; on which af∣terwards, as often as he did look, he seemed to see the most amiable Virgin his spouse there present before his eyes, and in her a liuely & excellent patterne of all vertue, and perfection. In this Ring was engrauen the Angelicall Salutation, and that miraculously, as by the relatiō of diuers of vn∣doubted fayth & sincerity was affirmed. [In eius vita 16. Nouemb.] Others haue inuented, and vsed other signes, & memorials to the same end.
CHAP. V. The fourth Help to the Imitati∣on of the B. Virgin, is to im∣plore her ayd, and assistance often. ALl that industry which hath byn expressed in the former Chapters, will produce but little, or no fruit at all, vnles it be wate∣red with the plēteous dew of the diuine Grace: ther∣fore we must humbly, and often implore, and begge the same with a great di∣strust of our strength, and no lesse confidence in our
B. Sauiour, and his Holy Mother. To which end, & insteed of Iaculatory pray∣ers, we may vse certayne Versicles approued by the Holy Church, in crauing now this, now that vertue of the Bles. Virgin. As for Example, in crauing of Chastity & Meeknes, these words of the Hymne, Aue Maris stella, will be most proper. O Virgin singular, in mild∣nes passing all, Make vs both meek & chast deliuer'd from sins thrall. As likewise, in crauing of sincere and ardent Charity,
out of the Hymne, Stabat Mater Dolorosa, these words thus. Mother, Fountaine of true louing, Mee to feele thy Sorrow mouing, Cause that I may mourne with thee. Let my Hart with feruour burned, Towards Christ with Loue be turned, Which to him may plea∣sing bee. The B. Mother of God herself, gaue vnto S. Ioane Found resse of the Annun∣tiates, three most wholsom documents, wherby she at∣tayned
vnto great Perfe∣ction. The first was, that she should say ten Aue Ma∣ries in memory of those ten Vertues wherin the Bles. V. so greatly excelled, to wit, Chastity, Prudence, Humi∣lity, Fayth, Gratitude, O∣bedience, Pouerty, Patiëce, Piety, and Constancy in af∣fliction. The second was, that she should salute with 5. Pater Nosters, & 5. Aue Maries, the 5. most pretious wounds of our Sauiour IE∣SVS-Christ, in imitation of that deuotion, with which the B. V. saluted, and con∣templated them whilest he hung vpon the Crosse. The
third was, that daily in ho∣nour of the fruit of the B. Sacrament, she should re∣cite twelue Aue Maries. Vnto which threefold de∣uotion the Popes of Rome haue graunted many par∣dons and Indulgences. [In Chron. Annunciat.] That you may styr vp in your selfe, and more and more enkindle in you, both a firme trust in the B. Vir∣gin, as also feruour in de∣maunding the gift of the imitation of her vertues, it wilbe necessary, that you often practise these follow∣ing Exercises and the man∣ner of begging her help & ayde.
CHAP. VI. The practice of begging of our Blessed Lady. IN crauing of grace and ayde, you must with as great feeling as may be, ac∣knowledge your own wāts and the liberall graces, and fauour of the Mother of God. And first you shall ima∣gayne your selfe to be in a threefold state. 1. As one sicke and wounded (for so indeed spiritually you are, through your sinnes, vn∣bridled passions, and inor∣dinate affections,) so as
from head to foot there is no sound part in you. 2. As one poore, and in ex∣treeme want of all vertues, merits, and diuine graces. 3. As one hungry, longing and thirsting after Iustice & perfect vnion with God in this life, and Glory in the life to come, desiring to be healed of your infirmities, and relieued in your wants, & nakednes, still looking about you if by chāce you can espy any rich and mer∣cifull person, who may be∣stow an Almes vpō a Soule, so miserable, so poore, so diseased, so hūgry as yours. Secondly, you shall ima∣gine,
that you heare with∣in you the B. Virgin calling of all mortal men vnto her, who want or seeke for help offering them ayde and as∣sistance in these words: Blessed is he who watcheth daily at my doores, & wai∣teth at the entrance of my gates. He that findeth me, shall find life, and saluation from our Lord. [Prou. 8.] Then thinke vpon the Mo∣tiue which may perswade you with humility & con∣fidēce to haue recourse vn∣to this Lady and Queene: As first, how that she is re∣plenished with all those graces, which you so much
need. 2. That she is so pure, as neuer taynted with the least blemish of Veniall or Originall sinne, 3. So holy that she excelleth in all kind of vertue. [Many daughters haue gathered togeather ri∣ches for thēselues, but you haue surpassed them all.] 4. That she is so vnited with God, that there is no pure creature eyther in he∣auen, or earth, who enioy∣eth him in greater perfecti∣on. Lastly cōfider both the meanes, & the will she hath to do you good. For she is called the Queene of Mer∣cy (sayth S. Bernard) be∣cause she can when she will,
how she wil, and to whome she will, open the Treasure of diuine Grace; in so much as no wicked sinner can pe∣rish, to whom the Saint of Saintes doth lend a helping hand. [Serm. 1. in Salue Reg.] Thirdly, being now stir∣red vp with these cogitati∣ons, resolue to approach neere to the B. Virgin, like as a poore & needly begar. And to the end you may the better obteyne what you desire, help your selfe with the intercessiō of your Angell Guardian, & of all the other Angels, also of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apo∣stles, and the rest of the
Saintes in Heauen, of all whome you must earnestly intreat, to begge an Almes for you of her. Then pre∣sent your selfe before that sacred Queene and Lady, humbly saluting, & magni∣fying her, laying open your owne miseries, & begging redresse, with no lesse ear∣nestnes and affection, then beggars vse to do whē they cry out for pitty in the streets; lastly make a firme purpose to be more feruent in honoring her heerafter, and humbly say, as follo∣weth. I salute you humbly, O most sacred Virgin, I prayse
and glorify you, O most Clement, most Pure, most Holy & most Happy Lady, most powerfull Queene of Angells, most glorious Queene of Patriarches, Prophets, and Apostles, most potēt Queene of Mar∣tyrs, most wise Queene of Cōfessors, most vnspottēd Queene of Virgins, & most faithfull Queene of all Ho∣ly Saints. O most Blessed Mother of God, you know my miseries, my infirmities and wounds, my pouerty & nakednes, behould heer my groans, and the languishing of my desire! Your breasts are so filled with pitty, that
being but toucht with the knowledge of our wret∣chednes, they instātly flow forth with the milke of mercy. Behould me heere pro∣strate at your feet, O San∣ctuary of the Miserable, hubly begging of you, by those motherly breasts of yours, by that inflamed loue you bare vnto your Blessed Sōne IESVS Christ, by that burning Charity, with which you haue acce∣pted vs to be your seruāts, your votaryes, yea, & which is more, your most vnwor∣thy childre, that you would be pleased to obteyne for
me a fullremissiō of all my sinnes, & a true and harty detestatiō therof, also wor∣thy fruits of pennance and repentance in this life, per∣fect mortification of all my senses, and victory ouer all my passions, and temptati∣ons. Obteyne likewise for me O sacred Virgin, a strong Fayth, a firme Hope, & per∣fect Charity, a full resigna∣tion of my selfe to the will of God, Purity of intentiō, and true Deuotiō towards Christ IESVS Crucified, the B. Sacrament, and your most Holy selfe. Obteyne likwise for me, I humbly
beseech you, Obedience towards my Superiors, Af∣fability & Mildnes towards all, profoūd Humility, For∣titude, and Patience in all aduersityes, and lastly the gift of Perseuerance, and a happy, and holy End. Grant vnto me, O Blessed Aduocate, at the houre of death, your most glorious and delighfull presence, and shield me then, vnder your shaddow, against the fear∣ful threats of diuine Iustice So shall you alwayer be my most honoured Lady, my most reuerenced Queene, and my most beloued Mo∣ther. So shall I with all the
force, and powers of my soule, thus confirmed by your Grace and Fauour, alwayes endeauour to set forth your worship, ho∣nour, and glory. CHAP. VII. The Imitation of the B. Virgin, in the contemplation and me∣ditation of heauenly things. THe help for imitatiō of the B. Virgin which hi∣therto we haue set down in generall, are now to be re∣duced to practise & applyed to ech particular act & ver∣tue of hers. Wherfore two things are briefly to be no∣ted.
1. How to frame vnto our selues a patterne of those actions principally, in the which the B. Virgin was most conuersant. 2. How to make a Catalogue of such principal Vertues which she chiefly exercised. The first of her Actions, was prayer and meditation of heauenly things. For so [in Med. vitae Christi c. 3.] sayth S. Bonauenture, fol∣lowing the opinion of S. Hierome, who writeth that the Bles. Virgin continued from morning vntill the ninth hower of the day in meditation of diuine mat∣ters. Euen so in like man∣ner,
as well in order as in esteeme, with al care and af∣fection, must we make our meditation in the morning before all other things: and that we may do it well, we are to indeanour to imitat the Blessed Virgin in foure things. 1. In diligent prepa∣ring our selues thereunto. 2. In making prudēt choyce of the matter wheron we are to meditat. 3. In exerci∣sing offeruent acts and affe∣ctions. 4. In recollecting di∣ligently the fruite of our meditation. In all which, what cleere example the B. Virgin hath left vnto vs, we shall heere briefly cōsider.
Of her preparation to Me∣ditation. OF our B. Ladyes pre∣paring her selfe for Me∣ditation, Dion. Carthusianus explicating these words of the Canticle (I sleepe, but my heart watcheth] speaks of her in this manner: The most holy Virgin could iu∣stly say this of her selfe, (sayth he) because she al∣ways led a most contempla∣tiue life, & (marke heer the things required in contem∣plation) being wholly free from all externall trouble and inordinate noyse, from
all superfluous care & per∣turbation of mynd, atten∣ded onely to God, with a quiet and watchfull heart. She was of an ardent & la∣borious charity, of a res∣plendant and aboundant wisdome, and of a daily and continuall recollection. [In Cant. 5.] To which may be added, how much she was giuen to the reading of spi∣rituall books, wherein or∣dinarily she spent a great part of the day. Marke now diligently, this example, & see that you follow it as neer as may be. Feed your soule euery mor∣ning, of which you ought
to haue more regard then of your body. Srengthen it, I say, and cherish it with that Angelicall bread, and most sweet Manna of con∣tēplation: & that you may the sooner a riue vnto per∣fection, prepare, your selfe before hand thereunto (as did the B. Virgin) with pu∣rity of life, internall repose of mynd, frequent aspira∣tions vnto God, & by a true desire of meditation, and the reading of spirituall books. Take also the Bles∣sed Virgin for your Guide & Patronesse in this so es∣peciall a worke, & desire of her in most humble māner
that she would obtayne for you, diuine light, feruent & pious affections. S. Eleazarus the Earle, being demaunded of a Re∣ligious man, what order & method he obserued in his prayers, & what patrons he chose among all the Saints for his guide & direction therin, answered thus: Tru∣ly I haue chosen the B. Vir∣gin to be my Guide & Pa∣tronesse, & when I set my self to prayer, I put before my eyes, first myne owne vnworthynes, and so reco∣mending my selfe vnto the Mother of Mercy, I hum∣bly beseech her to put that
into my mouth and heart, which may be most gratful to her, and to her Blessed Sonne IESVS, and withall I offer vp vnto her, with as much feruour and deuotiō as I can, the Angelicall Sa∣lutatiō, which hauing once recited, I neuer wāt matter to meditate on. [Sur. in cius vitac. 5.] Whereon the B. Virgin did meditate. THE matter on which our B. Lady meditated, was the law of God, his holy Wll and pleasure, al∣so vpon those Prophecies
which chiefly fortold the cōming of the Messias. For (as Origen sayth) she had the knowledge of the Law and Prophets, & did daily meditate theron. [Homil. 6. in Luc.] Next she pon∣dered, the benefits of God, wherwith (as Bernardinus Senensis sayth) her mynd was continually exercised, in the heat of Charity, [serm. 51. c. 2.] After the birth of Christ, she medi∣tated vpon the mysteries that did daily occurre be∣fore her eyes, and conser∣ued the memory therof in her heart by meditation, as witnesseth S. Luke. After
the ascensiō of her B. sonne (as Saint Hierome and o∣thers do wryte) she did cō∣template in her secret bo∣some, his Life & Doctrine, his Crosse, Death, and Glory, and to that end did oftētimes ascēd to the top of mount Caluary, where our Lord was Crucifyed, that she might fill that place with tears, which was once stained with the bloud of her deare sonne, flowing from the crosse, to wash a∣way our sinnes. Frō thence would she go into the caue to worship the sepulcher of our Sauiour, and adore the glory of her Sonne in his
Resurrection. She would also go to the Mount Oli∣uet, and ther kisse the print of his holy feet ascending into heauen And when she went to Bethleem and visi∣ted that most happy place, where she first had brought forth her sweet sonne, who can imagine the inward ioy she felt, and the teares of sorrow she shed in vie∣wing this and other places, whilst in the mean time she most studiously meditated vpon mysteryes which had there byn wrought. [Ca∣nisius de B. Virgin. E 5. c. 1.] Take you now the same matter, and argumēt for
your daily meditation: thinke diligently & often on the life of Christ, and of his Holy Mother, and be assured it will be most ple∣asing and gratfull vnto thē both. F. Lewes dela Puente doth relate in the life of F. Baltazar Aluarez, that, to a certaine deuout woman, replenished with the spirit of God, and adorned with the gift of high Contem∣plation, an Angell did one morning appeare, when as making the spirituall Ex∣ercises of S. Ignatius, she was meditating on the life of Christ his Blessed Mo∣ther; telling her that he
came of a message from the B. Virgin, to let her vnder∣stand, that those deuotions and spirituall Exercises which she vsed, were most gratefull and pleasing vnto her, especially those of the diuine Mysteries of her Blessed Sonne IESVS, as being most apt to styr vp the affection vnto heauēly things. Willing her also to go forwards daily as she had begon; for that her selfe was both the Patro∣nesse and Inuentresse of those kind of Exercises, & did first instruct S. Ignatius in the making therof, and disposing thē into method,
And that also they were the same, which herselfe had daily vsed, whiles she liued vpon earth. [P. Bur∣ghesius in libello, quod Socie∣tas fit Ʋirgini sacrat. c. 12.] Of the solide purposes made by our B. Lady in meditation. THat our Blessed Lady did exercise most solid acts and affections in her meditations, S. Brigit will witnesse, who treating of her continuall meditation in the Temple from her tē∣der years sayth thus: Whē B. Mary being yet but an
Infant, began to conceyue a knowledge of God, she did not childishly, but ma∣turely consider, with feare and care to discharge her duty, how much she was to honour and reuerence so high a Maiesty. And when afterwards she came to vnderstād how God the Creatour of all things, did behould & iudge the liues & actions of euery one, she firmely purposed with her selfe to adore him in the humblest manner, and to cōmit nothing that might be displeasing to so great a Maiesty. Againe, comming to know that this God
was the peculiar Iudge of Israell, who had byn al∣ways so good and gratious vnto that People, she reso∣lued to loue, and honour him alone, with all her hart & mynd. But when she came at last to vnder∣stand, that he was to come into the world as a Rede∣mer, and to be borne of a Virgin, she began so to burne with charity & loue towards him, that she thought of nothing, nor desired nothing but him. [lib. 1. Reuel. ca. 10. & l. 3. c. 8.] And Canisius speaking of her affections in meditatiō
euē in her childhood saith: That fayre Virgin who was most deare to God, began euen thē to be woū∣ded with the darts of the diuine Loue, & to be cho∣sen out among thousands to be the only Beloued of God. O what heate, what fyre of loue, did thē burne within her? What scope, or end had she of louing, when the most sweet and pretious spirit of God did mooue her to shed pious & louing teares, and to send forth innumerable sighes? Whose senses were so who∣ly absorpt therewith, and suffered such diuine violēce
that her mind would in a manner be rauished, & euē languish in the most sweet contemplation of the only Good [Canis. l. 1. c. 13.] The Doctours of holy Church are of opiniō, that whatsoeuer rapts, illustra∣tions, diuine Contempla∣tions, & Extasies were euer granted vnto any Saint, or holy person, the same were communicated to our Bl. Lady in a farre more per∣fect and excellent manner, by her Blessed Sonne. Imagine therfore, that when you contemplate S. Paul burning with most ardent charity, and crying
out, Who shall separate me from the charity of Christ? Or when you see S. Mary Magdalen like snow, mel∣ting away in a most tender passion of loue, before the presence of her Lord Christ IESVS: or Saint Augustin wounded to the hart with the Dart of Loue, wholly languishing in the midst of his kisses bestowed vpon the wounds of Christ, and dying to himselfe, as vnto him he liued: or S. Francis vttering of these word, My God, and my All, whilst he imbraced the Crosse of his Loue, with his Seraphicall armes: or els S. Thomas of
Aquin sighing vnto IESVS, from his pure and feruent flames of loue; I desire thee thy self, & nothing els but thee: Or S. Ignatius with this motto of his Contem∣plation, O how vile doth the Earth seeme, when I looke vp to heauen? And that other, O God of my heart o that the world did but know thee? Or that Earthly Angell B. Stani∣laus Kostka whilest he was eleuated from the earth, al wet, with the teares of a te∣der deuotion, and wholy rapt with cerestiall delight, yea so burning with diuine loue during the tyme of
his meditation, as it was ne∣cessary, often to apply a wet cloth, to coole his burning bosome: Imagine (I say) when you ponder these, & a thousand like rapts, and extasies, as the true & liuely effects of Contemplation, and compare them to that diuine & most ardent flame which burned in the B. Vir∣gins breast, they will all ap∣peare but as litle sparks on∣ly in regard of hers. Oh that we could but warme our frozen hearts somety∣mes whilest we meditate, at the fornace of her most ar∣cent loue! If thou wouldest when thou art dul & drow∣sy
propose Her, vnto thy selfe, as a patterne to be imi∣tated: If thou wouldest say vnto thy selfe whilest thou meditatest; how much more feruētly would the B. Virg. handle this matter in which I so dully & slothfully me∣ditate! with what zeale and affection! with what higher desires and firmer purposes would she be vnited vnto God the only good! Of the the Recollection of the Blessed Ʋirgin. IN the recollection, which the Bl. Virgin vsed after her Meditation, she was al∣wayes most carefull to keep
in memory the illustrations which were diuinly reuea∣led vnto her during the ty∣me of her meditation, as al∣so all the good desires and purposes which she concey∣ued from thence. All which she first preserued for her owne help, & then for ours as sayth Eusebius Emissenus [Homil. 5. in festo Assump.] And betwixt her tymes of meditation, she did so feed and stir vp the flame which was kindled in her hart, by that which she had medita∣ted, that her whole life was no other then a perpetuall burning heate, and an ex∣treme excesse of loue, as
saith Rupert. [serm. de Assump. Neyther is it to be doub∣ted, but the same B. Virgin who instructed S. Jgnatius in the making that admirable Booke of his Spirituall E∣xercises (as we haue former∣ly declared) did teach him also that Addition, where∣in is prescribed, that when we haue ended any medita∣tion, we should always spend a quarter of an houre in examining the fruit and successe therof, which both he himselfe did most dili∣gently obserue, by putting downe in writing all the conceyts and affections of his mynd euery day. And
the like did that holy man Fa Peter Faber, of whome are extant a few, but very pious Commentaries which he wrote of his daily actiōs in Meditations, to the end that no benefit which he receaued of God might es∣cape his knowledge, & that he might be stirred vp to thanksgiuing for the same, and to a greater loue of so bountifull a Father, from whom he did acknowledge to haue receaued all his progresse in vertue, all his heauenly consolations and delightes, all the diuine re∣uelations and inward lights of his mynd, and lastly all
those graces and blessings which had byn any way bestowed vpon him. And he acknowledged, that he was first moued heerunto, when as he deuoutly cele∣brated the Feast of our La∣dy De Portiuncula, or; Of the Angells. CHAP. VIII. Of the Deuotion and Reuerence of the B. Virgin towards the Sacrifice of the Masse. SVarez and other Doctors are of opinion, that the B. Virgin after her sonnes Glorious Ascension into Heauen, did heare Masse e∣uery day celebrated by S.
Iohn, or some other of the Apostles. Nor can it be iu∣stly doubted that the Bles. Virgin whilst she liued in this mortall life, did heare Masse daily, since that she, now triumphing in heauen, hath byn often seene, to come downe from thence, and be present whilest the Holy Masse was celebrated. It is recorded that S. Bo∣nitus Bishop of Auuerne in France, praying on a time all alone in the Church of S. Michael, our Bles. Lady descended from heauen ac∣cōpanyed with a glorious troupe of Angels & Saints, & commaunded him to say
Masse; which he forthwith performing, the Angels ser∣ued him with all reuerence, the Mother of God with all her heauenly Cōpany hea∣ring the same, with great Deuotion, & vnspeakable signes of ioy. Masse being ended, she gaue vnto him, in testimony of her pre∣sence, & of her deuotion to holy things, a Vestement made of a strang, and vn∣knowne, and of a wonder∣full white, & vnusuall light stuffe. [Sur. in eius vita.] Also the Bles. Virgin did another tyme honour with her presence, & multitude Angels, S. Andrew surnamed
Carmelitanus, Bishop of Fe∣suli; whilst he was saying Masse, saluting him with this no lesse honourable, then friendly greting Thou art my seruant whome I haue chosen, and in whome I will be glorified. [Sur. in eius vita.] But that which hapned vnto Henry the Emperour, the great imitator of the B. virgins purity, was yet more miraculous. For cōming on a tyme to Rome, and wat∣ching all the first night, as his custome was, in the Church of S. Maria Maior, he found our Sauiour there ready to say masse, hauing for his Deacon and subdea∣con
S. Laurence and S. Vin∣cent, the whole Church be∣ing full on euery side of ce∣lestiall Company, among whom, and aboue them all the B. Virgin did appeare. The Angels did sing the In∣troit, which was [Suscepi∣mus Deus misericordiam tuam &c.] & in singing those words [Iustitia plenaest dex∣tera tua] all the glorious Audience, imitating IESVS & his B. Mother, did poynt with their hands towards the Emperour. When the Ghospell was song our Sa∣uiour, his B. Mother & all the other Saints and An∣gels in their order, did kisse
the book. After which the B. Virgin made signe vnto the Angell who then held the Booke, that he should likewise carry it to the Em∣perour to kisse, with whose Virginity she was so much delighted. All which whilst the Emperour beheld with exceeding ioy, an Angell stroke him, like another Iacob, in the sinewes of his legge, saying: This shalbe a signe of diuine loue, and fauour vnto thee, for thy Iustice and Chastity: after which tyme he halted to his dying day. [Surin eius vita 19. Junii. The holy Virgin hath not
only manifested her Religi∣ous honour and reuerence to the holy Sacrifice of the Masse, but also to all other things that do any pertaine vnto the same, as to churchs Altars, & their ornaments; also to the Priestly veste∣ments some of which she is said to haue made, & ador∣ned with her owne hands; the which, both whilst she liued heere on earth, and whilst she now triumpheth in heauen, she hath often manifested to haue in espe∣ciall regard and reuerence. She once admonished Iohn a Senatour of Rome, togea∣ther with his wife, in their
sleepe, that, in that place which they should the next morning find couered with snow, they should build a Church in her honour; and that it was very pleasing vn∣to her, that they had made her heyre of their wealth. No lesse memorable is that apparition of the Bles∣sed Virgin vnto S. Ildephon∣sus Bishop of Toledo, who presented him with a sacred Vestment as he was ready to celebrate Masse, saying: Receaue from my hāds, this small guift, which I haue brought vnto thee out of the Treasury of my Sonne, as a reward of thy Chastity
and Purity, and for that thou hast also defended my Virginity. And whilest she spake these words, with her owne handes she put the Vestement vpon him, bid∣ding him to celebrate masse therein vpon all the Feasts of her B. Sonne, and Hers throughout the yeare. [Sur. in eius vita.] Of our B. Ladies behauiour du∣ring tyme of Masse. THe Honour, and more thē Angelical Reuerēce, which the B. Virgin shewed vnto this most dreadfull Sacrifice, by obseruiug and marking euery Ceremony
therof, with a most sweet tast of piety and denotion, may easily appeare. For if (as hath byn sayd before) she were so affected to all Holy places, because by them she foūd her selfe stir∣red vp to the memory and contemplation of the di∣uine mysteries and actions of her B. Sonne IESVS, & perceaued in her selfe a sen∣sible increase of sundry pi∣ous affections; with how much more pleasure, deuo∣tion and loue may we ima∣gine, her to be present at this most Holy sacrifice of the Masse, in which the my∣steries of the life & death of
her B. Sonne (who is there corporally & really presēt) are by the holy Ceremonies of the Church expressed & called to mynd, Do you therfore imitate the B. Vir. in hearing masse daily, with reuerence and deuotion, setting often be∣fore your eyes the example of her internall & externall reuerence, her admirable Charity in contemplating the seuerall mysteryes of that dreadful sacrifice: & la∣stly be you wholy inflamed with the fyer of deuotion, especially at the tyme of E∣leuation of the B. Sacra∣ment, supposing that then
you euen see the B. Virgin offering vp her dearly belo∣ued Sonne into the hands of his Eternall Father: As S. Mary of Oegnia did vse to see vpō euery Cādlemas day, our B. Lady offering her little IESVS in the Tē∣ple, & old Symeon imbra∣cing him in his armes, with admirable gust, and con∣tent [Ʋitriac. in eius vita.] Imagine likewise the B. Virgin to be present at the Holy Sacrifice of the Masse, expounding the mysteries thereof vnto you, as once she did to a certayne de∣uout Priest, who being of∣ten tempted to doubt of
the Reall Presence of the Body of our Lord in the Sacramēt of the Altar, one Saturday as he was saying Masse, perceaued the sacred Host to be suddainly vani∣shed away; whereat being much amazed, whilest he looked about the Altar to find it, he beheld our Bles∣sed Lady standing neere him, holding her little I E∣SVS in her armes, who spake thus vnto him; Be∣hould him, whō I brought forth of my chast wombe, whom thou hast consecra∣ted, handled, and eleuated; I deliuer this my sonne vn∣to thee, take him, & finish
thy Masse. The priest recea∣ued the heauenly Infant, lay∣ing him downe vpon the Corporall, & when he came to that place of the Masse where he was to deuide the holy Host, the child sodain∣ly vanished away, and the Host remayned in place therof as before. Wherupō the cloudes of his misbe∣liefe being wholy dispersed he euer after inioyed great peace, and tranquility of mynd. [Pelbart. in pomer. B. Ʋigin. lib. 12. p. vlt. §. 1.] Oh that you could, in hearing of Masse, but once heare the B. Virgin saying vnto you, Behold this, or
that is now presented, or si∣gnified! Or that at the ele∣uation she would say, Be∣hould now my B. Sonne, whome I bare in my most chast wombe, heere offered vp in this vnbloudly sacri∣fice! Or in tyme of Com∣munion, you did imagine her, putting her most belo∣ued sonne into your armes, as she did once to old Si∣meon, to the Sheephards, to the three Kings, and o∣thers!
CHAP. IX. Of the Imitation of the B. Vir∣gin, in receauing the Blessed Sacrament. THe most feruent Piety of the B. Virgin and her vnspeakable propensiō vn∣to things diuine, together with the deuout custome of Christians in those pri∣mitiue times, do manife∣stly proue, that whiles she remayned on Earth after the Ascensiō of our Sauiour she did dayly receaue the Blessed Sacrament of the Aultar. Whosoeuer therfor desyreth to imitae our B.
Ladyes most holy Example in often frequenting the Holy Communion (yet by the speciall direction of his Ghostly Father) let him haue a speciall care of that due preparation, purity, hu∣mility, charity, and other Vertues, which she dayly practised, & diligently ob∣serued. And first of all, let it be your chiefest care to make that consideration very fa∣miliar vnto you (especially the day before you are to communicate, or els the same morning) which F. Robert Southwell of the So∣ciety of Ieus (famous for
his constant suffering for the Catholique Cause in England) did dayly vse with great gust of mynd, and no lesse fruite of Spirit, and which he hath left written with his owne hād, in these words. If (sayth he) the B. Virgin were to beare Christ agayne in her wōbe, (or receaue him in the ho∣ly Communion) and knew the houre and moment in which he were to come, with what preparatiō wold she dispose herselfe? What continuall actes of loue, do you thinke, would she make? How carefully wold she prepare the chamber of
her heart to receaue him? with how many tears, with what sighs with what ardēt prayers would she expect that day and houre? And when she knew the tyme to be at hād, how humbly, how deuoutly, how reue∣rently, would she prepare herselfe for the entertay∣ning of him? She would no doubt spēd that tyme who∣ly in the contemplation of God, and consideration his infinite Goodnes, Loue, Mercy and Maiesty; in such manner, that euen enflamed with the fire of Charity, she would now become more diuine then humane; & for
getting all earthly things, would euen be rauished a∣mōgst the Celestiall Quires of Angels, togeather with him, whome she prepareth to receaue. So wryteth Fa. Southwell, concerning a more remote preparation. But now in the tyme of that Masse wherat you are to receaue, you must dis∣pose your selfe in another manner; by styrring vp in your selfe actes of Fayth, Humility, Confusion, and Sorrow for your sinnes, with these, or the like short Aspirations; O how fer∣uēt, how intent were those actes of Fayth which the B,
Virgin stirred vp in her self, when she was to commu∣nicate! They were euen as great as that which she exercised, in belieuing the Angell Gabriell; announ∣cing the so admirable, and incomprehensible Natiui∣ty and Conception of the Sonne of God! Or as that, wherewith she belieued, and adored him as true God, most wise, most Powerfull, most Holy, of an infinite Maiesty, Perfection, and Glory, euen when she saw him hanging naked on the Crosse, exposed to iniuries and scornes of men, and last of all dying an infamous
death! With this light of Fayth how profundly did she enter into herselfe, and how lowly did she humble herselfe before the diuine Maiesty! she I say, who be∣ing elected the Mother of God, yet reputed, and cal∣led herselfe his Handmayd? and who among the Apo∣stles, and disciples when they were gathered togea∣ther expecting the cōming of the Holy Ghost, had pla∣ced herselfe in the lowest ranke among them? Do you striue to imitate as neer as you can this humility & fayth of the B. Virgin, and falling downe before the
most B. Sacrament acknow ledge your owne vnworthi∣nesse, confessing your sins, & detesting them from the bottome of your hart; beg∣ging earnestly of the most pure Virgin who prepared a most decent place to recea∣ue our Sauiour comming into the world, that she would offer you vp vnto her Bl. sonne, cleansed, and purged from all sinne, and render you gracious in his sight. You must also exercise acts of Hope, and Confi∣dence in the mercy of God and stir vp in your selfe an carnest desire of receauing
Christ in the same manner, in imitation of the B. Vir∣gin. Who can imagine how she did erect her selfe vp to∣wards God, that so she might be made a most wor∣thy habitation to receaue his B. sonne, hauing first tasted of the diuine Mercy, & perceaued her selfe to be inuited vnto this most ho∣ly Sacrament, and disposed therto by celestiall guifts and vertues? Or who can once conceyue her earnest and fixed desire of recea∣uing Christ, which was with out doubt no lesse, then that with which, more ear∣nestly then any of the Pa∣triarkes,
she expected his comming into the world? Or that, wherewith she sought him with so great solicitude the three dayes he was lost in the Temple: Or els that, wherewith for the 3. dayes after his death like the mourning Turtle, she sighed after his Resur∣rection. Imitate the most B. Virgin in exercising the like acts of Hope, Confidence, and Desire of receauing so bountiful a guest, by whom so many benefits do accrew vnto thee. Desire of her, that she would intreat thou maist be drawne after him by the odour of those cele∣stiall
perfumes of his, and that he would adorne thy soule with all decent orna∣ments of vertue. S. Gertrude doth recount of her selfe, how that she was admonished by the B. Virgin, to repeat three ty∣mes ouer the 116. Psalme, [Laudate Dominum omnes gentes] in her honour, as often as she did communi∣cate, therby to prepare herselfe more worthily to receaue that holy Sacra∣ment: First, to beseech our B. Lady, by that most im∣maculate Purity, wherby she was made a pleasing Ta∣bernacle for the Sonne of
God, to free her from the stayne of her sinnes, by her intercessiō. Secōdly, by that most profound Humility, wherby she deserued to be exalted aboue the Quires of Angells, that she would be pleased to supply, and make amēds for all her ne∣gligences. Thirdly, by that inestimable Loue, wherby she was inseparably vnited vnto God, that she would obtayne for her, store and abundance of merits. And the same S. Gertrud addeth, that once vpon a tyme whilst the Religious drew neer to the Commu∣nion, she did perceaue the
Queene of Glory on the right hand of one who was amonge the rest, clothing her with a Robe adorned and beautifyed with the flowers of prayer and deuo∣tion, & desiring her sweet Sonne for her sake to haue this Virgin in particular re∣gard: Who at the petition of his B. Mother presently shewed great signes of grace and fauour vnto them all. [E. 4. Insin. diuin. cap. 49.] You must likwise stir vp in your selfe frequent actes of Loue, following therein the Example of Gods most Holy Mother. For who cā comprehēd the fire of that
loue, which alwayes bur∣ned in the Blessed Virgins breast, when she was ready to communicate, being as it were, euen changed into a Holocaust, especially whē she considered that he was now wholy to be giuen vn∣to her, who had before wholly giuen himselfe for all mankind, as a bloudy Sacrifice vpon the Crosse? Who had giuen those hāds and feet, to be cruelly boa∣red through? That breast to be pierced with a lance, which was yet more deeply wounded with loue? And lastly, who had giuen all his whole body, to be moul∣ded,
and (as we may say) ba∣ked with so many wounds, that it might become ther∣by bread more delicious to our tast? Labour to beget in thy selfe the like loue, & vnion with Christ, by cal∣ling to mynd euery tyme thou dost communicate, some one passage or other, of his passion: so shalt thou do a thing most gratefull & pleasing both to God, and his B. Mother. S. Lydwine the holy Vir∣gin, on a tyme lying sicke in her bed, was very desirous to communicate, but not hauing the commodity at that present, she was com∣forted
by her Angell Guar∣dian, who told her, that ve∣ry shortly Christ her Lord, whome she so much desired would come and visit her. Wherupon conuerting her selfe wholy to her prayers, being wrapt in contempla∣tion, she perceaued diuers Angels comming towards bed her, one carrying the Crosse, another the Lance, some the whippes, others the reed, the nayles, crowne of thornes, with all the In∣struments of the passion. In the midst of the troupe wēt the B. Virgin, and last of all our B. Sauiour. Being come into her Chamber, they
compassed her Bed round. And then our Sauiour first turning towards her, with a smiling countenance, in the likenesse of a beautifull child, presently appeared vnder the forme of an Host, which she receaued with such aboundance of solide ioy, that it was wonderfull how so narrow a brest, could conteyne such an O∣cean of diuine delightes. [In eiu vita mens. April.] Oh that thou couldst ob∣tayne but one only drop, out of this Oceā of diuine, Mercy, by the intercession of the B. Virgin, when thou art about to communicate?
Or at least, that thou coul∣dest, with a sincere, & sim∣ple heart, say with Thomas a Kempis: O Lord my God, my Creator, and my Re∣deemer, I do desire to re∣ceaue thee this day, with the same affection, reue∣rence, prayse and honour, with the same gratitude, dignity and loue, with the same Fayth, Hope, and pu∣rity, that thy Most Holy Mother the Glorious Vir∣gin Mary did receaue thee, when most deuoutly and humbly she answered vnto the Angel Gabriel announ∣cing vnto her the mystery of thy wonderfull Incarna∣tion:
Behould the hand∣mayde of my Lord, be it dōe vnto me according to thy word. [lib. 4. cap. 17.] What we are to do after Com∣munion, in imitation of the B. Virgin. WHen you haue com∣municated, you are principally to obserue three things. 1. To giue thāks vnto so great a guest whom you haue receaued. 2. To desire to be perpe∣tually vnited vnto God. 3. To demaund of him, what may be necesary for your selfe and others, in this, or the like manner.
O with what great ioy and exultation, with what celestial delight was the B. Virgin filled, when she had receaued the B. Sacramet? What infinite thanks did she render vnto the Diuine Maiesty for the same? She did, no doubt, euer and a∣none repeate▪ that Cāticle with Iubilation: My soule doth magnify our Lord. With how great sincerity and simplicity of heart, did she offer her selfe, & al she had vnto him, whome she thē lodged within her brest Christ IESVS, her Sōne & her God? Do you offer vp your selfe in the
same manner, and ima∣gine that your Angel Guardian doth salute you with words of congratu∣lation and ioy, as did her Cosen S. Elizabeth our B. Lady: Blessed art thou, because thou hast belie∣ued, and receaned God in the sacred Communion. And do you answere ioy∣fully againe: My soule doth magnify our Lord &c. pondering particu∣lerly euery worde of that Canticle, the better to be∣get in your selfe affections like vnto those which the Bles. Virgin had when she song the same.
Ponder also, with what desire the holy mother of God did burne of seing her Sonne, not hidden vnder the Sacramentall forme of bread, but with his face dis∣couered, shining with glo∣ry in heauen? And that you may the better conceyue the same, heare the B. Vir∣gin herselfe declaring this her desire, out of Ruper∣tus in these wordes: I did weepe (sayth she) & could not speake a word for the aboundance of sighes that vehemently burst forth. For how could I speake of him without weeping? Yet those teares were my
only consolation, and my sole delight: euen as any one may cōceaue by those which thēselues shal sweet∣ly shed, in memory of them whome they loue best and deerest. And if Dauid could say; My teares were my bread both day and night, whilst it was said vnto him dayly, Where is thy God: how much more reason had I to say the same of my selfe, when it was sayd vnto me dayly, Where, is thy God, where is thy Son? Or when I my selfe should say, My God, & my sonne hath sent me hither into this banishment [Rupert. l.
5. in Cant.] And lastly, ponder with what feruor the B. Virgin did demaūd of Christ now her Guest, new celestiall guifts, both necessary for herselfe and others. With what affectiō did she com∣mend the vniuersal Church vnto him, with al the faith∣full, both aliue and dead? Do you seeke to imitate her heerein and conclude this Exercise of the holy Communion. with the like petitions, strengthned and seconded by the help and intercession of Gods most holy Mother.
CHAP. X. Of the Imitation of the B. Vir∣gin, in labouring with our hands, or corporall Exercise. SAint Bonauenture, Eu∣thymius, Sophronius, and others do wryte of our B. Lady, that after she had spent the time from the morning to the 9. Houre in her deuotions, frō that time vntil Midday, she vsed to imploy herselfe in some work or other. Before our Sauiours Incarnation, she was wōt during her liuing in the Temple, diligētly to spēd her time, working in linnen, wollen, & silke, &
in adorning the holy Vest∣ments of the Priests. After the Conception and birth of Christ, she carfully ex∣ercised the office of a Mar∣tha in his education, and bestowed her tyme and la∣bout in the actiue life, by procuring things necessary for her house. There is an Orchard of Balsamum, betweene He∣liopolis and Babylon abun∣dantly made fruitfull and watered by a Fountayne, which springs vp therin. In this (as it recounted) the B. Virg. did vse often to bath her little IESVS, and wash his Clothes, whilst for fear
of Herod they liued bani∣shed in Egipt. There is lik∣wise therby a Stone, on which it is said she did vse to dry those cloths which she had washed. [Baron. in Annal. an. 7.] Others do affirmethat with her owne hands she wrought that seamles Garmet which our Sauiour wore at his passiō. Whosoeuer therfore wil imitate the B. Virgin, let him be sure to flye idlenes. As she admonished Ruper∣tus a singular honourer of hers to do, to whome be∣ing of a very dull wit be∣fore, she opened many se∣crets of holy Scripture, &
filled him with hidden knowledge, but with this charge, that he should flye idlenes, or els he should a∣gaine be depriued of that singular knowledg, which she had bestowed on him. How grateful the exer∣cise of labouring with the hands is vnto our B. Lady, doth well appeare, be it done eyther by obediēce of Superiours, or of chari∣ty, or with any pious intē∣tion & end. For it is writ∣ten in the Chronicles of the Cistercians, that when the Religious of that Or∣der one day had much la∣boured & sweat with rea∣ping
of Corne, the V. Vir∣gin appeared to one of thē a very Holy & wise man, hauing a viol-Glasse in her had which she put often to their noses, that they might smell the sweet sa∣uour which was within; saying these words: To day I haue seene my Reli∣gious labouring in the field, and I haue gathered their sweat into this viol, which doth send forth a most gratefull odour vn∣to my B. Sonne, & me. All that you do, I take to be done to me, I accept it, & in due tyme I will reward you for it. [Spec. exempl. l. 9. exem. 102.
Of the internall deuotion of our B. Lady. NOw with what inter∣nall deuotion & recol∣lectiō of mynd, did the B. Virgin exercise corporall labour, is euident by that which Petrus Damanus wri∣teth in these words: The actiue and contemplatiue life (sayth he) were so apt∣ly myxt, and conioyned in the Bles. Virgin, that ney∣ther her Action did hinder her Cōtemplatiō, nor was her Contemplation wan∣ting in her Actions. [serm de nat. Dom,
The same is also testifi∣ed by Guarinus [serm. de assūpt B. Mariae] who saith, That the Virgin Mary did so performe the part of Martha in the care of wel bringing vp her sonne, as she is belieued to haue had no lesse part with Mary, in the contemplation of the Eternall word. And al those, who haue gloryed in the Title of being the Seruants of the B. Virgin, haue carefully imitated her example in that kind, manteyning alwayes their internal recollection euen the midst of their external labours.
S. Catharine of Siena, whilest her Parents did of∣ten seeke to distracte her mynd, and diuert her from holy purposes, by putting her to do the ordinary of∣fices of the house, was di∣uinely instructed to build her selfe an Oratory in her breast, more lasting thē a∣ny could be made by hāds frō whence she should ne∣uer haue occasion to be re∣moued. The holy Saint did so, & imagined her Fa∣ther to be Christ IESVS her Mother our B. Lady, the rest of the house hould to be the Apostles, and disciples of our Lord: by
which pious imagination, she serued thē all, to their great ad miratiō, with wō∣derfull care and diligence, being neuertheles no ways distracted frō the presence of Christ her true spouse, for whom, & vnto whome she intended all that she did. [in eius vita.] B. Aloysius Gonzaga of the Soc. of IESVS was wont in like manner, whilst he made ready the Refectory (that he might keepe his Soule more attent vnto God) to imagine euery place to belong vnto some one in heauen; as the Re∣ctors place vnto Christ
our Lord, the next to it, vnto our B. Lady, the rest which followed, vnto the Apostles, Martyrs, Con∣fessors, and Virgins. So as when soeuer he helped the Refectorian to make rea∣dy the tables he wold say; Come now, let vs lay our Sauiours Napkin, or his B. Mothers, and so in the same manner would he cal the rest by their seuerall names, labouring in this manner with a heart no lesse inflamed, with a will & affection no lesse ready and feruent towards God then if indeed he had bin then to do the very same
offices, to the aboue na∣med Saints in heauen. [In eius vita l. 2. c. 25. CHAP. XI. The imitation of the B. Virgin, in her Eating, or Corporall refection. OF the admirable so∣briety & abstinence of our Blessed Lady, S. Bo∣nauenture following the distribution of the tyme obserued by the B. Virgin before the Incarnation of Christ, hath these wordes: From the ninth Houre she left not of her Exercise be∣fore mentioned, vntill the
Angell came vnto her, frō whose hands she was wont to receaue her sustenance. S. Ambrose speaking of her abstinence sayth, what shold I speake of the fru∣gality of her dyet, and the aboundance of her deuo∣tion? the one being wan∣ting to nature, the other a∣boue nature? the one ad∣ding day to day in fasting, the other letting passe no time nor occasion? and whensoeuer she had desire to eate, she made choyce of what was next at hand, and such as sufficed to maintayne her life, not to please her appetite. [c. 6. de Ʋirgin.]
Neyther did the B. Vir∣gin herselfe vse abstinence only, but hath commēded the same also the others, who desire to honour her. We read of a certaine Car∣thusi an Brother who was so wholly deuoted vnto the loue of God, and to the memory of his B. Mo∣ther, as it was iudged by those who knew well his I fe, that he knew nothing but IESVS Christ Cruci∣fied, and his Holy Mother. One might being in his cell, he seemed suddainly to be compassed about with a great troupe of di∣uells in the sharpe of wild
swine gaping all-fearefully on him, with very long & sharpe teeth. Then entred also into his Cell, one in humane shape, of a huge bignes, reprehending the forsayd Monsters for their slothfull coward lines; and hauing a terrible irō book ful of lōg & crooked teeth threatned to teare the holy mā in pieces: but the Mo∣her of God instātly appea∣red vnto him, hauing in her hand a litle wand, saying: How dare you, yee vile monsters, come neere vnto him, he is none of yours, neyther can you preuayle against him. At which wor∣des
the wicked crew, swif∣ter thē thought, did vanish away. Then she turning to the Religious man sayd: thou shalt vnderstand that thy deuotion is very gra∣tefull and acceptable both to God and me, therefore perseuere as how hast be∣gun, & striue dayly to pro¦fit therein. And that I may also giue thee some dire∣ctions in particuler, be sure to eate the worst meate thou canst find: Exercise thy selfe deuoutly in the labour of thy hands, and choose the worst & cour∣sest cloathes. And hauing thus spoken vnto him, she
sently departed. [Ʋincent, Bellou. l. 7. spec. hist. c. 117.] How the Bl. Virgin did ioyne the Refection of her mynd with that of her Body. NEyther may we make doubt, but that the B. Virgin whilest she fed her body, did also nourish her soule, since that she had the Angells alwayes to serue her, and Christ our Lord sitting at the Table with her. If you desyre to imitate this recollection of the B. Virgin, and nourish your soule with some pious me∣ditation
whilst you are fee∣ding your body; on Sun∣day you may imagine, that you see the heauenly ban∣quet, wherwith the Angels and Blessed soules in hea∣uen, together with IESVS-Christ & his B. Mother are sweetly replenished with the Glory of God. On munday, you may imagine Christ our Lord in his Ho∣ly Mothers armes when he was a child, feeding, & suc∣king at her breastes. On Tuesday, thinke you see him now more grown, sit∣ting at the Table with the Bl. Virgin, & S. Joseph. On Wednesday, that you see
him seeding in the desart, after he had fasted fourty daies, receauing food from the hands of Angels. On thursday, that you see him eating his last Supper with his disciples. On Friday drinking gal on the crosse. On Saturday, that you see the Bl. Virgin, as before sayd, feeding with the An∣gells who administer vnto her; or els, saying grace at your table, giuing a sweet tast & relish to your meate with the hony of her di∣uine Goodnes and Mercy. Which benefit she hath of∣ten bestowed on many, es∣pecially Religious persons:
as she was once seene to go about the Table of the Ci∣sterciā monks, & with her owne handes distribute a certayn Electuary, or sweet confection to all of them, one only excepted who re∣fused to eat as the rest did, but was of a particular diet [Caesar. l. 7. c. 48.] It is recorded also of one Fulbertus, a singular Ho∣nourer of the Bles. Virgin, that being once very sicke, and loathing all kind of meate, the B. Virgin apea∣red to him, & gaue him her virginall breasts to sucke, wherby he presently reco∣uered his health. O that
the Bles. Virgin would be∣stow vpon vs some of that celestiall sweetnes, out of her motherly breasts! how then should we despise and contemne all these corpo∣rall delicacies, and sensual pleasures, which are as wel common euen vnto bruite beasts, as to vs. With what discourse did the B. Virgin recreate her mynd, after her Refection. AFTER her sparing and temperate repast, we may piously imagine what recreation the B. Virgin v∣sed, being so neerly con∣ioyned
to God, that daily she conuersed with him, or with Angels, or els with S. Ioseph, or som of the sacred Virgins who had dedicated their seruice to the honour of God in the Temple. It was reuealed to S. Brigit that Christ IESVS when he was yet a Child (in pri∣uate and domesticall dis∣course with his Mother & S. Ioseph) did reueale vnto them diuers hidden & di∣uine things; and that the sweetnes of his words cau∣sed in thē both singularde∣light, kindling a great fia∣me of the diuine loue in their breasts. [lib. 6. de re∣uel.
cap. 58.] And it hath byn said be∣fore, that those who are truly louers & honourers of the B. Virgin, are very much addicted to spiritual colloquies and discourses; therefore there is no need to say any more thereof in this place. CHAP. XII. How the Bles. Virgin i to be imitated in Sleeping. YOu may learne out of S. Ambrose, what the repose of our B. Lady was. The B. Virgin (sayth he l. 2. de Ʋirg.) had sooner
necessity thē desire to sleep and yet, whilest her body did rest, her soule was still watchfull, often repeating in her sleepe what she had read; or interrupted of her rest, she continued still the same. To which may ad∣ded out of S. Bernard, that whilst the B. Virgin slept, by a meritorious act, she did wholy aspire vnto God & was euen then a perfect cōtemplant. [serm. 51. c. 2.] The which sanctity of hers euen in sleeping you are to imitate, as neere as you can. To the attaining wherof a continuall deuo∣tion and exercise of vertue
wil wōderfully help. Besi∣the B. Virgin doth vse to bestow her benediction v∣pon those who take their rest in decent & holy man∣ner, as S. Dominicke did see her once sprinkle with ho∣ly water, and blesse all his Religious being a sleepe, excepting one, who lay vn∣decently in his bed, al∣though he were ignorant thereof.
CHAP. XIII. Of the Imitation of the princi∣cipall Vertues of the B. Vir∣gin: & first of her Purity. THat the B. Virgins Puri∣ty was neuer so much as blemished, with the least spot of sin, S. Basil in one word doth sufficiently de∣clare when he sayth: That among all Creatures liuing there was not any greater nor the like Purity to be found then that of the Bl. Virgin. [in orat. de hum. Christi gener.] And S. Anselme sayth: The pure Sanctity, and most saintly
Purity of her pious breast, did infinitly surpasse the purity of all other creatu∣res whatsoeuer. (de Excell. B. Ʋirgin. c. 9.) And the better to pre∣serue this purity the B. Vir∣gin did accompany it with two other Vertues, to wit, the continuall Presence of God, and as carefull Cu∣stody of her selfe. Of the presence of God, Canisius doth thus discourse. What is more happy then the B. Virgin, who whithersoeuer she went, did alwayes con∣template the Euerlasting Diuinity of God adoring inwardly so great a Maie∣sty
in spirit and truth, con∣ceyuing nothing in that her so pure and holy breast but what was also most di∣uine and pure. (lib. 1. c. 13.) Of her euer watchful care to keep this Purity, the B. Virgin herselfe sayd thus vnto S. Brigit. Euen from that tyme (sayd she) that I first vnderstood there was a God, I was alwayes fear∣full and solicitous of my selfe, & of my obseruance towards him, inwardly lo∣uing him, and euery houre fearing least by word, or deed, I might any wayes offend him. [lib. de reuel. cap. 10.]
Of the loue and desire of the like Purity. NOw that you may not only know this Purity but that knowing it, may also loue it, & that louing it, may likewise desyre and imbrace it, you must of∣ten represent vnto your selfe the most admirable purity of the B. Virgin as most resplendant, fayre, louely and gratefull both to God, Angels, and Men. She appeared once to S. Ger¦trude, like to a most white & shining Lilly, spreading it self before the most Ho∣ly and Indiuidual Trinity:
at what tyme the B. Virgin likewise taught her the fol∣lowing Salutation, as most gratful vnto herself. Hayle O white Lilly of the euer resplendant, and peaceable Trinity. Haile o faire Rose of the celestiall Delights, of whose Roote, the king of heauen vouchsafed to be borne, & of whose milk he would be fed, therby to nourish our soules with di∣uine Influence. [lib. 3. in∣sin. diuin. c. 19.] Euen so when you shall behold any Image of our B. Lady, as if you perceaued some liue∣ly purity therein say; O B. Mary, more fayre then the
sun by thy purity, & in splē∣dour surpassing the starrs, I haue Ioued you euē from my youth, & I am become a louer of your Beauty. Another tyme the Bles∣sed Virgin appeared to S. Clare of Monte Falco (who though, she were then but six yeares old, did labour to obtaine this purity, by des∣pising althings for the most pure loue of Christ) bearing in her armes her litle IESVS, and so soone as the holy Child beheld S. Clare, he de∣syred to go downe on the groūd, to imbrace her as his beloued spouse. Wherupon S. Clare comming to imbra∣ce
him, he againe as in play & sport ran from her, and hid himselfe vnder his Mothers garmēts, leauing notwithstanding in the heart of the little Saint, a meruaylous sweetnes of his loue. A particuler examen touching the practice of imitating the said Pūrity. TO the practise of this Purity, a particuler Ex∣amine is very necessary to be made, at a certaine tyme and place, as neere as may be, obseruing these two speciall points. 1. To Exa∣mine your greater sinnes,
if by chante you haue fal∣len into any, making a firme purpose by the grace of God vtterly to forsake them. 2. You must conce∣aue a great and most vehe∣ment desire to root out all sinne wholy. For the first, thinke often with your selfe, how displeasing such offēces are vnto the B. Vir∣gin, being so pure, & thir∣sting so greatly after the diuine Honour and Glory and so extremely auerted from all sinnes, especially mortall. Of which her a∣uersion, we haue an exam∣ple of one, who comming vnto her House of Loreto
on Pilgrimage, burdened with a number of sinnes, and of a life most impure was twice frighted frō en∣tring into the sacred House by certayne terrible visiōs which the saw before him at the dore; nor was he able by any means to enter be∣fore he had byn at confes∣sion, and receaued absolu∣tion of his sinnes. [Tursell. in hist. Laur. l. 5 c. 27.] The like happened vnto S. Mary of Aegypt some∣times a grieuous sinner, who was hindred by a ce∣lestiall force from entring into the Holy Sepulcher of our Lord at Hierusalem,
vntil by help of the Mercy and pitty of the B. Virgin, she began seriously to a∣mend her life. Secondly whē you haue purged your self frō grea∣ter sinnes by the interces∣sion of the B Virgin, & by the help of diuine Grace, you are to proceed vnto the rooting out of veniall sinnes; and first, & chiefly, those, which may incline you to commit greater & more dagerous Crimes, & into which you do more ordinarily fall; perswading your self for certayne that not only mortall, but euen the least Veniall finne is
greatly displeasing to the B. Virgin. S. Catharine of Siena contemplating on a tyme a diuine Visiō, for only ca∣sting aside her eyes, out of curiosity, was for that so litle distraction sharply re∣prehēded by the B. Virgin in such sort, that it caused her to shed aboundance of bitter teares. [in eius vita.] As also a certaine Monke of the cistercians Order of an innocent life, by chāce falling a sleepe one night after Mattins before an Al∣tar in the Church, was pre∣sently awaked by the Bles-Virgin, telling him, that
was no place of sleeping, but of praying. How to begge the gift of Purity of the B. Virgin. YOv must also begge often, & hūbly the guift of Purity of the B. Virgin: to which end you may re∣peate these words of Holy Church, in the Hymne of Aue Maris stella. Grant vs pure life we pray, And make our way secure: That so behoulding Christ our ioy may alwayes dure. And since that the first de∣gree of Purity, is the true knowledg of our selfe and of our owne defects, you
must frequently desire the same of the B. Virgin, and that she would giue you so much light whereby to see and discouer all your sin∣nes and imperfections, that so you may detest them, & make a ful confession ther∣of, at your first opportu∣nity. This fauour she once im∣parted to a youth of her Sodality in Germany, who vpon a tymevery carefully examining his conscience of all thoughts, words, & deedes, & humbly desiring of the Queene of heauen, that he might leaue none of his sinnes vnconfessed;
behould suddainly, there fell downe from aboue, a paper of wonderfull whit∣nes, iust before his face as he was praying, wherein all his sinnes, in a very small, but curious character were written, with this additiō, that if he cōfessed all which was in that paper contay∣ned, and did but deuoutly say ouer his Rosary in the honour of the B. Virgin, he should be in a very good state. And that which incre∣sed the miracle was that an other youth of the same Sodality, as also his Father, the Pastour of the parish, & many others endeauoring
to read the same paper, could neuer vnderstād one letter therof. [Annuae Soc. Iesu. an. 1588. Coll. Monast.] Moreouer you are to cō∣ecyue a most vehement de∣testation of all your sinnes, as well of those you know as of those you know not, or may haue forgottē, such as S. Anselme conceaued, when he said: If (quoth he) on the one side I should see hel, and on the other side a Mortal sinne, & must needs choose one of them; I had rather go into Hell a thou∣sand tymes, then commit but that one Mortall sinne. And he addeth: That he
had rather go to Hell, free & pure from sinne, then to Heauen, defiled with the filth, and ordure of sinne. Lastly you must most hū∣bly, & often begge pardon of your sinnes, and amend∣ment of your life, euen frō the bottome of your heart through the mercy & pitty of Gods Holy Mother who doth louingly receyue all those which fly vnto her for help; like vnto that Cloud which God did on∣ce spread ouer the children of Israel to protect them in their flight out of Egypt, and in their iorney in the Desart, couering and sha∣ding
them like a Canopy, from the intollerable heate of the Sunne. O how often had the ardor of diuine Iu∣stice euen consumed al hu∣mane kind, had not the B. Virgin interposed her prai∣ers betwixt vs and the same like to another cloud, and defended vs from the fury of his offended Maiesty? In vayne should we seeke re∣fuge against the reuenge∣full hand of God, who with sword, sulphure, thunder, & most direfull flames dai∣ly menaceth the world, ha∣uing euery where so great & enormous sinnes to pu∣nish: for who could be
able to persuade, or miti∣gate his most iust wrath & fury, but only the pious Mother of our Lord, by extending the bosome of her pitty & commiseration to saue vs miserable sin∣ners, and by interposing her intercessions to keepe vs from the deadly stroke? wherof the world is full of examples, as once S. Ger∣trud did see her, as it were protecting all kind of wild beastes vnder her garment, by which was signified sin∣ners flying vnto her for re∣fuge and succour. A nota∣ble example whereof we will here recount.
A certayne wicked sol∣diar hauing no hope of his saluation, by reason of the multitude and hey nousnes of his sinnes, cōming once into a Church, fell downe on his knees prostrate be∣fore an Image of the B. Vir∣gin, desyring helpe of her with many teares: whē be∣hould the Child IESVS in the armes of his B. Mother seemed also to weepe with him, and a fountayne of water to issue out of the B. Virgins hand, which moy∣stened all the Altar whereō it fell: thereby to giue the Soldier to vnderstād, how great trust and confidence
he was to haue in her who was the fountayne of all Mercy, and how easily the Sonne would be wonne by his Mothers prayers, who did with teares receaue a lost man returning vnto him. His Companions vn∣derstāding of the miracle, came running thither, to the end theyr eyes might be witnes, & more credit giuen to the wonder; who in testimony thereof did deuide amōg thē as a pre∣tious relique, a Hādkercher wet in the sayd water. The soldiar hauing made con∣fession of al the wickednes of his former life, vowed to
enter into Reigion. [Bo∣nif. & Orland. E. 4. c. 5. CHAP. XIV. Of the Imitation of the Cha∣stity of the B Virgin. HOw excellent the Cha∣stity of the Bles. Virgin was, S. Antoninus well de∣clares when he sayth: That it did not only exceed the Purity of all earthly Crea∣tures, but euē of the Angels themselues. And truly the Epithete, or addition of the world VIRGIN, is so proper to the Mother of God, that Epiphanius ex∣clayming out, sayth: Who durst euer yet pronounce
the Name of Blessed Mary, & being demaūded whome he meant, did not presetly reply the VIRGIN Mary? Abrahā had giuen him the Title, of Friend of God, nor shal it be takē frō him: Iacob had the Name of Is∣rael, and it shall not be al∣tered: & B. Mary the Syr∣name of VIRGIN, nor shall it be euer changed for she alwaies remayned most chast and pure. [Haeres 78.] And although God him∣selfe had particuler care of this her Treasure of Virgi∣nity, yet did she also vse all posssible diligence for pre∣seruation therof, as in shū∣ning
the sight and conuer∣sation of men, & therfore is called. ALMA by the Pro∣phet I say, which is as much as to say, a Virgin, hidden or retyred from the sight of men, and of a most ap∣proued Chastity. And Ga∣latinus sayth; that the eyes of the B. Virgin did neuer behold any vnlawful thing and that among other her many perfections, she was indewed with the spirit of Prophesy, in such manner, as if at any time she might chance to heare, or see any vndecent thing her eares & eyes should presently be shut, & wholy reserued to
fulfill the diuine pleasure, (lib. de Arcan. cap. 5.) Nor did the Bl. Virgin only, loue and preserue her owne Virginity, but also did beget the same in o∣thers. For although (as sayth S. Bonauenture) she were of a most fayre & ad∣mirable aspect, yet did she mooue all men therby vn∣to greater purity of life. And now in heauē (saith S. Ambrose) she hath hūg out her banner of Purity, and sacred Virginity, and by her protection secureth all to follow and imbrace the same. (l. de instit. Virg. c. 5.) Let this her Angelicall
vertue therfore mooue & incite vs to her imitation. O how fayre is a chast ge∣neration with noblenesse? And let vt cōceaue a most earnest desyre of obtay∣ning the same by often re∣presenting to our selues the B. Virgin, calling vpon vs in these words of Ecclesia∣sticus: Come vnto me all you who seeke after me, and you shall be filled with my generations. For my spirit it sweeter thē hony, and the hony combe. I haue fructifyed like the vine, & brought forth the sweetnes of odour; and my flowers are fruites of ho∣nour
and honesty. Now that you may the better obteine this vertue, you must often cal to mind this versicle of the Church. O Virgin singular, in mild∣nes passing all, Make vs both meek & chast deliuered from sins thral, As also this other: By thy immaculate Conception, o most glorious Virgin, we beseech thee deliuer vs. Which short prayer, Do∣ctour Auila a most famous Preacher in Spayne, doth affirme to be of great force against all impure, and vn∣cleane thoughts. Lastly in what esteeme
the pure louers of Chastity are with God & his B. Mother, may appeare by the following history. One Iu∣lianus a Noble yongman, who intended to liue chast, was contrary to his pious desire inforced by his pa∣rents to mary a like Noble virgin called Basilissa. Now when night drew on, and they retyred to their Bri∣dal Chāber, there was such a sent of Lillyes & Roses (although it were then winter) that the Bride Ba∣sssa thought herself to be in some pleasant Garden in the moneth of May. Wher∣vpon her husband toke oc∣casion
to tell her of his de∣sire and purpose, and so far preuayled with her, that she likewise there vowed Virginity vnto IESVS the most pure spouse of al chast harts. She had no sooner done, but they perceaued the Chamber to shine with a wonderfull light, and saw Christ Iesus in the middest of a multitude of Celestiall wights, all cloathed in white garments, & the B. Virgin inuironed with vir∣gins one euery side to ap∣proach vnto that holy Ma∣riage feast; togeather with most melodious musicke, fit for so great a solemnity
sounding forth these wor∣des, Juliā how hast cōque∣red: And, Blessed be thou, O Basilissa, who hast obey∣ed the wholsom counsayle of thy spouse. Then was there giuen vnto Iulian a fayre booke to reade, in which was written this: Those who for the loue & desire of me, haue despised the world, shall haue their place among thē, that ne∣uer knew any woman. Basi∣lissa shall remayne among the Order of virgins, wher∣of MARY the Mother of IE∣SVS is Queene & Princesse, After Iulian had read this, he shut the Booke, and all
the holy Quires of Saintes there presēt answered with one voyce, Amen. O with what solid & pure delight was this most chast Payre of pure Soules filled? where are yee, O yee vanityes of the deceytfull fading im∣pure, wretched world? how poore and miserable will yee seeme compared with these celestiall, & most so∣lide delights?
CHAP. XV. The Imitation of the Pouerty of the B. Virgin. 1. HOw poore the B. Vir∣gin was in her proper choyce, and how much she despised and neglected all earthly riches, Saint Brigit doth declare in these wor∣des: That high-soaring Soule, (sayth she) which did cōtemplat the rewards prepared for the iust in hea¦uen, did prefer them be∣fore all other temporall ri∣ches, yea in regard of them she did so contemne all o∣ther external goods and fa∣culties,
that she was alone cōtent with that which did only seeme inough vnto her, to the only necessary sustenance of her life. (.10 Reuel. cap. 10. and 3. cap. 8.) And Richelius (cited by Ca∣nisius lib. 1. cap. 10.) testifi∣eth the same, when he saith that the B. virgin after her Sonne was glorifyed and ascended into heauen, did so conforme her selfe with his new glory, that the world grew daily more and more vile in her sight and esteeme, she thirsting insatiably after celestiall things. 2. How truly poore
she was in her temporall estate the same S. Brigit de∣clareth thus from the B. Virgins owne mouth. Frō the beginning (sayth she) I made a vow in my hart, if so it might be acceptable to God, neuer to possesse any thing in the world. The which our Sauiours poore Natiuity in the sta∣ble, and the handicraft of Saint Joseph, as also her owne hand-labour do suf∣ficiently witnesse, yea af∣ter the Ascension of Christ into heauen, she liued amōg the poore and Euangelicall widowes of the Iewes, with whome she receaued her
almes, out of the common Charity of others, with great simplicity, and ioy of hart. And although it be not improbable, that the B Virgin whe she fled with her little sonne IESVS into Aegipt did liue by the cha∣rity of others, and did aske almes from place to place: Neuerthelesse diuers graue Authors are of opinion, that afterwards she liued not so, it being an vnde∣cent thing that so most ho∣ly and chast a Matrone should so offer frequent the houses and conuersati∣on of others, or that so great a louer of priuacy,
should so often appeare in publicke. 3. Thirdly, that this Pouerty of our blessed La∣dy was free, of her owne accord, & not constray∣ned therto through wāt or necessity, appeareth as wel by the quality of her pa∣rents, whose only daughter and inheritresse she was, as also by the many rich, and pretious guifts of the three Kings, and of others, who would neuer haue suffered her to haue wanted any thing had she but desyred the same. 4. Fourthly, she was most obseruant of neatnes
and beseeming decency in ber habit, & clothes, as ha∣uing them alwayes very neat and handsome, and of a most graue and modest colour. And the like also in her Chamber, of which the Archangel Gabriell had the charge, as testifieth Guarinus and many others. Lastly, how much the B. Virgin desireth, this her Pouerty, (which was our Sauiours perpetuall cōpa∣nion on Earth) should be esteemed off by men, all good Religious persons do aboundātly testify by their obseruāce of the Holy Po∣uerty which they professe
& vow. And Saint Francis, famous for his pouerty, throughout the Christian world, receaued that spirit in no other place thē in the church of our B. Lady, na∣med Portiuncula, or, Of the Angells; vnto which Place, as witnesseth S. Bo∣nauenture, he bare a more special reuerence, then vn∣to any other place in the world, as hauing there hū∣bly begun, vertuously pro∣ceeded, & most happily en∣ded; and at his death com∣mended the same vnto his Friars as a place most plea∣sing to the B. Virgin. [In cius vita c. 2.]
CHAP. XVI. The Imitation of the B. Virgin, in humility, Modesty, Pa∣tience, and Obedience. HOw great the vertue of Humility, as the foun∣dation of al other vertues, was in the Blessed Virgin S. Mechtild declareth thus: The first vertue wherin she exercised her selfe was Hu∣mility, thinking alwayes so hūbly of her selfe, that al∣though she were adorned which so many graces, and priuiledges yet did she ne∣uer preferre her self before any other persō, but hum∣bled
her selfe euen vnto al, conseruing silently in her brest the many vertues, & praises due vnto her; as may appeare by her cāticle of Magnificat; the which S. Mary of Oegnia did sing forth, as she lay a dying, therby to declare the ho∣nour which she bare vnto the Bles. Virgin, as hauing burned all her life tyme with a most ardēt desire of imitating her humility. In recompence wherof the B. V. willed her to cal for the last Sacrament of Extreme Vnction, & was present at her death, with all the hōly Apostles, and Christ him∣selfe,
who at the feet of the dying Saint fixed his triū∣phant banner of the Crosse as a token of her Victory, whereby she triumphed by the Humility of the Crosse ouer all her enemies. (Ine∣ius vita cap. 3.) Nor can we heere passe ouer in silence that rare & singular feruour of imita∣ting the Humility of the Blessed Virgin, which was obserued in S. Lewis King of France, whose custome was euery Saturday throgh out the yeare, in honour of the B. Virgin to wash, wipe, and kisse priuately in his chamber, the feet of cer∣tayne
poor people; leauing to posterity a rare, & new example of kingly submis∣sion. (In eius vita. of the Modesty of the B. Virgin. VNto Humility, did the B. virgin ioyne Mode∣sty, as an inseparable com∣panion: Wherof S. Ber∣nard speaking, thus write∣th. When as (sayth he) the B. Virgin did heare her Sonne eyther speaking to the people in parables, or reuealing vnto his disciples the mysteries of the king∣dome of heauen; or when she saw him worke mira∣cles, yea hanging on the
Crosse & breathing out his soule, rising agayne in glo∣ry, or lastly ascending into heauen; yet at any of these times do we neuer read that the voice of this most bashful Virgin, of this most chast Turtle hath bin heard to speake. (serm. Signum magnū.) And if at any time she had occasion to speake, with what modesty, and humility did she vtter her words? She spake, sayth Nicephorus (l. 2. hist.) vnto al without pride, without laughter, without pertur∣bation, as deuoyd of all haughtines, simple, obser∣uant, and of most excellēt humility.
And this Vertue, so high∣ly esteemed by the Blessed Virgin, she much com∣mēds to those who honour her. For, as witnesseth S. Gregory [l. 4. dial. cap. 17.] on a ty me she admonished one Musa a yong Virgin, much deuoted vnto her, to abstaine from idle play, iesting, laughter, and all other childish leuity, if she desired to raygne with her. And truly, if the B. Virgin liuing heere on earth were so carefull, as sayth S. Bo∣nauenture (in medit. vitae Christi c. 3.) that none with whom she cōuersed should offend by any speach of
theirs, nor that they shold be heard at any time to laugh, or vtter any iniuri∣ous words of others: how much more solicitous may we now thinke her to be in heauen, that we should ob∣serue this Vertue of hers? Of the Patience of the Bl. Virgin. THe vertue of Patience springeth also out of Humility, the which shined most cleerly throghout the life of the B. Virgin. For that she was most cheerfull in al her persecu∣tions and afflictions, ne∣uer complayning in her
want or necessity, yea al∣ways most obseruant and officious euen towards her enemies. And S. Ambrose treating of her Constancy, and Fortitude whilst she stood at the foot of the Crosse, sayth; The mother stood by the Crosse of her Sonne, as not fearing the daunger of her owne life. The Sonne hunge vpō the Crosse, and the Mother of fred herselfe vnto the per∣secutors, wherby she be∣came more then a Martyr, and is therfore commonly called the Queen of Mar∣tyrs. (l. de inst. virg.) But how many, & how
solide arguments of patiē∣ce did the B. Virgin suggest vnto S. Lidwyne a most deuout seruant of hers, whilst she lay grieuously sicke for many yeares, may easily appeare, in that she often sent vnto her an Angell to recreate and cō∣fort her with his presence in the midst of her dolours & afflictions. This Angell would often carry S. Li∣dwyne to an Image of the B. Virgin to salute the same: often also to a most pleasant Gardē of flowers, and into a most sweet and temperate ayre, where she suffered neyther heate nor
cold. Somtimes also would he carry her to see the pay∣nes in Purgatory, that she might learne to set light by what she suffered heere on earth. At other times would he rayse her vp to behold the Blessed Soules in heauen, frō whence she receaued such aboundant pleasure & delight, that she was euen rauished with the sight therof. And the Bles∣sed Saintes did call vnto her, & animate her in these words: Suffer constantly, Lidwyne, that which yet remayneth for thee to suf∣fer; for we all haue passed through fyer, and water,
before we came to inioy this rest & happines as you see. (Jn eius vita.) Do you likwise imagine, that you heare the B. Virgin ani∣mating you with like wor∣des, to suffer couragiously whensoeuer occasion is of∣fered. To this may be added the example of Hermanus surnamed Cōtractus, or the Cripple (borne of a noble Family in Sueueland) so called for that all his mem∣bers were from his youth shrunke vp, & contracted. This man led a Religious life famous for learning, in the holy Order of S. Bene∣dict,
about the yeare of Christ 1060. And praying once vnto the Bles. Virgin most earnestly to graunt him the vse of all his lym∣mes, she appeared vnto him and gaue him his choyce of thes two things, eyther to remayne as he was, & haue the guift of al humayne & diuine science & learning, or els to be made whole, & altogether ignorant & vn∣learned. But he considering well the matter, chose to remaine a cripple as he was (Tritem. de viris illustr. lib. 2. c. 84.) No doubt but the Bles∣sed Virgin persuaded this
singular exāple of patience vnto Hermanus, to giue vs to vnderstand, that who∣soeuer will please the Bles∣sed Virgin, according to her example, must patient∣ly imbrace all troubles and afflictions. But to returne vnto our story. From that time forwards Hermanus did so excell in all kind of Learing both in the Latin, Greeke, & Arabicke toūge as he was inferior to none of his age. And among ma∣ny other things he set forth the Ant-hymne of Salue Regina, vsually sunge by thē Church in her Office, and often celebrated by
Angelicall musicke, and many miracles. Of the Obedience of the B. Virgin. LAstly, Obedience, the Daughter of Humility, was most excellent & rare in the B. Virgin the which Gerson doth cōfirme whē he sayth: That she standing by the Crosse, exercised a most highe Act of Obedi∣ence, in offering her Sonne vnto God, and in confor∣ming her will, in his most bitter death, vnto the will of God. She was most o∣bedient vnto all, but espe∣cially vnto her Parents, as
saith S. Metchtild of whom she was so obseruant, that she neuer offended them in any the least thing. The Vertue of her imitation in this so excellent māner she commended vnto S. Catha∣rine daughter to S. Brigit, who liuing at Rome with her Mother, did so greatly desire to returne to her Country of Sueuia againe, that her Mother could by no means perswade her frō the same. Wherupō the B. Virgin appearing, did shar∣ply reprehend her, saying: Shall I help, or fauour thee in any thing, when thou neyther obeyest God, nor
me, nor thy Mother, nor thy Confessor? After this admonition, S. Catherine began to desist, & was euer after of a most ready, and prompt obedience. (Sur. in eius vita.) The great propension & readines of Fa. Peter Cani∣sius of the Society of IESVS, & late Apostle of Germany, to honour the B. Virgin, is well knowne vnto all; and himselfe hath declared in the end of his fifth Booke writtē of her prayses. The which our B. Lady did as greatly & abundantly re∣ward, by bestowing on him the Vertue of Obedience
to his Superiours, with such true feeling and im∣pression of hart, as he was ready to vndergo any Of∣fice, or ministery of the Society, though neuer so meane, or humble without respect or care of himselfe, but reposing all his com∣fort & confidence in God and his B. Mother. These be his owne words. I desire you earnestly, O most glorious Queene, whome none do call vpon without pious fruite, that you would fauourably ac∣cept this poore testimony of my deuotion towards you. I confesse I am not E∣phrem,
that I would dare to say with him; Make me worthy to praise you, o holy Virgin. Neither am I Damascen, that I should make new hymnes vnto your honour? Nor am I Hildephonsus, that I should be honoured with a pecu∣liar reward for vnderta∣king your defence: But I shall thinke my selfe fully and highly rewarded, if you would be pleased to enrole me, not in the num∣ber of your friends, or children, but of your ser∣uants and vassals. Thus he of his deuotion towards the B. Virgin. He∣are
now what a true feeling of Obedience she there∣fore, in recompence besto∣wed vpon him. For he thus answered S. Jgnatius com∣mending Obedience vnto all those of his Society, & to him in particuler. I do simply professe, that it will be most gratefull vnto me, whatsoeuer office or ministery shal be inioy∣ned me by holy Obediēce be it of Cooke, Gardener, Porter, or any other office, in which I am ignorant & wholy to learne. And frō this day forwards, I do make a holy vow, setting aside all respect whatsoe∣uer,
that I will haue no care heerafter either of the disposall of my selfe for Mission or habitation, or any other commodity whatsoeuer, but remit all vnto the Care and disposi∣tion of our Reuerend Fa∣ther Generall; to whome I offer vp, & faithfully com∣mend in Christ Iesus our Lord, the gouernement both of my body & soule my vnderstāding, my wil, and all that I haue. (Orlād, hist. l. 8. n. 4.) Do you by these exam∣ples implore the ayde of the B. Virgin, that you may be obedient in so excellent
a degree, imagining you heare her often say vnto you as she did to those ser∣uants of the wedding feast in Cana of Galiley: What∣soeuer he shall say vnto you, that do. CHAP. XVII. The Imitation of the B. Virgin in Charity towards our Neighbours. SAint Bonauenture spea∣king of the Almes which the B. Virgin was wont to bestow vpon the poore when she was yet a Child, sayth: She refreshed her body with the foode she
receaued from the hand of her Angell & gaue all that was allowed her by the Priests of the Temple, vnto the poore. (medit. c. 13.) Saint Ignatius also sayth: she was very pittifull to∣wards the poore and af∣flicted; being always ready to help theyr necessityes. in Canis. l. 1. c. 13.) From hēce may we imagine, that she distributed all the of∣ferings of the three Kings vnto the poore, as also as∣sisted towards the poore wedding in Cana of Gali∣ley. And how pleasing the giuing of Almes is vnto
the B. Virgin, may appeare out the life of S. Lydwyne before mentioned, who by order of the B. Virgin was once conducted by an Angel into Paradise, where she saw as it were an army of Saints, in the midest of whom was the B. Virgin herselfe, sitting at a Table richly couered with silke feeding vpon the Almes which S. Lidwyne had gi∣uen vnto the poore in Ear∣then vessels, but now set forth in dishes of gold and christall, with admirable ioy and content. Vpon whome herselfe also did seeme ioifully to wayte, &
administer all things fit∣ting. After this vision she alwayes increased her libe∣rality and almes vnto the poore. (Jn eius vita.) What should I say of the zeale of soules, wherewith the B. Virgin did so burne whilst she liued on Earth? She became all, vnto all, that she might gayne all, perfectly knowing the end of the Law & consumatiō therof, to be only charity. Wherfore as witnesseth S. Brigit, she was the Mistresse of the Apostles, Example of Martyrs, Doctresse of Confessours, Mirrour of Virgins, Comfortresse of
Widdowes, wholsome ad∣monshier of the marryed, perfect strengthner of al in the Catholike faith, by whose words, works, ex∣amples, studies and honest labours many Iewes & E∣thnicks haue byn conuer∣ted to the faith of Christ. Neyther doth she now, since her assumption into heauen, cease continually to seeke the saluation of soules by all meanes possi∣ble. She it is, who sēt ayde vnto S. Bernard, S. Domi∣nicke, and S. Francis, and to those of their Orders la∣bouring in the world for the conuersion of soules.
She it is who hath led forth Ignatius, Xauerius, Barzeus and others, into the lists, & field to fight the combats of Christ Iesus. Whosoe∣uer therfore thou art, that labourest in the conuersiō of soules, remember that thou offer vp, & seriously commend thy functiō vn∣to this Glorious Virgin, & giue her thanks for all the fruite which thou already hast, or shalt reap, eyther by thy owne, or by others labour, in the Vineyard of our Lord.
CHAP. XVIII. The Imitation of the B. Virgin in the Loue of God. WHatsoeuer hath bin hi∣therto said of the Ex∣cellency of the B. Virgins Sanctity, is to be ascribed vnto her Loue of God, wherof she was full, and by which she was led vnto all the rest at the first Motion thereof. Of this so great flame of her loue Sophro∣nius thus writeth. The loue of Christ (saith he) did be∣get the desire of his Mother & the desire so increased & enkindled within her, be∣ing
still repayred, and aug∣mented with fresh fewell, that I belieue, as at al times she surpassed all others, so at sometymes she euen ex∣ceeded herselfe. For who cā euer imagine with what vnquenchable flames of pious loue she burned, who was so full of grace, infu∣sed by the holy Ghost, that there was nothing in her to violate her affection, but a continual ardour & rauish∣ment of loue? [sermone de Assumpt. Whosoeuer thou art that seekest after this most faire and odoriferous flower of Diuine Loue; whoseouer
thou art, that with S. Au∣gustin, or S. Bonauenture, desirest to haue the iner∣most bowells of thy soule pierced through with the most sweet, and healthfull wound of the diuine loue, or with S. Francis to haue thy mynd wholy absorpt, and consumed in the for∣nace of the loue of God, that thou mightst euē dye for him, who for thy loue was pleased to giue vp his life vpon the Crosse; ap∣proach neere vnto the B. Virgin, & first contemplate her vertues and perfections frō which, after thou shalt haue admired them as in∣comprehensible
and innu∣merable, thou mayst passe to the consideration of the fountaine of al these guifts & graces, to wit, God him∣self; in cōparison of whom, all the excellencyes & per∣fections of the Bl. Virgin, all her beauty, sanctity, yea and the whole masse of all her graces, heaped togea∣ther, will seeme but as a droppe, deriued from that Ocean of Goodnes & Loue which is in him. Who with this consideratiō doth not burne & wholly consume with the Loue of God? Who now will not cry out with S. Augustin, Oh what
is it that I loue, louing my God! This contemplation you must accompany with feruent praiers vnto the B. Virgin, that she wil imprint in your heart, the inuiola∣ble affection of this Chari∣ty. O how readily, how easily will she heare your petition, comming from a heart sincere and pure? To which end, she gaue once vnto a certaine Virgin who had long desired that high fauour of her, her litle Bles∣sed sōne into her armes of whome Iesus demaunding whether she loued him or no? She answered him, yea euen more then her owne
body. He asked her, how much more? she sayd more then her heart. He asked her agayne, how much more thē her heart? Wher∣unto the Virgin answered, Let my heart answere for it selfe, for I haue no more to say; at which words it presently burst asūder with the vehemency of Loue, wherin were written these words in golden letters: I loue thee more then my selfe, since thou hast crea∣ted, redeemed and espoused me. [Spec. exemp. d. 9. ex. 74] O sweet Eclypse of a lo∣uing soule! O liuely Loue of God, which by taking
away this mortal, doth lead vs vnto an immortal life! O profitable Loue, & ser∣uice of the Bl. Virg. which doth beget in our soules the Loue & honour of Al∣mighty God, by so happy and blessed a death! For so shall the louers of the B. Virgin dye: who ready to depart out of this life, & drawing towards their last end, lāguishing more with the loue of God, then the force of sicknes, shal aspy∣re vnto the celestiall king∣dome, desire to be disso∣lued, and be with Christ: and turning vnto the B. Virgin, shall in most hum∣ble
manner implore her ayde & assistance, saying: O B. Mary, help me, and protect me from myne e∣nemyes, and receaue me now in the houre of my death. There needs no more to be said; for one only sigh, one only teare of such as are truly deuoted vnto the B. Virgin, in their necessity & affliction, doth beyond all imagination so stir vp her motherly pitty & cō∣miseratiō, that she presētly is ready to assist them, say∣ing: [I am heere ready to help you, be confident. A worldly Mother may ne∣glect
her owne child a dy∣ing; she may be absent, or not care for his last imbra∣cement: but I cannot be vnmindful of you, neyther will I euer forsake you.] And this is certayne. For whilst they be prepared with their Viaticum for their last iourny, & armed with the shield of Extreme Vnction, this most louing Mother sits by thē, com∣forts them, strengthens them, and euen warmes thē in her owne most sacred bosome, intreating her Blessed sonne to be propi∣tious vnto them, and im∣brace thē, and so ioyneth
their harts vnto the hart of Iesus, while the Angels sing and triūph, & them∣selues intone that heauen∣ly Canticle of Loue and Iubilation with old Sime∣on: Let thy seruant now, O Lord, depart in peace, according to thy word &c. and in the middst of these celestiall ioyes, do they se∣curely giue vp their soules into the hands of God, & the B. Virgin, to be crow∣ned for all Eternity. And as the Patriarch Noe did passe out of his Arke, to wit, out of the prison, & captiuity of his bodyly mansion, so soone as the
Doue did bring him an Oliue-branch: so the B. Virgin bringing that sa∣cred Oliue-branch her de∣are Sonne Iesus for their cōfort, & consolation to this their last passage; they send forth their soules with all alacrity, ioy, and Iubilation. O death, how bitter art thou to one in loue with the deceyt of the world? O death how sweet art thou to one in loue with B. Ma∣ry the Mother of Mercy? O death, how fearfull and terrible art thou to one a dying, agaynst whome Hell it selfe doth fight? O
death, how secure, and quiet art thou to one a dy∣ing, whome the B. Virgin doth defend? What horrour, what des∣peration shal we then con∣ceaue, from the remem∣brance of our sinnes, and chiefly of our neglect of not honouring God, and his Blessed Mother? What ioy on the other side, what hope shall we haue, when we find that we haue ser∣ued her all our life? Oh how terrible will it seeme to be when we come to dye among so many ene∣myes? Oh how happy, how secure to dye in the
armes of the B. Virgin? Wherein, without doubt, all shall dye that liue truly deuoted to her. And this Flower (to conclude) of eternall Saluatiō doth this Garden of the B. Virgin offer vnto vs; not to be gathered heere in this life, but afterward in the King∣dome of Heauen. FINIS.
