18507.218 S120130 99855330 177448
June, 25. Numb. 31. THE CONTINVATION of our weekly Newes from Forraine parts, Contayning amongst divers matters these Particulars following. The preparation of the Duke of Saxony and all the Protestant Princes, and their vnanimous joyning with the King of Sweden, for the recovery and preservation of theyr Liberties, against the unjust persecution of the Emperour. The great Preparation of the King of SVVEDEN for the performance of some great Designe about the River Elve. The Emperours denunciation of grievous Pu∣nishment against the Citie Newrembergh and all that shall partake with them, by reason they continue in the raising Forces contrary to the Emperours Com∣mand, to which end the Emperor hath given charge to the D. of Bavaria to oppose them with all his power. Two thundring Ploclamations of the Emperours, against all the Protestant Princes of the late Diet at Lypsich, and all those which Ioyne with them. The Malicious inhumane Cruelty offered to the Dead bodies of those which were Martyred at the taking of Mag∣denburgh, and Tllies causing of Te Deum to be sung for his Bloudy massacring of the innocent Protestants. The late proceeding on both sides in the Low-Countries. LONDON. Printed for Nath: Butter and Nicholas Bourne. 1631.
THE CONTINVATION OF our Weekely Newes. From Venice the 24. of May. 1631. COncerning the Peace now, there is no farther question made, since there are no more forces leavied. And besides this, the Governour of Mylan hath faithfully promised within the space of one Moneth, to establish a Generall reformation. The Messenger which is returned from his Emperial Maj. Certifie, that notwithstanding his Maj. did not well like and approve of the agreement made at Cherasco, con∣cerning the Switzers at Suza, and Avigliano. Neverthelesse, he is now willing to stand to, and ratifie the same: to the end, that Italie might subsist in Peace and tranquility, and all these broyles and distractions, may be allayed and have a quiet end. And furthermore, that remainder of those Spanish forces in J∣talie, may be brought together, and march toward the lower-Palatinate, there to be enquartered. For all the Forces out of those parts are departed, and are at this present employed, some of them against the King of Sweden, and the rest are marched into the Netherlands, and are employed against the States. From Overlandt the 26. of May. The troupes of Souldiers which late came out of Italy, re∣maine yet in full essence, and are dayly strengthened and aug∣mented. It seemes that whereas formerly, there solution was to bring them downe toward the Donou, the same no is altered; those Forces shall be employed against the League, contracted by the Protestant Princes and Peeres at Leypsich. Especially, for the defence of the smaller Townes, as Memming and the like. Which at this present are in great danger, and extreamly threat∣ned, if so be they would not yeeld themselves to that League, and receive some of the Protestant forces, that then they shall presently be attached. Hereupon the Imperialists doe not onely expect the rest of their forces, but also certaine thousands more
of Spanish and Italians to ayd and assist them. Wherefore men in these parts are much troubled and perplexed, and take great care how to dispose of all their troupes, and where they shall become, and how they shall be billetted and enquartered. His Maj. the Emperour, hath forewarned us in these parts, not one∣ly to provide for the enquartering of those Spanish and Italian Forces, which are to come, and are now upon the march, but also to find quarter for 25000. other forces, which shall bee newly raised. From Vlm the 25 of May. The Imperiall Forces from Jtalie being 8000. strong are yet hereabouts, they enforme us that certaine thousands more Spa∣nish Forces are shortly to follow them. They intend to blocke up Memmimgen, and will againe re∣duce the same under contribution, and bring it under the Em∣perours Iurisdiction. And for the ensuring of the same, they will lay in some Troupes for Garrison there. And doubtlesse as those of Memmimgen speed, we must look for the same, and not to fare better than our neighbours. Wherefore we of this Citie, the better to defend & guard our selves, we have caused all the trees to be hewen downe, which stood before the Helbergate of this Citie. The Duke of Wirtenbergh with his forces, lyes upon the frontiers. From Berlyn the 27. of May. The foote Forces of the King of Sweden at this present are at Posedan. And his Cavallerie is betweene the Dessaw Sconce, and Posedan. It seemes as we by all circumstances can gather, and conjecture, that his Majesty intends not to enquarter long in these parts. But doe rather thinke that hee will undertake some siedge or other. For his Majesty to that end hath caused many boards and other necessaries to be shipped. And forth of every Regiment he hath taken 400. horse, for to convey the Ordnance, munition, and other Sconce provision. The Lord Feeld-Marshall conducts an Army of 1000. men, which he doth dayly enforce and augment, and levies very strongly to that end. The Forces which were in Pomerania, are now on the march. From Franfort Oder the 29. of May. All things here (God be praised) are in good being, and great and vigilant care is taken for this Citie: great paines day∣ly
is taken about the fortifications of the same. Within this Weeke were brought into this Citie, so many horses of the Im∣perialists, as made up 5. Companies compleat. These horses were taken grafing neare unto great Glogan. The Queenes Majesty of Seaen sent hither lately two Camels richly Laden, to his Maj. with enformation, that God willing shee doth intend shortly to arrive at Wolgast or at Straelzondt her selfe in person. Yesterday here marched by 3. Regiments toward Crossend and farther into Silesia. About Statyn great forces are raised, and the King of Sweden causes an Army to be assembled to assault the Imperialists which are at Melchim. There are dayly and hourely expected 2000. men from Colbergh to march hither, and also 6000. from Ru∣gen. When these shall be arrived, his Maj. resolves with vio∣lence vehemently to assault Gripswolde, and afterward to con∣duct an Army into Mechelenbergh. From Leypsich the 31. of May. The Prince Elector of Saxony, as also, the Marq. of Brandenbrugh, with their Dukedomes & all their adherents, and Confederates, have yeelded and betaken themselves freely unto the defence & protection of his Maj. of Sweden. The passage of Wirtenbergh is now also granted unto his Maj. At this present here at Leip∣seich are Embassadors of the King of England, the King of Swe∣den, the Prince Elector of Saxonie, and of the Marquis of Bran∣denburgh. And certaine it is that throughout the whole Duke∣dome of Saxonie, the Drum beates, and forces levied openly for his Majestie of Sweden. The Merchants here must contribute to his Princely Excel∣lence of Saxony, 6000. and the rest of the Cittizens of Leipsich, 2000. Florins: and besides this sum, a generall contribution will be raised throughout the whole Dukedome. Magdonburgh by the reason of the late miserable and hide∣ous disaster happened there, is reduced to an heape of stones, being quite and utterly ruinated. There are not left standing a∣bove 60. or 70. houses about the Walles, and here and there an house at the corner of a Street. His Majestie of Sweden causes a Ship-Bridge to be layd over the River of Elve, at Angermundt.
From Leypsich the first of June. Last Thursday the Prince Elector of Saxony, departed hence to orgau, to muster, the new levied forces there, which are certaine thousands strong, he will returne from thence hither a∣gaine. He hath more Patents to levie other forces, both horse and foote. The report here is very strong, that the Generall Tilly hath sent a Legate to our Prince Elector: to acquaint him, that very shortly he doth intend to come himselfe in person, to conferre with his Princely Excellence; declaring farther, that he had ob∣tained good meanes for the contracting of a Peace; which then he would propound unto him. And that he had full authoritie and Commission from his Emp. Maj. which Tilly hath consen∣ted unto. Within Wirtenbergh at this present, are 1500. Souldiers, which were levied for the Duke of Saxony, In their Ensigne they bare this Motto. Though Gods Almighty hand, We doe defend our Land. In other Ensignes which belong to the Forces of the Prote∣stant Princes is comprized this. Not without cause, doe We maintaine this Cause. The Generall Tilly causeth all the Ordnance (which he obtai∣ned in Magdeburgh) to be convayed to Groingen, and hath also given charge and strickt command to two or three hundred Boores or Countrymen, to cast all those Souldiers which were taken Prisoners in the sayd Citie Magdenburgh, with the Car∣kasses of the poore Massacred people, into the river Eive. But his owne Souldiers which were slaine in that expedition, hee yeelded extraordinary honourable buriall. He hath caused the said Prisoners to be strictly examined, to know what is become of their treasure, and where they have hid the same The Gene∣rall doth at this present strike a bridge over the Riuer Elve, to march with an army against the King of Seden. The army of the King of Sweden is pitcht about Brandenburgh, Ratenau, Nawen, Tremmen, Spandan, & those quarters. The Duke of Saxony, the Marq. of Brandenburgh, and more of the Vnited and Confederate Princes, have given themselves under the Protecti∣on of his Majesty of Sweden, & have yeelded unto him the passage neare unto Wirtenbergh.
The report is very strong here, that the King of Sweden doth intend to revenge the intollerable usage of the Imperia∣lists at Magdenburgh, he hath some notable exployt in hand, wherefore he hath newly layd a Bridge over the River Elve, neare unto Angermunde. His Emp. Maj. hath denounced Banishment, and sorely threatned the Citie Neurezbergh, because they continue leavy∣ing of forces his Majesty therefore hath delivered the same Ci∣tie to the Duke of Bavaria, and strongly charged the said Duke to persecute those that are belonging unto Neurenburgh with fire and sword: as also all those that adhere unto them. But they regard not these threatnings, but doe proceed strongly with their raising of men. And not onely at Neurenburgh, but through∣out the whole Iurisdictions of all the Protestant Princes. His Majesty of Sweden hath arrested and stayed certaine Mer∣chants at Spandau, who were journeying toward Hamburgh, and required of them fifty thousand Ryxdollers, which they were constrained to pay, because they had in their company an Emperiall Commissarie, who had betaken himselfe into this Company, to be sheltered and so to passe for a Marchant, who otherwise in former time was run from his Majesty of Swedens service, unto the Emperour but now is in hold. From Magdenburgh the 28. of May. All the dead Carkasses are now almost convayed out of this Citie, which have sorely pestered and annoyed us hitherto, and above 2500. Citizens, which were slaine in the fury and burnt, are cast into the River Elve. There were many of them so dis∣figured with the fire, that it was impossible any way to dis∣cerne them who they were. Yesterday here was sung for Ioy of the taking of this Citie. Te Deum Laudamus, and the Ord∣nance of the Citie, three times discharged. The Generall Tilly is at this present here, and is lodged in the 6. Shop-houses with his Concomitants. From Brandenburgh the first of June. The whole Marck even vnto the river Elue, is now quite freed from the Imperialists. Yesterday Doctor Stollman arriued here, who was taken prisoner at the loosing of Man∣denburgh with his Sonne. Hee escaped with his Sonne whilst the fire was so exceeding great in the Emperours Army neare
vnto Magdenburgh, but was constrained to swimme through the Riuer Elue, but now is here with his Maiestie of Sweden. Into this Army come dayly some Magdenburgers or other which formerly were imprisoned but now are ransomed. Ye∣sterday were attached the Hamburger goods which were brought from Leypsich betweene Ferberlin and Spandou. A cer∣taine Commissarie of the Emperour named Potau thought to haue passed along currantly with their Marchandizes, but both he and they were stayd and brought to Spandou The Hambrgers for the releasing of their Commodities haue proferred the Kings Maiestie 80000 Ryxedollers. At Wgst are arriued 5000. men which came out of Swede, and more forces are thence expected dayly. Besides these, 15000 men are also expected from Muscouia. From Franckfort-Oder the 2. dito. Yesterday were brought in hither 5. Companies of Horse, which our forces tooke from the Imperialists neare unto great Gloga, having defeated the Men. Hence are gone 3. Compa∣nies cut of this Citie, as also divers out of other Cities to re∣leeve Crossen, which the Imperialists seeme to ayme at. Here in this Citie are still aboundance of men and amongst the rest 800. sicke Soldiers. His Maiestie of Sweden hath shipt aboue 100. peeces of Ordnance at the Haukll. Some light peeces which may be drawne with one, and two horses. Hee intends doubtlesse some notable enterprise. For in his march he ioynes to euery Regiment 10. Peeces of Ordnance. From Isleven, the 30. of May. The 13. of this Month, the Imperiall Army neare unto Mag∣denburgh, happened on fire in three severall places: which fire did much harme amongst them. But by their losse some fared the better. For Doctor Sollman the Swedish Chancellor, escaped from his imprisonment who was imprisoned with the Byshop of Halverstad. This Doctor, and his sonne, and two Gentlemen, Servants to the Marshall Falckenburgh, and one Captaine Cresse, escaped, and are safely arrived at Brandenburgh. There were 400 Children of tender yeares within Magdenburgh; kept two dayes long in the Cathedral Church, which missed their Parents and knew not what was become of them, these poore children in two dayes space, eat no victuals, insomuch that some of them were famished.
The Imperiall Mandat or Decree published against the conclusi∣on and resolution lately taken by the Protestant Electors, Princes and States, assembled at Leipsick. FErdinand, &c. To all and every our and the holy Em∣pires Electors, Princes, spirituall and temporall Prelates, Earles, Barons, Lords, Knights, Marshalls, Captaines, Maiors, Bailiffs, Iudges, Counsellors, Citizens, Communal∣ties, and to all and every our and the Empires Subjects: But more particularly to all Commanders, Colonels, Captaines both of horse and foot, Ensignes, Lievtenants, and to all other Officers, and generally to all Soldiers both foot and horse, of what nation, dignity and condition soever, and in what ser∣vice (out of our Armies) soever they are or may be, unto whom these our Patents and Commandements, or a true copy thereof (which we will have beleeved and obeyed as the Ori∣ginall it selfe) shall appeare, We hereby doe signifie, Wheras by Letters dated the fourth of April last the Elector and Duke of Saxen hath given us notice of a conclusion made by the E∣lectors, States, Counsellors, Ambassadours, Deputies, and Commissioners of such Protestants as were absent, lately as∣sembled at Leipsick, the strangenesse whereof hath much mo∣ved and filled with displeasure our Imperiall heart, since that the said Electors, Princes and States have agreed and bound themselves, quite contrary to our admonitions sent before to the said electour of Saxen, under pretext of an order of Exe∣cution of the Circles, to make a dangerous preparation of Warre; and, without any signification of their number and de∣signes, make now already (as from divers parts we are adver∣tised) in severall Circles, and particularly in our Imperiall Ci∣ties great levies: And whereas it is easie to presume, that at this perillous constitution of the Empire, where the King of Sweden is entered as an enemy, and having already taken whole Pomerany, a part of the Mark of Brandenburg, and some places Meckeburg, will daily proceede, and incite other forraine forces to doe much: Where the rebellious Towne of Mag∣denburg is not yet brought to obedience, and where many old dangers doe yet appeare; such a dangerous beginning and in∣tent would tend to hinder (and as it were to bereave us of) all
meanes to maintaine the Warres, now so requisite for the de∣fence and necessity of the holy Empire and States thereof; it would further and advantage the power of the enemies; cause yet a greater confusion, troubles and evils, and withall a farre greater mistrust and hatred amongst this Nation: Yea (un∣lesse it be with all speed withstood) it would bring into the whole Roman Empire of the German Nation (our deare Coun∣try) a new unquenchable fire whereby the same (which these 800 yeeres hath most sweetly flourished) would now at once bee consumed to ashes and wholly overthrowne. Therefore we knowing that our duty requires that, as Roman Emperour we doe prevent all such threatning evills, and that such agree∣ments and unions are not to be made nor suffered without the knowledge, consent and pleasure of the Roman Emperour, who we are, but that they are quite contrary unto the Laws, orders and constitutions of the Empire, and the dehortations and admonitions made by us being prohibited under great and grievous punishments, so that wee intend by no meanes to suffer the same. We doe hereby admonish, will and com∣mand you and every of you, and our expresse will, pleasure and commandement is, that you doe not give nor permit any place of Rendez-vous unto my troopes or souldiers, that are, may or might be levied on the behalfe of the said agreement and conclusion made at Leipsick; Neither grant any of them passage or passe whatsoever, but rather where any shall be met or found, that you beat, destroy, disperse and kill them, as you will answer the contrary at your perils of the punishments expressed in the constitutions of the Empire. And most ear∣nestly we doe require and command you the Colonels, Lievte∣nants Captaines, Ensignes Commanders, and all other Offi∣cers both of horse and foot, and all soldiers of what name, con∣dition and quality soever they are or may be, that already are received and entred, or shall yet enter into service of the said preparation and agreement made at Leipsick, against our knowledge, will and pleasure, and against our dehotations, and the Lawes and Rights of the Empire; and more particu∣larly all those that in any way are subject unto us and the holy Empire upon paine and perils comprehended in the said Im∣periall constitutions, and upon paine to lose all the priviledges,
favours, rights, lands, possessions, and also all rights of Com∣panies, Cities and birth; And such others as are not subject to us nor the Empire, upon paine of death, when and wheresoe∣ver they shall be apprehended. Wee most earnestly and ex∣presly command, to give over and forsake all such service, and in time to come never to returne or enter into the same with∣out our knowledge and permission, under what pretext or colour soever they be required or may be induced: And that you make no excuse of your stay by reason of the oath you may or might be sworne and bound by, since the same in this con∣stitution of time is without force I and we doe hereby and by vertue of our Imperiall power discharge and free you of: And if there should be found some amongst you the said Colo∣nels, Captaines, Ensignes, and other Officers and common sol∣diers of horse or foot, that have entered into any service ei∣ther at home in their owne Country, or abroad amongst the troopes of strangers, they and every of them, that in obedi∣ence to this our Imperiall commandement doe or shall returne from that their service unto our troopes, there to serve us and the Empire, and bring their attestations from our Officers, shall have a generall and speciall pardon, and be received a∣gaine into our Imperiall grace. And we will and command withall you the said Electors, Princes and States, lately thus ar∣rived at Leipsick, not to charge or lay upon your vassals, te∣nants, inhabitants, burgers and subjects (in all and every your Countryes, Dominions, Cities, and also all Imperiall Townes and Dominions) any contribution, taxe or subsidy for and on the behalfe of your said levies intended and made against our will and contrary to the constitutions of the Empire; Com∣manding withall, if any such imposition and contribution is or should be required, all you the vassals, tenants, burgers, in∣habitants and subjects aforesaid upon the like and afore men∣tioned paine and upon perill to lose all priviledges, rights, and freedomes abovementioned, not to pay or to deliver the said contribution, but rather to remaine constant and faithfull in those duties you owe to us, as Roman Emperour and Su∣preme head of the hol Roma Empire, and also to shew all fa∣vour and furtherance to him that bingeth this our Imperiall and expresse commandement, that the same may without any
let or molestation bee hung up and published, according to your duty and according to our resolution and gracious and constant intention, that we will not suffer you nor any of you, the Electors, Princes and all others, upon your obedience and duty you shall shew herein, to be troubled or grieved, either by us or others, against the peace of the Religion and Policy. And hereof you are not to faile, but dutifully to obey as you tender our pleasure, and will avoid the punishments and reall executi∣on of the foresaid paine. And this is our expresse will and pleasure. Given at Vienna  the fourteenth day of May, 1631. Extract of severall fresh Letters written out of Germany. THe cruelty used by the Imperialists at the taking of Mag∣denburg (the like no History hath nor could ever make mention of) had indeed troubled many Protestants in Ger∣many, especially the Elector of Saxen found himselfe much perplexed upon the newes thereof, when he likewise was much troubled and urged by an Imperiall Ambassadour and many other Messengers and letters, both from the Emperour and other Catholike Electors and Princes. Howsoever seeing by the example of Magdenburg what he and others of his Profession and Religion have to looke for at their enemies hands and promises, and considering the Imperiall Mandates and Proclamations, published (like a thunder) against the con∣clusion lately taken by him and other Protestant Princes and States assembled at Leipsick; and hearing withall of the doubt and feare divers made of his constancie in the said resolution, he both gave order for the greater speed in the levying of his owne forces and sent also severall Messengers to other Prote∣stant Princes, States and Imperiall Cities, with ample letters, whereby he doth not onely assure them of his constancie and proceeding in the performance of their resolution, But ex∣horteth them also, to make greater haste and to take more care than some of them did hitherto to prepare and defend themselves, representing the great necessity and danger, their enemies extraordinary arming, threatnings and executions would else bring them into. These
letters of his have very much rejoyced and strengthened all the good party, especially Norimberg, Strasburg and other good Townes, the most part whereof are already well provided and armed. But Memming lying some what aside and feeling already those Imperiall forces as came and yet daily come out of Italy (which amount to some six or seven thousand thereabouts) neere them, they feare (as being neerest to the danger) the execution might beginne at their Towne, howbeit they have as yet and doe still refuse any fur∣ther contribution and admittance of an Imperiall Garrison, where formerly they were subject unto. The Elector of Saxen hath laid 10. or 12. thousand men up∣on his frontiers and makes great preparation. Tilly marches with an armie of 25000. men up into Germa∣ny, either into the Dukedome of Wimar, as some thinke, or else towards the Country of Hessen (as is most likely) there to de∣feat the forces of the Circle of the Rhine, who have there their Rendezvous, and part whereof have lately defeated some of those Imperiall tsoops that Tilly had sent to hinder their said Rendezvous. The King of Sweden (having firmed a royall Campe, since the Elector of Saxen did not grant him for his surety and re∣treate the Towne of Wittenberg to put his Garrison into, nor passage through his Country) expecteth more forces out of Prussia and from other parts; meane while he hath an armie in Silesia to which he hath sent some troopes for reinforcing and the better to oppose them all against the Jmperialists that in∣tend to besiege Crossen. Some of his Caualrie met lately with five Companies of Crabates that came out of Magdenburg laden with very rich booty they made there, which five Companies were all defea∣ted, and left all their riches (as if they had expresly fetched the same) unto the Swedish troopes. The like good fortune befell lately to the Garrison of Wesell, who met with a convoy that carried much money towards the Spanish Camp, which convoy being also beaten left all the money behinde them in their enemies hands.
From Arnhem the 11. of Iune. Our souldiers of Wesell and the neere adjoyning Garrisons 160 strong, have defeated a Convoy which was going from Culin to Antwerp, they were conducted by those of Rhynberk & Orsoy, & were set upon by our men neere about Deuren. In which exploit our soldiers obtained great booty 150000 Rix∣dollers in specie, much Silke & other rich commoditie, swhere∣with divers Carts were laden. The rest of the bootie besides the readie Coine doth amount to the summe of 250000 Rix∣dollers, this bootie they brought into Wesell last Sunday in the vening and 60 or 70 serviceable horses, and 2 Ensignes. The spanish soldiers fled all of them, onely the waggoners, and some other labouring men opposed our men, and killed 3 or 4 of them, but there was no meanes for them to prevaile. The Governour, Chancellour, & Councell of the Province of Geldria, and the Earldome of Zutphen have prescribed a ge∣nerall day of meeting, the 17 of Iune at Nimmegen, where the whole countrie is to appeare. The 12. of Iune from the Army of his Excellence the Prince of Orange. Whereas his Excell the Prince of Orange, had pitcht Armie at the side of the River Ley before the Citie Bridges the 3 of moneth, each one thought that his Excellence was of intenti∣on to approach & besiege the said Citie. But now it appeares probably that his Excel▪ was not so minded, for he did not en∣trench himselfe there, but lay with his Army in the field onely. In the meane while certaine Committees were sent out of the said Citie in the name of the 4 parts of Flanders to treat with his Excellēce concerning the Contribution which was behind and had long time beene unpayd, insomuch that they gave se∣curitie for entire payment of 10 yeares contribution. Where∣upon his Excell with his whole Army departed, and the verie same night tooke his resting place at Maldegom, where we pas∣sed the 5 of Iune over the river Lieve towards Walichem, and from thence toward Eckelo, and Caprick, and the 7 of sune re∣turned backe with our whole armie at Watervliet, where his Excell. instantly caused retrenchments to be cast up all along the Holland Dike, for the better ensuring of his armie, so that in
case the spanish forces (which as wee understood had continu∣ally followed us) had come upon us, then had we taken the said Dike for our defence. The 8 of Iune the provision of his Excell. was embarqued, and his horse troopes, being commanded presently as soone as they should be landed to march toward Bergen op Zoome. Ye∣sterday were all the Land-forces shipt, and all the waggons put aboard. The firelockes in the meane time stood in battle array, and held the watch untill all things were safely embarqued. Thus with the whole traine of our armie wee marched from Ysendyck to Rammekens, & so downwards, sayling many hun∣dred shippes together, & so forsooke the Flemish coasts, which country in this our expedition wee have wholly brought un∣der contribution untill the verie Citie Geudt. His Excellence in this expedition had a verie vigilant regard over his whole armie, and a speciall care that all things might be carried verie orderly, insomuch that hee caused many of his soldiers to bee hanged for their misdemeanours and insolencies committed against the inhabitants of the Countrie: But the like care was not taken on the other side, for many of our soldiers which did straggle somewhat out of their limits had by them their No∣ses and Eares cut off: Three soldiers wives with a child of 8 yeares were taken by the Flemish and hanged. The same day that we came to Watervliet, the spanish that night arrived at Caprick, but did not shew themselves any neerer unto us. So that in this enterprize, wee have not met with our enemie to any purpose, and have found no resistance worthy of relation. Onely wee were informed that the ene∣mie brought his whole armie together, therewith intending to cut off all passages from our armie and hinder the victualls from comming to us. What shall follow hereafter in time we shall acquaint you. From Dort 13. of Iune. The armie of his Excellence the Prince of Orange is returned againe out of Flaunders into these parts. Before this Citie are many ships laden with Ordnance, Munition, provision, and all warlike necessaries: Most of the horsemen were landed at Geer∣truydenbergh, & presently hasted thence to Oosterhout, Gilsen & other villages about Breda. The foot forces sayle all of them
toward the high & lower Swalwe, and Geertruydenbergh, whe∣ther these also will land there the time will manifest. In the meane while here and in divers other places many thousands of loaves are baked for the armie. The countrie people in the countrie of Heusden and Alte∣na, flye with all their goods and moveables from their country habitations into the Cities. Their Excellencies the States have prohibited preaching among the Catholickes in the Villages & Townes belonging to S'hertogenbosch, so that all the Churches are shut up continually. Wee have intelligence from Antwerpe with the last letters, that in the beginning of May the fleet of 25 ships at Lisbona is set sayle, among these are 15 Gallioons with 4000, some sup∣pose they are gone toward Calis Malis  ioyne themselves to the Castilian armado, others are o inion that they are bound for Cabo-verde, there to expect  rest, and so to passe forward to Brasill. His Majestie of France is at S. Germani, and the Queene Mother is arrived at Paris with her whole family or house∣hold: But his Majestie had rather that shee had remained at Moulins: Her guard is now lesse than it hath beene neyther is shee so strongly warded as formerly. The kings brother is still a Nancie, The Lord President Legneux is much condemned, for not counselling his Majesties brother for the best in these differences, The king hath charged the Parliament to call Marshall Marilack in question, which might easily endanger his life, by reason that hee hath committed grosse faults in Champgne, as also in Italy, in warlike affaires. The goes a strong report, that new warres is verie like to ensue etweene th Pope, and the great Duke of Moscovy, concerning the succession in Ʋrbinaet. Norwithstanding the Commander Pinsen his ransome is readie, neverthelesse he is not yet at libertie. Count Henry van∣den Bergh questioning one day with him, what he thought the Prince of Orange his enterprize might bee, hee answered him merrily, His Excellence is wise enough to conceale that from me, knowing that I cannot keepe counsell. The said count Hen∣ry is yet at Venlo with 3 or 4 hundred Marriners, it is thought that he will attempt something or other.
FINIS.
