F1430B 551.a.32.[61] R232521 99888920 196052
For the benefit of the New Hospital, to be erected in Dublin. By Authority of their Excellencies the Lords Justices of Ireland. TO be drawn in the City of Dublin for 25000 l. according to the following Table, and to be performed with Balls after the manner of the Greenwich Adventure, which was adjudged by all to be the best method that ever was used to prevent fraud or deceit in the managers thereof, and gave the greatest satisfaction to all the Adven∣turers. By the encouragement it has hitherto met with, there is no reason to doubt its being drawn; full in December next without further delay. The Undertaker hopes that no Adventurer will be discouraged, because it is to be drawn in Ireland for if it be objected, that the Undertaking being performed there, they cannot see it drawn, and the Trustees being strangers to them, they may doubt the fairness of the performance, and whether they may receive their Prizes, if so fortunate to get any. To obviate which, 'tis answered, That the Trustees are so well known by most Merchants in the 3 Kingdoms, to be persons of great Estates, and unquestionable Honour and Integrity, that there is no room to doubt their justice, nor have the English Adventurers so much reason to question its being done in Ireland, as the Dutch, the French, and other Foreigners, had those in England, who freely remitted great Summs to be adventured in that for Greenwich Hospital, and are now the greatest Adventurers in this, without questioning the credit of the Undertakers, or the fairness of the management; and 'tis certain,  Adventurer in an hundred, was ever present at the drawing of  in England, but depended on the justice of the Trustees. They have, for further satisfaction, empowred one of the Undertakers of the Greenwich Adven∣ture, to deposit such money as shall be received there, in the Bank of England, to answer the payment of their Prizes in English Money, who will also be present at the drawing thereof, in behalf of the English Adventurers, and will take care to send over corrected Lists in print of every days drawing, to be published in London▪ and engages to see the Prizes punctually paid at the Bank▪ as those were in the said Greenwich Adventure. There being therefore no reason left to doubt of justice, all persons are desired to be expeditious in taking ut the remainder of the Tickets, that the drawing may be effected accordingly. Such as are willing to subscribe, may enter their Subscription▪ at the Undertakers Office, at Mercers Chappel Porch Cheapside, near the Bank at Mr Harrisons Goldsmith in Cheapside, and at Mr Puckles, Notary Publick it Popes Head Alley in Cornhil, paying down only 2 s. in the pound, and keeping the rest in hand, till notice be given in the publick Papers of Drawing. And for the convenience of all those that are so desirous to Adventure in Partnership, a certain quantity o Stock of Tickets that remain uncut are divided as following, viz Every 5 s. Ticket con∣tained in the said quantity, is divided into 5 equal parts, which are made into small Tickets at 1 s. each. So that every one that takes out a single 1 s. Ticket, is entituled to a 5th part of the benefit that arises with the 5 s. Ticket, from which it was cut, as appears plainly by the Books of Tickets so divided as aforesaid, by which the advantage to each Adventurer is; That by taking out 10 sin∣gle 1 s. Tickets. out of 10 several 5 s. Tickets he has a 5th share in all the benefits that arise in the said ten several 5 s. Tickets from which they were cut. Note, That every Receiver is accountable to the Adventurers, for what Money he receives, till they pay the money into the Bank of England.
harp   4 At 200   800 10 At 100   1000 20 At 50 Each 1000 20 At 40   800 20 At 30   600 20 At 20   400 200 At 10   2000 200 At 5   1000 200 At 4   800 300 At 3   900 350 At 2   700 4700 At 1   4700 umber of the Prizes 6060 Value 25000 harp Tickets at 5 s. and smaller Tickets at 1 s. each may be had at most Goldsmiths and Coffee Houses in the City of Dublin, and at the following places in England. RECEIVERS. At the Undertakers Office at Mercers Chappel Porch Cheapside, near the Bank of England. Mr Edward Harrison, Goldsmith in Cheapside. Mr Pinfold Goldsmith in Lombardstreet. Mr Fordham, Goldsmith in Lombardstreet. Mr Cowper Goldsmith against the Maypole, Strand. Mr  Goldsmith in the Strand. Mr Keat Goldsm▪ at the Unicorn  the Strand Mr Bullock Goldsmith in Cheapside. Mr Reynolds Goldsmith in Fleeestreet. Capt. Jenkins Goldsmith in Essexstreet Mr Hickin Goldsmith against Grays Inn Holbourn Mr Underwood Golds▪ at Fetterlane end in Holbourn Mr Lloyd Golds. next to the Globe Tavern Hat∣ton Garden. Mr Lyon, Goldsmith near the Playhouse Lincolns Inn Fields. Mr Pounton, Goldsmith in Long Ae Mr Catterall Golds. in Russelstreet, o Garden Mr Clements Goldsmith in Newgatestreet. Mr Elms Goldsmith in Newgatestreet. Mr Yarner Goldsmith in Newgatestreet. Mr Roberts, Goldsmith in Newgatestreer. Mr De Caine Goldsmith in Bishopsgatestreet Mr Wilcocks Goldsmith near Bishopsgate Mr Grant Goldsmith St Margaret Hill Southwark Mr Rich. Parker under the the Roy. Exc. Bookseller Mr Brown, Bookseller near Templebar. Mr Benj. Took at Temple Gate Bookseller. Mrs Fabian in Mercers Chappel. Mr Mashbourne Mercer in Oxford. Booksellers. Mr Geo Rose in Norwich, Mr  Hildyard in York, Mr Rose, a Sword-cutler in Ludgate-street. Mrs Milner, a Toyshop in Popeshead Alley. Mr Trubshaw, a Caneshop in Bartholomewlane▪ Mr Holcomb at the Bear Tavern, Holborn. Mr Phips Kings head Tavern Holbourn. Mr Batsons Coffee-house in Cornhil obins Coffee-house in Exchange-Alley. Mr Allen, Bris Coffee-house in Cornhil. Grigsbys Coffee-house behind the Royal Exchange. Jacks Coffee-house in Swithens Alley by Exchange. Joes Coffee-house in Swithens Alley. Peters Coffee-house the corner of Finchlane▪ Mr Frutrer, Exchange Coffeehouse Cornhil. Mr Jacks at Coles Coffee-house, Birchinlane Mr Tingnels Londonstone Coffee-house, Cannonstee▪ Mr Giggs Garter Coffee-house by Custom-house. Tarrants Coffee-house within Aldgate. Jonathans Coffeehouse behind Royal Exchange▪ Walsals Coffee-house in Bartholomewlane. Rows Coffee-house at the Bridge Foot, Southwark. Mr Ivs Scotch Coffee-house, Bartholomewlane▪ Mr Duncalfs Garter Coffeehouse by Ro. Exchange Mr Squires Coffeehouse in Fullers Rents▪ Mr Shank, Nandoes Coffee House near the Temple. Mr Sheffields, Temple Coffee-house, Fleetstreet Mr Hinton at the 3 Conys Grocers Alley. Mr Browns Coffeehouse, Bellyard, Templebar Mrs Wells Coffee house at Scotland Yard. Mr Mitcheis, Rainbow Coffee-house by Northum∣berlandhouse Young Mans Coffee-house at Charing Cross. Mrs Potters Coffee-house near St James's-house Robinsons Coffee-house in Berry-street
