H2098A [ocm]12578937 200314
Historical Collections CONCERNING CHURCH AFFAIRS: In which it is shew'd, From the Ancient Church HISTORIANS, FA∣THERS, and other Ecclesiastical WRITERS, THAT THE Right to dispose of BISHOPS, purely in relation to their Spiritual Charges, in their respective Districts, was believed to be subjected in the Clergy alone, as a separate independent Body from the Lay Power, du∣ring the Reigns of Constantine and Constantius, the two first Christian Emperors: And that it was the Judg∣ment of the Catholick Christians, in those days, if the Secular Magistrate, or any irresistible Party did assume the same Right, upon any consideration whatever, that they were not to be recem'd nor obey'd in the exe∣cution of it. To which are added, Some occasional Observations upon Dr. Hody's Book, called, The Case of the Sees vacant, by an unjust and uncano∣nical Deprivation, stated. Jussos a te Episcopos non esse quos condemnare nullus audebat. B. Hilarius, lib. con∣tra Constantium, pag. 201. Ed. Basil. Ex eo intra no tantum communio dominica continetur, ex quo his perturbationibus vex∣ari ecclesia caepta est, ut exulent episcopi, demutentur Sacerdotes, plebs terreatur, fides fericleetur, humano arbitrio ac Potestate doctrinae Dominicae decreta statuantur. By a Presbyter of the Church of England. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1696.
THE PREFACE. IT is now somewhat above half an year since the following Papers were finished; and perhaps they may never come abroad, but at the discretion of our Adversaries, though they have now, well nigh gone through the Press: For, why may we not suspect, that they will be seized as well as the learned Vindicator's answer was t'other day, tho' Doctor Hody had dar'd him to make a Reply, and promised him the liberty of the Press, in an unhandsome Letter which he sent him about August last, and it was the only stroke in it that savour'd of decency and good manners: I am apt to think that so great rudeness has not been offer'd to so learned a Man before: and if the Doctor does not make amends to his Reputation, by finding some ways that the Sheets may be restor'd, or by publickly declaring that it is not in his power to have it done, he must, his best friends being judges, leave it in a very low and forlorn condition. But tho' our Vindicator had such ill success, providence so far favour'd us, that when we were putting
our Sheets into the Printer's hands, there comes out a Book, which is, entituled, The Bishop of Sarum's Vindication: or, Reflections upon a Pamphlet, entituled, Some Discourses upon Doctor Burnet and Doctor Tillotson, occasion'd by the late Fune∣ral Sermon of the former upon the latter, by the Right Reverend Father in God, Gilbert Lord Bishop of Sarum. P. 52.In this Book he tells us, that Dr. Hody has fully ended the Argument he had begun from the Practise of the Church, and that in so convincing a manner, that matters of fact seem'd not to be capable of a clearer proof; and though we pre∣tended other reasons, and make an excuse for not answering him, the true reason why the Book [of the Case of the Sees vacant] is not answer'd, is, because it cannot be answer'd; men may wrangle eternally in Points of Speculation, but matters of fact are severe things, and do not ad∣mit of that sophistry. After this he adds, that the Practice of the Church is evidently made out to have been this; that since the Church cannot be kept in order with∣out Governors, when Princes turn out Bishops, tho' upon groundless and untrue suggestions, but without any design to corrupt and alter the Faith, in such a case, the Church is rather to bear a par∣ticular injury then to break with the Prince, to forfeit his protection, or to venture on his dis∣pleasure,
even in protecting an innocent and in∣jur'd Bishop. Sacred Orders are indeed deriv'd according to the Rules of the Gospel: but the allotment of this or that Bishop, to this or that See, are things of a mixed nature, in which the Civil as well as the Ecclesiastical authority have their share; both are under the Rules of Discre∣tion and Prudence: and the Protection of the Magistrate is of that consequence to the whole, and to the advance of Religion it self, as well as to the quiet and safety of all the Members of that Body, that it is certainly better to bear, even with a particular injustice, then, by opposing it, to venture on a Concussion of the whole Frame. He goes on, and makes us two challenges; the first is in these words; We challenge them to shew us any one In∣stance,P. 146, 147. where after a Revolution of the State hap∣pened, that was generally receiv'd and settled, the Bishops and Pastors of the Church refused to ac∣knowledge the present Civil Government, and to act in their station under it; and more particu∣larly, where any Revolution happened, which rescued and settled the true Religion, that was not receiv'd with general joy and gratitude, even though the methods of it, and steps of it, were liable to just and great exceptions: we are sure they cannot shew any instance that looks like a precedent to their Proceedings; but that the
whole course of History is one continued Prece∣dent in our favour. The second is in these words; we challenge them to shew us where ever a Schism was formed up∣on the Lay Deprivation of a Bishop, even when the grounds that it proceeded on were visibly un∣just, if the Faith of the Church was not pretended to be concern'd in the matter; more particularly we challenge them to shew us an instance, where the Bishop or Clergy of a Church adher'd to a Metropolitan or a Bishop, so turn'd out, or made a Schism upon his account, when he did not by any publick act or instrument assert his own Right, and challenge the Obedience of those who were subordinate to him. P. 1, 8.He says farther: That our leaving the general Argument from the constant uninterrupted Pra∣ctice of the Church, and betaking our selves to the methods of slander and defamation, is such an evident vindication of a bad cause, and of a worse managery, that it is not possible but that the generality of indifferent Men will soon discern how weak our Reasons, and strong our Passions are: that we have in all our Writings built too much upon the Practice of the Church, to be able with any shame to reject this Argument, and to say, that we ought to be governed by Rules and not by Examples. In which bold challenges, and most false groundless as∣sertions,
there are many things unskillfully and untheologi∣cally laid down and expressed, and call for a castigation: insomuch, that if this Vindicator had not, t'other day, autoritatively demanded a Recantation from Mr. Altham upon his Licensing the learned Mr. Hill's Book, which he wrote against him on Just Principles, and with sound Reasonings, this his performance is alone a convin∣cing indication that he writes and acts not with the skill of a Divine, but upon raw and indigested Thoughts: or, rather, in the strength of his Peerage, and under the pro∣tection of a Writ called Scandalum Magnatum. I'll divert my self and my Reader a little, in taking notice of two or three of his rash productions. 1. He tells us, that the Church cannot be kept in order without Governors, i. e. without the Secu∣lar Power. Pray, how then was she governed, and all things done decently and in order by her own Charter and Officers, in St. Paul's time, and from thence to Con∣stantine the Great, during which space, the Empire was Heathen, and its Secular Arm gave her little or no pro∣tection, but with Gallio, its Deputy in the Acts, cared for none of these things? Can we think that our Saviour founded and erected a Corporation with its own Officers and their Subordinates, through the merits and vertue of his Cross, to subsist under it in the time of Persecution, and did not furnish it with just means and abilities to preserve it self, when the Secular Power frown'd, even rag'd, upon it, whether it was then Christian or Hea∣then?
2. What does he mean when he says, that if the Prince offers violence to the Bishop, and turns him out, in such a case the Church is to submit rather then to break with the Prince, and forfeit his Protection? The Church of God stands and acts by vertue of her Charter from Christ: She is thankfull to the Prince for the worldly immunities and protections with which he vests her; but if she be depriv'd of these, either in part, or in the whole, her Charter remains the same, and retains its original force and obligation; and she subsists neverthe∣less, by the promise and assistance of her Saviour, as she did before any secular donation was bestow'd upon her: her Revenues may not be so large upon it, but her constitution and essential rights, her, even vigor, are not lessened: she neither breaks with the Prince by departing from him, much less by opposing him, nor forfeits, tho' she loses those favours which he had bestowed upon her; but still acts in the same Subordination as to Christ her head in Spirituals, and to the Prince her head in Tem∣porals: neither did she receive one secular donation, but on condition that her Corporation, and the Liberties with which Christ vested it, should receive no abatement, much less a plenary and final abrogation. And it may be far∣ther observed, that as this Vindicator in a few lines be∣fore, makes the Churches subsistence, even ber frame and being, to depend on the Princes favour, the Concussion of which he mightily fears, and wou'd have every body else do so, upon his displeasure, so he again seems, in the same Paragraph, to vest the Church with an intrin∣sick
right of Independency and Non-subordination to him, and to stand upon and execute it, if it be for her advan∣tage. For, what else can he mean, when, having af∣firm'd the Magistrates Prorection of the Bishops to be necessary, he yet owns the Church to have a right to protect an injured innocent Bishop, and to allot a Bishop to this or that See, as well as the Prince, at her own discretion and prudence? And he that will not take this for a self-contradiction, must first make it to appear that these two propositions are competible, the Church is unable to protect her self, and to subsist without the Magistrate: the Church hath a Power to protect her self, and to subsist with∣out the Magistrate. And, which is worst of all, he allows these Rights, which he, with so much difficulty, asserts to be in the Church, to be sacrificed to the Princes displeasure: and the innocent and injur'd Bishop is no more to be protected, but to be given up, in the time of persecution. 3. He farther shews his loose and indigested Thoughts, when he says; that, the allotment of a Bishop to this or that See is of a mixed nature, in which the Civil, as well as the Ecclesiastical Authority have their share; both are under discretion and pru∣dence. If by allotment he means nomination, or (which was the same in the Ancient Church) Election, his distribution is imperfect; for, the Prince, and Bishop, and People had their share in it, during some time of the Ancient Church, in which the Prince was Christian, and sometimes one of them, sometimes the other, and some∣times
all of them joyntly, made this allotment: and since he is (at least pretends to be) so strenu∣ous a retreiver of the Practice of the Ancient Church, and wou'd to be apprehended to make it his rule, he may not be conceived to take it in this sense, because he seems to allow the People no share in it: I will add, (which in the upcast will mostly prevail with him) since the Laws of our Land have limited the nomination of a Bishop to this or that See to the Prince, and do not allow the Bishop or People to have any thing to do with it. Again, if by Allotment he means Election, as distinct from nomination, as our latter Ecclesiasticks use it; thus the same Muncipal Law of our Land places it in the Church and People, but I do not find that the Princes has meddled with it, or pretended to a share in it. Or, if by Allotment he means, the actual vesting of a Bishop with his Spiritual Right in this or that district, or the enthroning him upon his Nomination and Election, the Church Officers only perform this, and the Practice, not only of our own Church, but of the whole Church of God justifies them in it; neither the Prince or People have been concern'd in it, either by the Laws of our Land, or of the Church. This Vindicator therefore ought to have been more carefull in his expression, since, let him take Allotment, in which of the forementioned Senses he thinks fit, he is short, or quite mistaken. But if he confines it to Nomination, as opposed to Election and Enthroni∣zation, he evidently brings himself into a Premunire; because he diminishes from the King's Prerogative, making
it a mixed action, and asserting the Ecclesiastical Authority to have a share with him in the Nomination of a Bishop, as it shall be directed by the Rules of Dis∣cretion and Prudence. But I forbear to insist any longer here, least I should outrun the bounds which I have design'd for this Preface; neither need I take any advantage from these and the like out-works, since the following Collections, which con∣tain the Practice of the Church and Empire in the Reigns of Constantine and Constantius, and Valens and Theodosius in part, do abundantly shew in so convin∣cing a manner, that matters of fact seem not to be capable of a clearer proof, that this Vindicators main Cause is founded on the Sand, and obtruded on Mankind without any precedent in Church History, so far as those reigns do reach, or foundation in things: and that the Empire, then disown'd and remov'd those Rights, in placing a Bishop in his Spiritual Charge within his district, which he pretends it had; and the Church re∣monstrated upon it, when Constantius once attempted it. So that the whole course of History, within the fore∣mentioned interval of time, is one continued Precedent, not in his but in our favour, and it is thence manifest, that as we have not left the general Argument from the constant uninterrupted Practice of the Church, (in the true Ecclesiastical Sense, which concludes the Tra∣dition to be constant and uninterrupted, which is con∣tinued for some time, perhaps, by but a few Catholick hands, when a more numerous company of Hereticks and
Schismaticks trash and interlope it) as this Vindicator slanders and defames us; much less that we betake our selves to the methods of slander and defamation in∣stead of it, so it is no less plain that we had no need to do it. The meek, and pious, and most learned Vindicator of the deprived Sees, yet unanswer'd, is, alone, a just confutation of it. But the judicious Reader will find the Truths which I shall set down by and by, to be as plain and legible in the following Collections, as the Sun is visible at noon, in a clear day: each of which are full in the Teeth of the Bishop of Sarum's Vindicator, and in contradiction to that which he hath, as above recited out of his own Vindication, with so much assurance, and contempton us, asserted. And though he cannot, perhaps, or will not, yet indifferent Readers will see, that there might be other reasons why we have not answer'd Doctor Hody, so soon as he thinks we ought to have done, besides those which he gives, who makes them our ignorance and inability, and because he cannot be answer'd, since he will find, that we had just grounds to contemn him: he needed not, indeed, have been answer'd now, were it not to rectifie and set in their true light those truths and matters of fact, which he hath ignorantly and injudiciously involv'd and obscur'd, or passed over, or, which is worse, wilfully conceal'd. The truths are these that follow; most evi∣dently prov'd to be such, upon the Principles, and from the Practice of the Church, in the Reigns of the two first Christian Emperors: the same, in part, being e∣qually manifested from the succeeding Reigns of Valens and Theodosius. As.
That if the Prince should turn out Bishops, and pretend to discharge their People of their Obedience to them, upon what suggestions soever, whether they be true or false, but maintain the Faith unalter'd and unspotted, the Prin∣ciples of that Age (and its Practice was accordingly, upon each occasion) directed the Church to adhere to the right∣ful and innocent Bishops so deprived, contrary to her Laws, and by an incompetent Power, and to chuse rather to ven∣ture the Prince's displeasure, and to lose his Protection, and to depend upon her Charter given her by Christ, for her preservation, then to recognize and submit to such a Deprivation. That as not Sacred Orders, so neither was the Vest∣ment of a Bishop in his Spiritual Right and Charge in this or that See, then, lookt upon to be a thing of a mixed nature, in which the Civil as well as the Ecclesiastical Authority have their share, but, as the former, so the latter was to be performed by the Ecclesiastical Autho∣rity only. That the Empire it self then disown'd all right, by which it might be enabled to derive a Bishop's Spiritual Charge on him, or to take it from him, and elease his People of their Obedience to him: And, not only so, but, the Empire accounted such an attempt to be profane, im∣pious, unscriptural, and an usurpation; and declar'd the Right of doing it to belong to the Bishop only. That there was no Revolution in the Civil Govern∣ment during this interval of Time, and the Query is im∣pertinent, what was then the Churches Practice under a
Revolution? But since the then Bishops refused to own and submit to the Emperor's Power in placing and displacing Bishops, though the Emperor was settled there by the Law of the Empire, and not upon a forcible removal of his Pre∣decessor, or a Revolution; since these Bishops then declar'd their unquestionably lawful Governor a Persecutor, the worst of Persecutors; Antichrist and Sacrilegious, upon his doing such a thing; we may safely believe that they would not have recogniz'd and submitted to the same Pos∣session or Deprivation, if it had been made by a Governor placed over them upon a Revolution, when his Title was questionable, but that they wou'd have retain'd those ejected Bishops in the Colledge, and made good their stations, tho' themselves were deprived by him for it, and he had placed a Second upon them. The Bishops of the Church are to keep their stations, and, so far as their personal liberty ena∣bles them, to discharge their Functions under the present Government, be it just or unjust. Christ's Charter requires and enables them to do it: no question can be made con∣cerning it. But the Query is, if the present Government, be it what it will, (it is all one, in this regard, whether it be just or unjust) imposes on them unlawful terms, and, on their non-compliance with these terms disenables them to discharge their Functions, in publick or altogether; whether they are not bound to acquiesce under that disability, rather then take it off, and recover their liberty, by complying with those unlawful terms? But, especially, when the Charter of Christ it self, and that Unity which is essential to it, are in danger to be deliver'd into the hands of the Civil Power, and to be violated by it.
That the Catholick Bishops and Pastors of the Church always separated (the Vindicator of the Bishop of Sarum may, in his loose and unthinking way of speaking, when he states cases, call it making a Schism) I say, they always separated from those Bishops that were brought into their Colledge upon a Deprivation, though the Empire had an hand in it, and, at the least, confirm'd it: and the Catholick Presbyters and Believers did so likewise, when the same Bishops were brought into their respective Districts upon the same voidance, whether the Faith of the Church was pretended by them to be concern'd in it, or not: and where the Faith was own'd to be really concern'd, the Schis∣matical intrust of a Bishop (which was thought to be made when a Lay Hand, though it was a Royal Hand, did it) was believ'd as just a ground for their separation, and to contract as deep a guilt, if he was receiv'd and sub∣mitted to, as the heretical imposing a false Article of Faith, if it was embraced and subscrib'd to. That the then Bishops adher'd to a Metropolitan, or another Bishop, as continuing true Members of their Col∣ledge, or Episcopal Fraternity, and the Clergy and Belie∣vers closed with and adher'd to them, as their lawful heads, in their respective Districts, when they were removed from them by a Lay Power that was irresistible; and, not only so, but, when they were banish'd into a remote Land; and, so far as we find in any Church Law which oblig'd them to it, or matter of fact to president them in it, this they did, though these their Bishops had not (sometimes their hard circumstances might be such that they could not)
asserted their own Rights upon their leaving of them: nor did afterwards challenge the Obedience of those that were Subordinate to them, i. e. such the Presbyters and Believers adhering to them, by any publick Episcopal act, or instrument. That though the then Catholick Clergy and Believers built the whole frame of their Proceedings in these Cases, as upon the Principles, so, upon the Practice and Authority of the Church, they were not ashamed to say, under some Emergencies, when Persecution was high, and Professors were thin, and to insist upon it, that they were to be go∣vern'd by Rules and not by Examples: and that the rule, not the numerousness of those who shrank from it in the time of distress, was their guid: and they compar'd their case with those of Daniel in the Lyons Den, and the three Children in the fiery Furnace, in respect of their fewness in number. And though this Vindicator wou'd have done it, none in those days, or since, except some few of his complexion, have thought it to be a vindication of a bad cause, and of a worse managery, nor con∣cluded their reasons to be weak, or their passions to be strong by reason of it. Nor will, even, this Vin∣dicator, when he is out of a Party, or any body else, that is unprejudiced, say, that examples, though they be never so numerous, and otherwise great, have any force or obliga∣tion, but (to speak in his own words) when a Founda∣tion is once laid, and a Cause is provided to be just in it self:Pag. 112. then the steps of providence that watch over it, will be observ'd by all that are not atheisti∣cal and irreligious.
Now, all this, with a great deal more to the like effect, by which Doctor Hody's whole Fabrick is totally over∣thrown, being prov'd at large, as in the following Colle∣ctions upon a sure foundation of Principles, and from as good Authority, as to matters of fact, as any hath been in Christendom, since the Apostolical Writings were penned; I hope we shall be no more upbraided (tho' we may still be contemned) for not answering the Doctor's Book of The Vindication of the Sees vacant, as that Book which could not be answer'd. Neither do I know why these Sheets may not also go for an answer to the Vindicator's mighty challenge, in which, with a Spirit too near a kin to that of Goliah of Gath, and in the same Thrasoni∣cal way that uncircumcised Philistine did, he bids de∣fiance to the Armies of the living God, through the sides of the little Remnant of the present distressed Church of England, and I expect no handsomer dealings from him hereafter, nor any other return at present then what he hath generally made, for some years past, to other Wri∣tings which gall'd him, but he durst not pretend to answer them. As that my Book is a Pamphlet, I have lost my Temper and other Principles with my Bene∣fice: I am ignorant and malicious: let the Rea∣der try his patience on my Book if he can: I may depend upon it, I shall never be answer'd: that my Writings are a disparagement to the side I write for: I am an underworkman; a Journey-man: a bold Scribler, without any sprinkling of Salt to give it a relish: I shall be desir'd to give
over writing: that I am a turbulent Libeller: a distracter of the Church: if they had a mind to make our body to appear ridiculous, they would only wish us to imply such a Writer to make Apo∣logies for us: that my way of managing the most horrid and unnatural Schism, which lies at our door, has made us both odious and contemptible: that my reasons are weak and my passions are strong: that I shew a keeness of spirit which can hurt no body but my self:See Postscript to the Vindication f the Bishop of Sarum. And, perhaps, I may be called a Knight of the Post, as one is; because I have pub∣lish'd some Truths which this Vindicator and his friend Doctor Hody were ignorant of, and are as unable to bear as to disprove. I had like to have forgotten, that a long Title is another of his Arguments, by which he enervates, in his enervating way, the Learned, Judicious, and most Catholick Tract, entituled, The Charge of the Socinianism against Doctor Tillotson's consi∣dered, &c. to which as I am equally liable; so I expect my share of it: but a Brother of his has since convinc'd him that that Book has something in it, and forced a kind of ibid supra recantation from him for his heady, rash contempt which he has cast upon it: though his friends Vindication leaves their Primate in the dirt, and does a little more than wash the Aethiopian Skin. Now, are not these trivial thread-bare Phrases and Expressions fine Arguments to use against several Treatises concerning Schism, and other weighty Subjects, wrote with
as much acuteness, reading, solid judgment, and weight of argument as any controversie has been stated and argued since the Apostles days; the greatest part of which have not yet been pretended to have been answer'd any other way? Which have been wrote, also, with as much temper and candor as any of the ancients Tracts have been: For the, even, Primitive Champions of our Faith and Discipline have still used a great deal of warmth, and never waved any just opportunity of exposing and aggravating the sleights and tergiversations, even, immoralities, of their adver∣saries, in their own defences and justifications. Though one would think, since this Vindicator has had, very late∣ly, one of his Books burn'd by the common Hangman, by the Order of the House of Commons, and another just∣ly chastised by the learned Mr. Hill, it might have coold him a little, and learnt him some tenderness for those Au∣thors, who write, possibly, with a good meaning, but may not perform, in every little particular, so dexterously and advantageously as some others do. It seems, even, his lawn sleeves have not alter'd him, unless for the worse, and he has not attain'd, at least in appearance, more wit or dis∣cretion in his representations of things and persons, since he put them on. But let him go on in his way for me; as I have no reason to regard his railery, neither do I fear his strength of argument. And, surely, having lost all I have to lose, I shall not be frighted into a recantation, as Mr. Altham was. Besides, I am well ussur'd that the Authorities which I have produced, and the Temper which I have used in my stile and way of arguing are such, that the
ingenuous Reader will not take offence, though he does dis∣like the subject matter: and if his great acuteness and dis∣cerning judgment should discover some mistakes and failures in the Narrative and Argument, of which I do not pre∣tend to be wholly free, and I will thank him if he gives me notice of them: nor can I think that any one will receive the whole with the Vindicator's Spirit, except himself, and some few more, if there should be any such, who make it their own concern, that Doctor Hody is here prov'd to be an ill Historian, and a weak and fallacious reasoner. I desire it may be consider'd, that this whole perfor∣mance is Historical, as the Title speaks it: and if the Doctrines and Practices, of which I give an account, be distastful to the Reader, I hope be will be so candid and just as to pass me by, and lay them at the doors of those who delivered and practiced them: who are no other then the most eminent Catholick Bishops, Confessors and Champions for the Cause of Christ in the Reigns of Constantine the Great and Constantius his Son, with some others a lit∣tle later in time, but not less eminent, who joyfully suffered the loss of their goods, and sustain'd the banishment of their Persons into remote Countries, and were, moreover, ready to die in the attestation and defence of them, being Martyrs, though their blood was not pour'd out, (for Constantius made no Sanguinary Laws) in the sense of the ancient Church. And I doubt not but that they are such in the acceptance of Christ; nor in the least question but that they have, at this instant, a first place in Heaven, and enjoy a nearer attendance on God there, agreeably to Tertul∣lian's
representation of them, if he was the Author of that Poem.De ultimo judi∣cio, cap. 7. Excelso{que} throno celesti sede coruscat Martyribus septus. I'll conclude with the Apology which St. Hilary made in his Book de Synodis adversus Arianos, upon his set∣ting forth the Councils which had been since the Nicene Council. In quibus si quid vitiosum inesse intelligetur, nemo mihi vitium potest assignare dictorum: in∣ternuncius enim sum ipse, non conditor. Si quid vero rectum at{que} ex doctrinis Apostolicis depre∣hendetur: nemo ambigit non interpretantis in eo esse gloriam, sed autoris: ego tamen quae gesta sunt fideliter transmisi: vos an Catholica, an he∣retica sint, fidei vestrae judicio comprobate.
THE CONTENTS. CHAP. I. SECT. 1. THE Author gives his Reasons why these Collections begin with the Christian Empire, and is confin'd to the times of Constantine and Constantius. The Subject of them is comprized under two general heads. As, 1. That during the Reigns of Constantine and Constan∣tius, the forcible removal of a Bishop, by what ways and hands soever it was effected, was not thought to make way for a Suc∣cessor. 2. That the Empires Right and Power was not then thought to be competent for the abdicating a Bishop, and dissolving the Relation between him and his Subjects, and placing a Successor in his room, and obliging the people to receive him. Page 1, 2, 3, 4. SECT. II. THe forcible removal of a Bishop, by what ways or hands soever, was not thought to make way for a Successor, and this is prov'd,
From the example of Athanasius, Paulinus Bishop of ¦ers, Eusebius of Vercellis, Dionisius of Millane, and se¦ral others. If the Empire had placed Orthodox Bishops in the Chairs of those whom it deposed, the Principles of those times would not have permitted the Colledge, Clergy, and Believers to have receiv'd them. Pag. 5, 6, 7. For this we have the examples of Eustathius and Meletius, Bishops of Antioch. Christians may lose Christ by running away from a true Bi∣shop to a false Bishop, but never by adhering to their true Bishop, though he be in exile. The Antiochian Christians who adher'd to Meletius their Bishop, though he was then in exile, are a president for Chri∣stians therein. Pag. 8, 9, 10, 11. SECT. III. DOctor Hody's Arguments are confuted, by which he en∣deavours to prove from the examples of Eustathius and Meletius, that Orthodoxy alone will justifie a Possessor, tho' Heresie will not: and that, when Meletius rejected Paulinus, it was because he was reputed an Heretick, or else for other warrantable reasons, which his Orthodoxy did not compensate for. P. 12. Meletius's Title to Antioch, during Eustathius's life, was not founded in Eustathius's deposition which was made in the Synod of Gangre. Eustathius was alive when Meletius was made Bishop of Antioch, so that Meletius's right to Antioch was not founded in Eustathius's death. Eustathius's dposition in the Synod of Antioch did not legitimte Meltius's Possession of the Antiochian Chair. Pag. 13, 14, 15. Though we allow Eustathius's Successors in the Antiochian
Chair to have been Arians, and tho he disown'd them for that reason, until Meletius, who was Orthodox, came to his Chair: Yet he had just reason also to disown them, be∣cause they were Schismaticks, and came into his Chair by his unjust and uncanonical Deprivation. Doctor Hody's ar∣guing is wide when he concludes, that though their Possession was not warrantable as they were Arians, it was warrantable as they were Schismaticks. Pag. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Meletius's Orthodoxy and Possession did not legitimate him in the See of Antioch, till Eustathius resign'd unto him. Pag. 21, 22, 23, 24. Eustathius's Resignation is a just Pattern for all Christian Bishops, upon the same, or like Emergencies. Pag. 33. Meletius did not think Paulinus's orthodoxy to legitimate Paulinus to the See at Antioch, of which he was the lawful Bishop, because he was possessed of it, whilest Meletius was in exile; but he received his people, at his return, and pre∣sided over them in divine Worship, a part from Paulinus, as from Euzoius, the then Arian Bishop there. A Bishop that is an heretical Possessor, and a Bishop that is a Schismatical Possessor, are to be shunn'd a like, and a Convention ought to be made in opposition to both of them: tho' it be but in a corner. It may be believ'd, as Baronius says, that the Bishop of Rome, and the Synod of Alexandria did receive Paulinus as the lawful Bishop of Antioch, without any prejudice to that which we have just now said: since we have reason to believe that they did not then know that Meletius was alive. Pag. 33, 34, 35. The Doctor proceeds upon a sandy bottom, when he pleads, that the Meletians did not refuse Paulinus, as an illegitimate Possessor, but because he did not allow of the Meletian Clergy, as being originally consecrated by the Arians. Nothing less than the Popes Omnipotent Dispensation, which Baronius pleads, can justify the Doctor, when he asserts
Paulinus the lawful Bishop of the Antiochian See. Pag. 35, 36, 37, 38. It is inconsequential, that tho' Paulinus was justly excepted against, because he was placed in Antioch by Lucifer, who was a Foreigner, and inconpetent to do it, he therefore might not be also excepted against, because he was in Intruder upon Meletius. Since Paulinus was in possession, what ever hand gave it him, he had a full Authority, upon the Doctor's princi∣ples. Pag. 38. Catholick Bishops have exercised their Episcopal Functions out of their proper Districts: As Athanasius, Eusebius Vercellensis, Hilary, Eusebius Samosatensis, Eusta∣thius, Gregory the Great, which last, or his Deputy, made Austin Bishop of Canterbury. Our Reformation was, in all likelihood, bottom'd on the same principle, and is hardly, or not so well, justifiable any other way. pag. 39, 40, 41, 42. The Doctor outdoes his precipitant self, when he insists, that Meletius was received as Bishop of Antioch, and Paulinus rejected from the See, because Meletius was not then disenabled by the Secular Power, to serve as Bishop there, but had the Empire's leave to return from his exile. pag. 43. SECT. IV. THE Doctrine of passive obedience is mightily exem∣plified in the practice of Meletius and Eusebius Sa∣mosatensis. The Bishops of that Age did not teach Mob Doctrines to their people, upon the Governments unjust removal of their persons from them, nor though it suppressed some Ar∣ticle of Faith. They warned them under these and the like exigencies to
continue in unity under their exil'd Pastours, and to pre∣serve themselves from Schism, as well as from Heresie, and to adhere to the remnant of the Priests, and to exhort one another▪ And through these practices they had, in Gods good time, their Bishops restored, and their eyes saw their Teachers. pag. 44, 45, 46, 47. SECT. V. SOme Observations are made upon Paulinus, Meletius, Flavianus, &c. which will be useful in the present Discourse. Other reasons besides Heresie are a just ground for a peoples not communicating with a Bishop that is only a Pos∣sessor. pag. 48, 49. The Church has a power to constitute Districts, and make them fewer or more: even to make two Districts in one and the same City: The Ancient Canon which provides that there be but one Bishop in one City, is not violated by it. There was a settlement made at Antioch by consent of all Parties, that were concern'd in that See: It was ihe only way to make peace in that then distracted Church. pag. 50, 51, 52. Flavianus and Evagrius soon after broke this unity, which occasioned some new troubles, but God in his good time, and by his own ways, provided for its reestablishment. pag. 53, 54. The separation which the Eustathians first made, was not upon the account of the Sophronians Arianism, they did not then profess it, but the contrary: But by reason of their un∣just possession. pag. 55. The latitude young men, who had been for every Bishop that could get into possession, whether he was an Arian, Homoousian, or an Eusebian, were the Bishops who car∣ried it in the second General Council held at Constantinople,
for Flavianus against the anteceding stipulation, and some, at least, of their most solemn Oaths to the contrary. St. Gregory chose rather to relinquish his Bishoprick then receive Flavianus, their false Bishop, contrary to the Church Laws. Doctor Hody makes use of St. Gregory's Resignation to a wrong purpose, when he brings it for a president for our de∣prived Bishops Resignation. A General Council does not oblige on such proceedings; nor on any, if they be not consistent with the Faith once de∣livered, relating to Government as well as to Doctrine. The other Apologizes for his staying long upon this head. p. 58. to 68. CHAP. II. SECT. I. DƲring the Reign of Constantine the Great, neither the Empires right nor power were thought to be competent to abdicate a Bishop, and dissolve the relation between him and his Flock, and place a Successor in his room, and oblige the Colledge and Diocess to receive him. Constantine disown'd any such Power and Right, as lodged in him, in the case of Cecilianus and Majorinus, when both pleaded their rights to the See of Carthage, and the latter appeal'd to him, as his Judg. Melchiades Bishop of Rome decided that Case. à pag. 68. ad p. 76. SECT. II. IN this Section the errours of two sorts of men are corrected. 1. Of those that will have the right of placing Bishops in their Sees, and to displace them, to have been in the Church, so long as the Empire was Heathen, but it devolv'd on the Em∣pire so soon as it became Christian. 2. Of those who say, that the Bishops convey'd their rights
to Constantine, when he became a Christian, in Compo∣sition for his Secular Protection, and for the endowments which he possessed their Bishopricks with, and some other out∣ward Priviledge, all which he made Law. This Spiritual Power was then solely in the Churches hands. a p. 76. ad p. 79. SECT. III. IN the Council of Tyre, Constantines Secular Ministers acted unseemly in the case of Athanasius, and too much influenced the Bishops, but these only gave judgment there. Constantine did no more in his own right and in his own per∣son then back their Sentence against Athanasius, with exiling him. Constantine and Cyprian had the same sentiments, and their practice was the same, concerning the rights and power of the Church and State, in relation to Bishops. â p. 79. ad p. 87. CHAP. III. SECT. I. THE state of the Empire and the Church were the same, as to this affair, in Constantius's days, as it was in Constantines. Which appears. 1. From Constantius's proceeding against Athanasius in the Council of Antioch. p. 87, 88, 89. 2. From Constantius's proceedings in the Council of Sar∣dica and Millane. Constantius's care that the Bishop of Rome should be pre∣sent in the Council of Millane, to confirm Athanasius's Ab∣dication in the Synods of Tyre and Antioch does not give the Romanist that advantage he thinks it does. p. 89, 90, 91, 92. When Constantius assumed the Deposing Power, and in his own name, and the Imperial right, remov'd Athanasius, and some other Bishops contrary to the Law of the Empire and
the Church, Athanasius tells him, that he is an Ʋsurper, Antichrist, &c. p. 93, 94, 95, 96. Hosius tells him to his face, that he intrudes into Christs Office, and is to be accountable for it at the day of Judgment. other Bishops tell him that he is unpresidented therein, &c. If these great Bishops did think the fixing, or removing a Bishop, was an indifferent thing, and to be done at the Princes pleasure, why did they suffer rather then comply with Constantius in it? p. 97, 98. SECT. II. AEtian's Arianism was not publikely asserted and professed from the time that it was condemn'd in the Nicene Council, until the second Sirmian Council, nor settled in the Empire by Law, till some time after; and the Catholick Bishops were not opposed and condemned because they asserted the Eternal Generation in any one Council within that interval, but by reason that they opposed and condemned Athanasius and other Bishops unjust and uncanonical Deprivations. p. 99, 100, 101. The Euzoian Creed, upon which Arius was received in the Council of Jerusalem did not oppose the Homoousian Do∣ctrine. p. 102, 103, 104. The Eusebians did not declare themselves to be Arians in that Council of Antioch, where Eustathius was deposed, but quite contrary. The Eustathians separated from them because they brought in a false Succession upon Eustathius. The Eusebians retein'd and professed the Homoousian Do∣ctrine in the Council of Tyre. p. 105, 106, 107. They asserted the Eternal Generation in the following Coun∣cil of Antioch, in which they made four Creeds, they there confirmed Athanasius's Deposition at Tyre for the same reasons it was there made, and for some new ones, but of the same nature. p. 108. They asserted it likewise in another Antiochian Creed, in
the Sardican Council, in the Pseudo-Sardican Council in the East: all the World then professed it: even Constantius, Va∣lens and Ursacius. p. 109, 110, 111, 112, 113. An account is given of the various acceptions of the word Arian within our prefixed distance of time: which is necessary to be considered by all that study this Controversy. p. 114, 115. The Sardican and Pseudo-Sardican Synods did not convene directly about matters of Faith, but concerning the removing of Bishops, each refusing to submit to that Deposition which they conceived to be unjust and uncanonical, tho the Secular Arm concurr'd in it. p. 116, 117. Since the Clergy of Siria and Palestine repented because they had own'd Athanasius's abdication, and receiv'd a Possessor put upon him, if they had likewise consented to Arius's Do∣ctrine, he would certainly have required the same repentance from them by reason of it. p. 118. Their crime was in subscribing to Athanasius's Condemna∣tion, not to Exoukontianism; for which reason the Church refused Communion with them, except upon their repen∣tance. p. 119, 120. The exil'd Fathers of the Council of Millane were not Arians, but they declar'd, notwithstanding against Athana∣sius's Deposition. p. 121. SECT. III. COnstantius proceedings against Hosius and Liberius shew that not Arianism but Athanasius's and some other Bi∣shop's Abdication was the point then principally under debate. The Emperor's right does not extend unto their Spiritual Removal. p. 121. to 128. SECT. IV. IN the first Sirmian Council the Eusebians declar'd for the Eternal Generation, as they had done in the former Synod. p. 128.
Constantius banish'd Liberius because he would not own a false Abdication and Succession; with which that Age could no otherwise comply then with a false Article. p. 129. In the second Sirmian Council the Eusebians first declare against the explication of the Homoousian Doctrine, and then assert the Son to be inferior to the Father; to which last Hosius there subscribed: but he repented of it. p. 130, 131. Church Ʋnion and Articles of Faith are specificks and have their own entities, both are alike to be contended for, and main∣tained. p. 132, 133. A false Ʋnion and Succession may not be own'd and embraced, though the Faith is inviolated. The Prince was not conceived to be able to legitimate an unlawful Succession. Nothing is more false, then that an unjust Possession legiti∣mates a Bishop, if he be not an Heretick: or is otherways un∣exceptionable. p. 134. The Orientals that afterwards met, first at Ancyra, and then at Sirmium, corrected the Heresies and Blasphemies of the second Sirmian Council, and there asserted the Son to be like the Father in all things, but they dissented from the Antiochian and first Sirmian Councils, in that they anathematized the Ho∣moousian Explication. p. 135. It is shew'd wherein the difference consisted between the Ho∣moousians, Eusebians, Semi-Arians, and Exoukontians, or Arians properly so called. p. 136, 137, 138. The Confirmation of the second Sirmian Creed was recom∣mended by the Eusebians in the Council of Ariminum, but cast out: and the Nicene Faith was establish'd, and those Bi∣shops who opposed it were deposed, by four hundred Bishops. Ibid. The same Sirmian Faith was, a little after, receiv'd, and the Nicene Faith condemned by the majority of those very Fathers, through the craft and industry of Valens and Ursacius, and Constantius's power. A remnant remain'd, and asserted the Catholick Faith and Succession, whose memory was perpetuated, and sacred. p. 139. The Princes Arbitrary Right to remove a Bishop, and consti∣tute
a Successor is a direct step to the Church's ruine, at his pleasure. The Baroccian MSS. which vests him with such a right, shews the degeneracy of the Greek Church in those times, to an excess. p. 140. When the Eusebians found themselves unable to retrieve their Exoukontianism, and were necessitated to profess the Eter∣nl Generation, they, at length, gain'd the secular Arm on their side, and, through its assistance, sometimes in their false Sy∣nods, and now and then in the Emperors right, deprived the Ca∣tholick Bishops which stood in their way, but upon pretended crimes which did not relate to Christs eternal Godhead, and they thus obtain'd their ends, and brought their Heresie a broad. p. 141. The Catholicks foresaw the depths of Sathan, and stood by their proper Bishops. All good Christians are to oppose the same practice, and hold to their proper Bishops, when illegally removed. p. 142. The generality of Bishops in our British Island have lately thought fit to give up their Brethern's Rights, and are therein become so far Desertors of the Ancient Church's practice, to the contrary. p. 143. The Council of Seleucia so order'd it, that Exoukontianism was there cast out, and the Antiochian Creeds were confirm'd and received. But Acacius farther contrived, that, by Constan∣tius's power, his own Creed was ratified and received in a Synod, which was held at Constantinople, and Arianism appear'd bare fac'd in the World upon it, and was made the Religion of the Empire. The Persecutions which were rais'd before, upon the account of the Bishops unlawful and uncanonical Abdications, and their illegal Successors, which the Catholicks would not own, are now carried on, because they will not declare against the Eternal Ge∣neration, and say that the Son is a Creature. p. 144, 145. SECT. V. THose Men mistake matter of Fact within our fixed Epoche, who say, that the Catholicks refused the Successors that
were placed over them, upon an unjust and uncanonical Abdica∣tion of their proper Bishops, because those Successors were Arians, since Arianism was not then professed by them. p. 146. They all along declar'd, that the unjustness and uncanonicalness of their Abdications was the reason that they did not comply with them. Those are strangely mistaken who say, that Arianism was the only reason, and their Schism alone would not justify them in it: is not the Shism almost the only reason they give for it? Bishop Arsenius, who was one of the false Evidences against A∣thanasius recanted as a Shismatick, not as an Arian. p 147. ad. 150. Since the Catholick Bishops chose to be deprived, and were ready for Martyrdom, rather than submit to false Abdications and Suc∣cessions, tho they were made by the Secular Arm, it hence seems very plain, that they did not account the receiving or not receiving them to be an indifferent thing: which was to follow the will of the Prince, or the ordering of an irresistible Power, or present Convenience: especially since they rejected them with the same aversion, zeal, and constancy, they did reject a false Faith. p. 151. The Eusebians made, in tract of time, a head against the Do∣ctrine, by excepting against the explication of the Eternal Genera∣tion, when they professed it at the same time. This was another of their artificial steps by which they brought in their rankest Arianism: and the Son was generally received as a facture, made out of nothing. No one step leads more directly to the abolishing the most Scriptural and Catholick Doctrine, if the literal sense be once question'd. p. 152, 153. SECT. VI. LIberius's unjust and uncanonical ejectment by Constantius, and Felix's Possession of his See, brings advantage to our cause, and disadvantage to Doctor Hody's. During Liberius's banishment, he never own'd nor submitted to Felix as Bishop of Rome. neither did the Believers at Rome receive him. p. 155, 156, 157, 158, 159. The two Presbyters, Marcellinus and Faustinus, say, that the
people of Rome all along, and the Clergy at one time, adher'd to Liberius' and rejected Felix, upon Liberius's Abdication and banishment. p. 160. The Believers after practice at Rome in adhering to Liberius shews, that Felix's Possession against the Laws of the Church, was reputed by them a just ground for their not communicating with him, and that they then acknowledg'd. Liberius to be their Bishop. p. 161, 162, 163. Liberius and the Believers at Rome are acquitted of Schism, tho the former, upon his return, immediately enter'd upon his Bishoprick, and executed his Episcopal function: and the latter receiv'd, and communicated, with him, notwithstanding that he had then subscrib'd to Athanasius's Deprivation and communi∣cated with the Arians, and their false Successors. p. 164, 165. 166. Liberius's return without a new Ordination, is a demonstration, that his Lapse was not, then, reputed to forfeit his Orders, nor to require a second Consecration. Ibid. SECT. VII. DOctor Hody's Arguments are considered, which he brings in justification of the validity of Liberius's Deprivation, and Felix's Succession. He is in a great mistake, when he says, the Catholicks refused Felix, not as a Successor to Liberius, but because they were not satisfied in his Orthodoxy, and he was Ordain'd by Arians. p. 167, 168, 169. The Doctors Argument from the Oath, which the Clergy are said to have taken to Liberius, notwithstanding his banishment, shews, that he does not understand the true grounds of reasoning. p. 170. There is nothing more false than his asserting Liberius to have subscribed to Arianism. Liberius was not rejected as Bishop of Rome for that reason. p. 171. Since the Doctor owns, that Liberius was Orthodox at the time of his Abdication, and two years after; he must own, likewise, that his Abdication was not lookt upon as a competent ground for the Believers Translation of their Obedience, who, notwithstanding, ad∣her'd to him, during that time.
If they afterwards did reject him as an Heretick, it will only affect us so far, as it is prov'd, that our now deprived, and, by the many deserted, Bishops are Hereticks likewise. It was the work of God, in that Constantius brought Liberius back to his people. Liberius died a most zealous Anti-Exoukon∣tian. The Believers constant adhesion to him, before and after his exile was a secundary means of his reestablishment: they are therein, a great example to Posterity, in the same, or the like case. Our expectations are thence strengthened, that God will provide, by the same, or other, means, that our Abdicated Bishops, shall still be own'd, and, in his good time, be restor'd unto us. p. 172, 173. The Roman Clergy might engage themselves by Oath to Libe∣rius that they would not receive another Bishop, upon his Abdica∣tion; and, also, that they would not accept of an Heretical Bishop, that was likely to destroy the Faith. p. 174. The Doctor's argument, by which he proves, that Felix was a law∣full Bishop of Rome, because Damasus once thought him so, is trifling. p. 175. He is not more true to just reasoning, when he argues on, and concludes Felix to be a lawful Bishop, because the Bishops of his own District, communicated with, and receiv'd him, as their Metro∣politan. His other Authorities, which he produces, to the same purpose, are no more to be valued then his reasonings, p. 176. Though Liberius, as the Doctor says, did receive the ordina∣tions which Felix made, it proves nothing less, then that Liberius own'd him as the lawful Bishop of Rome. p. 177. The Authority of the whole Western Church, which, he says, own'd Felix, to have been one of the true Bishops of Rome, is not cogent either. p. 178. He does not mend his usual arguings, when he contends, that the whole Eastern Church own'd him as the true Bishop of Rome, be∣cause Nicephorus, in his Chronology, has placed him among the Bishops of that See. p. 179.
SECT. VIII. IT is shew'd, from a notable Instance, upon the Election of Meletius to the See of Antioch, that, not only the Catholicks, but, the Arians disap∣prov'd the bringing a Second into a full Chair, and thought the Second's Title to be invalidated by it: Though the Arians then broke, as all laws to serve their turn, so, this Church Law, and immediately brought in Euzoius upon Meletius, without an anteceding Church voydance. Doctor Hody may make them his, and his Parties, precedent in it, if he think fit. p. 181, 182. It is not so trifling a thing as the Doctor thinks it to be, when men insist on  cancelling a right by those ways it is usually done, but more especially in the Church, which hath prescribed her own. p. 183. It is the duty of a Christian Bishop to be very careful that he does not deliver up the rights of the Church, deposited in his hands, contrary to the end of their commitment to him, though an irresistible Power, even the Emperor with his drawn sword, should demand them of him. Nothing but Church Mens unfaithfulness can betray the Churches right into forrein hands. The Se∣cular and Spiritual Trusts were accounted at that time, even by Constan∣tius, two distinct things. Nothing less then Eusebius's sense of his obli∣gation from God, could engage him to withhold the latter from Constantius, upon his demand. The goodness of God has alwaies raised up some choyce Men, in every exigence, who have asserted and maintain'd the rights of his Church: he will always preserve a Remnant for that purpose. We could not attend the Press as we desir'd to do, which has occasion'd some points to be mis∣placed, and other Typographical errors, part of which are here corrected; we hope the Reader will mend the rest with his pen, as he goes along. PAge 6. l. 42. r. all the Bishops of the. p. 11. l. 38. for some, r. the same. p. 12. l. 23 r. pro∣scription. p. 21. l. 37. r. . p. 51. l. 19. r. implying. p. 56. r. . p. 61. l. 7. r.  p. 62. l. 2. r. . p. 71. l. 20. r. any heed. p. 85. l. 30. r. how oft. p. 102. l. 13. r. Phanicia. p. 103. l. 8. r. . p. 105. l. 24. r. Pamphilus. p. 107. l. 8. r. Sasimus. p. 101. l. 37. r. . p. 115. l. 4. r. Exoucontitae. p. 116. l. 10. r. Philippolis. p. 117 l. 30. r. Sa∣mosatenian. p. 119 l. 21. for murther, r. their. p. 126. l. 11. for some, r. seem. l. 33. r. . p. 129 l. 20. r. Sardican. p. 132. l. 16. r. Aaetian. p. 133. l. 6. r. subjected. p. 141 l. 3. r. if the —of Heresie. p. 153. l. 1. r. that of the Fathers. p. 167. l. 29. r. premises. p. 175. l. 4. Damasus. In the Margin. P. 9. l. 4. r. . p. 3. pro H. Socrat. r. Hist. Sacr. p. 41. r. quae. ibid. r. . p. 55. r. . p. 71. l. 24. r. quid. l. 32. r. jam. p. 74. r. in vita. . 77. r, . p. 8. . p. 84. . p. 112. coegisti. . p. 120. de laude Athanas.— de Sanctis. p. 123. r. vitam. p. 171. r. 915.
Historical Collections CONCERNING Ecclesiastical Affairs, &c. CHAP. I. SECT. I I Have taken some pains, in another Tract, and consult∣ed the most eminent Authorities and Instances in the three first Centuries of the Church; and there found that the secular Power is, all along, accounted to have no right in disposing of the Bishops, as to their Spiri∣tuals, in their respective Districts and Governments; and that all Lay-deprivations, and Successors, or Seconds, pursuant to them, are reputed to be uncanonical and unlawful, and were rejected, as such, and no ways to be complyed with by the then Bishops and Subjects of the Church; if any such thing should be attempted, as it was not within that period of time: Such power being seated by the Father only in the Son, and thence derived, by the Son's Appointment, to the Apostles and Bishops their Successors, and confined to them until the Government it self shall have an end, and be delivered up to the Father. I have also considered, and (if I mistake not) expos'd the Weakness, Inconsistency, and Inconcludingness of Dr. Hody's Pleas, Objections and Arguments which he hath thought fit to use to the contrary, in his Case of the Sees Vacant, &c. And I once also thought to have made it all publick agreeably to it's Birthright, as being antecedent in it's composure, and in the order of things to these following Historical Collections: But, upon second
thoughts, I have since changed my Mind; contenting my self, at present, with giving the Reader this little taste of the Doctor's performance upon tht Subject: As, That the Heathen Emperors, tho' Nero's and Dioclesians, had an immutable Right, anecdent to our Saviours, by vertue of which they were fully instructed to depse his Church Officers, as to their spiritual Cures, and appoint their Successors; and notwithstanding the Son hah received the same Au∣thority, and invested his Apostles, and the Bishops  rightful Successors with it, whatsoever these Bishops should do in p nce of that Au∣thority, was to be null and wholly repealed at the  f those Em∣perors, i. e. Of Rome Heathen, and to give way  r present Orders, even to the quitting them of their Charge and People in regard of Conscience, if so be they deposed them by a coercive Arm, and irretreivably: Nay if any irresistable party did it, it was to be the same in effect; and the otherwise lawful Bishops stood obliged in Conscience to receive it's force, and acquiesce in it's deposing Sentence: And the want of some such abetting coercive irresistable Arm, was it which made the Novatians, Donatists, and Meletians, Schisma∣ticks; and occasioned the Church of God to condemn them as such. And surely this is hopeful Theology. Leaving therefore this lucky Atchievement of the Doctor's, so much for the honour and advantage of Christ and his Church, to that more full and particular account of it, which the World may have in due time, if God gives me Life and Opportunity; I continued my Labour, and enquired into the sense and pra∣ctice of the Church and State when the Empire became Christi∣an; from Constantine the Great downwards throughout the best Ages: and I here found also, that not only the Bishops and Doctors, but even the Emperors themselves, within this Interval, did conclude, that the secular, personal, removal of a Bishop from his District, as by Banishment, Imprisonment, &c. whereby he became wholly uncapable, or less able for a time, to dis∣charge his Pastoral Function, did not directly, and by it's own force make way for a Second, or Sucessor; and that no other but Church Hands could effectually depose him, and acquit his Peo∣ple of their Duty to him; nor upon a just deposition, constitute a Successor, and create in him a true Ecclesiastical, I may say, Gospel Right over the Believers, within that District which is truly vacated, in the same measure the Predecessor had it, being justly such ere he was deposed. The Empire, in becoming Christian, had many advantages, as well as the Church; but it
was not hereupon vested with the Church's peculium, (of which her disposing of Bishops in their several district, was then reputed one part) but remained the same (as in other respects, so par∣ticulaly in that) as whilst it was Heathen. And tho' the argu∣ment from the practice of the three first Primitives, or Centuries, is not less demonstrative of this great Truth; yet that of these latter Ages comes nearer to our Adversaries, and shuts up their Mouths more effectually, and does not give them that seeming ad∣vantage for the trashing our less thinking Adherents with the tri∣flng Objections the other does. As, that the Heathen Emperors were ignorant of this Prerogative, or thought it less considerable, or not at all to be regarded, as they did the Christians themselves, and their Re∣ligion: What cared they for a Fairy Government, as Mr. Hobbs has since call'd it, and they then thought it to be? And since the Em∣pire did not concern it self with it, who else but the Bishops should ma∣nage it, as their Discretion directed them? But I do here ask these Men, who thus seem to argue, had Constantine, Constantius, Jovian, Valentinian, Gratian, the two Theodosius's, Honorius, with other eminent Emperors, the same opinion of it's Regiment in general, or it's Governours, and their Successors in particular? or can they be supposed to have been regardless of their Church Prerogatives? Or to have suffered the Bishops to assume them? Besides, the Church (as the judicious Cassander,Prefat. ad consultat. I hath observ'd) under the Reign of these Emperours (Constantius only excepted) becomes a thorow President for us in these now last dayes; our circumstances being now altogether the same, under the Nursery of Kings and Queens. And we are not to plead that disparity we may be allow'd to do, whilst she was in the Wilderness. And these considerations do move me, in part, to recommend to the publick the practices of these succeeding Ages in the first place, as the most likely to prevail upon a lethargick Generation in or∣der to the receiving this great and universal Truth we here con∣tend for; which hath remain'd as immutable under prosperity, and when Kings and Queens were nursing Fathers and Mothers to the Church as under the Cross, and when they were its bitter ene∣mies, and most cruel persecutors. But in the management of this enquiry I find, that I must con∣fine my self, at present, to two of the forementioned Reigns, viz. Those of Constantine and Costantius, who were the two first Christian Emperors; otherwise this Tract will be bulky and unweil∣dy, both in and out of the Press, and reque a greater Purse and
better advantages for the printing and publishing of it, than our present narrow circumstances will give us leave to attain unto, promising if God continue life and health unto me, to go over the rest, and give the World a particular account of them, as re∣lating to our present debate; and I shall at present follow this method in the doing of it. I. I shall shew, that during the Reigns of Constantine and Con∣stantius, the removing of a Bishop from his District by their own, or any other forceable or illegal hands, tho' rendring him thereby uncapable to govern, or so far disenabling him that he could not (in Dr. Hody's words) exercise his Episcopal Function, as before, was not reputed, upon Catholick Principles, and by the Catholicks of those Ages, to affect his right, and make way for the placing a Successor upon him, as in a Chair which is made vacant upon those terms, which the Church allows. II. I shall further shew, That, during the Reigns of Constan∣tine and Constantius, the Empire was not reputed, upon Catho∣lick Principles, and by the Catholicks of that time (nor even by most of the Hereticks) to be vested with a right to abdicate a Bishop, when a Possessor; and by vertue of such his Abdication, or Deposition, to acquit his Subjects of that spiritual Allegiance they owed to him, tho' he was, in his person uncapable to exer∣cise his pastoral Function among them: Neither was the Empire understood to be vested with any such Right as to enthrone a Bi∣shop, and rightfully possess him of an Episcopal Chair, tho' it were vacant upon the terms which the Church allows, and by vertue of that possession from his secular Arm, to enable him to demand Obedience of the Officers and Believers within that district, of which he is so possess'd; nor to lay an obligation on the said Officers and Believers to receive, and obey him; it being only the Church hands that were then believ'd to be capa∣ble of doing it. And farther if any Emperour, or otherwayes illegal power has attempted and effected such a thing; and so set up, or depriv'd a Bishop; a competent number of the Col∣ledge, or Episcopal fraternity, and of under Officers and Believ∣ers, that were truly conscientious and Christian, have alwayes remonstrated, upon Gospel Principles, and adhered notwithstan∣ding to the one, and rejected the other.
SECT. II. FIRST of all, then I shall shew, that during the Reigns of Constantine and Constantius, the removing a Bishop from his district by their own, or any other illegal, forcible hands, tho' rendring him thereby uncapable to govern, or so far dis∣enabling him, that he could not (in Dr. Hody's words) exercise his Episcopal Function as before, was not reputed upon Catholick Principles, and by the Catholicks of those Ages to affect his Right, and make way for the placing a Successor upon him, as in a Chair which is made vacant upon those Terms, which the Church allows. And of this St. Athanasius is a full and preg∣nant evidence, beyond all contradiction; who was forc'd from his Country, and the Execution of his Episcopal Function, fal∣ling under the wrath of several potent Emperors; and Con∣stantineAthanas. apol. 2. Socrat. hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 23. the Great banish'd him into France; ConstantiusSozom. l. 4. c. 2▪ 8. Athanas. Apol. de fugâ, p. 695. 6, 7, 8, 9. his Son made him fly from Alexandria by reason of a great Persecution which he rais'd upon him, and the rest of the Catholicks; Va∣lensSocrat. l. 4. c. 12. Sozo. l. 6. c. 12. his wrath was no less cruel to him, upon which he ab∣sconded four Months in his Father's Sepulchre; and JulianSoz. l. 3. c. 12. Theodor, l. 3. c. 8. first sought his life, and then exil'd him, tho' he repeal'd Con∣stantius's Edict against him upon his coming to the Throne. Now, was this great Patriarch er'e the less a Bishop for all this? Did his People think that his violent dispossession any ways impair'd his Right and Title to them, as his Flock; and that not only under Julian's, but even under Constantine's force and banishment? Did they under these his several absences, or any one of them, pretend that they were quitted of their Sub∣ordination to him, and look out for a Successor? Or can Dr. Hody prove, That he, not exercising his Episcopal Power as before, laid claim to their obedience, by some such publick signification of his will, in the doing of which, the DoctorThe Case of the Sees, &c. p. 7. says, our present ejected Bishops are wanting; and thereby made it known to his People, that he did not resign and give his consent, that a Successor should be acknowledg'd, but retained his Right; whereas ours lost theirs, in giving way to a Successor, by not doing of it? Did even the Eusebians, who were his profess'd enemies, and desir'd, and endeavour'd all they could to bring a Successor upon him, and irretrievably depose him, think such a removal made a just and effectual way unto it? If so: Why did they take an ad∣vantage
of his absence in the Synod of Tyre,Athan. Apolog. p. 797. Socrat. l. 1. c. 21. and in shew at least, thee depose him? And afterwards in a Council atAthan. Epist. ad Orthodox. p. 944. Socrat. l. 2. c. 6. Antioch, (which was pretended to meet upon another business, to Con∣secrate a Church) slily bring in Gregorius, as a Successor upon him? All this abundantly shews, that the secular removal was not then thought competent for dissolving the Relation between a Bishop and his People, ho' it was made by Costantine's own hand; and that he receiv'd no new Right, which enabled him to do it, by being a Christian; nor was more comptent for it than Trajan, Decius, or even a Dioclesian had been bfore him. Again, the case of the other Catholick Bishops, who suffer'd with Athanasius under Constantius, and were remov'd fom their Bishopricks (as he had been, in the same cause) by banishment, imprisonment, &c. is no less pregnnt an evidene on our side, as of Paulinus Bishop of Triers, Lucifer Calaritanus Bishop of Sar∣dinia, Eusebius of Verselli, Dionysius of Millan, Pulus of Constan∣tinople, Hillary of Poicteirs, with Hosius, Liberius, d many others, all indeed, that would nt either submit t Athanasius's unjust and uncanonical deposition, or else betray their Faith in the Eter al Son of God, by retracting their first Sentences and De∣clarations in ttestation of it, or do both But did the Homo♉sians declare, either that these were the less Bishops for it? Or the less Bishops over those who had been placed in districts under them? Tho' the Supream Power was peremptory against them, and had publickly declar'd, that they should govern no longer; and it was impossible that they should exercise their Episcopal Jurisdiction as before. Did they look upon their absence as a just voidance of their Sees, or as any ways making room for a Successor? Or did they, thereupon submit to those Seconds, whom Constantius, or raher his naughty Courtiers, and the Eusebians which joyn'd them for that purpose, plac'd in their Chairs? Or, (because the Doctor will say, that they refus'd them, because they were not Orhodox, but Arrians as he often does in other cases) did they then think themselves oblig'd to look out for new Bishops that were truly Catholicks? We read of no such thing in our Story, but the contrary: And St. Hillary in particular gives this accourt of himself, and his Episcopal Right, under his exile, in respect of his fellow Bishops in the Gallican Churches, and the Bishops of the Christian World, and his own single district;Lib. ad Con∣stantium. in ini∣ti.—Episcopus eg sm in omni∣um Gallicarum Eclesiarium atque Episcopo∣rum communi∣one, liet exilio permaen, & Ecclesiae adhuc per presbteros  cmmuni∣ distba∣s. I am, saith he, a Bishop in the Communion of all the Galican Churches, and Bi∣shps, and the Christian World, and my own district, distributing
Communion to the Church by my Presbyters, tho' I remain a banish'd man. His secular and unjust deprivation did not cut him off from the Colledge of Bishops, nor take his own Officers and Peo∣ple from him; but they retain'd their just communion, and dependance upon him, in the things of God, as before. And it is no less evident that the People at Rome adher'd to Libe∣rius against Felix, and the Emperor at once, when he was de∣pos'd by the same violent hand, and precarious authority; of which I shall speak particularly anon. And the truly devout Christians, likewise kept themselves together in a body, as well as they could, in a certain place whither they fled, upon the persecution which happen'd immediately upon the Council of Ariminum, when their Bishops were taken from them; and there they remain'd, not without Christ, when Cephas was in Prison, and uncapable of acting the part of an Apostle among them, (as the DoctorPag. 12. represents us now to be under the like circumstances) but without their Bishops, who had been taken from them, and so much of the outward Ministry as depended upon their personal presence among them: during which time, they had the Ministrations of the Spirit plentifully pour'd upon them by other means, through God's usual mercy to his people in such extremities; and it's Graces and Vertues did so far a∣bound unto them, that they grew highly exemplary in Faith and good Works: For the better preservation of whose Me∣mories to posterity St. Athanasius, somewhere in his Works, tells us, that they had a Monument erected. They did not suspect themselves to be under an obligation to take to themselves new Bishops, because their old ones were forcibly remov'd, and their eyes did no longer see them. It is ten to one but that Dr. Hody will come in here also with his wonderful Argument, and prove, that tho' these Christi∣ans cannot be said to have actually disown'd an Orthodox Bishop, put upon them by the Empire, because then it did not think fit to put one upon them; yet they would not have disown'd such a Bishop, if the Empire had thought fit to impose him. But, if we do admit his consequence upon his negative in any other cases, which strangely infers, That they would receive such a Bishop, because they did not receive him: It cannot hold in our present Homo♉sian's case, since it is well known, that they did then, and their Succession all along, oppose Novatianism, in the same degree that St. Cyprian had done before them, and the other Catholick
Bishops his contemporaries, whose common rule was,Lib. 3. Ep. ii. Et Li. 4. Ep. 2. one God, one Christ, one Faith, one Bishop; and that they enthroniz'd none, but in loco Petri post Fabiani mortem, by the Church Rules of Suc∣cession, and by Church-mens hands; believing it as much their duty not to enthrone, if upon other terms, as to reject the Gnostick's Aeones, Marcion's two Gods, and the Gentiles Polytheism: As, if God gives me life and opportunity, I shall shew, when I come to give an account of the Cyprianick Succession. And those few Catholicks, of whom we read, that some time after, and but once, they joyn'd with the Novatians in their Publick Prayers, and by consequence, receiv'd their illegal Bishops, when the Arrian Persecution was sore upon them, are not therein commendable, nor consequently, exemplary: But of these also I am to speak particularly in their just place. I will annex the no less fam'd instances of Eustathius, Meletius, Paulinus, Flavianus and Evagrins, (for tho' the two latter come not at all within the bounds of our fixed Epoche, which ends within the Reign of Constantius; yet their Stoy will be told here with more advantage) who all of them pretended to be Bishops of Antioch, tho' all of them were not truly such; since an examination of their whole Story, and a faithful representa∣tion of it, will not only farther confirm the Truth of our Point in hand, viz. That the dispossessing, or local removing a Bishop, does not affect his Right to that Chair, from which he is re∣moved; nor make way for a Successor: but it will also give us an opportunity, and just ground for the clearing several other Truths, which Dr. Hody is engag'd to deny and oppose; but we to assert and defend in the management of our present Debate: tho' he is very confident that the whole Story, and each of it's Circumstances make only on his side; and thereupon takes a great deal of pains and care in giving an account of it, pursuant to the Design of his Baroccian Manuscript. And in the first place, It will be found apparently manifest from Eustathius's case, that the removal of a Bishop, and taking him from his personal care and inspection of his people, by banishment, or any other means, does neither cut off their Relation and Duty to him, nor his Relation, nor right to them; but they notwithstanding remain his Flock, and he their Bishop. For that great Bishop was banish'd into ThraceChrysost. de laud. Eustathii Tom. 5. Ed. Lat. Paris. Et Theod. l. 1. c. 21. by Constantine, in the year 329, or 330. and yet was continu'd and acknowledg'd Bishop of Antioch
by all the truly Orthodox, until Meletius was made Patriarch of that See, which was in the year 360. according to the Doctor'sNot. in MS. Barroccian. own computation, although he did not come back to Antioch, nor into that district, until he was call'd home by Jovian, which was not till the year 370. and ten years after Meletius had been Bishop there, as the Doctor tells usIbid. out of SocratesLi 4. c 14 15, Li 6. c. 13 and Sozomen: And his own words do also farther vouch this in part. I observe (saith he)Case of the See, &c. c. 17. p. 188. that Eustathius, being in banishment, con∣tinu'd to take care of the Orthodox of Antioch, as their Bishop (as much as he could at so great a distance) as long as those that were put into his place were Arians: But as soon as Meletius, an Orthodox Person, was made Bishop in his room, he peaceably gave over, and ne∣ver concern'd himself any more as Bishop of Antioch. And he is moreover so kind to our cause (tho' we are not to thank him for it, as the Sequel will make to appear) as to back this great Truth with the Authority of St. Chrysostome,De laud Eu∣stathii, uti supr  whose words to that purpose, I shall at large repeat, as they are set down and translated by him;pag. 191. foreseeing, that I shall have occasion to make use of them hereafter. , &c. —.God permitted the blessed Eustathius to be led away into banish∣ment, that he might make the strength of truth, and the weakness of Hereticks more manifest. When he was to be carried away, tho' he was to leave the City, yet he would not cease to love you. And he did not therefore look upon himself to be depriv'd of his Episcopal Office be∣cause he was thrust out of the Church, but so much the more he applied himself to take care of you, and calling you together, he exhorted you not to yield to Wolves, nor betray the Flock to 'em. — When they invaded the Flock he did not leave them, tho he was not possest of the Episcopal Chair. But that his generous and philosophical Soul di not value: The honours of a Governour he lef to others, but he bore the burthen of a Governour, being conversant among Wolves. —In doing thus, he formed all to the true Faith, neither did he desist, till, by the Providence of God, the blessed Meletius came hither, and receiv'd the whole Mass. The one sow'd and the other reap'd.
And the fam'd Meletius, who succeeded Eustathius in the An∣tiochian Chair, is a no less evident and pregnant proof of the same, when he was banish'd by Constantius into Armenia, and after∣wards by Valens: but did he then look upon his People to be less his Flock; or they upon him to be less their Bishop, by reason of it? Did the former thereupon withdraw his Pastoral Care and Instructions, or the latter their filial Duty and Relation? The Doctor is here on our side again, and confesseth, That his people did not look upon the Emperor's Secular Edict to have any in∣fluence upon their Bishops Spiritual Right, nor upon their Duty arising from it; but that when Meletius return'd from his first banishment under Constantius, together with the rest of the Catholick Bishops, by the favour of the Emperor Julian, Lucifer Calaritanus having Consecrated Paulinus, and seated him in his Chair during his absence; thisPag. 192. the greatest part of the Orthodox did not allow of, but ceas'd to receive him as their Bishop, and when their Bishop Meletius return'd, adher'd to him; and his own St. ChrysostomePastor abigebatur, & oves non dispergebantur: guberna∣tor expellebatur, & scapha non mergebatur: agricola fugabatur & vitis plus fructûs ferebat; —non illa∣tae tentationes, non impenden∣tia pericula, non viae longi∣tudo, non diuturnitas tem∣poris, ne{que} quicquam aliud nos potuit disjungere, &c. Sti. Chrysost. Hom. de Meletio Antioch. seu de laude Meletii. Ed. Lat. Tom. 5. Parisi. 1614. thus expresseth himself upon Meletius's second banishment, by Valens into Armenia. The Pastor was driven away, and the Sheep were not dispers'd; the Governour was expell'd, and the Ship was not sunk: the Husbandman was put to flight, and the Vine brought forth more Fruit. In short, the Holy Father goes on, and declaes, That no temptations, no dangers, neither the length of the way, nor the continuance of time, nor any thing else could disjoynt their daily converse with their blessed Pastor Meletius; but he was the nearer to them by his expulsion; and when his body was in Armenia, his mind and spirit was daily with them: and on the other side, when they were circumscrib'd within the confines of Antioch, they were flying away in the spirit of love into Armenia, beholding there his countenance, hearing his most blessed voice; and that their reception of him, when it pleas'd God to send him again to them, was proportionate; the whole City went out to meet him; some embrac'd his feet, kiss'd his hands, and heard his voice; and those that could not approach him by reason of the multitude, receiv'd equal satisfaction, and the same influences by looking upon him at a distance. I will add, and all this when Paulinus,Socrat. H. E. l. 3. c. 7. l. 5. c. 5. Soz. l. 5. c. 12. an Ortho∣dox Bishop had been plac'd and receiv'd there; and was in actual possession of his Chair. So great is the tye and obligation between a Pastor and his People, when the relation and dependence is just and true betwixt
them: this Love-knot, and Obedience, is so made up, that no force or proscription can dissolve and loose it. The Bishop then is not then depriv'd, and thrust out,  (in St. Chry∣sostom's language,) of his Church and Presidency in it, because a strong hand removes him thence; nor the People of their Right in him, or of God's blessings by him, tho' he be in person quite taken away and banish'd from them. Believers may lose Christ, by runing from Cephas (in his exil'd state) to Paul; i. e. from their true Bishop to a false Bishop; but they never lose Christ, who resolve to have Cephas, i. e. their true Bishop, tho' he be in prison; and refuse a false one. Dr. Hody alone is so un∣thinking, as to suppose the contrary.Pag. 12. At least, they shall never lose Christ whilst they keep to that resolution; if they do not fail in other Duties, which are to be it's concomitants and inse∣parable adjuncts: for a faileur in which, a bare recognition of, and outward communion with him will not make a compensa∣tion: tho' a firm adherence to their Bishop is an eminent Vertue, and will be in it self always acceptable; and it will always be requir'd of God from them, Spiritu charitatis, as the Antiochians are said to have discharg'd it to Meletius, when he was a banish'd man in Armenia, and absent in body from them: they then pursuing him with their love and duty; and retaining, entirely, their subordination to him. And these two great, and immediately successive examples, so highly and justly extoll'd byHomil. de Sancto Meletio. St. Chrysostome, will somewhat at least vindicate the practise of a Remnant at this day of the Church of England, who retain the same heart and affections to∣wards their lawful Pastors, tho' not exil'd into a strange Land, yet under the like restraint, by the Secular Arm, Eustathius and Meletius once were. And as our ejected Fathers, the Prelates, do not look upon themselves so to be depriv'd, as to be quitted of their Episcopal Functions, but execute them for their Peoples good, with the same love and care those two excellent Patriarchs did, according to their best opportunities; so their People retain the same dependance upon, and duty for them, the Believers in Antioch did for their Bishops, (tho' God knows, as in Antioch, so in England the Remnant is but small) and cease not to love and obey them; tho' they do cease in some conspicuous manner, as some time since, to peside over them. Neither do I question that our Believers and infrior Officers perseverance in so doing, will come short of theirs at Antioch, thorough God's same continuance of
his mercies to them: or that they are less ready to receive their persons with the like demonstrations of duty and affection, the Antiochians did Meletius, when the same goodness of God shall see fit to reseat them in their Chairs, in their own Persons, or lawful Succession. In which Performances, if the Pastors and People should err, it will be done with great Examples, recommended as such to after Ages: and in good times of the Church. SECT. III. I Know Dr. Hody will come briskly here upon us, and say,Cap. 17. pag. 187, 188. &c. that, Eustathius continu'd Bishop of Antioch, tho' he was locally dispossess'd by the Secular Arm, and the People of Antioch adher'd to, and recogniz'd him as such; but it was so long as Arian Bishops were in his place; and because there was not in effect any Bishop there, the Possessos being Hereticks: So soon as (by the providence of God) the blessed Meletius came thither (in the words of Chrysostome) who was Orthodox, and he was plac'd in Eustathius's room, as Bishop; Eustathius never after concern'd himself with Antioch; and the same Orthodox party then as readily concurr'd and accepted Meletius, as be∣fore they had Eustathius. So that the secular removal of an Or∣thodox Bishop does not make way for a Successor that is an Arian, or otherways Heretical; but it makes way for a Successor that is Orthodox, and the Believers are to receive him. Again, as to Meletius's continuing also Bishop of Antioch under his prescription, and removal by the secular arm, and his being adher'd to in his exile and deprivation, and receiv'd upon his return, by the Orthodox, tho' Paulinus, who was no Heretick, had been possessor there during some time of his absence, and was actual Possessor at his coming home: the Dr. thus answers.Ibid. 1. That Paulinus was by some esteem'd not Orthodox, but a Sabel∣lian. 2dly. He did not allow the Ordinations of the Meletian Clergy; and that was enough to make them oppose him. 3dly. Lucifer Calari∣tanus, who constituted him Bishop there, had nothing to do with the See of Antioch: What authority had he to constitute a Bishop at Antioch? Had Meletius been dead, the Church of Antioch would not have been oblig'd to submit to Paulinus, whom he made Bishop. If an outlan∣dish Bishop, that had nothing at all to do here, should pretend to Conse∣crate an Archbishop of Canterbury, in the room of a banish'd Arch∣bishop; who can imagine, that by the Principles which we advance, we should be oblig'd to receive him? 4ly. Meletius was not at that
time in banishment, not made uncapable of serving as a Bishop of An∣tioch: he was so far from being made uncapable by any Sovereign Power, that by the Emperor's authority he had leave given to return to his See; and was, as it were, upon the Road. And what is more divers than the Case of these, and our present ejected Bishops? Is any one of their Successors an Heretick? Or their Ordainers? Or but under suspition of Heterodoxy? Or does any object against their Consecrati∣ons? Did an outlandish authority place them in their Sees? Or were they under the Inhibition of the Secular Arm? Did they not enter on their Sees by the leave of a Sovereign Power? And are they not there actu∣ally fix'd by it's Authority? And can they pretend a president in Antioch for their not communicating with them? The Doctor is very well assur'd that they cannot: tho' I do not doubt but to make it ap∣pear, that he has no true grounds for it; and I shall to that pur∣pose answer him, as follows. And in the first place. 1. I do not pretend to found Meletius's Title to the See of Antioch upon Eustathius's first deposition from the See of Sebastia by his own Father Eulalius: or his second deposition, which is said to have been executed against him in a Synod at Gangre in Paphlagonia, upon Articles exhibited against him; of which we have an account in Socrates'sL. 2. C. 32. and Sozomen'sL. 3. C. 13. & L. 4. C. 23. Church-Histories. This his Synodical Removal, if upon good evidence, may be justly made use of to prove Meletius's Title to the See of Sebastia; the two foremention'd Historians telling us,Socrat. l. 2. c. 32, 33. Soz. l. 4 c. 24. that he was next to Eustathius in that Chair: But I cannot see how it can justifie his Title to the Church of Antioch, tho' he there also succeeded Eu∣stathius; for he did not come thither as Bishop of the place till many years after, but was first madeSocrat. c. 33. ibid. ut Supra. Bishop of Baerea in Syria, where it seems he likewise succeededSoz. l. 1. c. 2. Eustathius. And besides, SozomenIbid l. 3. c. 13. says, That Eustathius did retract those errors for which he was depos'd by the Synod. So that he might have a just right to his Bishopricks of Baerea and Antioch, notwithstanding his first recidivation and censure upon it: and whatsoever his demerit and incapacity was before, we may be sure that he had abundant∣ly expiated, and remov'd it, ere he was admitted to either, or both of them, by a plenary repentance and satisfaction. And tho' it was a just ground, before his repentance and purgation, for his deprivation at Sebastia; it was no bar, it could not be one, to his Titles to Baerea and Antioch; especially since we find him after∣wards so far from lying under the Church censure, or any in∣capacity for the Work of a Bishop, that he was translated from
the See of Braerea to the See of Antioch,Theodor. l. 1. c. 7. Soz. l. 1. c. 2. by the consent of all the Bishops, Presbyters, and People; and the unanimous Act of the first Council of Nicaea, in which he eminently appear'd as a Member: and he is all alongSoz. l. 2. c. 17, 18. represented to have been a stiff opposer of the Arian, and most zealous maintainer of the Homosian Doctrine: He that desires his Character, may have it at large from St. Chrysostome,Hom. de laude Eustathii. both as a Bishop and a Christi∣an; whom he calls a Martyr, tho' he died in his Bed:Non enim e∣ventu solo, sed etiam voluntate Martyrii corona comparatur. Ibid. For the Crown of Martyrdom is not obtain'd by the event only, but by the will also. If Eustathius had been Synodically depos'd, and justly; and continu'd by the Church under that inter∣dict, and had been, whilst under its censure, vested with the Primacy of Antioch, his title had been nominal only; and Mele∣tius would have been the true Primate of that See, entring upon it upon those Terms which the Church allows, tho' Eustathius had then been alive; but since, tho' once disabled in a former See, he had been restor'd, and his censure had been taken off, and he was plac'd in Antioch by Church-hands, and Laws; Meletius could have no right in that See, at the same time he was in it, by rea∣son of Eustathius's deposition and censure; but could be only a Second, in St. Cyprian's sense, i. e. an intruder; or, which is the same thing, Dr. Hody's Possessor only, in claiming a Right, and ex∣ercising Episcopal Jurisdiction there. Again. 2dly. Neither will I pretend to have Meletius's rightful posses∣sion of the Antiochian Chair to be founded in Eustathius's death; tho' betwixt it and Meletius's enthronization, no lawful Bishop had been plac'd there, at the time of that Solemnity; as those, who plead it for Meletius's legitimation, do assert. For, tho' his death would have taken away the objection of two Bishops in the City, upon Meletius's admitance, and obviated so much illegality and guilt, as it would otherwise have contracted; and since Meletius was Orthodox, and admitted by those other Rules, which the Church requires, (we'll suppose, at least, he was) nothing but Eustathius's being alive at the time of his admittance could illegi∣timate his Chair, and make it adulterous: Yet his death cannot be prov'd from authentick hands, or those collections and infe∣rences which will be demanded to make it good. And indeed Socrates and Sozomen are so particular in their Narratives, where∣in they represent him to have been alive, at the time when Me∣letius came to the Antiochian Chair, and are backt with such cor∣roborating Authorities, and Circumstances in Church Story, that
it may not be denyed upon full thoughts and a just conside∣ration of them. As, that he was call'd from his Banishment bySocrat. lib. 4. c. 10. Soz. l. 6. c. 13. Jovian, and was at Constantinople in the Reign of Valens, where he then Consecrated Evagrius Bishop of that City; The Homo♉sians taking an opportunity to fill the Episcopal Chair, upon the death of Eudoxius the Arian, who had usurp'd it: and both Evagrius and Eustathius were afterwards banish'd for it by Valens, the latter into Bithinia in Thrace, and the former into another Forreign Region. But especially (besides many other which the Doctor himself has collected, and we may safely stand by) in that St. Chrisostome tells us, that he was living when Me∣letius was made Bishop of Antioch; and exercis'd his Episcopal Function in that district, until his coming thither; whose ac∣count of it I have a little above recited. And the single Au∣thority of TheodoritH. E. l. 3. c. 4. hath not weight enough to carry the Scale against all these; nor the reasons and conjectures which Baroniusad, An. 370. pag. 244. and ValesiusAnnot. ad l. 4. H. E. Socr. c. 14, 15. thence take occasion to give for his being dead; Tho' they were great Men in their times, and Ob∣servations: It being manifest that they came short in this par∣ticular. 3ly. I cannot think either, That Eustathius's Deposition, which was made by the Council of Antioch, whilst he was made Bishop of that See, of which we have an account in Socratesl. 1. c. 18. and Sozomenl. 2. c. 18., can make a just plea for Meletius to that Chair, and Legitimate him as a Successor there. For the Bishops in that Council, who were mostly Eusebians, condemn'd him, in truth, for his great and experienc'd zeal and performances against Aria¦nismAthan. Apol. p. 702. 812. Hieron. in Chron. in the Council of Nicaea; tho' they did not implead him for it, (it being too early days,) but, partly as a Sabellian; (the Arians usually arraigning the Homo♉sians as such, they frequently also call'd themPhilostorg. Epit. Hist. Eccl. Sandius Histor. Enucleat. Photinians, Montanists, &c. Athanasius had his share of it) and the crime which they ultimately insisted on, was his suppos'd incontinency; but they had not competent evidence to make good their Accusation: And all the truly Orthodox Bishops in the SynodTheod. H. E. l. 1. c. 22. Protested against their Pro∣ceedings. Neither may we believe that Eustathius himself, who was so great and eminent a man, in his life and death, being recorded as a Saint and Martyr, would have wrote, and conti∣tinu'd himself Bishop of Antioch; That the Orthodox would have made separate Meetings, and Communicated under, and recogniz'd him as their lawful Bishop; That he would act as such▪ and pre∣side
over them, tho' in Exile, until, by an agreement between them, and his Resignation, Meletius was rightfully placed in that See; That the Eastern Church should depute him, with two more Bishops, as their Legates to Liberius,Soz. l. 6. c. 10, 11. Socrat. l. 4. c. 11. to let him know, that they did then acknowledge, and always would unto death, the Nicene Faith; and the Doctrine of one Substance; That he should be receiv'd as a Bishop of Christendom, upon other special occasions, as by the Orthodox at Constantinople, and be made use of by them for theSocr. l. 4 c. 13. Consecrating Evagrius, and advancement of the Catholick Doctrine; That the Orthodox at Antioch should all along be call'd Eustathians, by a Denomination from him: This (I say) cannot be believ'd, if he had all this while been legally abdicated, and remov'd upon the terms which the Church allows, and had liv'd and dyed under it's Censure. As for those that say there were two Eustathius's, the one of Sebastia, and the other of Antioch; and that he of Antioch was not the Legantine Bishop from the East, and did not consecrate Eva∣grius at Constantinople, but he of Sebastia did both: I cannot be any ways affected with it, as to our present Argument; (tho' upon a thorough enquiry they may be found to be in a mistake) since those against whom I advance it, do contend but for one, which is he of Antioch, and that it was he who perform'd those Offices. Besides, if Eustathius had been actually and truly depos'd, and the Orthodox had deem'd him to be, and remain so, how came it to pass that they did not Elect another in his room, but let the See continue vacant till Meletius was en∣thron'd, which was, at least, thirty years after, during some part of which time it was fill'd with Arian Bishops, pro∣fessedly such, and from the beginning with those whom the Arian contagion had deeply infected, but it appear'd not so publickly as afterwards? as we read in Theodoritl. c. 22. and I shall make more plain anon. This is contrary to the Practice of the Church in those times, which still continu'd a Succession in opposition to the Arians: And since she did not do it here, we are to believe it was because she knew the See to be fill'd by Eustathius, till Meletius was made Bishop there: And conse∣quently did not look upon Eustathius Abdication to be made on true Church grounds and to be effectual. If it be replied, how came it then to pass that Constantine did own and abet Eustathius's Abdication with his secular Arm, and banish'd his person, (it may be believed) upon his non
submission to it? To this it may be replied, that upon a thorow inquiry into his behaviour in that whole affair concerning Arius, it will be found, that His Majesty, was litle better then a Trim∣mer from the beginning, in his own Inclinations: And believed that the sense of the Homosian Doctrine might be received without the Synods explication; But especially without making it Law: though his piety directed him to receive, enfranchise, and submit to it. And he might in his latter days (when this Scene, in which Eustathius had so great a part, was acted) be over yeilding to the Eusebians, who carried it in the Synod, in which Eustathius was condemn'd, and there pretended to be Catholicks, but with a naughtier Design; Viz. That they might effectually overthrow the Nicene Doctrine by it. And if not at the same time, it was not long after, that theL. 2. c. 32. Arian Presbi∣ter had Constantine's favor to a great degree: And first prevail'd with him to recall Arius: With the same Arian Presbyter, 'tis asserted, that Emperor left his last Testament, and Enjoin'd him under Oath, to deliver it with his own Hand, to his Son Con∣stantius. And as this Presbyter had great advantages for the promoting his Religion, and it had success accordingly under Constantius, so we are not to question, but that he insinuated notions into Constantine, which he had not at first received: Though the Actions of Princes, in some particulars, have alvays been unaccountable. 4ly. But to come closer to the Doctors own Arguings: What he contends for, in these following words, may in part be granted him: Viz. That Eustathius and the Orthodox Party,Pag. 188. did not own and receive the Second, or Successors, which were placed in the Antiochian See, upon his Banishment, until Meletius was Enthron'd who was Orthodox; Because before his Admission, such Seconds were accounted Arians: But then Eustathius gave over, and never concern'd himself any more as Bishop of Antioch, being secur'd of an Orthodox Successor. But though we do grant that this was one reason, and at that time, their only reason, which they produced: yet might they not have separated, as they then did, and made their Conventions under other Bishops, whom they believed to be legal, and given some other account of it, which was justifiable, upon those terms which the Church stands engag'd to accept? What if that Succession that was placed upon Eustathius was not Arian? And someBaron an. 340. contend it was not: Of which I am hereafter to give an account:
(Supposing what the Doctor and we at present allow, Viz. That Eustathius was not deposed under Constantius, but under Con∣stantine the Great, it will then be more then probable that it was not Arian) and what reason will the Doctor then leave for Eustathius, and the Orthodox People of Antioch to give (ad∣mitting that he was duly deposed) why they renounced their Communion, and he govern'd, and they assembled under him in opposition to that Succession? He must conclude them to have been Schismaticks in the doing of it: But then he will own, that there is another reason over and above that of Heresy, (especially Arianism) which justify's a separation. And surely (be the Doctors Opinion what it will,) they might have done it, purely and solely, because that Succession was Schismatical and brought in upon Eustathius whilst he was alive, and vested with the Government of the Antiochian See, upon Church terms: As the Doctor allows he was, till Meletius came thither; at which time, and not before, he says he gave over: But nothing is more sure, than that the Principles and Practices of the Church of God would have borm then out in it, for that consideration; which have all along opposed Novatianism in the same degree, and with the same zeal, they have opposed Arianism: And the Characters of each, as of the Heresy, are still found to be given by the Ancient Church, wit the same detestation: And it is also most manifest, that the same Ancients have oppos'd Novatus, by reason of his Schism, and for that he brought in Bishops upon full Sees, which were not voyded by Church Laws, to the di∣sturbance of the peace and quiet of the Church of God. And did not Arius do the same? Or, was he less a Schismatick than Novatus, because he was more an Heretick, and consequently, less hateful, and to be avoyded for it? And I do not in the least question, but that Eustathius would no more have comply'd with Meletius upon his forcible and uncanonical coming to the See of Antioch, had he indeed come to it in such a manner, than he did with Sophronius and his Succession; supposing them to have been Arians: Or that even Meletius did account his Or∣thodoxy, alone, sufficient to vouth his Succession, without Eu∣stathius's leave, and Resignation. Both which I shall fully make ap∣pear by and by. Neither do we find, that the Church has been less careful to continue, and maintain, her Succession against Novatianism, than she has been against Arianism. The Doctors reason may be good which he gives, why Eustathius and the
Orthodox at Antioch did not submit to that Succession, founded in Sophronius: (Who was the first Eusebian Bishop that came in his Chair) but he makes a perverse improvement of it, when he thence insinuates, or rather directly infers, that the Schism alone of the Sophronians, had not been a just ground of their separa∣tion from them: As though if they had not been Arians, the Eustathians wou'd have compli'd notwithstanding Eustathius was invalidly depos'd, and at the same time a rightful Proprietor, but forcibly remov'd by Constantine, and illegally by the Synod, as they afterward did, when Meletius came into the See, with Eustathius his leave. But this is the Doctors constant way of arguing: And he all a long prov's, with a great deal of weakness and fallacy; that because the Empire hath by its own Authority, without a Synod, placed Bishops in full Sees, not voyded by the Church Laws, but only by its secular removal of the proper Bishops, and the Orthodox have refus'd to receive and submit unto them, and given this reason for it, Viz. Because they were Arians: There∣fore (he wou'd infer) these Catholicks wou'd have received the same intruded Bishops or others, in the same Circumstan∣ces, if they had been Orthodox; and the Schism of the action, and their being Seconds in a full See upon an anteceding Church right, not justly extinguished, would not have made a defensive plea, nor justified their non Communion with them. But, might he not as well have argued, that, because adultery is declared to be a sin, which will forfeit that mans salvation who commits it, therefore, Perjury, Drunkenness, Witchcraft, &c. are not such noxious sins as Adultery is, because they are not always upon the same occasion, and at the same time, declar'd to have the noxious effect, but passed over and not mention'd, because the Judge thinks fit to arraign and condemn a Criminal as a Traytor, who at the same time, is known to him to be a Felon, Murderer, Sodomist, &c. But he doth not think fit to arraign and condemn him for them, at that Assize, therefore the Criminal is not arraignable, nor lyable to be condemn'd upon those scores?Cap. 5. Sect 4. The Docter himself tells us that Acacius Patriarch of Constanti∣nople refused to Communicate with Timothy Aelurus, not because he was put into the place of Timothy Salofaciolus, unjustly deposed by the Herretical Usurper Basilicus, but because he was an Heretick and a Paricide. Now, what if his Murther had not been men∣tion'd there, as well as his Heresy? Why the Doctor, by the parity
of Arguing, must have concluded, that, not his Murther, but his Heresy only, had been a just ground for Acacius's rejecting him. But then, he must conclude likewise, that, as not Schism, so, neither were Symony, Idolatry, &c. just ground for it, since they are not mentioned neither: And thus he that arraigns but one sin, at one, and the same time, as damning, must be interpreted to acquit all the rest, though of the same, or the like malignant Influence. And is not this pretty Arguing? But his Book is stuff'd with the same or worse: And we have it heaps upon heaps throughout a great part of it. He ought to have prov'd, that a Bishops Schismatical Possession, upon a bare secular Deprivation, is not a just plea for the Believers not Com∣municating with him, as well as his Arianism; which he can no more do, than he can prove; because Arianism is a most wicked Heresy, therefore Schism brings no guilt with it. But in that he proves the Schismatical possession, not to be a just Plea, because there are more just Pleas, and but one of them is, upon a special occasion, produced as a just one, when that of Schism is not mention'd together with it; this argues only the Doctors rash head, and unthinking Complexion. When a Criminal is brought to the Bar, who is guilty of many Offences that are Capital, the Judg's prudence will direct him to single out one of them, against which the Evidence is most full, and when it's pu∣nishment will be more exemplary, and conduce, at least, under the present circumstances, in a greater measure to the common good: And we may easily think, that the same Prudence did direct our Orthodox Believers, in a proportionable degree, to insist upon the Second's Arianism, (admitting that they did insist only upon it, which is not prov'd) as the reason why they refus'd to Communicate with him, it being a sin which did then, when the Doctor produces these instances and reasons of it, as visibly appear as the Sun at Noon day, to the no less manifest destruction of the Church, by its Heterodoxy in Faith, and ill effects upon manners, being fill'd with Sacriledge, Rapine, and all sorts of Injustice, which swallow'd up the Schism, and Church Usurpation. And though the Schism had been a competent Plea in its self (and the Catholick Church did at that time no more submit to Novatianism than to Arianism) yet the Arianism might be thought a more seasonable Plea, (Novatianism being then Indulg'd by the Empire and made Law, and its abetters, in some other respects, had gain'd a tolerable reputation with
the Catholicks) as like to prove a better, and more effectual ad∣vocate for them: and if any that profess'd to be Orthodox have closed with, and submitted to the Schism, when not complicated with the Heresie, the Doctor must prove that they did it upon Principles and Conscience, otherwise his telling of Stories (of which he has abundance) will prove nothing. 5. As to that which the Doctor says, viz. That Meletius's Orthodoxy, was it which gave him a rightful Title upon his Possession; and accordingly, Eustathius and the Orthodox at Antioch received him as their lawful Bishop, so soon as they were secured of it. I shall shew: That as Meletius's Arianism, during his Profession of which he was ConsecratedSoz l. 4. c. 27. Baron. an. 360. num. 44.45. Bishop of Antioch, would have been a compe∣tent and undeniable bar to his own rightful Possession of that Chair, if he had not contrary to the expectation of Eudoxius and others, who promoted him as an Arian into it, retracted that Heresie, and professed himself a Catholick; and neither Eusta∣thius's deposition, resignation, or death would have removed that bar: So that it was not his Orthodoxy alone, and possession, which made him the legitimate Pastor there, till Eustathius gave way unto him, and upon composition, resigned his Right into his hands: but without it, he would have been no better than St. Cyprian's Second: i. e. he would have been a Schismatick, and not a lawful Bishop there, so long as Eustathius continued alive, and a Synod did not remove him, upon terms which the Church allows. And this will be readily done, in parts, from the ac∣count of Eustathius's relinquishing that See, and Meletius's receiving of it, which the Doctor has given us out of St. Chrysostome, and I have recited from his Transcript, a little above, in this Secti∣on: Where it is most evident, that Eustathius continued to inspect and govern the Orthodox in Antioch, and they their dependance on him, as their Bishop, until Meletius came thither; that Eusta∣thius did not own Meletius as the Bishop of Antioch, till it pleased God to bring him off from his Arianism [] and he became a Catholick; that his Orthodoxy alone, and Pos∣session (which the Arians gave him) did not create his full and just right, until Eustathius desisted, and gave up his jurisdiction to him [] by resignation; and he then, and not be∣fore, became the lawful and compleat Pastor of Antioch, [] and received the whole Mass, and reaped; and the Flock, which before was Eustathius's, became Meletius's Fold and People. And all this
is very well consistent with that which the DoctorP. 188. tells us is observ'd by Photius, Patriarch of Constantinople, which is in a Trea∣tise not yet publish'd, but to be met with in the Oxford Library:B. M. S. Baro. as that Meletius being advanced to Eustathius's Throne, when he was banish'd for his Piety, and still living, prov'd no pre∣judice to him: but because he was Orthodox, he was readily receiv'd by the Church: For though it was in consideration of Meletius's Orthodoxy that Eustathius resign'd to him; Photius does not say, that his Orthodoxy alone gave him a title to the See, and that it was in it self, though accompanied with Schism, competent to do it; and Eustathius's resignation was not requir'd in order to it. The Doctor wonders, that neither Baronius, nor Valesius (he might have added, nor the vindicator) observ'd this passage in Chrysostome, and so do I: and much more that Baronius miss'd it; since he has given us some account of Meletius, out of St. Chryso∣stom's Homily, de sancto Meletio Antiocheno; and that his industry did not lead him a little further, to the Homily de sancto Eustachio Antiocheno, where the above-mentioned Narrative is to be found: the two being still placed not far from one another in those Edi∣tions of Chrysostome, which I have met with. And I cannot but wonder that the Doctor should commit a greater oversight, and be so inconsiderate as to say;P. 191. That the Orthodox Party very readily concurr'd and accepted Meletius, being an Orthodox Bishop, though it does not appear, that they knew that Eustathius would give his con∣sent; for, how can he think that they were, or could be, igno∣rant of it: since their own eyes and ears were their evidences for it: did not their own Bishop Eustathius, who all along before, from the time of his banishment, had applied himself to take care of them, and called them together, and exhorted them not to yield to Wolves, or betray the Flock to 'em, when they invaded the Sheep, he did not leave 'em: (in the words of the Doctors own translation of Chrysostome) did not Eustathius (I say then visibly desist to take the same care of them any longer, and (for I cannot tell how to express it otherwise) resign his Right and Jurisdiction to him, when by the providence of God the blessed Meletius came thither? Nor can we think that Meletius did not receive Eustathius's resigna∣tion in the same visible manner; unless we can suppose these Or∣thodox Believers of Antioch, who had so firmly and conscienti∣ously adher'd to Eustathius, under his state of abdication, would not once ask him the reason why he desisted; but arbitrarily desert him at the last; that they should satisfie their consciences
in doing of it; or, that Eustathius should not give them his reasons for it; or, in the last place, that Meletius, who was at that time brought off, by the goodness of God, from Arianism, should remain so great a Novice in the Catholick Polity, as to be ignorant (I shall shew you by and by, that he was not igno∣rant) that his Orthodoxy alone was sufficient to legitimate his possession, whilst Eastathius was alive, without his consent and resignation? Eustathius's bare desisting ought to satisfie the Do∣ctor that he did resign: if he be not a meer Sceptick,P. 7. who con∣tends only for a present Argument; since he tells us; that in reason we ought to presume, that our ejected Bishops did give their con∣sent that their Successors should be acknowledged, because, (since their ejectment, he must be supposed to mean) they have never, by any publick signification of their will, laid claim to the obedience of their People, and do not now exercise their Episcopal Jurisdiction, as before. It is true, Eustathius did act as a Bishop after his resignation: but it was not as Bishop of Antioch; neither did he lay claim to the obedience of that people any more than to another: but he acted as a Bishop of the whole World: De quavis in toto orbe Con∣stituta Ecclesia, as St. ChrysostomeHomil. de Sancto Eustath. Antioch. Ed. Pa∣ris. Lat. speaks; (of which Episcopal Right, I am to speak more anon,) who tells us; that he took care of the Christians in Constantinople, under the Arian Persecution, being recall'd from banishment by Jovian, and continuing in that City: at which time he also, ordain'd Evagrius Bishop there, and they both were banish'd for it by Valens, as we read in Socrates,H.E. l. 4. c. 13. and possibly he might perform an Embassy to Liberius, from the Eastern Church, if that was not another Eustathius, as Baronius, thinks he was, who perform'd it. But if the Doctor will stand by his own Argument no longer than it serves his turn, and re∣ject what is here produced as an incompetent proof of a resig∣nation; and at this day require Eustathius, Meletius, and their Antiochians Original Contract, with their Hands and Seals to it; I do own that I am unable to do it: and I am so much the less concern'd for it, because I am not in Westminster Hall, but in the Church, where such proof is not required. Besides how can any man think that the Catholicks in Antioch who adher'd to Eustathius, notwithstanding that a Council there had depos'd him, they believing his deposition to be unjust and null; and form'd themselves into a Party upon it, and were call'd Eustathians, in opposition to Sophronius, who was placed in Eustathius's Chair, and lookt upon by them as a Second, and in∣truder:
and continued their separation from him all along in his succession, only because he was a Second, and possessed a See, to which he had no right; for the Eusebians then professed the Doctrine of the Eternal Generation, as in the Nicene Creed, as I shall make it appearCap. 3. S. 2. anon; so that the Eustathians could not plead their Arianism, as the reason of their separation; tho' it is ten to one but Doctor Hody will say they did: can we (I say) think, that these same Eustathians would have received Meletius into the Chair of Antioch, and paid him their duty, as their lawful Bishop, which all men, even the Doctor owns they did, Eu∣stathius being then alive, and filling that See, with the same justice he had filled it, from the time of his enthroning; if he had not resign'd it, and quitted his right to Meletius, and there∣by made way for their admission and acknowledgment of him, upon Church terms? We cannot think it: For what else could Meletius be otherwise but a Second in Antioch, as Sophronius was? Which way could he come into the Antiochian district, but by the same injury, which the Sophronian Succession had before done to Eustathius's right and person? How infamous must these Eusta∣thians be, upon their entertaining Meletius, who filled the See with the same injustice Sophronius did? But they embrac'd the one, and separated from the other, they may not be thought to have done it, without Eustathius his consent, and voidance of the Chair, some way or other, if not by a formal resignation, openly made known unto them; especially if we consider their practice a little after; whom we find to adhere to Meletius, upon a principle of right, when he had been a long while for∣cibly absent, and Paulinus was brought into his See, without his consent, and regular relinquishment of it; though Paulinus was not thought to be an Arian: they did not believe his Orthodoxy to be sufficient to justifie his coming into a full See, and unlaw∣ful Possession, any more than they believed Meletius's possession in opposition to Eustatbius, or the Sophronians, in opposition to both of them, was their warrant for it. I will here add; that this generous and most Christian action of Eustathius seems to have been, in some measure, a president to that proposal whichEp. ad Mar∣cel. apud August. l. de gestis cum Emerito do∣natist. St. Austin and the African Bishops made in the days of Honorius; who, upon the growth of Donatism, and after many attempts and conferences for the adjusting the diffe∣rences arising upon it, betwixt the Donatists and Catholicks, ten∣der'd this offer, viz. that if upon a just stating of their respective
rights, the lawful title should appear to be with the Donat would resign their Bishopricks to them. And the distresi Greek Patriarchs seem to have imitated them both; in that they have sometimes resign'd their Patriarchies to those Bishops o their own Faith, whom their hard Masters thought fit to nomi∣nate, least their Religion and its Orders should be wholly sup∣pressed, upon their refusal, or less protected. Did not this great Bishop of Antioch, Eustathius, act much after the same manner before them? Did he not first quit,  (in St. Chrysostome, as above cited) the Honours of a Governor, when he retain'd the Episcopal Office, and the cares of it, whilst his People were among Wolves, and in the hands of Arian Suc∣cessors, and afterwards relinquish his right also to the Orthodox Meletius; himself being then in exile, and less capable to serve that People than Meletius was? Tho' Meletius did not long en∣joy that liberty which he then possessed. And surely, he is not a truly Christian Bishop that will refuse to do the same, under the same, or the like circumstances; but refuses to resign, though the Church may enjoy thereby those advantages, which it can∣not have, if he does not: though it be otherwise in danger of ruine: neither on the other side is he a truly Christian Bishop, who quits his Rights and Government, into the hands of its ene∣mies, when they are either Schismaticks or Arians: which was the case of Eustathius, who upon that consideration refused for some time to do it: or when they are purely obstinate Schis∣maticks, which was the case of St. Austin, and the African Bi∣shops; and it was upon that account they did not resign: but of this by the way: to return then where we left off: In the next place. 6ly. Meletius will be found a farther full and pregnant instance, that the Church in those days, did not allow Orthodoxy, and possession upon it, to make a passable title, whilst the Predeces∣sor was alive, and not duly remov'd; since we have not only prov'd Meletius to have received a resignation from Eustathius, e're his title could be just and compleat to the See of Antioch; but we farther know him not to have own'd Paulinus's title to the same See, though he was Orthodox, and in possession of it, and himself, the first and proper Bishop, was, at the same time, per∣sonally abdicated; being remov'd by exile from it: but when he return'd, by the favour of the Empire, and found Paulinus in his Chair, who had been seated there by Lucifer Calaritanus, he de∣clar'd himself to be Bishop of that place notwithstanding: and
received his Congregation, which consisted of those BelieversSocrat. l. 3. c. 11. Soz. l. 5. c. 11, 12. that had adhered to him, and disown'd Paulinus, as well as Euzoius: which latter was the Arian Bishop, (who had been in Antioch from the time of Meletius's absence, and set up, in oppo∣sition to them both) tho' Meletius was forced to officiate with them in the Suburbs only, when Paulinus was permitted to have his Altar in the City, by that favour which was denied Meletius by Euzoius. And we are hence to observe, which will corroborate what we have just now offer'd in proof of Eustathius's resignation, First, That Meletius whose Character is so great in the Church for Orthodoxy and Integrity, cannot be thought to have in∣sisted on his Orthodoxy alone, upon his possession as a just qua∣lification, and competent title to the See of Antioch, without Eustathius's resignation; since he did not allow of Paulinus's claim to the same, upon such terms: for Paulinus was an Eustathian (which sect was entirely Orthodox) and in possession, as Eu∣stathius had been before him; we have shew'd it to be highly pro∣bable, that Eustathius resign'd, otherwise the Eustathians would not have deserted him, and accepted Meletius for their Bishop: which is further prov'd by little less than a demonstration, since none may think, that Meletius would have oppos'd Paulinus as a possessor without right, when at the same time, himself had been no better than a bare possessor in the See of Antioch, with equal injury to Eustathius, as he pretended Paulinus was to him; unless Eustathius had resign'd unto him: if Paulinus's title was not good against Meletius; Meletius's title was not good against Eustathius, except upon Eustathius's resignation, or his voluntary voidance of his right in Antioch, by some way which was equiva∣lent to it. 2dly. That it is no new thing for a holy and religious Bishop to summon his people, and convene with them, in the worship of God, though it be in some remote and obscure place, when he is overpower'd by Schismaticks and Hereticks, and they shut up against him, those Houses of God, that are assign'd in his City, and District, for that purpose, as Euzoius the Arian, and Paulinus the Schismatick, did then upon Meletius. 3dly. That Meletius and his Catholicks, did separate, and keep their worship apart, in respect to Euzoius and Paulinus alike, and as the Heresie and Schism of the former (for the Arians were not only Hereticks but Schismaticks) so the Schism alone of the latter, was adjudg'd by him as a just cause, and sufficient war∣rant
for his doing of it: St. Cyprian's Second, or a Bishop that is an illegal Successor, and a Bishop that is an Heretical Successor, are both to be shunn'd: and we stand engag'd not to acknow∣ledge, nor to communicate in subordination to the one, as muh as to the other: the true Catholick Succession was then presev'd and continued, in opposition to both the Arian and Novatian Suc∣cession: and will be contradistinct to Heresie and Schism, to the World's end: tho' it may be less pompous and visible, many times; and in a corner. I know, that Baronius contends for Paulinus as a legitimate Bishop, upon every occasion in his Annals: and for the putting it out of all doubt that he was such, he tells us that Lucifer Ca∣laritanus did constitute him Bishop of Antioch, as the Pope's Le∣gate: but he says it in the Index of his fourth Tome, which refers us to pag. 176. where he has not one word of it, nor doth he at∣tempt to prove it any where else: neither is he singular herein; it being the usual precarious way of the Romish Doctors, to place their Pope in the head, and represent him as the primum Mobile of every action that seems considerable: and we will grant the great and excellent Annalist, that the Bishop of Rome did receive Paulinus as a Bishop of Antioch, as also the Council of Alexandria, according to the account which Athanasius gives of it, in his Syno∣dical Epistle ad Antiochenos; which Epistle he hath recited at large, and truly in his Annals:An. 362. where it also appears, that Athanasius and Eusebius Vercellensis did the same: the formerEph. ad An∣tiochenses. exhorts the Antiochians to unity with Paulinus, as their Bishop: but SozomenL. 5. c. 11. tells us, that Meletius was not then return'd from his exile: (which is omitted byL. 2. c. 7. Socrates) and since Baronius has not prov'd the contrary, nor that the Synod of Alexandria knew that he was alive, at the time of its then sitting; upon whose cre∣dit, he says the Pope received Paulinus, but by no means upon his Election by Lucifer, a Schismatick Bishop, (though at another time he says Lucifer acted therein as the Pope's Legate) Meletius's title will not be ere the worse, but his case will be found to be the sme with Narcissus, in EusebiusH.E l. 6. c. 9.; upon whose long absence, and no communication with them, they supposing him to be dead, the Neighbour Bishops ordain'd three Successors into his See, but after all, received him upon his postliminium, or return, in the same capacity, he went out from them: And the present Successor gave way to him, as Paulinus and the other Western Bishops ought to have done to Meletius; and we have this great circumstance
to perswade us to think, that the Bishops of the Synod of Alex∣andria and they of the West, might easily think, that Meletius was not then alive, to challenge his right; since he did not return upon Julian's Edict, which (we know) gave him, and all the exil'd Bishops, liberty to do it, and to come home; but continued in his banishment and obscuriy, till the daysBaron. an. 862. p. 88. of Valens. And this will be the more confirm'd, since St. Basil is express in his Epistle ad Terentium, cited byAn. 3. 72. q. 327. Baronius, that the Western Bishops were, many of them, ignorant of the affairs of the East, when they rejected Meletius, and communicated under Paulinus; and those that knew them better, related them contentiously, and not according to the truth: and it may not be unlikely, but that Eu∣sebius Samosatensis was dissatisfied upon Paulinus's election, for the same reason, and refusedSz. l. 5. c. 12. Scrat. l. 2. c. 7. to communicate with him: if it be demanded, how Meletius's People at Antioch, which constantly adhered to, and communicated with him, during his absence, knew that he was alive, any more than the Western Bishops did? I answer, that as we have no reason to suspect it, so we have just reason to believe that they had a constant information of his being alive, by Letters or some other way: especially, since we have just grounds, from St. Chrysostome, to believe, that they had correspondence from Thrace, whether Meletius was exil'd: and, indeed if they had not done it, they could not have acquit∣ted themselves of Schism, in making such their distinct worship; Paulinus being otherwise unexceptionable, save only that he pos∣sessed a See, to which another Bishop had a just right, being then alive, only in banishment by the secular Arm. But Doctor Hody does not seem to have consider'd any of these things; nor to be concern'd which way they go: believing himself abundantly secur'd, that it makes nothing against Paulinus's title, as a Possessor, though Meletius was alive together with him, and not rightfully remov'd, upon Church Terms; and his Party did not receive Paulinus, but waited for Meletius's return, and adher'd to him in his absence: nor that any thing like an argument is thereby ad∣ministred on our side; since they refused Paulinus for other rea∣sons, which he has produced, and I have a little above recited:Sect. 3. and shall here give in my answer to each of them. And, 1. The first reason (which he is inclinable to conceal,) viz. That Paulinus was esteem'd by some not Orthodox, ought not indeed to have been nam'd by him: it being the usual practice of the Arians, to represent the Homo♉sians as Sabellians, to make them
thereby less acceptable, even odious to their own People; even others that did less incline to Arianism, were very apt to ap∣prehend the Catholicks to be really such: in that they asserted the Father and the Son to be of one substance: because they could not find out any distinction between the three Persons in the Trinity (which the Sabellians deny'd) unless they were allow'd to be three distinct Substances; which the Catholick Doctrine of one substance altogether precluded. 2. It had been more for the Doctors credit, if he had also passed over, without naming it, that other reason which he has given, why the Meletians might oppose Paulinus, and refuse to communicate under him upon it, and not upon his unjust pos∣session, viz. Because he did not allow of the Meletian Clergy as being deriv'd from the Arians. For this could not, in all likeli∣hood, be their plea, since Paulinus was one of the Alexandrian Synod, which determin'd, that those who had so far comply'd, with the Arians, as to receive orders from them, should be re∣ceiv'd, upon their repentance, with their orders, and remain Priests in their former stations; of which we have the account inEp. Synod ad Antio chenses. Athanasius: and they did no otherwise therein than the Church of God had always done before them: even the first Council of NicaeaCan. 8.; and the more ancient famous CouncilEuseb. H. E. l. 7. c. 24. of Antioch, which received Paulus Samosatenus in his Bishoprick, upon his repentance: besides, Paulinus was never accounted a Lucife∣rian; whose error we know, consisted in the denying communi∣on with those Bishops, who had Arian hands laid upon them; though they did afterwards come over to the Church, and re∣linquisht the Heresie: but, if the Objector will persist, that Meletius did withstand Paulinus as a Luciferian; since Lucifer was not condemn'd as an Heretick, but only as a Schismatick, in that he refused to communicate with his Brethren, the Bishops; and re∣fus'd it upon those terms which the Church did not allow: we shall hereby gain that which Dr. Hody will not thank us for: and with as much authority on our side, as the practice of so great a man, as Meletius is known to have been, can add to it, viz. That a depriv'd Bishop hath not submitted to his Successor, though he was no Heretick, Paulinus being in all other things such whose com∣munion no good Catholicks can justly refuse. Catholicum quidem & sanctum virum, & per omnia dignum sacerdotio Paulinum Episcopum collocavit, as RuffinusH. Socrat. l. . c. 27. speaks of him: have we not as much au∣thority on our side, as the Church of God can give us? Which
refused to communicate with Lucifer Calaritanus solely upon the same account: and the main point is clear'd. For it is mani∣fest, that if Meletius, the ejected Bishop, did not refuse Paulinus the Successor, as an intruder on his Church Right, and in that instance of the sin, a Schismatick: he had sufficient ground to do it, as he was a Schismatick in the foremention'd instance of it: and Paulinus's Orthodoxy would have vindicated him against Melerius, no otherwise than Lucifer's Orthodoxy did him, against the Church of God. I have already observed, how Baronius all along, contends to have Paulinus the Catholick Bishop of Antioch, though he owns Meletius to have been alive at the same time: and I cannot but further take notice with what impotency and meanness of ar∣gument he pursues it: as, when he gives this for one of his rea∣sons,An. 362. p. 87. viz. because Meletius was once an Arian, and had been consecrated by the Arian Bishops: but did not the Church, at that time, receive all such in their Orders? Does not the Annalist tell us so? But the learn'd Cardinal had recorded it as true History,Ibid. that Lucifer Calaritanus did enthrone Paulinus in the Antiochian Chair, as the Pope's Legate; and he is bound to make the performance as passable as he can; though his attempts do make but the whole more incredible, as it is usual for those to do, that embarque in a bad cause: And, notwithstanding a most establisht principle in the Church is violated by it, and two Bishops are in one Chair at the same time, he is abundantly se∣cur'd, that his Holiness's appearance in the Cause, is a competent dispensation for it all. And I think it will be the Doctors best way to take up his refuge there also, and vouch his Successor (at least at Antioch) by the same authority: I am sure he may do it by as good argument as he uses, when he proves, in the next place, that the Meletians did not refuse communion with Pau∣linus on the score of his being an Usurper, and unjustly possessed of Meletius's Chair; because they refused him, as plc'd in the Antiochian Chair, by him who had no authority for it; and for this he tells us 3ly. That Paulinus was placed in his See by an incompetent Authority: For, Lucifer Calaritanus (who seated him there) had nothing at all to do with the See of Antioch: What authority had he to Constitute a Bishop of Antioch? Had Meletius been dead, the Church of Antioch would not have been oblig'd to submit to Paulinus, whom he made Bishop. And what then? might they not refuse
him, as St. Cyprians Second, and a Possessor without right, because Meletius was a live; and likewise, because we was placed there by Lucifer's hands, which were not sufficiently authoriz'd for it? How do these two reasons exclude one another? The Doctor may see how they do, but no body else can, if Meletius had been dead, they could not be said to refuse Paulinus for both reasons, but only for the latter: But so long as he was alive they might have refused him for both reasons, for what any man alive can discern, but himself, in the two reasons, as rend∣ring their doing of it, upon the account of them, inconsistent: And why he urges Lucifers supposed powerless enthroning him, as an Argument that they did not receive him, because he was an intruder upon Meletius, he seems only able to give an account. Besides; does not the Doctor wonderfully forget his main Pro∣legomenon: viz. That Possession and Orthodoxy create a right, and oblige the Subjects to receive the present Bishop under these two qualifications, though the predecessor be unjustly remov'd, and conse∣quently the Possessor was unduly enthron'd? I always thought that the Principle which they have advanced, had obliged them to receive him that is in the Chair, i. e. the Possessor, if other ways unexce∣ptionable. And how comes it then to pass that the Doctor pleads, that the Meletians might refuse Paulinus when possessed by Lucifer, and was every waies else unexceptionable, save that he had not a Right to do it? He thinks fit (inTo the Reade one place of his Book) to put us upon this Impossibility, (as he concludes it to be) That to justify our selves from the charge of Schisme, in that we do not submit to the present unjust and uncanonical Deprivations, and receive the present Possessors, we ought to prove that no one Bishop, who is put into the place of another, deposed by an incom∣petent Authority, ought to be own'd: whereas even himself has put us in a ready way to do it; he hath done it to our hands; in that he hath granted, from the Meletians practice, and his own principles, that Paulinus was not own'd, because he was placed in Antioch by an incompetent Authority: And that we in England are not oblig'd to receive an Archbishop of Canterbury, constituted by an Outlandish Bishop, that had nothing at all to do here, in the room of a Banish'd Archbishop: For, surely the Incompetency of an Authority can no more legitimate the Displacing, than the placing of a Bishop. But to speak a word or two as to the Incompetency of a Bishop to act, and constitute a Bishop out of his own district,
under the same Emergences Lucifer of Sardinia acted, when he placed Paulinus in Antioch: Now if it be so as the Doctor will have it, and Lucifer had no right, as a Bishop of Christendom, (though Meletius had been dead or alive, and justly abdicated) to come into Antioch, and consescrate and fix an Orthodox Bishop there, and oblige the Antiochians to receive him, for the continuance or replantation of the Catholick Doctrine and Succession, which by reason of the Heresy and Schism of the Arians, was in visible danger to be suppressed, if not quite ex∣tinguished, they having then possessed themselves of all the Churches in that City: For, saving that Paulinus (sometime after his Enthronement) gain'd a Church of Euzoius the Arian Bishop, within the Walls, out of a respect to his person, not his Doctrine, the Homo♉sians held their Assembly, for Gods worship, in the suburbs only: I say, if this be a fixed truth, as the Doctor peremptorily asserts it to be; and Lucifer Calari∣tanus had then no right in Antioch, nor any Forrein Bishop has at this day, in England, or any Region, which is not his proper district, to retrieve and restore the Christian Doctrine and Succession, under the forementioned, or the like emer∣gencies: I do demand of him, what account he will give of the Practice of the most eminent Bishops of Christendom (es∣pecially during the Eusebian and Arian Persecutions, and pros∣perous success of Shism and Heresy at that time) who have all along done the same that Lucifer did in Antioch and Taught and Ordain'd in the respective Regions, in which they were exil'd, Arianism having infected the whole World? And also of such Orthodox Prelates and Subjects, who eithr justified, or obey'd them in it? Or how will he reconcile this (if he thinks there be need) to his principles? Socr. l. 2 c. 19.I'le begin fist with the great and most holy Athanasius, who, being recalled from his Exile by Constantius, in his way to Alexandria, Taught the Believers that they should avoyd the Arians, and adhere to the Homo♉sian Doctrine: And he ordain'd in many of the Churches:. And tho' the Eusebians added his doing of it to the number of his accusations; and it was one of their charges against him; we do not find it was reputed his crime by the Catholicks:Soz. l. 5. c. 12. Eusebius Vercellensis travell'd over the East, and re∣duc'd and settled the Churches there: and Hilarius Pictavensis did the same in France, and in Italy: neither did Eusebius Sa∣mosaiensis come behind any of them in the same Duty: But
being banish'd by Ʋalens, and knowing that many Churches were deprived of their Pastors, he travelled over Syria, Phaenicia,Theod. H. E. l. 4. c. 12. and Palestine in a disguised habit, and there created Presbyters and Deacons, and performed other Ecclesiastical Offices: And if at any time he met with Bishops who consented with him in Doctrine,. he constituted them Governors over such Churches as wanted Pastors. Though Eustathius did resign his Bishoprick of Antioch to Meletius, and quitted himself of his special care of that City, he did not also quit his Episcopal power, and lay aside his Function: But when he was freed from his Exile by Jovianus, he came to Constantinople, that he might confirm the Homo♉sian Faith in that City: as we read in St.Hom. de Eust. Antioch. Tom. 5. Ed. lat. Paris. Chrysostomel. 4. e. 13. p. l. 6. c. 13. Socrates and Sozomen. St. Chrysostome says,Illo itaque tempore ecclesiam quod apud nos est regebat beatus iste sacram hanc na∣vem multa cum securitate gubernabat quoquo circum∣cursitans, &c. Nautas, Ve∣ctores, Navigantes, &c. That he then govern'd their City of Constantinople, and as a wise Phypsitian prepared all manner of Medicines for the prevention of that disease, which he foresaw would, through Arianism, in a little time, infest them, as it had done all their neigh∣bours, having an active and general care of all, inciting all men of all orders, that they should watch and at∣tend as if the Pyrats had actually fir'd their City, and shiprack'd their Faith. But Socrates and Sozomen are more particular who tell us, That the people chose Evagrius their Bishop, upon the death of Eudoxius the Arian,Ibid. supra. who had intruded into the Constantinoplitan Chair, and that Eustathius consecrated and enthron'd him: For which Valeus banish'd them both. But they were not suspended or censured for it, by their brethren the Catholick Bishops: And the true Succes∣sion in that City was asserted and maintain'd by it, and the Gospel glorified in their sufferings upon it.— St. Chri∣sostome goes on, and tells us;Ibid supra. That Eustathius did not only take care of their particular City,Neque vero hic tantum hanc curam adhibuit, sed in omnes partes mittebat, qui docerent, qui hortarentur, qui disputarent, qui hostibus adi∣tum omnem intercluderent —Ecclesiae praesulem non de illa tantum solicitum esse debere, quae a Spiritu Sancto illi commissa est, sed etiam de quavis in orbe terrarum constituta—si enim pra Ʋniversa Ecclesia fundendae sunt preces mul magis & ejus Ʋniversae gerere curam oportet. but sent forth his Emissaries into all parts, that should teach, exhort, dispute, and preclude the enemy in each of his approaches it being the duty of a Bshop to be solicitous, not only for that one Church, which the Holy Ghost hath committed to him, but for every Church in the Christian World: accordingly as it is his duty to pray for the whole Church.
To come home, to our own Kingdome; epecially sin Doctor Hody has made one of his Instances here: No man will say, but that Austin the Monk was rightfully constituted Archbishop of Canterbury by Gregory the great, who was an outlandish Bishop, i. e. Bishop of Rome: we to be sure may not say otherwise, since we claim the Succession of our Bi∣shops from him; And because the Succession had fail'd, and Christianity with it, by reason of the banishment, and other hard usage, the Bishops had receiv'd upon the return of Hea∣thenism, which then mostly reign'd in this Island: The re∣turning of the Christian Religion was sufficient to warrant it. And there is not any thing in that performance which makes these two great Men to appear blame worthy, but that Gre∣gory claim'd a right to it, as his own peculiar, exclusive to the rest of the Bishops of Christendom, And pleaded a power from the same bottom, as derived from Christ and St. Peter to him, enabling him to inspect and animadvert upon all of them, and to be unaccountable for it; even to demand a sub∣jection from them: And Austin, in pursuance of his Com∣mission from him, extended it to Wales: And exercised it Autoratively and Arbitrarily over the Pastors, and Believers, and their Archbishop there, who were duly and regularly seated in a just polity, rightful government and subordination, the sincere profession of the Orthodox Faith, and in a lawful Succession. The sum of the whole matter is this. No Bishop, by the Canons of the Church, may act out of his district, except in Barbarous Regions, in which there is no Bishop: Or when another, district is over run with Heresy and Schism, to the hazarding of the Catholick Faith and Suc∣cession; under which emergencies he may, and ought upon a possibility of success, to extend his care, and exercise his Epis∣copal Function, without his pale; even by constituting his own Officers there; as the forementioned eminent Bishops and Con∣fessors have done: And, not only their practice, but the polity of Christendom will bear him out in it: A Reformation is otherwise impracticable, upon an Apostasy of one or more Churches; if the State of the World be such, that Synods cannot be had: Unless we shou'd follow Baronius, and call in the Popes universal Pastorship and Superintendency for that purpose: And therefore thatAnn. 362. p. 183. c. 1. Annalist says, that Athanasius, Eusebius Vercellensis, and Lucifer Calaritanus acted in their For∣rein
inspections, as Legates from Rome; but precariously enough, and without any bottom for it. And perhaps as our Church of England was reformed by some of her own Doctors and Bishops, who Consecrated other Bishops, and fixed them in Sees, which were then filled with Romanists, as the forementioned Sees, in which the abovenamed eminent Servants of God placed their Bishops, were fill'd with Arians, so our Church will be found able to justify herself; but upon the same Considerations, and upon them only; at least not without them. And I heartily wish some of those who have undertook her Justification, had consider'd those famous Presidents a little more then they have done: but of this only by the way. It is manifest that these things did not come into Doctor Hody's thoughts: If they had, he would not, surely, have urged it as unlawful in all cases, for a forrein Bishop to act beyond his District: and we can allow him to defend a Successor possessing a full See, upon the foremention'd Considerations. But in the fourth and last place. 4hly. He out does his unthinking self, when he urges, that Meletius's Party did not receive Paulinus, but adher'd to Meletius, because no Sovereign power had at that time made Meletius un∣capable of serving as Bishop of Antioch; the Emperor having recall'd his banishment, and given him leave to return to his See, and he was upon the road. For, besides the  which it im∣ply's: As, that the Imperial Prescription doth unmake, and it's relaxation make, a Bishop, and engage or disengage a Peo∣ple, as to their dependance upon him: He that had thought at all, would never have intimated, that such considerations could have any ways influenced these Meletians, to the rejecting, or receiving, their proper Bishop Meletius: For what is more ma∣nifest then the zeal with which they accompanied him, (so long as they could) and adher'd to him, upon his banishment? It's heat and fervency boyl'd too high: And they assaulted the Governor, that carried him away, with stones: Neither did they, with less love, and zeal, and conscience of duty, but better regulated, follow him into Armenia, though they were, in their persons, disjoyned from him; but own'd him alone to be their supreme Pastor, Communicating under him, and no other, as their Virtual Head, in their separate conventions at Antioch, until his return unto them, whom they then received with all expressions of obedience, joy, and gratitude, as the Pa∣stor
and Bishop of their Souls; and, under Christ Jesus, the great Instrument of their Salvation: All which and more may be seen in St.Hom. de Mel. Antioch. Chrysostome: And I have in part, given an account of it. Surely, there is nothing in all this that can give a man of common perceptions occasion to believe, that the Secular banishment did cut off their Subordination, and quit them of their allegiance to him: The contrary is evident beyond a Contradiction. And is it not again as evident to the same common apprehensions, that as he remain'd a Bishop, in the full extent of his right, notwithstanding his exile, and it did not in the least intercept it, but his People own'd and obey'd him, as their Bishop, during the whole time of his absence, so, that such his right is no ways owing to his return by the favour of the Empire: And that his People cannot be conceived to have thought it was? Meletius's being upon the road homewards could not create that right in him, which he had in Armenia, nor be the reason why Paulinus was rejected, and himself received by his Antiochians: Nothing but the Doctors Ignorance of the Story, and matter of Fact, or his rash and undigested thoughts, could occasion him to produce this as an instance, upon such an occasion. SECT. IV. HAving touch'd upon the undue behaviour of Meletius's Party towards the Governor of the City, upon his taking their Bishop from them into Armenia: I shall venture upon a di∣gression, so for as to give an account of the whole Passage, and to make some just Observations vpon it: The doing of which will tend much to the Reputation of his Flock, and mostly of Meletius himself, since it will thence plainly appear, that it was not for the honour and riches of his Bishoprick, that he contended with Paulinus and his Eustathians (for part of the Eustathians adhered to Paulinus, and part to Meletius upon the Schism) but the Institutions and the rights of the of the Church, and its Unity and Peace, which would have suffer'd much, by his submission to a Successor against the Laws of it. Though I expect no thanks from the Doctor for it, If these Papers should chance to come into his hands. The whole matter of Fact is this, as it may be found in St. Chryso∣stome, in the abovemention'd Homily. When the Governor of the
City rode in his Chariot over the middle of the market Place, and caused the Holy Bishop to be placed by him, stones thicker than snow were cast at his head from every side, the City by no means bearing his being taken away; but chose rather to die, then lose him. But what did the blessed Bishop do? Seeing the cast of stones, he folded up his Garments, and cover'd the Presidents head with them, and made his enemies ashamed by that his eminent Instance of his own meekness: and taught them and his people at once what patience they ought to shew towards them that do them injury: and that they ought, not only to do them no hurt, but even when they are in dan∣ger from other men, to rescue them from it, with their best endeavour. I will add to this a no less eminent Instance of the like behavour, in all meekness, humanity, and charity, which the Apostolical Eusebius, Bishop of Samosata, hath left to the World,L. 4. c. 13. . by his own practice, and at the same time: of which Theodorit gives us this following account in his Church History. When the Emperours Edict for his Banishment was deliver'd unto him, he receiv'd it with the greatest Christian Prudence and magnanimity: And first order'd the messenger to keep it private, least the People should rise upon it, and cast him into Euphrates, which runs by the City Wals, and his life should be required at the Bishops hands by the Government: And then (it being twilight when the mes∣sage was brought) having said evening Prayer, as he usually did, instead of going to sleep, he went out of the City, attended with one Servant, who carried a Pillow and a Book, and coming to the River, he took shipping, and safely arrived, so soon as it was day, at Zeugma, as he designed. Samosata was by this time fill'd with sorrow and cmplaints, upon the loss of their Bishop, being inform'd of his departure by another Servant, who was to follow him with a few necessary things: And the Citizens went directly to Euphrates, and after they had sailed up and down, for sometime, they at length came to him: whom they solicited, with lamentations and groans, and the force of tears, to return to them, and not leave them to the cruelty of Wolves: But when they could not perswade him, and had heard him recite the Precept of St. Paul, in Which we are ma∣nifesty commanded to obey Magistrates and Powers;. he receiv'd a few of those many things they presented him with, to sustain him in his long Journey▪ and when he had fortified them with his Weapons of Doctrine and Prayers, and exceedingly exhorted them, that they would defend the Apostolical precepts, he departed from them. Those Bishops that are truly Apostolical, and under perse∣cution,
do not then preach Mob Doctrines to their people: They are so far from inciting the Believers to make insurrection for their rescue; that they will not countenance them, when they are made: But their business is to suppress them, and reprove those that are actors, and managers of them, least they receive damnation for it: They not only teach their Flocks passive Obedience, and non-resistance to the Powers on earth, under their harder Sentences; but to be active and serviceable in the preservation and defence of their Persons, though in execution of them: and take care that their unjust Laws and Edicts be receiv'd with the same calm and resignation as those that are most righteous; and that no striving be in the Streets by reason of them, any more then there was in Jeru∣salem, when our Saviour was led forth to be crucified. The best of Princes have not only mutable natures and wills, as well as other men; but they are more subject to change upon the account of the singular circumstances they are always under: and the Church of God has still suffer'd more or less by reason of them: The great Eustathius of Antioch, to whom the Christian Church ow'd so much, was banish'd by Constantine the Great, through the Eusebians instigation, who had influenced him too much towards his latter end: St.Socr. l. 7. c. 33. Evag. l. 1. c. 3▪ 4, 5. 12. Cyril and Memnon, two eminent Bishops, and Defenders of the Faith, suffer'd for a time in the Council of Ephesus, and the Catholick Faith of one person in the Incarnation, as before of one Substance together with them, under Theodosius the younger; though he was no Heretick, but a stout Defender of the Christian Doctrine, and Liberty, by his Principles: and the Persons and Doctrines of these two Catholick Bishops were Anathematized at once by a Conven∣tion held in an Inn, under John of Antioch, and Nestorius and his Heresy were receiv'd as Orthodox: But the good Emperor was cheated into it by the treachery and false Information of Candidianus, a principal Favorite, and the Nestorians party at Court; whose craft and industry was such, that they precluded all Posts, which the true Council sent to inform his Majesty of the truth of its proceedings, and their own integrity. Even Constantius was no ill man in himself, nor perhaps in his principles: But he was carried away by a powerful Party of the Clergy and Laity; and it was through their deceit and instigation that he so sorely persecuted the Orthodox. Now, under all these infelicities and more of them, the truly Apo∣stolical
Bishops made it their business (as I have above shew'd, to form their Flocks into the Christian temper of meekness, mo∣desty and gentlness, and an entire submission and resignation to that part of it which was worldly, bodily, and penal; without any abatement of their duty and love to those, which laid the burden upon them: and they claim'd right and truth, when re∣trenched, with the same complexion: but never by binging in, or abetting a foreign Power, with force and arms, to retrieve and restore them: as theVid. Carion. Chron. lib. 4. in Hen 4. Romanists once did Rodolphus upon the Emperor Hen. IV. (he having as they said, at least, usurped some Church Priviledges) whom they first placed on Henry's Throne, and after him his two Sons, by an horrid and most un∣natural Rebellion, on Hildebrandian Principles, though Rodolphus being mortally wounded, was brought to repentance: (of which vertue I do not find Henry's two Sons to have been guilty) and when he was on his death-bed, call'd for his right hand, which had been cut off in a Battle, and shew'd it to the Bishops which stood by, and had incited him to that hideous Re∣bellion, speaking these words to them:Haec dextra est inquit, quae Imperatori promissam fidem confirmavi, haec violatae à me, vobis impulsoribus, fidei argumentum: & nefariae ve∣strae perfidiae testis est: d qua a vobis rationes reddend erunt Deo▪ This is the right-hand with which I confirm'd the Faith which I promised to the Emperor: this is a sign of the Faith which I violated by your instigation, and is a witness of your perfidiousness, of which an account is to be given to God by you. In short, when the secular arm remov'd their Bishops, they were instructed by no means to submit to, and receive the Suc∣cessor: but to continue their subordination to the abdicated, and to hold communion with them, in their separate Conventions, and the Apostolical Doctrine and Discipline, in a rightful Suc∣cession, and to preclude Schism as well as Heresie: but in other respects to give way to the outward force in meekness of spirit, as a notorious and indispensable duty laid upon them by St. Paul: and this was the practice of Meletius's party in Antioch, in opposi∣tion, not only to Euzoius the Arian Possessor, and his Heterodoxies in Faith, but to Paulinus and his Eustathians, (for, as I have already said, though the Eustathians were they who first followed Eustathius, upon his removal from Antioch; they afterwards divided, and some adhered to Meletius, and some to Paulinus) which Eustathians were Orthodox in Doctrine, but maintained a possession upon a full See: and accordingly, Eusebius Samosatensis's People are said, (inL. 4. C. 14. Theodorit's History of that Affair) rich and poor, master and ser∣vant,
man and woman, young and old, to have forsaken the Church upon a Successors ascending his Throne at Samosata: and when they were depriv'd of their Pastor, they executed his office,. in their several stations and capacities; whether as Presbyters, Deacons, or believers only: the latter, as such, having a right, and it is their duty, when no Officers can be had, to pray to God and praise him, and exhort one another while it is to day, in their respective stations: and they thus continuing in Faith and good Works, became, though rejected of men, mighty with God; and so prevailed, that in his own good time, their eyes saw again their Teachers: and he restored their Bishops unto them, though by the hands of Julian the Apostate, and his toleration; which he design'd for the Church's extirpation; and his mercy will still find out a way that our Bishops shall not always, nor finally, be banish'd from us. And we may securely expect it by vertue of the same promise, which our Saviour made to his Church, that he would be with her always to the end of the World. And tho' the adversaries of Judah do prevail upon the death of Cyrus, and obtain an Artaxerxes to be his Successor, so that the building does not go on for a time, as it was when the second Temple was erecting; he will afterwards send us a Darius, who shall take care that it may be continued: and by these Vicissitudes, as the Jews did of old, who, in their passage to their Canaan, were sometimes in Vallies, and sometimes on the Hills, sometimes in smooth, and sometimes in rough Places; sometimes in Peace, and sometimes in War, shall we also possess our Canaan till the end of this Government, shall be, by a restitution of all things: then▪ when Christ shall deliver up the Kingdom to the Father, that God may be all in all. SECT. V. I Will make the following remarks upon Meletius, Paulinus, Flavianus and Evagrius, all either rightful or pretended Bi∣shops of Antioch; which may be useful in our present contro∣versie; and then shake hands with them: And in the first place I do observe. I. That after a long Dissention, and Schism, which had di∣stracted the Church of Antioch,Socrat. l. 5. c. 5. Paulinus, and Meletius, upon an accommodation between themselves, were jointly and unanimously receiv'd by the whole Church, (especially the Pastors and Peo∣ple
in that City, that were Orthodox) to be Bishops there, du∣ring the natural life of each of them: and, upon the death of either, the Superviver was to be Bishop alone.L. 5. C. 3. Theodorit says, that the Divine Meletius, being desirous that there should be no difference about the primacy, made this offer, viz. that they might govern in common, and feed the Flocks as one man; but Paulinus did not accept it, and it was referr'd to Sapor,Cap. 3. ibid. who was appointed by the Emperor Gratian to take care that the Law, which his Majesty had made for restoring the Bishops, whom Valens ejected, should be duly executed, and Sapor adjusted their jurisdictions apart. I shall stay here a little, and observe, the thing it self is very plain, viz. That the separation which we find to have been in the Church of Antioch and Anti-communion, was not made by the respective parties, upon the account of He∣resie in either of the Bishops; since there is nothing more cer∣tain, than that Meletius and Paulinus were Orthodox at that time: for if they had not, but Heresie had been the bar to their union, care would have been taken, upon the accommodation, for the removing of it; otherwise the Schism must have remain'd as before, because the Heresie, the occasion of it, would have remain'd; if Paulinus had not taken up that error which Lucifer Calaritanus afterwards improv'd into a rupture in the Church, and believ'd that Meletius ought not to be own'd as a true Bi∣shop, nor communicated with, because he was ordain'd by the Arian Bishops: it is well known that Lucifer was never censur'd as an Heretick for it, but only as a Schismatick. Since then both were Orthodox, the Schism must have remain'd, or never have been, or some other ground, besides their Heresy, is to be assign'd for it. And if Orthodoxy alone, as such, would have legiti∣mated a Communion with them, they would have been as law∣full Bishops before the stipulation, as after it. And yet Doctor Hody very frequently insists, and with a great deal of assurance, (as I have before observ'd) that those many Catholicks, whom he owns to have rejected such Bishops as possessed Sees in injury to others then alive, and who were their rightful Bishops, might, and would have receiv'd them, if they had been Orthodox, i. e. they had not been Arians: for if so, what made this distur∣bance in Antioch? Or, what ground was there for a Church debate about it? Or, what pleas had the Orthodox there for their not communicating before, as afterwards, but the supposed unjust, and therefore Schismatical possessions of the opposite
Bishops? Or, how were things alter'd, upon the common agree∣ment, and Church determination? Or, how will the Doctor go about to make any one believe, (who is not resolv'd afore∣hand to be of his Party) that since the Arians, upon their Ordinations into full Sees, erected and continued a Succession against the Catholick Succession, in the same notorious and visible manner as the Novatians and Donatists did; those Arians were not also to be rejected for their Schism in so doing, though they had no Heresy, as he must own the Catholick Church had all along refused to own and Communicate with these Donatists and Novatians, purely and solely upon the account of their Schism? Neither is any thing more sure, than that this Anti-communion in Antioch, was also founded upon the same bottom of Schism on the one or the other side, in the appre∣hension, at least, of the two respective Bishops, and their peo∣ple: And Paulinus either pleaded his Possession, to which Me∣letius could not submit, because, though he was absent at the time of Paulinus's enthroning, he was alive, and had not resign'd, and was then present and demanded his Right. Or else Paulinus might plead that Meletius was Ordain'd by Arian Bi∣shops: But none of these pleas could amount to any more than Schism: for, in all other respects, the Competitors were unsuspected, and believed to be as entire and untainted, as in their faith. 2. We have here an Instance of the Churches Right and Pra∣ctice in disposing of Bishopricks, and making them more or fewer, as her prudence shall see occasion, for the better service of the Faith: And the same City of Antioch, which had but one Bishop ever since the Believers were first call'd Christians there upon St. Peters preaching to them in the Acts of the Apostles, hath now two Bishops lawfully, and truly, consti∣tuted, (besides the false ones of theTheod. H. E. l. 5. c. 3. Arian and Apollinarian Sects, which she then also had) to continue so long as Paulinus and Meletius live: And when one dies, or other ways lawfully quits his Charge, the remainer is to be Bishop alone, and their districts, before a part, are then to be blended again, and united, and the single Succession to continue, unless the Churches wisdom, upon some emergency, sees fit to make a further alteration.An 378. p. 393 Baronius says, that this settlement was made by a Council: But he produces no Authority for it: and I am so much the more inclinable to think he had none, becauseH. E. Secul. 4. Part. 1. Natalis Alexander mentions
none in this account of the Synods of that Age, but that the Clergy made it out of Council, seeing their stations out of it qualified them for that performance: Neither hath a Council been alwaies thought necessary for it; and much less the Se∣cular Arm: For, the piety of Gratian, upon his coming to the Empire, didSoz. l. 7. c. 1. Theod. l. 5. c, 2. fix those Bishops in their Sees, whom Valens had banished, and Meletius among the rest, had the benefit of his Edict: But it was only a fixing them in their own Sees, to which they had a Church Right before; and Gratian con∣firm'd indeed 'but, otherwise did not meddle with the Di∣stricts nor the Bishops, which the Church authority had assign'd. And though Baronius is very angry with Theodorit (the other Historians say nothing of it) for representing Sapor, the Emperor's Prefect, to have appointed Paulinus and Meletius their distinct Jurisdictions; I cannot see what reason Baronius had for it, as if the Prefect had invaded the Churches right. For, the Church had before, by consent of all Parties, setled the Government of the City in them both: And his Arbitration, which assign'd each of them a District apart, is so far from imploying an original antecedent Right in the Civil Power, derived unto Sapor, at that time, from the Empire, for that one end, that it is thence very plain, he acted only by that power which the Church gave him, when she made him Arbitrator: And his Decision had no other effect than that which she promised to receive, and stand by: Though it hath happen'd that the Empire has divided a District, upon its own Motion, for its own reasons: It is well known that the EmperorPraefat. ad Novel. 11. & Novel. 130. cap. 4. Justinian took Justinianaea Prima out of the Diocess of Thessalonica, because it was the City of his birth: And it is reckon'd among the Churches that are Autocefalous, byIn can. 2. con. gen. Constantine. Balsamon: But he is not to be conceiv'd to have done this without the Churches consent: Especially not without the allowance of the Primate of Thessa∣lonica, whose previous concurrence, and not the Emperors au∣thority aone, legitimated the district, and its Bishop: Neither could the Bishops of Christendom have communicated with him, upon other terms. It may be here objected, that this settlment of two Bishops in one City, with distinct Jurisdictions in it, at the same time, is not agreeable with a very ancient, and universally receiv'd, Canon of the Church, which hath order'd, that there should be no more than one Bishop, at one time, in a City: But
this will readily appear to be a mistake: For that Canon was so phrased in compliance with the general custom of the Church in those days, according to which, every City had a Bishop;Can. 12. Apost. Can. 8. Conc. 1. Nic. & abili sepius. in so much, that a City and a District were Syno∣nimous; and the only meaning and importance of it, is, that one Bishop shall not interfere upon another, much more in∣trude, but keep his own station and bounds which are set, and limited him upon Church Terms, whether they contein more or less, and consist of half a City, or a whole one, or of more Cities than one. Neither can it, with any congruity of reason, be apprehended, that such a tract of ground, with such boundaries, inhabited by such a people, and vested with such priviledges, must necessarily make one Diocess and no more; and have but one Bishop in it, upon what emer∣gencies soever: Especially, since no one pleads our Saviour's Institution for the limitation of it. Surely, as Paulinus and Me∣letius were constituted Bishops of Antioch, and resided and exercised Jurisdiction there at the same time, the same Autho∣rity might have taken in the Arian and Apollinarian Bishops, who had, at the same time, seated themselves there, and made the two Bishops four, if the latter would have laid aside their Heresy, and come in upon Church terms; and if the doing of it had been found truly serviceable to the Church of God: Hence two Bishops have been in one and the same City in good times: Of which abundance of Instances may be given; and none of them were thought to violate the Rule.L. 3. c. 2. num. 418, 419. Antonio: de Dominis, Arch∣bishop of Spalato, hath excellently well given the Churchs sense of it in these words:Canon Nicaenus excludit duos E∣piscopos inter se divisos, non au∣tem duos in se conjunctos, & in uno regimine amice copulatos. The Nicene Canon (saith he) exclud's two Bishops divided among themselves but not two conjoyn'd in themselves, and friendly coupled in the same Government: I do further observe, in the third place. 3. That this settlement in Antioch was not made, but upon an antecedent previous consent, and interpretative, if not ex∣press resignation, not only of Paulinus and Meletius, who were the present actual Pretenders (and the right to the whole City was certainly in one of them) but of all the Clergy;Socr. l. 5. c. 5. i. e. the Presbyters that were pretenders in reversion, and might expect the Chair by a vacancy:Soz. l. 7. c. 3. Our Historians add, that all this was ratified by Oath between the Parties. And here Doctor Hody may find, that these two Bishops in the Church of God, than whom there were not any that have been more faithful
and couragious in it during Constantius's persecution; or that have received more, and more honorable Eulogies for it; these (I say) together with the rest of the Orthodox in the City of Antioch, were not of his mind, when he thusPag, 7. declares: Other men I must leave to their own ways of thinking; for my part, I cannot imagine that the welfare and prosperity of mankind does depend upon so ticklish and uncertain a point as that of an ejected Governor's consent: That if he refuses to give his consent, all the Church must be made a Sacrifice to him. For, it is very mani∣fest, that this Church of Antioch was in great distraction, and must in course have been sacrificed by its Schisms, which always bring ruine, if it had not been prevented by this ami∣cable consent: And our great Meletius is, on the one hand, an immediate President to all ejected Governors; and they are taught by this his practice, that it is their duty, to recede from their own personal rights, upon a prospect of the Church's just sett∣lement by it: And Paulinus's practice on the other hand, teaches all Intruders, that the way to the Church's just settlement, upon a Schism made by them, and to prevent it being made a Sa∣crifice, is the ejected Governor's consent: To be sure nothing was done in this affair at Antioch without Meletius's knowledg and appro∣bation: And no body but the unthinking Doctor can conceive, that, since Christ has so ordered the Oeconomy of his Govern∣ment, that it is placed in the hands of particular Bishops, seated in their respective Districts, for the preservation of its peace and unity; it can be wrested out of their hands irregularly, and without their consent, or, which must be the same thing, contrary to Christ's disposal and Oeconomy, at the pleasure of the Prince, or one or more Bishops, or any Irresistible Party, and the Church, i. e. its constitution and peace not to be sacrified by it, since all is directly laid open to every pretender that is successful. It is true, that Meletius's just care for this Churches peace, and even Paulinus's, had not its design'd effect; and the difference in Antioch was palliated, not cured, by it: For upon Meletius's death, Flavianus ascended his Throne, whilst Paulinus was alive; and several of the Believers hatred to him for it was such, in that he broke his Oath, and the peace of the Church, that they refused to communicate with him, and made separateSocr. l. 5. c. 15, Soz. l. 7 c. 11. 15 Conventions: And Paulinus died a little after; which made the breach wider,Ibid. Evagrius being consecrated in his room:
and thus both the Sects were revived, and continued as at the first: and held opposite communion; even whenSoz. l. 5. c. 15. Evagrius was dead: (which happn'd a little after) by reason of the irre∣concileable aversion, which Paulinus's party retain'd towards Flavianus, tho' Evagrius had no Successor: and theScrat. ibd. supra. Eastern and Western Churches were concern'd, and became Parties in it. But notwithstanding, God's good providence so ordered it, that Evagrius's death became a step and means to that rightful Uni∣on, which was wroughtTheodor l. 5. c. 23. among them in tract of time; and an end was put to that Schism which began in the latter end of Constantines Reign, upon the removal of Eustathius: and the Eusebians erecting their succession upon it, and continued near an hundred years:An. 381. Baronius says it lasted till the yar 408. when Pope Innocent put an end to it, with some difficulty. ButP. 437. Theodorus Lector says, it continued an hundred years after Eustathius's death: if so; it lasted fifty years, at least, after Innocents time; though, strictly speaking, the Schism, which began upon Eustathius's removal, ended in Meletius's lawful possession of the Antiochian See: Eu∣stathius resigning unto him, when he had declar'd for the Nicene Faith; he being the last of the Sophronian Succession, and the immediate lawful Bishop of Antioch to Eustathius: for, by this time the Eusebians had pull'd off their Mask; (of which I am to give an account at large in the sequel of this Tract) and tho' they did not cease to place their own Bishops in Antioch, upon Meletius's disappointing them, by his turning Catholick, and re∣ceiving that Chair in a just Succession, upon true Church Terms; yet they did not continue them there, as Successors to Sophronius, (who was the first Bishop brought in upon Eustathius) and law∣ful Possessors, by reason of Eustathius's abdication: but as Exo∣koutian Arians; in which Sect they founded a new Succession, upon Meletius's deposition and banishment: out of which the Eusebians, who had asserted the eternal generation, as the Ho∣mo♉sians, who abated nothing of the Nicene explication, were alike excluded. Now after this Schism thus ended, the same deposition and banishment of Meletius occasion'd another: for in his absence, Lucifer Calaritanus coming to Antioch, and find∣ing it without a Bishop, upon a presumption, surely, that Mele∣tius was then dead, he enthron'd Paulinus in that Chair: where∣upon, the Eustathians, who had adher'd to Eustathius their Bishop, and to Meletius as his true Successor, divided themselves into two parties, but went under the name of Eustathians; and the one
communicated under Meletius, and the other under Paulinus, when both were Orthodox; till, some time after, Meletius and Paulinus accommodated the business between them: and though the Schism return'd, and was continu'd after their deaths, it did not last very long; as I have shew'd in the foregoing Paragraph. Thus our good God, by vertue of his promise once made to his Church, always preserves a due succession, by the means of some choice men, whom he raises up for that purpose: and his wisdom finds a way by which her disentons are overul'd, not∣withstanding the Schisms and Heresies which must be, i. e. though the lusts and revenge of men will always so far prevail, as to raise and continue them for a while; (for thence their necessity comes) and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against her. Having in the third Paragraph preceeding, produced Theo∣dorus's authority to prove a farther continuance of the Eustathian separation, than some men have allow'd, I do not think fit to dismiss him so: but shall reassume him, to make good a point, which will be of greater concern, and bring more advantage not only to the present subject, but even to our common Christianity: for since heCollect an. l. 2, in Inii. . tells us, that the Eustathians spa∣rated, and held communion a part, by reason Eustathius their Bishop, who was wrongfully remov'd from the Antiochian See; and the separation continued an hundred years after Eustathius's death; it is hence as plain as any thing needs be; at least, it hath as much authority as the Historian can give it; that the separate communion, which the Eustathians first held, was not made upon the account of Sophronius's Arianism, or his Successors; but because they were brought into Eustathus's See, when he was lawfully possessed, and fill'd it upon Church Terms, and it was not justly voided: tho' the Eustathians separated, the Sophronians were the Schismaticks, and had the guilt of it: but this will be hence prov'd with greater and more notorious conviction, from the continuance of the Schism: (it matters not whether it was one and the same) for though some have mistook, and represented Sophronius, and his Successors in Antioch, down to Meletius, as Arian Hereticks; and those that say, the Eustathians separated from them for that reason, may have a pretence for their opinion; none ever pretended that Paulinus, and the rest of the Bishops of Antioch, from his time, to the time of the continuance of that separation, which a Moiety of the Eustathians made from them,
and lasted, according to Theodorus, till an hundred years after Eustathius's death; these Bishops, I say, were never suspected by any to be Arians; and it was alone upon the account of Paulinus's assuming Meletius's Chair whilst he was alive, and his Successors continuing the injustice, or the Eustathians supposing it to be continued, which occasion'd the foremention'd Moiety of them to make a separate Congregation in Antioch, and refuse to com∣municate with them. TheodoritL. 5. c. 23. H. E. tells us (and he alone of our Historians) that Paulinus assign'd and consecrated Evagrius for his Successor a little before he died, and by his single hands, without his Brethren: which, if true, adds a great deal to the disadvantage of them both: especially in regard to their falsness to their Oaths and Compact: as men once dipt in Schism are hardly brought again to a consi∣stency and integrity: tho' Baronius is of the opinion, that Theo∣dorit mistook this circumstance; and that he might be inclinable to look with less diligence into that affair, by reason of the great affection, even to partiality, which he all along shew'd unto Flavianus. AndDe Eccles. Antioch. Schism. Natalis Alexander (who seems to be the more ex∣quisite and unbiassed Historian of the two) relates it diffidently as to its Truth: but no one questions Theodorit's relation in ano∣therL. 5. c. 9. place, where he tells us, that the Fathers in the second general Council, held at Constantinople, did approve and receive Flavianus's ordination and succession to Meletius, contrary to their Settlement at Antioch; which recommends his Cause to the World, with much seeming advantage. Now, because the Reader may justly require some satisfaction concerning it, I shall give him Gregory Nazianzens's account of it, who tells us, That Flavianus't Cause was carried in the Synod by the ju∣nior Bishops,Carm. de vita ejus a num. 121. ad num. 158. Ed. Paris. who made the greater number, and over∣rul'd the elder; and so far prevail'd upon them, that they made them on their side, through their rio∣tous, insolent and clamorous proceed∣ings and behaviour.
That these young∣er Bishops, who carried it, in the Synod, against Pau¦linus, were a sort of men of a tem∣porary Faith, who had ran with the Times, accordingly as they were suc∣cessful; when the Orthodox were per∣secuted, in the Reign of Valens, they were Arians; when Gratian and Theodosius protected the Catholicks, and would permit none to enjoy their Bi∣shopricks, unless they would sub∣scribe the Doctrine of one Substance, they were Homo♉si∣ans. That their mu∣table complexion instructed them likewise to receive any Bishop, if a Possessor, without any regard to his Church Right, and lawful Succession; but it was all one to them if Paulinus Flavianus, or Euzoius a Schismatick, Ho∣mousian or an Ari∣an,
presided over them in their as∣semblies, and wor∣ship, as the head of their communion; they could receive two Bishops in the same district, and at the same time, tho' they opposed one another, and the Churches Law. Our excellent Bi∣shop, out of his a∣bundance of zeal for Peace and Truth, exhorts them To take better advice of him, and lay down their pretended pleas in behalf of Flavi∣anus, and receive Paulinus, who is the rightful Bishop of Antioch, he hav∣ing been placed there together with Meletius, and ap∣pointed for the sole Bishop in that Ci∣ty, upon his death, by the consent of all the Clergy, who then were, or could be supposed to be, concern'd in that affair, and the pre∣sent Possessor; and not to make a new Bishop, till death,
or some just occa∣sion, has made the See void, upon Church Terms. He tells them roundly, That since Paulinus is a right∣ful Possessor, and not under the visi∣ble breach of any Church Law, even a general Council has not a right to inspect him, or to but debate his re∣moval; much less to bring in another Bishop upon him: a full See is a Sa∣cred Thing; and none but seditious and evil Men will attempt such things. He shews them them the several great inconveniences and destructive conse∣quences which will attend the affecting their design upon Paulinus, and place Flavianus in his Chair: As That such a Schismatical action will bring a guilt upon those that then commit it, and all such as in the fu∣ture comply with
it, whom he pities and laments. That the Faith, and most holy and venerable Doctrine of Christianity will be hazarded, if not Shipwrack'd by it, and this is so visible, that no eye can chuse but see it. That the Go∣vernment of the Church will fail, and be destroy'd by such proceed∣ings, and anarchy be the effect of it, to the shame and grief of good men. And after all this, when the good Bi∣shop found that his endeavours had no other effect upon them, then to wi∣den the Churches breaches, and en∣flame their heats and oppositions; he stir∣ring only a Waspes nest, and bringing Stones, and new Turmoils upon him∣self, by reason of it: in the last place, He chooses ra∣ther to quit the
Synod and his Bi∣shoprick, and live an obscure private life, then comply with these unjust, and ungospel Pro∣ceedings. Upon this, the People, with others, much bemoan'd his
departure, lamen∣ting him as a man that was dead: and solicited him to continue with them, in affecting Ora∣tory; As will you leave us, your la∣bour in the Lord, when you have brought us to ma∣turity? Who shall take care of your charge? Have some regard to the Work of your Mi∣nistry, which of a small Remnant, is become a great Multitude. But these things did not move him so far as to in∣duce him to change his purpose; he thought he was more oblig'd to keep himself clear of their notorious Schism, in bring∣ing two Bishops in∣to one City, of which he apprehen∣ded he could not wholly be acquit∣ed, if he continued in the Colledge, or not so fully, than to officiate in his Episcopal Function; and chose rather, upon this seeming competition, to forego the latter, than hazard the disrepute, he was to undergo in closing, though but in appearance with the former. Num. — , 137. . 138. . 139. .
142.Vid. Jac. Billi Schol. in num. 123. . 143. , 144. . 146. . , . , .
122. . 130. — , ; , . 133. ,
123. . , .
132. . 147. . 137. . 138. . 133. —. 135. ,
. . , . 149. . 151. , 152. . . . .
. . . —.
I am not ignorant that Doctor Hody makes use ofPrefat. ad MS. Baroc. The case of the Sees, p. 197. St Gre∣gories Resignation, to the prejudice, as he thinks, of our present deprived Bishops: And he urges it as an obligation upon them to resign also to their present Intruders and Possessors: He even, upbraids them because they have not done it, as coming short therein, of the pious and peaceable temper of this most exemplary Prelate. But he argues, as he usually does, upon a mistaken bottom: For, 1. The Doctor ought to prove, e're he makes his Inference from it, that St. Gregory was so far exemplary in his Resigna∣tion, as that it hath been since, and is now, a crime not to imitate him in it. Was it not his faylure, to yeild to the pre∣sent Emergency, and Resign? Ought he not, with the other Bishops, who stood out, to have adher'd to Paulinus, against Flavianus, and asserted his Right, which he own'd, not by ab∣dicating; but, by continuing in his Chair, and in the exercise of his Jurisdiction; so long as he might have done it without sin, and he was not disenabled in his person to do it, by the force of his Enemies? Would he not have done more service to the Church of God by it, then by resigning? If every Christian Bishop should be of his mind, under the same, or the like, Exigency, what would become of the Unity, Government, the, even, being of the Church of God? He is really, and indispensably, imitable in opposing Flavianus, and not par∣taking in the guilt, which he would have necessarily incurr'd, by abetting a Schismatical Possessor, whose Chair was full, upon his Possession; but might he not have found out a better and more approv'd way of maniesting his opposition to his Usurpation, and vindicating his Innocency, then by laying down his Ministery? He that truly thinks will not say that St. Gregory is imitable in this; but will own that it was one of those naevi and inperfections, which good and great men have some times about them. A Bishop ought not to consult his quiet, even a more frequent opportunity of saying his prayers, as it is plainEp. 55. ad Procopium. he did, in laying down his Bishoprick, when the constitution and peace of the Church are at the stake; as he acknowledg'd they were, upon the opposition Paulinus met with, through the headiness of the junior Bishops in the Coun¦cill of Constantinople. And the, Carm. de vita ejus. num. 148. complacency which he seems to have taken in a fit of sickness, which seiz'd him, and justi∣fied his absence from the Synod to Theodosius, though it was
next untoIbid. death, argues something that was humane in him, and not his vertue. And his Character, upon Doctor Hody's supposition, who makes it the effect of his full deliberation, and his vertue can be little less then that which our Saviour gives the Hireling in the Gospel, Who runs away when the Wolf is coming, and careth not for the Sheep: The true Shepherds character, who lays down his life for his Sheep, will hardly belong unto him. But then, 2. If we allow his Resignation to be commendable, and to be imitable: Wherein is his case, and the case of our deprived Bishops so alike, as to be the same? Is their parity such, as to admit a true and thorow arguing from the one to the other? If this be a due arguing it will: viz. because St. Gregory, in a kind of despondency, apprehended that he was unable to discharge his Episcopal, function, by reason partly, of his bo∣dily indisposition, partly, of his enemies opposition to him, who threatned hisVid. num. 153, 154, 155. in carm. de vita sua. deprivation, partly out of his desire of a private life, resign'd his See, whereby it became legaly void, and theIbid. num. 130. People and Bishops elected another into it; therefore, our pre∣sent deprived Bishops ought, in imitation of him, to resign, upon the unjust and uncanonical deprivation of the Secular Arm, or the Majority of a Council, and receive their illegal Bishops, placed in their own full Sees, by those powers. If St. Gregory had been in possession of Antioch, as Paulinus was; or those Aegyptian and Macedonian Bishops, whom heIbid. num. 153. mentions, had unduly depriv'd him, and brought Flavianus, or another Bishop, into his See, being full, as they brought Flavianus into Antioch, and St. Gregory had resign'd, and receiv'd them; upon this his example, there might be some shew of a plea, for the validity of unjust and uncanonical Deprivations; and our deprived Bishops, might be urg'd to resign likewise, with an appearance of some reason for it, upon St. Gregory's example: But it is altogether unaccountable, that St. Gregory should be urg'd as their Paten for it, since it cannot be prov'd that he would have resign'd upon such considerations; since his Resignation was not made upon any such considerations; since we have all the reason in the world to be∣lieve he would not, because he censur'd and condemn'd such an intrusion in Flavianus, and loaded it with the foulest guilt, as I have above given an account, and may be seenIbid. supra. more largely: Did he not refuse to receive him as his Collegue? And the avoiding the Schism of that action is one reason of his resigna∣tion: And the other old Bishops, that were overvoted by the
younger, did not receive Flavianus, but made a separation from them upon it; as it is well known in our Church Story. And all the use that I know the Doctor can make of this Constan∣tinopolitan affair, and St. Gregory's Resignation, is; that, since St. Gregory made an invective against the Majority of the second General Council which was held there, and condemn'd it, in that it brought Flavianus into a full See, Paulinus, the righful Proprietor, being then alive; and for that reason, among some others, chose rather to quit his Bishoprick, then to seem, by holding it, and communicating with those Bishops, who did it, to countenance, and partake of the sin of so vile an action; since St. GregoryEpist. 55. ad Procop. was so highly offended with the Council for it, and not being able to master his resentment, in the heat of his passion, resolved never to come into a Synod more, and hastily said, that he never knew one that had a good event. Such a sense had he of the impiety of this proceeding; what then? Therefore, the Prince, the Mob, any thing that hath power enough, may without plea of right, deprive a Bishop, and bring in a Possessor, and the Depriv'd is oblig'd to resign, and receive, and communicate with him: Surely, a hopeful consequence: But tho' the Doctor has not, we have learn'd to make better use of the rash proceedings of these temporizing young Bishops, and the Elder's mean compliance with them, which is. That the Nature and Constitution of the Christian Com∣monwealth, and the obligation of Obedience to its Decisions, even those that are made in a General Council, do not engage a Christian at large, nor yet a Christian Officer and Bishop, who is a Member of that Council, to submit unto them upon the forementioned terms: I mean when a pack of pretended Converts, shall, by their number and turbulency, to vindicate thereby their own naughty practices of the same nature, over∣throw a first principle, receiv'd from Christ, together with the incorporation, which he instituted and founded in his Blood; and erect a false Communion under Peter, or Paul, or Apollos; or in opposition to them, or any one of them, by deserting the proper Bishop, or bringing in a false Bishop upon him; so that two Bishops are in the same District, at the same time: Even, the most holy of Bishops have not a right to determine, and oblige, the subject upon such terms. And tho' the hundred and fifty, which made this General
Council at Constantinople (for, notwithstanding that our Hi∣storians failing often in our Chronology, give us some occasion to think this Vote was passed in a Council held at Constantinople, subsequent to the other just now mentioned, called the third Coun∣cil at Constantinople, theVid. Natal. Alexand. hist. Eccles. secul. 4. pars prima. p. 233. contrary is made apparent) I say, though those Bishops had been Orthodox in their Faith, and unspotted in their manners, and had then made the Decision; St. Gregory had forfeited his Title, the Divine, if he had not declar'd a∣gainst their proceedings, and the improbity of them; and dis∣sented from them in the same manner he hath done. It is own'd to be the proper work of a General Council to determine the rights of Bishops, when they fall under debate, and the Bishops and Clergy of the Neighbourhood cannot do it: And thus the cases of Maximus Cynicus, and St. Gregory of Nazianzum were adjusted by the same Council of Constanti∣nople, when Theophilus of Alexandria, and his Egyptian Bishops had consecrated Maximus Bishop there, upon their own Autho∣rity, and Schismatically; and he was ejected upon the Antient Church Rules and Grounds, and Gregory fixed in that See: The Synod could no more have settled them both in it, by bringing the one upon the other, vested with the same rights, to be promiscuously exercised by both, and in opposition to one another▪ contrary to the antecedent immutable Govern∣ment founded in Christ1 Cor. cap. 1. & 3d. Mon videtur ab his exhiberi a Christo fides, a quibus evacua∣tur ejus passio. corpus{que} distra∣hitur. Ambros. in funere satyri. crucified (for his Cross reconcil'd us to God, and constituted his Church and his respective Bishops in it, as Peter and Paul: And the effects of the Cross are voyded in eluding the one as well as the other) then it could have made its own definition of Faith, in opposition to that which was once deliver'd to the Saints: In which case all men believe that Christians are no ways oblig'd to receive, and submit to it; nor to an Angel from Heaven: And, accordingly, the true Church hath adher'd to its proper Bishops and to its Faith, upon the same bottom, and by the same obligations, as I shall shew in the following Chapters: And if a Council does act contrary to a first Principle, as the Council of Con∣stantinople (the Majority over ruling) did in the case of Fla∣vianus; the remonstrance of a Gregory Nazianzen, a Cyril of Jerusalem, a Meletius of Antioch, or the like Elder and well grounded Prelates, is notwithstanding, to oblige us, and become our rule, especially, against a more numerous Company of young Divines, and Latitudinarian Bishops, who at first betray'd their
Faith and Obedience by closing with Heresy and Schism, and afterwards professed Homo♉sianism, to preserve those Bi∣shopriks, which their first perfidiousness had obtain'd. And that rule which Cardinal Baronius lays down and proposes;An. 381 pag. 436. That this Synod of Constantinople may be receiv'd or rejected in its De∣terminations, accordingly as it is found to have observed it, is firm and good, and is to be our guid in the like cases;Ʋt pote nihil praeterea novi in eâ apposuissent, sed quod anti∣quitus traditum, divinis Scriptu∣ris probatum, a veteribus custo∣ditum, & a re∣centioribus de∣claratum. which re∣quires, that nothing which is new be put in the Synods Determi∣nations, but that only which is Anciently deliver'd, prov'd by the Divine Scriptures, preserved by the ancient Fathers, and declar'd by the latter Doctors. Though the Learned Annalist will be found at another time, to be as uneasy under this Rule, as some others are: neither hath he here made use of it, but to serve a turn, and thereby overthrow some Canons, which the Council hath made, and he concludes to be innovations; especially that one which brings Constantinople too near Rome in its Privi∣ledges. And we have this advantage by it; that as our Church in her one and thirtieth Article hath said, that General Councils may erre, and sometimes have erred in things perteining to God, so a Cardinal of Rome hath acknowledg'd the same. For, surely, Romes Universal Pastorship is accounted by him to be among the things that pertain to God. Is it not reputed by the Romanist as a first Truth, even no less then an Article of Faith? And now, I have done with these five Bishops, viz. Eusta∣thius, Meletius, Paulinus, Flavianus and Evagrius, who made great figures in their times; and not only Antioch, but the whole Church has been concern'd upon some Emergencies, which happn'd by reason of them. I did not think that I should have insisted so long here as I have done: But new considerations still arose, and I was the more willing to dwell upon them, because the Doctor even triumphs, upon the advantages which he thinks he has from them: Though it is upon a bottom, which I have shew'd to be sandy all along, but here more particularly: Indeed, each circumstance, throughout the whole Story, strengthens our cause against him: And if any one shall so far concern himself with that, which I have here taken no∣tice of, and made my observations upon, as to think it too long; I expect, that the weightiness, and present usefulness of of the matter should be some plea for me: The subject is comprehensive enough to make a distinct Tract, and deserves
it: I am not ignorant that some part of it is variously related by our Historians: Especially that concerning Eustathius: and if any find fault that I have not clear'd the Story, as he may think I ought to have done, because I suppose some things, and acquiesce in them, as truth's, which are impugn'd by others; I need not undertake a vindication of my self upon this account: For, if there were two Eustathius's, the one Bishop of Sebastia, the other of Antioch; it is no matter, then, where the former was, when Meletius was made Bishop of Antioch: That See could not then be filled by him: Again, if there was but one Eustathius, and he was translated from Sebastia, or deposed, and upon repentance admitted to Beraea, and thence to Antioch, by the Council of Nicea: Whether he was afterwards legally deposed and remov'd from Antioch, in Constantine's days, or illegally and ineffectually, but, being banish'd, never appear'd, and his Chair became a Derelictum; or, whether he was dead and voyded it that way; or remain'd alive, and appear'd after∣wards, but resign'd his right of Antioch, before Meletius was righfully possessed of it: as it is variously argu'd and concluded; if, I say, any of them hold, it must sink the Doctor's plea, which he makes with a great deal of assurance: viz. That Eustathius was invalidly depriv'd, and alive, and exercised his function over the Antiochians, and had not resign'd, when Meletius was possessed of that See: And consequently, Meletius's, coming to Antioch is not a competent plea for the Doctor's Second, or Successor. And the great and most Catholick Principle; viz. One Bishop at one time, in one and the same District, is not vio∣lated through Meletius's Example. CHAP. II. SECT. I. I Come now, in this second Chapter, according to my de∣signed Method, to shew, that during the Reigns of Constan∣tine and Constantius, the Empire was not reputed, upon Catho∣lick Principles, and by the Catholicks of that time, (or even by most of the Hereticks) to be vested with a Right to ab∣dicate a Bishop, when a Possessor; and by virtue of such his Abdication, or Deposition, to acquit his people of their de∣pendance upon him: No, though he was in his person, rendred uncapable to exercise his Pastoral Function among them. Nor
was the said Secular Power thought to be competent to en∣throne a Bishop, and righfully possess him of an Episcopal Chair, though it was vacant upon terms which the Church allows, nor could it by virtue of that Possession enable him to demand obedience of the Officers, and other Believers, within that District; nor to lay an obligation on the said Officers and Believers, to receive and obey him; it being only the Church hands, that were then believed to be capable of doing this: And further, that if any Emperor, or other incompetent Power, has attempted, and effected such a thing, and so de∣priv'd, or, dipossess'd a Bishop; a competent number of the Colledge, or Episcopal Fraternity, and of others Christians, that were truly conscientious, did always remonstrate upon Gospel principles, and adhere notwithstanding to the righful Bi∣shop, and reject the Interloper. Now, in pursuance of this, I shall begin with Constantine whose principle was asserted and manifested by him, in the case of Caecilianus and Majorinus, when both of them were vested by their several Parties, and contended for their respectives rights in the Archbishoprick of Carthage; and the latter call'd the Em∣peror in as their Judge; being well assur'd, that the whole action will be found an undeniable and irrefragable evidence on our side. For, in this great affair Constantine did not stand a neuter, but disclaim'd all right to be a Judge in it; as what belong'd only to Church-men, and would be an Ʋsurpation upon the Law of God in him, if he should undertake it. And for the making this appear, I need only state the case, and declare the proceedings upon it, on the Churches, and on the Emperor's side: Which is this, according to the account that our Church-Historians, if St. Austin may be reckon'd among them, have given us of it.Vid. Aug. l. de Heres. c. 69. & Brevicul. collationis di. 3. & Ep. 62. & l. 3. contra Crescen: gramat. c. 28, 29. Et lib. de Ʋnit. Eccles. c. ulti. When Mensurius Bishop of Carthage dyed, Caecilianus, the Arch-deacon of that Church, was elected Bishop in his room, and consecrated by Felix Aptungentenss, who was a Neighbour Bishop, (according to the practice of the Church in St Cyprian's days) Botrus and Celeusius, two Presbyters that contended for it, being rejected. Caecilianus, entring upon his Charge, de∣manded the Church Vessels and Ornaments, which Mensurius left in the hands of the Elders of the Church, when Maxentius the Tyrant sent for him to Rome, by reason that he had con∣ceal'd Felix, a certain Deacon, who had wrote a notable Epistle
against him; but these Elders refus'd to deliver the Church-goods, or to Communicate with Caecilianus; and joyning them∣selves with Botrus and Celeusius, (who were discontented because they miss'd the Bishoprick) and Lucilla, a rich and potent Widow, whom Caecilianus had justly censur'd when he was Archdeacon: By the concurrence of these three causes, viz.Mulieris ira∣cundia peperit, ambitus nutri∣vit, avaritia roborarit. As Optatus speaks l. 1. contra Par∣men. The wrath of a Woman, the ambition of two Presbyters, and the covetousness of the Elders, a great and flagrant Schism was soon made; which they varnish'd over with a pretence, that Felix, who had ordain'd Caecilianus was a Traditor; they aspers'd Caecilianus also, that their cause might appear better to the World: And having done this, they called Secundus Tigisitanus, the Primate of Numidia, and Prince of the Traditors, and other Bishops to Carthage, who there intruded Majorinus into that full See, and condemn'd Caecilianus, in a Synod of seventy Bishops, who all were infa∣mous Traditors: And it was hence that turbulent Sect, after∣wards call'd Donatists, arose, and disturb'd the Church of God for some hundreds of years. But they did not rest satisfied in this settlement, being jealous of Caecilianus's growing power, that he might overtop them, since he had the Bishop of Rome on his side, and the assistance of other potent neighbouring Bi∣shops; and, above all, the favour of Constantine. Hereupon they apply themselves to Anulinus, the Proconsul in Africa, and re∣quest him, that he would make their cause known to the Emperor; which he undertook: And Constantine having receiv'd their Li∣bels at his hands; and some farther appeals in the progress of this affair, he thence took occasion to reprove and admonish them all in these words, Petitis ame in hoc seculo ju∣dicium, cùm ego ipse Christi ju∣dicium expe∣ctem. Optat l. 1. adv. Parmen.Ye ask judgement of me in this world, when I my self may expect the Judgement of Christ. Meaning, that he himself was but a Subject of the Churches, and lyable to receive judgment from Christ, by her hands; as it appears by his Epistle, which he wrote to the Catholick BishopsInter gesta purgationis Cae∣ciliani & Felicis, in fine Op. Optati Ed. Paris. upon the same occasion; where the words will be found in the same sense, tho' Optatus hath given us no account of it. Quia si nunc vera fide voluerint obsequia sanctissimae Legi deferre, intelligere poterunt, quantum sibi nutu Dei provisum sit. Et hoc quidem Sanctissimi Patres, sperabam etiam in eis, quibus ingenita est maxima durities animi, posse reprehendi. Sed non profuit apud eos recta dijudicatio, neque in eorum sensus in∣gressa est divinitas propitia. Revera enim non immeritò ab his procul abcesserit Chri∣sti clementia, in quibus manifestâ luce claret hujusmodi esse, ut eos a caelesti provisione exosos cernamus; quae in ipsos tanta ve∣sania perseverat, cum, incredibili arrogan∣tia persuadeant sibi, quae nec dici, nec au∣diri fas est, deciscentes a recto judicio dato, quo caelesti provisione meum judicium eos comperi postulare? Quaevis malignatatis in eorum pectoribus perseverat? Quties a me jam ipso improbissimus additionibus suis sunt condigna responsione oppressi, qui utique si hoc ante oculos suos habere voluissent, mi∣nime hec ipsum interposuissent. Meum ju∣dicium postulant, qui ipse judicium Christi expecto. Dico enim (ut se veri∣tas habet) Sacerdotum judicium, ita de∣bet haberi ac si ipse Dominus residens ju∣dicet. Nihil enim his licet sentire, nec aliud judicare, nisi quod Christi Magiste∣rio sunt edocti. If these Donatists had so pleas'd, they might have known, that God had pro∣vided in his Law, that the Church only should judge in these cases. And this is so plain, that he hop'd the most hard'ned temper might have been made
sensible of it. But God's favour did not possess their senses, and that is the reason why a true determination did them no advantage; and God's mercy deservedly departed from them; since it is as mani∣fest as the Sun at noon day, that they hated the provision which God, by his Church, hath made in these cases: What madness is it that possesseth 'em, in that, with an incredible arrogance, they think they may do that which may be lawfully neither spoke nor heard, and departing from the righful judgment which God has appointed, they require my judgment, together with the Church's? What force of malignity is it which dwells in their breasts? How often have they been just∣ly reprov'd by my self, for these wicked additions to God's Word in these cases? To which, if they had given any, they had not requir'd my judgment, who my self expect the Judgment of Christ: For I speak (as the truth is) that the judgment of the Priests ought to be accounted, as when the Lord himself, residing, Judgeth. The most Holy Emperor goes on in the same Epistle.Ibid. Quod igitur sentiunt malign homines, officia Diaboli? Perquirunt Se∣cularia, relinquentes caelestia. O rabida furoris audacia! Sicut in causis Gentilium fieri solet, appellationem interposuerunt. Quid hi detractatores Legis, qui renuentes caeleste judicium, meum putaverunt postu∣landum? Sic senserunt de Christo Sal∣vatore? Ecce tam Proditores l Ecce sine ulla acriore disquisitione ipsi per semet pro∣diderunt facinora sua! Quid ab ipsis sen∣titur humanitas, qui in ipso Deo immanes prosilierunt? Nihilominus vos (Fratres charissimi) qui Domini Salvatoris se∣quamini viam, patientiam adhibete, data his adhuc optione, quid putant deligendum, ac si eos in iisdem videritis perseverare, protinus cum his, quos Dominus dignos cultu suo judicavit, proficiscimini, & redite ad proprias sedes, meique mementote, ut mei Salvator noster semper misereatur. What then do these ma∣lignant men favour, but the works of the Devil? They diligently search after Secu∣lar things, and relinquish the Heavenly. O outragious and daring ury! they make appeals, as in the causes of the Gentiles! What do these undervaluers of the Law, who refuse the Heavenly Judgment, and have deem'd that mine should be asked? Have they had these thoughts of Christ their Saviour? See now the Proditors! Behold how themselves have discover'd their evil deeds, without any further strict search after them! What civility can be expected from them, who thus rudely have insulted upon God? But do you (my Brethen) have patience, who follow the ways of our Lord and Saviour,
and whatsoever the Bishops shall fix upon, be sure that you readily comply with them in it, whom God hath thought fit to be honour'd by him. And return to your proper Sees, and re∣member me, that our Saviour may always have mercy upon me. That which I find prefix'd to the Epistle ought not to be here omitted; because it represents these Donatists, who appeal from the legal Sentence of the Bishops for the fixing a Bishop in his District, to be singular therein; and, which is worse, to have made the secular Courts their Presidents. The words are these. Epistola Imperatoris Constantini; ubi dixit, qui pars Donati, quomodo forenses, sic litigant, ut denuntient & appellent, & Imperatorem de∣siderent audire post Episcopum judicata. The Epistle of the Emperor Constantine, where he hath said: those that are of the Party of Do∣natus, like secular pleaders, do so contend, that they remonstrate and appeal, and desire the Emperor to hear those things, which the Bishop have judg'd before. And now, since this wise, and most religious Emperor hath thus amply and pathetically declar'd, that the rights of fixing a Bishop in his See are instated on the Bishops by Christ himself; and he brands those hat appeal from their judicatures, to the thrones of Princes, i. e. from the heavenly, to the Secular powers, (as he phrases it), asserting a right in the latter to revoke the Church's investiture and possession, and place a Successor upon it: Since these men (I say) are characterized by him, as men that have seared Consciences, and despise the Law of God, and Christ; and that are destitute of his Grace and Clemency, with a great deal more to the same effect, we may neither wonder at, nor censure St. Austin, in that he thus speaks of him,Sed quia non ausus est Con∣stantinus de cau∣sâ Episcopi judi∣care, eam discu∣tiendam atque finiendam Epis∣copis delegavit; quod & factum est in urbe Ro∣ma, praesente Melchiade Epis∣copo, &c. Ep. 162. But because Constantine durst not judge of the cause of a Bishop, (viz. of Caecilianus) he assign'd that Office to be discuss'd, and ended by the Bishops; and it was determin'd in the City of Rome by Mel∣chiades its Bishop, and his Collegues. An Emperor is no more warranted to inrode and usurp the rights, which Christ hath deriv'd, and solely and immutably fix'd on the Bishops, than the meanest of his Subjects is; but he is subjected to the Church as well as they. And how can it be conceiv'd that so wise, religious, and knowing an Emperor as Constantine hath all along shew'd himself to be, should dare to do such a thing? Or why may not a Bishop say, that he durst not. But yet, since the Donatists were so stubbornly resolv'd in the
carrying on their Schism; and neglectful of their duty to God and his Church, as to stand by their appeal to the Emperor, after all this; his Princely care of the Church, and that duty incumbent on all Governours to make and continue peace, ac∣cordingly as their secular arm enables them for it, directed him to receive their petition, and to comply so far with it, as to or∣der an hearing of their cause at Rome before Meltiades (so his name is wrote in Eusebius) its Bishop, and Rhetericius, Maternus, and Marinus his Collegues, who were Bishops in France, and fifteen Italian Bishops; commanding Caecilianus to appear there, and bring with him ten Bishops of his own, and ten of the adverse party: of which affair we have an account in Constantine's EpistleEuseb. Hist. Ecc. l. 10. c. 5. to Meltiades; in the beginning of his Epistle toIbit, Chrestus Bishop of Syracuse; and inContra Parm. l. 1. Optatus, and St. Austin.Brevic. Collar. Dist. 3. Ep. 162. Ps. contra par∣tem Donati. In which two Epistles in Eusebius, his Imperial concern for the Church's divisions, and the noxious consequences of 'em, and his care and zeal for the present composing, and future preventing of them, is express'd at large, with abundance of piety and dis∣cretion: But the Bishops were sole Judges in the Case, by vir∣tue of their antecedent Commission, which they had from Christ their Master: And the Emperor only call'd the Synod, and legi∣timated the Assembly, by vertue of which Legitimation it be∣came civilly legal; and protected their persons in their per∣formances; but they made the Decision according to the Law of God.Ep. ad Mel∣chidem supra. . And suitably (upon a thorow vindication of Caecilianus's innocence) Melchiades concluded to this effect.Cum constterit Caecilianum ab iis qui cum Donato venerunt, secundum professio∣nem suam, non accusari, nec à Donato con∣victum esse in aliqua parte constiterit sua, Communioni Ecclesiasticae, in iegro statu, retinendum merito esse censo. That since it appear'd that the Donatists had not accus'd Caecilianus as they engag'd to do, and he is not convicted of any one crime, which they arraign'd him of; I think he is deser∣vedly to be retain'd in the Ecclesiastical Communion in his whole state: (That is as a Christian, and as a Bishop.) And he censur'd DonatusQuem totius mali principem invenerat.— Sanitatis recuperandae optionem liberam caeteris fecit, paratus communicatorias li∣teras mittere, etiam iis quos a Majorino ordinatos esse constaret. Ita ut quibuscun∣que in locis duo ordinati essent Episoopi, quos dissentio geminasset, eum confir∣mari vellet, qui fuisset ordinatus prior, aliri autem eorum plebs alia regenda provideretur. August. Epist. 162. as the Chief promo∣ter of the Schism— as for othes, he gave them liberty to come into the Church, if they pleas'd; being ready to send Commu¦nicatory Letters, even to those whom Majori∣nus had ordain'd; and where two Bishops had been ordain'd in one place, by reason of the Schism, he decreed that the Bishop
should be continued and confirm'd in the See, who had been first ordain'd; and that another people, who wanted a Gover∣nor, should be assign'd for the other. And a Decision was made to the same effect, by the same au∣thority, i. e. by the Bishops only, in the Council held at Arela∣tum, which Constantine call'd sometime after for that purpose, upon the continu'd complaints, and restless importunities of the Donatists, pretending that they had not had a fair hearing in the former Synod; as it is in the foremention'd Epistle toEuseb. H. E. l. 10. c. 5. Chrestus. The Empire's favor call'd them thither, and order'd Ablavius, the then Proconsul of Africa, to give every Bishop his Tractatoria,Ep. ad Ablav. in fine Optat. supra Baron. Annal Anno. 314. Num. 45. i. e. sufficient provision for his Journey: But tho' Constantine was there in his own Person (if we'll take Eusebius's words for itDe int. Const. l. 1. c. 37.) and sat amidst the Bishops, as a common Bishop constituted of God., and did joyn with them in their Episcopal Acts. Ibid., assist∣ing them in order to peace; yet he did not act judicially amongst them (but in that respect subjected himself as became him) nor did he perform the part of a real Bishop in that Convention: So that the Donatists did afterwards make their appeal from the Council to the EmpireIbid., since Constantine did not act as a Judge in it; tho' Natalis AlexanderHist. Eccles. secul. 4 pars. prim p. 62. thinks their Appeal to be a sufficient proof, that he was not personally in the Council. I cannot omit taking notice here of one of the CanonsCan. 6. Conc. 1. Arelat. in this Synod, which provides, That the Bishops should exclude from the Church communion those Magistrates which were Christian. Si contra Christianam Disciplinam aliquid agerent, if they acted any thing against the Christian Discipline. It being a strong evidence, that the Secular power did not then over rule in the Government of the Church. But these turbulent men did not desist; tho' the Catholick Bishops had, in two Councils, determin'd and declar'd against them; they being in the number of those, who may be con∣futed, but cannot be overcome, because their work is always to resist the truth. And as they had before appeal'd from the Council at Rome to the Emperor's Person; they again make another ap∣peal from this Council of Arelatum: and tho' Constantine did not think that they were less impious and unreasonable in this appeal, than they were in the former; or that himself was better qualify'd to judge in a Church case than he was before; yet, upon a full experience that their prejudices to the Church Judges was so great that their Decisions would have
no effect for peace upon them; and considering withal that the greatest part of Africa joyn'd with them, and became very tu∣multuous, insomuch that his Empire might be embroil'd by them, and its quiet, in those parts of it, hazarded, if they contemn'd; especially since they so clamourously pretended, that they would acquiesce in his determination. Hereupon, the most Religious Emperor (tho' unwillingly)August. Ep. 162. condescended to their request; but not without regret for his seeming to intermeddle with the Bishops Province, and asking them pardon for it. And he first appointed Rome for the place of hearing, and gave each party orders to appear there; but Caecilianus did not come; and Con∣stantine would not proceed against him when absent, as the Dona∣tists had done before: So that Assembly prov'd ineffectual, for which St. Austin seems much concern'd, wishing that he had then declar'd his judgment, and thereby put an end to their mad animosities, since they had engag'd themselves to submit unto it, and could not go back without a great blemish upon them. But the Emperor appointed another at Milan, in which all parties appear'd; and, upon a full hearing, he declar'd, Caecilianum innocentissimum, illos improbissimos, as St. Austin speaks, Caecilian to be innocent, and the Donatists most impious. But as his judgment here concurr'd with the two Synods precedeing, so it had no better effect; for they censur'd him upon it as corrupt, partial, and unjust. And tho' he did not here either take upon him the part of a spiritual Judge, or add to, or diminish from the decisions and sanctions of the two precedeing Councils; but concern'd himself so far only, , with the things which the Bishops had done thereDe vita Con∣stant. l. 1. c. 37. as to satisfy himself in the impar∣tiality and probity of them: Yet he acted as a Secular Judge, and punisht their pursesAug. Ep. 168. l. 2. cont. Petil. c. 92., took from them the liberty to make a will, seized their meeting Houses, and determin'd to punish themId l. 1. cont. Parmen. c. 8. capitally for their non compliance; but Hosius with the other Bishops prevail'd upon him to forgo that severity. And the argument seems to be good,Vid. Constant. Ep: ad Caecilian. Episc. Carthag. in Euseb H. E. l. 18. that since these worldly mulcts are thus particularly mention'd, and no other; they are the only judicial Acts which Constantine perform'd in this Con∣troversie.
SECT. II. AND thus, I think, I have abundantly made it to appear, to any, who shall peruse this account, and desire satisfaction; that the right to constitute and remove a Bishop was solely in the Church, during Constantine's reign; unless they can produce their , or secret History, in opposition to that, which our best Authors have openly deliver'd of those affairs. And I do heartily wish, that two sorts of men would seriously consider it, and lay aside their frequent discourses, in which they declare themselves of another opinion, and contradict that which is wrote as with a Sun beam, in the eyes of all men that can, and will, see it. One sort of these men say, That the Church exercis'd a right, or rather a power, whilst the Empire was Heathen: But it became an Escheat to Constantine, when he became a Christian, and hath since remain'd in his Succession; and now is actually subjected in every Prince that is Christian, of what Line, Age, or Country soever. But how came Constantine to be ignorant of this accumulated right upon his becoming a Christian? or, if he knew it, why did he forego it, nay abdicate it, since his conversion deriv'd and warranted it unto him? To say nothing of the Emperors that were his Successors, whose case was the same. Or were the Bishops in Constantine's, and the succeeding reigns, ignorant of this? Or, which will be a great deal worse, did they know, but conceal it, and usurp upon the Empire, by the exercise of that power, which they knew to belong unto it, and themselves had no right in? This Character will not become these holy Men: But their enemies would have been glad to have met with such men as Mr. Selden, Mr. Hobbs, and some other no∣vellists, and receiv'd the information from them; for none then among them were able to have given them these new lights. It would have effectually prov'd that charge against them some so much desir'd to make out, and so frequently attempted, but could find no bottom to build it upon, viz. That they acted by principles very prejudicial to the Government. The other sort of men (which, I hope, may in time be better advis'd) are those that say no less, to the Church's disreputation; viz. That the Bishops did relinquish their original right to the Empire,
and wholly quit it, when the Emperors became Christian; even by a kind of Simoniacal compact, being brib'd unto it, by the temporal Possessions and Immunities, with which they vested them. Now tho' I will not undertake to answer for the integrity of every Bishop, as to this matter, especially in the two Reigns of Constantius, and Valens; under which, too many will be found to have waver'd, during their persecutions, (tho' a competent number did not) their worldly Interests having over much in∣fluence upon them: Yet they had no temptation to do it under Constantine, whose principles directed him (and his practice was accordingly, save once, in Athanasius's case, in the Coun∣cil of Tyre) to support, and preserve them entire, in those liber∣ties, with which Christ had endow'd them; and they would have incurr'd his utmost displeasure, if they had deliver'd up one of them. So that this Plea also is altogether precarious. And surely the case of Caecilianus and Majorinus is so full an evidence of the Church's immutable Right, exclusive to the State, and the inviolated preservation of it, that nothing can be more so. For 1. Caecilianus was enthron'd at Carthage by the neighbouring Bishops, and by their hands only, upon the voy∣dance of that Chair, by the death of Mensurius: And this Con∣stantine himself has own'd to have been done according to Christ's Institution.Ep. ad Episc. Catholicos supr. And farther when Donatus, and his Party, op¦posed Caecilianus in bringing Majorinus upon him, he tells them That they did thereby so far wickedly and perversely desert the Holy Religion, the Heavenly Power, and the Catholick Determination.. Euseb. H. E. l. 10. c. 5. As in his Epistle to Chrestus Bishop of Syracuse, above mention'd; with a great deal more to the same effect; which I have al∣ready recited. 2. That the Bishops, and they alone, were the Judges, and had a right to determine, judicially, upon any doubt that seemingly, or really, might arise concerning Caecilianus's Title, to confirm it, or voyd it, and place a Successor upon him: And Constantine admonisheth, censureth, and condemns the Donatists for asserting the same right in himself, and supplicating him to execute it; for which he represents them as men that are hardned, destitute of the Sunshine-light of the Gospel, and of the Di∣vine Clemency, and haters of the Provision which Christ hath made for that purpose by his Church. Of which, and more, I have also given an account above. 3. Constantine removes this right and power quite from him∣self,
and disowns it, as that which no ways belongs to him. It seems then that the Coordinate Power of the Church and State in the exercise of it, which Doctor Hody speaks of, was unknown to this great Emperor, when he says That the Civilp 9. and Eccle∣siastical Persons are Governors alike; and the latter exceeds the for∣mer only in that those have a superadded right to administer the Sacraments and ordain the Clergy: And if the Emperor had thought fit to have exercised his right in the Ecclesiastical Government, and depos'd Cornelius; St. Cyprian would have own'd, and sub∣mitted to his deprivationp. 10. as reasonable and just. And tho' I can't answer his demandp. 41. and make it appear. That the Church hath ever refus'd to submit to the present Possessor, because his Pre: decessor was unjustly depos'd by the secular Power; we have prov'd the secular Power incompetent to deprive him: and if he does prove that St Cyprian, or any one, or more Bishops, have sub∣mitted, (tho' I'll engage he cannot prove it upon St. Cyprian) their examples will not be argumentative: and he had as good let it alone. 4. All that Constantine did, or was capable to do, in this mat∣ter of Caecilianus, and Majorinus, in the way of Judicature, was to confirm the anteceeding judicial Acts of the Bishops, and cor∣roborate them, by his secular Laws and Penalties. 5. And lastly. It is here also to be consider'd, that this Power, of which we have been discoursing, thus exercis'd by the Bishops, and disclaim'd by Constantine himself, related purely and solely to the fixing a Bishop in his See. i. e. To that one par∣ticular branch of the rights and power of the Priesthood, by which one Bishop is enabled to give possession to another; and the Bi∣shop so possess'd receives a right to govern the Officers subjected to him, and the Believers within his own District, and they become oblig'd to pay their duty of subjection to him. The Empire could then no more do it (at least in its own apprehen∣sions) then it could administer the Sacraments, or give holy Orders. 'Tis true the right of Investiture is so far in the Prince, as it extends to the Bishop's Temporals, and no other hand but his can legally possess a Bishop of them, and give him a civil forinsick right unto them: But as it extends to his Spirituals, the Prince can no more invest him with them, than he can give him the Holy Ghost, or a Power to dispense any other of Christ's Institutions. And we are most sure, that the Catholicks did not refuse to communicate with Majorinus because he was an
Heretick, (tho' Doctor Hody often contends they did refuse Communion with several Schismatical Bishops brought in upon a full See, as Majorinus was, not because of their Schism, or want of a Title, but because of their heresie) since no one pretends that the Donatists were any ways Heretical; at least when this Controversie of Church Right was started by them: Tho' St AustinHeresis autem Schismainvete∣ratum post cau∣sam dictam & finitam, — in Haeresin Schisma verterunt. l. 2. contra Cresc. Gram. c. 7. de Haeresibus c. 69. afterwards calls them Hereticks, by reason of their continu'd, obstinate, and invincible Schism; as also in that they maintain'd several Errors, concerning the nature of the Ca∣tholick Church, as rebaptizations, &c. which they did not broach till that cause was ended. SECT III. I Cannot omit one instance more in Constantine's days: It is that of his proceedings against Athanasius; which great Pre∣late, we know, fell so far under his displeasure, thro' the ma∣lice and craft of his restless Adversaries, (especially the Eusebians, who had gain'd too much upon the good Emperor, and thereby lay'd their design to restore Arianism, but did not effect it till the latter end of Constantius's Reign,) that Constantine gave way to that great Prelate's deposition, for several crimes exhibited, but never prov'd against him. Now, did Constantine effect it, or but pretend to do it, by his own Right or Power? Or did the Treacherous Eusebian Bishops and Clergy advise him so to do by his own Authority? Or did they divest themselves of their own Rights therein, tho' they afterwards shamelesly postituted the Priviledges of the Church to Constantius in the like cases of Liberius, and other Bishops? Was not a Council call'd at Tyre by ConstantineSocrat. l. 1. c. 21, 22, 23. Theod. l. 1. c. 30, 31. Soz l. 2. c. 24. on purpose to remove him? Or did any hands there except those of the Bishops, make and execute the deposing Sentence? Or what more did the Empire do in that whole affair, but second the Synod's Decree, by exiling him into Trevers in France? And this was in the 30th. year of Constan∣tine's Reign, and but two years before his death: From whence it is very evident, that he continued in the opinion he had entertain'd in the case of Majorinus, which was 22. years be∣fore. And during these 30 years of his Reign he was not sensible of any such Church Rights, which some, so very con∣fidently maintain to have accrew'd to his Crown upon his be∣coming Christian. We may with the same security vouch for
his two following years; and that the Bishops did not them∣selves relinquish any such rights, or derive them unto him, being brib'd to it by his temporal Favours. And this will be rendred much more probable, it will be demonstrated, if we consider the nature of this Synod, and some circumstances of it, as we find them in AthanasiusApol. 2. p 728. By what right then (says he) could they convene a Synod against us? Or, with what impudence call that a Coun∣cil, where the secular Governor, or Prefect, is President, his Guards keep the door, and instead of the Deacons of the Church, his Notary, or Register, introduceth the members: He speaks, the other keeping silence, or rather, paying their obedience to him: Insomuch that the Bishops had not freedom of speech by reason of him: he gave the command; we were conducted by the Soldiery; or rather the Prefect himself did only attend the Sentences of the Eusebians? In short (my belov'd Bre∣then) what face is there of a Synod, where banishment, or slaughter were determin'd, if the Emperor's pleasure had no effect. Athanasius. Ibid. p. 730. adds in another place, They pretend the name of Synod, when the work of it is manag'd by the King: And for this end, the secular Governor and the Soldiers do overawe the Bishops with their Guards; and the King's Letters call the Meeting, compelling those whom they require to come in. From whence these following observables are easy and manifest. 1. That Constantine cannot be conceiv'd to have chang'd his Opinion in his latter days, and maintain a direct and imme∣diate right in himself to abdicate a Bishop, and absolve his Sub∣jects of their duty to him, since he not only call'd this Council of Tyre on pupose for Athanasius's abdication, (which makes a strong presumption that he did not think his own Power to be competent for it) but in that he acted mediately only, and in∣directly▪ by the Bshops hands: And either provided that the Synod should be made up of his own Creatures; or else he im∣ploy'd his Prefect, and inferior secular Officers to overawe, and over rule their votes, menacing terrors and penalties against them, when they did not answer his design. For what needed he to have proceded in this manner, if his single Edict had been a Law to the Church, as it was to the State? Can any account be given of these his Artifices, mean complyances, and his servile dependence on the Eusebian Bishops? Or of the meaning of his threats to the Or∣thodox, if he could of himself, have effectually depos'd Athanasius,
or the Bishops had not had a right, and power to obstruct his Deposition, separate, and independent upon the Emperour. 2. If it be said here, (as it usually is upon other occasions) that Constantine did not understand his own Rights in the Church; or else that he gave them up to her discretion, being guided by an over ruling zeal, or, as some may say, by a particular interest. The first cannot be pleaded; since it is not likely that his whole Court knew no better, or that it did not inform him; or that it would at the same time preclude the Empire's right and truckle under those that usurpt it; especially under the Bishops, whose Lordship it could least endure. And for the latter, he was so far from giving all up to the Church's discretion, that he gain'd a Majority in the Council by menaces and violence. The Euse∣bian Bishops only were they that acted freely, and their votes were implicitely receiv'd and submited to, thro' the present distress of those who complied with them. And by these means the cause was gain'd against Athanasius. 3. It is hence very plain, that Constantine's Doctrine and Pra∣ctice, in the case of Caecilianus, and Majorinus (of which an ac∣count is given above) was purely upon Church principles; since Athanasius does contend here, and declare for the same; and we are to think that the other Catholick Bishops, which were in the Synod, and adhered to him, nay protested against the Eusebians proceedings, amongst whom the famous Paphnutius was one, did not come behind him in it. What less doth our most Holy Alexandrian Patriarch say, than that the secular Power is not to intermeddle with the deposing of a Bishop, either by the Em∣peror in Person, or by his Substitutes, but that it is the work of the Bishops alone. Besides, since AthanasiusTheod. H. E. l. 1. c. 31. Soz. l. 2. c. 22. appeal'd from this Pseudo-Synod to Constantine; we may not think that his protestation against his right to depose, was, even in Constantine's opinion, in injury to him; if it had been thought so by him, we cannot believe that he would have shew'd so much kindness to him as he did afterwards. Constantine the Son tells us, that his Father design'd to recal Athanasius, but he was prevented by his death; and that he did not banish him to Trevers as a guilty man, but to preserve him from the Rabble in Aegypt; and farther, that it was upon his own experience in France (where Constantine the Son's Government lay) of Athanasius's eminent virtues, that he accomplisht his Father's design, and sent him back in
peace to Alexandria; an account of which we have in his Epistle to the People of that City; whee, he says that his Father pur∣pos'd to call him home, , as to his proper place, and as an unduly dispossess'd Prelate. But do Emperors use to be∣stow suh Eulogies and Graces on those, who take the chief Jewels out of their Crowns, and teach others that they ought to do the same? For such we are told, by some, their de∣posing Power is. I thought to have concluded this Chapter here; but I cannot forbear, upon further considerations, to desire the Reader to compare the follwing Account of St. Cyprian and Constantine; in which he will find them to have had the same sentiments con∣cerning the Rights of the Church, as to our present Case, tho' they liv'd, at least, sixty years asunder; St. Cyprian, when No∣vatianus and Fortunatus were brought into his and Cornelius's Sees, whilst they were alive, and possess'd them upon Church terms: Constantine, when Majorinus was brought into Caecilia∣nus's See, Caecilianus being the rightful Possessor of it, and the Donatists supplicated him to undertake their cause: And both of them are positive, that none but a Church Right can fix a Bishop in a District, or deprive him: Even a Church Right cannot bring a Bishop into a See that is then legally fill'd: But if the Prince, or any other Power that is worldly, does fix or deprive a Bishop, and a People does receive and obey him, or reject and disobey him, upon that Authority, they herein act in opposition to God and Christ, and the Church; whose Laws have provided otherwise. St. Cyprian declares, upon the foremention'd occasion, to this effect, viz. That he who brings in a Bi∣shop upon another,L. 1. Ep. 3. Ed. ve. than duly placed in a See, acts against the Divine Law, and makes himself a Judge, not of the Bi∣shop, but of God. Ibid.That the Secound which is brought in, is not a Bishop ac∣cording to the will of God▪ but contrary to the disposition and tradition of the Gospel: such a Bishop is made without God and his Holy Spirit.
That when desperate men, made for destruction, do im∣pugn a rightful Bishop, it is not from Christ, who constitutes and protects Bishops; but from him who is the Adversary of Christ, and enemy of the Church, the Devil. Cornelius succeeded Fabianus in a lawful Ordination, and Novatianus assumes his Chair; he does it in contempt of the Evangelical and Apostolical Tradition: —he is a For∣reigner, and profane. As there is one God, one Christ, one Church; so there is one Bishop: a new Priesthood cannot be made, besides that one which is constituted: If so, it is adulterous, it is impious and sacrilegious; it is institut∣ed by the fury of man, that the Divine Institution should be violated. To bring in one Bishop upon another is contrary to the Ec∣clesiastical Disposition, the E∣vangelical Law, the Unity of the Catholick Institution. One Bishop is placed in a District instead of Christ. By the Sentence of God. By the Sentence of God and Christ. By Divine Inspiration. By the Omnipotent God, and Christ the Lord. By the Will of God. This Unity was deliver'd from the Lord by the Apo∣stles,
to the Bishops their Suc∣cessors. L. 2. Ep. 11. l. 4. Ep. 2.This one Bishop is placed and confirmed in his See by the Testimony of his Collegues, and the Suffrage of the Cler∣gy. Ep. 6. l. 1. Ep. 11. l. 2. Ep. 2. l. 3.He cannot be accounted a Pastor, nor hold a District, who is Ordain'd by his own private Rule, upon a lawful Succession. Neither the se∣cular Magistrate, nor any ir∣resistible Party can constitute such a Bishop. Such a thing is neither permitted by the Law of God, nor lawful to be done. Ep. 8. l. 4.Whosoever he is that is placed in a Bishoprick, and accepts it with the breach of the Laws of the Church, is to be reputed as no Bishop. Ep. 3. l. 1. Ep. 6. Ibid:He is made a Bishop, but not according to the Will of God: He cannot be account∣ed a Bishop. He is a Stranger and without. Euseb. H. Eccl. l. 6. c. 35.(Cornelius of Rome says of Novatianus also, that he did not receive his Bishoprick from God.) L. 2. Ep. 10. l. 3. Ep. 14.He is an Adulterous and contrary head. He hath an adulterous Chair. L. 4. Ep. 2.Tho' he boast much of him∣self, and challenges a great deal, he is no Bishop. Quod Sacerdoti Dei non obtem∣peratur, nec unus in Ecclesia ad tem∣pus judex, nec ad tempus Sacerdos. —si secundum Magisteria Divina, —post divinum Judicium—judi∣cem se non tam Episcopi quam Dei. Plane Episcopi non de voluntate Dei fiunt, sed contra dispositionem & traditionem Evangilii,—si bimet ipsi Regem constituerunt, & non per me: habuisti consilium & non per me; & fecisti conventionem & non per Spiritum meum.
Cum talis frater a quibusdam desperatis & perditis impugnari videtur, non Christus,Ep. 9. l. 4. qui Sacerdo∣tes aut constituit, aut protegit; sed ille qui Christi Adversarius, & Ecclesiae inimicus. Ibid.—Dia∣bolo crederent Episcopum proscri∣benti. Qui Fabiano legitima Ordina∣tione successit — Evangelica & Apostolica Traditione contem∣pta — alienus est,Ep. 6. l. 4. profanus est. Deus unus est, Christus unus est,Ep. 8. ibid. & Ecclesia una est. —novum fieri praeter unum Socerdotium non potest: —Adulterum est, impium & sacrilegum est:— Humano furore instituitur, ut di∣positio Divina violetur. Contra Ecclesiasticam dispositio∣nem, contra Evangelicam Legem,Ep. 2. l. 3. contra Institutionis Catholicae Uni∣tatem. Unus in Ecclesia Sacerdos vice-Christi.L. 1. Ep. 3. Judicio Dei.Lib. 3. Ep. 13 Dei & Christi ejus Senten∣tia.Ibid. Ad hunc locum Divinitus electi.Ibid. A Deo Omnipotente,Ep. 2. ibid. Christoque Domino.Lib. 4. Ep. 2. De Dei voluntate A Domino per Apostolos nobis Successoribus.Lib. 2. Ep. 8.
Episcopo facto Collegarum Te∣stimonio; Cleri suffragio Ordinato. —Factus Episcopus a plurimis Col∣legis nostris.—De Sacerdotum Col∣legio.—Omnium nostrorum con∣sentione firmato. Pastor haberi quomodo potest, qui manente vero Pastore nemini succedens, a seipso Ordinatus est? — Nullo modo tenere Ec∣clesiam potest.—Constituti nullo modo posse:—Nec fas est, nec fieri licet. Quisquis ille fuerit: &c. Planè Episeopi non de volun∣tate Dei fiunt.—Nec Epis∣copus computari potest. Est alie∣nus, foris. (.) Adulterum & contrarium caput: —adulteram Cathedram. Multum licet de se jactans, & plurimum vendicans, nullus est. Constantine the Emperor declares also to the same effect in his Epistle to the Catholick Bishops, upon the forementioned occasions. as, That the Donatists do not
receive the Scriptures with a right Faith. A propitious Divine Influ∣ence hath not reacht them. The Clemency of Christ is gone far from them. They hate the provision which is made for their better information. Great madness abides them. A forcible malignity is lodg'd in their breasts. Otherwise they would have understood that God had pro∣vided in his Law, that the Church alone should be Judg in the case of fixing Bishops in their Sees: It being as clear as the Sun at Noon day: The contrary is not to be spoken nor heard: Neither would they have requir'd my Judg∣ment; since a Heavenly pro∣vision is made for them other∣waies by the Church. If a prevailing malignity had not aboad in their breast; and they had not willfully forgotten the Law, oft have they been inform'd and warned by my self against these their wicked practices, they would not have interpos'd and sup∣plicated me in this matter. They ask judgment of me, in this affair, who am to be judg'd by the Church: I speak as the truth is, the judgment of the Priests ought to be ac∣counted the same as God's
judgment, given in his Per∣son from the Bench. These men in refusing the Heavenly Judgment (meaning the Churches, by which Caeci∣lianus was plac'd in the Car∣thaginian See) and thinking it fit that my Judgment should be ask'd, and my Power be imply'd in the continuing him there, or removing him from it, they therein— Do the Offices of the Devil. Act the part of the Gentils, Make their savage insults upon God himself. He exhorts the Catholick Bi∣shops to go home to their Di∣strict, and receive those Bishops, whom the Lord, by his Church, has placed in their seve∣ral Sees: and to pray for him. Si vera fide voluerint obse∣quia
Sanctissimae Legi deferre. Neque in eorum sensus ingressa est propitia Divinitas. Ab his procul abcesserat Christi clementia. Eos a Caelesti provisione exosos. Quae in ipsos tanta vesania per∣severat. Quae vis malignitatis in eorum pectoribus perseverat. Intelligere poterunt quantum sibi nutu Dei provisum sit. — in quibus manifesta luce claret;— in iis quibus maxima durities in∣genita est possit reprehendi.—Cae∣lesti provisione meum judicium eos comperi postulare. Quae vis malignitatis in eorum pectoribus perseverat? — Quo∣ties improbissimis additionibus suis sunt condigna responsione oppressi? —si hoc ante oculos suos ha∣bere voluissent, minime hoc ipsum interposuissent. Meum judicium postulant, qu ipse judicium Christi expecto.— dico enim, ut se veritas ha∣bet Sacerdotum judicium ita deht haberi, ac si ipse Deus residens judicat.
Renuentes Caeleste judicium, meum putaverunt postulandum. Officia Diaboli. Sicut in causis Gentilium fieri solet. Qui in ipso Deo immaniores pro∣silierunt. Cum his quos Dominus dignos cultu suo judicavit proficiscimini, & redite ad proprias sedes, meique mementote, ut mei Salvator mi∣sereatur. Now, upon a just consideration of this state, and these rights of the Church and the Empire, with respect to the filling and vacating Sees, or accepting and rejecting Bishops, in the time of our Eminent Archbishop St. Cyprian, and Constantine the Great, and first Christian Emperor, as themselves have given us an account of them; and a due comparing their Judgments and Determinations concerning them, as they are above set down, from their own pens; it will appear very plain and evident, to a demonstration, That those Rights, and that Power, which the Christian Bishops, in the Cyprianick Age exercis'd to the foremen∣tion'd purpose under Rome Heathen, remain'd in the Bishops, and only in them; and were exercis'd by them, under Rome Christian, in the days of Constantine: They then became neither an escheat to the Empire, nor were delivered into its hands, by the Bishops, upon its becoming Christian: but, as the practice of the Church and of the Empire, so the Laws of both continu'd their execution, as subjected before in the Church: Even the immediate and and eternal Law of Christ Jesus provided for it. And that in their Jdgements, none but senseless and stupid men, as to the
things of God, being under the Devil's instigation, could think and believe otherwise. As the Church is concluded by St. Cy∣prian to have a Divine indefeisable right, not only to lay hands upon and Consecrate them; but to Ordain, (as he useth the word)Apud Corne∣lium qui Epis∣copo Fabiano le∣gitima Ordina∣tine successit. l. 1. Ep. 6.— Episcop Cor∣nelio Cleri & plebis Suffragio ordinato. l. 3. Ep. 13.— Nec habeat Ecclesiae odinationem. l. 4. Ep. 2. i. e. to invest the Bishops in their Sees; So she is suppo'd and allow'd by Constantine to retain the same, and she alone: He does not pretend to it. Doth he not quite remove it from him? CHAP. III. SECT. I. IF we look into the State of the Empire and the Church in Constantius's Reign, (who was Son to Constantine the Great, and his immediate Successor) we shall find them to be the same as in Constantine's: Tho' we may meet with some different practices, which the Eusebians put him upon, (de∣serting the true Government, and the true Faith, at once) but were still protested against by a competent number of Catholick Bishops and Believers: And we have good reason to think that Constantius was well aware of his error therein; and that he was wheedled into i by his Eusebiaus, who were dexterous in that Art, and would boggle at nothing to serve a present turn; since few Princes have been known more constantly to apply them∣selves to their Clergy, and to make use of them more than he did; insomuch that the Heathen HistorianƲt catervi antistitum ju∣mentis publicis ultro citroque discurrertibus per Synodos, quas appellant. Ammian. Mar∣cel. l. 21. in sine Libri., not only takes notice of it, but he does it in a lessening way, representing the Bishops, as running hither and thither in Troops by Synods, as they call them. And, I remember, he somewhere, thereabout, ridicules them, and says, That Constantius plough'd up his roads with the frequent going of Coaches, which carried them from place to place. For the prof of this, and that Constantius did not really be∣lieve that he was vested with a Right to exercise the deposing power on a Bishop, and by removing him from his Bishoprick to make way for a Successor; tho' his passion and Interest did now and then push him on to make some attempts that way: I will proceed on the Instance of Athanasius, omitting others at present. Now it is well known that Constantius had a peculiar disgust against this holy Man, insomuch that he peremp∣torily
resolv'd that he should be dispossest, and finally remov'd; tho' he condescended some time before, by the Intercession of his Brother Constantine, that he should be releas'd from that exile in France, which his Father had lay'd him under, and return to his Church and People of Alexandria: But did he pro∣fess and endeavour to effect his removal afterwards as by a Right, connate, and coeval to his Empire, and vested in a Decius or a Dioclesian, as Doctor Hody would have us believe? Or as escheated from the Church to him upon his receiving Christia∣nity, as Mr. Selden would have it? Or by the submission and resignation of the Bishops then in being, as others suggest? Did he attempt it by any other hands then those of the Bishops? Even when he used his own upon other occasions, was it any other waies, then by offering violence to the hands of the Bishops, and haling them in, that they might lift them up in voting on his side, as his Father had done before him in the Council of Tyre? It must be own'd that he did not alwaies make use of a fair deal∣ing Council, whose Acts were bottom'd on true Church prin∣ciples: He, indeed, waved every one, which he suspected to be such, as much as he could. Hence, AthanasiusƲbi nec comes assuturus esset, nec satellites pro foribus excuba∣rent, nec ex Cae∣saris praescriptis omnia fierent, quibus rationi∣bus, & non aliis, Episcopos vice∣runt, imo qui sine hoc praesidio ne loqui pte∣runt Ep. ad Solitar. p. 816. tells us, that the Eusebians refus'd to come to the Roman Synod, to which Julius summon'd them, because, there was no Prefect to be pre∣sent, no Soldiers to keep the Guard, and all was not to be done by the prescript of Caesar, by which means, and no other, they had con∣quer'd the Bishops, who might not speak, but under this Presidency, and with their leave. Yet, he did not hitherto pretend to a se∣parate independent Power in Church affairs, or the deposing Power in particular: nor afterwards, till the perfidious Eusebians, Sycophant Courtiers, and debaucht Eunuchs, joyning altoge∣ther, had influenc'd him for the worse; and made him, even their Creature: which occasion'd St. Athanasius to use these ex∣pressionsIb. p. 835. The Eunuchs can do all things with Constantius; no∣thing is done by him without them; they exercise domination over the Church, to whom the government of Houses is rarely committed. And Gregory NazianzenOrat. in laude Heronis. complaining of the same times, par∣ticularly laments them, in that so much power was given to those who are to be accounted in the number neither of men nor women. Ac∣cordingly, his first p oceeding against Athanasius was in the Synod or Antioch, which was held in the first year of his Reign, for the dedication of a Church, which this Emperor's Father be∣gan in that City, and he finish'd: Where his cause was re-examin'd,
and condemn'd, and his former Sentence in the Synod of Tyre confirmed, and reviv'd: In the obtaining of which he made use of his Courtiers,Socr. l. 2. c. 5. Soz. l. 3. c. 5. and their power; and it was un-Syno∣dically done, (for the Eusebian Bishops were at first the lesser part of the Council) but the Bishops alone, made the Decree, and pass'd the Judiciary Sentence upon him; notwithstanding that Constantius was there in his Person. And which is more; the same Synod which remov'd Athanasius made Gregorius Bishop of Alexandria in his room: And we hence gain our other point, viz. That as the Rights of the Empire were not conceiv'd to enable the Emperor for the removal of a Bishop, once fixed in his See by the proper and righful hands; so they were not conceiv'd to be competent for the enthroning and justly posses∣sing a Bishop in a See, tho' Synodically made void. And as Constantius did not dare to do the one; (for why may I not use the expression concerning him, since St. Austin us'd it of his Father in the same case) so nor the other, in his own right, as Emperor. I shall not here undertake to determine how far the deposing a Bishop by an Heretical Synod does oblige; or by an Ortho∣dox one, if it proceed upon false suggestions, publickly known to be such, and to be malitiously prosecuted: neither doth our present enquiry expect it of me. It suffices us at present that Constantius did once think fit to make use of Bishops, for the de∣posing Athanasius; and did it not then by his own secular Arm: Hence I thus argue. That we cannot, upon common thoughts, apprehend, since as Constantine his Father had done before him in the Council of Tyre; so Constantius the son would not have proceeded against Athanasius, and remov'd him in this Council by the Bishops, if he could have effectually done it by his own Power and Authority, separate from 'em, and independent upon them; if he had not been assur'd, as his Father was, that his secular, worldly Arm was incompetent for it; or if he could have satisfied himself, that he had had but a coordinate power with them in order to it. The Argument is much stronger on Constantius's side, since his displeasure towards Atha∣nasius was much greater than Constontine's: It was to excess, be∣cause of his insuperable adherence to the Nicene Faith; and be∣came so publick that the Heathen HistorianAmmian. Marcell. l. 15. takes notice of it, and reports it to the world in these words: Athanasio semper infensus. Is it any ways credible that he should seek, nay catch
at the advantage of a Synod, as he did of this; put the issue of so desir'd a cause, and the conquest of so considerable a Person, to its hazard; nay use tricks in it, which he would have been asham'd of at another time; and employ his Courtiers to bring the Bishops, by threats and violence, to his side, when himself, (as some would have it) was at the same time, the supream Judge of the cause, and could singly, and alone, effe∣ctually and irreversibly have determin'd and decided it? His parasite Courtiers upon whose provocation he so much the more desir'd it, could not be ignorant of such a right, if he could have pretended to it. And they would have so order'd it, that no hands but his own should have executed it: But by no means can it be conceiv'd that the Emperor wou'd have been beholden to the Bishops for the doing of it: Especially since the charge of High treason lay against Athanasius: In which case Doctor HodyPag. 10. tells us, That if Cornelius had been depos'd by Decius, we have all the reason in the world to believe, that his deprivation would have been lookt upon by St. Cyprian as very reasonable and just, and that that great Archbishop would have submitted to it: Though neither Constantius nor Constantine were aware that they had any such power: Nor would Athanasius have submitted to it, if they executed it upon him. And surely, the Sun is not clearer at high noon, then that these two Emperors supremacies were not conceiv'd to instruct and enable them for it: Or, which is more, that the then Christian World did not believe it self oblig'd to comply with them, if they had usurped it. It was not very long after the Council of Antioch, that the Council of Sardica wholly clear'd and acquitted Athanasius: AndSocrat. l. 2. c. 11. 14 18. Theod. l. 2. c. 5. 11, 12. Soz. l. 3. c. 19. Gregorius dying within some few years, he was partly, by the intercession, and partly, by the threats of Constans (who plainly told him that he would otherwise make War against him) call'd home by Constantius, and receiv'd by him, and the Church, with great joy; but into the City of Alexandria in triumph: And coming in his way to Jerusalem, Maximus, who was Bishop there, called a Synod, at which all the Bishops of Palestine, who had subscrib'd to his banishment, except two confessed their fault in doing of it, and that they were forced to it, and upon their satisfaction, and desire, he receiv'd them into Communion with him.Socrat. l. 2. c. 20, 21. Theod. l. 2. c. 12, 13. But alas! all this was like the morning dew, which vanishes away: ForAthan. Apol. p. 8.25. Socrat. l. 2. c. 19. Constans died soon after, and Magnentius rebell'd, and this gave fresh occasion, and
new courage, to that black combination of the Eusebians, Eunuchs, and Courtiers, to rally upon Athanasius; who accus'd him to Constantius for making enmity betwixt him and his Brother Constans, and siding with the Tyrant Magnentius; they pursu'd their malice home, reinforcing the old, and bringing new in∣formations against him; and a greater persecution then the former, was raised upon the Catholicks:Ammian Mar∣cel. l. 15. Constantius being pre∣par'd for it by an excess of pride and haughtiness, when the World so vastly enlarg'd his Empire, and he had subdued Mag∣nentius; so that the Homo♉sian Bishops were banisht, and Atha∣nasius condemn'd to die, but heTheod. supra. miraculously escaped: Yet that did not serve their turn, unless his spiritual deprivation, which had been denounc'd at Tyre, was confirm'd, and a di∣vorce be made for ever betwixt him, and his Church and Peo∣ple of Alexandria. Now, I do here again demand of our Ad∣versaries: Did Constantius attempt to do this by his own power as Emperor, or was he at this time, aware of that Supremacy, which Doctor Hody invests him, and his Predecessors, even Diocletian, withal, enabling him to dissolve the relation betwixt a Bishop and his Flock, and make way for a Successor to be brought in upon him? His two Brothers were now dead, and he was a kind of Universal Monarch; his enemies were under his feet;Ibid. supra. Ammianus Marcellinus says, that he was hereupon, so highly exalted in the opinion of his own Power, that, in dictating to others what he would have them to write,Eternitatem meam aliquoties subscriberet ipse dictando: scri∣bendoque propria manu, orbis totius se Dominum appellaret. he sometimes whisper'd, My Eternity: And when he wrote with his own hand, he would name himself the Lord of the whole Earth: But it seems he was not sensible that his Soveraign Coercive Power did instruct him to remove a Bishop, or to place one in a full See; but wanted a Doctor Hody to inform him of that Imperial Right; who attain'd beyond his Eu∣sebians in that point, tho' they are known to be pretty good Artists: And knowing no other power but the Church's, whereby he might effectually take Athanasius from his See, for that end he call'd another Synod atSocrat. l. 2. c. 29. a Theod. H.E.l. 20. c. 15. Soz. l. 4. c. 8. Millane in Italy, of the Eastern and Western Bishops; not to make a new Proscription against Atha∣nasius; but they being there convened, that he might (using his old Methods) force them to assent to the abdica∣tion which was made by those unjust Judges,. against certain Bishops in the Council of Tyre; amongst whom Athanasius was one; who
would thereby be effectually cast out of the Church, and he gain the advantage of the Authority and Corroboration of the We∣stern Bishops, for what had been done in that Synod against that great Alexandrian Prelate; but especially the Authority of the Bishop of Rome; whose absence from that and the Antiochian Synod, (in which last the Tyrian proceedings were confirm'd) was pleaded by some, for the invalidating the force of them both. L. 15. p 75, 76. Ed Lugdun. in 12 mo.Ammianus Marcellinus gives a very good account of Con∣stantius's calling that Synod, (tho' he represents Athanasius as a Conjurer at the same time: For which he is so much the more excusable, since Hadriamus the Emperor,Nemo Chri∣stianorum Pres∣byter non Ma∣thematicus non auruspex in Favii vopisci Saturnino. characterizeth every Bishop in Aegypt as such) but that account is to this effect: That Athanasius being deposed by a Synod, and Constantius re∣quiring Liberius Bishop of Rome, to subscribe unto it, but he re∣fusing; Id enim ille, Athanasio infensus, licet sciret impletum, tamen Authoritate qua potiuntur eternae urbis Episcopi, firmari desiderio nitebatur ardenti. Tho' he knew his Deposition was com∣plete, being made by two Councils, one of Tyre, and the other of Antioch, yet he very much desir'd to have it confirm'd by the Bi∣shop of Rome: In order to which, he call'd all the Western Bishops together at Millane, by which means he expected to have the advan∣tage of prevailing, through his Power and menaces, managed by his Courtiers and Eusebians over Liberius, together with the rest; and obtain their assent. And this is a full vindication of Constantius's sence of the necessity of a Church Power for the effecting Athanasius's deposition; and of his own incompetency to have done without it. I know the Romanist Doctors say; that he so solicitously re∣quir'd Liberius's consent, because neither the Synod of Millane, nor those of Tyre and Antioch, nor twenty more, were, or would be valid, without the concurrence of the Bishop of Rome: And they hence assert his Universal Pastourship, as a thing so well known, that the Heathens were not ignorant of it: And Valesius doth it, in particular, in hisIn Socrat H.E. l. 2. c. 8. ed. Vales, l. 2. c. 13. Ed. Colon. &c. 5. Annotations upon this following Passage of Pope Julius; in which he contends, that they ought to have called him to the Council of Antioch, since the Church Canon forbids any Decree to be made without the Bishop of Rome. But, if they have any bottom from this Ca∣non for that assertion, it seems very apparent that they have none from Ammianus, in the above cited place: For he there
says, (sciret impletum) that Constantius, was very well satisfid with the validity of Athanasius's Synodical Deposition, in the Synods of Tyre and Antioch; and his great desire to have the Bishop of Rome's concurrence in it, was not because he believ'd him to have, Potestatem privativam, a power to null and render it ineffectual; but cumulativam, a power to add strength and vigor to it, as the first and most potent Bishop in Christen∣dom. And, as to Julius's plea (to say some thing of it) I am well assur'd that there was no such universal Canon in those days, because there is none such extant, nor any footsteps of it. And if we consult the Epistle at large, in Athanasius's secondPag. 744. Apology, we shall find, that when he pleads a Custome, ut nobis primum scribatur, ut hinc quod justum est definiri possit, That the Bishop of Rome should be first wrote unto, and the Definitions come from him; he contends only for the Authority of the present Roman Synod, which he had then call'd, for the deciding Athanasius's cause; to which the Eusebians refus'd to comeAthanas. de Synod. Ep. ad Slita. pag. 818, 819. upon trifling reasons: Neither, I say, will any Church Law or Practice be found in those early day, which makes it unlawful for a Metropolitan to have a Synod, where the Bishop of Rome is not present, or, if he has not notice of it: Within a few years after the Council of Antioch, there was a Law made in the Sardican Synod, That if any Bishop found himself injur'd by his Comprovincial, he might ap∣peal to the Bishop of Rome, and that his determination should be good: but how could they appeal to him, if he was to be present in every Provincial Synod? Or what good would it do them? And this possibly might be the Law of the Church, which Julius is said, inL. 2. c: 4: . Theodorit, to have followed, when he call'd Athanasius, and the Eusebians (they having inform'd Julius against him) to Rome, that Athanasius might there plead his cause before them; but this supposes some Provincial Synod, in which the Bishop of Rome had never sat as a Judge: So far is it from for∣bidding them: Besides Julius requires the Eusebians to bring their cause before him to Rome, by reason of its greater note, and as a City of greater eminency in the World, according to the account, we have of his Epistle in Athaasius.Apolog. pag. 744. But what ever the advantage was which Constantius promised himself in calling this Council of Millane, and having the Bi∣shop of Rome's presence in it, he was wholly bawk'd of it, and it came to nothing: For very few of the Eastern BishopsSocrat. Soz. ibid. supra. ap∣pear'd,
by reason of the great age of some of them, and the great length of the Journey; which pretence kept others away: But above three hundred Bishops came to it from the West, who soon over rul'd those few Orientals that were present; and requir'd that the Sentence which had been pro∣nounc'd against Athanasius at Tyre, should be confirm'd; the Occidentals alledging that these accusations which they brought against him were false and scandalous, and managed with a design to over-throw the Nicene Faith: and upon this the Council was dissolved. But Constantius, like a she Bear bereav'd of her whelps, takes hence an opportunity to exercise his further rage and arbitrariness upon the Church; and, as we observ'd a little before out of Ammianus, that he had wrote himself Lord of the whole Earth, and assumed the attribute of eternity, he now makes him self Lord of the things in Heaven, which the Father committed to the Son, and the Son to the Church Officers; without any regard to the contrary practice of his Father Con∣stantine, and the Constitution of the Empire, or, which is more to the Institution and Practice of the Church of God. And asEp. ad solitar. vitam agentes. p. 861. Vid. Sulpit Se∣ver. l. 2. Et Hilar. lib. ad Constan∣tium in fine. Athanasius gives us the account, He made his Palace the Tribunal, for the hearing of spiritual causes, and himself the Chief Judge of them: and when he saw the Accusers to be perplexed, and at a stand, himself helped them out; and, through his power, those that where falsly accused had not liberty to speak for themselves: And par∣ticularly, when the Catholick Bishops made it to appear, thatAthnas. ibid. supra p. 821. Atha∣nasius was innocent, because Valens and Ursacius, who were his ac∣cusers, had repented, and that their evidence ought not to be receiv'd; rising up he said, I am Athanasius's Accuser, believe them in my Name. And when Paulinus Bishop of Trevers, Lucifer of Sardinia, Eusebius of Versellis, Dionysius of Millane and (as Theodorit says) Liberius of Rome, were call'd before him, and commanded by him to subscribe to his Imperial Sentence against Athanasius, they being amazed at his new measures, and telling him that they were not according to the Ecclesiastical Canon, he immediatly adjoyn'd, ‖ that which I will is to be a Law: Either obey me, as the Bishops of Syria have done, or I'le banish you also: And thus in his own Right and Name, Athanasius was remov'd, with the just now mention'd Catholick Bishops: Of which Socrates, Theodorit, and Sozomen, gives us an account. Neither was Constantius more willing and forwar'd to this usur∣pation, then his Eusebians, Eunuchs, and Courtiers were to own
and second him in it: And, accordingly, we find in Athana∣siusEp. de Sn. Armin. & Se∣leuci. p. 870. 871. cited byƲti supra l. 2. ▪ 29. versus medium. Socrates, that, instead of Christ, they named another Lord, viz. Constantius: And at the same time that they denied the Son of God to be eternal, they said the Emperor was eternal; he being the man who gave strength to their ungodliness—and, as the Cata∣phrigians write Maximilla and Montanus, so, these write Con∣stantius, their Master, instead of Christ: And surely they had need, as the Montanists before them, to have had a new Prophesy to in∣struct them in these things; since, according to the old one, it is Christ's peculiar, as the Mediator, to purchase a Church, and govern it, as well as to satisfy for the sins of it: the latter of which was executed once for all upon the Cross; and the former is alwaies to be excuted; but never by any, unless the right and power to do it be first deriv'd in a just succession, unto them, from him that1 Cor. 1.13. was crucified. This is the first time that this judicial Power (deriv'd only by Christ on his Apostles, and their Successors, the Bishops) hath been assum'd by the Empire, as such: And these time serving Eusebians are the first, likewise, (of any that call'd themselves Bishops) who recognized, and submitted to it, and believ'd it to be competent, of it self alone, and by its own virtue and influence to make way for a Successor, by a Lay deprivation, so as the relation and dependance between a Bishop and his people should be broken off, and cease, upon it. Under what circum∣stances, and by what motives, it was done, hath been abundantly made to appear: They are surely very black and detestable. And if Doctor Hody, and his party, shall think fit to call them their Praecentors, and examples, in the case of their present Suc∣cessors into full Sees; (whether they allow their proceedings to be unjust, or uncanonical, or otherwise, it matters not: Their principles will bear them out the one way, as well as the other.) Much good may they do them: I know others, and as good as they, that have neither allow'd their actions to be lawful, nor to be any just presidents to themselves, or others, but have despised and rejected them: Of whom I here give this ac∣count. No less a man then Athanasius is one of them: Who painy tells Constantius,Ep. ad Star. p. 845. That he therein undertakes the protection of a wicked Religion, and breaks the Ordinance of Christ: When was it heard from the beginning of the World, that the Church's Sentence did receive its Authority from the Emperor? Or when was the Emperor's
Verdict receiv'd for Judgment? There have been many Synods, and many Church-Sentences; but the Fathers never endeavour'd to engage the Prince in them, nor hath the Prince himself been curious concerning them. He, again, thus says of Constantius: What hath he omitted here, which doth not belong to Antichrist? Or what more can he do when he shall come? Or will he not find at his coming, an expedite way made ready by these doings for the exercise of his deceits?bid. p. 80, 861 Since he has made his Palace the Tribunal for the hearing those causes, and himself the Chief Prince of them, which belong'd to the place of Ecclesiastical cognizance.—That the Judgment is not of a Ro∣man, or Civil, Business, in which his arbitratory Decision may be acquiescd in, as he is an Emperor, but of a Bishop to which his pre∣rogative does dot extend. And farther: These grievances are very excessive, and the practice of him alone who hath the Image of Antichrist: For who is it that, seeing him, by his Decrees, to make himself a Prince of the Bishops, and to preside in Ecclesiastical Judicatures, may not justly say, that he is the very same Abomination of Desolation,Ibib p 862. which was fore∣told by the Prophet Daniel? For, when he puts on the garment of Christianity, and enters into the holy Places, and sitting there, lays wast the Churches, abrogating the Canons, and, by force, compelling that his Decrees do obtain; who, at any time, shall dare to say, that this is a peaceable time among Christians? And not rather a Persecution, and such a Persecution as hath not been before, and perhaps, no one hath made but that Son of iniquity. I cannot forbear to add these following resentments which the most holy Athanasius had upon the same occa∣sion. Truth is not to be preach'd by swords and darts, and a military hand; but by perswading and consulting: But, what freedom of perswading is there, where there is a fear of the Emperor? Or what Consultation is that,Ibid. p. 831. in which he that contradicts hath banishment or death for his rewards?—He, (i. e. Constantius) guided by no reason, compels all by force and power: So that it is evident to all Men, that their Sentence is not Divine, but Humane: And they indeed, have no King but Caesar: For they do what they think fit in the Church by him. Why doth he pretend to have regard to the Ecclesiastical Canon, who contrives to do all things against it? What Canon is that which provides,Ibid. p. 844. that he who is to be a Bishop shall be sent out of the
Palace? Or what kind of Canon is that, which licenses Souldiers to invade the Churches? Or instructs the Secular Officers, and the Eunuchs, who have no reason, to Lord it over the Churches? And to publish, by an Edict, the Sentences of those who are Bishops in name only? If the Church judgeth these things, what can the Emperor have in common with her? And if the threats of the Emperor guid all, what need is there of Bishops in name only?Ibid. p. . Was it ever known from the beginning of the World, that the Sentence of the Church had its Authority from the Emperor? He hath done an unheard of thing in Rome, .Ibid. p. . It is truly a representation of the communion of Antichrist: And, appointing his Palace, in stead of the Church, and three Eunuchs to be present in the place of the Believers, and three of his Scout Bishops, one Felix forsooth, was made a Bishop, worthy of them. We may see, that Athanasius had not the same opinion of Felix as Bishop of Rome that Doctor Hody has. The eminently renown'd Hosius was particularly concern'd upon the same account; and opposed Constantius with no less zeal and courage, then Athanasius did: whose advice to him,Ibid. p. 639. and admonition, upon his assuming the deposing Power, we have thus transmitted to us by Athanasius. Pray cease and remember that thou art mortal: Fear the Day of Judgement: Keep thy self pure for that day: Do not concern thy self in Ecclesiastical affairs, nor command us in this nature: But rather learn those things of us. God hath committed to thee the Empire; and he has intrusted us with those things that belong to the Church: And as, he who with malignant eyes reproacheth thy Empire, opposeth the Divine Ordinan∣ce; so, do thou beware least drawing to thee those things which be∣long to the Church, thou becomest thereby, lyable to a great guilt. It is written, give those things unto Caesar which are Caesar's, and those things which are God's unto God, It is neither lawful for us, O Em∣peror, to hold the earthly Empire, neither hast thou the power of holy things, I write these things out of my care of thy souls health. And the abovemention'd five great Bishops of Rome, Vercellis, Trevers, Sardinia, and Millane, did not spare him neither, when they argued the point with him, in his Palace:Ibid. p. 831. As we have it also in Athanasius. But they told him plainly, That he was un∣presidented, in that he acted so notoriously against the Church Laws: That the Kingdom which he possessed, was not his, but God's; of whom he receiv'd it: And that he is to be fear'd, least he suddenly take that
away from him which he had given him: They denounc'd the day of Judgment against him; and advised him, that he would not cor∣rupt the Ecclesiastick affairs, nor mingle the Roman Empire with the Church Constitutions; nor introduce the Arian Heresy into the Church of God. To whichH. E l. 2. c. 18. Theodorit adds; that when Constantius would have forced them, in his Palace, to give their consent to Athanasius's abdication, and to make a new Faith; the foremention'd Bi∣shops not only refused, but openly argu'd, and told him, that he  commanded unjust and ungodly things: for which he citesApol. 2. Athanasius as a concurring Authority. And says, that he used these following words among others, upon the occasion of the Emperor's invading the Church rights: , who can remember these things? &c. And now, these great Authorities seem to make it very plain, that the Catholicks, at this time of day, (for surely we may conclude them to have been all of the same mind with these above named) did not place this custome and Law of the Church, by which the fixing a Bishop in his See, and the continuing him there, or removing him, and making way, upon his removal, for a Successor, is subjected in Church hands, and that the Prince is not permitted to perform it without them: Nothing, I say, seems more plain, then that these Christians did not place these actions, I say they did not place them amongst some other indif∣ferences in her polity, which were not so sacred and indefeisable, but that she readily superceded, nay Sacrificed, them, whensoever necessity requir'd it, to the peace and tranquility of the Church: But on the contrary, that their observation was immutably retain'd by them, tho' the worst of consequences did attend it, from any, either Soveraign, Coercive Power, or irresiscible Party; the evils being greater, by a relaxation, and complyance, then any future good that can possibly accrue unto the Church of God. Surely the exercise of that power, the violation of which is a breach of the Ordinance of Christ, the work of Antichrist, unjust and ungodly, unpre∣sidented by its novelty, and not to be receiv'd into a Christians thoughts, (for as such they characterize it, and worse, in the foremention'd citations) is not an indifferent thing; nor can they, who have so stigmatized it, be conceiv'd to have thought it a matter of so little moment, as Doctor Hody does: Surely these first Christians did not think the outward peace and tranquillity of the Church to be an equivalent for the damage she would receive, by such a secular
Ministration, if vouch'd, and submitted to, by them. What per∣secutions did they not suffer, and patiently undergo, in the loss of their Estates and Liberties, nay in their capacities of offi∣ciating to their people in holy things, rather than yeild in this point? And though we cannot prove, that any one Bishop in the three first Centuries was disown'd by the Church, because he was put into the place of another deposed by the civil authority, (as the Doctor un∣reasonably demands of us) because no one Emperor, within that space of time did act such a work of Antichrist: Yet since the Doctor has extended his Epoche, in anotherTo the Reader. place, to this day: We can prove to the contrary, and that it has been done over and over again by more than one Bishop, since these following most eminent Bishops in the fourth Century, viz. Liberius, Athanasius, Paulinus, Lucifer Calaritanus, Eusebius, and Dionysius, are recorded to have disown'd their Successors plac'd upon them by Constan∣tius, who had unjustly and uncanonically depriv'd them, because he depriv'd them meerly by a secular Force, believing it in∣sufficient to void a See, tho' that force be Sovereign, Coercive and Irresistible: (As surely Constantius's arm was) and if incompetent to effect a just vacancy, then incompetent also to legitimate a Succession upon it. SECT. II. I Am very well assured that Doctor Hody will here reply, as he does upon several other occasions and say; that though the deprivation of the foremention'd Bishops was unjust and uncanonical, yet that was not the reason, why those Bishops refus'd to acknowledg and submit unto it, and to the Successors which were placed over them: But because those Successors were Arians: If they had been Orthodox, they would have acquiesced and communicated with them. But this will be found one of the Doctor's mistakes, which he is frequently guilty of. ForL, 2. c. 15. Theodorit says in express words, that the Synod of Millane was conveen'd on purpose to give credit and Authority to Athanasius's deposition, in the Synod of Tyre. And the other two Historians say the same in effect: But when Constantius found that he was not able to carry it, the Western Bishops running as one man against it, he remov'd the Synod into his Palace, resolving to carry it by his own Authority and Power: And in the virtue of it, he there depos'd Athanasius with a non obstante; although the Law, the
Canons, Justice, and all the Western Bishops, were against it, and disallow'd it: And this is the usurped right and power, which the true Church of God, there, and then, opposed, and protested against: not fearing the wrath of the King, nor the persecutions, which fell upon them, by reason of it. For the further clearing of this point, not only in relation to the Council of Millane, but to all the Councils which were be∣tween it and the Council of Nicea, and a while after it; in which the EusebiansVid. Socrat. l. 1. c. 19. Theod. , 1. c. 14. Jer. adv. Lucifer. plaid their parts against Athanasius, and the Ca∣tholick Bishops, which adher'd unto him; I do here undertake to prove, that from the time that Arianism was condemn'd, and cast out of the Church, by the Fathers of the Council of Nicea, (upon which Condemnation, not only the Bishops which had opposed the Council, but Arius himself, came in, and subscrib'd to the Article of one Substance, and renounc'd their opposite he∣resy) until some little time after the Council of Millane, Arianism was not openly asserted and maintained in any of those Councils, held within that interval, much less was it restor'd, setled and made Law, in the Church and Empire; as the Doctrine of the eternal Generation had been establisht before, and was, after Va∣lens's Persecution, when Theodosius corroborated the Nicene Faith, by his secular arm, as Constantine did, upon that Council's de∣claring for it: But on the contrary, Constantius and every single Bishop, some time or other; and every Council alwaies, if it did any thing concerning it, continued in appearance to abhor it: And accordingly, declar'd and protested against it. And professed and maintain'd the coessential and coeternal Nature of the Father and the Son, in the full sense and importance, of the Nicene Faith: They only omitted the word  or consub∣stantial; but without making any exceptions against it. And they thought (at least pretended, that, since the thing and My∣stery were receiv'd, the expression and explication might make disputes, but would add nothing, in reality to it. And what ever else Constantine, Constantius, and their Eusebius, contriv'd and practised against Athanasius, was in order to his Deposition, and final removing, from his Ministery, and Church, at Alexan∣dria, which thing they endeavour'd to effect, not by articling against him as an Homo♉sian; they did not once attempt it; but by arraigning him as one, That imposed tribute on she Emperor's Subjects; that was a traytor and rebel to Constantius, in that he supply'd one Philumenus with mony, who was his enemy; that he made
enmity betwixt him and his Brother Constans, and assisted Mag∣nentius, the Tyrant, against him; that one time, he stopp'd the gift of corn which the Emperors liberality bestow'd on Constantinople, and was to come from Egypt; another time converted it to his own use; that he murder'd Arsenius, and practic'd Magick; that he violently entred into Ischyras's Chappel, and broke his consecrated Chalice; violated the Canons of the Church; was guilty of Incontinency; &c. Of which our Histories have given an account at large. And as they proceeded upon one, or more of these, when they actually de∣pos'd him, and put Gregorius in his Chair; so, when he refus'd to submit to their Sentence, and own the Successor, which they put upon him, and the Catholick Bishops, his Brethren, united with him in it; it was because they lookt upon his removal to be unjust and uncanonical; whether as executed by their Bi∣shops in their Synod, or as executed by the Emperor, apar from them; and in both respects to be incompetent. And it was upon this account, that Athanasius suffer'd exile under Con∣stantine; and he with the other Bishops, afterwards underwent those heavy persecutions under Comstantius, not inferior to the Decian and Diocletian cruelties; only, they were not capital: These holy Prelates believing themselves oblig'd to resist even unto Blood, in defence and maintenance of the rightful Succession, according to the rules of the Church, as in defence and mainte∣nance of the Nicene Faith: And that they might no more dispense with a Successor upon other terms, then those which the Church allows, then with a false article in their Creed: And, also, that neither a Synod, nor the Empire, though Christian, could legitimate the one, more then the other: And that every Depri∣vation which is unjust and uncanonical, is likewise incompetent, and does not oblige the Colledge of Bishops to own or submit to it: (though Doctor Hody is of another mind) they, herein, treading in the steps of the Ancient Church before Constantine, of which I may hereafter give an account. And now, if this be made appear, and prov'd; as I am well assur'd it may, by notorious and undeniable matter of fact in Hi∣story: (the first part of it, relating to the Arianisme of that time, was started, and asserted, by a late and learned BishopBishop Parke of Religion and Loyalty. part. 2 of our own, but not managed by him with our present design) there will be no appearing ground left, that the great Alexandrian Primate and his Catholick Brethren, should plead the Arianism of the Succession, as the reason why they did not submit to their
Deprivations, and receive their imposed Successors: But no man of common sense, can apprehend that they pleaded it (if they did at all) as the only reason; or can think, but that the injustice, and incompetency, of the whole, was a sufficient bar to their closing with, and sumission to it. And this I shall make appear, by proving the matter of fact: Which I undertake to do, as follows. And, First: When the Synod which conveen'd at Jerusalem in the days of Constantine, for the Dedication of a Church, which that Religious Emperour had built there; the Fathers of which it consisted, who represented the Churches of Macedonia, Pan∣nonia, Mysia, Persia, Bythinia, Thrace, Cilicia, Cappadocia, Siria, Mesopotamia, Phenitia, Arabia, Palestine, Egypt, Africa, and The∣bes, according toDe Vita Con∣stantini, l. 4. c. 43. Eusebius's ennumeration of them: These Bishops (I say) receiv'd, indeed, Arius into the Communion of their respectiveSocrat. l. 1. c. 22. Churches, being directed, by Constantine's Letters, to do it: But it was upon the supposed truth of his Re∣pentance, agreeable to the Nicene Faith. And the Euzoian Creed, which he and EuzoiusSoz. l. 2. c. 26, 27. offer'd for their purgation, must be own'd to bear a Catholick sense; though it was so slighly compos'd, that it was interpretable on either side;Ibid. as Sozomen has well taken notice; and says it was the sense of others besides himself: Whther the Synod had a just insight into it, or were willing to connive, or were too much biassed by Con∣stantine's Letters; as he was too much influenced by his SisterIbid. Constantia, and her Arian Presbyter; it seems that the Clergy of AlexandriaAthanas. de Sn d. p 890. were all aware of the dangerous consequence of receiving him upon that Creed: And so wasSoz. supra. c. 28. Alexander their Bishop; he being afterwards, at Constantinople, when Arius came hither, on the same Arrant; they supposing the Nicene Decision to be directly over thrown by it, because  was left out. And Athanasius had not much better thoughts of it; but says, that the SynodIbid. de Sy∣nodis, p. 841. approv'd and praised , all Arius's naughty sentiments: And that no less was design'd, by the Eusebians, in laying their plot for their after proceedings against himself, and the other Bishops, then the restoring Arius Person, and introducing his Heresy: But his wondeful death in a Jakes, immediately following, put a stop to it for a time, and , (as SozomenIbid. supra. c. 28. observes) God himself excommunicated him from the Communion of the Faith∣ful. But notwithstanding all this,Supra de Synodis. Athanasius there confesses
that Arius's Party did declare only their good will; , and did not appear above board: though their plot was thorowly seen into by thinking men: And themselves were sensible of it: And, it being not then ripe, nor for their ad∣vantage openly to appear, and directly state their case, and produce their proofs, in order to a palliation, and the better recommending themselves, they procure a new Synod at Antioch, in which , they make several alterations, and here begins that trade which they manag'd by steps: And at length obtain'd their end: As I am to give an account. The plain truth is; of which I will here again give an ac∣count, in part, tho' I have done it but a leaf or two before; as Arius's subscription did no wayes come from his heart, but was altogether forc'd, and hypocritical: Perhaps no man that pretended to integrity acted such a part before, or since, as he did, when he made it; according to the account whichH. E. l. 1. c. 25. So∣crates gives of it, which is this: That he wrote his Hretical Thesis in a Paper, and holding it under his m at the time he subscrib'd, he swore he did truly, and without any reserve, think as he had written: meaning, in his paper, which he had then under his arm; so he took no other cae in his Creed, but to regain and fix himself in Constantine's favour; and have better opportunity, under his protection, to eject Athanasius, and some other Catho∣lick Bishops, and place the most confiding of his own faction in the chief Government of the Church, as the most expeditious, and effectual course (they could not hope to do it by other means) to retrieve and establish his Arianism, and make them∣selves heads of the Succession; agreeably to the pot which was laid byIbid. c. 10. 18. Eusebius of Nicomedia and Theognis, immediatly upon their return from Banishment: the accomplishment of which Arius did not live to see,Ibid. c. 25. he being prevented by a miraculous death; But Eusebius, Theognis, Maris, Valens, Ursacius, with others of that black combination, brought it to pass in some measure, in the latter end of Constantius's Reign. To speak all in one word: The main thing above board, on the Eusebians side, was to remove the foremention'd Prelates: Their own beloved Arianism was not it: And the Catholicks, on the other side, contended, with no less industry and zeal, but with btter Arguments, and more integrity, to keep them in, who all along, remonstrated to their Deprivations, as imcompetent un∣canonical, unjust, and invalid, and openly declar'd that they
ought to maintain and adhere to their lawful Bishops and lawful Succession, and oppose two Bishops in one District, upon the same ground that they stand engag'd to maintain and adhere to the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints. The Eusebians, also, maintain'd their own psuedo-Bishops with the like vigor, and constancy, and for the same reasons. I will only add, that their contrefeit subscription to the Catholick Truth, designing thereby to root it out, puts me in mind of the advice I have heard a great man of our Natiom, gave to Mr. Cotton of Boston, when he came to him, and made complaint that his conscience would not give him leave to comply with the Church's Laws; and its persecutions would, other waies, be so great that he could not endure them; whereupon he had resolv'd to go into New England: Which advice was this: Pish, you are a fool; stay and be a Dean or a Bishop, and thus you will have better oppor∣tunity, and more effectually ruine its Hierarchy: And I do heartily wish that the Church of God had had fewer such false friends of old, especially in the days of Constantius; and since in our Church of England: Even, at present, that too many of the same com∣plexion, were not lodg'd in her bowels. But I cannot omit taking notice, howSpra de vlt. Constant. l. 4. c. 43. Eusebius makes the Church of Egypt to appear, by its Bishops, in the foremention'd Synod of Jerusalem, and concur with it in Arius's reception: Whereas that Councils Synodical Epistle (as it is inSupra de Sy∣nodis. Athanasius) to Alexandria, Egypt, Thebais, Libia, and the rest of that Diocess, solicits the Egyptian Churches to a complyance with its Deter∣minations, and receive Arius, which is a full evidence that they were not at the Council. Besides, Sozomen says expressly, that the Alexandrian Church, together with the Constantinopolitan, did actually deny to receive him, as I have just now observ'd: AndAr. 335. num. 42. Baronius (though he does not insist on it, as his evidence) may not have observ'd amiss, when he remarques, that Eusebius hath given a wrong account of the Bishops in the Jerosolymitan Synod, and ostentatiouslly made their number greater then it was, thereby to gain a reputation to it, and render Arius's re∣ception more unanimous and authorative. For, though Eusebius was a good man, and subscrib'd conscientiously to the Nicene Faith, and its particular explication, in obedience to the Church of God; yet, as we must allow that he was so much an Arian, as to think, that the word Consubstantial had been better left out: And to have desir'd the Church's compliance, and to represent
it as authorative as he could; and Arius's reception, without that word; so it cannot be denied, but that it lessens his reputa∣tion, as an Historian, by his mistaking the account: And we may have some reason to doubt whether he may not have been mi∣staken, as to some other Churches, which he avers to have been in the Synod; and to believe, that the Synod might consist of fewer Bishops, to a greater quantity, and be less authorative, then he would have us believe it had. Though our Annalist says, that the greatest part of the Bishops, who were at the Synod, were for the Hom♉sian explication, but the Eusebians met after the Synod broke up, and determin'd for their own advantage; and the Synod hath been, for that reason, esteem'd a convention, and not a legitimate Council. Again when the case of Eustathius, Bishop of Antioch, was a little after contested, in a Council held in that City; where he was ab∣dicated and banish'd by the Eusebians, and the Empire, (whether it was done in Constantine's or Constantius's days, is not material at present) the crimes which were objected, and pretendedly prov'd against him, were, 1. Sabellianism. 2. Incontinency. 3. Tyranny: And though he was a zealous contender for the Nicene Faith, and the Homo♉sian explication of it, not inferior to Athanasius,Athanas. ad. Solitar. p. 812. Socrat. l. 1. c. 18. Theod. l. 1. c. 21. Soz. l. 2. c. 17, 18. that was not laid to his charge: But on the contrary, they proceeded against him as a perverter of it, by his Sabelliauism: And when Eustathius accus'd Eusebius Panphilius (betwixt which two the dispute was managed) because of his violation of the Homo♉sian Article, Eusebius return'd the accusation upon him, and they mu∣tually purg'd themselves: And since a Party in Antioch adher'd to Eustathius, notwithstanding his pretended deposition, which, for that reason, were call'd Eustathians, and refus'd to communi∣cate with those Successors whom the Eusebians appointed; shall we think that they refus'd, because they were Arians, when Arianism was disown'd by those Eusebians, at that time: And they were as shy in communicating with them, as the Eustathians were:In vita Const. l 3. c. 60. Especially, since Constantine gives this character of Sophronius, a Presbyter of Cesarea, and Georgius, another of Arethusa, as,H. E. l. 1. c. 22. , of an approv'd Faith; and he then recom∣mended them for the Bishoprick of Antioch, upon Eusbius's re∣fusal of it; and the fomer was actually constituted Bishop there. And though these Successors were asrsed, by common same, h the character of Arians, asL.  Theodort tells us; and Athanasius  him intimates s much; yet since they then acted and
approv'd themselves otherwise, that could not be given by the Eustathians as the reason why they separated from them: nor did the Catholicks so strictly insist upon the word , un∣less it visibly appear'd, that the Faith was struck at, by its omis∣sion: So, this alone seems to be the reason why the Catholicks did not communicate with them; viz. because Eustathius had been unjustly remov'd, and they were not Successors according to the rules which the Church requires; but Seconds, in a full See. And Theodorit, in the above mention'd Chapter, says little less: Where he tells us, , many that chose to serve God in the right way, and according to his own Rules of worship, both of the Clergy and Laity, lest the Ecclesiastical Conventions, and congregated among themselves; who therefore were call'd Eustathians: For we know the Eusebians omitting the word , but retaining the Eternal Generation, did not make any change in the Worship, or publick Service; and the Eustathians and Eusebians might at this time of day, have assem∣bled together, without any disadvantage to one another, upon that account. I am very apt to think, that Eusebius Pamphilus might refuse the Bishoprick of Antioch upon the account of the Schism; when, upon Eustathius's Deposition, it was offer'd him by the Bishops and Constantine: And perhaps, the manner of Eustathius's re∣moval was worse than it is represented, in our Historians short account of it; and the secular Force contributed too much to it, as it did to Athanasius's removal, in the Council of Tyre; and this might, in part, keep Eusebius out of it; for he was, certainly, a good man, as to the main: But the most likely reason of his refusing it was, because his receiving it, would not have compor∣ted with the Church principle of one Bishop in one See; nor with the Ancients Judgment, upon Novatianus's assuming Cornelius's Chair, and violating that principle; of which we have an ac∣count from himself in his Church History. Besides; theSoz. l. 2. c. 18. Euseb. de vita Constantini lib. 3. c. 58, 59. reason for which he is said to have refused it seems too slender; as, because the Canon forbids a Bishop to remove from one Bishoprick to another: For that Prohibition was only accidental and temporal: Neither did the Church ever think her self indispensably oblig'd to its Observation.L. 5. c. 35. Socrates gives us an account, how several Bi∣shops have been translated: And he receives one of them fromL. 6. c. 9. Eusebius; and the thing is approv'd by him. And the same opi∣nion concerning the nullity of those Canons, which once pro∣vided,
that a Bishop should not be translated from one See to ano∣ther, continued in the Church till the days of Gregory Nazianzen; who calls them dead. * Carmin de vita s Ed. Paris. num. 155. Vide Schol. G. Billii in Locum. Laws, which expired long since, and then, laid no restraint upon him; when the Junior, Latitude Bishops, who had been Arians, and Catho¦licks, as the Empire protected them, objected them against him, in the second General Council at Con∣stantinople; as having been Bishop of Sasimos and Na∣zianzum; and their excess of envy and malice could not direct to any other plea, upon which they might, with any shew of justice, remove him from his Bishoprick of Constantinople, as they had remov'd Paulinus from Antioch before, bringing, by clamors and noyse, only, Flavianus into his Chair, when Pau∣linus was the legal Bishop there, by the Church Laws and settle∣ment; for which St. Gregory severely chastises them, a little be∣fore, in the same Poem; and it, possibly, might occasion, in some measure their present proceeding against him: But of this I have given some account already. Athanasius is the next man, upon whom the Eusebians make their effort, with a design to fling him out of his Church at Alexandria, as they had done Eustathius out of his Church at Antioch: And they were instigated to it, partly out of revenge, because he refused to receive Arius, as a Presbyter of the Church of Alexandria, being not well pleased with the Creed which he and Euzoius offer'd, tho' it did not oppose that of Nicea,Socrat. l. 1. c. 20. but only came short of it in some expressions: Of which I have just now given some account: But chiefly because he knew his re∣ception would be a leading and effectual step for the restoring their espoused Arianism, which they then retain'd with their old affections, tho' they outwardly renounc'd, and openly pro∣tested against it. And, in order to this, they prevail'd with Con∣stantine, upon their suggestions against Athanasius, as a notorious Criminal; and a Synod was call'd at Tyre; in which, by the corrupt dealings of the secular Officers, (of which I have already given some account) he was remov'd from his See, and the Emperor banish'd him upon it: But the Allegations which they made, and proceeded on, against him, were, for cutting off Arsenius's hand, &c. No matter of Faith was started,Vid. pag 66. much less canvassed and determined, nor accusation brought against him by reason of it: But the Faith then remain'd as before in the Council of Nicea, and the Eusebians embraced it in shew, and
this may easily be conceiv'd: for tho' Constantine was, at that time, too much influenced by his Sister Constantia, and her Arian Priest; yet, his complexion was too well known, to be suppos'd, as inclin'd to desert the Nicene Faith, and assert the Son a Crea∣ture, which the Eusebians knw very well; and their craft di∣rected them to accost Athanasius another way. And tho' Con∣stantine did banish Athanasius's Person, the Faction, as to that, pre∣vailing too much upon him; he was, notwithstanding, sensible of his innocency, as to what he was accused of: And his Son Constantine has told us,rat. l. 2. c. 2. that he did it as a means for his escape from the fury of his Persecutors. Upon Constantine's death, Constantius his Son, was possessed of the Eastern Government: And, what through his own inclination, and the incitation of his Eunuchs, Courtiers, and Eusebians; Arianism began to lift up its head, within that circuit: But the Western Empire continued resolute and inflexible for the Nicene Faith, which gave a curb to its growth:Socrat. ibid. sup. And Constantius was over-rul'd by the Letters which he receiv'd of his Brother Constantine, so that he gave leave that Athanasius might come home: Upon which the Eusebians were much discompos'd; but especially because he was receiv'd with a general welcome by all, not only at Alexandria, but in his way thither, except by themselves: and they did not permit him to enjoy the advantage of it long; but, soon after, obtain'd of Constantius that another Council was call'd at Antioch, the majority of which was of their own Fa∣ction: And having rallied up all the accusations they had laid to his charge at Tyre, and added some new ones, as That he re∣assum'd his Ministry at Alexandria, when the Synod, by which he was abdicated,Soz. l. 3. c. 5. had not restor'd him, that he occasion'd commotions and tumults in the City; they confirm'd his Tyrian deposition, and placed Gregorius in his Chair: But tho' they made four Creeds in this Council, or immediatly upon it; (for some think the two latter Creeds were made by the same Bishops, but not in the same Synod) and tho' we have good reason to believe, that they conven'd on purpose to overthrow the Nicene Faith: (so our Historians, and so the event, speaks it) Yet they there open∣lyl. 2. c. 7. , &c. protest, that they neither follow Arius, nor receive any other Faith besides that which was deliver'd from the beginning: And concludes the second and fourth Creeds with this Declaration.Socr. & Soz. ibid. supra. Athan. de Synod. Arim. & Se∣leuc. p. 893. 900. Hilar. de Synod P. 227. Ed. Basil. Let those be accursed that say, the Son was made of a non-ens, or of nothing; or of another subsistance, and not of God:
Or, that a time was, when the Son was not: Or a time, Or an age, before which he was born:. And though the four Creeds differ from one another in some things: The lowest of them is consistent with the Nicene Faith, and fully asserts the Eter∣nal Generation: But the second comes up to it in every thing; save that the word Consubstantial is omitted: It was subscrib'd by all the Eusebians, even by Acacius and his Complices, as we read inIbid p. 91. Athanasius; and by Gregory, though he was then but Bi∣shop electSoz. Ibid. of Alexandria, in their own ordering and account. It's here to be observ'd; that when Julius call'd a Synod at Rome, immediately upon this Synod at Antioch, which remov'd Athana∣sius, and there, i. e. in that Synod of Rome, restor'd him; that which Julius blames the Eusebians for, is not their Creeds; but their unjust and uncanonical ejectment of Athanasius, and settle∣ment of Gregorius in his See: and for removing, by the same in∣justice, the other Catholick Bishops that adher'd to him: As it may be seen at large, in Julius's Epistle upon that occasion, re∣corded byApolog. p. 739. Athanasius; and mention'd byL. 2. c. 13. Socrates andL. 2. c. 10. So∣zomen, in their Church Histories:Apolog. p. 907. Athanasius has well taken notice, upon the occasion of these several Creeds, and their va∣riations; that they made them on purpose, to have thereby an opportunity to serve their ambition; and by their loquacity, to draw away the simply ignorant; and conceal that Heresy which, in truth, they nourished: So far were they at that time, from openly professing themselves Arian Hereticks. Three years after this, the Orientals call'd another Synod at Antioch, and there presented a Creed to the Occidentals call'd , by reason of its great length: where they dnounce the same Anathema the precedeing Council did, against those that said, That the Son was made of nothing, or of another substance, and not of God. Or that a time or a scuum was, in wch he was not. And super added these following expositions: As not∣withstanding the Son is subjected to the Fathr and to God,. . we know him to be born of God according to nature, and Coeternal with God, the perfect and true God. And again or we know him to be not simply the Interpreter of the mind and thoughts of God, or the outward a∣nation of them, or the inward Word and Con∣ception
of his Mind, but the Word and Living God, existing in it self, and the Son of God, and Christ; and not existing with him in his foreknowledg, and conversing with his Father before all Ages, and administring to the whole Creation, but the true inexisting substantial word of the Father, and God of God. And farther; We believe him to be like the Father in all things. Which explications are a full indication they did believe aright in the Eternal Genera∣tion: And the Occidentals had no other objection against them, but their omitting the word , an account of which we have inL. 2. c. 15. Socrates andL. 3. c. 10. Sozomen. The Sardican Council comes next: which was conveen'd chiefly for the sake of Athanasius, and his abdicated Brethren, whom it restor'd: And it also ejected their Intruders: But the Eusebians very politickly, absented themselves, being aware that the Catholicks were the far greater number: And that they could not have the assistance of the secular Arm, which they had enjoy'd in other Synods: As the account is given us in the Synodical Epistle which the Council wrote, Omnibus ubique Epis∣copis, &c. And may be seen inApol. 2. p. 757. Athanasius,l. 2. c. 16. Socrates,l. 2. c. 10. So∣zomen andl. 2. c. 7, 8. Theodorit:Ibid. Theodorit says that they made new ex∣positions of Faith in this Sardican Synod, andl. 3. c. 11. Sozomen men∣tions the same. But it is plain from Athanasius, that those new Creeds they speak of were forgeries, andEp. ad Antio∣chenses. p. 576. he forbids the Antiochians to read them: and adds, that the Synod made a Law, which commands, that no one tittle shall be added to the Nicene ones: But the Law is not now extant: And all that those Fathers did there was to confirm the Sanctions at Nicea: As we know the second General Council did afterwards; neither has it been, since, unusual for a succeeding Council to give its Authority to a precedeing one: Even when no defect, was sup∣posed to be in it. But, though the Eusebians kept themselves wholly off from the true Synod of Sardica, they did not lye still; much less ac∣quiesce in its Determinations and Orders: But they call'd ano∣ther at Philippolis in the East, in opposition to it; which, usually, goes by the name of the Pseudo-Sardican Synod: And here they made a new Creed; But they, at the same time, declared against Arianism; they industriously, all along, represented themselves to be abhorrers of it; espousing the same Faith which was re∣ceiv'd at Nicea. And the Creed which they here made is ap∣prov'd by St.L. de Synodis. Hilary, as agreeing with the Nicene sense, only
the word Homo♉sios is not in it:L. 3. c. 10. Sozomen gives us an account of it: As that they made no mention of the Essence of God in the Synod,. but they anathematized all those who assert that the Son was made of nothing, or of an Essence which was diverse from God the Father's Essence; or that there was a time, or age, in which the Son was not. L. 3. c. 10.Sozomen also further says, that they condemn'd more false Opinions concerning the Incarnation, among which this is one: , that the Son is not be∣gotten: But Homoousianism is not pretended to have been one: So we may safely say, thatL. 2. c. 16. Socrates is very much mistaken when he tells us, that these Orientals at Philippi anathematized the word : For there was not any direct and open opposition made to the word Consubstantialis at that time, by this Synod, or by any other: At least, so as to erect a Sect upon it: But all that was done, was by omitting the word; though the discerning Athanasians were not then insensible of their further design in its omission; but lookt upon it, as a direct step to the introducing what they afterwards effected, to the abolition of the word and thing; asIbid. Heres. 73. Epiphanius has taken notice: tho' he gives there a confused account of the progress of their mistakes, and seems to make the Semi-Arians, who censur'd the word Consubstantial, the same with those that omitted it only, as Unscriptural; and and yet, he afterwards distinguishes them, and gives a plain ac∣count of their different Opinions: And yet some Editions have made Socrates guilty of another great mistake in this Chapter, which are follow'd in Christoforsons Translation, where he is represented to say, that these Sardican Bishops not only anathe∣matized the word Homo♉sios, but publish'd every where the Anomean Doctrine, and asserted the Son not to be like the Fa∣ther, but to be of another Substance; whereas that Doctrine had not been receiv'd, neither had Aetius, who was its Author, then appear'd: And so far as I can find byAnimadvers. in Epiphan. he∣rs 73. num. 2. Petavius; all the preceding Greek and Latine Editions give the same account o him; until the Colen Edition; which in stead of ; read , but Christoforson, nevertheless,Opinionem quod Flius Patri dissimilis esset per literas Scri∣ptas ubique dis∣seminare cae∣runt. keeps to the old Translation: when, not , but,  is printed in the Column over against it. And agreeably to the account which Sozomen gives of these Bishops here; as it is above related out of him, upon the success of the Sardican Council, which the two Emperors, Constantius and Constans, abetted, all the World
so far comply'd, as to receive and profess, the Eternal Genera∣tion, and one Substance: Though many cared not to meddle with the word Consubstantial. St.Lib. contra Cn∣stantium. Hilary thus upbraids Constan∣tius when he turn'd Apostate. Thou damnest (says he) also the word substance by which thou dissembledst thy self to be pious,Damnas quoque & Substantiae nomen, quo te, & Sardiensi Synodo, & Sir∣miensi pium esse occidentalibus mentie∣baris. both in the Sardican Synod, and in the Sirmina. And farther: Thou commandest them to condemn every thing which hath been approv'd of before.Omne quod probatum est antea, dam∣nare jubes, quod improbatum semper est, sanctificari compellis. Tu Sacer∣dotes Christi resorbere ea, quae expuerant oegisti. And com∣pellest that which hath always been rejected to be sanctified, thou hast forced the Priests of Christ to sup up again those thing, which they spew'd out. Theodoritl. 3. c. 3. gives the account with Hilary in part, in his Eccle∣siastical History: As, that Constantius was prejudic'd against the word , but believ'd the thing it self; and order'd those Priests to be deposed, who asserted the Son to be a Creature: And Sozomen gives the like account; and with all gives the reasons, why that Emperor chose the word  in∣steed of : Which reasons though suggested to him by great men, are as slender as his adversaries can wish: Yet they serv'd his turn so far, as to take him off from the Catho∣lick explication, and six him on the other; but he retain'd, notwithstanding, the thing it self: And, as his Brother Con∣stans, so, he was of the same Faith which Constantine their Fa∣ther profess'd and maintain'd: OurIbid. . 12. Historian gives it as his Opinion, that the differences which arose in the East, after the Council of Sardica, were about these foremention'd words; and that they agreed in the Substance with Paulus, Athanasius, and the rest of them. Agreeably hereunto S.L. de Synod. Arim. & Sleac. Athanasius says; that the Eusebians cast out the Doctrine of one Substance, in the Synod of Seleucia, contrary to their own profession, in the Synod of Antioch, held at the Feast of Dedication, there; in which the Faith is the same as the Sardican. It is not long after, that,Atanas Apl.  721. ad Soli∣. p. 825, & 28. Sz. l. 3 c 22, 23 even, Valens and Ursacius came in with their Libel, sign'd with their own hands; and presented it to Julius Bishop of Rome, with a Letter of submission, deliver'd by them to Atha∣nasius: In the first of which, they Anathematize, and for ever condemn, the Arian Heresy, and it Asserters in these words, We at present,. and for ever, d Anathmatize the Heretical Arius, and ths  defend him, and sa tat th  the Son
was not, and that Christ exists of that, which once had no being: And those tha deny Christ to be God, and the Son of God before the Ages. And in this they shew themselves thoow pac'd Eusebians, whose profession of aith was all along before the same; butL, 2. c. 19. Socrates goes farther, and sayes, that they de∣clared for the Homoousian explication, at the same time; for which we have only his bare assertion: Their Form of Recan∣tation is a much better evidence:Sozomen, ibid. supra. where we find no such thing: besides, it was no more than was, in that juncture, indis∣pensably requir'd, in order to an admission into the Catholick Communion; but a Profession, that the Father and the Son were of the same substance, and of the Eernal Generation, were suf∣ficient for it; the Homoousion Faith being really, and necessarily, included in it; tho some men pleas'd themselves, that they did not verbally, and in so many letters, say it. Yet I could be in∣clinable to think, that they might do it: since their Submission was occasioned by Athanasius's success in the Council, and the Churches prosperity upon it, though the favour of the two Em∣perours: Fo what will not Men of their broad Principles do, when their Bishopricks and Temporalities are otherwise at stake? Did not they afterwards turn direct Euzoian Arians; and assert the Son a Creature, in the Council of Ariminum, to oblige the Emperor? And it was by their means and incitation, that Con∣stantius raised heavy persecutions upon all that refused to do the same, and took their benefices from them. Of which I shall speak more anon. And if we thorowly consider, and compare the Acts of these two Councils, viz. the true, and the pseudo Sardican, in relation to the Athanasian Faith; we shall find, that both of them have in their Anathema's, alike omitted the Homoousian explication, and, as the reason, why the true one remov'd Theodorus, Narcissus, Acacius, Stephanus, Ursacius, Valens, &c. from the Catholick Church, is said to be,Literae Synod. apud Theodor. l. 2. c. 9. because,. They separated the Son from the Substance, and Divinity of the Father, and as∣serted Christ to be God, but not the tru God; to be a Son, but not the true Sn: to be begotten, and also unbegotten. So the false oneVid. Hil. ar. de Synod. & Epist. pseud. Sard. Syn. apud Baron ann. 47. num. 8. ict, out of its Communion al that ssert the same. As it will appear to him, who will take the pains to compare the sense of its words,
as I have a little above given an account of them, with the words immediately foregoing, and Valens's and Ʋrsacius's form of Re∣cantation, abovementioned, are an exemplification of the former. In which the word, , is not. And as this their Recantation was made purely out of fear and a servile complyance with the Synod, so we are to think that it was drawn up and subscrib'd according to the sense of the Synod, and their practice then in re∣ceiving Penitents: it would not, surely, otherwise, have been re∣ceiv'd by Julius of Rome. And as Athanasius was then at Rome with Julius, and receiv'd, at the same time, those two penitent Bi∣shops, upon the termsAthan. ad Solitar. p. 826, 829. Sozomen. ibid. supra. Julius did (agreeably hereunto he is said immediately upon it, to leave the West and go for Egypt) so he may mean no more than what their Recantation directly imports by that Homoousianism, which heSocrat. ibid. supra. exhorts certain Christians to fol∣low, who address'd themselves to him in his way betwixt Syria and Alexandria; as that sense which he opposes to Arianism. No∣thing is more certain, than that neither Julius nor Athanasius, would have receiv'd Valens and Ursacius, upon any other Recan∣tation, but that which directly and immediately included the one Substance; tho it might have been more fully expressive in the explication of it. And we have so much the more reason to think he meant no more by it; because, he says, they asserted the Consubstantial Faith in their Recantation, which they made to Ju∣lius: tho in words they there declare no such thing; but onlySocrat. ibid. c. 29. vers. ini∣tium. anathematize those that assent to Arius, in his denying the Eter∣nal Generation. I shall take leave to digress a little and observe; that when the Ecclesiastical Authors and Historians use the Name, Arians, within this distance of time, to which we have limited our present inquiry: they seldome are to be apprehended to mean by it, those that as∣sert the Son to have been a Creature; since all such were con∣demn'd and silenc'd at the Council of Nicea, and so continued dur∣ing our Epoche; save, that now and then, two or three, as Valens, Ursacius, and their complices, started up a fresh, and asserted, that Heresie, and recanted it: Nor is it used by them to repre∣sent those that oppose the Nicene Homoousian explication: But they generally represent by it the Eusebians, who subscribed the Nicene Doctrine, in the true sense of the Council; and all along, in shew at least, asserted and maintained the Eternal Generation, and but one , or unbegotten, never opposing , but drew up their Scheme without it, and thought it to be better
omitted. Thus Socrates calls the Bishops of the Antiochian Coun∣cil, Arians: When their four Creeds, of which he gives an ac∣count, declare them to be as far from those of the Sect that were call'd Exoucontite, as the most zealous Homoousians have ever been; and that they savour'd of nothing less than of asserting the Son to be made in time and of nothing: And others did the same, when they were not liable to be suspected as Setters for the Aetian, or Eunomian Arianisme: Nor have the Homoousians ever contra-di∣distinguisht themselves to the Eusebians, but by asserting the Ni∣cene Article, according to its own Explication of it. This use of the word Arians, might be exemplified all along in Athanasius; but I will make this alone further instance of it, taken out of hisPag. 616. Apology; where Eusebius, Theognis, with others, are called Arians: whereas nothing is more sure, than that that Synod never once professed it self to be of the Arian Heresie; it was then too early for them to do it: Nor would Constantine have indured them if they had: Besides, we know thatSocrat. H. E. l. 1. c. 10, 18, 25. Eusebius of Nicomedia, Theognis, and Arius, recanted publickly, and declar'd for the Nicen Faith; thereby to oblige Constantine; and they prevail'd so much upon him, that he gave leave for it, and the Synod of Tyre was call'd, solely for the abdication of Athanasius, in the management of which they shew'd themselves true Eusebian Arians, who did not openly pretend to destroy the Faith, but to destroy the rightful succession of the Bishops, and by that means, they in some measure effected it, when in the end of Constantius's Reign, they placed themselves in the principle Sees of Christendome. The word Se∣mi-Arian is often used by Ecclesiastical men: (and is often wrong applied by them) but it is never used (if I do not mistake) within this interval of time, concerning which we are now making an inquiry, tho the thing it self is obvious there. But the word, Arian, is there all along promiscuously used, and applyed to all those that did not come up to the top of the Nicene Creed, tho it is as manifest as the Sun is, in a clear day at noon, that all of them did not deny the Eternal Nature of the Son of God, and the Homoousian explication of it. And if he, who shall peruse the History of Arianisme contain'd within our Epoche, does omit to observe this various use of the word, it will involve him in a great, and even, inextricable confusion: But he, especially, that reads this Discourse, must needs be at a loss; for we here assert Arianisme to have ceased, since the Council of Nicea, and yet there is nothing so frequent here as the terms. Arians and Ari∣anisme
throughout it. Neither will the distraction be less to him who reads on, in the close of Constantius's Reign, to the end of Julian's and Valens's Reign; where the Arians, Eunomians, Eudo∣xians, Acacius, &c. are promiscuously called Arians; and, if the various use of that name be not observ'd, they cannot be distin∣guished a sunder. But to rturn to our Councils: upon a further consideration of which w shall find, that neither the first and true Council, which met at Sardica by Constantius's and Cnstans's appointment, nor the false Council, which divied and removed to Philiopolis, did convne primarily, and immediately, in the Empires design, and their own, upon the account of Faith. And that which they determin'd in either or both, was an emergent, upon their Assem∣bling: But they met upon the Eusebians complaints concerning Athanasius, Marcellus of Ancyra, Asclepas of Gaza, and Paulus of Constantinople; whom the Eusebians had remov'd from their Bi∣shopricks, and Julius of Rome had order'd, upon his hearing their Cause in a Synod there, to be restored: And it was their great work to revise and examine their Causes, and the Sentences, which had been given for and against them: Both sides refusing to desert those Bishops, whom they apprehended to be unjust∣ly and uncanonically remov'd: Or, to receive those, whom they believ'd to be unjustly and uncanononically, enthron'd; tho the Empire and a Synod had united in the effecting of it: As we know Constantine and a Synod did in deposing Athanasius at Tyre; so likewise did Constantius and a Syond in enthroning Gre∣gory at Antioch: So again did Constantius, Constans, and the true Sardican Synod, in restoring Athanasius, and the Bishops who had been ejected with him. The Homoousians receiv'd Athanasius, and ejected Gregory; while the Eusebians retain'd Gregory, and rejected Athanasius; proceeding pon this known rule in Church Polity, receiv'd by all who pretend to any Church Government, except Doctor Hody, viz. that an unjust and uncanonical Deprivation does not acquit the subject believers of their dependance on their Bi∣shop, so depriv'd: Again, that an unjust and uncanonical possession will not vouch the sujct believers in paying their obedience to a Bishop so possessed. And this their Synodical Acts do abun∣dantly manifest. First nothing is more plain than this, in thEp. Synod. ad Jul. Episcop. R. apud Hilarium in fragment. & ad Aeyptios. Ep. Synod. Eucycl. apud Theod. . E. l. . c. 8. Athanas. Apol. p. 755, 75. & Ep. ad Solitar. p. 80. proceedings of the true Synod: It be∣ing its business to review and examine the
Crimes which had been charg'd upon Athanasius, in the Councils of Tyre and Antioch: And finding them to be false and malicious, it flung them off, but restor'd him to his Chair, and wrote Letters to the people of his Diocess, which commanded them to receive him as their rightful Bishop: The same Synod remov'd Gregory (with the rest of the intruders upon the same authority) from the Alexandrian See; commanding the people, that they should neither own, nor receive him for their Bishop. Again: The Eusebians first refused to joyn with the true Sardi∣can Synod, for this reason, viz. because Athanasius and the rest that had been abdicated by them, were admitted into the Synod, as lawful Bishops; and having done this theySocr. l. 2. c. 16. conveen'd in Thrace, where they condemn'd and ejected, not only Athanasius, Paulus, &c. But several other Bishops, who had communicated with Athanasius, &c. after their false Synods had condemn'd them, or had any wayes own'd or assisted them, under their deposition; asBaron. supra Ann. 347. num. 80. Hsius of Cor¦duba, Maximus of Treves; even Julius Bishop of Rome: Which last they proceeded upon with particular, aggravations: as the rise of their communion with them; Ʋt Principem & Ducem malorum, qui primus januam Communionis sceleratis atque damnatis operuit. as the Chief and Cap∣tain of all evils: as he who frst open'd a door for com∣munion with those wicked men; but particularly in that he cleer'd and defended Athanasius; and they commanded all other Bishops in the usual Mandatory Church language;Szom l. 2. c. 10. . That they do not enter into communion with them, nor write to them, nor receive any writing, nor Letters of Communion from them. And it is farther remarkable; that they here proceeded against none of them for matters of Faith, save only Marcellus: Whom they condemned as a Photinian, and Sa∣mosetanian. Whence we may conclude, that they would also have censured Athanasius, and the rest, as Homoousians, if their Eu∣sebian principles, own'd and professed, at that time of day, would have born them out in it: they certainly had then, declared a∣gainst them, as they did afterwards, as heretical, but for that reason. But much more if these Eusebians had, then, openly pro∣fessed themselves Exoukontians, and asserted the Son to be a Crea∣ture: but that only which they insisted upon, and urg'd against them was breach of Unity and Discipline: and we are moreo∣ver to observe, that an unjust and uncanonical possession, whose hand soever gave it, did not create an Episcopal right to him that re∣ceiv'd it, tho it was the Empires own hand: for both Constanti∣us
and Constans presided in the true Sardican Council; but they notwithstanding rejected Athanasius, &c. tho not for any Here∣sie; as Julius before had own'd and protected them against Constan∣tius, and against Constantine the Great, in the Synod of Tyre and Antioch.See Hil. supra. Indeed the Orientals chiefly pleaded their Priviledges against the Occidentals; and Athanasius's cause may be said to be the oc∣casion of the first breach betwixt them: TheSocrat. l. 2. c. 11. former then refu∣sing to appear before Julius at Rome; and pleading that he had no right to take cognizance of their cause; they farther insisted upon it till it became a rupture, and separation: And the other great Churches after this, pleaded the same right for some time, 'till Rome's potency prevail'd, and swallow'd them up: But the Eastern Churches retain their character a part, and do not whol∣ly submit to Romes yoke at this day; but of this by the way. As to these Synodical Actions themselves, they may be seen at large inL. 3. c. 10. Sozomen andIn fragmen∣tis, l. 2. Hillary. A Copy of them has been some time since set out by Nicolaus Faber, as he found it in the Library of Petrus Pitheus, and it is printed at large by CardinalAnn. 347. num. 80. Baronius. It will appear very probable, that the rejecting Athanasius, and not communicating with him, but with Gregory upon the unjust and uncanonical Deprivation of the former, and possessing the latter, was the Eusebians, not only principle, but sole fault, at that time; since upon Athanasius's being restored, after the Sardican Synod, by Constantius's order, tho not without the importunity and threats of Constans; When Athanasius passed through Syria and Palestine, in his way to Alexandia, and the Clergy of those Churches uni∣ted in a Synod,Socrat. l. 2. c. 19. Athanas. ad Solitar. p. 825. and address'd him; it was the only fault that we know of which they then repented; confessing with grief and re∣stitution, (its just effect) that they had voted for his abdication; and receiving him in his Station, as Bishop of Alexandria. But can we believe that Athanasius would have receiv'd them into Com∣munion, as he then did, upon that single Repentance, if they had been guilty at the same time, of Arianism, and had as openly asserted the Son to be a Creature, as they had assented to his deposition; and not have required the same Repentance for it of them? Or can we, by any means, think, that he abstain'd from their Com∣munion before, because they were Arians, and for that only rea∣son, and not because of their Schism, and breach of Church U∣nion, in that they assented to a false Bishop, placed in his own See; since he did not require of them the same repentance for the
former, he did for the latter, in order to his admitting them to his Communion? Nay, when he required no repentance of them upon the account of the former, neither does there appear any reason to be given, why Valens and Ursacius, having before Recant∣ed their Arianism at Rome, should afterwards reconcile themselves to Athanasius, so solemnly asSozomen. l. 3. c 23. they did, if their Arianism alone had made the breach: Since, if so? their Recantation had made it up. Nor may we readily apprehend, since the Empire, all along de∣pos'd him, or confirm'd his deposition; what need they had of that reconciliation they procur'd upon their repentance and com∣pliance; if we grant our Adversaries supposition, which is, that a present secular, local, displacing a Bishop, extinguishes all his re∣lations, as such, to the Christian World: Or, again, that its pos∣sessing a Bishop, makes him a lawful Successor, and ipso facto in∣states him in a just relation to all Christians. And surely the Bi∣shops of Syria and Palestine might have saved their Repentance, at least, their, then, Reconciliation had been useless for the same considerations. In a word,Ibid. supra. Athanasius gives us an account of seve¦ral of them, that did voluntarily come into him, and purge them∣selves of their separation, and other unjust dealings towards them; and anathematiz'd murther, heresie; and declar'd,, that they appear∣ed among the Eusebians with their bodies, but did congregate in their minds with him; and consequently their deserting him, and adhereing to an unlawful Successor, was their fault, as well as their heresie: Tho Heresie there might imply no more than their Schism, according to its frequent acceptation amongst the Ancients. But, besides these, we find, in Story, several Bishops to have comply'd with Athanasius's deposition, and, consequently to have receiv'd his Successor, either out of fear, or in hopes, thereby, to abate the rigour of the Persecution, or upon some little by re∣spects, which that time of trial put them upon; but these Men were, at the same time, not only not tainted with the Eudxian, and Aetian Arianism, but not suspected of it. They openly declar'd and protested against it, and suffer'd to imprisonment, or exile, rather than own or subscribe to it. I'le instance on∣ly in these two, viz. Dionysius Bishop of Millane, and Gregory Nazianzen; the first of which hath given a large testimony of his resolution and constancy in adhereing to Athanasius, in the Council of Millane; he was banished for it by Constantius, as we read inL. 2. c. 29. Socrates; who might also have found in Lucifer Calari∣tanus, that after his Subscription against Athanasius, he was banish∣ed
by Constantius, because he would not be an Arian, quod Aria∣nus esse noluit, miseris in exilum, asPro Athanas. ad Constant l. 2. Lucifer there tells the Emperor. And we have it inHist. Sar. l. 2. Sulpitius Severus, that he subscribed with this provision, that he should not be inroll'd as such. St. GregoryIn encomi. Na∣zianzen is as well known to have been unspotted in that respect: But notwithstanding himself gives us an account of his recidivation in subscribing against Athanasius,Athan. inter opera ejus. Ed. Paris. when he was a young man; and withal, of his sorrow and true repentance for it. Now, shall we think, that the Catholicks did not then absent from their Communion, as much as Athanasius did from the Bishops of Syria and Palestina, above mention'd, until they recanted their subscri∣ptions? But if our Adversaries will persist, that those Bishops were Arians, and he did not communicate with them, for that reason: Yet, it cannot be the reason why the Catholicks ab∣sented from the others Communion; because they professedly were not Arians: No man pretends they were. If it be farther said, that their quitting Athanasius was not sinful, or a just ground for the Athanasians to separate from them; this will be abun∣dantly confuted from the sorrow and repentance which it cost them; which as it always arises from the sense of a precede∣ing guilt; so their guilt, and conscientiousness of it, could arise from no other consideration then their false Union under an unlawful Possessor; and just exclusion from the true Church, up∣on it; since, at the same time, their Morals and Doctrinals, in respect of other Heresies, as well as in respect of Arianism, were unspotted: And that famous artifice, mention'd by the Au∣thor of anSermn 15. de Santii S. Ambros. ad Script. Oration on the birth day of Eusebius Vercellensis, by which the said Eusebius (with some perhaps, abatement to his reputation) pevail'd to have Dionisius's subscription blotted out; pretending, that, if it was erased, he would subscribe: But that he would not otherwise, because Dionisius was a young man, and had still call'd him Father, and it would not be decent if his subscription was lowermost; but when it was expung'd, himself refused, and openly declar'd, that as he would not per∣mit his Son to appear upon record to have communicated with them, much less would he pollute his own hand in subscribing: This (I say) is a plain indication of the personal guit that was contracted by it; and, also, that the action it self was infamous in the eyes of men: And though Dionisius had, e're that, re∣pented of it; that was not a sufficient expiation, but its foorstps we e to be erased and no remains of it, as neer as they could, were to be left to posterity.
As for the Council of Millane, which succeeded the Council of Sardica within a few yeas: Nothing seems necessary to be said here concerning it; since I have already taken notice and prov'd, that it was call'd by Constantius on purpose to ratify the proceedings against Athanasius, in the Council of Tyre: Upon the obtaining of which, in a full Synod of Eastern and Western Bishops, (for his aim was to have them all meet thee) he did not doubt but that he should wholly, and finally, shut him out of Alexandria, and silence him for ever, and that no Arti∣cles of Faith were debated, much less any new ones introduced, or old ones cashier'd, in opposition to the precedeing Antiochian Creeds, so that whe Constantius found himself disappointed of his purpose, for few of the Eastern Bishops appear'd, and all the Western declar'd against Athanasius's abdication, he broke up the Synod; or, rather, translated it to his Palace. No bu∣siness was there done; excepting that he condemned Athanasius in his own person, and right, assuming that Sacerdotal Power, which neither himself, nor any other Emperor had done before him: For which he was severely reprov'd by Athanasius, Hosius, and others of the Catholick Bishops. ThoughHist. Sacr. l. 2. Sulpitius Se∣verus saith, that the Eusebians, being the major part, publish'd an Epistle in the Emperors name, full of blasphemous points of Faith, but the People of Millane rejected it; they being emi∣nent for their Orthodoxy: But we have no other account of it, and it sunk. SECT III. 'ERE I go on to the following Councils, I shall first make a stop, and give an account of Constantius's Inquisition a∣gainst Liberius▪ and Hosius: and of their answers, reasons, and vindication of themselves: Also, of their sufferings, occasion'd by their Courage and Resolution in adhereing to Athanasius, and Constantius's disappointment by it, in the Council of Millane: In all which we shall find that he continued his first design and measures, though his ultimate aim was to restore the pri∣migena▪ Arianism, asserted and maintain'd by Arius, in the Council of Nicea; which the Catholick Bishops w horowly sensible f. And Athanasius, accordingly, says, ha Constanius's severe poceedings against these two great Prae, were the effect of his study and zeal for it; and preludis to it: But
his main desire and endeavours were wholly to suppressEp. ad Solit. p. 842. . Atha∣nasius: And when he requir'd the assistance of those two Bi∣shops in it, by their subscription to his Abdication, and ac∣knowledgment of his Successor; they refused to do it for these reasons: That it would be contrary to the Laws and Duties of Union and Subordination in the Christian Church, to which they were indispensably oblig'd as Christian Bishops; no less then to refuse subscribing to Arianism its self: That they may not acknowledg that Deprivation, which is unjust and uncanonical; whether it be made by Church hands, but not by Church Laws; or by secular hands, in opposition to both of them: And when St.Ad Constant. in fine. Hilary says, that Eusebius Vercellensis made this pro∣posal to the Eusebians, in the Council of Millane; viz. That if they would consent to the Doctrine of one substance, in the Nicene Creed, he would do all other things which they should ask, if it be interpreted,Omnia se quae postularent esse facturum. that Athanasius should be given up to their mercy, and the Laws and Rights of the Church sacrificed to that one Arti∣cle; Eusebius seems to mean nothing less by it: Nor is it to be lookt upon otherwise, then as his artifice to discover their deceit: For, he knew they would not accept of the terms, nor receive the Doctrine of one substance, in the Synods own explication of it, though they had so frequently pretended that they were not enemies to it; and they gain'd their darling point against Atha∣nasius by it. Possibly Eusebius's prudence may be question'd in making the offer, but no other sense can be put upon it, which is consistent with his own, and the other Catholick Bishops practice, concerning Athanasius's, and their remonstrance upon Constantius, when he comply'd with his Deposition, confirming it with his secular Sentence: Of which I have give an account. Did not these Catholick Bishops rather suffer exile than subscribe to his Condemnation? That duty which is not absolutly necessary, but may be commuted, will not warrant Martyrdom in its defence: And tho' I am to forego my liberty and life, rather than quit an Article of Faith; I may not defend it by quitting another duty which my Christia∣nity alike obliges me to. Neither may any other sense, of this offer, which Eusebius made, be consistent with Constantius's far∣ther proceedings against the Homo♉sians: In which the stress of their trial is put upon their consenting to Athanasius's con∣demnation. And, as it is said to be the primary reason of his calling the Council of Millane; so it is the first thing to which
he endeavours to work Liberius and Hosius: Which argues that their obligation to adhere to Athanasius, was not an accessary, but a first duty: And that the preservation of their Faith was rather a dependant upon their constant adhesion to him, (and surely it was so in a great measure) then that they believ'd it of less consequence, that his cause shall sink, so their Faith was preserved; had the Emperor been assur'd, that they therefore, did not desert Athanasius, nor would consent to the proceedings of Tyre; because they were not assur'd that they should retain the Athanasian Faith, the common course of such pro∣ceedings must have instructed him, to have first drove them from their Faith, since the effecting of it, would have taken so much argument from them for their adhereing to Athanasius; but this was not the method he took: And his proceedings against Liberius and Hosius are particular evidences of it, which now follow, Ile begin with Hosius, though he be last in our story. The account whichEp. ad Solit. vita a Gentes. p. 827, 838, 839, &c. Athanasius gives of the proceedings up∣on Hosius, is; that when Constantius first sent for him to Rome, and interrogated him, it was solely in reference to his adhereing to Athanasius, and to engage him to subscribe to his Condemna∣tion; and to communicate with the Arians: That the holy Bi∣shop replied to him with such weight of argument; and gave such effectual reasons, why he ought not to do it, that the Emperor was convinced, and dismiss'd him, with leave to return to his Country and Church: but this brought no small trouble to the Eusebians, especially the Eunuchs and Courtiers: which last, according to their usual practice, provok'd and embitter'd Constantius, to a greater excess, against him: Insomuch that he wrote a menacing Letter to him, to the former effect: with the contumelies and reproaches of which, Athanasius tells us, the most religious Prelate was affected, but its terrors pre∣vail'd nothing with him for the changing his opinion, which he had found upon the firm Rock of Faith; but he retain'd it, not∣withstanding, with his first constancy: When the Emperor wrote a second Letter to him, mixing some flatteries with his threats, but to the same end; requiing him to subscribe, and become an Arian, he reply'd in a large Epistle, which Athanasius has recorded at length, intermixed with Instructions, Arguments, Threats, and reproofs. And towards the end, he declares himself to be no Arian; And that he is so far from joyning
with, and assisting, him, that he Anathematizes his Doctine: But all the rest of it is purely and solely in relation to Ahana∣sius's abdication: And first he tells him, that, As he suffer'd before under his Grand Father Maximianus,Ibid supsa. so, if he thnks fit to make a∣nother trial of him, he is now ready to suffer any thing rather than join with his Eusebians against Athanasius, and shed innocent blood, and betray the Truth. He goes on, and advises him, that he cease to give ear to the Orientals, and to believe Vlens and Ursa∣cius; since they refused to appear in the Council of Sardica, and im∣plead him there, after they had been summon'd to it, and the Synod had declar'd him to be innocent: That Valens and Ursacius had de∣clar'd him to be innocent in a Synod at Rome. He exhorts him to cease to offer that violence to Synods and Bishops by his letters and secular arm he had heretofore used, for the gaining subscriptions, to the end Valens and Ursacius might have their design'd advantages. He puts him in mind, that he is mortal; that he should fear the day of Judg∣ment, and keep himself pure for that day: And that in order to it, he do not encroach upon the Church Rights, and force the Bishops, in their Depositions and Censures; but be govern'd by them: such things be∣longing to them, and not to him, by the Ordinance of God; and that it is neither lawful nor safe for him to intermeddle with them. But our Abrahamitical old man, (as Athanasius calls him) prevail'd nothing upon Constantius, by this grave advice: But he raves and persecutes the more upon it. viz. Because Hosius, not only refuses to subscribe against Athanasius, but condemns the Eusebians for so doing: And declares that it is better to suffer death, then to become thereby, betrayers of the Truth: The Emperor hearing too that several in Spain were of the ame opinion; and finding that he could neither by force, nor solicitation, prevail with them to subscribe, he calls the great Bishop to him, and banisheth him, for one year, into Sirmium. And if we take an account of Liberius's Case, as it is related byEp. ad Solitar. p. 832, 833, 835. Athanasius andH. E. l. 2. c. 16. Theodorit; we shall find that neither Con∣stantius, nor his Eunuchs▪ no Bishop Epictetus, (which three are appointed to interroga  cathechise him) move any question to him concerning  Nicene Faith, and the Eternal Generation: But all which they require of him i, To cease his friendship and commnion with Athanasius, and subscribe to his Con∣demnation, and in the Council of Tyre; they tell him, that upon these terms, he may return to Rome; otherwise he must expect to be translated to some new place. And to this the Bishop's anwer is much at the rate with that which Hosius gave to Constantius.
viz. That he could not do it, because a Synod at Rome had declar'd A∣thanasius innocent. That the Sentence which those Bishops gave against him, by whom they pretend he was Synodically condemn'd, was unsy∣nodical and unlawful: That they condemn'd him to procure the Em∣peror's favour, or for fear least he should punish them, or to avoid the common infamy which they might otherways undergo: That they condemn'd him when he was absent, and neither saw the matter of fact done themselves, nor bad it sufficiently prov'd from others: That their own false Witnesses confessed the forgery and cheat, and asked pardon for their prevarication: He demands that if Athanasius hath deserv'd an animadversion, and the Church censure is to pass upon him, that it be done by a righful Judgment, and according to the Ecclesiasti∣cal form, and the Canons of the Church: And that he values and insists upon the Observations of them, as deliver'd from St. Peter, more then he does his Palace at Rome: And, if he should be alone here∣in (though he was not) it is all one to him: A cause of Faith (for so heTheod. ibid. : calls it) is not lessned by it: since three only heretofore, were found, that resisted the King's Commandment, as he now doth in not subscribing: That if the Emperor does truly interpose his care for the Peace of the Church, and he require that our subscriptions for Athana∣sius be blotted out; then let the subscriptions that are against him be expung'd; and all the abdicatd Bishops be rstor'd to their proper Sees, and a Synod be call'd with these Limitations: As, that it be a great way from the Palace, that the Emperor be not pre∣sent in it, let not the Prefect be there,. let not the Judge threaten, and the fear of God only remain, and restrain, and the Ordinance of the Apostles. More especially, let not any Bishop be of the Council, and vote in it, who does not receive the Nicene Faith, in the true exposition of it: It being unjust that a question, concerning the fact of any one, should be inspected, before a question of Faith. It is here to be observ'd, that the main thing, if not the all, which these Bishops have, above, contended for with Constantius, and his Adherents, is: That the Apostolical Rule, deliver'd by the Church to them, was the Rule which the Ancients propos'd to be observ'd; and themselves adher'd unto, in the abdicating and enthroning of Bishops, and non communicating or commu∣nicating with them: And the secular Arm in the Emperors own person, or by his Ministers, had no judiciary decisive right in that affair; but was wholly precluded it, as well as matters of Faith. Liberius, is not to be so understood, as if the Emperor
or his Ministers, might not come into a Council, but that they may not, when they are there, assume and exercise the Rights and Powers which belong to the Bishops and Clergy: For we well know, that the first Council at Nicea was, not only call'd by Constantine's writ, but conveen'd in his Palace, (as the second General Council at Constantinople afterwards did in Trullo: i. e. in a certain arch'd room in Theodosius's Palace) and the EmperorEuseb. de vit. Constant. 3. c. 10. himself sat there in his own Person; as Emperors have very often, sat since in Councils, and many do at this day, if they so please: Likewise their secular Ministers have seldome been out of them: Neither doth it same reasonable, that the Soveraign Powers should imbody Conciliary Acts and Decisions into the Em∣pire and make them Law blindfold; or without being satisfied in their particular debates; that a reception and legitimation of them is consistent with the honor and safety of the Govern∣ment. This is all that Constantius could obtain from these two great Men, either by himself or his Emissaries, in these two famous Congresses: Only he thought fit to try Liberius two ways more, viz. by bribes or banishment: But he desir'd that the bribes might be given to the Emperor's two Bishops, viz. Auxentius and Epictetus, as persons whom they would gratify, for himself scorn'd them. And he chearfully submitted to the banishment, as that which was his portion, and a Christian Bishop ought not to think strange of. . Ep. ad Solitar. p. 829. Athanasius farther confirms that which we here contend for, when he tells us; that this was not only the state of the cases be∣tween Constantius and Hosius, and Liberius, but between Constan∣tius and the other Catholick Bishops, and that they had only this had choice, either subscribe, or go out of your Churches: That the aged Bishops were driven into exile, because they communicated with him.. Apol p. 681. And that it was a thing well known, and in every body's mouth, ; That Liberius Bishop of Rome, the Great Hosius, Paulinus, Dionisius, Eusebius, and Lucifer, with other Bishops in Spain and France, Italy and Sardinia, and other pla∣ces, and several Presbyters and Deacons were banish'd, because they refus'd to subscribe against us. ibid. p. 692.; And that Vincentius of Capua, Fortunatus of Aquileia, Eremius of Thessalonica, and others that were seated westward, suffer'd great extremity and afflictions, until they declar'd, that they would not communicate with us.. ibid. With a great deal more to the same effect in his writings.
Now, this whole affair of Constantius, Hosius, Liberius, and ma∣ny more Bishops, being duely consider'd, can any man think (who thinks at all) if their Arianism was a reason why the Catholicks did not submit to Constantius, and to the Successors, which he placed upon these Bishops, that the unjust and uncanonical Deprivation of the antecedeing rightful Possssors was not a reason of it too? What account can be given, that the Emperor and his Emissaries should urge Hosius, Liberius, and the rest of the depriv'd Bishops, to e∣cal their Subscriptions to Athanasius, nay to subscribe against him, and to communicate with the Eusebian Bishops, as Posses∣sors; that Constantius should do this with so much zeal and im∣portunity, by argument and menaces, and principally, and in the first place, nay singly, without any relation to Arianism, for the most part, if a bare local removing a Bishop from his See, and possessing another in it, upon what motives, and by what hands soever, especially when unjust and incompetent, did, upon Church Principles, oblige them to desert the Bishop so remov'd, and re∣ceive the Bishop so possess'd, and indemnifie them in each? Or, how came it to pass, that the Emperor and his Agents were so inconsiderate, and unwary, as not to command them to do it, upon Church Principles, and Conscience? Surely nothing is more plain and self evident, than that Athanasius, Hosius, and their Associates and Dependants, did not believe the Empire alone, their Synods alone, or both united, were competent for it: Or that Church Principles would justifie them in it: Why, if they believ'd otherwise, d they plead all along, and peremptorily insist upon the stice of their own, and the injustice of their ad∣versaries Cau? And even plead the incompetency of their evi∣dence, indeed, of every thing else, which was urged against them. Again, must not Athanasius, Hosius, &c. be very unthinking men, when they plead the Laws and Canons of the Church in their own defence, as most sacred, and inviolable, as the indispensable Rules in their Case, and when they suffer'd in the Observation of them, and when they requir'd a lawful Synod to determine, apart from the Prince and his Substitutes, and that the Church Power, but neither of them, should exercise Jurisdiction in it? What need all these Allegations, when, at the same time, they knew them∣selves oblig'd to quit these Eusebian Successors, or any other, pure∣ly, and solely upon the account of their being Arians? And such the Dostor contends, they believ'd the Eusebian Successors to be. When also, as he farther says, It was a Maxime of the An∣cients,
That no Law, or Custom of the Church was so sacred and inviolable, but they were to be sacrific'd to the outward Peace of the Church, whensoever necessity requir'd: And that Necessity and Convenience were the only Legislators? If they had been Aetian Arians, all the formalities of Law and Right could not have justify'd a Commnion with 'em: and if they were not, being Possssors, by a Supream Secular Coercive Power (upon Hodian principles) neither Law, nor Custom, but Necessity and Convenience, would legitimate a Communion in opposition to them: So why these Bishops pleaded Law and Custom at all, if the Doctor's Principles steer'd them, is altogether unaccountable. Some men have been so bold with the Ancients, as to characterize them as weak heads, but honest meaning men: and Liberius and Hosius, &c. did certainly answer the first part of the Character, upon Dr. Hdy's supposition. For, who, but addle-heads, would have gone into banishment, and have been ready to suffer whatever else the Power of the Empire, and their keenest enemies, were capble to lay upon them, rather than lay aside those Laws, and Canons, and Customs, which only oblige so far, as the observa∣tion of them was consistent with their own and the Church's Peace and Tranquility, (i. e. in plain English, so far as they could observe them, and enjoy their ease and revenues) when they stood alone, and all the World was against them, as it was against Liberius. SECT. IV. I Now come in course to the Council of Sirmium; for I need not stick to affirm, that it was after the Council of Millan, sinceEp. ad Solitar. Athanasius,L. 2. C. 26. Socrates,L. 4. C. 5. and Sozomen tells us, that Hosius came unwilingly to it, and was there, forc'd, through their tor∣tures upon his aged body, he being above an hundred years old, to sucscribe aginst Athanasius, after he had refus'd to do it in the Council of Millan, and suffer'd an years Imprisonment for it. Now, it was in this Council that our Eusebians began to unmask, and shew themselves abroad, tho' not so openly and barefac'd as they did a little after: but upon the opening of it they dissembled their opinion for some time, as they had formerly done, and seem∣ingly contended for the Doctrine of the Nicene Faith, with their usual Zeal, and by new Arguments: and as they drew up three forms of Faith, (whether the two latter were compos'd during
the time of the Council, or by the same Bishops, tho' not by all of them, a little after, I shall not enquire at presnt) so in the first, which was certainly made while the Council sa, they c¦demn'd PhotinusSn. ibd. St. l. 2. c. 2, 25. Ath.  d. p. 900. ar. de Sa. . A a. in ii  p. 23. , Basil. as a Follower of the Doctrine of Sabellius  Paulus Samosatenus, in that he asserted the Son to have no oh r being, but that which he receiv'd in the Womb of the Vigin, and remov'd him from his Bishoprick of Sirmium, having di'd five and twenty Anathemaes against his Heresie. But caus their having done this did not sufficiently vindicate their Orth∣doxy, and rescue them from the mark of primigenial Ari ce, tho' they had declar'd the Son to have had a being e're he cam into the Womb, they might at the same time believe that pre-existing being to have been created in time, and either,  of nothing, or to be, , of another substance, and not of the same Substance with the Father, so they were notwithstanding liable to be suspected as Exoukontians, or Heterousians, by each commonly thinking person, they took care to have the ground of these suspitions remov'd, and their first Anathema is this; (fo which they had Presidents in their own Antiochian and Sardinian Councils, recited above, but I will repeat them). The Holy Catholick Church doth reject those from her communion, who say, that the Son is made of nothing, or of another substance, and not of the Substance of God, and that there was a time, or age, in which he was not. And added.. If any one doth say that the Son is made by the will of God, as one of the Creatures, let him be Ana∣thema: In which they come fully up to the Sense of the Nicene Article, only they declin'd the Homo♉sian explication, as they had done all a long before: but neither did they now op∣pose it, nor declare the Homo♉sian's retaining it to be a just ground for their separation from them: neither did the Homo♉si∣ans account them Hereticks. And here we have a just occasion to take farther notice, that it could not be a pretence of Faith in the Incarnation, for which Constantius banish'd Hosius and Liberius, since they, and the Euse∣bians, hitherto outwardly profess'd and embrac'd one and the same Faith in it: but it was (as I have above prov'd) because those two great Bishop could not betray the Rights of the Church with which Christ had invested her, by submitting to an unjust and un∣canonical Deprivation and Succession upon it, tho' they were made, even by a Synod, as when Athanasius was depos'd at Tyre and Antioch, and the Antiochians had enhon'd Gregory in his
Chair: much less, when by the Secular Arm only, as when by Constantius, in his Palace at Millan: Performances of that nature being then alone valid and to be obey'd, when they are done according to those Rules which the Church can own, and when her Canons and Laws, for that purpose, are not therein violated: in the preservation of which, as well as of his Faith, each Christian Bishop is to look upon himself indispensably concern'd and engag'd: and he is to quit, not only his Palace, (as Liberius declar'd) and so much of the practise of his Ministry, as an exile State will ren∣der him uncapable to discharge, but his life, in the asserting and maintaining of them. But this first Creed, and the Anathemaes against Photinus which they annex'd to it, were made purely to serve a turn, their Politicks instructing them to manage their disguise a while longer: that expression which we may find in one of their Anathemaes, where the Son is said to administer to the Father in the Work of the Creation, does a little unveil them, and create a suspition of their design, tho' the Ancients have made use of it very inno∣cently. They did not miss of the craft of most Hereticks, in that they denounc'd these Anathemas before they declar'd themselves, it being their usual artifice to oppose some one, or more Heresies with great shew of vehemency, and thereby introduce their own with more ease and advantage, and so they seldom miss of their aim, for the many being possess'd of their Orthodoxy, as they apprehend, in some points, they can hardly be induc'd to believe that they can be erroneous in any other, but credulously receive all that they offer to them. I remember Vincentius LirinensisQui ut uni hae∣resi suae aditum patefaceret cun∣ctarum haerese. en blasphemias insectabatur. Adver. haeres. c. 16. vid. So∣crat. H. E. l. 2. c. 25. says of Nestorius, That he pursued the Blasphemies of all Heresies, to make way for his own. Thus St. Austin tells us,De Peccato Origin. contr. Peleg. 23. That when Pelagius was summon'd to Rome, to give an account of his Heresie, he offer'd a Book of his Faith, from the Unity of the Godhead and Trinity of Persons to the Resurrection, expecting that his Or∣thodoxy in those Articles should render his error, concerning the Holy Ghost, more passable. So here, being prepar'd and forti∣fied by the same methods, our Eusebians compose and offer their second Sirmian Creed, in which, after an unusual Declaration of their Belief in the Father and the Son, omitting all the other Articles, they peremptorily affirm,Hilar. de Sy∣nod. ibid. That neither the words  or  ought to be us'd at all, nor to have any mention or explica∣tion made of them for these reasons, viz. Because there are no such words in the Scriptures; and they exceed mans apprehension, and cannot be
explain'd, according to that of Isaiah,Cap. 53. . who shall declare his Gene¦ration? that the Father only knows how he begot the Son, and the Son only knows how he was begotten of him: that it is manifest to every one that the Father is greater than the Son in Honour, Dignity, and Essence:. Socrat. l. 2. . 1. Szm. l. 4. that the Son is neither consubstantial, nor of like sb∣stance, with the Father: that he is to be anathematiz'd, who asserts the Son to have no beginning, but the Essence of God produced him, or affirms, That he is not inferior to the Father, (for we'll suppose Sozomen to have been mistaken, and that these last positions be∣long to this second Creed, if to any; tho' he places them after the first) or, that the Son is not subject to the Father as all other Crea∣tures are. It was in this Council that the Great Hosius so unhappily fell, and their Doctrine of new impiety, it having suppurated for some time, broke forth, as St. Hillary speaksNv, & ta∣men jamdiu sup∣puratae, impie∣tatis doctrina erupuerat. L. de Synod. contr. Arian. p. 236. Ed. Basil.. And as he came unwil∣lingly to it, being first summon'd by the EmperorSocrat. l. 2. c. 26. Sozom. l. 2. c. 5., and then over-rul'd to sit, by the industry and perswasion of the Eusebian Bishops, they promising themselves great advantages to their Heresie, which was then upon the retrieval, by the concurrence of his illustrious authority, so he no less unwillingly subscrib'd to it, compell'd to it by many and unusual sufferings, notwithstand that he had compos'd the Nicene Creed, and stood out so valiant∣ly in Athanasius's Cause. But, (which made some amends) he willingly repented of it before his death; for tho' some do con∣tend that he subscrib'd to the first, and not to the second Sirmian Creed, we dare not contradict the generality of our Hi∣storians who have thought otherwise, especially since the con∣trary assertion is built only on conjectures: and yet Epiphanius. Haeres. 73 §. 14. Ed. Parisii. seems to imply that he was not fairly dealt with in that af∣fair; but the Bishops in that Synod us'd undue means, and frau∣dently produc'd some Letters of his, by which they represented him to have asserted, That the Son was not like to the Father in all things, hoping thereby to gain advantage to their Cause, and overthrow the Church of God. But I may not omit a farther account which Athanasius gives of Hosius,Ep. ad Solita vitam ag. p. 807.8. viz. That tho' after a long banishment at Sirmium, and being worn out with following evils, he communicated with Valens and Ursacius, yet he did not subscribe against Athanasius: neither did he think the former a lght thing, but being about to die, as by testament, he declar'd their force, and condemn'd the Arian Heresie, and forbad all men to approve and receive it. I shall not do the great Cause of
the Son of God, nor the excellent Bishop (tho' he once unhappily fell) so much injury, as to infer from thence, that he set a less value upon that Article of Faith, than he did upon Church Uni∣on, under the Church's lawful Governours, in that he rejected the former, but retain'd the latter, for his repentance shew'd his just sense of his recidivation, in opposing the former, the doing of which is to be attributed to his frailty, and not his choice, but it must be hence allow'd, that what prospect soever, under that dismal juncture, he had of the former, he did not look upon the latter as an indifferent thing: nor may we think that his sub∣scription against Athanasius was less requir'd of him by his ene∣mies, the Eusebians, nor less acceptable to them, nor that it would have been less beneficial to himself, than Liberius's was a little after. But, since it was so order'd by a Superior hand (which dis∣poseth every thing, so as to bring advantage out of it) that Hosius sub∣scrib'd to the Aetian Article, in which the Son is asserted to be a Creature, but did not subscribe against AthanasiusVid. Baron. 357. Num. 41, 42.; But Liberius subscrib'd against Athanasius, and ente'd into communion with the Oriental Bishops, and did not subscribe to the aforesaid Ar∣ticle, but only to the first Sirmian Creed; even Felix (who was Liberius's intruder) was not an Aetian Arian, but had constantly adher'd to the Nicene Faith; and no other reason seems to be given why the Christians in Rome boggl'd to receive Liberius, for a while, upon his return, but because he had communicated with the Arians, and subscrib'd to Athanasius's Deprivation, or which is the same thing, comply'd with a false succession, and made no satisfaction for it; since even Dr. Hody acknowledges,P. 44. in fine pag. that the Felicians in Rome kept off from Liberius for some time, and I would fain have him give any other reason for it, but that they were not satisfied in the legality of his re-establishment, but thought Felix their lawful Bishop upon his possession; and Libe∣rius the Intruder, i. e. a Schismatick, though he was not an Heretick: These things being (I say) thus manifest and apparent to all men, if they amount not in themselves to a rule, they are great and convincing exemplifications of the distinct natures of Heresie and Schism, which two, like other Specificks, have di∣stinct operations and effects. Church Union, in a just succes∣sion, and Articles of Faith, or res personarum, and res fidei, things belonging to Persons, and things belonging to Faith, were under eparate considerations in those days, in the opinion of both Par∣tis, with which we are now concern'd, and surely, upon a
common Principle in Government. Doth not our Historian tell usThedor. l. . c. 17. that they all believ'd they were oblig'd to have one Bishop, as they had but one God, one Christ? And it will hence also follow, that Schism and Heresie were not lookt upon as substance and accident, and the former thought to have no being but as subject in the latter, and as a meer dependant upon it: or that, as the Doctor states itP. ., there is no rule for Union, but in re∣lation to the Articles; and the even unjust and uncannonical De∣privation, and Successor upon it, are to be receiv'd, supposing the Successor be not an Heretick. But, if so, how comes it to be Hosius's virtue (for surely Athanasius's records it to be one) that he did not subscribe to Athanasius's condemnation, as well as to the Aetian Article, and that he was not wholly an Apostate? I will not ask why he did not subscribe to the false condemna∣tion, as well as the false Article, because in subscribing to the latter, he must have subscrib'd to the former upon the Doctor's supposition, the accident, or shadow, changing, or ceasing as the substance doth, and it is either black or white, sower or sweet, or nohng, in correspondence with it. Neither may it be pleaded, that Hosius was then desirous, being above an hundred years old, and under great oppressions, which make a wise man mad, since he had a sense and grace to repent: Or farther, that the Euse∣bians were of the Doctor's opinion, and that they did not insist up∣on his subscription against Athanasius, having gain'd his subscrip∣tion to the Article, as not thinking it valuable in it self, since I have shew'd the contrary from our adversaries own precedeing practice with Hosius and Liberius. Besides, what was Liberius's crime? Or wherein did his fall consist, when after a strong trial, and an undaunted courage, and great constancy for some time to the contrary, he subscrib'd at length against Athanasius, and communicated with the Arians, but retain'd the right Faith, if to own a false and desert a true Union, was not a fault, tho' the Faith at the same time is invio∣lated? For if the Doctor does think Liberius's deserting Athanasius, and communicating with the Arians, was not to desert a true, and comply with a false Union, nor a fault, all truly Catholick Christians have thought it to be one. Or why did the Catholicks refuse to communicate with Liberius upon his subscription? For we must own they did refuse upon his return by Constantius's oder, untill he made satisfaction for his recidivation, and its scandal, because the Church Principles oblig'd them to that re∣fusal till his retractation: tho' our Histories fail in giving u a
particular account of it: but nothing is more sure, than that they did not own Felix to be their Bishop, and communicate with him, tho' he was not an Arian, (for that he was not one all confess, and even Dr. Hody too) nor otherwise exceptionable as to Doctrine: Now for this, no other reason can be given, neither is any other pretended, but that he subscrib'd against Athanasius, and communicated with those that had also subscrib'd against him, and was placed in a full Chair, contrary to the Church Laws, by the secular arm. Or, why did, even Felix's Disciples, at least so many of them as receiv'd the right Faith, together with him, refuse Liberius when he was restor'd by the Emperor, if they were of the opinion the Baroccian Manuscript represents its dege∣nerate Greek Bishops to have been, and believ'd that the Prince could legitimate an unjust and uncannonical Succession, so be the Bishop possess'd by him was not an Arian, or otherways He∣retical, since it is certain that Liberius was not? In short, a Bishop that turns Arian, and openly professes him∣self to be such, may not be receiv'd, tho' he does not formally, and in so many words renounce Communion with the Colledge of Priests, or Catholick Bishops of Christendom. And such was Hosius's case, upon his fall. Again, a Bishop that is not an Arian, nor otherways Heretical, but renounces the Catholick Communion, and separates from the Episcopal Colledge, may not, either be communicated with, and this was the case of Liberius, upon his subscription against Athanasius, and of Felix, upon his assuming Liberius's Chair, when he had been exil'd by Constantius: but I shall have a farther opportunity to consider Liberius and Felix anon: I have here but toucht upon them (to∣gether with Hosius) that I might take occasion (for the omission of which I could not pardon my self) to expose that crude im∣perfect Plea which Dr. Hody frequently makes, in vindication of his most false assertion, [viz. That unjust possession legitimates a Bi∣shop, if he be not an Heretick] as from the Practise of the Church of God, when he tells us; that such and such Bishops, when they were plac'd in Sees by the secular arm, upon unlawful Deprivations, were ejected, but it was because they were Arians, and that their un∣just possession was not a competent ground for their ejection, since it is so very plain, not only upon Church Practise, but upon Church Principles, that, as they were Arians, so if they were also Schismati∣cal Possessors, as their Arianism, so their Schism upon such possession, did disable them, and put a just bar to the Peoples receiving,
and communicating with them: And the Doctor ought to have prov'd, but has not attempted it, that their Arianism, or other Heresie, could alone do it, but their Schism could not. And yet he insults all along upon the Plea as unanswerable, and makes it over and over, even to nauseousness. A little after the Composure of the Second Creed at Sirmium the Oriental Bishops met, first at Ancyra, and then at Sirmium, and there corrected its Heresies and Blasphemies: and tho' Sozo∣menL. 4. c. 5. has again mistaken when he says, That they omitted the word Substance, and declar'd that it ought not to be nam'd, be∣cause it is not found in the Scriptures, and asserted the Son to be like the Father, as in the Second Sirmian Creed; yet St. Hilary's accountDe Synod. p. 227. Ed. Basil. is otherwise; and we there find, that they not only mention the word Substance, but declare the Son to be of the same Substance with the Father, and like him in all things: and to this Creed Constantius subscrib'd; and Valens, who was afterwards Emperor, did the same by his means, but unwillingly; be∣cause he could not digest that part of it, which made the Son like the Father in all things, as we find in Epiphanius.Heres. 37. §. 25. Ed. Paris. And he farther says§. 22. ibid., That it was afterwards so accomodated between the Semi-Arians and the Arians, that the word Substance, in the Ancyran, and third Sirmian Creed was left out, (the Arians be∣ing not able to bear with it) so both consented, that the Son should be asserted like the Father in all things: and the former were very well pleas'd, for they concluded, that if the Son was like the Father in all things, he was also like him in Substance, and in his Eternal Nature: and the latter were well satisfy'd for the present, because they had escap'd the word Substance; and they soon after improv'd it to the advantage of their design'd Heresie, or rather to the restoring of it, as it was stated and maintain'd by them in the Council of Nicea, till those Fathers there cast it out. And the Acacians (who made a Sect which arose presently upon it) openly declar'd the Son to be like the Father in his will only, in the Council of Seleucia. Socrat. L. 2. c. 32., which renders him a Creature with a witness. For, if so, every truly regenerated Man is as much God, as the Son is. And, I remember, Garnerius, the learned Jesuite relates it, That Theodorus, Bishop of Mopsvestia, us'd to reply, when Christ's divinity was urg'd upon himAnnot. in Marium mercatorem.; possum & ego Deus esse si volo: and I can be a God if I will: and very truly upon his tacking the fore∣mention'd
Acacianism to the Pelagain Principle, of which last he is there represented to have been an assertor, if he was not the Author, but tho' the Ancyran Bishops came up to the Eusebians in the Council of Antioch, and the first Sirmian Creed, and as∣serted with them the eternal Generation; they differ'd from them in that they anathematiz'd the Homo♉sian explication, and consub∣stantality of the Son and the Father, as we find it in Epiphani∣us:Ibid supr. §. 11. and St. Hilary owns as much too,De Synod. but he says it is not in every Copy of the Council. And it may not be amiss, if I here stay a little, and give an account of the several Sects, and their discriminations, which rose upon Arius's starting the con∣troversie with Alexander concerning the Generation of the Son: for I call them all Sects alike, tho' I place the Homo♉sians a∣mong them, since I find the term applied to the Christians, as well as to the several Heathen Worships, by our Ancient Apologists. And, 1. The Homo♉sians, or Athanasians, (as they may be properly call'd) assert, the Father and the Son to have one and the same Substance, Nature, and Essence, which they express and explicate by the word Consubstantial, as in the Council of Ni∣cea: tho' I do not find in the Progress of the Controversie they accounted those that wav'd the word Consubstantial, [] in their explication of the eternal Generation, to be Heretical, if it was not done upon some visible design for evil, but communi∣cated with them, if they were otherwise unexceptionable: And accordingly AthanasiusL. de Synod. Arim. &c. p. 915. has openly declar'd, That, as to those who receive all the Writings of the Synod of Nicea, but make a doubt concerning Consubstantial, , we are not to proceed against them as enemies, neither do we contradict them as Ariomanites, or enemies to those Fathers, but we discourse them as Brethren, holding the same opinion, and differing only in words. 2. The Eusebians, who came next, asserted the same in every respect, (though not with the same integrity) and did not condemn the word Consubstantial, but thought it the safer way to omit it, as what might occasion disputes and strife, and so they left it out of their Creed, as in the Council of Antioch. St. HilaryDominum nostrum Jesum Chri∣stum Deum & Dei filium a patre, nec honoris confessione, nec virtu∣tis potestate, nec substantiae di∣versitate, nec intervallo temporis separari. L. de Synod. has fully express'd the Catholicks and their Sense in these words, in the Margin.
3. The Semi Arians (so some call them) were those, who retein'd th word Substance, and asserted the Son to be of the same Essnce with he Father, and to be like him in all things, but thy left out the word Consubstantial, and not only so, but con∣demn'd it, and declar'd that it ought not to be us'd. I just nw intimated this out of Epiphanius. Sect. 10, 11., who gives us a large ac∣count out of an Epstle, which the Pseudo-Anciran Synod wrote, shewing how they asserted te Eternal Generation, and that Christ had the same Substance with the Father, and Anathema∣tiz'd all that oppos'd them, and yet this is the conclusion of those assertions, viz.. Sect. 10, 11. If any one who asserts the Father to be in Power and Essence the Father of the Son, shall say that the Son is Consubstantial, and Coessential with the Father, let him be an Anathema. The Bishops in the second Council of Sirmium were the first who denied the Eternal and Identical Nature of the Father and the Son, and that the Son was like the Father in all things, from the end of the Nicene Council to that time: And these in the Pseudo Ancyran Council were the first that ever assert∣ed the same Eternal and Indentical Nature of the Son and the Fa∣ther; and that the Son was like the Father in all things, but deny'd the Consubstantiality of the Father and the Son, and anathematiz'd those that asserted and subscrib'd to it, and erected a Sect upon it, whose Members are generally call'd Semi Arians by Ecclesiastical Writers: But Epiphanius (who, if I mistake not, is the first that mentions it) does not seem to apply the title to them, as a Cha∣racteristick, when he manifestly makes them a dstinct Sect, and calls them Semi Arians, by their principles and distict theses. And tho' the succeeding Church set a separating mark upon them, and not unjustly, it arguinst an ill spirit: And, surely, it is of a very ill consequence, when men, not ony censure, but reject the Church's Explication of Faith, in order to peace, up∣on an emerging controversie, especially when it is altogether innocent, and, which is more, conteins the true Doctrine of the Article: For when the Son is said to be of the same Substance with the Father, and like him in all things, and of no ther Substance, is he not Consubstantial with him? And accordigly, St. Hilary says, when I had heard of neither I un∣derstood both,Testor Dminum Coeli atque terrae me cum neutrum audivissem, semper tamen utrumque esisse, quod per hmoision ho∣msion oporteret intelit: id est nihil si∣mile sibi secundum nauram ess posse, nisi quod esset ex eadem natura. Regeneratus pridem, & in Episcopatu aliquantisper manens, Fidam Nicaenam uunquam nisi exulaturus audivi, sed homo♉sii & ho∣mo♉sii intelligentiam Evangelia & Apostoli intimaverunt. L. de Synod. in fine. and that Homoousios ought to be understood by Homoiousios, because nothing can be lke to him according to nature, but that which is the same nature. Being long ago re∣generated,
and remaining for some time in the Episcopate, I never heard of the Nicene Faith till I was to be banisht; but the Gospels and the Apostles intimated unto me the sense of Ho∣moousios and Homoiousios. But notwith∣standing, neither the chain of consequences, nor the authority of the Council did pre∣vail with these men. (which last St. HilarySi quid ad interpretationem addendum est, communier consulamus. ibid. thinks ought to prevail) Though someBaron. an. 358. num. 16. Natal. Alex. Hist. Eccl. Secul. 4. vol. 1. p. 97. Et dissertat. de iisdem. vol. 2. have thought that they were not plac'd among the heretical Professors, nor condemn'd as such, but receiv'd into communion. 4. And lastly, the Ex♉kontians, or Arians properly, rejected and condemn'd Substance and Consubstantial; and asserted, that the Son was destitute of his Father Essence, and to have receiv'd his Ori∣gine with the Creatures out of nothing; as St. HilaryEssentiae inops paternae, acce∣pisse cum crea∣turis originem de non extanti∣bus. Hilar. de Synod.. And they dif∣fer from the followers of Photinus, Paulus Samosatenus, &c. and our modern Socinians, who assert him to receive his beginning in the Womb of the Virgin, but they agree with them, in that both assert his excellency beyond other Creatures to consist only in his more regular will and Godly qualities, than any of them had; as also, in his larger Prophetick gifts, and gratuitous endowments of edfication. And hence the Sect of Anomeans arose, from Aetius, Eudoxius, Eunomius, and others. Having given the Characteristicks of these several Sects, I go on in any propos'd method. And the next, which comes before us, is the second Creed, which was compos'd at Sirmium: It was offer'd in the Council of Ariminum (which follows not long after the third Creed of Sirmium) by Valens,Socrat. l. 2. c. 29. Soz. l. 4. c. 16, 17, 18. Baron. an. 359. num. 3. Athan. de Synod p. 876. Ursacius, and their Associates, and its confirmation requir'd, with a nullity of all other Creeds which had been before: But the Western Bishops would by no means hear of it, or any such thing; but, on the contrary, confirm'd and receiv'd the Nicene Council in all things: Also they wrote their Synodical Epistle to Constantius, in which they requir'd his Concurrence and Ratification; as likewise, in their abdication of Valens, Ursacius, Germanicus, Auxentius &c. which was done at the same time, in that Council, because they insisted on the second Sirmian Creed, and refus'd to receive and obey their Determination and Sentence. Thus the true Faith of the Eternal Generation was restor'd and ratified in the Church of God, by no less than four hundred Catholick Bi∣shops.
But alas! how suddenly was this face of things alter'd? What through the unwearied industry of Valens and Ursacius, (which is usual with Hereticks) and the apostacy (to the astonishment of Christendom in all after Ages) of the same Bishops; the im∣portunity of those two restless men so far prevail'd upon Constan∣tius, partly because the Bishops brokeSocr. & Soz. ibid. up the Synod of Ari∣minum, and went home, without his leave, but chiefly for the effecting their old design, that he commission'd them, as Pleni∣potentiaries, with an unlimited Power to govern the Western Churches according to their discretion: And they ejected all those Bishops that refus'd to subscribe to the second Sirmian Creed, and placed others in their Chairs: And thus possibly too by wheedling,Theod. H. E. l. 2. c. 21. Soz. l. 4. c. 18. and pleas of uniting the Eastern and Western Churches, but mostly by. Socr. l. 4. c. 11. terrors, and a worldly fear of losing their Bishopricks, they soon effected their purpose. So the words Consubstantial and Substance were condemn'd and cast out, and the Ex♉kontian Faith subscrib'd, in a Council which they had to that end procur'd in ThraceThed. ibid. &c. 19, 20.: And it was done by the far greater number of the Bishops that had receiv'd and subscrib'd to the Catholick truths in the Council of Ariminum, and there delibe∣rately resolv'd never to depart from them: as their Synodical Epistle to Constantius make appear. I must stay a little, and make a few remarks upon some passages in the foregoing paragraph, if it be only to oblige Doctor Hody: And I should not pardon my self, if I did not give notice of the pregnant instance it affords him of the seeular Ma∣gistrates practice in depriving Bishops by his own Authority, and of its recognizance by some hundreds of Bishops, (especially, since he was so unhappy as to leave it out of his laborious Collection to that purpose) in that Constantius hath so signally deriv'd his Power upon Valens and Ursacius, and thereby enabl'd them to govern all the Western Churches according to their discretion, and eject every Bishop that did not come up to his terms, and place Successors upon them, and a whole and great Council (some few only excepted) complied with them in it. But the same kindness to him does likewise direct me to let him know, that this Power was assum'd by the Empire, and thence deriv'd upon Valens and Ursacius, and entertain'd by them, on purpose to break in pieces the unity of the Church, and overthrow its Faith in the Eternal Generation, and that the far more nume∣rous part, which subscrib'd did it against their knowledg and
conscience, and former subscriptions, compell'd to it by horrors and fears; that they afterwards repentedTheod. H. E. Comment Synod. de Concil. Arim. & Athans. Ep de eodem. l. 2. c. 22, 23. Athan. Ep. de Synod. p. 877. and made satisfa∣ction with retractions and tears; and to give him an account how there was a remnant at the same time, which neither subscrib'd to their Faith, nor submitted to their unjust and un∣canonical deprivations, nor own'd their Successors, notwihstanding the Sovereign Coercive Power and irresistible Party, neither small nor tumultuous, by which it was effected, but disown'd their Authority, in relation to their false Bishops, as well as to their false Faith, and went apart,Athanas. ibid. Baron a. 359. num. 59. to a small Vilage, scituated on the Sea shore betwix Ariminum and Pisaurus, and made their Re∣ligious Conventions in it, tho' the Persecution did not pemit them to continue there long; and the Village was therefore call'd Catholica, and afterwards retain'd its name. St. Athana∣sius says a monument was erected there to perpetuate their me∣moy. And surely thee is no one artifice a Prince can use, that more immediately and directly, contributes to his design for overthrowing the Faith, and a Church's whole Constitution, than his assuming a Right, as congenious to his Earthly Power, to remove Christ's Bishops, and supreme Officers, and surrogate others in thei Sees at his pleasure, and his executing it accordingly. The late Editor of the Baroccian Manuscript could not have repre∣sented the degenerate state of the Greek Church, otherwise too well know within those Ages to which it is there confin'd, more lively than he has done in the publication of it, since this Para∣dox, (for so it is to the Catholick Church) is there asserted and maintain'd: viz. That the Civil Power hath an Authority arbi∣trarily to remove a lawful Bishop from his See, and constitute his Successor. I have said, Arbitrarily: At which exceptions will be made, because it is added by me, and that Manuscript hath it not. But since. Heresy is the only bar which it puts in the case, or, (as Doctor Hody has alter'd it) unless that Successor be not such whom no good Catholick can refuse; he that tuly hinks will find, that this secular Power, in removing a Bishop, and making his Successor, can be none, if it be not Arbitrary: For, if the Church hath a Power, (what doth the Doctor seem to say less, in his own restriction, than that every private Christian hath it?) to refuse the Prince's Bishop, because he is not such as she requires, but par∣ticularly because of his Heresy, (of which I have always thought the Church to be Judge) then the Prince hath no
power to make a Bishop, and the Church alone can do it: Can∣not every Believer oppose him in it, if as a good Catholick, he seem to have a just cause to refuse him? But of the Church be not Judg Heresy, it being the Greeks only bar to the Princes Arbitrariness, Heresy can be none, because if the Prince thinks his Possessor is not an Heretick, tho' he is one, there is no Judg to over rule him, and nothing but his own Arbitrariness can give him rules, in an emerging case: Or, indeed, at all. Our Eusebians were thoroughly sensible of this advantage their cause would receive by their removing the Chatholick Bishops, which they partly did, by their false Syns, and partly by the Regal Power, separate to the Ecclesiastical, the, condemnation of the Arian Heresy, in the Council of Nicea suppressing it for the present: (themselves, and even their Ma∣ster Arius, seemingly at least, consenting, and approving the Council) And when they could not hope to retrieve the He∣resy directly, (for they retain'd the same affection for it which they had at first) these subtile, as well as incessantly active and unwearied persons, made it their business to have several of the principal Bishops depos'd as criminals, whose arguments and industry had procur'd its ejection in the Council: And thus they gain'd the Court so far on their side, that by its Potency and terrors Eustathius of Antioch was depos'd by a Synod at Antioch, Athanasius of Alexandria was likewise remov'd, first in a Council of Tyre, and then in another at Antioch, and Gregory was made a Successor to him; Paul of Constantinople was abdi∣cated, with several others: And if Constantine the Father had not been aware of their deceit, and his two Sons Constantine and Constans had not approv'd themselves true friends to the Catho∣licks, they might have ut of more. But all this while they did not meddle with the Nicene Feith, but profess'd to believe and maintain it, with the same love and constancy the Catho∣licks did. Did they not make these Bishops abdication their only visible mark for some time? This will further appear in that, when they found their party less numerous and unable to vote with the Athanasians in the Council of Sardica, but saw that Athanasius and othes would be restor'd and confirm'd there, they either excepted against the place and refused to come there, or quitted it, and the Nicene Article was not their concern. The proceedings of the Pseudo-Sardicans, who met in the East within a while after, and profess'd the Eternal Generation, but carried
on the first design, and depos'd Julius of Rome, Gaudentius, Maximinus, and others, upon pretences of misdemeanours, which were not of Faith, are no less evidence of it. They took the same course in the Council of Millane, and immediately broke up when they found they could not have their purposes upon Athanasius's person. DionysiusTheod. H. E. l. 2. c. 15. in initio. of Italy, Paulinus of France, Lucifer of Sardinia and Eusebius of Vercellis, were there abdicated by Con∣stantius's secular hand, and Hosius and Liberius, not long after: Of all which I have already given an account. It is true, Con∣stantius order'd that another method should be taken in the Council of Ariminum, and, by his Letters, directed the Bi∣shops, that they should first determine matters of Faith, and then the causes of the Bishops,Soz. l 4. c. 6. in initio. who were abdicated or exil'd, should be consider'd, they finding that their party had gain'd ground in the Council of Sirmium, in whose second Creed the words Consubstantial and Substance are rejected, and the Son asserted to be a Creature: But they found themselves deceiv'd upon Valens and Ursacius's offering that Creed there, and requiring its reception: Upon this they return'd to their old methodes, and Constantius made Valens and Ursacius his Vicar-Generals, with an indefinite latitude, who, by turning out some Bishops, and terrifying others, threatning their abdication, gain'd their cause effectually, and Exoukontianism was replanted, and continu'd by the same method, for a good while, in the Church. And the Children of Light were not less wise in their Gene∣rations than these Children of darkness, but knew full well, and saw thorough these depths of Sathan, whose main design was that the Faith might be distroy'd: As Paulus and Athanasius give the reason of their own. Scr. l. 2. c. 16. abdication by the Eusebians. (Athana∣sius says it over and over again in his Works) and thereupon they solicite the Empire for the ejected Bishops restoration: The same reason we find to to be given by Dionysius of Alba, Eusebius of Vercellis, Paulinus of Trevers, Rhodanus and Lucifer, in the Synod of Millan: All of them remon∣strate against these abdications,. as the leading step to the destruction of the Ni∣cene Faith.Theod. l. 2. c. 15. These Eusebians pretended no more at first but to remove Athanasius, and they brought plausible reasons for it, as, that he was an ill commonwealths man,Soz. l. 4. c. 8.
that he violated the laws, was an enemy to the Emperor's person and government, of which with more I have already given an ac∣count: But, , as Sozomen well observ'd, this was not their ultimate aim, neither did their mischief stop here: The Orthodox Faith was struck at thorough Athanasius's, and the other suffering Bishop's sides, and wise men saw it. And tho' the Eusebians had then in a great measure conceal'd themselves, so as their Arianism was not openly made known, yet the Orthodox believ'd themselves equally oblig'd to oppose their depositions of Bishops, as to assert and defend the true Faith. Nor do I believe that any one, who thinks at all, can be so loose in his thoughts as not to apprehend, that the same Power, which has an indefiesable right to remove the Magistrates of a Corporation upon its own terms, and place Successors in their room, and oblige the Society to receive them, may not, and will not, by often changing, and the advantage of man's corrupt heart, overthrow the Laws, and alter the Constitutions of that Corpo∣ration, when ever it shall think fit. Constantius and his Eusebians practice are a sad, but true instance of it, who by these means incorporated Exoukontianism into the Church: A full improve∣ment of Doctor Hody's, and his Greek's principle would have kept it there for ever, if the Empire had so pleas'd. But as A∣remnant thought it their duty to oppose them for that one reason, and to adhere their proper Bishops, so they preserv'd the true Faith in opposition to them: And all good Christians and Bishops ought to do the same. I cannot but be sorry, that our British Island hath lately given us two instances; the one of which comes short of these Orthodox Bishops practice, and the other exemplifies the Hereticks practice and its sad event, but, I hope, without their destructive inten∣tions. We have had a Synod, in which our Divines acted learnedly and zealously in the behalf of the outward Constitu∣tions of our Church, but without their Metropolitan, and others of our Bishops, whom the secular Arm alone withheld from them, and, which is worse, without desiring them, or enquir∣ing after the reason of their absence: Herein they came short of the Orthodox Clergy in the case of Athanasius, and others, particularly in the Synods of Sardica and Millane. We have had also our Metropolitan, and more of the Colledge, depriv'd (Doctor Hody says unjustly and uncanonically) by the secular Arm; and
within a while after the whole Order abolish'd in a considera∣ble part of our Island, and not only the Discipline, but the Doctrine of our Church disenfranchis'd, and pestilent Heresies brought in, which are very noxious at present, and may be no less destructive to the Faith, than Arianism once was: Neither have the remaining part of the College, as yet, attempted their Order's restauration, nor put up one Petition in its behalf to those powers by which it was abolish'd, in whom they may be suppos'd to have an interest for effecting its Restauration: Herein they also go contrary to the ancient Rules and Pra∣ctice of the Christian Incorporation, by which the Governors stand engag'd, and have still endeavour'd, to retrieve and con∣tinue each others Rights in the Fraternity, and the Order it self. But to return where we left of. A little after the Council of Ariminum, if not during the time of its sitting, the Council of Seleucia was call'd: In which the Eusebians carried it, (tho' the Arians had outvoted them be∣fore) and obtain'd to have the Creed of the Council of Antioch subscib'd to, but for what reasons, I cannot tell. The Creed is set down at Large byAdver. Haeres. l. 3. Tom. 1 haeres. 73 sect. 25. Edict Paris. Epiphanius. And tho' Acacius so order'd it, that he brought another Creed into the Council, he miss'd of his design in it: But upon his appeal to Constantius, who was then at Constantinople, he procur'd a Synod in that City, in which the Ariminum Faith was read and receiv'd, with some alterations for the worse: And, as they assert'd the Son to be like the Father according to the Scriptures; so they anathematiz'd all those that should mention the word Substance in their Creeds. And they moreover decree'd. That the subsistence of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost ought not to be named. Of all which we have a particular account in our Church Historians.Socr. l. 2. c. 31, 32. Theod. l 2. c. 27. Soz. l. 4. c. 21, 22, 23. And we are not to wonder at the procedeings of this Convention, if we consider St. Hilary's character of itOrientalium in Selencio Syno∣do, ubi repperi tartum blasphe∣miarum, quan∣tum Constantio placebat. Hil. de Synodis.. Especially since he tells us, that Constantius's will was the rule of their proceedings. And now Arianism came barefaced upon the stage of the World, when it had been disguis'd and underhand manag'd from the time of the Nicene Council to this day. Before the Lord Christ was denyed in the dark and in corners,Antea enim in obscuro atque in angulis Dominus Coristus Dei esse secundum na∣tuam Filius negabatur, & Essentiae inops Ptnae, accepisse cum Creaturis originem de non extantibus praeaicabatur: At vero nunc publicè, authoritatis professione Hae∣resis prorumpens, id quod antea sutim mussitabat, nunc victrix gloriatur. Quibus enim antea cuniculis in Catholicam Eccle∣siam non tentavit erumpere. Ibid. de Synod. contr. Arian. p. 240. to be the Son of God according to Nature, and declar'd destitute of his Father's Essence, and to have receiv'd his beginning out of nothing with the Creatures:
But now the Heresy breaking out publickly, and with the profession of authority, that which was talk'd privately, among themselves and by stealth, glory's a Conqueress. For by what mines did it not before attempt to creep into the Catholick Church? As St. Hilary speaks. It is become the Religion of the Empie, and Constantius protects none that shall dare to oppose, that will not embrace, it. Be∣fore this time Valens and Ursacius, and some few more Bishops did now and then assert it, but their endeavours, like untimely births, ended in nothing, and they repented and submitted to the Church's Censures, accordingly as their principles directed them, upon a failure of success: But Eunomius, Eudoxius, Aetius, Euzoius, Macedonius &c. are now seated in their Chairs, and the question is not, whether Consubstantial may not be better omitted in our Creed, when the Eternal Generation is asserted? (which was all that the Eusebians, at the first, desir'd; the Antiochian Creed was fram'd by them, to satisfie the world that they desired no more,) Nor is it now only contended, that the words, Consub∣stantial and Substance, ought not to be us'd, because they are not found in the Sc iptures, as in the second Sirmian Creed: But the Anomans and Exoukontians give the Laws and Rules of Faith in the Son of God, and he is to be recogniz'd as a Creature, differing only from the rest of the sons of men, in that he was made before the world, and endued with graces beyond the mst accomplish'd and perfect o them. Accordingly AthanasiusOrat. 1 & 3. ad Arian. p. 286. 296. 385. & Orat. 4. p. 468. represents these men to be no better than Heathens, in the divine Worship, which they perform to him, as giving it to the crea∣ture, instead of the Creator, which they equal with him. The heavy persecutions carry'd on before, were upon the account of Athanasius's deposition, and some other abdications which attended it, the Church of God refusing to own and submit to them, because they were unjust and uncanonical, and to receive Successors upon them: And the Eusebians policy directed them to begin here, as a direct, but remote step to their main end; that was the introducing the same Heresie, which was not then rie, and requir'd concealment: But now the child being come to the birth, and their strength having enabled them to bring forth, there needs no other cime, than to profess the Consub∣stantiality and one Substance of the Father and Son. And, as. l. 2. c. 30. So∣crates spks, The Law of the Emperor, and the violence of Macedo∣nius commanded, that the Churches which determin'd for the Ho∣moousian
Faith should suffer exile: Here the persecution was founded; and it raged no less furiously than those of former and after ages. The name of Substance is abolish'd, and the damnation of the Nicene Faith is unanimously assented to, when even the whole world groan'd, and beheld, with astonishment, it self to be Arian, as St.Ʋsiae nomen a∣bolitum est, & Nienae fidei damnatio con∣clamata, quando & ttus orbis ingemuit, & A∣rianum se esse miratu, est Advers. Lucifer. Jerom, upon the same occasion. And tho' the persecution abated in the Reign of Julian, by the advantage of his indul∣gence, it return'd under Valens, and continu'd raging, until God's mercy to his Church took him away, and seated Gratian in the Throne, who immediately upon itVid. Socr. l 5. c. 2. Theod. l. 5. c. 2. Soz l. 5. c. 2. call'd home the ba∣nisht Bishops, and restor'd them to their Sees, and a liberty for the exercise of their functions. SECT. V. HAving shew'd (if I do not mistake) from undoubted mat∣ter of fact, that after the Doctrine of one Substance was receiv'd and ratified in the Council of Nicea, as that Faith which had remain'd from the beginning, and the Prophets and Evangelists had preach'd, and after the Arian Heresie had been confuted and extinguish'd by. Synod. Ari∣min. Ep. Synodal, ad Constantium, apud Socrat. H. Ecl. 2. c. 29. those Fathers, Arianism was not retriev'd in any one instance, unless by three or four Bishops now and then, upon some emergencies; (who were immediately silenced, and repented, and retracted it) but, tho' suppurated in St. Hilary's expression abovemention'd by me, it continu'd almost a con∣ceal'd thing neer thirty years, i. e. from the end of the Nicene Council, to the Council of Sirmium, the common computation making it little less, and the second Sirmian Creed made the first essay for its publication; but the Council of Ancyra, and third Sirmian Creed soon after corrected the mistake of the second, and then above four hundred Bishops anathematiz'd it in the Council of Ariminum: Tho the majority, by far, of those Fathers at Ari∣minum were so unhappy, to a prodigy, as to retrieve and reesta∣blish it in the Church, through the threats and terrors of the Empire, when they had pawn'd their Faith and Souls to the contrary but a little before: This was the time when it was first openly profess'd, and made the Law of the Empire upon the Ariminum Fathers supplicating Constantius, that he would receive it into his protection, and embody it in his Kingdom. 'Tis with a respect to the Anathema in the Ariminum Synod, that Athanasius. Ep. ad So∣litar. vitam. a∣agentes. p. 830. tells us, Constantius observing Arianism to be hated of all men, forced several of the Bishops to subscribe unto it, that the few of his
own party might be augmented, and he thereby be enabled to over∣throw the truth. Having also shew'd, that the Catholicks, during the foremention'd interval, contended directly and im∣mediately, if not only, against the deposition of Athanasius and other Bishops, and their unrighteous Successors, as unjustly and un∣canonically done, by the malice and fraud of the Eusebians, who part∣ly wheedled, and partly over rul'd, the Empire by their false sugge∣stions and notorious calumnies, so as it became instrumental to their wish'd purpose, and was the most effectual means for the recovery of their espous'd naughty Heresie, to establish it in the World. It has been made appear too, that Athanasius and his Party suffer'd principally upon this account, daring no more to submit to an unjust Deprivation, and false Succession, than to a false Faith; I should now proceed to something that is behind, but I think fit first to annex the following consectaries, conteining a few use∣ful observations and inferences from the whole, which each eye, that hath perus'd it, must have observ'd. As, 1. The , or ignorance of the plain History and matter of fact, within our interval or prefix'd Epoche, is notoriously evi∣dent in those, who tell it abroad, that Athanasius, and the then Catholick Bishops, and Believers, did refuse to submit to, and receive, the Eusebians Abdications and Successions, becuse the Suc∣cessors were Arians. These holy Bishops sagacity, and superadded graces, with which, by the mercy and favour of the heavens, we are to believe them to have been abundantly instucted, must be allow'd to have warn'd and guarded them against the natural and de∣structive consequences of the Eusebians proceedings of that na∣ture, which still made way for the introducing what Heresies the Managers of them design'd to infest the Church of God with: And we have a great deal of reason to believe, that they were especially aware of their Adversaries aim,Vid. Secrat. l. 1. c. 20. in initio. thereby to re∣store Arianism, they having subscrib'd through force, and not sincerely, to its condemnation in the Council of Nicea: but yet, since they openly subscrib'd the Nicene Faith in the Council of Nicea, and had not renounced and recall'd their subscription by any overt act; but, on the contrary, upon all occasions, in their Synods and Creeds, either openly declar'd for its Doctrine, or palliated it, but made no open remonstrance against it, and neither the Eusebians nor Semi Arians wereAugust. Ep. 174. accounted here∣tical; since themselves did not think they were distinguish'd from the Catholicks by those Creeds which they made, or any other outward performances, within our set compass of time,
and therefore made new ones, upon their declaring themselves to be Arians, which was done after the aforesaid Epoche: Is it not very odd and inconsistent to think and say, that they were then Arians, and that their right was not own'd; nor their po∣testative judicial acts of Government receiv'd as competent, and valid, meerly because of Heresie? Can a more favourable cen∣sure be pass'd upon those that maintain this, than that they were ignorant of the state of persons and things within that time? Or can the Catholicks, who are suppos'd to have refus'd them, be accounted so unthinking and imprudent as to do it upon that account, since their adversaries might so very easily clear themselves of the aspersion, and invalidate their reason, from their own concessions? For, what was more ready for their reply, then this, viz. That their own mouths had acquit∣ted them of it? Might not these Eusebians have loaded them back with the guilt of Schism, and Disobedience, upon their non-submission to their Successors, if their present Arianism had been the only thing they had to plead in their own defence? If therefore the Eusebians unjust and uncanonical Deprivations and Possessions did not put the bar, Athanasius and his Party will hardly be found justifiable in not submitting to them, since it did not appear, but that in all other respects they were such whose com∣munion no good Catholick could refuse. 2. If we admit the Eusebians to have been profess'd Arians, within our Epoche, or distance of time, how does it follow, that the Abdications and Successions, which they then created, were rejected by the Athanasians as incompetent and invalid, for that reason only? Might there not have been social Reasons that equally oblig'd them to it? It is evident that there were others, and that they were reputed competent, because the unjustness and uncanonicalness of the Abdications and Successions, were mostly, if not only, pleaded, as the reasons why they were not receiv'd: I do not remember that the Successor's Arianism is once directly insisted on, as its reason: but the undue Abdication is very fre∣quently: and the Catholicks refusing to receive the Successor up∣on the account of the latter, is that which occasions their ad∣versaries objection against them. Besides, may not he that is an Arian be a Schismatick too? And is not Schism, in bringing in a false Succession, as much to be separated from, and as just a ground for it, when it is joyn'd with Arianism, as it was when the Novatians and Donatists made it, who were not Arians, nor
otherways Heretical? St. Paul1 Cor. 11. was easily inclinable to believe, hat there were Schisms in the Church of Corinth, because there must be Heresies in it; but he was far enough from thinking that Schism lost its guilt by being accompanied with Heresie, and that the Believers ought not therefore to avoid, nor have any regard to the Schism; but that it ceas'd, for that reason. Bishops were professedly Arians, in the days of Valens the Emperor, and unjustly possess'd of most of the Sees of Christendom, but the Catholicks were not less careful and conscientious to keep up the rightful Succession, than the rightful Doctrine, in opposition to them, and the malignity of the Schism oblig'd them to it, as much as the malignity of the Heresie; otherwise the Church was mistaken before, when she rejected the Novatians and Donatists. But I have alreadyC. 1. Sect. 3. shew'd the weakness of Dr. Hody's Arguings at this rate, and shall not farther expose them here. And yet I cannot forbear to add this following recantation, which Arsenius made, (who is stil'd Episcopus Hyspelitarum, and was the man, whose hand the Eusebians pretended to have been cut off by Athanasius, they bringing him into the open Court to evidence it) upon discovery of the Plot, which those Children of darkness had laid deep for the destruction of Athanasius, and his repentance and reception into the Church: The Recantation ought to be laid up in the Churches Archives, as a president in the same, or like case: but I here recite it, as an undeniable in∣stance, That it was one part, at least, of Bishop Arsenius's guilt, in that he not only concurr'd with the Eusebians most impious device, for the taking away Athanasius's life, but in that he like∣wise joyn'd with them in their most abominable Schism, by breaking the lawful Succession, in turning Athanasius wrongfully out of his See, and bringing in a false Bishop, as a Second, into his Chair. This is the Sin which he here condoles and recants for by name, and principally, if not solely, repent; him of, promising to have no more communion with them in their Schism, but to return to his lawful Metropolitan, as the Laws of the Church require: here is not one word of his joyning with them in the Arian Heresie, nor any thing like a retractation on that account: they did not indeed then profess it, but it's contrary: neither may we think the Church would have receiv'd Arsenius without his retracting it, if he had concurr'd with the Eusebians in an open profession of it. The Recantation it self is among Athanasius's works. Athanas. Apol. P. 786., which I will recite in the Greek, and translate into English.
We embracing Peace and Unity with the Catholick Church, in which thou dost preside by the grace of God, and having re∣solv'd on a full choice to be subject to the old Ecclesiastical Law, write unto thee, most be∣loved Bishop, and promise, in the name of the Lord, that we will not, for the future, com∣municate with Schismaticks, who break the Peace of the Catholick Church, whether they be Bishops, Presbyters, or Deacons, nor unite with them in a Synod, nor send them paci∣fick Letters, nor receive any of them, nor make any determination concerning Bishops, or any other common Ecclesiastical Dogma, without the judgment of thee our Metropoli∣tan Bishop: but we will give place to all the Canons which have been made and receiv'd according to the example of the Bishops, Ammonianus, Tyrannus, Plupanus, &c. If our Adversaries will insist, and say, That Arsenius has here omitted his most foul crime, not only in contriving Athanasius's death, together with the other Eusebians, but in acting so emi∣nent and singular a part in order to it, as he has passed his con∣cern in the Aria Heresie over in silence; and as it is sure that he was guilty of the first, tho' it is not here-mention'd, nor its re∣pentance declar'd, so he might be guilty of the Second, and have also repented of it. I thus answer, That as his passing o're the immoralities of the first nature, cannot be an argument that he did not commit them, the contrary being manifest: neither may we believe that the Church did admit him without a repentance for them, tho' it is not here mention'd: So we do not expect that his silence, as to the Heresie, should be lookt upon any more than a probable argument that he was not guil∣ty of it, since he might be, notwithstanding. But nothing is more plain than that he was guilty of te Schism, in being a Party in breaking the rightful Succession, and that the Church did not admit him without a severe repentance, and publick recantation for it: And, if this his recantation for the Schism was not here transmitted to posterity, singly and alone, by design, and the accidents of time, or carelessness of a Copier, had not deprived us of his Recantation for the other: we may safely conclude, the judgment of the then Church, but of Athanasius in particular, was,
That it behov'd all Christians to be satisfied of his recantation of the Schism, and that the common Christianity was concern'd to have it done, for the one as much as for the other. 3. It farther appears, as clear as the Sun at noon-day, That the rejecting a Bishop lawfully possess'd of his Chair, and the re∣ceiving an uncanonical Successor upon him, was not accounted an indifferent thing in Athanasius's time; and that the Church had other Rules in those cases, besides its present outward advan∣tage, tho' a Sovereign Coercive Power had Abdicated the Right, and possess'd the wrong; since the Athanasians did not submit to Constantius under such emergencies, but believ'd themselves obliged by the Law of God, to maintain the lawful and canoni∣cal Successions, and refuse the contrary; as to maintain the true Faith, and refuse that which is Heretical. Even the Eusebians would not receive Athanasius, and some other Bishops, tho' the Sardican Synod, with the assent of Constantius and Constans, and what authority they could give to that action, had re-establisht them in their Sees, because they suppos'd their own precedeing Church-Censures, by which they had been depos'd, were just and canonical, and a supervening authority incompetent to rescind them, tho' it were the Empires own: and not only so, but they call'd a Synod in the East, and confirm'd those Censures, nay excommunicated Julius Bishop of Rome, because he had a hand in reversing them. Did not the Athanasians undergo more than one persecution, rather then own a false Succession, and submit to Constantius's imperial Power, which erected it? Was this to consult the outward peace and tranquility of the Church, before her just Rights and Enfranchisments? Neither may we think so meanly of them, as to believe they would have expos'd themselves to Martyrdom, as they did, rather than comply with Dr. Hody's Law of Necessity, in receiving an obtruded false Go∣vernment, if, as he characterizes it, it was no more than aCap. 1. P. 2, sort of Theological Pedantry, if they had not known themselves to be antecedently and indispensbly oblig'd to the contrary, though they were alone in it, as Elijah once was at Jerusalem, and Daniel and a few more in the Land of Assyria; and as Liberius declar'd it to be his duty, who was in the like difficulty. 4. We are hence to take notice of the Artifice which these Eu∣sebians us'd for the restoring and re-establishing that Arianism, which they durst not own and profess, but at the same time protested against it; which was to begin with the Catholick
Bishops who were most able, and had been most zealous to oppose it, and maintain the contrary Orthodoxy, and repre∣senting them as Criminals in other respects, to depose and re∣move them. Thus fell Eustathius, Athanasius, Paulus of Constanti∣nople, and others: then the Tares grew up, and took place, and the whole World became Arian upon it. Athanasius gives us this account of their proceedings, and appeals to Constantius himself, as one that knew full well, that all the Calumnies which were rais'd upon him, were for no other cause, then to cast us (the Bishops) out of the Churches, and be able thereby to bring in their own impiety. Apol. p. 693.. And he farther says; That their false Council at Tyre was so early conven'd for the same purpose, to overthrow the- Council of Nicea, and bringIbid p. 727. in their own decrees. That the me∣thod, which they laid for effecting it, was, taking away the Ortho∣dox Bishops. Vid. Ep. ad So∣litar. p. 850.; of which himself, we know, was made an ex∣ample. This Artifice the more prevail'd, from the severe tryals those Bishops, which stood, were put upon by their Abdication, for sad experience has always shew'd us, that Flesh and Blood too often complies under those circumstances: As also from another prejudice the World has lain under, in being brought to believe, that the Offices and Unity of the Church are not so tied to any particular Persons, however circumstantiated, but that they may effectually be executed, and had, under those that uncanonically officiate, and therein openly oppose the establish'd Laws and Unity of the Church, upon the rightful Of∣ficer's deprivation, contrary to them. 5. Here we ought to take some notice of another device these artificial Hypocrites made use of, for the restoring and establish∣ing their beloved Arianism, which was, by excepting against and omitting, in their Creeds, the manner of explicating the Eternal Generation, and Union betwixt the Father and the Son, by the word Consubstantial, or the expression of one Substance, which the Coun∣cil of Nicea us'd to that purpose: And this they did when they retain'd in their own Creed the same Doctrine with the Council (as the Council it self on'd they did) and subscrib'd to it. One would be very apt to think, and the World is very hardly brought to think otherwise, that since they agreed in the Sub∣stance, and the Eusebians were acknowledg'd to have come up, even to the explction, in effect, there needed have been no more requir'd of them: For since they assented to the Eternal Generation, and that the Son was made of no other Substance then
How could they be interpreted to think and say otherwise? Why should a Phrase make a breach among Christian Bishops? Or why might not the Council have expung'd it? But yet, upon a thorough consideration, the Council will be found to have been in the right, in retaining its explication, and that those Fathers upon just grounds consulted the peace of the Church. St. Hilary thus Apologizeth for the many Creeds which were in the Church, and there were a great many in his days. You are not (says heNihil autem mirum videri vobis debet, fra∣tres charissimi, quod tam fre∣quenter exponi fides susceptae sunt: necessita∣tem hanc furor Haereticus impo∣nit. De Synod. p. 226.) to wonder, most dear Brethren, at the many expositions of our Creeds, since the Heretical fury imposes this necessity upon us. And how can the Church's peace be consulted and provided for upon Heretical insults, and a Controversy that ariseth through their restless attempts, if, when those that have a power to determine it, and have done it, agreably to the Reveal'd Religion, and in words that are innocent and signifi∣cant, but are not found in Scripture, a party shall be allow'd to dissent, and separate, because they do not like the expression, tho they aknowledg the sence to be sound which is compriz'd in it? If Authority should acquiesce upon these terms, it will soon cease to be any Authority at all. A Change by allowance, makes an inlet to the abolishing the Article, and if Authority be so imprudent as to grant such a Change, those that require it are not so unskilful but they foresee a door to their ends by it. Upon this bottom the Exoukontians came with their full blow upon the Eusebians and Semi-Arians. And AcaciusSocrat l. 2. c. 32. Soz. l. 4. thus argues irrefragably upon them. If the Nicene Faith was once chang'd, and often since, what hinders but that a new form of Faith may be again made? And he thereby took off, ad hominem, the just force which that Argument carried, Sophronius Pompeiopolis, and Elusius, two Bishops that contended for the Creed at Antioch urg'd a little before upon him in these words,Ibid. If the arbitrary conception of every day is to go for a form of Faith, the exact Rule of Truth will soon fail. But our Historian'sSocrat. ibid. judgment is sound, who thus freely gives his opinion upon the matter. In my judg∣ment, if all men had formerly been, and now were, of the same opinion concerning the Nicene Faith, every contentious quarrel had been laid aside, and this present unreasonable trouble had ceas'd in the Church. Silvanus had much the better of Aetius and his party, who, when they requir'd Eustathius to anathematize the word , because it is not in the Scriptures, thus reply'd upon them,. Theod. H. E. l. 2 c. 27. versus finem Athanas. de Synod. p 911. Then let these words Exnihilo, Creatura, alteus Substan∣tiae,
&c, which are not found in the Scriptures, nor the Prophetical Writings, nor the Doctrine of the Apostles, be rejected, and driven out of all divine Conventions. And surely upon either of these fol∣lowing terms, as, whether, with the Eusebians, men take a li∣berty to leave the explication of the Church out of their Creeds, and retain the sense of the Council, or whether, with the Exou∣kontians, they reject it, because the terms of it are not found in the Scriptures, all Church Authority may be waved, and render'd null upon the growing of a party, even Hereticks will not less injure themselves, than they do the Orthodox, upon the latter terms. For those will thereby be equally incapacitated to draw up their own forms, and obtain subscriptions to them, as Sylvanus well replied to Aetius: And he that hath half an eye must have seen what damage the Church of God hath receiv'd by it these last hundred years. All the Controversies, and troubles upon them, which have arose concerning Discipline, have issu'd from it: The disadvantages also which the Ancient Church had by reason of the former, are not less manifest from the success of the Eusebians upon it, who made themselves by it a party from the Nicene Fathers, when at the same time they retain'd the true sense of their Creed, and, in the sequel, they cast out the Creed, and establish'd the rankest Arianism, even Ariomanism, (in St. Athanasius's expression often us'd by him) in its room by its advantage; which wiser men than I believe they could not have compass'd otherwise, but, according to Socrates, as he is just now cited, as their Heresie was condemn'd, and wholly silenc'd by the foremention'd holy Nicene Fathers, so it never had been re∣triev'd, nor any more infested the, not only outward peace, but, vitals of Religion, as it did. Some men who have been very free in censuring the same Fathers, because they retain'd the explication, and would not be oblig'd to forego it, do not seem to have fathom'd the whole depth of things, but those who thoroughly think, see their great wisdom and integrity in it. SECT. VI. BUT, notwitstanding all that hath been said, Doctor Hody comes upon us with his full blow, and is well assur'd, that we are not able to support our selves under it: For he tells usThe Case of the Sees vacant. p. 42. and 47. That Felix the second Bishop of Rome, who was Ortho∣dox, was in the year ccclv. put into the place of Liberius, an Orthodox
Bishop of that City, he being depos'd by the Emperor Constantius; and that Liberius was depos'd and banish'd by the bare Authority of the Emperor, without any pretence to a Synod, and that too very unjustly; for no other reason, but because he was Orthodox, and refus'd to com∣ply with him in subscribing to the condemnation of Athanasius Arch∣bishop of Alexandria, is manifest beyond all doubt, from the testimonies of all Historians: And tho he was made Bishop in the room of the unjustly depriv'd Liberius; yet, first, the Catholick Bishops of his own District communicated with him, and receiv'd him as their Metropo∣litan. Secondly, his Ordinations were receiv'd, and allow'd of as valid, by, even, his Adversary Liberius. Thirdly, the whole We∣stern Church has all along own'd him as one of the true Bishops of Rome. And I not wonder if this stroke does seem, in the eyes of some, to fall heavy upon us, especially in the Doctor's appre∣hension, (and some others of his complexion) who hath abun∣dantly shew'd to the World, that he seldom sees half way, and that it is the surface of an argument, which generally over-rules him: But it can appear no more than a flea-biting to those, that have their eyes in their head. And I question not but that I shall be able to demonstrate to them, that it is no more; but affects the Doctor, not us; if they give themselves their usual freedom in the exercise of their thoughts upon the considerations which here follow, by way of a reply unto him. And in the first place. 1. It is very evident, that the Doctor, and his party, have no advantage from Liberius's practice, in his cession to Felix, and recognition of him as Possessor of the Chair, upon his own unjust Deposition, and Felix's unjust possession, by the Emperor. This (I say) can no ways vouch their most false and pernicious Do∣ctrine, which they have endeavour'd to obtrude upon mankind, viz. That an unlawful Possessor, upon a lay and unjust Deprivation, if he be Orthodox, may be warrantably receiv'd, and submitted to, he ought to be, by the ejected Bishop, tho' he is every ways Orthodox, and depriv'd for adhering to the truth, and opposing Vice or Heresie. For all Histories are silent, and give us no account that Liberius receiv'd and submitted to Felix, as Bishop of Rome, or did any thing that can create a Suspition of it. He submitted to his banishment, to Berea in Thrace with that courage and faith which a good Bishop ought to do: And perhaps none exceeded him under the same circumstances: We may not think that he was ignorant of the pleas which others do use in behalf of their resi∣stance; as, that he was taken from his charge, and those Souls
over which the Holy Ghost had made him Overseer, in the execu∣tion of which he had walked innocently as to God and Man; that his Flock became destitute of his Ministry upon it; that they were left among Wolves and expos'd to their treachery;. Theod H. E l. 2. c. 17. as they complain in their Petition to Constantius for his return. But these opicks were never made use of, in those ages of the Church, to stir up and encourage its Bishops to stand out against the hardest sentence of their lawful Governors: The most righte∣ous cause was not then thought a due botrom for their Justifi∣cation, in such a case: Of which I have produc'd some instances aboveC. 1. Sect. 4.: Neither did our Roman Pastor return to his See, till he had the Emperor's leave and order for it. And this is all we find of him during his exile, which was two yearsTheod. ibid.. There are no footsteps during that time, of his Cession to Felix, by Resignation, or otherwaies, or that he submitted and recog∣niz'd him, or was interpreted to have done it. For Doctor Hody thinks,P. 47, & 54. Case of the Sees vacant. that he needs not any thing to confute that story, which we find in the two fabulous lives of Pope Damasus, that when Pope Liberius was banish'd, he constituted Damasus (which he suely mistakes for Felix) his Vicar, to supply his place in his absence, and continu'd him till Liberius was restored. Tho' whether it was Damasus, or Felix, it is alike fabulous, and BaroniusAn. 355. num. 8. counted it so before the Doctor, allowing Liberius capable, at the most, but to make a Chorepiscopus, whilst himself was alive, because, otherwise, there would be two Bishops at one time in a City. And if we look upon Liberius from the time of his return to his Chair at Rome, and reassuming his Episcopal Function, there will not any thing appear, which can probably perswade us to think, that he took any notice of Felix, as a Successor there, much less as Co-ordinate with him in Power in that District: Theodorit says,H. E l. 2. c. 17. That he secretly withdrew himself from Rome, and and went to another City upon Liberius's return. And we have reason to believe him in this affair, rather than any of our other Historians, since it seems plain that he studied it more, and we owe the famous, and useful Dialogue, between Liberius and Con∣stantius, to his industry and care, which preserv'd it, when all the rest let it stip; save that SozomenL. 4. c. 10. has a little toucht upon an expression or two in it. Sozomen says,Ibid. c. 14. That Felix died within a while after, and Liberius govern'd alone, the Providence of God so ordering it, that two Bishops should not preside at once in St. Peter's See, to its manifest dishonour, it being a note of discord, and
contrary to the Laws of the Church. From whence, if we do infer, as the words may direct us, that they govern'd together until Felix's death, it is apparent that they did not do it in an amicable con∣junction, but in opposition to one another, otherwise it wou'd have been no more to the infamy of that City, then it was when St. Peter and St. Paul presided there at the same time. Faustinus and Marcellinus sayPraefat. ad libel. praecum., that he liv'd eight years after. But what if he did lve so long, or but a third part of that time, or less; and Liberius accepted of the terms which Constantius, and the Bishops, then congregated at Sirmium, offer'd unto, him, viz. That Felix and the Clergy of Rome should receive him, and both Officiate there amicably, and in common, and those dismal things which happen'd upon Felix's Theod. l. 2. c. 16. Soz. l. 4 c. 14. Election, as also Liberius's banishment, should be forgotten? Even this does no ways imply, that Felix was receiv'd as a Successor and Intruder, but the contrary: For, it was to be done upon a new composition; and Liberius must first have made a cession, and then deriv'd on Felix o much of his Power, as would place him in a Co ordination with himself; by virtue of which, and not of his Possession, his right could come. But after all, this was never done: For, the people unanimously refus'd the thing, and cried out with one voice,. one God, one Christ, one Bishop! Whence we may also learn, that the Empire's Authority was not by them thought sufficient to give a Rule, by virtue of which, the first Church Law, which re∣quires one Bishop only in a City, seem'd to be violated. Again, if Orthodoxy alone, tho in wrong, to all other Church-Laws, does legitimate a Possessor, it does not appear, that the Believers in the Roman Church, at that time, were aware of it. And yet two Bishops in that Apostolical Chair, if justly placed there, would neither have dishonour'd the See, nor oppos'd the Church Laws, as I have just now intimated, and farther exemplified above,Cap. 1. Sect. 4. in Meletius's and Paulinus's cases at Antioch, which was some time after in our Church Annals. In short, (for this head of our discourse has grown a little too much upon us) this great man, Bishop Liberius, and Victo∣rious Defender of the Truth, as Theodorit justly calls him. l. 2. c. 17., was so unhappy, as to offer vioence to his own knowledge and con¦science, and deepest sense of duty to the contrary, in that he contradicted (in the worst manner, because it was by his pra∣ctice) his own receiv'd principle of unity, built on a sue foundation, byAthanas. F, ad Sl p 837. subscribing to Athanasius's unjust and uncanonical
Deprivation, when he had refus'd, and oppos'd it to the Empe∣ror's face, with the greatest courage and Christian fortitude, chosing rather to be an exile, and without house and home, nay, even death it self, if the pleasure of Constantius, which lay'd the first upon him, had thought fit to condemn him to the latter, this great Man (I say) thus fouly fell, upon the poor motives of riches and honourQui biennio postea, recupe∣randae sedis a∣more, Athanasii condemnationem suscripsit. Pe∣tav. Ratiarii temporis par. 1. l. . (which he had so generously despis'd two years together) to the amazement of mankinde and great dis∣honour to his Station and Order. But God's Grace so far pre∣vented him, that he did not improve the trangression so very scandalously, as Dr. Hody thinks he might lawfully and warran∣tably have done, and recognize Felix, and give countenance there∣by and authority to the Doctor's most pernicious Doctrine, viz. That where a Successor is placed in the See of a Bishop that is unjustly and uncanonically depos'd, so it be done by a Sovereign Coercive, or otherwaies irresitible, power, there the Successor may be acknowledg'd, if he be Orthodox. 2. As we have no ground upon which we may probably per∣swade our selves, that Liberius submitted to, and recogniz'd Felix, as a Successor, either during his banishment, or after his return to Rome, so we have it most surely deliver'd unto us, that the Believers in Rome, at least a very considerable part of them, did not receive and communicate with Felix as their Bishop, but recogniz'd and adher'd to Liberius all along, even under his banish∣ment and deprivation. For what less can be the importance of that which▪ Theodorit relates of themL. 2. c. 17., when he says, That the Wives of the Magistrates and Nobility in Rome plainly told their Husbands, that if Liberius was not restor'd to his Flock, they would leave them, and fly away to him their great Pastor, What other motive but a deep sense of their duty, and indefiesable depen∣dace uon him, as their continu'd and proper Bishop, tho' asent in his person, could advise them to such resolutions and methods? Or can we believe them to have so learn'd Christ, as to make an offr of leaving their Husbands and Families, and think it was warrantable upon a lower consideration? And any thing less, then that which they apprehended to be their duty in a very high degree, would justify them in it? And we have no reason to look upon this as the effect only of womanish zeal, since their Husbands, the Magistrates and Nobility, do not only not contradict, nor countemand them in it; but they are reprsented, by our HistorianTheod. ibid. spra., to approve of their zeal and resolution so far, as
that when their Wives as d their leave, that they might petition Constantius (he being then at Rome) for Liberius's return; they not only granted their request, but declar'd that themselves were ready to have done it in their own persons, and that they for∣bore, as being more lyable to the Emperor's wrath, if it was resented amiss, tho' it was nothing but worldly policy, which is a too common bar to holy and just performances, which prevented them: and theirIbid. answer is set down to this effect They, said that they fear'd the wrath of the King, and being men, he possibly might not pardon them, but they (i. e. their Wives) would obtain mercy, and one of these two be its consequent, either he will grant their supplication, or send them peaceable away. These men and women, and the most considerable of the people in Rome, being afterwards, upon farther considerations, united as one man, (interpretatively, if not in their persons) and suppli∣cating the Emperor, the words and matter of their Petition abundantly, and unexceptionably farther declare, That they neither had, nor own'd, any other Bishop than Liberius, but rejected Felix at the same time and did not communicate with him: For they supplicate him,Ibid. That he would have pity upon so great a City depriv'd of its Pastor, and made thereby a prey to the treachery of Wolves. And what do they else but remonstrate unto him, that their City is without a Bishop, tho' Felix, at the same time, was an actual Possessor among them, made such by a So∣vereign Coercive hand? Could they have more effectually re∣nounced Felix, then they have done in these words? If he had been their Bishop, why did they not direct their request to him for their rescue from the Wolves that invaded them? Especially, since he was Orthodox in his Faith, and no bar lay against him in that respect. The Catholick Principles which they profess'd, had he been their lawful Bishop, would have directed them to it. Neither may we think, that they petition'd Constantius upon Felix's remisness in his duty, by reason of which it was that the Wolves broke in upon them, that he would extend his Royal Arm for their assistance, (tho' the Catholick's Faith would have bore them out in the doing of it) since their actual want of a Bishop to reside among them, upon Liberius's exile, and their longing desire to have him restor'd, was the ground and occasion of their Petition. Our Historian adds ‖ That none of the Inhabitants of Rome would come to prayers, whilst Felix was in the Church:Ibid. , And tho' they seem'd
at first to hearken to the Emperor's proposal upon his permission that Li∣berius should return, viz. That he and Felix should govern together, yet, upon second thoughts, they corrected themselves, and with one com∣mon voice cried out, one God, one Christ, one Bishop, founded upon a first common Church principle, which requires but one Bishop to be in a City: Upon this just and pious demand, Liberius came back; but Felix withdrew privately, and went to another City. SocratesL. 2. c. 29. says, that the People at Rome rose and cast him out of the City, and that the Emperor was forced to comply with them. SozomenL. 4. c. 10. adds, that, , a multitude requir'd Liberius, with a great clamor; that the Bishops of Felix's party and the Emperor consulted together, and order'd his return; that FelixIbid. cap. 14. died presently after, and Liberius go∣vern'd alone; the special Providence of God so disposing it, that the Seat of St. Peter should not be aspersed with the calumny of being go∣vern'd by two Bishops, it being a mark of division, and contrary to the Laws of the Church. Now, though these three famous Historians differ somewhat in their Relations, they all agree, that the peo∣ple, or Believers, in Rome did not receive Felix either before Liberius's return, or after it. Sozomen alone, seems to intimate, that some of the Clergy of the City adher'd to him. 3. Doctor Hody may easily be observ'd to catch at the two presbyters, Faustinus and Marcellinus, upon every occasion, and improve their Authority for the advantage of his cause: Tho' a man would wonder at it, if he wonders at any thing in him, since the two Schismatical Presbyters, is the usual Epitaph he bestows upon them:P. 53. besides other remarques, that much lessen them. But he particularly says of them, that, whatsoever their Authority may be, it deserves not at all to be regarded, since what they write is directly against Damasus, who was one of that party: And since when they wrote, they were Schismaticks, and had never regard to the peace, and tranquility of the Church: Surely their Libellus precum which they offer'd to Valentiniam, Theodosius, and Arcadius, indicates them to be men of excellent spirits in many things, but especially in their renunciation of the world, and its outwards advantages, when it came in competition with that which they believed to be their duty. It is the want of the same spirit which hath mostly, all along, ruin'd the Church of God, and never more then in days of Constantius and Valens, during whose persecutions, the generality of the Bishops, that were, in their own Inclinations, good and honest men, chang'd their Faith, as they were in dan∣ger to lose their Bishopicks, upon an opn propession of it. I
wish our modern Ages had given us less pregnant instances of the like recidivations. Neither can I forbear saying, that my pressing thoughts concerning them have some times occasion'd me to wish, with those two Presbyters, that the Church had no revenues, but was, at this day, in the same naked condition our Saviour and the Apostles left her, and first planted her. It must be own'd, that these two zealous Men, tho' they did not too deeply resent these things, (for that cannot be done) drew undue conse∣quences from them, and carried themselves into the Luciferian mistake. Because it is a fim truth, that we may not commu∣nicate with a Bishop in his Arianism, they thence concluded, that we may not, either, communicate with him upon his re∣pentance, and that his fall is not recoverable, by his giving sa∣tisfaction, but he is to be finally driven from the Altar. They must be, likewise, own'd to have managed this mistake with too great an allay of that Gospel spirit, which is, at other times, visibly discrnible to be more pure, and less mixed, in them, but, the integrity, s Historians, seems to be justly questionable, fom the account wich they give of the great and eminently re∣nowned Hsius, whose fall all men have lamented, but excus'd at the same time his infirmity: But they, more popularly to ag∣gravate the Eusebians injustice, (which they could not do too much, in the ways of truth) make him an eminent Actor in it, and say, that, instead of repenting for his fall, hLibel. precum. p. 14. took a Com∣mission from Constantius, and sat Judg on the Bench; and that his impious Procedeings, and Censure, against Gregory, Bishop of Emerita, immediatly call'd for vengeance from Heaven, that he was struck speechless, and expired on the place. But, I say, their Authority here seems very little, because they are primi & soli, the first, and only men, that have said it. And there are not only no footsteps in History of it, but all Histories have said the contrary. But, whatever the Authority of these two Presbyters, Fau∣stinus and Marcellinus, was in other instances, (it must be own'd to be passable in some, though the Doctor, some times, will not allow it) since the Doctor has thought fit to make use of it, so far as he appehends it to serve his turn, I shall make use of it also, so far as it evidently serves mine. And, 1. They tellPrefat. ad Libellum. us, that, Upon Liberius's exile, the Clergy of Rome were so fa from the Doctors thoughts, viz. that a Secular Prescription makes way for a Successor, that the very dy, in which he was
banish'd and left them, they all, i. e. the Presbyters and Archdeacon Felix, and even Damasus the Deacon, and all the Officers of the Church, went as one man, the People being present, and oblig'd them∣selves by oath, that, so long as Liberius lived, they would, at no hand, have another Bishop. Our other Historians have abun∣dantly acquainted us with the zeal of the people for him, i. e. the Believers only. But leave some ground for us to suspect, that the Clergy might have come short of them, and have been less active in his behalf: But this doubt is wholly remov'd by this account from our two Presbyters, and they let us know, that the Clergy no ways came behind thim, once at least, tho' they fell off from him a little after. Ibid.2 They farther tells us, that, it was Damasus's corruption through ambition (ambitione corruptus) which, afterwards turn'd him aside from doing his duty to Liberius, as he was his Deacon: And, when he had accompanied him seven miles from Rome, prevail'd with him to desert him:Contra fas: quod minime decet cum summo per∣jurii scelere quod factum u∣niverso populo displicuit & se ab ejus processi∣ne suspendit. Also, that when he, and the rest of the Clergy, a little after, obtain'd to have Archdeacon Felix, ordain'd, and receiv'd him as their Bishop in Liberius's room, they were, not only rude and un∣civil, and deeply perjur'd in doing of it, but it was illegally done, against the Laws of God, and the Church: and that all the people were displeased at it, and refused to be present during the solemnity: It seems the people of Rome, at this time of day, were better Christians than their Guides: And tho' they were not obliged to Liberius by oath, as the Clergy were, they out went them in the continuance of their duty to him, as their proper and lawful Bishop. It would be a detraction from their integrity to say, that these Lay-Believers had no Bishopricks, nor Spiri∣tualities, to lose, as the Clergy had: And that is the reason why they did not comply, as the Clergy did, but kept to their duties of spiritual Allegiance; when their Captains so shame∣fully deserted, nay acted contrary to it. But I heartily wish that there were less pregnant reasons producible, and obliging me to think, that the Clergy had never complyed with Constan∣tius, nor enthroned Felix, if they had not well known that he otherwise, would take their temporalities from them. 3. The same Preface imforms us moreover, that these Lay-Believers not only rejected Felix, but, petition'd Constantius for Liberius's return, and, that, upon the Imperial Grant of their Re∣quest, they met him without the City, and joyfully introduced him: The Clergy are not mention'd here neither, but on the contrary, we are
told, that when Felix had been cast out of the City by the Senate, the same perjur'd Clergy brought him back, but the whole number of Believers, and the Nobility, cast him out again, with great disgrace; and that they continued firm in their duty to Liberius until his death, and his Throne was voided, upon the terms that the Church allows, tho' they were, at least, some of them, so unhappy as, when he died, to elect Ursicinus in his Chair, against Damasus, and there was a short Schism upon it. But this Election was carried not with design to invade the Laws of the Church so as to plead the Right of the Empire against the Church in it, and Doctor Hody and his friends will have no advantage by it. Damasus was no less unfortunate in the managment of his righful title against Ursicinus, it being done, not only in a tumultuous way, but in spilling of blood, of which we have account in our other HistoriansSocrat. l. 4. c. 24. Soz. l. 6. c. 22 as well as in our Pre∣face: Tho' Socrates ond Sozomen make Ursicinus, and his party, the occasion of it: And, perhaps the two Presbyters may be over partial in their own cause, in laying it upon Damasus. But my purpose is not to vindicate them as Historians, but to make it appear, (which, if I mistake not, I have abun∣dantly done) that all the authority they have is full against the Doctor, notwithstanding he has taken so great pains to have the World think otherways. I now go on to my following Observations; as. 4. It will farther appear to any considering person from the practice of Liberius, and the Believers at Rome, even of the Clergy until worldly fear and ambition corrupted them, that, a B shops forcible absence was not then believed to make way for a Successor, tho' he was Orthodox: For, it is very plain, that Liberius was forcibly sent into Thrace, and OrthodoxTheod. l. 2. c. 7. Felix, was in his Throne, but Liberius did not submit to him, nor the Christians in common, but the latter openly declar'd, that if he might not be restor'd, convolaturos, (as Chistoforson translates it) they wouldTheod. ibid. . fly together to him their great Pastor. So vastly distant are the thoughts of these Ancient Christians, in this case, from those which some have entertain'd at this day in the like juncture, who plead the forcible removal of their Bishops, as sufficient to justifie their submission to those call'd their Successors, though they are not sent away near so far from them, as Italy and Thrace are from one another.
5. It is no less evident from the Circumstances of our present case, that the Prince's acceptance and confirmation of a Successor, whom the Clergy have placed in a See, whose Bishop is for∣cibly absent, or the Prince's possessing him, in his own Right, even the Bishops concurring, were not thought sufficient to legi∣timate his Possession, and justifie the Subject Believers, that re∣ceive and obey him, by virtue of it. ForL. 2. c. 17. Theodorit andL. 4. c. 14. Sozo∣men tells us, that, though the Emperor first argued with the Peo∣ple of Rome concerning Felix, and recommended him unto them as the present Bishop, and every ways able to guid and govern them, and afterwards commanded them to receive him, and the Bishops that were, then, congregated at Sirmium did the same, yet, both their Rights and Authorities were concluded incompetent, and refused, because they brought in Felix, and endeavoured to settle him, in a See that was full, by the Laws of the Church. Once more; it is also hence evident, that, as professed Here∣sie, and Arianism in particular, was then reputed one just ground for the refusal of a Bishop, and not holding communion with him, if Heresie be made the Terms of it, so profess'd Schism was re∣puted another, and it was not then judged lawful to hold com∣munion with a false Succession of Bishops, or with those that Schismatically communicated with them. This was the plain case of the People of Rome and Felix, whomIbid. supra. Theodorit and Sozomen represent to have retain'd the Nicene Faith entirely, and to have been without reproof as to that, but he was faulty, not only because he ordain'd Arian Priests, but also, in that he freely communicated with them: and for this reason none of the Inhabitants of Rome would come into the Church, whilst he was there, but peremptorily refused com∣munion with him. The last Paragraph occasions a doubt to arise, which requires a Solution, even for Liberius's reputation, and the Believers that had been his Adherents: for it is well known that after two years exile, Liberius wasAthams. Ep. ad solitar p. 837. . over-ruled to subscribe to Athanasius's condemnation: and though it abundantly argued the Eusebians force, and his own hatred of the Heresie, and his suffrage for Athana∣sius, when he had his choice free. And I have above shew'd, that he did not go far as to submit to Felix's Person, whilst he was in his Chair, yet he herein visibly own'd their falsely assumed Power, and did partake of their Schism in so doing, and since the Historical Account, which we have of this Affair,
does make it probably, at least, appear, that the Believers at Rome did immediately communicate with Liberius, upon his return, and, consequently, in his polluted State, what could they incur less, then the same Schism? And why may they not as well have communicated with Felix? Or how could they be less pec∣cant in it? It being a certain Rule in the Church, that if a Bishop breaks the righful Succession, by invading a full See, as Majorinus did, when he came into Cecilianus's Chair at Carthage, and if one legally possessed of a See, and, so far, no violator of Church-Unity, shall, notwithstanding, give to the Usurper his Letters of Peace, and communicate with him, as Marcian, Bishop of Arles, in St. Cyprian's Epistles, did to the Novatian Bishops, who had usurped upon Carthage, and broke the Church's Succession, in the same manner Majorinus, and the Donatists, did afterwards, and if a People communicate with such, they therein joyn with them in their Schism, and the Bishops, and Believers, contract its guilt upon their Souls, and the Church hath still markt them for Schismaticks, and shun'd them. Now, as to the thing it self,An. 357. Num. 56, 57, 60, 66, 70. Baronius vindicates them, and tells us, that, upon Liberius's return, he found a great many of the Catholicks to have fallen off from him, because he communicated with the Arians, and to have receiv'd Felix as their lawful Bishop, believing Liberius's right to be extinct, by reason of his fall, and since Felix, was not an Arian, and was not then in a full See, his Title was good, and they were not Schismaticks in receiving him: and, farther, that a Persecution was raised upon them, because, in receiving Felix, they disobey'd the Imperial Letters, which commanded Liberius's resti∣tution, and Felix continued the lawful Bishop, till his death, which he is inclinable to believe to have been eight years, according to Marcel∣linus, whom he cites to that purposePrefat. ad Libel precum., but not daring to take this Schis¦maticks single authority for it, thinking, no doubt, his own as good, he concludes it to have been but one year, three months, and three days, and after Felix's death, Liberius, rejecting the Arian Commu∣nion, was receiv'd, and, upon his satisfaction and pardon, and his confirmation of Felix's ordinations, they were all united, and the Church had peace. So from this account, it is plain, that here was no Communion held with any Bishop, that was Schismatical, and a Possessor only, after Liberius's subscription: or, upon his becoming Arian, he lost his Right, and the People there∣upon justly deserted him: and since he had none, Felix's Title, upon his Possession, was good, and they did not receive
upon Felix's death, till he made satisfaction: and Dr. Hody goes along with the Cardinal, as to the main, but differs from him in that he will have Liberius, deprived for a time by reason of his Arianism. But alas! though, in some things, this Narrative seems to help the Doctor out, and he is known to catch at every Bulrush to help himself, what else but a Romance is all of it? And it hath not only, no foundation in authentick History, but no footsteps there: and as the Doctor has no other thenIbid. supra. Num. 72. Baronius's authority on his side, (even the two Presbyters in their Preface, overthrow the substantial part of it) so Baronius produceth only some Apochryphal lives of their Popes for it, in which there will not be any such thing found neither, without the help of the Car∣dinal's conjecture, which usually, takes a great Liberty. Besides, how were the Catholicks less Schismaticks in deserting Liberius, upon his subscribing, and communicating with the Arians, (if he did so,) then in receiving Felix, and communi∣cating with him (which the Cardinal and the Doctor suppose) who is own'd, by all, to have communicated with the Arians, since both were Orthodox? Though the Doctor takes a strange liberty, and says that Liberius was an Arian, and therein differs from the Cardinal. But, I shall shew his precariousness in it anon. But to leave the Cardinal and the Doctor in the enjoyment of their own imaginations, and speak briefly, but home, to the matter: our Histories are short here, as they are in many other cases, and do not give us any account of Liberius and the Be∣lievers at Rome, from the time that they petition'd Constantius for his return, untill he actually repossessed his Chair, and ex∣ercised his Function among them, save that they rejected Felix, in that interval, so we are altogether ignorant of the manner and degrees of Liberius's repentance, upon his subscription against Athanasius and coming into the Eusebians, as also of the manner, and time in which the People receiv'd and recognized him. Yet we are not to doubt but that it was done upon his satisfaction, (not in order to his second enthronization, upon the death of Felix, whom they fancy to have died the lawful and Catholick Bishop of Rome) whereby he was restor'd to the Church's Unity, from which his lapse broke him off, and the Believers Communi∣on with him was legitimated. Some high Romanist Zealots, who receive the Council of Sinuessa, will possibly tell us, from the example of PopeBaron. An. 3 2. Num. 89. &c. Marcellinus, upon his Idolatry, that Libe∣rius,
being the Supream Head of the Church, and no inferior was capable of doing it, he penanced himself. And St.Ep. 106. Austin seems to be of an opinion that a Bishop of Rome is not to be subject to the Rules of common Penitents. But DoctorP. 49. l. 1. Hody allows the thing it self, and so far subjects him to the Church as to say, that upon his Restoration, he received pardon from her, though we have surer authority for it. We may not believe, that since the Church Rules and practice from the beginning, do not permit a lapsed Bishop to be received, but upon satisfaction, these Believers at Rome on the one hand, or this eminent and most exemplary Bishop, (all along save in this one matter of subscription) on the other hand, would have reunited as Pa∣stor and People, and not in a thorow compliance to those Rules and Practice. Neither doth Baronius'sAn 355. Num. 70. suggestion seem to be ill grounded, which is, that even Felix's Party came in to Liberius, because Felix's succession sunk, and there was no care taken to or∣dain his Successor. For nothing can give a greater blow to a Sect then its remissness in that nature, especially when the succession of Pastors is not continued. We gain this much also beyond a contradiction, that a Bishop's Schismatical Communi∣on, and lapse upon it, was not, in those days, concluded to forfeit his Orders, but he was receiv'd, if there was no other bar, into Communion, and into his See, without a new Con∣secration. No one suspects Liberius to have had one, neither would the Laws of the Church have endured such a thing. SECT. VII. AND thus, if I mistake not, I have made good that which I promised, upon my entrance on the former Section, and do verily perswade my self that such as give themselves a full liberty of thinking, and consider the Premisses therein con∣tain'd, and the bottom on which they stand, will readily yield that the advantages from Liberius and Felix are on our side, and not on the Doctors, and that their whole story is so far from proving the forced absence of a Bishop from his See and Peo∣ple, whether it be by exile or an unjust Deprivation, to legiti∣mate a Successor, though he be otherwise Orthodox, that all the argument it affords is on the contrary. I know the Doctor has farther pleas in Felix's behalf. And I now undertake an inquity into them, following not my own, but his methods throughout his whole Chapter. And,
1. The Doctor is altogether precarious when heP. 42. tells us, that the much greater number of the Laity of Rome rejected Felix, be∣cause though he was really Orthodox, they were not satisfied in it, but being ordain'd by the Arians, he was thought to favour that Party: all our accounts which pretend to be ancient mentioning no such thing, save only that in some Copies of St. Jerome deIn Acacio. scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis it is said, Felix the Arian. But Sophro∣nius's Geeek translation hath left it out, and so have the Ancient Copies which St. Jerome hasBaron. An. 355. Num. 55. followed in his Chronicon. But the Doctor is smeless in the Authorities which he produces in his Proofs. For, Supra. l. 2. c. 17.1. Theodorit says expresly, that they knew Felix had kept the Nicene Faith entirely at the same time, when they would not go into the Church with him, nor whilst he was in it. Was it then because they suspected his Orthodoxy in the Faith? Or could they in this conjuncture mean any thing else, when they pleaded, that they could not communicate with him, because he communicated with the Arians, then that he joyn'd with them in their unlawful Successions; for these two were the only Points that could then fall under debate, viz. the Schism and the He∣resie: but they did not think Felix to be an Arian. Again, when the Emperor recommended Felix and Liberius unto them, and requir'd them to receive both as joynt Bishops of the City, did these Romans, that refused Felix, except against his Faith as the reason of it? Or make any scruple relating to it? Was it not for this reason they rejected him, viz. because they must then receive him in a full See, by reason of Liberius's incom∣petent Deprivation, which they could not comply with, being obliged to have, as but one God one Christ, so one Bishop, in a City? And nothing is more sure then that which the Doctor secures himself to have gain'd from Theodorit's Testimony, viz. that they would not have refused, if he had not communicated with Here∣ticks, i. e. if he had not united in worship with the Arian Bi∣shops, it being here, to be sure, capable of no other sense, since he did not communicate with them in their Heterodoxy of Faith. 2. Would any man, that did not only design to fill the Margin, without consulting his reputation any farther, have insisted on the authority of Freculfus,Ibid. who wrote in the Ninth Century, to prove matter of fact in the Fourth, and at the same time grant that he did not write it from some ancient Historians? But, his infe∣rence
which he makes from Freculsus's conjecture (for he owns it to be no more) is prodigious. As, that it thence appears, that he did not think there was any other good reason for which they might separate from Felix. But why might not a rational man think, that, though he was not an Heretick, yet, if he was a Schis∣matick, they might, for that reason, separate from him, espe∣cially, since the Principles of Christianity will bear them out in it? Or, what if a Bishop be no Heretick but Sodomitical, Simonaical, &c. Will his Orthodoxy in Faith compound for them all? The Doctor has declar'd himself to be of another o∣pinion, but it was to serve a turn, and so it is now, of which I have already givenCap. 1. Sect. 3. an account, and after all, Freculsus is most probably abus'd by the Doctor, and he injuriously interprets his Original Words. For, why by Heretick (when he says, they declin'd the Communion of Felix as such) must he mean an Arian? Since the Eusebian Schismaticks are all along, called Arians by the Ancients, and their Arianism was generally interpreted to a mount to no more than their receiving a false Succession of Bi∣shops, and that was one reason, at least, why the Athanasians refused to communicate with them. Neither may we suspect that Freculsus was ignorant of it: Since he wrote a judicious Chronicon from Adam, till about the sixth Century: 3. But AthanasiusEp. ad soli∣tar. p. 861. is manifestly abused by him, and if he says any thing to the Doctors purpose it is too much, and overthrows his whole Plot. For Athanasius tells us, , all the People of Rome, not the greater number, were aware of their Heresie. And more, [] that they knew it: they did more then suspect it. And the DoctorP. 43. l. 3, 4, 5, 6. confesseth as much in the next Lines, in his own translation of Athanasius, though in the fol∣lowing Line he represents Athanasius to have only thought Felix an Heretick. And he is so bold with him as to impute his mi∣stake to his ignorance, which, says he, is not at all to be wondred at, for he knew nothing of him, and had never heard of him, but as put in by the Arians into Liberius's place. But, can we wonder enough at the Doctor's lessening Character of the great Alex∣andrian Prelate, in which he is represented so very ignorant, as not to know what sort of man he was that usurp'd his great Friend Liberius's See for two whole years, and whether Felix was an Arian or not, even, at the same time when the whole World quitted him of it? And, after all, if Athanasius was not so ignorant as not to know certainly whether Felix was an Here∣tick,
i. e. an Eunomian Arian, or not, nothing can be more plain, then that the Heretical Pravity, , from which he tells us, the Catholicks here separated, related only to the Epis∣copal Succession, for the violation of which the Eusebians are still called Hereticks by him, and by our Ecclesiastical Writers. And the instances of it which Athanasius produces, do irrefragably make it good. As, of Gregory and George, who were brought into the Chair of Alexandria upon himself: in Auxentius, who was brought into Millane, upon Dionysius: in the ejection of Lucifer, Paulinus, and Eusebius, by Constantius's arbitrary and single autho∣rity.Athaaas. ibid. supra. p. 860, 861, 862. . And lastly, Which comes up to our very Point, in the instance of Epictetus, who introduced Felix into Liberius's See at Rome by his Commission from the Empire, and created him Bi∣shop, in the Palace, upon which Athanasius immediately makes this exclamation, what hath he here omitted which belongs to Antichrist? So that the Hereticks here are those who enthron'd and adher'd to Felix, and they are Antichrists into the bargain. So miserably is the Doctor mistaken in this authority. 2. One would wonder what advantage he proposes to him∣self and to Felix's Title against Liberius, from the Oath that all the Clergy took,P. 43. P. 44. obliging themselves by it not to accept of any other Bishop, whilst Liberius was living, especially since this is the only thing he concludes from it, viz. that the Principles of those Times did void Liberius's See upon his secular Deprivation and Expul∣sion from Rome, and did justifie the reception of another into his Chair, for, otherwise, according to his own sense of the thing, what needed they to have taken that Oath? But, I rejoyn, does no man then take an Oath to maintain an antecedent in∣defiesable Right? Does our Oath of Canonical Obedience im∣ply that our Bishops have no other Right over us, then that which the Oath gives them? We have been often told, that it obliges no longer then the Right remains, for the Defence of which we took it, but Doctor Hody, surely, is the first man that hath said it supposes no right, nay, that it excludes it, and the Prin∣ciples of those times (unless he means his elder Brethren's, the time-serving Eusebians) did certainly teach them otherwise. But, especially, that a secular proscription did not void a See, and make way for a Successor, whether Liberius's Clergy knew it or not; if they did not, their ignorance is not to be our pre∣sident.Ibid. 3. That which the Doctor pleads in behalf of the Roman
Clergy, who deserted Liberius,Ibid. and constituted Felix their Bi∣shop, viz. because Liberius, in the time of his banishment, had sub∣scribed to the Arians, and they lookt upon him as no longer a lawful Bishop; this has a good bottom in it self. And also that which he farther says, to this effect; as, that 'tis Orthdy we are to have regard to. Our love to our Bishop is not to be inferior to our Love to the Church. And our Oaths and Relations, in which we stand oblig'd to him, are all for the security of the Orthodox Faith. For, if our Bishop be an Heretick, and indispensably mkes the Heresie the Terms of Communion with him, we are to separate, and not to accept them. For this we have instances of as eminent Bishops as Christendom has had; as, Athanasius, Hilary, Eusbius of Samo∣sata, Lucifer of Sardinia, &c. who were banish'd into remote Districts under Eusebian and Aetian Bishops, and thy erected there their own Churches a part from them: Of which I have alreadyCap. 1. Sect. 3. given an account. And the parity of reason is the same, and will equally reach those Clergy men, who call a Bi∣shop into a full District, to preside there and exercise his fun∣ction in the same manner, if their, otherwise, proper Bishop shall impose the same terms upon them, and indefeisably, which the forementioned Arian Bishops did, upon those Prelates. But then, Doctor Hody's application of these Rules to the Roman Clergy and Liberius's case, is as false as any thing is true, all agree∣ing that Liberius only subscrib'd the first Sirmian Creed, and he consequently, could be no Heretick in the judgment of the Church, which quitted that Creed of Heresie: EvenDe Snod. p. 9. 15. Atha∣nasius andDe Synod. Hilary have done it. And tho' the Doctor will have it, that these two last have thought otherwise in some places of their works, which he has produced to that purpose, with the authorities of St. Jerome and Sozomen, those places will be found either false quoted, or to have a wrong sense put upon them.Ep. ad Solitar. p. 837. Athanasius says expresly, (what ever it was that Liberius subscrib'd unto) he subscrib'd through force, and retain'd his first sentiments entire: and we have just now prov'd that he entred upon his government immediatly upon his re∣turn, and that the Catholicks receiv'd him, and communicated under him. And we may easily farther think, that he as soon declar'd the force, and asserted his Catholicism, and made sa∣tisfaction for his Errors, upon Church grounds, without which he is not to be imagined to have been receiv'd. And since he stood upon the same foot of Orthodoxy, the Docter supposes Felx
to have done, and was replaced on his Throne by the Empire, and Felix rejected, if the Clergy, upon the Doctor's principles, believ'd themselves in Conscience bound to submit to the Pos∣sessor, being Orthodox; they cannot be suppos'd to have chose the latter and rejected the former, but, on the contrary, to have receiv'd Liberius and quitted Felix; unless they openly violated the Prince's Right and their own Consciences. Tho', after all there is not one word of this affects our present case; for, if Liberius did, at last, become an Heretick, and was rejected by the Catholicks upon it, the Doctor has own'd that he was Orthodox at the time of his Deprivation, and two years after. And since the same Catholicks, whom he supposes to have rejected Liberius for his Heresie, and not to have receiv'd him until he had retracted it, did adhere to him whilst he was Orthodox, notwithstanding his Secular Deprivation, it thence directly follows, that Liberius's Secular Deprivation was not a competent ground, in it self, for a people's Translation of their allegiance, during a Bishop's Orthodoxy. And their after re∣jecting Liberius, as an Heretick, if such a thing was done, will only so far justify the Doctor's design, and vindicate the pre∣sent Vacancy of our Sees by an unjust and uncanonical Deprivation, as they can prove our respective deprived Bishops to have been Heretical likewise: which none pretends, nor can ever do. It will be objected, that Constantius would not have permitted Liberius to return and reassume his See, unless Liberius had, not only subscrib'd to Arianism, but, continued a Professor, and Propugner of it, according to his power, since he was exil'd, and depriv'd, partly, because he refused to do it, and Constan∣tius, otherwise, would have been defeated of his design, which he never sincerely quitted, but continu'd in truth a rigid Exoukontian, and irreconciliable opposer of the Nicene Article. But our Histories, as I have already observ'd, speak very im∣perfectly of this affair, if they be not altogether silent. And since all the account they give of Liberius after his return, is, that he was aSe Socrat. l. 4. c. 11. Soz. l. 6. c. 10, 11. zealous Anti Aetian, and also Anti-Eusebian Arian, until his death. We are to look upon Constantius's indulgence to him as the work of God, who can turn the hearts of Kings at his pleasure, in that the lawful Succession was restor'd, and Truth and Unity, in some measure, together with it, in the midst of that naughty Generation, through the Faith and Courage of the Believers; whose constancy to their duty to
their lawful Bishop, was a secundary means, by which it was effected, and they remain a beauteous example to posterity in the like case. And we may hence strengthen our expectations of the same mercy, that tho' our Pastors be hid from our eyes for a time, they shall be restor'd as at the beginning, if we, through want of Faith, and our just endeavours, do not desert them, and God, in his wrath, does not put a final bar to their return. Surely a truer sense of duty to an exil'd Bishop has not appear'd, then in these Roman Christians, for their Bishop Liberius, according to the account which all Historians give of it: Tho' Doctor Hody is so unfortunate as to make them one of his Proofes, or Presidents, for the warranting our practice, in receiving every unjust and uncanonical Deprivation, and Successor, if he be Orthodox. I will add, 4. That the Doctor keeps true to his wide arguings, when he would have us believe it to be imply'd, that because the Clergy of Rome had a regard to Orthodoxy and the Faith, in their Oath which they took to be true to Liberius, upon his departure, and thereby engag'd themselves to accept no other Bishop as long as he should live, that was likely to destroy the Faith, they, therefore, did not engage themselves unto him by it, that they would not receive another upon his unjust and uncanonical Deprivation. For, surely, the Oath, and its engagement, might take in both considerations: And why it did not, especially, since Athanasius's and other Deprivations that were unjust and uncanonical are known to have put a bar to their Successors: Doctor Hody may, possibly, be the man that is able to give an account. But thus he will argue all along; as because the Catholicks did refuse to commu∣nicate with particular Bishops that were Exoukontians, therefore these Bishops Lay and forcible Rights to their Sees were not also a just ground for those Catholicks to separate from them: the Roman Clergy bound themselves by Oath that they would not receive an Heretick into Liberius's See; and for that reason they did not oblige themselves, by the same Oath, that they would not receive an intruding Schismatick upon him: Besides, the DoctorP. 45. line 2. tells us, that upon Liberius's return, and the Fe∣licians's coming into him, he pardon'd them for breaking their Oath, (tho he would have it call'd by another name) and they pardon'd him for his Apostacy. And I thus argue upon him ex ore suo, that their Oath could not relate solely to the true Faith, and to nothing else, because then they would not have wanted a pardon, since
their bringing in Felix upon him made no change in the Faith, nor any violation of their Oath, as to that. Neither can they be conceiv'd to have obliged themselves by this Oath, but only upon Church principles, as knowing that who soever was put upon him would be a true Bishop,P. 44. line 5, 6. and the principles of those times did not oblige them to think otherwise. And it was their duty upon, Felix's coming to the Chair, as a Successor, to receive him. So then, their breaking that first part of the Oath, which related to Liberius, was so far from wanting a pardon either, that it was their duty to break it, and to disclaim all manner of obli∣gation to Liberius by it. It might be their fault in that they took such an Oath, but their breaking of it was their duty, which asks no pardon. A few just thoughts will direct an un∣prejudiced man thus to conclude, upon the whole matter: viz. That, since they broke an Oath, and sinn'd, and wanted pardon for it, it was, in that they brought Felix into the Chair at Rome, as a lawful Possessor, when it was quite contrary to the princi∣ples of the Church, which does not allow of such Possessors, and to their particular obligations, by that Oath, to the con∣trary. And for this they wanted a pardon at Liberius's hand, as he wanted a pardon for his Apostacy. Which breach of Oath is justly call'd their perjury by the twoPrefat. ad libel precum. Presbyters. Tho' the Doctor must be allow'd to be shy in calling it so, because the case comes too near some of his acquaintance. 5. What if Damasus, who is wont to be call'd the Great, the Pious, and the Orthodox Damasus, (and he has five times as many more glorious Titles then the Docter has reckon'd up,) did believe Felix a lawful Bishop,De Prescript. c. 3. and receive him? Tertullian'sP. 45, 46. Rule abundantly shews the unconclusiveness of such arguings ab authoritate: What then (saith he) if a Bishp, if a Deacon,Quid ergo si Episcopus, si Diaco∣nus, lapsus a regula fuit, ideo He∣reses veritatem videbantur ob∣tinere? Ex personis probamus Fidem, an ex Fide personas. hath fallen from the Rule, did therefore Heresies seem to obtain the nature of Truth Do we prove the Faith from persons, or persons by the Faith? Did the Catholick Faith and Practice bear out Damasus in that he did? The Doctor does not pe∣tend to prove that. Besides, how many bad men are there, that have receiv'd the largest characters from good men, and were thought to deserve them when they were given them, but are their precedeing, or subsequent, vices made paterns for man∣kind upon it? Damasus was a good Pope, and deserv'd well of the Church of God, in the administration of his Function: But
he might be a seditious Deacon, notwithstanding. And, if the two Presbyters, Marcellinus and Faustinus, and Doctor Hody have given a just account of him, he was an ill Deacon. But the Doctor only represents Damasius as a good Bishop for an example to Posterity. 6. His argument which he uses a little after in behalf of Felix, by which he thinks that he proves him a true Bishop,P. 49. in that the Catholick Bishops of his own District communicated with him, and receiv'd him as their Metropolitan, is a little more bulky, but labors under the same inward defect with the former. As we are not to prove the Faith by the practice of one single Bishop, so nor by twenty, no nor a greater number, but by no means by an handful of Bishops that once inhabited the Subur∣bicarian Region, or Roman District. They have receiv'd a Succession of Bishops, as Universal Monarchs, and Infallible, and they might be mistaken when they receiv'd Felix, as a true Bishop, when he was not such. But the Doctor pretends to make it good that he was receiv'd by others, as a lawful Bishop; tho' his authorities for this are not less defective. He first poves it, because there are some Epistles in Isidore Mercator, in which Athanasius, and a Synod at Rome, own'd him as a true Bishop: But since Isidore was so ill advised as to forge these E∣pistles, and think the World would receive them as true ones, are we to believe that each matter in them is true, when we have his wretched authority only to avouch it, when he was so unthink∣ing at the same time as to lay two of the Epistles at Athanasius's door, who is known to have rejected, and ridicul'dApol. p. 861. & alibi. Felix's title to Rome at a great rate, by every one that has read any thing in his works? If there was such a tradition of the Church in Isi∣dores time, it is to be rejected for that reason. Neither is there a bter argument to proves the Epistles counterfeit, then in that they make Felix the true Bishop of Rome, contrary to the pinciples and practice of the true Church. But the argument is not to be endur'd which concludes Felix a true Bishop because Isidore said so. Again, his Pontifical is not more Authentick then Isidores Epistles: And the authority it hath, is at last, re∣solv'd by the Doctor, into the foremention'd Tradition: And he does no more, in effect, then prove the Pontifical to be true from the Tradition, and the Tradition to be true from the Pon∣tifical, when both go against that Faith which hath been from the beginning. Farther more, his argument to maintain Felix
in his Chair, taken from the Miracle which the Legendary tells us was done at his Tomb, helps the Doctor on extreamly: I see he can have a Romanist's Faith when it will ser vehisturn: And he is so much the more precarious herein, sinceAn 357. num. 62, 63. Baronius own's himself to have been convinced by the same Miracle; tho' he had wrote a Book before, and prov'd Felix a false Bi∣shop. It follows, that FelixP. 50. ordain'd five Deacons, twelve Pres∣byters, and eighten or nineten Bishops. And what then? Might he not be a false Bishop for all this? Did not the Novatians, Meletians, Donatists and Arians keep up their Succession by their Ordinations? Were they therefore true Bishops? He ades,Ibid. our Historians mention how the Laity of Rome refused to commu∣nicate with him, but not a word that the Bishops did. I am not concern'd to enquire strictly into the truth of this; since the merit of our cause does not depend on their complyance, or a greater number of Bishops, if it be done against the Laws and Principles of the Church. I am sorry, if they did not refuse communion with him, but came so notoriously behind the Laity in doing their duty. Tho' I cannot see what the Doctor can hence infer to his advantage, unless it be, that Bishops have laid aside their duty, when they coold not otherwise keep their temporalities: It being, in all likelyhood, that one conside∣ration which made them comply with Felix, according to the Eusebian practice at that time. I have already demonstrated that their perjury consisted in receiving a second Bishop, and shall not take further notice of what isP. 51. urged to the contrary. As also when the same isP. 53. repeated by the Doctor. For he seems to be more then ordinary careful to wipe off that stain: And it neerly concerns him to do it, though he washes only an Aethio∣pian skin. I will also venture to think, that his Authority fromP. 51. Philostorgius is not worth taking notice of. And go on di∣rectly to his next seat of argumentation, where, 7. He contends with a great deal of assurance that Felix was own'd by Liberius himself as a true Bishop of Rome, because his Ordinations were receiv'd by him as valid:P. 47. 51. Now, tho' I do not find any authority which vouches this, but that of the twoIn Libel pre∣cum 359. num. 70. Presbyters Faustinus and Marcellinus, and Baronius, and the Doctor: Tho' the learned Cardinal does not pretend one pre∣cedent for it: Yet I'le grant it: It being no new thing to find that our Ancient Historians have let slip other things besides this: And what if it be all true? Did not Melchiades, Bishop of Rome,
receive the Donatists Bishops in their Orders, even those whom Majorinus had Odain'd,Aug. Ep. 162 upon their coming in and submission to the Catholick Church? But nothing is more certain then that he did not own, at the same time, Majorinus to be the lawful Bishop of Carthage, and Cecilianus to be the Intruder. The Council of Nicea receiv'd the Meletian Clergy upon the same terms, in their Conciliary Epistle to the Alexandrians: For,Socrat. l. 1. c. 6. Thed. H. E l. 1. c. 11. . what ever the Council might mean by the Mystical laying on of hands, which they receiv'd upon their Admission, we may not think it meant thereby a second Ordination, since we are told that they re∣tain'd their Ecclesiastical degree, and right to Officiate,. and lost nothing but their Seniority: And the word , added to , does not imply their reeiving new Oders, but a Coroboration of their old ones. To whichL. 4. c. 23. . Sozomen adds, that they were allow'd, to communicate and exercise their Ministery: Neither may we think, that this grant, and their admission to give attendance at the Altar, implys them to have lost their Orders. Now, can the loosest thoughts apprehend that Meletius was accepted by the Nicene Fathers, and obey'd as the Lawful Bishop of Alexandria, because his Ordinations were acceped? Or, (to back it with another-instance) since Alexander, into whose Alexandrian Diocess Me, letius intruded, did, in obedience to the Council's Authority receive those of his Ordaining, is he therefore to be concluded to have received him as rightful Bishop there, in the same man∣ner Doctor Hody would have us believe Liberius did Felix? The Doctor himself dares not say so, upon second thoughts. I know very well, that, not only some School-Men, but other learned Bishops and Doctors have asserted the Ordina∣tions which have been made contrary to the Law of the Church, and in Schism, to be altogether oid, and that nothing less then a second Ordination can make amends, and place those persons, who have receiv'd them, in a Sacerdotal station: And there are some who strongly plead▪ that the Council of Nicea is on their side, whenCar. 3. it thus determines; viz. that the Catharists or Novatians, which return to the Church, shall be receiv'd by Imposition of hands, and remain among the Clergy. The meaning of which they will have to be, that they shall be Re-ordain'd in order to it: And they ground their opinion upon the word , which is used to signify Imposition of hands in Ordination, as well as upon repentance: And believe
it to be used altogether in the former sense, in that Canon. I have consider'd the Canon as well as I could, and must say, that I cannot perswade my self to be of their mind. But whe∣ther they are in the right, or in the wrong, the several Do∣ctors different Judgments so far serve us, as to shew the rashness of Doctor Hody's inference. If he had first made it appear, that Liberius was among these Doctors, who asserted all Ordinations void, that were made by a second Bishop, against the Law of the Church, his consequence had then been direct and necessary, viz. that since Liherius receiv'd Felix's Ordinations as true ones, he did not look upon him as a second, but a rightful Bishop: But this he hath neither supposed, nor attempted to prove: though the contrary seems most probable; from the practice of the Church, about that time, which receiv'd the Ordinations which the Arian Bishops made, as Possessors. But in that he argues, and concludes universally, that Felix must have been the true Bishop of Rome, because Liberius receiv'd his Ordinations, when his receiving them might as well prove the quite contrary, since, for any thing he knows, or has made to appear, Liberius was of the opinion that the Ordinations wich a Second or un∣lawful Bishop made in Schism, were valid; and it is granted by all to have been a disputed point; nothing can be more ma∣nifest then the weakness of his consequence, and his undue assumption: It is to go for a Hodism: His Book will be found to be stuffed with inferences of the same alloy. I cannot for∣bear to say, that I do not remember one concluding argument in it. And that subject neither deserves nor is capable of better, whose main undertaking is to vindicate vacant Sees by unjust and uncanonical Deprivations. 8. ButP. 52, 53. he adds, that the whole Western Church has all along own'd Felix, as one of the true Bishops of Rome, This is the better laid medium of the two, but it will not infer his conclusion. For, fist, the Western Bishops are but a moiety of the Bishops in the Christian Church; and then, he instances only in such of them as are too modern to prove a point in the fourth Century: (they coming within the tenth or very near it) especially since none before them have done it. But if his citations be true, which I have some reason to suspect, they add but little to the repute of the whole. If Papebrochius says true: And the Martyrologies, Breviaries, &c. do own Felix to have been the tue Bishop of Rome, will they either by sufficient authorities for
the Doctor in this case? Do not even some of the Roman Do∣cters disown Felix as the lawful Bishop of Rome, because two Bishops could not be at a time in one City? Besides, there is not one of the Doctors authorities that mentions Felix, as a true Bishop of Rome, upon any other bottom then a supposed Tradi∣tion, which will hardly be of force against a generally receiv'd truth: And, after all, those two Rules in Tertullian come so full upon them, that they do not seem to be either escaped, or withstood.Quodcunque adversus veritatem sapit, haec erit Heresis, etiam vetus consuetudo; † In tan∣tum enim Heresis deputabitur, quod postea in∣troducitur; in quantum veritas habebitur, quod retro a primordio traditum est. * De Veland, virginibus c. 1. † l. 1. adv. marc. c. 1. Whatsoever (sayth he) savours contrary to truth, this is Heresie, tho' it be an old Custom. That which is after∣wards induced, shall be esteemed Heresie, in the same measure, as that which was de∣livered in times past, and from the begin∣ing, shall be accounted truth. 9. Well! But he fartherP. 53. saith, that Felix is likewise own'd for a true Pope, in the Eastern Church by Nicephorus the Patriarch of Constantinople, who flourish'd in the year 806. and that too tho' Nicephorus well knew, that he came in the place of Liberius, when Liberius was unjustly depos'd, by the Emperor, , as in his Chronology. And, as Liberius is reckon'd up the 25. Bishop of Rome, so our Felix, is call'd the 36. true; he ought to be call'd our, i. e. his Felix, as a fit Bishop for him, who writes himself R. Rmo. in Christo Patri ac Dno. Dno. Joanni Archiep. Cantuar. a Sacris Domest. I do not in the least question, but he would have been a Sacris Domest. to Felix at Rome, if he had been of the same time, and could have obtain'd the honour to have assisted him in his Arian Ordinations, as he hath done John at Lambeth, if that had been as consistent with his interest at Rome, as this was with his interest at Lambeth, and as likely a way to obtain two fat Benefices, with as many Dignities of the same quality, and, in due time, an Eusebian prize, i. e. a good Bishoprick. Nor do I question but that he would have de∣serted Felix too, upon his abdication, that afterward follow'd by Constantine, as his Damasus (for we will not envy him the having both of them for his own) deserted Liberius, when the same Secular Hand depriv'd him, and that the Doctor would have believ'd himself as little guilty of perjury for it, as he thinks Damasus was, notwithstanding his Oath of canonical Obedience. Felix's title at Rome, and Doctor Til—n's at Lambeth, were so much the same, that he who could recognize the one,
might, for the same reason, recognize the other: Both were enthron'd by the same secular arm, when that same arm had remov'd their Predecessors, without the advice and con∣currence of the Colledge of Bishops, or laying treason, or a Church forfeiture, to their Charge, cum locus Fabiani, & locus Sacerdotalis non vacaret, but the righful Bishops were alive, and fill'd their Sees at the same time. Neither will it (tho' the Doctor is of another opinion) in the least advantage Felix's title, nor, by consequence, Doctor Til—n's, in that Ni∣cephorus has left him and Liberius upon record, in hisLiberius ex∣terminatus a Constantio Ari∣ano. An 6. Fel. an. 1. ed. Anto∣nii Contii Pa∣ris. 1573. Chronology, as Bshops of Rome, and Felix, Liberius's Successor, upon Liberius's abdication by Constantius. For tho' this Nicephorus, Bishop of Constantinople, is of more authority then Nicephorus Calisti, the fam'd Ecclesiastical Historian; yet his credit is not such, as to conclude the whole Greek Church: besides, the Doctor owns that he did not write his Chronology till the beginning of the ninth Century: but that which we are chiefly to consider is, that Chro∣nologers, in making their Tables, have a respect only to matter of Fact, and set down the Successors, as they find them in posses∣sion, without a regard to their Right: and we are to make use of them for that purpose only, and to take from them the Succes∣sions; but the truth of their Titles, if contested, are to be prov'd otherways. And, accordingly, not only the Chronologers of the Reformation, but of the Church of Rome, set down in their Successions, or rather Possessions, all the Antipopes, together with the true ones; even Constantine and Formosus. For his sa∣tisfaction, as to the truth of which, I will at present, desire the Reader to consult Labbee's account of the Bishops of Rome, which he will find in the end of his Dissertatio Historica,Labbe de scrip∣toribus ecclesi∣asticis. de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis, pars secunda: but neither the Roman Church nor any else have thought Constantine and Formosus to be better or truer Popes for it. SECT. VIII. I Should now have done with the Reign of Constantius, did not one more remarkable passage occur in it which I may not omit. It is this, according to the account which Theodorit gives of it, in hisL 2. c. 31, 32. Ecclesiastical History. Eudoxius the Arian Posses∣sor, being remov'd from the See of Antioch to Constantinople, the Arians elected Meletius for their Bishop at Antioch, and Eusebius
Samosatensis, (being there at that time) together with the Catholicks of the City, concurr'd with them in it, the former concluding Meletius to be of their Party, for which they had then some bottom: But Euse∣bius and the Catholicks, were abundantly satisfied of his adherence to the Doctrine of the Eternal Generation: and both designing to serve themselves by him, and to make use of one another in order to it, they appointed a Decree for his admission and enthronization to be drawn up, and having universally, and unanimously, subscrib'd it, it was by a common vote deposited in the hands of the great and eminently up∣right Eusebius Samosatensis, as an approv'd Register, for its preser∣vation, whose fidelity will abundantly appear by and by. For, upon Meletius's coming to Antioch, and possessing himself of that See, by virtue of the Bishops Institution, and with the leave of Constantius, he immediately declar'd himself an Homoousian, and asserted the Eter∣nal Generation, and the Trinity in Unity, in a Sermon in the great Church, on Prov. 8.22. The Lord possessed me in the beginning, of his ways before his works of old: the Sermon is at large in Epi∣phaniusAdv. Heres. l. 3. Tom. 1. § 28., and well worth a serious perusal. Upon this, Constantius and his Arians were greatly provok'd and incensed against him, and their zeal was not less for his removal then it had been for his enthro∣nization: in order to which, it being found necessary that their De∣cree which placed and confirm'd Meletius in the See, should be openly cassated and null'd, otherwise it might remain in force against them, and be a bar to their Election of another Bishop, because it shew'd the Chair to be full (for a Supersemination was not acceptable) but this could not be done until Eusebius had deliver'd the Decree into their hands. For these considerations, I say, Constantius immediately sent away a Messenger to Eusebius, with his Royal Commands, that he should deliver the Decree; to whom Eusebius replied, that he could not deliver up the common Decree, with which he had been publickly entrusted, without the common consent of those of his own Faith, who, as one man, had committed it to him. The Emperor being highly incensed against him for such his answer, sends the Messenger back unto him with authority to demand the Decree, and if he persisted in his refusal, to cut off his right-hand; but the most holy Bishop was so far from being fear'd and overaw'd to act against his conscience, that when the Messenger declar'd the Emperors pleasure, he reach'd forth, not only his right hand, but his left, and bad him cut of both, saying, I will not deliver the Decree which is so full a conviction of the Arian impiety, by reason of which greatness and constancy of mind, the Em∣peror, being informed of it, much admir'd and commended him. For
enemies are wont to admire the eminent virtues of their adver∣saries, being compell'd to it by their great action: As our Historian there well observes. And from the whole I shall take no∣tice. 1. That a double, or second Election, and fixation in one and the same Chair, whilst the Person, first elected and fixed there, is alive, and not remov'd by his own consent, resignation, or some other due way, which the known Rules of the Church allow of; this proceeding (I say) was so very foul in those days, that the very Arians did shrink in upon it, and knew not how to submit into it: thoughC. 31. ibid. supra. Theodorit gives this Character of them, that they readily broke every Law to establish their impiety. And that the transgression of the Laws is the foundation of their blasphemy. And though they afterwards elected Euzoius into Meletius's Chair, and their Decree to the contrary was not deliver'd back unto them, it was not done to their own ease and satisfaction, it remaining a manifest redargution of their haughty Hearts and and Actions:. For which reason Eusebius did not deliver it into their hands, because thereby they would have had an opportuni∣ty to extinguish it;Cap. 32. Ibid. . but rather chose to undergo the wrath and cruelty of Constantius: themselves were not less sensible of it, ap∣prehending it to be conviction upon them of their injustice. And, if the want of a legal cancelling their first Votes, and Decree upon them, had not been a bar to their succeeding Election, nor laid it under the scandal of bringing a Bishop upon a full See, what was it could hinder Eusebius, but that he might have sur∣rendred his Paper? Or what needed the Arians to have been so urgent in demanding it? The one sure, is not to be conceiv'd, otherwise, to have expos'd himself to such mighty Sufferings, nor the other to have undergone, so much solicitude and trouble, as they did; and both he and they to have been so ill advis'd in the carriage of that affair. Much less may we think Constantius would have sent his Messenger twice, and such menaces along with him, concerning it, if there had not been a real purpose in it, and the effects had not been answerable: but thus it hath al∣ways been: and those evil men who do not boggle to tread on the necks of Laws, when to serve their own turn, will choose rather to keep them, and have the advantage of them, if it be consistent with their own project, and their design will be bet∣ter managed by a compliance with them. It is hence also evi∣dent, that the quitting a right by cession, resignation, or the
legal cancelling it by what other just ways it may be done, is not so trifling and sapless a thing, as Doctor Hody has declar'd it to be for the securing a Possessor in his See, and rendring his Possession defensible to Mankind, though Constantius exil'd Me∣letius, and his Arians rejected him notwithstanding, and consti∣tuted Euzoius Bishop of Antioch in his room. I must beg leave to make a little stand here, and caution Mankind on this occasion, that they do not wonder at the Vicissitudes in our own, or o∣ther Ages, especially, when Good men are degraded, and In∣famous men exalted, since Euzoius, who was aSozomen l. 4. c. 27. co-partner with Arius in his Heresie, and censur'd with him for it, to an abdi∣cation, by the famous Council of Nicea, is now made Bishop of the Apostolical and Mother Church of Antioch. I know Do∣ctor Hody will make this a President, and infer from it, that the Supream Coercive Power having placed him in that See, and made him a Possessor, the illegality of the action was no bar, tho' his Arianism might be one, to his reception and recognition: but Meletius (whose Fame was so great, that all men ran to see his person, asIbid. supra Theodorit l. 2. c. 31. Sozomen says, and he is called  the oraculous and great Meletius) did not own the inference, nor Eusebius Samosatensis, who is not inferior to him in Character, in our Church Story: the integrity of the latter therein, is ap∣plauded, even, by Constantius in his cool thoughts, though he made his Will his Law here, as he had done before in the Council of Millane: he found also the same slavish interested minds to comply with him. But I have abundantly givenCap. 1. Sect. 3 P. 18, 19, 21, 22. an account of Meletius's behaviour in this affair, which is here abet∣ted with the authority and practice of Eusebius Samosatensis. And though Eusebius did not attest the same with sufferings, as Meletius did, he was not less prepared and ready for it, if they had been inflictd upon him, as they were menaced. 2. The next thing that I am to take notice of, from this Hi∣storical passage between Constantius, Eusebius, and the Arians, is, our great Bishop of Samosata's just knowledge, zeal, and courage, in that he did not betray his trust, and give up the Church Rights, deposited in his hands, upon the demands, not only, of a Potent Faction, even irresistible, in Doctor Hody's Sense, but of Constantius, and his Sovereign Coercive Power, requiring them of him, with his drawn Sword in his hand. Our Savi∣our has so seated the Sacerdotal Character, and Churches Rights, in the hand of his Lieutenants, the Bishops, and, partly, in every
Presbyter and Deacon, that it is their own treachery alone, can betray and surrender them. The Arm of the most Potent cannot snatch and extort them from them, unless their Wills concur, and, in their Persons, they become assistants to him in it: And as it is their honour, so it ought to be their care, and earnest Prayers, that they be found faithful. Again, the same Wisdom of Christ our Saviour hath so order'd his Oecono∣my, and disposal of those Church Gifts, that if his Priests, with whom they are lodg'd, should make a general Apostacy, and surrender, or rather, acquit and devest themselves of them, nothing less then a new Feast of Penticost can restore and resettle them: The Edicts of Princes and Senates would be found insignificant in it; it would be their presumption, and their sin to attempt it. We are not then, to wonder that St. Paul so earnestly and solicitously advises Timothy in these words, O Timothe, depositum Custodi,1 Tim. 6.20. O Timothy, keep that good thig which is committed to thy trust. And that he repeats and reinforces it in more words, but to the same effect: that2 Tim. 1.14. good thing which was committed to thee, keep by the Holy Ghost, which dwelleth in us. By which command we are not to doubt but that Eusebius was influenced: it reaching farther, in its design then to Timothy's Person: neither may any one that duly consults the two Epi∣stles, restrain that injunction to Doctrinals only. Surely, Timo∣thy's care of the Church, and due behaviour in it, in respect of the ruling part, and succession of the Bishops, is thence ex∣pected. It is most sure, that the trust which Samosatensis, so conscientiously preserved, was Meletius's lawful right to the See at Antioch; in the keeping of which he was no less solicitous and conscientious, then he was to keep the Nicene Article of the the Eternal Generation. This is the Character which the two Emperors, Valentinian and Valens, give of the Homoousian Chri∣stians, in their Epistle to the Asian Diocess, in Theodorit'sL. 4. c. 7. Church History. They do not (saith he) refuse to pay tribute according to the Laws; they do not oppose the Imperial Power, but holily and sin∣cerely observe, as well our Laws, as the Commands of the great God and King. Valens had not at this time commenced his persecution, but he had seen those holy Bishops thoroughly try'd, and Eusebius Samsatensis in particular, in the Reigns of Constantius and Julian; and found them, afterwards, the same in his own Reign, in which he gave them farther great tryals: their Active and Passive Obedience was abundantly demonstrated to his
own Eyes, and the Senses of the whole World. Now Eusebiu did not comply with Constantius (notwithstanding the foremen∣tion'd imperial Character of him) but withstood his commands and threats, and refused to deliver up the Credentials, and the Church Rights with them, though he had before obey'd his other Edicts, and deliver'd up the Temporalities of his Bishoprick into his hands, together with his Person, to be disposed of at his Royal Pleasure: of which I have already givenCap. 1. Sect. 4. an account. And it is hence very plain, that the Civil and Spiritual Trust were two di∣stinct things, in the Sense of the then Empire: and the retaining the Spiritual, though against the Will of the Prince, was not reputed to be a breach of the former. Again, since Eusebius did not comply with Constantius's Commands, and deliver the Church Credentials, it can be imputed only to his just sense of Duty to his God, which, even in our present instance of it, those An∣cients believed themselves equally, nay antecedently, obliged to have a regard unto, as well as to their Duty to their Prince. The good Bishop justly apprehending, that his contributing, in the delivery of the Schedule, to the Settlement of Euzoius, in the full See of Antioch, Meletius being then alive, and not remov'd upon Church Terms, would be a Violation of the Law of God. Nothing else being supposable, upon the known Principles of that Age, and the Principles of the true Church in all Ages, to have with-held him from obedience to Constantius's commands, requiring his surrender of the Papers, and the same considerati∣ons only could justifie him in it to the Christian World. Thus God's great and infinite goodness to his Church has raised up men in all ages, who have asserted and maintain'd her Rights, upon every Emergency, even before Kings, who have sometimes endeavour'd to erase and sink them. But we have more eminent Examples of this Nature, over and above this of Eusebius, in the Reign of Constantius, which was almost all over a Persecution: As, Athanasius of Alexandria, Eustathius and Meletius of Antioch, Paulus of Constantinople, Paulinus of France, Eusebius of Vercellis, Dyonisius of Italy, Lucifer, of Sardinia, Hilary of Poicteirs, Hosius of Corduba, Liberius of Rome, which two last were highly serviceable after their lapses, upon their true repentance, as well as in their labours and sufferings, whilst they stood. BaroniusAr. 359. Num. 83. says, that there were twenty in the Synod of Ariminum, which adher'd to the true Faith, and there∣by preserv'd the rightful Succession, and Orthodox Doctrine.
And the same mercy of God will always preserve a remnant of true Israelites to be partakers of the afflictions of the Gospel, according to the Power of God, and assert his Truths, and his Churches Rights, in performing their Trusts, under the like Emergen∣cies: being perswaded, as St. Paul was, that God2 Tim. 1.12. is able to keep that good thing which is committed unto them against that day. And that he will be with them always unto the end of the World. Whose God∣liness is not placed in the Gain, and little poor concerns in this Life. Who expect no other recompence here but the Blessings and Peace of a good Conscience, and that Euge bne serve, well done good and faithful Servant, at the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, which in his times he shall shew, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, who only hath im∣mortality, dwelling in that Light which no man can approach unto; whom no man hath seen, or can See; to whom be Power ever∣lasting, Amen. FINIS.
