11363 99838545 2927
ARTICLES Agreed vpon and concluded be∣tweene the victorious, excellent, high and mighty Prince and Lord, FREDERICK HENRY, Prince of Orange, Count of Nassaw, &c. on the one part, and the van∣quished Towne of S' hertogenbosh on the other side. And also, How the Towne, and the Pettler-Sconce was deliuered, on the fourth of September, into the hands of His said Excellence: and how his Garrison entred into the said Towne, there to keepe the Walles and Gates. Worthy of reading. LONDON, Printed for Nicholas Bourne, and are to bee sold at his Shop, at the South entrance of the Royall Exchange. 1629.
Articles agreed vpon, betweene His Excellence the Prinee of Orange, and the vanquished Towne of S'Her∣togenbosh. SInce that by the Command of the Excellent, high, and mighty Prince of Orange, the Towne of S'hertogen∣bosh hath beene this great while be∣sieged, and daily furiously assaulted and battered; chiefly since that the Gallery by the Vucthter gate hath beene brought ouer the Ditch, whereby his Excel∣lence endeuoured by all meanes to get the Halfe-moone without the Vncthter gate, wherein they of the Towne had all their trust and confidence; To which end, his Excellency had already blowne vp a Mine. And although the Frenchmen hauing giuen an Assault, and attempted vpon the Towne, they with∣in had beaten them backe, and forced them to retire, yet the next day after, being betwixt Sunday and Munday, the English and Dutch hauing the Watch there, haue also giuen an assault vpon the said Halfe-moone, and haue taken the same by force of Armes; so that they within had no more Trenches or out∣workes, but onely the Walles, into which, by the continuall battering of the Ordnance, was made so
great a breach, that two Waggons together might well haue passed thorow it. And whereas his Prince∣ly Excellence did for the last time summon them to yeeld themselues and warned the Gouernour, that if he would not in good time hearken to a Composi∣tion, that he should take heede to himselfe, and to all them that were in the Towne, lest they might come in danger of their liues, because his Excellence was resolued to assault and take the Towne by force, and way of Armes. The said summons caused not little alteration and troubles among the Burgers and Wo∣men, so that they ranne with great fury to the Com∣manders House: But because the Gouernour would not hearken vnto their complaints, whereby the se∣dition of the people did continually increase, There∣fore the Clergie with the Bishop, were forced to come forth themselues, both to appease the people, & to moue the Gouernor by their perswasions, telling him, that there rested no hope for them, of any helpe or reliefe from abroad, and that within the Towne there was an infinite number of sicke and hurt per∣sons, and besides also, that they were altogether vn∣prouided of warlike Amunition, to make sufficient resistance against the Forces of the Prince: so that they thought it more necessary to parley, and make a Composition with the Prince, then to hazzard and endanger all their liues. By this perswasion and request the Gouernour was induced and content to demand of His Excellence a cessation of Armes for three daies, that in the mean while, there might bee made some good agreement and composition on both sides. Therefore on the 11. stilo nouo, and the 1. stilo veteri, of September, being Tuesday, there came out of the Towne into the Prin∣ces Quarter, the Deputies, namely, 2. of the Coun∣cellours
of the Town, the Brother-in-law of the Go∣uernour, and two Monkes, the one a blacke-Frier, and the other a white-Frier, which did treat, Coue∣nant▪ agree and conclude with the Prince of Orange, and some of the Lords States, on the 13. of Septem∣ber at night, being Thursday last; these Articles as here doe follow. 1. First, the spirituall or Ecclestasticall persons, as Fryers, Priests, Monkes, shall depart out of the Towne within 6. weekes. 2. Other religious persons as Nunnes, and such Women, shall keepe their Cloisters, and there bee maintained and well entertained during their liues. 3. The Towne and the Burgers are to keepe and be maintained in their Priuiledges: But as for such as will depart, they shall haue liberty for two whole yeeres next ensuing, to sell their Houses and goods at their profit, according to the agreement of Brede. 4. The Papists are to haue liberty of conscience, but no publike exercise of their religion. 5. The Souldiers shall on Munday next (being the 7. of September) depart out of the Towne, with their full Armes, burning Matches, Bullets in the mouth, and with 4. Peeces of Ordnance. 6. Vpon Friday last, the 4 of September, the Towne was deliuered into the hands and power of his Excellence, wherefore our Garrison was receiued into the Towne, and doe now keepe watch & guard vpon the Wals, and of the Gates of the Towne: And on the same day there hath also beene deliuered into the hands of his Excellence the Pettler Sconce, and receiued and kept with his Garrison. 7. The Gouernor shall be conuoyed to Breda. 8. Those of the Towne haue required, that they may haue a Gouernour of the House of Nassaw, which hath beene granted vnto them.
Louing Reader, this is that which in the Treatie, (so much as is deliuered vnto vs) hath beene agreed vpon. Wherefore we can not enough praise and thanke the good Almighty God, for the great and worthy Victory, which he hath giuen vs in despight of all our Enemies. The Lord God blesse and preserue with all happinesse, the Excellent, high and mighty Prince, the Prince of Orange, His Excellencie, Count Ernest, and the high and mighty Lords, the States, and all true maintainers of his holy Word. Amen. These former Articles are printed according to the Dutch Copie, printed at Delfe. This following Copie is translated out of the Ori∣ginall.
Articles, granted by His Excel∣lence the Prince of Orange, vnto the Go∣uernour of the Towne of the Busse, and vnto the Captaines and Souldiers being in the same. 1. THe Gouernour of the Busse, with all the Officers of War, and Souldiers, of what quality and condition soeuer they are, both the Horse and foote, none excep∣ted, yea euen those that haue forsaken the Seruice of the Lords the States, and accepted the seruice of the King of Spaine, are to march out of the Towne without any let, trouble, or hinder∣ance, with their Armes, Bagge and Baggage; the Horse with the sound of Trumpet, flying Colours, armed in their full Armour, and their Weapons in their hands: The Foot, Drumme beating, Colours displaid, Matches kindled on both ends, Bullets in their mouths, in such sort, forme & order, as they were wont to march in Bat∣tell-aray, hauing all their goods and liues safe, from thence vnto the Towne of Diest. 2. They are to carry with them Six Peeces of Ordnance, and two Morters, or Murthering-peeces, the which the Gouernour hath to make choice of; and withall, such appurtenance and Amunition of Warre, as may suffice to shoot off euery Peece twelue times. 3. They shall be furnished and prouided with Horses
and Waggons, with their Waggonmen and conductors, sufficient to carry away the said Peeces of Ordnance, and Murderers, with the said appurtenances, to the Towne of Diest. 4 All the Amunition of Warre and victuals, belong∣ing to the King of Spaine, are to bee deliuered without any fraud or deceit whatsoeuer, into the hands of such as His Excellency shall appoint to that end, except onely such victuals as haue beene sold before te 2. of this present moneth when this Treaty was first begunne▪ for the same shall so remaine sold, and those that haue bought the same, are not to be searched or troubled for it. 5 All Officers & Souldiers, both sicke and hurt, being in the Hospitall, or else-where, may stay and remaine in the Towne, vntill their health shall giue them leaue to trauell▪ and then they are to haue a safe conduct and meanes to carry away their armes and baggage, either to Diest or to Breda. 6 There is also to bee granted asufficient number of Waggons, Carts and Horses, which the Gouernour shall aske for, both for his seruice, and all other Officers, and Souldiers to carry away his stuffe, and all sorts of bagge and baggage to Diest, there being comprehended all Armes, yea even of those Souldiers of the Garrison, as are either absent, dead, sicke, hurt, fled, or runne away; and the said Waggons are not to be visited or searched in any manner. 7 To those that shall desire to carry their stuffe and baggage to Antwerpe, shall be furnished without their pay or charges, some Boats to carry the same thither by Holland, freed from all taxes, impositions or customes, with permission to appoint to the same persons to take care of their said goods: the which are not to be search∣ed or stayed in any place or vnder any colour whatso∣euer, but are to passe freely to Antwerpe, without stay or vnlading.
8 The Gouernour, Officers, Inginers of Warre, Souldiers, and other persons, enioying wages of the King of Spaine, being Ecclesiasticall, or seculars, none excepted; as likewise the widdowes and children of such Officers, that haue in the said Towne any houses, inheritances, reuenues, rents, be it vpon the States of Braband in this Quarter, or vpon particular houses and grounds, or any other goods, moueable and immoueable, that they are to hauc the space and terme of two yeeres from the signature of this present Treaty, according to their owne will, either to transport, sell, ingage, or otherwise dispose of the said goods: and during the said time, they are to enioy the said reuenues, rents, fruits, and goods, gotten, or to be gotten, in such nature and condition as they euer can be. 9 The Officers and Souldiers, of what charge or condition so∣euer they are, may leaue their wiues and children within the towne; and during the said terme of two yeeres, they may dispose of their goods, moueables, and immoueables, situated in the said towne, or elsewhere, none excepted, and there shall no confiscation, or prize, be vsed against them. 10 The said Officers and Souldiers, if they forsake and giue o∣uer their Office, charge, or seruice, within the said space of two yeeres, they may freely returne into the said towne, and en∣ioy this Treaty, as other Burghers of Inhabitants: But so rhat first they doe signifie it, and declare themselues either to his Excellence, or to the Gouernour that shall be in this towne. 11 No Officer or Souldier, nor their baggage can be stayd or arested for any debts, whether he now march out with the Garrison, or being sicke or hurt, stay and come after when he shall be well againe. 12 All prisoners on both sides, of what condition soeuer, are to be put into liberty without any ransome, saue onely they
are to pay the expences for their meate and drinke according to he taxe and order of the Quarter. 13 All booties that haue beene taken by those of the towne, both before and during this siege, are not to be taken from them, but remaine to those that haue them. 14 The Articles of this composition being signed, the Gouer∣nour of the Busse is to haue liberty, and leasure, to send an ex∣presse Messenger towards the most Excellent Infanta of Spaine, with a safe-conduct and assurance, to giue her notice of what hath beene done: But it is vnderstood, that the Go∣uernour shall send him away on the same day when the Trea∣ty shall be signed. 15 The said conditions being resolued vpon, and concluded, there shall be granted vnto the said Gouernour and all his men of warre, and Souldiers, at the least two dayes, to make them∣selues ready for their departure: The which terme being ex∣pired, the said Gouernour and Officers of the said garrison doe promise to be gone, to wit, vpon Munday next very early, which shall be the 7/17. of this month of September. 16 It is to be vnderstood, that during the said space of two dayes, no body at all of the towne may come into the army, nor those of the army into the said towne, and the same to hinder and preuent all disorder: But euery one is to remaine in the meane time within his trenches, or forts; And there shall also bee made no approaches, nor done any act of hostility: for the bet∣ter assurance wherof, there are to be giuen Hostages on the one and the other part. 17 Before the Garrison doth march out, there are to be giuen two sufficient Hostages on his Excellence's part, the which are to march with the said Garrison, armes and baggage, from hence to Diest: As likewise on the other side, the Gouer∣nour also is to giue two Hostages, which are to remaine vntill
the said Hostages of his Excellence, and the Wagons are come back: And then presently his Excellence is to send away the said Hostages with a safe-conduct and security vnto the towne of Diest. 18 The Officers, Captaines, and other persons, comprehended in the first Article of this present Treaty, hauing any armes, barges, or boats, or other stuffe of warre belonging particular∣ly vnto them, may sell, or transport the same, and those that shall buy or transport them, are not to be searched or troubled for it. 19 There is no restitution to be made of horses, armes, mar∣chandizes, goods, or other stuffes, that haue beene fold, or taken as booties, and no body is to be molested for the same. 20 Those that are of the Garrison of Breda, being now in this said towne, both Officers and particular Souldiers, they may now returne with their goods and liues safe, vnto Breda; And there shall be also granted vnto them a sufficient number of wagons and horses for the carriage of bag and baggage, and an Hostage and Conuoy to conduct them thither with all safety, in the like manner as is expressed in the first Article, as being comprehended therein. Giuen in the Campe before Boiste∣duke, or the Busse, this 4/14. of September, 1629. Signed. F. Henry de Nassaw. A. Grobendonke. And beneath it was written, By order of his Excellence. And signed I. Iunius. And confirmed by the seale of his Excellence. This agreeth with the Originall. Signed Corn. Musch. FINIS.
