19344 99849307 14447
THE BARREN TREES DOOME: A SERMON PREA∣CHED AT NEWBERY ON THE FIFTH DAY OF AVGVST. E DAY OF HIS  MOST HAPPY DE∣  m THE BLOVDY CON∣spiracie of the Earle of Gowry and his brother Alexander. By BARTHOLOMEVV PARSONS Batchelour in Diuinitie, and Vicar of Collingborne King∣stone in the Countie of Wiltes. DAN. 4.23. Hew downe the Tree and destroy it. PSAL. 18.40. Thou hast giuen me the neckes of mine enemies, that I might destroy them that hate me. LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OKES, for MATHEVV LAVV, and are to be sold at his shop in Pauls Church-yard at the signe of the Fox. 1616.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE WIL∣LIAM EARLE OF PENBROOKE, LORD HARBERT OF CARDIFFE LORD Parr and Rosse of Kendall, Lord Marmion and St. Quintine, Lord Chamberlaine to his Maiesty, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and one of his Maiesties most Honourable Priuy Councell. RIGHT HONORABLE LORD, KING Saul being brought in∣to such a straight, that to escape the hands of the vncir∣cumcised Philistimes, hee laid violent hands vpon himselfe, fell vpon his owne sword and died 1. Sam. 31.4.. Dauid in his Funerall Elegies, in his Lamentations wherewith hee lamented ouer Saul and Ionathan, cryeth out, Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Ashkelon, lest the daughters of the Philistims reioyce, lest the daughters of the vn∣circumcised tryumph2. Sam. 1.20.. But when a better then
Saul1. Sam. 15.28., to whom God hath giuen the Kingdomes of great Brittaine, being so brought into the snare of those mightie Hunters, Nimrods, vncircumcised in heart, the Earle of Gowry and his brethren, that the sorrowes of death compassed him, the floods of the vngodly made him afraid Psalm. 18.4., and hee was ready to say with King Hezekiah, I am depriued of the resi∣due of my yeares, I shall not see the Lord in the Land of the liuing, I shall behold man no more with the Inhabitants of the worldEsa. 38.10.11, was notwith∣standing so deliuered out of the snare of those Fow∣lers, that not an haire of his head fell to the ground; It is a good thing for vs that are the Lords Prae∣conesEsay 58.1., in our Panygyrickes that wee speake vnto the Lord in the day of the commemoration thereof Psal. 18.1., to cry it in the streetes, in the chiefe places of con∣course, in the opening of the gates Prou. 1.20., and in the Tem∣ples of the Lord that both Sion hearing of it, may reioyce and be glad Psal. 96.8.; and all the daughters of Baby∣lon that beare euill will at Sion, all treacherous Zi∣bahs, that could find in heart to blow the Trumpet of rebellion against their Soueraignes 2 Sam. 20.1., may bee con∣founded, and hang downe their heads for shame. Now though my tongue be not as the pen of a ready writer, though mine hand want Apelles Art to paint out this our Alexander in his great deliue∣rance; yet I haue made bold, in mine heart to endite some good matter, with my tongue to speake, and with my pen to publish the things that I haue made touching the King Psalm. 45.1. And albeit it might be said to mee, being little both in mine owne and others eyes,
What art thou? Whence commest thou? yet I haue like Hester, aduentured to come wth these my raw medi∣tations into the Courts of your Honors house without calling thither Hest. 4.10., hoping as Dauid shewed kindnes to Mephibosheth for Ionathans sake 2. Sam. 9.7., so you will vouch safe to receaue it into your fauourable protecti∣on for the subiects sake whereof it intreateth, his Highnesse happy and wonderfull sauing, in whose safety at that time consisted, both in generall, the pre∣seruation of these two famous kingdomes, and also in speciall, the continuance of your honours prosperi∣tie and dignitie vnto this day; you being one of the foules of the aire that haue their habitation in the branches of this great tree Dan. 4 21.. Againe, my perswasions are strong, that any thing spoken of his Maiesties wonderfull deliuerance, shall be welcome to him, in whom haue bene obserued to meet, and be conioyned, those seuerall commendations that Alexander the Great gaue to two of his seruants, commending the one (Craterus) to be , a louer of the king in the things that concerned his crowne and dignitie: the other (Hephaestion) to be , a louer of Alexander in a priuate respect & affection towards his person: and that the basest earthen vessell, that bringeth in it any of the heauenly treasures, shall finde fauour in his eyes, who (as it was sayd of Sce∣uola that he was Iurisperitorum eloquentissimus, of all the Lawyers the most eloquent man) is , of our Nobles the most skilfull in Diuinitie, who hath made Gods testimonies his counsellers, ta∣keth more delight in them then in thousands of gold
and siluer, and thinketh it a greater honour to bee a member of the Church, then a Peere of the Realme. All which hath made me put on the spirit of bold∣nesse, to dedicate vnto your honorable protection, this  song of triumph, wherein the highest note is concerning the Mercies of the Lord, and the faith∣fulnesse that he hath shewed vnto our Dauid his an∣nointed. Pardon then (I beseech your Honour) my boldnesse, accept it with gracious fauour, and protect it vnder the shadow of your roofe (as Lot did the Angels) that miscreants may doe nothing vnto it. And in my poore measure I wil not cease to fall down an humble suppliant before the Throne of grace, to make request, that God which hath blessed you with the blessings of heauen aboue, and of the deepe that lyeth vnder neath, would also blesse you with all spi∣rituall blessings in heauenly things in Christ; who hath giuen you a name vpon earth, would giue you a name and place within his house and his walles; which hath made you happy in standing before an earthly Salomon, would giue you the fulnesse of ioy in his presence; and which hath set you with the Princes of his people, would in his good time set you at his right hand where there are pleasures for euermore. Your Honours in all humble duty, BARTHOLOMEVV PARSONS.
THE BARREN TREES DOOME. MATH. 3.10. Therefore euery Tree which bringeth not forth good fruite, is hewen downe, and cast into the fire. THAT this Parabolicall speech may not bee vttered to vs, as vnto them to whom it is not giuen to know the secrets of the Kingdome of heauen: Who seeing do not see, and hearing doe not heare, nor vnderstandMat. 13.11.: If with the Disciples wee aske the heauenly Mai∣ster apart concerning this Parable, , hee will vnfold and expound it vnto vs Mar. 4.34.: And as hee doth, aperire os suum in parabolis, open his mouth in Parables; so hee will, aperire etiam ipsas parabolas, open the Parables them∣selues
also August. in Psal. 77., if wee consult with the heauenly Oracles, the light of them will dispell the darke∣nesse that hangeth on the face of this Text: Nihil enim fere, &c. (saith Saint AustinAugust. de doctr. Christ. l. 2. cap. 7.) For the most part there is nothing fetched out of those obscurities (which are in the Scriptures) which we may not finde more plainly spoken in another place. Let vs know then, that the Lord (who speaketh of himselfe according to the He∣brew prouerbe, With the tongues of the sonnes of men, and of whom, according to that golden rule of Athanasius, those things which in Scrip∣tures , are spoken according to humane affection, are to be vnder∣stood as becommeth the nature of God) is plea∣sed to take vpon him the name and profession of an Husbandman, whose husbandry his Saints are 1. Cor. 3.9.: Of a Maister: Of a Vineyard, Esay 5.1. whose Vineyard is the house of Israel, the men of Iu∣dah his Plants Ibid. v. 7., being a Vine, noble for gene∣rosity Ierem. 2.21., excellent for glory Ezek. 17.8., and pleasant for delectation Esay 5.7.: And of a Gardener, whose Spouse is a Garden inclosed, the Plants where∣of are an Orchard of Pomegranats with plea∣sant Fruite Cant. 4.12.. Now as in the floare of the Church, there is mingled together, chaffe to be seuered with the fanne and throwne into the fire, and wheate to bee gathered into the Gar∣ner Math. 3.12.; In the field of the Kingdome of Heauen, are tares to bee pulled out, and burnt vp, and wheate to bee carryed into the Barne in their
due season Math. 13 30.: In the Net of the Kingdome of Heauen, are gathered all kinds of things; bad to bee cast away, and good to bee put into vessels Math. 13.44.48.. So in this Vineyard of the Lords of Hosts, in this garden of our Wel-beloued, there are found, both trees planted by the riuers of the water of the Sanctuary, whose leaues shall not fade, neither shall their fruite faile Ezek. 47.12.; and also  Trees of Autumne decaying, whose fruite withereth; yea without fruite, twise dead,Iude 12. as the speech of the Holy Ghost riseth by de∣grees in that place. These, these Trees doth this Messenger before the face of the Lord, be∣ing like to purging fire Mal. 3.2. De coelo tangere, strike at from heauen; and not either Totum genus hu∣manum, all man-kind (as some Interpreters would haue it Hugo Cardin. Beda Iansen.) for they are the Trees of the Forrests Esay 44.14., not of the Garden of the Lord: or onely Genus Israeliticum, the people of Israel (as some restraine this commination Chrys. Hilar. Theophilact. Muscul. Piscat. Maldon..) For though this Parabolicall speech be specially in∣tended against euill Professours of his time by Iohn the Baptist heere, as it is vsed also by our Sauiour against euill Prophets of the succee∣ding times Math. 7.19.; yet Communi ratione, in a generall consideration all Pseudo-Christians, that like the Angel of the Church in Sardis haue a name that they liue, but are dead Reu. 3.1., are vnderstood; inclu∣ding herein; who bearing not fruite in Christ, must be taken away Iohn 15.2., and being barren, must be
cut vp, that they may not cumber the ground of Gods Sanctuary Luke 13.7.. Of which Trees, not to the boughes or body, but to the roote, is laid alrea∣dy, not to be laid hereafter; not a knife to prune (for such dressing is requisite for the good bran∣ches that bring forth fruit Iohn 15.2.) but an axe to cut downe: Which whether wee enterprete with Saint IeromeHieron. in lo∣cum. of the Ministery of that most pier∣cing Heb. 4.12. word, which is like as a fire, and like an hammer breaking the Rockes Ier. 23.29., and which by denouncing vengeance against all disobedience, doth plucke vp, roote out, destroy and throw downe Ier. 1.10. (for so God heweth by his Prophets, and slayeth by the words of his Mouth Hos. 6.5.:) Or with ChrisostomeChris. in lo∣cum., to bee the Acutissima ira con∣summationis, Gods most sharpe anger that will make an end of all: With Maldonate, the Di∣uinum Iudicium,Maldonat. in locum. diuine iudgement; It commeth all to one, there being but little difference be∣tweene Gods voyce threatning, and his hand taking vengeance on them. Chrisostome summeth vp the whole hitherto very elegantly, Nihil ter∣ribilius, &c.Chris. in lo∣cum. There is nothing more more ter∣rible then this manner of speaking, for hee threatneth not them with a flying hooke, nor with the destruction of the hedge, nor the trea∣ding downe of the Vineyard, but with a cutting Axe; yea, and which is more terrible, with such an Axe that is at hand, and cutteth euen pre∣sently. Therefore] Nihil certius, nothing is more
certaine, it is a conclusion from the breathe of his mouth, who is the God that cannot lie Tit. 1.2.. A Tree] yea a Tree of the Vineyard, of the Garden, that no man may build vpon, or boast of a plantation without fructification. Euery Tree] that no man may exempt him∣selfe from the common condition; For hee that goeth about to except himselfe doth but deceiue himselfe. That bringeth not forth good fruit] that no man may thinke it enough to haue brought forth good fruite, Maldonat in locum. nor place the whole duty of a Christian in abstayning from euill. Is cut downe] not, shall be cut downe: the time present, intimating the presentnesse of the dan∣ger; and hee threatneth not any slight stroke, but cutting downe by all meanes Musculus in locum.. And cast into the fire] that like Iudas it might go into his owne place Acts 1.25.. This second Elias then walking in the spirit and power of the first Elias, doth, as it were, call for fire from heauen 2. King. 1.10. against these barren vn∣bearing Trees, that haue lost the blessing of their creation in Christ Iesus Gen. 1.11. Ephes. 2.10., to bring forth fruite according to their kinde. But that we may take a suruay of the particu∣lars in their rankes, let vs marke, First, the certainty of the vengeance denoun∣ced; Therefore,] It is not a matter nakedly affir∣med, but strongly concluded, like the Apostles , Rom. 3.28 We conclude, &c.
Secondly, the subiect, or person, capable of this punishment; A Tree] of the garden; which least the Iudge should shew himselfe partiall, is amplified by the generall extent, euery such Tree.] Thirdly, the mouing cause hereof; For farre be it from the Iudge of the whole world that hee should not do right,Gen. 18.25. that he should punish any vndeseruedly; because it bringeth not forth good fruite.] Lastly, the nature of the punishment stan∣ding vpon two feete: 1 Such a Tree is to be Hewne downe] that it may not cumber the ground, and offend other good plants. 2 It must be cast into the fire] that it may re∣ceiue as it hath deserued, for the end of such Trees is to be burned Hebr. 6.8. The certainty of the vengeance heere de∣nounced, standeth in the doore of the Text, like Abraham in the dore of his Tent. Therefore:] It is not a bare affirmation, which were enough, but a demonstratiue conclusion, inferred out of his premisses, which is, , superaboundant: For if the words of Gods mouth are mighty and operatiue, Dixit, & facta sunt;Psal. 33.9. much more are the counsels of his heart infallible, indiuertible, The counsell of the Lord standeth for euer, the thoughts of his heart to all generationsIbid. vers. 11.: Therefore (as Saint Ierome saith well) If we beleeue not God when hee speaketh, yet
let vs beleeue him when hee sweareth: So, if we be∣leeue not God when hee doth nakedly Affirme, yet let there be a , a full assurance of faith in vs, when hee doth regularly Conclude, and compell vs (as it were) by force of Argument. As then all the promises of God, are Yea and amen, in Christ Iesus: I will not (saith hee 2. Cor. 1.20.) fal∣sify my truth, I will not alter the thing that is gone out of my lipsPsal. 89.33.: So all his denunciations of ven∣geance are stable, yea immutable, as the Lawes of the Medes and Persians, which alter not Dan. 6.8.. Moriendo morieris, Thou shalt surely die the deathGen. 2.17., was Adams doome, if hee should fall into sinne; the words being doubled, because the thing was established, as in Pharoahs dreame Gen. 41.32: Whether vengeance then come in the morning, as vpon the SodomitesGen. 19.23.24., vpon whom about the rising of the Sunne Gehennam è coelo misit deusSaluianus l. 1 de gubernat dei., God sent an hell out of hea∣uen; Or at noone day, as to Haman, who was caught from his dinner to the gallowes Ester 7.9.; Or at euentide, as to Ahab, who being wounded in warre, dyed in his Chariot about the going downe of the Sunne 1. King. 22 35: Or in the night season, as to Chedorlaomer, and the Kings that were with him, whom Abraham ouertooke and smote by night Gen. 14.15.: Whether it come serius aut citiùs, later or sooner, yet certis passibus illa venit, it com∣meth surely without failing: The Lord that re∣compenceth will surely recompenceIer. 51.56. Know certain∣ly that yee shall die by the sword, by the famine and
by the pestilenceIer. 42.22.. And that vision that Habecuck saw against the capitall sinnes, not onely of his times, but also of all times; Pride, Couetousnesse, drunkennes, and Idolatry, must surely come Habacuk. 2.3. Ther∣fore not so much for the secresie, as for the cer∣tainty thereof, is vengeance sealed vp amongst Gods treasures, Deut. 32▪ 34. yea bound with the indissoluble band of an oath; The Lord sweareth that hee will haue warre with Amalecke from generation to ge∣nerationExod. 17.16.: I haue sworne vnto the house of Eli, that the iniquity of Elies house shall not be purged with sacrifice, nor offering for euer1. Sam. 3.14. Let no man then, when hee heareth the words of Gods cur∣ses denounced against his euill waies, sing a re∣quiem to his owne soule, blesse himselfe in his heart, saying, with the stubborne in heart, I shall haue peace, though I walke according to the stub∣bornnesse of mine heartDeut. 29.19.; with the wicked, I shall neuer be mouedPsalme 10.6.; with the sinners, Euill shall not comeAmos 9.10. with the grieuous trespassers, Euill shall not come vpon vs, the Prophets are but winde, and the word is not in themIer. 5.12.13.; with the frozen in their dregges, The Lord will do neither good nor euillZeph. 1.12.. For as the Lord liueth (it is his owne attestation) if he whet his glittering sword, and his hand take hold on iudgement, hee will render vengeance on his enemies, and reward them that hate him, hee will make his arrowes drunke with their bloud, and his sword shall deuoure their flesh Deut. 32.40.41.42.. But I haue many things to say, I passe from the certainty, and come to the subiect or per∣sons,
vpon whom this vengeance must bee in∣flicted: A Tree.] Now all Trees are not of one sort, of one ranke, for some are Trees of the Forrest, some of the Garden: What Trees then must this Axe hew at? Not those of the Forrest; For what hath hee to doe to iudge them being without 1. Cor. 5.12. but the Trees of the Garden, for them hee iudgeth being within Ibidem., and in the Garden, Not those flourishing Palmes, that bring forth fruite still Psal. 92.12.13, but those ligna arida, dry Trees Esay 56.3.: Such as will bee Citizens of Syon, and yet not suffer the Lord that reigneth in SyonEsay 52.7., to rule ouer them Luk. 19.14.27; Such as will bee in the Vineyard, yet will yeeld no fruite to the Lord of the Vine∣yard Mat. 21.34.; for such Chaffe will grow with the Wheate Math. 13., such Tares will spring vp with the good Seed, and such vessels of dishonour will thrust themselues into the great house of Gods Militant Church 2. Tim. 2.20., though being in the Church, they are not of the Church 1. Iohn 2.9.; no more then the Elect being in the world, are of the world Ioh. 15.19.. Those Pharisees then of the Concisi∣on, the brethren of the Separation, which stand apart, will not come neere our Churches, as though they were holier and sounder then they Esay 56.5., and which can finde no rest for the soale of their foote, but the Synagogue of Amsterdam, are not led with the feruour of zeale, but transpor∣ted with the fury of Schisme, whilst they leaue Gods Floare because of some Chaffe, breake his net because of some baggage of fish, depart
out of his house because of some vessels of dishonour, and forsake his field because of some cockle: Non propter malos boni deserendi,Angust. epist. 48. sed propter bonos mali tolerandi: Good men are not to be forsaken for ill mens sakes, but the ill are rather to be tolerated for the goods sake. Doth the Oliue Tree presently loose his fatnesse, or the Fig-tree his sweetnesse, because the pricking bramble groweth neere them? Doth the Lillie cease to be a Lillie, because it is amongst the Thornes Cant. 2.2.? Hath our Mother lost her beauty, yea her face it selfe, if there bee a spot or scratch vp∣on it? Ecclesiam teneo (saith Saint AustinAugst. lib. 3. contra Crescon. grammat. cap. 35) &c. I abide in the Church being full of Wheate and Chaffe, I amend those that I can, I tolerate those that I cannot amend, I flye from the Chaffe least I should be it, but not from the Floare, least I should be nothing: But they being carryed about with euery blast of vaine doctrineEphes. 4.14., still innouating their Positions, still new hammering their Church Constitutions, shew themselues to bee but Chaffe. Tu qui vento tentationis euobasti, &c. (saith Austen) Thou which art blowne out of the Floare with the winde of temptation, what art thou? Wheate: the winde would not carry it out of the floare: By the place therefore where thou art, ac∣knowledge what thou art. But to leaue the pursute of these fugitiues, & to come neerer to our selues; if this must bee done to these drie barren trees Luke 23.32., though they want not leaues to couer their nakednes, Math. 21.19. thogh
they haue a name and place within the walls of Gods house, Esay 56.5. what profiteth it them to rest in an outward profession, shew of godlines, & to want the inward power, and life thereof? to be painted Sepulchres, beautifull without, loathsome with∣in Math. 23 27., foris Catones, intus Nerones, outwardly as graue as Cato, inwardly as wilde as Nero: and as Saint Austen speaketh, in superficie boni, in alto mali; in the outside good, in the inside euil: and to haue our fruit like to the Apple of Sodome, which Solinus. in the outside hath a shew of ripenesse, but in the inside smoaky dust, so that vpon the least touch it sendeth out smoke, and goeth away in a flying dust. Shall the wolfe euer be set on the right hand, be∣cause hee commeth sometimes in sheepes cloa∣thing? Math. 7.19. Shall not Sathan fall from Heauen like lightning, Luke 10.18. though heere hee often transforme himselfe into an Angell of light? 2. Cor. 11.14. Shall not the fiue foolish Virgins, that brought with them the lamps of an outward profession onely, and wan∣ted the oyle of grace, bee shut out of the King∣dome? Math. 25.10. Could Ahab escape the stroake of the arrow, though hee were disguised in his habite? 1. King. 22.34. And shall men, though they sweare vaine, false oathes, commit murther, adultery and such like wickednesse, be deliuered if they come and stand before God in his house? Ier. 7.9.10. Assuredly such hal∣ting betweene God and world, will make vs pen∣dere inter coelum & terram, hang betweene hea∣uen and earth (as Erasmus was painted) yea per∣dere coelum & terram, loose both heauen & earth;
the world hating vs, because wee are Christians so much as in appearance, God hating vs dou∣ble, because wee are Christians but in appea∣rance. But that none may dreame of any starting cor∣ners, hope for any lurking holes here, that great∣nesse may not keepe out of the way Cum priuile∣gio, that meanenesse may not thinke to be retur∣ned with a non est inuentus, let vs cast our eyes vpon the extent, it is euery such barrentrer, that this Axe must doe execution vpon. It is not in foro poli, in the Court of heauen, as it is in foro soli, in the earthly Courts; where the greater flies break through the Spider webs of the lawes, and escape, and the lesser are onely caught; and where a Dauid that sitteth on the Throne findeth some sonnes of Zeruich too hard for him, so that he cannot reward the doer of euill according to his wickednesse: But this Iudge of the whole world (who iudgeth without any respect of per∣sons) Roman. 2.11. will doe right, in giuing to euery such fruitlesse tree the recompence of their cursed barrennesse, in destroying vtterly euery enemie that doth euill in his Sanctuary, Psalm. 7.4.3 whether Iew or Gentile, Roman. 2.9. whether naturall branch or ingraf∣fed, Rom. 11.21. whether low or high, rich or poore, Psalm. 49.2. whe∣ther sitting vpon the Throne, or being captiue in the prison, Exod. 12.29 whether people or priest, seruant or maister, maid or mistresse, buyer or seller, lender or borrower, taker of vsury or giuer of vsury; Isaiah. 24.21. and to vse Saint Austent words in another case, quic∣quid
aliud dioi potest, &c.August. Tract. 52 in Iohem. Whatsoeuer else may bee spoken, according to those innumerable differences, whereby men differ one from another, from the high∣est to the lowest, from the King to the begger. This ventus vrens, scorching winde then of the Lords indignation, shall not only light vp∣on or blight the lowe shrubbes, the thistle of Le∣banon,2. King. 14 9. the hyssope that groweth vpon the wall, 1. King 4.34. but also the Cedars of Lebanon, that are high, 2. King. 19 23 for their eminency, excellent Cant. 5 12. for their glorie, the Cedars of God Psalm. 80.10. for their dignity. The voice of the Lord, the thunderbolt of his wrath, brea∣keth the Cedars, yea breaketh the Cedars of Le∣banon in peeces, Psalm. 29.5. he will prepare destroyers for these chiefe Cedars, and cast them into the fire. Ierem. 22.7. Zedekiah an high Cedar must be taken in Gods nette, and brought to Babylon, there to receiue his iudgement. Eze. 17.20.22 Yea the higher they stand, the more frequent, the more vehement is the blow∣ing, the beating of the winde of Gods indignati∣on against them, according to that of the Horat. Carmin lib. 2. Ode 10. Poet. Sapius ventis agitatur ingens Pinus, & celsae grauiore casu Decidunt turres, feriunt{que} summos fulgur a montes. With windes is often toss'd the Pine tree tall, And highest towers with greatest ruine fall, And tops of mountains lightnings of tenst smite. Horribly and speedily, will God appeare to thē that be in high places, a sore triall shall be to the mightie Wisd 6.5.8., he shall cut off the spirit of Prin∣ces,
and is terrible to the kings of the earth Psal. 76.12.. For are not they vnder God? as Ioseph speaketh of himselfe Gen. 50.19., and being so vnder God, that they are solo Deo minoresTertul. ad Scapulam. cap. 2. onely lesser then God, they doe soli deo peccare, sinne onely against God, as Dauid said of himselfe Psal. 51.4., and must giue accounts of their doings at Gods tribunal seat only Gods anointing being vpon them, thought they should hunt after our liues, as after a Partridge in the mountaines 1. Sam. 29.20, yet must we not cut off the lappes of their garments 1. Sam. 24.6.. Neither on the other side, is this day of the Lord of Hosts onely vpon all that is exalted, vpon the Cedars of Lebanon that are high and exalted, and vpon all the Oles of Ba∣shan, and vpon all the high mountaines, and vp∣on all the hilles that are lifted vp, and vpon eue∣ry high to wel, and vpon euery strong wall, super valentissimos & mutissimo▪ vpon those that are most strong and fenced; as Iunius glosseth the words, and vpon all the ships of Tarshish, and all pleasant pictures; super opulentissimos & rnatissi∣mos, vpon them that are most wealthy and gay Esay 12.16. & Iunius Ibid.: but also vpon the Firre trees, that is, populares quos{que}, all the people, and the forrest of the vin∣tage, that is, promiscuum numerum tenuium è po∣pulo, the confused number of the poore amongst the peopleZach. 11.2. & Iunius Ibid.. Howle Firre tree for the Cedar is fallen, be∣cause all the mightie are spoyled. Howle ô yee Okes of Bashan, for the forrest of the vintage is come downe. The meane man must be brought downe as well as the mightie humbled Esay 5.25, for euery man must
beare his owne burthen Galat. 6.5., euery one giue an ac∣count of himselfe to God Rom. 14.12., and euery man re∣ceiue the things that he hath done, according to that which he hath done 2. Cor. 5.10.. But what is the cause why so certainly, so ge∣nerally, euery such tree must be so dealt withall? For Gods thoughts are not as mans thoughts, his wayes as mans wayes Esay 55.9., that he should bate a∣ny vn worthily, condemne them vndeseruedly. No man can complaine of him, as Dauid the type, and Christ the Antitype of their haters, , They hated mee without a causePsal. 35 19. Iohn 15.25.. It is a mans voyce, or rather a deuils, not Gods; Non amote Sabidi, nec possum dicere quare; I loue thee not. Sabidius, but I cannot tell why. As Dauid then answered his brother when hee chec∣ked him, for comming to the warre, Is there not a cause1. Sam. 17.29.? So is there not a cause of the Lords warre against these Trees? Surely euery Tree at his first creation, had his blessing to bring forth fruite according to his kinde Gen. 1.11.; and these Trees of the Garden if they will bee created a new in Christ Iesus Ephe. 2.10., must haue a blessing to bring forth fruite in him; which, if with pro∣phane EsauHeb. 12.16., they haue set light by Gen. 25.33.34., they are fit for nothing but the Axe, and good for no∣thing but the fire: Being then with the cursed Fig-tree barren Math. 21.19., not bringing forth good fruite] the Lord who is righteous in all his waies, holy in all his workes Psal. 145.17., cannot bee vnrighteous in executing this vengeance vpon them.
Wee see then the euidence that is heere giuen in against them, They bring not forth good fruit. Now that wee may not thinke them thus con∣demned before their cause (though it bee not vnheard) be well vnderstood, that wee may not cry with the Eunuch heere, How can we vnder∣stand without a guideActes 8.31., Nouerint vniuersi, bee it knowne to all, that the fruites wherein they faile, are the fruits of righteousnesse, wherewith they should bee filled Phil. 1.11., good workes, wherein they should bee fruitfull Col. 1.10., the fruites of the Spi∣rit of God, in all goodnesse, righteousnesse, and truth Ephe. 6.9.. Now these fruits are not all of one sort, are not all subiect to one consideration; for some of them are generall, growing vpon all the Trees of the Garden, vpon all the branches that are graffed in the true Vine, such as are those good fruits of the Spirit to bee found on euery good Tree, Loue, Ioy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentlenesse, Goodnesse, Faith, Meeknesse, Tempe∣ranceGal. 5.22i; Some are speciall, particular, which euery Tree must bring forth according to his kind, as being his  proper fruite, whereby hee must bee knowne Luke 6.42. in that Calling wherein God hath set him. For thus the Oliue Tree hath his fatnesse, the Fig Tree his sweet∣nesse Iudges 9 13, the Vine his Vinum laetificans, Wine that cheareth God and Man, and euery Tree plan∣ted by the riuers of the waters of the Sanctuary, bringeth forth fructum suum, his owne fruite in due seasonPsal. 1.3.. As then (according to that diffe∣rence
made by Saint AustenAust. Epist. 50) a King serueth God after one sort, as hee is a man, after another sort, as hee is a King: As hee is a man, hee ser∣ueth him by liuing faithfully; as hee is a King al∣so, hee serueth him by ordaining Lawes that command Iustice, and forbid the contrary with conuenient authority. So all the houshold of faith oweth a seruice to God, after one sort in the generall fruites of holinesse Rom. 6.21., and after another sort in the proper fruites of a particu∣lar Calling, and as they are the seuerall Mem∣bers of one Mysticall Body; if Heads, in Ruling; if Eyes, in looking about; if Hands, in wor∣king; if Feete, in walking. For thus besides those generall duties of piety, which lie equally on euery ones shoulders, the Princes fruite, that sitteth on the Throne, is to doe equity and rightousnesse 1. King. 10 9., to bee (as Nebuchadnez∣zers Tree shewed to him in a vision) faire and fruitfull, hauing meate in it for all, ma∣king shadow for all the beasts of the field, and and spreading its boughes that the fowles of the aire may dwell in it, and of which all flesh may be sed Daniel 4.9. the honorable mans fruite, to hold it his greatest honour with Iabesh, to call vpon the name of the Lord 1. Chron. 9.10., to honor him by whom he is honored, to open his treasures, and to offer gifts vnto Christ Math. 2.11.. The Iudges fruit to execute iudg∣ment truly and vprightly in the gate Zach. 8.16., the man of warres fruite, to do violence to no man, to ac∣cuse no man falsely, and to bee content with his
wages Luk. 3.14.18.. The Pastors fruite, to rule well in the house of God, to labour in the word & doctrine 1. Tim. 5.17.. The rich mans fruit, to bee rich in distributing and communicating 1. Tim. 6.18.. The subiects fruit, to yeeld obedience to Principalities and Powers Titus 3.1.. The seruants fruit, to be subiect to their Masters, and please them in all things Titus 2.9.. And in a word, e∣uery particular mans fruit wherein hee is called, therein to walke and abide before God 1. Cor. 7.20.. And as the figge tree cannot bring forth Oliues, nor the vine figges Iam 3.12.: so neither ought one of these trees planted in the courts of the Lords house, bring forth the fruit that is peculiar to another, but still euery one according to his kinde. Simcon and Leui brought not forth fructum suum, their fruit, when they slew Hamor & Sechem that had abused their sister as a whore Gen. 34.26. For vengeance is Gods Deut. 32.35., & this power to execute vengeance he hath de∣legated to the Gods of the earth, tying priuate mens hands therefrom. Corah, Duthan, and Abi∣ram with their company, brought not forth their fruit, when being not of the seed of Aaron, they would come neere to offer incense before the Lord Num. 16.40. Vzzah not his fruit when he put his hand to the Arke of God, and held it 2. Sam. 6.6., which was the Leuites charge, and neere to which no stranger might come Num. 18.4.. Vzziah the King not his fruit when he went into the Temple to burne incense vpon the Altar of incense, which pertained to the Priests that were consecrated to offer incense 2. Chr. 26.17 18.. The base bramble not his fruit, when he would be
annointed King ouer the trees. Iudges 9.15. For he by whom Kings doe reigne Frou. 8.15. neuer set such trees on the Throne. Seruants, not their fruite, when they ride on horse-backe, and cause Princes to walke as seruants on the ground Eccles. 10.6.. The vagabond Iewes, not their fruite, when they tooke in hand to adiure the euill spirits by Iesus whom Paul Preached Actes 9.13., for that Iesus who onely could com∣mand the vncleane spirits, had neuer said vnto them, cast out deuils Math. 10.8. Priute spirits, not their fruite, when they would reforme Temples, throw out Idoles, and put downe either reall or supposed abhominations: For their fruite is, to keepe themselues from Idoles 1. Ioh. 5.21., not to lay hands on Idoles; to beware of bowing to Baal1. King. 19.18., not to meddle with breaking of Baal in peeces; to refuse to fall downe before a Nebuchadnez∣zars Images Dan. 3.6., but not to throw it downe. Our reformed Sisters, not their fruite, when they climbe into Moses Chaire, and will bee Doctors of the Law; For Saint Paul hath long since inhi∣bited, suspended such excesse of zeale: I permit not a woman to teach, nor to vsurpe authority ouer the man, but to be in silence.1. Tim. 2.12. But to leaue this enumeration of particulars, In quibus non tam copia quam modus quaerendus est, wherein I must not so much seeke for store as keep measure. From this euidence here brought in against these Trees, that they want good fruit, ariseth another case in Diuinity, whereby wee may bee resolued, that it is not enough to bee
harmelesse in forbearing of euill, but wee must also be fruitfull in doing of good: And that our righteousnesse must not onely bee priuatiue, in ceasing to do euillEsay. 1.16., but also positiue, in learning to do well: Abhorre that which is euill, cleaue to that which is goodRom. 12.9.. The curse cleaueth vnto the Fig-tree, not because it had Figges (such as Ieremy saw) very naughty, which could not bee eaten, they were so euill Ier. 24.2., but for want of good Figges Mar. 21.19.. And Iobs letters of commendation that hee carryeth, as it were, from God to men, runne in this tenour, that hee was not onely harmelesse in eschewing euill, but also vpright in working of good Iob. 1.1.. And all the Sheepe in Christs Fold must not onely bee innocent in do∣ing none euill, but also fruitfull in bringing forth thousands and ten thousands in the Courts of his Gares. They that haue learned Christ, are taught by his sauing grace, not onely to de∣ny vngodlinesse and worldly lusts, but also to liue soberly, righteously, and godly in this pre∣sent world Titus 2.11.: Not onely to cast away the workes of darknesse, but also to put on them the armour of light Rom. 13.12.. Yea euen that Pharisie, whose praise was of men, not of God; whose outside onely had a faire shew, his inside being full of filthines, and whose iustifying himselfe before men, made him abhominable in the sight of God; Luk. 16.15. soun∣deth the Trumpet of his owne praise, not onely for omission of euill, God I thanke thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, vniust, adul∣terrers,
but also for the operation of good, I fast twise in the weeke, I giue tithes of all that I possesseLuk. 18.11.12, whose righteousnesse, if wee exceed not in righteousnesse, wee cannot enter into the Kingdome of God Math. 5.20.. Let the oppressour then, not onely, not with-hold the pledge, nor spoyle by violence; but also giue his bread to the hun∣gry, and couer the naked with a garment; Ezek. 18.16.; yea, with Zacheus, restore foure-fold to him that hee hath wronged, either by feigned cauillation, or by horrible extortion Luke 19.8.: and of the rest giue Almes, yea sanctifie an halfe, In pios vsus, to good vses, that the whole may bee cleane vnto him Luke 11.41.. Let the swearer not onely vtter no blas∣phemy, but also blesse God with that tongue wherewith he hath blasphemed him: The adul∣terer not onely abstaine from fornication, but also possesse his vessell in holinesse and ho∣nour 1. Thess. 4.3.4. The Vsurer, not onely loose the bands of wickednesse, and take off the heauy burthens Esay 58.6.7.; but also breake his bread to the hungry, bring the poore, that are cast out, to his house, and co∣uer the naked, when he seeth him. The lyer, not onely cast off lying, but also speake the truth vn∣to his neighbour Epes. 4.25. The Thiefe, not onely not steale any more, but also labour, working with his hands the thing that is good, that hee may haue to giue to him that needeth Ephes. 4.28.. And in a word, let the wicked not onely forsake his wic∣ked waies Esay 55.7., but also turne into the waies of righ∣teousnesse. Otherwise, if (like to that conceit
which Atheists haue of God) we will neither do good nor euill Zeph. 1.12., our doome shall not bee so easie as to be throwne into that feyned Limbus, either of the Fathers that dyed before Christ, or of in∣fants that die vnbaptized, where we shall neither enioy good nor euill Bel. lib. 2. de purgator. cap. 6.: But as in the omitting of good it is impossible not to commit euill, so for our both omission of good, and commission of euill, wee shall be shut out of heauen, where is all good, and throwne into hell where is all euill. Againe, if these Trees that bring not forth good fruite bee heere threatned with the fire, what shall become of those Trees, whose fruite like the Vines of Sodom and Gomorrah, is as bitter as gall Deut. 32.32.; yea vpon euery branch of which, there groweth nothing but rotten, stinking, and vn∣sauory fruite, and whereof all the members are seruants to vncleannesse and to iniquity, to com∣mit iniquity Rom. 6.19.; whose hearts within them ima∣gine mischiefe Psal. 58.2., whose hands without them ex∣ecute cruelty vpon the earth, and whose right hands are full of bribes Psal. 26.10., whose feete run to euill and make hast to shed bloud Pro. 1.10.; whose cares are vncircumscised Act. 7.51.; whose eyes are full of all adul∣tery, and cannot cease to sin 2. Pet. 2.14.; Whose throates are open sepulchres, whose tongues are vsed to deceit, vnder whose lips is the poyson of Aspes, whose mouthes are full of cursing and bitternesseRom. 3.13.14? Yea out of whose nosthriles (so full hath Sathan filled euery member with iniquity) commeth out
smoake, as out of a boyling pot or caldron, like to that LeuiathanIob 41.11., and all whose daies are con∣sumed not onely like smoake Psal. 102.3., but euen in smoake and fumes. And if the rich Glutton lie in the torments of hell, whose pride of apparell was but in purple and fine linnen Luk. 16.19., what riuers of burning brimstone shall bee kindled against them, who with Lucullus haue ducent as vestes pur∣pureasPlutarch. in vita Luculli., two hundred purple garments, and with Nero haue new euery day, and throw away the old Sueton. in vi∣ta Neronis.: and with the Princes children are cloa∣thed in strange apparrell Zeph. 1.8., being so variable in their fashions, that as it is growne to a by-word of Poland, by reason of the toleration of men of euery sect and religion there, that if any one haue lost his religion, he may find it there or no where: so it may of them, that if any nation haue lost their fashion, they may find it amongst them or not at all Sir Edwin Sands his Re∣lations of Re∣ligions.? If he who fared only  (as saith the originall) neatly and delicatly euery day, what they who rise vp early to follow gluttony and drunkennesse, and continue till night, till they be inflamed Esay 5.11., yea till all their Tables be full of filthy vomitting Esay 28.8.. If hee who clothed his backe, and filled his belly with his owne: what they whose backes are clothed with the spoyles of o∣thers, and their bellies filled with the bread of de∣ceit and rapine? If he who would not vouchsafe his crummes to hungry Lazarus, what they who eate vp the poore as bread Psal. 14.4.? Hinc magnopere colli∣gendum, &c. (saith Gregory on these words) we
may hence sufficiently gather, with what punish∣ment he shall be punished which taketh away another mans goods, if he be cast into the damnation of hell, which giueth not his owne. And si in ignem mitti∣tur (as S. Austen speaketh in the case of the dam∣ned Aug. de verbis Domini serm. 20, &c. If he must be cast into the fire that hath preyed vpon another mans? If hee burne not giuen his owne goods, whither shall hee bee sent that hath preyed vpon another mans? If hee burne with the Diuell that hath not clothed the naked, where thinkest thou shall hee burne that hath spoy∣led him? And if they must goe captiue with the first, that are not sorry for the affliction of IosephAmos 6.6.7., shall not they be bound hand and foot, and cast into vtter darknesse Mat. 22.13., that haue caused the affliction of Ioseph? If folly bee layd to his charge that went but about to lay vp the fruits of his owne grounds Luk. 12.20., shall not bitter things bee written against them that enter into the fields of the Fatherlesse, and deuoure the houses of Wi∣dowes? Si stultus est qui recondit suaAug. de verbis Domini serm. 19, vos inuenite nomen eius, qui rapit aliena. If he be a foole which hoordeth vp his owne, finde yee out a name for him that taketh away another mans. An application of the Text to the present solemnity of the fift day of August. BVt all this while I may say vnto my selfe, as the Lepers that met with the spoyles of the the Host of the Syrians, one to another 2. King. 7.9., I do
not well. This is a day of good tidings, and shal I hold my peace? This is a day which the Lord hath made (as truly may it be said of our present Soueraignes preseruation, as of Dauids either coronation or exaltation) & shal we not reioyce and be glad therein Psal. 118.24.? Shall I not intreat in my speech of the King, and of his great deliuerance? Let the leprosie of these cleaue as inseparably vn∣to me, as euer the leprosie of Naaman did cleaue vnto Gehezi2. King. 5.27., if it bee not as ioyfull a thing vnto me to speake of the honour of this day, as it was to those foure Lepers to publish in Samaria the the happy tidings of the Syrians flight Oh that my tongue were as the pen of a ready writer Psal. 45.1., that my voyce were lifted vp as a trumpet Isai 58.1., to found out vnto you the great works of our God, and the mercies that he hath shewed vnto his an∣nointed. And that the words of my mouth may be as words spoken in due season, the matter that I will vtter shall be built vpon the foundation of this present Text. For I may be bold to say vnto you, that euen this day hath this Scripture beene fulfilled in our eares, which haue heard of, and in our eyes, which haue seene, certaine trees that budded forth (for that they brought it not to maturitie, it was the Lords doing) corrupt, rot∣ten, abhominable fruit (quis potest verbis aequare dolorem?) cut downe with the Axe of diuine in∣dignation, and throwne into the fire, euen into the fire of hell. What these trees were, what their fruit, & how hewne downe, audite & obstupescite,
behold, and in beholding wonder with great maruell. These Trees then (which, as time the mother of truth, hath manifested, had many spreading branches Restalrigge with his ser∣uant Boux. and Sprotte their accessary, with other aid, mentioned in Restalrigges let∣ter to the Farle of Gow∣ry. See Sprottes arraignment.) were not the Thistles of Lebanon, exalting themselues against the Ce∣dar 2. King. 14 9.; nor yet the Brambles of the wood, desi∣ring to be annointed Kings Iudges 9.15., (although Thistles and Brambles, for their pricking and piercing) for then it had beene easie to haue troden downe such Thistles, a fire would quickly haue come out of the Cedar, and haue consumed such Brambles: But they were a couple of the Oakes of Bashan, (so the Prophet calleth the mighty men of the Land Esay 2.13.) a paire of brethren; a Simeon and Leui, brethren in euill Gen. 49.5.; Ioah and Abishai sonnes of Zeruiah, that thought to haue beene too hard for our Dauid2. Sam. 3.39.: Neither were they Trees of the Forrest, open enemies, against whom there might haue beene, either defence, or hiding Psal. 55.12. strangers for Nation or Religion, as Egyptians to Hebrewes, who held it abhominati∣on to eate bread one with another Gen. 43.32.; as Iewes to Samaritans, who meddle not one with another Iohn 4.9., (which yet should not haue touched Gods An∣noynted Psal. 105.12.13.14.; for was not the Amalekites bloud vpon him for touching of Saul the Lords Annointed, though he were a stranger and no Subiect 2. Sam. 1.16.) But euen Trees of the Garden, men of the same lip and speech, that were in subiection vnder this Cedar, owing him a seruice in the Lord, with their goods, body, yea the sacrifice of their dee∣rest
bloud, men worshipping the same God with him after the same manner, to whom there was one Lord, one faith, one Baptisme with him Ephes. 4.5., who professed as Ruth to Naomi, thy God shall bee my GodRuth. 1.16.; and who went together into the house of the same God, as companions in the same Religion Psal. 55.14.; yea Trees so clad in the leaues of an outward seeming zeale, that euen this very day, the elder of them kept an Ahabs fast, when Naboth must die 1. King. 21.12. and with Absolom pretended a vow, when he would rebell 2. Sam. 15.8., came and stood before God in his House Alexander would haue his Maiesty arriue there, whilst the Earle his brother was at Sermon. See Gowries con∣spiracy., vouchsa∣fing an care to the Gospell of peace, which hath brought and taught all peace, when warre and bloud was in his heart; when hee purposed to haue mingled his sacrifice with the bloud of his Soueraigne, as Pilate did the Galileans bloud with their sacrifices Luke 13.1.: so dangerous, so perni∣cious is the deuill, when hee is cloathed in white, when he commeth in the shape of an Angell of light 2. Cor. 11.14.. These were the Trees, Now for the ill friute that onely blossomed, budded forth out of them (for the most High blasted it that it could not come to maturity, as that of Rechab and Baana, who smote King Ishbosheth on his bed and slew him 2. Sam. 4.7., it was the fruit of sediti∣on, of rebellion, which is as the sinne of witch∣craft 1. Sam. 13.52, of lifting vp their hands with Absolom against the Father of their Country; yea of lay∣ing violent bloud-thirsty hands vpon him, who was to them and is to vs, the light of our Israel 2. Sam. 21.17.,
and the breath of our Nosthrils Lam. 4.20., whom they should haue feared to haue laid hands on 2. Sam. 1.14., as being their Maister the Lords annointed 1. Sam. 24.7. & 26.9., yea as being a righteous person (as Dauid aggraua∣teth the sinne of Rechab and Baana, for slaying a righteous person 2. Sam. 4.11) one cuius virtutes nullo viti∣orum confinio laeduntur, as Pliny faid of Traian, whose vertues are impaired with no neighbour vices, who neuer was an Ahab, to spoyle any Na∣both of his Vineyard 1. King. 21.16., nor a Manasses, to defile the streets of his Cities with innocent bloud 2. King. 21.16, (so farre is hee from that, that hee hath pardo∣ned many railing Shemeis, bloudy Ioabs, and re∣bellions Absoloms, and would euen with good Theodosius, etiam mortuos in vitam reuocare, wish them aliue that are dead) nor an Herod, to take away anothers wife Math. 14.4.: One, to whom the Church of God doth euen owe it selfe, not onely for being nursed vp with the milke of his Breasts, but also for the seruice that hee hath done to Sion in publishing Apologies in her de∣fence, and shewing himselfe to be a defender of the faith, not onely in a Complementall Title, but also in actuall performance. One, whom the Common-wealth hath found as a Nebuchad∣nezzars Tree Dan. 4.9., a King raigning in righteous∣nesse, and being an hiding place from the winde, a couer from the tempest, as Riuers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of a great Rocke in a weary land Esay 32.2.: And one, of whom all his Sub∣iects do for his walking in and out before them,
Eadem secretò quae palam loquiSeneca., speake none otherwise in secret, then openly. This was their naughty detestable fruite; Now for the crop∣ping of it in the bud, for the hewing downe of such corrupt Trees, well spake euen wicked Ie∣sabell; Had Zimri peace when hee slew his Mai∣ster2. King. 9.31: Had these men peace, when they sought, attempted to haue slaine their Maister the Lords Anointed, and had so farre gone on in their wic∣kednesse, that they had brought him as a bird into the snare of the Fowler; and had dealt with their Soueraigne, as the euill seruant with his fellow, laid hands on him, and taken him by the throate Math. 18.28.? No, but euen when there was but a step betweene his soule and death, the Lord stirred vp the spirit of some of those mighty men, whom this our Dauid had Sir Iohn Ram∣sey, Sir Thomas Ersins, Sir Hugh Heries, and one Wilson a seruant., whose hands claue vnto the sword, and vnto whom the Lord gaue great victories that day 2. Sam. 23.9.10., so that they did beate them as small as the dust, and tread them flat as the clay of the street Psal. 18.42.. And as they thought to haue done not onely to their brother, but also to their maister, so were they retaliated, so was it done to them, life for life, bloud for bloud Deut. 19.21., (blessed are they for re∣warding them as they would haue serued the Lords annoynted) although in this case there was great disproportion, they seeking his life who was worth ten thousand of the vulgar 2. Sam. 18.3.: yea & they found there was no inchantment against Iacob, no diuination against IsraelNum. 23.23., Gowries in∣chanted
characters, wherein he did trust, could not keepe his body from the sword, nor his life from destruction See Gowries corspiracie.. And for their casting into fire, euen into the fire that neuer goeth out Mark. 9.43., al∣though we must be sparing in iudging any who haue a maister of their owne to stand or fall to Rom. 14.4., although Maior sit dei benignitas (as saith S. Au∣stine) quam omnium hominum iniquitas, the good∣nesse of God be greater then the wickednesse of all the men in the world, so that a man may bee receiued to mercy inter pontem & fontem, be∣tweene the bridge and the brooke: Yet if rebel∣lion threw Adam out of Paradise, cast the Angels downe out of heauen into hell 2. Pet. 2.4., how shall these rebels, these traitors euer escape the condemna∣tion of hell, and be saued in the day of the Lord? Nay, if Iudas, in whom there was a kinde of re∣morse, (for the Holy Ghost saith of him Mat. 27.3. He Was sorry that euer he had done the deed) and who tooke the deepest revenge of himselfe that could be, (for he went and hanged himselfe) be yet gone into his owne place Acts 1.25., euen hell prepa∣red of old for him, whither are they gone, who with Corah, Dathan, and Abiram died in their trespasse Num. 16.33., were neuer pricked in heart, but stood in defence of the deed, died in defence of it, and breathed out their last breath with sorrow that they had not the wit Alas I had not the weight of it, said Alex∣ander. See Gowries conspi∣racie., to haue imbrued their hands in Maiesties sacred bloud, but euen in in∣fernum inferius into the nethermost hell? And so euer let his enemies perish, let the enemies of
our Lord the King, and all that rise to doe him harme, be as those two brethren, but vpon him∣selfe let his crowne flourish, and let the Lord speak of his house for a great while 2. Sam. 7.19., that there may neuer want a man of his posterity to sit vp∣on the throne of great Britaine so long as the Sunne and Moone endureth. And for our selues let vs praise the name of our God with a song, & magnifie him with thankesgiuing Psalm. 69.30, who giueth so great deliuerance vnto his King, and sheweth mercie vnto his annointed, and to his seed for e∣uermore Psalm. 18.50. Yea let vs cry with Ahimaaz, blessed be the Lord which hath shut vp the men that lift vp their hands against my Lord the King 2. Sam. 18.28. bles∣sed and thrice blessed be the name of the Lord, that reserued him in meliora tempera, for better times, that he might set him on the throne of our Israel, and make him king to doe equitie and righteousnesse 2. King. 10.9.. And let the King himselfe re∣ioyce in the Lords strength, euen reioyce great∣ly in his saluation Psalm. 21.1., and praise his God which gaue him not as a prey vnto their teeeh, but euen then when there was but a step between his soule and death, sent from heauen, and saued him from thereproach of them that would haue swallowed him vp Psam. 57.3., redeemed his life from the very brinkes of the graue, and crowned him with mercie and compassion Psalm. 103.4.. So that God which hitherto hath saued him from the Lyon and the Beare, will hereafter also (for so he may with Dauid, ex ante∣cedentibus colligere consequentia, from the by-past
experiments of Gods prouidence towards him, gather what wil follow hereafter) rescue him frō those vncircūcised Philistims that at any time rise vp against him 1. Sam. 17.36, and wch hath crowned him here on earth with a corruptible crowne, will crowne him hereafter with a crowne incorruptible, and giue him a kingdome that cannot be shaken, reserued in Christ Iesus, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory for euer and euer. Amen. FINIS.
