19492 99849420 14566
A FRVTE∣full booke of the comon places of all S. Pauls Epistles right necessarye for all sortes of people, but especially for those of the mini∣sterye dyligentelye sette foorthe by Thomas Pani∣ell. Anno. 1562.
¶To the right worship∣full master Thomas Argall Thomas Paynel wisheth all prosperitye and health. YOure gentlenesse ryghte worshipfull master Argall to me at all times and in al places most gently manifested and declared: And your sincere and vnfayned loue to the word of God most holy, and to those that trulye professe the same, wyth youre lyberall and dailye helpinge hande to the mainte∣tenaunce and encrease of the vnfained professoures and stu∣diantes there of hathe prouo∣ked and inforced mee to wryte thys boke of Sayncte Paules Epitles thus in common pla∣ces digested vnto you a louer,
a diligente reader and a conti∣nuall ensuer and folower of the same. For in what other thing should a purely mynded Chri∣stiane solace him selfe, or delyte in, than in the precious worde of God, and in the cleare doc∣tryne of hys moste noble, and moste excellente Apostle Paul? Whose doctryne is frome hea∣uen heauenly, replenished with all spyrytuall wysedome and ghostlye consolation, the whi∣che thinges to you most gentle master Argall, and to all other of lyke conuersation and pure myne, is no doubte most pre∣cious, mooste beautyfull, and mose amyable. Let this doc∣trine then bee grauen in youre harte moste stedfastlye. Take sure holde vppon thys Godlye learninge, that is vppon Iesus
Christ. Let thys doctrine bee wrytten wych spirituall yncke throughe your Godlye admo∣iions, in the hearte (as I doubte not but it is) of youre most chaste and vertous wife, well nurtured and obedyene chyldren, and famelye mooste tractable and Godlye. For th is the larninge that shall con∣ducte and bringe them too the kingedome of God, and hys eternall fruytio. Thys is it, that shall learne them to feare, and to loue God, and to folow the fotesteppes of hys Godlye conuersation aboue all things. Thys is it, that shall instructe them to contempe the world wyth the caduke and frayle pleasures, honoures, ryches pompe and pryde, therof. This
is it that shall inflame them too be the true followeres of Christes gospell, and the faith∣ful champyons and protectors of the same. This is it, that shal instructe them too put theyr whole and onely trust and affi∣aunce in the merytes of Christ oure Sauyoure, and not in theyr onelye deedes withoute fayeth and merytes. Thys is it, that shall exalte and eleuate theyr earthly myndes and de∣syres to be wyth Christe Iesu oure sauioure. Drawing their affections and gredye myndes frome this worldlye trumpery and slydynge bagage. Nowe then if thys be so (as in verye bede it is) receaue this my gift as a thinge moste precious and pleasaunte. And laye it vppe in
the treasurye & and store house of your hart, as a thing in time of nede, mooste excellente and coumfortable. For as vntoo a fayethfull and a true Christian there houlde be nothinge deli∣tius and more acceptable, then the delicate and swete word of God: so there is nothinge to a Chrysten reader more sweete and sauerye, than the Episles of Goddes electe vessell, and dearelye beloued Apostle saint Paule. Reade them therefore wyth all deuotion and syncere iudgement, and if ye intend (as I doubte not but that ye do in∣tende) to be blessed, folowe the doctryne and precepts of them most carefully, and as a precus margarite and pearle. Whan ye haue perused and rede them moste tenderlye and dearly ob∣serue
and kepe them. For it is not the onely herer or eader of Pauls Epistles, and of scrip∣ture that shall be iustified, but the reuerent and feruent prac∣tier of the same. Thus oure Lorde to whom be all honour and glorye for euer, kepe you and your deuout and faith¦full yoke felow and most chaste wyfe nowe and euer.
¶The common places of all Saynt Paules Epi∣stles. The forme of saluation Ca. 1. PAule the seruaunt of Iesus Chrise called to be an Apostle, not of men nether by mā but by Iesus Christ,Gala. 1. & by God the father. By the commaundment of god our saiour and Lord Iesus Christe,1. Timo. 1 by the wyll of God after the promes of life, which is in Christ Iesu.2. Timo. 1. And af∣ter the fayth of Gods electe,Titu. 1. and the knowledge of the truth, whiche is after godlines, vpon the hope of eter∣nall life, whiche life god that can not lye, hath pomised before the worlde beganne, but hath openned his word at the time appoynted through prea∣chinge, which preachinge is commit∣ted vnto me by the commaundement of God oure sauioure put a parte t preache the gospell of God, whiche
he promised afore by his prophetes in the holye scryptures that make mension of his sonne, the which was begotten of the sde of Dauid as per∣tayninge to the fleshe, and predesty∣nate to be the sonne of god, with po∣wer of the holy ghost that sanctifieth sence the time that Iesus Christe our Lorde rose agayne frme deathe, by whome we haue receaued grace and Apoleshippe to bringe all manner eathen people vtoo the obedyence of the ayeth that is in his name. To them that are sanctifyed in Christe Iesu,1. Cor. 1. called Saynctes, wyth all that call on the name of oure Lorde Iesus Christe in euery place bothe of theirs and of oures phi. 1.And too all them whiche beleeue. Grace be with you, and peace frome oure father,Rom. 1. and frome our Lord Ie∣sus Christ ¶The thanks geuing of Paul the Aposell. For the gyftes of grace geuen of God, to the faythfull
Capitu. 2. FYrst verely I thanke my God thorowe Iesus Christe for you all,Rom. 1. because your fayeth is pu∣blished throughout all the worlde. I thanke my God alwaies in your behalfe,1. Cor. 1. for the grace of God which is geuen you by Iesus Christe, that in all thinges, ye are made riche by hym, in all learnynge, and in all knowledge, euen as the testimonye of Iesus Christe was confyrmed in you, so that ye are behinde in no gift and wayte for the appearinge of our Lorde Iesus Christe, whiche shall strengthe you vntoo the ende, that ye maye be blamelesse in the daye of of our Lord Iesus Christ Thankes be vnto God,2. Cor . for his vn∣speakeable gyfte. Wherefore euen I (after that IEphe. 1. hearde of the fayeth ye haue in the Lord Iesu and loue vnto his saintes) ceasse not too geue thankes or you makinge mention of you in my prai∣ers.
Collo. 1.We geue thankes to God the fa∣ther of oure Lorde Iesus Christe al∣wayes prayinge for you, sence wee hearde of your fayeth which ye haue in Christe Iesu, and of the loue whi∣che ye beare to all Sayntes, for the hopes sake which is layed vp in sore for you in heauen. Callinge to remembraunce your woorcke in the ayeth, and laboure in loue,1. Thes. 1. and perseueraunce in the hope of our Lord Iesus Christ, in the sighte of God our father. 2. Thes. 1.We are bounde too thanke God alwaye for you breethren, as it is meete, because that yre ayeth groweth exceadingelye, and euerye one of you swimmeth in loue toward an other. Therfore we are bounde to geue thankes alwaye to God for you bre∣thren beloued of the Lorde2. Thes. 2. For be∣cause that God hath from the begin∣ninge chosen you too saluation, tho∣rowe sanctifyinge of the sprite, and thorowe beleuynge the truth, where vnto he called you by our gospell, to
obtayne the glory that cometh of our Lorde Iesu Christ. ¶Of Pauls orations and prai¦ers for his discyples. Capitu. 3. GOd is my witnes, whō I serue wyth my spirite in the gospell of hys sonne, that wythoute ceasinge I make mention of you al∣wayes in my prayers beseching that at one tyme or other, a prosperous iourney, by the wyll of God, myght fortune me, to come vnto you. For I longe to see you that I myghte be∣stowe among you some spirytuall gyte, to strength you wyth all, that is, that I mighte haue consolation together wyth you throughe the cō∣mon fayeth whiche bothe ye, and I haue, to haue some frute amonge you as I haue amonge other of the gentyles. I desyre before God, that ye do none euyll,2. Cor. 1. not that we should seme commendable, but that ye shoulde do
that, whiche is honeste, and let vs be counted as lewde personnes. We wyshe also, that ye were perfecte. The grace of oure Lord Iesus Christ and the loue of God, and the felow∣shippe of the holye ghost be with you all. Amen. Ephe. 1.The God of oure Lorde Iesus Christe, and the father of glorye, myghte geue vntoo you the spirite of wysedome and open to you the know¦ledge of hym selfe, and lyghten the eyes of youre mindes, that ye might knowe what that hope is, wher vn∣to he hathe called you, and what the riches of his glorious inheritaunce is vpon the saintes, and what is the exadinge greatenes of his power to vs warde, which beleue according to the workinge of that his mightye power whiche he wrought in Christ when he raysed him from the dead. Ephe 3.For this cause I bowe my knees vnto the father of oure Lorde Iesus Christe, whyche is father ouer all that is caled father in heauen and in
earthe, that he woulde graunte you acordinge to the riches of his glorye, that ye maye be strengthened wyth mighte by hys spiryte in the inner manne, that Christe maye dwell in youre heartes by fayeth, that ye be∣inge rooted and grounded in loue mighte be able to comprehende with all sayntes, what is that bredth and length, depth and heyth, and too knowe what is the loue of Christe, whiche loue passeth knowledge that ye might be fulfylled with all maner of fulnes of God. In all my prayers for you I praye wyth gladnesse, because of the fe∣loweshyppe whyche ye haue in the Gospell frome the fyrste daye vntoo nowe.Phi. 1. And thys I praye, that your loue maye encrease more and more in knoweledge, and in all fealynge, that ye mighte accepte thynges most excellente, that ye mighte be pure, and suche as shoulde hurte no mans conscience, vntyll the daye of Christ fylled wyth the frutes of righteouse∣nesse,
whiche frutes come by Iesus Christe vnto the glorye and laude of God. Coe. 1.Therefore we haue not ceassed prayinge for you, and desiringe that ye might be fulfylled wyth the know¦ledge of hys wyll, in all wysedome & spiritual vnderstandynge, that ye myghte walke worthye of the Lorde in all good workes, and increasinge in the knowledge of God strengthed wyth all myghte, wyth ioyfulnesse geuinge thankes vntoo God the fa∣ther. My God fulfyl al your desyres thorowe hys gloryous ryches in Isu Christ.Phi. 4. And the peace of God which passeth al vndersandinge kepe your hartes and myndes in Christe Iesu. God hym selfe oure father and oure Lorde Iesus Christe guyde our iorney vnto you,1. Thes. 3. and the Lorde in∣crease you, and make you flowe ouer in loue one towarde an other, and towarde all menne, euen as we doe
towarde you, to make your heartes stable and vnblamable, in holines before God oure father, at the com∣minge of oure Lorde Iesus Christe wyth all his sayntes. The verye God of peace sanctifye you thorow oute,1 Thes. 5. that youre whole sprit, soule and body, be fautelesse vn∣to the comminge of our Lorde Iesus Christ. We praye alwayes for you,2. Thes. 1. that oure God make you worthye of the callynge, and fulfyll the delectation of goodnesse, and the worke of faith wyth power: that the name of oure Lorde Iesus Christe maye be glory∣fyed in you, and ye in him, thorowe the grace of oure God, and of oure Lorde Iesus Christ. Our Lorde Iesu Christe him selfe,2. Thes. 2. and God our father which hath loued vs, and hath geuen vs euerlastinge consolation, and good hope thorow grace, comfore youre heartes, and stablishe you in all doctrine and good doynge. And gyde your hearts to the loue of God, and pacience of Christ.
2. Titu. 1.The Lorde geue mercye vntoo the house of Onesiphoros for he ofte re∣frehed me, and was not ashamed of my chayne: but when he was come to Rome, he soughte me oute verye diligentelye, and founde me. And in how many thinges he ministred vn∣to me at Ephesus thou knowest very well. The Lorde graunt him that he maye fynde mercye wyth the Lorde at that daye. The God of peace, y• brought again from death our Lord Iesus the great shepeherde of the shepe,Heb. 13. through the bloud of the euerlastinge Testament make you perfecte in all good wor∣kes to do his wyll workinge in you that, whyche is plesaunte in hys syghte, throughe Iesus Christe too whome be prayse for euer whyle the worlde endureth. Amen. ¶ Of fayethe. Capitu. 4. Rom. 1.I Am not a shamed of the Gos∣pell of Christe because it is the power of God to al that beleue
namelye to the Iwe, and also too the gentyle. For, by it the ryghte∣ousenesse whyche commethe of God is opened from fayeth to fayh. As it is written. The iuste shall lyue by fayeth. As Abraham beleued God, and it was coumpted nto hym for righ∣teousenesse,Rom 4. whyche Abraham con∣trarye to hope, beleued in hope, that he shoulde be the father of manye na∣tions, accordinge to that. Whiche was spoken vnto him. So shall thy eede be, as the starres in heauen, and the sande of the sea. And he fain∣ted not in the fayeth, nor yet consy∣dered hys owne bodye whyche was nowe deadde, euen when he was al∣mooste an hundred yeare olde, ney∣ther yet that Sara was past chylde∣berynge. He stackred not at th promesse of God thorowe vnbeliefe, but was made stronge in the fayeth, and gaue honoure to God, full cer∣tifyed that what he hadde promysed he was able too make good. And therefore was it reckened to him for
righteousnesse. It is not written for him onelye that it was reckened to him for righteousenesse: but also for vs, to whome it shall be coumpted for righteousnsse, so we beleue on him that raysed vp Iesus oure Lorde from death. Rom. 5.We therefore beynge iustified by fayth, are at peace with God thorow our Lorde Iesus Christ, by whom we haue a waye in, thorowe fayeth vnto the grace of God, wherein we stande.Rom. 9. What shall we saye then? we say that the gentiles which folowed not rightoousnes haue ouertaken righte∣ousnesse: I meane the righteousnsse which cometh of faeth. But Israell which folowed the law of righteous∣nes, could not attain vnto the law of righteousnesse Wherefore? Because thy soughte it not by fayth, but as it were by works of the law. For they haue stombled at the stombling stone as it is written, beholde I put in Si∣on a stomblinge stone, and a rocke which shall make en fall.Esa. 8. And non
that beleue in him, shall be ashamed. For Christ is the ende of the lawe, to iustifye all that beleue.Rom. 10. Moses de∣scribeth the ryghteousnesse whiche commethe of the lawe, how that the manne whiche doeth the thinges of the lawe, shall lyue therein. But the righteousnesse which cōmeth of faith speaketh on thys wyse. Saye not in thine harte, who shall ascende in to heauen? (that is nothinge els then to fetch Christ downe) Other who shall descende in to the deepe? (that is no∣thinge elles but to fetch vppe Christe frome deathe) but what sayeth the scripture?Deu. 30 The worde is nye thee, euen in thy mouthe and in thyne harte. Thys woorde is the woorde of fayeth, whyche we preache. For, if thou shalte knowledge wyth thy mouthe that Iesus is the Lorde, and shalte beleue wyth thyne harte that God raysed hym vppe frome deathe thou shalte be safe. For the beliefe of the hart iustieth, and to kowledge wyth the mouthe maketh a manne
afe. For the scripture sayeth, who so euer beleueth on hym, shall not be a shamed. Thee is no difference betwene the Iewe, and the gentyle. For one is the Lorde of all, whiche is ryche vnto all that call vpon him. For who so euer shall call on th name of the Lorde, shall be safe. But how shal they call on him, on whom they beleue not? How shall they be∣leue on him of whome they haue not hearde? So then fayeth commeth by hearynge. Rom. 14.Hast thou fayeth? haue it with thy selfe before God. For he that maketh conscyence, is dampned if he eate: because he doeth it not of fayeth. For what so euer is not of faith, the sam is synne. Heb. 10.The iste shall lyue by fayth. And if he wythdrawe him selfe, my soule shall haue no pleaure in him. We are not which wythdraw our selues vnto dampnation, but pertayne to fayeth, too the wynnynge of the soule. 2. Cor. 1.For, by fayeth ye stande.
Hauinge the same spirit of fayth, accordynge as it is wrytten:2. Cor. 4. I bele∣ued and terefore haue I spoken. We also beleue,Psal. 124. and therefore we speake. Hearinge alwaye,2. Cor. 5. and knowinge that as longe as we are at home in the body, we are absente frome God. For we walke in fayeth, and see not. Proue youre selues whethr ye are in the fayeth or not,2. Cor. 13. examyn your owne selues. I maruayl that ye are so sone tur∣ned from hym that called you in the grace of Christe,Gala. 1. vnto another gos∣pell, whiche is nothinge elles, but that there be some whyche trouble you, and intende to peruert the gos∣pell of Christe. Neuerthelesse thoughe we oure selues, or an Aungell from heauen, preache any other gospell vnto you, then that whyche we haue preached vnto you holde hym as accursed. As I sayed before, so saye I nowe agayne, if anye manne preache
any other thinge vnto you, then that ye haue receaued, holde hym accur∣sed. Preach I mans doctrin or gods? I certifye you brethren, that the gos∣pell which was preached of me, was not after the maner of men, neyther receaue I it of man, neyther was I taughte it, but receaued it by the re∣uelation of Iesus Christ. 2. Cor. 1For Goddes sonne Iesus Christ, which was preached amonge you by vs (that is to saye by me and Silua∣nus and Timotheus) was not ye and naye. But in him it is ye, for all the promises of God, in him are yee, and are in him amen, vnto the glory of God throughe vs. Gala. ,That I nowe lyue in the fleshe I lyue by the faith of the sonne of God. Gala. 3.Euen as Abraham beleued God, and it was ascribed to him for righte¦ousnesse. Understande therfore, that they whiche are of fayeth, the same are the children of Abraham. For the scripture sawe afore hande, that God woulde iustifye the heathen through fayth, and therefore shewed before
hand glad tydinges vnto Abraham:Gene. 25. In thee shall all nations be blessed. So then they whiche be of fayth, are blessed with faithfull Abraham. For ye are all the sonnes of God, by the fayth whiche is in Christe Iesus. We looke for,Gala. 5. and hope in the spi∣rit to be iustified throughe fayth, for in Iesu Christe, neyther is circumci∣sion anye thinge worth, neyther yet vncircumcision, but fayth which by loue is mightye in operation. By grace are ye made safe thorow fayth,Ephe. 2. and that not of youre selues. For it is the gifte of God and cometh not of workes, least anye man should boaste him selfe. Let there be but one God,Ephe. 4. one faith, one baptisme. All menne haue not fayeth.2. Thes. 3. Yf we beleue not, yet abideth he faythfull,2. Timo. 2. he can not denye him selfe. ¶Of the definition and effectes of faythe. Capitu. 5.
Heb. .FAyth is a sure confydence of thinges, which are hoped for, and a certayntye of thynges, whych are not sene. By it the elders were well reported of. Thorowe fayth we vnderstande that the world was ordayned by the worde of God: and that things which are sene were made of thynge which are not sene. By fayeth Abell offered vnto God a more plēteous sacrifice then Cain, by whyche he obtayned wytnes that e was righteous, God testifyinge of is gyftes. By whiche also he be∣inge deade yet speaketh. By fayeth was Enoch translated, that he should not see death, neyther was e founde, for God hadde taken hym away, before he was taken a∣waye, he was reported of that he had pleased God, but wythoute fay∣eth it is vnpossibe to please hym, for be that commeth to God, muste be∣leue that od s, and that he is a rewader of them that seeke him. By fayth Noe honoured God, after that he was warned of thinges whi∣che
were not sene, and prepared the Arke to the sauinge of his houshold, throughe the which Arke he condem∣ned the worlde, and became hyer of the righteousnes which commeth by fayeth By fayth Abraham, when he was called, eyed o go out in to a place, which he oulde afterwarde receiue to inheritaunce, and he wente oute, not knowinge whether he should go. By fayth he remoued i the lande that was promised vnto him, as into a stranuge countrei, and dwelt in ta∣benacles: and so did Isaac, and Ia∣cob heyers with him of the same pro∣mes, for he loked for a citye hauing a fundation, whose builder and maker is God. Throughe fayeth Sara also recei∣ued srengthe to be with childe, and was deliuered of a childe when she was past age because she iudged him faithfull which had promised. And therfore sprong ther of one) & of one which was as good as deadde) so mani in multitude as ye starres of the
and as the sand of the sea shore whi∣che is innumerable. Gene. 27.In faith Abraham offered vp Isaac, when he was tempted, and he offerd him beynge his only begotten sonne whiche had receaued the promyses, of whom it was sayed. In Isaac shal thy seede be called. For he considered that God was able to rayse vp again from death. Wherefore he receaued him for an ensample. In fayth Isa∣ac blessed Iacob and Esau, concer∣ninge thinges to come. By fayeth Iacob when he was a dyinge, blessed bothe the sonnes of Ioseph, and bowed him selfe toward the toppe of his cepter. By fayth Ioseph when he dyed, re∣membred the departinge of the chyl∣dren of Israell, and gaue commaun∣demente of his bones. By fayeth Moses when he was borne, was hydde three monethes of his father and mother. Because they sawe he was a proper chylde, ney∣ther feared they the kinges cōmaun∣demente.
By fayeth Moses when he was great, refused to be called the son of Pharaos doughter, and chose rather o suffer aduersitye wyth the people of God, then to enioye the pleasures of synne for a ceason, and estemed the rebuke of Christe greater riches then the treasure of Egipte, for he had respecte vnto the rewarde. By fayeth he forsoke Egipte, and feared not the fearcenes of the king, for he endured euen as he hadde sene him which is inuisible. Throughe fayeth he ordayned the ester lambe, and the effusion of bloud least he that destroyed the first borne shoulde touche them. By fayth they passed through the redde sea, as by drye lande, whiche when the Egiptians had assayed to do, they were drouned. By fayth the walles of Irico fell downe, after they were compased a∣boute seuen ayes. By fayth the harlot Raab perished not wyth the vnbeleuers, when she had recaued the spyers to lodgige
peaseablye. And what shal I more say, the time woulde be to shorte for me to tell of Gedeon, of Baruch, and of Samp∣son, and of Iephthae, also of Dauid, and Samuell, and of the prophetes, which throughe ayth subdued king∣domes, wroughte righeousnesse, ob∣tayned the promsses, soppd the mouthes of Lyons, quenched the vi∣olence of fyr, scaped the edge of the swearde, of weake were made stronge, waed valente in fyghte, turned to lighe the armyes of the a∣lyentes, and the woman-receaued theyr deade, raysed to lyfe agayne. And thse all throughe fayth obtay∣ned good reporte, and receaued not the romes, God prouidinge a beter thing for vs, that they withoute vs, shoulde not be made perfecte. ¶Of hope. Cap. 6. Rom. 5.HOope maketh not ashamed. For we are saued by hope. But hope that is seene is no
hope. For howe canne a manne hope for that whihe he seeth?Rom. 3. But and if wee hope for that we see not, then do we with pacyence abyde for it. Reioycinge in hope.Rom. 12. What soeuer thynges are wrt∣ten afore tyme,Rom. 15. are wrytten or oure learnyng, that we thorow pacience and comforte of he scriptures might haue hope. The God of hope fyll you wyth all ioye and peace in bele∣uinge: that y maye be ryche in hope thorowe the power of the holye ghoste. Let vs not put oure truste in oure selues,2. Cor. 1. but in God, which rayseth the dead to life agayne. Such trust we haue through Christ to god ward not that we are sufficy∣ent of our selues to thinke any thing as it were of our selues,2. Cor. 3. but our able¦nes commeth of God. Seinge then that we haue such trust, we vse great boldnes. For in Christ we haue trust, & accesse through confydence by faith on him.Ephe. 3.
Phi. 1.And therefore wyth all confiden Christ shall be magnifyed in my bo∣dye, whether it be throughe lyfe, or elles death. For Christe is to me life, and death is to me a vauntage. Collo. 1.For the hopes sake, which is la vp in store for you in heauen, of whi∣che hope ye haue heard before by th true worde of the gospell. Phi. 3.From whence we loke for a sauiour euen the Lorde Iesus Christe, whi∣che shal chaunge our vile bodies that they maye be fahoned like vnto hi glorious body, according to the wor∣kinge wherby he is able to subdue al thinges to him selfe. 1. Cor 9.For he which eareth shuld eare in hope, and that he whiche thresheth in hope shoulde be partaker of hy hope. 1. Timo. 4,This is a sure sayinge and of all parties worthye to be receaued. For therefore we laboure and suffer re∣buke because we beleue and hope in the lyuinge God which is the sauy∣our of all men, but spcially of thos that beleue.
Which hope we haue as an ancre of the soule bothe sure and stedfaste,Heb. 5. and entringe in to the thinges which are within the vayle. Seing brethren that by the meanes of the bloud of Iesu,Heb. 10. we may be bold to enter in to that holye place, by the newe and lyuinge waye whiche he hathe prepared for vs, throughe the vayle, that is to saye, by hys fleshe, and that we haue also an high priest, which is ruler ouer the house of God let vs drawe nere with a true hart in a full fayth sprinkeled in our hartes frome an euyll conscience, and wa∣shed in oure bodyes with pure water let vs kepe the profession of our hope withoute waueringe, for he is faith∣full that promised. We haue confydence because we haue a good conscience in all thyngs and a desire to him honestlye.Heb. 13. Caste not awaye therefore youre confidence,Heb. 10. which hath a greate re∣ward to recompence. Let vs therfore go boldely vnto the seate of grace,Heb. 4. that we maye receiue
mercye and fynde grace to helpe in the tyme of neede. ¶ Of charitye. Cap. 7. Rom. 5.THe charitye and loue of God is shed abroad in our harts by th holy ghost which is geuen vn∣to vs. Rom. 8.For we know that all things work for the best vnto them that loue God, which al are called of purpose. Then who shall separate vs from the loue of God? shal tribulation? or anguish or persecution? eyther hunger? ey∣ther nakednesse? eyther parell? either swearde? as it is written.Psal. 43. For thy sake are we killed all daye longe, and are coumpted as shepe appointed too be slayne. Neuerthelesse in all these thynges we ouercome strongely tho∣rowe hys healpe that loued vs, yea, and I am sure, that neyther death, neyther life, neyther Aungels, nor rule, neyther powr neither thinges
presente, neither thinges to come neyther strength, neither heigh, ney∣ther loweth, neither any other crea∣ture shall be able to departe vs from the loue of God, shewed in Christ Iesu our Lorde. Owe nothinge to any man,Rom. 1. but to loue one an other. For he that loueth an other fulfyllethe the lawe. For thou shalt not commytte adtery. Thou shale not steale, Thou shalt not beare false witnes, Thou shalt not desyre, and so foorth (if there be any other commaundement) they ar all comprehended in thys sayinge: Loue thy neyghboure as thy selfe. Loue hurteth not hys neyghboure: Therefore is loue the fulfyllinge of the lawe. Let loue be withoute dissimulation.Rom. 1. And be kynde one to an other wyth brotherly loue.Rom. 12. Beynge seruente in sprite.1. Cor. 6. He that is ioyned vnto the Lorde, is one sprite who so loueth God,1. Cor. . the same is knowen of hym.
Knowledge maketh a man swell,1. Cor 8. but loue edifieth. 1. Cor. 10.Let no man ske his owne profit, but let euerye manne seke an other wealthe. 1. Cor. 12.And yet do I shewe you a more ex∣cellente waye. Thoughe I speake wyth the tonges of menne and An∣gels and et had no charitye, I wer euen, as oundynge brasse, or as  tinklinge cymball. And thoughe I coulde prophesye, and vnderstand all secretes, and all knowledge, yea, if I hadde all fayth, so that I could moue mountaynes oute of theyr places, and yet had no charitye, I wen nothinge. And thoughe I bestowe all my goodes to feede the poore, an thoughe I gaue my bodye euen tha I burned, and yet had no charitye, i profiteth me nothinge. Charitye su∣fereth longe and is courteous, chari∣tye enuyeth not, charitye doeth no frowardly, swelleth not, dealeth no dishonestlye, seketh not her owne, i not prouoked to anger, thinketh no euyll reioyseth not in iniquitye: bu
reioyseth in the truthe, suffereth all thinge, beleueth all thinges, hopeth all thinges, endureth in all thinges. Thoughe the prophesyinge fale o∣ther tonges shal cease, or knowledge vanyshe awaye, yet charitye falleth neuer awaye. Nowe abideth fayth, hope and charitye, euen these three, but the chefe of these is charitye. Laboure for loue.1 Cor. 14. 1. Cor. 16 Let all youre businesse be done in loue. Grete ye one an other with an holy kysse, if anye man loue not our Lorde Iesus Christe the same be an∣athe mameranatha. My loue be with all in Christe Iesu.2. Cor. 6. Our mouth is open vnto you, our heartes is made large, ye are in no strayte in vs, but are in a strayte in youre owne bowelles, hauinge lyke rewarde wyth me, I speake as to my children. Set youre selues therefore at large.2. Cor. 8. Wherfore shew vnto thē in profe of your loue & of the reioysinge that we haue of you, that the congregations maye see it.
2. Cor. 11.I am gelous ouer you with Godly gelousye. In loue serue one an o∣ther. For all the lawe is fulfylle in oure worde.Gala. 5. Thou shalt loue thy neyghboure as thy selfe, phe. 5.Be ye therefore olowers of God, as deare chyldren, and walke in lou euen a Christe loued vs, and ga hym slfe for vs an offerynge and  sacrifyce of a swete sauer to God. Collo. 3.Aboue all theese thinges, put o loue, whiche is the onde of perfecnesse. 1. Thes. 4.But as touchinge brotherlye lo ye neede not that I wryte vnto you For ye are taughte of God to lo one an other: ye and hat thynge v¦relye ye do vnto all the brethren. 1. Tim. 1.The ende of the commaundeme is charitye, that commeth of a pu hearte, and of a good conscyence, and of fayeth vnfayned, frome t whiche thinges some haue erred, a are tourned vnto vayne iangling because they woulde be doctoures  the scripure, and yet vnderstand  what thy speake, neyther where
they affyrme. Therefore let vs consider one an o∣ther to prouoke vnto loue,Heb. 10. and too good workes, and let vs not forsake the feloshippe that we haue amonge oure selus, as the manr of soe is: but let v comforte one an other and that so muche the more, because y see that the daye draweth nye.Heb. 13 Phi. . Let brotherli loue continue with you And let not euery man loke on his owne thynges, but on the thinges of other men. ¶ Of feare Ca∣pitu. 8. BE not hye mynded,Rom. 11. but feare seinge tha God spared not the naturall braunches, least hap∣pelye he also spare not the. Rulers are not to be feard for good workes,Rom. 13. but for euyll. Wylte thou be wythoute feare of the power? Do well then: and so shalt thou be prai∣sed of the same. For he is the mi∣nystr of Godde for thy wealthe,
but and if hou do euyll, then feare: for he beareth not the swerd for nou∣ghte, but is the minyster of God to take vengeaunce on them that doo euyll. 2. Cor. 11.But I feare least as the serpent be∣guiled Eue thorow his suttelty, euen so youre wyttes shoulde be corrupte from the synglenes that is in Christ. 2. Cor. 12I feare least when I shall come, I shal not find you such as I wold, ad I shall be found vnto you such as I would not. I feare leaste peraduen∣ture there be founde amonge you de∣bate, nuinge, wrath, sryfe, bac∣bytinges, whisperinges, swellings, and dyscorde. I feare leaste when I come agayne, God brige me lowe amonge you, nd that I shal bewaile many of thm which haue sinned al∣readye and haue not repented of the vnclenns, fornication, and waan∣ns whych they haue committed. Gala. 4.I am in feare of you, leaste I haue bestowed on you laboure in vayne. Phi. 2.Wherfore my dearly beloued work your owne saluation wyth feare and
tremblynge. For why I was amōg you in weak¦nes,. Cor. 2. and in fear & in much trēbling. Let vs feare herfore, least any of vs forsakynge the promsse of en∣trge in to hys re,Heb. 4. shoulde seeme to come behinde and be lacking: or vn∣to you it was declard as wel as vn∣to them. For if we sinne wyllingelye after that wee haue receaued the know∣ledge of the truthe,Heb. 10. there remayneth no more sacrifyce for synnes, but a fearefull lookinge for iudgemente, and violent fyre, which shall deuour the adursaryes. He that despiseth Moses lawe, dyeth wythoute mercy vnder two or thee wynesses. Of howe muche sorer punihement sup∣pose ye shall he be coumpted worthy whih treadh vnder fote the sonne of God and oumpteth the bloude of the Testamente as an vnhoye thing wherwyth he was sanctified, and doth dishonour to the spirit of grace? It is a fearefull thinge to fall in eo he handes of the luinge God.
Ephe. 5.Therefore let vs serue God with feare and reuerence, submittinge our selues one to an other in the feare f God. ¶Of humility and against pryde. Cap. 9. Rom. 12.FOr I saye (thorow the grace that vnto me geuen is) to eue∣rye man amonge you, that no man esteme of him selfe more then it becōmeth hym to esteme, but that he discretely iudge him self. In gyuinge honoure, go one before an other, be not hye mynded, but make youre selues equall to thē of the lower sort, be not wyse in your owne opinions. Auenge not youre selues, but geue rowme o vnto wrathe. Gala. 5.Let vs not be vain glorious, prouo∣king one an other, and enuyinge on an other. Phili. 2.Let nothinge be done thorow strife or vayne glorye, but in mekenesse of mynde euerye man esteme other bet∣er then him self. Let the same mynd
be in you that was in Christe Iesu, the which made him selfe of no repu∣tation, takinge vpon him the shape of a seruaunte. Yf anye man seme to him selfe that he is somewhat,Gala. . when in dede he is nothinge. He deceauth him selfe. Knowledge maketh a man swell.1. Cor. 8. Yf any man thinke that he knoweth anye thinge, he knoweth nothinge as he ought to knowe.1. Timo. 6. Yf any man teache other wise, and is not contente with the wholesome wordes of oure Lorde Iesus Christe, and with the doctrine of Godlynesse, he is pufte vp and knoweth nothing, but wasteth his braynes aboute que∣stions and strife of wordes, whereo springe enuy, strife, raylinges, euyl surmysinges, and vayne disbutati∣ons of menne with corrupte myndes and destitute of the truthe whyche thynke that lucre is Godlines. Some swell as thoughe I woulde come no more to you,2. Cor. 4. but I wil come to you shortelye, if God wyll. and wyll knowe, not the wordes of them
whiche swell, but the power, for th kingedome of God is not in wordes, but in power. ¶Of the pacience, and tri∣bulations of the electe and iuste. Capi. 10. WE reioyce in tribulation for we knowe that tribulation bringeth pacience,Rom. 5. pacience bringeth experience, experience brin∣geth hope. Rom. 12.Blesse them which persecute you, belsse,Deu. 32. but curse not, recompence no man uyll for euyll. For it is writ∣ten, vengeaunce is myne, and I wil rewarde, sayth the Lorde, be not o∣uercome of euyll but ouercome euyll wyth goodnesse. 1. Cor. 4.We are reuiled, and yet we blesse, we are persecuted, and suffer it. We are euil spoken of, and we pray, we are made as it were the fylthines of the world, the ofrowringe of al thin∣ges, euen vnto this time. 2. Cor. 4.We are troubled on uery side, yet
are we not withoute shifte. We are in pouertye, but not vtterly without somewhat. We are persecuted, but are not forsaken, we are cast downe, neuerthelesse we perish not. And we alwayes beare in oure bodies the dy∣inge of our Lord Iesus, that the life of Iesus mighte appeare in oure bo∣dies. For we that lyue are alwayes deliuered vnto death for Iesus sake, that the lyfe also of Iesu, mighte ap∣peare in oure mortall fleshe. So then deathe woorketh in vs, and lyfe in you. Therefore in all thinges let vs be∣haue oure selues as the ministrs of God,2. Cor. 6. in much pacience, in afflictions, in necessitye, in anguishe, in stripes, in prisonmente, in strife, in labour, in watchinge, in fastinge, in pure∣nesse, in knowledge, in longe suffe∣ringe, in kindnes, in the holy ghoste, in loue vnfained, in the wordes of truthe, in honoure and dishonoure, in euyll reporte and good reporte, as disceauers and yet true, as vnkno∣wen, as dyinge, and beholde we yet
lye, as chastened, and not killed, a sorowinge, and yet alwaye merye, as poore, and yet make many riche, as hauinge nothinge, and yet posses∣singe all thinges. Wherefore I desire you,phe. 3. that y faynte not because of my tribulati∣ons for youre sakes, whiche is youre prayse. 1. Thes. 1.And ye became folowers of vs and of the Lorde, and receaued the word in muche affliction and trybulation, with ioye of the holye ghose: so that ye were an ensample to all that be∣leeue in Macedonia and Achaia. For, frome you sounded oute the word of the Lord, not in Macedonia and in Achaia onely, but in all quar∣ers. And that of God. For vnto you it is geuen,Phil. 1. that not onely ye shoulde beleeue in Christe, but also suffer for his sake, and haue euen the same fyghte whiche ye sawe me haue, and nowe heare of me. 2. Cor. 11.For ye suffer fooles gladdelye, because that ye your selues are wise.
For ye suffer eun if a manne bringe you into bondage: if a man deuour: f a man take: if a manne exalte hym selfe: if a manne smyte you on the face. For ye youre selues knowe bre∣thren of oure enraunce in vnto you,1. Thes. 2. howe that it was not in vayne, but euen after that wee hadde suffered before, and were shamefullye en∣treated at Philippos (as ye well knowe) then were we bolde in oure God to speake vnto you the Gospell of God with muche stryuinge. Ye remember brethren our laboure and trauayle. For we laboured daye and nyghte, because we woulde not be greauous vntoo anye of you, and preached vntoo you, the Gospell of God. And ye became folowers of the congregaion and church of God, whyche in Iewrye are in Christe Ie∣su. For ye haue suffered lyke things of youre kinsmen, as we oure selues haue suffered of the Iewes, which as they killed the Lord Iesus and their
own prophets, euen so haue they per∣secuted vs. 1. Thes. 3.For when I was with you, I tolde you before that we shoulde suffer tri∣bulation, euen as it came to passe, and as ye knowe. Therefore haue continuall pacy∣ence towarde all men,1. Thes. 5. see that none recompence euyll for euyll vnto any man: but euer folowe that whiche is good, both amonge your selues, and to all men. 2. Timo. 3,All that wyll lyue Godly in Christ Iesu, muste suffer persecutions. Heb. 10.Call to remembraunce the dayes that are passed, in the which after ye hadde recaued lighte ye endured a greate fighte in aduersities, partlye whyle all men wondered and gasd at you for the shame and tribulation that was don vnto you & partli while ye became cōpanions of them which so passed their tyme. For ye suffered also with those that were in bandes, and toke in worthe the spoylinge of youre goodes and that with gladnes, knowinge in youre selues how that
ye had in heauen, a better and an en∣duringe substaunce. So that we oure selues reioyce of you in the congregations of God,2. Thes. 1. o∣uer youre pacience and fayeth in all youre persecutions and tribulations that ye suffer, whiche is a token of the righteouse iudgemente of God, that ye are coumpted worthye of the kingedome of God, for which ye al∣so suffer. For ye haue nede of pacience,Heb. 10. that after ye haue done the wyll of God, ye mighte receaue the promesse. Other were racked,Heb. 11. and would not be deliuered, that they might receiue a better resurrecion. Other tasted of mockinges and scourginges, more∣ouer of ondes and prisonment were stoned, were he wen a sunder, were tempted, were slayne wyth sweards walked vppe and downe in shepes skinnes, in goes skynnes, in neede, tribulation, and veration, whiche the worlde was not worthye of, they wandered in wildernesse, in moun∣taynes, in dennes, and caues of the
arthe. Heb. 12.Wherefore let vs also (seinge that we are compased wyth so greate a multitude of witnesses) laye awaye all that presseth doune, and the sinne that hangeth on, and let vs enne with pacience vnto the battaill that is set before vs, lookinge vnto Iesus the auctor and finisher of our fayth, whiche for the ioye that was set be∣fore him abode the crosse, and despi∣sed the same, and is set downe, on the ryght hand of the throne of God. Consider therefore how that he en∣dured suche speakynge againste him of synners leaste ye shoulde be wea∣ryed and faynte in your mindes. For ye haue not yet resisted vnto bloude∣sheddinge, stryuinge agaynst sinne. And haue forgotten the consolation, whyche speaketh vntoo you as vnto hildren: sayinge, my sonne despise not the chasteninge of the Lorde, nei∣ther faynte that thou art rebuked of him: For whome the Lorde loueth, hym he chasteneth, yea and he scour∣geth euerye sonne that he receaueth.
Continue in the dyscipline and cha∣steninge of the Lorde, for God offe∣rethe hym selfe vntoo you as vnto sonnes. What sonne is that whome the father chasteneth not? If ye be not vnder correction (whereof all ar partakers) then are ye bastardes and not sonnes. Let vs go foorth therfore out of the entes,Heb. 1 and suffer rebuke wyth him. My thinketh that God hathe set foorth vs,1. Cor. 4. whiche are Apostels. For the lowest of all, as it were menne appointed to death. For we are a ga∣singe stocke vnto the worlde, and to the Aungels, and to men. We are fooles for Christes sake, and ye are wise thorowe Christ. We are weak and ye are strong, ye are honourable, and we are despised. Euen vnto this daye we hunger and thyrste, and are naked, and are buffeted with fistes, and haue no certayn dwelling place, and labour workinge with our own handes. Brethren I would not haue you ig∣norant2. Cor.  of our trouble which hapened
vnto vs in A. For we were grea∣d out of measure passing strength, so greately, that we despeared euen of lyfe. Also we receaued an aunswer of death in our selues, that we should put our truste in God. 2. Cor 7.For when we were come in to Ma∣cedonia, oure fleshe had no rest, but we were troubled on euerye syde. Outwarde was fyynge, inwarde was feare. ¶Of iustice. Ca∣pitu. 11. GEue to euery manne therefore his dutye.Rom. 13. Trybute to whom tribute belongeth: Cusome to whom custome is due: feare is whom belongeth honour to whom honour pertayneth. Owe nothinge to anye man, but to loue one an other. For if hath pleased thm of Mace∣donia and Acai,Rom. 15. to make a certaine destribution vpon the poore sainctes whiche are at Ierusalem. It hathe pleased them verelye, and their det∣toures
are they. For if the gentyles he made pertakers of their spirituall thinges, their dutye is to minyster vnto them in carnall things. Let euerye man abyde in the same state wherein he is called.1. Cor. 7. Art thou called a seruaunt care not for it. Ne∣uerthelesse if thou mayest be free, vse it rather. For he that is called in the Lorde being a seruaunt, is the Lords freeman. Like wyse he that you cal∣led being free, is Christes seruaunte. ye are dearly boughte, be not mans seruaunts. Let euery man wherin he is called, therin abide wyth God. For none of vs lyueth his own ser∣uaunte:Rom. 14. neyther doeth any of vs dye his owne seruaunte, if we lyue we lyue to be at the Lordes wyll. Whe∣ther we lue therefore, or dye we are the Lordes. For Christ therfore dyed and rose againe, that he might be Lorde both of the dead and qucke.1. Cor. 7. Therefore as the Lorde hath called euery person, so let him walke, and so ordayne I in all congregations, if anye man be called beinge circumci∣sed,
let him adde nothinge thereto. If anye be called vncircumcysed, let him no be circumcised. Circum∣cision is nothing, vncircūcision is no thing but the obseruation of the com¦maundementes of God. . Cor. 9.My defence and answer to them that aske me is this. Haue we not power to eate & to drink? ether haue we not power to lede about a sister a womā as wel as other Apostles, and as the brethren of the lord and Cephas? E∣ther only I and Barnabas haue not power this to do? Who goeth a war∣fare any time at his owne cost? Who planteth a vineyard and eateth not of the frute? Who feedeth a flocke, and eateth not of the mylke? Saye I theese thynges after the manner of mnne? Or saieth not the lawe the same also? For it is wrytten in the lawe of MosesDeu. 25. thou shalt not mossell the mouthe of the ore that treadeth oute the corne. Doeth God take thoughte for oren? Eyther sayth he it not all together for our sakes? For our sake no doubte this is written:
that he whiche eareth shoulde ear in hope: and that he whiche thresheth in hope, shoulde be partaker of his hope. Yf we sow vnto you spirituall thinges, is it a greate thinge if we reape youre carnall thinges? If o∣ther be partakers of this youre po∣wer, wherfore are not we rather? Neuerthelesse we haue not vsed this power, but suffer all thinges leaste wee shoulde hynder the Gospell of Christe. Do ye not knowe how that they whiche minister in the temple haue theyr fyndinge of the temple? And they which wayte at the aulter are partakers with the aulter? Euen so also dyd the Lorde ordayne, that they which preache the gospell shuld lyue of the gospell. But I haue vsed none of these thinges. Neyther wrot I theese thinges that it shoulde bee so done in me. For it were better for me to dye, then that anye manne shoulde take thys reioysinge frome me. In that I preache the Gospell, I haue nothyng to reioyce of, for neces∣sity, is put vnto me, wo is it vnto me.
Yf I preach not the Gospell. Yf I do it with a good wyll. I haue a re∣warde. But if I do it againste my wyll, an office is committed vnto me. What is my rewarde then: verelye that when I preache the gospell, I make the gospell of Christ free, that I mysuse not myne autoritye in the gospell. 2. Cor. 6.Beare not a yoke with the vnbele∣uers. For what feloship hath righte∣ousnes with vnrighteousnes? What company hath light with darkenes? What conuention or recorde hathe Christe with Belall? Eyther what parte hath he that beleeueth with an infidele? How agreeth the temple of God with Idols? and ye are the tem∣ple of the lyuinge God, as sayd God. I wyl dwel among them,Leui. 26. and walke amonge them, and wil be their God, and they shall be my people. Wher∣fore come oute from amonge them, and separate youre selues (sayth the Lord) and touche no vncleane thing, so wyl I receiue you, and wil be a fa∣ther vntoo you, and ye shall be my
sonnes and my doughters saieth the Lord almighty. This I saye.2. Cor. 9. How that he which soweth lyttle shall reape lyttle, and he that sowethe plentuouslye shall reape plentuouslye. And let euerye man do according as he hath purpo∣sed in his hearte, not groudgingelye or of necessitye. For God louethe a chearefull geuer.2. Cor. 8. For if there be a wyllinge mynde, it is accepted accordinge too that a manne hathe, and not accordinge to that a manne hath not. It is not my mynde that other be set at ease,Exo. 16. and ye broughte into combraunce. But that there be egalnes nowe at thys time, that youre aboundaunce suc∣coure theyr lacke, that theyr aboun∣daunce maye supplye youre lacke. there maye be equaletye, as it is written, he that gathered much, had neuer the more aboundaunce, and he yt gathered lyttle, had neuerthelesse. Therefore write I these thinges beynge absente.2. Cor. . Leaste when I am presente, I shoulde vse sharpenes ac∣cording
to the power which the lord hathe geuen me to edifye, and not to estroye. We canne doe nothinge a∣gainste the truthe, but for the truth. I olde you before, and tell you be∣fore as absente and now presnte, to them whiche in time pase haue syn∣ned, and to all other, that if I come agayne, I wyll not spare. Seeke ye experience of Christ which speaketh in me? Gala. 6.Let euery man proue his owne woorke, and then shall he haue re∣ioysinge in his owne selfe, and not in an other. For euery manne shall eare is owne burthen. Be not de∣ceaued, god is not mocked. For what so euer a manne soweth, that shall h reape. He that soweth in his fleshe, shall of the fleshe reape corruption. But he tat sowethe in the spirite, shall of the spirite reape lyfe euerla∣ynge. Ephe. .Be not therefore partakers wyth them. 1. Thes. 4.And that no man goe to farre, and defraude is brothr in barganing,
because the Lorde is a venger of all suche thinges, as we haue tolde you beforetime and estifid. He that doth wronge shal receaue for the wronge that he hath done.Collo. 3. Yf there be any that prouideth not for his owne,1. Tim. 5. and namelye for them of his ousholde, the same denieth the fayeth, and is worsse then an in∣fydele. No man that warreth and is geuen to God,2. Tim. . entangleth him selfe with wordlye businesse, and that be∣cause he would please him that hath chosn him to be a souldioure. And thoughe a man striue for a masterye, yet is hee not crowned, excepte he striue lawfullye. The husband man that laboureth muste fyrste receaue of the frutes. It is a true sayinge, if we be dade with him, we also shall lyue with him. Yf we be paiente, we shall also raygne with him. Yf we denye him, he also shall denye vs. Studye to shewe thy selfe laudable vnto God, a workeman that nedeth not to be a shamed, handelinge the the worde of truthe iustlye.
Titu. 3.This is a true sayinge. Of these thinges I woulde thou shouldest cer∣tifye, that they which beleue in God, mighte be diligente to goo forwarde in good workes. A man that is ge∣uen to heresye, after the firste and the seconde admonition auoide, re∣membringe that he that is suche, is peruerted, and synneth euen damp∣ned by his owne iudgemente. Heb. 6.For it is not possible that they whi∣che were once lighted, and haue ta∣sted of the heauenlye gifte, and be∣come partakers of the holy ghost, & haue tasted of the good word of God, and of the power of the worlde to come, if they fall shoulde be renued agayne vnto repentaunce. For as much as they haue (as concerninge them selues) crucified the son of God, a fresshe makynge a mocke of him. For that erth which drineketh in the rayne which commeth oft vppon it, and bringeth foorth erbes meete for them that dresse it, receaueth bles∣singe of God. But if it bringe foorth thornes and bryers, it is repro∣ued,
and is nye vnto cursinge, whose ende is to be burned. Strech foorth therfore the handes which were let down,Heb. 12. and the weake knees, and see that ye haue streighte steppes vnto youre ete, leaste anye hatinge turne you oute of the waye yea let it rather be healed. Beinge made free frome sinne, ye are become the seruauntes of righte∣ousnes.Rom. 6. For when ye wer seruaunts of sinne, ye were not vnder righte∣ousenesse. ¶Of prudencye and of the vice of imprudencye. Capitu. 12. THey that are carnall, are car∣nallye minded.Rom. 8. But thy that are spyrituall, are ghostlye minded. To be carnallye minded, is deathe. But to be spirituallye min∣ded is life and peace. The wisedome of the fleshe, is enemye against God, for it is not obediene to the lawe of God, neither can be.
. Cor. 10.For the naturall man perceaueth not the thinges of the spirite of God For they are but folishnes vnto him. Neither canne he perceaue them, be∣cause hee is spirituallye examyned. But he that is spirituall, discusseth al thinges: yet he him selfe is iudged of no man. 1. Cor. 10.Therefore let him that thinketh he standeth. Take hede least he fall. I praise you brethren, that in all thinges ye are mindfull of me. 1. Cor. 14.And let all thinges be done honestly and in order amonge you. Rom. 12.And hat your seruice be acceptable vnto God. 2. Cor. 13.Knowe ye not youre owne selues how that Iesus Christe is in you ex∣cepte ye be cast awaye. I trust ye shal know that we are not cast awaies. Gala. 6.Beholde how large a letter I haue written vnto you, wt mine own hand. Ephe. 5.Take hede therefore tat ye walke circūspecly, not as fols, but as wise redeminge the time, for the daies ar euyl. Wherfore be ye not vnwise, but vndrstād what the wil of the lord is.
Beware leaste any man come and deceiue you throughe philosophy and deceitfull vanitye,Collo. 2. through the tra∣ditions of men, and ordinaunces af∣ter the world, and not after Christ. Let no man deceaue you, which after his owne imagination walkeh in the humblenes and holinesse of Aun∣gels, thinges whiche he neuer saw, causelesse past vppe with his leshlye minde, and holdeth not the headde, wherof all the bodye by ioyntes and couples receiueth norishemente, and is kni to order, and encreaseth wit the increasinge that cōmeth of God. Wherfore if ye be deade with Chri rom ordinauncs of the world, why are ye leade with traditions of them that decerne and sye, Touche not, ast not, handell not: which all perish with the vsinge of them, and are af∣er the cōmaundements and doctrine of men: whiche thinges haue the si∣militudes of wysedome in chosen ho∣lines & humblenes, and in that they spare not the body, and do the flesh no worship vnto his nede.
Collo. 4.Walke wiselye to them that ar without, and rdeme the time. Let your speache be alwaies well sauou∣red and poudered with salte, that ye maye knowe how to aunswer euery man. The deare brother Tihicus shal tell you of al my busines, which is a faiethfull minster, and felowe seruaunte in the Lord, whom I haue sente vnto you for the same purpose, that he myght knowe how ye do, and mighte comforte youre hartes with one Onesimus, a faithfull and a be∣eued brother whiche is one of you, They shall shewe you of all thinges, whiche are a doinge here. And when the Epistle is red of you, make that it be rdde in the congregation of the Laodicians also, and that ye likewise redde the Epistle of Laodicia. And saye to Archippus, take hede to the office that thou haste receaued in the Lorde, that thou fulfyll it. Remem∣ber my hands. 1. Thes. 3.And we haue sente Timothe∣us oure brother and minister of God, and our labour felowe in the gospell
of Christ, to stablysh you, and to com∣forte you ouer youre fayth. For this cause when I coulde no longer for∣beare, I sente that I mighte haue knowledge of youre faith, least hap∣pely the tempter hadde tempted you, and that oure laboure had bene be∣stowed in vayne. But nowe latelye when Timotheus came frome you vnto vs, and dealred to vs your faith and your loue, and how that ye haue good remembraunce of vs alwayes, desiringe to see vs as we desire to see you. Therefore we had consolation in you, and in all oure aduersity and necessitye, throughe your faith. For now are we alyue if ye stand stedfast in the Lorde. O Timothe,1. Timo. 6. saue that whiche is geuen the to kepe, and auoid vnghost¦ly vanityes of voyces and appositi∣ons of science falsly so called, whych science whyle some professed, they haue erred as concernynge the fayth. See thou haue the ensample of the2. Timo. 1. wholesome wordes which thou har∣dest of me in fayth and loue whyche
is in Iesu Christ. That good thinge which was cōmitted to thy kepinge, kepe in the holye ghost, which dwel∣leth in vs. And what thinges thou haste harde of me many bearing witnesse,2. Timo. 2. the same deliuer to faythfull menne, whych are apte to teache othe. Con∣sider what I saye. The Lorde geue the vnderstandinge in all hinges. 2. Timo. 3.But the euyll menne and discea∣uers shall waxe worsse and worsse, whyle they deceaue and are deceaued them selues. But continue thou i the thinges whiche thou haste lear∣ned, whiche also were commytted vnto thee, seynge thou knowest of whome thou hast learned them. And for as muche as thou haste knowen holye scripture of a chylde, whych is able to make the wise vnto saluation thorowe the faith which is in Christ Iesu. Heb. 3.Wherefore holy brethren parta∣kers of the celestiall callynge, coi∣der the embasidoure and the prieste of oure profession Christ Iesus, whi∣che
was faiethfull to him that made hym, euen as was Mses in all by  house. Take heede brethren, that there be in none of you an euyll hart in vnbeliefe that he shoulde departe frome the liuinge God, but exhorte one an other dailye, while it is called to daye, least anye of you ware hard harted thorowe the deceytfulnesse of synne. Let no man deceaue you with vain wordes.Ephe. 5. Prouydinge afore hande thyn∣gesRom. 12. honest not onelye in the syghte of God, but also in the syghte of all menne. ¶Of wisedome and of the faue of foolishenesse. Capitu. 13. THe inuisyble thinges of God,Rom.  are vnderstande and seene by the workes frome the creation of the worlde. So that when they coumpted them selues wyse, they be∣came fooles.
Rom. 16.I woulde haue you wise vnto that which is good, and to be innocent as concerninge euyll. For Christe sente me not to bap∣tise but to preache the gospell,1. Cor. 1. not with wisedome of wordes, leaste the crosse of Christ shoulde haue be made of none effecte. For the preachinge of the crosse is to them that peryshe foolishenes, but vnto vs whiche are saued it is the power of God.Esa. 29. For it is written: I wyll destroye the wise¦dome of the wyse, and wil cast away the vnderstandinge of the prudente. Where is the wyse? Where is the Scribe? Where is the searcher of the world? Hath not God made the wis∣dome of this worlde foolishnes? For when the worlde through wisedome knewe not God, in the wisedome of God it pleased God through foolish∣es of preachinge to saue them that beleeue. For the Iewes require a signe, and the Grekes seke after wis∣dome. But we preache Christ cruci∣fied, vnto the Iewes an occasion of fallinge, and vnto the Grekes folish∣nesse:
but vnto them which are called bothe of the Iewes and Greekes, we preach Christ the power of God, and the wisedome of God. For the foo∣lihnes of God, is wiser then men, and the weakenes of God is stronger then men. And vnto hym pertaine ye in Christ Iesu, which of God is made vnto vs wisedome, and also righte∣ousenesse, and sanctifyinge, and re∣demption. That accordinge as it is written,Iere. . he whiche reioyseth, should reioyce in the Lorde. That we speake of, is wisedome amonge them that are perfecte:1. Cor. 2 not the wisedome of this worlde, neither of the rulers of this worlde (whiche go to nought) but we speake the wis∣dome of God, which is in secrete and lyeth hydde, whiche God ordayned before the worlde, vnto oure glory: whiche wisedome none of the rulers of the worlde knowe. For had they knowen it, they would not haue cru∣cified the Lorde of glorye. But God hath opened it vnto vs by his spirite. For the spirite searcheth all thinges
yea, the bottome of Gods secretes. For what manne knoweth the thin∣ges of a manne, saue the spirit of a manne whiche is with in him? Euen so the thinges of God, knoweth no manne, but the spirite of God. Nor we haue not receaued the spirite of the worlde, but the spirite whiche commeth of God, for to knowe the things that are geuē vs of God, whi∣che things also we speake, not in the common woordes of mannes wyse∣dome, but with the common woor∣des of the holy ghost, makinge spiri∣tuall comparions of spirituall thin∣ges, for who knoweth the mind of the Lord, other who shall informe him. But wee vnderstande the mynde of Christe. 1. Cor. 3.If anye man seme wyse amonge you, let him be a foole in this world, that he maye be wyse. For the wise∣dome of this worlde, is foolshenesse wih God. For it is writen, he compasseth the wise in their craftinesse.Psal. 93. And agayne,Iob. 5. Godde knowethe the thoughtes of the wyse that they bee
vayn. Yf anye man be ignoraunte,1. Cor. 14. let him be ignoraunte. But we all behold the glory of the Lorde with hys face open,2. Cor. 3. and are chaunged vnto the same symiliude, from glory to glorye, euen of the spi∣rite of the Lord. For it is God that commaunded the lighte to shyne oute of darkennesse,2. Cor. 4 whiche hathe shyned in oure hartes, for to geue the lighte of the know∣ledge of the glorye of God in the face of Iesus Christe. We haue this treasure in earthen vesselles that the excellente power of it, might appeare to be of God, and not of vs. Where∣fore we are not wearyed, but thou∣ghe oure outewarde manne peryshe, yet the inwarde manne is renewed daye by daye, whyle wee looke not on the thynges whyche are sene, but on the things which are not sene. For thinges whiche are seene, are temporall, but things which are not seene are eternall.
Co. 25.Wherfore hence foorth know we no man after the fleshe. In so much thoughe we haue knowen Christ af∣ter the flesh, now hence foorth know we him so no more. Ephe. 1.For whye the grace of God, is hed on vs abundantelye in all wisedome and perceueraunce. And hath ope∣ned vnto vs the misterye of his wyll accordinge to his pleasure, and pur∣posed the same in him selfe, to haue it declared, when the time were full come, that all thinges, bothe the thinges which are in heauen and al∣so the thinges whyche are in earthe shoulde be gathered together euen in Christ. Ephe. 3.For this cause I Paule am in the bonds of Isus Christ, for your sakes which are heathen, if ye haue hearde of y• ministration of the grace of god, which is geuen me to you ward. For by reuelatin shewed e this mistery vnto me, as ye readinge maye know myne vnderstanding in the misterye of Christe. Which misterye to other generations was not opened, as it is
now declared vnto his holy Apostels and prophetes by the spirit: that the gentyles should be inheritours also, and of the same body, and partakers of his promesse that is in Christe, by the meanes of the gospell, where of I am made a minister, by the gyfte of the grace of God, geuen vnto me through the working of his power. Unto me the lease of all sayntes this grace is geuen that I shoulde preach amonge the gentiles the unserchea∣ble ryches of Christ, and to make all men see what the felowshippe of the mistery is, whiche frome the begin∣ninge of the worlde had bene hydde in God, which made all thinges tho∣rowe Iesus Christe, to the intente that nowe vntoo the rulers and po∣wers in heauen mighte be knowen by the congregation, the manyfolde wisedome of God, accordinge to the eternall purpose, which he purposed in Christ Iesu our Lord. Ya I thyke all thinges but lostePhi. . for that excellent knowledges sake of Christ Iesu our Lord.
Collo. 1.Whose gospell is preached among all creatures whiche are vnder hea∣nen, whereof I Paule am made a minister according to the ordinaunce of God, whiche was geuen me vtno you warde, to fulfyll the woorde of God, that misterye hydde sence the worlde began, and sence the begin∣ninge of generations, but nowe is opened vntoo his sainctes o whome God would haue knowen the glory∣ous riches of this misterye amonge the gentiles, whiche riches is Christ in you, the hope glorye, whome we preache, warninge all wenne in all wisedome and teachinge all men, to make them perfecte in Christe Iesu. Wherein I also laboure and stryue euen as far foorthe as his workinge worketh in me myghelye. Collo. 1.That they might be comforted, and knyt to gether in loue, and in all ry∣ches of full vnderstandinge or too knowe the mistery of God the father and of Christe, in whome are hydde all the treasures of wysedome and knowledge. This I saye leaste any
man shoulde beguyle you with enty∣sing words. For though I be absent in the fleshe, yet am I present with you in the spre, ioyinge and behol∣ding the order that ye kepe, and your stedfast fayth in Christ. Let the worde of Christe dwell in you plenteously in all wisedome.Collo. 3. Unghostly and vayne voyces passe ouer,2. Tim. 2 for thei shal ecrease vnto grea∣ter vngodlines, and theyr woordes shall frete eue as doeth a cancre, of whose number is Hymeneus and Philetos, whyche as concerninge the truthe haue erred, sayinge, that the resurrection is paste alreadye, and doe destroye the fayth of dyuers personnes. But the sure grounde of God remaynethe, and hathe this seale, the Lorde knoweth them that are his, and let euery man that cal∣leth on the name of Christe, departe frome iniquity.2. Tim. 3 A Iannes and Mambres withstode Moses, uē so do these resist the truth, menne they are of corrupte mindes,
and lewde as concerninge the fayth. but they shall preuayle no longer. For their madnes shal be vttered vn¦to all men as theyrs was. But thou haste seene the experience of my doc∣trine. But continue thou in th thin∣ges whych thou hast learned, for all scripture geuen by inspyration of God, is profitable to teache, to im∣proue, to amende, and to instructe in righteousnes that the manne of God maye be perfecte and prepared vnto all good works. ¶Of Obedience. Capitu. 14. Rom. 3.WE knowe that what soeuer the lawe sayeth, he sayeth it to them which are vnder the lawe: that all mouthes maye be stopped, and all the world be subdu∣ed to God. Rom. 5.As by the synne or inobedience of one man, condempnation came on al men, euen so by the obedience of one shall manye be made righteous.
Remember ye not howe that to whom so euer ye exhibit and commit your selues as seruaunts to obey,Rom. 6. his seruauntes ye are to whome ye obey: whether it b o sinne vnto death, or of obedience vnto righteousnes? God be thanked, that thoughe ye were once the seruaunts of synne, ye haue yet obeyed with hart vnto the forme of doctryne where vnto ye were deli∣uered. Let euerye soule submit him selfe vnto the autority of the hier powers,Rom. 13. for ther is no power but of God. The powers that be, are ordained of God. Who soeuer therfore resisteth power resysteth the ordinaunce of God. And they that resist, shall receaue to them self dampnation. Wherefore ye must needes obey, not for feare of venge∣aunce onely, but also because of on∣science. And euen for this cause pay ye tribute. For they are Goddes ministers, seruinge for the same pur∣pose. Youre obedience is knowen in all places.Rom. 16.
Brethren (ye knowe the house of Stephana,1. Co. 16. Fortunatus, and Achai∣cus, howe that they are the first fru∣tes of Achaia, and that they haue ap∣pointed them selues and minyster vn∣to the sainctes) I beseche you, that ye be obediente vnto suche, and too all that healpe and laboure. Look therfore that ye know them that are suche. Titus in warde affection is nowe more abundaunte toward you,1. Cor. 7. when he remembreth the obedience of eue∣rye one of you, howe with feare and tremblinge ye receaued him. Gala. 3.O foolishe Galathians: who hath be wytched you, that ye shoulde not beleeue and obey the truthe? before whose eyes Iesus Christ was descri∣bed, and amonge you crucified. Ye did runne well, who was a let to you,Gala. 5. that ye shoulde not obey the truthe? Eun that counsayle that is not of him that called you. A lyttle leuen doeth feruent the whole lompe of dowe. Phi. 2.Wherefore my dearely beloued, as
ye haue alwayes obeyed, not when I was presente onelye, but nowe muche more in myne absence. Euen so. &c. For ye know and remember what commaundementes we gaue you in oure Lorde Iesu Christ.1. Thes. 4. He therfore that despyseth theese, despiseth not manne, but God, whiche hath sent and geuen hys holye spyrite amonge you. Therfore brethern stande fast,2. Thes. 2. and keepe the traditions and ordinaun∣ces whiche ye haue learned, whether it were by our preachinge, or by our Epistle. We haue confidence thorowe the Lord to you warde,2. Thes. 3. that ye both do, and wyll doe that, whiche we com∣maunde you. Yf any man obey not oure sayinges, sende vs woorde of hym by a letter, and haue no compa∣nye with hym, that he maye be asha∣med, and coumpt him not as an ene∣mye, but warne him as a brother. This commaundement commit I vnto the sonne Timothe accordinge1. Timo. 1.
to the prophesies which in time past were prophesed of the, that thou in them shouldest fight a good fight, ha∣uing faith and good conscience, whi∣che some haue put away from them, and as concerninge fayth haue made shipwrake. Of whose number is Hy∣meneus and Alexander which I haue delyuered vntoo Sathan, that they might be taught not to blaspheme. 1. Timo. 4.Such things commaund and teach. Let no man contempne thy youth, but be vnto them that beleue, an en∣sample, in worde, in conuersation, in loue in spirite, in fayth, and in purenesse. Priestes that rule wel, are worthy of double honoure,1. Tmo. 5. most speciallye they which laboure in worde and in teachinge.Deu. 25. For the scripture sayeth.Luc. 10. Thou shalt not mousell the mouthe of the oxe that treadeth out the corne. And the labourer is worthye of hys rewarde. I testifye bfore God, and the Lorde Iesus Christ, and his elect Aungelles, that thou obserue theese thinges withoute hasty iudgemente,
nd do nothinge parciallye. I geue the charge in the sighte of God,1. Timo. 6. which quickeneth all thinges, and before Iesus Chiste, which vn∣der pontius pilate witnessed a good witnessinge, that thou kepe the com∣maundement, and be wythout spotte and vnrebukeable, vntyl the appea∣ringe in oure Lord Iesus Christ. There be manye disobediente,Titu. 2. and talkers of vanitye, and dysceauers, namelye they of the cyrcumcysion, whose mouthes muste bee stopped, whiche peruerte whole houses, tea∣chinge thinges whiche they oughte not because of fylthye lucre. One be∣ynge of them selues whyche was a poynte of theyr owne, sayed. The Cretaynes are alwayes lyars, euill beastes, and slowe belies. This wit∣nesse is true, wherfore rebuke them sharpelye, that they maye be sounde in the fayeth, and not takinge heede too Iewes fables, and commaunde∣mentes of men that tourne from the truthe. These thinges speake, and exhort
and rebuke with al commaundinge. Se that no man despise the. Titu. 3.Warne them that they maye sub∣mitte them selues to princes and po∣wer, to obey the officers, that they be readye vnto all good workes, that they speake euyll of no manne, that they be no syghters, but softe, she∣wynge all meakenes vnto all men. Phili. 1.Thoughe I be bolde in Christe to enioyne the that, whiche becommeth thee, yet for loues sake I rather be∣sech the trusting in thine obedience, I wrote vnto thee, knowinge that thou wilte do more then I saye for. Heb. 2.Therefore we oughte to geue the more heede to the thynges we haue hearde, laste we perishe. For if the wordes whiche was spoken by Aun∣gels was stedfast, so that ury trans∣gression and disobedience receaued a iuse recompence too rewarde: howe shall we escape if we despise so great saluation? Heb. 5.Although Christ were Gods sonne yet learned he obedience by the thin∣ges whyche he suffered, and was
made perfecte, and the cause of eter∣nall saluation vnto all them that o∣bey hym. Moreouer seinge we hadd fathers of oure owne fleshe which corrected vs,Heb. 1. and we gaue them reuerence, shoulde not we muche rather be in subiection vnto the father of spiritu∣all gyftes, that we myght lyue? And they verelye for a feawe dayes nur∣tered vs after their owne pleasure: but he learneth vs vnto that whiche is profytable, that we might receiue of his holinesse. Se that ye despyse not him that speaketh. For if they escaped not whiche refused him, that spake on earth, much more shall we not escape, if we turne awaye from him that speaketh frō heauen, whose voice then shuke the earth, & now de¦clareth sayinge, yet once agayne wil I ke, not the earth onelye, but al∣so heauen. And that hee sayethe yet once more, signyfyeth the remo∣uynge away of those thynges which are shaken, as of thynges whyche haue ended theyr course, that the
thinges whiche are not shaken maye remany. 1. Cor. 11.I cōmende you brethren that ye kepe precepts and ordinaunces euen as I deliuered them to you. ¶Of pittye and mercy. Capitu. 15. Rom. 12.BE merye wyth them that are merye, weepe with them that wepe. Yf thyne ennemye hon∣ger, feede him. Yf he thurste, geue him drincke, for in so doynge, thou shalt heape coles of fyre on hys head. Rom. 14Him that is weake in the fayeth receaue vnto you, not in disputinge and troubling his conscience. Rom. 15.We which are stronge, oughte to beare the fraylnes of them which are weake, and not to stand in oure own consaytes. For Christe pleased not him selfe, but as it is written. The rebukes of them which rebuke thee.Psal. 67. fell on me. Wherfore receaue ye one an other as Christe receaued vs, too the prayse of God. It hathe pleased
them of Macedonia and Achaia oo make a certayne destribution vppon the poore saynces which are at Ie∣rusalem. I commende vnto you Phebe our syster (which is a minister of the con∣gregation of Cenchrea) that ye re∣ceaue her in the Lorde,Rom. 16. as it becom∣meth sayncts, and that ye assiste her in what soeuer businesse she neadeth of your ayde. For she hath succoured many and mine owne selfe. Of the gatheringe for the sainctes as I haue ordayned in the congrega∣tion of Galacia,1. Cor. 16. euen so do ye, vpon some sonday let euery one of you put asyde at home, and laye vp what so euer e thinketh mete, that there be no gatherings when I come. When I am come, who so euer ye shall a∣lowe by youre letters, them wyll I sende to bringe youre liberalitye vn∣to Ierusalem. And if it be mete that I go, they shall go with me. Yf Ti∣motheus come, se that he be without feare wyth you, for he worketh the worke of the Lorde as I do. Let no
man despise him, but conuaye him thence in peace, that hee maye come vno me. I am glad of the comming of Stephana, forunatus, and A∣chaicus. For that whiche was lac∣kinge on your part, they haue sup∣plied. They haue comforted my spi∣rite and youres. 2. Cor. 2.Yf anye man hath caused sorowe, the same hath ot made me sory, but partlye, leaste I shoulde greue you all. It was sufficiente vnto th same man that he was rebuked of manye. So that now contrarye wyse ye ou∣ghte to forgeue him and coumforte him, least that same personne should be walowed vppe with ouer much heauynes. Wherfore I xhort you that loue maye haue strengthe ouer hym. For his cause verelye dyd I wryte, that I myghte knowe the proofe of you, wheher ye shoulde be obedinte in all hinges. To whom ye forgeue anye thynge, I forgeue also. And verelye if I forgeue anye thinge, to whome I forgaue it, for your sakes I forgaue it in the roume
of Christ, last Sathan shuld preuent vs. For his thoughts are not vnkno∣wen vnto vs. And I after the truthe eare rcord vnto the congregation of Ma∣cedonia,2. Cor. . that beyonde their power, they were wyllinge of their own ac∣corde, and prayed vs with greate in∣staunce, that wee woulde receaue theyr benefyte, and suffer them too be partakers wyth other in myny∣sryng too the saynctes. And thys they dyd, not as we looked for, but gaue theyr owne selues firste to the Lorde, and after vnto vs by the wyll of God, so that wee coulde not but desyre Titus o accomplish th same beneuolence amonge you also, e∣uen as he had begonne. Nowe ther∣fore as ye are ryche in all partyes in ayeth, in worde, in knowledge, in all feruentnes, and in loue, which ye haue too vs: euen so see that ye be plenteouse in thys bneuolence. This saye I not as commaun∣dynge, but because othr are so fer∣uente, therefore proue I youre loue
whether it be perfecte or no. And I geue counsayl hereto. For this is ex∣pediente for you, which beganne not to do onelye, but also to wyll a yeare ago. Nowe therfore performe th the dede: that as there was in you a readynes to wyll, euen so ye maye performe the deede of that whiche ye haue. Thankes be to God, whiche put in the hearte of Titus the same good mynde towarde you, for he of hys owne accorde, came vntoo you. We haue sente with hym that bro∣ther, whose lade is in the gospell, thorowe oute all the congregations: and not so onelye, but is also chosen of the congregations o be as felow with vs in oure iourney concerning this beneuolence that is mynistered by vs vntoo the prayse of the Lorde, and after oure destinate and prompt minde, eschuinge this, tha any man shoulde rebuke vs in this plentuous destribution that is ministred by vs: and therefore make prouision for ho∣nest thinges, not in the sight of God onely, but also in the sighte of men.
We haue ent with him a brother of ours, whom we haue oft tymes pro∣ued diligentlye in many thinges, but nowe muche more dilgente. The greate confidence whyche I haue in you, hath caused me his to do: part∣lye for Titus sake whiche is my fe∣lowe, and healper as concerninge you, partely because of other whiche are our brethrn and the messengers of the congrgations, and the glorye of Christe. Wherefore shewe vntoo them proofe of youre loue, and of he reioysynge that we haue of you, that the congregatons may se it. Of the ministringe to the saynctes t is but superfluus for me to write vnto you,2. Co. 9. for I knowe youre ready∣nes of minde whereof I boast my self vnto them of Macedonia. For Achaia was prepared a yeare ago, and your feruentns hathe prouoked manye. Neuerthelesse yet haue I sent theese brethren, least oure reioysinge ouer you shuld be in vaine in this behalfe, and that ye (as I haue sayed) prepare youre selues laste paraduenure if
they of Macedonia come wyth me, and fynde you vnprepared, the boast that I made in hys matter shoulde be a shame to vs, I saye not to you. Wherefore I thoughte it necessa∣rye to exhorte the bretheren to come before hande vnto you. For to pre∣pare youre good blessinge promysed afore, that it myghte be readye, so that it be a blessinge, and not a de∣fraudinge. For the office of this mi∣nistration, not onely supplieth the neade of the sainctes, but also is a∣bundaunt therein, that for this lau∣dable ministringe, thankes might be geuen to God, of manye. Whiche prayse God for the obedience of your professinge the gospell of Christ, and for youre singlenes in disstributinge to them and to all men: and in their prayers to God for you, longe after you, for the abundaunt grace of God geuen vnto you. 2 Cor. 11.Would to God, ye could suffer m a little in my foolishnes, yea and I pray you forbeare me Gala. 6.Bear ye one an others burthen, and
so fulfyll the law of Christ. Let him that is taughte in the word, minister vnto him yt teacheth him, in all good thinges. Brethren if any man be fa∣len bi chaunce in to any faut, ye whi∣che are spiritual helpe to amend him in the spirit of mekenes, considering thy selfe, last thou also be tempted. Let him that stole steale no more,Ephe. 4. but let him rather laboure with his hands some good thing, that he may haue to geue to him that nedeth. B ye courteous one too an other, and mercyfull, forgeuinge one an other euen as God for Christes sake for∣gaue you. I supposed it necessaye to sende brother Epaphroditus vnto you,Phi. . my companion in laboure and felowe souldiour, youre Apostell, and my minister at my nedes. For he longed after you, and was full of heauines, because ye hadde hearde saye that he shoulde be sycke. And no doubte he was sicke, and that nye vnto death, but god had merci on him, not on him only, but on me also, lest I shuld haue
sorowe vpon sorow. I sent him ther∣fore the diligent liar, that when ye shoulde se him, ye mighte reioyce a∣gayne, and I mighte be the lesse so∣rowefull. Receaue him therefore in the Lord with all gladnes, and make muche of suche, because that for th worke of Christe he wente so farre, that he was nye vnto deathe, and re∣garded not his lyfe, to fulfyll that seruice which was lackinge of your parte towarde me. Phi. 4.Ye & I besech the Germane my yoke felowe, helpe those which laboured wyth me in the Gospell, and wyth Clment also, and with other my la∣bour felowes, whose names are writ¦ten in the booke of lyfe. I reioyce in the Lorde greatelye, that now at th laste ye are reuiued agayne too care for me, in that, wherein ye were al∣so carefull, but ye lacked oportunity. I spake not because of necessitye. For I haue learned in what so euer estate I am, there with to be content notwithstanding ye haue well done that ye bare part with me in my tri∣bulation.
Ye of Philippos knowe that in the beginning of the gospell, when I departed frome Macedonia, no congregation bare parte with me as concerninge geuinge and recea∣uinge but ye only. For when I was in Thessalonica, ye sente once and afterwarde agayne vnto my nedes: not that I desire gyftes, but I desire aboundante frute on youre parte. I receaued all and haue plenty, I was euen fylled after that I had receaued of Epaphroditus, that came frome you an odour that smelleth sweete, a sarifice accepted and pleasaunte to God. We praye you brethren,1. Thes. 5. comforte the feble minded, receaue the weake. For God is not vnrigheous that he shoulde forget youre worke and labour that proceadeth of loue,Heb. 6. whi∣che loue ye shew in his name, which haue ministred vnto the sayntes, and yet minister. Yea and we desyre that euerye one of you shewe the same di∣ligence, to the stablishing of hope: e∣uen vnto the ende.
Heb. 10.For ye had pitty on them that were in andes. Heb. 13.Be not forgetfull to kepe hospitali∣tye and lodge straungers, for therby haue diuers receaued Aungels into theyr houses vnwares. Remember them that e in bondes, euen as though ye were in bonde with them. Be mindefull of them which are in aduersiti, as ye which are yet in your bodies. To do good and to distribute forget not, for with suche sacrifices God is pleased. I besech you brethrē suffer the wordes of exhortation. Excercise thy selfe vnto Godly∣nesse. For bodilye excercise profiteth little:1. Timo. 4. but Godlinesse is good vnto al thinges, as a thinge which hath pro∣mises of the life that is nowe, and of the life to come. ¶Of temperaunce and sobrie∣tye, and of bodily castigation. Capitu. 16. BRethren we are now debtters not too the fleshe,Rom. 8. to liue after the fleshe. For if ye lyue af∣ter
the fleshe, ye must dye. But if ye mortifye the dedes of the bodye, by the helpe of the spirit, ye shall liue. I beseche you therfore brethren,Rom. 1. by the mercyfulnesse of God, that ye make youre bodyes a quicke sacrifice holy, and accptable vnto God. And make not prouision for the flesh to fulfyll the lustes of it.Rom. 13. He which is weake eateth earbes.Rom. 14. It is, good neither to eate flesh,Rom. 14. ney¦ther to drincke wyne. I therefore tame and chast my bo∣dye,1. Cor. 9. and bringe it in to subiection, lest after I haue preached to other I my self should be a castaway. Therfore let vs behaue our selues as the ministers of God in fastinges,2. Cor. 6. in chastitye, in watchinge. And let vs clense oure selues from al filthines of the flesh and sprite.2. Cor. 7. I say walke in the spiriteGala. 5. and ful∣fyll not the lustes of the fleshe, for the fleshe luseth contrarye to the spirite and the sprite contrarye to the fleshe. Theese are contrarye one to the other, so that ye canne not doe that
whiche ye woulde. They that are Christs haue crucified the flesh with the appeies and lustes. Ephe. 2.In the which in time passed ye wal∣ked accordinge too the course of this worlde, and after the gouernours that ruleth the ayre, the spirite that nowe worketh in the children of vn∣beliefe, amonge whiche we also had our conuersation in time past, in the lustes of oure fleshe, and fulfylled the wyll of the fleshe and of the mynde: and were naturallye the chyldren of wrathe, euen as well as other. Ephe. 4.This I saye therefore and testifye in the Lorde, that ye hence foorthe walke not as other gentiles walke. in vanitye of their mynde, blinded in their vnderstanding, being straun∣gers from the life whiche is in God thorowe the ignorauncye that is in them, because of the blindenesse of their heartes: whiche beinge past re∣pentaunce, haue geuen them selues vnto wantannes, to worke al maner of unclennes, euen with gredines. But ye haue not so learned Christe
if so be ye haue heard of him and are ughte in him, euen as the truthe is in Iesu, to laye from you that olde man, which is corrupte thorow the deceaueable lustes. For many walke,Phi. 3. of whom I haue tolde you often, and nowe tell you wepinge, that they are the enemies of the crosse of Christe, whose ende is dampnation, whose God is their be∣lye, and whose glorye is their shame, which are wordlye minded Mortifye therfore youre members which are on the earth fornication,Collo. 3. vnclennesse, vnnaturall luste, euyll concupiscence, For whiche thinges ake, the wrath of God commeth on the children of vnbeliefe, in whyche thinges ye walked once, when ye li∣ued in them. For this is the wyll of God,1. Thes. 4. euen that ye should be holye, and that ye shoulde abstaine frome fornication, that euerye one of you should knowe howe to kepe his vessell in holynesse and honoure, and not in the luste of concupyscence, as doe the heathen
which knowe not God. 1. Thes. 5.Therefore let vs not slepe as other do, but let vs watche and be sober. 1. Timo. 5.Keepe thy selfe pure and chaste, drinck no longer water, but vse a lit∣tle wine for the stomacke sake, and thine often diseases. 2. Timo. 4.Be sober. Heb. 12.Let ther be no fornicator or vnclean personne, as Esau, whiche for one breakefast solde his byrth righte. Ye knowe how that afterward when he woulde haue inherited the blessinge, he was put by, and he found no mea∣nes to come therby again, no though h desired it with teares. Ephe. 5.Therfore be not drnke with wine wherin is xcsse. ¶Agaynste the vyces of the fleshe. Capi∣tu. 17. Rom. 1.THey serued the creatures more then the makr. For this cause God gaue them vp vnto sham∣full lustes, for euen their women did
chaunge their naturall vse vnto the vnnaturall. And lyke wise also the men lefte the naturall vse of the wo∣man, and brente in their lustes one an other. And manne with manne wroughte filthines, and receaued in them selues the rewarde of their er∣rour as it was accordinge. Let not sin ragine therfore in yourRom. 6. mortall bodies that ye shuld therun∣to obey in the lustes of it, nether geue ye youre members as instrumentes of vnryghteousenesse vnto synne: I speake grosselye because of the infyr∣mitye of youre fleshe. As ye haue ge∣uen your members seruaunts to vn∣clennes and to iniquitye, frome ini∣quitye vnto iniquitye, euen so nowe geue your members seruaunts vnto vnrighteousnes that ye may be sanc∣tified, what frute had ye then in those thnigs wherof ye are now ashamed? For the end of those things is death. For the reward of synne is death.Rom. 6. They that are geuen to the fleshe,Rom. 8 can not please God, But ye are not geuen to the flesh, but to the spirite,
if so be that the spirite of God dwell in you. Therefore we are now det∣tours not to the fleshe, to lyue after the fleshe, for if ye lyue after the flesh, ye muste dye, but if ye mortifye the dedes of t body, by the helpe of the spirie ye shall lyue. Not in eatinge and drinking,Rom. 13. nei∣ther in chamburinge, and wantan∣nesse, but put ye on the Lorde Ies∣sus. 1. Cor. 5.There goeth a common ayinge, that there is fornication among you, and suche fornication as is not once named among the gentiles, that one shoulde haue his fathers wife. And ye swell, and haue not rathr soro∣wed, that he which hathe done thys deede, mighte be put frome amonge you. For I verely as absente in bo∣dye, euen so presente in spirit, haue determined alreadye, as thoughe I were presente of him that hath done this dede, in the name of oure Lord Iesus Christ, youre reioysinge is not good know ye not that a little leuen sowreth the whole lompe of dowe?
I wrote vntoo you in a Epistle that ye shoulde not companye with forni∣tours. Nor I mente not at all of the fornicatours of this worlde, ether of the couetous, or of extorsioners, ether of the ydolaters. For then muste ye nedes haue gone oute of the worlde. But nowe I write vno you that ye company not to gether. Meates are ordained for the bellye,1. Cor. 6. and the bellye for meates, but God shall destroye bothe it and them. Let not the bodye be applyed vnto forni∣cation, but vnto the Lorde, and the Lorde vnto the body. Ether remem∣ber ye not, that your bodies are the members of Christe? Shall I nowe take the members of Christe, and make them the members of an har∣lote? God for bydde. Doe ye not vn∣derstand that he which coupleth him selfe with an harlot, is become one bodye? For two (sayeth he) shall be one flesh. Fle fornication. All sinnes that a man doth are wihoute the bo∣dye, but he that is a fornicatour syn∣neth against his own body.
Gala. 5.The deedes of the flshe are many∣fest which are these, aduoutrye, for∣nicaion, vnclennesse, wantannes, ydolatrye, witchcrafte, hatered, va∣riaunce, zale, wrath, strife, sedition, sectes, enuyinge, murther, dronc∣kennesse, gluttonye, and suche like, of the whiche I tell you before, as I haue tolde you in time past, that they whiche commit suche thinges, shall not inherit the kingdome of God. Ephe. 5.Se that forniation, and all unclen∣nes, or coueteousnes be not ones na∣md amonge you, as it becommeth saynctes: neither filthynes, neither foolishe talkinge, neither gestinge, whyche are not comelye, but ra∣ther geuinge of thankes. For thys ye knowe that no whoremonger, e∣ther vncleane personne, or couetu∣ous personne, which is the worship∣per of ydoles hath anye inheritaunce in the kyngedome of Christe and God. 1. Thes. 4.God hathe not called vs vnto vn∣clennes, but vnto holines. God wyll iudge fornicators and aduouterers.Heb. 13.
¶Of fortitude and stabilitye and of the constancy of the hearte. Cap, 18. THerefore my deare breethren be ye stedfast and vnmouable,. Cor. 15. alwaies rich and abundant in the works of the Lord, in as much as ye knowe how that youre laboure is not in vaine in the Lord. And therfore let vs not hence foorth be no more children,Ephe. 4. waueringe and caried with euery wynde of doctrine by the wilines of men and craftines, whereby they laye awayte for vs to deceaue vs. Fynally my brethren, be strong in the Lorde,Ephe. 6. and in the power of hys mighte, put on the armoure of God, that ye may stand stedfast against the crafty assaultes of the duyl. For we wrastle not against flesh and bloude, but against rule, against power & a∣gainst worldly rulers of the darken∣nes of this worlde, against spirituall wyckednesse, for heauenlye thyn∣ges. For this cause take vnto you,
the armoure of God, that ye may e able to resiste in the euill daye, and stande perfecte in all thinges. Stand therefore, and youre loines girde a∣boute with veriye, hauinge on the breast plate of ryghteousenesse, and shood with showes prepared by the gospell of peace. Aboue all thynges take to you the shelde of faith, wher∣with ye may quenche al the fire dar∣tes of the wicked. And take the hel∣met of saluation, and the swearde of the spirite which is the word of God, and praye alwayes with all manner prayer and supplication, and that in the spirite. Collo. 1.Continue grounded and stablished in the fayeth: and he not moued a∣waye frome the hope of the Gospell, where of ye haue heard, how that it is preached amonge all creatures, which are vnder heauen. Collo. 2.As ye haue therfore receiued Christ Iesus oure Lord, euen so walke, ro∣ted and built in him, and stedfast in the fayeth, as ye haue learned, and there in bee plentuouse in geuynge
thankes. Armed with the brest plate of fayth and loue,1. Thes. . and with hope of aluation as an helmet. For God hath not ap∣poynted vs vnto wrathe, but to ob∣tayne saluation, by the meanes of our Lord Iesus Christe, which dy∣ed for vs: that whether we make or slepe, we shoulde lyue together with him. We beseche you brethren by the comminge of our Lord Iesu Christ,2. Thes. 2. and in that we shall assemble vntoo him, that ye be not sodenlye moued frome your minde, and be not trou∣bled neyther by the spirite, neyher by wordes, nor yet by letter, whiche shoulde seeme to come to vs, athou∣ghe the daye of Christ were at hand. The Lorde is faithfull,2. Thes. 3. which shall stablishe you, and keepe you from e∣uyll. Brethren be not werye in well doynge. Then therfore my sonne,2. Timo. 2. be strong in the grace that is in Christ Iesu. And let vs hold fast the confidence and the reiosinge of that hope,Heb. 3. vn∣to
the ende.Psal. 93. Wherefore as the holy ghost sayeth. To day if ye shall hear his voyce, harden not youre hartes, after the rebellion in the day of tem∣tation in the wildernes, where your fathers tempted me, proued me, and sawe my workes fortye yeare longe. We are parakers of Christe, if we kepe sure vnto the ende the fyrst sub∣staunce, so longe as it is sayed. To daye if ye heare hys voice, harden not your harts, as when ye rebelled. Heb. 13.Be not caried aboute with dyuers and straunge learninge. For it is a good thinge that the harte be stably∣shed with grace, and not with mats whiche haue not profyted them that haue had ther pastime in them. 1. Cor. 10.Though we walked compassed with the fleshe, yet we warre not fleshlye, For the weapons of oure warre are not carnall thinges. But thinges mighty in God, to cast doune strong holdes, wherewith we ouerthrowe imaginations, and euerye hys thing that exaltethe it selfe agaynste he knowledge of God, and bringe in to
captiuitye all vnderstandynge to the obedyence of Christe, and are rea∣dye to take vengeaunce on all diso∣bedience, when youre obedience is fulfylled. ¶ Agaynst coueteousnesse, and of liberality. Capitu. 19. SE that couetuousnesse be not once named amonge you,Ephe. 5. for the coueteous person (which is the worshipper of ydolles) hathe no inheritaunce in the kingedome of Christ and of God, Ye I thinke all thinges but losse,Phi. 3. for the ecellente knowledges of Christe Iesu, and do iudge them but donge, that I myghte wynne Christ. The destitute of the truthe, thinke that lucre is Godlynesse.1. Timo. 6. Godlinesse is greate riches, if a manne be con∣tene wyth that he hathe. For we broughte nothynge in to the worlde, and it is a playne case, that wee
can carye nothinge oute. When we haue fode and raymnte, let vs ther∣with be content. For they that wil be rich, fall in to temptation and snares and in to many foolishe and noysome lustes, which droune men in perdi∣tion and destruction. For couetuous∣nes is the rote of all euyll. Whiche whyle some lusted after, they erred from the fayeth, and tangled them selues with many sorowes, but thou whiche art the man of God, flye such thinges. Charge them whiche are riche in this world, that they be not exceadinge wyse, and that they trust not in the vncertayne riches, but in the liuinge God, which geueth vs a∣boundauntlye all thinges to enioye them, and that they do good and be riche in good workes, and readye to geue and distribute, layinge vppe in store for them selues a good ondati∣on against the time to come that they may obtain eternall life. Heb. 13.Let youre conuersasion be wyth∣oute couetuousnesse, and be cntente with that ye haue alreadye. For he
verely sayd. I wyll not fayle the,Iosu. i. neither for∣sake the, that we maye boldlye saye: The Lorde is my helper,Psal. 27. and I will not feare what man doth vnto me. For all other seke their owne,Phi. 2. and not that which is Iesus Christes. ¶Of the obseruation of en∣samples, and auoydynge of offences. Ca∣pitu. 20. IF thou he called a Iewe, and trustest in the lawe,Rom. 2. and reioy∣sest in god and knowest his wil and hast experience of good and bad, in that thou art informed by the law and beleuest that thou thy selfe art a guide vnto the blind, a light to them which are in darkennesse, an infor∣mer of them whiche lacke discresion, a teacher of vnlearned, whiche haste the ensample of that which ought to be knowen, and of the truth, in the lawe. But thou whiche teacthest an other, teachest not thy selfe. Thou
preachest, a man shoulde nt seale, and yet thou stealest. Thou sayest,  man shoulde not commit aduoutery and thou breakest wedlocke. Thou abhorreste ydols and robbest God of his hooure. Thou reioyesest in the law, and thorow breaking of the law dishonourest god, for the name of god is euyll spoken of amonge the gen∣tiles thorowe you. Let no man put a stombling blocke or an occasion to fall in his brothers way.Rom. 13. For I know and am full certi∣fied in the lord Iesus that ther is no∣thinge common of it selfe, but vnto him that iudgeth it to be common, to him it is common. Yf thy brother be greued with thy meate, now wal∣kest thou not charitablye. Destroye not him wt thy meat for whom Christ died. Cause not youre treasure to be uyll spoken of. For the kingdome of God is not meate and drincke, but righteosenesse, peace, and ioye in the holye ghost. For who so euer in these things serueth Christ, pleaseth God wel, and is commended of men.
Therfore let vs folowe those thin∣es where with one maye edifye an other. Destroy not the worke of God for a little meates sake. All thinges are pure, but it is euyll for that man whiche ateth with hurte of his con∣scyence. It is good neyther to eat fleshe, neyther to dryncke wyne, nei∣ther anye thynge whereby thy bro∣ther stombleth, eyther falleth, or is made weake. Let euery manne please his neigh∣bour vnto his wealth and edifyinge.Rom. 15. I besech you brethren,Rom. 1. marke them which cause diuision and geue occa∣sions of euill, contrarye to the doc∣trine which ye haue learned, ad a∣uoid the, for they that are such, serue not the lord Iesus Christe, but their owne belies. And with swete prea∣chinge and flatteringe wonders, de∣ceaue the hartes of the innocentes. For some suppose that there is an ydoll vntyll this houre,1. Cor. 8. and eate for as a thinge offered vntoo the ydoll, and so their consciences beynge yet weake, are defyled. Meate maketh vs
not acceptable to God. Neither if e eate, are we the better. Neither  we eate not, are we the worsse. But take hede, that youre lybertye cause not the weake to fall. For if som man see the whiche hast knowledge, syt at meate in the ydols temple, shal not the conscience of him whiche is weake, be boldenned too eate those thinges whiche are offered too the ydole? And so throughe thy know∣ledg shall the weake brother perishe for whom Christ dyed. When ye sin so against the brethren and wounde their weake consiences, ye synne a∣gainst Christ. Wherefore if meate hurte my brother, I wyll eate no fleshe whyle the worlde standethe, because I wyll not hurt my brother. 1. Cor. 10.All thinges are lawefull vnto me, but al thyngs are not expedyent. All thinges are lawefull to me, but all thinges edifye not. What soeuer is solde in the market, that eate, and aske no questions for conscience sake. For the earth is the Lordes, and all that therin isPsal. 25. Yf any of them which
elee not, hyd you to a feast, and if ye e disposed to go, what so euer is set before you, eate: askinge no que∣stion for conscience sake. But and if anye man saye vnto you, this is dedi∣cate vnto ydoles, eate not of it for his sake that shewed it, and for hurtinge of conscience. Conscience I saye not thyne, but the conscience of that o∣ther. For whye shoulde my libertye be iudged of an other mannes consci∣ence? For if I take my parte wyth thankes, whye a I uyll spoken of for that thynge wherefore I geeue thankes. See that ye geue none oc∣casion of euyll, neyther to the Ie∣wes, nor yet to the genyles, euen as I please all menne in all thynges not sekinge mine own profit, but he profytte of manye, that they mighte be saued. Let all thinges be done vnto edi∣fyinge.1. Cor. 14. Therefore we haue caste from vs the clokes of vnhonestye, and walke not in craftynesse, neyther corrupte we the worde of God: but walke in
pen truthe, and reporte our selues to euerye mannes conscience in the sight of God. 2. Co. 6.Geuinge no man occasion of euyll that in our office be ound no faut. . Cor. 7.Understande vs, we haue hurte no man, we haue corrupte no man, we haue defrauded no man. 2. Cor. 8.For this we eschue, that any man shoulde rebuke vs in this plenteou distribution that is ministred by vs. And therfore make we prouision for onest thinges, not in the ighte of God onely, but also in the sighte of menne. 2. Cor. 12.For we do all thinges dearelye be∣loued, for your edifyinge. But if ye doe be and deuoure one an other,Gala. 5. take hede least ye be consu∣med one of an other. Let no fylthy communication pro∣ceade oute of your mouthes,Ephe. 4. but that which is good to ediye with all, that ye maye haue fauoure wyth the hea∣rers. 1, Thes. 4.And that ye behaue your selues ho∣nestlye towarde them that are with¦oute.
Wherefore comforte youre selues together,1. Thes. 5. and edifye one an other, e∣uen as ye do. We require you breethren in the name of oure Lorde Iesus Christe,2. Thes. 3. that ye wyth draw your selues from euerye brother that walketh inordi∣natelye, and not after the instytuti∣on whyche ye receaued of vs, ye your selues knowe, how ye oughte to fo∣lowe vs. For w behaued not oure selues vnquyetly amonge you. Ney∣ther toke we breade of anye man for noughte but wrought with labour and traayle night and daye, because we woulde not be greuous to any of you: not but that we had autoritye, but to make oure selues an ensample vnto you to folow vs. Be vnto them that beleue, an en∣sample,1. Timo. 4. in worde, in conuersation, in loue, in spirite, in fayeth, and pure∣nes. These things exercise, and geue thy selfe vnto them, that it maye be sene how thou profytest in all thyn∣ges.
Titu. 3.Aboue all thinges, shewe thy selfe an ensample of good workes, in doc∣tryne, in integritye, and in gratui∣tye Ad phile∣mo.So that the feloshippe of thy faieth maye be euydente throughe know∣ledge of all good thinges in Christe Iesu. 1. Cor. 9.For we suffer all thinges, least we should hynder the gospell of Christ. Phi. 4.Let your modesty and softenesse be knowen to all men. ¶ An exhortation to peace, and concorde, and againste dissen∣tion and contention. Capitu. 21. Rom. 14.LEt vs folow those things whi∣che make for peace. The God of pacience and con∣solation,Rom. 13. geue vnto euery one of you, that ye be like minded one owardes an other, after the ensample of Christ Iesu, that ye all agreinge together, maye wyth one mouthe prayse God the father of our Lord Iesus Christ.
I besech you brethren in the name of oure Lorde Iesus Christe,1. Cor. 1. that ye all speake one thinge, and that there be no dissention amonge you: but be ye knyt together in one minde, and in one meaninge. It is shewed vnto me (my brethren) of you, by them that are of the house of Cloe, that there is strife amonge you, and this is it that I meane, howe that commonlye a∣monge you, one sayeth: I holde of Paule an other I hold of Apollo, the third I holde of Cephas, the fourth I holde of Christ. Is Christ deuided? Was Paule crucified for you? Ether wer ye baptised in the name of Paul? I thanke God that I Christened non of you, but Crispus and Caius, least any should say that I had baptised in mine owne name. And I coulde not speake vnto you bretheren as vnto spirituall,1. Cor. 3. but as vnto carnall, euen as it were vnto babes in Christ I gaue you mylke to drincke, and not meate. For ye are yet carnall. As longe verely as there is amonge you enuyinge, strife and
dissention, are ye not carnall, and walke after the maner of menne? As longe as one sayth, I holde of Pal and an ather I am of Apollo, are ye not carnall? What is Paul? What thynge is Apollo? Onelye minister are they, by whome ye beleued, e∣uen a the Lorde gaue euery manne grace. I haue planted, Apollo, wa∣tered, but God gaue the encrease. So then, neyther is hee that lan∣teth any thinge, neither he that wa∣terethe: But God that gaue the en∣crease. He hat planteth, and he that watereth are neither better then the other. Therefore let no man reioyce in menne, for all thinges are youres, whether it be Paule, eyther Apollo, eyther Cephas, whether it bee the worlde, eyther lyfe, yther deathe, whether they be present thynges, or thinges to come: all are youres, and ye are Christes, and Christ is Gods. 1. Cor, 4.Let men this wise esteeme vs, euen as he ministers of Christ, and dispo∣sers of the secretes of God. Further∣more it is requyred of the dysposers
that they be founde faythfull. These things brethren haue I described in mine own personne and Apollos for your sakes, that ye mighte learne by vs, that no man coumpte of him self beyonde that whiche is aboue wryt∣ten: that one swell not against an o∣ther for anye mans cause. For who preferreth the? Now ye are ful: now ye are made ryche: Ye raygne a kynges wythoute vs: and I woulde to God ye did raigne that we myghte raigne with you. God hath called vs in peace.1. Cor. 7. 1. Cor. 11. If there be anye manne amonge you that lustethe to stryue, let hym knowe that wee haue no suche cu∣stome, neither the congregation of God. This I warne ye of, and com∣mend not, that ye come together not after a better manner, but after a worsse. Fyrst of all when ye come to gether in the congregation, I heare that there is dissention amonge you, and I partly beleue it. For ther must be heresyes and sectes amonge you, that they whiche are perfecte among
you, mighte be knowen. When y come together a man cane not a the Lordes supper. For euery ma beginneth afore to eate his own sup∣per. And one is hungrye, and an o∣ther is dronken. Haue ye not house to eae and to dryncke in? Or elles despise ye the congregation of God, and shame them that haue not? what shall I saye vnto you? shall I prays you? In this prayse I you not. 1. Co. 14.For God is not causer of styfe, but of peace, as I teache in all congrega∣tions of saincts. Gala. 6.And as many as walke accordinge to this rule, peace be on them, and mercye, and vpon Israell that par∣taineth to God. Phili. 1.Onelye let youre conuersation be, as it becommeth the gospel of Christ: that whether I come and see you, or elles be absente I maye yet heare of you, that ye contynue in one spirit, and in one soule, labouringe as we doe, to mayntayne the ayeth of the gospell. Phi. 2.Therfore if there be amonge you
ae consolation in Christe, if there be anye coumfortable loue, if there be anye feloship of the spirite, if there be anye compassion or mercye, fulfyl my ioye, that ye drawe one way, ha∣uinge one loue, being at one accord and of one minde. Neuerthelesse in that wherunto we are come,Phi. . let vs proceade by one rule that we maye be of one accorde. I praye Enodias,Phi. 1. and besech Sin∣tyches that they be of one accorde in the Lorde. And the peace of God rule in your hartes,Collo. 3. to the which peace ye are cal∣led in one bodye. Striue not aboute wordes,2. Tim. 2 which is to no profyte, but to peruerte the hearers. Folish & vnlearned questi∣ons put from the, remembringe that they do but gender strife, but the ser∣uaunte of God muste not striue, but must be peaceable vnto all men? Folishe questions,Titu. 3. and genealogies and braulinge, and strife aboute the law, auoyd, for they are vnprofitable and superfluous
¶Agaynste temerarius and inordinate idgementes. Capi. 22. Rom. .THerfore art thou inexcusable o manne, who so euer thou be that iudgest. For in that same wherein thou idgest an other, thou condempnest thy self. For thou that iudgest, doest euen the same self thin∣ges. But we are sure that the iudge∣mente of God is accordinge to truth, againste them which commytte such things. Thinkest thou this O thou manne that iudgest them whiche do such things, and yet dost euen the ve∣rye same, that thou shalte escape the iudgemente of God? Ether espises thou the riches of his goodnes, paci∣ence & long sufferaunce? and remem∣brest not thou how that y• kindne of God leadeth the to repentaunce? but thou after thine harde hart y• can not repent, heapest together y• trasure of wrath against the day of vengeaunce whē shal be opened the righteosnes of God, whiche wyll rewarde euerye man accordinge to his dedes.
One beleueth that he maye eate all thinge. Let not him that eateth,Rom. 14. de∣spyse hym that eateth not. And let not him which eateth not, iudge him that eateth. For God hath receaued him. What art thou that iudgest an other manns seruaunte? Whether he stande or fall, that pertaineth vn∣to his master. Ye he shall stand. For God is able to make him stand This man putteth difference betwene day and day, an other man counteth all dayes a like. Se that no man wauer in his owne meaning. He that obser∣ueth one daye more then the other, dothe it for the Lordes pleasure. And he that obserueth not one daye more then an other, doeth it to please the lorde also. And he that eateth, doth it to please the Lorde, and geueth God thankes. But whye doest thou then iudge thy brother? Other why dost y• despyse thy brother? we shall all be brought before the iudgment seat of Christ, for it is writtē.Esa. 45 As truly as I liue saith y• lord al knees shal bow to me & al tong shal geue aknowledge
to God. So shal euery one of vs geue accomptes of him sele to God. Let s not therefore iudge one an other any more. But iudge this rather, that no manne put a stombling blocke or an occasion to faule in his brothers waye. Happye and blessed is e that condempneth not hym selfe in that thinge which he aloweth. 1. Cor. 4.With me it is a very small thing, that I should be iudged of you, ether of mans daye. No I iudge not myne owne selfe. I knowe nought by my selfe, yet am I not thereby iustify∣ed. It is the Lorde that iudgeth me. Therefore iudge nothinge before the tyme vntyll the Lorde come, whyche wyll lighten thinges that are hidden in darkennesse, and open the coun∣sayles of the heartes. And then shall euery man haue praise of God. 1. Cor. 5.What haue I to doe, to iudge them which are without? Do ye not iudge them that are with in? Them that are without, God shal iudge. 1. Cor. 6.How dare one of you hauinge bu∣sines with an other go to lawe vnder
the wicked, and not rather vnder the sayntes? Doe ye not knowe that the sainctes shall iudge the worlde? if the worlde shall be iudged by yu: are ye not good ynoughe to iudge small tri∣fles? knowe ye not how that we shal iudg the Aungels? How much more maye we iudge thinges that pertayn to the lyfe? If ye haue iudgement of worldlye matters, take them whi∣che are despised in the congregation, and make them iudges. This I saye to youre shame Is there vtterlye no wyse manne amonge you, what not one at all, that canne iudge betwene brother and brother, but one brother goeth to law with an other, an hat vnder the vnbeleuers Nowe there∣fore there is vtterlye a faute amonge you, because ye go to lawe one with an other. Why rather suffer ye not wroge? Why rather suffer ye not youre selues to be robbed? Naye, ye youre selues do wronge, and robbe, and that the breethren, oo ye not knowe ad remember howe that the vnrighteouse shall not ineryte the
kingdome of God Yf we would iudge oure selues, we should not be iudged.2. Cor. 11. But when we are iudged of the Lorde, we are cha∣stened, because we shuld not be dam∣ned with the world. Of them whiche seme to be grete (what they were in ime passed,Gala. . it maketh no matter to me) God oketh on no mans person. Let no manne therfore iudge you a∣bout meat,Collo. 2. or drinke, or for a pece of an holye daye as of the newe mone, or of the saboath dayes, whiche are nothinge but shadowes of thinges to come. but the body is in Christ. ¶Of spirituall furtheraunce and perftion. Ca∣pitu. 23. PErceaue ye not how that they whiche runne in a course, run all,1. Cor. 9. yet but one receaueh the reward. So runne, that ye maye ob∣tain uery man that proueth maste∣ries,
abstaineth frome all thinges, and they do it to obtayne a corrupti∣ble crowne: but we to obtaine an vn∣corruptible crowne. I therefore so runne, not as at an vncertayn thing. So fighte I, not as one that beateth the ayer. Cuet after the best gifes.1. Cor. 12. When I was a chylde, I spake a a chylde I vnderstode as a childe,1. Cor. 13. I ymagened as a chylde but as soone as I was a man, I put awaye chyl∣yshnesse. Euen so ye (for as muche as ye co∣uet pirituall gyfts)1. Cor. 14. seke that ye may haue plenty vnto the edifyinge of the congregation. We as helpers,1. Cor. 6. therefore erhorte you, that ye receaue not the grace of God in vayne. For he sayeth: I haue hearde th in a tyme accepted, and in the daye of saluation haue I hearde thee. Beholde, nowe is that well accepted tyme,Esa. 4. beholde now is that daye of saluaion. God is able to make you riche in al
grace, that ye in all thinges hauing sufficient vnto the vttermost, may be riche vnto al maner good workes, a it is written.Psal. 100. He hath sparsed abroad and hathe geuen too the poore? hys righteousenesse remayneth for euer. He that findeth the sower sede, shal minister breade for foode, and shall multiplye youre seede, and enrease the frutes of youre righteouenesse, that on all parties ye maye be made iche in all singlenesse, whiche cau∣sethe throughe vs thankes geuynge vnto God. Gala. 4.Be feruent alwaies in a good thing and not onelye when I am presente with you. Let vs folowe the truthe in loue,Ephe. 4. and in all thynges growe in hym whiche is the headde, that is to saye Christ. Ephe. 5.Ye were once darkennes, but are nowe lighte in the Lorde, walke as the children of lighte. For the frute of the spirite is in all goodnes, righ∣teousnesse, and truthe, acceptinge that which is pleasyng to the Lord.
The frute of the spirit is loue,Gala. 5. ioye peace, longe sufferinge, gentlenes, goodnes, faithfulnes, mekenes, tem∣peraunce, continene, chastitye. A∣gainst such there is no lawe. Furthermore we beseche you bre∣thren,1. Thes. 4. and exhorte you in the Lorde Iesus, that ye encrease more and more euen as ye haue receaued of vs how ye ought to walke and to please God. Wherefore let vs loue the doctrine pertayninge to the begynninge of a Christian man,Heb. 6. and let vs goo vnto perfection, and nowe laye no more the foundation of repentaunce frome dead workes, and of ayeth towarde God, of Baptisme, of docrine, and of layinge on of handes, and of resur∣retion from deathe, and of eternall iudgemente. And so wyll we doe, f God permitte. Neuerthelesse deare frendes we truste to see better of you, and thinges whiche accompanye sal∣uation, though we thus speake. Yea and we desyre that euerye one of you shewe the same diligence, to the sta∣blishinge
of hope, euen vnto the end, that ye faynte not, but folowe them which thorowe fayeth and pacienc inherit the promises. Phi. 3.Not as thoughe I had alreadye at∣tayned, ether were already perfece: but I folowe, if hat I may compre∣hende that, wherein I am compre∣hended of Christe Iesu. Brethren I counte not my selfe that I haue got∣ten it: but one thinge I say, I forget that whiche is behynde, and stretched my selfe vnto that whiche is before, and prayse vnto that marke appoin∣ted, to optayne the rewarde of the highe calling of God in Christ Iesu. Let vs therefore as many as be per∣fecte, be thus wise minded, and if ye be other wyse minded. I praye God open euen this vnto you. Heb. 5.But stronge meate belongeth to them that are perfecte, whyche tho∣rowe custome haue theyr wyttes ex∣cercysed, to iudge bothe good and euill also. Growinge vppe to full holynes in the feare of God.2. Cor. 7.
Brethren be not children in wytie. Howe be it,1. Cor. 14. as concerninge malici∣ousnes, be children, but in wytte be perfecte. Nowe therefore ye are deliuered from synne,Rom. 6. and made the seruaunts of God. And haue youre frute that ye shoulde be sanctified, and the end euerlastinge life. But eternall lyfe is the grace and gift of God, through Iesus Christ oure Lorde. Eyther knowe ye not how that youre bodyes are the temple of the holye ghost,1. Cor. . whych is in you, whom ye haue of God, and that ye are not youre owne? For ye are dearelye boughte. Therefore glorify ye God in your bodyes, and in your sprites, for they are Gods. The firste manne is of the earth,1. Cor. 15. earthlye, the seconde man from hea∣uen heauenlye. As is the earthlye, suche are they that are earthlye. And as is the heauenly, such are they that are heauenly. Therefore as we haue borne the ymage of the earthlye, so
shall we beare the ymage of the hea∣uenlye. Thys saye I brethern that fleshe and bloude can not inherit the kingedome of God. Neither shal cor∣ruption inherit incorruption. I am crucifyed with Christ. I liue verelye:Gala. 2. yet now not I. But Christ lyueth in me. Which loued me, and gaue hym selfe for me. I despise not the grace of God. Gala. 6.From hence foorth, let no manne put me to busines. For I beare in my bodye the markes of the Lorde Iesu. Collo. 4.Epaphras the seruaunt of Christ, whiche is one of you, saluteth you, and alwayes laboureth seruently for you in prayers, that ye maye stande perfect and full in all that is the will of God. Phi. 3.Oure conuersation is in heauen. Therefore my brethren deare lye beloued and longed for,Phi. 4. my ioye and croune, so continue in the Lord. 1. Thes. 2.Ye are wytneses, and so is God, how holyly and iustely, and vnbla∣meablye, we behaued oure selues a∣monge you that beleue, as ye knowe
howe that we exhorted, and comfor∣ted, and besought euerye one of you, a a father his children, that ye wold walke worthye of God, which hathe called you vntoo his kingedome and glorye. Ye are all the the children of light1. Thes. 5. and the children of the daye. Wherefore I warne the,2. Timo. 1. that thou styrre vppe the gifte of God which is in the, by the puttinge on of my han∣des. For God hathe not geuen vnto vs the spirite of feare, but of power, and of loue, and of sobernes of mind. Therefore be not ashamed to testifye our Lord neyther be ashamed of me, whiche am bounde for his sake: but suffer thou aduersitye also with the Gospell, through the power of God. ¶Of iuste and charitable cor∣reption. Cap. 24. HAue no felowshippe with the vnfrutefll workes of darck∣ness,Ephe. 5. but rather rebuke them. For it is shame euen too name those
thinges, which are done of them in secrete: but all thinges, when they are rebuked of the light are manife, for what so euer is manyfeste, that same is lighte. Wherefore he sayth, awake thou that epest, and stande vp from death, and Christ shall geue the lighte. 1. Thes.We beseche you brethren, warne and rebuke them that are vnrulye. 2. Thes. 3.Yf anye man obey not our saying counte him not as an ennemye, but warne him as a brother. 1. Timo 5.Rebuke not an elder, bt exhorte him as a father. Them that synne rebuke openly, that other may feare. 2. Timo. 4.I testifye before God, and Christe Iesu, whiche shall iudge quycke and dead, and by his comming and king∣dome, be it in season or oute of sea∣son, improue, rebuke, preache the worde, be eeuente, exhort with all longe sufferinge and doctryne. For the time wyll come, when they wyl not suffer wholesome doctryne, but after theyr owne lustes shall they (whose eares itch) get them an helpe
of tachers, and shall tourne theyr eares frome the truthe, and shall be geuen vnto fables. All scripture is profitable to im∣proue and rebuke.2. Tim. 3. These thinges speake,Titu. 2. exhort, and rebuke with all commaundinge. The seuaunte of God with mode∣stye muste reproue them that resyste the truthe,2. Timo. 2. if that God at anye time wyll geue them repentaunce for too know the truth and come agayne to them selues oute of the snare of the deuyll, which are nowe taken of him at his wyll. For when as concerninge the time,Heb. 5 ye oughte to be teachers, yet haue ye neede agayne that we teache you the firste principles of the worde of God and are become suche, as haue nede of mylke, and not strong meate. For uerye manne that is feadde wyth mylke, is inexperte in the woorde of ryghteousenese. For he is but a babe. What sonne is that whome the father chaseneth no?Heb. 12.
Al maner of chastning in the present tyme seemethe not too be ioyouse, but greuouse: Neuerthelesse after∣warde, it bringeth the quyet frute of righteousnesse vnto them whyche are therin excercised. ¶ Of temptation. Capitu. 25. 1. Cor. 10.LEt vs not tempte Christe, as some of them tempted and wer destroyed of serpentes. None other temptation hathe taken you, but suche as foloweth the nature of man. But God is faythfull, whiche shall not suffer you to be tempted a∣boue youre strengthe, but shall in the myddes of the temptation make awaye to escape oute, and sustayne it. The God of peace shall treade Sa∣than vnder your feete shortely. 2. Cor. 11.For these false Apostels are disceit∣ful workers, and fashion them selues like vnto the Apostelles of Christe. And no maruayle, for Sathan hym
selfe is chaunged in to the fashion of an Aungell of lighte. Therefore it is no greate thinge, thoughe his mi∣nisters fashion thē selues, as thoughe thei were the ministers of righteous∣nesse, whose ende shall be according to their dedes. And least I shoulde be exalted oute of measure thorow the aboundaunce of reuelations:2. Cor. 12. ther was geuen vnto me vnquietnes of ye flesh, the mssen∣ger of Sathan to buffet me. For this thinge besoughte I the Lorde thryse, that it mighte departe from me. And he sayed vnto me, my grace is suffy∣ente for thee, for my strength is made perfecte thorow weaknes. The fleshe lsteth contrarye to the spirite,Gala. 5. and the spirite contrarye to the fleshe. &c. As aboue. Ca. 16. Neither geue place vnto the deuyl. For we wrastle not against flesh and bloude,Ephe. 4. Ephe. 6. but againste power and worldly rulers. &c. as aboue Capi. 18.1. Thes. 2. For as muche brethren as we are kepte frome you for a season as con∣cerning the bodyly presence, but not
in the hearte, we enforced the more to see you personablye wyth great desyre. And therfore we would haue come to you, I Paule, but Sathan withstode vs. For this cause when I coulde no longer forbeare,1. Thes. 3. I sent, that I might haue knowledge of your fayeth, least happelye the tempter had tempte you, and that our labour hadde bene bestowed in vayne. Heb. 2.In that Christe him selfe suffered, and was tempted, he is able to suc∣coure them that are tempted. Heb. 4.Seinge then that we haue not an hye priest, which can not haue com∣passion on our infirmites, but in all poyntes tempted like as we are: but yet withute synne. . Cor. 2.That we be not circumuented of sa∣than. For his thoughtes are not vn∣knowen vnto vs. . Tim. 2.No manne is crouned, excepte he strie laufullye. ¶Of prayer. Capi∣tu. 26.
LYkewise the spirit also helpeth our infyrmities.Ro. . For we know not what to praye for, or to de∣sire as we ought: but the spirite ma∣kethe intercession mightelye for vs. And he that searcheth the heartes, knowethe what is the meaninge of the spirit, for he maketh intercession forthe saintes accordinge to the plea∣sure of God. Christe maketh inter∣cession for vs. Yf I praye with the tonge, my spi∣rit praieth,1. Cor. 14 but my minde is without frute. What is it then? I wyll pray with the spirit, and wyll praye wih the mynde also. I wyll synge wyth spirit, and wyll syng with the minde also. Continue in prayer,Rom. . Pray alwaies with al maner praier and supplication,Ephe. . and that in the spi∣rit, and watch therunto with al in∣stance, and supplication for al saints. In all thinges shewe your peticionPhi. 4. vnto God in praier and supplication with geuinge of thanks. Continue in prayer & watch in theCollo. 4.
ame with thankes geuinge. 1. Thes. 5.Praye continuallye. I praye you therefore, that aboue all thinges,1. Timo. 2. prayers supplications, intercessions, and geuinge of thanks b had for all men, for kinges, and for all that are in autoritye, that we maye lyue a quyet and a peaceable lyfe, in all Godlynes and honestye, and chastitye. For that is good and accepted in the syghte of God our sa∣uioure. I wyll therfore that the men praye euery where liftinge vp their handes without wrath or doubting. Likewise also the women that they araye them selues in comely apparel with shamefastnesse and discrete be∣hauiour. Heb. 5.Christ in the dayes of his fleshe did offer vppe praiers and supplications with strong cryinge and teares vnto him that was able to saue him frome death. And was also hearde, because of his Godlye reuernce. Therefore he is able also euer to saue them that come vnto God by him,Heb. 7. seinge he euer lyueth to make
intercession for vs. Christe is entred in to very heauen for to appeare nowe in the sighte of God for vs.Heb. 9. ¶ Of spirituall gloriation, or ioye, and inwarde consolation. And against vayne glory. Capitu. 27. TO euery man that doth good, shall come prayse,Rom. 2. honour, and peace, to the Iewe firste, and also to the gentyle. We glorye and reioyce in the hope of the children of God,Rom. 5. neyther doe we so onelye, but we reioyce in tri∣bulations, and we reioyce and ioye in God by the meanes of oure Lorde Iesus Christ, by whom we haue re∣ceaued the attenmente. The God of hope fyll you with all ioye and peace in beleuinge.Rom. 15. Therefore let no man glorye or re∣ioyce in mē.1. Cor. 3. For all things are yours whether it be Paule, eyther Apollo, eyther Cephas, whether it be the
worlde, eyther life, eyther death, whether they be presente things, or thinges to come: all are youre, and ye are Christes, and Christe i Goddes. 1. Cor. 5.Your reioysinge is not good know ye not that a lyttle leuen soureth the whole lompe of dowe? 2. Cor. 1.God which comforteth vs in all oure tribulation in so muche that we are able to comforte them which are troubled in what so euer tribulation it be. Wyth the same exhortion and comforte wherewith we oure selues are comforted of God. For as the af∣flictions of Christe are plentuous in vs, euen so is our consolation plen∣tuous by Christe. Whether we be troubled for youre consolation and saluation, whiche saluation sheweth her power in that ye suffer the same afflictions whych we also sufferior whether we be cōforted for your con∣solation and saluation, yet our hope is stedfast for you, in as much as we knowe howe that as we haue your part in fflictions, so shall ye be par∣kers
of consolation. For oure glo∣rye and reioysinge is this, the testy∣monye of oure conscyence, that in singlenesse and Godly purenes, and not in the fleshly wisdome, but by the grace of God we haue had oure con∣uersation in the worlde, and moste of all to you wardes. We write no other thynges too you, then that ye reade and also knowe. Yea, and I truste ye shall fynde vs vnto the end, euen as ye haue fode vs partelye, for we are youre reioysinge, euen as ye are oures in the daye of our Lorde Iesus Christ. Therfore I am glad of you.Rom. 1 Seinge then that we knowe howe the lord is to be feared,2. Cor. 5. we perswade and fare fayre with you. For we are knowen well ynoughe vnto God. I trust also that we are knowē in your consciences, we praise not our selues again vnto you, vut we geue you an occasion to glorye and reioyce of vs, that ye may haue some what against them, which reioyce in the face, and not in the heart.
2. Co .We haue shewed you before that ye are in oure hartes to dye and lyue with you. I am very bolde ouer you, and reioyce greatelye in you. I am fylled with comforte, and am excea∣dinge ioyous in all our tribulations. For God that comforteth the abiect, comforted vs at the comminge of Ti∣tus. And not with his comminge on∣lye, but also wyth the consolation wherwith he was comforted of you. For he tolde vs youre desire, youre mourninge, your eruente minde to me ward, so that I nowe reioyce the more. Therefore we are comforted, & exceadingly the more ioyed we, for ye ioy that Titus had because that his spirit was refreshed of you all. I am therefore not nowe ashamed, though I bosted my selfe to him of you, for as all thinges which I speake vnto you are true, euen so is oure bostynge, that I bosted my selfe to Titus wyth all, ounde true. I reioyce that I may be bolde ouer you in all thinges. 2. Cor. 8.I do you to wytte brethren, of the grace of God whiche is geuen in thē
congregations of Macedonia, howe that the abundance of their reioysing is, that they are tried with much tri∣bulation. And thereto thoughe they were exceadinge poore, yet haue they geuen exceadinge richlye, and that in singlenes. We wyll not glory aboue mesure,2. Cor. 10. but accordynge too the measure and quantity which God hath distributed vnto vs, a measure that reacheth e∣uen to you. For we streche not oue our selues beyond measure although we hadde not reached vnto you. For euen vnto you haue we come wyth the gospell of Christ, nor we boaste not oure selues oute of measure in o∣ther mennes laboures. Ye and we hope, when your fayeth is encreased amonge you, to be magnifyed accor∣dinge to our measure more largelye, and to preache the gospel in those re∣gions which are beyonde you, and not to reioyce of that which is by an other mans measure prepared alrea∣dye. Let him that reioyseth, reioyc in the Lord, for he that prayseth him
selfe, is not alowed, but he whome the Lorde praiseth. 2. Cor. 11.I say agayne, least any man thinke that I am foolishe: or els euen nowe take me as a foole, that I maye glo∣rify and boast my selfe a lyttle. That I speake, I speake i not after the wes of the Lorde, bt as it were foolishely, whyle we are come to bo∣stinge. Seinge that manye reioyce after the fleshe, I wyll reioyce also. Were in so euer anye man dare be bolde (I speake folishelye) I dare be bolde also. They are Hebreues, so am I. They are Isralits, euen so am I. They are the seede of Abra∣ham, euen so am I. They are the ministers of of Christe (I speake as a foole) I am more. Yf I muss nedes reioyce. I wyll reioyce and glorye of mine infirmities. 2. Cor. 12.Uerye gladly therefore wyll I re∣ioyce of my weknes, that the streng∣the of Chrit may dwell in me. Gala. 6.God forbid yt I shuld reioyce but in y• crosse of our lord Iesu Christ, wher by the world is crucified as touching
me, and I as concerning the worlde. What then? So that Christ be prea∣ched all maner wayes,Phi. 1. whether it be by occasion, or of true meaninge, I therin ioy, ye & wyl ioy. For I know that this shal chaunce to m saluatiō through your prayer & ministring of y• spirit of Iesu Christ as I loke for & hope y• in nothing I shal be ashamed. Yea and though I be offered vppe vppon the offeringe and sacrifice of your faieth,Phi. 2. I reioyce, and reioce with you all. For the same cause al∣so reioyce ye. and reioyce ye with me. Moreouer my brethren reioyce in the Lorde.Phi. 3. Reioyce in the lord alway,Phi. 4. & again I say reioyce. The Lorde is euen at hand. Be not careful. I reioye in the lorde greately, that nowe at the laste ye are reuiued againe to care for me in that ye were also carefull. &c. What thanks can we recompence to God agayne for you,1. Thes. 3. ouer all the ioye that we ioye for youre sakes be∣fore oure God, whyle we nyght and day pray exceadingly that we myght
see you presentlye, and myghte ful∣fyll that, whiche is lackinge in your fayeth. 1. Thes. 5.Comforte youre selues together, comforte the feble minded. 1. Thes. 2.What is our hope or ioy or croune of reioysinge: are not ye it in the pre∣sence of oure Lorde Iesus Christe at hys comminge? Yes ye, are our glo∣rye and ioye. We haue greate ioye and consola∣tion ouer thy loue,Ad phile. for by the (bro∣ther) the Saynctes are coumforted. Euen so brother, let me enioye the in the Lorde, comforte my bowels in the Lorde. ¶Agaynste loquacitye, and y∣dlenes. Capitu. 28. THe kingdome of God is not in wordes,1. Cor. 4. but in power. Euyll and malicious wordes, corrupte good maners.1. Cor. 15. . Cor. 1.Dyd I vse lightenes? Or thinke I carnally those things, which I think that with me shuld be yea yea, & nay
naye. God is faithfull: for our prea∣chinge vnto you, is not ye and naye, but in him it was yea. Wherefore put awaye lyinge,Ephe. 4. and speake euerye manne truth vnto hys neighboure, for as muche as we are members one of an other. But he ye fulfylled with the spirit speakinge vnto youre selues in psal∣mes and hymnes,Ephe. 5. and spirytuall songes. I besought the to abyde styll in E∣phesus when I departed in to Mace∣donia,1. Timo. 1. euen so doe, that thou com∣maunde some that they teache no o∣ther wise, neither geue hede to fables and genealogies whych are endlesse and brede doubtes, more then godly edifyinge whiche is by fayth. Frome the whiche thinges some haue erred, and haue tourned vnto vayne iange∣linge, because they woulde be doc∣toures in the scripture, and yet vn∣derstande not what they speake, nei∣ther whereof they affirme. And also they learne to goo frome house to house,1 Timo. 5. ydle, ye not ydle only,
but also triinge and busye bodyes, speakinge thynges whyche are not comelye. 2. Thes. 3.For when we were with you, this we warned you of, that if there were any whiche would not worke, that the same shoulde not eate. We haue hearde saye no doubte that there are some which walke among you inor∣dinatelye, and worke not at all but are curius and busibodies. Thē that are such we commaunde, and exhort by the Lorde Iesu Christe, that they worke with quienes and eate theyr owne breade. . Timo. 4.Caste awaye vnghostlye and old wyues fables. Titu. 2.With an whole some worde, which can not be rebuked, y• he which with∣standeth may be ashamed, hauing no thing in you that e may disprayse. ¶ Of internall reformation, & thanks geuing, and of certain spi∣rituall exercises, and of the ordi∣naunce of al things to the last ende. Capiu. 29.
FAshion not youre selues lyke vntoo this worlde.Rom. . Bu e ye chaunged i your shape, by the renuynge of yore wyttes, that ye may fel what thinge that good, that accepable, and perfect wil of god is. Pourge therefore the olde leun,1. Cor. 5. that ye maye be new dowe, as ye are seat breade. For Christ our Estr lambe  offered v or v. Therfore let vs kpe holye day, not with olde lea neither with the leuen of ma∣liciousnes and wikednesse but with the swete brnde of purenes & truth. Therfore whether ye eate or drin,1. Cor. 10. or what so euer ye doo, do all to the praise of God. For if we be o seruent,2. Cor. 5. to God we are to seruent. Y we kepe masure, for youre cause kepe we measure, for the loue of Christ costrayneth vs. Be ye renued in the spirit of youre mindes,Ephe. 4. and put on that newe man. which aftr the image of God, is sha∣pen of righteousnes & true holines. Singinge and making melodye toEphe. 5. the lord in your harts geuing thanks
alwayes for all things vnto God the father, in the name of our Lorde Ie∣sus Christ. Phi. 4.Furthermore brethren, what so e∣uer thinges are true, what so euer thinges are honesse, what so euer thinge are iust, what so euer things are pure, what so euer thinges per∣tayne to loue, what so euer thyngs are of honest reporte, if there be any vertuous thinge, if there be any lau∣dable thinge, those haue ye in youre mynde, which ye haue both learned and receaued, bearde and also sene in me, those thinges do: and the God of peace shall be with you. Collo. 3.Let the olde man with his workes be put of, and the newe be put on, which is renued in knowledge after the ymage of hym that made hym, where is nother gentyle nor Iewe, circumcision nor vncirūsion, bar∣barous or Sithian, bound or fre, but Christ is in all thinges, and see that ye e thankefull, eache and exhorte youre owne selues in psalmes and hymnes, and spirituall songes, which
haue fauoure with them, singynge in youre heartes to oure Lorde. And all thynges (what so euer ye doo in worde or deede) doe it in the name of the Lorde Iesu, geuinge thankes to God the father by him. In all thinges geue thankes,1. Thes. 5. for this is the wyll of God in Christ Ie∣su towarde you. For by him offer we the sacrifice of laud alwayes to God:Heb. 13. that is to say, the frute of oure lyppes, which con∣fesse his name. Which deliuered vs from so great perilles,2 Co. 1. in whome we truste, that yet here after he wyll delyuer, by the helpe of youre prayer for vs, that by the meanes of many occasions, than∣kes maye be geuen of manye on oure behalfe, for the grace geuen vnto vs. For I doo all thinges for youre sakes,2. Cor. 4. that the plentuous grace by thankes geuing of manye, maye re∣sounde to the prayse of God.
¶Of originall synne, and the trāsfusion therof. And of the com∣parion of Christes grace, to A∣dams faule. Capi. 30. Rom. 5.WE haue now by Iesu Chris receiued ye attonment wher¦for as by one mans sinne entred in to the worlde, and death by the meanes of sine, so death wente ouer all men in so much that all men sinned. For death raigned from Adā to Moses, euen ouer thē also that sin∣ned not with like trāsgression as dyd Adam: which is the similitude of him that is to come. But the gifte is not like as the sinne For if thorowe the sinne of one manye be deadde, muche more plentuous vppon manye was the grace of God, and gifte of grace, which grace was geuen by one man Iesus Christe. And the gifte is not ouer one synne, as death came tho∣rowe one synne of one that synned. For dampnation came of one sin vn∣to condempnation: but the gift came to iustify from manye sins. For if by the sinne of one death raigne by the
meanes of one, much mor shall they which receaue abundaunce of grace, and of the gif of righteousnes, raign in lie by the means of one (that is to say) Iesus Christ. Whrfore then as by the sinne of one, condmpnation came on all men, euen so by the iusti∣fying of ne cometh the righteousnes ye bringeth life vpon all men. For as by one mans disobedience manye be∣came sinners, so by the obedience of one shal manye be made righteous. And wher abūdance of sin was, ther was more plentuousenesse of grace. That as sin had raigned vnto death, euen o might grace raigne thorowe righteousnesse, vnto eternall life, by the helpe of Iesus Christ our Lord. We know that the law is spirituall,Rom. 7, but I am carnall solde vnder sin, be∣cause I wote not what I do for what I would, that do I not, but yt I hate, that do I. Yf I now do that which I would not. I graunt to the law that it is good. So then nowe it is not I that do it, but sinne that dwelleth in me. For I know yt in me (that is to
saye in my fleshe) dwelleth no good thing. To wyll is present with me, but I fynde no meanes to performe that which is good. For I do not that good thing which I would: but that euyl do I which I would not, final∣lye if I do that I woulde not, then is it not I that doo it, but synne that dwelleth in m doeth it. I finde then by the lawe, that when I woulde do good, euyll is presente wyth me. I delyte in the law of God, concerning the inner manne. But I see another lawe in my members rebellinge a∣gainste the lawe of my minde, and subduinge me vnto the lawe of sinne which is in my members. So then I my selfe in my mynde serue the lawe of God, and in my fleshe the lawe of synne. Ephe. 1.We were naturallye the children of wrath, euen as well as other. 1. Cor. 15.For by manne came deathe, and by a manne came the resurrection of the deadde. For as by Adam all dye, e∣uen so by Christe shall all be made a lyue.
For that the lawe coulde not doo, in asmuche as it was weake because of the flesh,Rom. 8. that performed God, and sente his sonne in the similytude of synfull fleshe, and by synne damned synne in the fleshe, that the righte∣ousnes required of the lawe, might be fulfylled in vs, whiche walke not after the flesh, but after the spirite. ¶Of threfolde heauinesse, lau∣dable, vituperable, and indif∣ferente. Capi∣tu. 31. I Saye the truthe in Christ,Rom. 9. and lye not in that my conscyence beareth me witnes in the holye ghot, that I haue greate heauinesse and continuall sorow in my hart for my brethren, which are Israelites. But I determined this with my selfe,2. Cor. . that I would not come againe to you in heauinesse. For if I make you sorye, who is it, that shuld make me glad, but the same which is made sory by me. And I wrote this same to
you, least if I came I should take he∣uynes of thm, of whome I oughte to reioyce. Certainly this confidence haue I in you all, that my ioy is the ioye of you all. For in great afflicti∣on and anguyshe of hearte, I wrote vnto you with manye teares, not to make you sorye, but that ye mighte perceaue the loue which I haue most specially vnto you. Yf anye manne hathe caused sorowe, the same hathe not made me sory, but partely, least I should greue you all. Wherfore thoughe I made you so∣ry with a letter,2. Cor. 7. I repent not: though I did repente. For I perceaue that the same pistle made you sory, thou∣ghe ye wer bu a season. But now I reioyce, not that ye were sorye, but that ye so sorowed that ye repented. For ye sorowed Godly: so that in no∣thinge ye were hurt by vs. For god∣lye sorowe causeth rpentaunce vnto saluation not to be repened of: when worldly sorowe causeth death. Be∣holde what dilygence this Godly so∣rowe that ye toke, hathe wroughte
in you: it caused indignation, it cau∣sed are, it caused desire, it caused a feruente mynde, it caused punyshe∣ment. For in all thing ye haue she∣wed youre selues that ye wre cleare in that matter. Epaphroditus was sicke, and that euen to death.Phi. 2. But God had mercye on him, not on him onelye, but on me also, least I shoulde haue sorowe vpon sorow. I would not brethren haue you ig∣noraunt1. Thes. 4. concerning them which are falln a slepe, that ye sorowe not as oher do, which haue no hope. ¶An exhortation to labour for felicity and beatitude it selfe. Capitu. 32. I suppose that the afflictions ofRom. 8. this life are not worthye of the glorye whiche shall be hewed vpon vs. For the feruente desyre of the creatures abydeth lokynge when the sonnes of God shall appeare, because the creaures are subdued
to vanity against their wyll, but for hys wyll whyche subdueth them in hope. For the verye creature shall be delyuered frome the bondage of corruption, in to the glorious liberty of the sonnes of God. This also I knowe, I meane the season,Rom. 13. howe that it is the time that we shoulde now awake out of slepe. For nowe is oure saluation nearer then when we eleue. The night is passed, and the daye is come nye. Let vs therefore cast awaye the deedes of darkenesse. And let vs put on the armoure of lighte. Let vs walke ho∣nestlye as it were in the daye lighte, and put ye on the Lord Iesus Christ. For it is written. The eye hathe not seene,1. Cor. 2. and the eare hath not hard, neyther haue entred in the hearte of man, the thinges which God hathe prepared for them that loue him, but God athe opened them vnto vs, by his spirie. 1. Cor. 13.Now we se in a glasse, euen in a dark speaking, but then shall we se face to face. now I know vnperfectlye, but
then shall I knowe, euen as I am knowen. Wherfore we are not weried.2. Cor. 4. For oure exceadinge tribulation which is momentanye and lighte, prepareth an exceading and an ternall weight of glorye vnto vs. We knowe surelye of oure earthy2. Cor. . mancion wherin we now dwel were destroyed, that we haue a buildinge ordayned of God, an habitation not made wyth handes, but eternall in heauen.Gala. 6. Let vs not be weary of wel doinge. For when the time is come, we shall reape withoute wearynes. Whyle we haue therefore time, let vs doo good to all menne, and speciallye vn∣to them, whiche are of the housholde of faieth. For the things that were vantage vnto me,Phi. 3. I counted losse for Christes sake. For whome I haue counted all thinge losse, and doe iudge them but donge, that I mighte wynne Christ, and mighte be founde in him not ha∣uing mine own righteousnes which
is of the lawe: but that which sprin∣geth of the fayth which is in Christ. I meane the righteousnesse whiche commeth of God thorowe fayeth in knowinge him, and the vertue of re∣surrection, and the feloshippe of his passion, that I mighte be conforma∣ble vnto his death, if by anye meanes I might attayne vnto the resurrecti∣on o the dead. For why God the father hath made vs meete to be partakrs of the inhe∣ritaunce of saynctes in lighte,Collo. 1. which hath deliuered vs from the power of darckenes, and hath translated vs in to the kingedome of his deare son, in whom we haue redemption through is bloude, and forgeuenesse of oure sinnes. Therefore if ye be rysen agayne with Christ,Collo. 3. seke those things which are aboue, where Christe sitteth on the right hande of God. Set your af∣fections on thinges that are aboue, and not on thynges whiche are on the earth. For ye are dead, and your life i hid with Christ in God. When
Christ which is your life shall hewe him selfe, then shall ye also appeare with him in glorye. Fighte the good fyghte of fayeth.1. Timo. 6. Lay hand on eternall life, wherunto thou art called, & hast professed a good profession before many witnesses. I knowe whome I haue beleued,2. Timo. 1. and am sure that he is able to keepe that whiche I haue committed to his kepinge against that daye. Suffer affliction as a good souldi∣er of Iesu Christ.2. Timo. 2. For the husbande∣man that laboureth must first receiue of the frutes. I am nowe ready to be offered,2. Timo. 4. and the time of my departing is at hand. I haue fought a good fight, and haue fulfylled my course, and haue kepte y• fayth. From hence foorth is laid vp for me a croune of righteousnes whi∣che the lord that is a righteous iudge shall geue me at that daye, not to me onelye, but vnto all them that loue his comminge. For the grace of God,Titu. 2. that bringeth
saluation vnto all men, hath appea∣red and teacheth vs, that we shoulde denye vngodlynesse, and worldelye lustes, and that we shoulde lyue so∣ber minded, righteouselye, and god∣lye in thys presentete worlde, loo∣kinge for that blessed hope aud glori∣ouse appearinge of the mightye God Iesu Christ. Heb. 4.But we whiche haue beleued, doo enter in to his rest, as contrary will h sayed to the other: I haue sworn in my wrath, they shall not enter in to my rest. And that spake he verely longe after that the woorkes were made, and the foundations of the worlde, layed. For he spake in a cer∣tayne place of the seuenth daye, o this wyse. And God dyd reast the se∣uenth daye from all his workes.Gene. 2. And in this place againe.Psal. 94. They shall not come in to my rest. Seinge therefore it foloweth that some must enter the in to, and they to whom it was fyr preached, entred not therein for vn∣beleues sake. Agayne he appoynte in Dauid a certaine present day aft
s longe a time, sayinge as it is re∣hearsed: this daye if ye heare hys ice,Psal. 9. be not hard harted. For if Io∣sue had geuen reast, then woulde he not afterwarde haue spoken of an o∣ther daye. There remayneth there∣fore yet a rest to the people of God. For he that is entred in his rest, doth tras frome his owne workes as god did from his. Let vs haste and studye therefore to enter in o that rest, least anye manne faule after the same en∣sample, in to vnbeliefe For when God made promesse to Abraham,Heb. 6. because he had no greater thinge to sweare by, he sweare by him selfe saying. Surely I wil blesse thee, and multiply thee in dede. And and so after he had suffered and tari∣ed a longe time,Gene 23. he enioyed the pro∣mes Menne verelye sweare by him hat is greater then them selues, and an othe to confirme the thinge, is amonge them an end of all sryfe. So god willing very abundātly to shew vnto the heyers of promes the stable∣nes of his counsayl, he added an othe
that by two immutable thinges (n whiche it was vnpossyble that God shuld lie) w might haue perfect con∣solation, which haue fled. For to hold fast the hope that is st beore vs. For here we haue no continuinge citye,Heb. 13. but we seke one to come. ¶Of the dyssolutiue desyre to be wyth Christe. Ca∣pitu. 33. Rom. 8.WE know that euerye crea∣ure groneh wih vs also, and trauaileth in payne e∣uen vnto this time. Not they onelye but euen we also which haue the fir frutes of the spyrite mourne in our selues, and wayt for the adoption,  loke for y• deliueraunce of our bodies. Rom. 7.O wretched man that I am: wh shall deliuer me frome this bodye o death? he grace of God, through I∣su Christ our Lord. 1. Cor. 13.For oure knowledge is vnperfecte, and oure prophesyinge is vnperfect But when that, which is perfecte i
come: then that which is vnprfect, shall be done awaye. Herefore sigh we,2. Cor. 5. desiringe to be clothd with oure mansion which is from heaun, so yet, if we be founde clothed and not naked. For as longe as we are in this tabernacle, we sigh and are greued. For we woulde not be vnclothed, but wolde be clothed vpon, that mortality might be swa∣lowed vppe of life. He that hath or∣dayned vs for this thynge, is God: the whyche hathe geuen vnto vs the earnest of the spyrite. And we heare and knowe well, that as longe as we are in the bodye, we are absent frome God. For we walke in fayeth and see not. Neuerthelesse we are of good coumforte, and had luer to be absente frome the bodye, and to be presente with the Lorde. Wherefore whether we bee at home, or frome home, we endeuoure oure selues to please him. For Christ is to me life,Phi. 1. and death is to me a vauntage. If it chaunce me too lyue in the fleshe, that is too
me frutefull for to worke, and what t chuse I wo not. I am constrained of two thinges, I desyre to be lowsed and to be with Christe which thinge is best of all. Neuer the lsse to abide in the fleshe is more ndefull for you. And this I am sure of, that I shall abyde, and with you all coninne for the furtheraunce and ioye of your fayeth, that ye maye more aboudant∣ly reioyce in Iesu Christ thorow me, by my comminge to you again. Heb. 11.And they all dyed in fayth, and re∣eaued not the promiss: but sawe them a far of, and beleued them, and saluted them, and confessed them, that they were straungers and pilgrimes on the earthe. They that saye suche things, declare that they seke a con∣trey. And if they hadde bene minde∣ful of that cuntrey from whence they came out, they hadde leasure to haue returnd agayne. But now they de∣syre a beter, that is to say a heaun∣lye. Wherefore God is not a shamed of them, euen to be called theyr God: For hee hathe prepared for them a
cyye. ¶Agaynste ydolatrye. Capiu. 34. WHen the counted them sel∣uesRom. . wyse they became foles and turned the glory of the immortall God, vnto the similitude of the ymage of a mortall man, and of byrdes, and foure footd beastes, and of serpentes. Whiche turned hys truth vnto a lye, and worshipped and serued the creatures more then the maker, which is blessed for euer. Of suche thinges whiche are dedi∣cate vnto ydols,1. Cor. 8. we are sure that we all haue knowledge. To speake of meate dedicate vnto ydols: we are sure that there is none ydoll in the worlde, and that there is none other God but one. And thoughe there be that are called Goddes, whether in heauen, or in earth (as there be gods many, and Lords many) yet vnto vs is ther but one God, which is the fa∣ther, of whom are al things, and we
in him, and one lord Iesus Christ, by whom are al things, and we by him. But euery mā hath not knowledge. 1. Cor. 10.Neither be ye worshippers of ydols as were some of them, accordinge as it is written. The people sate doune to eate and drinke, and rose vp again to playe. Wherefore my deare belo∣ued, flye frome worshyppinge of y∣dolles. Are not they whiche eate of the sacrifice, partakers of the altare? What say I then that the ydol is any thinge? or that it, which is offered to ydols is anye thinge? Naye, but I say that these things which the gen∣tiles offer, they offer to deuils, and not to God. And I woulde not that ye should haue felowshippe with the deuyls. Ye can not drincke of the cup of the Lorde, and of the cuppe of the deuyls. Ye canne not be partaker of the Lordes table, and of the table of deuyls. Eyther shall wee prouoke the Lorde? Or are we stronger then he? Exo. 32.Ye know that when ye were gen∣tyles, ye wente youre wayes vntoo
domme ydols, euen as ye were ledde. Wherfore I declare vnto you that no man speaking in the spirit of god1. Cor. 12. defyeth Iesus. But when ye knewe not God, ye did seruice vnto them,Gala. 4. which by na∣ture were no Gods. But now seing ye knowe God (yet rather are kno∣wen of God) howe is it, that ye turne agayne vnto the weake, and symple ceremonyes, where unto agayne ye desire a frshe to be in bondage. ¶Agaynste dyuers vices of menne. Capitu. 35. THey are wythoute excuse,Rom. 1. in as muche as when they knewe God, they gloryfyed hym not as God, neyther were thankefull, but waxed full of vanytyes in theyr ymagynations, and theyr foolyse heartes were blynded. Wherefore God likewise gaue thē vp vnto their harts lustes, vnto vnclennes, to defile
theyr owne bodyes betwene them selues. And as it semed not good vn∣to them to be knowen of God, euen so god deliuered them vp vnto a lewd minde, that they should do the thin∣ges whiche were not comlye, beinge full of al vnrighteous doinge, of for∣nication, wickednesse, coueteousnes, maliciousnes, full of enuy murther, debate, disceite, euyll condicioned, whisperers, backebyters, haters of God, doers of wronge, proude bosters bringers vp of euyll thinges, disobe∣diente to father and mother, without vnderstanding, couenaunt breakers, vnlouinge, truce breakers, and mer∣ciles. Which men though they knew the righteousnes of God, howe that they which suche thinges committe, are worthye of death yet not onelye do the same, but also haue pleasure in them that do them. Rom. 3.We haue already proued, how that both Iewes and gentiles are al vnder synne, as it is written:psal. 139. psal. 9. psal. 13. There is non righteous, no not one: there is none that vnderstandeth, there is non that
sekeeth after God, they all are gone oute of the waye, they are all made vnprofitable, there is none that doth good, no not one: Their throte is an open sepulchre, with their tounges they haue disceaued, the poysonne of Aspes is vnder their lippes. Whose mouthes are full of cursinge and bit∣ternes. Theyr fete ar swifte to shed bloude. Destruction and wretched∣nes are in their wayes. And the way of peace thei haue notknowen. Ther is no feare of God before their eies. Yf anye that is called a brother a∣monge you, be a fornicator,1. Cor. 5. or coue∣tuous, or a worshipper of ydols, ey∣ther a rayler, eyther a dronckarde, or an extortioner, with him that is such see that ye eate not. Put awaye from you that euyll person. Be not deceiued, for neither forni∣catoures, nether worshippers of y∣dols,1 Cor. 6. neither who remongers, nether weaklynges, neither abusers of them selues with the mankynde, neyther theues, neither the couetuous, ney∣ther dronkards, neither cursed spea∣kers,
neither rauishers, shal inherit the kingdome of God. 1. Cor. 10.Let vs not iuste after euyl things, as they lusted. Neither let vs commit fornication, as some of them commit∣ted fornication, and wer destroied in one day. 33. thousande. Neither let vs tempt Christ,Exo. 14. as some of them temp∣ted, and were destroyed of serpentes. Neither murmure ye as some of thē murmure, and were destroyed of the destroyer.Nume. 25. All thynges happened vnto them for ensamples, and wre written to put vs in remembraunce,Nume. 21. whome the endes of the worlde are come vpon. Ephe. 4.Be angrye, but synne not, let not the sunne goo doune vpon your an∣ger, neyther geue place vnto the de∣uyll. And greue not the holye spirite of God, by whome ye are sealed vn∣to the daye of redemption. Let all bitternes, fearcenes, and wrath, ro∣ringe and cursed speakinge, be put a∣waye from you, wyth all malicy∣ousenesse. Phi. .Some there are whiche preache
Christe of ennye and strife, and som of good wyl. The other part of lou, because they see that I am set to de∣fende the gospell. Some other prea∣cheth Christ of strife and not purely, supposinge to adde more aduersitye to my bondes. But nowe put ye also awaye from you all thinges,Collo. 3. wrath, fearcenes, maliciousenes, cursed speakinge, fil∣tye speakinge out of your mouthes, lye not one to an other. And vnderstande this how that the lawe is not geuen vnto a righteous man,1. Timo. 1. but vnto the vnrighteous and disobediente, to the vngodlye and to synners, to vnholy and vncleane, to murtherers of fathers and mothers, to mansears, and whoremongers, to them that defyle them selues with mankinde, menselers, to lyars, and to periured, and so foorth, if ther be any other thinge that is contrarye to holesome doctrine, accordinge to the gospel of the glory of the blessed god which is committed vnto me. The spirit speaketh euidētly that in1. Timo. 4.
the later tymes some shall departe frome the fayth, and shall geue hede vnto spirites of erroure and deuilish docrine of them whiche speake false thorowe ypocrisye, and haue theyr consciencs marked with a hote yron forbyddinge to mary, and commaun∣dinge to abstayn from meates, which God hath created to be receiud with geuinge thankes, of them which be∣leue and knowe the truth. For al the creatures of God ar good, and no∣thing is to be refused if it be receaued with thanks geuing. For it is sancti∣fid by the worde of God and praier. This vnderstand that in y• last daies shal come parilous tymes,2. Timo. 3 for the mē shall be louers of their owne selues, coueteous, lusters, proud, cursed spea¦kers, disobediente to father and mo∣ther, vnthankfull, vnholye, vnkynde, truce breakers, stubburne, false accu∣sers, ritous, fearce, despisrs of them whiche are good, traytours, heddy, hye minded, greedye vppon volupti∣ousnes more then the louers of God, hauinge a similitude of godly liuing,
but haue denyed the power thereof, and suche abhorre. Of this sorte are they whiche enter in to houses, and bringe in to bondage women loden with sinne, whiche women are ledde with diuers lutes, euer learninge, and neuer able too come vntoo the knowledge of the truth. Unto the pure,Titu. . are all thynges pure, but vnto them that are defiled, and vnbeleuinge, is nothinge pure: but euen the verye myndes and con∣scyences of them are defyled. They confesse that they knowe God: but wyth the deedes they denye him, and are abhomynable, and disobedient, and vnto all good woorkes dyscom∣mendable. ¶ An exhortation to dyuers vertues and to the actes of the same. Ca∣pitu. 36. GEue not your members as in∣strumentes of vnrighteousnes vntoo synne,Rom. . but geue youre
selues vnto God, as they that are all alyue from death. Let not sinne haue power ouer you. For ye are not vn∣der the lawe, but vnder grace, what thē? shal we sinne becuse we are vn∣der not the lawe, but vnder grace? God forbydde. . Cor. 1.I desyre you to folow me. For this cause haue I sente vntoo you Timo∣theus, whch is my deare sonne, and faithfull in the Lord, which shal put you in remembraunce of my wayes which I haue in Christe, euen as I teach euery wher in al cōgregations, For though ye haue ten thousand in∣structors in Christ yet haue ye not ma∣ny fathers. For in Christ Iesu I haue be gotten you thorow the gospell, I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloued sons I warn you. 1. Cor. 7.This I saye brethen, the time is shorte, it remayneth that they which haue wyues, be as though they had non, and they that wepe, vs asthough they wept not: and they that reioyce be as thoughe they reioysed not and they that bye, be as though they pos∣sessed
not: & they that vse this world, be as though thei vsed it not. For the fashion of this worlde goeth away, I would haue you without care. Watche ye, stand fast in the faith,1. Cor. 16. guyte you like men, and be stronge. Let all your busines be done in loue. In all thinges let vs behaue oure selues as the ministers of God. In fa∣stinges,2. Cor. 6. in watchings, in purenes, in knowledge, in longe sufferinge, in kindenes, in the holy ghoste, in loue vnfained, in the wordes of truthe, in the power of God by the armoure of righteousenes of the righte hand and on the lefte. Fynallye brethren be of good com∣forte,2. Cor. 13. be perfecte, be of one mynde, lyue in peace, and the God of peace and loue shall be with you. I therfore which am in bondes for the Lordes sake exhorte you,Ephe. 4. that ye walke worthy of the vocation wher∣with ye are called: in all humblenes of mynde, and mekenes, and longe, sufferinge, forbearing one an other,
throughe loue, and that ye be dyly∣gent to keepe the unitye of the spirite in the bonde of peace, beinge one bo∣dye, and one spirite, euen as ye are called in one hope of your callinge. Phi. 2.Doe all thinge withoute murmu∣ringe, and disputinge, that ye may be fautesse and pure, and the sonnes of God withoute rebuke in the myd∣des of a croked and perurse nation: amonge the whiche se that ye shyne as lighes in the world holdynge fast the worde of life vnto my reioysinge in the daye of Christ, that I haue not runne in vayne, neither haue labou∣red in vayne. Collo. 3.Now therfore as elect of God, holy & beloued, put on tender mercy, kind∣nes, humblenes of mindes, mekens long sufferinge, forbearing one an o∣ther, & forgeuing one an other, if any man haue a quarell to an other, euen as Christ forgaue you, euen so do ye. 1. Thes. 4.We beseche you brethren that ye encrease more and more, and that ye studye to be quiet, and to medie with youre owne busynes, and to worke
with your owne handes, as we com∣maunded you, that ye maye behaue your selues honeslye towarde them that are withoute and that nothinge be lackinge vnto you. Reioyce euer, praye continuallye, quenche not the spirit.1. Thes. 5. Despyse not prophesyinge. Examyn and proue al things, and kepe that which is good. Abstaine from all suspitious things. Fayethfull is he whiche called you, which wyll also do it. Brethren pray for vs. Grete all the brethren with an holye kysse. I charge you in the Lord, that this Epistle be redde vnto all the holy brethren. Lustes of youth auoyde,2. Timo. 2 and folow righteousnes, fayth, loue, and peace with them that call on the Lord with pure hearte. The seruaunte of the Lorde muste not striue, but muste be peaceable vnto all men, and apte to teache, and one that can suffer the e∣uyll in meeknes, and canne informe them that resist truth. Let oures also learne too excell in good workes,Titu. 3. as far foorth as neede
requyreth, that they be not vnfrute∣full. 1. Timo. 6.Folow righteousnes, godlins, loue pacience, and mekenesse. ¶Of the sinagoge, and of dy∣uers gifts of grace in time past ge∣uen vnto it, and of doble cir∣cumcsion. Capi. 37. CYrcumcision veelye auaileth, if thou keepe the lawe.Rom. 2. But if thou breake the lawe, hy cir∣cumcision is made vncircumcision. Therefore if the vncircumcised kepe right thinges contayned in the law, shal not his vncircumcison be con∣ted for circumcision? And shal not vn∣circumcision which is by nature (if it kepe the lawe) iudge thee, which be∣inge vnder the letter and circumcisi∣on, doest transgresse the lawe? For he is not a Iewe, whiche is a Iewe outward. Neither is that thinge cir∣cumcision which is outward in flesh. But he is a Iewe, which is hyd with in, and the circumcision of the hart, is the true circumcision which is in
the spirit, and not in the letter, whose prayse is not of men, but of God. What prefermente then hath the Iewe?Rom. 3. other what auauntageth cir∣cumcision? Surely very much. First, vnto them was committed the word of God. what then thoughe some of them did not beleue? Shall their vn∣beleeue make the promesse of God withoute effecte? God forbyd. Whiche are the Israelits,Rom. 9. to whom pertayneth the adoption, & the glory, and the couenauntes, and the lawe that was geuen, and the promises. whose also are the fathers, and they of whome (as concerninge the fleshe) Christ came, whiche is God ouer all thinges blessed for euer. Amen. I saye then:Rom. 11. hath God caste awaye his people? God forbyd, for euen I verely am an Israelite, of the sede of Abraham, and of the tribe of Benia∣min, god hath not cast away his peo∣ple, whiche he knew before. Eyther wote ye not what the scripture sayth by ye mouth of Helias how he maketh intercessiō to god against Israel say∣ing?
2. regu. 16.Lord they haue kylled thy prophe∣tes, and dygged doune thine altares: and I am left only, and they seke my selfe. But what sayeth the aunswere of god to him agan? I haue reserued vnto me seuen thousand men, which haue not bowed the knee to Baal, euē so at this time, is ther a remenaunt lefte thorow the electio of grace. Yf it be of grace, then is it not of woor∣kes. For then were grace, no more grace. 1. Cor. 10.Brethren I wold not that ye shuld be ignoraunte of this, how that our fathers were all vnder a cloude, and al passed through the sea, and wer all baptised vnder Moses in the cloude, and in the sea, and did all eate of one spirituall meate, and did all drincke of one maner spirituall drincke. And they drancke of that spirituall rock that folowed them, which rocke was Christe. But in manye of them had God no delyte, for they were ouer∣throwen in the wildernes. Theese are ensamples to vs. Gala. 2.We are Iewes by nature, and not
sinners of the gentiles. And I saye that Iesus Christe was a minister of the circumcision for the truthe of God,Rom. 15. to confirme the pro∣mises made vnto the fathers. Beholde I shall whiche walketh carnallye.1. Cor. 10. For we are circumcision whyche worshippe God in the spirite and re∣ioyce in Christe Iesu,Phi. 3. and haue no confidence in the fleshe, thoughe I haue where of I might reioyce in the fleshe. Yf anye other man thinketh that he hath whereof he mighte trust in the fleshe, muche more I circum∣cised the eyghte daye, of the kindred of Israell, of the trybe of Beniamin, an Hebrue borne of the Hebrues, as concerninge the lawe, a Parysey, and as concernynge feruentnesse, I persecuted the congregation, and as touchinge the righteousenesse which is in the lawe, I was vnrebukeable. God in time past diuerslye and ma∣ny wayes,Heb. 1. spake vnto the fathers by the prophets: but in these last dayes, he hath spoken vnto vs by his sonne.
Heb. 9.The first tabernacle had ordinaun∣ces, and seruings of God, and world∣lye holynes. For there was before a tabernacle made, wherein was the candelsticke, and the table, and the shew bread which is called holy, But within the second vayle, was there a tabernacle, which is called holyest of al. Which had the golden senser, and the Arke of the Testament, ouerlaid rounde aboute with golde, wherein was the golden potte with Manna, and Arons rod that spronge, and the tabls of the Testamente. Ouer the Arke were the Cherubins of glorye shadowing the seate of grace, of whi∣che thinges we wyll not now speake particularlye. ¶Of the churche. Ca∣pitu. 38. Gala. 4.THat Ierusalem, whyche is a∣boue is free: which is the mo∣ther of vs al. For it is written. Reioyce thou baren,Esa. 55. that bearest no childrē. Breake foorth and cry, thou that trauailest not. For the desolate
hathe manye mo children, then she, which hath an husbande. Christ is the heade of the congre∣gation,Ephe. 5, and the same is the sauioure of the bodye: and the congregation is in suiction to Christe, the why∣che loued the congregation, and gaue him selfe for it, to sanctifye it, and clensed it in the ountayne of water thorowe the worde of lyfe, to make it vnto him a gloryous congregation withoute spote or wryncle, or anye suche thinge, but that i shuld be im∣maculate and holy. For no man euer yet hated his owne fleshe, but nouri∣sheth and chearyseth it, euen as the Lorde doth the congregation: for we are mmbers of hys bodye, of hys flesh, and of his bones. For this cause shal a man leaue father and mother, and shal continue with his wife, and two shall be made one flesh. Thys is a greate secrete and sacramente, but I speake beweene Christe and the congregation. These thinges write I vntoo thee,1. Timo. 3. trusinge to ome shorly vno hee,
but and if I tarye longe, that then thou mayest yet haue knowledge, how thou oughtest to behaue thy self in the house of God, which is the con∣gregation of the lyuinge God, thy pyller and ground of truth. Heb. 3.And Moses verelye was faithfull in al his house, as a minister to beare witnes of those thinges, which shuld be spoken afterwarde. But Christe as a sonne hathe rule ouer the house, whose house are we. 1. Cor. 3.Ye are the temple of the lyuinge God vt sup. Capi. 23. Heb. 12.For ye are not come vntoo the mounte that can be touched, and vn∣to burninge fire, nor yet to myst and darkensse, and tempest of wether, neither vnto the sound of a troumpe and the voice of words. Which voice they that hearde it, wyshed awaye, that the communication shoulde not bee spoken too them, for they were not able to abyde that whiche was spoken. Yf a beast hadde touched the mountayne, it must haue bene stoned or thruste throughe wyth a darte: e∣uen
so terrible was the sight which appeared. Moses said. I fear I quake. But ye are come vnto the mount Si∣on, and too the citye of the lyuinge God, the cestiall Ierusalem, and to an innumerable sight of Aungels and vnto the congregation, of the first borne sonnes which are written in heauen, and to God the iudge of all, and to the sprites of iust and per∣fecte menne, and to Iesus the media∣tor of the newe Testamente, and to the sprincklinge of bloude that spea∣keth better then the bloude of Abell. Wherefore if we receaue a kingdom which is not moued, we haue grace, whereby we maye serue God, and please him with reurence and God∣lye feare. ¶Of the efficacitye and argu∣mentes of he preachinge of the Euanglicall lawe, and of the miracles of blessed saynt Paule the A∣postle. Ca∣pitu. 39.
Rom. 1.I woulde that ye shoulde knowe brethen, howe that I haue of∣ten times purposed to come vn∣to you, (but haue bene let hytherto) to haue some frute amonge you, as I haue amonge other of the gentiles. For I am detter both to the Grekes, and to them that are no grekes, vnto the learned, and also vntoo the vn∣learned. Likewise as much as in me is, I am ready to preache the gospel to you at Rome also. Rom. 15.Neuerhelesse breethren I haue somewhat bollye written vnto you, as one that putteth you in remem∣braunce, thorowe the grace that is geuen me of God, that I shoulde be the minister of Iesu Christe amonge the genles, and sanctify the gladde idinges of God, that the gentyles might be an acceptable offering sanc¦tifyd by the holy ghost. I haue ther∣fore wherof I may reioyce in Christ Isu in the thinges which pertayne to God. For I dare not speake of any of these thinges, which Christ hath not wrought by me, to make the gen∣tiles
obedieute with worde and dede, in mightye sygnes and wonders, by the power of the spirit of God: so that from Ierusalem and the coses round about vnto Iliricum, I haue fylled all cuntreys with the glad tidings of Christ. So haue I enforced my self to preach the gospell, not where Christ was named, least I shuld aue built on an other mans foundation. But as it is written.Esa. 4. To whome he was not spoken of they shall see, and they y• hard not shal vnderstand. For this cause I haue ben oft let to come vnto you, but nowe seing I haue no more to do in these cuntres, & also haue ben desirous manye yeares to come vnto you, whē I shall take my iorney, in to Spain, I wyll come to you. I truste to see you in my iorney, & to be brou∣ght on my way, thither ward bi you, after yt I haue somwhat enioyed you now go I vnto Ierusalem, & minister vnto ye saints, whē I aue performed this, & haue brought them this frute sealed, I wil come backe again bi you in to Spaine. And I am sure when I
come, that I shall come with aboun∣daunce of the blessinge of the gospell of Christe. And I brethren when I came to you,1. Cor. 2. came not in gloryousenesse of wordes, or of wysedome, shewynge vnto you the testimonye of God. Ne∣ther shewed I my selfe that I knewe anye thinge amonge you, saue Iesus Christe, euen the same that was cru∣cified. And my wordes, and my prea∣chinge was not with entising words of mannes wisdome, but in shewing of the spirite and of power, that your fayth shoulde not stande in the wise∣dome of menne, but in the power of God. We are Goddes labourers, ye are Goddes husbandrye,1. Co. 3. ye are Goddes buyldinge, accordinge to the grace of God geuen vntoo me, as a wyse buylder haue I layed the foundation and an other builte theron. Am I not free? Am I not Apostle? Haue I not seene Iesus Christe our Lorde?1. Cor. . Are ye not my worke in the Lorde? Yf I be not an Apostle vnto
other, yet I am vnto you. For the seale of mine Apostleshippe are ye in the Lord. Brethren as pertayninge to the gospell whiche I preached vnto you,1. Cor. 15. whiche ye haue also accepted, and in the which ye continue, by the which also ye are saued, I doe you to wytte after what manner I preached vnto you, if ye kepe it excepte ye haue be∣leued in vayne. Thankes be vnto God. Which al∣wayes geuethe vs the vyctorye in Christ,2. Cor. 2. and opened the sauer of hys knowledge by vs in euery place. For we are vnto God the sweete sauoure of Christe, bothe amonge them that are saued, and also amonge them which pearishe. To the one parte are we the sauoure of deathe vnto death: And vnto the other parte are we the sauoure of lyfe vnto lyfe. And who is mete vnto these thinges? For we are not as manye are, which choppe and chaunge with the word of God: but euen out of purenes, and by the power of God, and in the syghte of
God, so speake we in Christ. Whiche hath made vs able to my∣nister the newe Testamente,2. Cor. 3. not of the letter, but of the spyrite. For the letter kylleth. But the spirit geueth lyfe. Yf oure gospel be yet hyd it is hyd among them that are lost,2. Cor. 4. in whom the God of this worlde hath blynded the minds of them which beleue not lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ which is ye ymage of god shuld shyne vnto them. For we preach not oure selues, but Christe Iesu to be the Lorde, and our selues your ser∣uauntes for Iesus sake. For if he that commeth, preache an other Iesus then hym,. Cor. 11. whom we preached, or if ye receaue an other spirite then that whiche ye haue re∣eaued: eyther an other gospell then that ye haue receaued, ye might right well haue bene contente. I suppose that I was not behinde ye chefe Apo∣stels. Though I be rude in speaking yet I am not so in knowledge. How be it amonge you we are knowen to
the vttermoost what wee are in all thinges. For in nothing was I inferior vn∣to the chiefe Apostels,2. Cor. 12. thoughe I be nothinge, yet the tokens of an Apo∣stell were wroughte amonge you wyth all pacience, with signes, and wonders, and mightye dedes. I woulde ye vnderstode breethren,Phi. 1. that my busynes is happened vntoo the fortheraunce of the gospell. So that my bondes in Christ, are mani∣fest throughe oute all the iudgement hall, and in all other places: In so muche that manye of the brethren in the Lord, are bold through my bonds and dare more largelye speake the worde wythout feare. We knowe brethren, beloued of God,1. Thes. . how that ye are electe. For our gospell came not vnto you in worde only, but also in power, and in the holye ghoste, and in muche certain∣tye, as ye knowe, after what ma∣ner we behaued oure selues among you, for youre sakes.
Oure exhortation was not to bringe you to erroure, nor yet to vnclennes, neither was it with guyle,1. Thes. 2. but as we were alowed of God, that the gospell shoulde be committed to vs: euen so we speake, not as thoughe we en∣tended to please men, but God, whi∣che tryeth oure hartes. Neither was our conuersation at anye time wyth flatteringe wordes, as ye well know neither in cloked couetuousnes, God is recorde: neither soughte we praise of men, neither of you, nor yet of a∣ny other, when we might haue bene chargeable as the Apostles of Christ, but we were tender amonge you. How shall we escape, if we despise so greate saluation,Heb. 2. whiche at the first began to be preached of the Lord him selfe, and afterwardes was con∣firmd vntoo vs warde by thm that hearde it, God bearing witnes ther∣of both with signes and wonders al∣so, and with diuers myracles and gyftes of the holye ghost, accordinge to his owne wyll. Rom. 10.How shall they preache except they
be sent? As it is written. How beau∣tyfull are the fete of them that bring good and gladde tydinges of peace, and bringe gladde tidynges of good thinges.Esa. 4. But they haue not all obei∣ed to the gospel.Esa. 53. For Esaias saeth. Lord who shall beleue our sayings? So then fayeth cometh by hearig, and hearinge commth by the worde of God. But I aske: haue they nt heard? No doubt. Their sound went oute in to all landes,psal. 28. and their words in to the endes of the worlde. The gospel is come vnto you,Collo. 1. euen as it is in to all the worlde, and is fruteful, and groweth as it is amo you. From the first daye in the whi∣che ye harde of it, and had experience in the grace of God in the truthe, as ye learned of Epaphra oure deare fe∣lowe seruaunte, whyche is for you a faythfull minister of Christ, which also declared vnto vs, your loue, whi∣che ye haue in the spirit. ¶Of the vocation of the gen∣tyles, and of the exccation and
blindnes of the Iewes, and also of their finall con¦uertyon vntoo Christ. Ca∣pit. 40. Rom. 9.THe vesselles of mercye, which he hath prepared vnto glorye, whiche he called not of the Ie∣wes onely, but also of the gentiles. As he sayeth in OseeOse. . I wyll call them my people, whiche were not my people, and her beloued, whyche was not beloued. And it shall come too passe, in the place where it was sayed vnto them, ye are not my peo∣ple, where they shall be called the children of the lyuinge God. But E∣sayas cryethe concernynge Israell.Esa. 10. Though the member of the children of Israell be as the sande of the sea, yet shall a remnaunte be saued. He finisheth the worde verelye and ma∣keth it shorte in righteousenes, for a shorte word wil God make on earth. And as Esaias sayed before:Esa. 1. Except the Lord of saboth had lefte vs sede,
we had bene made as Zodoma, & had bene lykenned too Gomorra. What shall we saye then? We saye that the gentiles whiche folowed not righte∣ousenes, haue ouer taken righteous∣nes: I meane the righteousnes whi∣che commeth of fayth. But Israell whiche folowed the lawe of righte∣ousnes, coulde not attayne vnto the lawe of righteousnes. For I beare them recorde,Rom. 10. that thei haue a feruent mind to godward but not according to knowledge. For thei are ignoraunte of the righteousnesse whiche is alowed before God, and goo aboute to stablishe theyr owne righteusnes, and therefore are not obedient vnto the righteousnes whi∣che is of value before God. But I de∣maunde whether Israell did knowe or not? Fyrste Moses sayeth: I wyl prouoke you for too enuye by them that are no people,Deu. 22. and by a foolysh nation I wyll anger you,Esa. 65. Esayas after that is bolde, and sayeth. I am founde of them that soughte me not. And haue appeared too them,
that asked not after me. And to Isra∣ell he sayeth. All daye longe haue I stretched foorthe my handes vnto a people that beleueth not,Deu. 1. but spea∣keth againste me.Esa. 6. Rom. 11.What then? Israll hathe not obtai¦nd that, that he soughte. No, but yet the election hathe obtaynd it. The remnaunte are blinded, accordinge as it is written: God hathe geuen them the spirite of compunction:Esa. 6. eies that they shoulde not see, and eares that they should not heare euen vnto thys daye. And Dauid sayeth:Psal. 68. Let theyr table be a snare too take them with all, and an occasion o faule, and a rewarde vnto them. Let their eies be blinded, that they see not, and uer bowe doune their backes. I say then: Haue thy therefore stombled that they should but faule only? God forbyd. But thorowe their faule is saluation happened vnto the geny∣les for to prouoke them wyh all. Wherfore if the faule of tem, be the riches of the worlde, and the miny∣singe of them, the riches of the gen∣tyles:
howe muche more should it be so, if they all beleeued. I speake to you gentyles, in as muche as I am the Apostell of the gentiles. I wyll magnifye myne office, that I might prouoke them whiche are my fleshe, and mighte saue some of them. For if the castinge awaye of them be the reconcilinge of the worlde: what shal the receauinge of them be, but life a∣gayn from death. For if one pece are holye, the whole heape is holye. And if the rote be holye, the braunches be holye also. Thoughe some of the braunches be broken of, and thou be∣inge a wylde olyue tree, arte grafte in amonge them, and mad partaker of the rote and fanes of the oliu tre, boast not thy lf agaynst the braun∣ches. For if thou boaste thy selfe, re∣member that thou bearst not the rote, but the rote thee. Thou wyle saye then, the braunches are broken of, that I might be grafte in. Thou sayest well: because of vnbeleue they are broken of. an thou standest sted∣fast in fayeth. Be not ye mynded,
but feare, seinge that God spared not the naturall braunches, leaste haply e also spare not thee. Beholde the kindenes and rigorousnes of God: on them whiche fell, rigorousenes, but towards thee, kyndnes, if thou con∣tinue in his kyndnes. Or els thou shalt be hewen of, and they if they yde not styll in vnbeliefe, shall be grafte in agayne. For God is of po∣wer to graffe them in agayne. For if thou wast cutte oute of a naturall wylde olyue tree, and wast graffed contrarye to nature in a true olyue tree, how muche more shall the na∣turall braunches be graffed in theyr owne olyue tree agayn. I would not that this secrete should be hyd frome you my brethren, lest ye shuld be wise in your owne consaytes, that partly blindnes is happened in Israell, vn∣tyll the fulnesse of the gentyles bee come in, and so all Israell shall be saued. As it is wrytten.Esa. 5. There shall come out of Syon be yt doeth deliuer and shal turne away the vngodlines of Iacob. And this is my couenaunt
vnto them, whan I shall take away theyr synnes. As concerninge the gospell they are ennemies for youre sakes. But as touchinge the election they are loued for the fathers sake. For verelye the gyftes and callynge of God are suche, that it canne not repente hym of them, for looke as ye in tyme passed haue not beleeued God, yet haue nowe obtayned mer∣cy thorowe theyr vnbelyefe: euen so nowe haue they not beleeued the mercy which is happened vnto you, that they also maye obtayne mercye. God hathe wrapped all nations in vnbelyee, that he myght haue mer∣cye on all. O the deepenesse of the a∣boundaunt wisdome and knowledge of God, howe vnserchable are hys iudgementes? And I saye that the gentiles praise God for hys mercye as it is wryt∣ten.Rom. 5. For this cause I wyll prayse the amonge the gentyles,Psal. 17.2. regu. 1. psal. 116. and synge in thy name. And agayne he sayeth.Esa. 11. Reioyce ye gentiles with his people. And again. Prayse the Lorde all ye
gentiles, and laude him all nations. And agayne Esaias sayeth. There shall be the rote of Iesse, and he that shall ryse to raygne ouer the genty∣les, in him shal be the gentiles trust. . Cor. 3.We do not as Moses, which put a vaile ouer his face that the children of Israell shoulde not see, for what purpose that serued whiche is put a∣waye. But their mindes were blin∣ded.Exo. 34. For vntyll this daye remay∣neth the same concernyng vntaken & waye in the olde Testamente when they reade it, which in Christ is put away. But euen vnto this day when Moses is red, the vayle hangeth be∣fore their harts. Neuerthelesse when they turne to the Lord,Ephe. 2. the vaile shall be taken awaye. Remember that ye beinge in time passed gentiles in the flesh, and were called vncyrcumcision to them which are called circumcision in the fleshe, which circūcision is made by hands. Remember I saye, that ye were at that time withoute Christe, and wer reputed alintes frome the common
wealth of Israell, and were straun∣gers from the Testament of promes, and had no hope, and were withoue God in this woorlde. But nowe in Christ Iesu, ye which a whyle a goo were farre of, are made nye by the bloudde of Christe, and he came and preached peace to you which were a far of, and to them that wer e. For thorow him we bothe haue an open way in, in one spirit vnto the father.Ephe. 3. As it is now declared vnto hys ho∣lye Apostels and prophettes by the spirite, that the gentiles should be inheritoures also, and of the same bodye, and partakers of his promes that is in Christe Iesu. &c. vt supra. eodem. ti.1. Thes. 2. The Iewes as they kylled the lord Iesus, and their owne prophettes, euen so haue they persecuted vs, and God they pleased not, and are con∣trarye to all men. And forbydde vs too preache vntoo the gentiles, that they myghte bee saued, too fulfyll their sinnes alway. For the wrath of God is come on them, to the vmost.
¶Of diuers gifts of grace ge∣uen vnto the church in the time of grace, vnder and in time of the Euangelycall lawe. Capitu. 41. SEinge that we haue dyuers gyfs accordinge to the grace that is geuen vnto vs.Rom. 12. Yf any man haue the gyfte of prophesye, let him haue it, that it be agreinge vnto the faith. Let him that hath an office, waite on his office. Let him that tea∣cheth, take heede to his doctrine. Let him that exhorteth, geue attendaunce to his exhortation: if anye man geue, let him doe it wyth synglenesse. Let hym that ruleth, doo it wyth dily∣gence. Yf anye manne shewe mercy, let him do it wyth chearefulnes. Let loue be withoute dissimulation, hat that whiche is euyll, and cleaue vn∣to that whiche is good. Let not that busines which ye haue in hande, be tedyous vnto you. Dystribute vntoo
the necessites of the saynctes, and be readye to harboure, be of lyke affec∣ion one towardes an other, yf it b possible. Howe be it of youre parte, haue peace with all menne. Deare∣lye beloued auenge not youre selues, but geeue roume vnto the wrath of God. I my selfe am full certifyed of you my brethren,Rom. 15. that ye youre selues are full of goodnes, fylled wyth all knowledge, and are able to exhorte one an other. For in all thinges ye are made rich in God,1. Cor. . in all learninge, and in all knowledge, so that ye are behinde in no gifte. &c. vt sup. And ye not ware that ye are the temple of God, and how that the spi∣rit of God dwelleth in you?1. Co. 3. Yf anye man defyle the temple of God, him shall God destroy. For temple the of God is holy which temple ye are. And verely ye were wicked,. Cor. 6. but ye are washed, ye are sanctified, ye are iustyfyed by the name of the Lorde
Iesus, and by the sprie of our god. eyther remember ye not, that youre bodyes are the temple of the holye ghoste, whiche is in you. Whome ye haue of God, and how that ye are not your owne? For ye are dearelye boughte. Therefore glorifye ye God in youre bodies and in your spirits. In spirituall thinges brethren I would not haue you ignoraunt.2. Cor. 12. For no manne can saye that Iesus is the Lorde, but by the holye ghost. There are duersities of gyfes, yet but one spirite. And there are differences of administrations, and yet but one Lorde. And there are diuers maners of operaions, and yet but one God, whiche worketh all thinges that are wroughte in all creatures. The giftes of the spirit are geuen to euerye manne,1. Cor. 12. to profyt the congre∣gation. To one is geeuen thorowe the spirite, the vtteraunce of wyse∣dome. To an other is geuen the vt∣teraunce of knowledge, by the same spirite. To an other is geuen fayth, by the same spirite. To an other the
giftes of healinge, by the same spirit. To an other power to doe miracles. To an other prophecye. To an other iudgemente of sprites. To an other dyuers tonges. To an other the in∣terpretation of of tonges. And these al worketh euen the self same spirit. Diuidinge to euerye manne seuerall gifs un as he wyll. For as the bo∣dye is one, and hathe manye mem∣brs, and all be mmbers of one bo∣dye, thoughe thy be manye, yet are but one bodye: euen so is Christ. For in sue spirite ar we baptised to make one bodye, whether we be Ie∣wes or gentiles, whether we be bond or free: and haue all droncke of one syirit. For the body is not one mem∣ber but many, yf the foote saye. I am not the hand, therfore I am not of the bodye: is he therefore not of the bo∣dye? And if the eare saye, I am not the eie, therfore I am not of the body, is he therfore not of the body. Yf all the bodye were the eye, where were then the eare? Yf all were hearinge, wher were the smellinge? But now
athe God desposed the members, e∣uerye one of them in the body, at his owne pleasure. If they were all one member, where were the body? now are ther manye members, yet but one bodye. And the eye can not saye vnto the hande, I haue no neede of the, nor the heade also to the fete, I haue no neede of you. Ye rather a greate deale, those members of the bodye whiche seme to be moste feble, are moste necessarye. And vpon those members of the bodye, whiche we thinke least honest, put we most ho∣nestye on. And our vgodlye parties haue moste beautye on. For our ho∣neste members nede it not. But god hath so disposed the bodye, and hath geuen mooste honoure to that parte whiche lacked, least there shoulde be anye strife in the bodye, but that the members shoulde indifferentlye care one for an other. And if one member suffer, all suffer with him, if one member be had in honoure, all mem∣bers be gladde also. Ye are the bo∣dy of Christ, and members one of an
other. And God hath also ordayned in the congregation, firste the Apo∣stels, Secondaryelye prophettes. Thirdelye teachers, then them that do miracles, after that the giftes of healinge, helpers, gouernoures, di∣uersitye of tounges. Interpreters of tonges. Are all Apostels? Are all Prophettes? Are all teachers? Are all doers of myracles? Haue all the gyftes of healynge? Doe all speake with tonges? Do all interprete? ¶Yet of the selfe same matter and of the comparison of one gyfte to an other. And of the vse, and profytte that commeth of them. Ca∣pit. 42. COuet spirituall gyftes, and most chieflye for to prophesys.1. Cor. 14 For he that speaketh with ton∣ges, speaketh not vnto men, but vnto god, for no mā heareth him, how be it in ye spirit he speaketh misteries, but
prophesieth, speaketh vnto menne to edifyinge, to exhortation, and to com∣forte. He that speaketh with tonges, profiteth him selfe: he that prophe∣syeth, edifyeth the congregation. I would that ye all speake with tongs: but rather that ye prophesyed. For greater is he, that prophesieth, then he that speaketh wyth tonges, except be expounde it also, that the congre∣gation maye haue edifyinge. Nowe brethren if I come to you speakinge wyth tonges, what shall I profytte you, excepte I speake vnto you o∣ther by reuelation, or knowledge, or prophesyinge or doctrine. More∣ouer when things without life geue sounde, whether it be a pype, or an harpe, excepte they make a destincti∣on in the sounds, how shal it be kno∣wen what is pyped, or what is har∣ped? And also if the trumpe geue an vncertayne voyce, who shall prepare him selfe to fyght? Euen so likewise when ye speake with tonges, except ye speake wordes that haue signify∣cation, howe shall it be vnderstande
what is spoken? For ye shall but speake in the ayre. Manye kindes of voyces are in the worlde, and none of them are without signification. If I know not what the voice meaneth, I shall be vnto him that speaketh an aliente, and he that speaketh shal be an alient vnto me. Wherfore let him that speaketh with tonges, pray that e maye interprete also. For elle if thou blessest with the spirite, howe shall e that occupyeth the roume of the vnlearned, saye amen at the ge∣uinge of thankes, seinge he vnder∣standeth not what thou sayest. Thou verelye geuest thankes well, but the other is not edifyed. I thanke my God, I speake with tounges more then ye all. Yet I adde leuer in the congregation to speake fyue wordes with my mynde to the information of other, rather then ten thousande wordes with the tonges. In the law it is written,Esa. 28. with other tonges, and with other lippes wyll I speake vn∣to thys people, and yet for all that, they wyll not heare mee, sayeth the
Lorde. Wherefore tonges are for a sygne, not to them that beleue, but to them that beleue not. Contrarye wyse, prophesyinge serueth not for them that beleue not, but for them whiche beleue. Yf therefore when al the church and congregation is come together, and al speake with tonges, there come in they that are vnlear∣ned, or they whiche beleue not, wyll they not saye that ye are oute of your wytes? But and if all prophecye, and there come in one that beleue the not, or one vnlearned, he is rebuked of all men, and is iudged of euerye manne: and so are the secretes of his heart opened, and so falleth he done on his face, and woorshippeth God, and saieth that God is wyth you, in dede. How is it then brethren? when ye come together euerye man hathe hys songe, hathe his doctrine, hath his tounge, hath his reuelation, hath his interpretation. Let all thynges be done vnto dyfinge. Yf any man speake with tonges, let it be two at
once, or at the mooste three at once, and that by course, and let an other interprete it. But if there be no in∣terpreter, let him kepe silence in the congregation, and let him speake to him selfe and to god. Let the prophe∣tes speake two at once, or thre at once and let other iudge. Yf anye reuela∣tion be made o an other that sytteth by, let the fyrste holde his peace, for ye may all prophecy one by one, that all maye learne, and all maye haue coumfore. For te spyrites of the prophettes are in the power of the prophettes. For God is not causer of stryfe, but of peace, as he is in all other congregations of sainctes. Wherefore breethren couet to pro∣phecy, and forbyd not o speake with tonges. Thankes be to God whiche hathe1. Cor. 1. geuen vs victorye through our Lord Iesus Christ. For it is God whiche sablished vs and you in Christe,2. Cor. 1. and hath anoin∣ted vs, which hath also sealed vs, and
hath geuen the earnest of the spyrite in our hares. Gala. 3.Yf ye be Chrstes, then are ye A∣braham sede, and heyres by promes. Because ye are the sonnes of God,Gala. 4. God sente the spirite of his sonne in to youre hartes, whiche crieth Abba faher. Wherefore now thou art not a seruaunte, but a sonne, if thou be the sonne, thou art also the heire of God, through Christ. Rom. 8.As manye are ledde by the spirite of God, they are the sons of god. For ye haue not receaued the spyrite of bondage to feare anye more, but ye haue receiued the spirit of adoption, where by we crye Abba father. The same spirite cerifieth our spirit that we are the sons of god. Yf we be the sonnes, we are also heirs, the eiers I meane of God, and heiers annexed with Christe: if so be that we suffer together that we maye be gloryfied together. Therefore brethren, we are after the nature of Isaac children of pro∣mes.Gala. 4. But as thou, he that was borne
carnallye persecuted hym that was borne spiritually.Gene. 2, Euen so it is now. Neuerthelesse what sayeth the scrip∣ture,Esa. 54. put awaye the bonde woman, and her sonne. For the sonne of the bonde woman, shal not be heier with the sonne of the free woman. So then brethren, we are not children of the bonde woman, but of the free woman. ¶Of the exellencye of the su∣pernall graces graunted vnto the faythfull of Christe, newlye in the primytiue churche. Capitu. 43. BLessed be God the father of our Lorde Iesus Christe,Ephe.  whiche hath blessed vs with all maner of spirituall blessinges in heauenlye thinges by Chrite, to the prayse of the glory of his grace, wherewith he hathe made vs accepted in the belo∣ued: by whome we haue redempcion throughe his bloudde, euen the for∣geuenesse of synnes, accordinge to
the riches of his grace. In whom al∣o ye (after that ye hearde the worde of truthe, I meane the Gospell of youre saluation where in ye beleued) were sealed with the holye spirite of promes, whiche is the earnest of our inheritaunce, to redeme the purcha∣sed possession, and that to the lad of his glorye. But God whiche is riche in mercy thorowe his greate loue wherewith he loued vs, euen when we wer dead by synne, hath quickened vs together in Christ (for by grace are ye saued) and hathe raysed vppe together and made vs sytte together in heauenlye thynges thorowe Christe Iesus, for to shewe in tyme too come the excea∣dinge riches of his grace in kindenes to vs ward in Christe Iesu. Nowe therefore ye are no more straungers and oriners, but citysins with saints and of the hosholde of God, and are bilte vpon the foundation of the A∣postles & prophets, Iesu Christ being the head corner stone, in whom euery buildinge coupled together groweth
vnto an holye temple in the Lorde in whome ye also are builte together, and made an habitation for God in the spirit. Uto euery one of vs is geuen grace accordinge to the measure of the gift of Christe.Ephe. 4. Wherfore he saieth: He is gone vp an hye,Psal. 17. and hath ledde cap∣tiuitye captiue, and hath geuen gif∣tes vnto menne. And the verye same made some Apostles, some prophets, some Euāgelistes, some Shepeherds and some Teachers. That the saints mighte haue all thinges necessary to worke and minister with all, to the edifyinge of the bodye of Christe, tyll we euerye one (in the vnitye of faith, and knowledge of the sonne of God) growe vp vnto a perfecte man, after the measure of age of the fulnesse of Christe. Ye were an ensample to all that beleue.1. Thes. 1. For youre fayeth whiche ye haue to God, sprede her selfe abroade in all quarters, so greatelye, that it nedeth not vs to speake anye thynge at all. For they them selues shew of
you what manner of entringe in we had vnto you, and how ye turned to God frome ydols, for to serue the li∣uinge and true God, and for to looke for his sonne frome heauen, whome he raysed frome death, I meane Ie∣sus, which deliuereth vs from wrath to come. For this cause thanks we God with oute ceasinge,1. Thes. 2. because that when ye receaued of vs the worde wherewith God was preached, ye receiued it not as the worde of manne but euen as it was in deede, the woorde of God, which worketh in you that beleue. 1. Timo. 1.The grace of oure Lord was more abundant with fayth and loue which is in Christ Iesu. God saued vs, and called vs with an holy callynge,2. Timo. 1. not accordinge to oure deddes, but accordinge too hys own purpose and grace, which grace was geuen throughe Christ Iesu be∣fore the worlde was: but is now de∣clared openlye by the appearinge of oure sauioure Iesus Christe, whi∣che hathe put awaye death, and hath
broughte life and immortalitye vnto light through the gospell, wherun∣to I am appointed a preacher and A∣postell, and a teacher of the gentiles. For the whyche cause I also suffer theese thinges. Neuerthelesse I am not ashamed. For Christ gaue him selfe for vs,Titu. 2. to redeme vs frome all vnrighteous∣nesse, and to pourge vs a peculiar people vnto him selfe, feruently ge∣uen vnto good workes. For we our selues also wer in times paste vnwise,Titu. 3. disobediente, deceiued in daunger and geuen to lustes, and diuers manners of voluptiousnes, li∣uing in malitiousnes and enuy, full of hate, hatynge one an other. But after that the kindenesse and loue of oure sauioure to man warde appea∣red, not of the dedes of righteousnes which we wroughte, but of his mer∣cye he saued vs: by the fountayne of the new byrth of the holy ghost, whi∣che he shedde on vs aboundantly tho∣rowe Iesus Christ our sauioure: that we once iustifyed by his grace, shulde
be heyre of eral lye, thorowe hope. Heb. 13.We haue an altare, wherof they maye not ate whiche serue in the tabernacle. For the bodyes of thse beasts, whose bloud is brough in to the holye place, by the pryest to pourge snne, are burnt whout the tens. Therfore Iesus, to sanctifye the people with his own bloud, suf∣ferd whout the gae. ¶Of predestination, and the oreknowledge of God. Capit. 44. WE knowe that all thynges work for the best vnto them that loue God,Rom. 8. whiche are called of purpos. For those which he knewe beor, he also ordayned be∣fore, that they shuld be like fashoned vnto the shape of his sonne, that e mighte be the firt begotten sonne a∣monge manye brethren. Moreouer whiche e predestinated and appon∣ted before, them also he called. And
whhe he called, them also he ust∣ed, which e iustfed, them he also lored. What shall we then saye  these thnges? Yf God be on oure de, who can be againste vs? which paed not hi owne sonne but ga im fr vs all: how shall he not with him geue vs al things also? who shall lay any thinge to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that iustiyehe: who then shal condemne? It is Chrt whh is dead, ye rather which is ri∣en again, which is also on the right hand of God, and maketh intercessi∣on for vs. I peake not these things asthough the woorde of God hadde take non effecte.Rom. 9. For they are not all Israeli∣tes whiche came of Israell: either are they all children, because they ar the seede of Abraham. But in saac shall thy sede be called: that is to say, they whiche are the children of the fleshe, are not the chyldren of God. But the children of promes are coū∣ted the seede. For thys is a woorde of promesse, aboute thys time wyll
I come, and Sara shall haue a childe. Neither was it so with her only:Gene. 25. but also when Rebecca was with cylde by one, I meane by oure father Isa∣ac, yet the children wer borne, when they had neither done good neyther badde: that the purpose of God whi∣che is by election, migte stande, it was sayde vntoo her, not by the rea∣son of woorkes, but by grace of the caller, te elder shall serue the yon∣ger. As it is written, Iacob e loued, but Esau be hated.Mal. i. What shall we saye then? Is there anye vnrighte∣ousenesse with God? God forbydde. For e sayeth to Moses: I wyll shew mercy to whom I shewe mercye:Exo. 23. and wyll haue compassion on whome I haue compassion. So lyeth it not thē in a mans wyll, or conninge, but in the mercye of God. For the scripture sayeth vnto Pharao. Euen for thys same purpose haue I styrred the vp,Exo. 9. to shewe my power on the, and that my name myght be declared thorow out all the worlde. So hath he mer∣cye on whome he wyll, and whome
e wyll, he maketh hearde harted. Thou wylte say then vnto me. Why then blamethe he vs yet? For who can resist his wyll? But o man what art thou which disputeth with God? Shall the work say to the workman, why hast yu made me on this fashion? Hath not the potter power ouer the claye, euen of the same lompe too make one vessell vnto honoure, and an other vnto dishonoure? Euen so, god wylling to shew his wrath, and to make his power knowen suffered with longe pacience the vesselles of wrath ordayned to damnation, that he mighte declare the riches of hys glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had prepared vnto gorye. O the depenes of the aboundante wisedome and knowledge of God,Rom. 1. how vnsercheable are his iudgemen∣tes, and his wayes past finding out? for who hath knowē the minde of the lord? Or who was his counseller? E∣ther who hath geuen vnto him first, that he might be recompensed again. For of him, and thorowe him, and
for him ar all thgs. To him be honoure and glorye for euer Amen. 1. Cor. 1.Brehren looke on your callinge, howe that not manye wise men aftr the flesh, not many mighti, not many of hye degre are called: but god hath chosen the folish things of the world to conounde the wise. And God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound things which are migh∣tye: And vile thinges of the worlde, and thinges which are despised hath God chosen, ye and things of no re∣putation, for to bringe to noughe thinges of reputation, that no fleshe shoulde reioyce in his presente. For God is fayethfull by whome ye are called vntoo the flowshippe of hys sonne Iesus Chrit. God hathe chosen vs in Chiste before the foundation of the worlde was layd,Ephe. . that we should be saynts and wythoute blame before him tho∣rowe loue. And ordaynd vs before through Iesus Christe, to be heires vntoo hym selfe, accordinge to the
pleasure of his wyll, too the praise of the glorye of hys grace, where∣with he hathe mde vs accepted. In whome we are called, and pedesty∣nate according to the purpose of him which worketh all thinges after the purpose of his owne wyll: that wee whyche beleeued before in Christe, shoulde be vntoo the prayse of hys glorye. For we are his workemanshippe,Ephe 2, created in Christe Isu vntoo good workes vnto the which god ordained vs before, that we shoulde walke in them. For it is God,Phi. . whiche worketh in you both the wyl and also the dede of good wyll. Notwithstanding in a great house are not onelye vessels of golde and of syluer,2. Tim.  but also o wood and earthe, sme for honour, and some vnto dys∣honoure. But if a man pourge him selfe from suche felowes, he shall be a vessl sanctified vnto honour, mete for the Lorde, and prepared vnto all good workes.
¶ Of the iustice of God, and of the rigoure of the diuine iustice agaynst synners. Ca∣pitu. 45. Rom. 1.THe wrathe of God appeareth frome heauen againste all vn∣godlnesse and vnrighteousnes of mn, whiche with holde the truth of god in vrighteousnes, seing what maye be knowen of God, that same is manifst amonge them. For God did shewe it vnto them. Rom. 2.For God wyll rewarde euery man accordinge to his deedes, that is to saye, prayse, honoure, and immorta∣lity, to them which continue in good doinge and seeke eternall lyfe. But vnto them that are rbellious and dis∣obey the truth, and folowe iniquity, shall come indignation, and wrathe, tribulation and anguishe, vpon the soule of euery man, that doth euyll, of the Iewe first, and also of the gen∣tile. For there is no parcialitye with God. But who soeuer hathe synned without the lawe, shall perish with∣out
lawe. And as many as haue sin∣nes vnder the lawe, shall be iudged by the law. For before God they are not righteous which heare th lawe, but the doers of the lawe shall be iu∣stifyed. For if the gentiles whiche haue no law do of nature the things contayned in the lawe: then they ha∣uinge no lawe, are lawe vnto them selues, whiche shewe the dede of the lawe written in their hartes, whyle their conscince beareth witnes vnto them, and also their thoughtes, accu∣singe one on other or excusinge, at the day when God shall iudge the se∣cretes of men by Iesus Christ accor∣dinge to my gospll. God is true, and all men lyars,Rom. 3. as it is written. That thou mightest be iustified in thy sayinge,psal. 50. and shouldest uercome when thou art iudged. Yf our vnrighteousenes make the righ∣teousenesse of God more excellente, what shal we saye? is God vnrighte∣ouse whiche take the vengeaunce. I speake after the maner of men, God forbydde. For howe then shall God
iudge the worlde? Yf the veritye of God appeare more xcellent thorow my lyfe vnto his prayse, whye am I hence foorth iudged a siner? And say not rather (as men speake euyl of vs) let vs do euyll that good maye come thereof. Whose dampnation is iust. What saye we then? Are we better then they? No, in no wise. For we haue alreadye proued. &c. Euery manne shall receaue his re∣warde accordinge to his laboure.. Cor. 3. s a wyse builder haue I layd the foun∣dation, let euerye manne take hde howe hee buyldethe vppon. For o∣ther oundation canne no man laye, then that which is laid, which is Ie∣sus Christ. Yf any manne builde on this foundation golde, syluer, preci∣ous stones, tymber, haye or stoble, euery mans worke shall appear. For the day shall declare it, and it shalbe shewed in fier. And the fyer shall trye euerye mannes worke what it is. Yf anye mans worke that he hath buylt vppon, byde, he shall receaue a re∣warde. Yf anye mans worke burne,
he shall suffer losse, but he shall be safe him selfe, neuerthelesse yet, as it were thorow fire. We muste all appeare before the iudgemente seate of Christe,2. Cor. 5. that e∣uerye man maye receaue the workes of his bodye accordinge to that hee hathe done, whether it be good or badde. For god loketh on no mans person.Gala. . It is verelye a righteous thynge with God,2. Thes. . to recompence tribulation to them that trouble you: and to you whiche are troubled reast with vs, when the Lord Iesu Christ shal shew hym selfe frome heauen wyth hys mightye Aungels, in flaminge fire, rendringe vengeaunce vnto them, that knowe not God, and too them that obeye not the Gospell of oure Lorde Iesus Christe. Which shall be punyshed with euerlastinge damna∣tion from the presence of the Lorde, and frome the glorye of his power, when he shal come to be gloryfied in his sainctes, and to be made maruay∣lous in all them that beleeue because
oure testimonye that we had to you, was beleued euen the same daye that we preached it. Some mennes sinnes are open before hande,1. Timo. 5. and goo before vntoo iudgemente. Some mens synnes fo∣lowe after. Likewise also good wor∣kes are manifeste before hande, and they that be otherwyse canne not be hydde. Heb. 3.Wherfore I was greued with this generation and sayed. They erre e∣uer in their hartes,Psal. 94. they verelye haue not knowen my wayes, so yt I sware in my wrath, that they shuld not en∣ter in to my reaste. Some when they heard, rebelled how be it not all that came oute of Egypte vnder Moses. But with whome was he displeased fortye yeares? was he not displeased with them that synned, whose carka∣ses were ouerthrowen in the desert? To whome sware he that they shuld not enter in to his reast. But vntoo them, that beleued not? And we see, that they coulde not enter in, because of vnbeleue.
A fearefull lokinge for iudgement and violente fyre,Heb. 10. which shal deuou the aduersaries. For we knowe hm that hath sayed, vengeaunce belon∣geth vntoo me, and I wyll recom∣pence.Deu. 32. And agayne the Lorde shall iudge hys people. For yet a vry lyttle whyle, and he that shall come wyll come, and wyll not tarye. Whiche wyll lyghten thinges that are hydde in darckenes,1. Cor. 4. and open the ounsayles of the heartes. &c. ¶Of the vnspeakeable mercy of God vntoo mankynde. And of Christes meke redemp∣tion of manne. Capit. 46. YE are iustyyed freelye by the grace of God,Rom. . throughe the re∣demption that is in Christ Ie∣su, whome God hathe made a seate of mercye, throughe fayeth in his bloude, to shewe the righteous∣nes which before him is of valure, in that he forgeueth the synnes that are
passed which God did suffer o shewe at this time, that he migte be coun∣ted iust, and a iustifiar of him which beleueth on Iesus. Which was deliuered for our sin∣nes,Rom. 4. and rose agayne for to iustifye vs. Rom. 5.For when we were yet weake ac∣cordinge to the time, Christ dyed for vs, whiche were vngodlye. Yet ace wyll any manne dye for a rghteous man. Paraduenture for a good man durste a manne dye. But God setteth out his loue that he hath to vs, seing that whyle wee were yet synners, Christe died for vs, much more then nowe (seinge we are iustified in hys bloud) shall we be saued from wrath thorowe him. For if when we were ennemies, we were recnciled to god by the death of his sonne, much more seinge we are reconciled, we shall be preserued by his life. . Cor. 5.Aste minge this, that if one be dead for all, then are all deade, and Christ dyed for all, that they whiche lyue,
shoulde not hence oorthe lyue vnto them selues, but vnto him, why∣che dyed for them, and rose agayne. Therefore if anye man he in Christ, he is a newe creature. Olde thinges are passed awaye. Bholde all thin∣gs are beme nwe. Neuerthe∣lesse all thinges are of God, whiche hathe reconcild vs vntoo hm selfe, by Iesus Christe, and hathe geuen vnto vs he offyce too preache the at∣tonment. For god was in Chri, and made agemnt betwene the world and him selfe, and impued not their sinnes vnto them, and hathe cm∣mytted too vs the offce of reconcilia∣tion. Nowe then are we messengers in the roume of Christe. Euen as thoughe God dyd beseeche you tho∣rowe vs. So praye we you in Chri∣stes steade, that ye be atone wi g: For he hathe made hm to be synne for vs, whiche knewe no synne, that we by hys meanes shoulde bee that ryghteousenesse whic bore God is alowed.
Whyche gaue hym selfe for oure sinnes,Gala. 1. to deliuer vs frome this pre∣sente euyll world, throughe the wyl of god our father, to whom be praise for euer and euer Amen. Christ hath redemed and deliuered vs frome the curse of the lawe,Gala. 3. and was made a cursed for vs. For it is written. Cursed is euerye one that hangeth on tree,Deu. 21. that the blessinge of Abraham might come on the gen∣tiles through Iesus Christ, & that we might receaue the promes of the spi∣rit through fayeth. Christ is our peace, whiche made of both one,Ephe. 2. and hath broken down ye wall that was a sop betwene vs and hath also put awai thorow his flesh ye cause of hatred (that is to saye, the lawe of commaundementes contai∣ned in the lawe written) for to make of twayne one new man in him selfe so makinge peace, and to reconcyle bothe vnto God in one bodye thorow his crosse, and slewe hatered therby, and came and preached peace to you whiche were a farre of, and to them
that were nye. For thorow him we bothe hau an open waye in, in one spirite vnto the father. For it pleased the father y• in Christ shuld all fulnes dwell,Collo. . and by him to reconcile al thing vnto him selfe and to set at peace by him, throughe the bloude of his crosse, bothe thinges in heauen and thinges in earthe. And you (which were in times past straū∣gers and ennemyes, because youre myndes were set in euyll woorkes) hath he nowe reconciled in the body of his flesh thorow death to make you holy, vnblameable, and without faut in his owne sight. And ye whiche were deade in sinneCollo. . through the vncircumision of your fleshe, hath he quickened with him, and hath forgeuē vs al our trespases thth put out the hand writing that was against vs, contained in the law written.1. Timo. 1. And y• hath he taken out of yt way, & hath fastened it to his crosse,  hath spoiled rule and power, & hath made a shew of them openly, & hath triumphed ouer thē in his own persō.
1. Timo. 1.This is a rue sayinge, and by all manes worthy to be receaued, that Christ Iesus came in to the worlde to saue sinners. 1. Timo. 1.For ther is one God, and one me∣diator, betwne God and mā, which is the man Christ Iesu, which gaue him self, a raunsome for all men, that it shuld be testified at his time, wher vnto I am oraynd a preacher and an Apostle. I tell the truth in Christ and lye not, beinge the teacher of the gentyles in faith and veritye. ¶Of diuers misteries of Christ that is, of his incarnation, nauiy, humility, pouerty passion, resurrec∣tion, apparition, ascention, and glo∣rification. And also of the effec∣tes of his saluiferous pas∣sion. Capitu. 47. BUt hym that was made lesse then the Aungels, we see that it was Iesus,Heb. 2. which is crouned with glory, and honoure for the suf∣feringe of death, that he by the grace of God, shoulde taste o deathe for all
men. For it became him, for whome are all thinges, after that he hadde broughte manye sonnes vnto glory, that he should make the Lord of their saluation perfecte thorowe ofering.Psal. 21. For he that sanctifeth, and thei whi∣che sanctified are al of one. For whi∣che causes sake he is not a shamed to call them brethren,Esa. 8. sayinge, I wyll declare thy name vnto my brethren, and in the myds of the congregation wil I praise the. And againe, I wyll put my truste in him. And againe be∣hold hear am I, and the children whi¦che god hath geuen me. For as much then as the children were partakers of fleshe and bloude, he also him selfe likewise toke part with them. For to put doun thorow death him that had Lordeship ouer death, that is to say, the deuil, and that he mighte deliuer them, which thorowe feare of death were all theyr lyfe tyme in daun∣ger of bondage. For he in no place aketh on hym the Aungels: but the eede of Abraham taketh he on him. Wherefore in all thinges it became
him to be made lyke vntoo his bree∣thren, that he mighte be mercyfull, and a faithfull hye prieste in thinges concerninge God, for to pourge the peoples sinnes. Heb. 9.But Christe beinge an hye prieste of good thinges too come, came by a greater & a more perfecte tabernacle not made with hands, y• is to say, not of this maner building, nether by the bloud of gotes and calues, but by his owne bloudde, he entred in ones for all, in to the holye place and founde etternall redēption. For if the bloud of oxen and of goetes, and the ashes of an heyfer, when it was sprincled purified the vncleane, as touchynge the purifying of the flesh, how much more shall the bloude of Christ (whi∣thorowe the eternall spirite, offered him self without spot to god) pourge your consciences from deade workes for to serue the lyuing God? And for this cause is he the mediator of the new Tstamente, that thorow death whiche chaunced for the redemption of those transgrssours that were in
the firste Testamente, they whiche were called, might receaue the pro∣mes of eternall inheritaunce. For whersoeuer is a Testamēt ther must be also the death o him that maketh ye Testament, for the testamēt taketh auctoritye when men are deade. For it is of no value as longe as he that made it, is alyue. For which cause also, neither that firste Testamente was ordayned withoute bloude. For when all the commaundements wer redde of Moses to all the people, he toke the bloud of calues and of gotes, with water and purple wull and y∣sope, and sprinckeled both the boke and al the people, sayinge: this is the bloud of the Testament whyche God hathe appoynte vnto you. Moreo∣uer he sprinckled the tabernacle with bloude also, and all the ministringe essels. And also almost all thinges, are by the lawe pourged with bloud, nd withoute sheddinge of bloude is no remission. It is then neede that the similitudes of heauenlye thinges be purifyed with suche thinges, but
the heunly things them selues are puryied with beter sacriyces then are those. For Chiste is not entred in to the holye places that are made with handes, whiche are but simi∣udes of true thinges: but is entred in to verye heauen, fo too appeare now in the sighte of God for vs: not to offer him ele often, as the ygh prie entreth in to the olye place e∣urye year with traunge bloud, fo then mute bee haue oten suffered sence the world began. But nowe in the ende of the worlde hath e ap∣peared once to put lyne to lighte, by the offeringe v of him selfe. And as it is appoined vnto men that the shall once dye, and then commeth the iudgemente, euen so Christe was ones offered to take away the sinnes of manye, and vnto them that looke for him, shall e appear again with∣oute synne vnto saluation. There is then no dampnation too them which are in Christ Iesu,Rom. . whi∣che walke not after the leshe. For God nte his sonne in the simyli∣tude
of synull flehe, and by synne dampned synne in the he. &c. I deliured vnto you tat, which I reaceaued:1. Cor. 15. howe that Christe dyed for our sinnes, agreege to the scrip∣tures. And that he was urid and that he rose agayne the thyr ay ac∣cordinge too the criptures: and that he was seene of Cephas, then of the twelue. After that, he was sene of more then fyue hundred brethren at once, of whiche, manye remayne vn∣to this daye, and manye are fallen a slepe. After tha, he appeared too Iames, then to all the Apostels. And laste of all, he was seene of me, as of one that was borne out of due yme. Thereore remember that esus Christe beinge of the seede of Daid,2. Timo. 2. rose agayne frome deathe accordinge to my gospell, wherein I suffr trou∣ble as an euyl doar, but the wod of God is not bounde. But when the me was fll come God sent his son borne of a woman and made bond vno the law:Gala 4. that to redeme thē which were vnder ye law
that we thorowe election mighte re∣ceaue the inerytaunce that belon∣geth vnto the naturall sonnes. 2. Cor. .Ye know the liberality of our Lord Iesus Christ, which though he were rich, yet for your sakes became poore that ye thorow his pouerye, might be made riche. Hb. 6.Whether the fre runner is for vs entred in, I mean Iesus that is made an hye priest for euer, after the order of Melchisedeh. That he ascended, what meaneth it, but that he also dsended first in too the lowest pares of the earthe.Ephe. 4 He that descended, is euen the same al∣so, that ascended vppe, euen aboue all heauens, to fulfyll all things. Phi. .The whiche beinge in the shape of God, thoughte it no robberye to be equall wyth God. Neuerthelesse he made him selfe of no reputation, and toke on him the shape of a seruaunt, and became like vnto men, and was founde in his apparell as a man. He humbled him selfe, and became obe∣dient vnto the deathe, euen the death
of the crosse. Wherfore God hath x∣alted him, and geuen him a name a∣boue all names, that in the name of Iesus shoulde euery knee owe, both of thinges in heauen and thinges in earth, and thinges vnder the earth, and that all tonges shoulde confesse that Iesus Christ is the Lorde, vnto the prayse of God the father. And wythoute naye,1. Timo. . greate is that misterye of Godlynesse. God was shewed in the flesh, was iustified in the spirite, was seene of Aungels was preached vnto the gentiles, was beleued on in the earth, and receiued vp in glorye. ¶ That Christ is the head, not onely of the churche militant, but also of the triumphante. And of the mysticall vntitye of the churche, And of the excellency and lad of Christ. Capitu. 48.
I Saye to euerye man among you,Rom. 12. that no man esteme of him selfe more, then it becommeth hym to esteeme, but accordynge as God hathe dealte o euerye man the measure of fayeth. For as we haue many mbrs in one body, and all members haue not one office: so we beynge manye, are one bodye in Christe, and eurye manne amonge oure selues, one an others mem∣bers. 1. Cor. 1.For as the bodye is one, and hathe manye members. &c. vt supra. Capi. 41. Nowe is there no Iewe neyther gentyle,Gala. 3. there is neither bonde nor ree, there is nither man nor wo∣man. But ye are all one thinge in Christe. Whome God sette on hys ryghte hand in heauenly hinges,Ephe 1. aboue all rule, power, and myghte, and do∣mination, and aboue all names that are named, not in thys worlde one∣lye, but also in the worlde to come, and hathe put all thynges vnder hys
eete, and hath made hym aboue all thinges the headde of the congrega∣tion, which is hi bodye, and the ful∣nesse of him, that ylleth all in all thinges. Whiche is the heade, that is to say Christe,Ephe. 4. in whome all he bode is coupled and knit together in euerye ioynte, wherewith one minirete to an other, accordynge too the ope∣ration as euery parte hath his mea∣sure, and increaseth the bodye, vn∣to the edifyinge of it selfe in loue. For Christ is the heade o the con∣gregation,Ephe. 5. and the same is the saui∣oure of the bodye. Which is the ymage o the inuisy∣ble God,Collo. . firste begotten of all crea∣tures. For by him were all thinges created, thinges hat are in heauen, and thynges that are in the earthe, things visyble, and thigs inuisible, whether thei be maiesty, or lordship, either rule or power. All thinges are created by him, and in hym, and he is before all thinges, and in him all
thinges haue their beginninge. And he is the heade of the bodye, that is to wytte, of the congregation, he is the beginninge and first begotten of the dead, that in all things he might haue the preheminence. Collo. .For in him dwelleth all the fulnes of the Godheadde bodilye, and ye are complete in him whiche is the heade of all rule and power. Heb. .He hath not vnto the Aungels put in ubiectyon the worlde too come, wherof we speake. But one in a cer∣tayn place wytnesseth, sayinge: what is man, that thou art so myndefull of hm?Psal. 8. and the sonne of manne that thou visitest hym? After that thou haddest for a season made him lowr then the Aungels, thou crounest him with hooure and glorye, and hast set him aboue the workes of thy han∣des. Thou hast put all thinge in sub∣iection vnder his fete. In that he put all thinges vnder him, he lefte no∣thing that is not put vnder him. Ne∣uerthelesse we yet se not all thinges to be subdued vno him.
Whiche was faythfull to him that made him,Heb. . euen as was Moses in al his house. And yet was this manne counted worthy of more glorye thn Moses: In as muche as he whiche hathe prepared he honse, hath most honour in the house. Euery house is prepared of some man. But he hat ordayned at things, is God. And Mo∣ses berelye was aythfull in all hys house, as a minyster, to beare wyt∣nesse of the thinges, which shoulde be spoken afterwardes. But Christe as a sonne, hath rule ouer the house, whose house are we, so that we holde faste the confience and the rioy∣synge of that hope, vnto the ende. ¶Of the dyuinitye and emy∣nence of the onelye begotten sonne of God. Ca∣piu. 49. GOd hathe spoken vntoo vs by his sonne,Heb. . whome hee hathe made heiere of all thinges, by whom also he made the world, which
onne beinge the brightenesse of his glorye, and verye ymage of his sub∣staunce bearinge vp all thinges with the worde of his power, hath in his owne person pourged oure synnes, and is sytten on the ryghte hande of his maiestye on ye, and is more e∣cellene then the Aungelles, in as much as he hath by inheritaunce ob∣tayned an eellener name then they haue. For vnto which of the Aungels sayed he at anye tyme.Psal. 2. Thou art my sonne, this daye begat I the. And and agayn, I wyll be his father, and he shall be my sonne. And agayne, when he bringeth in the first begottē son in to the world, he sayth. And all the Aungels of God shall worshippe him.Psal. 96. psal. 103. psal. 44. And of the Aungels he saith. He maketh his Aungels spiris and hys ministers lames of fyre. But vntoo the son he saith. God, thy seate shalbe for euer and euer. The cepter of thy kingdome is a righte cepter.psal. 101. Thou hast loued righteousenesse and haed iniquity. Wherfore god which is thy god hathe anointed the with the oyle
of gladnesse aou hy flowes. And thou Lord in the beginnyng hast laid the foundation of the earth. And the heauens are the wrks. Th shall perishe, but thou shal endur.psal. 109. h all shal ware old as doth a gament, and as a estur shal tou chaunge hem, and they shalbe chaunged. But thou art alwayes, and hy yeas al not ayle. Unto whche of the Aun∣gels sayde he at anye me: Syn my ryghte hade, tyll I make hne enemies thy fo sl? r they not all ministringe sps sente to ini∣ster for theyr sakes, whic sll be eers of saluaion? For the word of god is qucke,Heb. 4. and mghtye in operan, and sarpr then anye : and en∣freth through, euē vnto the diudige a sonder of the soule and the spirite, and of the oyntes, and the mar: and iudgethe the thoughtes and he intentes of the heart, neither is ther any creature inuisible in the sight of it. For all thynges are naked and bare vnto the eyes of him, of whom
we speaek. Heb. 13.For Iesus Christe yesterdaye and to daye, and the same continueth for euer. Rom. 9.Whiche is God ouer all thinges blessed for euer. Phi. 2.Whiche beinge in the shape of god thoughte it not robberye to be equall with God. &c. ¶Of the nisufficiencye & feble∣nesse of the law of Moses, too saue manne withoute fayth and grace. Capi.+tu. 50. Rom. 3.BY the deedes of the lawe, shall no flesh be iustifyed in the sight of God. For by the lawe com∣meth the knowledge of sinne. Nowe verelye is the ryghteousenesse that commeth of God declared withoute the fulfyllinge of the lawe, hauinge witnes yet of the law and of the pro∣phetes. The righteousnes no doubt which is good before God, commeth by the fayth of Iesus Christ vnto all
nd vppon all that beleeue. There is no difference: for all hue sinned, and lacke the prayse that is of valure before God. Where is thn, thy reioysinge? It is excluded. By what lawe? By the lawe of workes? Naye, but by the lawe of fayth. For we suppose that a man is iustified by sayeth without the dedes of the law. Is e the God of the Iewes onely, is he not also the God of the gentiles? Yes, euen of the gentiles also. For it is God onelye which iustifieth cir∣cumcision which is of fayth, and vn∣circumcision thorowe faith. Do we then destroye the lawe thorow faithe God forbyd. But we rather mayne∣tayne the lawe. What shall we saye then, that A∣brahame oure father as partayninge to the fleshe,Rom. 4, did fynde? Yf Abraham were iustified by dedes, then hath he wherin to reioyce: but not with god. For what saith the scripture. Abra∣ham beleeued God, and it was coun∣ted vnto him for righteousenes. To him that worketh,Gene. 15. is the reward not
reckened of auoue, but o duty. To him that wort not, but bleueth on him that iusifieth the vngodlye, is his fayth cond for rightouns Eun as auid desribth the bles∣sedfulnss of the manne vnto whom od ascribeth righteousenesse wyth∣oute deedes. Blssd are they whose vnrightousnss are frgeun, and whose sinnes ar courd. Blessd is that manne to whome oure Lord im∣puteth no ynne. Came this blessed∣nsse then vpon the circumcised, or vpon the vncircumcised? we saye ve∣elye howe that fayeth was reckend vntoo Abraham for righteousness. Howe was it rckened? In the time of circumcision, or in the time before he was circumcised? Not in the time of circumcision, but when he was yet vncircumcised. And he receaued the sygne of circumcysion, as a seale of te righteousens, which is by fayth whiche faieth he had yet beynge vn∣circumcisd: that he should be the fa∣ther of all them that beleue, tough they be not circumcied, that righe∣ousnesse
mighe be imputed to them also: and that he might be th father of the circumcisd, not because they are circumcisd only, but because thei walke also in th steppes of that fay∣eth that was in our father Abraham before the time of circumcision. For the promes that he shul be the heier of the worlde, was not geuen to A∣braham, or to his seede thorowe the lawe: but thorowe the righteousnes which commeth of fayth. For if they which are of the law, be heyers, then is fayth but vayne, and the proms of none effect. Because the law causeth wrathe. For where no lawe is, there is no transgression. Therfore by fayeth is the inheritaunce geuen, that it might come of fauour, and the promes might be sure to all the sde. Not to them onely whiche are of the law, but also to them which are of the faith of Abraham, which is the father of vs all. As it is written. I haue made the a father to many nations,Gee. 17. euen before God whome thou hast beleued, which quickeneth
the deade, and calleth those thynges which he not as thoughe they were. Rom. 5.For euen vnto the time of the law, was synne in the worlde, but sinne was not regarded, as longe as there was no lawe. For the lawe in the meane time entrd in, that syn shuld encrease. Rom. 7.Remmber ye not brethren (I speake to them that know the lawe) how that the law hath power ouer a mā as long as it endureth, for the wo¦man whch is in subiection to a man is bounde by the lawe to the manne, as longe as he lyuth. Yf the man be deade, she is lowsd frome th lawe of the man. So that she is no wed∣locke breaker, though she couple her selfe with an other man. Euen so ye my brethren are deadde concerninge the lawe, by the body of Christ, that ye shoulde be coupled to an other. (I meane to him that is rysen agayne frome death) that we shoulde bring foorthe frute vnto God. For when we wer in the flesh, the lustes of sinne whiche were stirred vppe by the law,
aygned in oure members, to bring foorth frute vnto deathe. But now we are deliuered from the lawe, and deade from that, wher vnto we were in bondage, that we shoulde srue in a newe conuersation of the spirite. and not in the old conuersation of the letter What shall we say then?  the law synne? God forbyd: but I knewe not what synne meante, but by the lawe. For I had not knowen what lust had meante excepte the lawe had sayed, thou shalte not luste: but sinne toke an occasion by the meanes of the commaundemente, and wroughte in me all manner of concupiscence. For verely without the lawe, synne was deade. I ones liued withoute lawe: but when the cōmaundement came, synne reuiued, and I was dead. And the verye same commaundemente whiche was ordained vnto lyfe, was founde to be vntoo me an occasion of death. For sinn tok occasion by th the meanes of the commaundement, and so disceaued me, and by the selfe commaundemente slewe me. Wher∣fore
the lawe is holye, and the com∣maundemente iuse and good. Was that then which is good, made death vnto me? God for bydde. But synne was deathe vnto me, that it might appeare how that synne by the mea∣nes of that whyche is good, hadde wroughte deathe in me, that synne which is vnder the commaundement mighte be out of measure sinfull. For the lawe of the spirite that bringeth life throughe Iesus Christ,Rom. . hath deliuered me frome the lawe of sinne and death. 1 Cor. 6.All thinges are lawefull vnto me, bu all thinges are not profytable. I may do all thing as, but I wyll be broughte vnder no mans power. ¶ Of the erfection and excel∣lency of the eangelcall lawe, a∣boue the aw witten. Capiu. 51. . Cor. 3.IF the minystration of deathe throughe the letters figured in ones was glorious, s that
the children of Israell coulde not be∣holde the face of Moses for the glorye of his countenaunce, whiche glorye neuerthelesse is done awaye, why shall not the ministration of the spi∣rite be muche mor glorious? For i the ministring of condempnation b glorious, muche more doeth the mi∣nistration of righteousenes eceade in glorye. For no doubte that which was there glorified, is not once glo∣ryfied in respecte of this eceading glorye. Then if that whiche is de∣stroyed was glorious, muche mor shall that whiche remayneth be glo∣ryous. Then the commaundemente that wente are, is disanulled, because of her weaknes and vnprofitablenes.Heb. 7. For the lawe made nothinge perect but was an introduction of a better hope, by which hope, we drawe ny vnto God. And for this cause it  a better hope, that it was not promy∣sed without an othe,Heb. 8. now hath Christ optayned a more excellente offyce,
in as muche as he is the mediator of a better Testamente, whiche was made for better promises. For if that first Testament had bene fautelesse, then shuld no place haue bene sought for the second. For in rebuking them he sayeth: Beholde the dayes wyll come, sayeth the Lorde, and I wyll fynihe vppon the house of Israell,Iere. 3. and vppon the house of Iuda, a new Testament, not lyke the Testament that I made with their fathers at that time when I tooke them by the handes, to leade them out of the land of Egipte. For they continued not in my Testamente, and I regarded them not sayeth the Lorde. For this is the Testamente that I wyll make with the house of Israell. After those dayes sayeth the Lorde. I wyll pt my lawes in theyr myndes, and in their heartes I wyll wryte them, and I wyll be their God, and they shall be my people. And they shall not teache euerye manne his neygh∣boure, and euery manne his brother, saying, knowe the Lorde. For they
hall knowe me. from the least to the moste of them. For I wyll be mer∣cifull ouer their vnrigoteousnes and on theyr sinnes, and o their iniqui∣ties. In that he sayeth a newe Te∣stamente, he hathe abrogate the old, nowe that whiche is disanulled and wared olde, is readye to vanyshe a∣waye. ¶Of the insufficiencye and re∣probation of the sacrifyce of the lawe. And of the efficacye of the sacryfice of the nwe lawe. Ca∣pitu. 52. FOr the lawe whiche hath but the shadowe of good thynges to come,H. 1 and not the thinges in theyr owne fashion, canne neuer with the sarifices whiche they offer yeare by yeare continually, make the commers there vnto perfaycte. For would not then those sacrifices haue ceased to haue bene offered, because that the offerers once spourged, shuld
haue hadde no more conscyences of sinnes. Neuerthelesse in those sacri∣fices is there mention made of sinnes euerye yeare. For it is vnpossyble that the bloude of oxen and of gotes shoulde take awaye synnes. Wher∣fore comminge in to the worlde. He sayeth. Sacrifice and offeringe thou wouldest not haue.Psal. 39. But a bodye hast thou ordayned me. In sacrifices and synne offeringe thou haste no lust. Then I sayed. Lo I come. In the che∣es of the boke, it is written of me, that I shoulde do thy wyll. O God. Aboue when he hadde sayde sacrifice and offeringe,sal. 1. and burnte sacrifice, and synne offeringes thou wouldest not haue, neither hast alowed (whi∣che yet are offered by the lawe) and then sayed. Lo I come to do thy wyl o God He takethe awaye the fyrst to stablish the latter. By the which wyl we are sanctified, by the offeringe of the body of Iesus Christ once for all. And euery priest is ready daylye mi∣nistringe, and often times offereth one manner of offeringe whiche can
neuer take awaye synnes. But thys man after he had offered one sacrifice for sinnes, sat him doune for euer on the righte hand of god, & from hence foorthe aryeth tyll his foes be made his fote stole. For with one offering hath he made perfete for euer, them that are sanctified. And the holye ghost also beareth vs recorde of this, euen when hee tolde before. This is the Testamente I wyll make vnto them,Iere 31. after those dayes sayeth the Lorde. I wyll put my lawes in theyr heartes and in their minde I wyll write them, and theyr syns and iniquities wil I remember no more. And where remission of these things is, ther is no more offering for synne. There was first a tabernacle made &c. vt supra. Ca. 37.Heb . When these things wer thus ordai∣ned, the priestes went alwayes in to the first tabernacle, and executed the seruice of God. But in to the seconde wente the hyghe prieste alone, ones euerye yeare, and not wythoute bloud, which he offered for him selfe.
and for the ignoraunce of the people. Wherewith the holye ghost this sig∣nifyed, that the way of the holy thin∣ges was not yet opened, whyle as yet the first tabernacle was standing. Whiche was a similitude, for the time presente, and in which were of∣fered giftes and sacrifices that could not make the minister perfecte, as partayninge too the conscience with onelye meates and drynckes and di∣uers wesshynges and iustifyinges of the fleshe, which were ordained vntil the time of reformation. ¶Yet agayne of the insufficy∣ency & imperfection of the law and of the ceasing & laying doune of the thinges there of in the tyme of the newe lawe. Capitu. 53. Gala. 2.I Wente vppe to Ierusalem by reuelation and cōmened with them of the Gospell, whiche I preached amonge the gentiles: but
bewene oure selues with them whi∣che were counted chiefe, least I huld haue ben thought that I shuld runne or hadde runne in vayne. Also Titus which was with me, though he wer a Greeke, yet was not compelled to be circumcised, and that because of incommers beynge false breethren, which came in amonge to spye oute our lyberty which we haue in Christ Ies, that they mighte bringe vs in to bondage. To whome we gaue no roume, no not for the space of an houre, as concerninge to be brought in too subiection: and that because that the truthe of the Gospell might continue with you. They which se∣med to be somewhat added nothinge too me. But contrarye wyse, when they sawe that the Gospell euer the vncircumcision was committed vnto me, as the gospell ouer the circumci∣sion was vnto Peter (for he that was mighty in Peter in the Apostelshippe uer the circumcision, the same was mightye in me amonge the gentiles) and therefore when they perceaued
the grace that was geuen vntoo me, then Iames, Cephas, and Iohn, which seemed to be pillers, gae to me and Barnabas the right hands, and agreed with vs, that we should preache among the heahen, and they among the Iewes, warninge onely that we should remember the poore. Whiche thinge also I was diligente to do. And when Peter was come to Antyoche, I wythstode him in the face. for he was worthye too be bla∣med. For yer that certayne came from Iames, he eate with the gen∣tiles. But when they were come, he withdrewe and seperated him selfe, earing them whiche were of the cir∣cumcision. And the other Iewes disē∣bled like wise, in so much that Bar∣nabs was brought in to their simu∣lation also. But when I sawe that thei went not the rightway after the ruth of the gospel. I said vnto Peter before all men, if thou being a Iew, liuest after the maner of the gentiles, and not as do the Iewes: why causest thou the gentiles to liue as do the Ie∣wes:
knowings that a man is not i∣ified by the dedes of the law, but by the faith of Iesus Christ. And thre∣fore we beleued on Iesus Christ, at we mighte be iusified by  aith of Chrise, and not by the deedes of the lawe, because that by the ddes of the law, no flesh can be ustified. Yf then we wyl seke to be made rightes by Christ, w our seles are found sin∣nrs, is not then Christe the mini∣ster of synne? God forbydde. For if I bylde agayne that whyche I de∣stroyed, then make I my selfe a tre∣spaser, but I throughe the lawe, am deade to the lawe: that I mighte lyue vnto God. O folish Galathians:Gala. 3. who hath be∣witched you, that ye shuld not beleue the truthe? To whom Iesus Christe was described before the eies & amōg you crucified. This onelye woulde I learne of you, receiued ye the spirite by the deedes of the lawe? or elles by preaching of y• faith, re ye so nwise that after ye haue begonne in the spirit, ye wold now ende in the flesh?
So manye thinges then ye haue suf∣fered in vayne, if that be vayne, whi∣che ministred to you the spirite, and worketh miracles amonge you, doth he it throughe the dedes of the lawe, or by preachynge of the fayethe? For as many as are vnder the dedes of the lawe, are vnder maledic∣tion. For it is wrytten. Cursed is euerye man,Deu. 37. that continueth not in all thinges which are written in the booke of the lawe, too fulfyll them. That no man is iustified by the law in the sighte of God, is euident. For the iust shall lyue by fayth. The law is not of fayth, but the man that ful∣fyllethe the thinges conteined in the lawe, shall lyue by them. Brethren I wil speake after the maner of men. Thoughe it be but a mannes Testa∣mente, yet no man despiseth it, or addeth anye thinge thereto, when it is once alowed. To Abraham and his sede were the promises made. He saith not in the sede as in many, but in the sede as in one, which is Christ. This I saye that the lawe which be∣ganne
afterwarde beyonde. 400. and 30. yeares, doth not disanull the Te∣stamente that was confyrmed afore of God vnto Christe warde, to make the promes of none effect. For if the inheritaunce come of the lawe, it cō∣meth not of promes. But God gaue it vnto Abrahā by promes. Wherfore then serueth the law? The lawe was added because of transgression (til the sede came to whiche the promes was made) & it was ordianed bi Angels in the hand of a mediator. A mediator is not a mediator of one. But God is one. Is the lawe then againste the promes of God? God forbyd. Howe be it, if there had bene a lawe geuen which coulde haue geuen lyfe, then no doubte righteousnes shoulde haue come by the lawe. But the scripture concluded all thinges vnder synne, that the promes by the fayeth of Ie∣sus Christe, shoulde be geuen vntoo them that beleue. Before that fayth came, we were kepte and shut vppe vnder the lawe, vnto the fayth whi∣che shoulde afterwarde be declared.
Wherefore the lawe was our scole∣master vnto the ime of Christ, that we myghte b made ryghteouse by fayth. But after that ayth is come, now are we no longer vnder a scole∣master. We knowe that the lawe is goo, if a man vse it lawfullye,. Tim. . vnderstan∣dinge this, how hat the lawe is not geuen vnto a righteous man. But to the vnrighteous &c. ¶ Of the cessation and ende o circumcison, and other obserua∣tions of the law, in the time of the promulgation of the gospell. Capit. 54. STande fae, therefore in he libertye, wherewith Christe hath made vs free,Gala. 5. and wrap not your selues againe in the yoke of bondage. Behold I Paule saye vnto you that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profyt you nothinge at all. I testifye agyne to euery man which is circumcised, y• he is bound to kepe
the whole lawe. Ye are gone qyte from Christ as manye as are iustif∣d by the lawe, and are fallen from grace. Ye did runn well, who was a let vnto you, that ye shuld not obey the truth? Euen that counsel, that is not of him, that called you, I haue trust toward you in the Lord, that ye wyll be none other wise minded. He that troubleth you shal bear his iud∣gement what so euer he be. Brethrē if I yet preache circumcision, why do I then yet suffer persecution? For then hadde the offence whyche the crosse geueth, ceased. I would to God they were seperaed from you, which trouble you. Breethren ye were cal∣led in too lybertye, onelye lette not youre liberty be an occasyon vntoo the fleshe, but in loue serue one an other. As many as desire to please carnal∣lye, they constraine you to be circum∣cised, onelye because they would not suffer persecution with the crosse of Christ. For they them selues which are circumised, kep not the lawe,
but desire too haue you circumcised, that they might reioyce in your flesh. For in Christe Iesu neyther circum∣cision aualeth any thnge at all nor vncyrcumcysion, but a newe crea∣ture. Yf ye be ledde to the spirit, then are ye not vnder the law.Gala. 5. And I saye that the heier as longe as he is a child differeth not frō a ser∣uaunte,Gala 4. thoughe he be Lorde of all, but is vnder tuters & gouernrs vn∣tyl the time appoynted of the father. Euen so we, as long as we wer chil∣dren, were in bondage vnder the or∣dinaunces of the worlde. Ye obserue dayes, and monethes, and times, and yeares. I am in feare of you, leaste I haue bestowed on you laboure in vayne. Breethren I beseche you, be as I am, For I am as ye are Ye haue not hurte me at all. Ye knowe how throughe infirmitye of the fleh. I preached the Gospell vnto you, at the fyrste. And my temptation which I suffered by reason of my fleshe, ye despysed not neyther abhorred, but
receaued me as an Aungell of God, ye, as Christe Iesus. Howe happy were ye then? For I beare you re∣corde, that if it had bene possible, ye woulde haue plucked out your own eyes and haue geuen too me. Am I therefore become youre ennemye be∣cause I tell you the truth? They are gelous ouer you amysse. Ye they in∣tede to exclude you, that ye shoulde be eruente, to them warde. My lit∣tle children (of whome I trauaile in yrthe againe vntil Christ be fashio∣ned in you) I wold I were with you, and coulde chaunge my voice.Gene.  For I stande in a doubte of you. Tell me, ye that desyre to be vnder the lawe, haue ye not hearde of the lawe? For it is written, that Abraham had two sonnes, the one by a onde mayde, the other by a free woman. But he which was of the bond woman, was borne after the fleshe. But he which was of the free woman, was born by promes. Which thinges betoken mistery. For theese women are two Testaments the one from the mount
Sina, whiche gendreth vnto bon∣dage. Which is Agar. For mounte Sina is called Agar in Arabia, and bordreth vppon the citye, whiche is now Ierusalem, and is in bondage with her children. Rom. 9.Let none synne haue power ouer you. For ye are not vnder the lawe, but vnder grace. What then? Shall we synne because we are not vnder the lawe, but vnder grace? God for∣bydde. ¶Of Christes priesthode, and bishopricke, and of the excllency of Melchisedech, whiche was the figure of Christ. And how Abraham payed tithe vnto Leui. Capitu. 55. SEygne then that we haue a greate hye prieste,Heb. 4. whiche is entered in to heauen (I mean Iesus the sonne of God) let vs holde
ure prophession. For euerye hye prieste, that is ta∣ken frome amonge men,Heb.  is ordayned for menne, in thinges pertaininge to God, to offr gyftes and sacrifices for synne, whiche can haue compas∣sion on the ignoraunte, and on them that are out of the way, because that he him selfe is compased with inir∣mityes. For the whyche infimities sake he is bound to offer for sinnes, as wll for hys owne parte, as for th peoples. And no man taketh honour vnto him selfe, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. Euen so like wise, Christ glorified not him selfe,1. para. 2 to be made the hye priest: but he that sayed vnto him, thou arte my sonne,psal. 2. this daye begat I the, glorified him. As he also in an other place speaketh Thou art a priest for euer,psal. 1. after the order of Melchisedech. Whereof we haue many thinges to say which are harde to bee vttered, because ye are ull of hearinge.
This Melchisedech king of Salem (which beinge priest of the most hye God met Abraham,Heb. 7. as he returned agayne frome the slaughter of the kinges, and blessed him: to whome also Abraham gaue tithes of al thin∣ges) firste is by interpretation kinge of righteousnes, after that he is king of Salem, that is to saye, kinge of of peace, withoute father, withoute mother, without kinne, and hathe neither beginninge of his time, nei∣ther yet ende of his life. But is like∣ned vnto the sonne of God, and con∣tinueth a prieste for euer. Consider what a manne this was vnto whom the Patriarke Abraham gaue tithes of the spoiles. And verelye those chil∣dren of Leuy, whiche receaue the of∣fice of the priestes, haue a commaun∣dement to take according to the law, tithes of the people, that is to say, of their brethrē, ye though they sprong oute of the loynes of Abraham. But he whose kinnered is not counted a∣monge them receaued tythes of A∣braham, and blessed him that had the
promises. And withoute all nay say∣inge, he whiche is lesse, receaueth blessinge of him whiche is greater, And here men that die receiue tithes, but ther he receiueth tithes of whom it is witnessed, that he liueth. And to saye the truthe, Leuy him selfe al∣so whiche receaueth tithes, paied ti∣thes in Abraham. For he was yet in the loynes of his father Abraham when Melchisedech met him. Yf now therfore perfection came by the prest¦hode of the leuytes (for vnder that priesthode, the people receaued the lawe.) What needed it furthermore that an other priest shoulde rise after the order of Melchisedech, and not after the order of Aaron? Nowe no doubte, if the priesthode be transla∣ted, then of necessitye must the lawe be translated also. For he of whome these thinges are spoken, pertaineth vnto an other tribe, of whiche neuer man serued at the altare. For it is e∣uidente that our Lord spronge of the tribe of Iuda, of whiche trie spake Moses nothynge, concernynge priest¦hode.
And it is yet a more uydent thynge, if after the symilytue of Melchisedech, there arise an other priest, whiche is not made after the law of the carnall commaundement but after the power of the endelesse lyfe (for he testyyethe:psal. 10. Thou arte a prieste for er, after the order of Melchisedech). Those priestes were made without an othe, but this priest with an oh, by him that sayed vn∣to him. The Lorde sware and wyll not repente. Tho arte a priest for euer after the order of Melchisedech. And for that cause was Iesus a sta∣blisher of a better Testamete. And among them many were made prie∣stes, because thei were not suffered to endure by reason of death. But this man, because he endureth euer, hath an euerlastinge prieshode. Such an hye priest it became vs to haue whi∣che is holye, harmelesse, vndefyled, separate frome synners, and made hyar then heauen, whiche nedeth not daily (as yonder hie priest) to offer vp sarciice, firste for his owne synnes,
and then for the peoples sinnes. For that did he at once for all, when he offered vppe hym selfe. For the lawe maketh men priestes which haue in∣firmity, but the word of the othe that came sence the lawe, maketh the son priest, which is perfect for euermore. Of the thinges whyche we haue spoken, this is the pith:Heb. 8. that we haue such an hie priest that is sitten on the righte hande of the seate of maiestye in heauen, and is a minister of holye things, & of the very tabernacle whi∣ch God pyghte and not man. For euerye hyghe prieste is ordayned to offer giftes and sacrifices. Wherfore it is of necessitye that this man haue somewhat also to offer. For he were not a priese if he were on the earthe where are pryestes that accordynge to the lawe offer gyftes, whych prie∣stes serue vnto the ensample and sha∣dowe of heauenlye thinges euen as the aunswer of God was geuen vnto Moses when he was about to finishe the tabernacle.Exo. 25. Take hede (saieth he) that thou make all things accordinge
to the patrone shewed to thee in th mounte. ¶Wyth what vertuouse, by∣shops, priestes, and deacons, be∣inge wythin holye orders, oughte to be adorned. Capitu. 56. 1. Timo. 1.This is a true sayinge: if a man couet the office of a byshoppe, he desireth a good woorke. Ye and a byshoppe muste be fauelesse, the husbande of one wyfe, sober, dis∣crete, honestlye apparelled, harbe∣rous, apte to teache, not droncken, no fightr, not geuen to filthy lucre, but gentle, abhorringe fighting, ab∣horringe couetousnes, and one that ruleth his owne house honestlye ha∣uinge children vnder obedience with al honety. For if a man can not rule his owne ouse, howe shall he care for the congregation of God. He may not be a yong scoler, least he swel and faule, in to the iudgement of the uyl speaker. He must also be well repor∣ed
of amonge them whiche are with oute, leaste hee fall in too rebuke and snare of the euyll speaker. Lyke∣wise must the deacons be honest, not doble tonged, not geuen vnto much drinkinge, neither vnto filthy lucre, but hauinge the mysterye of the faith in pure conscience. And let them first be proued and thē let them minister, if they be founde futelesse. Let the deacons be the husbands of one wife, and suche as rule their children wel, and their own housholdes. For they that minister well, get them selues good degree and greate liberty in the faith which is in Christ Iesu. For this cause left I thee in Crete,Titu. 1 that thou shouldeste performe that which was lackinge, and shouldest ordayne priestes and elders in euery citye, as I appointed thee. Yf anye manne be fautelesse, the husbande of one wyfe, hauinge faithfull children which are not slaundered of riot, nei∣ther are disobedint. For a bishoppe must be fautelesse, as it becommeth the minister of God, not proude, not
angrye, no dronkarde, no fighter, not geuen to filthy lucre: but harbe∣rus, one that loueth goodnes, sober minded, righteous, holy, temperate, and suche as cleaueth vnto the true worde of docrine, that he maye be a∣ble to exhorte with wholesome lear∣ninge, and to improue them that say againste it. . Timo. 5.Against an elder or a priest receaue non occasion: but vnder two or three witnesses. ¶Of the institution of the cō∣munion, and howe damnable a thinge it is to receaue it vnwoorthelye. Capitu. 57. . Cor. 10.I Speake as vnto them whiche haue discretion, iudge ye what I say. Is not the cuppe of bles∣singe whyche we blesse, partakinge of the bloude of Christe? Is not the bradde whiche we breake part ta∣kynge of the bodye of Christe? be∣cause
that we (thoughe we bee ma∣nye) yet are one breade, and one bodye, in as much as wee all are partakers of one breade and of one cuppe. That whiche I deliuered vnto you I receaued of the Lorde.1. Cor. 1. For the Lorde Iesus the same nighte in whi∣che he was betrayed, toke bread, and thanked, and brake, and said. Take ye  eate ye, this is my body, which shal be betrayed for you. This doe ye in remembraunce of me. After the same manner he toke the cuppe when sup∣per was done, sayinge. This cuppe is the newe Testament in my bloud. This do as ofte as ye drincke it in the remembraunce of me. For as of∣ten as ye shall eate this breade, and drincke of this cup, ye shall shew the Lordes deathe, tyll he come. There∣fore who so euer shall eate of thy breade, or dryncke of the cuppe vn∣worthely, shall be gily of the body & bloud of the lord. Let a man therfore eamin him selfe, a so let hym eate of the breade and  the cupe
For he that eateth or drincketh vn∣worthelye, eateth and drinketh hys owne damnation, because he maketh no diference of the Lords body. For this cause many are wake and sycke among you, and many slepe. Wher∣fore my breethren when ye come to gether to eate, tarye one for an other. Yf anye man honger, let him eate at home, that ye come not to gether vn∣to condempnation. Other thinges shall I set in order, when I come. ¶How that they which be ma∣ryed ought to behaue them selues. And of the contynence of vyr∣gynes and wydowes. Capitu. 58. . Cor. 7.AS concerning the things wher∣of ye wrote vnto me, it is good for a man, not to touche a wo∣man. Neuerthelesse to auod fornica∣tion, let euerye man haue hys wyfe: and let euery wyf haue her husbād. Let the man ge vnto the wyfe due enuolence. Likewise also the wife
nto the man. The wife hath no po∣wer ouer her owne bodye, but the husband. And likewise the man hath no power ouer his owne bodye, but the wife. Withdraw not your selues one from an other, excepte it be wit consente for a time, for to geue youre selues too fastinge and prayer. And afterwarde come againe to the same thinge, leaste Sathan tempte you for youre incontinencye. This I saye of fauoure, for I woulde that all men wer as I am my selfe: but euery man hath his proper gifte of God, one af∣ter this manner, an other after that. I saye vnto the vnmaryed men and wydowes: it is good for them that they abyde euen as I doe. But and if they can not abstaine, let them mary. For it is better too marye then to burne. Unto the maried commaund not I but the Lorde: that the wife se∣perate not her selfe from the man. If she separate her selfe, let her remain vnmaried, or be reconciled vnto her husbande agayne. And let not the husbande put awaye his wife frome
him. To the remnaunte saye I and not the Lorde. If anye brother haue a wyfe that beleueth not. Yf she be contente to dwell with him, let him not put her away. And the woman whiche hath to her husbande an infi∣dell, if he consente to dwell with her, let her not put him awaye. For the vnbeleuinge husbande, is sanctifyed by the wife: and the vnbeleuing wife is sanctified by the husbande. Or els wer your children vncleane, but now are they pure. But and if the vnbele∣uinge departe, let him departe. A brother or a sister is not in subiection to such. God hath called vs in peace. For howe knowest thou o woman, whether thou shalt saue that man or no? Other how knowest thou o man, whether thou shalt saue that woman or no? But euen as God hath distry∣buted to euerye man. As concerning virgynes, I haue no commaunde∣mente of the Lorde: yet geue I coun∣sell, as one that hath obtained mercy of the Lorde to be fayethfull. I sup∣pose that it is good for the presente
necessity. For it is good for a man so to be. Art thou bounde vnto a wyfe? seeke not too be lowsed. Arte thou lowsed from a wife? seke not a wife. But and if thou takest a wife, thou synnest not. Lykewise if a virgyne marye, she sinneth not. Neuerthe∣lesse suche shal haue truble in their flesh, but I fauoure you. The single manne careth for the thinges of the Lorde, how he maye please the Lord. But he that hath maried, careth for the thinges of the worlde, howe he maye please hys wife, and is deuided, The syngle woman carethe for the thinges of the Lorde, that she maye be pure both in body, and also in spi∣rit, but she that is maryed, careth for the things of the world, how she may please her husband. Thys speake I for your profytte, not to tangle you in a snare: but for that whiche is honest and comely vnto you, and that ye maye quietly cleaue vnto the Lord without separation. If any mā think that it is vncomelye for his virgyne. Yf she passe the tyme of maryage,
and so if neede require, let hym doe what he lusteth, he sinneth not, if she be maried. Neuerthelesse he that pur¦poseth surelye in his harte, hauinge no neede, but hathe power ouer hys owne wyll, and hath so decreed in his harte, that e wyll kepe his virgye, doth wel. So then e that oyneth his virgine in mariage, doth wel. But he that ioyneth not his virgine in ma∣riage doth better. The wife is bound to the law as long as her husband li∣ueth. If her husbande sepe, she is at libertye, to marye with whome shee wyll, onelye in the Lorde. But she is happiar if she do abide in my iudge∣mente. And I thinke verelye that I haue the spirit of God. Women submytte your selues vn∣to your owne husbandes,Ephe. 5. as vnto the Lord. For the husbande is the wiues heade, euen as Christ is the heade of the congregation. Therefore as the congregation is in subiection vntoo Christ, likewise let the wiues be in subiection to theyr husbandes in all thinges. Husbands loue your wiues
en as Christ loued the congrega∣n, and gaue him self for it. So ought mene to loe their wiues, as their owne bodyes. He that louethe hys wyfe, loueth him selfe. Neuerthelesse  y so that euerye one of you loue his wife ruly euen as him selfe. And let the wyfe se, that she feare her usbande. Wyues, submitte your selues vnto your owne husbanes,Collo. 3. as it is come∣lye in the Lorde. Husbandes loue youre wyues, and be not bytter vn∣to them. Let wedlocke be had in price in all pointes,Heb. . and let he chamber be vn∣defyed. ¶Of Certain documentes ge∣nerally partayning to men, wo∣men, and widowes. Ca∣pitu. 59. I Woulde ye knewe that Chrst is the head of euerye man,1. Co. . and that the manne is the womans heade. And God is Christes headde.
Euerye man prayinge or prophesy∣inge hauing any thinge on his head, shameth his hadde. Euery woman that praieth or prophesieth bare hea∣ded, dishonesteth her headde. For it is euen all one, and the very same thinge, euen as though she were sha∣uen. Yf the woman be no couered, let her also be shorne. If it be a shame for a woman to be shorne or shauen, let her couer her heade. A man ought not to couer his heade. For as much as he is the image and glory of God. The woman is the glory of the man. For the man is not of the woman, but the wman of the man. Neyther was the mā creatd for the womans sake, but the woman for the mannes sake. For this cause ought the womā to haue a vayle on her hadde, for the Aungels sakes. Neuerthelese ney∣ther is the man without the woman nether the woman without the man in the Lord. For as the woman is of the man, euen so is the mā by the wo∣man, but al is of god. Iudge in youre selues, whether it be comely y• a wo∣man
pray vnto god bare headed? O tis doeth not naure teach you that it is  hame for a man if he haue long heare: and a praise to a woman if she haue a longe heare? For her heare is geun her to couer her with all. Let wemen kepe silence in the con∣gregations.1. Cor. 10. For it is not permytted vnto them too speake, but let them be vnder obedience, as saith the law. Yf they wyll learne anye thynge, let them aske theyr husbandes at home. For it is a shame for wemenne too speake in the congregation. Sprong the worde of God frome you? Ether came it vnto you onely? Yf any man thinke him selfe a prophet either sp∣rituall, let hym vnderstande what thynges I wryte vntoo you. For they are commaundementes of the Lorde. Lykewise that the wemen araye them selues in comely apparell with shamfastnes and discrete behauiour,1. Tim.  not with broided heare other gold, or pearles, or costly aray: but with such as becommeth wemen that professe
the woorshippinge of God thorowe good workes. Let the woman learne in silence with al subiection. I suffer not a woman to teache, neyther to haue autority ouer the man: but for to be in silence. For Adam was first formed, & then ue. Also Adam was not deceaued, but the woman wa deceaued, and was in transgression. Notwithstanding thorowe bearing of children they shall be saued so thy continue in fayth, loue, and holynes with discretion. Honoure widowes which are true wydowes.1. Timo. 5. Yf any wydow haue chil∣drn or nephes, let thē learne first to rule theyr owne houses Godlye, and to recompence their elders. For that is good & exceptable before god. She that is a very widowe and frendlesse putteth her trust in god: and continu∣eth in supplication and prayer night and day. But she that liueth in plea∣sure is deadde euen yet alyue. And theese thinges commaunde that they maye be withoute faute. Let no wi∣dow be chosen nder three score year
old, and such a one as was the wife of one mā, and wll reported of in good workes: if he haue nourished chyl∣dren, yf she haue bene liberall too straungers, if she haue washed the saynctes fete, if she haue ministred vnto them which were in aduersity, if she were continuallye geuen vnto all maner good workes. The yonger widowes refuse. For when thei haue begonne to wee wanton, to the dis∣honoure of Christe, then wyll they marye, hauinge damnation because they haue broken hir first faieth. I wyll therefore that the yonger wo∣men marye and beare children, and ud their hoses, ad geue none oc∣casion to the aduersarye to speake e∣uyll. For manye of them are already turned back, and are gone ater Sa∣than. And if anye manne or woman that beleuethe haue wydowes, let them minister vnto them, and let not the congregation be charged: that ye maye haue sfficinte for them, that are widowes in dede.
¶How parents oughte to vse them selues vntoo theyr children. And masters to theyr seruaunts And contrarye wyse howe children and seruaun∣tes must vse them selues to their parents and maysters. Capit. 60. Ephe. 6.Children obey youre fathers and mothers in the Lord. For so it is right. Honour thi father and mother, that is the first commaunde∣mente that hathe anye promes, that thou maist be in good estate, and liue longe on the earthe. And ye fathers moue not your children to wrath: but bring them vp with the nurture and information of the Lorde. llo. 3.Children obey youre fathers and mothers in all thinges. For that is well pleasinge vntoo the Lord. Fa∣thers, rate not youre children, least
they be of a desperate minde. The children oughte not to laye vp for the fathers and mothers,2. Cor. 1. but the fathers and mothers for the chyl∣dren. Seruauntes be obedyente vntoo youre carnall maysters,Ephe. 6. wyth feare and tremblynge in synglenesse of youre heartes, as vnto Christe: not wyth seruyce in the eye syghte, as menne pleasers, but as the seruaun∣tes of Christe, dooinge the wyll of God frome the hearte wyth good wyll seruynge the Lorde, and not menne. And remember that what∣soeuer good thynge any manne doth, that shall bee receaue agayne of the Lorde, whether he be bonde or free. And ye masters, doe euen the same thynges vnto them, puttinge awaye threatenynges, and remember that euen youre master also is in heauen, neyther is there anye respecte of per∣son with him. Seruaunts,Collo. 3. be obediēt vnto your bod¦dily masters in all thīgs in singlenes
of heart fearinge God. And what so euer ye do, do it hartely, for as much as ye know that of the Lorde, ye shal receaue the rewarde of inheritaunce Ye masters do vnto your seruaunts that which is iust and equall, seynge ye knowe that ye also haue a master in heauen. Let as manye seruantes as are vnder yke, Timo. 6. counte their maysters worthy of all honour, that the name of God and his doctrine be not uyll spoken of. See that they which haue beleuing masters, despise them not, because they are breethren, but so muche the rather, do seruice. For as muche as they are beleueinge, and beloued, and partakers of the bene∣fyte. Tim. 2.The seruauntes ehorte to be b∣diente vnto theyr owne masters, and to please in all thinges, not aunswe∣ringe agayne, neyther be pyckers, but that they shew all good aythul∣nes, that they maye do worshyppe to the doctryne of our sauiour God in all things.
¶How superiours shoulde vse them selues to theyr subiectes, and contrarye wyse. And of certaine documentes partayninge vn∣to prelates. And how they shuld diuersly instruct dyuers. Ca∣pit. 61. WE beseeche you breethren,1. Thes.  that ye knowe them which laboure amonge you, and haue the ouer sight of you in the lord and geeue you exhortacyon that ye haue them the more in loue for their woorkes sake, and be at peace wyth them. He therfore that despiseth this,1. Thes. 4. de∣spiseth nat man, but God. The priestes and elders that rule well,1. Tim.  are worthy of double honour, most specially they, which labour in the word, and in teaching. Remember them which haue the o∣uersight of you, which haue declared vnto you, the word of God, the ende of whose conuersation se that ye loke
vpon and folow theyr fayeth. Obey them that haue the ouersight of you, and submit your selues to them. For they watch for your soules, euen as they that muste geue accomptes for youre soules: that they maye doo it with ioye, and not wyth grefe, for that is a profytable thing for you. Phi. 2.And receaue suche a one with ho∣nour and all gladnesse. 1. Timo. 4.Tyll I come, geue attendaunce to readinge, to exhortation, too doc∣tryne. Despise not that gifte that is in thee, whiche was geuen the tho∣rowe prophesye, and with the lay∣inge on of handes of an elder. Take hede vnto thy self, and vnto learning and contynue herein. For if thou shalt so do, thou shalt saue thy selfe, and them that hear the. 1. Timo. 5.Laye handes sodenlye on no man. Nether be partaker of other mennes synnes. 2. Timo. 4.Watch thou in all things, and suf∣fer aduersitye, and do the woorke of an euangelist, fulfyll thyne office vn∣to the vttermost. Be sober.
Of theese thinges put them in re∣membraunce, and testifye before the. Timo. 2. Lorde. For thou haste sene the experience of my doctrince, fashion of liuinge,2. Timo. 3. purpose, fayth longe sufferinge, loue, paciene, persecutions, afflictions, which happened vntoo me at Anty∣oche, at Iconium, and at Lystra. Whyche persecutions I suffered pa∣cientlye. And from them al, the lord deliuered me. Preache the worde, be feruent,2. Timo. 4. be it in season or out of season, improue, rebuke, exhorte. Be vnto them that beleue, an en∣sample, in worde, in conuersation,1. Timo. 4. in loue, in spirit, in charity. An elder exhort as a father, yong mē as brethren, the elder women,1. Timo. . as mo∣thers y• yōger as sisters in al chastity. But speake thou that, which becō∣meth wholsome learning y• the elder men be sober, honest, discrete, sound in the fayeth, in loe, and in pacy∣ence. And the elder women likewyse that they be in suche raiment as be∣commeth
holynes, not false accusers not geuen to much drynckinge, but teachers of honest thinges. to make the yonge wemenne sober myn∣ded, to loue theyr husbands, to loue theyr chyldren, to be discrete, chast, huswyye, good and obedient vntoo theyr own husbands, that the word of God be not euill spoken of. 1. Timo. 4.Yf thou shalt put the breethren in remembraunce of these things, thou shalte be a good minyster of Iesus Christ, which hast bene nourished vp in the wordes of fayth and good doc∣trine, which doctrine thou hast con∣tinually folowed. ¶Of the spirituall generation of baptime. And why that from hence foorth, we ought to depart from sinne. Capu. 62. o. 5.WHere abundaunce of syne was, there was more plen∣tuousenesse of grace. &c. vt upr.
What shall we say then?Rom. 6. Shal we continue in sin, that ther may abun∣daunce of grace? God forbydde. How shall we that are deade as touchynge synne lyue any longer therein? Re∣member ye not, that al we which are baptised in the name of Iesus Christ are baptysed to dye wyth him? We are buryed with hym by baptysme, for too dye, that likewyse as Christ was raysed vppe from death by the glorye of the faher, euen so we also should walke in a newe lyfe. For i we graffe in death like vnto him, euē so muste we be in the resurrection. This we must remember, that our olde man is crucifyed with him also, that the bodye of sinne might vtterly be destroyed, that hence foorthe we should not be seruaunts of sinne. For he that is dead, is ustified from sin. Wherfore if we be dead with Christ, we beleue that we shall lyue wyth him: remembringe that Christ once rayseh from death, dyeth no more. Death hath no more power ouer him for as touching that he dyed, he dyed
concerning synne, once. And as tou∣chinge that he liueth, he liueth vnto God. Likewise imagine ye also that ye are dead concerninge synne, but are alie vnto God, thorowe Iesus Christ our Lorde. Tim. 2.For al ye that are baptised in Christ Iesu, haue put on Christ. Gala. 3.In whom ye are circumcised with circumcision made withoute handes by puttinge of the sinfull body of the fleshe throughe the circumcision that is in Christe, in that ye are buryed with him through baptime, in whom ye are also rysen agayne throughe faith y• is wroughte by the operation of God which raised him from death.Collo. 2. ¶Of the comming of the most wicked and most falsest Antichrist and of the day of iudgement. Capitu. 6. 2. Thes. 2BE not sodēly moued, athough the day of Christ were at hand. Let no man deceiue you by any manes. For the Lorde commeth not
excepte there come a departinge first and that the sinfull man e opened, the sonne of perdition, whiche is an aduersarye and is exalted aboue all that is called God, or that is woor∣shipped: so that he shall sytte as God in the temple of God and shewe him selfe as God. Remember ye not, that whan I was yet with you, I told you theese thynges? And nowe ye knowe what wythholdethe: euen that e mighte ee vttered, at hy tyme. For the mysterye of the ini∣quytye doeth alreadye woorke: tyll he whiche nowe onely letteth, be ta∣en oute of the waye. And then shall that wicked be vttered, whō the lorde shall consume with the spirite of hys mouth, and shall destroye it with ap∣pearaunce of his cominge, euen him whose cominge is by the working of Satan, with al lying power, signes & wonders: and in al dceiueablenes of vnrightuousenes, amonge them that perish, because they receaued not the loue of ye truth, that they might haue bene saued. And therefore God shall
end them strong delusion, that they shuld beleue lys that all they might be dampned whyth beleued not the truth, but had pleasure in vnrighte∣usnes. 1. Thes. 5.Of the times and ceasons brethren ye haue no nede that I write vntoo you: for ye your selues knowe par∣fectly, that the daye of the Lord shall coe uen as a theee in the nighte. When they shall saye peace and no dunger, then commeth on thē soden destruction, as the trauaylinge of a woman with chylde, and they shall not scape. But ye brethern are not in darkenes, that that daye should come on you as it were a thee. ¶Of the generall resurrec∣tion that is too come. Capitu. 64 YF so be that any man haue not the spirit of Christ the same is none of his.Rom. 8. But if the spirit of him that raysed vp Iesus from athe, dwell in you, euen he that
aysed vp Christe from deathe, shall uycken youre mortall bodyes, be∣cause that his spirit dwelleth in you. God hath raysed vp the Lorde,1. Cor.. and shall rayse vs vp by his pwer. For we knowe that he which ray∣sed vp the Lorde Iesus,2. Cor. 4. shall rayse vp v also, by the meanes of Iesus, and shall set vs with you. Christe amonge you is not weake, but is mightye in you.2. Cor. 13. For thoughe it came of weakenes that he was cru∣cified, yet liueth he thorow the power of God, And we no doubte are weake in him, but we shall lyue with him, by the might of God amonge you. If we beleue that Iesus dyed and and rose agayne,1. Thes. . euen so them also which slepe by Iesus, wyl God bring agayne with him. And this saye we vnto you, in the worde of the Lord, that we whiche lyue and are remay∣ninge, in the comminge of the Lord, shal not come yerre they which slepe. For the Lord him selfe shall descend frome heauen with a shute, and the voice of Archaungell, and trompe of
God. And the dead in Christ shall a∣ris first, then shall we, which lyue and remayne, be caughte vppe with them also in the cloudes too mete the Lorde in the ayer. And so shall we euer be with the Lorde. Wherefore comforte youre selues one an other with these wordes. ¶Of fayethfull probation, and and diuersity of the resurrection that is to come, and of the gif∣tes of the glorified bodies. Capitu. 65. 1. Cor. 15.YF Christ be preached, how that he rose from the dead. How say some that are among you, that there is no resurrecion of the dead? Yf there be no risinge againe, then is Christe not risen. Yf Christe be not risen, then is our preachinge vaine, and your faith also in vayne. Ye and we are found false witnesses of God. For we haue testifyed of god, how that he raised vp Christ, whom he raysd not vpp, if it be so that the
eade ryse not again. For if the dead rise not againe, then is Christe not risen againe. Y it be so that Christ rose not, then is your fayeth in vain, and yet are ye in youre synnes. And therto they whiche are fallen a slepe in Christe, are pearished, if in this life onelye we beleue in Christ, then are we of all men, the miserabliest. But nowe is Christe risen frome the deade, and is become the first frutes of them that slepte. For by a manne came deathe, and by a manne came the resurrection of the deadde. For as by Adam all dye, euen so by Christ shall all be made a lyue, and euerye man in his owne order. The first is Christe, then they that are Christs at his comminge. Then commeth the ende, when he hath deliuered vp the kingdome to god the father, when he hath put down al rule, actority, and power. For he must raign til he haue put all hys enemies vnder his feete. The last enemy that shal be destroied is death. For he hath put al thiges
vnder his fete. But when he saieth all thinges are put vnder him, it is manifest that he is excepted, whiche did put all things vnder him. When all thynges are subdued vntoo him, then shall the sonne also him selfe b subiecte vnto him, that put all things vnder him, that God maye be all in all thinges. Either els what do they which are baptised ouer the deade, if the dead rise not at all? Why are they then baptised ouer the dead? yea, and whye stande we in ieopardye euerye houre? By our reioysinge whiche I haue in Christ Iesu our Lorde, I dye daylye. That I haue foughte wyth beastes at Ephesus, after the maner of men, what aauntageth it me, if the dead rise not again? Let vs eate & dryncke, to morow we shall dye. Be not deceaued, malycius speakynge corrupte good manners. Awake ye iuste, and synne not. For some haue not the knowledge of God. I speake thys to youre rebuke. But some man wyll saye: howe aryse the deadde:
wyth what bodyes come they in Thou ole, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it y. And what sowest thou? Thou sowest not that bodye that shall be: but bare corne, (I meane ether of wheate, or of some other) and God geueth it a bodye at his pleasure, to euerye seede a se∣uerall body. All fleshe is not one ma∣ner of fleshe, but there is one maner of fleshe of men, an other manner of fleshe of beastes, an other manner of flesh of fyshes, and an other of byrds. There are celesiall bodyes, and ther are bodyes terrestriall But the glo∣rye of the celeyall is one, and the glory of the terestryall is an other. There is one manner gloye of the sun, and an other glorye of the mone, and an other glory of the starres: for one starre differeth from an other in glorye. So is the resurrection of the deade. It is sowen in corruption, and riseth in incorruption. It is sowen in dishonoure, it riseth in honoure. It is sowen in weakenes, and riseth in power. It is sowen a naturall bo∣dye,
and rysethe a spirytuall bodye. There is a naturall bodye, and there is a spirituall body. As it is written. The first man Adam was made a ly∣uinge soule,Gene. 2. and the last Adam was made a quickening spirite How be it, that is not firste which is spiritu∣all, but that which is naturall, and then that whiche is spirituall. Be∣holde I shewe you a misterye. We shal not all sleepe, but we shall be all chaunged, and that in a momente, and in a twinckling of an eye, at the sounde of the laste trompe. For the trompe shall blowe and the deadde shall rise in corruptible, and we shall bee chaunged. For this corruptible must put on incorruptibilitye, & this mortall muste put on immortalitye. When this corruptible hathe put on incorruptibility, & this mortall hath put on immortalitye, then shall be brought to passe the saying y• is writ¦ten. Death is consumed in to victory. Death wher is thy stynge? Hel wher is thy victorye? The stinge of death is synne and the strength of synne is
the lawe. But thankes be vnto God, which hath geuen vs victory, thorow our Lord Iesus Christ. ¶Of the feruente charitye of saynte Paul the Apostell. Capitu. 66. I Haue wyshed my selfe too be∣cursed frome Christe,Rom. 6. for my brethren and my kynsmen as partaininge to the flesh. My hartes desire and praier to god for Israell,Rom. 1. is that they mighte be saued. For though I be free from all men yet haue I made my selfe seruaunte vnto all men,1. Cor. 9. that I mighte wynne the moo. Unto the Iewes I became as a Iewe, too wynne the Iewes. To them that were vnder the lawe, was I made as though I hadde bene vnder the lawe, to wynne them that were vnder the lawe. To them that were wythoute lawe, became I as though I had ben wtout law (when I was not without law, as pertaining
to God, but vnder a lawe as concer∣ninge Christe) too wynne them that were without lawe. To the weake became I as weake, too wynne the weake. In all things I fashoned my selfe to all men, to saue at the leaste waye some. And this I doe for the gospels sake, that I mighte haue my parte therof. Cor. 1.And in this confidence was I min∣ded the other time to haue come too you, that ye might haue had yet one pleasure more, and to haue passed by you in to Macedonia, and too haue come agayne out of Macedonia vnto you, and to haue bene lead foorth to Iewry ward of you. When I was come to Troada for Christes Gospells sake,. Cor. 2. and a great dore was opened vnto me of the lord I had no rest in my spirite, because I founde not Titus my brother but toke my leaue of them, and went a∣waye in to Macedonia. For in great affliction and anguish of hart I wrot vnto you with manye teares, not to make you sorye, but that ye mighte
perceaue the loue which I haue most speciallye vnto you. Ye are oure Epistle written in oure hartes,2. Cor. 3. whiche is vnderstande and reede of all men, in that ye are kno∣wen, how that ye are the Epistle of Christ ministred by vs and writen, not with yncke, but with the spirit of the liuing God, not in tables of stone, but in fleshely tables of the heart. For the loue and charitye of Christ constrayned vs. vt su.2. Cor. 5. Behold, now I am ready to come the thirde tyme vnto you,2. Cor. . and yet I wyll not be greuous vnto you. For I seeke not youres but you. I wyll verye gladly bestow, and wyll be be∣stowed for your soules, thoughe the more I loue you, the lesse I am lo∣ued againe. I am surelye certyfied of this, that be whiche beganne a good worke in you,Phi. 1. shall goo foorth with it vntyll the day of Iesus Christ, as it becom∣meth me so too iudge of you all, be∣cause I haue you in my hart, and in my bondes, and in the defence and
stablishmente of the gospel. For god beareth me witnesse, how greately I long after you all from the very hart rote in Iesus Christ. Phi. 2.I truste in the Lorde Iesus for too sende Timothe shortelye vntoo you, that I also maye be of good comfort, when I know what case ye stand in. For I haue no man that is so liuelye mynded to me, whiche with so pure affection careth for youre matters, for all other seeke their owne, and not that whyche is Iesus Christes. Ye knowe the prose of him, how that as a sonne wyth the father, so wyth me he bestowed his laboure vpon the gospell. Him I hope to send as soont as I knowe how it wyl go with me. I truste in the Lorde that I also my selfe shall come shortly. Phi. 3.It greueth me not to wryte all one thinge vnto you. For vnto you it is necessarye, I woulde ye knew what solicitude and care I haue for youre sakes,Collo. 2. and for them of Laodicia, and for as ma∣nye as haue not sene my personne
in the fleshe, that they might be com∣forted. Although I wrote vnto you, I did i nt for his caus that did hurte,2. Cor. 7. ne∣ther for hys cause that was hurt, but that our good mynde which we haue towarde you, in the sighte of God, mighte appeare vnto you. Euen as a nourse cherysheth her children,Collo. 2. so was oure affection to∣warde you, oure good wyll was to haue dealte vnto you not the Gospell of God onelye, but also oure owne soules, because ye were deare vntoo vs. I thanke God whome I serue from myne elders wyth pure conscience,2. Timo. 1. that withoute ceasinge I make men∣tion of the in my prayers nighte and daye, desiringe to see the, myndefull of thy teares, so that I am filled with ioye, when I call too remembraunce the vnfained faith that is in the, whi∣che dwelte first in thy grandmother Lois, and in thy mother Animica, and I am sure that it dwelleth in the also.
Brynge Zenas the lawear, and Apollos on their iourney dilygente∣lye,Tit. 3. that nohinge be lackinge vnto them. I for charities sake beseche the, se∣inge thou arte as I am euen Paule aged,Ad phil. and nowe in bondes for Iesus Christe sake. I beseeche the for my sonne Onesymus, whome I be∣gatte in my bondes, whiche in tyme passed was to the vnprofitable, but nowe profitable both to the and also to me, whome I haue sente ome a∣gayne. Thou therefore receaue him, that is to saye, mine owne bowels, whome I would fayne haue retained with me, that in thy steade he might haue ministred vnto me in the bonds of the Gospell. Neuerthelesse, with∣out thy mynde, I would do nothing, that the good which springeth of the, shoulde not be as it were of necessity, but wyllingely. Happely he there∣fore departed for a season that thou shouldest receaue hym for euer, not nowe as a seruaunte, but aboue a seruaunte, I meane a brother belo∣ued
speciallye to me: but how much more vnto the, both in the fleshe, and also in the Lorde? Yf thou count me  felowe, receaue hym as my selfe. Yf hee haue hurte thee, or owethe thee ought, that lay to my charge. I Paule haue wrytten it wyth myne ande, I wyll recompence it. So that I do not say to thee, howe that thou west vnto me euen thine owne self. Euen so brother, let me enioye thee in the Lorde. Comforte my bowels in Christe. Moreouer prepare mee lodgynge, for I truste throughe the helpe of your prayers, I shall be ge∣uen vnto you. ¶ Of the humilitye, pacience and persecutions of blessed Paul the Apostell. Capi∣tu. 67. ANd last of all, Christ was sene of me,1. Cor. 1 as of one that was borne oute of due tyme. For I am the least of all the Apostles, whiche am not worthye to be called an Apostle,
because I persecutee the congregati∣on of God. But by the grace of God I am that I am, and his grace which is in me, was not in vaine: but I la∣bourd more abundantlye then they all, yet not I, but the grace of God which is with me. Whether it were I or they, so we preache: and so haue ye beleued. I Paule my selfe besech you by the mekenes and sotens of Christ whi∣che when I am prsente amonge you am of no reputaion,2. Cor. 10. but am bolde towarde you beinge absente. I be∣seche you that I nde not to be bolde when I am presente (with the same confidence, wherwith I am supposed to be bold) against som which repute vs as thogh we walkd carnallye. For we dare not make our selues of y• number of them, or compare our selues too them, whiche lade thm selues. Neuerthelsse whyle they measure them selues with them sl∣ues, and compare them selues wyth them selues, they vnderstand nought Gala. 1.Other goo I about to please men?
Yf I studyed to please men I were not the seruaunte of Christe. Nor we were not as thoughe we entended to please men. &c. vt supra.1. Thes. 2 Capitu. 39. This is a true sayinge, that Christ Iesus came in to this worlde to saue synners,1. Timo. . of whome I am cheefe. &c. For this cause haue I delectation in infirmities,2. Cor. 12. in rebukes, in nede, in persecutions, in anguyshe, for Christs sake. For when I am weake, hen am I stronge. They are the ministers of Christe (I speake lyke a foole) I am more.2. Cor. 11. In laboures more abundaunte. In strypes aboue measure: In prysonne plentuouslye. In deathe oe. Of the Iewes fyue tymes receaued I eue∣rye tyme fourtye strypes saue one. Thryse was I beaten wyth roddes. I was once stoned. I sufered thryse shipwrake. Nghte and daye haue I bene in the depe of the sea. In orne∣ing often. In parele of waters. In pa¦relles of robbers. In ieoperdyes of mine owne nation. In ieoperdyes
amonge the heathen. I haue bene in parels in cityes, in parels in wilder∣nesse, in parels in the sea, in parels amonge false breethren, in laboure and trauaile, in watchinge often, in hunger and thirst, in fastinges often, in colde and in nakednesse. And be∣sides the thinges which outwardelye happen vnto me, I am combred dai∣lye, and doo care for all congregati∣ons. Who is sick, and I am not sicke? Who is hurte in the fayeth, and my hart burneth not? The God, & father of oure Lorde Iesus Christe, whyche is blessed for euer, knowethe that I lye not. The gouerner of the people of Damasco vnder king Aretas, laied watch in the city of Damasco, & wold haue caughte me, and at the window was I let downe in a basket thorowe the wall, and so scaped his hands. Collo. 1.Now ioye I in my sufferings whi∣che I suffer for you, and fulfyll that whiche is behynde of the passions of Christ in my flesh for his bodies sake, which is the church. 1. Timo. 2,Herefore I suffer all thinges for
the electes sakes, that they mighte also obtaine that saluation which is in Christe Iesu, wyth eternall glo∣rys. Therefore let no man be moued in theese afflictions,1. Thes. 3, for ye your selues knowe that we are euen appoynted therunto. This thou knowest howe that all they whiche are in Asia,2. Cor. . be tourned from me, of whiche sorte are Phile∣tus and Hermogenes. Alexander the copper smith did me muche euyll,2. Timo.  the Lorde rewarde him accordinge to his dedees, of whome be thou ware also, for he withstode our preachinge sore. At my first an∣sweringe and defence, no man assi∣sted me, but all forsoke me. I praye God, that it maye not be layed too theyr charges. Notwithstanding the Lord assisted me, and strengthed me, that by me the preachinge shoulde be fulfylled to the vttermoste, and that all the gentiles shoulde heare. And I was deliuerede out of the mouthe of the Lyon. And the Lorde hathe dely∣uered
me frome all euyll doinge, and shal kepe me vnto his heauenly king¦dome, to whome be prayse for euer and euer. Amen. ¶Of the excellencye of Paule the Apostels rectitude and since∣ritye. Capit. 68. What wyll ye? Shall I come vnto you with a rod,1. Cor. 4. or els in loue and in the spirite of mekenesse? Out of sincerity and purenes, and by the power of god,2. Cor. 2. and in the sight of God, so speake we in Christ. 1. Cor. 3.Begynne we to prayse oure selues again? Nede we as some other, of E∣pistels of recomendation vnto you? or letters of recomendation frome you? 2. Cor. 10.Yf any man trust in him elfe that he is Christes, let the same also consi∣der of him selfe, that as he is Chri∣stes, euen so are we Christes. And thoughe I shoulde boast my self som∣what more of our autority which the lord hath gne vs to edifye and not
t destroye you, if shulde not be to my ame. This saye I leaste I shoulde seme as thoughe I wente aboute to make you afrayed wyth letters. For the Epistles (sayeth he) are sore and stronge. But his bodilye presence is weake, and his speache is rude. Let him that is suche thinke on this wise that as we are in wordes by letters when wee are absente, suche are we in ddes when we are presente. Did I there in sinne, because I sub∣mitted my selfe,2. Cor. 1. that ye mighte be ex∣alted, and because I preached to you the Gospell of God free? I robbed other congregations and toke wages of them, to doo you seruice with all. And when I was present with you, and had nede. I was greuous to no man. For that which was lackinge vnto me, the breethren whych came frome Macedonia supplyed: and in all thynges I kepte my selfe that I shoulde not be greauous to you, and so wyll I kepe my selfe. Yf the truth of Christe bee in mee, thys reioy∣singe
shall not be taken frome me in the regions of Achaia. Wherefore? Because I loue you not? God kno∣weth. Neuerthelesse, what I doo, that wyll I do to cut awaye occasion frome them, whiche desire occasion, that they may be founde like vnto vs in that wherein they reioyce. For what is it wherin ye were in∣feriours to other congregations,2. Cor. 12. ex∣cept it e therin that I was not gr∣uous vnto you, forgeue mee thys wrong done vnto you. But be it that I greaued you not. Neuerthelesse I was crafty, and toke you with gule. Did I pyl you by any of them which I sente vnto you? I desired Titus, and with him I sente a brother. Did Titus defraude you of anye thinge? Walked we not in one spirite? Wal∣ked we not in like steppes? Agayne thinke ye that we xcuse our selues? We speake in Christe in the sight of God. Beholde now come I the third tyme vnto you. In the mouth of wo or three witnesses shall euery thinge stande.
Our exhortation was not to bringe you too erroure,1. Thes. 2. neyther was it in guile, not as thoughe we entended o please menne. &c. vt supra. Capi∣tu. 39. ¶Of the takinge vp, and visi∣ons of the blessed Apostell saincte Paule, and of his perfection in all vertue. Ca∣pitu. 69. I Wyll come to the visions and reuelations of the lord, I know a man in Christe,2. Cor. 12. aboue. 14. yeares agone. Whether he were in the bodye, I can not tell, or whether he were out of the bodye I canne not tell. (God knoweth) whiche was ta∣ken vp in to the thyrde heauen. And I knowe the same man, (whether in the bodye or oute of the bodye I can not tell God knoweth) howe that he was taken vppe in to paradise, and hearde wordes not to be spoken, whi∣che no man can vtter. Of this manne wyll I reioyce, of my self wyll I not re∣ioyce,
excepte it be of myne infiry∣ties. And yet thoughe I woulde re∣ioyce, I shuld not be a fole: for I wold say the truth. Neuerthelesse I spare, lest any man shuld think of me abou that he seeth me to be, or heareth of me, I am made a foole in boasting my selfe, ye haue compelled me: I oughte too haue bene commendd of you. Phi. 4.I haue learned in what so euer e∣state I am therewith to be contente. I can bothe humble and caste downe my selfe, I can also exceade. Euery where and in all thynges I am in∣structed, bothe to be full, and to be hungrye, to haue plentye, and to suf∣fer nede I can do all thinges through the helpe of Christe, whiche streng∣theneth me. ¶Of the multitude of goddes mercies vnto the Apostle. And of the actes of the begynninge of his conuersion. Capitu. 70.
I Thanke Christ Iesus our lord whiche hah made me stronge,1 Timo. . for he counted me true, and put me in offyce, when before I was a lasphemer, and a persecuter, and contumelius. But I obtayned mer∣cye, because I dyd it ignorauntlye throughe vnbeleefe. Notwythstan∣inge for thys cause was mercye ge∣uen vntoo me, that Iesus Christe shoulde firste shewe on me all longe pacience, vnto the ensample of them which shal in time to come beleue on him vnto eternall lyfe. For why ye hard of my conuersati∣on in time past,Gala. 1. in the Iewes waies, how that beyond measure I persecu∣ted the church & congregation of god and spoyled it, and preuayled in the Iewes law, aboe many of my com∣panyons, which were of myne own nations, and was a muche more fer∣uente mayntayner of the traditions of the elders. But when it plea∣sed Godde (whyche separated me frome my mothers wombe, and cal∣led me by hys grace, for to declare
his sonne by me) that I shuld preache him amonge the hathen, immdiat∣ly I comened not of the matter wih fleshe and bloude, neiher returned to Ierusalem to them which were A∣postles before me, but went my wai∣es in to Arabia, and came again vnto Damasco. Then after three yeare, I returned to Ierusalem to see Peter and abode with him. 15. dayes, none other of the Apostles sawe I, but Ia∣mes the Lordes brother. The things whiche I wryte, beholde, God kno∣weth I lye not. After that, I wente in to the costes of Siria, and Cilicia, and was vnknowen as touchynge my person, vnto the congregation of Iewrye whiche were in Christe. But they hearde onely, that he whi∣che persecuted vs in time past, nowe preacheth the fayeth, whyche before he destroyed. And they glorified God on my behalfe. Then .14. yeares af∣ter I went vp agayne to Ierusalem wyth Barnabas and ooke wyth me Titus also.
¶How humblye the Apostell desireth hym selfe and his disci∣ples to be prayed for. And of certayne other hys actes. Capi∣tu. 71. I Beseche you brethren for oure Lodre Iesus Christes sake,Rom. 15. and for the loue of the spirite, that ye helpe me in my busines with your prayers to God for me, that I maye be deliuered frome them whiche be∣leue not in Iewrye, and that this my seruice, which I haue to Ierusalem, maye be accepted of the saintes, that I may come vnto you with ioye, by the wyll of God, and maye with you be refreshed. Prayinge for mee,Ephe. 6. that vtte∣raunce maye be geuen vnto me, that I maye open my mouthe boldely, to vtter the secretes of the gospel, wher of I am a messenger in bondes, that therein I maye speake frely, as it be∣cometh me to speake. Praye ye for vs,Collo. 2. that God open
vnto vs the dore of vtteraunce, that we may speake the mistery of Christ. (Wherfore I am also in bondes) that I maye vtter it, as it becommeth me to speake. 2. Thes. 3.Furthermore breethren praye for vs, that the worde of God, may haue free passage and be glorified, as it is with you: and that we maye be de∣liuered from vnreasonable and euyll menne. Heb. 13.I desire you therefore somewhat the more abundauntely, that ye so do that I may be restored to you quicke∣lye. Knowe the brother Timothe, whome we haue sente from vs, with whome (if he come shortelye) I wyll see you. 1. Cor. 16.I wyll come vnto you, after I haue gone ouer Macedonia. For I wyll go throughe oute Macedonia. Wyth you peaduenture I wyll a byde a whyle, or els wynter, that ye maye bringe me on my waye whether so e∣uer I goo. I wyll not see you nowe in my passage: but I truste to abyde a whyle wyth you, if God shall suffer
me. I wyll tarye at Ephesus vntyll whytsontyde. For a greate dore and a frutefull is opened vnto me, and there are manye aduersaryes. To speake of brother Apollo, I certifye you, that I greatelye desired him to come vnto you with the brethren, but hys mynde was not at all to come at this tyme. How be it, he wyll come when he shal haue conueniente time and leysure I call God for a recorde vnto my soule, that for to fauoure you all,2. Cor. . I came not any more vnto Corinthum. Not that we bee Lordes ouer youre faith: but helpers of your ioye. Make spede to come to me at once.2. Timo. 4. For Demas hath left me, and loueth thys presente worlde, and is depar∣ted vnto Thesselonica. Cressensis gone too Galacia, and Titus vnto Damatia. Only Lucas is wyth me. Take Marke & bringe him with the. For he is necssary vnto me, for to mi¦nister. And Lithicus haue I setto E∣phesus. The cloke y• I left at Troada wt Carpus when thou comest bringe
with thee, and the bokes but special∣lye the partchement. Erascus abode at Corinthum. Trophimos I left at Myletum sicke. Make spede to come before wynter. Titu. 3.When I shall sende Artemas vnto the, or Tithicus be diligente to come to me vnto Nichopolis. ¶Of suche persons whiche in hys Epistles he saluted, and were saluted. Ca∣pitu. 72. Rom. 16.GReete Prisca and Aquila my helpers in Christ Iesu, which haue for my lyfe layed downe theyr owne neckes. Unto which not I onelye gaue thankes, but also the congregation of the Gentiles. Like∣wise greete the congregation that is in their house. Salute my welbelo∣ued Epenetes whiche is the firste frute among them of Achaia. Greete Marye which bestowed much labour on vs. Salute Andronicus & Iunia my cosyns, whiche were prysonners
with me also, whiche are well taken amonge the Apostelles, and were in Christe before me. Timotheus my woorke felowe and Lucius, and Ia∣son, and Sopater my kinsmen, sa∣lute you. Caius myne hoste and the host of al the congregations saluteth you Graseus saluteth you. &c. The congregations of Asia salute you,. Cor. 16. Aquila and Priscilla salute you muche in the Lorde, and so doeth all the congregatyon that is in theyr house: with whom I am lodged. All the brethren grete you. The saluta∣tion of me Paule, with myne owne hande. &c. All the saintes salute you.2. Cor. 13. Epapra saluteth you, I beare him recorde that he hathe a feruente minde toward you,Collo. 4. and toward them of Laodicia, and them of Ierapolis. Deare Lucas the Phisition greeteth you, and Demas. Salute the ree∣thren whiche are of Laodicia, and salute Nimphas, and the congrega∣tion which is in her house. Epaphras my felowe presoner inPhi. 1.
Christe Iesus, salutethe thee, and Marcus, Aristarcus, Demas, Lucas my helpers. riarcus my pryson felowe salu∣teth you,Collo. 4 and Marcus Barnabas si∣sters sonne: touchinge whome, y receaued commaundementes. Yf he come vnto you, receaue him, and Iesus whiche is called iustus, which are of the circumcision. These onely are my work felowes vnto the king∣dome of God, whiche were vnto my consolation. Salute all the saintes. Heb. 13. Phi. 4.The brethren whiche are in Ita∣lye salute you. All the saintes salute you, and moste of all they whiche are of the Emperoures housholde. The salutation of me Paule, with mine owne hande. This is the token in al epistels.2. Thes. 3 So I write. The grace of our Lorde Iesus Christe be wyth you all. ¶The prayse and glorification o the omnipotent Lor and god. Capitu. 73.
TO him that is of power to sta∣blyshe you accordynge to myRom. 16. gospell and preachynge of Ie∣sus Christe, in vtteringe of the my∣sterye which was kepte secrete sense the worlde began, but nowe is ope∣ned by the scriptures of prophesye, at the commaundemente of the euer∣lastinge God, to styrre vp obedience to the faith, published among all na∣tions. To the same God which alone is wyse, be prayse throughe Iesus Christ for euer. Amen. God is fayethfull. By whome ye are called.1. Cor. . Blessed be God the father of oure Lord Iesus Christ, the father of mer∣cye, and the God of all comforte,2. Cor. 1. the Lord no doubte is a spirit. And wher the spirite of the Lorde is,2. Cor. 3. there is libertye. Unto him that is able to do excea∣dinge abundaundauntelye aboue all that we aske or thinke,Ephe. 3. according to the power tha woorcketh in vs, be praise in the congregation by Iesus Christe through out all generations
frome time to time. Amen. Phi. 4.Unto God and our father be praise for euermore. Unto God, kinge euerlastinge, im∣mortall, inuisible,1. Timo. . and wise onely, be honoure and prayse for euer and euer. Amen. Whiche wyll haue all men saued, and to come to the knowledge of the truthe in Christ.1. Timo. 2. Whome when the time is come, he shall shewe that is blessed,1. Timo. 6 and migh∣tye onely, kinge of kynges, and lord of Lordes, which onely hath immor∣talitye, and dwelleth in lighte that no man can attayne, whome neuer man sawe, nether canne see, vnto whome e honoure and rule euerla∣stinge. Amen One Lorde, one fayeth, one baptyme,Ephe. 4. one God and fa∣ther of all. Whiche is aboue all, tho∣rowe all, and in you all. FINIS.
¶Here begynnethe the table, whereby ye maye fynde spedelye all the principall maters contayned in this booke. ¶The tytles. THe forme of saluation. capitu. 1. The thankes geuinge of Paul the Apostle, for the gyftes of grace geeuen of God, to the faiethfull. capi. . Of Paules orations and praiers for his disciples. ca. 3. Of fayth. ca. 4. Of the defynition, and effectes of fayth. capi. 5. Of hope. capitu. 6. Of charity and loue. cap. 7. Of feare. capitu. 8. Of humility and against pryde. ca. 9. Of the pacience, and tribulations of the electe and ut. capi. 10. Of iustice. capitu. 11 Of prudencye, and of the vice of im∣prudency. cap. 12
Of wiseome, and of the faute of fo∣lyshnes. capi. 13 Of obedience. ca. 14 Of pitty, and mercy. cap. 15 Of temperaunce, and sobrietye, and of bodelye castigation capi. 19 Againse the vices of the fleshe. ca. 17 Of fortitude and stability, and of the constancye of the hearte cap. 18 Against couetuousnes, and of libera∣lye. ca. 19 Of the obseruaions of ensamples, & auoydinge of offences capi. 20 An exhortation to peace and concord and agaynste dissention and conten∣tion. capi. 21 Againste temearius and inordrdi∣nate iudgementes capitu. 22 Of spirituall furtheraunce, and per∣fection ca. 23 Of iust & charitable correption. ca. 24 Of temptation capi. 25 Of prayer ca. 26 Of spirituall gloriation or ioye, and inwarde consolation. And againste vaine glorye capi. 27
Against loquaity & ydlenes. capi. 28 Of internall reformation, & thanks euing, & of certain spirituall xerci∣s, and of the ordinaunces of al thin∣es to the lase ende. cap. 29 Of originall synne, and the transfu∣on throf, and of the comparison of Christes grace to Adams faule. ca. 30 Of threfolde heuines, laudable, vi∣perable and indifferente cap. 31 n exhortotion to labour for felicity nd beatitude it selfe capi. 32 Of the dissolutiue desire too be wyth Christ. cap. 33 gaynst ydolatrye. capi. 34 Againste diuers vices of men. ca. 35 n exhortation too diuers vertues, nd to the acts and dedes of the same apitu. 36 Of the Sinagoge, and of diuers gif∣s of grace in time paste geuen vn∣to it, and of double cyrcumcysion, apitu. 37 Of the church ca. 38 Of the efficacity & arguments of the reachinge of the euangelicall law.
And of the miracles of blessed saincte Paule the Apostle. Capi. 39. Of the vocation of the gentiles, and of the exceation and blindenes of the Iewes, and also of their small con∣uersion vnto Christ. Cap. 40. Of dyuers gyftes and graces geuen vnto the church in the time of grace, vnder and in the time of the euange∣licall lawe. Ca. 41. Yet of the selfe same matter. And of the comparison of one gyfte to an o∣ther, and of the vse of them, and of the profytte that commeth of them. Capitu. 47. Of the excellncye of the supernall graces graunted vnto the faythul of Christe, namelye in the prymityue churche. Ca. 43. Of predestynation & the foreknow∣ledge of God Ca. 44. Of the iustice of God, and of the ri∣goure of the diuyne iustice agaynste sinners. Capi. 45. Of the vnspeaeable mrcye of God vnto mankind, and of Christes meke redemtion of man. Ca. 46.
Of diuers misteries of Christ, that is f his incarnation, natiuity, humili∣ye, pouertye, passion, resurrection, pparition, ascention, and glorifica∣ion, and also of the effectes of his sa∣tiferus passion. Capi. 47. That Christ is the heade, not onely f the churche militaunt, but also of he triumphant. And of the misticall nitye of the churche. And of the ex∣ellencye, and laude of Christ. ca. 48. Of the diuinitye and eminence of the nly begotten sonne of god. Cap. 49 Of th insufficencye and feblenes of he lawe of Moses, to saue man with  faith and grace. cap. 50. Of the perfection and excellencye of he euangelicall lawe aboue the law written. Capit. 51. Of the insufficendy and reprobation of the sacrifices of the law. And of the fficacye of the sacryfice of the newe lawe. capi. 52. Yet agayne of the insufficiencye and iperfection of the law. And the cea∣inge and layinge downe of the thin∣ges thereof, in the time of the newe
lawe. capi. 53 Of the cessation and ende of circum∣cision, and other obseruations of the lawe, in the time of the promulgati∣on of the gospel. ca. 54 Of Christes priesthode, and bishop∣prike. And of the excellencye of Mel∣chisedech, whiche was a figure of Christ, and howe Abraham payed tythes vnto Leuy. ca. 55 With what vertues bishops, prieses and deacons beinge within holy or∣drs, ought to be adorned ca. 56 Of the institution of the communion and how damnable a thinge it is too receaue it vnworthelye cap. 57 How that the whiche be maried, ou∣ghte to behaue them selues. And of continence of virgines and widowes capitu. 58 Of certayne documentes generallye pertayninge to menne, women, and wydowes capi. 59 How parenes ought to vse them sel∣ues vnto theyr children, and masters to thir seruauntes. And contrarye wyse howe children and seruauntes
must vse them selues to their parents nd masters ca. 60 Howe superioures shoulde vse them selues to theyr subieces. And con∣trarye wyse, and of certayne docu∣mentes partayninge vnto prelaes. And howe they shoulde dyuersly in∣structe diuers cap. 61 Of the spirituall generation of bap∣time, and that frome hence foorthe, we oughte too departe frome synne. capitu. 62 Of the comminge of the most wicked and most falsest Antichrist. And of the daye of iudgement capi. 63 Of the generall rsurrection that is to come cap. 64 Of faythfull probration, and the di∣uersiti of resurrection that is to come and of the gyftes of the glorified bo∣dyes. ca. 65 Of the feruente charitye of S. Paull the Apostle ca, 66 Of the humilitye, pacience, and per∣secutions of blessed Paul the Apostle capu. 67
Of the exellencye of Paule the Apo∣stles rectitude, and sincerity. cap. 68 Of the taking vp, and visions of the blessed Apostle saint Paul, and of his perfection in all vertue. cap. 69. Of the multitude of Goddes mercies vnto the Apostle. And of the actes of the beginnynge of hys conuersion. capitu. 70 Howe humblye the Apostle desyreth him selfe and his disciples to be prai∣ed for. And of certain other his actes. capitu. 71. Of suche persons which in his Epi∣stles saluted, and were saluted. ca. 72 The prayse and gloryfication of the omnipotente Lorde and God. ca. 73. ¶The Table. A. Abraham contrarye to hope beleued in hope. capi. 4. Abraham dwelt in tabernacles. ca. 4 Abraham gaue tythes to Melchise∣ech. capi. 55. Abrahams belefe was imputed vnto him for righteousenes. cap. 4
Abrahams children. cap. 4. Abba father. cap. 42. Abyde in the estate that thou art cal∣led. cap. 1. Adam was not deceiued. cap. 59. the Afflictions of this life, are not to be compared to the glory that is too come. ca. 32. All thynges woorke well vnto them that loue God. capi. 7. All synnes sauynge fornycation are withoute the body. capi. 17. All thinges are pure. cap. 20. ca. 35. All thinges are not expedient. ca. 20. All thinges edifye not. ca. 20. All are vnder sinne. cap. 35. All voyces haue signification. ca. 42. All thinges worke for the best vnto them that loue God. ca. 44. All men are liars. ca. 45 All thinges are become newe. ca. 46 All thinges are good ap. 46 All thinges in the law was pourged with bloude. cap. 47. All fulnes dwelleth in Christ. ca. 46. All haue sinned. ca. 50 All thinges are lawfull, but not pro∣fitable
capi. 50 Alexander the copper smith ca. 67 A lyttle leuen sowrethe the whole lompe of dowe ca. 27 A newe Testamente doeth abrogate the olde. ca. 51 Among whō the gospel is hiddē ca. 36 Aūgels are ministring spirits. ca. 49 Antichriste shall syte as God in the temple cap. 63 Antichrist shall be consumed by the spirit of Christes mouth ca. 63 Al things are naked vnto God ca. 49 the Apostles labour with theyr owne hands ca. 10 the Apostles were agasing tocke vn∣to the worlde ca. 10 Apply not the body vnto fornication capitu 17 An othe is an ende of all strife ca. 3 Arme your selues wt faith & loue ca. 8 As longe as we are in the bodye, we are absente from God cap. 4 A ombling tone capitu. 4 A seruaunt is the lords fre man ca. 11 A venge not your selues ca. 9 Auoyd an hereike cap. 11 Auoyde vnghostly vanytyes ca. 12
Auyde folyshe questions ca. 21 Auoyde lustes of youth ca. 36 A willinge mynde is accepted recor∣dinge to that a man hath ca, 11 B. Bear the frailnes of the weake. ca. 5 Bear one an others burden cap. 15 Be alwayes feruent in a good thing capi. 23 Be a foole in this world ca. 13 Be rych in hope ca. 6 Be not hie minded ca. 8.9.40 Be not wise in your owne eies ca. 9 Be not wise in your owne opinions capitu. 9. Be not vaine gloryus ca. 9 Be not ouercome of euyll ca. 10 Be innocēt as concerning euill. ca. 13 Be ready to al good workes ca. 14 Be mercifull one to an other ca. 15 Be not forgetful to kepe hospitality capitu. 15. Behaue your selues as the ministers of God ca. 16.36 Be not dronke with wyne ca. 6 Be rich in the works of ye lord. ca. 18 Be angry but synne not ca. 35
Be not caryed with euery winde of doctrine. cap. 18 Be not wery in well doinge. ca. 18.32 Be not caryed aboute with straunge learning. capit. 18 Be content with raimente and fode. capitu. 19. Be riche in good workes. ca. 19 Be ready to geue. capi. 19 Be not children in wytte but in ma∣liciousnes. capit. 23 Be not ashamed to testifye our Lord capitu. 23. Be not carefull. ca. 27 Be thanefull. capitu. 29 Be not a worshipper of ydols. ca. 34 Be not wise in your own conceytes. capitu. 40 Be ready to harbor. ca. 41. Beware leaste any man decaue you through philosophye. ca. 12 By grace we are saued. capi. 43 By the lawe cometh the knowledge of synne. capi. 50 Bodely exercise profitteth little. ca. 15 a Bishop and what maner of man he oughte to be. cap. 56
C. Carnall men are carnallye minded. capitu. 12. Cast away the deds of darknes, ca. 32 the Children of wrathe. ca. 16.30 the Children of fayth are Abrahams children. ca. 4. Children obey and honour your pa∣rentes. capiu. 59. Christ came of the sede of Dauid. ca. 1 Christ rose frome death. ca. 1.47 Christes gospell is the power of God capitu. 4. Christ is the ende of the lawe. ca. 4 Christ is to me life. ca. 6 Christ shall fashion oure vyle bodyes like vnto his glorious bodye. ca. 6 Christ made him selfe of n reputa∣tion. capt. 9.47 Christ toke vppon him the shape of a seruaunte. ca. 9.47 Christe died and rose agayne, to be Lord both of the dead and the quick. capitu. 11. Christ speaketh in Paul. ca. 11. Christ the embassidoure and priest of oure profession. ca. 12
Christe is the power and wysedome of God capi. 13 Christs riches are vnsercheable, ca 1 Christe was tempted in all poyntes like as we are cap. 25 Christe maketh intercession for vs. capi, 26.44 Christ prayed wyth stronge cryinge and tears ca. 26 Christ is in all thinges ca. 29 Christ damned synne by syn. ca. 30 Christ is our life cap. 32 Christ is preached of diuers diuersly capitu. 35 Christ was a minister of the circum∣cision cap. 37 Christe is the headde of the churche capitu 38.48.58 Christ gaue him selfe for the congre∣gation ca. 38 Christes bloud speaketh better then the bloude of Abell cap. 38 Christ throughe his bloude redemed vs capitu. 43 Christ is the head corner stone ca, 43 Christ did put awaye death ca. eod Christ shal shew him selfe from hea∣uen
in flamynge fyer capi 4 Christ rose o iustify vs cap. 46 Christ reconciled vs to God beynge enemies cap. 46 Christ which knewe no sinne, hathe made him self to be sin for vs. ca. eodē Christ was made a cursed for vs. eod Christ hath broken doun ye wall. eod. Christ hath put oute the hande wry∣inge that was agaynst vs ca. eo. Christ came in to this worde to saue synners ca. eo Christ is the hye priest of good thin∣ges to come cap. 47 Christ is the mediatoure of the newe Testament ca. 47 Christ apeared & put sin to flight eod Christe is a prieste after the order of Melchisedech ca. eod Christ descended and ascended to ful∣fyll all thinges ca. eod Christ is aboue al rule & power. ca. 48 Christ is the ymage of the inuisible God. ca. 48, 49 Christ is before all things ca, 48 Christ offered him selfe once for all capitu 52 55
Christe spronge of the tribe of Iuda. capitu. 55 Christe is our hye priest. cap. 55 Christs descention frō heauen. ca. 64 Christ that in man beginneth a good thinge, shall end the same. cap. 66 Children of the flesh are not the chil∣dren of God. ca. 44 Circumcision is nothinge. ca. 11. Circūcision & how it auayleth. ca. 7 Couetous persons haue no inheri∣taunce in heauen. ca. 19 Coueteousnes is the rote of all euyll capitu, 19. Coueteousenes is not too be named. capitu. 17.19. Couetous persons are worshippers of ydols. ca. 17 Comfort the feble mynded. ca. 15 Cōpany not with fornicatours. ca. 17 Continue in prayer. cap. 26 Couet spirituall. giftes. cap. 42 Cretaines are liars. cap 14 The creatures of god are good. ca. 25 Crucifye the fleshe with the apetites thereof. capitu. 16 A crowne of righteousnes. capi. 3
Cut away occasions. capi. 68 D. Death is to me aauntage. ca. 6.33 Death worketh in vs, and life in you capitu. 10 Death entered by synne ca. 30 Deathe hathe no more power ouer Christ capit. 62 Death is the last that shal be destroi∣ed. ca. 65. Defraud not thy brother in bargan∣ninnge. ca. 11 Despysers of Moses lawe were put to death ca. 8 Despise not the chasteninge. ca. 10 Despise the superioures commaun∣dementes, and despise God ca. 14 Deacons, and what manner of men they shoulde be capi. 56 Departe from iniquitye. ca. 13 Deny God, and he shal deny the. ca. 11 the Dedes of the fleshe. ca. 17. the Dedes of the law iustify no man. capitu. 50. Diuersyties of bodies ca. 65 Do all youre busines in loue. ca. 7.36 Do nothinge groudgingly, or of ne∣ceitye.
ca. 11 Do all thinges, honestly ca. 12 Do nothinge parcially ca. 14 Doe all thinges to the prayse of god capitu. 29. Doo all thinges in the name of the Lorde Iesu ca. eo Do good to all men ca. 32 Do all thinges without murmuring capitu. 36 Do all thinges vnto edifyinge ca. 42 Doers not hearers of the lawe be iu∣stied ca. 45 Domes daye shall not come vntyll Antichriste be come capi. 63. Domes daye shall come lyke a theee capi. eodem, Denye all vngodlynes capit. 32 Deuour not one an other ca. 10 Drawe all one waye ca. 21 E. Eae not with couetus men. ca. 35 Enoche was translated cap. y• Earth that bringeth forth thornes must be burnie cap. 11 Esau solde his byrthrighte for one breakefast capi. 16
ternall lyfe is the grace and gift of god ca. 23 Esteme not thy selfe more then it be∣ommeth the ca. 9.48 Esteeme other better then thy selfe. apitu 9. Euerye manne shall beare his owne urthen capit. 1 Euery man shall geue accomptes of im selfe cap. 22 Euery mā hath not knowledge ca, 34 Euery man shall receaue his reward ccordinge to his labour cap. 45 Euyll wordes corrupt good maners pitu. 28 Experience bringeth hope ca 10 Exhort one an other dayly ca. 12 Examyn thy selfe, and so eate of that reade. ca. 57 F. Fayeth is the waye vnto grace. ca. 4 Fayth and belefe of the heare iusti∣yeth capi. eod Fayth cometh by hearing ca, 4.39 Fayeth by loue is mghye in opera∣ion cap. 4 Fayth is the gifte of god ca. eod
Faith commeth not of workes ca. 4 Fayth is asure confidence of thinges which are hoped for ca. 5 the Faithfull are blessed with fayth∣full Abraham ca. 4 Fashion not youre selues like vnto the worlde ca. 29. Fathers moue not youre children to wrath cap. 60 Fathers rae not your childrē. ca. 60 Fathers must laye vp for their chyl∣dren ca. eodem the Faule of the Iewes is vnto the gentiles saluation ca. 40 the Fashion of this worlde goeth a∣waye capitu. 36 Fede thine enemy. ca. 15 False Apostles the ministers of Sa∣han ca. 25 Feare to faule in to the hands of god capitu. 8 Filthy communication ca. 20 Fighte the good fight of faith ca. 32 Fire shal trye eery mās work. ca 45 the Flesh luseth contrary to the spi∣rit. ca. 16.25 Fleshe and bloudde shall not inherit
he kingdome of God cap. 23 Flee frō worshipping of ydols. ca. 34 Fleshly men can no please god ca. 17 Folow that which is good ca. 10 Folow the truthe in loue. ca. 23 Forget not to do good capitu. 15 Folow ye thou mast cōprehend. ca. 23 Fornicatours do synne against their wne bodyes. ca. 17 Folish questions do gēder stryfe. ca. 21 he Frutes of the spirite ca. 23 Fulfyl not the lustes of ye flesh ca. 16 G. Geue roume vnto wrath ca. 9 Geue to euery man his duty ca. 11 Geue your members seruauntes vn∣righteousenes ca. 17 Geue no occasion of euill. ca. 20 Geue no place vnto the deuil. ca. 25.35 Geue no hede to fables ca. 28 Geue your selues vnto God ca. 36 Geue with singlenes cap. 41 Gentiles offer to deuils ca. 34 Gifts of the spirit ca. 41 Giftes of the spirite are diuers. ca. 41 od cannot lye. ca. 1 God promised eternall life before the
worlde began. cap. God from the beginninge hath chosē vs to saluation cap. 2 God hath called vs vnto hope. ca. 3 God brought our Lorde Iesus from death cap. 3.4 God is riche vnto all that call vpon hym capi. 4 God iustifieth the heathen throughe fayth cap. eod God can not denye him selfe ca. o God rewardeth them y• seke him. ca. 5 God raiseth y• dead to life again. ca. 6 God is able to subdue all thinges to him selfe ca. eo God is the sauioure of all that beleue capitu. eodem God loueth a chearefull geuer. ca. 11 God geueth power to edifye and not to destroye. ca. od God compasseth the wise in theyr fo∣lyshenes ca. 13 God quickeneth all thinge ca. 14 God forgettethe not the woorke that cometh of loue capitu. 1 God wyll iudge adulterers ca. 17 God geueth the encrease ca.
God is causer of peace, ca. e God shall rewarde euery man occor∣dinge to his dedes ca. 22 God loketh on no mans person, ca. eo God shal suffer no mā to be tempted aboue his strngth ca. 25.45. God hath deliuered vs frome the po∣wer of darkenes cap. 32 God sware by him selfe ca. eo God is not ashamed to be calde oure god ca. 33 God hath prepared a citi for vs ca. eo God gueth vp synners to their har∣tes lustes ca. 35 God tryeth the harie cap. 39 God wyl make a short word in earth capitu 40 God hath wrapped al nations in vn¦belefe. ca eo God woorkethe all thinges that are wroughte in all creatures ca. 14 God is not causer of strife ca. 42 God in his churche hathe ordayned diuers rulers ca. 41.43 God hath anoynted vs and sealed vs capitu. 42
God is rych in mercy ca. 43 God loued vs when we were dead in synne ca. eod God raised Christ frō death. ca. 43.63 God called vs not accordinge to oure deedes, but accordinge too his grace. capi. 43 God hathe chosen the foolyshe of the worlde to confounde the wise. ca. 44 God is faithfull ca. eo. God ordayned vs too walke in good workes ca. eod God worketh both the deede and the wyll ca. eo God is not parciall ca. 45 God loketh on no mannes personne. capit. 45.60 God of his righteousenes recompen∣seth tribulation to those that trouble vs cpi. 45 God hath made Christ a seate of mer∣cye cap. 46 God onely doth iustifye man. ca. 50 God calleth those thinges that be not as though they were ca. eod God is a spirit ca. 73 God is able to do exceadinglye aboue
that we aske ca. eod God wyl haue all men saued ca. eo Gods kindnes ledeth to repentaunce capitu. 22 Gods woorde was committed to the Iewe ca. 37 Gods house is the cōgregation. ca. 38 Gods husbandrye ca. 39. Goddes iudgemente is accordinge to truthe ca. 2 Godly liuers suffer persecutiōs. ca. 10 Godlynes hath promises of the lyfe that is nowe and to come. ca. 15 Godli sorow causeth repentaūce ca. 31 Godlynes is great ryches ca. 19 Godly edifyinge is by faith. ca. 28 Go forewarde in good workes. ca. 10 Go not too lawe one wyth an other. capitu. 22 Glorify god in body & spirit. ca. 23.41 Glory in infirmyties ca. 27 Grace is more plentuous then synne capitu. 30 Grace is no grace where workes a∣uayle ca. 37 H. Handle the word of truth iustly. ca. 11
Halte not out of the way ca. eod Hate that is euyll ca. 41 Haue no felowship with deuils ca. 34 Haue peace with all men ca. 41 Haue them in honoure that haue the ouersigte of you cap. 60 Heauen hath an enduring substance capitu. 10. He that suffreth tribulation is coun∣ted worthye of the kingedome of god capitu. 10 He that prouideth not for his house∣hold is worse then an infidele. cap. 11 He that resisteth power resisteth god capitu 14 He that praiseth him selfe is not alo∣wed ca. 27 He that wyll not worke shoulde not eate ca. 28 Heretikes are to be auoided ca. 11 Heresies must ned be ca. 21 Helpe those that by any chaunce are fallen in to any aute ca. 15 His seruaunt thou art to whom thou obey cap. 14 Hynder not the gospell ca. 20 Holde fast the worde of god ca. 36
Hope is layed vppe for vs in ore in heauen ca, 2 Hope putteth no man to shame ca, 6 Hope saueth a man ca, eodē Hope that is sene is no hope ca. eo How the ministers of god should be∣haue them selues ca. 10 Honour true widowes ca. 59 the Husband is the wiues head. ca. 58 Husbandes loue youre wyus. ca. eo Husbandes be not bytter vnto youre wyues ca. eodē I. Iesus the greate shepehearde ca. 3 Iesus the actour and finisher of our faieth ca. 4 Iesus the mediatour of the new Te∣tament cap. 38 Iesus suffered without the gate ca, 43 Iesus continueth for euer ca. 49 If thou mayst be free vse it cap. 11 If thou stande take heede thou faule not capi 12 If thou be y• son, thou art heire ca. 43. If the rote be holy, the braunches are holy ca. 40 If god be on our syde, who canne be
agaynst vs. ca. 44. I desire to be wyth Christe cap. 33 In mā dwelleth no good thing. ca. 30 In man are two lawes cap. eodem In a great mannes house are vessels of golde and wood capit. 44 In the latter dayes some shall geeue hede to deuilyshe doctrine ca. 25 In Christe dwelleth all the fulnes of the godheade capi. 48 In two and three witnesses all thin∣ges doo stande cap. 68 Inobedience brought condempnati∣on on all menne ca. 14 It becommeth a preacher too speake freelye ca. 70 It became Christ to be made like vn∣to hys breethren capi. 47 It is appoynted that men shall once dye ca. eod It is good for a man not to touche a woman capitu. 57 It is better to marye then to burne capitu. 58 It is dampnable to breake the firste sayeth ca. 59 Iudge not hastly capi. 14
Iudge not one an other ca. 22 Iudge nothinge vntyll the lord come capitu. eodem Iustification cometh not by the dedes of the lawe but by fayth ca. 53 K. Kepe holye daye with purenesse and truth cap. 29 the Kingedome of god is not in wor∣des but in power ca. 9.28 Kingedome of god is not meate and dryncke but righteousnes ca. 20 Knowledge maketh a man too swell capitu. 7.9, Know not Christ after the flesh. ca. 13 Know ye not that a lyttle luen sow∣reth the whole lmpe of dow ca. 17 L. Labour with thy hands cap 15 Lay from you that old man capi. 16 Lay hand on eternall lyfe. ca 32 Lay sodenly hands on no man. ca. 61 Lawes are geuē to the vnrighteous capitu. 35. the Law made nothing perfect. ca. 51 the Lawe hathe but the shadowe of good thinges to come cap. 52
the Lawe is good if it be vsed lawe∣fullye cap. 53. Learne to be content in what so euer estate ye e ca. 15. Let youre woordes be well sauoured with salte capitu. 12 Let not sinne raigne in your mortall bodyes ca 7 Let not sinne haue power ouer you. capitu. 35. Let vs do euyll that good maye come thereof capi. 45 Let euerye man haue hys wyfe to a∣uoyde fornication ca. 58 Let vs eate and drinke tomorow we shal dye ca. 65. Lye not one to an other ca. 35. the Leter killeth ca. 39 Leaue father and mother, and conty∣nue with thy wyfe capi. 38 Liue after the flesh and die ca. 16.17 the Loue of Christ passeth knowledge capitu. , Loue fulfylleth the lawe. ca. 7 Loue thy neighbour as thy self. ca 7 Loue hurteth not ca. od Loue without dissmulation. ca. eodē
Loue god & he wil know the. ca. eodē Loue edifieth ca. eo. Loue falleth neuer away ca. eodē Loue and his properties ca, eodē he Lord knoweth them that are his capitu. 13 Luste not after euil things. ca. 35. Lust had not ben knowen but by the lawe co 50. M. ake your bodyes a quicke sacrifice vnto god. cap. 16 Make not prouision for ye flesh. ca. eo. Manne doeth not what he would but what he woulde not ca. 30 Man is iustified by fayth ca. 50. Man when he prayeth muste be bare eade capitu. 59. Man is the ymage of god ca. eodem Man neuer sawe god ca. 73 Mans conscyence accuseth, or excu∣seth capi. 45. Masters threaten not your seruaunts api. 60. Malitius and euyll speaking corrup∣eth good maners capi. 65.
Meate maketh vs not acceptable to god. cap. 0 Meate is to be receiued with thanks geuinge capitu. 51. a Mediator is not a mediator of one. capitu. 53. Medle with your own busines ca. 36 Mens sinnes go to iudgement before hande cap. 45 Men seeke theyr owne, and not that whice is Iesus Christes. cap. 66 Melchisedech kinge of Salem. ca. 55 Minysters of the altare, are parta∣kers of the alter ca. Mortife the deedes of the fleshe and lyue cap. 16.17 Mortifye your members which are on the earth ca. 16 Moses was a proper childe ca. 5 Moses estemed the rebuke of Christe greater ryches, then the treasure of Egypte cap. eode Mounte Syna. ca. 4 N. Naturall men perceaue not the thin∣ges of the spirit ca. 12. Noe throughe the arke condempned
the worlde ca. 7 No man knoweth anye thinge as he oughte to know ca. 9 No man that is geuen to God entan∣gleth him selfe with worldly busines capitu. 11. No manne speakinge in the spirit of God defyeth Iesus. ca 34 No man hateth his owne flesh. ca. 38 No man despiseth an alowed Testa∣mente ca. 53 No man but he that is called taketh honour vpon him capi. 55 Nothinge can departe a manne from the loue of God capi. 7 Now we se in a glasse cap. 32 Nothinge is commen of it selfe. ca. 20 O. Obey not for feare, but because of conscience cap. 14 Obey them that haue the ouersyght of you capit. 61 Olde thinges are passed away. ca. 46 Olde womens dutye and office. ca. 61 One mediator betwene god and man capitu. 46. O the abundaunte wisedome of god
O the depenesse of the aboundaune knowledge of God ca. 44 Our ablens cometh of god ca. 6 Our knowledge is vnperfect ca. 33 Our fathers were all baptised vnder Moses in the cloude & in the sea. ca. 37 Our reioysinge is the testimonye of conscience capi. 17 Owe nothinge to any man but loue capitu. 7.11. Ouercome euill wyth goodnes. ca. 10 P. Pacience bringeth experience. ca. 10 Passe ouer vayne voyces cap. 13 Paule was called too be an Apostle be god ca. 1 Paule was appointed to preache by the commaundemente of god ca. 1.43 Paule is not ashamed of the Gospell capitu. 4. Paule receaued not the gospel of mā but of Christ ca. 4 Paul because he woulde not be gre∣uous to anye man labourd daye and nighte capiu. 10.20 Paule a minister of the gospel. ca. 13. Paule deliuered Alexander to Sathā
capitu. 4 Paule christened but two ca. 21 Paul was vnquieted in ye flesh. ca, 25. Paule prayeth night and day. ca. 27 Paule counteth all thinge as doung to wynne Christ ca. 3 Paule was of the tribe of Beniamin capitu. 37 Paul as concerninge the law was a Pharisee. ca. eodem Paule persecuted the congregation capitu 37.70 Paule is in debte to all men. ca. 39 Paule came not to the people in glo∣riousnes of wordes ca. eode Paule preached not with entisinge wordes ca. eod Paule sawe Iesus Christ ca. 39.47 Paule was no chopper of the worde of god cap. 39 Paule was not behynde the chefe A∣postles ca. eo Paul was not rde in knowledge. eo Paul exhorted not with gule. ca. eod Paul was no flatterer ca eod Paule cloked no couetuousnes. ca. eo Paul sought not to please men. ca. eo
Paul was diligent to remember the poore ca. 53 Paule withstode Peter. cap. eo Paule for his brethren wyshed him lfe to be cursed from Christ ca. 66 Paule made him selfe seruaunte vn∣all menne cap. eo Paul delited in infirmities. ca. 67.69 Paul was let doun in a basket. ca. 67 Paule fulfylleth that is behynde of the passions of Christe ca. 67 Paule was taken vp in to the thyrde heauen cap. 69 Paule coulde do all thinges through the helpe of Christe ca. ode Paul was learned to be content both wyth wealth and wo ca. eo Pauls cloke & his parchements. ca. 71 Pauls token in al his Epistles. ca. 72 Peace of God passeth all vnderstan∣dinge ca. 3 Please thy neighboure vnto his edi∣yinge cpitu. 20 Potter hathe power ouer the claye capitu. 44. Praye in the spirite capi. 18 Preache the Gospell and lyue of the
gospell capi. 1. the Preachinge of the crosse capi. 13 Preache the worde be it in season or out of season ca. 24.61 Preachers must be sente cap. 39 Priestes that rule well are worthye of double honour. cap. 61.14 Praye with the spirite ad with the mynde ca. 26 Praye continually ca. 26.36 Pray lyfting vp your hands wihout wrath ca. 26 Praye for kinges and for all that are in auctoritye cap. eo Power cometh of god ca. 14. Prouide for honest thinges cap. 12 Put on the Lord Iesus ca. 17.32 Put on the armur of lighte ca. 18.32 Put not a stomblynge blocke in thy brothers way cap. 20.22 Put away childishnes ca. 23 Put awaye lyinge and speake the truth cap. 8 Put on the newe man cap, 29 Put of the old man with his works capi. eod. Put away all maliciousnes ca. 35
Put awaye ilthye communication. capitu. 35. Put on nder mercy ca. 36 Put not thy wyf from the. ca. 38 R. Raab the harlote ca. 5 Rebuke the works of darknes. ca. 24 Rebuke not an elder ca. od Rebuke the sinfull openly. ca. eo Recaue the weake ca. 15. Receaue not the grace of god in vain capitu 23. Recompence not euyll for euyl. ca. 10 Redeme the time ca. 12 Reioyce not in men ca. 20.27 Reioyce in tribulation ca. 27 Rioyce in God cap. 27.13 Reioyce in the crosse of Christ. ca. 27 Remember them that are in bondes capitu 15. the Rward of synne is dath ca, 17 Reward to him that worketh is rec¦kend of duye ca. 50. Reprue tem wyth modesy that re∣syse the truthe cap. 4 Righteousnesse is opened by sayeth capitu 4.50.
Rich men saule in to many noysome lustes cap. 19 the Rote of Iee ca. 40. S. Sacrifices which please god ca. 15. Sacrifice of lawe is the rute of oue lippes ca. 29 Sathan fashioneth him selfe in to an Aungell of lighe ca. 25. Sara through fayeth was deliuered of a childe ca. 23 Seke not thine owne profyte ca. 7 Seke an other mans wealth ca. eo Seke the profitie of many ca. 20 Seke not for a wyfe cap. 58. Seeke the thinges whiche are aboue capitu. 32. Seruauntes of synne are not vnder righteousenes ca. 11 the Seruaunte of the Lorde muste informe them that resyste the truth capitu. 36 the Seruaunte of the Lorde must not striue ca. eo Seruauntes obey youre maysters. capitu. 60.
Seruauntes must counte they ma∣sers worthye of all honour ca. eo Serauntes oughte not to aunswer agayne. ca. eod Scripture is able too make a manne wise vnto saluation ca. 12 Scripture geuen by the inspiration of God is profitable to teache, to im∣proue ca. 13 Shewe mercy with cherfulnes. ca. 41 Synners haue pleasure in them that synne capi. 35 Synne was not regarded as long as there was no lawe cap. 50 Sowe spirituall thynges and reape carnall cap. 11 Sowe lyttle and reape little. ca. eod Sorowe not for the deadde withoute hope capi. 31 Spirituall men discusse all thinges capitu. 12 Speake euyll of no man ca. 14 Speake all one thinge ca. 21 Styrre vp the gift of God whiche is in the ca. 23 Study to be quiet ca. 36 Striue not about wordes ca. 21
Sand not in thy own consaite. ca. 5 Swell not one agaynst another. ca. 21 Submit your selues to the auctority of the hier powers ca. 14. Submit your selues one to an other in the feare of god capi. 8 Suffer affliction ca. 32 Suffer to gether and be glorifyed to∣gether ca. 42 T. the Tabernacle, and what was con∣tained in it cap. 37 Take hede to thy office ca. 12 Tame and bring the body in to sub∣ection. capi. 15 Teache and take hede to thy doctrine capitu. 41. Tempte not Christe cap. 25 The feblest members are mooste ne∣cessarye cap 41 The earnest of our inheritaūce. ca. 43 The woorde of the preacher is the worde of God ca. eod The wrath of God against vngodly∣nes cap. 45 The word of god is not bound ca 47 They that faule canne not be renued
vnto repentaunce ca. There be that reioyce in the face and not in the hearte cap. 27 The thinges which god hath prepa∣red for them that loue are vnspeake∣able cap. 3 There is but one God in the worlde capitu. ca. 34 Ther is not one that doth good ca. 35 They confesse God and in dedes de∣nye him. ca. eo Thei shal be damned that beleue nt the truthe capi 63 They that studye to please men are not the seruauntes of Christe ca. 67 Things written are written for our learninge ca. 6 Thynges seene and not seene, ca 13 the Tyme goeth awaye ca. 36 a Testament taketh auctory by the deathe of men cap. 47. To Abraham and his seede were the promyses made ca. 3 Translate the priesthode, and tran∣slate the lawe ca. 55. Transgression receaueth a iuste re∣ward ca. 14
Treasure in earhen vessels ca. 13 Tribulation bringeth pacience ca. 10 Trust not in vncertayne riches. ca 19 Tribulation preparethe for vs an e∣ternall waygie of glorye cap. 3 To the defiled nothing is pure, ca 35 Trust not in your selues, but in god capitu. 6. True circumcision capi. 37 U. W. Walke worthye of oure Lorde in all good workes ca. Walke circumspetlye ca. 12 Walke not in vanitye of the mynd apitu. 16 Walke as children of light ca. 23 Walke honestlye cap. 3 Walke worthye of God ca. 23 Walke worthye of youre vocation capitu. 36. Walke in a newe life ca. 63 Wast not thy braynes about questi∣ons ca. 9 Warne the vnrulye. ca. 4 Watche and be sober ca. 16 Wayte on thy office ca. 41 Wantn widowes cap. 59
We shoulde swym in loue one to an other ca. 2 We are iustified by fayth cap. 4 We preache not ye and ay ca. eod We are not sufficient of oure selues to thinke anye thinge cap. 6 We are made the of scourynge of all thinges ca. 10 We wrastle not agaynste fleshe and bloude ca. 18 Wee broughte nothynge in too the worlde cap. 19 We knowe not what to praye for as we oughte ca. 26 We seke for a citye y• is to come. ca. 32 We loke for the deliueraunce of oure bodyes capi. 33. We are mēbers of Christs bodi. ca. 38 We are of the houshold of God. ca. 43 We must all appeare before the iud∣gemente seate of Christ cap. 54 We are all one in Christ ca. 48 We are buried with Christe by bap∣tym ca. 62 We shall be chaunged in the twin∣kelnge of an eye ca. 65 Wemen throughe ayeth receaued
theyr dead raysed to life agayn. ca. 5 Women araye your selues in come∣lye apparell ca. 26 Wemen must pray couered ca. 59 Women were created for mans saks capi 59 Wemens heare is geuen them to co∣uer them wyth all ca. odem Women muste kepe silence cap. eo Womē must be vnder obedience. eod Wemen must learne of their husban∣des. ca eode Wemen may not teache men ca. eo Women throughe bearinge of chil∣dren shall be saued cap. eodem a Woman is bounde to the man as longe as he lyueth ca. 50 the Womā ws deceaued not Adam capitu. 59 What so euer is not of fayth is synne capitu. 4. the walles of Ierico cap. 5 What companye hathe lighte with darkenes? ca. 1 What so euer a manne soweth that shall he reape ca. od What Godly sorowe causeth. ca. 31
When they counted thē selues wise, they became fooles. ca. 34 Where the spirite of God is, there is liberty ca. 73 Who is sicke & I am not sicke. ca. 67 Without fayeth it is vnpossible too please god ca. 5 Who shall seperate vs from the loue of god ca. 7 Who goeth a warfare at his owne coste. cap. 11 Who knoweth the minde of the lord capitu 13.44 Who shall deliuer me from this bo∣dy of death ca. 33 Wylt thou be without feare do well capitu. 8. Wylful sinners haue o sacrifice for synne ca. 8 Whom the Lorde loueth him he cha∣steneth ca 10 Wo to me if I preache not. ca. 11 Worke poure owne saluation ca. 8 the Wysedome of the fleshe is Gods nemye ca. 12 be wise vnto that which is good ca. 13 the Wisedome of this worlde is but
foolishenes c. o the Wyll of god is that ye shoulde be holye ca. 16 Wyues loue and feare your husban∣des ca. 58. Wydowes that lyue in pleasure are dead ca. 59. Workes of good wydowes ca. eod Wordlye sorowe causeth death ca. 31 Wrappe not your selues in the yoke of bondage ca. 54 the Word of god is quick and sharpe capitu. 49. Wythdrawe youre selues from those that worke inordinately ca. 20 U. Uessels of mercy ca. 40 Uessels of wrat prepared to damna∣tion ca. 44 Uessels of mercy prepared vnto glo∣rye cap. eod the Uisible thinges of God are kno∣wen by the inuisible ca. 13 Y. Ye are the temple of the liuynge god capitu. 11.41. Ye are dearelye boughte. 23.41.
Ye ye, naye naye capi. 28. Ye are not yonr owne cap. 41 Ye haue not receaued the spirite of bondage, but of adoption ca. 24 Y are iustifyed freelye by the grace of God. capitu. 46. Here endeth the Table. FINIS. ¶IMPRYNTED at London, by Iohn Tisdale, and are to be solde at his shoppe in the vpper end of Lombarde srete in All. hallowes chuchyarde nere vnto grace churche. 1562.
