19611 99849620 14779
A TREATISE CONTAINING THE AEQVITY OF AN HVMBLE SVPPLI∣CATION WHICH IS TO BE EXHIBITED VNTO HIR GRACIOVS MAIESTY AND this high Court of Parliament in the behalfe of the Countrey of Wales, that some order may be taken for the preaching of the Gospell among those people. Wherein also is set downe as much of the estate of our people as without offence could be made known, to the end that our case (if it please God) may be piti∣ed by them who are not of this assem∣bly, and so they also may bee driuen to labour on our behalfe. AT OXFORD, Printed by IOSEPH BARNES, and are to be sold in Pauls Church-yard at the signe of the Tygers head. 1587.
TO AL THAT MOVRN IN SION VNTIL THEY SEE Ierusalem in perfect beuty, & namely to my Fathers & Bre∣thren of the Church of England, grace, mercy and loue in the Lord Iesus bee mul∣tiplied. IT hath beene the iust complaint (beloued in the Lord) of the godlie in all ages, that Gods eternall and blessed verity, vnto whom the very Heauens themselues shoulde stoupe and giue obesiance, hath bin of that smal reckoning and account in the eies of the most part of great men, as they valued it to be but a meere losse of time to yeeld anie attendaunce there∣upon. Hence it commeth to passe that the truth being at any time to be countenanced, none very often are found in the traine thereof, but the most contemptible and re∣fuse of men. And because these also being guilty vnto themselues of great infirmities (and foule sinnes manie times) and not ignorant that affliction is the sequele of earnest and sincere profession doe pull their neckes from the yoke, and their shoulders from the burden: the Lorde is constrained verie seuerely to deale with them before they can be gotten to go on his message. Whereupon also followeth their endeuours in Gods owne cause not to haue the euents which they expect. Example hereof Ionas may be one for all. And which is farre more lamentable, in as
much as the drousie and carelesse security, the colde and frossen affections of the godly themselues in most waigh∣tie affaires is neuer wanting, their careful diligence, and earnest zeale ioined with hartie, and vehement praiers alwaies desired, the Lord suffereth his owne cause, to con∣tract some spot from their sinful hands. These considera∣tions beloued, but specially the later, kept me back a great while from this action, which I haue now by the goodnes of God brought to this passe you see. It would be a gree∣uous wound vnto me all my life long if the dignitie of a cause worthy to haue the shoulders of al the princes vn∣der the coape of heauen for it footstoole should be anie whit diminished by my foule hands, which notwithstan∣ding I protest to haue been washed as fair as their stains would permit. But I am not a little comforted, two maner of waies. First that the Lord knoweth he thrust me almost against my wil hereunto. And for asmuch as I see the ho∣nour of Iesus Christ (in whose countenance God the fa∣ther hath louingly wincked at my sinnes, and whose is al that I haue) standeth vpon the progresse of the woorde preached among vs, my silence, though to the daunger of my life, shal not be tray his honour. Is not he a God? Will he not be religiously worshipped? Wil he not haue this re∣ligion framed according vnto his owne mind? Hath hee not regard whether his true seruice be yeelded him or no? if he haue, woe be vnto that conscience that knoweth this and keepeth it secret, or is slacke in the promoting hereof. Seing it pleased him, who also separated me from my mo∣thers womb to stur me vp hereunto, I doubt not but hee wil giue that successe of my labours, that may be most to his glory. Surely by his assistaunce I neither can nor will be slacke. The dignity of the cause (I hope) wil be regar∣ded: if not, importance must take no deniall in the matter
of our God. My second comfort is, that what effect soeuer shal ensue my paines, I seek not my owne but theirs whom it concerneth, namely my parents and brethren according to the flesh. Whose state is so miserable at this daie, that I think it were verie great vndiscreetnes for me to spare anie speech that were likely to preuaile. Naie I would to God my life coulde winne them the preaching of the Gospel. Our sicknes is at the hart, it must not be dallied with, either present remedy or vndoubted perdition. And so will they iudge, who viewe our estate offered vnto her Maiesty and the Parliament. Which was not pub∣lished onely least posterities should knowe such dishonour of God either at al to haue beene, or in 28. yeares not re∣dressed vnder Queen Elizabeth our souerain. As for the aduersaries who vnderstand our estate too wel and reioice at our silence, I regard them not at al, for what haue we a∣misse at this day, which flowed not out of the midst of their inheritance, cursed Rome, that bottomles pit & fornace of idolatry? I haue only therein touched our calamity, & not touched a great part thereof. To come vnto you beloued of the church of englād, I know our cause shal come through many of your hands, I do with teares beseech that it maie haue al the lawful fauor you find of your harts to affourd vnto Christ in his poor members. It may stand in some one to dash the whole. Therefore in the name of God I require al of you, that you hinder not his honour, the saluation of perishing souls, & the good to the common wealth hereby intēded. If you do otherwise, I praie God, so many souls, as perish in miserable Wales for want of preaching, be not required at your hands in the daie of iudgement. But be∣loued I promise al good things on your parts, and craue not only praiers, vnto the Lord for the speedy erecting of our Ierusalem; but all other helpes of speech and counte∣naunce,
of motioning the matter vnto her Maiesty & the Parliamēt; shewing the danger, of denying the great pro∣fit, and necessitie of granting our petition. It is your dutie which cannot bee shaken off, as it appeareth by the ex∣ample of Ebed-melech,Ierem. 38.9. Ieremie 38.9. The like act done by the Princes and Elders of the Lande, Ieremie. 26.16, 17. When the Princes hard Baruch read in their eares, the wordes of the booke containing al the curses Iehouah had determined to bring vpon Israel and Iuda &c. it is re∣corded by the holy Ghost, that they were affraid both one and other, and said vnto Baruch, we wil certifie the king of these woords, and did so. Wherein they perfourmed no∣thing but that which euery one of you before the Lord is bound to doe. Gods people requireth this at your handes. The state of the common wealth and her Maiesties (whom the Lord in mercie deliuer from all forraigne and dome∣stical treasons) crie vnto euerie one of you that can giue anie counsel,Iliad. 3. A counsellor must not sleepe all night. . You must not sleepe al night, in this case, but intreat the Lord, her maiesty, and this honourable court, to raise the ministerie of his word in Wales. This matter concerneth al verie nearlie. The way to procure to your selues fauour with the Lord, and credite with her Maiestie, is to solli∣cite our cause, and so you shal find it. The more earnest you be herein, the more honor shal be vnto the Lord, and her Maiestie wil be the more beholding vnto you. Nebu∣chad-nezzer an idolater blessed the Lorde, because Sha∣drak Meshak and Abednago the seruants of the liuing God,Dan. 3.9. changing the kings decree, did yeeld their bodies, ra∣ther than they would worship anie other God. If they had been as backewarde as were other Iewes in this case, howe had that notable decree to the honour of God beene pro∣mulgated? ver. 29. Where had been their commendation?
No other waie conueyeth the true fauour of anie prince vnto the subiect.Prou. 10.22. Gods blessing which maketh rich and honourable is ioined hereunto. Though it were otherwise, yet this thing is laid vpon you, be not disobedient. And likely it is to be otherwise. For (I am affraid) behold that which the Lord hath built, he wil destroie, that which he hath planted he will roote vp.Ierem. 45.45 And doe you seeke for great things vnto your selues? Seeke them not. If in the daie of trouble you will be hidden, you must be Ieremies, you must be Hebedmeleches, you must be Barucks. In these three men the Lord shewed, that euen in this life, he ma∣keth great difference betweene the zealous and luke∣warme professors. Ieremy for his roundnes in his office was beaten and put in the stocks,Ier. 35.15.16 Ier. 29.26.27. Iere. 35.15.16. iudged wor∣thy to die, Ier. 29.26.27. accounted a rauer and one that made himselfe a prophet, Ier. 29.26.27, a man that sought not the wealth of his people but the hurt, Iere. 38.4. He∣bedmelech was a noble man, but some thing ouer zealous, and one that would not stick to tel the king himselfe that he had yeelded vnto his noble men in a thing that was e∣uill in all that they had doone to Ieremie the Prophet, Ier. 38.5.9. Baruch was out of fauor both with prince and priest, Ier. 36.19.26. because he fauoured Ieremie. But when the land was made desolate, and the wordes of poore Ieremie became true, who then went vnto the wal? Verily the king and his nobles, priests, and prophets. And Ieremy the true seruant of the Lord, must haue a whole senat of noble men sent to take him out of prison and to know his wil, Nebuzaradan, Nebushasban, Raebsaris, Neregal,Ier. 39.4.13. &c. the king of Babeles princes. Hebedmelech should not bee giuen into the hands of the men whom he feared, but bee surely deliuered because hee put his trust in Iehouah.Ierem. 45.45. Ba∣ruch should haue his life giuen him for a pray. Howeso∣euer
it goeth therefore, your seruice in our cause shall bee recompensed. They that know what it is to haue their in∣iquities forgiuen, and their sinnes couered by the suffe∣rings and passions of Iesus Christ will be wounded, to see others vnder the curse. The Churches of God round a∣bout vs goe to wrack in Fraunce, Belgia and a great part of high Duch, I would Scotland had continued in her first loue, and that the hands of the builders were strengthned among you. Come what will come, stand you manfully in the faith, my fathers and brethren, and according to the counsel of Iude renew the battle againe with your spiri∣tual enimy,Iud. 3. and contend with earnestnes. It maie please God though the liuelie branches be cut off, to quicken vs dead boughes, by the vertue of our head Iesus Christ. I doubt not by the Lords goodnes, if the truth be establi∣shed among vs through continual preaching, but that al which professe Godlines in Europe, shall hartilie thank the Lord for our zeal and courage therein. Our nation are ful of drosse I graunt, as al the sonnes of Adam are by na∣ture, and verie stonie harted. But the word of God is a fire for the drosse and an hamber for the stone Ier. 23.29. And the weapons whereby the man of God warreth, are not carnal, but mightie through God to cast downe houldes, and to bring vnder euerie imagination that is against the knowledge of God. 2 Cor. 10.5. when al things shall be measured vnto vs by the measure of the sanctuarie (as all must bee or else the building proue ruinous) our God will be for a diadem of beutie vnto vs, and for a spirite of iudgmēt, he wil giue vs his spirit to please him. I thought it needlesse to put hir Maiestie and the Parliament in mind that euerie thing amongst vs must be ordered accor∣ding to the word it selfe. For otherwise both the word and the Minister shall want a great deale of the dignitie due
vnto both. Suffer the scepter of the word to rule, & this will not be derogatorious vnto man, much lesse vnto the word. It wil be hard to find a yoke fellowe for that, which can neither abide superior nor brooke an equal. My bre∣thren for the most part know not what preaching mea∣neth, much lesse think the same necessarie to saluation. Though they graunt it needeful, they think it sufficient to heare one sermon once perhaps in al their life. There∣fore was is needfull for me to set downe the necessitie of preaching, and of continual preaching, that if they labor not for the same, their bloode maie be vppon their owne heads. For they cannot denie themselues to be put in mind hereof. If there be anie other point of doctrine tou∣ched it tendeth also to this end. The diligence beloued which I hope your learned Bishoppes, Doctors and other great Diuines men of famous report haue taken in Eng∣land, cannot suffer you to be ignorant in these pointes. Therefore take thē not as written vnto you. For the case it selfe you know what it is, euen that which the Lord of host will haue most seriouslie thought vpon, & graunted without al naie. In respect wherof it commeth with Gods own letters patents, wherewith all estates in the worlde, naie all the Angels in heauen cannot dispence. Concer∣ning the hādling of it by me a wretch, I protest my self to haue labored according to the example of the Apostle, to speak as I haue beene allowed of my God, seeking to win the fauour of none, much lesse the disliking of anie, least mans vnequall displeasure would bee contented with no lesse satisfaction than the bloode of manie a thousand soules. God forbid mans infirmities in mee should bring this effect. Naie it must not. For be I the sonne of Adam ten thousand times, compassed with neuer so manie infir∣mities, neuer so base, vile, polluted, and defiled, yet the
preaching of the word in Wals is Gods glorie, and ther∣fore must stand. And yet it maie be the Lord by this sup∣plication doth but trie the good wils of those small or great through whose hands it shal come, and neuer mea∣neth to haue anie such thing performed: as being out of hand to make an end of al, and to come himselfe to sit in iudgement, where his word shal be surelie countenanced. The consideration whereof should make men enter deeply into their dealings herein. O why should the curse of any damned soule among vs pursue the withstander of our saluation? To make an end, pray for vs breethren and now pray, and pray againe that our God would encline mercie vnto vs in the sight of the Queene hir Counsell and all the Queenes mightie princes, and that builders may be raised among vs. So let it be our God, Amen.
THE NECESSITY laid vpon mā to2. Thes. 1.8. Isai. 53.11. know aright, the eternal, his creator, & redeemer, & to seiue him accor∣ding vnto that know∣ledge; which is doone of that people alone,Ephes. 2.12. 2. Tim. 19.10. 1. Cor. 1.22. amongst whome, the light of the Gospell doth shine, as is not obscurely shewed, by the Lordes seuere punishment, vpon them that are either. Iud. 4. & 15. irreligious, or negligently regard, & des∣perately contemne the trueth, being offered vnto them: so doth it most liuely appeare, by the Lords free and vndeseruedEzek. 36.32 1. Cor. 4.7. Rom. 4.2. Iam. 1.17. (yet rewarding blessings) vpon all such, as in an holy obedience conforme themselues according to his will. What flames of vnquenchable vengeance, carelesse negligence of Gods seruice, & the wilfull reiecting thereof, hath stirred in former times amongst nations; and will, as long as the iust God iustly requiteth the con∣tempt of his word, kindle for euer amongst poste∣rities, I wish all men duely to consider. The Lords anger, for the sinnes of his owne people, the chil∣dren of Israel, was executed vpon them to the ful: euen because, they hardenedIerem. 19. their neckes, and would not heare his worde. TheIere. 22.5.7. Lord sware by himselfe, that the Temple should bee laide wast, that he would prepare destroiers against it:Ierem. 21.5. hee himselfe with a stretched-out hand, and with a mightie arme, would fight against them, euen in anger, and in wrath, and in great indignation. And
becauseIerem. 26.2. they would not heare him their Citie should be a curse vnto all the nations of the earth. The wholeIerem. 24.9. people should be giuen for a terrible plague to all kingdomes, for a reproch, for a pro∣uerbe, for a common talke, and for a curse vnto all places whither he should cast them. ConiahIerem. 22.24 the King himselfe should not escape, no though hee were the signet of the Lords owne right hand, yet should he be plucked thence. These plagues with many others most heauy and wōfull, did the Lord denounce against them by the handes of his Pro∣phets, and perfourmed by the hand of Nebucad∣nezzar king of Babell: BecauseIerem. 40.3. they sinned a∣gainst the Lord & obeied not his voice, therefore these things came vpon them as it is manifest Ie∣remy 40.3. Which are not so lightly to be set by of any, as though they belonged properly vnto that time, and people, especially seeing the Lord iudg∣eth1. Pet. 1.17 without respect of persons; and seeing that nation, kingdome and people that sinneth against the Lord; shalbe destroied, as it appeareth by the tenor of his iudgement executed vpon Tyrus, Ni∣niueh, Babel, and other Monarchies of the world. There is no exception of theDeut. 7.26. & 30.15.19. blessing and curse; life and death; but the blessing and the life shalbee to him that obeyeth, the curse and death shal bee vpon the disobedient soule. Neither was the grosse Idolatry of this people the only cause of their ru∣ine; but the Lord would haue them acknowledgeIerem. 2.19. that it was an euill, yea a bitter euil that his fear was not in them. This also did the LeuitsNehem. 3.9. after their returne, confesse to haue beene the cause of their banishment, euen that their King, Princes, &
Priestes did not diligently attend, diligently at∣tend I say vpon the commaundements of Iehoua. And in that great day, all wicked men shall know, that the Lorde will surely render confusion in fla∣ming fire, not onely vnto wicked doers, but al∣so vnto them2. Thes. 1.8. that know not God. Nothing ther∣fore but shame, indignation, and wrath,Rom. 2.8.9. tribulati∣on, and anguish of soule in this life, can bee expe∣cted for of those people, whose tongues & workes are against Iehoua, to prouoke the eies of his glo∣ry,Isai. 3, 8. and after this life, a tormenting portion in that lake that burneth with fire & brimstone, which is the second death. Of which sort al they must needs be, which neuer heard of that, which is theRom. 1, 15. 1. Co. 1.21. power of God to saluation to as many as beleeue. On the contrary side the prosperous estate of that nati∣on, language, and people, whose God is the Lorde Iehoua, what hart will not reioice to see? If you will knowe therefore the roote of the florishing estate of any kingdome, DauidPsal. 44.15. telleth you that it is, in hauing Iehoua to be your God. The chil∣dren of Israell vpon this foundation were thought to be such a gorgiousDeut. 4.6. building, that all other na∣tions seemed to be but cottages, and wormes-hou∣ses in respect of them. For in that theyDeut. 26.16.17, 18, 19.34.26. had set vp Iehoua to be their God, and to walke in his waies; to keep his ordinances, lawes, and statutes, and to harken vnto his voice, the Lord also had set them vp that day to be a precious people vnto himselfe; & to make them high aboue all nations in praise, in name and in glory. A large declaration of the priuiledge of such a people is recorded Psalm. 33. Behold the eies of Iehouah doe looke vpon them
that feare him, and wait for his kindnesse, that hee may deliuer them from death, and keepe them a∣liue in the time of famine. And in the life to come Iohn saith of them in the Reuelation,Reue. 7.16.17 that they shall not hunger any more, neither shal the sunne light on them nor any heat, for the lambe that is in the middest of the throne shall gouern them, & lead them to the liuely fountaines of water, and God shall wipe away all teares from their eies. Oh then what Christian, yea ingenious, humane, na∣turall heart will not be greeued to see any people in such a forlorne case, as not only to be bereaued of those vnspeakable blessings of the Lord, where∣of al they shal be partakers that fear him, but also laid open vnto the weapons of his reuenging and consuming anger in this worlde, and in that to come, to his eternall and neuer ending wrath? And who would not strain himselfe to the vtmost of his ability, and beyond all his might, to make knowen the case of such a people, vnto those who both can, and also would find a remedy therunto? For mine owne part, because I see the spirituall miserie wherein wee nowe liue in the Country of WALES, for want of the preaching of the Gospel and the great plagues that are like vndoubtedly to fall vpon vs for the same; I cannot but be so as∣fected toward these our calamities, as in respect of the Lords honor, the desire of the saluation of my breethren, my loyall obedience vnto her Maiesty, and the discharge of my own conscience, I doe al∣waies from the bottome of mine heart wish and pray for the redresse heereof, & nowe by writing with all humility and submission in the feare of
God, lay open our estate, first vnto the conside∣ration of your excellent Maiesty my dread soue∣raigne Queene Elizabeth, vnto whom only of all the potentates of the earth, I owe all obedience and seruice in the Lord Iesus, and next vnto the viewe of your high court of Parliament, desiring you vpon my knees in the name of the great God the creator and preseruer of heauen and earth; whose honor is now in hand, that our petitiō may be so throughly waied, as our necessity requireth. The summe whereof is; that it would please your Maiesty, & this honorable assembly, in a zealous and a godly compassion, to regard the lamenta∣ble and wofull estate of vs your poore subiects, & breethren, which liue at this day altogither with∣out the knowledge ofIsai. 43.11. a sauing God, because we haue not2. Chro. 15.2 teaching Ministers among vs, & that some order may be taken by your Maiesty and the estate, whereby wee may bee freed from that de∣stroieng grosse darckenesse of ignorance, wherein we nowe are bewrapped to the woe of our soules for euer: And so by our true conuersion vnto the Lorde, we may auoid euerlasting death, and pre∣uent the fiercenesse of the wrath & indignation, which we see iustly to hang ouer vs in this life. The remedy of this our grieuous case, is only had (and no other way) by speedieLuk. 10.2. Matth 9.8. prouiding vn∣to vs such pastors, as may feede vs with the food of life, the pure worde of God, and bring vs home vnto the only1. Pet. 5.4. Heb. 13.20. Luk. 22.25. Mark. 10. Lord of pastors, & sheepeheards, the Lord Iesus. This is the summe of al (my dread soueraigne) that I your base vassall haue embol∣dened my selfe to offer vnto you, and this your
high court of Parliament; wherein I protest that in respect of my weakenesse al maner of waies; the basenesse of my condition, I intreated the Lorde to send vnto you by the hand of him whomExod. 4.13. hee should sende, that is by one endued with such giftes, and authority also, as whereby the suite might haue purchased some countenance, and so be found more auaileable, and plausible. But con∣sidering that this mine endeuor might be a means to stirre vp some such, and that the Lorde, is the Lord of countenance, credit, and fauour, & there∣fore can adde vnto his own cause; the good liking of men either more, or lesse, as seemeth best vnto him, which only guideth the harts of the children of men. And that he is then fullie seen for his own gloriesRom. 4.2. Ezek. 36.32. sake to bring the worke to passe that ten∣deth to the saluation of any, when hee vseth most abiect, and vnfit tooles, I doe not doubt if it be his good pleasure, but that this supplication, though put vp by a sinfull weake hand, shal haue all the in∣tertainment that the message of the liuing God desireth to haue. And although our estate beeing duly waied, doth with most patheticall, & pierce∣ing cries, (that may moue againe the very flinty rockes) make intreaty for it selfe, and declare the vnanswerable necessity either of hauing our peti∣tions graunted, or of the torments of our soules in hel fire for euer, and our fatal ruine in this life: yet I thought it most needefull in this briefe treatise to set downe some of the reasons whereupon our petition is grounded, that by the view of them, it may appeare how daungerous a thing it is in the sight of God and man to deny our suite. And here
verilie the cause may be seene at the first sight to be inuironed with a two-fould wall (as it were) of most iust, and apparant equity. First in respect of the honour of God, whereat especially it aimeth. Secondly in regard of man, whom it doth not a li∣tle concerne. Whether therefore you do consider the Lord himselfe whom we disdain, and contemn (for want of better instruction out of his woord) by our vngodlie liues, or her gracious Maiestie and this honourable assembly, who are bound be∣fore the Lorde with an vncancelable band to see the eternall verity of the Gospell of Iesus Christ taught vnto, & obeied of al the inhabitants within the precincts of her Maiesties dominions; or my deere brethren and countri-men, whose ioiful and happy felicity is this way sought for, you shall find the supplication to be full of dutifull endeuors to∣wardes the maintenance of Gods glory, the safe estate of this kingdome, & our soueraign, (whom the Lord long preserue ouer vs) & hurting none, full of equity on all parts. Wee desire to haue the knowledge of our God, and the Lawes of his king∣dome (whose subiectes in name wee professe our selues, and in deede ought to bee) made knowne and taught vnto vs. We desire that the tyranny of Sathan, who2 Cor. 4.4. Ephes. 6.2. & 2.23. exerciseth a regencie in the hearts of all them (amongst whom Gods trueth hath not beene taught) may be ouerthrownRom. 1.16. Heb. 4.12. Ier. 23.29. by the power∣full arme of God the worde preached,Iam. 1.21. who can saue our soules. Now therefore to you right hono∣rable, worshipful, and reuerend of this Parliament (with al humility be it spoker) in the audience of our God, in the presence of Iesus Christ, and in the
witnesse of euery child of God, who shall read this litle treatise, we most earnestly and vehemently as in the cause of Iesus Christ, and in the cause of our soules, entreate and beseech you, cry and cal vpon you to do your endeuors, that Sathan may no lon∣ger keep vs in bondage, which ought to be imploi∣ed in the seruice of our God, and that the Lorde Iesus his throne may be established in our hartes,1. Cor. 6.19. & 3.16. as it ought to be in those which are his members. What interest hath sathan in vs, that wee should be permitted to be at his beck, and leaue vndoone the duty we owe vnto our most beneficial & louing God, euen by the law of creation? Why should he preuaile more with you which continually seeketh your destruction & ours, than Iesus Christ, whose loue towardes vs was sealed with the losse of his life, euen then, when we were his enimies? Wil you reward his vnconceiueable kindnesse in such sort: as to suffer any that you can hinder, to be sworne seruants of his professed enimies? Sworn seruants I say, for whosoeuer serueth not the Lorde Christ inRom. 6.16. & 7.5. 2. Pet. 2.20. newnesse of life, and holinesse of conuersati∣on, hath taken the oth of a souldier to serue sinne vnder Sathans banner. Why should the sonne of God be bereaued of the title that he hath in his people, & conueiance thereof made vnto a dam∣nable crature? Consider I pray you the weight of the cause in this one point: it is concerning no lesse matter thā a kingodme, yea the kingdome of the God of al kings, Iesus Christ: the contention is betweene the most glorious in heauen & earth, and his own slaue, where the indignity of the vsur∣per ought to moue you. We are wearie of the hea∣uy
bon∣uie bondage of the one, and desire the easie yoke of the other. In the absence as it were of our Lord and king, wee haue none to runne vnto for helpe, but you, whom he hath placed aboue vs. Pitie our condition, naie rather let it bee seene that you re∣ioice to haue such oportunitie to enlarge, and make conspicuous the glorie of your redeemer, that it may bee a witnesse vnto your soules when∣soeuer you depart this life, that indeede you haue quited your selues like men in the places where∣unto he hath enioined you, by defacing the king∣dome of Sathan. You are nowe to declare vnto which of the two you would haue vs subiectes, who shal be king, Sathan or the Lord Christ: and ther∣fore whether of the two can preuaile more with you Not that the diuel is able, or dareth withstand his maker, or that the Lord needeth the helpe of mā, to ouerthrow his forces, as not being of power to rule, vnlesse man set the crowne vpon his head: but because hee hath taken this course in the go∣uernment of his Church here vpon earth, that vnlesse the Magistrate doe vphold his honour a∣gainst Sathan, it will fall to the ground for ought men can see, and hee hauing commaunded men of authority to be zealous in his cause, wil reward them according vnto their loue towardes him in this point. For hereby hee doth trie their good wils, in that he declareth his honour to be vsually measured in the hart of the people, according vn∣to the proportion of the magistrates loue towards him: reseruing alwaies vnto him neuerthelesse the power to beget his loue in the subiectes, whose prince may be an Idolater: and to bridle the furie
of his enemies when hee will, without the assi∣stance of man; and to reedifie his Church, though al the kings vnder heauen gainesaie the same. But this not proceeding frō them wil be to their grea∣ter condemnation, because they chose rather to haue their people in the slauery of Sathan, than in the liberty of Christ. For one of them will, yea must needes beare rule in the hearts of all men; either the Lord by his spirit conueyed vnto them through the ministery of his word: or the old ser∣pent, by his diuelish illusions. That both cannot rule togither,Mat. 12.25.29. it is apparant, because they are so contrarie the one to the other: the subiectes of both kingdomes disagree, the lawes be diuerse. If you chuse the sonne of God, and place him in his throne among vs, by the preaching of his Gospell (for otherwise you cannot be said to make choise of him) then assure your selues that the Lord will1. Sam. 2.30 honour you, because you honour him, and not forget the vpholding of his kingdome by you, es∣pecially in such an age: as wherein most of the e∣states in the earth haue bereaued him of his right, and giuen their crowns vnto the beast. Then happy be your names and memories, and the me∣mories of your posterities for euer. And happy be the daies that euer we were borne to be gouerned by such a godly Prince, and godly counsellers. But if you make worse than Claucus his chaunge, and as much as in you lieth robbe Christ Iesus of his kingly dignity, what are you to looke for at his handes, but the cruel destruction that is prepared for those, who will not suffer the sonne of God to rule ouer them, or theirs? Consider, and consider
againe, that they deny Iesus Christ a kingdome o∣uer theirs, and consequently prefer Sathan before him; which deny the ministery of the Gospell vn∣to the people, vnder their gouernment. The rea∣son of which assertion appeareth not onely by some places of Scripture before quoted: but also in that the woorde preached, is called theMatt 13.19. Luke 8.11. woord of the kingdome by our Sauiour himselfe: and the glad tidings of the Gospell called theLuke 8.4. Matth. 3.1. kingdome of heauen. By the parable of the vineyard which is said to be the inheritance of the sonne of God Matth. 21.38. and whereof he accounteth himselfe robbed when he hath not fruit yeelded vnto him;Matt. 21.38. which only is done where the Gospell florisheth. In that the Ghospell is called the Ghospell of theMat. 24 14. kingdom. Wherein politik Gamaliel alsoAct. 5.39. gessed aright that the High-priests and Sadduces should be found to do nothing lesse than , that is, fight against God, if they withstoode the course of the Gospel. To be shortverse 31. Peter in the very same chapter a little before maketh it a part of Christs prerogatiue roial, to work repentance in the hart of man, and assurance of remission of sins, which no Christian wil saie to be otherwise effected, than by preaching. In so much as they must needes be conuinced to eneruate, and weaken the same so∣ueraignety of the Lord of life, who any way refuse to haue them for whose wealth they are to pro∣uide good lawes, instructed by the Gospel. If this conclusion be true (as in very deed it is most true) oh how ought you of this honourable assemblie to labour, for the erecting of the ministery of the word in Wales, seeing they that wil be slack in the
same detract from the honour they owe vnto Ie∣sus Christ, and plainly shewe how little they care whether his kingdome sincketh or swimmeth. As for these that withstand this, I dare boldly affirme them to conspire with Sathan about the inuading of Christs kingdome, and most contumeliously to tread his crowne vnder foote. Where by the waie they are intreated with al reuerence to looke bet∣ter vnto their dealinges, who vnder the name of conformity, and obedience, stay the course of the ministery in any place, & desired to acknowledge this vnity to bee nothing else but a consent with Satan to wrest the scepter out of Christ his hand, and vndermine his chaire of estate; if they haue done heretofore foolishly, let them now, (follo∣wing the counsel of the wiseman) lay their hands on their mouthes, and take heede least by defen∣ding former practises, they ad drunckennes vnto thirst. It may be if men knew the sinne of resisting the Gospell to bee so hainous, they would perhaps further our suite; or at least not hinder it. But be∣cause the preaching of the woorde is thought no better than folly of worldly wisemen, it commeth often to passe that the reiecting of a suite tending thereunto, is made a thing of smal moment. And although in very deed this sinne be high treason against the Lord, yet the offenders herein will a∣uouch themselues to seeke the honor of God, no lesse than the earnest furtherers of the woorde preached, yea though they throw al their blockish, and wilful reasons in the way, to stop the passage of it. And least men shoulde terme them by their rightname, they thinke the excuse will stand in
good steede, to saie, they cannot see how the hin∣dering of the Gospell should bee so odious in the sight of God, and therefore no reason why they should be thought kickers against the heauen, see∣ing they in euery point fauour the proceedings of their Prince. But how vaine and ridiculous is their excuse? For shal a traitour be therefore acquited, because he offending against the Lawes of God, and his soueraigne (as in transferring the prae∣rogatiue due vnto his Prince vnto a forraine Ido∣latrous shauen priest) protesteth that he neither acknowledgeth not seeth his actions therein to bee traiterous? Or shall Pellagians, Papists, Ari∣ans, &c. auoid the names and punishments of he∣retickes, because they affirme nothing but that whereof, by the strong delusion of Sathan they are persuaded? I trow not. No more can hee be said to doe any thing lesse than to iustle against the hea∣uen, and him that dwelleth therein, which put∣teth his shoulder against the progresse of his woord, though his owne corruption will not suffer him to perceaue this his rauing madnesse. As therefore you of this honourable assembly would not bee taken defacers of Gods glory: so in most humble wise I admonish you not to oppose your selues in any sort against this our petition: and as you would find fauour at the handes of the iudge of al the woorld in the day of iudgement, and bee acquited before Iesus Christ, and by him, further his honour to the vttermost of your power. Re∣gard whose cause it is; what account hee maketh of it: how derogatorious it is vnto his glory, for you to deny vs the Gospell. I know it will bee aun∣swered
here, that her Maiesty and the Parliament deny the true seruice of God vnto none, and haue taken order that no false religion should bee vsed of anie subiect in this land. Which thing also I doe affirme from my hart, and thank God for, and the Lord wil not forget Queene Elizabeths kindnesse in this thing towards his house. I adde moreouer, that if any the people of this Realme want the same in particular, which hee hath granted all in general, it is her wil they should acquaint the Par∣liament with their cause, where they ought to bee heard Hitherto therefore tendeth my speach. If we th. people of Wales making our estate known, shall not haue it redressed by this assembly, that then the ouerthrowe and weakning of Christes kingdome is intended thorough this meanes (by them that shall binder preaching to be graunted vnto vs) our calling adding great strength there∣unto. Let all know therefore how greatly it ten∣deth to the honour of the most high God, (which he wil maintaine as the apple of his eie against al the euil willers thereof, vnto their vtter ruine and shamefull confusion both of body and soule) that the lamp of the Gospell should bee set on fire a∣mongest vs, and that a repulse should bee giuen to Iesus Christ by repelling this our cause. Good my Lords, whose honour in the feare of God I desire, thinke with your selues that the Lord of heauen, being now reiected of most nations of the earth is thrust into this poore Iland of England, as into the furthest westerne partes (sauadge America, and that continent excepted) but surely his en∣tertainment here, if one handmaid had not better
cherished him, had beene very cold. He hath of∣ten threatned vs to depart, by taking her with him from such vngrateful subiectes as wee are. Parti∣cular men he hath by his seueral blessing, and the sound of his woord, from the highest to the lowest sollicited vnto his seruice. Alser the most part re∣fused. This one time he wil try whether the whole estate of the land will allowe him anie larger de∣maines, than hitherto he enioied. And therefore he now knocketh by this our suite, at the doore of the Parliament, to know whether we the people of Wales shall bee graunted him, as his herytage. If it be denied, he protesteth that hee will stay no longer. He expecteth an aunswere: Haue a regard what ye doe. A greater matter cannot be consul∣ted vpon. What a shameful thing were it for man to deny his God, that which most concerneth his glory? Alas the day what hinderance wil it be vn∣to any of you to haue vs poore Welshmen cele∣braters of the honour of our God? And what plea∣sure will it bee vnto you to haue him departed from this kingdome in a rage, because he is not heard in that thing, wherein he most delighteth? And beleeue me, I am highly afraid he will take your denial so vnkindly, that England shal feele, by the taking away of his Gospell, what a gest it vngratefully lost. Therefore, as I said before, so I say againe, that our suit is not sleightly to be loo∣ked vnto, much lesse denied: because vppon the graunting of it, not onely the saluation of many thousand soules; but also the glory of the most mighty God relieth. It were extreme madnesse for vs to be cold in that suite, wherein we woulde
haue others whom it concerneth not so much, to be vehement and earnest. And we might iustly both before God, and men, fry againe in our con∣demnation, if we were not most earnest in a mat∣ter of such weight. Saluation is not bestowed vp∣on them that care not whether they haue it or no: Nay our Sauiour setteth downe, that seeking for it will not serue, but there must be great stri∣uing vsed; and that with agony, and contention.. Striue saith heeLuk. 13.24 to enter in at the strait gate; for many I tel you wil. seeke to enter, and shal not be able. Maruel not therefore if we leaue no stone vnturned to come by that which is so precious, and so hardly found. But the obiection ministreth greater strength to our argument. For either the Parliament must deale most iniuriously with her Maiestie, and saie it is not her will to haue Christ Iesus raigne ouer vs, (which far be it from ente∣ring into anie mans heart) or that they will in a cause so directly tending vnto Gods glorie, and the good of the weale publicke, resist that, which she most of al would haue decreed. This later hath not beene found, and I hope neuer will be in the Parliament of England, as long as Queene Eli∣zabeth hath the scepter in her hand. And can any man admire that we haue al this while of her Ma∣iesties ragine been by the iust iudgement of God, without the word preached, and also read, as shall be shewed, whereas wee neuer as yet opened our mouthes for it? I am so far then, from conceiuing any vnduetifull thought of my soueraigne, and this high Court, as transferring the cause of our ignoraunce vpon them, that I protest in iustly re∣steth
on our selues. For when did that day shine this twenty eight yeares, and aboue, that anie a∣mong vs, (whom the Lorde had endued either with authority or giftes of learning) haue moued this cause effectually vnto her Maiesty, or the Court of Parliament? Though I would wish wee had found the fauour in their sight, (howbeit vn∣worthy of our selues) to be driuen vnto the mari∣adge of Iesus Christ, against our wils, that some more might solemnise the same, than doe at this day, to his honour and their owne eternall felici∣ty. If any man will heere demaund, whether the Lorde requireth any more at the handes of this high Court in the cause of religion, than is alrea∣dy perfourmed, seeing there is not only permissi∣on graunted, for al that will to professe the truth; but also a commandement, that none aduenture the contrary, I answere he exacteth a great deale more. As to see that euery inferiour person, haue done his duety in the performance of that, en∣ioined vnto him, for the planting of religion. To see, whether such Lawes, as haue beene alreadie prouided, in that cause, haue beene put in pra∣ctise, if not to consider wher the fault was, and see it amended. To consult whether a better order may be taken for the progresse of true religion, than hitherto hath been, and being found to put the same in execution. Againe, for as much, as the work is the ruling of Gods people, especiallie to prouide, that the gouerment may be according to the Lords owne Lawes. Briefly where the word is not preached, there to establish the same with speed. Our whole country of Wales, as yet, being
altogether in ignorance, to endeuour themselues in deed, to see the same called. In a word to order euery thing in euery particular parcell of this I∣land and the other according vnto the Law, and testimony (for the declining there-from argueth great ouer-sight and folly, as it is set downe I∣sai. 8.20. Otherwise the Lord should enioine, more vnto a father, or maister in the gouernment of his family, than vnto a magistrate in the common wealth. For a father and so a maister, is not only bound to see, that his sonne bee no Idolatour, or swearer (which would to God all fathers perfour∣med) but also to bring them vppe, inEphes. 6.2. instruction and information of the Lord. Did Abraham no more, think you, than command his seruants, that they should take heede, they serued not the gods beyond the riuers, and wil them in some general sort, to serue Iehouah? You shall find it otherwise recorded of him, Genesis 17.19. Good Iehoshuah protested that he, and his house, that is, all those that were vnder his gouernment would serue Ie∣houah. In whose example the doubt will not bee worth the answere,Iehosh. 24.14 that Iehoshuah doth content himselfe in this place, onelie to haue barelie of∣fered the trueth vnto his people, and giuen them the choise whether they would professe it or no, whereas his protestation importeth, that as ma∣ny as would be gouerned by him, should serue Ie∣houah. If they did otherwise, such rebels against God, were not fit to bee his people. To omit, that the case is far vnlike, in the people of Wales, and the Israelites at this time, I would, that all, which be are the chiefe soueraigntie of anie common∣wealth
christian (whether monarchie, Aristocra∣cie &c.) would plainlie declare, that they should not be their subiects, who would not be obedient vnto the Lord, as did Iehoshuah in this place. Da∣uid tooke a band of himselfe,Psal. 101.7. to keepe no such in his house. Wherein it appeareth, that he did both denie the same, to be a cage for Idolatours, and in like maner would haue al things there accor∣ding vnto the will of God. His care was no lesse in the common wealth, as maie appeare by his great sollicitude, in bringing home the1 Chro. 13.5 1. Chro. 15.13 Ark, con∣fessing & amending his carelesse ouersight here∣in before committed, by his earnest desire to add as much dignitie as hee could vnto the seruice of God, in offering to build him an house. Lastly the exhortation he made at his death∣bed, to the rulers, & his sonne Salomon proclai∣meth openly, what a care he had to see the Lorde honored of euery man in his kingdome. I thought good in this place to set downe Dauids wordes.1. Chro 28.8. Now therefore (saith he) in the sight of al Israel, the congregation of Iehoua, & in the eares of our God, keepe and make diligent enquiry, for all the commandements of Iehouah, your God, that you may possesse this land, and leaue it for an inheri∣tance vnto your children after you, for euer. And thou Salomon my sonne, knowe thou the God thy fathers, and worshippe him with an vpright hart, and with a careful soule, for Iehouah search∣eth the hearts, and vnderstandeth all the imagi∣nations of the thoughts, if thou search for him, he will be found of the; but if thou forsake him, he wil cast thee off for euer. I see to whome I
speake, and therefore application needeth not. Onely you are to marcke, that no seruice by picce-meale, but according vnto al the comman∣dementes is allowable, and that the Magistrate must practise all that God requireth of him. The wil of God in any particular point of religion be∣ing vnknowen vnto him, hee must make diligent search and inquiry for it himselfe (keepe & seeke all the commaundementes saith he.) In which wordes the holy ghost noteth, that a good magi∣strate may be ignorant of his duty, but giuing this caueat withall, that as soone as he is put in mind thereof,We must seek vntil we find, and hauing sound, keepe the comman∣dements. though by an inferior person, he must not be borne in hande by any other that all is well (for how can that be well and in good case, which is not according to the Lordes wil?) but see refor∣mation out of hand. The necessity of obaieng, is set downe, in that the Lord would not spare Salo∣mō if he did the cōtrary, no, though he had made a promise of fauor vnto him. Further concerning the magistrates dutie in this particular care, that God be honoured through his charge, wee shall find in the example of good Iehosaphat, who, ha∣uing in the third yeare of his raigne, most2. Chro. 17.9 2. Chro. 19.5. nota∣bly established religion. (sending Leuits about throughout all the Cities of Iudah to teach ithe people) notwithstāding, in the 18. or 17 year con∣fer 2. Chr. 16.5. 1. Kings 22.41. with the 1. Kin. 16.29. went through the people from Bersheba to mount Ephraim, and brought them againe vnto Ieho∣uah the God of their fathers, so litle a thing was it in his eies, to haue once verie notablie refor∣med his people, vnlesse he did the same, as often
as need required. Religious Ioshia,2. Chro. 33.29. caried the like heart with him. The good king rent his clothes, his heart melted within him with weeping, and wringing of handes, he humbled himselfe before his God, and immediatly set vpon the reformati∣on of euery thing amisse, as soone as he perceiued the Lord to be dishonored by neglecting the per∣formance of his will, in any point. But what nee∣ded he to haue taken all these paines? He had a promise, all should go well in his daies, and after him, his people were sure, to smart for their for∣mer sinnes. He had doone well for his part, fals-religion was expelled in the 1. yeare of his raigne (this being the 18.) Iudah & Ierusalem were pur∣ged from their high places, time would not serue to establish euery thing, according vnto the lawe of Moses, the people were simple, not capeable of the gouernment, required by the worde of God, his nobility, by reason of their long continuance in Idolatry, not so well perswaded of the true reli∣gion, he sought to establish. It was very new vnto them, their weakenes were to be born-withal: Yea they must haue the liberty of their consciences. Perhaps they who should haue beene most for∣ward, as the high priest, and others, were found very great enimies, vnto all good proceedings. It may bee they looked, that all should bee com∣mitted vnto their handes, as the pope hath done in times past. For what had a ciuil magistrate to doe with setting in order things belonging vnto religion? These and many other hinderances, hee had I grant.2. Chro. 34.3. But looke when the zeal of the Lords house hath eaten vp any, how easily they swallow
all occasions, that might hinder the true worship of God, in any that belongeth vnto them. And therfore, that very yeare, euen then, when he was farther instructed, by examining the booke of the Lawe of Moses, concerning his duty, he gathered the people from the greatest,vers. 30, 31, 32 to the smallest, priest and Leuite, read the woord, of the couenant in their eares, and made a couenant before Iehouah to keepe his commaundements, his statutes, and his testimonies, with all his heart, and with all his soule. He cause al, that were found in Ierusalem, and Beniamin, to stand vnto it. So farre was hee from bearing with any in their Idolatrous perswa∣sions, that could not (for consciences sake for∣sooth) but turne backe from Iehouah the God of their fathers, that as it is recorded of him heeverse 33. compelled all that were found in Israel, to agree vnto the couenant, & to serue Iehouah their God which they did al his life. In which actiō (religion being now receiued by publicke consent) hee did not only according to the commandementDeut. 13.69. & the example of his pre decessors theIus. 22.21.19 whole cōgrega∣tion in the booke of Ioshua and godly king AsahChro. 15.13 (who de creed that whosouer would not serue Iehouah, should be stoned, whether he were small or great) but also, that which the wonderfull, and great woorkes of God, wrested fromDan. 3.29. Neubuchad∣nezzer, and almost nature it selfe shewed vnto king Artashash.Ezra. 7. a6. Gods honorbeing precious in the eies of this assembly, as I hope it is, wil driue them to follow these godly examples, and to looke with the eies of an Egle, into the estate of our Church in Wales, yea compel vs, by authority rather than
faile to honour & sanctifie the Lord, by the know∣ledge of our saluation. For then, he is said to gaine a name, and maiesty to himselfe, when he is seene, to forgiue sins, not for mans desert, but for his ownIsai. 4.8.9.12 glory sake: and he is then knowen to be the Lord, when hee isEzek. 76.23 sanctified in his people. For indeede none is able, either to forgiue sinnes or to sanctify the prophane hart of man, but the Lord himselfe. Therefore the prerogatiue aboue all others giuen to out sauior christ in the reuelation, is, that when there was none found in heauen or earth, or vn∣der the earth, worthy to looke vpon the book sea∣led with seauen seals, muchlesse able to open it, he the lyon of the tribe of Iudah performed both. But who knoweth this saue they,Ephes. 2.13 that are redee∣med by his blood? And his blood clēseth none, but thesei which heard the worde of trueth, euen the gospel of saluation preached vnto them. The way then to procure, that the people of Wales maie cry with a loude voice, Woorthie is the lambe, to take the booke, & open the seales thereof,Reuel. 5.12 because he was killed, and hath redeemed vs to God out of euery kindred, and tongues, people, and nation, is to bestow the worde preached vpon them. And howe greatlie the calling of men vnto saluation augmenteth both the might, and the excee∣ding riches of Gods strength, shalbe easily gathe∣red, if you doe but consider that the treasury, the iewell house, and wardrobe (as I may say) of Gods glorious in heritance, in the Saints, and the excee∣ding greatnes of his power towardes them, that beleeue, is no other way discerned, but by the spi∣rite of reuelation, through the knowledge of god;
as the expresse woords of the Apostle do enforce, Ephes. 1.18.19. All which proceed from hearing the worde of truth,verse. 13 as he set down before. The wordes which the Apostle vseth to expresse the meaning of the holy-ghost doth most euidentlie conuince that they who felt not this power in themselues, count the Lord to be but a weakeling. For although the contemplation of nature,&c. the mouing of the heauens, and the creatures therein contained, may afforde some glimse of the might that is in the creator; yet this is not indeede so much as a shadowe of the other, wherein the Lord is said to exercise the power of his own right hand. As first in giuing the Lord Iesus a conquest ouer al theColoss. 15 principalities, and powers of his eni∣mies, making him to triumph ouer them, and thatHeb. 2.10 18.4, 5. & 5.7 by weakenesse, sufferings, crosses, calamities, temptations, yea and death it selfe: then in raising him from death, to giue him a name, aboue all names, and to make him the head of al. Secondly in vs, his poore members sauing our helplesse, and damned soules, woorking mightily in our sinful & stony hearts, by the conuersion of vs vnto him▪ giuing vs poore flesh and blood, a conquest also ouer our owne fleshe, and the rebellious motions thereof: and which is more, ouer the prince of the world himselfe. Assuring our vnbeleeuing hartes, of his loue towardes vs, shewing how mightie his spirite was in the Lorde Iesus; who had it powred vppon him, without measure, seeing wee that haue but a dramme thereof, and that in a body of sinne, are not without some reioicing effects by the power of Gods mightie spirite. Herein and
in such actions the power of God, to a beleeuing heart, sheweth it selfe, to be ten thowsand times greater, than in creating a thousand worlds. Can the Parliament of England be desirous to glorify their God, and not decree, that this power of his be manifested vnto vs, by deliuering euery of vs out of the tyranny of that mighty potentate, who is euen the God of this world? Our sauior Christ, euen in respect of his manhood is so glorified of his father; that man cannot augment the same, yet the Apostle is plain, that his honor con∣sisteth in no other point, than that euerie tongue should confessePhil. 2.11. him to be the Lord, to the glo∣ry of God the father, And least carnall men should thinke, the Lord smally to esteem the glo∣ry hee gaineth, by these, that are called vnto the knowledge of his trueth, the regard he hath here∣unto, is two maner of waies shewed. First, in that hee, which was the substance, and essence of the Lords owne glorious MaiestyPhil. 2.6. equall with God,Ier. 2.3. I saie 44.26 1 Iohn 1. Rom, 9.5. God himselfe, made himselfe of no reputation, taking vpon him the forme of a seruaunt, became vile, & bale, as we read, Esai the 52 14.15.3. Phil. 2.7.8. onely to the end hee might reserue from hell, some of the lost sonnes of Adam, by whose salua∣tion he should be glorified. Secondly for asmuch, as the chiefe end of his comming to iudgement, 2 Thess. 1.9. in that great and glorious daie, wher∣in the secrets of all hearts shal appeare, is to bee made glorious in his Saintes, and marueilous in them that beleeue. It is out of controuersie, that on this daie the Lord will make the maiestie of his sonne Christ, so glorious, and of such rare ex∣cellencie,
as the verie Aungels themselues shall wonder and be astonied thereat: and yet there be none others set downe, in whom he shal be glori∣fied. but only those that beleeue. Shal we say then, the training vp of such is of smal acceptaunce in his sight? God forbid. Shall we think, that their e∣state wil be any thing tolerable, who in this life, though they doe not further the Gospel, yet will not hinder the same? No truly. For here be onely two estates of men spoken of, either those, in whom Christ Iesus shall bee glorified (in euery of whose harts, the Lord hath so wrought, by his spi∣rit, that they desire nothing more, than that he maie rule the soules of men by his woord) or the other whose portion shall bee woe of soule. And who are they? only turks, infidels, papists, traitors, adulterers, theeues, murderers, and such like wor∣kers of iniquity? These I graunt indeed, but not these alone. For the Apostle giueth no such mark vnto al, but he comprehendeth both the one, and the other, in this, that they obey not the Gospell. Be a man therefore accounted neuer so ciuilly honest, talk he neuer so well of the Church, and the dignity of the Gospel, be he in shewe neuer so good a subiect vnto his prince (for the diuell is not so vnwise, as he wil haue al his limmes, mani∣fest breakers of the commandements, but he will vse some visured oppugners of Gods glorie) yet if in any sort, you can perceaue, that he vseth any other behauiour towardes Gods trueth, than he ought to shew there, whereunto greatest obedi∣ence, and duety is to be yeelded, take him by and by for one, whom Paul meaneth. Because he o∣beieth
not, but vndutifully handleth the gospel. Slips I grant the children of God may haue, and that very foul ones: but few of them so fal, as they must needs haue that to accompany them wher∣vnto the honour of God is tied. We may see then what reckoning our sauiour Christ maketh of the fruit he reapeth by the ministers labour. And he wil maintaine his honour in this point, by the vt∣ter ruine of al the clippers thereof, and be smally beholding (as wee heare) in heauen, vnto them that negligently labor for the same in earth. Here mark I beseech you, that for as much as Sathan is permitted among vs, not only to lift vp his heel against his Lord, but euen to out-face him in his owne inheritance, the Lord threatned very lately and doth euerie day to measure our punishment, by the same line. Howe likely was it, had not he in mercy choked with their owne raiging spirits, these vnsatiable blood-suckers, Babington, and his adherentes, that we should haue had in this kingdome the hand of the vile, against the hono∣rable, the base against the noble,Isaie 3.4. the indigne a∣gainst the woorthiest of the land? Yea and the Lords anointed, the veryLamen. 4, 20 breath of our nostrils, she vnder whose shadow we haue beene thus long preserued from heathen popish tortors, was like to fall into their hands. The Lord graunt you of this honorable assembly wise harts before it be to late, to examine aright the cause of these vngodly attempts, & to preuent the issues of them. Which shall neuer be done as long as the Parliament wil permitte Non-residences, impropriate liuinges, swarmes of vngodlie ministers, the insolent, and
tyrannicall proceedinges of some, ioined with pomp too too vnreasonable, to keep out a learned and godlie ministerie, by whose means the Lord Iesus would recouer his owne againe. Persuade your selues, that the Lord maie iustlie giue our possessions to strangers, because an enemie is to∣lerated in this land, quietly to enioie the right of Iesus Christ, and by suffering such vngodlie pra∣ctises countenanced in the action. If the Spani∣ard, French, or anie the forces of Rhomish Caine haue their desire vpon vs (as I hope in God they neuer shall) how shall pluralities of impropriati∣ons, & other Church-liuings &c. defend vs & ours from their furie? To shut vp this point, all the for∣mer thinges confidered, is not our petition most reasonable in regard of Gods honour? Wel in re∣spect of her Maiestie, it hath manie reasons where-vpon it maie be grounded. Can we euer hope to haue the tidings of saluation proclaimed in Wales, vnlesse this be perfourmed in hir daies? And haue we a lease of hir life? Would it pleased God we had. Rather the door of our hope is eue∣rie day threatned to be shut. Now therefore the Lord warneth vs, to take the opportunity while it is offered. Now hee taketh heauen and earth to witnes that at this instant, at this Parliament, at this time of her Maiesties prosperous raigne, hee laieth before vs life and death good and euil, sal∣uation and damnation, and that for euer. We shal neuer haue the time to choose againe for anie thing we knowe. And howe effectuall for the pre∣seruation of her highnes think you would be the praiers of so manie thousand of hir people, euen
of the whole welsh nation? Which she now wan∣teth in asmuch as they knowe not themselues bound by reason of1 Tim. 2.2 the commandement, to pray for their Prince, because the same was neuer taught them. When I consider that an infinite number of vs truelie conuerted (in the feeling of such a great benefit receaued at hir hands) would giue the Lorde no rest daie or night, but still bee begging of him to blesse our vertuous Queene E∣lizabeth with the blessinges of a regenerat heart, and a prosperous quiet gouernment: when I call to mind, what an earnest and ardent affection, a true Christian beareth vnto his Prince (especial∣ly who bestowed on him the meanes of saluation) and the promise of God, annexed to such praiers, I cannot in duty but beseech hir Maiestie not to be wanting vnto hir owne safety euen in this one thing. Which should not a little moue hir, seeing it was of such great moment to stir vpEzra. 6.10 Cyrus to the speedy erecting of gods honour at Ierusalem. Moreouer you may be assured, dread soueraign, both that we and our children for euer wil blesse our God, that he hath enclined mercy vnto vs in your eies. And also our calling wil be a testimony of your burning zeale vnto the truth among all the ages to come, euen to the enemies of your good name. Whereas on the other side the con∣tinuance of our blind ignorance wil be I fear me a blemish vnto your credit (in obedience I speak it) among our wofull posterities, and the enemies of God for euer. For what will our children that rise after vs and their children say, when they shal be brought vp in grosse superstitiō but that it was not
Queene Elizabethes will, that we their Parentes should haue that true religion she professed, made knowen vnto vs. Will not the enemies of Gods truth with vncleane mouthes auouch that shee had little regarde vnto true or false religion anie further than it belonged vnto hir profite? I would some of them did not slaunderously cast abroade amongst our people, that she careth not whether the gospel be preached or not preached. If she did wee also shoulde bee most sure to enioy it after twenty eight yeares and vpward of most prospe∣rous raigne. These thinges derogating from her Maiesties honor in a most villanous sort, must be withstoode thorough hir selfe and this whole as∣sembly, by making prouision for vs betimes of the food of our soules. Because I see this most notably detracteth from hir, I cannot in duety but repell and gainsay this slander, and with as loud a voice as ynck and paper can sound, affirme and publish that she would haue the truth made knowen vnto al her people, and wish al of them to be prophets. Which thing I trust in God shall bee manifested vnto the woorld euen at this Parliament, wherein Wales shal be alotted vnto Iesus Christ for his in∣heritance. And good reason why it should be so, because thereupon standeth the mainteinance of hir credit. Of al the men in the world therfore she may be least beholding to them that will not deal earnestly in our behalfe. And we the inhabitantes of Wales may thinke that very straunge that one suite, tending generally to the benefit of vs al, will not bee graunted vnto vs in twenty eight yeares, and that vnder hir Maiestie, whose good will to∣wards
vs is no Iesse we are assured then to the rest of hir subiects. If wee doubted heereof, behold at this time, opportunity is offered to take away all suspicion. Where-as the neglecting of our cause (beeing generall as it is) wil not bee with∣out some occasion of ielousie, as though we were contemned & not accounted of but as thrown in∣to the most baren corner of the land, so thought vnworthy to haue the seed of Gods woord sowen amongst vs, vnworthy to haue the seruice of the same God with hir Maiesty and the rest hir sub∣iects. You that are godly wise counsellers in mat∣ters of estate, look whereunto the shutting out of our most humble petition may tend. For all the good faithful seruice that euer hir graund-father, father, brother, kings of eternal memory, hir sister or hir selfe haue found at the hands of anie of our nation, we beseech her this one reward, that we may enioy the woord of God, and leaue it for an inheritance vnto our children, with this memori∣al also, that it is Queen Elizabeths reward aswel for the faithfulnes she hir self found in vs, where∣of we are already by hir prosperous Raigne re∣compensed, as also for the good wil our poore pa∣rents haue declared to the loffe of their liues vn∣to her noble progenitors. This would neuer be forgotten, and I know it will be aunswered againe with the forwardst readines to yeeld dutifull ser∣uice vnto hir highnes that any prince could hope for at the hands of hir or his most louing subiects. It might greeue vs the lesse to be denied the gos∣pel, vnlesse the same were the inheritance which our fore-fathers the Cymbrûbrittons many hun∣dred
yeares agoe possessed in this lande. For al∣though at this daie wee cannot cal true religion by the right name, yet are not our superstitious obseruations the blossoms of that auncient truth our forefathers professed and sealed with their blood. But the impes of that lifelesse and brutish stock of Rome, planted in England by Augustine that proud friar, whose tyranical proceedings our diuines in Wales resisted euen to the losse of their liues. That these trash be but of small continuance among vs in respect of the antiquity the trueth hath had, I proue because the vetie mother of them, the execrable Masse, was but yesterday, as it were knowen vnto vs. Shewed by two reasons. First among the cartloades of oathes which wee haue, our people cannot tel for their liues how to sweare by the masse. Secondly we haue the masse at the end of none of our holy daies. For Christ∣masse, Candlemasse &c. wee name the day of the natiuity, the holy daie of Marie &c. Which things doe prooue the Masse to haue had but colde en∣tertainement among vs, but within this later age wherin ignorance and idolatrie by the iust iudge∣ment of God tooke such deepe roote in England, that it can ouer our land also. The equitie then of our petition appeareth also in that we aske no∣thing but the possession and inheritaunce of our fathers to be restored vnto vs, which they coulde not alienate from their children. This were a sitte place to stir vp my deare countrimen to bee ear∣nest in obteining that iewell which is woorth all their riches besides, beeing their owne right: but their forwardae, in other causes persuadeth mee
they wil not bee slacke in the matter of the soule. And why should they not be earnest? Doe they not see our daunger to be so manisest that no wise man would spare either woords or life to be deli∣uered there-from? Are they not assured they shall be heard? The reason amongst many that might persuade them of hir Maiesties readines to yeeld vnto their petition is this. Either it must be said that her highnes would not haue the Lord hono∣red with our saluation that hue in hir daies, and that she enuieth vs that good, nay enuieth herself, yea reiecteth the infinite reward in the life to come, and assurance of safety, with diuerse other benefits in this life freely offered vnto her, for adding vs vnto the kingdome of his son (which assertion I know they will detest and gainesay:) or that shee greatly longing for the honour of God and our vnspeakable good, desirous of the crowne that shal bee giuen hir in the life to come, will be most carefull incontinently whatsoeuer may en∣sue, to plant the word in Wales. This later is to be embraced & affirmed. Neither can it be said that she wil take leisure herein, for that were plainly to say, her Maiesty waied not the honour of Iesus Christ, because many a thousand of vs should die before he were known to be a sauiour of distressed soules. Shee hath otherwise learned Christ, and therefore knoweth that the Lorde must not staie mans leasure when hee woulde haue anie thing perfourmed towards his seruice. If one wil not do it, he can finde another whom he wil honor h the deed. Shee hath learned that it is to wken the Lordes omnipotencie and to teach him wise∣dome
and discretion to goe no farther in a matter required by him than mans reasons seeth good likelie to come thereof. She assureth hir selfe the Lord is discreet & wise inough in commanding, and therefore will doe h will though hir king∣dome should be endaungred. For he sufficiently recompenseth the losse that befalleth to anie, while the execution of his will is attended vppon. This course she tooke at hir first coronation. This course I doubt not she wil take at this Parlament, euen this I saie: for who knoweth whether the Lord Iesus meaneth to keepe his before we haue a second proclaimed? Will you therefore good gentlemen (I speake vnto you my fathers, my brethren, my kindred, and what name of loue else can be inuented, my deare countrimen) be mute where there is no question you shal be hard, vnles the fault be in you? Indeed it concerneth vs poor inhabitants of Wales verie nearly to be hard, as wel in respect of our present misery, as of the won∣derfull calamity that is to fall vppon vs. Our case now is to bee especiallie pittied in respect of the inner man. For howe many souls doe daily starue and perish among vs for want of knowledge? And how many are like still to tread the same path? It grieueth me at the hart to consider how hel is en∣larged to receaue vs. And here the Lord knoweth and our soueraigne with this most honourable as∣sembly shal know that I doe not complaine with∣our cause. For our estate is such, that we haue not one in some score of our parishes, that hath a sa∣uing knowledge. Thousands there be of our peo∣ple that know Iesus Christ to be neither God nor
man, king, priest nor prophet: ô desolate and for∣lorne conditiom! yea almost that neuer heard of him. If anie by the great goodnesse of God be cal∣led, this came to passe not by the diligēce of their pastours which are either dumme or greedy dogs that delight in sleeping, as saith the Prophe (a few honest mē excepted) but either extraordina∣rily through reading, or by meanes of their ret and abode in some corner of the Church of ng∣land where the gospel is preached. And lg ay it be preached there, to the glory of Gd, the fe∣licity of our soueraign, and the eueasting good of that whole nobility, and people hose kindnes towards strangers, the Lord wil ot forget. And our Godremember Queen Elizabeth herein, and wipe not out hir kindnes shewed toward thy peo∣ple, shew mercy vnto hir, i that daie good Lorde, and forget hir not in this life also, seing by means of fostering thy Gospell in hir land, some of vs a people not regarded▪ haue known the remissiō of our sinnes, euen of our great sinnes. Let this ne∣uer be forgotten good Lord. I am caried I knowe not whither from my purposed intent. These lat∣ter sort are some few gentlemen, or such like. The rest of our people are either such as neuer think of anie religion true or false, plainly meere Atheists or stark blinded with superstition. The later are of 2 sorts. The first crue is of obstinate idolaters that would fain be again in execrable Rome, & so hold for good diuinity whatsoeuer hath bin harched in that sacrilegious nest. But these may doe what they wil with vs: for nether ciuil magistrat nor Bi∣shop wil controul them. They may be, euen of the
Parliament house, least that congregation should be without some Achā, that might giue the Lord iust occasion, to execrate his whole hoast. Hence flow our swarmes of south saiers, and enchanters, such as will not stick openly, to professe that they walke, on Tuesdaies, and Thursdaies at nights, with the fairies, of whom they brag themselues to haue their knowlege. These sonnes of Belial, who shuld die the death, Leuit. 20.6. haue stroken such an astonishing reuerence of the fairies, into the harts of our silly people, that they dare not name thē, without honor. We cal them bendith û mamme, that is, such as haue deserued their mothers bles∣sing. Now our people, wil neuer vtter, bendith û mamme, but they wil saie, bendith û mamme û dhûn, that is, their mothers blessing (which they ac∣count the greatest felicity that any creature can be capeable of) light vpon them, as though they were not to be named without reuerence. Hence proceed open defending of Purgatory & the Re∣al presence, praying vnto images &c. with other infinit monsters. The other sort is of good simple soules, that would full gladly learne the way vnto saluation, and spend their hart blood, for the safety of their godly Prince, in whō they do claim more interest then the rest of hir subiects whosoeuer. And this is almost the only happines they haue. These poore soules, because the Idol pastor can teach them nothing, entering more deeply with themselues into the consideration of things, find by the small light of religion we enioy through the meanes of hir Maiesty, & by the instinct of nature, that there
is a diuine essence who must be carefully and re∣ligiously serued and praied vnto for al blessinges that would be obtained. Which things they see vnperfourmed publikely, therefore priuatly they assay what they can doe. But wofull estate, they being not taught out of the worde of God, what he is, that must be ser∣ued, & how he requireth this to be doone, inuent vnto themselues, both their God, and the maner of his seruice: concerning saluation they either think, that the Lorde is bound to saue all men, be∣cause they are his creatures, or that al shal be sa∣ued at the later day, at the intreaty of the virgin Mary, who shal desire her sonne, after iudgement giuen, to saue as many of the damned as may bee couered vnder her man till: this being graunted al the damned souls shalbe there shrouded and so saued from helsiar. This is the cause why our peo∣ple make but a mocke of sinne. They thinke the soule only shal goe to heauen & not the body also, whence it commeth that they say, they care nor what becommeth of their bodies, so their soules may bee saued. They ascribe sauadge cruelty vnto God the father, because he punished mans sinne so seuerely, euen in his son Christ, the Lord Iesus they commend. Nû wath genûfhim amy tady gwr rûlon hinnûonûd cydymmaith da ûwr mab: I care not saith one for the father that cruel man, but the sonne is a good fellowe. Durst wee once con∣ceiue these base cogitations of our Prince, I know it would not be tolerated. And I hope this religi∣ous and wise assembly will procure that the Lord may haue some more reuerēce at our hands. Be∣cause
the poor creatures can hear nothing at the mouth of their minister, how their sinnes may be hidden & their iniquities couered, it is a common saying euen among those who care not for Rho∣mish Antichrist, that it was a good worlde then when a man might haue a pardon for his sins in such and such a place for one 4 d. They see no feli∣city where mere ignorance of saluation is. A false perswasion thereof they thinke better than none at all. Man must haue religion true or false. Our people learn one of another most blasphe∣mous praiers. This they doe so much the rather, because in them they commēd them selues, fami∣lies, &c. vnto the tuition of some saint whom they think most fauourable vnto them and best able to grant their petitions. My hart bleedeth to think howe these villanies with other vngodly songs are learned of good painfull soules with greedines. I know masters of families that teach these vnto their housholds. If they meete with any who can write and read, they wil demand of him whether he can teach them euer a good praier against such a disease in man or beast. Vngodly welsh bookes are fraught with these Idolatries. If conscience would not keep me from vttering an vntruth be∣fore my soueraigne monarch, yet fear of punish∣ment should containe me. But this I protest before Iesus Christ who shall iudge all euen according vnto their woordes, and in the presence of al the world, that the onely staffe & stay of al priuat reli∣gion among our people (the 2 sorts of men before named I exempt, are latine praiers) praying vnto Saints, superstitious obseruations, with vngodlie
welsh songs and books. If these things , meate Atheisme would ouer grow vs. Surely the reading ministery hath nor so much as wrought in the harts of anie almost, the persuasion of one true God. It were folly to goe about to heale the disease and let the cause remains. Concerning that which is reade, there is no man but thinketh very reuerently thereof. And we praise the Lord that we haue so much publikely by meanes of his highnes, whereas in the daies of blindnes we had nothing but professed idolatry. Take but a view of our liues, and you shal see also what effect reading hath brought to passe. There be many sinnes es∣sential almost vnto our nation. Profaning the name of God in common talk is prodigious, a affirmations or negations will bring thirty hes out of a great many. Some shieres of South wles haue gotten them an ignominious name by this sin. I dare write that which I durst not vtter in words. They are called gûr eig Dû. Looke the punishment of swearing Deut 8.5. Leuit  15.16. This is the  book Zach. 13. Look the Law of concealing an oath Leu. 5.▪ and you sh finde that the Parliament shoulde haue great ∣gard to damme the springes of this sinne by the word preached. What a hand we haue had in ad∣ultery & fornication, the great number of illegiti∣mate and base born among vs doe . I would our Princes and Leuit, had not beans chiefe in this trespasse. The punishment hereof in the Bi∣shops court is derided of our people. For what is it to thē to pay a litle money; or to run through the Church in a white sheete? They haue made
and songs of this vulgar penance. Neither iustice of peace not minister wil see the execution of the lawes prouided in this case. Though they did, see∣ing the Lords ordinance is not obserued, it would not preuaile. The seat of iudgement in our cōmon courts is turned into wormwoode. A man cannot haue his right in a yeare or two, though his eui∣dence be vnaunswerable. They haue gotten ma∣ny shifts, & whē al failes one wil stand viz. excom∣munication. The plaintife without al right maie be excommunicated in the Bishops court, and so not absolued in a whole yeare. Al which time hee is no person fit to prosecute his right in the com∣mon law. It is irksome to think how hardly a poor man can keepe any thing from the eues of great countenaunce. Though he seeth his own sheep or other cattel feed within two miles of him in some mens pastures, he dareth not aske them. Quaffing & surfeting is too too common. Al are become Is∣maels. Euery mans hand against them, and theirs against all other. Church men and all will haue their right by the sword, for by the word they ne∣uer seek it. These thinges I doe not set downe to disgrace my deare countrimen. I beare them ano∣ther hart. My purpose is to shew that all the good politique lawes in the woorld cannot wash awaie these our stains. The nitre that washeth purely the word of the Lord must doe it. A conscience must be wrought in our people, else they wil neuer leaue their idolatry, swearing, adulterie, and thee uery. They that know the country know how litle hold the straightest and seue rest laws in the world wil take on a great many. If it be the wil of the Par∣liament
therfore we shal be bettered, let the word be preached among vs. We haue preaching. How often? Quarterly. It is not so▪ For to that one pa∣rish where there is one ordinary quarter sermon, we haue twēty that haue none. The number of fit preaching ministers in wales can easily proue the truth hereof. Wee paietithes alwaies, and there∣fore we should haue preaching alway, for he that laboureth not must not eat. 2. Thess. 3.8.10. conti∣nuall preaching is Gods ordinaunce. Eph. 4.12. therefore man must not dispence with it. Confer Rom. 8.9. with Eph. 13.2. Tim. 4.2. Acts. 20.18.19.20.31. 1 Thess. 2.10.11. Heb. 5.12. Acts. 20.16. Colos. 3.16. 1. Pet. 1.23. Matt. 9.38. The seuerall reasons drawen our of these places of Scripture maie proue the necessity of continual preaching, either in respect that it is Gods decree, or that mans nature requireth it. They that dense this may learne their duty by Iacobs diligence in kee∣ping of sheep Gen. 31.40. So may they that set o∣thers to take the ouersight of the Lordes sanctu∣arie Ezec. 44.8. and blush. Preaching is graunted conuenient, but so as reading wil serue the turne. I maruel the face of mortall man wil be so brasen as to affirm this, the immortal word of god loudly gainsaying it, 1 Cor. 1 21. Rom. 1.16. Iam. 1.21. I wil not light a candle before the sun. Though prea∣ching be graunted necessary, and the word reade no meanes to saluation: yet there bee three diffi∣culties that inferre an impossibility to haue the same in Wales. The woorde in welsh neither must not can bee gotten. Must nor, because al should be brought to
speak English, of the condition the trueth were made knowen vnto them, I would it were brought to passe. And shal we be in ignorance vntil wee all learne English? This is not hir Maiesties will wee are assured. Raise vp preaching euen in welsh, & the vniformity of the language wil bee sooner attained. But why can we not haue preaching in our owne toung? Because the minister is not able to vtter his mind in welsh. He maie. For wee haue as manie words as in any vulgar toung whatsoe∣uer and we might borrow from the latine &c. The straunge words would become familiar thorough custom. They that defend the contrary are slow bellies and not wel minded to doe their countrie any good. A good excuse for the soul quelling non resident. Admit we cānot haue welsh preach∣ers, yet let vs not bee without English where it is vnderstood. There is neuer a market towne in Wales where English is not as rife as welsh. From Cheapstow to Westchester (the whole compasse of our land) on the Sea-side they all vnderstand English. Where Munmoth & Radnock shiers bor∣der vppon the marches, they all speake English. In Penbrok shier no great store of Welsh. Cōsider Anglisey, Magyû Crnarûon, & see if all these people must dwel vpon mount Gerizzin and be subiect to the curse, because they vnderstand not the English toung. The second difficulty is want of sufficient number of ministers. The aunswere hereunto may be diuerse. First the haruest is the Lords, therfore if he be sought vnto, laborers shal be sent Matt. 9.38. And extraordinary blessinges may be expected, if his ordinance shal take place
and mans remoued. Might it please hir Maiestie and the Parliament to take this course, the Lorde would raise those sauiours Haba. 21. that are vn∣likely in the fight of man. Further the a Vniuer∣sities are able to send out at this time three hun∣dred for the work of the ministery able mē euery way with a little practise. Wee neede not haue all welsh preachers, therefore these also might serue our turnes, and it would be very hard if a dosen of them were not of our own people. Thus many be∣ing now prouided for, would be such an incorage∣ment vnto students, that at the yeares end twise as many would be ready to consecrat themselues to this holy labour. What an encouragement al∣so would this be for men to send their Sonnes to the Vniuersities, whereas they coulde no sooner send them thither, than Colledges woulde haue places void for them? Now alas our Vniuersities decay in number of students. They that are al∣ready placed, either dally with their studies, or not apply them at all to diuinity, because they see no end therof. Some bound by reason of their fel∣lowships to enter into the ministery, wil make any shift to be dispenced with, nay they wil giue euer their places rather than vndergoe this calling. The reasons hereof bee two. First the idll priest∣hoode hath made the most glorious function vn∣der the sun, most contemptible. Secondly they see the minister hath no assuraunce of that liuing whereunto he is inducted. Euery tristing matter it now made depriuation. If it shall please har high∣ner and the Parliament to decree that euer godly learned minister may haue as good assu∣raunce
of his siuing for terme of his own life, as any subiect in the land hath of his fee simple, vn∣lesse he be found such an offender as his ministery wil be a reproch vnto the Gospel, I doubt not but the ministery would be soone furnished with able mē. A number of the idle drones now in our mini∣sterie would become fit for that work in one year, if preaching were but here and there scattered among vs, and they weekely driuen to exercise. Where it may bee seene that their vndoing is not intended, but their good. There be many worthy men in the Church of England, that nowe exer∣cise not their publicke ministery, these would bee prouided for among vs. I hope they wil not bee vnwilling to come and gaine soules vnto Iesus Christ. Priuate men that neuer were of Vniuerfi∣ty haue well profited in diuinity. These no doubt would proue more vpright in heart, as the Leuits in the like distresse 2. Chr. 29.34. then many of our learned men. For the preaching in Welsh, order might be taken that our breethren which are of the ministery in England should be sent home. Their flockes might be otherwise prouided for, & they depart with consent: Because the necessitie of the Church requireth it. One of the 2. Vniuersities since that ioyfull 17. day of Nouember 1557. haue sent into the cōmon wealth, 3400. Graduats: all these number of gra∣duats, a good course being taken, might haue bin found in the ministery of her maiesties own plan∣ting, & not so few as 2. thousand ouer-plus might haue bin imploied in other functions. Four-hun∣dred of these would haue beene since that time
wel placed in Wales, whereas at this day we haue▪ not 12. in all our country that doe discharge their duety in any good sort. The proofe hereof I offer to stand vnto against all gain-saiers. I hope this wil be considered of. If not, wee may be eight and twenty years more without the word preached. The last difficulty is the want of main∣tenance for our ministers. This is but a mere shift to bereaue the Lord of his honour, and vs of sal∣uation. Ezechia and Iosia could alleadge the like, better than we can. The people of the Iews being in captiuity, had nothing of their owne to builde the Temple: yet because they sought the Lord in truth, hee sturred vp Cyrus to prouide for them out of his owne reuenewes, Hesra. 6.8.9. So would he stir vp Queen Elizabeth, if we sought him with an vpright hart. They whose harts the Lord hath touched, would thresh to get their liuing, rather than the people should want preaching. Our gen∣tlemen and people, if they knew the good that in∣sueth preaching, would be soone brought to con∣tribute. They should bee constrained thereunto. Saluation were not bought too dear with the ve∣ry flesh of our armes. The honor we publickely yeeld in Wales vnto our god, the word preached being not amōg vs, if the lord be said to alow of (which were blasphemy to conceiue) he can be proued to be a meer Idoll. If to dislike, where is that sonne of Adam that wil presume to offer him that which hee regardeth as the killing of a man, vntil he may be prouided for in a better sort? Her Maiesty and this honourable assembly know that the seruice of the eternall is
not to be disperised withall, and therefore out of hand will see the erecting thereof, which shall ne∣uer e do  as long as any excuse wil be admitted to hinder the worde preached. If impropriations & Nontesfidencies were not tolerated, a teaching minister in Walles might liue wel by the Church. Is it not intolerable that some of our Gentle-men should haue 6. impropriate liuings? Our earnest and humble petition vnto her Ma∣iesty and this high court of Parliament is, that it could please them to decree, that the tenth part of euery impropriat liuing in Wales, may be be∣stowed to the maintenāce of a teaching minister: which is so reasonable, that I hope it wil be grāted And that thē minister finding hir Maiesty suffi∣cient security, may be hir farmer in euery impro∣priat liuing, that belōgeth vnto hir highnes within wales. We humbly intreat, that the same order may be taken with al improptiations in our coun∣rey whatsoeuer. Non-residencies haue cut the throte of out Church. Some that neuer preached haue three Church liuinges. Many of our liuinges are posses∣sed by students of either of the Vniuersities: who neuer come amongst vs, vnles it be to fleece. This I hope wil be tolerated no longer: seeing it is the very desolation of the Church, the vndoing of the common wealth, and a demonstratiue token, that the Lords will watch ouer vs to euill, and not to good: Our petition is that none whosoeuer ma possesse  one liuing, and that al may be con∣strained to bee resident on their charges. These reasonable petitions cōcerning Non residencies
and impropriations being graunted, a great many liuinges will bee ready to entertaine a learned pastor. Thus I hope al the difficulties that seemed to hinder preaching vnto vs are taken away. But I maruel what will be said to bee the cause why we haue not had publicke reading in welsh to any purpose as yet. The old testament we haue not in our tongue, therefore the 1. lesson is read in English vnto our people in many places that vn∣derstand not one word of it. This reading is taken to be the blasphemous masse. And they giue it the very name of the masse. û maû yr offairiad ar y fferē, (say they, when the first lesson is read,) that is the priest is at masse. One man seene in the original by the blessing of God would bee able to translate the whole in 2. yeares: more handes would make more speede. The small prophets in welsh might he read vnto vs vntil we obtaine the whole, which shalbe ready for the Presse whensoeuer it shall please hir Maiesty and the Parliament to call for them. Our humble petition is that the whole woorke may be set vpon incontinently, and that some or∣der may be taken for the charge of the impressiō. The dialect that euery sheire hath almost proper vnto it selfe, should not hinder this woorke. For it preaching were in euery Parish, the people would be stirred vp to read the worde priuatly in their houses, and so become acquainted with the phrase. Our ministers though neuer so ignorant, yet all vnderstanding English, might easily reme∣dy this, by conferring the Welsh with the English translations, and so where they vnderstood not
their owneroung, the English might direct them, & they their hearers. But they are far from taking this small pains. I would some of them in 0. years had learned to reade welsh at the first sight. They haue made the word of God of that base and con∣temptible account with many of our people, that they will aske to what end many thinges euen in the new testament it selfe are set downe. Because they wāt preaching, some points of the high my∣steries of saluation seeme vnto them to bee but vulgar and common, thinges not beseeming the wisedome of the great God. Bring some place out of Peter, Paul &c. and their answere wil be, eth a wodhon ni pûneû bod hwûyn dedûd gwir eû paidio? What know we whether they say tru or no? Is not this our case lamentable? The faculties and dis∣pensations of our Non residentes, whose absence do imprint these skars of spiritual misery vnto vs, wil not deliuer vs frō death. No they wil not shild vs from the temporal punishments that we now sustaine (which is our second misery) for want of their diligēce. We feel the Lords hād many waies against vs at this time in regard of the scarcity of all thinges, and especially of victuals, and great number of poor. Euery man among vs was either wont to sow as much corne as serued his familie al the year, or to make asmuch of his sheep and o∣ther cattle as might buy the same. The vnseaso∣nable haruest 1585 yealded very little Corne. Therefore many were able to sowe nothing the last year, because they had not bread corne, much lesse seed. The winter 1585 destroied al their cat∣tle wel near, so that now the very sinowe of their
mainteinance is gone. Many that liued well and thriftily, are faine to giue ouer both house and home, and to go a begging. They were driuen the last haruest to al the shifts in the world. As to rub the standing come being not halfe ripe to make them some bread thereof. This famine is for our sinnes, the Lord without our repentaunce faith it shal continue. Read Deut. 28.15.17.18. Amos. 4.8.11. It weer folly to continue in our sin, for the lord wil make vs sick againe in smiting of vs. Mich. 6.13 Leuit. 26.40. As long as the Lords house lieth wast in our land, we shall sow but meere salt. Haggai maketh this out of controuersie. Reade the whole prophesie. Al the politicke Laws in the worlde, is not able to amend our estate vntill the Lordes house be builded, and those sent among vs who may teach vs by praier, and fasting, to hum∣ble our selues before our God. This was the coun∣sel of Ioel euen in the like case, and this wee must follow, or abide the smart of it. It were strange that our estate being so many waies pitiful, would nor be redressed. You shall find it as yet more la∣mentable, by entering into the consideration of that which is like to fall vpon vs. Here first I wil not say, that the estate of that kingdome is verie ruinous, where there is not a preaching minister. 2. Chron. 15.2.5. God forbid that wee euer should haue occasion to say, that we haue no Prince,Hosea. 10.3. Ezra. 7.23. be∣cause we feare not Iehouah: as did those wicked ones in Hoshea his daies. Artashash was afraide that the Lord would be angry with the King, and his childrē: because speedy prouision was nor had for his true seruice in Ierusalem. Confer: Prou. 14.18,
with Hose. 7.13. and see whether the estate of that Prince whose people transgresse against God as wee do euen in pollicy is very daungerous. Io∣shiah was gathered to his fathers, because he should not see the misery that was to fall vpon a more relligious people than we are. Think not the Lorde to winke al this while at our great sins. Nay thinke rather that the Lorde will throwe as with a sting the inhabitantes of our land, because our pastors are become beasts & haue not sought Iehouah Ier. 10.18.21. There be two Archplagues (vndoubtedly to be expected for) of vs the inha∣bitants of Wales, if our petition be not graunted. The first indeed containing all the exquisite tor∣ments that may be inuented: yet leauing a place for the latter. In a woord it is the putting out of that small light of religion which wee haue, the cutting off both of vs, and our posterity from be∣longing vnto the Lord. The reason hereof is this: if the knights of our shiers and Bishops &c. will not shew themselues desirous to returne vnto the Lord with earnest labour for the word preached, then they doe asmuch as if they said, the woord spoken vnto vs in the name of the Lord we will not heare, but we wil do whatsoeuer goeth out of our owne mouth, as did the wicked Iewes, Ier. 44. But what was replied vnto them? Verily this: Vers. 26. Behold I haue sworne by my great name saith Iehouah, that my name shal be no more cal∣led vpon by the mouth of any man of Iuda in the land of Aegypt, saying Iehouah liueth. Our sinnes being like vnto theirs shall be surely rewarded a∣like. The other punishment is the vtter ruine of
our land, the rasing of our names frō vnder heauē, that we shal be no more a people. Ieremy maketh it but a smal matter with the Lord to ouer-throw a kingdome for the sinnes of the people therein. Chap. 18.7.8.9. So doth Amos 9.8. We haue not indeed as yet a barren womb giuen vnto vs, but I feare me we haue brought forth children for the murtherers. Though we bring foorth children, yet will the Lorde slay the dearest of our bodies: yea wo vnto them saith he when I depart from them. Hos. 9.21.17. Accoūt not these I pray you (whom I haue be∣fore named) to be the visions of the daies afarre off. Ezech. 12.18. but tremble and feare least the Lord say the words in our daies and perform thē. Thinke rather the Lord to expostilate with vs: as he did sometimes with the people of the Iewes. O you inhabitants of Wales, why wil you dy saith the Lord? Why should I giue you for a terrible plague to al the kingdoms of the earth? Ier. 12.7. Why should I forsake mine house, leaue mine in∣heritance, giue the dearely beloued of my soul in∣to the hands of her enimies? Ier. 3.12.13. &c. Thou disobedient (saith the Lord) return, and I wil not let my wrath fall vpon thee, for I am merciful. Be thou instructed least my soule be dismembred frō thee, and I make thee a lande without an inhabi∣tant. Ier. 6.8. Think these speeches I say to belong vnto you & vs, & in respect of them be vehement. The calamities of vs your kinsmé in the flesh, yea your own and your childrens wil force you (or els you are vnnaturall) to vnfould our griefe vnto hir Maiesty and this assembly. Our case is pitiful you
know! Our life short, we know not how soone the Lord wil cal for vs. How soon he wil make an end of al. If we haue not more knowledge than as yet we haue enioied meanes to come by the same, we can hope for nothing at his hand but that deadly voice, I know you not. You haue bothHerod. in Vra. . persuasion and necessity, which driue wise men, to take great matters in hand, to pricke you forwarde. Throw downe your selues before hir maiesty, and this ho∣nourable assembly, and plead for your liues and your peoples: rise not thence, vntill your suite bee yeelded vnto. We poore people look for nothing else but destruction, except our God graunt you fauour, at this verie instant time, in their sight. I with in the Lord, that if wee perish, we may perish our selues alone: and that Queene Elizabeth and hir counsel with the estate, and the whole com∣munalty of England, may in a good conscience testifie before the Lord, and say,Deut. 21.17. Our hands haue not shed the blood of these men; neither haue our eies seene it. I do most earnestly beseech the Lord Iehouah (for his Christes sake) who is great and wise in counsell, seuere in punishing sinne: yet a∣boundant in mercy, and kindnes towards the bru∣sed, and humble soule, to turne his wrath from vs, to giue hir Maiesty and this honourable court his spirit to direct them in euery action according vnto his word, to make al the enimies of his truth & Queen Elizabeth likeIer. 29.22. Ahab and Zedechiah whom the king of Babel burned in the fire, conti∣nue hir raigne ouer vs, hasten the comming of his Sonne Christ Iesus. Amen. Amen. Yea come quiokelie Lord Iesus.
To the reader. Some rumor of the speedy dissolution of the Parliament enforced me from the 32 Pag. or there abouts (so much being already vnder the presse) to cut off more of the booke by two parts than is now in the whole. The neerer I came to the ende, the more hast I made. I regarded not herein —Amphora coepit Institui, currente rota cur vrceus exit? The ouersight I hope hath not been very great: if any, I hartilie craue pardon. How tedious & vngainful it was for me to dismēber the whole and sow togither the torne parts, let other men iudge. Some thing spoken of in the Epistle, could not be well perfourmed. Pag. 30. l. 22. Read, through-out his dominion.
