20162 99850210 15397
The art of Thriving. OR, The plaine path-way to PREFERMENT. Together with The Mysterie and Misery of Lending and Borrowing. As also a Table of the expence of Time and Money. Consider it seriously. Examine it judiciously. Remember it punctually. And thrive accordingly. Published for the common good of all sorts, &c. by T. Powel. LONDON, Printed by T. H. for Benjamin Fisher, and are to be sold at his shop at the signe of the Talbot in Alders∣gate street. 1635.
To the Reader. THere is a method in all arts, and a mystery, but in none more then in the art of thri∣ving, being the very Center to which all the other arts doe tend, and for which they were invented. Magister artis venter, and what is that but Thriving? Now in the study of this great art, you must make the world your Liberary, and learne to reade men as well as bookes: and yet not to discourage you in the whole volume of this
science, you are to turne over but three leaves, onely some∣what close writ, very hard to reade, and when you are once out, can hardly begin againe: Times, Trades, and Debts, this is that screw of a three fold twinding; for if you screw not your fortunes the right way, as it is in all screwes, you may turne and work your heart out, remember but that first: And let me tell you, Time is the hinge of all thriving, Trades are the doores on which good hopes may turn, and stand long enough; if Debts those under∣mining leavers of husbandry, fling not all off the hooks. Thus then thinke with your selfe, to Time a businesse well, and to
begin businesse in time, is the very key to the door of prefer∣ment, and thinke the losse of a minute more dear than the losse of a pound; for certainly of all expences, the expence of Time s the costliest: which, mindefull reader, that thou mayst know now, learn to prize and reckon hy time right: for as Seneca said o Lucilius, quem mihi dabis qui aliquod pretium tempori ponat? qui diem estimet? qui intelligat se quotidie mori: and therfore that made him say in the beginning of the same Epistle to Lucilius, vindica te tibi, as if a man were to be revenged upon himselfe for hasting his owne death by osse of Time. Now therefore hat thou maist know how to
take and redeeme thy Time. I have here set before thee, a ta∣ble of each minute of thy life, this is the first leafe, and now I passe to the next, having not time to speake of Time. 2 All men are or would be rich; even the sluggard wish∣eth, though he hath not: 'Tis easie indeed to covet the top of wit or preferment, but to get up the hill, hic labor, hoc opus; there is a businesse indeed! the wayes to thrive are manifold, yet one good is worth all, and in effect is all: onely all the Art is finding and catching it: Could Archimedes but have found foo∣ting for his Mathematicall in∣strument, he would have done wonders.
Give me but footing where my selfe may stand, From their fixt Base I'le hoyst both sea and land. Boldly spoke, and bravely meant; and questionlesse, if you could have done the one for him, he would have perform'd the other for you: Thinke not, thriftie would be, that I by his example enjoyn the impossibi∣lities, or to build castles in the ayre, but meerely to shew thee how out of nothing to produce something, and thus I apply it. Could a young man once take hold or setling in preferment, where he may but fixe the in∣strument of his hopes, then may he easily drive the world before
him, and so mount up to wealth. Now who is able to le∣vell to a beginner the shortest cut, or score him the very way to thrive, if he either stand in his owne light through wilful∣nesse, or cut the throat as it were of all his hopes, through de∣spaire of better; the foole thus concluding with himselfe, He that's borne under a three-penny Planet, shall never be worth a groat. To him, and to him I de∣dicate not. What should I talke to such of Promotion? But to a forward spirit, and a manly heart, prepared for industry, and resolved to stand to his curse in Paradice, I commend this my Grammar of Trades. Nor thinke hopefull Reader I
have prefixt a specious title to make the sale more oylie, I would I were dead if I care whether you buy or burne it, onely I would have thee reade and be wise, labour and be rich. The old Paradox is witry and true. Quisque suae fortunae, faber. Every man sits at the very An∣vile and forge of his own For∣tune-making: now then if you can see to strike the Iron, while it is hot, that is, while time and the hand of Providence hold forth the opportunity, you may make your trade, but if you lin∣ger till it be cold, it will cost you another Heate. Experto mi∣hi credite. Now therefore that no man may over-slip his For∣tunes, or be pusled for want of
light, to see when it is offered, or to conduct him forward, when it is found, Loe here a Torch held out before him, pointing the plaine high way to preferment, in all Professions, Trades, and Arts, found out by an old traveller in the Sea of Experience, Longis erroribus a∣ctus, qui mores Hominum, &c. who now stands after all his folly, and ruines, a Land-marke, to the generall good of others. To the Father and his sonnes, to the Mother and every Mo∣thers childe, to the Scholler, the Apprentice, the Navigator, the Husbandman, the Courtier, and the Souldier, whether in hopes or in despaire, standing, rising, or falling, I bequeath
this my Legacy, my Looking-glasse to promotion, my Gram∣mar of Trades. 3 And since in the voyage to Promotion, Lending is the Rocke, and Borrowing is the Gulfe, I have discovered them both in the end, lest your ten∣der endeavours should tare against the one, or be swallow∣ed up in the other. Farewell, and where you see me, if you meane to Thrive, looke to your selfe. Thine living and dead, T. Powel.
The art of Thriving. The Contents. 1 AN Introduction to the fol∣lowing discourse with the occasion. 1 Direction for a Scholler in his Education, Maintenance, and ad∣vancement in his minority. 2 In the Vniversity. 3 In the Ministry. 4 In Benefices abroad. 2 Promotions following by Law. 1 Civill. 2 Common.
3 For the Physitian, and his meanes of Advancement. 4 The Apprentice with the due Election of Trades, and fol∣lowing of Merchandize. 5 The Navigator his way of Advancement & imployment. 6 The Husbandman. 7 The Courtier. 8 The Souldier. 1 By Sea. 2 By Land. Directions for matching of daughters.
The Mystery, &c. Contents. 1 The scope of the following Trea∣tise, first of the Borrower, secondly of the Lender. 2 1 The Courtiers Method. 2 The Innes of Court man. 3 The Country Gentleman. 3 Their severall causes of Insolency. 4 The sundry wayes and weapons wherewith they fence with their Creditors. 1 The Innes of Court mans. 2 The Country Gentleman. 3 The City borrower.
4 Their noted places of refuge. 5 Their dayes of Iubile and pri∣viledge. 5 The markes of a Conscious deb∣tor, with the discipline of the Mace. 6 The Lenders or Creditors part. 1 The charitable extent of the Creditors curtesie. 2 The reasons thereof. 3 The mystery of Multiplication. 7 1 Certaine signes fore-running and fore-shewing the Wonderfull Cracke. 2 The Recovery. 3 A voyage to two new Plantati∣ons.
The art of Thriving: OR, The plaine Path-way to Preferment. TRINITY Terme was now en∣ded; For by de∣scription of the time it could be no other parcell of the yeere. In that the Scrive∣ners at Temple-barrr, had no imployment, but writing of
blanke Bonds, and texting of Bills, for letting of Chambers in Chancery-lane. The Vintners of Fleet-street discharged their Iourney-men; A generall hu∣mility more than usuall possest the Cookery of Ram Alley. The Ostlers of Holborne had more than ordinary care to lay up their Guests bootes, rather for feare of their slipping out of Towne, than for any good ob∣servance towards them. And your Country Attorneyes would no longer by any means endure the unwholsome ayre of an Eight-penny Ordinary. Every one that had wherewith to discharge his Horse out of the stable, strove who should
first be gone. And amongst the rest, my selfe made shift for so much money as wherewith to abate the fury of Mistrisse Over∣count mine hostesse, and so I de∣parted likewise. At the top of Highgate hill I overtooke a Gentleman of Northamptonshire, riding home∣ward, whom I well knew; Him I saluted cheerefully, and he received me lovingly. But in travelling together (Mee thought) he was not Master of that mirthful disposition which he was wont to carry along with him to shorten the way be∣twixt his house and London, I gave him to understand, how strange, and notable this altera∣tion
appeared in him; And withall desired to know so much of the occasion thereof as might bee impartible to a friend of so small growth. To which he answered thus; Sir, I come from London, (it is true) from the Terme (It is certaine true) from London and Terme, True and certaine in nothing but expences in all things, yet I would have you know, that it is neither the Thunderclap of dissolving an Iniunction, nor the Doomesday of a Decree, nor Councellers Fees, nor Attor∣nies Bills in a language able to fright a man out of his wits, can proscribe me my wonted mirth. It is something nearer and dea∣rer
(my deare friend) that robs me of that cheere which used to lift me up into the very Spheare, where Iove himselfe sits to bid al his guests welcome right heartily. I remember me of Children, sixe Sonnes, and three Daugh∣ters, of whom I am the unhap∣py Father. In that, besides the scars which my unthriftinesse hath dinted upon their fortunes the wounds of unequall times, and a tempestuous age ap∣proching are like to take away from them all hope of out-li∣ving the low water ebbe of the evill day all meanes of thriving by honest paynes, study or in∣dustry are bereft them. The
Common upon which industry should depasture is overlaid, Numerousnesse spoiles all, and poverty sels all at an under va∣lue. In this case (Sir) what can be advised? Whereunto I thus re∣plyed. Sir, I have heedfully atten∣ded you in the delivery of your perplexed thoughts, concer∣ning the care which you have of your children, taking the true, and even levell of the de∣clention of arts, the distent of trades, and trading, the poverty of all professions, and the di∣stemper, not of ours onely, but of all Christian clymates at this present, tending rather to a
more contagion in the generall ayre, then a calmer tempera∣ment (for ought that yet appea∣reth) as for the storminesse of the sea of state forraigne or do∣mesticke, let us leave the grea∣ter, and lesser vessels that be ex∣posed to it, unto the proper Py∣lates, Masters, and Marriners, who have the charge to attend the line, or plye at the tackle, we are but poore passengers, and may assure our selves to partake in their boone voyage, if they succeed well, as they may be certaine to suffer in the same Shipwracke with us, if we miscarry. I addresse me to give you the best advise I can touch∣ing the preferment of your sixe
sonnes and three daughters, in manner following. It is true in most Gentlemen, and very likely in you, as in o∣thers, living onely upon the re∣venue of lands. That the height of their Husbandry amounts to no more than to cleere the last halfe yeeres booking, and bor∣rowing at the rent day. That their credit may hold up and keepe reputation till the next ensuing that againe. When you dye, the eldest Son claimes the inheritance of what you leave, thanke God, and nature for it, your selfe least of all, and your fatherly providence never a whit. If you take some course in
your life time to make the rest of your Children some small portions or estates out of the whole of your lands. It is tenne to one but you destroy both him, and them by that meanes. For the heire commonly stri∣ving to uphold the reputation of his Ancestors, He abates no∣thing of his fathers accustomed expences towards the raising of those portions or estates so de∣ducted. And they on the other side, presume so much upon the hope thereof, that no professi∣on will fit them. To be a Mini∣ster (with them) is to be but a Pedant. A Lawyer, a mercenarie fellow. A Shop-keeper, a man most subject to the most won∣derfull
Cracke, and a creature whose welfare depends much upon his Wives well bearing, and faire carrriage. What is then to be done? Surely it would be wished, seeing God and nature hath provided for the eldest, your younger sonnes, and your daughters; especially, being worst able to shift, should be by you provided for in the first place, while your Land is of virgin reputation, while it is chast, and undishonested by committing of single fornicati∣on with Country Creditors, that trade without sheets (that is) by Pole deed, onely for sa∣ving of costs; or at least, before
it have defiled the bed of its re∣putation by prostituting to the adulterous imbracings of a Ci∣tie Scrivener: But especially, before it grow so impudent, as to lye downe in the Market place, and to suffer every petty Clarke to bring its good name upon Record, and charge it that it was taken in the very fact be∣tweene other mens sheets. As in this Statute, or in that Iudge∣ment: Take heed of that by any meanes. And be sure to match your eldest sonne, when your credit is cryed up to the high∣est, while your heire is yet in your power to dispose, and will bend to your will, before his bloud begin to feele the heate
of any affections kindling about him, or before he can tell what difference is betwixt a blacke wrought Wastcoate, with a white apron and a loose bodied gowne without an apron. Put him off in his best clothes (I meane) in the assurance of your lands, sell him at the highest rate. Then dicotomize the whole portion of his wife into severall shares betwixt your o∣ther children. Not share and share like, but to every each one the more according to their de∣fects: Let impotencie, decrept∣nesse, ill favourdnesse and inca∣pacitie, rob the other of so much money as they have done them of comelinesse, acti∣vity,
beauty, and wit. Put them not into any course of living according to any pre∣script order, or method of your owne election. But according to their inclination and additi∣on, seeing that every one by instinct of nature, delighteth in that wherein he is like to be most excellent. And delight, and pride in any thing underta∣ken, makes all obstacles in the way of attaining to perfection of no difficulty. Now in the next place take heed that you put off those your sonnes whom you finde fit and addicted to be bred in the Ministerie, or made up to the law, or to be apprentized
betimes, and before they take the taynt of too much liberty at home. And when they be put forth, call them not home speedily to revisit their fathers house, no not so much as Hospitably by any meanes.
In the first place take your direction for the SCHOLLER. His Education. His Maintenance. His Advancement. FOr his Education. The Free-Schooles generally afford the best breeding in good let∣ters. So many of them also afford some reasonable means in ayde of young Schollers, for their diet, lodging, and teaching, gi∣ven to them by the Founders or Benefactors of such Schools.
Some of them be of the foun∣dation of some Kings and Queenes of this Land, and they are commonly in the gift of the King, or his Provost, or Substi∣tute in that behalfe. Others be of the foundation of some Bo∣dies or Societies incorporate. And they are commonly in the gift of such Masters, Wardens, Presidents, and their Senior fel∣lowes, such chiefe officers of a∣ny other title, or such Master Wardens, and Assistants, or such Opposers, Visitants, or Committees of such bodies re∣spectively as be appointed thereunto. Others be of the foundation of some private per∣sons: And they are for the most
part in the gift of the Executor, Heire, or Feoffees of such Do∣nor, according to the purport of his Will, or Grant, or both. Of every of which severall kindes respectively are: Eaton. Westminster. Winchester. The Merchantaylors Schoole London. The Skynners at Tunbridge. Suttons Hospitall. St. Bartholomews. And very many other the like. Briefly, few or no Counties of this Kingdome are unfur∣nisht of such Schooles. And some have so many, that it is
disputable whether the Vniver∣sities with the Innes of Court, and Chancerie have where to receive them or no. Some of such free-Schooles againe, have Schollerships appen∣dant unto them, in one of the Vniversities or both. To which upon Election yearely, they are removeable, As, From Eaton, to Kings Colledge Cambridge. From Westminster, to Trinity Colledge Cambridge, or Christ-Church Oxon: From Winchester, to New Col∣ledge Oxon. From the Merchantaylors, to St. Iohn's Oxon.
And the like, from many the like. Some other Free-Schooles have pensions for preferment of their Schollers, and for their maintenance in the Vniversity. Some Companies Incorpo∣rate (especially of London,) ha∣ving no such pensions in cer∣taine, doe usually out of the Stock of their Hall allow main∣tenance in this kinde. Besides that, there be many other private persons (upon my knowledge) who doe vo∣luntarily allow yearely exhibi∣tion of this nature. Now if you would know how to finde what is gi∣ven to any such Free-Schooles,
and in whose disposing they now be. Search In the Tower of London, till the end of Rich. the 3. For Grants and for License of Mortmaine, inde. And in the Chappell of the Rolles. From thence till the present, And for the like. In the Register of the Preroga∣tive Court, for such things devi∣sed by Will, by King, Queene, or Subject, For such Grants given by Will. And sometimes you shall finde such things both in the Tower, and the Prerogative, and in the Rolls, and Prerogative re∣spectively.
For the time since our refor∣med Church of England began here. Search Doctor Willets Synopsis, For all from the King, or from any other. Search In divers of our Chronicles For the like.
Next adde certaine helpes for discovery and attaining thereof. FIrst (if it may be) procure a sight of the Liedger Books, of such as in whom the disposi∣tiō of such things resteth, which they keep for their owne use. Next be acquainted with some of the Disposers them∣selves. Next take the directions of the Master or Teacher of such Free-Schooles. Especially, to be interessed in the Clarkes or Registers of such Societies as have the disposing of
any such things. Also to use meanes by Letters of persons powerfull, and use∣full to such disposers. For (indeed) it is not the sound of a great mans name to a Letter in these dayes, wherein they are growne so common, and familiar to our Societies (of London especially) can prevaile so soone as the Letter subscri∣bed by the Lord Maior, or other eminent Officer of the Citie, to whose commandement they be immediately subjugate. Lastly, if you use the meanes least seene, most used, and best allowed, together with these: For discovery and attaining of any such thing, it will not
be besides the purpose as I take it. Now suppose your sonne is brought to the Vniversitie by Ele∣ction, or as Pensioner. THe first thing you must take to your care is. In case he come not by election, but as a Pensioner, to live for the pre∣sent upon your owne charge, how to procure him a Scholler∣ship in the Colledge where you bestow him. Or in case he come elected in∣to one, how to procure a far∣ther addition of maintenance to him. To bring him into a Scholler∣ship,
place him with a Senior fellow of the house (as Tutor) though you allow to some Iuni∣on fellow somewhat yearely for reading unto him. This Senior fellow if the number of places voide will beare it, may nominate your sonne for one in his own right, if it will not beare it, he may call to his ayd some and so ma∣ny suffrages of the rest as with the speaking merit of your sonne may worke your desire. Then how to procure a pensi∣on for addytament of meanes. The chiefe skill is to finde it out, being either in the gift of some body Incorporate, or of some private person. Wherein
the discovery is to be made (as aforesaid.) If you sue to a Company con∣sisting of many persons Trades∣men, you must enquire who be the most potent Patritians, and best reputed Vestrie wits a∣mongst them, such as carry their gloves in their hands, not on their hands. Amongst an Assistance of ma∣ny, onely two or three strike the stroke, and hold the rest in a wonderfull admiration of their extraordinary endow∣ments. And how to speake sen∣sibly to these two or three is no Mystery. You know they are faithfull fiduciaries in the e∣lection. And therfore, you must
not presume to offer any thing by any meanes. Onely you may desire them to accept this poore peece of plate, with your name and Armes upon it, and binde you unto their love, in keeping the memory of you hereafter. Doe but try them in this kinde, and attend the suc∣cesse. I tell you, this with a Bucke at the Renter Wardens feast, may come somewhat neer to the matter. But for the pension to be ob∣tained of a private person, the way is not the same. It procee∣deth of the givers meere chari∣ty, and must be taken by the hand of a desertfull receiver. Though withall it may some∣times
fall out, that merit is made by mediation, especially of some such reverend Divine, as he doth most respect and fre∣quent. For other, letters can lit∣tle prevaile with such persons. The best note to discover a man inclinable to allow such a pension, is to examine how wealth and charity are equally and temperately mingled in him. And be sure withall that he be a man of some reasonable understanding in what he doth in this kinde. For a fooles pensi∣on is like a new fashion eagerly pursued at the beginning, but as scurvily left off in the procee∣ding. Your next care is, in his due
time to put on a fellowship, when he shall put off his Schol∣lership, seeing the Schollership keepes him company no far∣ther than to the degree of Ma∣ster of Arts, and a quarter of a yeere after, in those Colledges, where Schollerships are lon∣gest lived. And in some not so long. In some Colledges, The Fel∣lowship followes the Scholler∣ship of course, and as the one leaveth him, the other enter∣taines him. But in the most it is not so, but comes by Election. Which Election passeth by the Master and Senior Fellowes, whereof every one doth name one, if the number to be Elected
will beare it: or if not, then they passe by most voyces. Where note, that the Master hath a double voyce, and in some places he hath the nomi∣nation of one, if there be two places voyd, yea if there be but one at sometimes. In Colledges the letters of great persons, especially of the Lords grace of Canterbury, and the Vniversitie Chancellor have been of great prevailance. But it is not so now in these dayes. There be beneficiall gradati∣ons of preferment likewise, for Fellowes in their Colledges; as Lecturer, Deane, Bowser, Vice-master, and Master. But for my
part, I better like and commend those who when they finde themselves fit to put forth into the world, take the first prefer∣ment that is offered unto them, rather than such who live cloy∣stered like Votaries: who have Sacraments to fill up their pla∣ces be it but to keep out others, such as use no exercise, but wi∣ping the dust off their bookes, and have an excellent activity in handling the foxe tayle, such as hold no honour like to Sup∣plicat reverentijs vestris. And to be had Bowser of the Colledge, as good as to be Chiefe Butler of England. These preferments of the Colledge all but that of the
Master comes of course by or∣der, and antiquity. Therefore no meanes but patient abiding needs for the acquiring of them in their due time. I hasten to send your sonne out of the Cloyster into the Common-wealth, and to shew you how many wayes of Ad∣vancement are open unto him abroad, with the meanes to dis∣cover, and attaine.
And first for the Ministry. FIrst for his ease, let him looke no farther than next to hand, and enquire what be∣nefices belong to their owne Colledge, and are in the gift of their Master and Senior fellows (as most Colledges have divers such) and amongst them which are void at the present, or whose incumbent is not like to live long. And if he finde out any such; than if he know not after so long continuance among them to speake in his Seniors owne Dialect, let him never tra∣vaile beyond Trumpington for me.
More indigitly, For attaining of such a Benefice, let him en∣quire where the Mattens are read with Spectacles, or where the good old man is lifted up into the Pulpit, or the like, and make a way for Succession ac∣cordingly. Where note, that many times a fellow of the house may hold such a Benefice together with his fellowship, or a Pension for increment of livelyhood. And such tyes as these, are common∣ly the bond of matrimony whereby they are so wedded to the Colledge. Next, he must climbe up to the maine top of Speculation, and there looke about him to
discover what Benefices are emptie abroad where the In∣cumbent lives onely upon the Almes of Confectio Alchermi: Or where one is ready to take his rise out of Sierge into Sattin, out of Parsonadge and a Pre∣bendarie, into a Deanarie and a Donative, let him not be slow of footmanship in that case by any meanes. For Benefices abroad. Benefices abroad are in the gift of The King immediately. Or the Lord Keeper for the King.
Some Lord Bishop, Some Deane and Chapter: Some Body incorporate: Some Parish: Some Private Patron: You shall finde in the Tower a collection of the Patent Rolls gathered of all Presentations made by the King in those dayes to any Church Preben∣darie or Chappell. In right of the Crowne or otherwayes from 1. of Edward the first, till the midst of Edward the third. The King himselfe onely and immediately presented in his owne right to such Benefi∣ces as belong to him, and are a∣bove twenty pounds value in the first Fruit Bookes.
For attayning of any which I can advise you of no better course, than to learne the way to the backe stayres. The Lord Keeper presents for the King to all such benefi∣fices as belong to his Majestie, and are under twenty pounds value in the bookes. Now to know which of these are full, and who are Incum∣bents in any of these. Search, The first Fruits Office. The Clarke, who hath the writing of the Presentations. The Lord Keepers Secretary being. Where note that the King hath used very seldome to
grant any such living in Rever∣sion. And the Lord Keeper now being. His care is so great in this, as in all cases of common good to provide for mans me∣rit, and cherish industry in the growing plants, that no one can offer unto him a request of this kinde, without trespasse to his good disposition. In the next place concerning Benefices in the Presentation of any of the Lords Bishops. Note that most Bishopricks in England, have presentation to divers Benefices belonging to their Seas. For the number and present estate of these.
Search Their owne Leidgers. Their Registers. Enquire of Their Auditors. Their Stewards of their Courts. And sometimes you shall light upon some of their books of this kinde, in the hands of the heyres or Executors of such as have borne such offi∣ces under them. He that is Chaplaine to such a Lord Bishop, hath for the most part the best meanes, ac∣cesse, and opportunity, to at∣taine to such a Benefice. The commendations of such a great personage as to whom this Patron oweth greatest re∣spect,
especially for his affai∣ring in Court, may doe some good in the matter. The like wayes of discovery, and the like meanes of attaining any Benefice in the Presentati∣on of any Deane, and Chapter, are to be used with them respe∣ctively, as with the Bishops. With every Deane and Chap∣ter, are likewise divers Preben∣daries to be obtained of their gift after the same manner, and by the same meanes also. The other bodies Incorpo∣rate, besides those of Colledges, and Deanes and Chapters have many of them especially of London, and some subordinate Societies thereof) right of the
presentation to divers Benefices. Also some Parishes by pre∣scription doe present to their owne perochiall Benefices. And many Patrons are content to present, according to the ap∣probation of the Parishioners upon their hearing, and allow∣ing, and due exclamation of the integrity of the life of such su∣tors, and no otherwise, di∣vers governours, and gradati∣ons of the lands of divers Hospitals, and Mesons de dien have like right of presentation to Benefices, as have other bo∣dies Incorporate. And the meanes of discovery and attai∣ning are likewise the like. In Parishes, and Companies of Tradesmen Incorporate,
some very few rule the roast. Your Alderman of the Ward his Deputy, your Common Councell-man. Yea sometime that petty Epitomie of Warde-mote Enquerst, that little busie morsell of Iustice (the Beadle of the Ward) will make a strong partie in the election, if he be put to it. The Probotory Ser∣mon, that must be made upon such tryall before such an Audi∣torie, would be according to the capacity in generall. But more especially, according to the hu∣mour and addiction of those whose wits the rest have in sin∣gular reverence. As Mr. Fran∣cis Fiat, a good understanding Fishmonger (I assure you) you
may give the stile of right wor∣shipfull to them, though the best man of the company be but a Wine Cooper, and his judge∣ment better in Claret, than in Concioclerum a great deale. If your sonne upon his tryall can but fit their pallats smooth∣ly which is hard to doe; In re∣gard that they are so hollow mouthed, let him be sure though he misse the Benefice for want of preperation, yet tenne to one but they will straine themselves, to bring him in as a Lecturer, which is a thing they reverence farre be∣yond the Person of the Parish by many degrees. Lastly, to private Patrons,
and the Benefices in their gifts; Search, The Bishops Register: for Institution, and Pre∣sentation. The Archdeacons Register: for Induction. The Archbishops Register: if it be a peculiar. It was my chance lately to see a booke of all the Benefices within the Diocesse of Canter∣bury, with the manner of their tything in every each one re∣spectively. In which I finde, that there are, or should be with the Register of every Lord Bi∣shop seven Bookes kept for En∣try of the matters, and businesse of their Diocesse, of which this
of Benefice in the chiefe. The like I saw formerly of the Diocesse of St. Davids, which confirmes me in the in∣stitution, and custome of kee∣ping the said bookes also in o∣ther Diocesse. And seeing that severall pri∣vate patrons are of severall dis∣positions, some more Lucrative and Covetous: Others more charitable, and religious, I can give you no other rule of attai∣ning the Benefice than this, viz. That your sonne bring with him ability of learning, Integri∣ty of life, and conformity of behaviour, according to the or∣der of the Church establisht a∣mongst us, and these shall make his way, with the good and ge∣nerous
Patron. But for the o∣ther patron it makes no matter at all for learning, and a very little for manners, or whether he be a man conformable or no. Truely he is indifferent, for his part very indifferent. To such a Patron your sonne must present himselfe: thus (if he meane to be presented) ac∣cording to present necessitie. He must both speake and prove himselfe a man indued with good gifts. For he shall have to deale with a Patron of a quicke Capacity, more dexterous in apprehension than your sonne or you can be in delivery. Be this Patron what he will, your comfort is, the Benefice
must be fild, and that within a limited time, howsoever it is dangerous to attend the ending of the day in this case, (For sel∣dome doth the Clarke of the market get any thing by their standing too long and above their accustomed houre.) Lapse by reason of Simony, and Lapse for not presenting, in due time, Both offer ad∣vancement to learning. But the first is at hand to discover as a witch: And the second as rare to finde out as a faithfull fiduci∣arie or a fast Friend. The degrees of rising in the Ministrie are not easier knowne than practized by the industri∣ous man.
Briefly if all Church livings in England were equally distri∣buted, There is no one of the Ministry if he want not lear∣ning, or good manners, needs want maintenance, or good Livelyhood. Here I could wish to God; That it might please the right reverend Fathers of the Church the Lord Bishops, That they would once in every of their times cause a true Catalogue of all the Benefices within their severall Diocesse with the names of the patrons thereof according to the last presentati∣on to be sent into the office of the first fruits for the better in∣formation of al such as deserve,
and would gladly attaine to some meanes of maintenance, which they may the better doe by having recourse thither, there to take notice of all things of this nature. For I know that many sit downe in their wants, having good meanes to many private Patrons, onely for lacke of knowledge of the same. Note that it is an usuall thing in private Patrons to grant re∣version, and Advowson of such livings. My selfe intended heretofore to collect all such Benefices with their Patrons, into a cer∣taine Callender for such dire∣ction (as aforesaid) and made some passage into it. But the
farther I went, the more impos∣sible I found it. And I am now resolved that without the Bi∣shops assistance it cannot be done. And so much for the Ministery. The Lawes promotions follow BY Civill Law, and Common Law. FOr breeding of your youth in the Civill Law, there are two Colledges of especiall note
in our Vniversities: the one is Trinity-hall in Cambridge; the other is New-Colledge in Oxford. I remember me not of any Free-Schoole in England, that have any place appendant in Trinitie-Hall in Cambridge. But in new Colledge of Oxford, the Free-Schoole of Winchester, hath claime both of Scholler∣ships, & Fellowships; the whole Colledge consisting of none o∣ther, as I take it. It is to be confest, the charge of breeding a man to the Civill Law, is more expensive, and the way more painefull, and the bookes of greater number, and price than the Common Law requireth. But after the Civill
Lawyer is once growne to Ma∣turity. His way of Advance∣ment is more beneficiall, more certaine, and more easie to at∣taine, than is the Common Lawyers, and all because their number is lesse, their learning more intricate. And they ad∣mit few or no Sollicitors to trample between them and the Clyent. So that the Fee comes to them immediately, and with the more advantage.
The Preferments at which they arrive, are these: Chancellor to the Bishop. Archdeacon. Commissarie, where they have Commissarie. Officiall. Iudge, and Surrogate. Advocate for the King. Mr. of the Chancerie. The Kings Proctor. Advocate, and Proctor at large. In these Courts, viz. The High Commission. The Delegates. The Prerogative. The Consistory. The Arches.
The Bishops Courts. The Archdeacons Courts. Chancellors, Commissaries and Officials Courts. The Admiraltie Courts. The Court of the Kings Re∣quests. In times past. The countenance of some Bi∣shop, especially of the L. Archbi∣shop upon a Civilian, will much advance his practice as an Ad∣vocate, and give him promoti∣on as a Iudge. There are under the greater Officers aforenamed, divers o∣ther inferiour Officers: as Register. Arctuarie. Examiner.
The number of the Doctors (though I finde them never to have beene limited,) Yet it is certaine that the time was with∣in memory of man, when the house of their Commons did commonly give them all suffi∣cient lodging, and dyet. And as for the number of Proctors, they were of late times limited. How it is now I know not.
For the Common Law. FOr breeding of Students at the Common Law, take dire∣ctions for their method of study out of that Tractate which Mr. Iustice Dodridge did in his time pen for the purpose. Onely (for my part) I doe much commend the ancient custome of breeding of the younger Students. First, in the Innes of Chancery; there to be the better prepared for the Innes of Court. And this must needs be the better way, seeing too much liberty at the first proves very fatall, to many of the younger sort. I have ob∣served,
and much commend al∣so the breeding of some Com∣mon Lawyers in this kinde, viz. That when they have beene admitted first into an Inne of the Chancery, they have beene withall entred as Clarkes in the office of some Prothonotarie of the Common-Pleas to adde the skill of the Practicke to their speculation. And if a Student be thus bred, by his foundation in the one, and his experience in the other, he shall with more facilitie than others, who step into the Inne of Court at first, attaine to an ability of practise. Besides other ordinary requi∣site parts and Arts in a Com∣mon
Lawyer. Skill in the Re∣cords of all Courts of Record, and in other antiquities of Presi∣dent. With some Reading in the Civill Law, also will much inable him. The Common Lawyer is to be bred onely upon the purse. The charge most at the first. For after he hath spent some few yeares effectually, he may attaine to the imployment of some private friends, for advi∣sing with, and instructing of greater Counsaile, whereby he shall adde both to his meanes, and knowledge. It is true, that I have knowne some Attorneyes and Sollici∣tors, put on a Counsailors
gowne, without treading the same usuall path to the barre (as aforesaid.) But indeed, I never looke upon them, but I thinke of the Taylor, who in one of his Customers cast suits had thrust himselfe in amongst the Nobility at a Court Maske, where pulling out his Handker∣cher, he let fall his Thimble, and was so discovered, and handled, and dandled from hand to foot, till the Guard de∣livered him at the great Cham∣ber doore, and cryed, farewell good feeble. If the Common Lawyer be sufficiently able in his professi∣on, he shall want no practice, if no practice no profit.
The time was that the youn∣ger Counsaile had some such helpe, as To be a Favourite. A kindred. To marry a Neece, Cousin, or a Chambermaid. But those dayes be past, and better supply their roomes. As fellowes of Colledges in the Vniversities get Pensions, or Benefices, to adde to their live∣ly hood: So Barresters and Counsailors of the Innes of Court, advance their meanes by keeping of Courts of Mannors. Leets, and Barrons: Swannimootes of Forrests. Stannaries.
Cinque Ports, &c. By places of Iudges of Inferiour Courts. As London, and other like Corpora∣tions. The Virdg. The Tower of London. St. Katherines near the Tower. Borough of Southwarke. The Clinke. Wentwort and like Liberties. By office of Recorder of some Corporate Towne. Feodarie of some Counties: The Kings Counsaile in the Marches of Wales, or at Yorke, or Iudge, or Counsaile of some Countie Pallatine:
The greater places of prefer∣ment for Common Lawyers are The Iudges at Westminster, and elsewhere: The next, are all the severall Officers of the Courts of West∣minster and elsewhere: All which you shall finde set forth briefly in Smiths Common∣wealth of England, and part in mine owne Search of Records. And all these, together afford sufficient maintenance for thou∣sands of persons who may be here well provided for. Here I should and here I could for better direction of yonger brothers, shew what meniall Clarkeships of large exhibition,
are under the great Officers of the Land, the Iudges, the Kings Counsaile, and other Officers which are not elsewhere pub∣lisht. And I know it would open a doore to many a proper mans preferment especially; under the Lord Keeper: as Secretaries for Chancery businesse, and Spiritu∣all promotions the Commission of the Peace, Iniunctions, the Dockquets. And other the like under the Lord Treasurer, as Se∣cretaries for the businesse of the Realme, and the Custome-house besides the Inlets to so many preferments about the Cu∣stomes, and Escheators: places, under the Lord Treasurer, under the Chancellour of the Exche∣quer
Dutchie, and Principality of Wales, and Duchie of Cornewall, as Seale keeper, Secretary, &c. Vnder the Master of the Court of Wards, as Secretarie; under the Iudges, as Marshall, Clarke of the Bailes, &c. Vnder the Barons of the Exchequer, as Examiner; Clarke of the Bailes and other Clarkes. Vnder the Kings Attourney Generall, as Clarke of the Pattens, Clarke of the Confessions and en∣tries, Clarke of the References, Booke bearer. Vnder the Solli∣citor Generall, Clarke of the Pa∣tents, Booke bearer. Besides many other Clarkes under the white staves of the Court, and in the Counting house, and
many severall offices. Al which with hundreds more that I could name, with a plainer and more large deduction, were it not for fear that what I well in∣tend for general good, would be taken in offence for private pre∣judice. But for the Clarkeship of the Kings houshold, examine farther the Blacke booke in the Exchequer. The Physitian followes. ANd here I remember me of an old tale following, viz.
At the beginning of the hap∣py raigne of our late good Queene Elizabeth, divers Com∣missioners of great place being authorized to enquire of, and to displace all such of the Clergie as would not conforme to the reformed Church, one amongst others was Convented before them, who being asked whe∣ther he would subscribe or no, denied it, and so consequently was adjudged to lose his bene∣fice, and to be deprived his fun∣ction, whereupon in his impa∣tience he said; That if they (meaning the Commissioners) held the course it would cost many a mans life. For which the Commissi∣oners
called him backe againe, and charged him that he had spoke treasonable, and seditious words tending to the raysing of a rebellion, or some tumult in the Land, for which he should receive the reward of a Tray∣tor. And being asked whether he spake those words or no, he acknowledged it, and tooke upon him the Iustification thereof; for said he, ye have ta∣ken from me my living, and profession of the Ministrie, Schollership is all my portion, and I have no other meanes now left for my maintenance, but to turn Physitian, and before I shal be absolute Master of that Mystery (God he knowes) how
many mens lives it wil cost. For few Physitians use to try experi∣ments upon their own bodies. With us it is a Profession can maintaine but a few. And di∣vers of those more indebted to opinion, than learning, and (for the most part) better qualified in discoursing their travailes, than in discerning their Patients maladies. For it is growne to be a very huswives trade, where fortune prevailes more than skill. Their best benefactor the Neapolitan, Their grand Seignieur. The Sorpego, their Gonfollinere. The Sciaticke, their great Marshall that calles the Muster Rolle of them all together at every Spring and
Fall, are all as familiar to her as the Cuckow at Cank-wood in May. And the cure of them is the skill of every good old Ladies cast Gentlewoman, when she gives over painting, she falls to plastering, and shall have as good practice as the best of them, for those kinde of diseases. Marry for Womens griefes amongst Physitians, the Mas∣culine is more worthy than the Feminine. Secrecie is the chiefe skill, and virility the best learning that is required in a Womans Physitian. But I never read of many of those to be long lived, or honestly wived hitherto in
all my reading. Hitherto I speake nothing in disrepute of the more reverend, and learned sort of Physitians, who are to be had in singular reverence, and be usefull to mankinde next to the Divine. Indeed, I rather pitty them, and pittying smile to see how prettily these young gamesters Male and Female lay about them, and engrosse the greater part of Patientrie in all places wheresoever. And here I may more fitly say (God knowes) how many mens lives this abused opinion had of such Gamesters costs. Be∣cause they be not Masters of that Mystery, and that science
which requires the Greeke tongue, exactly, all the lear∣ning, and skill of Philosophie, History of all sorts (especially naturall) knowledge of all ve∣getatives and Minerals, and whatsoever dwels within the foure elements. Also skill in A∣stronomy, Astrology. And so much of the Iudicials upon all man∣ner of Calculations as may be well warranted with much o∣ther kind of learning, art & skil, whereof my young travailing Phisitian, and trading wayting woman never heard.
Their means of Advance∣ment are in these wayes, viz. To be Physitian of some Col∣ledge in one of the Vniversities, (as divers Colledges have such pla∣ces) Physitian to the King or Queens person. Physitian to either of their housholds. Or to some Hospitall, (as most have such.) Or to some great persons, who may prefer them hereafter, and be somewhat helpfull in the meane time. To a good old Vsurer, or one that hath got his great estate toge∣ther
unconscionably: For they feare nothing but death, and wil buy life at any rate: There is no coward to an ill Conscience. It is not amisse, to make way of acquaintance with Gallants given, to deepe drinking, and surfetting: For they are patients at all times of the yeere. Or, a Gentlewoman that would faine use the meanes to be pregnant. Or, your Lascivious Lady, and your man in the Perriwig will helpe to furnish with a foot-cloth. A Citizens wife of a weake stomacke, will supply the fringe to it. And if all faile. And the Bathe
will affoord no roome: Let them finde out some strange water, some unheard-of Spring. It is an easie matter to disco∣lour or alter the taste of it in some measure, (it makes no matter how little.) Report strange cures that it hath done. Beget a Superstitious opinion in it. Goodfellowship shall up∣hold it. And the neighbouring Townes shall all sweare for it.
The Apprentice followes. THe first question is, to what Trade you will put your Sonne, and which is most wor∣thy of choice. For the Merchant it requireth great stocke, great experience in Forraine estates. And great ha∣zard, and adventure at the best. And this is not all. For it de∣pends upon the Peace of our State with forraigne Princes, especially those with whom we hold mutuall traffique, Or, who lye in our way to intercept, or impediment our Trade abroad. Besides that, in time of Warre
they can hold no certainty of dealing, or supplying their Fa∣ctory in parts beyond the Seas. Shipping is subject ever at the let goe, to be stayed. Marriners to be prest, and many other in∣conveniences attend them in such times. Besides the burthen of Custome and Imposition which all States impose more or lesse. So that unlesse we have peace with such Neighbours, there is little hope in that pro∣fession in the ordinary and law∣full way of trading. Happily you will alledge that some Merchants thrive well e∣nough, when the warres most rage, and when the streame of State is most troubled. Some
then hold it to be the best fi∣shing; they that gaine then (Sir) if they gaine justifiably: gaine not as Merchants, but as men of Warre, which occupation a man may learn without serving seven years apprentiship unto it. And if they gaine justifiably as Merchants, it must be in some generall stocke of a Society in∣corporated, who have purse to passe to and fro with sufficient power, in the most dangerous times. And if such Societies are tollerable at any time; it is at such times. How they be other∣wise allowable, I leave to con∣sideration. For the Shopkeeper, his wel∣fare for the most part, depends
upon the prosperity of the Mer∣chant. For if the Merchant sit still, the most of them may shut up their Shop windowes. Lit∣tle Skill, Art, or Mystery, shall a man learne in Shop-keeping. A man shall never in forraigne parts, being put to his shifts out of his owne Meridian, live by the skill of weighing and mea∣suring. The most use of advan∣tage he can make of it, is to be∣nefit between the Mart and the Market, than which nothing is more uncertaine, seeing there is no true judiciall of the fal∣ling, and rising of commodities. And the casualties that they are subject unto, especially) in time of Warre.
Take this for a generall rule, that those Trades which aske most with an Apprentice, are incertainest of thriving, and re∣quire greatest stocks of setting up. Amongst Trades, give me those that have in them some Art, Craft, or Science, by which a man may live, and be a wel∣come guest to all Countries a∣broad, and have imployment in the most stormy times at home, when Merchants and Shop-keepers are out of use: (as,) An Apothecarie. A Druggist. A Chirurgion. A Lapidarie. A Ieweller. A Printer. An Ingraver in stones & metal.
One that hath skill in seasoning of shipwood. A Carpenter of all sorts, especi∣ally of shipping. A Smith of all sorts, especially of Clockes, Watches, Guns, &c. A Planter, and Gardner of all sorts. An Enginere for making of Pa∣tars, and the like Engines of Warre. And Hot Presses for cloth, &c. And Engines to weigh any Ship, or Guns that are drowned, &c. Skrues, &c. A maker of all sorts of Instru∣ments, for Navigation, Cōpasses, Globes, Astrolabes. A Drainer of grounds Sur∣mounded. A Sale-maker, and
A maker of Cordage, Tackle, &c. A Lymner. A Clothier, a Clothworker, and a Dyer. A Taylor, Shooe-maker, Glover, Perfumer, & trimmer of gloves An Imbroyderer. A Feltmaker, a Glasier, and one that can paint in Glasse. Briefly, any Manufacture or trade, wherein is any Science, or craft. Onely those Trades are of least use and benefit, which are called Huswives Trades (as Brewer, Baker, Cooke, and the like.) Because they be the skill of women as well as of men, and common to both. I would haue you know, that
the Maker was before the Re∣taylor, and most Shopkeepers are but of a sublimated Trade and retayle, but as Attorneyes to the maker. But if the Maker (without dispute of Freedome in any Corporation, might set up Shop and sell his commodi∣ty immediately) it would be a great deale better for the Com∣mon-wealth, than now it is. Besides, it is no matter of dif∣ficulty, burthen, or disgrace, for a Shopkeeper, yea a Mer∣chant, or a Gentleman, to have the skill of some one of these Manufactures, besides his Re∣venew, or profession, to accom∣pany him, what fortune soever may carry him into Countries unknown.
To my knowledge, a great Earle lately of this Land, did thinke it no scorne to indeavour the attaining of the Craft, and trade of a Farrior, wherein hee grew excellent. And when our acquaintance tooke first life with those of the Low Counrries, upon a Treatie wherein our Embassador strove to set forth the worthinesse of our King and Kingdome, with the Native commodities there∣of. The Dutch (ignorantly con∣ceiving that no man could at∣taine to wealth, without some good occupation, or manufa∣cture) askt him, what handicraft our King was brought up unto, or what trade he had used to
get so much wealth withall. I admit the Merchant Royall, that comes to his Profession by travaile & Factory, ful fraught, and free adventure to be a pro∣fession worthy the seeking. But not the hedg-creeper, that goes to seeke custome from shop to shop, with a Cryll under his arme, that leaps from his Shop-boord to the Exchange, and af∣ter he is fame-falne and credit crackt, in two or three other professions, shall wriggle into this and that, when he comes upon the Exchange, in stead of enquiring after such a good ship, spends the whole houre in disputing, whether is the more profitable house-keeping, either
powder Beefe and brewes, or with fresh Beefe and Porridge: though (God wot) the black Pot at home be guilty of neither. And so he departs when the Bel rings, & his guts rumble, both to one tune, and the same purpose. The Merchant Royall might grow prosperous, were it not for such poor patching interlo∣ping Lapwings, that have an ad∣venture of two Chaldron of Coles at New-castle; As much oyle in the Greeneland fishing, as will serve two Coblers for the whole yeare ensuing. And ano∣ther at Rowsie, for as many Fox-skins, as will fur his Long-lane gowne, when he is called to the Livory.
The Shopkeeper is a cleanly Trades; especially, your Linnen-Draper, which company hath the greatest Commonalty, and the largest priviledges of all o∣ther; and yet they maintaine nothing by Charter, for (in∣deed) they have none. But a manufacture for my mo∣ney; especially, if he sell to the wearer immediately. Now for the better incou∣ragement of men of Trade. Know that in most Companies of Tradesmen incorporate (es∣pecially in London) there is pro∣vision made by divers benefa∣ctors of their Societies decea∣sed, for the enabling and setting up of yong beginners, by stocks
of money remaining in the hands of some few of the chiefe of their Company, (how faith∣fully disposed, I leave to their owne consideration). But surely the poorer sort complain much of the misimployment of it ge∣nerally. There is but one little Crevis to peep in at their dealings. And that is betweene their Masters conscience, and the Clarks con∣nivence, which is so narrow, that you may sooner discern the South Pole through the maine Center, than discover their my∣stery. Indeed in times past, the Clearkship of the Company hath been bestowed vpon some
ancient decayed member of the Company, for his livelihood. But the Attorney & Scrivener; and some petty Clarkes of the Citie, by the Letters of, &c. pre∣occupy those places. And here I could wish for righting of the dead, and relee∣ving of the poorer members of such Companies, who are kept in ignorance. That some paines were taken in the Prerogative Office, for the collating of all gifts of this nature, to be pub∣lisht in print, that the meanest might thereby be able to call their Grand Masters to account, if they abuse the trust in them reposited in this behalfe. I ac∣knowledge the youth of mine
age to be determined. And (God knowes) how poore a re∣main of life is left in my Glasse, yet if it may please those in whom the power resteth, to give me leave to search (gratis) for all Grants and gifts of pious use in all kindes whatsoever. I could willingly bestow that lit∣tle of my Lampe, in collection of these things, and publish them to posterity. Provided al∣wayes, that I and mine may have the priviledge of imprin∣ting the same for some sitting number of yeares to come. The Navigator. NExt to the man of Trade, or rather equally with him
I must give the Navigator his due for that his profession is as full of science; as usefull to the Common-wealth, and as profi∣table to himselfe as any trade whatsoever. If he attaine the skill of knowing, and handling the tackle, the certaine art of his Compasse, the knowledge of languages, and dispositions of forraigne Nations where he travailes and trades, he may rise from a Squabler to a Master, from a Master to be a Generall honestly, and with good repu∣tation in a short time.
The Navigator his way of Ad∣vancement, & imployment is, by The Lords of his Majesties pri∣vy Councell. The High Admirall: Commissioners for the Kings Navy: Chiefe of ficers of the Navyes of Societies incorporate: Private Merchants, & the like. With the Trinity house. But if he get to be an Owner, he may trade as free as bird in ayre, as a man of warre or a man of trade, and Commerce. If he take heed that he intrench not upon the incorporated Compa∣nies, especially the minotaur. He cannot doe amisse (with Gods
assistance.) He may live merrily, and contentedly, be it but in tra∣ding as a meere Carryer of home commodities. Imported from one port to another with∣in the kingdome. The Husbandman. THe Husbandman may like∣wise for the happy content of the life, and the honest gaine which it brings with it, be wor∣thy to invite a right good mans son to undergoe the profession. Your sonne whom you intend for a Husbandman, must be of a disposition part gentile, and ru∣sticke equally mixt together. For if the Gentleman be pre∣dominant:
his running Nagge will outrun the Constable. His extraordinary strong Beer will be too headstrong in office of Church-Warden. And his well mouthed dogges will make him out-mouth all the Vestry. But if the clowne be predominant, he will smell all browne bread and garlicke. Besides, he must be of a hardier temper than the rest of his brethren, because the unhealthfullest corners of the Kingdome are the most profita∣ble for Farmers. He must espe∣cially ayme at a Tenancy under the Crowne, or some Bishops Sea, Deane and Chapter, some Col∣ledge, some Company, some Hospitall, or some other body
incorporate. Wherein the Au∣ditor or Receiver, must be his best Intelligencer, and Dire∣ctor. Young unthrifts acquain∣tance when they first arrive at the age of one and twenty. And good old conscionable Landlords that hold it a deadly sinne to raise the rents of their Grandfathers, or hope to be de∣livered out of Purgatory by their Tenants prayers will doe well. These professions before men∣tioned, be (as it were) the orbs to receive all fixed stars, and such dispositions as may be put into any certaine frame. But for a more libertine dis∣position,
Fit it with the profession of a Courtier. For an overflowing, and Ran∣ker disposition, make him a Souldier. But beyond this he is a lost man, not worthy a fathers re∣membrance, or providence.
The Courtiers wayes of advance∣ment be these. BY the generall and most an∣tient rule of Court, if you would have him to be prefer∣red unto the Kings service in the end. And in the meane time to have sufficient meanes of maintenance, Place him with one of the White Staves of the Houshold. By the more particular rule, (if you can) put him unto the Lord High Steward his Service (who amōgst the white Staves) hath the chiefest hand in prefer∣ring to any office beneath stayrs If the High Steward be full, seek to the Lord Chamberlain,
who hath the chiefe power to prefer to the places above stayrs, and to the Wardrobe. And if there be no entrance there, then seeke to the Treasu∣rer of the Houshold, and next to the Controller. The Master of the Houshold. The Coferer, & the rest of the greene Cloth. The Master of the Horse pre∣fers the Avenanarie and other Clarkeships offices, and places about the Stable. The principall Secretary hath heretofore had a great hand in preferring to the Clarkeships in the office of the Signet, and the Lord privie Seale into the pri∣vy Seale office. The Master of the great Ward∣robe
into the Clarkships, & of∣fices there. The Master of the Robes. The Master of the Iew∣ell-house, the Keeper of the pri∣vy Purse. The Master of the Toyles and Tents with some o∣ther the like have whilome bin the meanes of preferring divers their followers into the service of the King, in divers beneficial places, and Clarkeships, in their severall offices respectively. The Lord Treasurer without the house, prefers to his Maje∣sties service, in most places in or about the Custome-houses, in all the parts of England. And besides these, I finde no meanes used of old, for prefer∣ment into the Kings service for these kinde of places.
The yeomen of the Guard were wont to come in for their personage, and activity by their Captaines allowance. And the Bed-chamber mens fervants ever were in way to be preferred for Pages of the pri∣vy Chamber, or Groomes, or placed at the backe staires, not of right, but of custome. For the Clarkes of the Hou∣shold, they were wont ancient∣ly to rise by certaine degrees, according to the prescription of the Blacke Booke, but how it is now I know not. For your better satisfaction of Court Offices, their order and Fee, Search the Blacke Booke in the Exchequer, & in the Court.
And for all Offices whatsoever under the King, throughout the whole Kingdome; Either in Castle, Parke, Chase, Court, or house of the Kings royalty or place soever, with the then Fees of the same, I referre you to a booke, Whereof many hundred Copies are extant, which was collected by the Lord Treasurer Burleigh, and by him delivered to the late Queen Elizabeth of famous memory. And so much for the Courtier.
The Souldier followes. ANd the question is first. Whether the better way of thriving, is to be a Sea Soldi∣er, or a Land Soldier. Questionlesse the better way of thriving is to be a Sea Soldi∣er, In this Kingdome of Eng∣land, being an Island, for that he is more usefull to his Coun∣try. More learning is required to be a Sea Soldier than to be a Land Soldier. A Sea Soldier is certaine of victuals, and wages; where the Land Soldiers pay will hardly finde him suste∣nance. A Sea Soldier may now and then chance to have a snap at a booty or a prize which may
in an instant make him a fortune for ever; where the Land Sol∣dier may in an age come to the ransacking of a poore fisher Towne at the most. More valour is required in a Sea Soldier than in a Land Sol∣dier; because the extremity of the place requires it. The Sea Captaine is exposed to as much danger during the whole fight, as the poorest man in the Ship, where the land Captaine useth but to offer his men to the face of the enemy, & then retreateth. The way to rise to preferment at Sea, is by the Admirals coun∣tenance, and the Vice Admirals in the Kings service, or in other service by the favour of great
traded Merchants, and especial∣ly of your bodies incorporate: and their chiefe Officers; and more especially their President, & Treasurer for the time being. His breeding is a matter of more moment than his age re∣gardeth. If he be true bred, he should be first made a perfect Naviga∣tor able to direct the Sterage of their course, able to know the tackle, and appoint every Say∣lor to his charge. He should know what number of Saylors, what Ordinance, and what mu∣nition should be requisite for a Ship of such a burden. He should be a skilfull Caneere, and able to direct the Gunner, to
say what quantity of powder a Peece of such bore and depth re∣quireth, and of what weight the bullet should be where such a quantity of powder is used, whether the Peece be sound or hony-combed. He should be a∣ble to know and direct what quantity of victuall should be required for so many men, for such a voyage. And what quan∣tity of powder and shot. Also, to oversee and direct the Purser and Steward, in the ex∣pence of their victuall without profusenesse, or too much par∣simony. Likewise skilfull in all manner of Fire-workes, and fitting En∣gines for sea fight.
Briefly, he should be so com∣pleat, as that none should be a∣ble to teach him in his place, and he skilfull to controle eve∣ry other in their places. He should be courteous and loving to his men. Above all things he should be zealous of the honour of God. See that the divine ser∣vice be duely read on board E∣vening and Morning, and that swearing be severely punished. A Sea Captaine, is not a place for a young man to leape into instantly, and immediately out of a Ladies Vshership; a Great mans bed chamber, or a Little∣tons discipleship. It is not your feathered Gal∣lant of the Court, nor your Ta∣verne
Roarer of the Citie, be∣comes this place I assure you. I finde not any Meson de dieu, for relieving of mayned Marri∣ners onely, but that erected at Chattam by Sir Iohn Hawkins Knight, Treasurer of the Navy of the late Queene Elizabeth; wherein it was provided, that there should be a deduction of Sixpence by the Moneth, out of every man and boy their wages in every voyage towards the same. Which I could wish were as well imployed as collected.
The Land Soldier followes. IF the Land-Soldier thinke to thrive and rise by degrees of service, from a Common Sol∣dier to a Captaine in this age, (alas) he is much deceived. That custome is obsolete, and growne out of use. Doe what he can doe in Land-service, he shal hardly rise by his single merit. His happinesse shall be but to fill his hungry belly, and satiate himselfe upon a Pay day. But if he be of kin, or a favo∣rite to some great Officer, he may carry the Colours the first day, be a Lieutenant the second, and a Captain before he knows
how many dayes goe to the week in the Regiment. The Land-service where a man may learn most experience of War discipline, is in the Low-Countries, by reason of the long exercise of wars and variety of Stratagems there. Beyond that Northward, the service is both more unprofita∣ble and more dangerous, and lesse experience is to be there learned. The more your Sonne turnes his face to the South, the more profitable the Land-service is. Lastly, if he have no friend or kindred to raise in the Land-ser∣vice, I assure you that there is no Law against buying and sel∣ling
of Offices in the Low-Coun∣tries, for ought that I have redd. Neither is it markable amongst them. After the Soldier returnes home, it makes no matter what number of wounds he can rec∣kon about him. All the wayes of reliefe for him that I can nūber are these: A poore Knights place of Windsor; If the Herald report him a Gentleman, And the Knights of the Honourable Or∣der of the Garter wil accept him A Brother of Suttons Hospital; If the Feoffes have not servants of their own to prefer before him. A Pensioner of the County; if the Justices finde him worthy.
And that he was prest forth of the same County. S. Thomas in Southwarke, and S. Bartholomews Smithfield; only til their wounds or diseases be cured and no lon∣ger. And that if the Masters of the said Hospitals please to re∣ceive them. For the Savoy where Souldi∣ers had a foundation, I know none now. And other Houses appropria∣ted for reliefe of Souldiers now in use I remember none. For the chiefe are long since demolished. The Templarij are gone. The Knights of S. Iohn of Ierusalem forgotten. That fa∣mous House upon Lincolne green is rac'd to the ground. And ma∣ny
the like now better known by the Records than the remaines of their ruins with their Revenue, are all diuerted from the uses of their first foundation to private and peculiar Inheritances, which I pitty more than the dissoluti∣on of all the Monasteries that ever were. Here you see is preferment e∣nough for your six Sons though you bestow every one upon a severall Profession. Onely take this generall Rule for all, viz. To what course soever your Sons shall betake them. Be sure that they al have Grammar lear∣ning at the least. So shall they be able to receive and retaine the impression of any the said
Professions. And otherwise, shall scarce possibly become Masters in the same, or any one of them. Or if they doe, It will be with more than ordinary paines and difficulty. Your three Daughters challenge the next place. FOr their Portions, I shewed you before; how and when to raise them. That is, by the Marriage of your eldest Sonne, or out of that part of your per∣sonall estate which you may spare without prejudice of your selfe.
For their breeding. I Would have their breeding like to the Dutch Womans cloathing, tending to profit on∣ly and comelinesse. And though she never have a dancing school-master, a french Tutor, nor a Scotch taylor, to make her shoulders of the full breath of Bristow Cow-say. It makes no matter. For wor∣king in curious Italian purles, or French borders, it is not worth the while. Let them learne plaine works of all kind, so they take heed of too open seaming. In stead of Song and Musick, let
them learne Cookery & Laun∣dry, And in steade of Reading Sir Philip Sidney's Arcadia, let them read the grounds of good Huswifery. I like not a Female Poëtresse at any hand: let grea∣ter personages glory their skill in Musicke, the posture of their bodies, their knowledge in languages, the greatnesse, and freedome of their Spirits; and their arts in arraigning of mens affections, at their flattering Faces: this is not the Way to breede a private Gentlemans daughter. If the mother of them bee a good Huswife, and Religious∣ly disposed, let her haue the bringing up of one of them.
Place the other two foorth be∣times, & before they can judge of a good manly Leg. The one in the house of some good Merchant, or Cittizen of civil and Religious goverment: the other in the house of some Lawyer, some Judge, or well reported Justice or Gentleman of the Countrey, where the Servingman is not too predo∣minant. In any of these she may learne what belongs to her im∣provement, for Sempstry, Con∣fectionary, and all requisits of Huswifery. She shall be sure to bee restrained of all ranke com∣pany, and unfitting Liberty, which are the ouerthrow of too many of their Sexe: there is a
pretty way of breeding young maides in an Exchange shop, or S. Martins le grand. But many of them get such a Cricke with carrying the Band-boxe under their Apron unto Gentlemens chambers, that in the ende it is hard to distinguish whither it be their belly or their band-boxe makes such a goodly show and in a trade where a womā is sole chapman, she claims such a pre∣heminence over her Husband, that she wil not be held to give him an account of her dealings, either in retaile, or whole sale. A Merchants Factor, and a Ci∣tizens servant of the better sort, cānot disparage your daughters with their society. And the
Iudges, Lawyers, & Iustices fol∣lowers, are not ordinary Ser∣ving-men, but of good breed, & their educatiō, for the most part Clarkely, whose service promi∣seth farther and future benefit. Your daughter at home will make a good wife for some Yeomans eldest sonne, whose father will be glad to crown his sweating frugality, with alli∣ance to such a house of Gentry. Likewise the youngmans sin∣gers will itch to be handling of taffata, and to bee placed at the table, and to be carved unto by Mistris Dorothy, it wil make him and the good plaine old Ione his mother, to passe over al respect of portion or patrimony.
For your Daughter at the Merchants, and her sister if they can carry it wittily, the City affords them variety. The young Factor being fan∣cy caught in his dayes of Inno∣cency, and before hee travaile so farre into experience as in∣to forraigne Countries, may lay such a foundation of first love in her bosome, as no alteration of Climate can alter. So likewise may Thomas the fore man of the Shop, when beard comes to him, as Ap∣prentiship goes from him, bee intangled and belymed with the like springs. For the better is as easily surprized as the worse.
Some of our Clarkly men complaine the moysture of their palmes. Others the Sorpe∣go in their wrists, both moving meanes. With a little patience your daughter may light upon some Counsailor at Law, who may bee willing to take the young Wench, in hope of favor with the old Iudge. An Attorney wil be glad to give all his profit of a Michaelmas Terme, Fees and all, but to wooe her through a Crevice. And the Parson of the Parish being her Ladies Chap∣laine, will forsware eating of tithe Pig, for a whole yeare, for such a parcell of Gleb Land at all times. And so much for
your Sons and Daughters. I now espye mine Host of the Bull here in S. Albons stan∣ding at his doore uppon his left leg, like to the old Drummer of Parish-garden, ready to enter∣taine us: therefore I will heere conclude with that of the Poët — Navibus at{que} Quadragis petimus benevivere, quod petis hic est, Est ang lis, animus si te, non deficit equais. FINIS.
THE MISTERY AND MISERY OF LENDING AND BORROWING. BY THO: POWEL, Gent. LONDON: Printed by Thomas Harper for Benjamin Fisher, and are to be sold at his shop in Aldersgate streete at the signe of the Talbot. 1636.
THE MISTERY and misery of Len∣ding and Bor∣rowing. SETTING aside the contemplation of such Lending and Borrowing, as wher∣by the soule of Traffique is breathed into the body of a Common-wealth; I descend lower to that practice of mutu∣ation,
whereby wee accom∣modate one another for our present necessity in monies and other requisites. First, for the Borrower. I Will first shew who bee the most notable sort of Borrow∣ers and Booke-men. Next, what method every one holds in his severall way of Borrowing and Booking. Then their severall cause of failing and insolvency. Next their sundry waies and weapons; with which they fence with their Creditors. Next, their noted places of refuge and retirement.
Then their Jubilies and daies of priviledge. Lastly, the certaine markes of a conscious cautious Debtor, with the Marshall discipline of the Mace, according to the Mo∣derne practise of these daies. Next for the Creditor. I Will first shew the charitable extent of the Creditors cur∣tesie. Then his Mystery of Multi∣plication. Next, how the Oyster caught the Crow. The hand in the booke bred the wind-collicke in the ware-house. And then how that winde
being not able to force a pas∣sage through the cavernes of his credit, shakt the very foun∣dation of his shop-boord, threatning a most sudden, strange, and stormy eruption. Next, the signes fore-run∣ning the wonderfull cracke. Then the Reparation of the decaied man. And lastly, the singular com∣fort which the Common-wealth received by him, when he was sent forth for current out of his Creditors mint, with a new impression and a second edition. And of these in order. The chiefe and most notable Borrowers are,
The Courtier, that neither cares for the call of the Coun∣ting house, nor the Checke of the Chamber. The Innes of Court-men that never was studient. The Country Gentleman no Hospitall house-keeper. The City Gallant that never arrived at his freedome by ser∣vice. The Courtiours method followes. FIrst he invites his Creditor to a dish of Court-Ling, with Masculine Mustard plenty. Then hee shewes him the privie Lodgings, and the
new banqueting house. Perhaps the Robes next. Then the great Magolls tent in the Wardrope: And so much serves for the first meeting, and to procure an appetite to the second. To the second meeting our Creditor is summoned, and brings behinde him his Wife, like to a broken wicker glasse bottle hanging at his taile, and enters into the Masking roome. Whereat the Courtiers skill in delivering of the Maskers names, under their severall dis∣guises, did purchase an ever∣lasting and indissoluble City-consanguinity with his female charge, over whom the more
sleepy her spouse, the more vi∣gilant was my Cousen Cour∣tier. And now hee hath made his party strong enough to visit my Citizen, and to borrow and take up of him at his owne home, in the most familiar phrase that can bee devised for such like use and purpose. Then for the quickning, continuing, and enlargeing of of his credit, our Courtier pre∣tends how hee has received newes that his faign'd kindred is very sicke: and thereupon a takes occasion (in stead of ve∣nison) to send her bottle of that famous and farre fetcht Fron∣tineack: Hee bids himselfe to
dinner the same day, and there in a cursory way of commen∣ding the excellent art of man, in matter of Manufacture, hee fals by chance upon the re∣membrance of an extraordina∣ry stuffe which hee saw a great personage weare lately in Court, not doubting but that his couzens shop did afford the like: His purpose was to have a suit of the same very shortly, if they would but lay it by till his moneyes come in: Yet with a very little intreaty so cleanly exprompted, hee was perswaded to take it along with him, but onely for feare lest the whole peece might be sold by the foolish fore-man
unawares before his returne. Give us old Ale and booke it, O give us old Ale and booke it: And when you would have your money for al My couzen may chance to looke it. The Innes of Court-man, and his method. FIrst hee makes himselfe ac∣quainted with the Creditor, by going to him in company with one who is a knowne cu∣stomer there, and an approved good pay-master. Then hee procures this knowne customer to take the man of credence (as it were) modestly apart, and at his backe
while hee is walking downe the shop and aversed, to whisper: That this gentleman whom you see heere, is son and heire to that worthy Knight so po∣tent in the Peake, or that most markable Malster of much Marlborne: or the great Gra∣sier of Grims borow, or the like. Then he returnes to the upper end of the shop, and the Ma∣ster takes an occasion to call to Thomas to give the Gentleman a stoole, and tels him that hee knowes his friends very well: The ancient Mannor house, and the Mill, and goodly medowes a little beneath in the bottome: adding further, that no doubt but if hee please the good old
Gentleman, hee may in time bee owner of them all him∣selfe. Bee owner; saies my Innes court man. Why I tell you, that Water-mill came by my mo∣ther, with all the Meddowes of that Levell: And my Father would hang himselfe hee can∣not give them away from mee. And whereas you say I may be owner in time, I thinke the old man has held them long e∣nough: unlesse you would make his time endlesse, and him a very wandring Jew. I wis my Grandfather serv'd not him so, hee knew what he did when he dyed. Hee did it out
of true judgement, in fulnesse of understanding, able to penne his owne will himselfe, when he was no longer serviceable to his Countrey, hee would not live onely to mend the fire, or preserve it by applying every circumstant cinder within his reach: but though I pinch for it awhile, a time (I hope) may come. Whereat my Creditor inter∣rupting him, saies, alas you pinch for it? That shall not need) God be thanked) your credit it worthy to be rankt in a shop booke, cheeke by jowle with any debitory disposed Gentleman of this towne what∣soever. Besides, if you would
bee loath to have your name extant in so publicke a Reper∣tory, you are able by such e∣state as is inseparably annexed to your person, to give farther assurance (I doe but speake it if neede were) by otherwaies, and otherwise at your plea∣sure. Further assurance (replies my Gallant) A pox on't For assu∣rance they shall have what they will: And for price of a∣ny thing, it is my desire they should gaine by mee, yea they shall gaine by mee: For other∣wise how should you be able to live by it? Now sir, you speake like an honest gentleman (saies hee a∣gaine)
gaine) I would al our customers were of your minde, there bee too few such as you are; if you have neede of any thing heere, either for your wearing, or else for conversion, wherein I hope you conceive mee sir, it is at your command. Hereupon the man of the sword sweares that he shall not out-doe him in noblenesse: Had hee robbed the Statuaes of the new Standard of all their roy∣all resolutions. Hee vowes to returne thither againe, and that speedily to bring his Tailor with him advisedly: to take up for divers uses with much fa∣cility, and to give assurance ac∣cording to the direction of his
owne Scriviner, a Bow lane most legally. And so leave we him like a horse put up to dyet, whereby to bee prepared to runne his traine sents on the deepest ground of assurance, that City counsell can finde out or de∣vise. Puppy runnes well, but who shall winne the day. Puppy? or Noddy? 'Tis an e∣ven lay.
The Country Gentleman his Mothod THe Countrey Gentleman, he is by this time come up to London; and has brought his Atturney with him, one that professes the taking up of mo∣ney by writ of right. His Attur∣ny brings him to the Ship be∣hind the Exchange, and leaves him there while hee goes to fetch the onely Noverint in in those parts, whom hee pre∣pares at his shop with the pur∣pose, advising him withall in his eare, so to handle the matter in hall, that beards may wag all, which hee delivered with a
most familiar wringing of him by the hand, to insinuate his meaning as unto his share: Hee then brings the Scrivener unto the taverne, good compliance is in all parties, and the Scrive∣ner according to the true pra∣ctice of most of them, at the first meeting, especially while they are with the borrower in the taverne, was more easie in promising, then they in pro∣posing. The Atturney then softly tels the Gentleman apart, that hee should doe well to bespeake supper instantly, assuring him that if he could but fasten that courtesie upon the Scrivener for the present, hee were their
owne for ever after, neither the summe nor the security could bee matter of any dif∣ficulty. The counsell was held whol∣some as unto the supper, the Atturney was forthwith pre∣ferd to the Bar, where he spake so learnedly in the cause, that upon the same hearing they recovered three full dishes on their side, the boyes drew the proceeding of the businesse ve∣ry Clarke-like, the Kirchin∣maid supplied with the Tales. The Mistresse call'd earnestly for the Postea, and the Master he rated and allowed the bill of costs. At the execution whereof,
my Scrivener fearing lest the shot should disperse and scatter it selfe amongst them, while the Gentleman was feeling for mo∣ny to discharge it; he to facili∣tate that hand, askes him softly in his care; What is the summe that he would have? Then su∣specting the long dwelling of his hand in his pocket, hee tels him, He shall have what summe he will: Let mee see, faies the Scrivener, there comes in this night of Sir Samvan Skynkers money, five hundred, and to morrow as much more I can supply you from one hundred to ten out of that as your occa∣sions require: how say you? Wee will have no dry recko∣ning
replies the Gentleman: Heer's the full summe of the bil and and a pottle over; though wee be Leicester-shire fed, yet we be not Brackly bred, I assure you. And for the summe which I should (or at least would have) for especiall occasions, Let me see: there is a horse-race at Northampton on Munday come sevenight: I must needs have new furniture for Crop∣care, which I will send downe by Leicester Waggon. I wil have that Hawke which I saw in Southwarke this after∣noone: clothes would doe wel: but thats my least care of a thousand. A poxe a pride I say.
Howsoever I must see the party I told you of by the way, before I goe out of towne, by any meanes if shee keepe the same lodging & the same name that she was wont to doe: thats all now. Lets see, a matter of some three hundred will doe't so far forth as my present and most urgent occasions do presse me at this instant: As for payment, And for raiment, For hedges and mounds, And stocking of grounds, For Corne for seed, Or Cattle to breed, Or the Wolfe at the doore, And a thousand things more.
They are nothing so impor∣tant and concerning as the least of these: I would not misse Munday come sevenight for three such summes, I tell you Sir: Munday come sevenight! That were a jest indeed. For that and what you please beside, saies the Scrivener, you shall find no default on my par∣tie: This honest Gentleman that is with you knowes the course of these kinde of busi∣nesses: He and I shall take my leave at this time. The Scrivener departs, and the Gentleman staies behinde, onely to hugge and endeare the endowments of him that procured this meeting: Hee
praises the prosperity of their journey, commands the comely carriage of the Scrivener, and vowes everlasting acknow∣ledgment of his Atturnies acti∣vity. And so they betake them∣selves to their lodging likewise for that night. The next morning my gentle∣man sends his Atturney to see that the money which he spake for, be told out and made rea∣dy for him against his com∣ming, which should be when and where it shall please the honest Scrivener. (For by this time hee had attained so much of reputation among them. The same day and the next were both spent in continuall
quest of the Scrivener. But the Boyes in the Shop according to their masters direction made answere, one while that he was gone to Sir Sam for monies: Another while that hee was at the sealing of writings at such a place: Then that he was at the speeding of a Commission of Bankeruptisme at Guild-hall, God blesse the place, and eve∣ry good man of the Grand Ju∣ry: And then shortly after, that he was but even now gone forth, and that it was impossible but that he should meete him, unlesse the dust of Popes-head Alley had put out his eyes by the way. The time weares out, and the
horse-race comes onward, the apprhension whereof puts our Gentleman into such a perpas∣sion, that on the next day early in the morning he goes to the Scriveners shop, where sudden∣ly and unawares hee findes him saying his prayers, while hee was withall crosse gartering of himselfe: and had he not known him better by his crosse-garters then by his prayers, question∣lesse he had lost his labour. Good morrow (sayes the Gentleman) perhaps I doe di∣sturbe your devotion? You Rascall, how chance you doe not hang out the Labells? (saies the Scrivener to his boy) Then hee proceedes with his
prayers, and suddenly bespeaks the Gentleman, asking, What is your will with me Sir? Have you any businesse with me I pay now? O Lord Sir, (saies he) I hope you remember what past be∣tweene us at the Ship on wed∣nesday night last, touching the three hundred which I was in∣deed to have the next morning, parcell of the thousand which was to come in then Hum (saies the Scrivener) I thinke there was some such matter: I remember wee tal∣ked of it: But what were the names of your security which you did then give me.
For names (replies he) why I gave you none, for I con∣ceived it should not need: Or if it doe, you shall have lands and that for seat and site, value, and Virgine title, shall beare and ballance your morgage downe to the center. Now you come to me (saies the Scrivener) goe you to the Antwarp, but onely to pre∣pare mee a particular of this land, and I wil be with you pre∣sently. They goe before the parti∣cular is made ready. The wine is burnt, the Scrivener with much paine has past through his prayers, and recovers the Taverne doore, by that time he
was come to (Amen.) He returns to his old complement, pockets the Particular which they de∣liver him, and puts all unkind∣nesse into this cup; He drinkes freely, and promises nobly: So that now there was no doubt made but we might be at Nor∣thampton most opportunely. And so much for that meeting. After dinner they came both againe to the shop; where they found my Scrivener wrapt warme in his gowne about him, fast asleepe (good man.) For if ever he were good, he was then good: Or (at least) I am sure he was then and there at the very best of Scriveners good∣nesse; the height of their ho∣linesse,
and the perfection of their punctuality. They must by no means trou∣ble him before he bee fully re∣covered and enabled for a se∣cond meeting at the Mermaid after Exchange time. They attend the while: the clouds of Claret shortly spend them∣selves: he wakens, they salute him. At length with much a doe he cals them to remembrance, and askes them for their parti∣cular: they shew the errour in his pocket, and so hee promises their dispatch the next mor∣ning without any faile, and they are gone to be speake furniture for Cropeare in the meane
time. At the appoynted houre my Atturney comes to know if the writings were ready to seale, and the mony proportio∣ned into severall hundreds, in so many severall bagges or no. The Scrivener replies, that it should bee forth with prepa∣red accordingly, so as they should bring good Citty secu∣rity with them, but onely to undertake for the property and transparancy of the title of the Lands so tendred, and that was all should neede for the matter, procuration being over provi∣ded for, and writing taken to estimation according to the repute of the place where it was to bee written, and that
was all that was now remaining to bee considered of on the Gentlemans behalfe. This new taske required more time in possessing and perswading some Citizens his Country∣men, who knew him and his Lands so well, that it was dis∣putable, whether was more deare and desired unto them. They joyne with him in the security, and become immedi∣ately bound with him by bond for the payment of the money at a certaine day to come, and to the great amazement of the Scrivener, thanke him for this counsaile in advising and dire∣cting them to the cautionary cause-way of security both
latterally & collaterally, by di∣rect and oblique lines which he most methamatically had ima∣gined & contrived in his head, as well for his owne commo∣dity as for their indempnity, without demanding of any o∣ther assurance as yet, and so my Gentleman is dispatcht without further tie upon Lands or per∣son hitherto, saving what is mentally reserved upon the growth of this summe; by these his loving friends and coun∣trimen. Friendship for countries sake I doe commend But not to sell my countrie for a friend.
The Citizen, a Redempti∣onary Freeman, his Method. THe last, but not the least of these, is our City borrow∣er, a hopeful yongman (though I say it:) A man of wisedome, for hee is the best That ere was of our Ward-moot in∣quest: Of sweete behaviour, for this very yeere, He hath discharg'd the place of Scavenger. At an arbitrement he is a Cutter, As ere concluded in a Tavern supper. If Females for their linnen doe contend,
He takes up all, and makes a friendly end. And if our Vestry brethren do dissent, he makes the elder head most eminent Grow up thou man of iustice, and of hope, My pen gives thee thy due, give thou it scope. Now this youth, not alto∣gether free by Patrimony, but partly by Matrization, is won∣derfull cautious of being a bor∣rower upon Record, or in the eye of the World. He wil not have his name tendred unto a Scrivener by any means, while hee is yet but easily declining upon the streame of ready mo∣nies, and not in stocke, like the water which though it fall and sinke by the sides, yet runnes up
in the middest with a manifest current long after. Hee now studies how to take up without expression to bee a principall for himselfe, or to be too promptly drawn into secu∣rity for others. Hee finds out for property for this purpose a young heire, who for a third share of the summe, was con∣tent to beare the only name and blam of Borrower, and to yeild to the ensafing of my Citizen, by such Counter-bonds, sales, and assignements, as by the Scrivener and himselfe, could bee devised to uphold the Re∣putation of a wonderfull wary man. Can you now cal this man
a Borrower for doing his friend a courtesie? Or is this man in a declension, when it appeares by the booke, that he is in the way of purchasing? No such matter, this cries up his credit: And howsoever these monies be repayd, yet hee is sure of the Land, which before any insol∣vency shall appeare on his par∣ty, hee does intend to convey over in trust secretly, to the uses of his lively-hood for the time of restraint to come, and like one that prepares his tomb while he is yet living, hee re∣solves what lodging to take up on the Masters-side, when his credite shall depart this Mortall life.
Besides, hee had another way of borrowing, he findes out an old Usurer of the same Parish, Father to divers daugh∣ters, who catcht at Espousall preferment, onely by their Fa∣thers countenance, and their concise carriage. The one of these hee singles out from the Heard, and pre∣tends most pure and unfaigned love unto her: He visites her in his gown at Midsummer, where at the old man conceives great joy and comfort, glories in his gravity, and delights in his de∣cency. Hee on the other side perceives the powle-cat in the purse-net, makes present use of it. He shewes him the convei∣ance
which the Heire made the other day unto him of all the houses in Conny-hoope-lane a one side; and desires to bee fur∣nisht by him with so much as might bring the other side into his property likewise: for that it was now offered unto him up∣on reasonable conditions, so should he reduce all (as it were) into a circle, and his daughter should hold that for her joynter and have the Evidence in her owne custody. The old man lik't this passing well, and for feare least the bar∣gaine should bee snatcht out of his hand, he takes him into his closet, tels out the Monie, and sends him away instantly.
The old man turnes him a∣bout, and (poynting at her sweet heart) bespeakes his daughter thus: There goes hee that labours for you most industerously, studious your good right care∣fully, I pray God make you thankfull for him accordingly: For you shall have an Husband (be it not vainely spoken) that for thrift and Husbandry may be the very browch of of al the City. In stead of going forthwith unto his Chapman, for the hou∣sing and candle rents, he is hou∣sed presently at a widowes in the way, where hee spends his time till candle-light.
Here he likewise protests and professes love by whole-sale; he shewes her the monies, and tels her what a bargine hee could now have, if she would joyne stocke with him in such a commodity come lately into the Downes with the last East-Indian ships. It might please God that this might bee a happy occasion of uniting their persons as well as their parcels together. The Widow was hereupon taken with such a Sorpego in her wrists, that her fingers ends itcht to be testing out of her part, and to take issue upon his promise of the union, which she performed with much dexteri∣ty.
Then he puts altogether, and assures her that hee will bee gone the next tide to Graves∣end, When hee comes home, hee dispatches letters speedily to the old usurer, certifying him of his good progression in Cony∣hoope-lane, and desiring his pa∣tience for certaine dayes, which the contriving of his assurance by good and sufficient counsell would take up. The time pretended for the Downes, and to draw downe a good estate for his young Mi∣stresse, is upon better conside∣ration bestowed at Rumford, where whosoever had seene him in the lift of his liberality▪
would little thinke him to be so little a thing as might be contai∣ned within the compasse of a Counting-house, or bee confi∣ned within the prospection of a false light. Expect anon the sequell of his story. Let Rumford now be famous for John Dory. Their severall cause of insol∣vency followeth. THe Courtiers cause is in his conscience: For he neither can, nor cares to pay. The Innes of Court mans cause is in his Coercence, for
he would if hee could pay. The Countrie Gentlemans cause is in his confidence, for he trusts to his Country men of the City, and had rather they then he should pay. But the Cittizens cause is in his complacence. It pleaseth him so to pay, and he sees no reason why he should goe beyond the rule of defor∣mity. Hee findes good grand Jury Presidents of five shillings in the pound, and it is faire too and sufficient soder for the first flaw (by my faith.) Some would and if they could: Some can, and yet they care not:
The least pay what they should: The most spend all and spare not. The sundry wayes and weapons with which they fence with their Credi∣tors, challenge the next place. THe longest weapons with which my Courtier keeps his creditor farthest off, are the winters journeyes, and the sum∣mers progresse. And when he is neerer hand, hee doth keepe them at staves length, by challenging of a pri∣vacy for indisposition of body, conference with great and ho∣nourable personages, or im∣ployment
in the States won∣derfull weighty affaires, when (God wot) the indisposition is for want of cleane linnen. The conference is with his boy, how to pay the Landresse which detaines it. And his imployment is in and about the taking of a pipe of Tobacco. The privy watergate, and the garden out-let doe well. And when hee findes no re∣medy, but that his Creditor wil close and come into him with∣in his weapons length, then hee sweares that hee was even now about to send for him, had hee not prevented him. He tels him in great secresie
how he is in possibility to passe a suit of great worth, onely hee wants some money to scatter in fees by the way: For it is to be understood, that with great Of∣ficers the Chamber men weare good clothes, & the doorkeeper has a pretious faculty: hee shall onely supply with so much as will even the old summe, and pay himselfe, tot, talia, and tan∣taa, at his owne pleasure, yea he shall be a Patentee himselfe, for argument of honest purpose and honourable dealing. What shift so ere we make, hee needs must doe it. For profit and preferment pricke him to it.
The Innes of Courts mans weapons HIs first weapon is a wel∣pen'd Letter, excusing his delay by incompetency of ex∣hibition. Or by the necessity of atten∣ding the revolution of their te∣nants sixe monthes day of pai∣ment, according to the custome of the country. But especially by occasion of his fathers great and dan∣gerous sicknesse (though there were no such matter) for that he knew was the only vis∣couse matter to belime his Cre∣ditor that could bee devised or applyed.
The next weapon, when the former way is stale of assiduity, is his good sword, a watchfull eye and a ready hand. The last is the deviation and avoyding of the most frequented passages and streets, and to hold compasse at the halfe point, through the Let-goes of Allies, Tavernes, with backe-doores, or by water, as stands wit most ac∣commodation. His fencing in the night I most commend, When hee may safely drab, and drinke, and spend.
The Country Gentleman his weapons. THis youth (alas) hath nei∣ther occasion at the first to practise his defence, or knowes the use of the weapon, nor will he bee brought to it of a long time; when payment is prefixed to be made to him the said Sa∣lomon set in silver street London, hee in his better wisedome is betting of all his white money at the Cock-pit in Coventry. And when all comes to all, when farther occasion hath drawn him into a farther respe∣ctuality with his undertakers in London; so that he must either
stand upon his guard; or lose the Bleane, with all meadowes, pa∣stures, feedings, woods, under∣woods, and other the appurte∣nances worth tenne times the mony borrowed. Then, O then, hee lookes out his manly munition. The ancient sleeping entaile. The old mother joyncture. The endowment of his wife, ad ostium Ecclesiae. Al these he brings to his Cut∣ler of Chancery-lane, and be∣stowes so much upon the oyle of equity, and will scoure them up cleanly, and make them fit weapons of defence against al the cossaques of the City.
Petitions bee the postures of thy guard, And may thy motions bee like Canons heard; Set field, or skirmish, Chamber, or the Barres, Tis like to prove a very lingring warre. The City borrower his fence. HE handles his weapon with the best grace of them all, his Creditor dares scarce come within his reach, but onely aske how hee does as hee goes by. And if he doe presume to leave word with the apprentice boy, that he would have him tel his master that he was here to speak with him about the other busi∣nes, it is a very bold adventure,
and a sawcy presumption taken very censoriously by my young master, at his comming home, especially if he have bin at the Renterwardens feast, the Ci∣ties occasion the Cōpanies con∣vention, & the parochical pro∣vision: these be the things that challenge propriety and priori∣ty in a comely Citizen, before all other respects whatsoever. He wil not discontent the first, nor disapoynt the second, nor disfurnish the last for obser∣vance of whomsoever. For the mony taken up of the Scrivener, the interest on∣ly needes to be paid in as yet: and the Scrivener (to stop his mouth) hee shall have the im∣ployment
and benefit to eject the Tenants of Cony-hoop∣lane, and withall hee will have the Scrivener sue the bond both against the heire and himselfe, upon which he will appeare to suffer judgements against both right willingly. (Marry) he shal take execution against the heire onely. For the old Usurers mony, he found that the assurance could not be perfected til the next Mi∣chalmas terme, for it required the ceremony of the barre, and before hee would debarre his wife of any ceremony belon∣ging to her, he would bee re∣puted the unperfectest member that ever ministred in the Cities mysteries.
And for the Widowes money bestowed in the Downes, hee found the commodity not so vendible here as beyond the seas, therefore hee thought it best to send it into Holland, where it attends the next mar∣ket, and would not so much as suffer it to touch at our cost. This cannot cure but lengthen thy disease, It may deferre the paine, but not release. Their noted places of re∣fuge and retirement followes. Ram-Alley. I Will not so much as looke in to the Court, or any the stan∣ding houses; the House-kee∣pers
lodging, nor the Gardi∣ners receit, neither the Mewes. Nor prye into the meniall pre∣cincts of any of the Innes of Court, farther then they stand for refuge and reliefe of the neighbouring priviledges about them. The first and chiefest of all which, for advantage of the ground, for Fortifications, for water-workes, posternes and passages, supplies, and provisi∣on by Land or otherwise, is that so farre fam'd, & so fitly nam'd Ram-alley, or the Ramy-kins, ac∣cording unto the Dutch transla∣tion. In it is a garrison of olde souldiers, every one of the
which is able to lead a whole arwy of younger debtors. They call their Muster-role in the round Church: they drill them in the Garden, and they make their set battailes under the trees in the new walkes, which peece of ground was li∣sted in, and level'd for the same purpose. For the workes within Ram-Ally, there be 2 most notable: the one is rais'd & contrived in the forme of a Ram, which Rams were used in the old Iewish Dis∣cipline, as appeares by the Hi∣story it selfe more at large. This worke is of a reasonable strength, having a watch-tower in the similitude of a Coblers
shop, adjoyning, from whence all the forces about are called together upon the least ap∣proach of the enemy. But the other is a fort most impregnable, where the enemy dares not so much as come with∣in shot, to take the least view of it. There is none but this onely one so invincible, far and neere: and therefore our latter writers have stiled it the Phoenix. There be other pretty contrived plat∣formes in the fashion of the Cookes-shops two or three, where if a Setter or Spy doe but peepe in at them, they will make him pay for the Roast before hee
depart (Ile warrant him.) To the Rammy kins doe be∣long a very great fleete, consi∣sting of many saile well man'd, and these are onely for the ser∣vice by water. This place according to the Geographicall map, and the re∣port of our moderne Authors, cannot possible be so besieged, but that they within may go in and out at their pleasure with∣out impeachment. At the Middle-temple gate they issue in spite of the Divell. At the Inner temple gate they feare no colours in the Raine-bow. And at Ram-Alley Postern, in case they cannot fetch Fetter∣lane,
but discover ambushment, they need onely draw their bo∣dies within guard of pike, turn faces about, and retreat through the Miter. Or admit they stand for Fleet∣street, & be so intercepted, that they can neither recover the Miter, nor Ram-Alley, it is no more but onely to mend their march, fall downward as if they gave way, suddenly discharge their right hand file, and fall ea∣sily into Serjeants Inne, where by ancient treaty had betweene these two houses, it was agreed that the parties in such distresse might, paying the welch Gen∣tle man porters Fee; haue con∣voy and conveyance thorough
the Garden into the temple without re-hazzard of his per∣son. Likewise when they would Forrage, they are no sooner out of the Middle-temple-gate, but there be three several places of defence to friend them: (viz.) The Bell Inne: the Bar-gate, and Shire lane. And the passage through the Kings bench office is a most excellent safe way for close contriving and retriving. The Gardners war fage as the tide may serve, wil serve the turne too. But the new doore by the Bochards, though it be none of the sweetest way, yet it is the sa∣fest of al the rest, for at the sight
of the pompe the setter starts backe, and will by no meanes pursue him any further. Fulwoods Rents. THe next place of refuge is is commonly called Ful∣woods Rents, which lies so in the maine and plaine continent, that it requires the stricter watch, and stronger court of guard to be kept about it. Besides, the Generall of the enemy hath planted very neere it, and lately cast up a mount in the fashion of a Shriefes Office just in the face of them. In Ful∣woods Fort, otherwise yeklee∣ped Skink-skonce, besides Robin∣hood & his out-lawes, like a regi∣ment of Tailors, the one halfe
with red beards, and the other having no beards at all. Captaine Swanne was a very tall man, So was not Francis Drake a; When Srypp does sweare in single Beere, The Bailiffes use to quake a. At the upper end of these rents and at the very portall of Pur∣poole-palace westward, was lately begun a most excellent peece of worke, which had it not beene interrupted by those that playd upon them from a∣bove, (questionlesse) it had bin the very strongest and surest hold that ever was rais'd with∣in the continēt for this purpose. The backe gate into Graies Inne lane, with the benefit of the little Alley, ex opposito, is of good use, but not at all times.
The passages through certain Innes on the field-side, are at∣tempted with some hazzard by reason of the stragling troopes of the enemy who lye pardue in every Alehouse thereabouts. The only safe way of Sally, is that through the walkes, from whence the red Lyon in Graies-Inne-lane receives them with good quartering, and passes them through the back way in-the maine land: And so much for Skinke-Skonce. Milford Lane. THe next is Milford lane, to which certaine Captaines and their companies being long since eashired, betooke them∣selves, and liking the situa∣tion
of it did there erect divers divers workes, both to the land∣side and the water for their en∣saving. As they came in by conquest, so they hold it by the sword; and howsoever their title hath bin much disputed heretofore, yet they have now commuted the matter, proud plantation, pretended the first discovery: and withal have reduced it, to a most absolute Hance and free towne of it selfe without de∣pendency. The chiefe benefit they have for securing of their persons is that of the water, for to the land there is little safety, when you are once without their works, &
therefore I will abide heere no longer, but hold my course on∣ward to the Savoy. The Savoy. IF the Savoy should not be suf∣ficiētly defended every way and in every respect, it were a great shame to the discipline of the place, and the troups that are there billited, the rather for they consist for the most part of Engyners and Projectors: and in memory of them have buil∣ded there certaine tenements which shall beare the name of Projector-Ally for ever. Duke Humfrey. FRom hence you must give me leave to passe by boat to Duke Humfries, which was a
very strong fortresse in former times, when the Megazine of munition, viz. the treasury of To bacco-pipes was there esta∣blished. But the Megazine is removed, and the place much weakned, their Commanders dispersed a∣bout Budge-row, and scattered in Warwicke-lane, where they are the onely upholders of the three-penny ordinary (a strange alteration) The poore remainder of this Garrison, unlesse they be spee∣dily relieved by them of the Colledge, to re-enforce the daily assaults of the enemy, must of necessity yeeld up all with much dishonour.
I can stay no longer here with good name and fame, and ther∣fore I returne to my watermen attending all this while, who is to set me over to Southwark, and land mee at an excellent hold indeed, commonly called Montague-close, sometimes the Sene or the Monastery of Saint Saviours neere the bridge. Montague-close. AND though the Garrision here consist not of so ma∣ny old Souldiers, yet their number is no whit inferiour to that of Ram-Ally, and some of them serve on bo h sides, and are in both rolls ever attending where the service most requi∣reth, and the most of them are
men of much activity. The eldest company within it, are and have beene directly di∣ers in graine, descended from from the race of the old blew Brittaines. In Lent when other Garrisons are most thinne and worst victu∣alled, these doe most exceed in both, for then whole troops of Butchers from the Cantons ad∣joyning, offer themselves like so many Switzers unto them: and convey by land and water to that place, such aboundance of cattle fetcht firm the Kentish Kernes, and the Sorry Yonkry about them, as makes them∣selves plumpe and paliable for any enterprise of all the yeere
after, and also draws very great store of Wascoterians & hand∣some Basketerians unto them from all parts of the City and suburbs, & al for meer carnality Ely Rents, THe last is that everlasting liberty of Ely Rents in Hol∣borne, which is so advantagi∣ously mounted, that it com¦mands all the levell beneath it. It is a worke of small receipt for it may bee made good with—good, with three Bro∣kers, two Coblers, a Baker, and a Tapster, against all invasions and invaders whatsoever. I cite not that priveledge of S. Mertins le grand, with many other adjoyning, which have
proper officers for returne of writs within themselves; be∣cause though they be not under command of the City, yet they admit no Sanctuary or refuge to the borrower, unto whom the fire and the frying-pan are both alike. These fore-mentioned Gar∣risons, Forts, and Fortresses, stand still in such state as is be∣fore expressed. But I cannot forget the pre∣sent state of others upon which the enemy hath entred, either by conquest or composition: Namely, Cold Harbour. THat of Cold Harbour, where was and excellent Blocke-house,
to correspond with that of the close on the other side. Both which together cleered the passage of the river between them, so that no water Bay liffe durst come within their reachat point blanke. And this (as they write) was taken in by the sword in time of their security. The Fryers. THe Fryers, Augustine and Cruciate, Blacke, White, and Gray great and lesse, and those of the Trinity. The Spitle and Saint Graces, had all their Cooles pul'd o're their heads, and so were all for the most part led into the City captive, where they re∣maine
to this day. 'Tis said that they were most lost by this meanes, that they suffered those of the freedome not only to dwell among them, but likewise to encrease & mul∣tiply, to plant and supplant, the Nobility and the Gentry which upheld their liberties; and in the end when they got and en∣grossed all the power of office, trust and authority, into their hands; they set open the gates and suffered the Military men of the Mace to enter and sur∣prise all. The Commanders of the City were onely content upon treaty to article and agree with those of the Blacke Friers;
that notwithstanding they so entred by conquest, yet the old companions, especially the En∣glish Feather-makers, the Dutch Jewellers, the Scotch Tailers, and the French Shoomakers, with some forreigne forces, should have and enjoy their an∣cient priviledges, without mo∣lestation or interruption of any kind. Great Saint Bartholmewes BUt the greatest blow that ever was given to the bor∣rower, was the taking of Great S. Bartholmewes, upon wose plat-forme a whole Army of Borrowers and Booke-men might have beene mustred and drawne out in length, or into
what forme or figure it had pleased them to cast them∣selves. What workes, yea what va∣riety of art and workemanship was within it? What an excellent halfe Moon was there cast up without it for defence, towards Aldersgate∣street? What Sconces in the fashion of tobacco-shops and tap-hou∣ses, in all parts of it. What art was in the Silke-weavers there, who in twisting of their silke, made it serue like so many Op∣ticke lines to convey & receive intelligence too and fro in an instant, & laugh to scorn asinis∣simum illum nuntium inanimatū.
But alas, these are demolisht, the old souldiers discharg'd, & all delivered and yeelded up, upon composition and consent of the Commander. But the last packet we receive newes, that there are daily as∣saults made upon S. Iohn of Ieru∣salem. It is said likewise that they are in a sore Mutiny within themselves; which if it bee so, the band of Borrowers there bil∣letted, will bee shortly dis-ban∣ded and dismissed utterly. The Iubilees and dayes of pri∣viledge follow. THe unparaleld Parliament is the first, and of all others the best: the very tunc temporis wherein Iupiter hath the full ef∣fects
of his influence, when he is in his Masculine House, and in a full aspect (hor a optima.) The next is a time of a raging pestilence: for if the Serjeants do not then feare the plague of God hanging over their heads, I know not what the Divel will feare them. The next is the time wherein my Lord Maior takes his oath: For then the Serjeants and their Yeomen are all at Westminster (hor a hona.) The next is that wherein the Sheriffes are sworne: For in the fore-noone the Mace-men at∣tend their Masters. At noone they have enough to do to wait upon M. Maior of Oxfords cups:
& in the afternoon, it is as much as they can doe to get home. Other daies of priviledge are all such wherein they are al ge∣nerally tyed for to attend their Sheriffes to Pauls, as that of Christmas day, All-saints day, Candlemas day, the Coronation day, the Powder-plot, and the 5. of August, (hor ae mediocres,) On∣ly take heede how you touch at any Taverne neere unto Pauls after the Sherifes are once set, & untill they bee ready to depart, for feare of Free-booters. I cannot say what hope there is in the priviledge of the Sab∣both, but there is great presump∣tion uppon the benefit of those times, wherein the Serieants
we are their best apparell, for I have observed that they will make bold with their zeale, when they place much matter of conscience in their cloathes. The daies of their Spittle-ser∣mons are speciall good ones: for their Masters and Mistresses be∣ing then in Conjunction, it re∣quires that they should be dou∣ble diligent the while. The dayes wherein the great Lords come down to ociate, or negotiate, cate, or treate with their Masters, are very good. Whitsunday at the New-Church-yard does well, but I am affraid that they wil not be altogether so mad, as to be all comprised within the peram∣bulation
bulation of Bedlam, where I wil leave them at this time: & pro∣ceede unto The markes of a conscious cauti∣ous Debtor, with the dis∣cipline of the Mace. These be the markes. 1 Uncertainty of meeting. 2 Obscurity of walking. 3 Uariety of lodging. 4 Inconstancy of abiding. The particular marks follow. At the lanes end he ever lookes behinde him. And after hee is once turned out of sight, hee mends his pace in an extraordi∣nary degree of Foot-man-ship, til he have gained some ground f the followers. And then he
makes another stand to take no∣tice whether any of them have arrived thither with more then ordinary speed, or precipitate himselfe at the comming about the lanes end, which is the cer∣taine signe of a Setter or a Ser∣jeant. He never keepes the pro∣ponticke passage. Hee hath a catalogue of of al Tavernes with backe doores, especially to the waters side. Difference of attire (if hee have it) stands him in great stead. He envies the en∣crease of the Moone more then he pitties the decrease of his owne fortunes. Hee knowes there's little got by run∣ning, and lesse by rising at the Serjeants hands. There∣fore
when he hath businesse to doe on the next day, hee com∣monly removes himselfe o're night, to the end hee may have a safe mornings flight. His mee∣tings (when hee does say and hold) are in places where hee may stand as much upon his re∣putation as his Taylor may upon his credit. With the Italian he does much mislike the over∣hasty maner of peace used by our nation in the City, (a place of civility, and that in the fol∣lowing of their ordinary af∣faires. Hee is better at retriving then at contriving. He is a great enemy to idlenesse, for he loves not to see one leaning at a stall, or looking about him, where
hee claimes no property, nor owes any service, Hee learned of his Grandmother to hate whistling after candle-light a∣bove all things. He praies not in common forme, but that the Commons may meet in forme (as aforesaid.) And no sinne sticks so impassively in his con∣science, or disperses it selfe through is whole heart, as that he ever paid any thing to his Creditors in part. The Discipline now offers it selfe, and the Mace is lifted up, in Terrorem populi WIthin London there are two regiments of Mace∣men. The one is incamped in
the Poultry: The other in Woodstreet: The great num∣ber of them attend their colours where they are ever ready to sally upon the Alarum or sig∣nall given. Other of them guard their Collonels person by turnes. And the rest are appoynted and exposed (as followeth.) So many of the best able and most trusty in their Cavallerie, as their service requires, espe∣cially in terme time, are planted at Chancery-lane end, to make good that place, and to cut off such as issue out of the works on the other side, or come downe from other parts to put them∣selves under the protection of them.
Of these Chancery-lane end men, if the designe doe deserve it, some one or two are drawne out of them, to defeate the pas∣sage betweene the middle Tem∣ple and the Bell, or the Bar-gate, but this is upon especiall occa∣sion, and therefore seldome at∣tempted, but when they have intelligence of some extraordi∣nary booty, or good pillage comming that way. Others of them are quartered in Smithfield, where every mon∣day, wednesday & friday, they stand charg'd with cocke up, ready to give fire at every poor Butcher in the grasiers quarrel, and these are of their Infantry. Others are on every market
day commanded for Leadenhal, where they serve one day under the Tanner, against the Shoo∣maker, another day under the Butcher against the Tanner, and sometimes the Scrivener, against both. Others are appoynted to other several markets, where rather then they will want en∣tertainement, they will beare armes against the very butter∣wives (enough to make their hearts to melt with the very thought on't) the eldest sort of them, such as hold charge, ra∣ther for their advice then their ability, are laid at the Exchange, where though the service bee daily, and the Nation against whom they serve are all people of great stomack, meeting ever
at dinner and supper times only, yet the danger is but smal in re∣gard they have the Countrie round about to friend. The onely Despervieos a∣mong them are severally ap∣pointed to the severall gates; where they scoure and keepe cleere the passage to the Barres, being the utmost extent of their workes. They are all right per∣fect at their Postures: As, Beare your Musket under your left arme, id est, Be sure to touch the prisoner on the sword side. Pull out your scourer, id est, Draw your warrant. Advance your Pike, id est, Exalt your Mace. cocke your Match, id est, Enter your Action. And so for every posture, pun∣ctually and particularly in his order. Then for Strategems of war, they ride the ancient disci∣pline, quite dagger out of sheath
The best that Roman Histo∣ries affoord us, is of that one noble resolution, who to gaine beliefe and credit of the ene∣my, mangled himselfe, running out of the gates into their Campe to complain of his own misery and his Countries ty∣ranny, with offer of giving them up into the enemies hand, onely for actuation of his owne revenge. But give me the plot that conquers at farre lesse price. A Porters Frocke (a Project of excellent carriage.) A Lawyers gowne, (Latet quod non patet.) A Scriveners Pen and Inke∣horne (a designe of deeper
reach than you are aware on.) These shall make his passage, sine sanguine & sudore. This is your onely Projector indeed, whose first ancestor was begot between the man i'th Moone, and Tom Lancasters Laundresse, upon a faire fagot pile, from whom are descen∣ded the onely Choristers of our counter-quire. It would doe you good to heare the whole packe of these together, they are so excellent for sent and cry. But the best mouth'd among them in truth, and for my mo∣ney, the onely mouth is with∣out Bishopsgate. And the best sented at the up∣per
end of red-crosse street, just at the entrance into Golding∣lane, into whose sweet bosome I commit them all, and there leave them. It may be expected that I should say somewhat of the Discipline of the Bailiffes, but especially of those of the Vierge and the Clinkonians. But some of them have no Discipline or order at all, and the rest very little. The poore Pichard cannot out pilfer them in the plaine path-way of their practise, they hold no good quartering with any man, but are more desirous of prey then of lawfull con∣quest.
The better sort of them goe in bootes without spurres, and they for the most part are bought in Turning-stile lane in Holborne: the Author holds them not worthy his penne, or to be rank't with the men of the mace before mentioned, and therefore by his good will he will have nothing to doe with them at any hand. The Creditors part. FOr the Debtors part, I am perswaded that our Author hath performed it reasonable well.
But for the other of the Cre∣ditor (to say the truth) he hath practised that part very little hitherto, and therefore is very diffident of his ability therein. Yet howsoere, hee'le stand upon his credit, And iustifie his word, because he sed it. For the charitable extent of the Creditors curtesie. VErily this man of Credence doth observe these princi∣ples in all his proceeding of this nature.
First, that he may lend or trust upon such conditions as may tend to the benefit of the Borrower or Debtor chiefly. Then, that his owne gaine may be moderate. Then, that there may be Re∣cord thereof kept for testimony of his sincere intention, in two or three severall bookes at the least. And lastly, he doth not onely lend or trust, but farther giveth it a blessing, that it may yeeld much increase to the borrower and debtor.
The reasons hereof are all as preg∣nant as pious. 1 For it is better for him to build than to pull downe. 2 He will not grinde the fore-head of his poore brother. 3 His booke cannot erre, for it admits no tradition, but the pure and uncorrupted text it selfe, as it was delivered in the primitive register, while Tho∣mas his fore-man was yet li∣ving, and did beare record as a faithfull witnesse of these pro∣ceedings. And though the blessing be bestowed upon a dead commo∣dity,
yet I hope it argues no su∣perstition in him that giveth it. And all this is apparantly good till we come to The mystery of Multiplication. TRadition, it is not tollerable but an abhomination, and yet our Creditor holds that Addition in the secret of shop-booke may be very well allow∣able. For so long as he doth onely make up in credits what he hath lost in stocke, or what is decaid in necessary expences, and not riotously or vainly, seeing the wicked are but usurpers of the
riches of this world, it is lawful for him with an equall hand to be carried among his Debtors by way of apportionment, to rate and assesse them at his dis∣cretion. He will take no interest, nor wrong his conscience for any good, his shop-booke hath hi∣therto held good name and fame. Heresies may creepe in∣to the Church daily, but never into his shop-book in any wife: there is nothing there but what hath beene delivered, and his servants (especially one a∣mongst the rest) will as boldly as any Brewers desperate Clarke maintaine and justifie it: shall he not maintaine his ma∣sters
mystery, when they are both to be saved by the same faith? Why, he shall put the debtor in minde of the delivery of every parcell, with all the circumstances to it, for he re∣members it as perfectly, as if it had beene done but yesterday. Now the Debtor beginnes to quarrell the Shop-booke, my Creditor is most justly incen∣sed: And therefore now in the next place, The Crow lookes to eat the Oyster alive, but is caught in the attempt, and the hand in the Shop-booke breedes the winde-col∣lique in the warehouse, which shak't the Fabrique
and foundation of all his factory as followeth: Suppose the tide is now com∣ming in, and the poore Oyster gapes for some refection in the moisture of it. The Birds of prey (scilicet) the shop-keeper the Crow, and the Vsurer the Cormorant: these hover about it, each of them hoping to pull it out of the little tenement where it dwels, and to devoure it alive. Hereupon the Cormo∣rant and the Crow contend for the prize: The Crow claimes it as a Stray lost, and left with∣out the bounds of any watry coverture on the dry land at a low ebbe, The Cormorant challenges it neverthelesse, as
being still within his high wa∣ter-marke; Then the Crow al∣ledges that it is so wasted (wan∣ting water) that it is become no better than Carrion, and therefore it does properly be∣long unto him. The Cormo∣rant denies that, and assures him that the Oyster is yet alive, and therefore no carrion. But the Crow had given so much credit formerly, that he would now scarce beleeve his owne eyes (especially in his wifes case) he would by no meanes beleeve this to be true, and therefore in hope to cousen the Cormorant, he desires that he may onely feele with his bill whether it were so or no:
Leave is given by the Cormo∣rant, who thought it was e∣nough for the Crow to smell upon the prey, intending that never any more should come to his share: Then the Crow who knew how to ticle a Trout at his pleasure, did without assi∣stance of Constable or advice of Counsell, make a most vio∣lent entry upon the Oyster, which presently claps to his doore, shuts the Crow within, and caught him so fast by his bill of entry, that all Colchester and the custome-house can te∣stifie to this day, with what un∣customed and uncourteous en∣tertainement he was there re∣ceived.
Well might the Crow cry and call for his companion the Cormorant to redeeme him from captivity, but all was in vaine. The doores were shut up, he could not so much as belch at the key-hole, or let out the winde which troubled the warehouse by any meanes for∣ward or backward, the very foundation of the shop and shopbord were shaken with the violence thereof. Being in this extremity, and so taken with the winde, that nothing applied inwardly could possibly helpe him, he cals for the shop-booke, and begins to conjure the collicke with such terrible charmes and
incantations, as the like were never devised nor put into any pentacle: Then he raised the great Prince, In primis, out of his Easterne Emperie, with a le∣gion of Items attending him. These two he sets to taske, and enjoynes them to distin∣guish his Debtors in Spero, from those in Despero, and to deale more plainly with him herein, than Widdowes use to doe by their Husbands estates in the Court of Orphans, and else∣where: They performe his designe instantly, and the greater number appeared to be perdues directly desperate and debilitate, amongst the which my cousin Courtier and
my Innes of Court-man were of the number. The Courtiers suit did long languish and was palliated and upheld with letters commenda∣tory, it complain'd much of the disease called the reference, it was a little lightened by a Cor∣diall certificat laterly, yet in the end no meanes nor medi∣cine could serve the turne, but of a stopping and obstruction at the great seale it died. The Innes of Court man was neither heire nor aged suffici∣ently, for the enabling of any such act as he had undertaken publikely by deed, or privately in the shop-booke. The Scri∣ver, the City counsaile, himself,
and all were fatally infatuated, betraid with a beard, and foold with formality. The winde rises more and more, the storme increaseth, strange stitches on every side of the shop, wonderfull weake∣nesse in the ware-house, and convulsions in the Counter∣boord and boxe, complaine and cry out upon the Collicke, at whose mercy we leave him, expecting the eruption thereof very speedily.
The Signes fore-running the wonderfull Cracke. THe certaine Signes in a Ci∣tizen are these: He strives to be call'd into such office, especially as where∣by he may have the stocke of the Parish or Company in his custody. He gives ground in matter of payment, the longer he deales, the more he leaves in the re∣mainder upon every payment. He leaves the plaine path of his profession, and places more faith in a Project, then in all the probabilities of his owne Tra∣ding:
and when a Citizen turns Projector, he has the very to∣kens of the wonderfull Cracke upon him. His Country house is too lit∣tle for him, and it wants a gate∣house for his Wife and Coach to come in at, and therefore there must be laid out in buil∣ding thrice as much as the Fee∣simple of all when it is finished will affoord. He takes up at interest to make good the building: all his good debts he sets over to the immediate accountant in trust, and with an intention to pre∣vent his Creditors. All his purchases are either in the name of his sonne, or
some trusty Kinsman of his wives. The neerer the Cracke, the faster he laies about him, to take up in any kinde, and upon any conditions, then he con∣veyes all things of value out of his house. And at last he gives fire with a report of his great losses at or beyond the seas, where he (God wot) had never any facto∣ry or dealing in all his life time. Then he sends his Wife to her Mothers, where she must live a while, that she may not be troubled with the noyse and clamour of the Creditor. He betakes himselfe to his
Chamber, keepes the shop win∣dowes shut, and provides a Ca∣talogue of all his desperate cre∣dits onely to deliver to his Creditors, when they shall come to treat upon the subject of satisfaction. The newes reaches to the Exchange by noone, where they that have given credit to him, looke so prettily and pitti∣fully one upon another, as you might know and challenge them by their faces. Then they gather together, and conferre their notes, and cast up the whole summe what all their credits may come un∣to, onely some of the more pragmaticall sort, who feare to
publish their losses lest their owne estates should come like∣wise in question, doe dissem∣ble the matter, and speake with the least. Others that suspect, it may be their owne case very shortly, pitty the mans misfor∣tune, blame the hardnesse of the times, deadnesse of trade, and scarcity of coyne, recoun∣ting what he is out for forraign plantations abroad, and other contributions at home, and with what charge he hath gone through so many offices in so short time, whereat every man relents and lets slacke his more strict purposes, agreeing all to goe to his house to confer with him after dinner.
And so dismisse we them till then. IT may be you looke I should have spoken somewhat of the Cracke of my City-gallant, but it is improper to place him a∣mongst Creditors that has been bred a borrower from his Cra∣dle, and that according to the custome of the Citie: let it one∣ly suffice, that though he had not his country house, yet he had his country Hostesse, and though he dealt not in Court Projection, yet he kept a vile coile for court Protection.
His Hostesse she paid the old Widdowes and his young Mi∣stresse their debts in the same coyne that he tendred to them. And at last when his insol∣vency appeared upon every post, she preferr'd any Iustice of peace his Clarke thereabouts to her respectuality before him, so that there was neither abiding at Rumford, nor returne to London, but he must of neces∣sity make a voyage, be it but to Britlesey, where he lies close under a borrowed name, which was the last commodity that ever he tooke up, till his friends shall have rectified his credit, and restored him to the
estate from which he was so lately collapsed and fallen. The recovery of the old man, with the common comfort which it did beget, hold the next place. AFter dinner all the Credi∣tors met againe on the Ex∣change, where they hold full three houres conference, during which time not any one of them did beleeve one word which another spake unto him, for they were too wise and learned in the use and exercise of conformity, to speake the simple truth, because they were
to deale in a matter mixt and compounded of many ingredi∣ent credits commedled and put together. From hence they goe to the house of their Debtor, in num∣ber as many as a whole col∣ledge of Physicians to enquire for their Patient: they are forthwith brought up unto him into his Chamber, where they found him in an old suit onely fit for garbling or eating of green-fish, with as many night∣caps upon his head, as there be cups in a nest of Court dishes, and the old gowne which was alwaies wont to lye at the Hall for ordinary dayes: in stead of plate there were onely two full
Vrinals standing upon the Court-cubbord, by which they might discerne the great disa∣bility and weakenesse, which the winde-collick had wrought within him. And in stead of accounts, bonds and bils, and other evi∣dences, there lay onely open before him, the foresaid Cata∣logue consisting of desperate debts and debtors (as afore∣said) They salute him as if they did in a manner partly remember him, and then all together, as well the man of ten, as he of two and twenty hundred in credits, without difference, put forward for the first deli∣very
of his minde unto him. This disorder was much bla∣med by the graver sort, and upon better advice, select men were drawne out of them to compound, for so many as would voluntarily conforme themselves, which was to be done according to the Cata∣logue, and as the ability would beare it. In the meane time a letter of licence is sealed for his liberty, to call in and recover what was due unto himselfe. This Letter of licence begat a commission of conformity, and then to worke they goe full roundly: some of the chiefe who had taken other and better
conditions of satisfaction of him in private, then the rest, shewed much forwardnesse in the publike way of compositi∣on, and in the end did so streng∣then their party, that they pre∣vailed against the other. The whole debt was cryed downe to sixe and eight pence in the pound, the windowes were opened, the servants in the shop flung up their caps, the Curse was removed from their house, their Master was a reco∣vered man, and none but a ban∣querupt would say to the con∣trary. Their Mistresse was sent for home with all the speed that might be, and this night all her
kindred and their masters friends were to solemnize this happy recovery of the decayed man, where they meant to drinke to the health of sixe and eight pence, from sixe in the e∣vening till eight next mor∣ning.
The common Comfort onely remaines. NOw the recovered man makes a most strickt scru∣teny and review into his shop∣bookes, as well for debtors sol∣vent as insolvent; he confers his Registers all together, and where he findes a debt uncrost in any one of them, though it be discharged in the other two it makes no matter, this is it by which he must stand charged, and unlesse he can discharge himselfe by this also, he is like to perish and receive condem∣nation by the very letter with∣out tradition.
He will spare no man whom the Law puts into his hands, lest he become a partaker in his in∣iquity. He cals home all things which he had formerly con∣veighed out of doores. And sets forward his building in the country. He flourishes as he never did before, and will give 1000. pound with his lame daughter now, more he then offered with her at the last swan-hopping. Hee'le out-bid all the towne for the great and lesser formes. Briefly, he vowes: To redeeme the time past. To prevent the evill day to come. To runne the course, and tread
in the footsteps of some of the right worshipfull, and in reverence of conformity to convert his old composi∣tion gowne into a faire and comfortable foot-cloth. But three rich wives, and such an∣other Cracke, Will make thee scorne to cry (What doe you lacke?)
By the Counsaile of Ramme Ally. Non nobis nati sumus. VVHereas in these latter times it concernes us in civill pollicy, to be so much the more industrious as we are become numerous above for∣mer ages, and no endeavour can be so beneficiall and ho∣nourable as the enlarging of our territory by discovery and plantation in parts habitable and agreeable with our debito∣ry disposition, where we may disperse our Colonies with
more conveniency and advan∣tage than at this present: for which purpose we have lately imployed and set forth the good ship, called (The least in sight) accompanied with that approved and well appointed Pinace (The pay nought) the charge and command of both which, we conferd upon Sir Oliver Owemuch, who man'd the same with persons best qua∣lified in the Art of Insolvency, the greater part whereof, him∣selfe had knowne and tryed to be men of much trust, being his owne Creditors, and crea∣tures of his owne discretion, whose loving kindenesses he required in manner of imploy∣ment
following, viz. His Mercer he made Master of (The least in sight) and his Ba∣ker Boat-swaine. And because his Vintner had bestowed many a shot upon him in prosperity, he made him Master Gunner in his adversi∣ty. His Tobacco-man desired to be the Gunners mate, be∣cause he would make all smoake againe. A Purser they needed not: for besides that, they had all bad memories in calling of things past to remembrance, they held it a foolish thing to keepe accounts where there was no purpose of payment.
His Haberdasher came some∣what with the latest, but his Laundresse by the power of her Letters commendatory, preferd her husband to be Controller of the Coile, Re∣membrancer of the Bilbowes, and Yeoman Squabber of (The pay nought.) And his Taylor last of all, be∣cause he had the best stomacke to the action, he was made Ste∣ward, and had charge of the vi∣ctuall for the voyage. Being thus provided on Mun∣day the first of March, the winde blew faire from the East, when they left the Temple∣staires; And the same day be∣ing Saint Davids day, the ayre
grew thicke and very foggy, in∣somuch that the Pinace had lost the Admirall, had it not in stead of a light in her Lanthorne, hung up a Leeke in the maine top, by the sent whereof it re∣covered sight of her againe the next morning by breake of day. On the second, third, and fourth day, the weather was very variable and stormy, how∣soever they still spoon'd on∣ward for most advantage. About eight of the clocke on friday the fifth of May, their Pylot who had beene a Specta∣cle-maker and a Prospectuary without Temple barre, descri∣ed a saile making towards
them, which they suspected by his flag to be the water-bailiffe of London. Hereupon a Councell was call'd aboord, the Captaine to consider what was to be done in this imminent extremity. Some advised that it were fit to make to the land, if they knew where to touch without hazard. Others of higher resolution advised to stand the fortune of a Sea-fight, and to draw their number out of sight into the hold, whereby to encourage the enemy to a neerer approch, which opinion was generally received and allowed. Presently, as the occasion re∣quired,
it was agreed that for the sublimation of every sparke Spirit amongst them, there should be an extraordinary al∣lowance made instantly (that was) the full proportion of one pipe of Tobacco, and a Tem∣ple-pot of six to every two of them, which when they had cheerefully past about; the Taylor whose conscience was more tender than his stomacke, would needs be resolved in two points concerning his souls health before the fight should begin. The first was, whether the cause and quarrell which they were to undertake were justifyable orno, for that he e∣ver held Ludgate more worthy
than Newgate in divers re∣spects: and the next was in case he should miscarry in the action, whether Limbus patrum & infantum, were not under his owne shop-boord or no. Before my Taylor could have opinion herein of their Captaines Chaplaine, who had beene a Vineger-man former∣ly, and a fellow of excellent sharpe apprehension: the suppo∣sed enemy came within shot, whereupon every one of them began to apply him to his charge. But just as Master Gunner was ready to let flye, (not for feare I hope) they perceived no other assailants but the Church∣wardens
of new Brainford, who were bound for London to buy bels, not for the Church but their morrice dance against the ensuing Whitson-ale. Hereup∣on for their better recouery, the allowance was againe doubled to every one of them. And on they passe bravely till on Satur∣day the sixth, they discerned firme land, lying upon the Sa∣voyans Eastward. Here the Captaine drew out the one halfe of his forces, and with his long boat put them to land, where they found a most spa∣tious continent fit for plantati∣on at foure degrees beyond the Temple, the climate excee∣ding temperate so long as you
pay the Tennis-court keeper for your lodging, the accom∣modations most excellent, ei∣ther thorow the white Hart in∣to the Covent-Garden, and so into the Country round about; or from the great house thorow the Swanne into Drury-lane, and so forth free as bird in the ayre: The Lacedemonian wo∣men supply them with fish and fruit of all sorts, which they bring downe in abundance from the upland countries: in∣somuch as there is neither feare of want of victuals, so long as they haue money; Nor of secu∣rity while they doe put them∣selves under the protection of Denmarke-house: Here they
left the Haberdasher and cer∣taine other to winter it, and the rest returned aboord the ninth day of May, bearing their course still West & by North: On the twelfth day, Cape Virde, or Greenes wharfe, did shew it selfe unto them, where they likewise put in, and forraged cleane thorow it on both sides. This place (besides other good∣ly beasts of all sorts) is most fa∣mous for Harts, whose hornes are of the comeliest branch and spreading, as also of dimension and extension that can be; so that in memory of them, the Captaine named the place Harts-horne-Ally: Then the which no place hitherto disco∣vered,
is of a more capable con∣tinent, or more rich in Mine∣rals, Vegitatives or Victuals, or more agreeable with the con∣stitution of our countrymen, especially if they be married. The severall commodities and merchandizes whereof you shall receive more at large upon returne of the Least in sight, from thence. In the meane time we exhort you that both with cheerefull contribution, and otherwise with your advice, you doe not onely uphold the old ones, but also further and advance the said two new plantations so happily discovered, and so prosperously pursued hitherto,
by you the Councell and Ad∣venturers of the said company, and at your onely charge and expence. So ye that see't may wish, but never shall ye Performe the like adventures as Ram-Ally. FINIS.
