22225 99846335 11295
THE LAMENTABLE TRA∣gedie of OEDIPVS the Sonne of LAIVS Kyng of THEBES out of Seneca. By ALEXANDER Neuyle. ¶ Imprynted at London in saint Brydes Churchyarde: ouer a∣gaynst the North doore of the Churche: by Thomas ColWell. 1563. 28. Aprilis.
To the ryght Honorable Maister Doctor Wotton: One of the Quenes Maesties piuye Counsayle. Alexander Neuyle wysheth Health: with encrease of Honor. WHen first right honorable Syr, I trauayled in the translation of this present Tragedie, Written by the moste graue, vertu∣tuous & Christian Ethenicke (For so doubteth not Erasmus to terme him) Lucius Aneus Seneca: I minded nothynge lesse, than that at any tyme thus rudely transformed he shoulde come into the Prynters hands. For I to no other ende re∣moued hym from his naturall and loftye Style to our corrupt & base,
or as al men affyrme it: most barba∣rous Language: but onely to satis∣fye the instant requestes of a fewe my familiar frendes, who thought to haue put it to the very same vse, that Seneca hymself in his Inuen∣tion pretended: Whiche was by the tragicall and pompous showe vpon Stage, to admonish all men of theyr fickle Estates, To declare the vnconstant Head of wauering Fortune, her sodaine interchaūged and soone altered face, And lyely to expresse the iust reuenge, & fear∣ful punishmēts of horrible Crimes, wherwith the wretched worlde in these our myserable daies pyteous∣ly swarmeth. This caused me not to be to precise in folowynge the Author worde or worde: but som∣tymes by Addition, somtymes by Subtraction, to vse the aptest Phrases in giuing ye Sense that I
coulde inunt. Wherat a great nombre I knowe wyll be more offended than Reason or Wisdom wold they shoul be. Thus as I framed it to one purpose: so haue my frenes (to whom I can not well dny any thyng ye Frend∣shyps ryght may seeme iustly to re∣quyre) wrested it to another effect: and by this manes blowen it a∣broade, by ouer rasshe & vnaduised pryntyng. By whiche fonde dede I know vndoubtedly I shal receiue ye poisoned Infamies, of a nombre of venemous tonges. Wherfore (ryght honorable Syr:) as I giue these the first Fruictes of my tra∣uayle vnto you: declarynge therin the great good wyll & dutie that I owe vnto your Honor, for the vertuous Liberalitie of your noble mynde: so am I driuen humbly to reqyre your strong ayde, & assured Defence against the sclaunderous
assaults of such malicious mouths, whiche obtaynd: I shalbe the bet∣ter encouraged agaynst an other time, to bestow my trauaile in mat¦ters of farre greater weyght and importaunce. In the meane sea∣son (desyryng your Honour to take these symple Attemptes of myne in good parte:) I leaue you to the tuicion of the ryght hyghe & migh∣tye GOD: Who kepe you longe in health, & graunt you NESTORS yeares: With encrease of Honor. Your Honours to cōmaund. Alexander Nuyle.
¶The Preface to the Reader. BEholde here be∣fore thy face (good Reader) the ryght lamentable Trage∣die of that most In∣fortunate Prynce OEDIPVS, for thy profit rudely translated. Wondre not at the grosenes of the Style: neither yet accownt the Inuentours dylygence disgraced by the Translators negligence: Who thoughe that he hath som∣tymes boldly presumed to erre frō his Author, rouynge at Randon where he lyst: adding and subtrac∣ting at plasure: Yet let not that engendre disdainful suspicion with in thy learned brest. Marke thou rather what is ment by the whole course of the Historie: and frame
thy lyfe free from suche mischiefs, wherwith the worlde at this pre∣sent is vniuersally ouerwhelmed, The wrathfull vengeaunce of God prouoked, The Bodye plaged, the mynde and Conscience in midst of deepe deuourynge daungers most terrybly assaulted, In suche sort that I abhorre to write: And euen at the thought therof I temble and quake for very inward griefe and feare of minde, assurey per∣swadinge my selfe that te ryght hyghe and immortall God, wyll neuer leaue suche horrible and de∣testable Crimes vnpunyshed. As in this present Tragedie, and so forth vniuersally in the generall Proces of the whole Historie, thou mayste ryght well perceyue. Wherin thou shalt se, a very expres and lyuely Image of the incōstant chaunge of fickle Fortune in the
person of a Prince of passyng fame and Renowne, midst whole studs of earthly blysse: by meare misfor∣tune, nay rather by the deepe hid∣den secret Iudgements of God py∣teouslye plunged in most extreame myseries. The whole Realme for his sake in straungest guyse gre∣uouslye plaged: besydes the appa∣raunt destruction of the Nobilitie, The generall death and spoyle of the Cominaltie, The myserable transformed face of the Citie, with an infynyte Legion of mischiefes moore, whiche I passe ouer vnre∣hersed. Onely wysh I all men by this Tragicall Historie (for to that entent was it written) to beware of Synne: the ende wherof is shamefull and myserable. As in the most Infortunate fall of this vnhappy Prince right playnely appeareth. Who by inwarde Gripe of fearefull consuming Con∣cience
wretchedly tormented: be∣holdynge the lamentable state of his vyle infected Realmes, wasted by the burnyng rage of priuy spoy∣lynge Pestilence, fyndes hym selfe in tract of Time, to be the onelye Plage and myserye of the almost quight destroyed Citie. Wherupon callynge togither his Preests and Prophettes, and askyng counsayle of the Gods by them, for present Remedy in those Euils, wherwith the Realme was than vniuersally ouerflowen, Aunswere was made that the Plague shuld neuer ceas, tyll Kynge LAIVS Death were throughly reuenged: and the blud∣dy Murtherer driuen into perpe∣tuall exyle. Whiche Aunswere re∣ceyued OEDIPVS farre more cu∣rious in bowlting out the trueth, than carefull of his own Estate: so∣daynly slides into an innumerable
cōpany of ryght dredfull myseries For as soone as he had once the perfect vewe of his own detestable dedes and wicked misdemeanour cast before his eies, togither wt the vnnaturall kyllynge of his Father LAIVS, the incestuous Mariage of his Mother IOCASTA. The preposterous ordre of his yll mys∣guyded lyfe, with a hūdred mo ike mischiefs, which chast & vndefyled eares abhorre to heare, frettyng Fury cōmon enmy & tormentor to corrupted conscience prickyng him forward, all inflamed wt Phrensie and boylyng in inwarde heate of vyle infected mynde, he rooteth out his wretched eies vnnaturally, spoyleth his Mother of her lyfe (though earnestly requested ther∣to) beastly, and in the ende in most basest kynde of slauerye, banisht: dieth myserably. Leauing behynd
hym vnto all posterities A dredful Example of Gods horryble venge∣aunce for Sin. Such like Terrors as these requyreth this our present Age, wherin Uice hath cyefest place, and Uertue put to yght: lyes as an abiect languishynge in great extremytie. For the whiche cause, so muche the rather haue I suffred this my base trāslated Tra∣gedie to be publyshed: from his Au∣thor in worde and Uerse far trans∣formed, though in Sense lytell al∣tred: and yet oftentymes rudely en∣creased with myne owne symple Inuētion more rashly I cōfes than wysely, wyshynge to please all: to offende none: But wheras no mā lyes so vpryghtly, whom slaun∣dring toonges laue vndyffamed: I referre my self to the Iudgement o ye wysest, lytle esteaming the pre∣iudiciall mouthes of suche carping
Marchauntes, whiche suffre no mennes doynges almoste to scape vndefyled. In fyne I beseche all togyther (yf so it myght be) to beare with my rudenes, and con∣sydre the grosenes of oure owne Coūtrey language, whiche can by no means aspire to the hyghe lofty Latinists Stile. Myne onely en∣tent was to exhorte men to em∣brace Uertue and shun Uice, Ac∣cordynge to that of the ryght fa∣mous and excellent Poet Virgyl. Discite iusticiam moniti & non temnere diuos. This obtayned: I holde my selfe throughlye contented: In the meane season I ende: wyshyng all men to flie Sin: the present Path waye to perfect Infelycitie. Farewell.
¶The names of the Speakers of this Tragedie. Oedipus. Chorus. Tiresias. Senex. Iocasta. Creon. Manto Porbas. Nuntius.
¶The fyrste Acte. Oedipus. Iocasta. Oedipus. THe night is gon. & dredful day begins at length to appeare And Lucifer beset wt Clowds, hymself aloft doth reare. And gliding forth with heauy hewe, A dolful blase doth beare (in Skyes.) Now shal the houses voide be sene, with Plagues deuoured quight: And slaughter yt the night hath made, shall daye brynge forth to lyght. Doth any man in Princely throe reioyce? O bryttle Ioye How many ills? how faire a face? and yet how muche annoye In the doth lurke, and hidden lies? what heapes of endles stryfe? They iudge amys, yt deame ye Prince to haue the happy lyfe. For as the mountayns houge and hie, the blustryng windes withstand, And craggy Rocks, the blhing fluds do dash and beate fro land.
Though that the seas in quit are and nought at all do fome: So kingdoms great submytted lye, to Fortunes doulfull Dome. How well shund I my father deare Plybus scepters late? Exilde bereft of carfull feare, in Pilgrims happy state. I call the Gods to witnes heare and ars that glyde in skies. A kingdom is befauln to me, I feare lest hereof rise A mischiefe, (mighty Ioue,) to great I feare alas I feare Lest these my handes haue spoyld the lyfe, of the my father deare. Appollo byds me this beware, and yet a mischiefe more, Foretelles. Can eny greater be then this I told before? Of father slayn by sonnes owne hand? My shyuering lyms do shake And all amased quaking stand at this vnhappie Fate. I am asshamed my desnies fowle, at large to thunder out, And openly to blase my feare. my dredfull minde doth doubt.
Yet out it goes. Phebu me bids my mothers beds to fly. As though that I hyr sonne wt hyr, incestuouslie shuld ly, This feare and only this my dryues from fathers kingdoms great. Not lyke a wanderyng Uacabounde the wayes vnknowen I beate, But all mystrustull of my selfe thy lawes (O Nature) for to keape I sought the meanes. Yet feare I stil and fear into my mynde doth creape Though cause of Dread not one I s yet feare and dread I all. And scante in credit with my self, I seke my fatal fall (By Dome of doulful Destinies.) For what shuld I suppose the cause? A Plage that is so generall And Cadmus countrie wholy spoiles and spreds it self thorough all? Shuld vs amongest so houge a heap of plaged Bodyes spare? And we alone amongst the rest reserued to myschiefes are? O heuy hap. And byde we still alone the spoyle to see? Of Cites great, of men, of beasts, by plage that wasted be?
And thou amongst so many yls, a happy lyfe to lead, Couldste once perwade thy selfe (O wretch without al fear or dread. Of Phebus secret Iudgements to, and that in kynges estate, Thou, thou, infected hast the ayre, in suche a fylthye rate. Thou art the onely cause of woe: by the these euils ryse, By the to graue on suche a sorte, this wretched people plies. The fyry flaming frieng heate, afflicted harts that wastes, Is not relyued as wont it was by cold and pleasaunt blastes. The gentle westerne windes haue left with helthful puffes to blow, And now the fyery Dog with blase of boylynge heate doth glow. The Sonne in Leo burns so hote, and so the earth doth broyle, That fluds and herbes are dried vp, and nought remaynes but soyle, So throughly schorcht and stued with heate, that moisture all is gon, And now amongst so may fluds, remaynes alas not one.
The places drye are only sene the streames are dronken vp. And water that doth yet abyde, the sokyng Earth doth sup. The Moone with clowds quight ouer cast, all sadly forth she glides, And dolfull darksom shades of night, the whole worlde ouerhides. No Star on hygh at all doth shyne but all the Skies are couered, With blacke and hellyke hewe & mis∣tie stenche, quight ouershadowed. The corne that wonted was to growe and frutefully to spring: Nowe to the voided Barnes nought els but emptie stalkes doth bring. No part of all our kingdome is, fre from Destruction: But all together ronne and rush, to vtter confusion. The olde men with the yong (alas:) the father with the childe The plage consumes. both man & wife all beastes both ame and wylde Are spoyled by the Pestylence. No pompe at all remaynes, That wonted was in Funeralles, to ease the mourners paynes.
Alas this spoile of people made, by Plage hath dryed myn eyes. And secretly within my brest, the grifit boyling fryes. And that that wonted is to hap, in most exremst ylls. My teares are dry and glutting grief my wretched brest it fills. The crased father bears the sonns, vnto theyr dampish graues. And after him with burden lyke, the mother comes and raues. And euen lamentyng as they stand starcke ded downe both they fall, And mourners new in like estate, for them and theirs they call. Who likwyse in the mydst of all, their toyle and paynfull payne Do drop into the graue they digd, and so the place do gayn (That was prepared for others erst.) A tombe is made for Noble men fast on the people hyes And in their burdēs ling. Nobility all vnregarded lyes.
For lacke of graues theyr bodyes all to ashes they do wast. And so half burnt they leue thē ther. and home away for hast They run & more they fetche & thē fier, wood, graue, and all Doth want. And down for very griefe the wretched misrs fall. No prayers auail No Arte can help this raging Plge tappease: For none almost is left alyue eche others grief to ease. Before thine aulters here O God my feble hands I hould, Requiring all my destinies, at once with corage bold. And that by death I may preuent, my Country prest to fall. For this: and only this (O God) Upon thy name I call. Let me not be the last that dies. The last that goes to Graue. Graūt this. & then (O mighty loue) My full request I aue. O cruell Gods vnkynd. O more than thrise vnhappy ates. That only me denied is, that lightes on all estates.
I meane a spedy death alas, these euyls to preuent: Leaue of thy blubberyng teares & flye these kingdoms foyld O foole With rotten plages and botches vyle and graues eche where dyspoilde. All whiche diseases thou vnhap∣pie gete didste bringe with the. Dispatche. away. Go hence. at least, vnto thy parents stie. Iocasta. What boots it Sir these mischiefes (greate) with piteous plaints to aggreuate. Stowtlie to beare aduersitie, is fitste for kynges estate. The more thy Reygne is douted of, and when that cares do crush Thy princelie brest. thē ought ye most to beare and bide the push. It is no point of courage stout, to fortune for to yeld. Oedipus Nay from this brest reprocheful feare hath euer been exilde. Our manhode is not subiecte now, to vaine and peuish feares, But euermore in eche assaulte, it princelie courage beares.
No not a thousand glistering swordes nor all the force of war, Can once appale my countenaunce nor yet my mynde detarre, The verie giauntes fyer and houge in fight withstand I dare. Not Sphinx his crafty compast words coulde make me once to yeld. I saw him belching gubbes of blud I vewde full well the fielde That all to spatterd laye. With blud and bones quight ouerhelde, And when yt he on moūtaynes top with mouth full houge to se. Stode gapinge all with gredie awes to feede and praye on me, Ofte fluttering wt his fearful wynges and shakyng oft his tayle, Began full like a Lion fierce with threates me to assaile. Of whom straight way the Riddell I. it rusht into myne eares With roring sownde. his wynges he claps the Rock for hast he teares. Desiring with my bowelles still to glutte his gredy Iawes. But this myne old practised hed his subtile question drawes,
In peces at the length dissolued. And it asundre sawes. Iocasta. What maks you wish for deth to late? you myght haue died than. As for rewarde of Sphinx destroyed this kingdom to you came. (ou nede no more therof to talk) The ashes of that Monster vile, Oedipus. agaynst vs doth rebell. That vyle mishapen lothsom Beast, that ragyng Feend of Hell. Is cause of all the plage that now, on Thebane Citie lights. Nw only this remaynes alone, if Phebùs heauenly might, Can eny meanes inuent for vs, or way of mercye make: Wherby these burnyng Plagues at length may haply chaūce to slake, (that thus our people wasts.)
Chorus. O More then thrise renowmed stock of aunciēt Cadmus race. O mighty Thebes Citie great, (O heuy ruthfull Case.) Loe now you lye all desolate, with Plagues deuoured quight. Both you and all your Husbandmen. (Oh miserable syght.) O fowle and fearfull fates (alas) what causeth all this wo? O God whence springs this Pesty∣lence? that vs tormenteth so? No age, no shape, no forme is sparde but all confounded lye. Thus happiest now yt man I cownte, whose chaunce was first to dye For he hath shund a thousand yls, whiche wretched eyes haue seen: And mischiefes great that vs do prese from him are taken clean. O God withhold thy furye great, thy Plages from vs remoue. Ceas of afflicted Soules to scourge, who the both serue and loue.
Powre downe on thē diseases fowle, that them deserued haue. A Guerdon iust for synne (Oh god) thys this of the we craue, And only this. we aske no more the cause and all is thyne, A thing not vsed of gods it is from pitie to declyne. My hart doth pant and trembling cold through all my lims doth run As oft as I remembring cownt the noble stockes vndun, By death and dolfull destenies that ouerwhelmed lye, And yet alas the people still to graue do faster hye. In longe Araye all in a rancke by thousandes on a Rowe, On euerye side in euery streate to buriall fast they goe. An hundred brode wide open gates, are not enoughe for waye, But throngd the people pestred stand stil in a fearfull staye, And in the mydst of al their toyle with corses on their backes, The number that before doth post the hinder number slackes.
The corses in the streates do lye and graue on graue is made, But all in vayne. for nought it boots the plage cannot be stayed. The sacrefices donne to Godes haue to to yll succes, And suche strainge sights & signes do rise that nought els I can ges But that at hande wt gastlye pawes, is vtter destruction, With thowsande ylls accompayned and extreme confusion. The shepe of rot by heaps as thicke as dogges do fall and dye, And belching owt their wasted lungs on grounde do sprawlyng lye. And I my selfe of late did see: (a sight vnseen before,) As our highe preste stode sacreficinge at the Temple dore, And strake wt greuous bludy wound the golden horned Bull When down wt liueles lump he drops and members made full dull. And all ye wounde wide bleding gapes and blacke goord blud out spus. And yet the blade vnsprinckled was. The bloud it boylinge stues
And bubbles on the ground. Alas Wha do these thyngs portend? Oh mghty Ioe at length I pray, some good and happy ende. At length withhold thy hand (O God) and health vnto vs sende. Nothyng alas remaynes at all, in wonted old estate, But all are turned topsey downe, quight voide aud desolate. The tyred Horse with labour long from back his burthen tats, And after on his Maysters brest, his lyueles lyms he squats. And all his partes in peces crush. The Beasts in field that byde Unkept. Unknowen wayes & paths do raunge and ouerstrid. The Bull for lacke of foode and meat in field all faintyng lyes, And all his flock dispersed quight, the sely Shephard dyes. And there amongst the Heifers fierce his fatall breath expyers, The Harts wtout all feare of Wolues do lyue in wretched peace, The very wrathfull roryng sownds, of rampyng Lyons cease.
The vengeaunce wylde outrageous Beares are now as tame as shepe The vgly Serpent that was wont, the Rocky Dennes to kepe. Oft quassyng poisoned Uenom soups in inwarde heate she boyles. And all inflamd and schorcht: in vaine for lenger lyfe she toyles. The woods are not adourned nowe, with fresh and lyuely hue, The wonted shades are gon. Al things are quight out of theyr Que. No grasse on grounde doth growe. The earth no moisture soupes, The Uine withouen eny sap, his drowsy head down drowpes. Wha shal I say? all things (alas) are writhen out of course, And as they seme to me, are lyke, to fare styll worse and worse. O mighty God aboue? when ende these euerduryng yls? When ceasthes Plages? that gyltles blud thus fierce and raging spyls? I thynke but we almost alyue, there do no men remayne: Whom dolfull Darts of Destenies, on earth haue lft vnslayne.
I thinke the darcksom shades of hell where filthy fluds do flowe, Where plages and vile diseases to where dreadfull horrors growe, And all the furies brasten loose do mischiefes on vs throwe, With botche & blane of sundry kindes whiche sothern blasts do blowe, And wrekfull vexed hagges of hell do breathe and on vs bringe The angrie fendes of hell I thinke their vengeaūce on vs slinge And out their mortall poyson spue which they againste vs beare. Lo see how gredy death on vs with scowling eyes doth leare. See see. Oh Ioue how fast he throwes his Darts. Not one he spares But al cōfownds. His thretning force, with stand no Creature dares. No doubt the lothesom Feryman the synful soules that traines Through stincking fluds. his labour loths that he for vs sustaynes. Such presse by plumps to him is made which still renews his paynes. But harke yet mōsters more thē these the fame abroade dothe flie
That hellishe dogges wt Bawling sound were herd to howle & cry, And yt the ground wt trēbling shooke, and vnder fete dyd moue. And dredfull blasing Comets bright were seen in Skies aboue. And gastly shapes of men besydes, to wander on the grounde. And wood and trees on euery syde, Dyd fearfully resounde. Besids all this straūge ghosts were seen in places wher they stode. And ryuers more then one or two, that ran all blacke goord blud. O cruell plage. O vile disease, far worse then spedy death. O we vnhappye thrise and more, who do prolonge our breath. In thease accursed dayes and tymes. But harke to me a while. When first this lothsom plage begins these mysers to defyle, It takes them thus. A fearfull Cold through al their bones doth run, And Cold and Heate together mixt, their sences all benome. Than litel lothesom markes appeare, and all their bodies spotte.
And al the members flaming glows, and burning fast do rot. The Lights, the Lungs, the hart, the Gutts, and all that in ward lis. And all the secret partes Iscorcht, with dedly fier fries. The bloud al clotterd in their cheks, in cluster lies by lumps. And it and heat together makes, great straunge and ruddy bumps. And blud and flesh congeled stands, in face as stiffe as stake. And yes in hed fast fixed set, and often tricklyng make. And down apace whole fluds they steame, and clots & drops do tril And al the skin from of their face, by flakes and scales doth pill. A thousand fearful sounds at once, into their eares do rush. And lothsom blud out of their nose, by stilling streames doth gush. The very anguish of their hart, doth cause them for to shake. And what wt Payn & Heat & Feare, their weried lyms do quake. Then som the rōning Riuers haunt, and some on ground do wallow.
And some agayn their thirst to sake, cold water gulping swallow. Thus all our country tost wt Plage in Grief it waltering lies. And stil desiring for to dy, A thousand deathes i dyes. But God them then to hear is prest, And death to none denies. Besides all this, the churche som do frequent: but not to pray. But only for to glut the Gods, with that that they do saye. But who is this yt comes from Court in hast with posting pace? What is it Creon that Noble bloud? comended for his grace (Of all that lyue.) Or doth, my crased minde opprest. thinges false for true conceyue, Tis Creon long desired for. His sight doth me releyue.
¶The second Acte. The first Sceane. Oedipus. Creon. Oedipus FOr feare my body chilles alas and tremblinge all I stande Inquaking dred. I seke & toile these mischiefes to with stande. But all in vayn I labour I it wil not bee I see. As longe as meare repugnaunts thus together mxed bee. My mynd desirous still (Oh god,) the truth for so vnfold. With doutfull Dred is daunted so, that it can scante vp hold. (It self.) O brother deare if eny meanes. or waye of health thou knowe. Declare it out and sticke not nowe. the truth to me to showe, Creon. Syr if it pleas your noble grace, the aunswers hidden lies. Oedipus Who doutful helth to sick mē brings all health to them denies.
Creon. Appolloes vse it is the trueth with darksom shades to duske. Oedipus. And Oedipus of gods it hath, things doutfull to discus. Creon. Speke out and spare not man. The mightie God comaundes. To purge the Princes seat forthith and that strayght out of hande That villayn vile requited be, with plages and vengeance due. Who firce with blody handes of late, my brother Laíus slue. Before that this performed be, no hope of mylder ayer. Wherfore do this O king. or els, of hope and healthe dispaier. Oedipus. Durst eny man on yearth attempt, that noble prince to slaye? Shewe me ye slaue that I may him, dispatche out of the way. Creon. God graunte the sight be good (Alas) the heringe is to terrible. My sences all amased stand, it is a thinge so horrible. That I abhore to speke my mynde, Oh god for feare I quake.
And euen at the very thought my lyms begin to shake. Assoone as I Appollos Churche, had entred in afrayde. Upon my face flat down I faul. And thus to him I prayd. Oh God if euer thou didest rue, on wretched misers state. Yf euer men opprest thou easd, or didst theyr cares abate. If euer thou in present Nede: didst present Helpe declare. If euer thou afflicted Harts, with Cares consumd didst spare. Now shew thy dredful force (O God) shew now thy mighty pore. Scant had I sayd: Resownding all the mountayns thundring rore. And filthy Feends spoute out their flames out of their darksom caues. And woods do quake. & Hils do moue and vp the surging waues Do mount vnto the skies aloft. And I amased stand. Stil lokyng for an awnswere at Appollos sacred hand. When out with ruffled hear disguisd the Prophet coms at last. And when that she had felt the heat, of mighty Phebus blast.
All puffyng out she swels in rage, and pattring still she raues, And scante she entred had into, Appollos shinyng caues, Whē out a thūding voice doth brust Thats far aboue mans reache. So dredful semed then to me, the mighty Phbu speach. Than thus he spake & thus at length, into myne ears he rusht. While sprawling still ye Prophet lay before the doores in dust. The Thebane Citi neuer shall,The Oracle. be free from Plagues, (quoth he,) Except from thence the Kyng queller forthwith expulsed be. Vnto Apollo knowen he was, or euer he was borne, Do this: or els no hope of halth, to this, the Gds haue sworne. Aud as for hym, he shall not long, in quit at endure: But with hymselfe, wage Warre he shall. and Warre he shall procure Vnto his Children deare. And crepe agayne he shall, into his Mothers womb.
Odpus. Loke what ye gods comaūded hau accomplished shalbe. Nor neuer shal these eyes of mine abide the daye to see. A kinge of kingdom spoild by force: by guile and craft supprest. A kinge to kinges the prop ought be, and chiefest cause of rest. No man regardes his death at all whom lyuinge he doth feare, Creon Gret cause maks me my princes death concele and closely beare. Opipus (In mynde.) Creon Ought enye cause of feare or griefe, thy dutie for to let. The thretening of the Prophesies, do still my brest beset. Oedpus As gods haue wild vs for this mis∣chiefe mends now let vs make. If eny waye or meanes there be, their suries for to slake. Thou God yt sits in Seate on high, and all the world dost guide And thou by whose comaundement, the starres in skies do glide. Thou thou that only ruler arte, of seas and fluds and all. On the and on thy Godhed great, for these requests we call.
Who so hath slayn kinge Laius Oh Iue I do the praye. Let thousande ils vpon him fall, before hys dienge daye. Let him no health, no comfort haue, bu al to crusht with cares, Consume his wretched yeres in grief and though yt Death him spares A while. Yet mischiefes all at once, at lengthe vpon him light. With all the euils vnder sonne, that vglye Monster smight. In exile let him lyue a slaue, the rated course of life. In Shame, in Care, in penurye, in Daunger and in strife. Let no man on him pitie take, let all men him reuile. Let him his mothers sacred Beds incestuouslye defyle. Let him his father kill. And yet let him do mischifes more. (what thing more heinous can I wish then that I wisht before.) Let him do all those illes I say, that I haue shund and past. All those and more (if more maye be,) oh God vpon him cast.
Let hym no hope of pardon haue: but sue and all in vayn. All hellish Furies on him light, for to encrease his payn. Oh loue powre downe thy fury great. thy thundryng thumps out throw. Let Boreas boysterous blasts & stor∣mie Plages vpon him blow. Consume hym quight. Fret out his guts with Pockes & botches vile. Let all Diseases on hym lyght, that wretched bodies fyle. Let these and more (if more may be,) vpon that Monster fall. Let Harpies Pawes & gredy paunche: deuoure his members all. Let no man hym regarde: or seeke his lyms in graue to laye. But let hym dye ten thousand deaths before his dieng daye. By this my kyngdome I do sweare, and kyngdom that I left, By al my Countrey Gods that ben in Tempels close I kept I sweare, I vow, I do protest, and therto wytnes take: The Stars, the Seas, the Earth, & all that ere thy hand dyd make.
Excepte that I my selfe forthwith this bludy Monster finde To wreke the wrath of God some way with solemne Oth I bynde. And so my Father Polibu, his happy dayes outlyue. And so my Mother Mp, no Mariage new contriue: As he shall dye that did this dede. And none shall hym excuse. What soeuer that he be I sweare: for that he shortly rues. But where this wicked dede was don Creon now tell me playne? Boh by what meanes? & where? and how? King Laius was slayne. Passing through Castalia woods, and Mowntayns heapd with Snow Creon. Where Goues of scrubs & Busshes thick & Brambels sharp do grow. A thre pathde crooked waye there is, that diuersly doth go. Oe vnto Bachus Citie bends, that Phocia doth hyght: The other to the Lande of Sisphus forth stretcheth out a ryght. The thyrde at thende wherof, a lothsom Serpent lyes, Tends down vnto the Banck wherby Eleia water plyes.
The are mynding nought but peas, a soden bande o thues. By open force of Armes owtright, this mischief greate contriues. But lo aswell as can be coms, Tiresi with trembling pace. I thinke Appollos heauenly might, hath brought him to this place. Se where he comes and Mano t. his wayes directinge goes. ¶The seconde Acte. The seconde Sceane. Oedypus. Tyresias, Manto, Oedipus COme holye priest to Phebus next these doutfull aunswers lose. And whom ye destnies wil to dy. Straight wayes to me disclose, Tyresias Renowmed Prince though stil I stand in silence dom dismayd. And though by inward feare of mynd my lingringe tonge is staied.
et pardon me (O oble Prince,) and giue me leue a while. From ak of sight prings Ignorance whiche power hath to exyle, Unspotd Truh frō doutfull brsts. This thing full wel you knoe, But whither god & Countrie calles, with willing mynde I goe. Let dedlie fatall destenies, be boulted out at lengthe. O kinge if I of greener yeres, had now my wonted strength This matter soone discust should be, and I wold take in hande. My selfe in presence of the Gods, in temple for to stande. A mighty Oxe all coulourd white, vp on the Aultars reare. Which neuer yet on weried necke, the Croked yoke dyd beare. And Manto thou O daughter myne, myne onely prop and staye. The secret hidden misteries, and sacred signes out saye. Manto. The beste before the Aultare standes. Tyresias To Gods a solemne praier make. And on the holye Aultars to, some pleasaunte odoures shake.
Manto. Tis don. And all the fiers fierce, with incence bright do flame. Tyresias O Manto now what signes seest thou? how do thy matters frame? What doth the fyre, the Sacrifice, encompas rounde about? Manto. Not so. But first it mownts aloft, and streight it flasheth out. Tire. Well. Yet, how doth the sacred flame all shining bright and cleare Hyt self on highe vnto the skies, with sparkeling flakes vprare? Or doth it oft rbounding backe, hit self, from skies vnfould? Or all with rumbling roring noise, about the place ist rould? Or mit with smoke ist tost frō place. to place now here now theare? Manto. Not all one but mingled colours, the flame doth with it beare. Much lyke vnto the Raynbow, which hauing soundry hues, Doth shew vnto the husbandmen, the wether that ensues. What colour it wants: or what it hath to me is like vncertayn. Now is it black, now blue, now red, and euen now agayn
Quight out it is. Yet once again, all fierce it flashing flames. But lo yet michiefs more then this, vnluckely it frames. The fier quight asounder parts, and flame with flame doth fight. O father I abhorre to see, this vglye lothesm sight. The wine to blud is turned quight, and all the Prynces hed. With thicke black clouds encōpast is, with smoke all ouer spred. O father tel what this portends? Tyresias What shuld I tell alas? My mynde for feare astonied stands, and trembling cold doth pas Through all my lims. What shall I say? or wher shal I begin? O cruel Plages O wrekfull Gods, O vengeaunce due for synne. Som horrible mischief great, alas, these fearfull signes declare. (O Iupiter) whats that y• Gods wold haue reueld and yet do bid beware. (To vtter it,) They are ashamed: I know not what. Come hether quickely bring. Som salte with the. Goe it vpon the wounded hefer fling.
Howe now? Dost once resistaunce make, or doth it gentlye bide The touchyng of thy sacred handes. Manto His hed on highe he liftes. And torning t the East, by course from thence he often shiftes Still lothinge as he semes to me, Of heauen to see the light, Oft scouling with his blearing eyes with gastely ruthefull sight. Tire. What? Doth one blowe them driue to groūd or more then one they haue. Manto. The heifer as it seemd enflamd, with couage stoute and braue Upon the mortall Blade dyd rush, and there himself destroyes. When out the blud it foming spoutes, and mounts vnto the Skies. The bull twise stroke or thrise, with groueling groning tyres. And toyling vp and down he moyles. and still to lyue desires. And yet at length with muche ado, his brutishe breth expiers. Tyre. What? doth ye wounde wide opē gape, or is it closed vp? Or doth the depnes of the hole. the blod in soking supp.
Manto. Out of the wounded Heyfers brest, blacke bluysh waters rush. And from his nose and eyes, & mouth, whole streams, of lud do gush. Tyresias By this vnhappy Sacrefyce, great feares within me rise. But tell me now: In the inner parts. what secrets hydden lyes? Manto. O father what means this? the in∣wardes, moore than wntyd guyse. Do moue & styr, and shake my handes, and heauing oft do rise. The blud by streams out of the vayns, full strayngely skyppes aloft. The hart all schorcht & hydden lyes, and strykes are seene full oft, Of Colour very wan and pale. The cheyfest parts do want. The lyuer blackysh gaull out spurts, and somwhat rysyng pants. And that that myscheyfs great, to kyngdoms doth forshow: A litell lothsom pece of Skyn, the hart doth ouergrowe. And ouerwhelms it quight. Wher∣through, a man may easly see, How both the hart the lights, & lūgs, And all dysturbed bee,
No parte his proper place obserues, or keeps his ordre due: But altogether quight disguisd, with an vnwonted hue. Misshapen out of frame, transormd, displaced quight. Alas. I feare, I feare, some yll succes in this vnhappy cas. Oedipus Declare from whence and why, these fearefull Signes do ryse, With courage stout I wyll it heare, it shall not once aggryse My valiaunt mynd. Extremest yls haue power to banysh feare: Tyresias You wyll wysh yt vnhard whiche you so muche desyre to heare. Oedipus Tell me I say, synce that the Gods wyl haue it to be knowen. Tell me, what is his name that hath kyng Laius ouerthrowen? Tire. No sacrifyce wyll serue (O kyng) newe meanes must we inuent: From dredful darke infernall damps: some Furye must be sent These mischiefes great for to vnfold. Or els kyng Ditis he, That Empier keeps on Ghosts, entreated needs must be
These things forthwt for to disclose. Tell who shall haue the charge, A kyng thou art, than mayst not thou go throughe those kyngdoms large Oedipus Than noble Creon thou shalt goe, this payne is fytst for the: Who must this auncient kyngdom great enioy after me. ¶The thyrde Acte. The first Sceane. Oedipus. Creon. Oedipus THough that thy face wt sadnes clad, in heauy mournyng guyse: Nought els portend: but dedli griefs and mischiefs styll to ryse. Yet tell som meanes wherby at lēgth the Gods we may appease, And purchase to our kyngdoms wast, som hope of health and ease.
Creon Alas yow byd me that dysclose, which eare doth byd me hyde. Oedipus Yf that the hebane Cites great, by doulfull Plags destroyd. Do the not moue. Yet oughtest thou, these kyngdoms for to ru, Which were vnto thy brothers house, of auncient title due. Creon You wish yt thing to know: which you, will wish vnknown at length. Oed. To banish ils: in Ignorance, ther rests no power nor strength. Wilt thou in al thes mischeyfs seeke, the truth for to suppres? Creon Where Cure of Care is to be lothd, I seake not to redres. Oedipus Speake out wt speade, or els I sweare, thou shalt by practyse proue, How great a thyng of weight it is, a Princes mynd to moue. Creon Kyngs often vse to wish vntold. Which they bad tell before. Oedypus. Go to dispatch. Ceas of I say, to vere me any moore, Except that thou furthwith thou wretch, this matter do discloes, The Gods I do protest for all, to death thou only goes.
Creon Pardon me O noble kyng. gyue leue to hould my peas, Of all the pardons Princes graunt. what pardon may be leas? Oedipus As though ye Silence hurts not more, oftymes than words ill spent. Dispatch at once: Styr me no more. thou knowst my wonted Guyse, Whan Silence is denyed: what than remayns that lawfull is? A traytour he is, that sylence kepes whan he is byd to speak. Creon. Constraynd I am. Receiue my words with gentell mynd I pray. Oedipus Was euer man rebukt for that. that he was byd to say? Creon Well than since neds I must: I am, contented to obay. A wood ther is from Citie far, encompast thick with trees, Where Ryuers rore: & wynds do whyrle that styr the Stormy sees, Wher grows an aūcient Cipres tree with crookyd bendyd lyms, With Stretching down his braūches old, vnto the water bryms.
His euerduryng bushes greene, whiche tyme dyd neuer breede, With auours sweet and comly mos, doth largely ouerspreed. Amydst them all, a tree there is, with longe outstretched Armes: Whose roring sownd, & craking nois the lesser woods Icharmes, And ouershades them all. A tree of monstrous houge estate, Beset with fearfull woods: here is that dyre, and dredfull gate, That leads to lothsom Lymbo Lake be¦neath, And pyts that euer flowe. Wher choked myry mud doth stream with slymy course full slowe. Here when the Priest was entred in, with comly aged pace, He stayed not: No nede there was, for nyght was styll in place. Than all ye ground wyde open gape and smoutheryng vapours rse, And fyre and smoke, & styflyng stynk, mownts vp into the Skies. The Priest with waylyng weede, I clad his faall rod out tooke: And entryng in, in blacke Aray, full often tymes it shooke.
With heauy chere and dolfull pace. His hoary heare was twynde With Bowes of mortall Ewe. A tree wherwith the mourners wynde, Theyr mourning heads. & Garlands make. In this guyse all arayde, The sacred Priest doth entre in, with quakyng lyms afrayd. Than in the sheepe and Oxen black, by backwarde course are drawn. And odoures swete, & Frankencence, on flaming fyres are thrown. The Beasts on burnyng Altars cast, do quake with schorched liis: And bluddy streames with fyre mixt, aboute the Aultars swims. Than on the darke infernall Gods, and hym that rules them all: With deadly shrykyng voyce aloude, the Prophet gyns to call. And rouls the Magick verse in muth and hydden Artes doth proue: Which eyther power haue to appease or els the Gods to moue. Than bludy streaming lycours black with broylyng heate do boyle: And al the Beasts consumes & burns. The Prophet than to toyle
Begins. And mingled wine and milk vpon the Aultars throwes. And all the Dongeon darke, and wide with streaming blood it flowes. Than out with thūdring voyce agayn the Prophet calles and cries. And straight as muche wt mumbling mouth he champs in secret wyse. The trees do turne. The Riuers stād The ground with roryng shakes. And all the world as seems to me, with fearefull tremblyng quakes. I am heard, I am heard, than out a∣loude, the Priest began to crye: Whan all the dāpned soules by heaps abrode outrushyng flye. Then woods with rumblyng noyse, do oft resounding make. And Heauen, & Earth together goes. And bowes & trees do crake. And Thūders roore. And Lightnings flash. And waues aloft do flye. And ground retyres: And Dogs do bawl And Ghosts are herd to cry. And whyther long of Acheron, that lothsom Flud that flowes. All stynkyng streames: or of y• earth, that out her Bowels throwes,
Dead Corpses to receyue. Or of that fyerce infernall Hownd That at suche tymes doth bustlyng make wt chayns, & ratlyng sownd. The Earth all wide it open gapes. And I did se on grownd, The Gods with colour pale and wan, that those darke kingdoms keepe. And very night I saw in dede. And thousand shapes to creepe, From out those fylthy stynkyng lakes and lothsom pits of Hell. Where all the eyls vnder Son, in darksom shades do dwell. So quaking all for feare I stoode, with mynd ryght sore apalde, Whilst on those Gods wt tremblyng mouth the Priest full often calde. Who all at once, out of theyr dennes did skip with griesly face. And Mōsters grim, & stinging snakes seemd wander in that place. And all the fowlest Feends of Hell, and Furies all were there. And al trāsformed Ghosts & sprights, that euer Hell did beare.
With Cares, and all Diseases vyle, that mortall mynds do crush, All those, and more I sawe out of those Dongeons deepe to rush. And Age I sawe, with ryfled face, and Nede, and Feare, and Death, And Fyre, and flames, & thousand yls out fro those Pyts to breath. Then I was gon: and quight amazd. The wenche in worser cas. And yet of old, acquaynted with her Fathers Artes she was. The Priest hymself vnmoued stood, and boldly cited owt: Whole Armies of kyng Ditis men, who clustryng in a Rowt: Al flittring thin like Clowds, disperst abrode in Ayre do flye. And breathing oft wt dyuers formes, do scud aboue in Skie. A thousand woods I thinke haue not, so many leaues on trees. Ten thousād medowes fresh haue not so many swarmyng Bees. Ten hundred thousand Hils haue not so many flakes of Snow. Nor all the drops & streames, & gulffs that in the Seas do flow.
Yf that they myght be wayd, can once so great a number make, As could those shapes & forms yt flew from out of Limbo lake. Both Tanalus and Zetus to, and pale Amphions Ghost: And Au, and after her, ten thousand Sprights do post. Than Pentieus and more and more, in lyke estate ensue: Tyll out at length coms Laus: with fowle and griesly hue. All perst wt wounds, I loth to speake with blud quight ouergrown: Uncomly drest, in wretched plight, with head styll hangyng down. A Miser ryght as seemd to me, and most of Misers all: Thus in this case, at length he spake, and thus began to call. O Cadmus cruell Cytie vile, that styll delighst in blood, O Cadmus thou, which kinsmens deth, acowntst as chiefest good. Teare out the bluddy Bowels of your Chyldren. Learne of me, Do that, & rathr more: than you wold byde the daye to se.
Like yls as late on me are lyght. Loe Mothers loue, (Alas) Is now, the ryfest fault outryght that ere in Theba was. The Coūtrye with the wrath of gods at this tyme is not tost. Nor Earth nor Ayre infect is not the cause that all ben lost. No. No. A bluddy kyng is cause of all these mischifes greate. A bluddy wretche. A wretched Child that sits in Fathers Seate. And Mothers bed defyles (O wretch) and entreth in agayn, In places whence he came frō once and doubleth so her payne. And that, that very Beasts almost, do all abhorre to do: Euen of his Mothers body he, hath brothers gotten too. (O myschief great,) (O dredful dede) than Sphinx, O Monster more. Example vnto Ages all, of Gods foretolde before. But I thee, thee ye Scepter holdst, thy Father wyll pursue: And wreke my selfe on the and thyne, with fearefull vengeaunce due.
All raging Plagues, all Botches vile I wyll vpon the blowe. And all the fowlest Feends of Hell, vpon the I wyll throwe. I wyll subuert thy Houses cleane, for this thy lothsom lust. I wyll do this, thou wretche. And the and thyne, consume to dust. Wherfore dispatche at once (I saye) into exyle dryue your Kyng. That groūd that fyrst of all he leaues with fresh greene grasse shal spryng And swee and pleasaunt Ayre, and healthfull blasts shall blow. And all the euyls vnder the Son, that beastly slaue shall folow. The Poks, ye Piles, ye Botch, ye blane and Death with hym shall flye. And with hym mischiefs all shall pas, and Monsters vnder Skye. And as for hym I know he wold depart with wyllyng mynd: But I wyll clog his feete and hands, his way he shall not fynd. But groping with his aged staffe, shall passe from place to place. This shall he do. And none shall rue vpon his wretched case.
Ryd you hym from the yearth in tim for Heauen let me alone: No sooner sayd, bu strayght away, his dreadfull Ghost was gone. And fast by thousands after hym, thother Sprights in hyde: Than Cold & tremblyng feare began through all my bones to glyde. Oedipus That, that I alwayes feard, alas vpon me now is layde: But slender props thei are (God wot) wherby your Treason is stayde. Merpa my Mother deare, shall me from this defende. And Polibus shall purge me quight, from Actions all that tend To muder, or to incest vile, they both shall me excuse. In suche a case no meanes at all of tryall I refuse. Laye what you can vnto my charge. No fault in me remayns. The Thebanes long or I cam here, of Laus death complayns. My mother yet alyue, my Fa∣ther styll in lyke estate. No, no, this is som doysh dryf, of you false Prophets pate.
Or els som mighty God aboue, doth beare vs no good wyll, And sekes by Plages on vs to wreke, his wrathfull vengeaunce styll. A syr I am glad, at length I smell your dryfts and fetches fyne: I know the whole confedrats well your sleyghts I can vntwyne. That beastly Priest. That blearcyed wretch be lyes the Gods and me: And thee thou Traytour in my place hath promyst kyng to be. Cron Alas wold I my syster of, her lawfull kyngdom spoyle? Thinke you suche Treason may haue place in brothers brest to boyle? Yf that myne Oth could me not kepe content with my degree: But that contemnyng meane estate, I wold clime aloft to be. Yet should yll Fortune me deterre, from suche attempts I trowe: Whose guyse it is on Princes heads, houge heapes of Cares to throwe. I wold aduyse you syr betymes this charge from you to threst: Least lyngryng long wt it at length, vnwares ye be opprest.
Assure your selfe, in baser state, more safer you may lyue: And shun a thousand Cares & Griefs: whiche Princes Harts do rye. Od. And dost thou me exhorte thou slaue my kyngdoms for to leaue? Darst tho attempt thou vyllayn vile this thyng to me to breake? And fearst thou not in suche a case so boldly for to speake. Creon Thynk you I wold them so perswade whiche freely myght posses Theyr Realmes? Or those yt nede not fear least cares should thē oppres. But as for you, of force you must, your Fortunes chaunge abyde: Oedipus The surest way for them that gape, for kyngdoms large and wyde: Is fyrst thyngs meane, and rest and base estate to prayse: And yet with tooth & Nayle to toyle, to mownt aloft alwayes. So oftentymes most restles Beasts, do chyefly rest cōmende. Creon. Shall not my Seruyce long suffice, my trueth for to defende?
Oedipus Tyme is the onely meanes for such, as thou to worke, theyr wil. Creon It is so syr. But as for me, of goods, I haue my fyll. A great resort. A pleasaunt lyfe: from Pryncely Cares, exempt. Al these might m diswade (O king) from suche a fowle attempt. Not one daye there is almost, the whole yeare throughout: Wherin some Royall Gyfts are not, vnto my Howses brought. Both precious Pearles, and princely Roobs and things of grater cost: Whiche I let psse, lest I shuld seeme but vaynely for to bost. In suche a blessed hapy state, what thing nede I require? Oed. The more yu hast, I know right well, the more thou dost desyre: Good fortune can no mean obserue, but styll she preaeth hyer. Creon Shall I than gyltles dye Alas, my cause and all vntryd? Oed. Were vnto you at any tyme my lyfe, my dedes discryde?
Did eny man defende me yt? or els my causes plade? And yet I am condemd. To this you do me leade. And me expres example giue whiche I entend to folow: Creon What yf that Innocent I be: Oedip The guyse of kyngs you know Is doubtfull things for true to feare yf thence may mischief grow. Creon The often fearful tremblyng mynd, true cause of feare doth show. Oedip He that in mydst of perylles deepe, and daungers hath ben cast, Doth seeke all meanes to shun lyke yls as he hath ouerpast. Creon So hatreds ryse. O. He that to much doth vse yll wyll to feare, Unskylfull is: and knowes not how, he ought hym selfe to beare In kyngs estate. For feare alone doth Kyngdoms chiefly keepe. Than he that thus doth arme hymself from feare all free may sleepe. Creon Who so the Tyrant playes and gylt∣les men with force doth smight: He dredeth them that hym do dred thus feare doth chiefly light.
On Causers chief A iust reuenge, for murdrynge mynds outryght. Oedipus Awaye with this Traytour. Awaye. In Dongeon deepe hym cast: There let his vyle deceytfull mynd due paynes and vengeaunce tast For his deserued yls. Let there dyre bondage him constrayne: Bondage the chiefest scourge of mind that Traytours can sustayne. Chorus. SEE, see, the myserable estate, of Prynces carefull lyfe. What raging storms? what bludy broils what toil? what endles strife Do thei endure? (O God) what plags? what grief do they sustayne? A Princely lyfe: No. No. (No doubt) An euer durynge payne. A state ene fyt for men on whom Fortune wolde wreeke her wyll. A place for Cares to couche them in. A doore wyde open styll For gryefs and daungers all that ben to entre when they lyst. A kyng these Mates must euer haue, it boots not to resyst.
Whole fluds of priuy pinching feare. great aguysh of the mynd: Apparaunt Plages, & deyly gryfs. These playsayres Princes fynd. And other none, wt whom they spende and passe theyr wretched dayes. Thus he that Princes lies, and base estate togither wayes: (Shall fynde the one,) A Dongeon deepe. A very Hell. A perfect infelycitie. (The other,) A Heauen ryght: A blessed lyfe, exempted quight from myserye. Let Odipus Example be of this vnto you all, A Mirrour meete. A Patern playne, of Princes carefull thrall. Who late in perfect Ioy as seemd, and euerlastyng blys, Tryumphantly his lyfe out ledde, a Miser now outright he is, And most of wretched Misers all, euen at this present tyme, With doutfull waues of feare I to, Subiect to suche a Cryme.
Wherat my tong mased stays, God graunt that at the last, It fall not out as  told. Not yet the worst is past, (I feare.) ¶The fourth Acte. The seconde Sceane. Oedipus. Iocasta. Oedipus MY mynd wt doubtfull waues of feare, is tossed to and fro I wot not what to say. Alas I am tormented so. For all the Gods on me do crye, for paynes and vengeaunce dew, They saye yt these my gyltles handes, kyng Laius ouerthrew. But this my valiaunt Courage stout, and minde from mischief free, To Gods vntried, to me well known denies it so to bee. Full well I do remember once, by chaunce I dyd dispatche, A man: who sought by force with me, presumptuously to matche.
And sought by force me to displace, as moche as in hym laye. This I remembre well enough, the stryfe was for the waye. And he a man of aged yeares, and I a lusty blood. And yet of me are disdayn and pryde, in vayne he me withstood. But this from Thebes farre was don. A crooked thre pathd way: That was ye place for which we stroue this I remember well, Deare wyfe resolue my dout at once and me expressely tell How olde was Laus when he died, of fresh and lusty yeares? (Or was he stryken well in age?) Iocasta Betwyxt an olde man and a yong: but nearer to an olde. Oedipus Were there great Bandes of men wt hym his Person to vphold? Iocasta Some by the way deceyued were. And some deterd by payne. A fewe by toyle and labour long, did with theyr Prynce remayne. Oeipus Were ny slayne in his defence? Iocasta But one of whom I here: Who valiant in his Prynces cause, full stowtly dyd expier.
Oed. It is enough I know hym now, that hath this mischiefe done. The nombre and the place agrees. The tyme vntryed alone Remayns. Than tell what tyme he died and when that he was slayn. Iocasta Tis ten yeare synce: You now renue the cause of all my payne. ¶The fourth Acte. The secone Sceane. Senex. Oedipus. Sen. THe Corinth people all (O kyng) do call for you to raygne, Polibus In your own kingdoms. eternall rest obtayne. Oe. O God what Fortune vyle doth me doth oppres on euery syde? How do my sorowes styll encreas? Tell how my father dide. Sene No one disease but onely Age, did of his lyfe hym reaue. Oedipus. And is he deade in dede? Not slayn? What ioye may I conceyue?
How may I now triumph? The Gods to wynes I do call, To whō are known my hidden thou∣ghts & secret workyngs all. Now may I lyft to Skies my hands, my hands from mischief free. But yet the chiefest cause of feare, remayneth styll to me. Sen. Your Fathers Kyngdoms ought all dred out of your mynde to weare. Oedipus Tha I confes. But wretched beast, my Mother I do feare. Sen. Do you your Mother feare? on your returne that onely stayes. Oedipus I feare not her: but from her syght my godly Zeale me frayes. Sen. What will you her a Wydow leaue? Oedipus Now, now, thou woundst my hart. This, this, and onely this alas, is cause of all my smart. Senex. Tell me (O kyng) what ouful fear! doth pree thy Pryncely brest: Kyngs Cowncels I can well concele that ben with Cares opprest. Oedipus. Least as Apollo hath foretolde, I shulde a Mariage make With myne owne Mother: nly this fowle feare doth mak me quake.
Sen. Suche vayn & peysh feares, at lēgth from out your brest eyle. Meopa your Mother is not in dede, you do your selfe beguyle. Oed. What vauntage shuld it be to her adopted Sonnes to haue? Sen. A kyngdom she shall gayne therby. Her Husbande layde in graue. The chiefest prop to stay her Realms from present Confusion, Is Children for to haue: and hope of lawfull succession. Oed. Tell me ye meanes wherby thou dost, these Secrets vnderstand? Sen. It was I that you an Infant gaue into your fathers hand. Oed. Didst thou me to my Father gyue? Who than gaue me to thee? Se. A Shepharde sir, that wonted on Cthero Hyls to bee. Oedip. What made thee in those woods to raunge what hadst yu there to do? Sen. Upon those Hils my Beasts I kept, somtyme a Shepharde to. Oedip. What notes, what priuy markes hast hou wherby thou dost me know? Oe. The hols yt thrugh your feet ar bored frō whence your name did grow.
Oedip. Declare what was his name yt gaue my body vnto thee? Senex The Kings chief Shephard thā yt was delyuered you to mee. Oed. What was his name? Se. Old mens remembraunce soone doth fayle: Oblyuion for the chiefest part, doth hory heads assayle And drowns theyr former memory of thyngs long out of mynd. Oed What? canst yu know the man by sight? Sen. Perhaps I should hym fynd, and know by face. Thīgs ouerwhelmd by tyme, and quight opprest. A small marke oft to mynde reuokes, and fresh renues in brest. Oedipus. Sirs byd ye Herdmen furthwith driue theyr Beastes to Aultars all. Away with speed, make hast the Mas∣ter Shepherds to me call. Sen. Whyther thy Destenies this do hyde or Fortune it detain, And closely kepe: Let it be s, from openyng that refrayne. That long conceald hath hydden lien that seake not to disclose: Suche thyngs outsercht & foūd of∣tymes agaynst the sercher goes.
Oed. Can any myschyefe greater be? than this that now I feare. Sen. Aduyse you well remembre fyrst what weight this thyng doth beare: That thus you go about to serche, and sift with tooth and nayle, Obserue the golden meane: Beware beare styll an equall sayle. Your Coūtreies wealth, O king your lyfe, and all vpon this lyes. Though you styr not, be sure at lēgth your Fortune you escryes. A happy state for to disturbe doth nought at all behoue. Oed. When things be at the worst of them a man may safely moue. Sen. Can you haue ought more excellent? than is a Prynces state? Beware least of your Parents found i you repent to late. Oedip. No, no, I warrant that? Repent? not I, I trowe: I seeke it not to that entent. I haue decreed to know, The matter at the full. Wherfore I wyll it now pursue. Lo Phorhas wher he tremblyng coms, with comly aged hue.
To whom of all the kyngs flock than, the are and charge was due. Dost y• his name, his spache, his face, or yt his person know? Seex Me thynks I shuld haue seen his face and yet I can not show (The places where:) This looke is nether thrughly known nor yet vnknown to me I can not tell. I doubt it muche. And yet it may be he. In Lu tyme long synce when he, these Kyngdom great dyd keepe: Wast yu not on Citheron Hils? chyefe Shepharde to his sheepe. ¶The fourth Acte. The thyrde Scaene. Phorba. Seex. Odipus Phorb SOmtim a charge of shep I had vnworthy though I weare And on those Hils long since chief rule on ther Shephards bare.
S. Knowst yu not me. h. I can not tell. Oe Didst yu once giue this man A Child Speake out, why dost thou staye? yf so, declare it than. Why dost yu blush & doubtyng stand Trueth seeketh no delay? Pho. Thyngs out of mynd you byd reuoke almost quight worne away. Oedipus Confes thou slaue, or els I weare, thou shalt constrayned be. Phor. In dede I do remembre once, an Infant yong by me, Delyuered was vnto this Man: But well I wot in vayn, I know he could not long endure, nor yet alyue remayne. Long since he is dead, & rakte in dust, he lyues not at this daye. Senex No? God forbyd, he lyues no dowt, and long may lyue I pray. Oedip. Why dost thou say the Child yu gauest is dead and rakte in dust? Phor. Because that through his tender feet. an Iron sharpe was thrust: Wherof a gruous swellyng rose, I saw the blood to gush Frō out of both the woundes: & down by powryng streams to rush.
e. Now staye (O kyng) no farther now, you know almost the trothe. Oedipus Whose child was it? tell me forthwt. Phor. I dare not for myne Othe. Oedip. Thyne Othe y• slaue. Some fyre here. Ile charme thyne Othe & the, With fyre and flames: except forthwt thou tell this thyng to me. Phor. O pardon me, thoughe rude I seeme, I seeke not to withstande Your Graces mynd: and wyll not I. My lyfe is in your hande. Oedipus Tel me the troth, what child, & whose what was his Mothers name? Phor. Borne of your wyfe and brough. Oedipus O Earth burst out and gape for me, deuoure my body quight, Or els thou God, that Ruler art of Houses voyde of lyght. To Hell my Soule wt Thunder bolts to Hell my soule down dryue. Where furyous Ghosts in darkenes deepe and endles payne do lyue. For the alone, these Plages do rage For the these mischiefs ryse. For thee, the Earth lyes desolate. For the thou wretche the Skies
Infected are. For the, for the, and for thy fylthy lust, A hundred thousand gyltles men, consumed are to dust. O people throw: cast heaps of stones vpon this hatefull Hed: Bathe all your Blades wtin my Guts Shewe pytie none. Procede. Agaynst me vyle transformd Beast with paynes and vengeaunce due. Let Father, Son, and wyfe, and all, with Weapons me pursue. Let those that for my sake alone, with Plages tormented be Throw Darts. Cast Speares: Flyng stones & flamyng Bronds on me. O Slaue. O fylthy vacabound. O hatefull head of thyne. Confownder O of Nature thou, to godly Lawes deuyne. Euen from thy byrth an open foe. Go to, dispatche, and dye. Thou hast deserued Death. Go, go, vnto the Court the hye. Therwith thy mother slaue triumphe Reioyce as thou mayst do: Whiche hast thy House encreased wt vnhappy Chyldren so.
Make haste wt spede, away, som thyng thy mischyefs worthy fynde. And on thy self wreke all the spyght of thy reuengyng mynd. Chorus. FOrtune ye Dame of presēt lyefe doth all thyngs chaūge at wil & styrryng styl, procureth grief suche mysers minds to fyll. Which careful ar theyr states to kepe when boystrous stormes do ryse, And blustring winds & daūgers depe setts Death before theyr yes. Who saith he doth her fawning feele! and chaungeth not his mynde, Whē fickle flight of Fortunes wheele doth turne by course of kynde. Thes greuus Plags frō priuat hous to Princely Thrones do flow. And oft theyr minds wt ares thei fous and thick vpon them strow. Whole heapes of grief & dyre debate. A wofull thyng to see: A Princely lyfe to mysers state, conuerted for to bee.
O Oedipus thy fatall fall, thy dredfull mischiefs ryght. Thy dolfull state, thy mysery, thy thrise vnhappy plyght: These thyngs shal blase through all ye world: what hart may thē reioyce At thy dystresse? I can no more: my teares do stop my voyce. But what is he that yonder stamps? and ragyng puffs and blowes, And often shakes his vexed head, some mischief great he knowes. (What newes good syr with you?) ¶The fyft Acte. The fyrst Sceane. Nuntius. WHen Oedipus accursed wretche, his fatall fals had spied, (And mischiefs great.) To Hell he damnd his wretched soule and on the Gods he cried For vengeaunce due. And posting fast with frantik moode & griesly hue, Unto his dolfull Court he went, his thoughts for to pursue.
Muche lyke a Lion rampyng wyld, his furious head that shakes. And roors wt thundring mouth alowd And often gnashing makes, None otherwise this miser fared. A lothsom syght to see. Besydes hymself for very rage, he styll desyres to die. And rouling round his wretched eies with visage pale and wan: Ten thousand Curses out he powres. Hymself the vnhappiest man Of all that lyue, he doth accownt: As iustly he may doe. A wretche. A slaue. A Caytyfe vyle. The cause of all his woe. And in this case enflamd with spite he cries, he stamps, he raues. And boylyng in his secret thoughts he styll desyres to haue. All torments vnder Son that may his Cares conceyued encreas. O wretched wyght, what shuld he do? What man may hym releas? Thus foming all for rage at mouth, with syghs, and sobs, and grones, His damned hed ten thousand tymes. as oft his weryed bones
He beats. And often puffing makes, and roors, and swels, and sweats. And on the Gods for death he calles, for Death he styll entreats. Three tymes he dyd begyn to speake: and thryse his tong dyd stay. At length he cried out alowd: O wretche Away, away. Away thou monstrous Beast he sayd: Wilt thou prolong thy lyf? Nay rather som man stryke this brest with stroke of bludy knyfe. Or all you Gods aboue on me your flamyng fyers outcast: And dints of Thunderbolts down hrow This is my Prayer last. What gredy vile deuouring Gpe, vpon my guts wyll gnaw? What Tigre fierce my hatefull lim wyll quight asundre draw? Loe, here I am you Gods: Loe, here, wreke now on me your wyll Now, now you fyry feends of Hell, of vengeaunce take your fyll. Send out som wild outrageous beast send Dogs me to deuoure. Or els all yls you can deuyse, at once vpon me powre.
O wofull soule. O synfull wretche. Why dost thou feare to dye? Death only rids frō woes yu knowst. Than stoutly Death defye. With that his bluddy fatall Blade, from out his sheath he drawes, And lowd he cryes. What now? thou beast? Why dost thou pawes? Thy father yu hast slayn. Thou, thou. Thou Cayteyf vyle. Thou wretch, yu Slaue, yu Beast, yu dost thy Mothers Bed defyle. And Brothers yu hast got. Nay Sons Sons: Thou liest: thy brothers all Thei ar. Thus for thy monstrou lust thy Countrey downe doth fall. And thynkst thou than for al these yls enough so short a payne? Thynkst yu the Gods wyll be apeasde, yf thou forthwith be slayne? So many mischiefs don: And ist enough one stroke to byde? Accownst hou it sufficient payne, that once thy Blade shulde glyde Quight thrugh thy gilty guts for all? Why then dispatche and dye. So maist thou recōpence thy Fa∣thers death sufficiently.
Let it be so. What mends vnto thy Mother wylt thou mak? Unto thy children what? These plags how wylt thou slak? That al for the thy Coutrey wasts? One push shall ende them all. A propre fetche. A fyne deuyse. For thee a worthy fall Inuent thou Monstrous Beast. A fall ene worthy for The selfe inuent: whom al mn hate and loth, and do abhor. And as Dame Natures lawful cours is brooke thou wretche by thee, So let to suche a mischiefe great, thy Death agryng bee. O that I might a thousand tymes, my wretched lyfe renewe. O that I myght reuyue and dye by Course in ordre dewe. Ten hundred thousand tymes & more Than shuld I vengeaunce take Upon this wretched pate. Than I perhaps in part shuld make A meete amends outright, for this my fowle and lothsom Syn. Than shuld ye proofe of payn reproue the lyfe that I lyue in.
The choyse is in thy hand yu wretche, than vse thyne owne discretion. And fynde a means, wherby yu mayst com to extreme confusion. And that, yt oft thou mayst not doo let it prolonged bee. Thus, thus, maist yu procure at length an endles Death to thee. Serche out a death wherby yu mayst perpetuall shame obtayne: And yet not dye. But styll to lyue in euerlastyng payne. Why stayst thou man? Go to I say: What meane these blubbring tears Why weepst thou thus? Alas to late. Leaue of thy foolysh feares. And ist enough to weepe thinkst thou? shall teares and waylyng serue? No wretche it shall not be. Thou dost ten thousand deaths deserue. Myne eyes do dally with me I see, and teares do styll out powre. Shall gushyng teares suffice? Not so, I shall them better scowre. Out wt thyne eyes, he sayd: And than with Fury fierce inflamd: Lyke to a bludy ragyng Feend, and Monstrous Beast vntamd.
With fyery flamyng spotted cheekes his brest he often beats. And scratch, and teare his face he doth and Skyn asundre freats. That scarse his eies in hed could stand so sore he them besets. With furyous fierce outrageous mynd he stamps & cries alowd: And roors & rayls, wt rampyng rage. Thus in this case he stood, Perplext, and vexed sore in mynd, with deadly sighs and teares. When sodenly all franticklyke hymself from ground he rears. And rooteth out his wretched eyes. And syght asundre tears. Than gnasheth he his bludy teeth, and bites, and gnawes, & champs, His eis all bathd and brued in blood, for fury fierce he stamps. And ragyng more than nedes alas, his eyes quight rooted out: The very holes in vayn he scrapes so sore the wretche doth dut: Least syght shuld chaunce for to re∣mayn he rents & mangls quight His face, his eyes, his nose, his mouth And all wheron his hands do lyght
He rygs & ryues. Thus fowly rayd alas in pyteous plyght: At length his head aloft he lyfts, and therwith gyues a shright. And whan he sees that all is gone, both lyght, and syght, and all. Than schriching owt: he thus begyns vpon the Gods to call. Now spare you Gods, spare now, my Countrey prest to fall. I haue done that you dyd cōmaund: Your wraths reuenged bee. This wretched looke, this mangled face, is fittest now for thee. Thus speakyng down ye blakish blud by streames doth gushyng flow Into his mouth. And clottred lumps of flesh the place doth strow (Wherin he stands.) Beware betymes, by hym beware, I speake vnto you all. Learn Iustice, trueth, & fear of Gods By this vnhappy fall.
Chorus. OUr lyf wt tōblyng fatal cours of Fortunes whele is rold. To it giue place, for it doth run al swiftly vncontrold And Cares & teares ar spent in vayn for it can not be stayed: But nedes must run the rated race, of Destenies all decreed. What mākynd hydes or does on erth it cōmmeth from aboue. Then wayling grones powrd out in griefs do nought at all behoue. Our lyf must haue her pointed cours Alas what shall I saye. As fates, decrees, so things do run. no man can make them stay. For at our byrth to gods is known our latter dying day. No Prayer, no Arte, not God himself may fatall fates resist. But fastned all in fixed cours, vnchaunged they persist. Suche ende them styll ensues as they appoincted were to haue, Than flye all fear of Fortunes chaūge seeke not to lyue a slaue
Enthrald in bondage vyle to feare. For feare doth often bryng Destnies that dreded ben and mis∣cheyfs feard vpon vs slyng. Yea many a man hath com vnto his fatall ende by feare. Wherfore set peuysh feare asyde, and worthy courage beare. And thou that Subiect art to Death. Regarde thy latter daye. Thinke no man blest before his ende Aduyse the well and staye. Be sure his lyfe, and death, and all, be quight exempt from mysery: Ere thou do once presume to saye: this man is blest and happy. But owt alas, see where he coms: A wretche withouten Guyde, Bereft of syght. Half spoyld of lyfe: Without all pomp and Pryde (That vnto kyngs Estate belongs.)
¶The fyfth Acte. The second Sceane. Oedipus. Chorus. Iocasta. Oedipus VUell, well: Its don. More yet? No no no more remayns My Fathers rites performed ar. What God? on Misers payns That rues. Within this Clowd hath rold & wrapt my wretched pate. Ah syr: this is a lyfe alone. This is a happye state. This is a case ene fyt for thee, for thee thou wretche, for thee. From whose accursed syght the Son, the Stars and all do flee. Yet mischiefs more who gyues to do? The dredfull daye I haue Escapte. Thou fylthy Paracide: Thou vyle mischeiuous Sla. Unto thy ryght hād nought thou owst all thyngs performed bee. Unhappy man that euer I lyued this wretched daye to see.
Where am I nowe alas: The lyght and all doth vs Abhorre. This looke is first for the, thu myserable Oedipus. Chorus. Se se, where Iocasta coms, with fyerce and furyous moode, Quight past her selfe. For very rage she frets and waxeth woode. Lyke to syr Cadmus Mother mad, who late her Son dyd kyll: Fayne wold she speake her mynd: For feare alas she dares not: Styll She stayes. And yet all shamefastnes these yls haue quight exild (From out her wretched brest.) Iocasta Fayne wold I speake, I am afrayd for what shuld I the call My Son? dowt not. Thou art my Son My Son thou art for all These mischiefs great. Alas, alas, my Son is ashamd of mee. O cruell Son. Where dost thou turn thy face? Why dost thou flee From me? From me thy Mother deare Why dost thou shun my syght? And leaue me thus in myserye with Cares consumed quight.
Oedipus. Who troubles me? Let me alone. I thought not to be fownd: Who now restores myne eyes to me my Mother, or my Mothers sownd? Our labour all is spent in vayne, now may we meete no more. The Seas deuide those meetings vile that we haue had before. The gaping yearh deuyde vs both, thone from thother quight. Styll let our feete repugnant bee. So shall I shun the lyght (That most of all me greues.) Iocasta The Destenies ar in faut. Blame thē. Alas, alas, not wee. Oedipus Spare now. Leaue of to speak in vain Spare now O Mother me, By these Relyques of my dismem∣bred body I thee praye. By myne vnhappy Chyldren pled∣ges left. What shall I saye? By all the Gods I thee beseche, By all that in my name, (Is eyther good or bad) Let me alone. To trouble me, Alas you are to blame.
Iocasta O woofull Soul O wretched hart Why dost thou faint alas? Why doest thou seek and toile in vain these ills to ouerpas. What meane these sighs and boiling teares? Why dost yu pains refuse? Thou mate of all his mischiefs thou, by whose means only rues The law of nature all: by whom Ah, Ah, counfonnded lies, Both god and man and beest and all that either liues or dies. Die yu. dispatch at once. thrust through thy vile incestruous brest. Not thou if god him self, if he his flaming fiers should throw On thee, or mischeifs all by heaps vpon thy body strow Couldst once repay dew payns for thy deserued yls. (Thou filthy wretche: Thou wicked Mother thou.) Death death now best cōtenteth me than seeke a way to dye. So mayst thou yet at length find ende for this thy myserye.
O Son lend me thy hand, yf that thou art a Paracide? This labour last of all remayns: this labour thee doth byde. Dispatche rid me thy Mother deare from all my wretched woe. It wyll not be. No praiers moue. Thy selfe this deed must doe. Take vp this sword. Go to. With this thy husband once was slayn. Thy Husband? Thou termst him fals. Thy father he was. O dedly payn. Shall I quight through my brest or through my throte it thrust? Canst yu not choose thy wound? Away dye dye, alas thou must. This brest. This wombe. Than woūd this, this, with thyne own hand. Strike, perce, and spare it not: whiche both a Husband: and (The same a Son dyd beare. Chorus. Alas alas, she is slayne, she is slayne, dispatched with a push: Who euer sawe the lyke to this: Se how the blud doth gush From out her wounded brest. (O heuy dolfull Case.)
Oedipus Thou God. Thou teller out of fates. On thee, on thee, I call, My Father onely I dyd owe, vnto the Destenies all. Now twyse a Paracide and more than I dyd feare mischeuous My Mother I haue slayne. Alas I am the cause. Its thus. O Oedipus accursed wretche, lament thyne owne Calamitie, Lament thy state, thy gryefe lament, thou Caytyfe borne to myserye. Where wylt thou become alas? Thy face where wylt thou hyde: O myserable Slaue, canst thou suche shamefull torments byde? Canst yu which hast thy Parents slain Canst thou prolong thy lyfe? Wilt thou not dye? deseruyng Death Thou cause of all the gryefe And Plages, & dredfull mischiefs all that Thbane Cytie preas. Why dost thou seeke by longer lyfe. thy sorowes to encreas? Why dost thou toyle and labour thus in vayne? It wyll not bee. Both God ad man: and beast, and all abhorre thy face to see.
O Erth why gapst thou not for me? Why do you not vnfold Your selfs you gates of Hel me to re∣eyue? Why do you hence wthold The fyerce infernall Feends frō me, from me so wretched wyght? Why breake not all the Furyes lose? this hatefull hed to smyght With Plages: whiche them deserued hath Alas I am left alone Both lyght, and syght, and comfort all from me (O wretche) is gone. O cursed hed: O wicked wyght, whom al men deadly hate. O Beast what meanst yu styll to lyue in this vnhappy state. The Skies do blush and are ashamd, at these thy mischiefs great: The earth laments, the heauēs weepe the Seas for rage do freat. And blustring ryse, & stormes do styr, and all thou wretche for the: By whose incestuous lothsom lust all thyngs dysturbed be. Quight out of course displaced quight O cursed fatall daye. O mischiefs great. O dredfull tymes O wretche, away awaye.
Exyle thy selfe from all mens syght thy lyfe halfe spent in myserye. Go ende: consume it now outright: in thrie as great Calamitie. O lyeng Phebe I haue done more than my Destnie was to do. With trēblyng fearfull pae go forth thou wretche Monster go. Grope out thy waies on knees in darke thou myserable slaue. So maist thou yet in tract of tyme, due paynes and vengeaunce haue For thy mischeuous lyfe: Thus thus, the Gods themselues decree: Thus thus thi fates: thus thus ye skies appoynt it for to bee. Than headlong hence: with a mischief hence O Caytife vile away: Away, away, thou monstrous Beast Go. Ron. Stand. Stay. Lest on thy Mother thou do fall.) All you that weryed bodyes haue, with syckenes ouerprest: Loe nowe I flye: I flye awaye. The cause of your vnrest, (I flye.)
Lyft vp your heads: A better state of Ayer shall straight ensewe, Whan I am gone for whom alone these dredfull mischiefs grewe. And you that now, halfe dead yet liue in wretched mysers case, Help those whō present tormēts pres forth, hye you on apace. For loe, with me I carry hence all mischiefs vnder Skies. All cruell fates, Diseases all that for my sake dyd ryse, With me they go: with me, both grief Plage, Pocks, Botch, and all The yls that eyther now you pres or euer after shall. With me they go. With me, wt me. These Mates ben meetst of all (For me.) FINIS. ¶Perused and allovved accordyng to the Quenes Maiesties Iniunctions.
¶Faults escaped in the Pryntinge. In C. the .5. Page the .5. line reade in the margent Creon. the same page the 6. line reade in the margent Oedipus. E. the .8. Pag the last vers for this rede his E. the last Page the .7. vers for where wilt thou become alas rede where wilt thou now become alas. ¶ Imprynted at London in Sainct Brydes Churchyarde: oueragaynste the North Doore of the CHURCHE, by Thomas Colwell.☞
