23805 99853495 18879
TAYLORS TRAVELS AND CIRCVLAR PERAMBVLATION, through, and by more then thirty times twelve Signes of the Zodiack, of the Famous Cities of Lon∣don and Westminster. With the Honour and Worthinesse of the Vine, the Vintage, the Wine, and the Vintoner; with an Alphabeticall Description, of all the Taverne Signes in the Cities, Suburbs, and Liberties aforesaid, and significant Epigrams upon the said severall Signes. Written by IOHN TAYLOR. LONDON, Printed by A. M. 1636.
THE PREFACE TO the READER. Gentlemen and others (of what Sex, Estate, Condition, Calling, Degree, Quallitie, Art, Mistery, Craft, Trade, Science, Function, or Occu∣pation soever) Greeting and friend∣ly Salutations. First, I most humbly and thanke∣fully remember my thankes to all such as have formerly taken my Labours in such good part, as I have felt their liking in their loving Bounty. Secondly, I doe expresse my Gratitude to as many as have accepted my Bookes at my hands, although some of them have not, and many of them could not Requite mee. And thirdly, I doe request as many as doe receive this small Pamphlet to take into their Consideration, that I doe expect they shall pay mee for it. I am sure there hath beene within these 30. yeares more then 200. Impressi∣ons
of Bookes in my Name; For though I have ot written above 80. yet some of them hath been rinted 10. or 12. times over, 1500. or 200. eve∣y time. Amongst which number of Pamphlets, I m sure, that (first and last) I have given free∣y for nothing (never expecting any thing but hankes) above 30000. Bookes, (besides those hat I have beene Rewarded for:) But so it is ow (my good Friends) that Age, and some Charge rging me to make triall of your Loues, onely for his one small Toy or Trifle; And though it may eeme a Trifle to you, it was a Travell to me in the ollecting and Writing: All which, with my elfe, I leave to be considered upon your receiving f the Second Part, which I am at as busie as a Bee; alwayes Remaining yours Heere and There Or Any Where IOHN TAYLOR.
TAYLORS TRAVELS through more then thirtie times twelve Signes. AS the Sunne, in his Celestiall Pro gresse, doth with perpetuall mo tion passe through the twelv Signes of the Zodiack, and every yeare doth beguirt the large Cir cumference of his Heavenly Spheare; yet it i to be noted, that twelve Signes only, and n more but twelve, are each one in his monethly course, the places of his Perambulation, an circular Travell. And as a Zany or Counterfeit, will (fo sports sake) in a pleasant way, imitate an Activ Nimble Tumbler in his feates of Activity So I, in Imitation of the Sunne, have in on
Moneth progress'd through London, Westmin∣ster, with the Suburbs, and the Burrough of Southwarke; not as the Sunne doth through twelve, but neer thirtie times twelve Signes. I have found Aries and Taurus in Rams and Rams-head, Buls, and Bul-heads; for Gemini I have made shift with the Signe of Adam and Ev in Tothill-street at Westminster, with all other double Signes, as Rose and Crowne, Castle and Miter, the Man in the Moone, the Crosse-Keyes, or any such signes wherein two severall things are depicted, they serve mee in my Course for Gemini. Cancer (or the Crab) was hardest for me to find out; nor did I much search for it; for in my Horizon it appeared not, except in the crabbed frowne of a womans face, or in the Rump or later end of a deare Reckoning. For Leo, I have found more then a Den of Lyons, Or, Argent, and Gules, Alias, Golden, Whie end Red. Virgo, or the Maiden-head Signe, was hard, or scarce to bee found neer a Taverne-Bush; but at last, Bush-lane afforded me one, which is as the Phaenix of Arabia, alone, there being
no more of that signe within the Hemispheare of the Citie. Libra was generally metamophosed in every Taverne, from weights to measures, except at the Bar, where Gold was weighed to a graine; it is said that Astrea, or Iustice, fled from the Earth, and was turned into the equall, or Sep∣tembers Equinoctiall Signe of Libra. The Signe Scorpio (or the Serpent) I conje∣cture to be transformed into greene Dragons; which Signe I have often past through in my peregrination. For Sagitarius, I was forced to make use of the signe of the Archer, neer Finsbury-fields, or Grubstreet end. Capricornus, is said to be a Signe in the Hea∣venly Firmament, containing twenty stars; but if the Goat in West-smithfield had not fur∣nished me, I had beene quite destitute of en∣tertainment at Capricorne. The Signe of the Fountaine was my flowing (and sometimes overflowing) Aquarius. In stead of Pisces, I was glad to make my Iourney to the Dolphin and Mermaids. Thus having declared my painefull passage
through twelve sorts of Signes, I proceed fur∣ther to speake of some other Signes. A Catalogue of such Signes, as the Author hath past by and through. I have past by and through Vrsa Major, at the Bridge-foot in Southwarke, and I have visi∣ted Vrsa Minor, in more places then one; I have found the Dog-dayes in the depth of Winter, both at Westminster, and elsewhere. I have beene in conjunction neer the Dragons tayle. I have plaid the Man in the Moone; I have passed through a Bakers dozen of Suns, besides the seven Stars, for my further peram∣bulation, through and by Angels, Kings and Queenes Heads, Crownes, Ankers, Antelops, Cities, Bels, Castles, Bores, Crosses, Crosse∣keyes, Cats and Cardinals, Hats, Eagles, Fleeces, Faulcons, Chequers, Hoops, Cranes, Christopher and Dunston, Globes, Griphons, Saint Iohn, George and Gartar, Field-gate, Turnstile, and Flowerdelice, Harts, Hornes, Harrowes, and Horshooes, Katherine Wheele, Grashopper, Lambe, Kings, Queenes, and
Princes Armes, Saint Martin, Mouth and Mi∣ter, Pauls-head, Bishops-head, Nags-heads, Pye, Pelican, Plow and Peacock, A Navie of Ships, A Brood of Swans, sweet Roses, kind Salutations, Tractable Tuns, An honest Shep∣heard, A Windmill, good Wrastlers, a faire Vineyard, A plentifull Vintage, and three Ta∣vernes onely with Bushes without a Thiefe. All which, you that have leisure may find, and when you have found, you may read at your pleasure. Furthermore, it is to be noted, that as in the Firmament there are not so many fixed, as wandring stars: And oftentimes the most part (or all of them) are darkned and involved round with Clouds, Vapours, Mists, and Fogs; so that they are obscured from our sight. So in this lower Circle of my passage, I have found Suns, Moones and Stars, in their bright and shining lustre (as it were to day) but upon the sudden some of my Suns have been eclip∣sed, with a Cloud of Debts; bad Customers (or small Custome) hath brought some of my Moones from the full, to an unrecoverable Wane; too much beliefe in bad Paymasters
hath obscured, now and then a star; and many other of my lesser stars have beene too often shipwrack'd, with running on a Rocke of Chaulk, or too much scoring. Amongst all these Changes and Mutabili∣ties, I would have the Reader to note, that all those Signes which are in this following Book nominated, were at the writing hereof in Pre∣terpluperfect being, shining and adorning our Terrestriall Hemisphaere with most hopefull, resplendent, refulgent, and translucent Luster. But if any planetary Influence hath with ma∣levolent aspect, cast a fog of Obscurity, or per∣petuall Extinction upon any of my Signes, let no man blame mee (the Author) for I plead not guilty, either to the Retrogradation, or Declination of any of them; for I have, and do love all the worthy Company of Vintoners; that I desire they may ever be like the latter end of a Scriveners Bond (In full Force and Vertue.) The antiquity of Wine is recorded memora∣bly by sacred & prophane Historians, and vines have been planted, and vineyards allowed here in England by the Permission of the Emperour
Probus, at such time as the Romanes had the Government here. And there was a Record (and I thinke is yet) in Windsor Castle, of an yearly account of the Charges for the planting Vines in the little Parke there; and of the ma∣king of Wines in many places of this Land; and that Grapes grew so plenteously, that some of the Wines served for the Kings houshold, the rest were sold for the King's profit: And that the Tythe of those Vines and Wines were paid to the Abbot of Walthamstow, who was then Parson of Old and New Winsor: And in the raigne of King Iohn, Wine was so plenty, that it was sold for twenty Shillings the Tun, which is but one penny the Gallon: And it was so cheape in the fifteenth yeare of King Henry the Seventh, that (much of it being rought out of France) it was given to the Mar∣iners (for their fraight) that brought it. Wee are commonly entertain'd with Wine t Christenings, Weddings, and Burials, so that Wine ushers us into the world, and kindly ac∣companies us all our life, & after death brings s to our graves. Thousands of people doe live y it, as the Planters of Vines, the Keepers of
Vineyards, Wine-Merchants, Vintoners, Miners, Coopers, Lighter-men, Wharfenge Shipwrights, Carpenters, Goldsmithes, Pe terers, & Carmen: Besides, the great charge  Cranedge and Selleridge; And which is not  be forgotten, Customes and Imposts. Thus much shall suffife to speake of Wine Now for the Honor of Vintoners, I find the have been many worthy and Honorable me of them; for in Anno, 1271, the fifty six year of the Raigne of King Henry the third, on Iohn Adrian, Vintoner, was Lord Maior o London. In the eighth yeare of King Edwa the third's Raigne, 1334, one Reignold at th Conduit was Lord Maior: In the fifteen yeare of the same King, one Iohn of Oxfor was Lord Maior. In the one and thirty year of Edward the third, 1356, Sir Henry Picar Vintoner, was Lord Maior; who for a perp tuall Honorable Memory of this Cities wo hinesse; and for a Brooch, Jewell, or famo Ornament to the Right Worshipfull Comp of Vintoners, the said Sir Henry Picard di feast foure Kings in one day with most sum tuous Magnificence, namely, Edward the thir
ing of England, Iohn, King of France, David, ing of Scotland, and William, King of Cypress, ith Edward the Black Prince of Wales, the aulphin of France, with many other Princes, ukes and Peeres, as may be read in Stowes d Howes Chronicle, and in the Survay of ondon. In the yeare 1558, Sir Iohn Stody, intoner, was Lord Maior of London. In the are 1395, the nineteenth yeare of King Ri∣ard the second, Sir William Moore, Vintoner, as likewise in that Honorable Office. In the neteenth yeare of the Raigne of King Henry  eight, 1527, Sir Iames Spencer, Vintoner, as Lord Maior of London. And in the yeare 94, in the five and thirty yeare of the Raigne Queene Elizabeth, Sir Cuthbert Buckle, Vin∣ner, did Nobly serve in that Honorable Of∣ce of London's Maioralty. Besides, I find that  the seventeenth yeare of Queene Elizabeth, laster Henry Prannell, Vitoner, was one of  Sheriffes of London. As concerning Pious and Charitable works ne by this famous Company, and by their ives, or Widdowes, he that list's to read the rvay of London, shall find the memorable
Records of (not onely those before named) b of Master Stephen Skidmore, Master Richa Iacob, Mistris Sibbella Iacob, with many other which for brevities sake, I omit. And thus I dedicate my selfe and this m Labour to that Right Worthy, and Ampl Company, requesting them, and as many  loves them, to take nothing in ill part, becau I know there was not any thing ill meant. An now I proceed to my Alphabeticall and Ep grammaticall Peregrination.
A ANgell in Long Aker. Angell in Shoreditch. Angell at the Tower Gate. Angell neere the Gatehouse at Westminster. Epigram. Coelestiall sure these Angels are not yet, Nor fiends infernall from the hellish Pit: Though Sinners made them, they are clean from Sin; Yet are they hang'd, to shew good Wine's within. Anker in West Smithfield. Anker in East Smithfield. Anker and Ship in the Minories. ker in St. Olaves, at Bermondsey street end.
Epigram. Some men have found these Ankers very able, To More them safe and fast without a Cable: A man may Load himselfe, and Sleepe, and Ride, Free from Storms, Tempests, Pirats, Wind and Tide. Adam and Eve at Westminster in Tuthill street. Epigram. Our Parents first (as I thinke) ne're dranke Wine, And yet for Wine their Figures are a Signe: As they forbiden were the Fruit to taste, So wee forbidden are, good Wine to waste. Antelop in West Smithfield. Epigram. The Antelop's a rare Beast, seldome seene, Nor hath it often in our Kingdome beene: A forraine Beast, a Signe, shewes forraine Wine For you, or mee, or any Friends of mine. Andrewes Crosse in Fetter lane neer Holborn.
Epigram. Saint Andrewes Argent Crosse in th'Azure field Is ancient, and a noble Christian shield: Ther's French and Spanish, to cheere heart and brain, From the most Christian Cath'like, France and Spain. Antwerp behind the Royall Exchange Epigram. Antwerp, is English'd, Throw thy hand Away, Rather then God, or King, to disobey: At Antwerp Taverne meet shake hands, be merry, Ther's Clarret, White, Canary, and good Sherry. Archer neere Finsbery Fields, or Grub∣street end. Epigram. This Signe doth shew the worthiest exercise Is Shooting, and it shewes unto our eyes, When Archers in the field have woon the Vpshot, They may come to this Archer and be Cupshot.
B. Bishops-head in Chancery Lane. Bell within Temple Barr. Bell without Bishopsgate Bell in Saint Nicholas Lane, through into Canning street. Bell at Saint Thomas in Southwarke Bell at Westminster in Kings street. Bell in Distar Lane Bell in Newgate Market Bell Savadge Bell in the Strand. Epigram. These Bels are never told with Rope in Steeple, Yet there's od Iangling, 'mongst od kind of people, And the 9 Bat once are dayly Rung With 2. strange Clappers, Pewter and the Tongue. Bull head in Towerstreet Bull head in East-smithfield Bull head in Cheapeside
Bull head in the Borough of Southwarke Bull head without Bishopsgate. Epigram. These Bull Heads nere had Bodyes I am sure, 'Tis strange Heads without Bodies should endure: Yet tis not strange; for though the Signe be dead, The Cellers foot below, holds up the Head. Bull-blacke in the Pallace at Westminster Bull-blacke in the Burrough of Southwarke Bull-red in Thames street neere Coleharbour Bull-red in Saint Iohns street. Epigram. These Bulls were never Calues, nor came of Kine, Yet at all seasons they doe yeeld good Wine, But those that suck these Buls more then they ought, Are Walthams Calues, much better fed than taught. Beare in the Pallace at Westminster Beare and Dolphin in Tower street Beare neere Fleetbridge Beare at the Bridgefoote in the Borough of Southwarke.
Epigram. No Ravenous, Savadge, Cruell Beares are these, But Gentle, Milde, Delighting still to please: And yet they have a Tricke to Bite all such As Madly use their Company too much. Bores head in West-Smithfield Bores head behind the Exchange Bores head in East-Cheape Bores head at Criplegate Bores head in Old Fishstreet. Epigram. He that will lay a wager sure shall win, These Bores Heads shewes that Hogsheads are within He that doth doubt let him the Celler try, And tis much marvell if he come up dry,
C. Crowne in West-Smithfield. Epigram. Within this Crowne hath many Crwnes been spent, Good Wine, Attendance good, and good Content: Theres Liquor of the best, from France and Spaine, Which makes this Crowne full weight above a Graine. Castle without Newgate Castle in Paternoster Row Castle in Cornehill Castle neere Pauls Chaine Castle behind Saint Clements neere the Strand Castle in Fleetstreet Castle in Bredstreet Castle in Woodstreet Castle in White Chapple. Epigram. Tis oftentimes no Hazzard or Adventure, These Peacefull Cles qtly to Enter: They are not built for Defence, or Offence, Yet all the Manhood is, in Going thence.
Crosse White in Whitecrosse street Crosse Red in Redcrosse streete Crosse Taverne neere Charing Crosse. Epigram. When men are overprest with Cares and Losses, They may finde speedy Comfort in these Crosses: But such as beare no Crosses thither, then Small Reason, tis, they should be welcome men. Crosse Keyes in Bedford Berry, alias, Covent Garden Crosse Keyes in the Strand, neere Yorke, or Buckingham house Crosse Keyes in Holbourne. Epigram. These Keyes were never made to open Locks, Yet they may be the meanes to ope the Stocks: For he that drinkes, sweares, rores, fights, spewes and reeles Hang such a Rascall, lay him by the heeles. Cat in Long Lane. Epigram. Who scratcheth worst the Broker, or the Cat, Good honest Reader, prethee tell me that:
The Broker scratches till a man be strip'd, For nothing every day the Catt is whip'd. Cardinals Hatt without Newgate Cardinalls Hatt in Cornehill. Epigram. The Cardinals hurt least, being farre away, And sure their Hatts will doe lesse hurt then they: We are much better pleasd, with the bare Signe, Then with the Hat, or Card'nall; There's good Wine Chequer in White Chappell Chequer in the Strand. Epigram. The Chequer square, doth many squares containe, And good square dealing there doth still remaine; Provided that you to the Chequer bring Th'Exchequer Coine, the stamp of Queene or King. The Christopher at Clearkenwell, at Turne∣bull street end. Epigram. I Read that Christopher once usde the Trade, A mighty dangerous River o're to wade:
And having left the Water, tis thought meet To set him up for Wine in Turnebull street. The Coopers hoope in Leadenhal street neere Limestreet. Epigram. Good Wine doth need no Bush, the Proverb sayes, And I have knowne that house three thousand dayes stoope. Without a Signe or Bush; onely a Hoope Shewes theres good Wine will make a strong man The Crane at Hoxton in the Parish of St Leo∣nards Shoreditch. 3 Cranes in the Vintage 3 Cranes in the Powltry 3 Cranes in the Strand neere the Savoy Gate 3 Cranes in the Old Bayly 3 Cr nes in Chancery Lane 3 Cranes in Saint Olaves street 3 Cranes in the Borough of Southwarke. Epigram. The Cranes heau'd Wine (from Water) to the Cart, The Ca to thie Cranes, hese Cranes to the Quart, And other Measures, Thus is Wine divided, And the divisions good, if not Misguided.
3 Cups in Holbourne. D. The Greene Dragon in Chepeside Dragon in Pauls Churchyard. Dragon in White Chappell Dragon on St Lamberts hill, and in Thames street, Dragon and Mermayde in Thames street, at the foot of Pauls hill Dragon in Southwarke, neere Saint Giorge's Church Dragon in Drury Lane Dragon in White Friers. Epigram. These Dragons onely bite and sting all such As doe immod'ratly haunt them too much: But those that use them well, from them shall finde Ioy to the Heart, and comfort to the Minde. Dog at Westminster Dog in Drury Lane Dog at Creede Lane end, neere Ludgate Dog within Newgate Dog in Chancery Lane.
Epigram. These Dogs are very Tame, and free from Spight. And yet sometimes they dare their Masters bite: Exceeding Gentle, being not abusde, They bite when they are over-roughly vsde. Dolphin in Thames street neere Dowgate Dolphin in Old-Fish street. Epigram. By Nature (as some famous Writers tell) The Dolphin doth love Man and Musicke well: And at these Dolphins men may at their pleasure, Have Wine and Musicke, both in Time and Measure. St. Dunstane. Epigram. The Divell with Rorers in the house may Rore, The whilst good Dunston guards & keeps the doore; But sure Apollo did with Bacchus Ioyne, That there's kind Entertainment and good Wine.
E. Spred Eagle in Grayes Inne Lane Eagle in Cow Lane. Epigram. The Eagles eye upon the Sunne dares stare, If other Birdes doe so, they blinded are: And men unto those Eagles Nests may come Cleare sighted, yet want sight ere they get home. F. Fountaine in Fleetstreet Fountaine in East-Smithfield Fountaine in Fanchurchstreet Fountaine in the Old Bayly Fountaine in the Strand neere the Savoy Fountaine in Saint Annes Lane ueere Alders∣gate.
Epigram. These Fountaines are not Proud, like many a knave, That brags of goodness, yet no Goodnes have: The Fountaines promise Water, yet affoord Good Wine, and so are better then their Word. Fleece in Bedford-Berry, Alias, the Covent Garden Fleece in Little Brittaine Fleece in Cornhill, neere Birchin Lane end. Epigram. In peace a Man may peecemeale venture Pieces, Spend Time and Coine, yet neuer win those Fleeces: But those that doe attempt with Moderation, Shall find the Hazzard but a Recreation. Faulcon on the Banke side Fanlcon in Rosemary Lane. Epigram. These Faulcons to the Lure did never stoope, Nor do they Mue, Mute, cast their Gorge, or Droope: Nor ever Mounted to the Sky (past Ken) Yet all their Game is still to pleasure Mn.
Fortune in Drury Lane Fortune in Golding Lane. Epigram. These Fortunes, are themselues nor good, or Ill, Nor (like Dame Fortune) are they Changing still: Yet do they make some Glad, some Sad, some Mad, And are as they are used, Good or Bad. The Flower De Lices in Finch Lane neere Cornehill. Epigram. French Flowers doth shew thers good French Wine to sell Which he that tries will find, and like it well: But if perchance your Pallat doe disgust it, Thers high and mighty Sacke, if you dare trust it. The Golden Field-Gate, at the upper end of Holborne. Epigram. All is not Gold that glisters here I say: This Gold Gate hath no Latch, Bolt, Locke, or Kay:
Yet at all lawfull houres (for lawfull Gaine) Tis open, honest Guests to entertaine. G. Globe in Fleetstreet Globe in Shorditch Globe in King street at Westminster. Globe in the Woolstaple at Westminster. The Globe in Thridneedle street Globe in little Eastcheape Globe neere Holbourne Barres. Criphon in White Chappell. Epigram. As the Celestiall Globe is various Mix'd With Starrs, some more, some Retrograde, some fix So in these lesser Globes, men are still Changing, Drunke, Sober, Mad, Sad, Merry, Reeling, Ranging, George in Turnbull street George in St Iohns streete
George in Fleet Lane George within Aldgate George in White Friers Epigram. George is on Horsebacke Riding Day and Night, And with the Dragon in perpetuall fight: Which shewes that we should watch 'gainst fleshly evill, To ride the World, and Combate with the Devill. Greyhound without Creeplegate Greyhound in Bowlane Greyhound in the Blacke Fryers Greyhound in Fleetstreet Greyhound in Knightrider street. Greyhound in Southwarke, or the upper Ground. Epigram. These Greyhounds nere hunt Buck, nor course a Hare Instead of hunting, they still hunted are: And those that hunt them many times are bit, Lam'd in the Leggs, and Creepl'd in their VVit. Goate in Smithfield.
Epigram, VVhen sicknesse doth man of his health deprive, Goates Milke is wholesome and preservative: And sure this Goare such Liquor doth containe, As can both Glad and Mad, Mans heart and braine. The Garter in Long Aker. Epigram. The Honorable Garter first did Spring From Famous Edward, Englands VVarlike King: He beat the French, and to requite his paine, French VVine hath ever since beat vs againe. The Grashopper in Threedneedle street, neere Finch Lane end. Epigram. This Grashopper is not a skipping Vermin, VVhose Glory with the Summer doth extermine: Nor Heate or Cold can change his hue or shape, Twill live upon the Liquor of the Grape.
H. The White Hart neere Charing Crosse. Hart in Shoreditch Hart in White Chappell Hart in Smithfield Hart in the Strand Hart in Tothill street at Westminster Hart at Hoxton in St Leonard Shoreditch Pa∣rish Hart at Drury Lane end neere Holbourne Hart without Bishopsgate. Epigram. Although these Harts doe never runne away. They'le tire a Man to hunt them every day: The Game and Chase is good for Recreation, But dangerous to make't an occupation The White Horse in Lumbard street Horse in Old Fish street Horse Flying in Woodstreet.
Epigram. Quite contrary to other Horses, these Feed not on Grass, Hay, Otes, Bread, Beanes, or Pease: The cost is small, their Provender to buy, For all the Charges in the Drinke doth lye. The Harrow in Charterhouse Lane Harrow in Gracious street Harrow in Little Woodstreet Epigram. 'Tis not a common use (as most men know) That men should goe to Harrow e're they sow: Yet here it is in fashion every day To Harrow first, and Sow when they doe pay. The Horshoe in Drury Lane Epigram. Hee were a cunning man that could declare, Whether this Shoe would best fit Horse or Mare: Those that will know, they may goe study there, And catch a Fox, and so be ne're the neere. The Hoope in Thame street, neere Saint Mag∣nus Church
Epigram. Here are not taught, Tricks, Sleights or active Feats, No Legerd' maine, or Inggling sharking Cheats: Drink moderate when thy Pensive mind doth droop, Or quickly learne to Tumble in the Hoope. The Harts Hornes and Miter at the end of Car∣terlane, neere Black-friers The Horne in Fleetstreet Epigram. Hee that will whet his wit when it is dull, Drinke, for these Cornu copeia's still are full: But if you whet away the Steele, take heed, It will the Megrim and the Staggers breed. I. Saint Iohns of Ierusalem at Clerkenwell Epigram. Knights of Saint Iohn, Knights, Templers, Knights of Rhodes, And Malta's Knights (there now is their Abodes)
And at this Place a House was built for them, Then call'd Saint Iohns House of Ierusalem. The Saint Iohns Head in Chauncery lane Iohns Head at Milks end Iohns Head neere Ludgate. Epigram. Hee that in all his life ne're car'd for Wine, For Wine his memory is made a Signe: Where such as to the Wine their lives doe wed, May lose their wit, although they keepe their head. K. The Kings head in Shoreditch Kings head in Saint Iohn street Kings head in Rose-mary lane, or King of Sweden Kings head in King street, at Westminster Kings head neere Leaden hall Kings head within Bishopsgate
Kings head without Bishopsgate, neere the Spittle Kings head at the end of Canning street, or Walbrooke Kings head in Saint Clements lane neere Lumbardstreet Kings head in Pudding lane Kings head in new Fishstreet Kings head in old Fishstreet Kings head on Tower hill, or neere East-Smithfield. Kings head in Drury Lane. King of Swedens Head without Bishopsgate Kings head in the Strand Kings head in the Blacke Friers Kings head in Fleetstreet, at Chancery Lane ende. Kings head at Horsey Downe Kings head in Holbourne Kings head neere Alhallowes in Thamestreet Kings head at the West end of the Covent Garden, or Bedford berry. Epigram. These Painted Signes unto my view doth bring The Royall figure of a Mighty King:
The fight whereef, should men to Temp'rance win, To come as sober out as they went in. The Katherin Wheele at Saint Katherins Katherin Wheele in Tothill street, at West∣minster Epigram. It is a Custome (e're since the beginning) Women (not Men) should use the art of Spinning: But Spinning is not practis'd with this Wheele, Yet (in short space) 'twill teach a man to Reele: The Kings Armes in Saint Martins lane, or Martins in the Fields Kings Armes in Cateaten street at Jronmon∣ger lane end Kings Armes at Milford lane end, neere Saint Clements, Strand Kings Armes in the Burrough of Southwarke Kings Armes in Holbourne Kings Armes in Thridneedle street, neere Broadstreet Kings Armes in Saint Martins
Epigram. To the Kings Armes, bring the Kings Armes I pray, For the Kings Armes must all the Reckoning pay: Without the Kings Armes, not the Kings Arms hant, Hee's quite disarm'd that doth the Kings Arms want. L. The Golden Lyon neere York-house or Buc∣kingham-house Lyon in Lincolnes Fields neere the Cockpit Lyon at Westminster in King street Lyon in Fetter Lane Lyon in the Strand Lyon in Silver street, neere Woodstreet The White Lyon at the end of Tower street, neere to the Hill Lyon in the Crottchet Friers Lyon in Canning street Lyon in Chancery Lane Lyon at the Mill-bank at Westminster
The Red Lyon in Shoreditch Lyon at Billingsgate Lyon in Grasse street, or Gracious street Lyon neere Saint Georges Church in South∣warke Lyon at Saint Olaves Watergate in South∣warke. Epigram. These Lyons are exceeding milde and tame, Yet oft (in Ieast) they'l claw a man starke lame: Play with them temperately, or looke to find, A Lyon in the end will shew his kind, The Lamb in Drury Lane Epigram. A harmlesse Signe of a most fruitfull Creature, Yet contrary to Sheep and Lambs by nature: They yield us cloathes to weare, and meat to live, And nothing else but drinke, this Lamb doth give.
M. The halfe Moone in White Chappell Moone in the Minories Moone in Saint Katherins Moone in Aldersgate street Moone in the Strand The Man in the Moone in King street, at West∣minster Man in the Moone in Chepe-side Epigram. Though these are but halfe Moones, yet to all such They are full Moones, that dare to drinke too much: The Moone is ever changing day and night, And hee's a Man that stands i'th Moone upright. The Mouth at Bishopsgate Mouth within Aldersgate.
Epigram. These Mouthes do (like two Monsters) live on Men, They swallow them, and put them out agen: They gape, yet bite not; if they bite, I'm sure They rankle not, my selfe have try'd the cure. The Saint Martin neere Charing-Crosse. Epigram. If it be true, some ancient Writers spoke, That Martin to a Begger gave his Cloake: Those that have Cloakes, let them this Taverne find, And there they and their Cloakes may well be lin'd. Mermayd in Shoe-lane Mermayd at Billingsgate Mermayd in Cornehill Mermayd in Cheapside Mermayd in Breadstreet Mermayd neere Charing-Crosse Mermayd in the Burrough of Southwarke
Mermayd in Watling street neere Bow∣lane Mermayd in Pater-noster-Row Mermayd at Aldersgate Epigram. This Mayd is strange (in shape) to Man's appearing, Shee's neither Fish, or Flesh, nor good Red-hearing: What is shee then? a Signe to represent Fish, Flesh, good Wine, with welcome and content. The Miter in Saint Stevens Alley at West∣minster Miter neere Aldgate Miter in Loathbury at the end of Barthol∣mew-lane Miter in Fenchurch street Miter at the lower end of Cheapside Miter in Breadstreet Miter in Woodstreet Miter in the Strand, neere to Denmarke house Miter and Castle in Fleetstreet Miter in Saint Iohn street
Epigram. These Miters have no Privilege from Rome, Nor are all Catholikes that to them come: No man's Religion here is call'd in question, Here's Wine to glad the mind, and breed disgestion. The Maydenhead in Thames street, or Bush∣lane Maydenhead and George in the upper ground in Surrey Maydenhead at Saint Giles in the fields Epigram. Virginity's a Vertue, much Renown'd, A Maydenhead once lost, can nere be found: But yet these Maydenheads (with little cost) May be both lost and found, and found and lost.
N. Nags head at Clerkenwell Nags head in Saint Iohns street Nags head at Westminster Nags head at the corner, against Leaden∣hall Nags head in Thames street neere the Customhouse Nags head in Cheape side Nags head neere Bassings hall Nags head without Temple Bar. Epigram. These head-strong heads all weathers will endure, And where you leave them, you may find them sure: They never kick or fling, yet with a trick They oft make sick men well, and sound men sick.
P. The Princes Armes at Hoxton Princes Armes at Pauls Chaine Princes Armes at Saint Martins lane Princes Armes neere the Church at West∣minster Princes Armes neere the Bouling Alley at Westminster Princes Armes over against Denmarke∣house Princes Armes in Holborne Princes Armes in West-Smithfield Epigram. Oft in the Field these Royall Plumes have wav'd When Englands Foes have bin both bang'd & brav'd: In memory whereof, wee ever since Drinke Healthes to'th Cambrian, or Great Britaines Prince.
The Popes head neere Smithfield Pens Popes head in Mooreelds Popes head in Cornhill Popes head in Chancery lane Epigram. These Popes heads are no Authors of Debate, Nor Schilmaricks, or oublers of the State: Yet theres good Clarret, and Sack Catholike Will make a Mad man Tame, a Tame man strike. The Pye at Aldgate Epigram. This Pye is dumb, yet oft shee makes folkes chatter Much, to small purpose, quite besides the matter: But temperate men excuse the harmlesse Pye, The fault is their's that drinke intemperately. The Peacocke in Thames street neere the old Swan Peacocke without Temple Bar
Epigram. Though Argus eyes be in the Peacocks taile, A man may drinke there till his eye-sight faile: But if a man a good Decorum keepe, Hee'l see the clearer, and more soundly sleepe. The Plough without Aldersgate Epigram. There's many goes to Plough, and doe not know Where Corne (upon the ground, or trees) do grow: Beware therefore, and looke before thou leape, And Plough and sow no faster than thou Reape. Pauls head at Pauls Chaine Epigram. Paul's head an ancient Taverne, in request, Well Custom'd, loving to each honest Guest: But yet they care not for such Guests at all, As rob and rifle Peter to pay Panl. The Phenix in Long Aker
Epigram. The rare Arabian Bird, expires in fire: Reviving, shee's both Young, and Dam, and Sire: Then as the Phenix is by fire refin'd, So let the Phenix liquor cleare thy mind. The Pellican in Drury Lane Q. The Queenes head in West-smithfield Queeenes head in East-smithfield Queenes head againe in East-smithfield Queenes head in Queene street Queenes head in the Strand
Queenes head in Bishopsgate street Queenes head in Thames street neere the Customhouse Queene Elinor's head at Queene hithe Queenes head in Pater-noster-row Queenes head neere Holborne Conduit Queenes head in Red-crossstreet Epigram. These Queenes heads like the Kings heads are, I see Both are one Sex, both Wood, both Painting be: There is but little difference in the Signes, And sure there is small odds amongst their Wines. The Queenes Armes in the Burrough of South∣warke Queenes Armes at the end of Saint Nicholas Shambles Epigram. The Queenes Armes and her Armies were renown'd, Eliza's Fame did fill the worlds wide Round: Through al her raign, France lov'd us, Spain did fear us And at her Armes are both their Wines to cheer us.
R. The Rose at Fleet-bridge Rose in the Covent Garden, or Bedford∣berry Rose in Saint Peters street at Westminster Rose against Barking Church, at the end of Tower street Rose at the Counter gate in the Powltry Rose in Newgate Market Rose in Shoreditch Rose at Temple Bar Rose in Thames street, neere the Tower dock Rose at the upper end of Holborne Epigram. Hee were a man of Art that had the skill Rose water from these Roses to distill: I know theres good Rose Wine, but for Rose Water I oft have still'd, and still find no such matter. The Ram in Fleetstreet, at Ram Alley end Rams head in Saint Olaves in Southwark
Epigram. At Ram or Rams head (be it knowne to all) Are Wines Predominant and Capitall, To set a Horse man quite beside the Saddle, And make a ootman's Pericranion Addle. The Sun in Shoreditch Sun in White-chappell Sun in the Minories Sun in Old Fishstreet Sun in Sheere lane Sun at Westminster Sun neere Mooregate Sun neere Cripplegate Sun in Aldersgate street Sun in New Fishstreet Sun in Old street Sun in the Strand Sun in Holborne
Epigram. The Grape is ripened with bright Phoebus Shine, Which shewes that at the Sun there is good wine: Beware of being Sun-burn't e're thou goe, Drink civilly, make not thy friend thy Foe. Star in the Minories Star at Chick lane end Star at Saint Katherins Star in Fenchurch street Star in Little Eastcheap Star in Cheap-side Star in Coleman street The 7 Stars by Smithfield Bars Epigram. Hee that by these eight Stars can Calculate, Iudge of Nativities, and descant Fate: Yet are their Influences good and bad, Some gaine wit by them, some lose that they had.
The Ship in White-cross street Ship at the Posterne gate neere the Tower Ship at Saint Katherins Ship at Bermondsey house, or the Armes of Bristow Ship in the Dukes place neere London Wall Ship neere Saint Mary Ax Ship behind the Exchange Ship in Long Alley, neere Moore Fields Ship in Bishopsgate street Ship in Fenchurch street Ship neere Little Eastcheape at Rood lane end Ship in Thames street, at Trinity lane end Ship behind Old Fishstreet Ship in the Old Baily Ship in the Strand Ship on the Bankside Epigram. Here is a Fleet of Ships, ne're crost the Maine, To bring Commodities from France or Spaine:
They ne're fear'd Tempest, Pyrat, Rock, or Wrack, Yet are wel fraight with French wine and good Sack. The Swan in White-cross street Swan in New Fishstreet Swan at Westminster Swan at Dowgate Swan in Knightrider street Swan in Old Fishstreet Swan in the Strand Swan at Saint Giles in the Fields Swan in Holbourne Epigram: These are strange Swans that neither swim or sinke, And all their maintenance is onely drinke: And I in lofty Verse his praise will sing, That can but pluck a Feather from their wing. The Shepherd in East-smithfield The Salutation in Tower street Salutation neere Billingsgate
Salutation neere Mooregate, or London Wal Salutation in the Strand Salutation in Montague Close, in South∣warke Salutation in Holbourne Epigram. When men doe meet, and courteously Salute, They at the Salutation may dispute: Some for their profit, some for their love or pleasure, Whilst all their wine is in and out of Measure. T. The 3 Tuns at Guild Hall gate 3 Tuns in Newgate Market 3 Tuns in Grass-street, or Gracious street 3 Tuns neere Charing-Crosse 3 Tuns in eetstreet 3 Tuns in Pauls Church-yard
3 Tuns in Smithfield 3 Tuns in Petticoat Lane 3 Tuns at the Tower Hill 3 Tuns at Westminster 3 Tuns at Saint Mary Hill, neere Billings∣gate 3 Tuns at Garlick hithe 3 Tuns in the Burrough of Southwarke 3 Tuns at the lower end of Great Wood∣street 3 Tuns neere Holbourne Bridge 3 Tuns on the Bank-side The Tun neere the Banke-end in South∣warke The Tun in Thames street, against the Cu∣stomhouse Epigram. These Tuns proclame there's Tuns of Wine below, Goe in and welcome, try, and you shall know: There shall you see a plenteous Spring that runs From Pipes, Buts, Hogsheads, from the liberall Tuns. Turnstile in Holbourne
Epigram. A Turn-stile is a Bar to keepe out Beast, Which oft times hath more reason than the Guests: When Wine makes men the Rules of Reason passe, They'r far inferiour to Oxe, Horse, or Asse. A Taverne with a Bush and no Signe, under the new Burse Taverne with a Bush and no Signe, in Milford lane Two Tavernes in the Tower of London Epigram. Where no Signe is, 'tis no ill Signe to mee, Where no Signe is, 'tis no good Signe to see: But though the Signes are neither good nor bad, There's Win, Good, Bad, Indifferent, to be had. V. The Vineyard in Queenes street Vintage neere the 3 Granes in the Vintrey
Epigram. The Vineyard doth the iuods Grapes produce, The Vintage Presseth, and makes Wine their Iuce: If these yield no good Wine, I must say still, The Vineyard's Barren, and the Vintage Ill. Venice, the Signe neere Saint Clements with∣out Temple-bar Epigram. The Citty Venice (Strong and Opulent) Fam'd from the Orient, to the Occident: And sure the Signe of such a Noble Citty Affords good Wine, or else the more's the pitty. W. The two Wrastlers in Lincolns Inne Fields Epigram. Wrastling is held a Manly exercise, A Game Olimpick, both for Praise and Prize:
But hee that is most Skilfull, Strong or Tall, And Wraftles with the Wine, shall surely Fall. The White Horse in Nicholas Shambles The Windemill in Loathbury Epigram. No Meale-mouth'd Miller keepes this Mill I know, And let the wind blow either high or low, Hee's kindly taking Toll, and at his Mill Is Wine exceeding good, and Welcome still.
Besides these Tavernes before mentioned, there are foure Houses in London that doe sell Rhennish Wine, inhabited onely by Dutchmen; namely, THe Stilliyard. The Swan in Thames street The Swan in Crooked lane The Sun at Saint Mary Hill Epigram. Here's the bright Christall rincing Rhennish Drink, The salt dry'd Neats-tongue, and West-phalia skink: The Pickled Herring, and th' Anchovea rare: And (if you please) Potarbo, or Caveare. They deale in Deale wine, and their dealing's Iust; And though their Faith be good, they seldom Trust.
THus (Gentle Reader) I have ran a Course That would have tyr'd (per haps have kild) a Horse: For if the winged Pegasus (like Mee) Had watred been, h'had had no eyes to see: Or if Bucephalus had trotted so, Hee had been lam'd and founder'd long agoe. Yet is my Task not done, for I must Play A Second Part before I have my Pay: Which Second Part shall to your view declare The Tavernes in ten Shires, and where they are; Within what County, in what Towne, what Signe, Or else (if not what Signe) who sels the Wine. The Couties are, Brave Barkshire, Hampshire, Essex, Kent, Surrey, Hartford, Middlesex, and Sussex; With Buckingham and Oxford; these are they Which in my Second Part I must display. FINIS.
