24651 99854285 19696
Extremities Vrging the Lord Generall Sir Fra: Ueare to the Anti-parle with the Archduke Albertus. Written by an English Gentleman of verie good account from Ostend, to a worshipfull Gentleman his friend heere in England, Imprinted Verbatim according to the Originall. With a declaration of the despe∣rate attempt made since, by the sayde Arch∣dukes forces, for the winning of the ould Towne. Printed for Thomas Pauyer. 1602.
Extremities pressing the Lord Gene∣rall sir Frauncis Veare, to offer the late Antiparle to the Archduke Albertus. NOt doubting but your Worship hath heard of our late anti-parle with the Archduke Albertus heare in Ostend, which I assure y lfe is of many wō∣dred at, and againe, knowing that no small number will iudge there of, some according to their vnderstandinges, and other some as they are carried with affection. I haue thought good to aduertise you of the verie truth there∣of; for your worships satisfaction, and better content∣ment of all Gentlemen to whome it shall please your worship to impart the same, wherein I assure you I haue plainely and faithfully set downe the truth without all fa∣uour or affection, as hereafter followeth. HIs Lordship hauing by many Letters for the space of two Moneths togither, solicited the States to reenforce him with fresh supplies of men, was still answered again with hope∣full promises, meane time his troupes in towne were generally harrazed & worne out, especially y• English by guarding & watching in the workes without the Towne euery second night for the space of sixe Moneths togither, their durtie passage thither, and
their myrie guard there, inseing them dayly with increase of sicknesse, so as by diseases and other accidents of warre, he had not remaining at the time of the Parley beg, being on Sonday night the 1 of December after the old stile, of 8000 soldiers and , 2150: and such as know Ostend as it is now, and haue withal any iudgment in martiall , can discerne that the Towne alne cannot bee sutiently guarded with  men, leauing out of this computation the outward workes and most part of the Counterscarps, which are ind principall pillars of saftie to this place. Againe the fury of the sea had so demolished the Rampart of the owne, that the same lay very weake and open i many places for the Enemies passage. And (notwithstanding that good indeauours had  vsed,  much cost  to secure vs against both those dangers, by store of long -wood lodged in ile at the North-west nd of the  bray, (the support of the foot of the bulwarke called the Sand∣hill) and of like wood platted along the foote of the Sandhill to the sea-ward, fastned (besides the workmans arte) with great stones, and well lined with sundry ranks of Pallizads armed with long and strong nailes of Iron) yet did the Ene∣my in the darknes of a boystrous night at a low water, so arte∣ficially, and wih such expedition put fire to the same pile, en∣tertaining our guards a good, distance from thence, towards the North-east part of the old Towne with an alarm, in the meane time that few enclined their eyes to this fiery , vntill the fire had fully embraced the same pile. This alarum being (to say truth) coldly taken, the enemie  his point till they came to the place of our new , being neare the North-east rauelling. and there finding the passage to enter o∣pen and no apparante of rance, they entred, and comming to a Corps du guad, they found one onely drowsey bird in the  whom they killed, the rest being  ed after their onted manne: yet I forbeare to name my Nation, Eupho∣ gratia. In the heate of this busines, his Lordship slenderly accom∣panied, fell vpon the skirt of all the place where the enemies were, and being with much ifficultie perswadd to stay his
further , till discouerie might be  before , much troubled with feare of treasn▪ hee sent away Capta Studde Commander of his owne companie▪ with one  Greuill,  , and some one or two priuate men besides These stumbled vpon the , against whome ma∣king a countenance of a charge by their voyces, Sa, , &c.  them to retire to the sands by the same way they entred ∣by it may e conced they had full view of our new , there they perceiuing the  of those that pursued them, turned head, and with a Musket, shot Captaine Studdr tho∣rough the arme, and then made away, none of ours in case to follow thē, by reason of their Cauallary, wherof we haue none in towne had this error been committed by any English Com∣mander, I durst haue aduentured to haue made an Alma∣nack of his end. This fire burned outragiously for the  dayes & nights without ceasing, viz. frō Thursday night, till Sonday night, neyther could our soldiers come well to quench it, the enemies Cannon still giuing against them, when they offred thēselues thereto, neither could the lowes of the sea, waing at euery tide far aboue the height of the fire extinguish the same. For it had gotten passage into the ground, and there found matter of continuall nourishment, by such timber & posts as were lodged there, for y• support of the  of the piece, & though it had been quenched sundy ties▪ yet doth it burst out again,  on Tews∣day last I saw it burne againe my selfe. Our chiefest enginors are of opinion that the sand heated with such extremity, by fu∣rie of the fire in the pile of Rise, is the chiefest cause of the long continuance thereof, by this fire the Faurbray, and the side of the Sandhill lying towards the sea, were both  open again to the mercy of all weathers and violence of the enemies, in far worse sort then it was before, and this was another instance of , &c. Another is, & that not y•  passage to alow for his . was, we were & are stil many contrary na iōs in town, English, rench, Scots, Wallons, & Duch, and therby a hotch-pot of cōtrary & dis∣nant humors. A natural instinct as y• world knoweth hauing disioyntment of affections, yet hitherto wee haue had good
, & by his Lordships well tempered command, all hu∣mors well tuned, neuerthelesse since the  had formerly béen practising by sowing of factions amongst vs, his L. to pruent the worst, layd these reasons as one step to his proiect. Further his Lordship had 4 little fortresses called eddotts in hand at the same time vpon the Rampart of the old towne, for the better securing thereof with few men if the enemy shold attempt vs, for those little skonses would haue been their scour∣ges vpon their entrie, (ech on flanking other) & one guardable against their furie with few men, for besides their Ramparts they now are fenced about with heighty and very strong palli∣zadoes, these begun workes lay open and nothing neare ∣shed, and this was another branch of his Lordships eares. After al these cōmeth the maine which was, as his Lordship was certainly enformed, that the Archduke was resolued that night to attempt  manner following, viz. The counte de Bukquoy, who commaundeth the forces on the East-side of the towne, was to giue onset at the North-east rauelling of the old towne vpon a low water which serued that time excéeding wel for their purpose falling out about 6 of the clocke at night. Then from the West they purposed to trie vs by the Sand∣hill, and in two places more of the old Towne viz. the port du∣pied which is a small rauelling in a counterscarp, lying West North-west from the towne, and is indéed a place of great in∣port for the kéeping of the Towne-dich full with water, and to preuent the enemies passage to scape our maine Rampart, and this place by furie of the sea, and rage of their Cannon, lay then méerely open and not tenable by any meanes. Their other places where to come on, were our outward works, lying South and by West from the towne, called the South square, the Poulder and the West square, from which last worke commonly called the Collonels worke, they had a∣bout 3 wéekes before béene gallantly repulsed in the night by our guardants, being all English, and driuen to returne with farre lesse bloud, then they brought thither. Another reason which was very powerfull with his Lord∣ship, was a noble & religious care and sence to spare the
of so much Christian bloud as in all , (if the  to carrie , by the  urie) must haue  shed on both sides. Inuested with these extreames of impendant dangers, his Lordship after many bitter trauerses through his great hart y• scornes to stoope, to the mightiest enemy whosoeuer, found that neuerthelesse the be, & most aured passage to general saetie, was to temporize with the enemie by a parley, for dolus an vir∣tus quis in hoste requirat, till the finishing of his works in hand, and the arriuall of his succours howrely expected, might settle him againe in tearmes of better assurance. But by the way, I had forgotten to tell you , that vppon precōsultation, al our outward works aboue mentioned, were to be abandoned,  all our men draw int the towne, and so they were, for as I sayde before, the  of our numbers was such as came farre short of a proportionable guard for the town alone, yet through the slacknes of the states, his Lordship had formerly béen driuen to extenuate his sayd works to halfe their greatnes, to make them guardable by few men, for they doe much import the safetie of the towne. Nowe , to lay our weaknes thus open to the enemie, to his so great aduantage and incouragment, and notwithstand∣ing to bee little or nothing secured thereby, what a gaule and excrutiament it might be to his L. those that know the tem∣pe of his spirit, can easily coniecture. So summoning as I sayd in sort before, all his considerati∣ons together, he fled to that refuge necessitie shewed him to be the most assured. And her  called all his Captaines of the seuerall nations togither, or so many of them as were not in guard, the time would endure o delay. This being towards euening on the Sonday formerly mentioned, they all hearing his conceipt, applaude it, and the Netherlanders more for∣ward then all the rest doe almost presse him with importuni∣ties to diligent the execution thereof, offring themselues to be agents therein, but shranke in the wetting immediatly: which coldnes & refusall of theirs, had almost quite  the clew of their late resolution. In the nde Captaine Ogle
Lieutenant Collonel to his Lordship, and Capt. Fairfax are de∣stined to bee the men, as ostages onely for such as the Arch∣duke should send hither to trea with his Lordship. And so immediately vpon sound of one of our drummes from the port Dpied, after losse of some breath by Capt. Ogle who was vnheard, called to them a good space in Spanish from thence, they were roused to attention: being (as was coniec∣tured) busie about their enterptise, and so, not so attentiue as it is like otherwise they would haue been, considering how neare and dangerous neighbours we are one to the other. All this tedious discourse, I haue been bould to trouble your worshippe withall, onely as a lanthorne to giue you the  light I could, for the through vnderstanding of our estate eue∣ry way, and now I will bring the acting of this proiect before you vpon the stage, ching your pardon if I shall séeme tax∣able for idle lightnes, by inserting accidentall iests in a subiect of such weight and seriousnes: for many times, Ducun  ∣ria ga. His Lordship as I haue before declared, hauing made ten∣der of his harsh tasting parley, I name it harsh in regard of his constraint, thereto finding the enemie verie tractable, and ex∣céeding prompt to entertaine the same, did without any losse of time the same euening send away to them the two fore-named Captaines, Ogle and Fairfax, vppon faith giuen for their safe∣tie and returne. A truce and generall cessation of all hostilitie on both des being promised during the time of their treatie for land matters, but no further. Hereby our abandoned workes remained neutrall, although quited by vs, yet not lawfull to be possessed by thē. Upon the arriuall of our Hosta∣ges in the enemies armie, they were brught to his Aliee at his onse of Albertus, he for welcome vailed his hat sparing∣ly, bad them welcome, demaunded of what natin they were, whether they had instructiō from our Generall, to treate with him about this place, and vppon their answere thereto nega∣tiuely, he asked them further if there were not fraude inten∣ded. They answere as Ignorants of any, & that they are on∣ly sent as hostages for such as his highnes should please to sen
to his Lordship about the proposed : and so with a se∣cond, but more ender respect with his Hat, they were carried from his presence to the lodging of Don Augustino de , a gray and graue headed Spanyard  of the Castle of Antwarp,  Cmaunder of the  forces at y• wst-end of this town, a gentlemā of most accōpli vertoes, by their applauses: in the chamber of this youthull old gallant (for to his gray head hee weareth a greene haite) they were lodged, the place being beautified with faue hangings and re∣ciprocall correspondent in the . By all the gallants. , Italians, and  else of other  of any re∣spect, they were entertained, and  y , ad a∣uing withall many watchfull es, and  eares on : but the gentlemē both of them, haue  so  well qualified, that neither of them will sily  y any vnadnes for taxation of ,  were not suffred to haue further view of any , or , then where they passed, neither were they free of a ,  guard ouer them. Whilest these flourishes of hostile courtsie  (n doubt wt hope of a speedie good bargaine) &  vpon our Capt. in the enemies Campe, ne Matheo   nor of Sluise, Generall o the Archdukes artillerie, and one of hisHe  his  him∣selfe at ta∣ble. Counsell of warre, together with one Matheo Anthonias Sar∣gent maior to Simon Anthuzino gouernour of Antwep towne, both Spaniards and men of prempt and smart spiritts, and Judiciall reach, came into the towne, but his Lordship proiec∣ting still the meanes to winne time, and how to entertaine de∣laies, did as was imagined (vpon y• approach of the two Spa∣niards) attended ouer the water at west, with about 60 horse, cause an alarum to be taken, for hee  where he saw thm all plainely, and layd hold on the manner of their mming for his aduantage, charging them with breach of prmise, and o∣ther soulder-like , and so  neither speake with them, nor  them, but gaue perptorie , that they should be foorthwith returned ack,  they were condued back to the place where they , ut the sea
being growne which his Lordship kwe well inough,  them passage, and thereupon backe againe into the towne they came fraught with new hopes of better intertainmēt (y• heate of their desire ing vp the eyes of their iudgment) his L. being aduertised hereof, gaue present order they should be sent  by the East. Now sir you may please to know that Serano being scarce well pleased (not ithstanding the large walke betwéene the onse Albertus, and their treches) grewe some what wearie, and de∣sired to stay in towne all night, but that would not bee graun∣ted, and so the Sergiant Maior of the towne (Captaine Car∣penter by name, and one Captaine Cleere a Scotsh man) con∣uoyde them through the towne, with euery stepp vp the knéens (at least) in durte and myre, so as the tired Spaniard began to endure a breach in his pacience vpon the Spanish bulwark, which lyeth at the East-end of the towne, a speciall Maguizine of durte and myres, standing vp to the knes, he desired some Tobacco for his refreshing, exclaiming in French, Ah la me∣chant vile de Ostend, but in stead thereof (because there was none to be had) he, and his associates were presented with 4 potts of good English Béere, which went downe merilie, and so throughly be-durted, they were brought to the Sentinell of Cauallarie on the East-sands, and out of their extreames and mye wearines, they lodged at East all night, with Count De Bucquoy, not being able to recouer the Archdukes quarter be∣fore the next day at Noone. And hereby so much time was got∣ten. After the returne of the two Spaniards to their Duke, the same men were againe appointed to trie his Lordshippe once more, and sending word ouer to vs thereof, were admitted to come, (our Captaines all this while remaining with them vpon faith giuen as aforesayd.) The Sergiant Maior of the towne demaunding which way he should bring them in, his Lordshippe willed him to guide them where they might come soft enough, for feare of embossing their féet on the hard stones: Saying withall, that besides their durtie walke, they shoulde
come to as cold a bargaine as euer they met wtal in their lius. Uppon their ente (which was vpon Monday night) they  directly brought to his Lordship, being in his Chamber, after enterchang of complements, his Lordship began  ∣cuse sor the rudenes he had committed the night before, ∣sing he had been vn-ciuill, charging (neuerthelesse, the occasi∣on thereof vpon their strange manner of comming ouer, and se according to the Law of  which is Que le battu payera L. Amende, they were plagued and must besides confesse them∣selues worthy thereof. They being ho on the chest, séem  to digest that, & say, now they hope his Lordship & they should agree: he , The agréement is easily made if his highnes will raise his siege, and suffer vs (as his poore neighbours) to liue by him in peace. Serano replied, thats not his errand thither, but hopes Que vous serez de nostre bandes, his Lordshippe (to cutte off further progression in this discourse) tells them after this wea∣rie-some iourney, it is more tting to entertaine them with meane refreshing, then with serious expostulation, and ther∣vpon intreates them to Supper, whereto they yeilde. And al∣though it were their Christmasse euen, and thereby fasting day, they did not forbeare eating fish, eggs, and such ionkets, besides as a towne so long besieged could affoord, taking out in Clarret wine what they lacked in meate. Serano drinking for his share aboue fiftie twoo glasses of wine, besides , answering euery man in the cuppe, and yet gaue no manner of appearance of yeilding any way to distemper. During their sitting at supper, many smart testes were bandied with good dexteritie on both sides. Amongst others, I remember Serano plotting a passage by circumstāce of words, to discourse of their perfect busines, gaue his Lordship occasion to tell him that his Altesse desired all, and the States woulde willingly part with nothing. The Spanyard replyed, that the Archduke demaunded but his owne: to that his L. tolde him, hee had neuer studied the Lawes to Iudge of mens titles, but that in England wee doe commonly holde possession, 11 poyntes
of the 12, the lawe is bounden withall, &c. Another was, hys Lordshippe told them, that now his highnes hauing continued his siege with such admiration and fame, as that in this age & compasse of the world, the like hath not béen heard off, and dri∣uen vs to abandon our outward works, & to retire our selues altogither into our towne, he might with great honour arise & leaue vs, and thereby preuent the ruine of his armie, which through wet lodging, and continuall labour, must néeds be ex∣treamly decayed, and also preuent the effusion of much Christi∣an bloud otherwise. To this Serano replied, that since his L. had with such ho∣nour as was applauded throughout all Christendome, so long preferued this place against so powerfullan enemie, and that as they all knew most certainely, many extremities had ouer∣taken him, whereby he was enforced to withdrawe himselfe wholly into that little ruinous nest, it could bee no manner of blemish to him to yld, &c. Thus yther of them by contrarie intended imputations la∣boured to extoll his owne carriage and prayses: many other prompt counterbuffes were passed, which (to auoyde tedious∣nes) I ouer-passe: after supper the Sanyards (wearied with their late myrie iournies) were by his Lordshippe conducted to their lodging, where with a slendr guard for fashion sake, be∣fore the outwardest doores of the house, they rested til morning. Before which ▪ Shippes of warre den with 6 compa∣nies of Zeland soldiers arriued in the road, beore the towne, which the enemie without, seng it, is easily to iudge whether he was offended or no. Heeupon, btimes on the Tuesdaye morning they sent in post for his L. resolution, and Serano himselfe (although ignorant of our supplie) importuned his L. for answere, &c. which he receues foorthwith sounding to this effect, viz. That it was true that some wants through the long contra∣rietie of the winde and other accidents had ouer taken him, and thereby he enforced to mke ose of his wi, to hele im∣selfe b winning of time, till his turne was otherwise sored, and that now since the states had béene mindfull of him, the
winde prospicious, and his necessitie supplied, he could not in honour procéede to trafique with them any further, neither had more to saye to them, vntill a newe extremitie, (if any might happily lay new hold on him) should occasion him thereto, ho∣ping his highnes as a vertuous and worthie Prince would nt take it ill, that as a martiall man he had practised and compas∣sed the best meanes for the preseruation of his honour and safe∣tie by the ordinarie and vsuall course of men of warre. The Spaniards (hauing the faire hopes of his fruitfull har∣uest thus quite blasted with this cold nipping answere) did ne∣uerthelesse in the most temperate manner he could, smother & suppresse his almost choaking discontent: for hee dreamed by y• negotiating of this busines, to haue made himselfe famous to ensuing ages, and so with this cold breake-fast (in stead of his Christmasse pie) he foorthwith departed, leauing his compa∣nion behind him, till our Captaine should be returned home∣his passage backe was by boate at South-west from the Pol∣der Rauelling, where he could sée almost no part of our fortifi∣cation, & vpon his repaire into their trenches, Capt. Fairfax was sent home, and the Lieutenant staied, so as they held the more worthy person. About 4 of the clock the same day, Captaine Ogle came to y• sands at west against the porte Dupied, accom∣panied with the great Marshall of the enemies Campe, and with one Owen an Englh fugtiue, staying for the Spanish Seriant Maior here in owne. He hauing dined with my L. after the duch entertaiment was conducted out of towne by Capt. Studder to y• same place where Serano had been for∣merly imboated. There was a little straining coursie▪ who should be passed first. But the utenant Collonell stoode not much thereupon, although the worthir person and the subiect of a farre more absolute and greater Prince, the reason (as I learned) being because we had been the petitioners, and so the Spaniard carried it. This I especily obserued being prese , and seeing the ac∣ting thereof, s I  also that his L. (although hee speaketh Spanish very redily) did notwithstanding vse onely y• French tongue with the twoo Spaniardes, which (all the Duch Cap∣taines
vnderstanding) the knewe of all that passed, and ther∣by all  preuented. The truth is, the boate lay on our side where the Spanyad was, and the water then ebbing, ca∣ried it with a swift course to the enemies side, so that (as it then appeard) when they had giuen the adwe on both sdes, and Capt. Ogle entred into the boate, the shps could not re∣turne against the streame, but driuing with the same, landed him on our counterscap, where he thought best, and here cea∣sed our Jubilie, I call it a Jubilie, for during this cessati∣on of hostilitie, I thinke there issued out of the neighbour ene∣mie townes aboue coo Burgers with their wiues, &c. to come to the Archdukes campe, walking vppe and dwne the sandes and trenches of the enemie, verie neere the towne, as though we had béen all good friends, and so did their soldiers likewise: but ours kept within of purpose to conceale our weaknes, and notwithstanding faith enterchangably giuen to forbeare all violence during the treatie, yet did out whole troupes hold continuall, and generall guardes without relying vpon any promise at all. All this while our workes in the old Towne were aduanced with all diligence, and secresie possible, and made defensible before our Mart ended. Our newe forces lan∣ded also this day, betwéene 12 and 2 of the clocke in the culde towne, in despight of the enemies Cannon, without anye more losse then the hurt of the two shippers, & as I can learne of two soldiers, but none killed, nor those mortally woun∣ded. And yet to giue the enemie his due by saying the full truth, they were more then bountifull of powder and shot, to hin∣der our mens landing. All this while wee remayned quiet on both sides without shotte little or great, but the next mor∣ning (being Wednesday) they first opened the windowes of their wonted displeasure; it being my Lords pleasure, that e∣uerie man in towne should be quiet, till the enemie shoulde giue occasion to the contrarie, and then wee resaluted them with good Cannon, and so all thinges stand on their former frame, all our outward workes repssessed and guarded as
before, and so wee liue dayly expecting more supplies from the States, that our poore men maye nowe at last bee re∣freshed in Holland after their longe and miserable toyle. Wee haue vnderstoode of late by an Italian gentleman one of their Centinells Perdues, who was brought prisoner into towne, that the Archduke is highly offended with his counsell of warre for diuerting him frō the execution of his re∣solution, which was to haue attempted vs on the Sondaye night, (so often spoken of before) with 6000 men, &c. that by reason of the extremitie of his passion, fewe of them dare come in his presence, for preuenting his oportunitie by their dis∣swsions: and besides that, he is no lesse displeased to haue béen so mocked by his Lordship. For the future, if the Stes finde themselues able, and haue withali a will to continue the charge, which the de∣fence of this place hath already, and will still drawe vp∣pon them: (the Archduke continuing his siege by reliening it with competent numbers of well affected soldiers, and other néedefull prouisions) there is yet no appearance of daunger, nor cause to feare the enemies preuayling: but if they slacke saile, and giue the Duke such an other o∣portunitie (as hee had nowe of late) they, and all the world besides, may bée assured hee will make his best vse there∣of. By Cannon there remaineth small hope for him, if the States faile not to send Rise-wood to repaire therewith in the night what hee spoyleth in the day: for, with Rise and sande mingled, we worke chiefly on both sides, we haue al∣redye endured abou 161500 Canonodoes, and yet all ou bastions, and defences stil firme and tenable, hauing only their outward faces  discountenanced by the furie of the mny shot most of them haue endured, especially the sand∣hill, which is so farced with bullets, that (our men labouring to driue in spiked pallizadoes) doe often stumble vpon 6 or 8 in one hole togither: ad their piles, or pallizadoes often hindred in their entrance by the abundance of bullts lodged in their
way. To vnderminevs it is not possible, so lōg as we can hold what wee haue, for to the Landward lie our outworks, to preuent their approches that way, & our other places of passage are wa∣shed verie high euery Tide, and so the sea affordeth them little time to worke against vs, where it challengeth passage. Be∣sides this, all our Bulwarks looking towards their trenches are vnited, and prepared for all such accidents. Then, eyther furie, faction, or famine must open him way, for furie here is little cause of feare, if (as I sayde before) the States can, and will furnish their towne with sufficient nū∣bers of men. For faction, the vigilancie, and  of the Comman∣der, being a man of sound vnderstanding, trained in this oc∣cupation, may easilie breake those impostumations, as hether∣to his Lordship hath done, to the great increase of his honour, and better approbation of the soundnes of his iudgement: for the enemie made an English man, one Simon Cobye, an in∣strument to worke for him that way: but I prsume that Co∣nisbye by the rack, and smart of the whip at the gallowes foot, hath learned a lesson to séeke some other trade to thriue by, and the fellowe was in my charge to kéepe, and sounde by questio∣ning, and expostulations, and thereby I knowe the managing of that busines. And to be famished (vnlesse both the states, and England a∣bandon vs) were verie strange: for (notwithstanding all y• bat∣tries the enemie hath eyther at East, or West, on the sandes or piles of the ould Hauen, or else where) we haue, when the winde serueth, some nights 40 sailes of Hoyes and Smackes come in togither, and scarse one man hurt. We haue further∣more a new hauen almost , where night and day Ships may passe at pleasure. Besides, if both these should faile, the states may (with long boates which they call sloupes) land a∣ny thing in the old towne, as they did their Zeland soldiers of late, marie this place serueth only for such small open boates, but for no Hoyes nor Boates of burthen.
And so  for a Conclusion, if the states stand vpon tear of honour, and start not aside like a broken bowe (it hauing éen their fashion to grow wearie of such chargeable nurse chil∣dren, as they tearme it here) you sée many apparant probabi∣lities for their holding of this towne against the Archke, for a longer time then is expected: he will wast himselfe before it, & yet all the charge of his armie and of all prouisions is borne by the country, who haue, and doe still furnish him verie plnti∣full with all necessaries. Besides, the recouerie of this towne would be so beneficiall vnto him, and such ease to his subiects, as they haue good reason to trie their vttermost meanes to car∣rie it: for besides, that it would absolutely frée all y• sea coasts, and country within of roads, and incursions, wherewith they are excéedingly infested by this towne, and withall giue the Archduke good coneniencie for the lodging of his gallies and other shipping with little cost. It would enable him to bring at the least 6000 men more into the field yearely, then he now doth or can. For hee is constrained to hold many guarrisons in skonses builded heere and there in the land, to block vp this towne, which require many men for their defence, and draw on for their wages, and by ortification, &c. a mightie charge. These men, & charges I say, if he could preuaile here, would bee conuerted to other vses, and a spacious countrie of fertile ground now ouer-flowed, and seruing to no vse, in few yeares wholly recouered and made profitable, and all contributions (which the feare of this guarrison enforceth) from the Boores quite cut off. As I was about the shutting vpp of this tedious and ill di∣gested discourse, Newes came that the Archduke hath nowe at last pacified, and reconciled all his mutinous soldiers which haue béen long time in Brabant, as at Derst, Herentalls and o∣ther places thereabouts, holding for none but for themselues (their discontent growing from want of pay, which it séemeth the ke hath not giuen them contentment of.) And that those forces being neere 5000, and marching this way to re∣enforce the enemies Campe, and to force vs if they can, the issue, time will bring foorth. Meane time, with mo humble
remembrance of dutie to your ,  the  euer to blesse and prospe you (begging pardon for this r∣treame ediousnes) I take leaue. From  this Saint Stéenens day after the old stile 1601. scribed in hast for the most part by candle light. His Lordship (to leaue no stone of aduantage ) causeth euery soldier to come doubly, armed to the watch, eue∣rie Musketier bringing withall a Pike, and euery armed man carrying a musket, to serue with eyther as néede shall . His owne trauailes (vnlesse he had a body of brasse, being continued any long time) must needes drawe him into sicknes for there passe fewe nights, wherein hee walketh not abrad, or watcheth not the most part thereof, and in the day time h is so continually possessed with busines, that he hath no time to sleepe, and fewe men féede more sparingly. All these bal∣lanced togither will confirme I doubt  less thn I say.
The declaration of the desparate  made since, by the sayde  forces, for winning of the ld . THe  the  of this par would be  his friends. forgat not presently to write thereof into , Spai,  ,  vnto  hys great  hope , to  the stronge towne of O-end, but  he had , (as is )  with greater wrth against  towne then at any . And  to  with his Collonels and Captaines, what course  might best take in this so waighty a cause, and reuenge this  done to him and his whole estate. After much  and debating (contrarie to the opinion of some of his  approoued, Captaines, and Councellors) it was concluded, that withall his forces, a desperate attempt should be made at one inant, as well vpon the trenches and counterscarps with∣out the owne, as vpon the  Hauen, for the winning of the  wne, or at the least wise of the sand hill: The order of which enterprise with the day, and time being nowe resolued vpon,  Wallo, Germaines, & others as had before mu∣tined in diuers places, were with money pacied and com∣maunded to the Campe, Ladders, Shouels, Spades, Pick∣axes, and all other necessaries were prouided. In the meane time the Archduke (to helpe the errour of his former writing, & perswading himselfe that the towne should not be able to withstād y• furie of this forcible enterprise) sent
posts into all places (as before) advertising his friends againe of this resolution, and that he made no doubt, but within ten or fourtéen dayes to haue the towne at his commaund. On Monday therefore, being the . day of December last An. 1601, being the day appointed for this great attempt, An Italian (who was among the rest appointed in y• first ranks to begin this charge, at the ld Hauen, and knowing the ac∣tion to be most desperate, and therefore smale hope left him e∣uer to returne with his life) ed from the enemies Campe, and with his Rapier in his mouth swoome into the Hauen, and be∣ing receaued into the towne, declared vnto the Lord Generall, that the same day about 3 of the clock in the after-noone, when the water was ebbed from the walls, the enemie would with all his forces make his attempt both at the ld Hauen, and at y• works without the  with ten Thouand men, and that he was ed thither, to  his life as is before ayd: declaring farther; that it was resolued to renue the assault the two next aies following, & affirmed that if they were the first day va∣liantly replused, there was no doubt to be had that the  would bee brought to the like banquet theother two daies▪ Sir  (iudging fore that the enemie had some such intent, by reason that he did all the same day as in y• night before continue shooting against the Sand-hill and por Dupi∣ed) had alredie giuen order to the Captaines for the ing of the walls, trenches, and Counterscarps, and caused péeces of Ordinance to be remoued, and planted 7 great  péeces vpon the ance of the Hauen, which were well laden with square and  shot, not omitting any things that a wise and vigilant Commander ought in so waightie a cause to esée, incouraging his people to play the parts of good sol∣diers, and to bestow their shot well, and among the thickest of the enemies when they should make their approach. When the houre appointed was come, and the water fallen, as is before written, the enemie marched towardes the ould Hauen 40 men abre, the formost rancks carried Shouels, Spades, and Pick-axes, the next carried Ladders, after them wed Targets, armed men, and Muskets, all marched
with such resolution, as if they had made accompt to haue  no resistance at all, but they were as gallātly, & with like cor reed, & at al places answered with losse of their best blod, as well without the towne, as at the old , where the murthering  caused the enemies to fall, as rot∣ten ripe apples from the trées in a mighty storme. And although they could not enter the hauen, but they must goe in water vp to the knees, they pressed forward, and those which came be∣hind, put forward the formost: But sodenly (as sir Frauncis Veere had before ordained) twoo sluces were opened, the one giuing way to the land waters, and the other to the waters of the ditches about the towne, by reason whereof many of the e∣nemies (not able to kéepe their footing) were drowned, and the others stoode in water vp to their Nauels, so that their shot ser∣ued to no vse, for y• their der  hereby wet, but were for∣ced to fight with their : the fight continued on both sides with great furie, and esolution, vntill the dark∣nes of the euening forced them to retire, whereof they were not a little glad, for the slaughter was verie great on the ene∣mies side, most , Dutches and other Nations to the number of 1500, besides many that were wounded. Many of the enemies had made  of bread and chéese tyed behind them to their girdles with a péece of match, thinking therwith to help themselues for a day or two (if néede should so require) after they had gotten the sand hill as they made full accompt, and there to secure themselues from the shot of the towne for a time, vntill they might with greater force and opportunitie obtaine the ould towne. In this assault at all places, there were not aboue 40 of the towne souldiers staine and hurt: the Lords name be blessed therefore. In this assanlt the enemies horsemen were appointed to follow the footmen at the héeles, and were commanded by the Duke not to suffr them to retire, but to force thē still forward on their enterprise, which they forgot not to accomplish: but as it should seeme not altogither with their owne securitie, for some of the horses with their saddells and bridels haue ince  taken vp at Sluce, Flushing, West▪ cappell, and other
places of Zeland, as it pleased the winde and  to  them. The Lord Generall slept little the , but was busied in  and repairing  ∣ding to the te was ree, doubting  would the next day renue his attempt,  the  ∣ted not any good will,  could not  to  so vnkinde an : Yet such as  of Fladers report that y•  had appointed  ∣day la ast being the xij▪ day of this moneth  vpon  towne withall his forces, and to that end had prouided 2000▪  of proofe.  the ene∣mies souldiers vnwilling to come  desperate . haue denyed there seruice, so that a mutinie is  in the e∣nemies Campe, 200 and  are  apprehended &  of the ring-leaders  whereof wee shall shortly  further. In the meane time let all good Christians prayse God for these his wonderfull victories, and with humble and heartie prayer without ceasing, dere him to continue these his lo∣uing fauours towardes his  afflicted Church. And con∣trarywise to confound and ouerthrowe all the deseings of this obstinate and bloud-thirstie Archduke, with all others his ad∣herents and partakers, who séek and practise all meanes possi∣ble (as es both by day and night) to , and  the bloud of the little flocke of Iesus Christ, Amen. FINIS.
