2497 99842747 7431
THE PSALMES OF Dauid in Meter, The plaine Song beeing the com∣mon tunne to be sung and plaide vpon the Lute, Orpharyon, Citterne or Base Violl, seuerally or altogether, the sing∣ing part to be either Tenor or Treble to the Instrument, according to the nature of the voyce, or for fowre voyces: With tenne short Tunnes in the end, to which for the most part all the Psalmes may be vsually sung, for the vse of such as are of mean skill, and whose leysure least serueth to practice: By Richard Allison Gent. Practitioner in the Art of Musicke: and are to be solde at his house in the Dukes place neere Alde-gate. LONDON Printed by William Barley, the Assigne of Thomas Morley. 1599. Cum Priuilegio Regiae Majestatis.
To the right Honorable and most vertuous Lady, the Lady Anne Countesse of Warwicke. RIght H. the heauens, th earth & al things in them do sing with Dauid both mercy & iudgemet, they teach vs that God doth whatsoeuer pleaseth him, being able to punish them which forget his mercies, and ready to blesse those that feare his iudgements: for in the hea∣uens we may reade, that he which made them glori∣ous, is himselfe of exceeding glory; that he which en∣ritcheth them so mightily for the comfort of man, is vnto man of exceeding mercy. In the shaking of the earth we may reade, that the Ruler of the earth is mighty: and in the fruits of the earth we do enioy the fruits of his bounty: all which matters are therefore published, that in his Maiesty hee may bee feared, and in his mercie loued. But because we are blinde, and cannot see to reade the works of God to our instruction: wee haue the word of God also from whence, if we be not deafe, we may heare the same doctrine to our edi∣fication: for it telleth vs, how in louing sinne iudgement is to be feared, in a∣uoiding iudgement repentance is required: in true repentance mercy is assu∣red, in imbracing mercy Eternall happinesse will be graunted. But because the whole Booke of God to idle schollers may seeme too tedious, we haue the Psalms of Dauid more compendiously teaching doctrine fit for vs: for if we would see the danger of sinne, they wil shew it: if we would know how to turn from sinne, they will teach it: if we would praise God for his mercy receaued, they can direct vs: if we would pray to be deliuered from misery, they will be good guides vnto vs: yea in euery good action wee shall finde in the Psalmes sufficient instruction for vs. And that our meditations in the Psalmes may not want their delight, we haue that excellēt gift of God, the Art of Musick to accompany them: that our eyes beholding the words of Dauid, our fin∣gers
handling the Instruments of Musicke, our eares delighting in the swetenesse of the melody, and the heart obseruing the harmony of them: all these doe ioyne in an heauenly Consort, and God may bee glorified and our selues refreshed therewith. But I leaue this Argument to Dauid himselfe, who in consideration of the premisses exhorteth vs to make melody with hart and harpe, with trumpet and lowde Cymball; as if he had said that no way is sufficient to furder men on earth in their praising the Lord of Heauen. I onely am to yeelde a reason of this my present doing: My honorable good Lady, as zeale to Gods glory hath caused me to publish this worke, so dutie to your H. hath moued me to present it to your Ladyship: whose loue of piety and care of Religion haue beene alwaies such, that your owne happinesse is sealed vp to you in your possessing them: whose fauours to me in the dayes of your H. husband, sometimes my good Lord and Master, haue beene so great, that I may not forget them: and hauing no way to shewe a thankefull mind, but by presenting this simple work vnto your H. I humbly craue pardon for my boldnesse in offering it, and fauor from your Ladyship in accepting it, leauing these my simple labors vnder your H. protection, and commending your H. to the protection of the Almightie God. Your Honors humbly deuoted in all duety Richard Allison.
Iohn Dowland Batcheler of Musicke in commendation of Richard Allison, and this most excellent work. IF Musicks Arte be Sacred and Diuine, And holy Psalmes a subiect more Diuine: If the great Prophet did the words compile, And our rare Artist did these smooth notes file, Then I pronounce in reason and in loue, That both combinde, this most Diuine must proue, And this deare friend I recommend to thee Of thine owne worth a prooued veritie: Whose high desert doth rather vrge me still, To shew my weakenes, then to want good-will. William Leighton Esq. in praise of the Author. GOe silly Muse, and doe my loue present to Musickes praise the Author of this worke: Pleade his desert thar is so excellent, in whose swete notes so secrete skil doth lurke: Let all that loues this Sience so Diuine, afford him grace that haps this worke to see: Whose eares may iudge what Concord can combine by Musicks arte, consists in notes but three, Conioinde in parts with true Concent of art, as may appeare by euery Close contriude, How concords three containeth euery part within this Booke, from whence notes are deriude: Admire his skill: let God haue laude and praise, whose holy words these swete Consorts doe raise. Let this graue Musick giue your eares content, Sith Musickes arte is drawne from this Concent. Iohn Welton in prayse of the Author. DIuine Apollo God of heauenly Muses The Garden walkes for his repast frequenting, In Allies-son bright shining there he vses, Oft to attend the gracious Nymphes presenting Psalmes of all sorts, with instruments and voyces, Of sundry aires and sundry are their choyses. In those faire walks they vse the exercises Of Psalmes and Hymnes and spirituall songs deuining▪ Perfuming aire with their swete sacrifices From earth to heauen by sacred meane inclining. Long may they haunt those pathes with sacred blissing▪ To charme the noise of venemous vipers hissing.
The extract and effect of the Queenes Maiesties Patent to Thomas Morley, for the Printing of Musicke. ELIZABETH by the grace of God Queene of England, France and Ireland, Defender of of the faith. &c. To all Printers and Booke-sellers, and to all and singular Mayors, Shiriffes, Bayliffes, Constables, Head-boroughs and all other our officers, ministers and subiects, greeting. KNOW ye that for the especiall affection and good-will that wee haue and beare to the Sci∣ence of Musicke, and for the aduancement thereof, by our Letters, Patents dated the xxviii. day of September in the xl. yeere of our Reigne, haue graunted full priuiledge and licence vnto our wel-beloued seruant Thomas Morley Gent. of our Royall Chappell, and to his Assignes, De∣puties, Factors and seruants only, and none other, for xxi. yeeres next insuing, to imprint or cause to be imprinted any and so many set song or songs in parts, either in English, Latine, French Italian, or in any other tongue or tongues that may serue for Musicke, either in Church or chamber, or otherwise to be sung or plaide: and to rule, and cause to be ruled by impression, all euery, & any paper, such as may serue for the printing or pricking of any such song or songs: and may sell and vtter any printed Bookes or quieres of such ruled paper. Wee also straitly by the same forbid and prohibit all Printers, Booke-sellers, subiects & strangers, other then as is aforesaid, to do any the premisses: or to bring, or cause to be brought out of any forreine realmes into any our dominions, any set song or songes in parts, or otherwise to bee sung or plaide, imprinted in any forreine cuntry, or any ruled paper for Musicke, or to sell, or cause to be sold or other∣wise to dispose, vpon paine of our high displeasure, & the offender in any of the promisses, for euery time to forfait to vs, our heyres and successors the summe of x. pounds of lawfull English mony, and to the said Thomas Morley or his Assignes, all and euery the said Bookes, papers, song or songs. Wee doe by the same giue free libertie, power and autho∣ritie to the said Thomas Morley and his assignes, that they and euery of them with an Officer lawfully authorized for the peace, shall at all times, and in such manner, as by the lawes of this our realme is required, search for all such set songes, or any other the premisses as shall bee imprinted, transported or vttered contrary to the tenor of this our graunt: and the same so found to seaze vpon, and to bee according to the vse before mentioned. And wee haue also by the same willed and commanded our Printers, Masters and Wardens of the misterie of Stationers, and all Mayors, shi∣riffes, Bayliffes, Constables and head-boroughs, and all other our officers, ministers and subiects, to assist the said Tho∣mas Morley or his assignes for the due execution of the premisses.
A Table containing what notes are to be sung to these particular Psalmes following. The Venite and Benedictus both to one tunne. The 112. and the 127. to the tunne of Our Father which▪ &c. The 125. Psalme to the tunne of the Ten Commandements. All other Psalmes are to bee obserued as they are orderly printed. Psal. 4. 8. 11. 15. 19. 29. 33. 36. 39. 43. 48. 54. 57. 62. 65. 73. 76. 82. 87. 90. 63. 96. 99. 102. 107. 110. 115. 123. 131. 139. 143. 144. 149. Psal. 10. 13. 17. 32. 35. 38. 42. 47. 51. 53. 56. 60. 64. 71. 75. 80. 85. 86. 95. 98. 101. 106 109. 114. 118. 142. 146. Psal. 9. 12. 16. 23. 31. 34. 37. 42. 49. 55. 58. 63. 66. 74. 79. 83. 89. 91. 94. 97. 100. 105 108. 117. 128. 129. 133. 140. 150. Psal. 50. 67. 70. 98. Psal. 84. Psal. 88. Psal. 92. Psal. 116. Psal. 146. Psal. 125.
Veni Creator CANTVS. Richard Allison. COme holy Ghost eternall God, pro- ceeding from aboue: Both frō the Father and the son, the God of peace and loue. Visit our minds and into vs, thy heauen- ly grace inspire: That in all truth and god- li- nes, we may haue true de- sire. Veni Creator CITTERNE. Richard Allison. COme holy Ghost eternall God.
Veni Creator. TENOR. Richard Allison. COme holie Ghost eternall God, Proceeding from aboue, Both from the father and the sonne, The God of peace and loue, Visite our mindes and in-to vs, Thy heauenly grace inspire, That in all truth and godli- nes, We may haue true desire, Veni Creator. BASSVS. R. Allison. COme holie Ghost eternall God, Pro∣ceeding from aboue. Both from the father and the sonne, The God of peace and loue. Visite our mindes and into vs, Thy heauenly grace inspire, That in all truth and godlynesse, We may haue true desire. Veni Creator ALTVS. Richard Allison. COme holie Ghost eternall God, proceeding from aboue, Both from the father and the sonne, The God of peace and loue, Visite our mindes and into vs, Thy heauenly grace inspire, That in all truth and godlynesse, We may haue true de-sire.
The humble sute of a Sinner CANTVS. Richard Allison. O Lord of whom I do depend, Beholde my carefull hart, And whē thy will & pleasure is, Release mee of my smart, Thou seest my sorrowes what they are, My griefe is known to thee, And there is none that can remoue, Or take the same from mee. The humble sute of a Sinner CITTERNE. Richard Allison. O Lord of whome
The humble sute of a Sinner TENOR. Richard Allison. O Lord of whome I do depend, Behold my carefull hart. And when thy will & pleasure is, Release me of my smart. Thou seest my sorrowes what they are, My griefe is knowne to thee. And there is none that can remoue, or take the same from me. BASSVS. R. Allison. O Lord of whome I do depend, Be∣hold my carefull hart. And when thy will and pleasure is, Release me of my smart. Thou seest my sorrowes what they are, My griefe is knowne to thee. And there is none that can remoue, or take the same from mee. The humble sute of a Sinner. ALTVS. Richard Allison. O Lord of whome I do depend, Behold my carefull hart: and when thy will and pleasure is, Release of my smart. Thou seest my sorrowes what they are, My griefe is knowne to thee. And there is none that can remoue, Or take the same from me.
Venite exultemus. CANTVS. Richard Allison. O Come & let vs now reioice, And sing vnto the Lord, And to our one- lie Sauiout, Al- so with one accord, O let vs come before his face, With inward reuerence, Con∣fessing all our for- mer sinnes, And that with di- li- gence. Venite exultemus. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. O Come and let vs now reioice.
Venite exultemus. TENOR. Richard Allison. O Come and let vs now re- ioyce, And sing vnto the Lord, And to our onely Sauiour, Also with one accord, O let vs come before his face, With inwarde reuerence, Confessing all our former sinnes, And that with dili - gence. Venite exultemus. BASSVS. Richard Allison. O Come and let vs now reioyce, and sing vn-to the Lord, And to our only Sauiout Al- so with one accord▪ O let vs come before his face, With inward reuerence: Confessing all our former sinnes, And that with diligence. Venite exultemus. ALTVS. Richard Allison. O Come and let vs now reioyce, And sing vnto the Lorde, And to our onely Sauiour, Al- so with one accord, O let vs come before his face, With inward reuerence, Confessing all our former sinnes And that with di- ligence.
Te Deum. CANTVS. Richard Allison. WE praise thee God wee knowledge thee, The one- ly Lord to be And as eter- nal father all, The earth doth worship thee, To thee all Angels crie the heauens, and all the powers therin, To thee Cherub & Seraphin, to crie they do not lin. Te Deum. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. WE praise thee God.
Te Deum. TENOR. Richard Allison. WEe praise thee God, we knowledge thee, The onely Lord to be, And as eter- nall Father all, The earth doth worship thee, To thee all Angels crye, the heauens and all the powers therein, To thee Cherub and Seraphin, to cry they doe not lin. Te Deum. BASSVS. R. Allison. WEe praise thee God, wee knowledge thee, The onely Lord to be, And as eter- nall Father all, The earth doth worship thee, To thee all Angels cry the heauens and all the powers therin, To the Che∣rub and Seraphin, To crie they doe not lin. Te Deum. ALTVS. Richard Allison. WE praise thee God we knowledge thee the onely Lord to be, And as eternall Father all the earth doth worship thee, To thee all Angels crie the heauens and all the powers therein, To thee Che∣rub and Seraphin, To crie they do not lin.
The Song of the three Children. CANTVS. Richard Allison. O All yee workes of God the Lord, Blesse yee the Lord, Praise him and mag- ni- fye him for e- uer. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. O All yee workes of God.
The song of the three Children. TENOR▪ Richard Allison. O All yee works of God the Lord, blesse yee the Lord, Praise him and mag- ni- fie him for e- uer. The song of the three. &c. BASSVS. R. Allison. O Al ye works of God the Lord, blesse ye the Lord, Praise him and magnifie him for euer. The song of the three Children. ALTVS. Richard Allison. O All yee works of God the Lord, blesse yee the Lord, praise him and mag- ni- fie him for e- uer.
Magnificat. CANTVS. Richard Allison. MY soule doth magni- fie the Lord, My sprite eke euer- more, Re∣ioyceth  in the Lord my God, Which is my Saui- our, And why? because he did re- garde, And gaue respect vn- to So base e- state of his handmaid, And let the mightie goe. Magnificat CITTERNE. Richard Allison. M My soule doth magnifie the Lord.
Magnificat. TENOR▪ Richard Allison. MY soule doth magnifie the Lord, My sprite eke euermore, Reioyceth in the Lord my God, Which is my Sauiour. And why? because he did regard, And gaue respect vnto, So base estate of his handmaide, And let the mightie goe. Magnificat. BASSVS. R. Allison. MY soule doth magnifie the Lorde, My sprit eke euermore, Reioiceth in the Lord my God, Which is my Sauiour. And why? because he did regard, And gaue re-spect vnto, So base estate of his hand∣maide,  And let the mightie goe. Magnificat. ALTVS. Richard Allison. MY soule doth magnifie the Lord, My sprite eke e- uermore, Reioyceth in the Lord my God, Which is my Sa- uiour. And why? because he did regard, And gaue respect vn- to, So base estate of his handmaid, And let the mightie goe.
Nunc dimittis. CANTVS. Richard Allison. O Lord, because my harts desire hath wished long to see: My one-ly Lord and Sa- uiour, thy sonne before I dye: The ioy & health of all mankind, De- sired long be∣fore,  Which now is come in- to the world, Of mercy bringing store. Nunc dimittis. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. O Lord, because my harts desire.
Nunc dimittis. TENOR. Richard Allison. O Lord, because my hearts de- sire hath wished long to see, My onely Lord and Sauiour, thy Sonne before I die: The ioy and health of all mankinde, desired long before: Which now is come into the worlde, of mercy bringing store. Nunc dimittis. BASSVS Richard Allison. O Lord, because my hearts desire, hath wish∣ed  long to see, My onlie Lord and Sauiour, thy son before I die, The ioy and health of all mankinde, desired long be∣fore:  Which nowe is come in- to the worlde, of mercie bringing store. Nunc dimittis. ALTVS. Richard Allison. O Lord, because my hearts desire, hath wished long to see, My onely Lord and Sauiour, thy son before I die: The ioy and health of all mankinde, desired long before: Which now is come into the world, of mercie bringing store.
Quicunque vult. CANTVS. Richard Allison. WHat mā so e- uer he be that, Sal- uation will obtaine, The Catholike be∣leefe he must, Before all things re- taine: Which faith vnlesse he ho- lie keepe, And vn- de-fy- led∣ly, Without all doubt eternally, He shall besure to dye. Quicunque vult. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. WHat man so euer.
Quicunque vult. TENOR. Richard Allison. WHat man so- e- uer he be that, saluation will attaine: The Catholike beliefe he must, be- fore all things retaine: Which faith vnlesse he ho-ly keepe, & vndefiledly: Without all doubt eternal∣ly, he shall be sure to die. Quicunque vult. BASSVS. R. Allison. WHat man so e-uer he be that, saluation will attaine: The Catholike beliefe he must, before al things retaine. Which faith vnlesse he holy keepe, & vn- de- filedlie: Without all doubt e-ter-nally, he shall be sure to die. Quicunque vult. ALTVS. Richard Allison. WHat man so-e- uer he be that, sal- ua- tion will attaine: The Catholike beliefe he must, before all things retaine. Which faith vnlesse he holy keepe, and vndefiledlie: Without all doubt eternally he shall be sure to die.
The Lamentation. CANTVS. Richard Allison. O Lord turne not a-way thy face, From him that lyeth prostrate, La∣menting  sore his sinful life, Before thy mercie gate, Which gate thou openest wide to those, That doe la∣ment  their sinne, Shut not that gate against me Lord, But let mee en- ter in. The Lamentation. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. O Lord turne not away.
The Lamentation. TENOR. Richard Allison. O Lord turne not away thy face, from him that lieth prostrate: Lamen- ting sore his sinfull life, before thy mercy gate. Which gate thou openest wide to those, that doe lament their sinne: Shut not that gate against me Lord, but let me en- ter in. The Lamenta. BASSVS. R. Allison. O Lord turne not a-way thy face, from him that lieth prostrate: Lamenting sore his sinfull life, be-fore thy mercy gate. Which gate thou o- penest wide to those, that doe la- ment their sin: Shut not that gate a- gainst me Lord, but let me en-ter in. The Lamentation. ALTVS. Richard Allison. O Lord turne not away thy face, from him that lieth prostrate: Lamenting sore his sinful life, before thy mercie gate. Which gate thou openest wide to those, that doe lament their sinne: Shut not that gate against me Lord, but let me enter in.
The Lords prayer. CANTVS. Richard Allison. OVR Father which in hea- uen art, Lord hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdome come, thy will be done in earth. Euen as the same in hea- uen is. Giue vs O Lord our daylie bread this day, As we forgiue our detters, so forgiue our debts we praye. Verte Folium The Lords prayer. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. OVr Father which in heauen art. Verte Folium
The Lords prayer. TENOR. Richard Allison. OVR Father which in hea- uen art, Lord hallowed▪ be thy name. Thy kingdome come, thy will bee done in earth, euen as the same in Hea- uen is, Giue vs O Lord our daylie breade this day, As wee for- giue our det- ters, so for- giue our debts wee praye. The Lords prayer. BASSVS R. Allison. OVr Father which in Heauen art, Lord hallowed bee thy name: Thy kingdome come thy will be done in earth, euen as the same in heauen is Giue vs O Lord our daylie bread this day: As we for∣giue our detters so for- giue our debts wee praye. The Lords prayer. ALTVS. Richard Allison. OVr Father which in hea-uen art, Lord hal- lowed be thy name: Thy kingdome come thy will bee done in earth, euen as the same in Hea- uen is. Giue vs O Lord our day- lie breade this day: As wee for- giue our det- ters so for- giue our debts wee praye.
The Lords prayer. CANTVS. Richard Allison. Into temtation lead vs not, from e- uill make vs free. For kingdome power and glo- rie thine, Both now and e- uer bee. The Lords prayer. CITTERNE. Richard Allison.
The Lords prayer. TENOR. Richard Allison. Into tempta- tion lead vs not, from e- uill make vs free: For king- dome, power, and glo- ry thine, both now and e- uer bee. The Lords prayer. BASSVS R. Allison. Into tempta- tion lead vs not, from e- uill make vs free: For kingdome, power, and glo- ry thine, both now and e- uer bee. The Lords prayer. ALTVS. Richard Allison. Into tempta- tion lead vs not, from e- uill make vs free: For king- dome, power, and glo- ry thine, both now and e- uer bee.
The x. Commandements. CANTVS. Richard Allison. HArke Isra- ell & what I say, Giue heede to vn- der-stand, I am the Lord thy God that brought, Thee out of Aegipt land. Euen from the house wherein thou didst, In thraldome liue a slaue: None other Gods at all before my presence shalt thou haue. The x. Commandements. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. HArke Israel and what I say.
The x. Commandements. TENOR. Richard Allison. HArk Is- ra- ell and what I say, giue heede to vnderstand: I am the Lord thy God that brought, thee out of E- gipt land. Euen from the house wherein thou didst, in thraldome liue a slaue: None other Gods at all before, my presence shalt thou haue. The x. Command. BASSVS Richard Allison. HArk Is-ra-el and what I say, giue heed to vnderstād: I am the Lord thy God that brought, thee out of Aegipt land: Euen from the house wherein thou didst in thraldome liue a slaue: None other gods at al before, my presence shalt thou haue. The x. Commandements. ALTVS. Richard Allison. HArk Is- ra- ell and what I say, giue heede to vnderstand: I am the Lord thy God that brought, thee out of E-gipt land. Euen from the house wherein thou didst, in thraldome liue a slaue: None other Gods at all before, my presence shalt thou haue.
The complaint of a Sinner. CANTVS. Richard Allison. WHere righteousnes doth say, Lord for my sin- full part, In wrath thou  shouldst mee pay, Vengeāce for my de- sert. I can it not de- ny, But needs I must con∣fesse,  How that continual- ly, Thy lawes I do transgresse, Thy lawes I doe transgresse. The complaint of a Sinner. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. WHere righteousnes doth say.
The Complaint of a sinner. TENOR. Richard Allison. WHere righ- te- ousnes doth say, Lord for my sin- full part, In wrath thou shouldst me  pay, Vengeance for my desert. I can it not deny, But needes I must confesse, How that con∣tinually,  Thy lawes I doe transgresse, thy lawes I doe transgresse. The Complaint &c. BASSVS. R. Allison. WHere righteousnesse doth say, Lord  for my sinful part, In wrath thou shouldst me pay,  vengeance for my desert. I can it not deny, but  needs I must confesse, How that continually, thy lawes I  doe transgresse, thy lawes I doe transgresse. The Complaint of a sinner. ALTVS. Richard Allison. WHere righ- te- ousnesse doth say, Lord for my sin- full part, In wrath thou shouldst me  pay, vengeance for my de- sert. I can it not deny, but needs I must confesse, How that con- tinual∣ly,  thy lawes I doe transgresse, thy lawes I doe transgresse.
Psalme. 1. CANTVS. Richard Allison. THe man is blest that hath not bent, to wicked read his eare, Nor led his life as sinners doe, nor sat in scorners Chaire: But in the law of God the Lord, doth set his whole delight, And in that law doth ex- er- cise, himselfe both day and night. Psalme. 1. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. THe man is blest that hath not bent.
Psalme 1. TENOR. Richard Allison. THe man is blest that hath not bent, to wicked read his eare: Nor led his life as sinners doe, nor sat in scor- ners chaire: But in the law of God the Lord, doth set his whole delight: And in that law doth exercise, himselfe both day and night. Psalme 1. BASSVS. R. Allison. THe man is blest that hath not bent, to wicked read his eare: Nor led his life as sinners doe, Nor sat in scorners chaire. But in the law of God the Lord, doth set his whole delight: And in that law doth exercise, himselfe both day & night. Psalme 1. ALTVS. Richard Allison. THe man is blest that hath not bent, to wicked read his eare: Nor led his life as sinners doe, nor sat in scorners chaire. But in the law of God the Lord, doth set his whole delight: And in that law doth exer- cise, him selfe both day and night.
Psalme. 3. CANTVS. Richard Allison. O Lord how are my foes in- creast, Which vexe me more and more? They kill my hart, when as they say, God can him not restore. But thou O Lord art my defence, When I am hard bestead. My worship and mine honour both, and thou holdst vp my head. Psalme. 3. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. O Lord howe are my foes increast.
Psalme 3. TENOR. Richard Allison. O Lord howe are my foes increast, which vexe mee more and more? They kill my hart when as they say, God can him not restore. But thou O Lord art my defence, when I am hard bestead: My worship and mine honour both, and thou holdst vp my head. Psalme 3. BASSVS. R. Allison. O Lord howe are my foes increast, which vexe me more and more? They kil my hart when as they say, God can him not restore. But thou O Lord art my defence, when I am hard bestead: My worship and mine honour both, and thou holdst vp my head. Psalme 3. ALTVS. Richard Allison. O Lord how are my foes in- creast, which vexe mee more and more? They kill my hart when as they say, God can him not restore. But thou O Lord art my defence, when I am hard be∣stead: My worship and mine honour both, and thou holdst vp my head.
Psalme. 6. CANTVS. Richard Allison. LOrd in thy wrath reproue me not, though I de- serue thine yre, Ne yet cor∣rect  mee in thy rage, O Lord I thee de- sire: For I am weake therefore O Lord, of mer- cie  me forbeare, And heale me Lord, for why? thou knowest, my bones do quake for feare. Psalme. 6. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. LOrd in thy wrath reproue me not.
Psalme 6. TENOR. Richard Allison. LOrd in thy wrath reproue me not, though I deserue thine ire: Ne yet correct me in thy rage,  O Lord I thee de- sire. For I am weake therefore O Lord, of mercy me forbeare: And heale mee  Lord for why thou knowst, my bones doe quake for feare. Psalme 6. BASSVS. R. Allison. LOrd in thy wrath reproue me not, though  I deserue thine ire: Ne yet cor- rect mee in thy  rage, O Lord I thee desire. For I am weake there∣fore  O Lord, of mercy me forbeare: And heale me  Lord for why thou knowst, my bones doe  quake for feare. Psalme 6. ALTVS. Richard Allison. LOrd in thy wrath reproue me not, though I deserue thine ire: Ne yet correct mee in thy  rage, O Lord I thee de- sire. For I am weake therefore O Lord, of mercy me for- beare: And heale me  Lord for why thou knowst, my bones doe quake for feare.
Psalme. 14. CANTVS. Richard Allison. THere is no God as foolish men, Affirme in their mad moode: Their drifts are all corrupt and vaine, Not one of them doth good. The Lord beheld from hea- uen high, the whole race of mankind: And saw not one that sought in deed, the li- uing God to find. Psalme. 14. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. THere is no God as foolish men.
Psalme 14. TENOR. Richard Allison. THere is no God as foolish men, affirme in their mad mood: Their drifts are all corrupt and vaine, not one of them doth good. The Lord beheld from heauen high, the whole race of mankinde: And saw not one that sought in deede, the liuing God to finde. Psalme 14. BASSVS. R. Allison. THere is no God as foolish men, affirme in their mad mood: Their drifts are all corrupt and vaine, not one of them doth good. The Lord beheld frō heauen high, the whole race of mankinde: And saw not one that sought in deed, the liuing God to finde. Psalme 14. ALTVS. Richard Allison. THere is no God as foolish men, affirme in their mad mood: Their drifts are all corrupt and vaine, not one of them doth good. The Lord beheld from hea- uen high, the whole race of mankinde: And saw not one that sought in deede, the liuing God to finde.
Psalme. 18. CANTVS. Richard Allison. O God my strēgth & for- ti- tude, of force I must loue thee: Thou art my castell and de- fence, in my neces- si- ty. My God my rock in whom I trust, the worker of my wealth: My refuge, buckler and my shield, the horne of all my health. Psalme. 18. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. O God my strength and fortitude.
Psalme 18. TENOR. Richard Allison. O God my strength and for- titude, of force I must loue thee: Thou art my Castle and defence in my ne- ces- sitie. My God my rock in whom I trust, the worker of my wealth: My refuge, buckler and my shield, the horne of all my health. Psalme 18. BASSVS. R. Allison. O God my strength and for- ti- tude of force I must loue thee: Thou art my castell and de∣fence, in my neces- sity. My God, my rock in whom I trust, the worker of my wealth: My refuge, buckler and my shield, the horne of all my health. Psalme 18. ALTVS. Richard Allison. O God my strength and for- titude, of force I must loue thee: Thou art my Castle and defence, in my ne- cessi- tie. My God my rocke in whom I trust, the worker of my wealth: My refuge, buckler and my shield, the horne of all my health.
Psalme. 21. CANTVS. Richard Allison. O Lord how ioyful is the King, in thy strēgth & thy power? How vehemēt∣lie  doth he reioyce, in thee his Sa- uiour? For thou hast giuen vn- to him, his god- ly  harts de- sire: To him nothing hast thou denide, of that he did require. Psalme. 21. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. O Lord how ioyfull is the King.
Psalme 21. TENOR. Richard Allison. O Lord how ioyfull is the King, in thy strength and thy power? Howe vehemently doth  he reioyce, in thee his Sa- uiour? For thou hast gi- uen vnto him, his godly harts desire: To him no∣thing  hast thou denide, of that he did require. Psalme 21. BASSVS. R. Allison. O Lord howe ioyfull is the King,  in thy strength and thy power? How vehemently doth  he reioyce, in thee his Sa- ui- our? For thou hast  giuen vnto him, his godly harts desire: To him no∣thing  hast thou denide, of that he did require. Psalme 21. ALTVS. Richard Allison. O Lord how ioyfull is the King, in thy strength and thy power? How vehemently doth  he reioyce, in thee his Sa- ui- our? For thou hast giuen vn-to him, his godly harts de- sire: To him no∣thing  hast thou denide, of that he did require.
Psalme. 22. CANTVS. Richard Allison. O God my God, wherefore dost thou, forsake me vtter- ly: And helpest not when I doe make, my great cōplaint and crie. To thee my God euen all day long, I do both cry & call: I cease not all the night and yet, thou hearest not at all. Psalme. 22. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. O O God my God, wherefore dost thou?
Psalme 22. TENOR. Richard Allison. O God my God wherfore dost thou, forsake me vtter- ly: And helpest not when I doe make my great complaint and cry? To thee my God euen all day long, I do both crie and call: I cease not all the night and yet, thou hearest not at all. Psalme 22. BASSVS. R. Allison. O God my God wherefore dost thou, forsake me vtter- ly: And helpest not whē I do make my great complaint and cry? To thee my God euen all day long, I do both crie and call: I cease not all the night and yet, thou hearest not at all. Psalme 22. ALTVS. Richard Allison. O God my God, wherfore dost thou, forsake me vt-ter-ly? And helpest not when I doe make my great complaint and cry? To thee my God euen all day long, I do both cry and call: I cease not all the night and yet, thou hearest not at all.
Psalme. 25. CANTVS. Richard Allison. I Lift my hart to thee, my God and guide most iust: Now suffer me to take no shame, for in thee do I trust. Let not my foes re- ioyce, nor make a scorne of me: And let them not bee o- uer thorwne, that put their trust in thee. Psalme. 25. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. I Lift my hart to thee.
Psalme 25. TENOR. Richard Allison. I Lift my heart to thee, my God and guide most iust: Nowe suffer mee to take no shame, for in thee doe I trust. Let not my foes reioice, nor make a scorne of mee: And let them not bee ouerthrowne, that put their trust in thee. Psalme 25. BASSVS. R. Allison. I Lift my hart to thee, my God & guide most iust: Nowe suffer me to take no shame, for in thee doe I trust. Let not my foes reioice, nor make a scorne of mee: And let them not bee ouerthrowne, that put their trust in thee. Psalme 25. ALTVS. Richard Allison. I Lift my heart to thee, my God and guide most iust: Nowe suffer mee to take no shame, for in thee doe I trust. Let not my foes reioice, nor make a scorne of mee: And let them not bee ouerthrowne, that put their trust in thee.
Psalme. 30. CANTVS. Richard Allison. ALl laud & praise with hart and voice, O Lord I giue to thee: Which didst not make my foes reioyce, but hast exalted me. O Lord my God to thee I cried, in all my pain and griefe: Thou gauest an eare & didst prouide, to ease me with re- liefe. Psalme. 30. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. ALl laud and praise with hart and voice.
Psalme 30. TENOR. Richard Allison. ALl laud and praise with heart and voice, O Lord I giue to thee: Which didst not make my foes reioice, but hast exalted me. O Lord my God to thee I cride, in all my paine and griefe: Thou gauest an eare and didst prouide, to ease me with reliefe. Psalme 30. BASSVS. R. Allison. ALl laud and praise with heart and voice, O Lord I giue to thee: Which didst not make my foes reioice, but hast ex- alted me. O Lord my God to thee I cride, in all my paine and griefe: Thou gauest an eare and didst prouide, to ease me with reliefe. Psalme 30. ALTVS. Richard Allison. ALl laud and praise with heart and voice, O Lord I giue to thee: Which didst not make my foes reioice, but hast exal- ted mee. O Lord my God to thee I cride, in all my paine and griefe: Thou gauest an eare and didst prouide, to ease me with re- liefe.
Psalme. 41. CANTVS. Richard Allison. THe man is blest that carefull is, the needy to consider: For in the season peri- lous, the Lord will him deliuer. The Lord will make him safe & sound, and happie in the land: And he wil not de- li- uer him, in- to his enemies hand. Psalme. 41. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. THe man is blest that carefull is.
Psalme 41. TENOR. Richard Allison. THe man is blest that carefull is, the needy to consi- der: For in the season perilous, the Lord will him deliuer. The Lord will make him safe and sound, and happie in the land: And he will not deli- uer him, into his enimies hand. Psalme 41. BASSVS. R. Allison. THe man is blest that careful is, the needy to consider: For in the season perilous, the Lord wil him deliuer. The Lord will make him safe and sound, and happy in the land: And he will not deliuer him, into his enimies hand. Psalme 41. ALTVS. Richard Allison. THe man is blest that carefull is, the nee- dy to consi- der: For in the season peri- lous, the Lord will him deliuer. The Lord will make him safe and sound, and happie in the land: And he will not de- liuer him, into his enimies hand.
Psalme. 44. CANTVS. Richard Allison. OVr eares haue heard our fathers tell, and reuerently record: The wōdrous workes that thou hast done, in alder time O Lord. How thou didst cast the Gentiles out, & stroydst thē with strong hand: Planting our fa- thers in their place, and gau'st to them their land. Psalme. 44. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. OVr eares haue heard our fathers tell.
Psalme 44. TENOR. Richard Allison. OVr eares haue heard our Fathers tell, and reuerently record: The wondrous works that thou hast done, in alder time O Lord. How thou didst cast the Gentiles out, and stroidst them with strong hand: Planting our Fathers in their place, and gauest to them their land. Psalme 44. BASSVS. R. Allison. OVr eares haue heard our Fathers tell, and reuerently record: The wondrous works that thou hast done, in alder time O Lord. How thou didst cast the Gentiles out, and stroidst them with strong hand: Planting our Fathers in their place, And gauest to them their land. Psalme 44. ALTVS. Richard Allison. OVr eares haue heard our Fathers tell, and reuerently record: The wondrous works that thou hast done, in alder time O Lord. How thou didst cast the Gentiles out, and stroidst them with strong hand: Planting our Fathers in their place, and gauest to them their land.
Psalme. 46. CANTVS. Richard Allison. THe Lord is our defence and ayde, the strength whereby wee stande: Whē we with wo are much dis- maid, hee is our help at hand. Though th'earth remoue wee wil not fear, thogh hils so high and steep: Be thrust and hurled here & there, with-in the Sea so deepe. Psalme. 46. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. THe Lord is our defence and ayd.
Psalme 46. TENOR. Richard Allison. THe Lord is our defence and ayd, the strength whereby we stand: When we with woe are much dismayd, he is our helpe at hand. Though th'earth remoue we wil not feare, though hils so high and steepe: Be thrust and hurled here and there, within the sea so deepe. Psalme 46. BASSVS. R. Allison. THe Lord is our defence and ayd, the strength whereby wee stand: when wee with woe are much dismaid, he is our helpe at hand. Though th'earth remoue wee will not feare, though hils so high and steepe: Be thrust and hurled here and there, with∣in the sea so deepe. Psalme 46. ALTVS. Richard Allison. THe Lord is our defence and ayd, the strength whereby wee stand: When we with woe are much dismayd, he is our helpe at hand. Though th'earth remoue we will not feare, though hils so high and steepe: Be thrust and hurled here and there, within the sea so deepe.
Psalme. 50. CANTVS. Richard Allison. THe mighty God th'eternal hath thus spoke, & all the world hee wil cal & pro-uoke, Euen frō the East, and so foorth to the West. From to- ward Sion, which place him li- keth best, God wil ap- peare in beauty most ex- cel- lent. Our God wil come be-fore that longtime bee spent. Psalme. 50. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. THe mightie God th'eternal hath thus spoke.
Psalme 50. TENOR. Richard Allison. THe mighty God th'Eternall hath thus spoke, And all the world he will call and prouoke: Euen from the East, and so forth to the west, from toward Sion, which place him liketh best, God will ap∣peare in beauty most excellent. Our God will come before that long time be spent. Psalme 50. BASSVS. R. Allison. THe mighty God th'Eternall hath thus spoke, And all the worlde hee will call and prouoke: Euen from the East and so forth to the west: From toward Sion, which place him liketh best, God will ap∣peare in beauty most excellent. Our God will come before that long time be spent. Psalme 50. ALTVS. Richard Allison. THe mighty God, th'Eternal hath thus spoke, And al the world he wil call and prouoke: Euen from the East and so forth to the west, from toward Sion, which place him liketh best, God wil ap∣peare in beauty most ex- cellent. Our God will come before that long time be spent.
Psalme. 51. CANTVS. Richard Allison. O Lord consi- der my distresse, and now with speed some pittie take: My sinnes de∣face,  my faults re- dresse, good Lord for thy great mercies sake. Wash mee O Lord, and make me  clean, frō this vniust and sinful act: And puri- fie yet once againe, my hainous crime and bloody fact. Psalme. 51. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. O Lord consider my distresse.
Psalme 51. TENOR. Richard Allison. O Lord consi- der my distresse, and now with speede some pittie take: My sinnes de∣face  my faults redresse, good Lord for thy great mercies sake. Wash me O Lord & make me clean, from  this vniust and sinfull act: And purifie yet once againe, my haynous crime and bloudie fact. Psalme 51. BASSVS. R. Allison. O Lord consider my distresse, and  now with speede some pittie take: My sinnes de∣face  my faults redresse, good Lord for thy great  mercies sake. Wash me O Lord and make me cleane,  from this vniust and sinfull act: And pu- rifie yet  once againe, my haynous crime and bloudy fact. Psalme 51. ALTVS. Richard Allison. O Lord con- sider my distresse, and now with speede some pittie take: My sinnes de∣face  my faults redresse, good Lord for thy great mercies sake. Wash me O Lord & make me clean, from  this vniust & sinfull act: And purifie yet once a- gaine, my haynous crime and bloudie fact.
Psalme. 52. CANTVS. Richard Allison. WHy doest thou tyrant boast a- broad, thy wicked works to praise? Doest thou not know there is a God, whose mercies last alwaies? Why doth thy mind yet still de- uise, such wicked wiles to warp? Thy tongue vntrue in for- ging lyes, is like a rasour sharp. Psalme. 52. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. WHy doest thou tyrant boast abroad.
Psalme 52. TENOR. Richard Allison. WHy doest thou tyrant boast abroad, thy wicked works to praise? Doest thou not knowe there is a God, whose mercies last alwaies? Why doth thy minde yet still deuise, such wicked waies to warp? Thy tongue vntrue in forging lies, is like a rasour sharp. Psalme 52. BASSVS. R. Allison. WHy doest thou tyrant boast abroad, thy wicked works to praise? Doest thou not know there is a God, whose mercies last alwaies? Why doth thy minde yet still deuise, such wicked waies to warp? Thy tongue vntrue in forging lies, is like a rasour sharp. Psalme 52. ALTVS. Richard Allison. WHy doest thou tyrant boast abroad, thy wicked works to praise? Doest thou not know there is a God, whose mercies last alwaies? Why doth thy mind yet still deuise, such wicked waies to warp? thy tongue vntrue in forging lies, is like a rasour sharp.
Psalme. 59. CANTVS. Richard Allison. SEnd ayd & saue mee from my foes, O Lord I pray to thee: De∣fend  and keepe me from all those, That rise and striue with me. O Lord preserue me from those men, whose doings are not good: And set me sure and safe from thē, that still thirst af- ter blood. Psalme. 59. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. SEnd ayd and saue me from myfoes.
Psalme 59. TENOR. Richard Allison. SEnd aide and saue me from my foes, O Lord I pray to thee: Defend and keepe me from all those, that rise and striue with mee. O Lord preserue me from those men, whose doings are not good: And set me sure and safe from them, that still thirst af- ter blood. Psalme 59. BASSVS. R. Allison. SEnd ayde and saue me from my foes, O Lord I pray to thee: Defend and keepe me from all those, that rise and striue with mee. O Lord pre∣serue  me frō those men, whose doings are not good: And set me sure and safe from them, that still thirst af- ter blood. Psalme 59. ALTVS. Richard Allison. SEnd ayde and saue me from my foes, O Lord I pray to thee: Defend and keepe mee from all those, that rise and striue with mee. O Lord preserue me from those men, whose doings are not good: And set me sure and safe from them, that still thirst after blood.
Psalme. 61. CANTVS. Richard Allison. REgarde O Lord for I complaine, and make my sute to thee: Let not my words returne in vaine, but giue an eare to me. From off the coasts and vtmost partes, of all the earth abroad: In griefe & anguish of my hart, I crie to thee O Lord. Psalme. 61. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. REgard O Lord for I complaine.
Psalme 61. TENOR. Richard Allison. REgard O Lord for I complaine, and make my sute to thee: Let not my words returne in vaine, but giue an eare to mee. From off the coasts and vtmost parts, of all the earth abroad: In griefe and anguish of my heart, I cry to thee O God. Psalme 61. BASSVS. R. Allison. REgard O Lord for I cōplaine, & make my sute to thee: Let not my words returne in vaine, but giue an eare to mee. From off the coasts and vtmost parts, of all the earth abroad: In griefe and anguish of my heart, I cry to thee O God. Psalme 61. ALTVS. Richard Allison. REgard O Lord for I complaine, and make my sute to thee: Let not my words returne in vaine, but giue an eare to mee. From off the coasts and vtmost parts, of all the earth abroad: In griefe and anguish of my heart, I cry to thee O God.
Psalme. 68. CANTVS. Richard Allison. LEt God a- rise & then his foes, wil turne themselues to flight: His enimies then wil run abroad, and scatter out of sight. And as the fire doth melt the waxe, & wind blow smoak a∣way: So in the presence of the Lord, the wic - ked shal de - cay. Psalme. 68. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. LEt God arise and then his foes.
Psalme 68. TENOR. Richard Allison. LEt God arise and then his foes, will turne themselues to flight: His enimies then will run a∣broad, and scatter out of sight. And as the fire doth melt the waxe, and winde blow smoake away: So in the presence of the Lord, the wicked shall decay. Psalme 68. BASSVS. R. Allison. LEt God arise and then his foes, will turne themselues to flight: His enimies then will run abroad, and scatter in his sight. And as the fire doth melt the waxe, and winde blow smoake away: So in the presence of the Lord, the wicked shall decay. Psalme 68. ALTVS. Richard Allison. LEt God arise and then his foes, will turne themselues to flight: His enimies then will run a∣broad, and scatter out of sight. And as the fire doth melt the waxe, and winde blow smoake away: So in the presence of the Lord, the wicked shall decay.
Psalme. 69. CANTVS. Richard Allison. SAue me O God and that with speed, the wa- ters flow ful fast: So nye my soule do they proceed, that I am sore a- gast. I stick full deepe in filth and clay, whereas I feele no ground: I fall into such flouds I say, that I am like be drown'd. Psalme. 69. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. SAue me O God and that with speed.
Psalme 69. TENOR. Richard Allison. SAue me O God and that with speede, the waters flow full fast: So nigh my soule doe they pro∣ceede, that I am sore agast. I stick full deepe in filth and clay, whereas I feele no ground: I fall in∣to such flouds I say, that I am like be drownde. Psalme 69. BASSVS. R. Allison. SAue me O God and that with speede, the waters flow full fast: So nigh my soule doe they pro∣ceede, that I am sore agast. I stick full deepe in filth and clay, whereas I feele no ground: I fall in∣to such flouds I say, that I am like be drownde. Psalme 69. ALTVS. Richard Allison. SAue me O God and that with speede, the waters flow full fast: So nigh my soule doe they pro∣ceede, that I am sore a- gast. I stick full deepe in filth and clay, whereas I feele no ground: I fall in∣to such flouds I say, that I am like be drownde.
Psalme. 72. CANTVS. Richard Allison. LOrd giue thy iudgments to the King, therein instruct him well: And with his Sonne that prince- ly thing, Lord let thy iustice dwell. That he may gouerne vprightly, and rule thy folke a- right: And so defend through equitie the poore that haue no right. Psalme. 72. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. LOrd giue thy iudgements to the King.
Psalme 72. TENOR. Richard Allison. LOrd giue thy iudgements to the King, therein instruct him well: And with his sonne that princely thing, Lord let thy iustice dwell. That he may gouerne vprightly, and rule thy folke aright: And so defend through equity, the poore that haue no might. Psalme 72. BASSVS. R. Allison. LOrd giue thy iudgemēts to the king, ther∣in instruct him well: And with his sonne that prince∣ly thing, Lord let thy iustice dwel. That he may gouerne vprightly, & rule thy folk aright: And so defend through equitie, the poore that haue no might. Psalme 72. ALTVS. Richard Allison. LOrd giue thy iudgemēts to the King, therein instruct him wel: And with his son that princely thing, Lord let thy iustice dwell. That he may gouerne vprightly, and rule thy folke aright: And so de∣fend through equi- ty, the poore that haue no might.
Psalme. 81. CANTVS. Richard Allison. BEe light & glad in God reioice, which is our strength and stay: Be ioyful and lift vp your voice to Iacobs God I say. Prepare your instruments most meete, some ioyfull Psalme to sing: Strike vp with Harp & Lute so sweete, on euery pleasant string. Psalme. 81. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. BEe light and glad in God reioyce.
Psalme 81. TENOR. Richard Allison. BEe light and glad in God reioice, which is our strength and stay: Be ioyful & lift vp your voice, to Iacobs God I say. Prepare your instruments most meete, some ioyfull Psalme to sing: Strike vp with Harpe and Lute so sweete, on euery pleasant string. Psalme 81. BASSVS. R. Allison. BEe light & glad in God reioice, which is our strength and stay: Bee ioyfull and lift vp your voice, to Iacobs God I say. Prepare your instruments most meete, some ioyfull Psalme to sing: Strike vp with Harpe and Lute so sweete, on euery pleasant string. Psalme 81. ALTVS. Richard Allison. BEe light and glad in God reioice, which is our strength and stay: Bee ioyfull and lift vp your voice, to Iacobs God I say. Prepare your instruments most meete, some ioyful Psalme to sing: Strike vp with Harpe and Lute so sweete, on euery pleasant string.
Psalme. 78. CANTVS. Richard Allison. AT - tend my peo - ple to my Law, and to my words encline: My mouth shall speak strange parables, and sentences di - uine. Which we our selues haue heard & learnd, euen of our Fathers olde: And which for our instruction, our Fa- thers haue vs told. Psalme. 78. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. ATtend my people to my Law.
Psalme 78. TENOR. Richard Allison. ATtend my people to my law, and to my words incline: My mouth shall speake strange parables, and sentences diuine. Which we our selues haue heard and learnde, euen of our fathers old: And which for our instruction, our fathers haue vs told. Psalme 78. BASSVS. R. Allison. ATtend my people to my law, And to my words incline: My mouth shall speake strange parables, and sen- tences diuine. Which wee our selues haue heard and learnde, euen of our fathers old: And which for our instructi- on, our fathers haue vs told. Psalme 78. ALTVS. Richard Allison. ATtend my people to my law, and to my words incline: My mouth shall speake strange para- bles, and sentences diuine. Which we our selues haue heard and learnde, euen of our fathers old: And which for our instructi- on, our fathers haue vs told.
Psalme. 103. CANTVS. Richard Allison. MY soule giue laud vnto the Lord, My spirit shall doe the same: And all the secrets of my heart, praise ye his ho - ly name. Giue thanks to God for all his giftes, shew not thy selfe vn- kinde: And suf - fer not his be - nefits, to slip out of thy mind. Psalme. 103. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. MY soule giue laud vnto the Lord.
Psalme 103. TENOR. Richard Allison. MY soule giue laude vnto the Lord, my spirit shall doe the same: And all the secrets of my heart, praise ye his holy name. Giue thanks to God for all his gifts, shew not thy selfe vnkinde: And suffer not his be- nefits, to slip out of thy minde. Psalme 103. BASSVS. R. Allison. MY soule giue laude vn- to the Lord, my spirit shall doe the same: And all the secrets of my heart, praise ye his holy name. Giue thanks to God for all his gifts, shew not thy selfe vnkinde: And suffer not his benefits, to slip out of thy minde. Psalme 103. ALTVS. Richard Allison. MY soule giue laude vnto the Lord, my spirit shal do the same: And all the secrets of my heart, praise ye his holy name. Giue thanks to God for all his gifts, shew not thy selfe vnkinde: And suffer not his bene- fits, to slip out of thy minde.
Psalme. 104. CANTVS. Richard Allison. MY Soule praise the Lord, speak good of his name: O Lord our great God: how dost thou ap - peare, So passing in glo - rie, that great is thy fame? Honor and ma- gi - stie in thee shine most cleare. With light as arobe, thou hast thee beclad: Verte folium. Psalme. 104. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. MY Soule praise the Lord. Verte folium.
Psalme 104. TENOR. Richard Allison. MY soule praise the Lord, speake good of his name: O Lord our great God: howe dost thou ap- peare, So passing in glo- ry, that great is thy fame? Honor and maiestie in thee shine most cleare. With light as a robe, thou hast thee be- clad: Verte folium. Psalme 104. BASSVS. R. Allison. MY soule praise the Lord, speak good of his name: O Lord our great God: how dost thou ap- peare, So passing in glo- ry, that great is thy fame? Honor and maiestie in thee shine most cleare. With light as a robe, thou hast thee beclad: Verte folium. Psalme 104. ALTVS. Richard Allison. MY soule praise the Lord, speake good of his name: O Lord our great God: howe dost thou ap- peare, So passing in glo- ry, that great is thy fame? Honor and maiesty in thee shine most cleare. With light as a robe, thou hast thee be- clad: Verte folium.
Psalme. 104. CANTVS. Richard Allison. Whereby all the earth thy greatnesse may see, The heauens in such sort thou al - so hast spread, That it to a cur - tain compared may bee. Psalme. 104. CITTERNE. Richard Allison.
Psalme 111. TENOR. Richard Allison. Whereby all the earth thy greatnes may see: The heauens in such sort thou al- so hast spread: that it to a curtaine compared may bee. Psalme 111. BASSVS. R. Allison. Whereby all the earth thy greatnes may see: The heauens in such sort thou al- so hast spread, that it to a curtaine compa- red may bee. Psalme 111. ALTVS. Richard Allison. Whereby all the earth thy greatnes may see: The heauens in such sort thou al- so hast spread: that it to a curtaine compared may bee.
Psalme. 111. CANTVS. Richard Allison. WIth hart I doe ac - cord, to praise & laud the Lorde, in presence of the iust: For great his workes are found, to search them such are bound, As doe him loue and trust. His workes are glo-rious, al-so his righ-teous - nesse, Verte folium. Psalme. 111. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. WIth hart I doe accord. Verte folium.
Psalme 111. TENOR. Richard Allison. WIth heart I doe ac- cord, to praise and laude the Lord, in presence of the iust: For great his works are found, to search them such are bound, as doe him loue and trust. His works are glo- ri- ous, al- so his righteousnes, Verte folium Psalme 111. BASSVS. R. Allison. WIth heart I doe ac- cord, to praise and laude the Lord, in presence of the iust: For great his works are founde, to searche them such are bounde, as doe him loue and trust. His workes are glo- ri- ous, al- so his righ- teous- nes, Verte folium Psalme 111. ALTVS. Richard Allison. WIth heart I doe ac- cord, to praise and laude the Lord, in presence of the iust: For great his works are found, to search them such are bound, as doe him loue and trust. His works are glori- ous, also his righ- teousnes, Verte folium
Psalme. 111. CANTVS. Richard Allison. it doth indure for e - uer. His wondrous workes hee would, wee still re- member should,  his mer - cie fai - leth ne - uer. Psalme. 111. CITTERNE. Richard Allison.
Psalme 111. TENOR. Richard Allison. it doth endure for e- uer. His wondrous works hee woulde, wee still re- member shoulde, his  mercies faileth ne- uer. Psalme 111. BASSVS. R. Allison. it doth en- dure for e- uer. His wondrous  works hee woulde, wee still re- member shoulde,  his mercies faileth ne- uer. Psalme 111. ALTVS. Richard Allison. it doth en- dure for e- uer. His wondrous workes hee would, wee still re- member shoulde, his  mercies faileth ne- uer.
Psalme. 113. CANTVS. Richard Allison. YE children which do serue the Lord, praise ye his name with one ac∣cord:  Yea blessed bee al- waies his name, who from the rising of the Sunne, till it returne where  it be- gun, is to be prai-sed with great fame. The Lord all people doth surmount,  Verte folium. Psalme. 113. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. YE children which do serue the Lord.  Verte folium.
Psalme 113. TENOR. Richard Allison. YE children which doe serue the Lord, praise yee his name with one ac- cord: Yea  blessed be al- waies his name, who from the rising of the Sunne, till it returne where it begun  is to be praised with great fame. The Lord all people doth surmount, Verte folium. Psalme 113. BASSVS. R. Allison. YE children which doe serue the Lord  praise yee his name with one ac- cord: Yea blessed  bee alwaies his name, who from the ri-sing of the  Sun, till it re-turne where it be- gun, is to be  praised with great fame. The Lord all people  doth surmount. Verte folium. Psalme 113. ALTVS. Richard Allison. YE children which doe serue the Lord, praise ye his name with one ac- cord: Yea  blessed be alwaies his name, who from the rising of the Sunne, till it re- turne where it begun,  is to be praised with great fame. The Lord all people doth surmount, Verte folium.
Psalme. 113. CANTVS. Richard Allison. as for his glory wee may count, aboue the heauens hie to be. With God the Lord who may compare: whose dwellings in the heauens are, of such great power and force is hee. Psalme. 113. CITTERNE. Richard Allison.
Psalme 113. TENOR. Richard Allison. as for his glo- ry wee may count, a- boue the heauens high to bee: With God the Lord who may com- pare, whose dwellings in the heauens are, of such great power and force is hee? Psalme 113. BASSVS. R. Allison. as for his glo- ry wee may count, a- boue the Heauens high to bee: With God the Lord who may com- pare, whose dwellings in the heauens are, of such great power and force is hee? Psalme 113. ALTVS. Richard Allison. as for his glo- ry wee may count, a- boue the hea- uens high to bee: With God the Lord who may com- pare, whose dwellinges in the Hea- uens are, of such great power and force is hee?
Psalme. 119. CANTVS. Richard Allison. BLessed are they that per - fect are, and pure in minde and hart: Whose liues and conuersa- ti - on, from Gods laws ne - uer start. Blessed are they that giue themselues, his statutes to ob-serue: Seeking the Lord with all their hart, and ne - uer from him swerue. Psalme. 119. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. BLessed are they that perfect are.
Psalme 119. TENOR. Richard Allison. BLessed are they that perfect are, and pure in minde and hart: Whose liues & conuersa- ti- on, from Gods lawes neuer start. Blessed are they that giue themselues, his statutes to obserue: Seek∣ing the Lord with all their heart, and neuer from him swerue. Psalme 199. BASSVS. R. Allison. BLessed are they that perfect are, and pure in minde and hart: Whose liues and conuer- sa- ti- on, from Gods lawes neuer start. Bles∣sed are they that giue themselues, his statutes to obserue: Seeking the Lord with all their hart and neuer from him swerue. Psalme 119. ALTVS. Richard Allison. BLessed are they that perfect are, and pure in minde and hart: Whose liues and conuersati- on, from Gods lawes ne- uer start. Blessed are they that giue themselues, his statutes to obserue: Seek∣ing the Lord with all their heart, and neuer from him swerue.
Psalme. 119. CANTVS. Richard Allison. IN trouble and in thrall, vn - to the Lord I call, and he doth me comfort. De- li- uer mee I say, fromly - ers lips alwaie, and tongue of false re - port. Psalme. 119. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. IN trouble and in thrall.
Psalme 120. TENOR. Richard Allison. IN trou- ble and in thrall, vn- to the Lord I call, and hee doth mee comfort. De-li- uer mee I say, from liars lips al- way, and tongue of false re- port. Psalme 120. BASSVS. R. Allison. IN trouble and in thrall, vn- to the Lord I call, and hee doth mee comfort. Deliuer mee I say, from li- ars lippes al- way, and tongue of false re- port. Psalme 120. ALTVS. Richard Allison. IN trou- ble and in thrall, vn- to the Lord I call, and hee doth mee comfort. De- li- uer mee I say, from lyars lips al- way, and tongue of false re- port.
Psalme. 121. CANTVS. Richard Allison. I Lift mine eyes to Sion hill, from whēce I doe attend, that succour God mee send. The mightie God me succour will, which heauen and earth fra - med, and all things therin na - med. Psalme. 121. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. I Lift mine eyes to Sion hill.
Psalme 121. TENOR. Richard Allison. I Lift mine eies to Si- on Hill, from whence I doe attend, that suc- cour God mee send, the migh- ty God mee suc- cour will, which hea-uen and earth framed, and all things there- in na- med. Psalme 121. BASSVS. R. Allison. I Lift mine eyes to Si- on hill, from whence I doe at- tend, that suc- cour God mee send. The migh- tie God mee suc- cour will, which Hea- uen and earth framed, and all things there- in named. Psalme 121. ALTVS. Richard Allison. I Lift mine eyes to Si- on hill, from whence I doe at- tend, that suc- cour God mee send. The migh-ty God mee succour will, which hea- uen and earth framed, and all things there- in named.
Psalme. 122. CANTVS. Richard Allison. I did in hart reioyce, to heare the peo- ples voyce, in offe- ring so wil - lingly: For let vs vp say they, and in the Lordes house praie, thus spake the folke full wil- ling-ly. Our feete that wandred wide, shall in thy gates a - byde, O thou Ie-ru-salem full faire: Verte folium. Psalme. 122. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. I Did in hart reioice. Verte folium.
Psalme 122. TENOR. Richard Allison. I Did in heart re- ioice, to heare the peoples voice, in offering so willing- ly: For let vs vp say they, and in the Lords house pray: Thus spake the folke full lo- uing- ly. Our feete that wandred wide, shall in thy gates a- bide, O thou Ie-rusalem full faire: verte fol. Psalme 122. BASSVS. R. Allison. I Did in heart re- ioice, to heare the peoples voice, in offering so willingly: For let vs vp say they, and in the Lords house pray: Thus spake the folke full louingly. Our feet that wādred wide, shall in thy gates a- bide, O thou Ie∣ru-  sa- lem full faire: Verte folium. Psalme 122. ALTVS. Richard Allison. I Did in heart re- ioice, to heare the peoples voice, in offering so willingly: For let vs vp say they, and in the Lords house pray: Thus spake the folke full lo- uing-ly Our feete that wandred wide, shall in thy gates a- bide, O thou Ieru-salem full faire: verte fol.
Psalme. 122. CANTVS. Richard Allison. Which art so seeme - lie set, much like a Ci - tie neate, the like where - of is  not else where. Psalme. 122. CITTERNE. Richard Allison.
Psalme 122. TENOR. Richard Allison. which art so seeme- ly set, much like a Cit- ty neate, the like where- of  is not els- where. Psalme 122. BASSVS. R. Allison. which art so seem- ly set, much like a  Cit- ty neate, the like where- of is  not els- where. Psalme 122. ALTVS. Richard Allison. which art so seeme- ly set, much like a Cit- ty neate, the like where-  of is not els- where.
Psalme. 124. CANTVS. Richard Allison. NOw Isra- ell may say I that true- ly, If that the Lord had not our cause maintaind: If that the Lord had not our right sustaind, When all the world against vs furi-ously, made their vprores, and said, we should all die. Psalme. 124. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. NOw Israell may say and that truely.
Psalme 124. TENOR. Richard Allison. NOw Is- ra- ell may say and that tru- ly, if that the Lord had not our cause maintainde: If that the Lord had not our right sustainde, When all the world against vs fu- riously, made their vp- rores and said wee shoulde all die. Psalme 124. BASSVS. R. Allison. NOw Is- ra- el may say and that tru∣ly, if that the Lord had not our cause main∣tainde: If that the Lord had not our right su∣stainde, When all the worlde a- gainst vs fu- rious∣ly, made their vprores and said we should all die. Psalme 124. ALTVS. Richard Allison. NOw Is-ra- ell may say and that tru- ly, if that the Lord had not our cause maintainde: If that the Lord had not our right sustainde, When all the world against vs fu- riouslie, made their vp- rores and said wee shoulde all die.
Psalme. 125. CANTVS. Richard Allison. SVch as in God the Lord doe trust, as Mount Si - on shall firmely stande: And be remoued at no hand, the Lord will count them right and iust, so that they shall bee sure, for e- uer to in - dure. Psalme. 125. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. SVch as in God the Lord do trust.
Psalme 125. TENOR. Richard Allison. SVch as in God the Lord doe trust, as mount Sion shall firmely stand, and be re- moued at no hand: the Lord will count them right and iust, so that they shall bee sure, for euer to in-dure, Psalme▪ 125. BASSVS. R. Allison. SVuch as in God the Lord doe trust, as mount Sion shall firmely stand, and be re-mou- ed at no hand. The Lord wil count them right & iust so that they shall be sure, for e-uer to in- dure. Psalme 125. ALTVS. Richard Allison. SVch as in God the Lord doe trust, as mount Sion shall firme- ly stand, and be re∣mou- ed at no hand: The Lord wil count them right and iust, so that they shall be sure, for e- uer to in- dure.
Psalme. 126. CANTVS. Richard Allison. WHen that the Lord againe his Si-on had forth brought, from bondage great, and al - so serui - tude extreme: His work was such, as did surmount mans hart and thought, so that we were much like to them that vse to dreame: Verte folium. Psalme. 126. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. WHen that the Lord againe. Verte folium
Psalme 136. TENOR. Richard Allison. WHen that the Lord a- gaine his Si- on had forth brought, from bondage great and al-so ser-ui-tude extreame: His work was such as did surmount mans heart and thought, so that wee were much like to them that vse to dreame: Verte folium. Psalme 136. BASSVS. R. Allison. WHen that the Lord a-gaine his Si- on had forth brought, from bondage great and al-so ser- ui- tude extreame: His works was such as did surmount mans heart and thought, so that we were much like to them that vse to dreame: verte fo. Psalme 136. ALTVS. Richard Allison. WHen that the Lord a- gaine his Si- on had forth brought, from bondage great and al- so ser- ui- tude extreame: His work was such as did surmount mans heart and thought, so that wee were much like to them that vse to dreame: Verte folium.
Psalme. 126. CANTVS. Richard Allison. Our mouthes were with laughter fil - led then, and eke our tongues did shewe vs ioyfull men. Psalme. 126. CITTERNE. Richard Allison.
Psalme 126. TENOR. Richard Allison. Our mouthes were with laugh- ter fil- led then, and eke our tongues did shewe vs ioy- full men. Psalme 126. BASSVS. R. Allison. Our mouthes were with laugh- ter fil- led then, and eke our tongues did shewe vs ioy- full men. Psalme 126. ALTVS. Richard Allison. Our mouthes were with laugh- ter fil- led then: and eke our tongues did shewe vs ioy- full men.
Psalme. 130. CANTVS. Richard Allison. LOrd to thee I make my mone, when dangers me oppresse, I call, I sigh, plaine and grone, trusting to find re - lease. Here now O Lord my re∣quest, for it isful due time: And let thine eares aye be prest, vnto this pray - er mine. Psalme. 130. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. LOrd to thee I make my mone.
Psalme 130. TENOR. Richard Allison. LOrd to thee I make my mone, when dangers me op- presse: I call I sigh plaine and grone, trusting to finde re- lease. Heare nowe O Lord my re- quest, for it is full due time: And let thine eares ay be prest, vnto this pray- er mine. Psalme 130. BASSVS. R. Allison. LOrd to thee I make my mone, when dangers mee oppresse: I call I sigh plaine and grone, trusting to finde release. Heare now O Lord my re- quest, for it is full due time: And let thine eares ay bee prest, vn- to this prayer mine. Psalme 130. ALTVS. Richard Allison. LOrd to thee I make my mone, when dangers me op- presse: I call I sigh, plaine and grone, trusting to finde re- lease. Heare now O Lord my request, for it is full due time: And let thine eares ay be prest, vn- to this pray- er mine.
Psalme. 132. CANTVS. Richard Allison. RE- mem - ber Dauids trou - bles Lord, how to the Lord he swore: And vow'd a vow, to Iacobs God, to keepe for euer - more. I will not come within my house, nor clime vp to my bed: Nor let my temples take their rest, or the eyes in my head. Psalme. 132. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. REmember Dauids troubles Lord.
Psalme 132. TENOR. Richard Allison. REmember Dauids troubles Lord, howe to the Lord hee swore: And vowde a vowe to Iacobs God, to keepe for euer more, I will not come within my house, nor clime vp to my bed: Nor let my temples take their rest, or the eies in my head. Psalme 132. BASSVS. R. Allison. RE- member Da- uids troubles Lord, howe to the Lord hee swore: And vowde a vowe to Ia-cobs God, to keepe for e-uer more. I will not come within my house, nor clime vp to my bed: Nor let my temples take their rest, or the eyes in my head. Psalme 132. ALTVS. Richard Allison. REmember Dauids troubles Lord, howe to the Lord hee swore: And vowde a vowe to Iacobs God, to keepe for e- uer more. I will not come within my house, nor clime vp to my bed: Nor let my temples take their rest, or the eies in my head.
Psalme. 135. CANTVS. Richard Allison. O Praise the Lord, praise him, praise him, praise him with one ac- cord: O praise him still all ye that be, the ser- uants of the Lord. O praise him ye that stande and be, in the house of the Lord: Ye of his Court & of his House, praise him with one ac - cord. Psalme. 135. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. O Praise the Lord.
Psalme 135. TENOR. Richard Allison. O Praise the Lord praise him praise him, praise him with one accord: O praise him still all yee that bee, the seruants of the Lord. O praise him yee that stand and bee, in the house of the Lord: Ye of his court and of his house, praise him with one ac-cord. Psalme 135. BASSVS. R. Allison. O praise the Lord praise him praise him, praise him with one accord: O praise him still all yee that bee, the seruants of the Lord. O praise him yee that stand and bee, in the house of the Lord: Ye of his court and of his house, praise him with one accord. Psalme 135. ALTVS. Richard Allison. O Praise the Lord praise him praise him, praise him with one accord: O praise him still all ye that be, the seruants of the Lord, O praise him yee that stand and bee, in the house of the Lord: Ye of his court and of his house, praise him with one accord.
Psalme. 136. CANTVS. Richard Allison. PRaise ye the Lord for hee is good, for his mer - cy en - dureth for e - uer: Giue praise vn - to the God of Gods, for his mercie endu - reth for e - uer. Giue praise vn - to the Lord of Lords, Verte folium Psalme. 136. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. PRaise ye the Lord for he is good. Verte folinm.
Psalme 136. TENOR. Richard Allison. PRaise yee the Lord for hee is good, for his mer- cy in- dur- eth for e- uer: Giue praise vn- to the God of Gods, for his mer- cy in- dur- eth for e- uer. Giue praise vn- to the Lord of Lords, Verte folium. Psalme 136. BASSVS. R. Allison. PRaise yee the Lord for hee is good, for his mercy in- dur- eth for e- uer: Giue praise vn- to the God of Gods, for his mercy indureth for e- uer. Giue praise vn∣to the Lord of Lords, Verte folium. Psalme 136. ALTVS. Richard Allison. PRaise yee the Lord for hee is good, for his mer- cy in- dur- eth for e- uer: Giue praise vn- to the God of Gods, for his mercy in- dur- eth for e- uer. Giue praise vnto the Lord of Lords, Verte folium.
Psalme. 136. CANTVS. Richard Allison. for his mer - cie en - du - reth for e - uer: Which onely doth great wonders worke, for his mer- cie endu - reth for e uer. Psalme. 136. CITTERNE. Richard Allison.
Psalme 136. TENOR. Richard Allison. for his mer- cy en- dur- eth for e- uer: Which one- ly doth great won-ders work. for his mercy in- dur-eth for e- uer. Psalme 136. BASSVS. R. Allison. for his mercy in- dur- eth for e- uer: Which on- ly doth great wonders worke, for his mercy in- dur- eth for euer. Psalme 136. ALTVS. Richard Allison. for his mer- cy in- dur- eth for e- uer: Which one- ly doth great won- ders work, for his mer- cy in- dur- eth for e- uer.
Psalme. 137. CANTVS. Richard Allison. WHen as wee sat in Ba - bi - lon, the ri-uersround a - bout: And in remem - brance of Si - on, the teares for griefe borst out. We hanged our harps & in - stru∣ments,  the willow trees vp - on: For in that place mē for their vse, had plated ma - ny one. Psalme. 137. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. WHen as we sat in Babilon.
Psalme 137. TENOR. Richard Allison. WHen as we sat in Baby- lon, the ri- uers round about, and in remembrance of Si- on, the teares for greife burst out, wee hangd our harpes and instru- ments: the willow trees vppon, For in that place men for their vse had planted ma- nie one. Psalme 137. BASSVS. R. Allison. WHen as we sat in Baby- lon, the riuers round about: And in remembrance of Si- on, the teares for griefe burst out. We hangde our harps and in- struments, the willow trees vp- on: For in that place men for their vse, had planted ma∣ny  one. Psalme 137. ALTVS. Richard Allison. WHen as we sat in Babylon, the riuers rounde a-bout: and in remembrance of Si- on, the teares for griefe burst out. we hangd our Harps and in- stru- ments, the willow trees vpon, for in that place men for their vse, had planted many one.
Psalme. 137. CANTVS. Richard Allison. O Lord vpon thee doe I call, Lord hast thee vn - to mee: And harken Lord vn - to my voice: whē I doe crie to thee. As incense let my prai- er bee, directed in thine eies: and the vplifting of my hands, as euening sa - cri- fice. Psalme. 137. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. O Lord vpon thee doe I call,
Psalme 141. TENOR. Richard Allison. O Lord vp-on thee doe I call, Lord hast thee vn- to mee: And harken Lord vnto my voice, when I doe cry to thee. As incense let my prayer bee, di- rected in thine eyes: And the vp∣lifting of my hands, as euening sacri- fice. Psalme 141. BASSVS. R. Allison. O Lord vp-on thee doe I call, Lord hast thee vn-to mee: And harken Lord vn- to my voice, when I doe cry to thee. As in- cense let my prayer bee, directed in thine eyes: And the vplifting of my hands, as euening sacrifice. Psalme 141. ALTVS. Richard Allison. O Lord vp-on thee doe I call, Lord hast thee vn- to mee: And harken Lord vn- to my voice, when I doe cry to thee. As in- cense let my prayer bee, di- rected in thine eyes: And the vp-lifting of my hands, as euening sa- crifice.
Psalme. 145. CANTVS. Richard Allison. THee will I laud my God and King, and blesse thy name for aye: For e - uer will I praise thy name, and blesse thee day by day. Great is the Lord most worthie praise, his greatnesse none can reach: From race to race they shall thy works praise, & thy pow- er preach. Psalme. 145. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. THee will I laude my God and King.
Psalme 145. TENOR. Richard Allison. THee will I laude my God and King, and blesse thy name for ay: For e- uer wil I praise thy name, and blesse thee day by day. Great is the Lord most worthy praise, his greatnesse none can reach: From race to race they shall thy works praise, and thy power preach. Psalme 145. BASSVS. R. Allison. THee will I laude my God and King, and blesse thy name for ay: For euer will I praise thy name, and blesse thee day by day. Great is the Lord most worthy praise, his greatnesse none can reach: From race to race they shall thy works praise, and thy power preach. Psalme 145. ALTVS. Richard Allison. THee will I laude my God and King, and blesse thy name for ay: For euer wil I praise thy name, and blesse thee day by day. Great is the Lord most worthy praise, his greatnesse none can reach: From race to race they shall thy works praise, and thy power preach.
Psalme. 147. CANTVS. Richard Allison. PRaise ye the Lord for it is good, vn - to our God to sing: For it is pleasant and to praise, it is a comely thing. The Lord his owne Ieru- sa - lem, he buildeth vp a-lone: And the disperst of Is- raell, doth gather in- to one. Psalme. 147. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. PRaise ye the Lord for it is good.
Psalme 147. TENOR. Richard Allison. PRaise yee the Lord for it is good, vnto our God to sing: For it is pleasant and to praise, it is a comely thing. The Lord his owne Ie- ru- sa- lem, hee buildeth vp a- lone: And the dis∣perst of Is- ra- el, doth gather in- to one. Psalme 147. BASSVS. R. Allison. PRaise yee the Lord for it is good, vn∣to our God to sing: For it is pleasant and to praise, it is a come- ly thing. The Lord his owne Ie- ru- sa- lem, he buildeth vp a-lone: And the disperst of Is- ra- el, doth gather in- to one. Psalme 147. ALTVS. Richard Allison. PRaise yee the Lord for it is good, vnto our God to sing: For it is pleasant and to praise, it is a comely thing. The Lord his owne Ie- ru- salem, hee buildeth vp a-lone: And the dis∣perst of Is- ra- el, doth gather in- to one.
Psalme. 148. CANTVS. Richard Allison. GIue laude vn- to the Lord, from heauen that is so hie: Praise him in deed and word, a- boue the star - ry skie. And also yee, his an- gels all ar∣mies royall, praise him with glee. Psalme. 148. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. GIue laude vnto the Lord.
Psalme 148. TENOR. Richard Allison. GIue laude vnto the Lord, from heauen that is so hie: Praise him in deed and word aboue the star ry skie, And also yee. his Angels all, armies royall, praise him with glee. Psalme 148. BSASVS. R. Allison. GIue laude vnto the Lord, from heauen that is so hie: praise him in deed and word aboue the star-ry skie. And al-so yee, his Angels all ar∣mies royall, Praise him with glee. Psalme 148. ALTVS. Richard Allison. GIue laude vnto the Lord, from heauen that is so hie: Praise him in deed and word, a-boue the starry skie. And also yee, his An -gells all, armies royall. Praise him with glee.
Audi Israel. CANTVS. Richard Allison. ATtend my people and giue eare, of ferly thinges I will thee tell, See that my wordes in minde thou beare, and to my precepts li-sten well Audi Israel. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. ATtend my people
Audi Israel. TENOR. Richard Allison. ATtend my people and giue eare, of fer- ly thinges I will thee tell, See that my wordes in minde thou beare, and to my pre- cepts li- sten well Audi Israel. BASSVS. R. Allison. ATtend my people and giue eare, of fer- ly thinges I will thee tell, See that my wordes in minde thou beare, and to my pre-cepts listen well. Audi Israel. ALTVS. Richard Allison. ATend my people and giue eare, of ferly thinges I will thee tell, See that my wordes in minde thou beare, and to my pre- cepts li- sten well.
The Lords prayer. CANTVS. Richard Allison. OVr father which in heauen art, and makstvs al one bro- therhoode, to call vp- on thee with one hart, our heauenly father and our God, grant wee pray not with lips a- lone, but with the harts deepesigh and grone. The Lords prayer. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. OVr Father which in heauen art.
The Lords prayer. TENOR. Richard Allison. OVr father which in heauen art, and makest vs all on brotherhood To call vpon thee with one heart, our heauenly father and our God, Graunt we pray not with lips alone, but with the harts deepe sight and grone. The Lordspr. BASSVS. R. Allison. OVr father which in heauen art, and makest vs all one Bro- ther-hood, to call vp- on thee with one heart, our heauenly father and our God, Graunt wee pray not with lips alone, but with the harts deep sigh and grone. The Lords prayer. ALTVS. Richard Allison. OVr father which in hea- uen art, and makst vs al one brother-hood, To call vpon thee with one heart, our heauenly father and our God, graunt we pray not with lips alone, but with the harts deepe sight and grone.
The Creede. CANTVS. Richard Allison. ALl my beliefe and confi- dence, is in the Lord of might: The Father which al things hath made, the day & eke the night. The heauens and the firmamēt, and also many a starre: The earth and all that is therein, which passe mans reason farre. The Creede. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. ALl my beliefe and confidence.
The Creede. TENOR. Richard Allison. ALl my beliefe and confidence, is in the Lord of might: The father which all things hath made, the day and eke the night: The heanens and the fir- mament, and also many a starre: The earth and all that is therein, which passe mans reason farre. The Creede. BASSVS. R. Allison. ALl my beliefe and confi- dence, is in the Lord of might: The Father which all things hath made, the day and eke the night. The heauens, and the firmament, and also many a starre: The earth and all that is therein: which passe mans reason farre. The Creede. ALTVS. Richard Allison. ALl my beliefe and confi- dence, is in the Lord of might: The father which all thins hath made, the day and eke the night. The heauens and the firmament, and al- so many a starre: The earth and all that is therein, which passe mans reason farre.
Da pacem. CANTVS. Richard Allison. GIue peace in these our daies O Lord, great dangers are now at hāde Thine enemies with one accord, christs name in euery land, Seeke to deface, root out and raze, thy true right worship in- deed: Be thou the stay Lord we thee pray, thou helpst alone in all need. Da pacem. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. GIue peace in these our daies O Lord.
Da pacem. TENOR. Richard Allison. GIue peace in these our daies O Lord, great dangers are now at hand, Thine enimies with one accord, Christs name in euery land, seeke to deface, roote out and raze, thy true right worship in∣deede, be thou the stay Lord we thee pray, thou helpst alone in all neede. Da pacem. BSASVS. R. Allison. GIue peace in these our daies O Lord, great dangers are now at hand: Thine enimies with one accord, Christs name in euery land, seeke to de∣face root out and race, thy true right worship in deed be thou the stay Lord we thee pray, thou helpst a∣lone in all neede. Da pacem. ALTVS. Richard Allison. GIue peace in these our daies O Lord, great dangers are now at hand: Thine enemies with one accord, Christs name in euery land, seeke to deface roote out and raze, thy true right worship in deed, Be thou the stay Lord we thee pray, thou helpst a- lone in all need.
The Lamentation. CANTVS. Richard Allison. O Lord in thee is all my trust, giue eare vn- to my woe- ful cry: re∣fuse  mee not that am vniust, but bowing down thy heauenly eye: behold how I doe still lament, my sinnes wherein I doe offend: O Lord for thē shal I be shēt, sith thee to please I doe intend. The Lamentation CITTERNE. Richard Allison. O Lord in thee is all my trust.
The Lamentation. TENOR. Richard Allison. O Lord in thee is. all my trust, giue eare vnto my woefull crie, re- fuse mee not that am vniust but bowing down thy heauenly eye behold how I doe still lament my fins wherein I doe offend, O Lord for them shall I be shent, sith thee to please I do intend. The Lament. BASSVS. R. Allison. O Lord in the is al my trust, giue eare vn∣to  my woful cry, refuse me not that am vniust, but bowing downe thy heauenly eye, be-hold how I do still lament, my sinnes wherein I doe offend, O Lord for them shall I be shent, Sith thee to please I doe intend. The Lamentation. ALTVS. Richard Allison. O Lord in thee is all my trust, giue eare vnto my wofull crie, re- fuse me not that am vn- iust, but bowing down thy heauenly eye, behold how I doe still lament my sinnes wherein I doe of- fend O Lord for them shall I be shent, sith thee to please I do intend.
A prayer. CANTVS. Richard Allison. PReserue vs lord by thy deare word, from Turk & Pope defend vs Lord: Which both would  thrust out of his throne, our Lord Iesus Christ thy deare son. Psalme 4. O God that art my righteousnesse,  Lord heare me when I call: Thou hast set me at liber- ty, when I was bound and thrall. A prayer. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. Reserue vs Lord by thy deare word. Psalme 4. God that art my righteousnesse.
A prayer. TENOR. Richard Allison. PReserue vs lord by thy deare word, frō turke & pope defend vs lord, which both wold thrust out of his throne, our lord Iesus christ thy deare son. Psalme 4. O god that art my righteousnesse, lord heare me when I call, thou hast set me at libertie, when I was bound and thrall. A prayer. BASSVS. R. Allison. PReserue vs Lord by thy deare word, frō turke and pope defend vs lord, which both woulde thrust out of his throne, our Lord Iesus Christ thy deare son. Psalme 4. O God that art my righteousnesse, lord heare me when I call, thou hast set me at libertie when I was bound And thrall. A prayer. ALTVS. Richard Allison. PReserue vs lord by thy deare word, frō turke & Pope defēd vs lord: which both wold thrust out of his throne our lord Iesus christ thy deare son. Psalme 4. O god that art my righteousnesse, lord heare me when I call, Thou hast set me at libertie, when I was bound and thrall.
Psalme 12. CANTVS. Richard Allison. HElpe Lord for good & god- ly men, doe perish and de- cay: And faith and truth from worldly men, is parted cleane a- way. Psalme 17. O Lord giue eare to my iust cause, attend when I com∣plaine:  And heare the praier that I put forth, with lips that doe not faine. Psalme 12. GITTERNE. Richard Allison. HElpe Lord for good and godly men. Psalme 17. O Lord giue eare to my iust cause.
Psalme 12 TENOR. Richard Allison. HElp Lord for good and godly men, do perish and decay: And faith and truth from worldly men is parted cleane away. Psalme. 17. O Lord giue eare to my iust cause at- tend when I complaine, And heare the prayer that I put forth, with lips that doe not faine. Psalme 12. BASSVS. R. Allison. HElp Lord for good and godly men, doe perish and decay, and faith and truth frō worldly men is parted cleane away. Psalme 17. O Lord giue eare to my iust cause, attend when I complaine. and heare the prayer that I put forth with lips that do not faine. Psalme 12. ALTVS. Richard Allison. HElpe Lord for good and godly men, do pe- rish and de- cay, And faith and truth from worldly men, is parted cleane a- way. Psalme 17. O Lord giue eare to my iust cause, attend when I complaine: And heare the Prayer that I put forth, with lips that doe not faine
Psalme 50. CANTVS. Richard Allison. THe God of Gods the Lord, hath calde the earth by name: From where the Sunne doth rise vn- to, the setting of the same: Psalme 84. How pleasant is thy dwelling place, O Lord of hosts to mee? The ta- berna- cles of thy grace, how pleasant Lord they bee? Psalme 50. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. THe God of Gods the Lord. Psalme 84. HOw pleasant is thy dwelling place.
Psalme 50 TENOR. Richard Allison. THe God of Gods the lord, hath cald the earth by name, from whence the Sunne, doth rise vnto, the setting of the same. Psalme 84 How pleasant is thy dwelling place, O Lord of host to me, The tabernacles of thy grace, how pleasant Lord they bee. Psalme 50. BASSVS. R. Allison. THe god of gods the lord, hath cald the earth by name, from whence the Sunne doth rise vnto the setting of the same. Psalme 84. HOw pleasant is thy dwelling place, O Lord of host to me, the tabernacle of thy grace, how pleasant Lord they be. Psalme 50. ALTVS. Richard Allison. THe God of Gods the Lord, hath calde the earth by name: From where the Sunne doth rise vn- to, the setting of the same: Psalme 84 How pleasant is thy dwelling place, O Lord of hosts to me, The tabernacle of thy grace, how pleasant Lord they be.
Psalme 88. CANTVS. Richard Allison. LOrd God of health the hope and stay, thou art alone to me: I cal & cry throughout the day, and all the night to thee. Psalme 92. It is a thing both good and meete, to praise the highest Lord: And to thy name O thou most hie, to sing in one ac- cord. Psalme 88. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. LOrd God of health the hope and stay. Psalme 92. IT is a thing both good and meete.
Psalme 88. TENOR. Richard Allison. LOrd God of health the hope and stay, thou art alone to me: I call and cry throughout the day, and all the night to thee. Psalme 92. It is a thing both good and meete, to praise the highest Lord: And to thy name O thou most high, to sing with one accord. Psalme 88. BASSVS. R. Allison. LOrd God of health the hope and stay, thou art alone to mee: I call and cry throughout the day, and all the night to thee. Psalme 92. IT is a thing both good and meete, to praise the highest Lord: And to thy name O thou most hie, to sing with on accord. Psalme 88. ALTVS. Richard Allison. LOrd God of health the hope and stay, thou art alone to mee: I call and cry through∣out  the day, and all the night to thee. Psalme 92. It is a thing both good & meete, to praise the highest Lord: And to thy name O thou most hie, to sing with one accord.
Psalme 116. CANTVS. Richard Allison. I Loue the Lord because my voice, and prayer heard hath hee: When in my daies I cald on  him, he bowed his eare to me. Psalme 125. Those that doe put their confi- dence, vpon the Lord our  God onely: And flee to him for their defence, in all their need and mise- ry. Psalme 116. CITTERNE. Richard Allison. I Loue the Lord because my voice. Psalme 125. THose that doe put their confidence.
Psalme 116. TENOR. Richard Allison. I Loue the Lord because my voice, and prayer heard hath hee: When in my dayes I calde on  him, he bowde his eare to mee. Psalme 125. Those that doe put their confidence, vpon the Lord our god on∣ly:  And flee to him for his defence, in all their n-  miserie. Psalme 116. BASSVS. R. Allison. I Loue the Lord be- cause my voice,  and prayer heard hath he: When in my dayes I  cald on him, he bowd his eare to me. Psalme 125. THose that doe put their confidence,  vpon the Lord our God onely, and flee to him for  his defence, In all their need and miserie. Psalme 116. ALTVS. Richard Allison. I Loue the Lord because my voice, and prayer heard hath hee, when in my dayes I cald on him  he bowed his eare to mee. Psalme 125. Those that doe put their confidence, vpon the Lord our God on∣ly,  and flee to him for his defence, in all their need and mi- serie.
