4404 S107184 99842886 7582
¶The Comentaries of M. Jhon Caluin vpon the first Epistle of Sainct Ihon, and vpon the E∣pistle of Iude: wherein accordyng to the truthe of the woordes of the holie Ghost, he most excellently openeth and cleareth the poinct of true iustification with GOD, and sanctification by the Spirit of Christ, by the effects that he bryngeth forthe in the rege∣neration. Translated into Englishe by W. H. Psal. 129 5. Thei that hate Syon, shalbe all ashamed and turned backward. Prou 19.14. House and riches are the inheritaunce of the Fathers: but a prudent wife commeth of the Lorde. Psal. 32 11. Be glad ye righteous, and reioyce in the Lorde, and bee ioyfull all ye that are true of harte. ¶Jmprinted at London by Jhon Kyng∣stone, for Jhon Harrison the yonger.
To the Worshipfull my very good freend Maister VVil∣liam Swan of Wye in Kent, and to the right Vertuous and Christian Gentlewoman Mistresse Amy Swan his Wife, with all those that in the truth of a single hart loue the Lord Iesus, in that Congregati∣on,1. Tim. 4.8. W. H. wisheth plentie of those blessynges whiche haue pro∣mises of this life and the life to come. IN the often consideration (right deare in the Lord) of the righteousGen. 2.17. Rom. 5.12. iudgemēt of GOD, against all the sonnes of men, with the in∣finite ouerflowinges of allGen. 8.21. Esa. 64.6. guiltinesse before hym, the many assaultes ofGen. 3.1. 1. Cro. 21.1. Sathan, and daungerous inticements of our ownRom. 8.13. harts into the waie of euill, theDeut. 32.8.19 20.21. Rom. 6.23. fearcenesse of the Lordes wrathe for sinne, and our owne vt∣ter1. Sam. 2.25. inabilitie to stande in his sight, whiche causeth that the hartes of manyPsal. 6.1.2.3.4 5. Math. 24.46. righteous
in the feelyng of their owne wants doe euen faint before the anger of the Lorde: hath in the direction of Gods Spirite, giuen an har∣tie desire to be assured of the waie of safetie, with what soeuer belongeth to the right ap∣plication and continuance of the same. Wherein as the Lorde hath made knowne the riches of his owne freeIeremy. 32.3. Ihon. 3.6. Rom. 5.8. Gala. 2.21. Ephe. 3.19.5.2. loue towardes his, the head and alone fountaine of all eter∣nall safetie vnto his elect, so is it also plaine that by no other way or meane we haue at∣tained vnto the free gift of grace, and full reconcilement with the Lorde, then by the mediation of theRom. 8.3. 1. Tim. 3.16. sonne of God in our owne fleshe. For all the counsell,Math. 3.17. Gala. 5.17. Ephe. 28. Phil. 1.6.2.13.2. Thes. 2.17. Tit. 17.14. Heb. 13.21. will, wisedome, and power of the sonnes of men, as in them selues thei are moste vncleane, so must they flie before the face of the Lord and neuer be able to pleade innocencie for his Sainctes. Whiche reconcilement as (albeit in it self it is alsufficient for all the sonnes of men) it is onely effectuall to the LordesRom. 9.11.11.5.11.7. elect, who in the power of an effectuallAct. 13.39.26 18. Rom. 3 21.24.25.28.4.5 11.24. Phil 3.9. Heb. 11.14. faithe alone receiue the fauour of the Lorde with appli∣cation of the promises of his grace: so in the like power vnto hymself, alwaies rulyng where he is had, prouidyng cheefly for the
Psal. 11 5. 1. Ihon. 17.4. Act. 3.13. 1. Cor. 6.20. honor of his name with a ioyned care for the good of his Churche,Exo. 29.45. Leuit. 26.12. Esa. 43.2. Math. 9.36.21.41. and woorking a newnesse of the wholeIhon. 3.3. 2. Cor. 5.17. man, doeth onely seale vnto the soules of the Sainctes of God the assuraunce of their good estate with the Lord. ForRom. 8.28.29 30.9.24. 1. Cor 1.9.24. whosoeuer by an effectuall cal∣lyng is grafted into the Sonne of God, and made a member of that bodie whereof Ie∣sus Christ is the head, is one with hym in theMath. 12.50. Ihon. 20.7. Rom. 8.29. Heb. 2.11.12. fellowshippe of all the blessynges of the Lorde. And albeit thei are onely infinite in hym, who hath receiued aboue his fellowes, yet according to the measure of the dispen∣sation of his grace, thei are freely giuen vn∣to all his elect, and are assured vnto them by a most effectuall witnesse, euen the Spi∣rite of adoption and grace, by whō he dwel∣leth in those that bee his, who as he is not without his effect, so in a moste liuely and quickning power he bothe applieth and sea∣leth vp. And as he hath appeared for vs a1. Sam. 2. Psal. 2.6. Esa. 3.6.7. Ieremy. 23.5.6. Ez 34.24. King aHeb 4.14.8.6. Heb. 5.6..11. Priest and aDeut 18.8. Act 3.11.22. 1. Cor. 1 30. Collo. 2.3. Iere. 23.5 45.5. Ezec. 21 26. Zach. 9.9. Prophet, so the great kindnesse of the Lord, is seuerally ap∣plied according to the same. As in the first, he hath vtterly spoiled and laied waste the power of all the enemies of his Church, and iustly taken the Kingdome vnto hymself,
the Scepter whereof shalPsal. 45.. neuer fade or de∣caie, so we being cleared of all daunger, and freed from the perill of all our foes, are in all care & conscience, to confesse him our Lord alone, and as true subiects of so good a King, to holde our selues against Sathan and men, vnto the pure obedience of his wil. Againe, as he is the onely true Priest,Psal. 110.5. Zach. 6.13. Heb. 2.17. who is sancti∣fied of God to offer vnto hym a most sweete Sacrifice to reconcile vs vnto hymself, and as by his alone execution of this office, and offeryng of hymself, we haue by hym a sure peace and free entrance into the presentes of the Lorde, as by hym all enmitie is doen a∣waie, and there remaineth inaccomptable peace and fauour for euermore, so we are most strongly to cast out of sight the sleightes of Sathan and all the deuises of men, as moste vncleane filthinesse for euer, and not to set our selues, or admit others of what sorte soe∣uer, to stande for vs in this duetie, to spoyle vs of assured safetie, and the Lorde Iesus of this honour, that he alone and none but he is the Priest of his Churche, and hath fully and alsufficiently performed whatsoeuer ap∣pertaineth to their peace for euermore. And as he alone among all the Prophets
of the Lorde,Esa. 40.11.1.. Deut. 18.15. hath infinitly opened the will of God, and as in him is al fulnesse of diuine wisedome,Ihon. 10.11. to reueale and make knowne the will of God vnto his Churche, and as what soeuer he discloseth vnto his Sainctes, hath a sounde warrant to be the will of the most highest, and ought to hold vs in the awe of the same: so he alone hath this peculier vnto hymself, to bee the moste excellent Prophet and Apostle of his Churche, and that none must be vnto vs in this place but he alone, and whatsoeuer doth not proceede from him must not be held of power to binde the con∣sciences of men.2. Cor. 2.12. In all whiche as the Lorde Iesus hath troden the Winepresse alone,2. Cor. 1.24. 1. Tim. 4.1. Esa. 63.3. and carried captiue for euermore, what soeuer might withstande the saluation of his, and by his Spirite directed vs into the light and vse of the same: so in the like power of the same Spirite he sealeth vnto the consciences of men, the sounde warrant of the infinite fauour of GOD in the righteousnesse of his Sonne, to the free and sure enioiyng of al the rest.Rom. 8.9. And as who so hath not the Spirite of Christ is none of his,Gala. 5.22.23. whereby is seuered the states of men, so the same Spirite is discer∣ned
by his effectes, whiche because in this case thei are of two sortes, it shall be profita∣ble in a worde to weigh them a parte, that in the effectuall triall of the same, the chil∣dren of God maie in a sounde experience of the power of Christ in their owne soules, bee cheared vnto constancie in euery good due∣tie against Sathan and men: and the vaine dissemblers, Heretiques, tyme seruers, Epi∣cures, and carnall Gospellers, with the like, who swarme euery where, maie (if thei had eyes to see) perceiue their iust cause to re∣turne, and to humble their soules vnto the obedience of the Lorde. The first effecte therefore is an inwarde witnesse vnto the soule of the infinite loue and free grace of God by faith in the righ∣teousnesse of Christ,Rom. 8.16. and whereby is giuen boldnesse with an assured trust to rest vpon hym in euery distresse, and to repaire vnto hym with callyng vpon his name. As it is written:Gala. 4.6. Because ye are Sonnes, God hath sent the Spirit of his Sonne into your har∣tes, criyng Abba, Father. Whiche although for a tyme it seeme to bee hid, and beyng as it were raked vnder the ashes of our owne corruption, yet because it is a pldge of the
loue of God, which is not for a daie: but per∣petuall in his Sonne (For whom he loueth,Ihon. 13.1. he loueth them to the ende) and working in vs an effectuall callyng,Rom. 11.29. which with God is without repentaunce,Rom. 8.30. it sealeth vnto vs the truthe of a sure election, and so conse∣quently, that there is no feare of fallyng a∣waie, because we rest not on any strength of our owne: but vpon the resolute cōtinuance of the loue of God, and the infinite truth of his worde and grace. The other effect is more apparātly seen. For by faith he doeth purifie the hart,Acts. 15.9. Rom. 6.4. Rom. .5.6.7.8. cau∣seth a true hatred and continual diying vn∣to sinne, and daiely quickeneth vnto the o∣bedience of the Lorde, chaungeth the natu∣rall disposition of the whole soule and body, and frameth it to the will of God,Psal. 69.9. and wor∣keth a feruent loue aboue all thynges vnto the Lord, and to those that be his, with cō∣tinuall callyng vpon his name according to his wil. And these effectes as thei are pecu∣lier to the Spirite of Christ, and haue not been, in a right purpose (namely for the glo∣rie of God and the good of his in any other then in the Sainctes of God, so in whom soe∣uer these effectes are founde, though with
much weakenesse,Who so hath the fruites of the Spirite, hath the Spi∣rite. 2. Pet. 1.10. so it be in truth and with out hypocrisie, it shall euer bee founde to bee most true, that where is the effectes, there is the cause to whom thei belong. So that by this right discernyng of the fruites of the Spirite of the Lorde Jesus, and the hauyng of the same, we maie truely gather that we haue hymself, so as is meant in the worde of God, and so are surely grafted into Christ, and maie assure our hartes before him both for our selues and others, what soeuer other waies our feare and feelyng be for the tyme. For if at sometymes wee maie finde that in some measure wee haue had these effectes, the true fruites of a liuely faithe, and so the assuraunces of our election and saluation by Christ, then is there no iust cause of any feare, if wee mourne vnto the repossessing of our peace againe,Rom. 11.29. because the giftes and cal∣lynges of God are without repentance. And if it bee obiected that wee haue felt the fa∣uour of the Lorde, but now it is gone, and cleane tourned awaie, as that obiection is most vntrue, so to thinke on that fashion, is to suppose an impossible thyng. For God ne∣uer chaungeth his owne purpose, but what soeuer he hath purposed shall stand,2. Tim. 2.19. and his
counsell shall take effect, whatsoeuer lets be against it. Wherevpon we maie rightly ga∣ther, that who soeuer hath a certaine testi∣monie of his faithe and saluation in all his life, maie be assured that it is there stil: and shall bee vnto the ende, although for a tyme thei feele it not, nor perceiue the working of it. For it doeth not followe, that a little child hath no reasonable soule, because he hath not the vse of it, or that the Trees be dead in Winter, because thei beare no fruite, or that there is no Fire, because there is no flame. Againe,Rom. 8.10. 2. Cor. 5.17. Reue. 21.5. the Lorde Iesus Christ killeth in vs, that is, beginneth to kil in vs the whole bodie of sinne, and maketh all thinges newe concernyng the qualitie thereof, so that our vnderstandyng and iudgement is lightened and gouerned, that it beginneth to approue of those good thynges which before it misli∣ked, our will also is cleansed to the hatred of sinne, and desire of those thynges that be good, and our affection beginne to flie and eschewe what is forbidden, and to embrace and followe that whiche is commended of the Lorde. The whiche inwarde power of the Spirite of Christ, if wee feele in effect,
and working in our owne soule, or see the care it leadeth others vnto: the conclusion is infallible and plaine, that wee haue faith, and so consequently Jesus Christ & eternall life. But it is obiected, how can there be as∣suraunce of the vndoubted fauour of the Lorde, and of saluation, seeyng all men are sinners: not onely in that euery man is cor∣rupted by nature, but that the corrupt na∣ture of man doth daily bryng forth effectes accordyng to the same, mouynges, prouoca∣tions, consentynges, and actions contrarie to the will of God? yea seing all doe sinne? The aunswere is easie, that albeit euery one hath continually in hym those thynges that bee in them selues infinitely offensiue before the Lorde, yet the distaunce is not so much be∣tweene heauen and earth, as the difference is great, betweene sinner and sinner, that is, betweene hym in whom sinne raigneth, and hym in whom sinne is. Of the first: the A∣postle commaundeth such as feare God, that sinne doe not raigne in them,Rom. 6.12. that is, haue power to leade thē with delight in the waie of euill. And of the other he saieth by his owne example:Rom. 7.15.17. That that I would not do,
that I doe: yet not I, but sinne that dwel∣leth in me. Where he meaneth by sinne, the remnaunces of corruption whiche yet were sinne, albeit he laboured against it, and was so farre from taking delight therein, that he euen groned vnder the burden thereof,Rom. 7.24. sai∣yng. O wretched man that I am, who shal deliuer me from this bodie of death? But who seeth not, that fewe there are, who striue to giue obediēce vnto the Lord, and to shew forth the effectual cognizaunce and badge whose people thei be, by true re∣generation, and sincere loue to the brethe∣ren? Infinite in deede are the thousandes of men, who beare an outward face to the Go∣spell of Christ, that yet doe wholly prophane them selues in the obedience of sinne, not knowyng, or not regardyng,2. Cor 5.17. that iustificati∣on, and sanctification are inseperable com∣panions, who can not bee sondred or put a∣parte. Yet the olde complaint of the Pro∣phet is in vse at this daie, that men seeme to saie in their hartes:Esa. 28.15. Wee haue made a couenaunt with death, and with hell are wee at a greement, though a scourge run ouer, and passe through, it shall not come at vs: for we haue made falshood our re∣fuge,
and vnder vanitie are we hidd. Moises commaunded the Israelites care∣fully to auoide the roote of bitternesse,Deut. 29.18.19.20. Heb. 12.15. and sheweth what it is and the daunger there∣of, that is, an harte hardened at the iudge∣mentes of the Lorde, and saiyng: Tushe I shall haue peace although I walke accor∣ding to the stubbornnesse of myne owne harte. The Lorde saieth Moises will not be mercifull to suche a soule. &c. And who maie not see the many, yea in∣finite thousandes of suche as haue in their profession succeeded Esawe, as prophane as he,Heb. 12.16. who contemned and solde his birthright for one messe of meate, but thei thinke thei shall safely retourne in conuenient tyme, yet thei are greatly deceiued:Gen. 25.32. Esawe thought not his birthright worth a strawe if he pe∣rished with hunger, that is, except it might serue hym in this life. These contemne the truth of Gods word, the honor of his name, and care of true obedience vnto his will, in regarde of their pleasure or profite the least that maie.Heb. 12.17. Esawe founde no place to repen∣taunce, although he sought the blessing with teares: and who can assure them that their portion wil not be as his. For howsoeuer thei
outwardly pretende to agree with vs in one and the same truthe of God, yet we continu∣ally see to our intollerable greefe, how in the practize of their life, thei runne headlong to all prophannesse, cast the glorious power of the worde of God (whiche should continual∣ly bynde them to the obedience of his will) out of their sight,2. Tim. 3.2.5. 2. Pet. 2.3. whilest thei accompt more of gaine then of Godlinesse, and wallowe in their vaine pleasures and fleshly delightes, as is infinitly seen at this daie. Who maketh not a tushe in his owne soule, to giue obediēce to the Lorde in all the actions of his life? If outwardly to bragge that we are children of the righteous, to glorie in our titles,Ihon. 8.3.3 if not rightly to accompt of the excellencie of our high callyng with God, if to be hardly dra∣wen to any good waie, and to goe swiftly to the waie of sinne, if our filthie gaine though but in a vile thyng, or beastly delightes, bee of force to carie vs against the obedience of the will of God, bee to holde an estate with Esawe as it is in deede, if onely thei haue sealed vnto them the fauour of the Lorde, who by the power of the Spirite of Christ, are chaunged in their whole beeyng, and cherefully led in the obedience of the wil of
God, then is there iust cause, that all car∣nall Gospellers, Libertines, carelesse profes∣sors and prophane men, should intollerably feare before the anger of the Lord. And al∣though thei be infinitly drunken with this vile conceapt, that so thei bee no Papistes, whiche vncleane beastes in deede remaine in their sinnes, so thei professe the Gospell, a∣lowe of the truthe and doctrine thereof as common men doe, in all thynges that touch not themselues, that for the rest, God is mer∣cifull, and thei shall doe well enough howsoe∣uer thei liue: yet let them remēber alwaies the example of Esawe. He though not the excellencie of Gods callyng to be as it was, in the tyme of his vanitie, nor yet doe thei. He wept for a blessing, and it maie be some of them would gladly be saued: But true re∣pentaunce,Luc 24 47. the waie whereby it is had, was farre from him, and who shall promise it vn∣to them? It maie bee, if the Lorde doe not conuert them, thei maie haue suche a re∣pentaunce as Judas had, a sight of the righ∣teous iudgementes of GOD and their owne sinne: but suche a power in their owne sou∣les, as maie soundly applie the free promises of God in Christ, and his whole righteous∣nesse
vnto them selues, it is onely from the Lorde, and resteth not in the power of any childe of man, as maie well be seen in Esaw, who is saide to haue founde no place to re∣pentance, though he sought the blessing with teares. Againe, seing the Lorde maketh it kno∣wen in some acceptable measure, who doe rightly profite in the profession of his name vnto the assuraunce of his grace & free dis∣charge from al daunger in the daie to come. As doeth appeare in the visitation of the greate Citie spoken of in Ezekiel. 9.4. com∣maundyng that all thei onely shall be sealed to a sure escape, that mourne & crie for the wickednesse of men: How shall these impure Macheuilles, Atheistes, Papistes, Li∣bertines, beastly professors, and carnall Go∣spellers be put in hope of the fauour of God, who are so farre of from mournyng in their owne soules for the euilles of men, that their owne life is nothyng els, but a Sea of sinne, and daiely proceedyng in continuall trans∣gression against the Lorde. And albeit it is moste true, that whom the Lorde of glo∣rie hath called from the death of sinne to the life of righteousnesse, and caused that they walke not as thei did before,Ephe. 2.2. seueryng his
people from the curse of the worlde, and the vsuall waies of men, yet very fewe there are found, that make conscience of any chaunge in them selues into those waies whiche bee accordyng to the Lorde. And though it be infinitely vrged vnto the myndes of men, that who soeuer is in Christ is a newe crea∣ture,. Cor. 5.17. that is, begunne to be chaunged in his whole soule and bodie, from corruption and sinne to the light and willing obedience of the will of God: Yet who maie not see that the most wilfully ignoraunt of this waie, and that it is true in experience, that the Prophet saieth, that, who so withdraweth himself frō euill must be spoiled. For where are not thei held commonly for the best mē, that beare an outwarde face to the Gospell, while their liues are moste full of euill, that sticke at nothing, but at that which is good. Who sweare, lye, and commit all abhomina∣tions, and yet saie thei are good Christians, and of many it is saide of them, that, thei are very good Protestants. But who so ca∣reth in all his life, to yeeld vnto the Lorde the fruites of an acceptable obedience from the grounde of a pure harte, and to square his thoughts, words & works after the rule of the worde of God, is made a praie to the
rest. And beyng accompted as the skumme of the worlde, is set forthe to the shame and reproche of all men, whose vnbridled lippes and bloudie handes doe besoyle and waste them from daie to daie: So that the poore Sainctes of the Lorde,Psalm. 124.1.2. maie still renewe the song of the Churche in Dauids tyme: Ex∣cept the Lorde had beene on our side, thei had long agoe swallowed vs vp quicke. And euen as of all the enemies that Iuda had, the tenne Tribes of Israell that were their bretheren, and gaue an outwarde profession of the name of GOD with them, were the greatest and moste daungerous: Euen so a∣mongst all the enemies that Syon, Gods Churche hath, the moste vehement and bitter are the falsharted and counterfaite Israelites, Papistes, and other Heretiques, and prophane men. Yet of all the rest, as one enemie within the Citie is more daungerous then ten without, so carelesse professors and prophane men as thei haue moste power to hurte, so are thei furiously enraged against the truthe of the waies of God, and beeyng set on fire to remaine in their sinne, and e∣uen sell them selues to woorke wickednesse: but in vaine, for he that sitteth on hight shal laugh them to scorne.Psalm. 2.4. The Lord shall haue
them in derision. For can thei make any ac∣comptes, that euer thei that haue beene in∣iurious to the Churche of GOD, and to his people, haue escaped the iust hande of the Lorde?Gen. 4.10.11. Did not Abels bloud, vniustly shed by Caine when he thought hym self to bee safe, crie vengeaunce on hym and his poste∣ritie for euer?Gala. 4.29. Psalm. 137.7. Did Jsmaell or Esawe go free, for their iniuries done to the Lordes seruan∣tes? Went the reprochfull taunts for nought, that the olde and euill worlde did vse a∣gainst righteous Noe?2. Pet. 2.5. 2. Pet. 2.8. Dan. 6.8. Or Sodome for their sinnes and iniuries against Lott? Or the Princes against Daniell? Was there euer Nation, Kingdome, or People, so mightie in power, so surpassing in policie, or wise in their generation, that haue set themselues against God, his truth and people, and haue not ta∣sted of his indignation in due time, and can these tyme scruers, hypocrites, and prophane men, perswade themselues that thei shall be the first? Doe thei not remember that the Lorde saieth to his Churche, who soeuer in thee shall set himself against thee shall sure∣ly fall? Are not Nimrod, Pharao, Ierobo∣ham, Nabuchadnezer, Darius, and Alex∣ander, and many moe gone, their Kyngdo∣mes laied waste, and their great and famous
names raised from the earth? Is not their Religion chaunged from euill to worse, their Cities, Townes, and Temples made dennes for wilde beastes and vncleane birdes, as the Lordes Prophets tolde long before? Can thei be more cruell then Nero, Dioclesian, Domitian, or suche like? Can thei passe Ie∣zabell, Antiochus, or suche beastly tormen∣tors? And yet in spite of them all, and all thei could doe, the Lord hath defended his, and powred vppon them the recompence of their waies, in his due tyme. If the wicked that now liue, could passe all these in mad∣nesse, and them selues in crueltie, yet shall this be iustly taken vp against them:Psalm. 2.5. Why do the heathen rage and the people mur∣mure in vaine? For he is infinitely more strong that is with vs, then any that can be against vs. And though the wicked bende them selues, and runne together against the Lorde and his annointed: yet if wee weigh the cause well, wee shall euer finde it moste true, that,2. Kin. 6.16. There are moe with vs thē with them.Iob. 19.29. Let the vngodly therefore haue their momentany ioye that shal ende with shame. And let vs striue to be mynded as he, who saied:Psal. 62.7.18.2. The Lorde is my strength saieth my soule, therefore will I trust in hym, and
vnder the shadowe of his winges shall be my refuge, &c. For as the Lorde our moste good and mercifull father, doeth, according to his infinite wisedome and endlesse com∣passion, prepare his people vnto hymself, tri∣yng what thei wil beare for his names sake, euen so he doeth not assaie them aboue that he makes them able to beare: Cor. 1.13. but armes them beyonde the thoughtes of the harte of man, till he sende them full deliueraunce of all euill. In these miserable daies wherein we liue, as God in greate mercie hath staied the rage of our enemies, that thei can not so spoyle and make waste of the bodies and li∣ues of the godly mynded, and suche as daie∣ly labour and profite in the true feare of GOD, as is like thei would: so yet thei re∣maine themselues, euen men vowed and gi∣uen ouer to the will of Sathan, hauyng their hartes sett on those thynges that are euill, and their feete swift to commit sinne.Prou. 1.16. What their bloudie hands dare not attempt, their poisoned tongues spare not to spue out where soeuer thei come. Now that fire and faggot cease, their slaunderous liyng lippes are ope∣ned wide, and their vncleane mouthes made Brothelhouses of all vntruthe against the seruauntes of the Lorde. And where thei
dare not openly blaspheme the doctrine for feare of shame, thei secretly seeke to vnder∣mine it, by inueighyng against the teachers and true professors thereof, railyng, liyng, and slaundering, without care or conscience what thei speake, so that thei maie doe the mischeefe that thei labour for. This kinde of persecution is not lesse greeuous to a godly mind, then the other, and yet it is euer true,Prou. 28.1. the righteous are bolde as a Lyon, and a iu∣stified mynde will tourne it self vnto God, will beare his crosse thankefully,Iames. 1.2. Phil. 1.29. accompting it for exceedyng ioye to be called out of the Lorde, to stande in his cause, and to suffer somewhat for his names sake, confessing that the seruaūt is not aboue his Lord.Math. 10.24. If Christ our Lorde escaped not the venome of suche impoisoned tongues:Ihon. 8.48. but thei called him Sa∣maritane, and saide that he had a Deuill, let no true Christian looke to be free. For if thei haue called the Maister of the house Beelzebub,Math. 10.25. what will thei call them of the housholde? Dauid,Psalm. 52.2. a paterne of the Church of God, felt those euilles, when he compared slaunderous tongues to Rasors and sharpe swordes, and when he praied:Psalm. 120.2. Deliuer my soule O Lord from liyng lippes and from a deceiptfull tongue. And the Lorde cut
of all flatteryng lippes, and the tongue that speaketh proude thynges. And as the Prophet hath praied, so will it come to passe to all suche as with vniust reproches or o∣therwaies iniurie the Sainctes of the Lord, and thei shall one daie approue it to be most true that is said of our Sauiour Christ, that, It were better a Milstone were hanged a∣boute their neckes and they drowned in the depth of the Sea,Math. 18.6. thē that thei should offende one of the least of them that be∣leeue in hym. For our owne partes, wee see into what condition we are come, that vn∣der Poperie we are tormented and persecu∣ted with all extreame handling, and vnder the Gospell we are slaundered and reuiled: so that we maie iustly saie with the Apo∣stle:Rom. 8.36. Psalm. 44.22. We are daiely accompted as Sheepe appoincted to be slaine. And yet beyonde all this, Sathan hath preuailed in an other euill, whiche is more vneasie to be borne to a godly mynd then all the rest is. And that is to see, that Papistes and other Hereti∣ques, the longer thei haue helde and practi∣sed their error, the more forwarde and fer∣uent thei bee in the waie of sinne, but many that seemed to haue well profited in know∣ledge of the Lordes truthe, haue at once
tourned out of the waie, and as beeyng in a dead sleepe of securitie, flatter themselues in a naked knowledge without all true zeale to quicken the giftes that thei haue, to the honour of God and the good of his Saincts. Jt is accompted a notable poinct of excee∣dyng wisedome in this daie with many, not to shewe a face to the truthe or to our bre∣theren before men, but as the moste doe, whiche is nothyng at all. When we first be∣gan to bee lightened with knowledge of the truthe, the Gospell it self was moste sweete vnto our soules, and the fellowshippe of our bretheren was moste deare and profitable vnto vs: but now Sathan hath besotted vs with an imagination of knowledge, and al∣most who doeth not thinke it follie to be fer∣uent, and a poinct almost of extreame mad∣nesse to make more accomptes of men as thei accompt of the Lorde, and yet we haue the president of the Spirite of God,2. Thess. 1.3. to comforte vs in that waie. True knowledge in deede, and right zeale for the Lorde, are ioynt cō∣panions, or rather Twinnes, that maie not be sondered, whereby the harte is lightened and stirred vp to a cherefull and moste rea∣die obedience of the will of God, with desire of his glorie and the good of his people be∣fore
all thynges in the worlde. And what maie we thinke of them that be otherwise, that pamper them selues either in a blinde zeale without care of knowledge, the waie to error, or in a bare knowledge thinking themselues wise despise the waie of the Lord, which is in true zeale and right knowledge of the Lordes waies according to his word. And their such proude accompt of nothing, taking the very shadowe of knowledge for true knowledge it self, maketh them secure, who of wise and zealous members of Gods Churche, according to the measure of their experience in that tyme, are now becomne vnprofitable Drones, and carelesse Epicu∣res, and thinke them selues more wise (in their extreame follie) then euer thei were before. But it must needes be as the Lorde hath foretolde of the like, that thei are ei∣ther stonie grounde,Math. 13.5.6.7. Luc. 8.6.7.8. where the seede had no depth of yearth, or that it is choked with thornes,Math. 12.45. euen their harts eaten vp with the care of this world, whose ende will be worse, then the beginnyng. Some others there are that take excep∣tions at whom thei wil, and albeit the Lord hath testified that there is no respect of per∣sons with hym,Act. 10.34. Rom. 2.11. yet thei feare not to vpholde
this imagination of their owne, that in re∣spect of profityng and practise of true god∣linesse, euery one in their place, it is more free for some men then for othersome, and for all men then for women. And that their such dreaming may appeare the more grosse, thei let not to saie, (with what purpose I leaue to them selues) that a woman should not bee more religious then her housbande, forget∣tyng belike, the approued examples of the Scriptures 1. Sam. 25.3. Luc. 8.3.Acts. 1.14. Rom. 6.6.12.13. 2. Tim. 1.5. Luc. 23.55.56. Luc. 24.1. Read Maister Foxe, and by name Anne Askewe, and Prestes wife of Exceter. And how many holy women are infinitely mentioned in the worde, without any mention of their housbandes fall, and holy Histories testifie of very many, that haue māfully giuen their liues for the Gospell, when their housbandes haue beene backesliders, and some of them haue persecuted their poore wiues. And that thei maie bee founde to peruert the straight waies of the Lorde, thei saie a man should not take to wife (as the like) one that is more religious then hym self. I would aske these men whether a man maie take a wife that is more welthie then hymself, if thei graunt that he maie (as I trust thei will easily do) then shal thei be inforced to saie, either, that the thynges of this worlde are more to be e∣steemed, then the heauenly blessinges of the
Spirite of God, and the transitorie thynges of the bodie, more worth then the giftes of the mynde, or that a man not onely should: but also ought to make especiall choyce, as there are excellent blessinges in the inner man.Gen. 2.18. And if the wife must be in all thyn∣ges a helper, then in the cheefe thynges it were absurde to saie she must bee vnapt to helpe. Thei maie remember that the Lords people haue from tyme to tyme, been forbid∣dē to match themselues with the prophane,Deut. 7.3. Iude. 3.7. whiche necessarily intendeth the contrarie. But thei will except, that thei doe not de∣nie, but the wife should haue some religion, but not more then her housbande: But thei should rather saie it is shame worthie in the housbande, who should be so farre before, to come so farre behind. I aske, when the hous∣bande hath no religion, and the wife must not haue more then he, or when he doth not labour for it, and she must not labour more then he: how muche is then left vnto her, either of religion, or of meanes to attaine vnto it, none at all. This is so farre of from continuyng them vnto all good duetie vnto their housbandes,Ephe. 5.22. Collo. 3.18. 1. Pet. 3.1. wherevnto thei are fast bounde by the lawe of God: and suche as in truthe feare the Lorde, will I am right sure
make conscience of: that it is to saie almost, that their saluation and the meanes of it, is not free, but at the deuotion of others, that God, his worde and grace, with the glorie of his name, are quite out of sight, and the housbande must be in his place. Let no man thinke that my meaning is to loose the real∣mes of obedience in this case: for my whole desire is quite contrarie. First, that bothe the housbande, and the wife, should obey the Lorde, bothe as Christians, and in their se∣uerall place: thei that are to gouerne, to go∣uerne in, and accordyng to the Lorde,Collo. 3.17. and thei that are to obey, to obey in, and accor∣dyng to the Lorde.Acts. 4.19. If any intende otherwa∣yes, their authoritie will bee without the Lorde, and deserueth to bee so taken. A∣gaine I aske, seyng the Lorde hath appoin∣ted this vnto all his children,1. Thes. 4 1.2. that whatsoe∣uer thei haue gained of knowledge & prac∣tize in the worde of God,2. Pet. 3.18. Psalm. 84.7. thei still grow and goe forwarde to full perfection whether thei be men or women: who shall prescribe a suf∣ficiēcie, or dare saie that thei haue enough? J wish we maie in this cleare light of know∣ledge leaue winking, as it were, at noone da∣yes, and tremble, thus to dallie, or thus to deale vniustly with the most holie truth of
the Lorde, and to presse vniust iniuries vp∣pon the soules of our poore bretheren, least in carelesse greeuyng the consciences of the Lordes annointed, we violently bryng vpon our selues the heauie wrathe and indigna∣tion of God. If we in the truth of an humble soule do weigh the seuerall testimonies of the worde of the Lorde, to the right guiding of his ser∣uaunts to the assuraunce of his grace in the obedience of his will, we shall easily be made able to meete with all these mischeefes and many moe, that might otherwaies preuaile to turne vs out of the waie. And as the Spi∣rite of God hath amongst infinite other pla∣ces of Scripture to that effect, by the Apo∣stle Sainct Ihon in his first Epistle, proued that true iustification and eternall life is onely by Iesus Christ, and shewed further, that there is no assuraunce of this grace of the Lorde, where is not the effectuall power of the Spirite of the Sonne of God in the iu∣stified (who are vnited vnto hym as the members vnto the head, and receiue of his fulnesse) to leade them in a continuall true obedience of his will reuealed in his worde, and in the truthe thereof, that thei might stand out immouably vnto the end, exhor∣ted
to beware of false teachers and all that deceiue, and reasoning from the effect to the cause, he proueth the truthe of the loue of God towarde vs, by our loue to the brethe∣ren. Which beyng well considered of vs and applied to our seuerall vse in the direction of the Spirite of Christ, will not onely arme vs against Sathan in the former euilles: but make vs effectuallie wise in the waie of life. And as the same Epistle of Sainct Jhon is most sweete and plentifull in it self, being full of plaine witnesse of the grace of God, and effectuall testimonies who bee his: So is it most clerely & profitably opened and made plaine by the reuerende and moste worthie seruaunt of Iesus Christ, M. Caluin, in his tyme. Whiche his labours, in regarde of the greate good thei might doe to many fearing the Lorde, that want the knowledge of the tongue wherein he wrote: I haue (as my o∣ther occasions haue giuen me leaue) tran∣slated into the Englishe tongue, and offryng my poore labours therein to the Churche of GOD, I haue been bolde to commende the first fruites, as it were, vnto you, right har∣tely praiyng, that whatsoeuer the Lord shall therein open vnto you, that maie concerne you through conuersion, continuaunce, or
cherefull constancie in the Lorde, that you will applie it nere vnto your soules, and that you maie so alwaies profite in the same, as may more & more seale vp vnto your seue∣rall consciences the effectuall assuraunce of the eternall grace of God in Iesus Christ, and make you able to stand vnder the bur∣thens that you do, or shall indure from tyme to tyme, for the honour of his name. Mai∣ster Caluin also vpon Iude, and an Epistle of his owne written to a freend, J haue, as I might, translated likewise, and deliuered withall to the Printe, praiyng that the one and other, maie doe that good to Gods Churche, and namely to your selues, that I hartely wishe, and that you maie euer re∣maine together in the vnitie of truthe, and in all holy fellowship among your selues, and with the whole Church of God, growing vp from strength to strength, to a full mea∣sure of perfection in Iesus Christ, to whose mercies I shall not cease by his grace, to cōmend you and the whole Church of God for euer. Yours assuredly in the Lorde. W. H.
THE COMENTA∣ries of M. Iohn Caluin, vpon the first Epistle of Iohn. The Argument. THis Epistle is most agréeable to his spirit, who before others was therfore beloued of Christ, that he might make him fami∣liar vnto vs. Further, it con∣tayneth Doctrine mixt with exhortations. It disputeth of the eternall dei∣tie of Christ, together also of the incompa∣rable grace, which being made manifest to the world he brought with him, & generally of all his benefits: and chiefly it commendeth and extolleth the inestimable grace of the a∣doption of the Lord. Thence it taketh the oc∣casion to exhort. Sometimes it doth gene∣rally admonish to religious and holye lyfe, and againe by name it giueth preceptes of loue: but none of these it doth prosecute in continuaunce. For euerie where in teaching and exhorting he is diuerse, but especially he is plentifull in vrging to brotherly loue. It also toucheth other thinges briefly: as of ta∣king
héede of seducers and such other lyke. But euerie thing maye be obserued in his place. CHAP. 1. 1 THat which was from the beginning, which we haue heard, which we haue seene with our eies, which wee haue looked vppon, which our hands haue handled of the word of lyfe. 2 And that life was made manifest, and wee haue seene and beare witnesse, and doo shewe vnto you that eternall lyfe, which was with the Father, and is made manifest vn∣to vs. HEe sheweth that in the be∣ginning lyfe was giuen vn∣to vs in Christ, which thing as it is an incomperable good, so it ought to rauish and inflame all our sences with a wonderfull loue and desire of it. Indéede this is spoken in fewe and simple wordes. That lyfe is made manifest. But if wée
doe account howe miserable and horrible the condition of death is: and agayne of what worthynesse the kingdome of GOD and his immortall glorye is: we shall héere perceiue some more excellent thing, then can bée expressed with anye wordes. This therefore is the purpose of the Apostle, when hée hath shewed the most excellent good thing, yea, the chiefe and alone happynesse, which GOD hath vouchsafed vs in his Sonne, to lighten our mindes. But because the greatnesse of the maker did require that the truth should be certaine and approoued, hée tourneth much in this part. For all these Which wee haue seene, which wee haue hard, which wee haue looked vppon, &c. are effec∣tuall to establish the credite of the Gospell. Nor indéed doeth hée adde so greate a desire to affection without cause. Séeing that our safetie doeth consist in the Gospell, the cer∣taintie thereof is a thing more then necessa∣rie. And how vntowarde wée are to beléeue, euerye one of vs by his owne experyence doeth knowe too well. I call, to beléeue, not lightly to imagine, or in only assenting, to a∣low that which is spoken: but to imbrace it with a certaine & vndoubted perswasion, so that we dare subscribe as to a knowen truth.
By this occasion the Apostle doth multiply so many things héere in confirmation of ye gos∣pell. 1 That which was from the beginning. Because it is a broken and confused speach, that the sence maye bée giuen more plaine, so the words are to be resolued. We declare vnto you, the word of life, which from the be∣ginning hath by all meanes, bene truly testi∣fied vnto vs, how life was made manifest in it. Or if you had rather otherwise, Whatso∣euer we shew you of the word of life, it was from the beginning, and it was openly shew∣ed to vs: because life is made manifest in it. But this member, That which was from the beginning, is vndoubtedly referred to the di∣uinitie of Christ, for God was not manifest∣ed in the flesh from the beginning: but hée who alwayes was life, and the eternal word of God, in the fulnesse of time became man. Againe, those things that follow of the behol∣ding and féeling with handes, doe more bée∣long to the humane nature. But because two natures make one persō, & that one is Christ, who came out from the father, that he might take vppon him our flesh, the Apostle doth worthely shewe foorth in common together, that he hath ben alwayes inuisible and after∣wards
séene. Wherby is refelled ye rotten ca∣uill of Seruetus, that there is one nature and being of the deitie with the flesh and more∣ouer that the word is transformed into flesh: because yt liuing word was séene in the flesh. Let vs remember therefore, that this doctrine of the Gospell is auouched, that he who in the flesh did truly proue himselfe to be the sonne of God, & was acknowledged for the sonne of God, was alwaies the inuisible word of God. And yet he doeth not héere assigne the begin∣ning of the world, but ascendeth higher. Of the word of life. The Genitiue case is taken in the place of an Epithite for quicke∣ning, because as he teacheth in the first chap∣ter of the Gospell, In it was life: albeit this title doth belong to the Sonne of God by a double right, both because he hath plentifully poured life vpon all creatures, and because he now repaireth life in vs, which was put out and perished by Adams sinne. Yea, moreouer the name it selfe of the word, may be expoun∣ded two manner of waies, either of Christ, or of the doctrine of the Gospel: for by that al∣so, health is brought vnto vs. But, because the substaunce thereof is Christ, and it doth not contayne anye other thing, then that hée at length was manifested vnto men, who al∣waies
was with the Father: the first Ex∣position séemeth to me more simple and more naturall. Further that the wisedome which dooth remayne in God, is called the word, is euidently séene by the Gospell. That which wee haue heard, That which wee haue seene. This hearing, was not of anye spread reporte, whereto small creditte vseth to bée giuen: but Iohn meaneth, that of those things which hée taught, hée was first effectually taught of his master, so that hée set foorth nothing rashly. And in truth, no man shall bée a profitable Teacher in the Church, who hath not first himselfe bene a Disciple of the Sonne of GOD, and rightlye instructed in his Schoole, séeing that his authoritie alone ought to bée of most force. Whereas hée sayeth, that hée Did see it with his eyes, it is not a Pleonasmos, but a greater expressing for amplification sake. Yea, not being contented wth a simple sight, hée addeth, Wee ooked vppon, and our handes haue handeled. By which wordes, hée dooth testifie that hée taught nothing, which hée had not throughlye approued. Yet the approouing of the senses, séemeth smallye
to be profitable to the present cause: For the vertue of Christ cannot bée comprehended with eyes or handes. I aunswere that the same thing is spoken héere, which is in the first Chapter of his Gospell: We haue séene his glorie, that is, glorie worthye the onely begotten Sonne of GOD. For the Sonne of GOD was not acknowledged according to the outwarde forme of his bodie: but by that whereas he shewed foorth famous expe∣riences of his diuine power: so that in him, as by a liuely and expresse Image, did shine the maiestie of the Father. Whereas the wordes are of the plurall number, and the matter doth most indifferently appertaine vnto all the Apostles, I doo willyngly inter∣prete it of them: especiallye because the que∣stion is of the authoritie of the testimo∣nye. But, no lesse friuolous, as I lately tou∣ched, and to be shamed at, is the lewdnesse of Seruetus, who vrgeth these wordes, where∣by to prooue that the worde of GOD hath bene visible and palpable. Hée dooth wic∣kedlye either destroye the two Natures, which is in Christ, or mingle them confused∣ly together.
He therefore doth imagine I wot not what lie, so deifying the humanitie of Christ, that he doeth vtterly take from him the truth of mans nature, denying in ye meane time that Christ is any other way the sonne of God, ex∣cept because he was conceiued of his mother by the power of the holye Ghost, and taking from him his proper abiding in God Where∣vpon it followeth, that he is neither God nor man, albeit he séeme to forge a cōfused Masse of both. But because the minde of the Apostle is vndoubted vnto vs, let vs passe by that Dogge. 2 And the life was made manifest. This note of ioyning together is héere put in stéede of shewing plainly. As if he should haue said, We do giue witnesse of the word that giueth life, euen as life were made manifest. Albeit the sence maye be double, either that Christ was giuen, who is life and the fountaine of life, or that life was plainely offered to vs in Christ. And this later doth necessarily fol∣low of the first. As much yet as doth belong to the signification of the words, these two dif∣fer betwéene themselues, as the cause and the effect. Where secondly he rehearseth, Wee shew eternal life. I doubt not but yt he speketh of the effect: that is, that we attaine vnto life
by the benefite of Christ. Wherevppon wée ather that Christ cannot bée preached vnto vs, but the kingdome of heauen is opened vn∣o vs, that béeing raised from death, we might iue the life of God. Which was with the Father. This is true, not onely since the worlde was made, ut also from the first eternitie. For God was alwayes the fountaine of life, but the power and abilitie of quickening was in his eternall wisedome, which yet he did not shew forth before the creation of the worlde. And ince God beganne to giue his worde, that power which before was hid, hath dispearsed it selfe into the creatures. Nowe this was ome manifesting, but the Apostle respecteth another thing, that is, that thē life was made manifest in Christ, when he being clothed wt our flesh, did performe the partes of redemp∣tion. For albeit the Fathers vnder the lawe were fellowes and pertakers of the same lyfe: yet we knowe they were shut vp vn∣der the hope, which afterwarde shoulde bée reuealed. It was of necessitie vnto them that they should seeke lyfe from the death & resur∣rection of Christ. But the matter was not onely farre separate from theyr eyes, but it was also hidde from theyr mindes. They
therefore depend vpon the hope of the Reue∣lation, which at the last in his time did fol∣lowe. They coulde not indéede obtaine lyfe, except by some meanes béeing made mani∣fest vnto them. But betwixt them and vs there is a great difference, because whom they sought darkly in figures being promised vnto them, we nowe apprehend him, béeing giuen as it were with our handes. But the purpose of the Apostle is, to take awaye the opinion of newnesse, which might impayre the dignitie of the Gospell. By which occa∣sion he sayth, That lyfe did not now beginne of late, as if it hadde latelye appeared, be∣cause it hath bene for euer with the Fa∣ther. 3 That which we haue seene and heard, doe we shew vnto you: that you also may haue fellowshippe with vs, and that our fellowship may be with the father, and with his sonne Ie∣sus Christ. 4 And these things we write vnto you, that your ioye may be full. 5 And this is the promise which wee declare vnto you, that GOD is lyght, and in him is not any darknesse.
6 If wee saie wee haue fellowshippe with him, and walke in darknesse, we lie, and doe not the truth. 7 But if wee walke in light as hee is in light, wee haue fellowshippe one with ano∣ther, and the bloude of Iesus Christ his sonne, doth cleanse vs from all sinne. 3 That which wee haue seene. Now hée doeth the third time repeate his hauing séene and hearde, least anie thing might bée wanting to the effectuall certainetye of his Doctrine. And that is dilygentlye to bée no∣ted, that the Preachers of the Gospell are chosen of Christ, who might be fit and faith∣full witnesses of all those thinges which they shoulde speake. Together also hée witnes∣seth the affection of his minde: because hée sayeth hée is not mooued with anye other reason to write, but that hée maye prouoke and incite them to whome hee writeth, to approch to the fellowshippe of an ine∣stimable good, whereby it well appeareth, howe much care he hath of their saluation, which auayleth not a little to procure other good and vertuous thinges, for we are too
too vnkind if we refuse to heare him, who de∣sireth to communicate with vs parte of that happinesse, which he himselfe hath gotten. He then expresseth ye fruit which is attained vnto by the gospell, that is, yt we might be made at one with God, & with his sonne Christ, wher∣in consisteth the chiefe goodnesse. This second member ought to haue bene added, not onely that he might make the doc∣trine of the Gospell precious and delightful, but also that he might shewe that he desired them to be his fellowes, to no other ende, but that he might bring them to God, and so all might be one in him. For ye wicked also haue their mutual coniunction among themselues, but without God, yea, that they may more and more estrange themselues from God, which is the vttermost poynt of all the wic∣ked. But this, as was said euen now, is our onely happinesse, to be receiued into fauor of God, that we may be truly knit vnto him in Christ: of which Iohn. 17. chapt. In conclu∣sion, Iohn pronounceth, that like as the Apo∣stles are adopted of Christ to be his brethe∣ren, that being gathered into one bodie, they may remaine fast vnto God: that so he with the rest of his fellowes in that businesse, doth performe this, that of this sacred and blessed
vnitie there may be many copartners. 4 That your ioye. By the name of full ioye, he doth more fitly expresse the full and perfect happinesse, which we attaine vnto by ye Gospel. He doth withal admonish ye faithful where they ought to haue all their affections fixed. True is that prouerbe, Where our tre∣sure is, there is our heart. Mat. 6.21. Whosoe∣uer therefore doth truly perceiue, of what worthinesse that fellow  is with God, hée doth wtall sufficiently satisfie himselfe wt this alone, & doth not further boyle with sundrye desires. The Lord is my cup, saith Dauid, and mine inheritaunce. The Lot is falne vnto me in pleasant places. Psal. 16.5.6. After the same manner, Paule sheweth, that all thinges wer vnto him as dunge, that he might pos∣sesse Christ alone. Phi. 3.8. Wherefore in fine he hath profited in the Gospel, who estéeming himselfe happie in the fellowship of god, doth rest himselfe in it alone, and so prefer it before all the worlde, that for it he be prepared to forsake all. 5 And this is the promise. I doo no lesse al∣low that which the olde interpreter hath yéel∣ded, This is the declaratiō. For albeit [Epagge∣ha] with the Grecians doth often signifie a  promise, yet because Iohn speaketh héere
of the testimonie, whereof he had made men∣tion a little before, the text séemeth rather to require the other sense: except possiblye you may resolue it thus, The promise, which wée bring vnto you, doth draw this with it, or hath this condition knitte vnto it. By this meanes we shal vnderstand the minde of the Apostle. Neither indéede dooth hée héere com∣prehende the whole doctrine of the Gospell: but sheweth that this is requyred, if we will inioye Christ and his benefittes, that we be∣come lyke vnto GOD in righteousnesse, and holynesse: lyke as Paule saieth. Tit. 2.11. That Grace of GOD which bringeth saluation to all men hath appeared, and tea∣cheth vs to denye vngodlynesse and worldly lustes, and teacheth vs to lyue soberlye, iust∣lye, and godlye, in this present worlde. Ex∣cepte because hée teacheth by a Metaphore, that wée must walk in the light because God is lyght. Further, whereas sometimes hée calleth GOD lyght, and sometimes sayeth, Hée is in the lyght, the wordes are not to be vrged too much. Why Sathan shoulde bée called the Prince of darkenes, it is euident inough. Therefore when GOD on the contrarye
parte is called the Father of light, and light it selfe, first wée may vnderstande, that there is nothing in him, but that which is cleare, pure, and sincere: then, that he dooth so ligh∣ten all things with his brightnesse, that hée suffereth nothing that is defiled or vnéeuen, no blemishes or vncleannesse, no hypocrisie or deceipt, nor any other euill to lye close or hidde. Therefore this is the Summe: Séeing there is no agréement betwéene lyght and darkenesse, that while wée walke in darke∣nesse, wée are at enmitie with GOD. Therfore that that societie which hée men∣tioned cannot otherwise stande, then if wée also bée accordingly pure, holy, and full of lyght. In him there is no darkenesse. This manner and kinde of speaking which is héere vsed, is verye familiar with Iohn, that hée maye amplyfie by a contrary deniall that which hée hath before affirmed. Therefore the sense is. That GOD is such a lyght as that hée admitteth no darknesse at all. Wherevpon it followeth that hée dooth con∣tinuallye hate an euill conscience, and a defiled, lewde, and wicked lyfe and conuersa∣tion,
& whatsoeuer doth sauour of darknesse▪ 6 If we saie. It is an argument of re∣pugnaunces, whilest he gathereth that they are straungers from God, which walke in darkenesse, yet this whole doctrine doth de∣pend vppon a more high principle, that is, that GOD doth sanctifie his children. For it is not indéede a bare precepte, whereby he doth require of vs an holy life, but rather he sheweth that the grace of Christ is also effectuall vnto this, that the darknesse bée∣ing driuen awaie, it may kindle the lyght of God in vs. As if he should haue sayd, where∣as God doth communicate himselfe with vs, it is no vaine counterfait, but it is of necessi∣tie, that the power and effect of this societie doe shew forth in our life, or else the professi∣on of the Gospell shall be counterfait. Wher∣as he addeth, We doe not the truth. It is as much as if he shoulde haue sayde, we doe not truly, or we haue not in estimation yt which is true and right. And it is that manner of speaking, which I noted first to be in plenti∣full vse with him. 7 But if we walke in the light. Now hée saith that this is a certaine marke of our con∣iunction with God, if we be made lyke vnto him, not that the purenesse of life dooe recon∣cile
God vnto vs as the first cause: but the Apostle meaneth, that by the effect it is appa∣rant that we are knit vnto God, if his pure∣nesse doe shine in vs. And indéede so is the matter, that wheresoeuer God doeth come, all things are so fully replenished with his holy∣nesse, that wipeth awaie all vncleannesse: but without him wée haue nothing but vnclean∣nesse & darknesse. Hence it appeareth that no man liueth well, except also he cleaue fast vnto God. Where he sayth that we haue fel∣lowshippe one with another, it is not simplie referred to men, but he placeth God on the one parte and vs on the other. Yet it may bée demaunded, what man canne so expresse the light of God in his lyfe, that this lykenesse which Iohn requyreth, maye bée appa∣raunt, for by this meanes it must néedes be, that he is altogether cleane and without darknesse. I answere that these kinde of spée∣ches are to be fitted to the capacitie of men. Therefore he is sayd to bée lyke vnto GOD, that doeth aspire vnto his similitude, howe farre so euer yet he be from the same. And no example is to be fetched else where, then from this present place. Hee walketh in darknesse. Whosoeuer is not guided by the feare of God, nor in a
pure conscience respecteth this end, that who∣ly giuing himselfe to God, he doth studie to promote his glorie. Therefore on the contra∣rie, he that in the sincere affection of his hart, conforming his lyfe and all the partes of it to the feare and obedience of God, doth pure∣ly worshippe him, albeit he faile in manye things, and to moane vnder the burthen of the flesh, hée is taken to walke in the light, because he holdeth the right waie. It is ther∣fore the alone vprightnesse of conscience, which doth discerne betwéene light and dark∣nesse. And the bloud of Iesus Christ. After hée hath taught of what manner is the bonde of our vnitie with God, hée also sheweth the fruit that issueth from thence: that is, that then our sinnes are fréely forgiuen vs. And this is that blessednesse, which Dauid descri∣beth in the 32. Psalme. That we may know our selues to be most miserable, vntil we be∣ing regenerate by the spirit of God, do serue him in a cleane heart. For what canne be thought more miserable then man, whom god hath in hatred & abhomination? Vpon whom together doth rest the wrath of God & eternal death? This is a place worthy noting, whēc we first learne, yt then the satisfaction gotten
by the death of Christ, doth properly belong vnto vs, whē we imbrace righteousnes with a right purpose of heart. For Christ is not a redéemer, but vnto them who béeing tourned from iniquitie, do lead a newe life. Wherfore if we desire to haue God mercifull vnto vs, that he may forgiue our sinnes, we must not excuse our selues. Finally, from repentance, remissiō of sins cānot be separate, neither can our consciences haue peace with god, where ye feare of God doth not beare rule. Secondly, this place doth teach, that the frée forgiuenes of sinnes is not once onely giuen vnto vs, but that this benefit remaineth perpetually in the Church, and is daily offered to the fayth∣full. For the Apostle doth héere speake to the faithfull, as in truth there was neuer anie, nor euer shall be, which can otherwise please God, séeing all are holden with guiltinesse before God. For whatsoeuer kinde of desire to doe well be in vs, we alwaies goe vnper∣fectly to the Lord. Further, whatsoeuer is an halfe part, deserueth no praise with God. Wée againe in the meane time do reiect our selues from ye grace of God, as much as lieth in vs. So it cōmeth to passe, yt all the Saints haue néed of daily forgiuenes of sins, because yt this onely doth continue vs in ye houshold of God,
Where he saith, From all sinne, he doth sig∣nifie, that by many meanes we are guilty be∣fore God: as indéede there is no man that is not defiled with very many sinnes. But hée teacheth that no sinnes doo hinder the righte∣ous and such as feare God, wherby they may the lesse please God. He also sheweth the way to obtaine forgiuenesse, and the cause of our being made cleane: that is, because Christ hath purged our sinnes with his bloud. But he affirmeth that all the godly shall vndoub∣tedly be pertakers of this being made cleane from sinne. This whole part of doctrine hath bene wickedly corrupted of the Schoolemen: for they fain, that the frée pardon of sinnes, is onely giuen vnto vs in Baptisme: they doe graunt, that there onely the bloud of Christ is effectuall. But after Baptisme they teach, that we are no otherwise reconciled to God, then by satisfactions. And héere they leaue indéede some part to the bloud of Christ: but when they ascribe vnto workes, commenda∣tion and power to satisfie for sinnes, and to please God, but in the least measure, they doo wholly ouerthrow, yt which Iohn saith héere, For these wil neuer agrée betwéen thēselues, That we are purged by the bloud of Christ, and that workes are cleansings from sinne:
because Iohn here assigneth not the one halfe, but the whole to the bloud of Christ. This therefore is the summe, that the faithfull doo certainly assure themselues, that they are ac∣cepted with God: because he is pacified to∣wardes them by the Sacrifice of the death of Christ. Wherefore the power and effect of all these, resteth in the onely bloude of Christ. Whereby is refelled the Papists most horri∣ble inuention of Indulgences: for, as if the bloud of Christ were not sufficient, they re∣quire also the bloud and merites of Martyrs to be an help. And yet this blasphemie amon∣gest them spreadeth further: for when their keyes, in which they holde that remission of ins is included, are coyned, partly of ye bloude and merits of martirs, and partly of ye works of superrogation, with which euerye sinner oth redéeme himselfe, there remaineth to thē no remission of sinnes, which doth not dero∣gate from the bloude of Christ. For if theyr doctrine should haue place, then shall not the loud of Christ purge vs, but shal onely con∣urre as an help in part. And by this meane he consciences shal hang in doubt, which the Apostle commaundeth héere to rest in a we ssuraunce.
8 If we say, that wee haue no sinne, wee deceiue our selues, and the Truth is not in vs. 9 If we confesse our sinnes, hee is faith∣full and iust, that hee maye forgiue vs our sinnes, and to cleanse vs from all vnrighteous∣nesse. 10 If we say we haue no sinne, we make him a lier, and his word is not in vs. NOW he commendeth that grace by ne∣cessitie. For because no man is frée from sinne: he sheweth that we are all cast away and without hope of remedie, except ye Lord doo help vs by ye way of forgiuenesse. This is the reason why he so vehemently vrgeth, that no man is innocent: that all maye the bet∣ter knowe, that they haue néede of mercye, which maye deliuer them from banishment, and so they might the more be stirred vp to the obtayning of this same so necessarye a good. By the name of sinne is noted not one∣lye a wicked and defiled inclination: but the fault which doth truely make vs guiltie before GOD.
Further, séeing the speach is generall: it followeth, that none of the Saints, which are, which were, or which shall be, are ex∣empted from this number. Wherefore Au∣gustine dooth excéeding fitlie refell the cauill of the Pelagians with this testimonie, and dooth also wiselye weigh, that the confession of guyltinesse is required, not for humilities sake: but lest in lying we deceiue our selues. When he addeth, The truth is not in vs. Af∣ter his manner he confirmeth the former sen∣tence by rehearsing it againe: albeit it is not a simple rehearsing as other where, but he sayth they are deceiued because they glo∣rie in lying. 9 If wee confesse. Againe, hée pro∣miseth the faythfull, that GOD will be fa∣uourable vnto them, so that they acknow∣ledge themselues to be sinners. For it is a most excellent thing that wée bée certainlye perswaded, that there is a readie and pre∣pared Reconciliation for vs with GOD, when we haue sinned otherwise wée conti∣nually beare Hell shutte vp within vs. Few indéede doo weigh this, howe miserable and vnhappie a thing the wauering and vnqui∣etetnesse of mans conscience is: But so the case standeth with vs, that hell dooth raigne
where ther is not peace with God. How much more ought we to imbrace this promise with all our heart, which offereth assured forgiue∣nesse to all that doe confesse their sinnes. Fur∣ther, he teacheth that it is founded vppon the faith and righteousnesse of God, because God who hath promised is true and plaine, for they that thinke he is called iust, because he doeth iustifie vs freely, in my iudgement, do reason too subtilly. For this iustice depēdeth of faith, but each of them is anexed to the promise, for otherwise God may be iust, & yet deale with vs in most high iustice: but because he hath bound himselfe to vs by his word, he will not be taken for iust except hée doe forgiue. But this confession when it is referred to God, re∣quireth a sincere affection of the heart, and ye heart cannot speak to God without newnesse of lyfe. Therefore it doeth containe in it true repentance. God indéede forgiueth fréely: but so, that his easines to mercie, be not an intise∣ment to sinne. Shall cleanse vs. The word of purging sée∣meth to be taken in another sence then before. For he said we were cleansed by the bloud of Christ, because by his benefit our sins are not laid to our charge. But now after that he hath spoken of forgiuenesse, he addeth also ye God
doth purge vs from vnrighteousnes, that this second member may be diuers from the rst. So he signifieth that a double fruit doth arise to vs of confession, that God being pacified wt the sacrifice of Christ, doth forgiue vs, and ye he doth correct and amend vs. If anie man ob∣iect, ye while we are in this world, we are ne∣uer purged frō all vnrighteousnesse, as much as belongeth to reformatiō, it is true indéede: but Iohn doth not teach, what God doth now perfect in vs. He is faithful, he saith, yt he may make vs cleane yt is not to day nor to morow. For as long as we are cōpassed about wt flesh, we must be in continual going forward. But that which he hath once begun, he doth dayly proceede to do, till at the last he doth performe it. So Paule saith, That we are elect, that we may appeare before God wtout reproofe. Eph. 1.4. and else where, yt the church is cleansed, yt it may be without spot or wrinkle: Eph. 5.27. Albeit if anie had rather interpret this place otherwise, as if he spake one thing twice, I leaue it frée. 10 Wee make him a lyar. Hée goeth further, that they blaspheame GOD, which claime purenesse vnto themselues. For we sée howe that euerie where hée condempneth all mankinde of sinne. Wherefore hée entereth
battayle with God: whosoeuer séeketh to shunne this determination, and doth reproue him of a lye, as if he did presse them that de∣serued it not. For confirmation sake he ad∣deth, that His word is not in vs. As if he shuld haue sayde, that we cast aside that his so ex∣cellent doctrine, which includeth all vnder guiltinesse. Wherevpon we gather, that then we haue rightly profited in the worde of the Lord, when we are truely humbled, yt mour∣ning vnder the burden of our sinnes, we learne to flye to the mercie of God, and rest our selues no other where then in the father∣ly frée mercie of God. Chap. 2. 1 LIttle children, these things I write vn∣to you, that you sinne not, but if any man sinne, we haue an aduocate with the Fa∣ther, Iesus Christ the righteous. 2 And hee is the propitiation for our sinnes, and not for ours onelye, but also of the whole world. THis is not onely a briefe rehearsing of the former doctrine, but almost a sum of the whole Gospell, That we abstaine from sinne:
and yet because we are alwaies subiect to the iudgement of GOD, wée are certaine that Christ doth make intercession with the sacri∣fice of his death, that he maye reconcile the Father vnto vs. In the meane also he vseth a predication, least anie man shoulde thinke that he giueth libertie to sinne, when he prea∣cheth of the mercie of GOD, and teacheth, that it is set forth vnto vs all. Hée therefore ioyneth together two partes of the Gospell, which prepostrous men separating, doe rend & make lame the Gospel it selfe. Further, the doctrine of grace hath euer ben subiect to the slaunders of wicked men: when the forgiue∣nesse of sinnes is set forth in Christ, then they bragge that there is graunted libertye to sinne. That the Apostle maye méete with these mischifes, at the first hée sheweth that this is the end of his doctrine, that men shuld cease to sinne. For when he sayth, That you should not sinne: He onely meaneth this, that they should abstaine from sinne, as much as they are able for the imperfectiō of man. And héereto tendeth that which I handled before of the societie with God, yt we might be made like vnto him. Yet in the meane time he cea∣seth not to speak of ye frée forgiuenesse of sins, because ye albeit yt the Sky should fall, & all
things be confused together, yet this parte of doctrine is neuer to be omitted, but that ye of∣fice of Christ must be preched plainly and to the purpose, and this it becommeth vs to doo at this day. And because flesh is prone vnto loosenesse, men are diligently to bée put in minde, that righteousnesse and saluation is therefore gotten by the death of Christ, that we may be an holy people of God. Yet how∣soeuer it come to passe that many doo wicked∣ly abuse the mercie of God, and also manye dogs doo slaunderously speake euill of vs, as if we let loose the reynes to wickednesse: wée must goe forward constauntly in auouching the grace of Christ, in which the glory of God doth most notably shine, and the whole salua∣tion of man consist. These barkings (I say) of the wicked, are to be despised, wherewith we sée yt the Apostles were assailed. For this cause, he straight addeth ye second mēber, That we haue an aduocate, when we haue sinned: by which words he confirmeth that which he had before. Because we are farre from perfect righteousnes, yea we daily increase our guil∣tinesse: that there is together a present reme∣die to appease God, if we flie vnto Christ. And this onely is it, wherin consciences may quiet themselues, wherein resteth the righte∣ousnesse
of man, and in which is established he hope of saluation. The conditional mem∣er, If any man, must be resolued into a cau∣all: for it cannot be but we sinne. Finallye, ohn sheweth, that we are not onely called rom sinne by the Gospell, because that there God doth call vs vnto himselfe, and offereth he spirit of regeneration: but also that the wretched sinners are comforted, as hauing God alwaies mercifull vnto them: and that heir sinnes wherewith they are holden doo ot let but that they are iust neuerthelesse, ecause they haue a mediator, who doth recō∣ile them to God. Further, when he goeth a∣bout to shew how we become again in fauor with God, he saith, that Christ is our aduo∣ate. For in this he appeareth before the face of God, that hée may shew foorth the efficacie of his sacrifice towards vs. To the ende this may be better vnderstood, I will speak more plainly. The intercession of Christ, is the con∣tinuall applying of his death vnto our salua∣tion. Whereas therefore God dooth not im∣pute our sinnes, hence it is because he hath respecte vnto Christ, our earnest Interces∣sour. But the two titles wherewith hée after∣warde adorneth Christ, doo properly belong
to the circumstaunce of this place. He calleth him Iust, and Reconciliation: It behooueth that he be indued with both, that he maye beare the office and person of an Aduocate: for what sinner can obtaine for vs the fauor of God? For therefore we are all driuen from hauing accesse vnto him, because no man is pure and voyd of sinne. No man therefore is a fit high Priest, but he that is innocent and seperate from sinners, as also is testified, Heb. 17. verse 26. Reconciliation is added, be∣cause without Sacrifice, none is a fitte high Priest. Therfore vnder the Lawe, the Priest neuer went into the Sanctuarie without bloud: and Sacrifice with prayer, as if a so∣lemne seale were wont to bee added by the ordinaunce of GOD. By which token, GOD woulde haue it knowen, that hée which shoulde obtaine fauour for vs, must bée prepared with Sacrifice. For when God is offended, the price of satisfaction to pacifie him is required. Hence it followeth, that all the Saints which haue bene, and which shal be, haue néede of an aduocate: and that there is none sufficient to vndergoe this office but onely Christ. And in truth Iohn hath ascri∣bed to Christ these two Epethytes by name,
that he might shewe him to be the onely ad∣uocate. And as there commeth vnto vs therby excéeding consolation, when we heare that Christ dyed not onelye once, that hée might pacifie his Father towardes vs: but continuallye make intercession for vs, that the waye might bée open for vs vnto the fa∣ther in his name, that our prayers might bée hearde: so is it chiefelye to bée taken héede vnto, least the honour that is appropriate and due to him alone, be transferred to ano∣ther. But we knowe in the Papistrie, this of∣fice was ascribed indifferently to the Saints. Nowe there bée almost thirtie yeares, since this excellent Principle of our Faith was almost buryed: That Christ is our Aduo∣cate. They confesse in déede at this daye that there is one of manye, but not alone. They that among the Papistes haue some more modestye, denye not that Christ dooth excell aboue all other Aduocates whatsoe∣uer: but neuerthelesse afterwardes they as∣sociate vnto him, a great rabblement of com∣panions. But the wordes of Iohn in this place doo plainlye manifest, that hée can∣not in anye wise bée an Aduocate, that is not a Priest.
Further the Priesthoode appertaineth vnto none but vnto Christ alone. In ye meane time we take not awaie the mutual intercession of Saints, whereby among thēselues they exer∣cise charity. But this is nothing to them that are dead, who are separate from the felowship of men, and nothing to those defences which they counterfait to thēselues, least they shuld onely cleaue to Christ. For albeit that brethe∣ren pray for their bretheren, yet without ex∣ceptiō they all respect one head defender. It is therefore no doubt, but the Papists doe set a∣gainst Christ euen so manye Idolles, as they imagine Patrones vnto themselues. But if is to be noted by the waie, that they erre too grosely, which tumble Christ at his Fathers knées, that he might praie for vs. Such ima∣ginations must be taken awaie which dero∣gate from the diuine glorie of Christ: and the simple doctrine is to be held, that the fruite of his death doe remaine fresh and perpetuall for vs, that by his intercession he reconcileth God vnto vs, and as well doeth sanctifie our pray∣ers by the swéete smell of his sacrifice, as help them by the fauour of his supportation. 2 Not for ours alone. He hath added this for amplification sake, that the faythfull may be assuredly perswaded, that the redemption
gotten by Christ is extended to al, which shal receiue the Gospel in faith. But héere is mo∣ued a questiō. How the sinnes of all ye world should be done away? I omit the dotages of such franticke fellowes, who vnder the pre∣tence of this, admit to saluation all the re∣probate, moreouer Sathan himselfe. Such a monstrous fantasie, is not worthie the refu∣tation. They that would escape this absurdi∣tie, haue said, that Christ suffered sufficient∣ly for the whole world: but onely effectually for the elect. This solution hath commonlye preuailed in the schooles. Albeit that I grant that saying to be true, yet I denie that it a∣gréeth with this place. For Iohn had none o∣ther purpose, then to make this good common to ye whole Church. Therefore vnder ye word All he dooth not comprehend ye reprobate: but pointeth out those which together were to be∣léeue, & wer scattered into diuers parts of the worlde. For then is the grace of Christ made manifest as is méet, when he is preched to be the only sauing health of the world. 3 And in this we knowe, that wee haue knowen him if we keep his cōmandements. 4 He that saith, I know him, and kepeth not his commaundements, is a lyar, and the truth is not in him.
5 But he that keepeth his word in him is the loue of God perfect indeed. In this wee knowe that we are in him. 6 He that saith that he abideth in him, ought euen so to walke as he hath walked. 3 AFter he hath handled ye doctrine of the frée remission of sins, he cōmeth againe to ye exhortations annexed, & dependeth vpon it: & first he admonisheth that ye knowledge of God, which is conceiued by the Gospell is not idle: but doth of it selfe bring forth obe∣dience. Afterwards, he sheweth, what God doth especially require of vs, what is ye chiefe in our life: namely, that we loue God. That which we read héere of the effectuall know∣ledge of God, the Scripture doth not euerye where repeate without cause: for ther is no∣thing more common to the worlde, then to draw the doctrine of godlinesse to vaine spe∣culations. After this manner was diuinitie adulterated among the sophisticall Sorbo∣nists, yt of all their knowledge, not so much as the least spark of godlines could appeare. And vaine men euery where doo onely learn from the word of God, that which they may babble out for oftentation sake. Finally, in all ages, this was too common an euil, to talk
vainly of ye name of God. Iohn therefore choo∣seth this principle, That the knowledge of God is effectuall. Wherevpon he gathereth, that they doo not know God, that kéepe not his commandements. Plato, though greping in the darke in Phaedro, and other places de∣nieth, that that excellent beautie which hée imagineth can be knowen, but that it will forceably carrie a man into the admiration of it. Therfore how may it be, that thou canst know God, & be touched with no affection? Neither indéede doth this procéede onely from the nature of God, that we immediatelye loue him whome wée knowe: but the same spirit which doth lightē our minds, doth lyke wise breath into our hartes an affection like vnto our knowledge. Albeit ye knowledge of God bringeth this with it, ye we feare & loue him: for neither can we acknowledge him as he sheweth himself to be Lord & father, except we yéelde our selues againe to him obedyent children and dutifull seruaunts. Briefly, the doctrine of the gospel is a liuely glasse, wher∣in we beholding the image of God, are chan∣ged into it, as Paule teacheth. 2. Cor. 3.18. Wherefore where there is not present a good consciēce, ye shew of knowledge cannot be but vaine. This is to be marked when he saith,
That we know that we haue knowen. For he noteth that obedience of God is so knit vnto the knowledge, that yet knowledge bée first in order: as it is of necessitie, that the cause be before the effect. If we keepe his commaundements. But there is no man, that doth kéepe them in eue∣rie part. By that meanes then should bée no knowledge of God in the world? I answere, that the Apostle is not at oddes with himself. When therefore he had lately set all men in guiltines before God, he doth not vnderstand that they kéepe the commaundements, which satisfie the lawe in all poynts (which exam∣ple can no where be found in the world): but those which labour to conforme their life to the obedience of God, so much as in regard of mans infirmitie they can. For so often as the Scripture speaketh of the righteousnesse of the faithfull, it is so farre off from excluding the forgiuenesse of sinnes, that rather it dooth take the beginning from it. Neither indéede is it to be gathered from thence, that faith do∣eth leane vpon workes. For albeit that eue∣rie one hath the witnesse of his faith, from works: yet it foloweth not that it is founded there, séeing that this latter proofe is added for a signe. The assurance therefore of faith,
resteth in the alone grace of Christ: but god∣linesse and holinesse of life discerneth true faith from a counterfaite & dead knowledge of God: because this truth is in Christ: as Paule saith, to haue put off the old man, &c. 4 He that saith, I know him. Whereby prooueth he that they lye, which boast of faith without godlinesse? Verely by the contrarie: because he had alredy proued, that the know∣ledge of God is an effectuall thing. For God is not knowen by a ae imagination▪ but when by his spirit he inwardly maketh him selfe knowen in our harts. But because that many hypocrits doo vainly pamper thēselues with the title of faith, the Apostle doth con∣uince such of a lie. For that which he sayth shuld be superfluous, except the false & vaine profession of Christianitie, did rule in the mouths of many. 5 But he that kepeth. Now he sheweth which is the true obseruing of the law of God: that is to wit, to loue god. This place in my iudg∣ment, is euill expounded of them, which vn∣derstand that they truely please God, which kéepe his word. Rather expoūd it thus: To loue God with a sincere affection of hart, is to kéepe his commaundements. For briefly, as I haue touched alreadie, his purpose was to
shew what god doth require of vs. The same also did Moses saye, when he gathered the summe of the lawe, Deut 10. Now Israel, &c. For ye law which is spiritual, doth not onely giue commandement of external things: but chiefly it doth cōmend vnto vs this, yt we loue God wt our whole hart. Because yt here is no mention made of men, it is not to be takē for an absurd thing. For brotherly loue doth al∣waies issue frō ye loue of God: as afterwards we shall sée. Whosoeuer therefore desireth to approue his life vnto God, let him direct all ye parts therof to this end. If any obiect, yt there was neuer any man found, yt so perfectly lo∣ued god. I answere, yt it sufficeth, so yt euery one for ye mesure of the grace ye is giuen him, doo aspire vnto this perfection. In the meane time ye definitiō is manifest, yt the perfect loue of God, is the due obseruing of his word. We know that in him He cōmeth again to ye fruit of ye gospell, wherof he had made mē∣tion: that is felowship with God and with his son. And so he cōfirmeth ye former sentēce, by things yt folow. For if ye end of ye gospel be, yt we may haue felowship wt god: & ther cā be no felowship wtout loue: no mā cā truly profit in faith, but he ye cleueth to god frō his hart. 6 He that saith he abideth in him. As before
he proposed vnto vs ye light of God as a pat∣tern to folow: now also he calleth vs to christ, yt we may becōe folowers of him. Yet he doth not simply exhort to ye imitatiō of Christ: but by ye vnitie which we haue wt him, he proueth that we ought to be like him. The likenes of life & works he saith wil proue vs to abide in Christ. Further by these words he maketh himselfe an entrance vnto ye loue of our bre∣thren, which he will immediately adde. 7 Brethrē, I write no new cōmādemēt to you: but an old cōmandemēt, which you haue had frō the beginning: this old cōmandemēt is that word, which ye haue hard frō the beginning. 8 Againe, a new commandement write I vnto you, which is the truth in him, and also in you: for the darknesse is past, and that true light now shineth. 9 He that saith he is in that light, & hateth his brother is in darknesse vntill this time. 10 He that loueth his brother abideth in that light, & there is none occasion of euil in him. 11 But he that hateth his brother, is in dark∣nesse, & walketh in darknesse & knoweth not whether he goeth, because that darknes hath blinded his eyes. 7 AN exposttion of the former doc∣trine, that is, that to loue God is
to kéep his commandements. And he doth not with mo words tarie in this without cause. First we know that newnes is alwaies ha∣ted or suspected. Then we do not easely take vp an vnwonted work. Moreouer, when wée haue imbraced some certain kind of doctrine, it is gréeuous vnto vs, yt any thing therin be changed or innouated. For these causes Iohn sheweth, yt he techeth nothing of loue, but that which ye faithful hauing heard from the very beginning, hath waxed old in ye verie vse. O∣thers doo expound oldnes otherwise: that is, that Christ prescribeth now no other rule of life in the gospel, then god did once vnder the law: & that is most true. Neither do I gain∣say, but in this sense a little after, he calleth the word of the gospell, ye old cōmandement. But now I take it, that he meaneth onelye this, That these are ye first rudiments of the gospel: yt they haue ben so trained from ye be∣ginning, yt there is no cause why they shuld shun yt as vnwoonted, wherewith they ought to haue ben indued lōg ago. For it is, plain yt ye relatiue is put in ye place of ye cause. There∣fore he calleth it Old, not because before ma∣ny worldes it was deliuered to the fathers: but wherin they wer instructed immediatly from their first entraunce of Religion.
And that auaileth much to the confirmati∣n of faith, because the readers ought to take t to haue procéeded from the same Christ, of whom they haue the Gospell. The olde commandement is. It is pro∣able that the name of oldnesse in this place s extended further. For the speach is more full when he saith. The woorde which you heard from the beginning, is that old comman∣dement. And verily in my iudgement, it sig∣nifieth that the gospell ought not to be taken as a doctrine newlye sprong vp, but which came out from God, and is his eternal truth. As if he should haue sayde, ye ought not to measure the antiquitie of the Gospell by the space of time, wherin it is brought vnto you, for therein is manifested vnto you the eter∣nall will of God. God therefore did not giue vnto you this rule of godlye lyfe, when you were first called to the faith of Christ, but the same was alwayes firme and approued with him. And indéede this finally ought to be ac∣counted antiquitie, and deserueth account and reuerence, which hath his beginning of God. For the counterfait deuises of men, by how long prescription of yeares so euer, haue not so much authoritie, that they shuld ouer∣throw the truth of God.
8 Againe, a new cōmandemēt. The interpre¦ters séeme to me, not to haue vnderstood ye A¦postles mind, for he calleth yt New, which g by instruction doth as it were dayly renew, ye faithful may all their life long exercise thē selues therin, because they cā require nothin more excellent For ye beginnings which chil¦drē learne, afterwards giue place to higher more soūd doctrine. Cōtrarily, Iohn denieth the doctrine of louing ye brethren is such, yt i time waxeth out of vse: but yt it doth perpetu¦ally flourish, that the highest perfection be no lesse then the first entrance. Further, this wa néedful to be added, because as men are more curious thē is méet, a great part do euer grée∣dily desire some new thing. Hence commeth yt irkesomnes of true doctrine, yt it begetteth in∣finit wōders of errors, whilst euerie one gap∣eth a fresh after new quiddities. But where this is once set down, yt the Lord procéedeth in one maner, yt in all our life he may hold vs in yt which we haue lerned: ther is giuē a bridle to such desires: therfore who so desireth to rech to ye point of wisdōe, because it belōgeth to ye right gouernmēt of life, let him profit in loue. Which is the truth. He proueth that which he hath sayd by reason: because in this one commandement of loue, which belongeth
to ye direction of life, the whole truth of Christ doth consist. Further, what other more great reuelation is to be waited for? For Christ is in truth the end & accōplishment of al things, therefore the name of truth hath regard vnto this, that they rest as in ye point. For it is ta∣ken for the fulnesse or absolute estate. He ioy∣neth Christ vnto them, as the head to ye mem∣bers. As if he should haue sayd, that the body of the church hath no other perfection, or that they shall be soundly knit vnto Christ, if an holy loue do mutually flourish among them∣selues. Others expounde it otherwise. That which is truth in Christ, is also in you. But I sée not to what end it serueth. Because the darknesse is past. He putteth the time present in place of the time past. For hée noteth that as soone as Christ hath shined, we haue the brightnesse of vnderstanding, not ye euery of ye faithfull vnderstandeth ye first daie so much as he ought. For Paul also Phi. 3.11. saith, yt he laboreth to apprehēd yt which yet he hath not attained vnto, but because ye know∣ledge of Christ is sufficient to expell dark∣nesse, therfore daily goinges forward are ne∣cessarye, and euerye ones faith hath first a beginning before it come to perfection. But because GOD continueth the tenour of the
same doctrine, wherein he biddeth vs to in∣crease: the knowledge of the Gospell is wor∣thely called the true light, where Christ the sonne of righteousnesse doth shine. So ye way is shut vp to the malepeartnesse of men, who indeauour to corrupte the purenesse of the Gospell with their owne counterfait inuen∣tions: and with good warrantise it is law∣full to condempne with most bitter cursing the whole Popish diuinitie, which doth who∣ly darken this true light. 9 He that saith he is in the light. He doth prosecute his Metaphor. He hath sayd yt loue is the onely rule, whereby our lyfe must bée squared: he hath sayde that this lawe is ap∣pointed to vs in the Gospell. Finally he hath sayd that there is as it were the noone lyght, which ought to continue our eyes in the be∣holding thereof. Now of the contrarie he ga∣thereth, that they are all blinde and doe erre in darknesse, which are strangers from loue. And whereas he first set downe the loue in God, and nowe of brethren, there is no more repugnaunce then betwixt the effect and the cause. Finally, they are so knit together of themselues, that they cannot bée separated. Iohn will after saie in the third chapter, that we doe falsely boast of the loue of God, except
wée loue the brethren. And that is most true. But now he taketh the loue to our brethren as a testimonie whereby we proue that wée loue God. In summe, séeing loue doth so re∣spect God, that in God it comprehēdeth men: there is no absurditie in that, that the Apo∣stle disputing of loue, doth referre it indiffe∣rently, sometimes to God, and sometimes to the brethren. And this is a common vse of the Scripture. Often times the whole perfection of life is placed in the loue of God. Againe, Paule Rom. 13.8. teacheth, that he fulfilleth ye lawe which loueth his brother. And Christ sheweth yt these are ye principal things of the lawe, Righteousnesse, iudgement, and truth. Mat. 23.23. And both is true, and doth most fitly agrée, because both the loue God direct∣eth vs to ye loue of men, & we do indéed wit∣nesse our diuine affection towards god by lo∣uing of men at his commandement. What∣soeuer it be, let this euer remaine firme, that loue is the rule of the direction of lyfe, which is so much the more diligently to be marked, because all almost do rather choose any thing, then this onely commandement of God. To the same effect belongeth that which follow∣eth, That ther is no offence, where is the de∣sire of loue, for he that so frameth his life shal
neuer offend. 11 He that hateth his brother. Againe, he admonisheth, that although thou make an ex∣cellent shew of vertue, yet there is nothing yt is not filthie where loue is absent. Conferre this place with the 13. of the 1. Cor. and it shal néed no long exposition. But this doctrine is therefore obscure to the worlde, because the greater part are astonished with I know not what maskes. So a counterfait holynesse al∣most dazeleth all their eies. In ye meane time loue is neglected, or else is reiected into some extreame corner. 12 I write to you little children, because your sinnes are forgiuen you for his names sake. 13 I write to you Fathers: because you haue knowen him which is from the begin∣ning: I write vnto you young men, because you haue ouercome that wicked one. 14 I write vnto you children, because you haue knowen the Father. I haue written to you Fathers, because you haue knowen him which is from the beginning. I haue written vnto you young men, because you are strong, and the worde of God doeth a∣bide
in you, and you haue ouercome that euill one. 12 LIttle children. This yet is a generall Sentence. And hée doeth not speake to them of young yeares, but generallye hée vnderstandeth by lyttle Children, men of all ages: as it is noted in the first Chapter, and in this also a lyt∣tle after. This I saye because sundrie In∣terpreters doe verye ill to restraine it to chil∣dren. But Iohn when hée will speake of Children, hée will call them [Paidia] that is, By Infancie: which name agréeth to the age. But hée as a spirituall Father calleth olde men as well as Children [Tecnia] by the name of lyttle Children. Immediat∣lye indéede hée will applye seuerall senten∣ces to euerye age. Yet they are not a lyt∣tle deceiued which doe beginne from hence. But rather least the former exhortation, might altogether darken the frée forgiue∣nesse of sinnes, this Doctrine which is pro∣per to Faith, hée doeth vrge agayne: As in déede this foundation ought alwayes sted∣fastlye to bée kepte, that eternall lyfe is layde vp for vs thorough the onelye grace of Iesus Christe. Holynesse of lyfe in∣déede
must be vrged, the feare of God must be diligently taught, men must be vehemently prouoked to repentaunce, the newnes of lyfe with his fruits must be commended, yet this must alwayes bée taken héede off, that the doctrine of Faith be not strangled, which ap∣proueth Christ the alone author of saluation, & of all good things: but rather is this meane to be kept, that faith maye alwaies holde the chiefe place. Iohn doth prescribe vs this order, when he hath diligentlye preached of good workes, least yet more should séeme to be at∣tributed to them then is méet, he doth so care∣fully recall vs to the grace of Christ. Your sinnes are forgiuen you. Without this trust the appearaunce of holinesse will be nothing else but inconstaunt and vaine. Yea, they that setting aside the forgiuenesse of sinnes, doe rest in other duties, doe builde without a foundation. In the meane time Iohn doth teach, yt there is nothing more fit to stirre men vp to the feare of GOD, then while they are truely taught what good they haue receiued by Christ, as Paul Ph. 2.1. doth beséech them by the bowells of the mercie of God: By which appeareth how lewd is that slaunder of the Papistes, who saye, that the desire of well doing waxeth colde, while that
is extolled, which only maketh obedient chil∣dren to God. For thence he taketh occasion to exhort, because we know that God is so lo∣uing vnto vs, that he doeth not impute our sinnes vnto vs. For his name. The materiall cause is as∣signed, least we should féele other meanes to reconcile vs to God. For it wil not be inough to hold, that God forgiueth our sinnes, except we come rightly to Christ, and to that price which he paid for vs vpon the crosse. And that is so much the more to be obserued, because we sée this waie stopped vp by the crafte of Sathan and vile inuentions of men: While foolish men go about to please God by diuers satisfactions, and inuent innumerable kinds of reconcilements to redéeme thē selues. For how many meanes we bring in before God to deserue pardon, by so many stoppes are we driuen from his presence. Therfore Iohn not content with this simple Doctrine, that God forgiueth vs our sins, addeth by name, that he is fauourable to vs in respect of Christ, that hée maye shutte out all other meanes. And that we may inioye this bene∣fit, it is of necessitie also that we passe by and forget al other meanes, and imbrace only the name of Christ.
I write to you Fathers. Now he commeth to the reckoning vp of the ages, that he may shew that that he teacheth agréeth to euerie one. For generall spéech doth sometimes af∣fect ye lesse: yea, which is our vntowardnesse, ther are but few which think that ye belōgeth to them, that together is directed to all. Olde men for the most parte withdrawe them∣selues, as if they were too olde to learne. Children as if they were not of ripe age, re∣fuse to heare: Men of middle age, because they are busied with other matters, they doe not héereto giue their minde. Therefore least a∣nie shoulde disburthen himselfe, hée apply∣eth the Gospell to euerie ones vse. And hée setteth downe thrée ages: which pertition of the lyfe of man is most vsuallye recey∣ued. From whence also that famous song of the Lacedemonians had thrée degrées: whereof the first song, That you are wée shall be: the last, That which you are we haue béene: but the middle sorte, Wée are that which the one haue béene, and the other shall bée. Iohn doth distribute the course of mannes lyfe in∣to these thrée degrées, and hée beginneth with olde men: and sayth that the Gospell doeth
belong to them, because thence they maye learne to knowe the eternall sonne of God. The waywardnesse of olde men is knowen: and especially because they measure wise∣dome by the number of yeares, they are made vnapt to be taught. Furthermore, this lewdenesse Horace in the booke of the art of Poetrie, doeth worthe∣ly note in them, that praising the time of their youth, they despise whatsoeuer is done or sayd. Iohn doth wisely remedie this euill, when he sayth, that in the Gospell is contay∣ned not onely olde wisedome, but that which bringeth vs to the verie eternitie of GOD. Whereon it followeth, that there is nothing héere which they may disdaine. Whereas he saith, that Christ was from the beginning. I refer it as wel to his diuine presence, where∣in he is coeternal with the Father, as to that power whereof the Apostle speaketh to the Hebrues. 13.8. Where he saith he was yester∣day as he is to day. As if he had sayd: If old∣nesse doe like you, you haue Christ, who ex∣céedeth all antiquitie. Wherefore bée not a∣shamed to bée his Disciples, who compre∣hendeth all worldes in himselfe. In the meane time is to bée noted, which is indéede the olde Religion, verily euen that which is
grounded in Iesus Christ. For otherwise ne∣uer so long a course of yeares shall be little worth, if it take the beginning from error. I write to you young men. Albeit he vseth a diminitiue [Neaniscoi] young men. Yet there is no doubt but he directeth his spéech to all men, which are in the good state and flowre of their yeares. We knowe further, that that age is so addicted to the vaine cares of the world, that it thinketh little of the kingdome of God. For ye sharpnesse of wit and strength of bodie, doe as it were make them dronke: Therefore the Apostle doeth admonish them, where true strength doth consist, least accor∣ding to their manner they boast in the flesh. Now saith he, Are strong, because you haue ouercome Sathan. For the note of coupling is of equall force, as a perticular causal, and in∣déede it is that valiancie which men ought greatly to desire: that is to saye, a spirituall. And together he sheweth that it is no other where had, then of Christ. For he putteth in minde of those good things which we receiue by the Gospell. He saith they haue vanqui∣shed which are yet in the verie act of warre: But our estate is farre other, then these that were vnder the standard of men. For the battaile is doubtfull to them, and the issue
is vncertaine. We are already conquerours before we buckle with ye enimie, because our head Christ hath alreadye vanquished for vs the whole world. 14 I write to you children. Children néed the gouernment of another, therefore the Apostle doth gather, that the gospell doth most fitly a∣grée with children, because there they maye finde the father. Now we sée how diuellishe the tyrannie of the Pope is, which tyranous∣ly driueth all ages from the doctrine of ye gos∣pell, which the spirit of God doth so prouoke them vnto. But these things which the Apo∣stle hath sorted into specialls, are indéed gene∣ralls. For we all flow out into vanitie and come to nothing, except our strength do leane vpon the eternall truth of God. There is no∣thing more fraile & fléeting then we, vnlesse ye power of Christ dwel in vs: we are all childrē vntil we come to the grace of adoption by the Gospell. What therefore he saith of children, is also common to olde men: but yet he will applie to euerie one yt which is most necessa∣rie for them, that he maye shewe that all without exception stande in néede of the doctrine of the Gospell. The note [Oti] Be∣cause, may bée two wayes expounded: but this sence which I haue giuen is much
better: and also will better agrée with the Text. I haue written vnto you. I take these repetitions to bée superfluous. And it is pro∣bable, that vnskilfull Readers thinking o∣therwise then it was, that hée spake twice of childeren, haue rashlye added other two partes. Albeit it may bée, that Iohn himselfe inserted the second time, the spéech of young men for increase, for there he addeth, that they were strong: which he sayde not before, but they would vnaduisedly make worke for the writer. 15 Loue not the world, nor those thinges that are in the worlde: If anie man loue the world, the loue of the Father is not him. 16 Because whatsoeuer is in the worlde, (as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of lyfe) are not of the Father, but of the world. 17 And this world passeth awaie and the lusts thereof: but hee that fulfilleth the will of God, abideth for euer. 15 He had sayd before yt this was the onely way to liue godly, To loue God: but because béeing occupied in the vaine delighte of this
worlde, wée tourne all our sences to another end: this vanitie must first be plucked from vs, that the loue of GOD may raigne in vs. Vntill our mindes be purged, the former doc∣trine maye be repeated an hundreth times without profite. No otherwise, then if pow∣ring water vppon a round gloabe, thou shalt not gather so much as one droppe, because there is no voyde place where the water may be kept. By the name of the World, vnder∣stande whatsoeuer belongeth to this present lyfe, when it is separate from the kingdome of God, and the hope of eternall lyfe. So it doeth comprehend in it selfe all kinde of cor∣ruption, and deapth of all naughtinesse and euills. In the worlde are pleasures, delights, and all inticements wherewith man may bée snared, to withdrawe himselfe from GOD: Furthermore, the loue of the worlde is so ve∣hementlye condemned: because when wée regarde nothing but the earth, it is of necessi∣tie, that we both forget God and our selues. And where such wicked desire doeth raigne and beare the swaie, and holdeth a man so snared, that he doeth not meditate of the hea∣uenlye lyfe, there is a beastlye senceles∣nesse. If anie man loue the world. Hée prooueth
by an argument of contraries how necessarie it is to cast awaie the loue of the world, if we wil please God. And that he doth afterwards confirme by an argument of repugnaunces: because those thinges which be proper to the world be vtterly at warre with God. That must be kept in minde which I sayd already, that héere is noted a prophane disposition of life, which hath no fellowshippe with the kingdome of God: where men so growe out of kinde, that being satisfied with this pre∣sent lyfe, they thinke no more of the im∣mortall life then bruite beastes. Therefore whosoeuer doeth so inbondage himselfe to earthlye desires, he cannot be the childe of God. 16 That is, the lust of the flesh. The olde interpreter saith otherwise. For of one sen∣tence he maketh two. The Grecians haue done better, which read together in one sen∣tence, That whatsoeuer is of the worlde is not of God: and in one continued spéech are sette downe thrée kindes of concupiscen∣ces. For in stéede of explication, Iohn hath put in these as it were thrée examples, that hée might brieflye shew what indeauours, & what kinde of thoughts they haue, which liue to the world.
Further it is no great matter, whether it be a full and whole partition. Albeit thou shalt not finde a worldly man, in whom these de∣ires doo not raigne, or at the least some one f them. It remaineth that we sée, what he mean∣eth by each of them. The first part vseth to e expounded generally of al wicked desires: ecause ye flesh signifieth ye whole corrupt na∣ure of man. Albeit I wold not contend, yet I will not dissemble, that I approue of a∣nother sence. When Paule forbiddeth, Rom. 3.14. that there should be thought taken for he flesh to fulfill the lusts of it. He séemeth to me a good interpreter of this place. What is lesh there? verilye the bodie and his increa∣ings. What then is the desire of ye flesh, but when earthly minded men, desiring to liue at ease and daintely, are onely giuen ouer to their profit? The thréefolde partition of an Epicure is knowen by Cicero and others, whereby he discerneth between desires: when he maketh some natural & necessarie: others naturall, yet not necessarie: others, neither naturall nor necessarie. But Iohn, who knew the disorder of mans heart, doth safely con∣demne the lusts of ye flesh, because it alwaies intemperately breaketh out & will not kéepe
a meane. Afterwards he ascendeth by degrées to the groser faults: The lust of the eyes, in my iudgement comprehendeth as well vn∣chast lookes, as the vanitie which rangeth in pompe and vaine brauery. There followeth lastly arrogancie or pride, whereto is ioyned ambition, bragging, contempt of others, a blind loue of it selfe, and a rash presumption. The summe is, that so soone as the world of∣fereth it selfe, our desires, as our hart is wic∣ked, like vnbridled beasts, are violently dra∣wen thether: so that diuers lustes doo beare sway, which al are contrarie to God. For life it is in Gréeke [Bios,] that is the kinde and manner of liuing. 17 But the world passeth away. Be∣cause in the world there is nothing but in∣constant and as it were for a short time: hée thereof gathereth how euill and miserablye they prouide for themselues, who set theyr felicitie héere: especially séeing God doth cal vs to the blessed glorie of eternall life: as if he should haue sayd, the true felicitie which God offereth to his children, is eternall. It is therefore an vnworthie thing, that wée should be intangled with the worlde, which will shortly vanish away with all his good things.
Concupiscence, I interpret héere by a Me∣tonimia, whatsoeuer is desired, and inforceth the desires of men vnto it selfe. The sense is, that whatsoeuer in the worlde is helde most precious, and chiefly to be desired, it is but a vaine shadow. When he saith, that they abide for euer that doo the will of God: he signifieth that they shall euer be happie, that labour to aspire vnto God. If any man obiect, that no man dooth that which God commaundeth: the aunswere is easie, that it is not meant héere of ye absolute performance of the lawe, but of the obedience of Faith, which howsoeuer it be not perfect, yet it is neuerthelesse approoued with God. The will of God is first showed vnto vs in the Lawe: but because no man dooth satisfie the Lawe, no happines can be hoped for from thence. But Christ méeteth those that bée without hope, with a newe supplye, who not onely dooth regenerate vs with his Spi∣rite, that wée maye giue obedience and re∣uerence to GOD: but causeth allso that our indeauour howsoeuer it be weake, obtai∣neth the commendation of absolute righte∣ousnesse. 18 Little children it is the last time,
and as you haue heard that Antichrist shal come, euen now also there begin to bee manie Antichrists, whereby wee knowe that it is th last time. 19 They went out from amongst vs, b they were not of vs. For if they had ben of vs they would verely haue tarried with vs: bu that it might haue bene made manifest, tha they were not all of vs. 18 IT is the last time. He confirmeth the faithful against offences whe with they might haue bene troubled. Nowe were sprong vp diuers sectes, which did cu a sunder the vnitie of faith, and disperse the Churches. And ye Apostle doth not only fence the faithfull, least they should stumble: but turneth all this into another ende. For hée doth admonish them that the last time is at hand, and therefore he exhorteth them to the greater watchfulnesse, as if he should haue saide. When diuers errours spring vp, you ought rather to be awakened then ouerwhel∣med. For thēce is to be gathered, that Christ is not farre hence. Therefore let vs be dili∣gent to waite for him, least he take vs at a sodaine We ought at this day to be stirred vp in like manner: and to lay hold by faith
f the comming of Christ which is at hande, when Satan setteth all out of order, to di∣turbe the Church. For these are signes of the ast time. But so many yeres which haue pas∣ed since the death of Iohn, doo seeme to con∣ince this prophecie of vntruth. I aunswere hat the Apostle doth shew to the faithful ac∣ording to the vsuall manner of the Scrip∣ure, that there is nothing remaineth further o be looked for, but that Christ appeare for the redemption of the world. But because he setteth no certaine time: he neither fed the men of his time with vaine hope, neither would he cut off the course of the Church in time to come, nor ye succession of many yeres, wherein the Church hath continued in the world vnto this day. And indéede if the eternitie of gods king∣dome were alwayes before our eyes, there will be no such long time, which would not be like to a verie moment. We must re∣gard the purpose of ye Apostle, because he cal∣leth that the last time, wherein al things are so fulfilled, that there remaineth, but the last reuealing of Christ. You haue heard that Antechrist. He spe∣keth as of a thing knowen. Whence it is easie to gather, that the faithfull wer taught
and admonyshed from the beginning  the dissipation of the Church which was t come: both that they might carefullye keep themselues in the faith which they haue re¦ceiued, and also that they might instruct th posteritie to beware. For so God would haue the Church to be tried, that none shoulde b deceiued, except wittinglye and willinglye, and that there shoulde be no excuse of igno∣raunce. But we sée the whole world almost to haue bene miserably deceiued, as if there had neuer bene word spoken of Antichrist. Furthermore, in the Popedome, there is no∣thing more of account and vsuall, then that Antichrist shall come. In the meane time they are so besotted, that they espie not his ti∣rannie that is yoaked vnto their necks. The same thing in truth is come vnto them, that was vnto the Iewes. For albeit they holde the promises of the Messiah, yet are they fur∣ther off from Christ, then if they had neuer heard of his name: for the imagined Messi∣ah which they haue fained to themselues, hath vtterly tourned them awaye from the sonne of God. And if any by the Lawe and the prophets go about to bring them to the knowledge of Christ, he shal doo nothing but loose his labour. The Papistes imagine an
Antichrist, which shall vexe the Church for thrée yeares and a halfe. All the notes wher∣by ye spirit of God doth point out Antichrist, doo euidently appeare in the Pope: but that thrée yeares Antichrist dooth hold the foolish Papists occupied, least in séeing they should see. Let vs remember therefore, that the spirit of God did not onely shewe that Antichrist should come, but together sette downe sure markes, by which he might be knowen. Yea, euen now there are many. This maye séeme to be added in stéed of a correction: as if they vntruly supposed yt they should be some one kingdome: but it is not so. They yt think that ther shalbe one only man, they are gret∣ly deceiued. But Paul whē he maketh mētiō of ye falling away to come, doth plainely wit∣nes, that ther shall be a certain bodie & king∣dome. 2. The. 2.3. First he foretelleth ye falling awaye, which shall spred it selfe ouer all the church, yt it may be as it wer a general euil: then he assigneth ye general head of ye Aposta∣cie to be ye aduersary of Christ: which shal sit in ye temple of god, vsurping diuine honor to himself. Except we will be blind of purpose, we may learne by this discription of Paul to know Antichrist, which I haue expoūded in his place: now it sufficeth to touch it a little.
But how shall this agrée with the words of Iohn, who saith, that there are now manie? I aunswere, that Iohn meaneth nothing els, then that seuerall sects begin to arise, which were forerunners of the falling away. For Cherinthus, Basilides, Martion, Valentinus, E∣bion, Arrius, and the rest, were members of that Kingdome, which the diuell afterward set vp against Christ. To speake proper∣ly, Antichrist indéede was not yet come, but the mysterie of his impietie did priuelye work. 2. The. 2.7. But Iohn vseth this name, that he might the more stirre vp the indea∣uour and care of the godly, to beate backe their falshoods. But if the spirit of God com∣maund the faithfull euen then to watch con∣tinually, when they did onely sée a farre off the signes of ye enimie to come: much lesse is it now a time of sléeping, when he oppresseth the Church with most cruell tyrannie, and doth openly set himselfe against Christ. 19 They went out from among vs. Hée preuenteth another obiection, that ye Church did séeme to haue begotten those mischiefes, and for a time nourished them in her bo∣some. For in truth it is of more force to trouble the weake, if any one who hath pro∣fessed one faith with vs doo fall away, then
if a thousand that are without shuld conspire against vs. He therefore so confesseth that they came out of the bosome of the Church, that he yet denieth, that they were euer of the Church. Further the way to deduce the obiection, is, that the Church is alwaies sub∣iect to this euill, that is, constrained to beare manye hypocrites, which in truth haue not Christ, howsoeuer wt their mouth they pro∣fesse his name for a time. When he saith, They went out from vs, he signifieth yt they did first occupie a roome in the Church, and were accompted in the number of the godly. Yet he denieth that they were of vs, because they did falsly pretend the name of ye faith∣full, euen as chaffe albeit it is mingled with wheate in one floore, yet is not accompted to be of the wheate. If they had bene of vs. He dooth open∣ly pronounce that they wer neuer members of the church which fall away. And in truth the seale of God vnder which he kéepeth his, remaineth sure, as Paul saith. 2. Tim. 2.19. But héere ariseth an hard thing: For it of∣ten falleth out, that manye who séemed to haue imbraced Christ, doo fall awaye. I aun∣swere, that there are thrée sorts of them that professe Christ. For there are, which doo but
counterfaite godlynesse, while yet an euill conscience dooth inwardly conuince them. The hypocrisie of others is more deceiptfull, which doo not onelye indeauour to make a vaine shewe before men, but shut their eyes, that they maye séeme to themselues to wor∣shippe GOD aright. The thirde haue a liuely roote of Faith, and they carrie in their hearts firmely grounded, a witnesse of their adoption. The two first degrées haue not any thing of assurance, of the last Iohn speaketh when hée saith, it is not possible they shoulde be a∣lienated from the Church: nor can the seale which God hath imprinted in their heartes, bée taken awaye. The incorruptible séede, that hath taken roote, can not bée plucked vp nor abolished. And héere the question is not of the constancie of men, but of the constan∣cie of GOD, whose election must néedes bée sure. Wherefore hée sayeth not with∣out cause, where the callyng of GOD is effectuall, that there is a sure perseueraunce. In summe he meaneth that they were neuer rightly indued with ye knowledge of Christ, which fall away: but had onely a light and vncertaine tast. That they might be made knowen. Hée
sheweth that examination is necessarie and profitable for the Church. Wherevpon it fo∣loweth on the contrarie, yt it is no iust cause to be troubled at. Séeing the Church is lyke vnto a floore, the chaffe must be fanned, that the wheate maye remaine pure. This dooth GOD when hée thrusteth hypocrites out of the Church: for hée dooth purge it from filth and vncleannesse. 20 And you haue an annoyntment from that holy one: and knowe all things. 21 I haue not written vnto you, because you knowe not the truth: but because you haue knowen it, and because no lye is of the truth. 22 Who is a lyer, but hee which deny∣eth that Iesus is Christ? This is Antichrist, which denyeth the Father and the Sonne. 23 Whosoeuer denieth the Sonne, the same hath not the Father. THE Apostle dooth modestly excuse it, that hée didde so carefully and diligent∣lye admonish them: least they should thinke themselues to bée ouerthwartlye rebuked, as
rude & ignoraunt of those things, which they ought very well to knowe. So Paul yéeldeth wisedome to the Romanes, that they might be able and fit to admonish others. Rom. 15.14. Yet together he sheweth that he could not otherwise perfourme the dutie that was in∣ioyned him, except he did admonish them. And yet the Apostles doo not flatteringlye speake so: but by this meanes they doo wise∣ly foresée, least their doctrine should be reiec∣ted of any sorts of men, while they shew that it agréeth and is profitable not onely to the rude people, but euen to those that be lerned in the Lords schoole. Experience it selfe tea∣cheth, how disdainfull the eares of men bée. Indeede such irksomnesse must be far from the godly: yet it is the parte of a good and wise teacher to let passe nothing, whereby he may make all willing to heare him. And it is certaine that we receiue with lesse héede & reuerence that which is spoken, if wée sup∣pose that hée which speaketh, dooth take from vs the knowledge which is giuen of the Lord. The Apostle dooth together sharpen the readers with this processe: because they haue the lesse excuse, which are indued with the gifte of vnderstanding, except they goe before
others in profiting. The summe is, that the apostle dooth not teach them as rude and such as learne but their principles, but he bring∣eth to their minde the things which they al∣readie know: and then he exhorteth them to stirre vp the sparkes of the spirite, that the full brightnesse maye shine in them. And he expoundeth himselfe in the next words, de∣nying that he wrote to them, therefore, be∣cause they knew not the truth, but because they were well instructed in it. For if they had bene ignoraunt and nouises, they could not haue vnderstood this doctrine, And wher¦as he saith, They know all things, it must not be vnderstoode generally, but restrained to the circumstances of the present place. But whereas he saith, they haue an an∣noynting of that Holy one. I doubt not but he alludeth to the olde Figures. For out of the Sanctuarie there was oyle taken to an∣noynt the Priests. But Daniel. 7.24. shew∣eth that the comming of Christ is the proper time of annoynting with the holy of holiest. For therefore was he annoynted of his Fa∣ther, that he might poure forth vppon vs, much plentie of his owne fulnesse. Hence it followeth that men are not rightly wise by the sharpnesse of their owne
vnderstanding: but by the inlyghtening of the Spirite: and then that we are no waies made pertakers of the Spirite but by Christ, who is the true Sanctuarie, and our alone high Priest. 21 And that no lye. Hée graunteth that they haue iudgement whereby they dis∣cerne truth from falshood. And this propositi∣on is not Logicall, That a lye differeth from the truth, (as generall Rules are giuen in Schooles) but the speach is applyed to Vse and Practise. As if he should haue said, that they doo not onelye holde that which is true, but are armed also, agaynst the subtiltyes and deceyptes of the wicked, that they maye wisely looke to themselues. Further, hée speaketh not of one or two kinde of lyes: but whatsoeuer crafte Satan goeth about, or by what meane soeuer he set vpon them, that the wisedome to discerne lyght from darkenesse, was alwayes readye with them, because they are guyded by the Spirite. 22 Who is a lyer? Hée dooth not af∣firme, that they onely are lyers, who denye that the Sonne of God is come in the flesh, leaste any shoulde beyonde measure disquiet
himselfe in dissoluing this doubte: but that they excéede all other. As if hée had sayde, Excepte this maye bée taken to bée a lye, that there cannot any other thing be taken so. As wée vse commonly to speake. If vnfaithful∣nesse to GOD and men bée not a faulte, what els shall we call a faulte? And that which hée had generally touched of false pro∣phets, hée nowe applyeth to the state of his owne time. For hée dooth with the finger poynt them out which troubled the Church. Whereas the olde Writers thought, that Cherinthus and Carpocrates were noted out, I easelye receyue it. But the denying of Christ stretcheth farre. For it is not inough to confesse in one word that Iesus is Christ, except he be acknowledged to be such a one as hée is offered vnto vs of his Father in the Gospell. Those two Heretykes whome I haue before named, gaue the title of Christ to the Sonne of God: but yet they vntruely helde him to bée onely man. As there are diuers others, as Arrius, who adorning him with the name of GOD, did neuerthelesse spoyle him of his eternall and omnipotent Diui∣nitie.
Martion dreamed that he was but the image of a man. Sabellius fayned that hée differed nothing from his Father. They all denyed him to bée the Sonne of God: because none of them did rightly know the whole Christ: but falsifiyng his truth as much as in them was, they haue for Christ framed to them∣selues an Idoll. Then brake out Pelagius, who indéed mooued no controuersie of the be∣ing of Christ, but graunted that hée was true God and man: but hée translated almost all his honour vnto vs. But this is to bring Christ to nothing, when his power & grace is abolished. So the Papists at this daye, setting frée will agaynst the grace of the ho∣ly Ghost, placing parte of our righteousnesse and saluation in the desarte of workes, fay∣ning infinite Patrones to themselues, by whome they may haue God fauourable, they haue I wot not what counterfayte Christ: but the lyuely and naturall Image of God, which ought to shine in Christ, they deface with their wicked inuentions, they weaken his power, they ouerthrowe and peruert his office. Now we sée yt Christ is denyed so often as those things yt are proper vnto him, are takē
from him. And as Christ is the end of ye lawe and the Gospell, and hath in himselfe all the treasures of wisdome and knowledge: so is he the verie marke that all Heretikes aime at, that thether they maye directe all their artillerie. Wherefore the Apostle doth not without cause make them the chiefe of all deceiuers, which fight against Christ, sée∣ing that the full truth is set forth vnto vs in him. This is Antichrist. He speaketh not of that Prince of falling away, which should fit in the seate of God: but hée putteth them in that wicked rabblement, whosoeuer striue to ouerturne Christ. And that he might increase their sinne, he sayth, that they denie no lesse the Father then the sonne: as if he shoulde haue sayd, That they haue no more religion, because they haue vtterlye cast awaie God, which he straight confirmeth by a reason ad∣ded: because the Father cannot be separated from the son. And this is a sentence of excel∣lent worthinesse and deserueth to be accoun∣ted amongst the chiefe principles of our reli∣gion, yea, after we haue confessed that there is one God. This second point must necessa∣rily bée adioyned. That hée is no other, but
which is knowen in Christ. Neither doth the Apostle héere cunningly dispute of the vnitie of béeing. It is certaine indéed that the sonne cannot bée separated awaie from the Father, because he is [Omoùsios] that is, One sub∣staunce: but nowe there is another thing in hande: namely, that the Father who other∣wise is inuisible, hath onelye made himselfe knowen in the son. Whervpon he is also cal∣led the image of the Father: because he doth represent and deliuer vnto vs whatsoeuer is profitable to be knowen of the father. For the alone maiestie of God doth alwayes darken our eyes with his infinit brightnesse. There∣fore it is of necessitie that we looke vnto Christ. Héere is accesse to the light, which is otherwise worthely sayd to bée vnable to bée come vnto. I saie againe, that héere is not handled the exact disputation of the eternall béeing of Christ, which only he hath with the father. Indéed this place doth plentifully suf∣fice to proue that: but Iohn calleth vs to the practise of faith, yt is, yt because God hath gi∣uen himselfe wholy vnto vs to be ioyned in Christ, it is in vaine to séeke him els where. Or if anye desire more plainelye: because in Christ dwelleth all fulnesse of diuinitie, that
without him there is nothing of God. Wher∣pon it followeth, yt the Turks, Iewes, & the ke, haue for God a very Idoll. For wt what itles so euer they adorn their God whō they worship: because yet they reiect him, without whom none can come to God, & in whom God ath wholy made himselfe knowen vnto vs: what haue they but their owne creature or counterfait? Let them flatter themselues as much as they wil in their fansies, ye reason of diuine matters without Christ: yet it is cer∣taine they do nothing but play the fooles, be∣cause they hold not ye head, as Paul saith, Col. 2.19. Wherevppon it is easie to gather, how néedfull the knowledge of Christ is. Manye bookes haue a sentence contrarie to this, He that confesseth the sonne, &c. But because I suppose it to be noted of some, ra∣ther to haue crept into the Text, I haue not feared to leaue it out. But if it séeme good to bée in, the meaning of it will be, that there is not anie other lawfull confession of GOD, then when the Father is acknow∣ledged in his Sonne. If anie man obiect that many of those that were before thought rightly of God, who yet knew not of Christ. I grant yt the knowledge of Christ was not alwaies so reuealed, yet I doe affirme that
that was euer true: euen as the light of th Sunne is spread abroad vnto vs by beames so the knowledge of God is not communica¦ted but by Christ. 24 Therefore let that same abide in yo which you haue heard from the beginning,  that shall remaine in you which you heard fr the beginning, yee also shall continue in the Father and in the sonne. 25 And this is the promise which he promi∣sed vnto vs: euen eternall life. 26 These things I haue written to you of them that deceiue you. 27 And that annointing which you haue receiued of him remaineth in you: and ye haue no neede that anie man teach you: but as that same annointing teacheth you of all things, & it is the truth, and is not lying, and as it taught you, abide in him. 28 And now little children abide in him: that when he shal appeare we may haue bold∣nesse, and not be ashamed at his comming. 29 If ye knowe that he is righteous, know ye that he that doeth righteously is borne of him. 24 He coupleth an exhortation to the for∣mer
doctrine: and to the end the exhortation ay haue ye more effect, he sheweth the fruit, hich they shall receiue by obedience. There∣re he exhorteth them to the constancye of ith, that they kéepe it firmelye grounded in eir hearts which they haue learned. Fur∣er when he sayth, From the beginning, one∣ antiquitie woulde not suffice to confirme hatsouer doctrine: but because he hath now hewed that they haue ben rightly instructed  the pure Gospell of Christ, hée concludeth, hat they ought of right to continue in it. And his order is to be well noted. For if we will ot depart from that kinde of doctrine, which we haue once receiued, of what sort so euer he same be: it will not be constancie, but a éeuishe frowardnesse. Wherefore there is hoice to be had, that the warrant of our faith may appeare out of the word of God: then let there followe an inflexible constancie. The Papists bragge of their beginning, because they haue dronke in their superstitions, euen from their infancie. Vnder this pretence they imbolden themselues contemptuouslye to cast aside the plaine truth. Such an obstina∣cie ought alwaies to teach vs that wée must alwayes beginne from the assuraunce of the doctrine.
If it abide in you. This is the fruit of per∣seueraunce, that in whom ye truth of God abi∣deth, they abide in God. Wherevpon we ga∣ther what is to be sought in al the doctrine of godlinesse. Wherfore he indéed hath excellēt∣lie profited, who hath gone thus farre, that he cleaueth wholy vnto God. And in whome so euer the father doth not dwell by the sonne, he is whollye vaine and vnprofitable, what knowledge soeuer he haue. Further, this is an excellent practise of sound doctrine, because it ioyneth vs to God, and we find in it what∣soeuer belongeth to the true inioying of God. In the last place he sheweth vs, that this is the chiefe happinesse if God dwell in vs. The spéech that he vseth is doubtfull: either that this is the promise, whereby he hath promised vnto vs eternall lyfe: or appositiuelye, that this is the promise which he hath giuen vs, namely, eternall lyfe. Because yet that whe∣ther waye thou takest it, the meaning is all one: let the choyce bée frée. The summe is, that there is no other waye for vs to lyue, then if wée nourishe continuallye to the end, the séede of life receiued in our mindes. Iohn is plentifull in setting downe this point, that not onely the beginning of an happie lyfe is placed in the knowledge of Christ, but also
perfection. But no repeating of it can bée too much, séeing it is apparāt yt this hath alwaies ben ye cause of destruction to men, because not being contēted wt Christ, they haue delighted to range beyond ye simple doctrine of ye gospel. 26 These things I haue written vnto you. The Apostle doth againe excuse it, that he ad∣monisheth them, who otherwise had know∣ledge & iudgement. And this he doth that they may adioyne ye iudgement of the spirite, least ye admonition be fruitles. As if he shuld haue said, I doe those things that belong to me: but it is of necessitie in the meane time that the spirit of God doe guide you in al things. For in vaine shall I beat your eare, or rather the aire with the sounde of my voice, excepte hée speake within. When wée heare that hée hath written of deceyuers, let vs alwayes marke that this charge doeth euer lye vp∣pon a good and painefull Pastour, not one∣lye that hée gather together the shéepe, but also that hée roote out and driue awaie all rauening Wolues. For what shall it auaile to sette abroade the pure voyce of the Gos∣pell, if wée winke at the manifest deceites of Sathan. Therefore there is not anye man that canne faythfully teach the Church, except he binde himselfe to represse errours,
if he sée anie cast abroade of the deceiuers. Where he saith, the annointing Which yee haue receiued of him, I referre it to Christ. 27 Ye haue no neede. Iohn had bene to be laughed at, as I sayd before, if he had broched an vnprofitable doctrine. He doth not there∣fore ascribe vnto them so much knowledge, that he denie them to be Christes Schollers. He onely signifieth, that they are not so igno∣rant that they should be taught as of things vnknowen: and that he did not propound a∣nie thing which the spirit of God did not rea∣dily prompt vnto them. Therefore mad men doe wickedly abuse this testimonie, that they might shutte out of the Church the vse of the outward ministrie. Hée saith that the fayth∣full are taught by the office of the spirite, to kéepe those thinges that he deliuereth, that they haue no néede to learne them as things vnknowen. This he sayth to the ende that he may procure the more account to his doc∣trine: while euerie one findeth his subscripti∣on written in his heart with the finger of God. But, séeing that euerie one vnderstan∣deth according to the measure of faith, & that faith in some is small, in some meane, and in none absolute: hence it followeth that no man knoweth so much, but that there is yet
place to further going forward. And then this is another profit of the doctrine, that where men hold fast that is méete, yet we warn thē and stir them vp, that thereby they may haue a greater increase. For in that Iohn testifieth that they are taught in all things by the spirit, it must not be so generallye taken: but restrained to the circumstance of the present place. In summe, he meneth nothing else, but to confirme their faith, while he recalleth them to ye trial of the spirit, who only is a fit examiner & approuer of the doctrine, while hée sealeth vp the same in our heartes, that we may know of a truth that God speaketh. For séeing yt faith ought to looke vnto God, he onely can be a witnesse vnto himselfe, yt he may perswade our hearts that ye procéedeth from him which our eares receiue. And that is the meaning of those wordes, As it teacheth you and is the truth. That is, that the spirite is like a seale, wher∣by is witnessed vnto vs the truth of GOD. Where he addeth, It is not a lye. This perty∣cular noteth out the other office of the spirit, namely, that he gouerneth vs by iudgement and discreation, least wée bée deceiued with a lye: least wée depende vncertaine and in doubt, least wée shoulde bée as it were neuer
in vncertaine things. As he hath taught you, continue. He had sayd yt the spirite remained in them: Now he exhorteth that they remaine in his reuealati∣on. And he noteth out the manner of the Re∣uealation. Abide, saith he, in Christ, as the spi∣rit hath taught you. I know it is commonly otherwise expounded, Abide in it: that it may note out the annointing. But séeing the re∣petition which by and by foloweth, can agrée to none but vnto Christ. I doubt not but here also he speaketh of Christ: and the course of the Text doth require the same. For the A∣postle tarryeth in that point, that the fayth∣full would kéepe sure the pure knowledge of Christ, and that they striue not anie other waye to rome to God. In the meane time he doth cléerely shew, that the children of God are lightened of the spirit to no other ende, but that they maye knowe Christ. But if they shall not decline from thence, he setteth forth the fruites of perseueraunce: namely, that they shall haue assuraunce not to be a∣shamed at his presence. For faith is not a na∣ked & cold apprehending of Christ, but a liue∣ly & effectuall féeling of his power, which be∣getteth assurance. Neither indéede could faith otherwise stand out, while it is daily assailed
with so many tēpests, except it did both looke to ye cōming of Christ, & being vpholdē by his power, did bring a quiet state to ye consciēces. Further, ye nature of cōfidēce is most fitly ex∣prest, whē he saith: ye presence of Christ shal be borne wtout feare, for they yt securely flatter thēselues in sin: turne their back vpon God: & find peace no where els, but in ye forgetfulnes of God. This is ye securitie of ye flesh yt besot∣teth men: yt being turned from God, they nei∣ther loath sin, nor feare death: in ye mene time they shun ye iudgement of Christ: but an holy trust disposeth it selfe into the alone sight of God. Whereof it is yt the godly do chéerfully looke for Christ, and feare not to behold him. 29 If you know that he is righteous. Hée a∣gaine procéedeth to exhortations: that he may after ioyne them in the whole Epistle to the doctrine. By many reasons he proueth yt faith must of necessitie be ioyned with an holy and a cleane life. The first is, that we are spiritu∣ally begotten into the similitude of Christ. Wherevpon it followeth that no man is be∣gotten of Christ, but he that liueth righte∣ously. Albeit it is vncertaine whether hée meane Christ or God, when he saith, yt they which work righteousnes are begottē of him. Indéede it is an vsuall kind of speaking in
the Scriptures, that we are begotten of God in Christ, but this other also, there is an ab∣surditie, that they are begotten of Christ who are renewed by his spirit. Chap. 3. 1 BEhold what loue the Father hath gi∣uen vs, that we should bee called the sonnes of God. Therefore the world know∣eth vs not, because it knoweth not him. 2 Beloued, nowe wee are the sonnes of God, and yet it hath not appeared what wee shall bee: But wee knowe that when hee shall appeare, wee shall bee lyke vnto him, because wee shall see him euen as he is. 3 And euerie one that hath this loue in him, puryfieth himselfe, euen as hee is pure. 1 THE second Argument is from the dignitie and excel∣lencie of our calling. Our heauenlye Father sayth hée hath vouchsafed to dignifie vs with no small honour, séeing hée hath adopted vs to bée his sonnes. This so greate fauour ought to kindle in
vs the studie of godlynesse, that wée maye bée lyke vnto him: and it canne no other way be done, except he which confesseth him∣selfe to bée one of the sonnes of GOD, doe purifie himselfe. And the more vehement the exhortation is, the more is set foorth vn∣to vs the grace of almightie God. For wher∣as he sayth that loue is giuen vs, hée shew∣eth that this commeth of méere liberalitie, that God accepteth vs for his children. For whence become we of such account, but by the loue of God? Furthermore, his frée loue is héere manifestlye spoken of. It is indéede an vnproper kinde of spéech, but the Apostle had rather speake vnproperlye, then not to ex∣presse that which was of necessitie to bée knowen. Briefelye, hée signifieth that the more plentifull the loue of GOD is shewed vppon vs, the more wée are bound vnto him, as Paule to the Romanes the 12.1. beséecheth the Romanes by the mercies of God, that they would offer themselues vnto him an holye Sacrifice. In the meane time we are taught, that as I sayde the adoption of all the godlye is frée, and dependeth not vppon anie respect of workes. For that which the Schoole men say, that they are adopted whom god did fore∣sée to be worthie, is plainely made of none ef∣fect
by these wordes. For by this meanes the gift of God should not haue bene frée: This chiefe point of doctrine is principally néedfull to holde. For séeing that the onely cause of our saluation is adoption, and that the Apo∣stle witnesseth that the same doth issue from the méere and alone loue of God, there is no∣thing remaineth to our owne worthinesse or the desert of works. For why are we sonnes? Verily because God hath begunne to loue vs fréely, when we were more worthie of hatred then of loue. And séeing that the spirit is the pledge of our adoptiō: hence it followeth, that if there be anie good thing in vs, it must not be so set against the grace of God, that rather it must be ascribed vnto it, as receiued from it. The Name whereof he speaketh cannot be a vaine title. For it is God who pronounceth vs with his owne mouth to be his sonnes: as he gaue a name to Abraham, according to the thing it selfe. Therefore the world. This temptation doth vehemently assayle our faith, that wée should not so be accounted for the children of God, or haue anie note of such excellencie séene in vs, yt rather the whole world almost doth hold vs for a mocking stocke. Therefore by the present condition it can hardly be ga∣thered
that God is our Father: for the diuell inuenteth all wayes to darken his blessing. He giueth a remedie to this offence when hée saith, That it is not yet knowen What man∣ner of men we are, because the world know∣eth not God: therefore it is no meruaile, if it contempne his children. Of which thing ther was a notable paterne in Isaac & Iacob. For when each of them was elected of God, the one Ismael scoffed and iested at Gen. 21.9. & 27.41. the other Esau persecuted wc threate∣nings & with swoord. Therfore howsoeuer we séeme to be oppressed in ye world, our saluatiō remaineth neuertheles founde & in good state. 2 We are now the sonnes of God. Now he descendeth to euery ones proper feeling. For albeit the wicked doe not intice vs to cast a∣way our hope, yet our present estate is far frō ye glory of ye childrē of God. For in respect of ye body we are dust, & a thing of nothing: death is euer before our eies, & we are in danger of many miseries, & the soule is subiect to infinit euils: so yt we alwaies find hel in our selues. How much more néed is ther yt al our sences be drawen frō ye beholding of things present, least the miseries wherwith we are compas∣sed, doeth driue vs out of the hope of ye hap∣pinesse that yet appeareth not. For this is
the Apostles counsell, that wée shall doe foo∣lishlye, if we measure what God hath giuen vnto vs, by our present condition, but that we must holde fast by an assured faith, yt which yet appeareth not. And we know that when we shall be made manifest. This condition must be chaunged into an Aduerb of time where, or when. Fur∣ther this worde shall appeare, is taken other∣wise then before. The Apostle sayde a lyttle before, yt it appereth not yet what we shal be, since the fruit of our adoption is hid: because our felicitie is in heauen, and we are straun∣gers farre from thence in the earth, & because this fraile life that is subiect to an hundreth deaths, is farre vnlike to that eternall glorye which belongeth to the children of God: be∣cause being shut vp after a slauishe manner in the prison of flesh, we are farre distaunt from the frée dominion of heauen and earth. But nowe he referreth this note to Christ, When hee shall appeare. For hée teacheth the same thing that Paule doeth vnto the Collos. chapter. 3. verse. 3. where he sayth, Your life is hidde with Christ: but when Christ which is your lyfe shall appeare, then shall yée also appeare with him in glory. And indéede our fayth can no other waye remaine
stedie, then while it looketh vnto ye comming of Christ. For this is the cause why God do∣eth deferre the manifestation of our glory: because Christ is not yet made manifest in the power of his kingdome. This I say, is ye onely prop of our faith, that we may pacient∣ly waite for the life that is promised vs. So soone as any one dooth turne aside but a lyt∣tle from Christ, it cannot be chosen but hée shall faint. By the word Knowe, he noteth out the certaintie of Faith, that he maye discerne it from opinion. Neither is héere noted a sim∣ple and vniuersal knowledge, but that which euery one ought to apply to himselfe, that he may know of a truth, that he shall once bée made lyke vnto Christ. Therefore howsoe∣uer the giuing forth of our glorie is deferred to the cōming of Christ, yet the knowledge of it is most excellently assured. Like. He dooth not meane that we shall be equall, but there must néedes be some dif∣ference betwéene the head and the members: but we shall be like him, because hée shall make our vile bodie like to his glorious bo∣die, as Paule teacheth. Phil. 3.21. For the Apo∣stle goeth about to shew yt this is the last end of our adoption, that yt which by order went
before in Christ, be at the last fulfilled in vs. Yet the reason that is added, séemeth to bée weake. For if the beholding of Christ shall make vs lyke vnto Christ, the wicked shall haue the same glorie with vs, who also shall sée him. I aunswere, that this is a familiar kinde of beholding, which the wicked cannot beare, but be sore amazed: yea ouer and be∣sides that they shall horribly feare, and flye from the sight of God: his glorie shal blind their eyes euen so that they shall be amazed with confusion. For we sée howe Adam knowing his owne euill, fled from the pre∣sence of God Gen. 3.6. And God doth pro∣nounce that generally vpon all men by Mo∣ses, No man shall sée me and liue, Exod. 33.20. Because it cannot otherwise be, but that the maiestie of God as a consuming fire, doo consume vs as stubble: such is the weaknes of our flesh. And as the Image of God is re∣newed in vs, we haue eyes prepared to the séeing of God. And now indéede God begin∣neth to restore his image in vs: but in how small a measure? Therefore except we be dis∣burdened of all the corruption of our flesh, we cannot sée God face to face. Which also is expressed in this note, Such as he is. Neyther dooth hée nowe take from vs all
sight of God in this life: but so as Paul saith, 1. Cor. 13.12. Now we sée as in a glasse by a darke speaking. And this kinde of séeing with an eye beholdinge, hée discerneth else where. In summe, God setteth foorth him∣selfe now to be séene of vs, not such as he is, but such as our small capacitie can compre∣hende him. So is fulfilled that which is set downe in Moses, that we sée him onely as it were on the backpart. Exo. 33.23. Because in his face there is an ouer-passing brightnesse. It is further to bée noted that this reason which the apostle bringeth, is taken from the effect and not from the cause. For he dooeth not teach, that wée shall bée lyke him there∣fore, because wée shall inioye the sight of him: but he prooueth that we shall therefore bée pertakers of the diuine glorie, because ex∣cept our nature were indued with a spiritu∣all, heauenly and an happie immortalitie, it could neuer come so néere vnto God. And yet there shal not be such a perfection of glory in vs, that our sight shal comprehend God who∣ly. For there shall be euen then betwéene him and vs, a great distance of proportion. But when the Apostle saith, we shall sée him as he is, he noteth out a new & vnspeakable kind of séeing, wherof we are now ignorant.
For so long as we walke by faith, Paule tea∣cheth, that we are straungers from him. 2. Cor. 5.6. And so often as he yéelded himselfe to be séene of the fathers, he was not séene in his being, but vnder certaine markes. There then shall the maiestie of God which now is secret, be séene at the last in it selfe, when the vaile of this mortall and corruptible nature shall be taken away. I passe by other subtill reasonings. For we sée how Augustine dooth vexe himselfe in them, and yet we sée he doth not ridde himselfe thereof, both in his Epist∣els to Paulina, and Fortunatus, and also in his booke of ye Citie of God. 22. & in other places. Yet yt which he saith there is worth noting, That in this inquisition the meane of séeing is more excellent then of speaking: and that there must be héede taken, least while by con∣tending we séeke how God can be séene, we léese the peace and holinesse, without which no man shall sée him. 3 Euery one which hath this hope. Now he concludeth that therefore the indeauor of holinesse ought not to waxe colde in vs, be∣cause our felicitie dooth not yet appeare, for that hope sufficeth. Further we knowe that those things are hoped for, which are hid. The meaning therefore is: Howsoeuer we haue
not Christ yet present before our eyes, if yet we trust in him, that it cannot be, but this hope will stir vs vp, and pricke vs forward to follow after holinesse: because being right it guideth vs to Christ, whom we knowe to be the perfect example of holinesse. 4 Whosoeuer doth commit sinne, doth also commit iniquitie, and sinne is iniquitie. 5 Further ye knowe that hee was made manifest, that he might take away our sinnes, and in him there is no sinne. 6 Whosoeuer abideth in him, sinneth not: whosoeuer sinneth, hath not seene him. 4 THe Apostle hath before alreadie sho∣wed how vnkinde we are towardes God if we lightly estéeme the honour of our adoption, whereby he preuenteth vs of his owne good will: & do not at the least render vnto him loue againe. He hath together put in betwéene that admonition, that our affec∣tion must not be made lesse, because the hap∣pie estate promised is deferred. And now be∣cause men vse to flatter themselues in euils more then is méete, he correcteth this wicked cockering, pronouncing that they are wicked, and breakers of the lawe, whosoeuer doo sin:
For it is verie credible, that there were then such, as by these flatterings did extenuate their sinnes, and make them séeme lesse then they were: It is no maruell if we sinne, be∣cause we are men: but there is great oddes betwéene sinne and the breaking of the law. The Apostle driueth from them this vayne excuse, when he defineth sinne to be ye trans∣gression of the lawe. For his purpose is, to set before them, the hatred and horrour of sinne. The name it selfe of sin séemeth to some to be but a light thing: but iniquitie or trās∣gression of the lawe, cannot so easely be for∣giuen. But the Apostle dooth not make sins equall, when he condemneth all sinners of iniquitie, but he laboureth simplye to teach, that sinne ariseth of the contempt of God, & that by sinning the righteousnesse of the law is broken. Wherefore this doctrine of Iohn hath none agréement with that doating Pa∣radox of ye Stoikes, Furthermore to sinne, in this place doth not signifie to offend in some work, nor is ye name of sin taken for euerye offence: but he calleth ye sin, when men runne headlong into euil with ye whole affection of the hart. And he doth not meane ye others sin, except they which are addicted to sin. Neither
are ye faithfull, who are still intangled with the affections of the flesh, taken for wicked, albeit they are not cleane and pure from sin: but because sin doth not raigne in thē, Iohn saith that they sinne not: as I wil anone ex∣presse more at large. The summe of this sen∣tence is, That their wicked life who giue thē¦selues leaue to sinne, is abhominable to god, and cannot be indured of him, séeing it is contrarie to his law. Hence it doth not folow nor can it be gathered, that the faithfull are wicked: because they desire to be subiect to God, & they mislike with themselues because of their sins, & that for euery offence. And a∣gaine, as much as in them lieth, they frame their liues to the obedience of the law. But where the desire or vsual course of sinning is wt deliberatiō, there is ye trāsgressiō of ye law. 5 Furder you know that he hath appeared. He showeth by another argument how much sinne and faith doo differ. For it is Christes office to take away sinne, and to this ende he was sent of his father: and by faith we are made pertakers of the righteousnesse of Christ. Therefore whosoeuer beléeueth in Christ, it is of necessitie, that he be purged from sinnes. But whereas our Sauiour Christ is sayde in another place to take
awaye sinnes, because by his death he hath purged them, least they should be laid to our charge before God: Iohn. 1.29. In this place Iohn meaneth that truly and in very déed, as they say, Christ taketh away sinnes, because by him our olde man is crucified. Rom. 6.6. And his spirit doth mortifie our flesh, with the corrupt affections thereof, by repentance. Neither doth the course of the text suffer to expoūd it of remission. For so, as I haue said he reasoneth, that they which cease not to sin, do make frustrate the benefit of Christ: séeing he came that he might destroy the kingdome of sinne. And that is referred to sanctificati∣on of the spirit. There is no sinne in him. He speketh not héere of Christs person, but of his whole bo∣die. Whether so euer Christ hath shed out his power, he denieth that there is anye more place for sinne. Therefore he straight gathe∣reth that they sin not which abide in Christ. For if by faith he dwell in vs, he perfour∣meth that his worke, that he may purge vs from sinne. Wherevpon it appeareth what it is to sinne. For Christ doth not renewe vs perfectly in one day or moment with his spi∣rit, but he continueth the renuing that is be∣gun in part all the life long. It cannot ther∣fore
be but the faithfull shuld be subiect to sinne, so long as they liue in the worlde. But forasmuch as Christs kingdome doeth flourish in them, sinne is abolished. In the mean time, they are accompted off, according to the principall parte, that is, that they are called iust, & said to liue iustly, because with a sincere affection of the hart they labour af∣ter righteousnesse. They are sayd not to sin: because albeit they fall by the infirmitie of the flesh, yet they doo not consent vnto sinne: but rather striue with griefe of heart, that they may truly say with Paule, they doo the euill which they would not. Rom. 7.19. The faithfull he saith doo abide in Christ, because by faith wée are grafted into him, and are made one with him. 6 Whosoeuer sinneth hath not seene him. Hée hath according to his woont, an∣nexed the contrarie parte, that wée maye knowe that the faith and knowledge of Christ, is falsly pretended, without newnes of lyfe. For Christ is no where idle where he raigneth: but sheweth foorth the power of his spirite. And it is said alreadie that it is his office to put sinne to slight, no other∣wise then the Sun driueth away ye clowdes with his brightnesse.
And we are taught again by this place, how liuelye and effectuall a thing the know∣ledge of Christ is: which indéede dooth trans∣forme vs into his Image. So by Affection and Knowledge, there is no other thing ment then faith. 7 Little children let no man deceiue you: he that doth righteousnesse is righteous, euen as he is righteous. 8 Hee that committeth sinne is of the Diuell, because the Diuell sinneth from the beginning. For this purpose was the sonne of God made manifest, that he might loose the workes of the Diuell. 9 Whosoeuer is borne of God sinneth not, for his seede remaineth in him: neyther canne hee sinne because hee is borne of God. 10 In this are the children of God kno∣wen and the children of the Diuell. 7 HE that dooth righteousnesse. The Apostle teacheth in this place, that the newnesse of lyfe must be made knowen by good works: and that the lykenesse wher¦of
hée hadde spoken, which is betwixt Christ and his members can not stande, excepte it bring foorth the fruite. As if hée hadde sayde, Séeing it dooth become vs to bée lyke vnto Christ, let the truth & witnesse of this thing, appeare in our lyfe. This exhortation is all one with that of Paules, in the 5. to the Gala∣thians vearse. 25. If you liue in the Spirite, walke also in the Spirite. For many would gladly perswade themselues that they haue righteousnesse hidde in their hearts, while their féete, their hands, their tongues, & eyes, are let loose to iniquitie. 8 Hee that committeth sinne. Also, this worde to Commit, is referred to the outwarde déedes, that the meaning may bée, that there is no lyfe of God and of Christ, where men behaue themselues leawdly and wickedlye, but rather suche are the bonde slaues of the Diuell. By which speach, he more fully expresseth how farre they disagrée from Christ. For euen as first he hadde sette foorthe Christ the Fountaine of all righteousnesse: so nowe also on the contrarye, he assigneth the Diuell, to bée the heade of sinne. Hée denyeth that anye man dooth belonge
to Christ, but hée that is righteous, and ap∣prooueth himselfe to bée such a one by his workes: now he sendeth all other into the diuels fellowship, and casteth them vnder his dominion: that we may know that Sathan dooth exercise tyrannie, where the righteous∣nesse of Christ dooth not beare the swaye. And yet there are not to be imagined with the Maniches two beginnings one against a∣nother, for we know that the Diuel is euill not by nature & creation, but by the iniquitie of his owne falling away. We knowe further, that he is not equall with God, that he should contend with him in a like power: but that hée is forced man∣ger his téeth, that hée cannot doo anye thing, except at the will and assignment of his cre∣atour. Finally when Iohn saith, Some are borne of God, and some are of the Diuell, he faineth no propagation as the Maniches did dreame: but he meaneth that the first are gouerned by the Spirite of Christ: and the others are vyolently carryed of Sathan, as God hath giuen him this power against vn∣beleeuers. Because the Diuell sinneth from the be∣ginning. Euen as before he spake not on∣ly of Christes person, when he sayd, hée was
righteous, but didde assigne him to bée the cause and Fountaine of righteousnesse: so nowe when hée sayth the Diuell sinneth, hée comprehendeth his whole bodie, that is, all reprobates. As if hée had sayde, this is the di∣uells propertie, that he force vnto sinne. Wherevpon it followeth, that they are his members and are led of him, whosoeuer de∣light in sinne. Further, this Beginning whereof the A∣postle maketh mention, is not of eternitie: as when he teacheth that the word was from the beginning. For there is great oddes, be∣twéene God and creatures. The beginning in God is without time. Wherefore, séeing the word was euer with God, thou shalt not finde any instant of time wherin it began to be: but it is of necessitie that thou come to very eternitie it selfe. And héere Iohn mea∣neth nothing els, but yt the diuell was an A∣postata, immediatelye after the creation of the worlde, and from thence hath neuer cea∣sed to spreade abroade his poyson amongest men. For this purpose appeared the Sonne of God. Hée repeateth the same thing againe in other wordes, that hée sayde before, That Christ came to take awaye sinne. Hence are
two things to be gathered: That they can not be accompted for the members of Christ, nor anye waye to appertayne to his bodye, in whome sinne dooth raigne. For wheresoe∣uer Christ sheweth his power, he putteth the Diuell and sinne to flight. Which also Iohn addeth immediatelye, for the next sentence, where he sayeth, That they sinne not which are borne of God, is the conclusion of those things, that went afore. The Argument is drawen from repug∣naunces, as I sayd before: because the king∣dome of Christ, which of necessitie bringeth with it righteousnnesse, can not stande toge∣ther with sinne. But I haue alredie touched afore, what Not to sinne dooth signifie héere. For hée dooth not make the Children of god vtterlye frée from all fault, but hée denyeth that they can trulye boaste of this title: ex∣cept such as from their heart indeauour them selues to frame their life vnto the obedience of God. Indéede the Pelagians and Puritanes did once abuse this testimonie: when they imagined that ye faithfull were indued with an Angelicall puritie in this world. And in this time certaine of the Anabaptistes haue renued that dotage.
But whosoeuer dreame of such a perfection, doo sufficiently showe what a blockish consci∣ence they haue. And these wordes of the A∣postle are so farre off from strengthening their errour, that they suffice to refute them. He sayeth, They sinne not, which are borne of God. Nowe resteth to be séene, whether God doo regenerate vs in one moment. But it is manifest that regeneration is so begun in vs, as the remnaunts of the olde man re∣mayne euen vnto death. But if regenerati∣on be not full and perfect, it doth frée vs from the bondage of sinne, but according to the measure thereof. Hence appeareth that it can not be possible, but the Children of GOD are burdened with offences, and doo daylye sinne, inasmuch as they haue yet some re∣maynder of the olde nature. And yet this remayneth sure that the A∣postle sayth, That this is the ende of rege∣neration, that sinne may be done away: and that they therefore lyue iustlye and godlye, whosoeuer are borne of GOD: because the Spirite of GOD dooth correct the desire of sinning. And that the Apostle meaneth, by the Seede of GOD. For so the Spirite of
God frameth the heartes of the godly vnto right affection, that the flesh with his lustes preuayleth not, but is kept vnder, as béeing tamed vnder a yoke. In conclusion, the chiefe effects in the elect, the Apostle ascribeth to the spirit of God, who by his power represseth sinne, and doth not suffer it to flourish. Neither can he sinne. Héere now the A∣postle ascendeth higher. For he doth plainly testifie, that the hearts of the godly are so ef∣fectually gouerned by the spirite of God, that they followe his direction with an vnchaun∣geable desire. But this is verie far from Po∣pish doctrine. The Sorbonistes indéede con∣fesse, that the will of man cannot desire that which is right, except it bée holpen by the spi∣rit of God: but they imagine the motion of the spirit to be such, as leaueth vnto vs the frée choice of good & euil. Hēce they draw me∣rites, because we willingly obeye vnto the grace of the spirit, which it was in our power to reiect. Finally, they define this to bée the onely grace of the spirite, that wée be able to will well, if we list. Iohn sayth farre other∣wise in this place: for he doth not onely teach that we are able not to sinne, but that the motion of the spirit is so effectuall, that of ne∣cessitie it holdeth vs in a continall obedience
of righteousnesse. Neither is this the onelye lace of Scripture, which teacheth that the ill is so framed, that it cannot bée but right. For God testifieth, that he giueth a new hart o his children, and he promiseth that he will ause them to walke in his precepts. Ezech. 6.26. Adde moreouer, that Iohn doth onely each how effectually God worketh in man, ut he plainely affirmeth, that his spirit doth continue his grace in vs to the verie laste breath, that inchaungeable perseuerance may be ioyned with newnesse of lyfe. Wherefore let vs not with the Schoole men imagine some middle motiō, which is in a mans choice to followe, or to refuse: but let vs know that our hearts are gouerned of the spirit of God, that they may constantlye cleaue to the waie of righteousnesse. Further, the absurditie which the Schoole men obiect, is easily refel∣led. They saie, but falsly, that by this meanes Will is taken from man. For will is of na∣ture: but because the corruption of nature bringeth foorth onely euill affections, therfore it is of necessitie, that the spirit of God doe reforme it, whereby it maye incline to good∣nesse. And againe, because men would easily fall from that which is good, it is of necessitie, that ye same spirit continue vnto the end, that
which he hath begun. The answere concer∣ning desert is easie: for it is not to be held for an absurd thing, if men deserue nothing: and yet workes cease not to bée accounted good, which procéed from the grace of the spirit, be∣cause they are voluntarie. They haue also reward, because they are fréely accounted vn∣to men, as if they were their owne. But here ariseth a question, whether so soone as anye man is regenerate by the spirit of God, god∣lynesse & the feare of God can neuer be extin∣guished in him. For ye Apostles words séeme to giue this. They that thinke otherwise, al∣leadge the example of Dauid, who for a time was so ouerwhelmed with a brutish senceles∣nesse, that there appeared no sparke to remain in him. And moreouer in the 51. Psalm. 12. he desireth that it may be restored to him again. Whervpon it foloweth, yt he was depriued of it. Yet I doubt not, but that séede wherewith God doth regenerate his elect, as it is incor∣ruptible, so it kéepeth the continuall force. I graunt it may be, that sometimes it bée (as it were) strangled, as it was in Dauid. But yet at what time al godlines séemed to be vtter∣ly put out in him, ye quicke cole lay hid vnder the ashes. Satan indéed goeth about to pluck vp whatsoeuer is of God in ye elect: but when
e is most of all let loose: ye secret roote remai∣eth, which afterward springeth forth at the st. But Iohn speaketh héere, not of one actiō s they call it: but of the continual course of ye fe. Certaine frantike fellowes dreame of I now not what eternall séed in ye elect, which y alwaies bring frō their mothers wōbe. But to this purpose they doo more then vnfit∣ wrest Iohn his words: For he disputeth not f eternal election, but beginneth at regenera∣on. There are also others twice mad, who nder this pretēce wil haue euery thing law∣ul to thē yt beleeue, because Iohn saith they cā ot sin. They wil therfore yt we folow wtout ifference, whatsoeuer our affectiō shal craue s: so they giue licence to cōmit whoredome, o steale, & to kill, because there can be no sin her ye spirit of God raigneth. But ye Apostle meaneth far another thing. For the Apostle enieth that the faithful can sin, because God ath written his lawe in their heartes, as it s in the Prophet Iere. 31.31. By this are knowne. In few words he con∣ludeth, yt they do in vaine challenge to them∣elues a name amōgst ye childrē of God, which o not approue thēselues to be such by a godly  holy life: forasmuch as by this marke they iffer from the children of the Diuell.
Further, he doth not so meane, that they  made manifest, that they may be openly kno∣wen to all the world: but this onely he mea∣neth, that the fruit and effect of the diuine a∣doption doth alwaies shew forth in the lyfe. Hee that doeth not righteousnesse is not  God, nor he that loueth not his brother. 11 Because this is the preaching which you haue heard from the beginning, that we lo one another. 12 Not of Caine which was of that wicked one, and slew his brother, and wherefore slew he him? Because his owne workes were euill, and his brothers good. 13 Meruaile not my brethren, if the worl hate you. HE that doth not righteousnes. To do righ∣teousnesse, and to commit sinne, are héere set one against another. Therfore to do righ∣teousnesse, is nothing else then from the heart to feare God, and to walke in his preceptes, as farre as mans frailtie will beare. For al∣beit yt righteousnes if it be takē precisely, is no other thing then the full obseruing of the lawe, from which the faithfull are alwayes farre of: yet because God doth not lay theyr
fences & faultes to their charge, this percel f obedience which they performe vnto God, s called righteousnesse. And Iohn sheweth plainly that they are not of God, whosoeuer ine not righteously: because whosoeuer God alleth, he doth renue thē by his spirit. There∣fore the newnesse of life is a perpetuall wit∣nesse of Gods frée election. And which loueth not his brother. He ap∣plyeth a generall doctrine to his purpose. For hetherto he hath exhorted the faithfull to bro∣therly loue: Now by the same he sheweth the summe of true righteousnesse, wherefore this part is added in stéed of an exposition. But I haue sayd before after what sort whole righ∣teousnesse is comprehended vnder brotherlye loue. The loue of God indéede hath the first place, but because of that dependeth brotherly loue amongst men, oftētimes by a Sinadoch that is contained vnder this: & this again vn∣der that. Therefore as euerie one is giuen to humanitie and well doing, so he saith that he is iust, and so accounted, because loue is the fulfilling of ye law. He cōfirmeth this sentence when hée sayeth, that the faithfull haue ben so taught frō ye beginning: for by these words he sheweth, that this definition which he gi∣ueth, ought not to séeme straunge vnto them.
12 Not as Caine. Another confirmati is taken of ye contrarie: because hatred rai¦neth in the reprobate and children of the d¦uell, and holdeth as it were the chiefetie  their life: of which thing he setteth dow Caine as an example. In the meane time  maketh to their comfort, as he concludeth at  last: Meruaile not if the world hate you. This exposition is to be diligently noted: for in the manner of life men are alwaies deceiued: be∣cause they place holinesse in figured workes, & while they tormēt themselues with trifles, they thinke they are twice acceptable to God. Euen as Monkes doe proudly, tearme theyr kinde of life, the state of perfection. And in Poperie there is not thought anie other wor∣ship of God, then yt filth of superstitions. But the Apostle doth especially shew that we are approued of God, if we loue oe other. A∣gaine, that the diuell raigneth, where hatred, grudge, enuie, and displeasures dooeth raign. Yet it is together to be kept in memo∣rie that I touched of late, that brotherly loue, because it ariseth of the loue of GOD as the effect of the cause, is not separated from it, but rather is commended of Iohn for this cause, for that it is an approouing of our ho∣lynesse before GOD. When he sayeth that
Caine was by this cause enforced to the slay∣ing of his Brother, because his owne works were euill. Hée meaneth that which I haue noted alreadie, that where wickednesse bea∣reth the swaie, hatred possesseth all the partes of life. Hée maketh mention of the iust works of Abel, that we may learne to beare it paci∣ently, if the world prouoked with no iniury, doe hate vs without cause. 14 Wee knowe, that wee are translated from death to life, because we loue the brethe∣ren. He that loueth not his brother abideth in death. 15 Euerie one that hateth his brother, is a manslayer: & you know that no manslay∣er hath eternall life abiding in him. 16 By this haue wee knowen loue, be∣cause hee layde downe his lyfe for vs: and we ought to lay downe our liues for the bre∣theren. 17 If anie man haue this worldes good, and seeth his brother haue neede, and shutteth vp his compassion frō him, how dwelleth the loue of God in him. 18 My little children, let vs not loue in word and tongue, but in deede and truth.
14 HE commendeth loue vnto vs by an excellent speach: because it is a te∣stimonie of our being deliuered from death to lyfe. Wherevpon it followeth, that if wée loue our bretheren, we are happie, and if wée hate them, we are miserable. Ther is no man that dooth not desire to escape and to be dely∣uered from death, therefore they must néede be more then blinde, who by fostering of ha∣tred doo willingly pamper their own death. Further, when the apostle saith, that by loue it is knowen that we haue passed into life, he meaneth not that man is his own deliuerer, as if by louing the bretheren hée deliuered himselfe from death, & obtained life for him∣selfe. For he dooth not dispute héere of ye cause of saluation: but séeing loue is the principall fruite of the spirite, it is also a certaine note of regeneration. Therfore the Apostle reasoneth from ye signe and not from the cause. For because no man doth truely loue the brethren, except he which is regenerate by the spirit. Hence it is right∣ly gathered, that the spirite of God which is lyfe, dooth dwell in them that loue the brethe∣ren. But one should therevpon preposterously inferre that lyfe is attained vnto by loue, sée∣ing
loue by order is ye later. This Argument should haue more coulour, if loue make vs more assured of our life: that then the assu∣rance of saluation doth consist in act. But the answere therof is also easie. For albeit that faith is confirmed by al ye graces of god, as by helps, yet it ceaseth not to haue his foundati∣on in the onely frée mercie of God. For exam∣ple, when we inioy the light, we are sure that the Sunne shineth: if the Sunne giue his beams into the place wherin we are, we haue a certaine more cléere sight: but yet albeit ye visible beames doe not pearce through vnto vs, in this same we are satisfied that the Sun yéeldeth out the vse of his shining vnto vs. So after that our fayth is established in Christ, certayne thinges maye come to passe, which maye helpe it: yet in the meane time it resteth in the alone grace of Iesus Christ. 15 Is a manslayer. To the end hée maye stirre vs the more vnto loue, he sheweth how detestable a thing before God, hatred is. Ther is no man but he abhorreth man slaughter: yea, wée al hold the verie name to be execra∣ble. And the apostle sheweth that they are al manslayers which hate theyr bretheren. Hée coulde not speake anie thing more bitterlie,
and yet this is not hyperbolical. For whō we hate, we could affoord that he perished. And it is no matter, if one kéepe his hands from the euill. For the verie desire is condempned be∣fore God as much as is the practise. Yea, also when we our selues do not desire to do hurt, if yet we desire that some euil may come vn∣to our brother from other wher, euen then al∣so we are manslaiers. Therfore ye Apostle do∣eth define the matter, euen as it is, where he giueth the name of manslaughter to hatred. Wherby is conuinced the foolishnesse of men, because when they doe euen loath the name, they make almost no account of the fault it selfe. And whence is that? Euen because the outward face of things doth occupie all our sences, before God the inwarde affection is regarded. Wherefore least anye doe anye more lessen so excéeding an euill, let vs learne to call backe our iudgements to the iudge∣ment feate of God. 16 By this wee knowe. Now he shew∣eth what is true loue. For it were not inoughe to prayse it excepte the power of it were knowen. And hée setteth forth a per∣fect rule of loue, in the example of Christ: because in not sparing his owne lyfe, hée
made it knowen howe much hée loued vs. Therefore hée biddeth vs labour to this point. The summe is, that therein is our loue commended, if wée transferre the loue of our selues vnto our bretheren: So as euerie one after a sorte forgetting himselfe, take care for others. It is indéede most cer∣taine that wée are not farre vnlyke vnto Christ, but the Apostle doeth commend vn∣to vs imitation, because albeit we attain not vnto him, yet it is good that wée followe his steppes a farre off. Indéede when the Apo∣stle giueth counsaile to hypocrites, that they cast awaye vaine boasting, which bragge that they haue the fayth of Christ, with∣out brotherlye loue, hée doeth shewe, that excepte this desire doeth preuayle in our heartes, wée haue nothing to doe with Christ. Neyther yet as I sayde doeth hée so set before vs the loue of Christ, that hée requireth an equall loue of vs. For what shoulde that bée else but a driuing of all at once to desperation? But so he will haue our affections framed, that wée maye de∣sire to bestowe both our life and death, first to the glorie of God, and then to the good of our neighbour.
There is another difference betwixt vs and Christ, that there cannot bée the same power of our death For neither is the wrath of God pacified by our bloud, nor lyfe attayned vnto by our death, nor the debt of others is paide. But the Apostle by this comparison, did not respect what was the end or effect of the death of Christ, but he onelye woulde that our lyfe should be conformed to his example. 17 If anie haue this worlds good. Nowe he preacheth of the common offices of loue, which procéed from that chiefe fountaine: that is, when we are prepared to reache out our selues euen vnto death for our brethren. Al∣beit he séemeth to reason from the more to ye lesse. For he that refuseth to ease the want of his brother with his good, while his life is not touched, much lesse will he bestowe his lyfe. Therefore hée denyeth that there is loue in vs, if we leaue our bretheren destitute of our helpe. But he accompteth so highly of exter∣nall liberalitie, that together he sheweth most fitly what is the true way to do well, & what kinde of affectiō ought to guide the same. Let therfore this be the first proposition: That no man doth truly loue the brethren, but hée wil shew forth ye same in effect, as oft as occasion doth require. Another, how much riches anie
man hath, accordingly he is bound to reléeue ye brethren, because ye Lord by this meanes doth minister vnto vs matter to exercise our loue. The third, yt euery ones necessitie is to be cō∣sidered: because as euerye one néedeth meate, drinke, or anye other thing, wherof we haue store, he doeth euen so craue our duetie. The fourth, yt ther is no liberality doth please god, except it be ioyned [Te Sumpatheia] to a cō∣passion, many séeme to be liberall, which yet are not anye whit touched with the miseries of their brethren. But the Apostle biddeth vs to open our bowells: which is done when wée put vpon vs almost ye same féeling yt we may bewaile together ye euills of others, no other waies, then as our owne. The loue of God. Heare the question is of the loue of brethren. Therfore why doth he name ye loue of God? Verily ye principle must be kept, that it cannot be but it is the loue of God, shoulde beget in vs the loue of our bretheren. And by this meanes God taketh an experience of our loue towardes him, while he commaundeth vs to loue men for his sake: as it is in the 16. Psalme. My doo∣ing well extendeth not vnto thée: but my will and my desire is vnto the Saints which are in the earth.
18 Let vs not loue in word. Ther is a gran∣ting in this first part For we cannot loue onely with the tongue: but because manye doe fasly boast of this, the Apostle giueth the name of the thing, to their dissimulation, as vseth often to be done Albeit in the other part he reproueth their vanitie, when he denieth yt it is ye truth, except it be in déede. For thus the words are to be resolued: let vs not pro∣fesse with tongue that we loue, but let vs ap∣proue it by déede: because this is the ryght condition of loue. 19 And by this we know that we are of the truth, & shal perswade our hearts before him. 20 But if our heartes accuse vs, truely God is greater then our hearts, & knoweth all things. 21 Beloued, if our hearts accuse vs not, wee haue trust towards God. 22 And if we aske anie thing, we receiue it of him: because we keepe his commande∣ments, and doe those things that are pleasaunt before him. 19 HE taketh the name of Truth héere in another sence: but it is an excellent giuing of a name, that if we loue our brethe∣ren truely, we haue héereby a testimonie that we are borne of God, who is the truth, or that the truth of God hath place in vs. But let vs
alwayes remember that we haue not that knowledge which the Apostle speaketh of frō loue, as if from thence were to be fetched the assurance of saluation. And indéede from no other where doe we knowe that we are the children of God, but because he sealeth into our hearts his ful adoption by his spirit, and we by faith imbrace the assured pledge there∣of offered in Christ. Loue therefore is an in∣crease or inferiour helpe, to the strengthning of faith: and not the foundation whereon it standeth. Why then sayth the Apostle, Wee shall perswade our hearts before God? Verily he sheweth by these words, that faith standeth not without a good conscience. Not that our assurance arise frō thence, or dependeth there∣on: but bicause thē we are perswaded truly of our coniunctiō wt god, whē ye efficacy of ye holy ghost doth shew forth it self in our loue. For it shal alwaies be profitable to weigh what ye a∣postle handleth. For because he cōdemneth in vs a fained professiō of faith, he saith yt we cā haue a sound perswasiō before God no other way, then if his spirit do bring forth in vs the fruit of loue. And albeit yt a good conscience cā neuer be separate frō faith, yet no man shall thence rightly gather, yt we must looke to our workes, that our perswasion may be firme.
20 But if our heart condemne vs. He prooueth by the contrarie, that they haue the name and shew of Christians in vaine, who haue not the testimonie of a good conscience. For if any man be guiltie in his own know∣ledge, and is conuinced in the proper féeling of his owne soule, much lesse shall hée escape the iudgement of God. It followeth therfore that faith is subuerted with the disquiet of an euill conscience. He calleth, God greater then our heart, in respect of iudgement, that is, because he séeth much more cléerelye then we, and searcheth more sharpe, and iudgeth more straightly. In which sense Paule saith, that albeit he knewe nothing by himself, yet he was not thereby iustified. 1. Cor. 4.4. For he acknowledgeth, that albeit he be carefully giuen vnto his dutie, yet that he offendeth in many things, and that he dooth forgiue him∣selfe by vnaduisednesse, those sinnes which God dooth sée. This therefore is the minde of the Apostle, that it cannot be that he shoulde escape the iudgement of God, whom his own conscience dooth accuse and conuince. To the same ende belongeth that he by and by ad∣ioyneth, that God séeth all things. For howe should those things be secret, which wée are driuen to sée, who in respect of him are block∣ish
and blinde? So therefore expound it, God in that he séeth all things, is much greater then our heart. For to take the word yt cou∣pleth together in stéed of a perticular causall is not straunge. Now the sense is plain, that is, that séeing the knowledge of God pearceth further then ye sense of our owne conscience, that no man can stand before him, excepte hée whom vprightnesse of conscience sustaineth. But héere is obiected a question: It is cer∣taine that the reprobate are sometime drow∣ned of Satan in such a Lake of féeling, that they féele not their euills at all, and without all griefe or feare, as Paule saith, they runne securely into their destruction. Eph. 4.19. And it is certaine also that hypocrites are wont to flatter themselues, and proudly to contemne the iudgement of God, because that béeing dronkē with a false opinion of righteousnes, they are not touched with their sinnes. The aunswere is easie, That hypocrites are decei∣ued because they shun the light: and that the reprobates feele nothing, because they goe a∣way from God. Yea, there is no securitie to an euill conscience, but in lurking corners. But héere the Apostle speketh of consciences, which being brought out into light, GOD bringeth to his tribunall seate, and exerciseth
with the féeling of his iudgement. Albeit yet this is also generally true: that we neuer haue any sound peace, except that which the spirite of God dooth giue vnto pure heartes those whome we haue sayd to be astonished, féele yet oftetinmes blind prickings, and are tormented in their drousinesse. 21 If our heart accuse vs not. I haue expounded alreadie, that this dooth neither belong to hypocrisie, nor to ye grose contempt of God. For howsoeuer the wayes of repro∣bates doe please themselues, yet the Lord tri∣eth the heart sayth Salomon, Pro. 21.2. This exquesite ballaunce of GOD causeth by his triall, that none canne boast himselfe that hée hath a cleane heart. Therefore the Apostles words hath this meaning, that then we come onely with a quiet conscience into the sight of God, when béeing of a sound purpose in our selues, wée bring with vs the witnesse of a ryght and good heart. That saying of Paule is indéede true: That we haue en∣traunce to GOD with boldnesse by faith, which resteth vppon the grace of GOD. Ephes. 3.12. Agayne, that by fayth we haue peace, that our consciences maye bée quyet before God. Rom. 5.1. But betwixte these
sentences there is no oddes. For Paule shew∣eth the cause of boldnesse: but Iohn onelye maketh mention of an inseparable accident, which is necessarily anexed, though it bée not the cause. Yet héere ariseth a greater hard∣nesse, because there séemeth no assuraunce to be left in the whole worlde. For who is there to bée founde whome his heart cannot accuse in anie thing? I aunswere, that the godlye are so reproued, as they together doe ease themselues: for it is indéede necessarye, that they shoulde inwardly be touched effec∣tually with their sinnes, that feare maye in∣struct them to humilitie: but by and by they flye to the sacrifice of Christ, where they haue assured peace. Albeit the Apostle doeth saye that they are not accused in anie other sence, because howsoeuer they acknowledge themselues to fayle in many things, yet they are releeued with this testimonie of consci∣ence, because they doe truelye and from the heart feare God, and desire to submit them∣selues to his righteousnesse. Whosoeuer are indued with this godly desire, & in the meane time knowe that theyr indeauours, howe much so euer they want of perfection, doe yet please GOD: are worthely sayde to haue a
quiet and peaceable heart: because there is no inward pricking, which should disturbe their quiet chéerefulnesse. 22 And if we shall aske any thing. Be∣cause assured trust and calling vpon God are things ioyned together: euen as before he had taught that an euill conscience was contra∣rie to assurance: so now he sheweth, that god cannot be called vppon, but of them which feare him and worship him a right in a pure heart. This latter foloweth of the first. Ther is another generall principle of Scripture, That the wicked are not heard of God, but rather that there sacrifices and prayers are abhominable. Therfore the way is héere shut vp against hipocrites, least they should rush into the presence of God with his contempt. In the meane time he dooth not intende that a good conscience must be brought, as if it did great acceptation to our praiers. Woe be vnto vs if we leane vnto workes, which haue nothing in themselues but matter of trembling. Therefore the faithfull come to the throne of God, no other waies then tru∣sting in the mediation of Christ. But because the loue of God is euer ioy∣ned with faith, to the end that ye Apostle may the more dazle the hypocrites, he depriueth
hem of this singuler priueledge, which God ouchsafeth his children: that is least they hould thinke to haue entrance to God with heir praiers. When he saith, Because wee keepe his commandements, he dooth not mean that our confidence in praying is grounded vpon our workes: but this onely he vrgeth, that godlinesse and the sincere worshippe of God cannot be seperate from faith. And it ought not to séem absurd that he vseth a cau∣sall note, albeit he dooth not reason of ye cause: for an inseperable accident vseth sometimes to be put for the cause. As if one should saye, because the Sun at noonetide doth shine a∣boue vs, that there is then more heat, yet it dooeth not followe, that heate ariseth of the light. 23 And this is his commaundement, that wee beleeue in the name of his sonne Iesus Christ: & loue one an other as he gaue vs commaundement. 24 Hee that keepeth his commaunde∣ments abideth in him, and hee in him. And by this we knowe that hee abideth in vs, by the spirite which he hath giuen vs.
23 ANd this is his commandement. A∣gaine he applieth a generall sen∣tence to his purpose. The effect is, that wée are at such disagréement with God, that wée are driuen from his presence, excepte we are knit together by brotherly loue among our selues. Albeit he dooth not héere commende loue alone, as before: but he ioyneth it as a companion and handmaide of Faith. The schoolemen depraue these wordes with theyr own deuices: as if we obtained fréedome to pray, partly by faith, and partly by works. Wher Iohn requireth this to the right man∣ner of praying, that we kéepe the commaun∣dements of God: and after teacheth, that this perfourmaunce standeth in faith and Loue, they gather that the assurance of praying. must be gathered of these two. But I haue sundry times already shewed, that héere is not handled from whence or by what means men get this vnto themselues, that they dare call vpon God. For héere the question is not of the cause or dignitie, Iohn onely sheweth, that God vouchsafeth the honour and priui∣ledge of his conference to none but to his children, and those that indéede are regene∣rate by his spirite. Therfore this is the course
of spéech, where the reuerence and feare of God doth not beare the swaie, it cannot be ye God shuld heare vs. But if our purpose be to obey his precepts, we must consider what hée commandeth. But he doth not separate fayth from loue: but he requireth each of vs as if it were in one fellowship. And this is the rea∣son why he hath put Commandement in the singular number. But this place is verie ex∣cellent: because he sheweth as plainely as briefly, wherein consisteth the whole perfecti∣on of an holy lyfe. There is no cause why we shuld alleadge hardnesse, when God doth not carie vs about by long by walks: but setteth down vnto vs simple and in one word, what pleaseth him. Adde moreouer, yt in this short∣nesse there is no darknesse, bicause he sheweth vs plainly ye beginning & end to liue wel: and because héere is onely mention of brotherly loue, passing by ye loue of God: the reson is (as we haue sayd els where) yt brotherly loue, as it issueth from the alone loue of God, so is it a certaine and true proofe thereof. In the name of his son. The name hath respect to ye preaching: & this relation is to be noted, because few vnderstād what it is to beléeue in Christ. By this spéech is easie to gather, yt this onely is a true faith which imbraceth Christ
for such a one as he is preached in the Gospel. Whereon also it commeth to passe, that there is no fayth without Doctrine: as Paule also teacheth, Rom. 10.14. And this also together is to be noted, that ye Apostle includeth faith in the knowledge of Christ. For he is ye liue∣ly image of the father, and in him are hid all the treasures of wisedome and knowledge. Wherefore so soone as euer we decline from him, wée canne doe nothing but wander in errour. 23 He that keepeth his commaundements. He confirmeth that which he had sayd before. That the fellowshippe which we haue with God is manifest by that meanes, if we loue one another. Not that the fellowshippe be∣ginneth there, but because it cannot be idle, and without his effect, whersoeuer it doth be∣gin to haue a being. And he proueth that by a reson annexed: because God doth not abide in vs, except his spirit doe dwell in vs. But his spirit wheresoeuer he is, it is of necessitie that he shew forth his force & power in wor∣king. Whence it is easie to gather, that no o∣ther remaine in God and are vnited vnto him, except such as kéep his commandements. When therfore he saith: And in this we know. And, the note of coupling together, for that it
is put for the rendering of a cause, is as much as, for, or because. But ye circumstaunce of the present cause must be weighed. For al∣beit this sentence agrée in words with that of Paule Rom. 8.15. where he saith, that the spi∣rite beareth witnesse in our hearts, that wée are the Children of God, and that by him we crye Abba Father: yet in the sense there is some difference. For Paul speaketh of the as∣suraunce of frée adoption, which the Spirite of God sealeth vp in our heartes: and Iohn héere hath respect to the effects, which the spi∣rite dwelling in vs, dooth bring foorth. As Paule also himselfe, when he saith, that they are the Children of God, which are ledde by the Spirite of God. For there also he dispu∣teth of the mortifieng of the flesh and new∣nesse of life. This is the effect, that thereby it is ma∣nifest whether we are the Children of God, if his Spirite doo rule and gouerne our life. In the meane time Iohn teacheth, whatsoe∣uer good workes is in vs, that it commeth from the grace of the Spirite: and that this Spirite is not gotten by our own righteous∣nesse, but is fréely giuen vnto vs.
Chap. 4. 1 BEloued, beleeue not euery spirite: but trie the spirits whether they be of God or no: because many false Prophets are gone out into the world. 2 In this knowe ye the spirit of God, eue∣rie spirite which confesseth that Iesus Christ, is come in the flesh, is of God. 3 And euerie spirite which confesseth not that Iesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God: and this is of that Antichrist, of whom ye haue heard that he should come, and euen now he is in the world. HE commeth againe to the for∣mer doctrine which he had han∣deled in the seconde Chapter. For manye, as vseth to bée done in newe matters, did a∣buse the name of Christ to spredde their errors. Others professed Christ but in halfe parte. In the meane time, while they had place amongest those of the house∣holde, they had ye more abilitie to do harme: Especially Sathan himselfe, tooke occasion to disquyet the Church in Christ himselfe. For
hee is the stone of offence, whereat all must néedes stumble, which holde not the playne waye, as God hath set foorth the same vnto vs. Further, this whole reason of the Apostle standeth on thrée members. For first he shew∣eth the euill, whence daunger came to the faithfull, and by this meanes he exhorteth them to take héede. Hée setteth downe the manner of héede taking, that they iudge be∣twéene spirites. And this is the second mem∣ber. At the last he sheweth one speciall from whence was their greatest perill. Hée forbid∣deth therefore to heare them, which deny that the sonne of God is manifested in the flesh. Now let vs handle euery one in order. And albeit this reason followeth in the text, That many false Prophets haue gone out into the world, yet it shall be good to begin there. For this sentence containeth a profitable admoni∣on: because, if euen at this time Sathan had filled many, which shoulde spread their false∣hoods vnder the name of Christ: the like ex∣ample ought not to discourage vs at this daye. For this is the perpetuall state of the Gospell, that Sathan busily goe about to in∣fect and to corrupt the puritie thereof by di∣uers errours.
This our age hath brought forth certain hor∣rible monsters of sectes. By occasion where∣of many stand amazed, & not knowing whe∣ther to tourne them, doo cast away all care of godlinesse. For they finde not any more spée∣die way to ridde themselues from the daun∣ger of errour. That is altogether foolish: for in flying from the lyght of the truth, they cast themselues willyngly into the dungeon of errours. Wherefore let this cleaue fast in our mindes, that there haue bene false Pro∣phets immediately since the Gospell hath be∣gun to bée published. And let this doctrine also arme vs against that offence. The aun∣cientnesse of errours holdeth the most as if it were so bounde, that they dare not goe out thence. But Iohn sheweth héere, the deadlye daunger of ye Church, That if euen then de∣ceiuers were mixed with the Apostles, and other faythfull Teachers, what meruayle is it, if the doctrine of the Gospell long ago be∣ing oppressed, many corruptions be spread a∣brod in the worlde? There is therefore no cause why antiquitie should hinder vs, that we should the lesse fréely discerne the truth from falshood. 1 Beleeue not euery spirite. Many as is sayde when the Church is vexed with dis∣cords
and contentions, being amazed, departe from the Gospell. But the Spirit prescribeth a farre other remedie: that is, that the faith∣full receiue not any doctrine without choyce. We must therefore take héede, least being of∣fended with varietie of opinions, we re∣nounce the teachers together with the worde of God. But let this moderation suffice, that all are not to be heard a lyke. The name of ye Spirite, I take to be by a Metonimia for him that boasteth, that he is indued with the gifte of the spirite, to vnder∣take the office of a Prophet. For when it is graunted to no priuate man that he speak in his name, nor is there credite to be giuen to them that speake, but so farre as they are the instruments of the holy Ghost: the more au∣thoritie the Prophets should haue, God ador∣neth them with this title, as if hée shoulde take them out of the common sort of men. They therefore were called Spirites, which onely giuing their tongues to the Oracles of the holy Ghost, did after a sort beare the per∣son of his ministerie: they set foorth nothing of their owne deuising, nor came they forth in their owne name. And héeretoo belongeth so honourable a ti∣tle, least any thing might faile of the reue∣rence
of the worde of God, for the contempt of the minister. For God alwaies wold haue his word receiued from the mouth of men, no other waies, then if he himselfe had plain∣ly appeared from heauen. Héere Sathan hath crept in as a meane: and when he fained in false teachers to adul∣terate ye word of God also gaue them a name vnder which, they might the better deceiue. So the false Prophets vsed alwayes proudly and with ful mouth to arrogate to thēselues whatsoeuer honour God had bestowed vpon his seruants. And the apostle séemeth to haue vsed this name, least they might deceiue vs with their false pretences, which falslye pre∣tende the name of God: euen as we sée at this daye very many to be amazed with the bare name of the church, that they had rather auowe themselues into the eternall destruc∣tion of the Pope, then to take from him any or the least part of authoritie. Therefore this graunting is to be noted. For the Apostle coulde haue sayde, that eue∣rie one is not to bée beléeued: but because false teachers did so belye the title of the spi∣rite, he so leaueth the same vnto them, that together hée sheweth that it is friuolous and triflyng, excepte they doo indéede perfourme
what they pretende, and that they are to be accounted as fooles, who being amazed at the very noyse of an honourable title, dare not inquire of the matter. Prooue the Spirites. Because all Prophe∣cies be not true, the Apostle sayth héere that they must be brought to the trial. And he spe∣keth not only to the whole body of ye church: but also to euery faythfull man. But it is as∣ked whence we haue such a discretion? They which aunswere, that the worde of God is a rule whereby euerye thing must bée tryed, which men doo publikely set foorth, they nei∣ther saye nothing nor the whole. I graunt that doctrines are to be proued by the worde of God: but except the spirit of wisedome be present, it will lyttle or nothing profitte to haue the worde of God at hande, whose in∣terpretation we shall not knowe. Euen as, for example, golde is tryed in the fire, and with the touch stone: but of them that haue skill. For vnto the vnskilfull, neyther the touchstone nor ye fire can be profitable. Ther∣fore that we may be fit iudges, it is néedfull that we be indued with the spirite of discre∣tion. And because the Apostle shoulde com∣maund vs this in vayne, except we had po∣wer to discern, it is for a certaintie to be held
that the godly shall neuer be destitute of the spirite of wisedome, so farre as shall be expe∣dient, so that they aske it of the Lord. But so then ye spirite shal lead vs to a true discer∣ning, if we submit all our senses to ye word. For it is (as is sayd) like vnto a touchstone: yea, it ought to be of much more price vnto vs: because that onely is true doctrine which is taken from thence. But héere ariseth a hard questiō: because if euery one haue right and abilitie to discerne, there can neuer any certaintie be determined: but rather ye whole state of Religion shall be vncertaine. I aun∣swere, that there is a double triall of Doc∣trine, priuate and publyke. Priuate, wherby euery one dooth establish his owne faith, that he may rest safely in that doctrine, which hée knoweth to haue come from God. Neither shall consciences finde other where safe and quiet resting place then in God. The publyke tryall belongeth to the com∣mon consent and good of the Church. For be∣cause there is perill least phantasticall men shuld rise vp, which might rashly boast them selues, that they wer indued with ye spirit of God: this remedie is of necessitie, that the faithfull come together, and séeke the meane of an holy and pure consent.
But séeing that that olde Prouerbe is too rue, How many heads, so many wits: it is certaine that this is the singular worke of God, that al ouerthwarting béeing mastred, he maketh vs to thinke all one thing, and to grow into an holy vnitie of faith. And wher∣as vnder this pretence whatsoeuer thinges are at anie time decreed in counsailes, ye Pa∣pistes will haue to be taken for true Ora∣cles, because the Church did once proue them to be of God: that is too childish. For howso∣euer that be an ordinarie waie to séeke a con∣sent, to gather a godly and an holy counsell, where the controuersies out of the worde of God may be determined: yet God hath ne∣uer bound vs to the decrées of euerie counsel. Nor yet so soone as an hundred or moe Bi∣shops are come together into one certayne place, it by and by followeth that they haue rightly called vpon God, and asked at his mouth what was ye truth: yea, ther is nothing more apparaunt, then that they haue often gone a side from the sincere worde of God. Therefore héere also ought the triall which the Apostle prescribeth to be of force, that the spirits might be tried. 2 In this knowe ye. He annexeth a spe∣cial marke, whereby one may better discerne
true Prophets from false. Albeit he héere one∣ly repeateth that we had before, that is, that Christ as he is the marke wherto true faith nimeth, so he is the rocke at whom all Here∣tikes doe stumble. Therefore so long as wée remaine in Christ, the matter is safe: but when we goe aside from him, faith is pery∣shed, and all truth is made voyde. But, wée may remember what this confession contay∣neth. For when the Apostle saith, that Christ is come: hence wée gather that hée was with the Father before: whereby is shewed his eternall Deitie. When hée sayth, That hee is come in the flesh: hée signifieth that in put∣ting on the flesh, hée is made a very man, of the same nature with vs, that hée might bée our brother, saue that hée was frée from all sinne and corruption. Finally, when hée sayth hée is come, wée must consider the cause of his comming: for hée is not sent of his Father in vaine. Héere∣vppon dependeth the office and power of Christ. Therefore euen as the olde Here∣tikes haue erred from this faith, partlye de∣nying the diuine nature, and partlye the hu∣mane nature of Christ: euen so doe the Pa∣pistes at this daye, albeit they doe confesse
Christ to bée GOD and man, yet they hold ot this confession which the Apostle requy∣eth, because they spoyle Christ of his pow∣r and authoritie: for when they haue esta∣lished theyr frée will, theyr merites of orkes, theyr fained worshippes, satisfac∣ions, and the supportations of Saintes, owe small a remainder is lefte to Christ? This therefore meaneth the Apostle, sée∣ng that the knowledge of Christ compre∣endeth in it selfe all the Doctrine of god∣ynesse, therefore we must fixe and cast our eyes thether, least wée bée deceiued. And in truth Christ is the ende of the lawe, and the Prophettes. Neither learne wée anye other thing by the Gospell, then his power and grace. 2 And this is the Spirite of Antichrist. This the Apostle addeth, to the ende that hée maye make the sleyghtes which seduce vs from Christ, to be the more detestable: For wée haue sayde that the Doctrine of the kingdome of Antichrist, is vsuall and well knowen: that the faythfull béeing admony∣shed of the dispearsion of the Church which was to come, might carefully take héede to themselues.
They did therefore worthelye abhorre th name as infamous and vnluckie. Now the Apostle saith, they are members of thi kingdome, whosoeuer withdraw frō Christ▪ But he sayeth that the spirite of Antichri should come and was now in the worlde, in a diuerse meaning. For he meant that he was then in the world alreadie: because the my∣sterie of his wickednesse beganne to worke. 2. Thes. 27. And yet because that the truth of God was not as yet ouerwhelmed with false and vntrue assertions, superstition had not yet preuailed to ye corruption of the worship of God, the worlde had not yet falne from Christ by a wicked distrust, the tyrannie set against the kingdome of Christ, did not yet manifestly shew it selfe: therefore he saith yt he was to come. 4 Little children ye are of God & haue ouercome them, because hee is greater that is in you, then he that is in the worlde. 5 They are of the world: therefore they speake of the worlde, and the worlde heareth them. 6 We are of God. He that knoweth God heareth vs. He that is not of God heareth vs not. In this we knowe the spirite of truth and
e spirite of errour. 4 You are of God. He had spoken of one Antichrist: now he maketh mention of moe, ut the plurall number is referred to the false Prophets, which euen then had come a∣broad, before the head was extant. Further, the purpose of the Apostle is, to giue courage to the faythfull, that they might resist the de∣ceiuers strongly & without feare. For much chéerefulnesse faileth, when there is striuing with a doubtfull successe. Further, it myght cause the godly to feare, because that when ye kingdome of Christ was scarce sprong vp, they sawe the enimyes euen then readie pre∣pared to ouerwhelme it. Therefore howsoe∣uer they must striue, he yet sayth, that they haue ouercommed: because they shall haue an happie issue. As if he should haue sayde, yt in the middest of the conflict they are with∣out daunger, because they shall preuaile. And this doctrine ought to bée caryed further. For whatsoeuer striuings we indure against the world and the flesh, yet it is ioyned with a sure victorie. Indéede sharpe and harde con∣flicts remaine for vs, and one followeth after another: but because we fight in the power of Christ, and are prepared with the armour of
God, in striuing and labouring wée get th victorie. As much as belongeth to the cir¦cumstaunce of this place, it is an excellen consolation, that with whatsoeuer sleyghte Sathan set vppon vs, yet wée shall stand i the truth of GOD. But the reason that hée addeth straight way, is to bée noted: because he is greater, yt is strōger which is in vs, thē he that is in the world. For that is our infir∣mitie, that before wée ioyne battayle with the enimie, we are readie to faint. For wee are euen wrapped in ignoraunce, and there∣fore set forth to all sleyghtes: and Sathan is excéeding cunning to deceiue. If wée in∣dure for one day, yet a doubtfulnesse créepeth vpon our minds, what shall come to passe to morrowe: and so we are alwaies doubtfull. The Apostle therefore sheweth that wée are strong, not in our owne strength, but in the power of God. Whervpon he gathereth, that we can no more be vanquished, then god him∣selfe, who hath armed vs to the ende of the world with his owne power. And in our spi∣rituall warrefare this cogitation must bée setled in our hearts, that we should vtterlye be vndone, if we shoulde fight in our owne strength. But because that when we doe no∣thing god confoundeth the enimies, the victo∣rie
is most certaine. 5 They are of the worlde. This is no small comfort, that they which dare incoun∣ter with God in vs, are onely strengthened with worldly helpes. Further, the Apostle vnderstandeth the worlde, as Sathan is the Prince of it. Together is added another com∣fort, when he saith, that ye world imbraceth in false Prophets, that which it doth acknow∣ledge for their own. We sée how great ye rea∣dinesse of man is to vanitie. Therefore false doctrines easilye enter by and by, and spread farre and wide. The Apostle denyeth that there is cause why wée shoulde therefore bée troubled: because there is nothing newe or vnwonted, if the world which is whole a lier, doe willingly heare a lie. 6 Wee are of GOD. Albeit this agréeth vnto all the godly: yet properlye it belongeth to the true and faithfull ministers of the Gospell. For the Apostle by the assu∣raunce of the Spirit reioyceth, that hée and his fellowes doe sincerely serue GOD, and that they haue receyued of him whatsoeuer they deliuer. It maye also bée that the false Apostles maye boast themselues of the same, (as it is theyr manner vnder a masking vi∣sour, as it were of GOD, to deceyue:)
but faithfull teachers differ much from them which speake nothing of thēselues in words, that they doe not performe in déede. Yet wée must alwayes remēber what cause he hand∣leth héere. There was a small number of the godly: & vnbeléefe almost possessed all things: few did truely cleane to the Gospell: ye grea∣ter part was prone to errour. Hence came the occasiō of offence: which that Iohn might méete withall, he biddeth vs be contented wt the fewnesse of the faithfull: because all the children of God doe giue honour to him, and submit themselues to his doctrine. For the contrarie member he opposeth immediatlye after, that They which are not of God, heare not the pure doctrine of the gospell. By which words he signifieth, that that great multi∣tude, to whome the Gospell tasteth not, dooe not therefore heare the approued and lawful seruaunts of God, because it is a stranger to God himselfe: and that therefore nothing is diminished from the authoritie of the Gospel, while it is reiected of many. But to this doc∣trine is anexed a profitable admonition, that by the obedience of faith we proue our selues to be of God: There is nothing more easie, then to boast that we are of God: and therfore there is nothing amongst men more cōmon.
As the Papists at this daie do proudly boast that they are the worshippers of God: and in the meane time they doo no lesse proudly cast aside the word of God. For albeit they coun∣terfait that they beléeue the word of God: yet when it comes to the point, they haue theyr eares shut. But this is the onely testimonie of the feare of God, to reuerence his worde. And ye excuse which many vse to pretēd hath héere no place. That they therefore flye from the doctrine of the gospell, when it is set forth vnto them, because they are not able to iudge. For it cannot be but ye hée know God in his worde, whosoeuer feareth him, and obeyeth him from his heart. If anie obiect, that ma∣ny of the elect doe not by and by come to the fayth, yea, that they doe verie frowardlye kicke against it at the first. I answere, that at that time they are not in our iudgement, to bée taken for GODS children. But, this is a marke of one that is a reprobate, when hée doeth obstinatly reiect the truth. It is also to bée noted by the waye, that that Hearing, whereof the Apostle maketh menti∣on, is vnderstoode of the inwarde and earnest hearing of the heart, which standeth in faith. In this wee knowe. The Relatiue In
this, contayneth the two members afore, as it hée should saye, that thereby truth is know∣en from falsehoode, because some speake from God, some of the worlde. And whereas by the Spirit of truth and errour, some thinke that the hearers are noted: as if he shoulde saie, that they which giue themselues to bée seduced of the deceiuers, are borne to errour, and haue in them the séede of lying: and that they which consent vnto the worde of GOD, are shewed by this testimonie to be true: I doe not allowe of it. For when the Apostle héere taketh a Metonimia of the Spi∣rite, for the teachers and Prophettes, I take it that he meaneth nothing else, then that the tryall of the Doctrine is to bée reduced to these two, whether it bée of God, or of the worlde. Yet in so speaking hée séemes to say nothing. For it will bée easie for euerye one to except, that hée speaketh not but from God. So at this daye, the Papistes boast with an emperiall pride, that all their deuy∣ses are the Oracles of the Spirite. Nor so much as Mahomet but hée giueth out that hée receiued his dotages from no other wher, but from Heauen. And also the Aegyptians forged, that those stinking dotages where∣with they besotted themselues and others,
were reuealed vnto them from Heauen. But I answere, that we haue the worde of God, which before all things we must aske coūsel at. Therefore when deceiuable Spirites pretend the name of God, it is good to search by the Scriptures, whether the matter be so or not. So that we adde a godly indeauour with humilitie and modestie: the Spirit of discreation will bée present, which maye ex∣pound himselfe speaking in the Scriptures, as a faythfull interpreter. 7 Beloued, let vs loue one another, because loue is of God: and euerie one that loueth is borne of God, and knoweth God. 8 He that loueth not knoweth not God, be∣cause God is loue. 9 In this appeared the loue of God to vs ward, because he sent his onely begotten sonne into the worlde, that wee might liue by him. 10 In this is loue, not that wee loued God, but that he loued vs, and sent his sonne a re∣demption for our sinnes. 7 HE cōmeth again to ye exhortatiō, which he handleth almost in all this Epistle. We said it was mixed wt the doctrine of faith
and exhortation to loue. Hée so continueth in two heads, that from one he goeth imme∣diatlye to the other. When he commendeth mutuall loue, he doeth not meane that wée haue done al our dutie if we loue our friends againe, because they loue vs? But because he speaketh in common to the faithful, he might not speake other wayes, then that they might loue one another. He confirmeth this sentence by a reason aleadged sometimes al∣readie: that is, because no man shall approue himselfe to be the childe of GOD, except hée which loueth his bretheren: and because the true knowledge of God worketh in vs of ne∣cessitie the loue of God. Hée opposeth also af∣ter his manner the contrarie member, That there is no knowledge of God where loue is not in his strength. And hée taketh a gene∣rall principle, because God is loue: that is, because his nature is to loue men. I knowe that manye doe subtillye playe the Philoso∣phers: and especially that the olde writers haue abused this place, that they might proue the Godhead of the Spirit. But the simple meaning of the Apostle is: Because God is the fountaine of loue, that this affec∣tion floweth and is powred out from him, wheresoeuer his knowledge commeth.
Lyke as before hée called him lyght, because there is nothing darke in him, but rather hée lyghteneth all with his brightnesse. Hée speaketh not therefore héere of the béeing of GOD: but onelye sheweth what a one hée is to bée perceyued of vs. But, there are two thinges to be noted in these wordes of the Apostle, that this is the true know∣ledge of GOD, which doeth regenerate vs and frame vs a newe, that wée maye become newe creatures: then that it cannot bée, but that it make vs conformable to GOD. Let goe therefore that foolishe in∣uention of faith vnformed: because if anye man separate faith from loue, he doeth euen as if one should goe about to take heate from the Sunne. 9 In this hath appeared. By manye other witnesses also wée haue the loue of GOD towardes vs approoued. For if it shoulde bée asked why the worlde was cre∣ated, why wée are placed in it to holde the Lordshippe of the Earth, why wée are pre∣serued in this lyfe, that wée maye inioye in∣finite and innumerable blessinges, why wée are created to the hope of a better lyfe, why wée are indued with light and vnderstand∣ing? there canne bée shewed no other cause
of all these, then the frée loue of GOD to∣wardes vs. But the Apostle chooseth the prin∣cipall witnesse in this place, and that which farre excelleth all others. For this loue of God was not onely infinite, that hée spared not his owne son, that by his death he might restore vs to lyfe: but the goodnesse is more then meruailous, which ought to rauish our mindes with admiration. Christ therefore is such an excellent and singular agréement of the loue of God towards vs, that so oft as we behold him, he doeth plainelye confirme this doctrine vnto vs, that God is loue. That he calleth him Onely begotten, it serueth to amplification. For in that he sheweth more cléerely, howe entirely he loued vs, in that he gaue his onely sonne to death for our sake. In the meane time hée that is one sonne by nature, maketh manye by adoption and grace: Euen whome so euer hée grafteth into his bodye by fayth. Hée sheweth the ende why Christ was sent of his Father, that wée might liue in him. For without him wée are all dead. But at his comming, he brought lyfe vnto vs. And except our own vnbeléefe doe hinder, we féele this effect of his grace in our selues. 10 In this is loue. Hée setteth forth the
loue of God more largely by another reason: that is, because hée gaue his sonne for vs, what time wée were enimyes: as Paule al∣so teacheth, Rom. 5.6. But hée vseth other wordes, that GOD béeing prouoked by no loue of men, hath loued them freelye of his owne accorde. By which wordes hée meant to teach, that the loue of God towardes vs was without deseruing Albeit the meaning of the Apostle is to set God before vs to fol∣low: yet the doctrine of faith is not to be neg∣lected, which hée ioyneth together. God hath loued vs fréely, why? because we wer sinners or euer wée were borne: then because in this corruption of our nature we haue an heart that is tourned from him, and is not inclina∣ble to right and holy affections. If the sub∣tiltie of the Papistes shoulde haue place, that euerye one is elected of GOD so farre as he foreséeth him worthye of loue: this Doctrine shoulde not stande, That hée lo∣ued vs first. For then our loue towardes GOD shoulde haue the first place by or∣der, although that it shoulde bée the last in time. But the Apostle doeth take a graun∣ted Rule of the holye Scripture, which these prophane Sophisters doe not knowe, that wée are borne so wicked and corrupted,
that then is as it were bred in vs an hatred of god, that we desire nothing but that which doth displease him, that euery affection of our flesh doth holde continuall warre with his righteousnesse. And hee sent his sonne. Therefore Christ with all his benefites is proceeded vnto vs, from the alone goodnesse of God, as from a fountaine. And as it is néedfull for vs to knowe this, that therefore we haue saluati∣on in Christ, because our heauenlye Father hath loued vs of his own accord: so when we are to séeke the sound and full assuraunce of the loue of God towards vs, it is conuenient that we looke no where but vpon Christ. Wherefore they dote to their owne destruc∣tion, whosoeuer passing by Christ, doe seeke what is determined of them in the secrete counsaile of God. Further, he sheweth again the cause of the comming of Christ, and his office, when he sheweth that he was sent ther∣fore, that he might be a propitiation for our sinnes. And indéede we are first taught by these wordes, that we were all straungers from God by sinne, and that this separation remaineth, vntil Christ come in betwixt, who may reconcile vs. Secondly, we are taught, that this is the beginning of our lyfe,
that God being pacified by the death of his son, receiueth vs to fauour. For in that that he is called A reconciler, this properly belon∣geth to the sacrifice of his death. We perceiue then, that this belongeth onely to Christ, that he put away the sinnes of the world, and so take away the hatred that was betwixt vs and God. But héere may arise some shew of contrarietie. For if God did loue vs before that Christ did offer himselfe to death for vs, what néede was there of a newe reconcilia∣tion? So the death of Christ might séeme su∣perfluous. I aunswere, when Christ is sayd to reconcile his Father to vs, that this is re∣ferred to our capacitie. For as we are guyl∣tie of euill in our selues, we cannot conceiue God but to be angrie and deadlye displeased, vntill Christ abolish sinne by his death, vntil he deliuer vs with the price of his bloud from death. Againe the loue of God requireth righ∣teousnesse. Therefore, that we may be assu∣red that we are beloued, it is of necessitie that we come to Christ, in whom onely wée finde righteousnesse. Now we sée the varie∣tie of speaking, which is vsual in Scripture, according to diuers respects, that it is apte and most fitly profitable to faith. God did therefore put his sonne betwixt,
to reconcile himself vnto vs, because he loued vs: but that loue was hidde, because in the meane time we were enimies to God, dayly prouoking his indignation. Then the feare and terrour of an euill conscience, didde take from vs all taste of lyfe. Therefore inasmuch as pertaineth to the féeling of our faith, God beginneth to loue vs in Christ. And albeit the Apostle doo héere intreat of the first recon∣ciliation, yet let vs knowe, that this is the perpetuall benefite of Christ, that by putting away our sinnes, he might make God at one with vs. And this the Papists also in some parte doo graunt: but afterwards they lessen this grace, and almost bring it to nothing, in bringing in fayned satisfactions. But if men redéeme themselues with the price of works, then Christ shall not be an onely reconcile∣ment, as he is called héere. 11 Beloued, if God haue so loued vs, we ought also to loue one another. 12 No man hath seene God at any time. If we loue one another, God dwelleth in vs: & his loue is perfect in vs. 13 In this we knowe that we abide in him, and he in vs: because he hath giuen vs of his spirite.
14 And wee haue seene and doo beare witnesse, that the father hath sent his sonne the sauiour of the world. 15 He that confesseth that Iesus is the sonne of God, in him dwelleth God, and he in God. 16 And we haue knowen and beleeued the loue that God hath in vs. 11 NOw the Apostle applyeth to his purpose, that which he lately spake of the frée loue of God: that is, that by the example of God he might exhorte vs to bro∣therly loue As also Paule setteth Christ forth vnto vs who offered himselfe vnto his father a sacrifice of a swéete smell, that euery one of vs might bestowe our selues to our brethe∣rens good Ephe 5.2. And Iohn dooth admonish vs, that our loue must not be for rewarde, when he biddeth vs loue our bretheren, as God loued vs. For that must bée repeated, That wée were loued fréelye. And in déede when wée respect our owne priuate commo∣dite, or render to our friends & acquaintance lyke for lyke, it is certaynly selfe loue, and cannot bée accounted for true charitie, that of the Apostle is héere required.
12 No man hath seene God. The sam words are had in the first chapter of the gos∣pell ver. 18. But Iohn Baptist respecteth no the same ende altogether in that place: for he onely sheweth, that God cannot other∣wise bée knowen, then he hath manifested himselfe in Christ. The same doctrine the a∣postle doth héere extend further, that we com∣prehend the power of God by faith and loue, that we may know that we are his children and that he dwelleth in vs. Yet he first spea∣keth of loue, when he sayth, That God dwe∣leth in vs, if we loue one another: because it is perfect, that is, his loue truly approued in vs: as if he should say, that God dooth shewe himselfe to be present, when by his spirite he frameth our hearts to the loue of our brethe∣ren. In ye same sense he repeateth that, which he had said once alreadie That we know by the spirite which he hath giuen vs, that h dwelleth in vs. For it is a confirmation of the next sentence: because loue is an effect of the spirite. Therefore this is the effect, séeing loue is of the spirite of God, we cannot tru∣ly and with a sincere heart loue our Brethe∣ren, but the spirite showeth foorth his power. By this meanes he is testified to dwel in vs. Further God dwelleth in vs by his spirite.
Therefore by loue we shall proue that wée aue God dwelling in vs. Againe, whosoe∣er boasteth that he hath God and dooth not oue the bretheren: by this one testimonie his anitie is confuted, because he pulleth God rom himselfe. When he saith, And his loue s perfect, he taketh the note of coupling toge∣her in stéede of a perticular causall. And the oue of God may be taken two wayes: either wherewith we loue him, or which he inspi∣reth into vs. That God hath giuen vs his spirite, and giuen vs of his spirite, is all to one effect, for we knowe that the spirit is gi∣uen to euery one by measure. 14 And we haue seene. Now he ex∣poundeth the other part of the knowledge of God, which we haue touched: that he com∣municateth himselfe with vs in his Sonne, and offereth to be inioyed. Wherevpon it fo∣loweth, yt he is perceiued of vs by faith. For héereto is the Apostles purpose, that we are so vnited to God by faith & loue, that he dwel∣leth truly in vs, and by the effect of his po∣wer dooth after a sort shew himselfe visible, which otherwise cannot be séene. When hée saith, We haue seene, and testifie: he setteth out himselfe and other Apostles: and he mea∣neth not euerie séeing, but that which is ioy∣ned
to faith, whereby they acknowledged i Christ the glorie of God: as also it follow∣eth, That he was sent to be the sauior of the world, which knowledge procéedeth from the inlightening of the spirite. 15 He that shall confesse. He that re∣peateth that generall rule, That we are vni∣ted to God by Christ, and that we cannot bée ioyned to Christ, except God abide in vs. And faith and confession, are put without difference in the same sense. For albeit that hypocrites doo most falsly bragge that they haue faith: yet the apostle dooth héere acknow∣ledge none in the order of such as confesse, except such as doo indéede and from the heart beléeue Further when he sayth, That Iesus is the Sonne of God, he comprehendeth the whole summe of faith in these fewe wordes. For there is nothing néedfull to saluation, which faith findeth not in Christ. But after he hath spoken in general, that men are so grafted in∣to Christ, that Christ dooth ioine them to god, he addeth a reason, which they hadde séene themselues: that hée might applye the gene∣rall sentence to them, vnto whome hée wri∣teth. Then followeth an exhortation, that they
maye loue others, as they themselues are lo∣ued of God. Wherefore this is the order, and this is the continuaunce of his speach, The faith of Christ causeth that God abideth in men. But we are the pertakers of this grace. Further séeing God is loue, no man can a∣bide in him, except he loue his bretheren. Therefore it is good that loue doo raygne in vs, seeing God hath ioyned himselfe vnto vs. 16 We haue knowen and haue beleeued. It is, as if he shoulde haue sayde, Wée haue knowen by beléeuing. For such a knowledge is not had but by faith. But hence wée ga∣ther, how much a wauering and doubtfull opinion differeth from Faith. Further, albe∣it he goeth about in this place to applye the next sentence to the Readers, as I haue sayd alreadie, yet he defineth the substance of faith diuerslye. First hée had sayde, Whosoeuer beléeueth that Iesus is the sonne of God. And now he sayth, By Faith we know the loue of God towardes vs. Whereby it ap∣peareth, that the fatherly loue of God is ap∣prehended in Christ: and that they knowe not any thing at all in Christ for certaine, excepte it bée onelye such, as acknowledge
themselues by his grace to be the children o God. For therefore the Father doth set forth his sonne vnto vs, that he might adopt vs in him. God is loue. It is as it were the lesse proposition in the syllogisme: because he rea∣soneth from faith to loue, after this manner, God dwelleth in vs by Faith: but God is loue: therfore, wheresoeuer God remayneth, there loue must néedes flourish. Héerevpon it followeth, that loue is necessarily knit vnto faith. 17 In this is loue perfect in vs, that wee might haue boldnesse in the daye of iudge∣ment: that, as he is, we also are in this world. 18 There is no feare in loue, but perfect loue casteth out all feare: because feare hath painfulnesse in it. And he that feareth, is not perfect in loue. 17 THere are two mēbers of this speach: that then we are made pertakers of the diuine adoption, when we so resemble god, as children doo their father, and then that this boldnes is an incomperable good, because that without it, we are most miserable. Therefore in the first place he sheweth vpon
what conditiō god hath imbraced vs in loue: and how in effect we inioye this grace which he hath giuen vs in Christ. Therefore the loue of god towards vs is héere to be vnder∣stood. He saith it is Perfect, because it is pou∣red out in full measure, and perfourmed so throughlye, as if it were absolute on all partes. But he affirmeth that there are none pertakers of this good, except such as béeing conformable vnto God, doo approue them∣selues to be his Children. The argument therefore is of those things, which be ioyned together. That we may haue boldnesse. Now he beginneth to shew the fruite of the loue of God towards vs: albeit he will afterwards shewe it more cléerely by the contrarie. But yet this is inestimable felicitie, that we dare stande boldly before God. For by nature we fly from the ight of God, and worthely. For séeing he is the Iudge of the world, and our sinnes doo presse vs with guiltinesse, it is of necessitie, that together with God, death and hell come into our minde. Hence is the feare which I spake off, that men flye from God, as much as lyeth in them. Iohn denieth that the faithfull are afraid, when there is mention made to them of the
last iudgement: but rather to come bold and chéerefull to the iudgement seate of God: because they are assuredly perswaded of his fatherly loue. Therefore, so much hath eue∣ry one profited in the faith, as he is rightlye prepared in minde to waite for the daye of iudgement. As he is. By these wordes as I said al∣readie, he dooth meane agayne, that this is requyred of vs, that we resemble the image of God. Such therefore as God is in heuen, such dooth he commaunde vs to bée in this worlde, that we may be accompted his chil∣dren. For the image of God, when it doth ap∣peare in vs, it is as a seale of his adoption. But so hée séemeth to place parte of our trust in workes. Therefore héere the Papists doo stroute themselues, as if Iohn denyed that trust, to haue an assured confidence of salua∣tion by the alone grace of God, except works did helpe together. But they are deceiued in that, that they weigh not that the Apostle dooth not héere fetch his Argument from the cause: but the place is of things ioyned to∣gether. And wée willinglys confesse, that no man is reconciled to God by Christ, excepte
together hée be reformed and made agréeable to the Image of God: and that they are so conformable, that they cannot bée seperated the one from the other. The Apostle there∣fore sayth this most fitlye, for he dooth driue all them from the assuraunce of Grace, in whome there is not séene any lykenesse of God. For it is most certayne that suche are vtterly straungers to the Spirite of GOD, and to his sonne Christ. Neyther also doo we denye, that the new∣nesse of lyfe auayleth to the confirmation of an assuraunce: but that I may speake so, that it be taken as a seconde helpe. But in the meane time it behooueth vs to bée grounded vpon onely grace. Neyther indéede other∣wayes shoulde Iohns doctrine agrée with it selfe. For common experience dooth shewe, and the Papistes themselues are constray∣ned to graunt, that there is alwayes a cause of fearfulnesse in the respect of workes. Wherefore no man shal euer come with a quyet and perswaded minde to the iudge∣ment seate of GOD, excepte hée deter∣mine first with himselfe, and willynglye confesse that hée is of him euen freelye be∣loued.
But there is no cause that any man shoulde meruaile, that ye Papists taste none of these things, séeing the miserable men knowe no faith, but that which is full of doubting. And further, that hypocrisie dooth ouer spred them with darknesse, least they should earnestlye bethinke, how fearfull is the Iudgement of God, where Christ is not present a media∣tour. Others passe by the resurrection, as if it were a tale: but that we may goe foorthe glad and chéereful to méete Christ, it doth be∣houe vs to haue our faith fixed in his grace a∣lone. 18 There is no feare. Now by con∣traries he commendeth the excellencie of that good: for he saith, that we are continuallye tormented, vntill God doo deliuer vs from that miserable torment, with the remedye of his loue towards vs. The effect is, séeing no∣thing is more miserable, than to be vexed with continuall disquiet, that we attain vn∣to this loue of God towardes vs being kno∣wen, that we maye quietlye rest without feare. Whence appeareth, how singular a be∣nefite it is, that God dooth vouchsafe vs wor∣thy of his loue. Further, of this doctrine he will imme∣diately raise an exhortation. But before hée
exhort vs to our dutie, he commendeth this guifte of God to vs, which by faith taketh feare from vs. I knowe that all this place is other waies expounded of many: but I re∣spect what the Apostle meaneth, not what o∣thers thinke. They saye, That there is no feare in loue: because when of our owne ac∣cord we loue God, we are not constrained to his obedience by force and feare. Therefore, according to them, a seruile feare is héere op∣posed to a voluntarie reuerence. Whence al∣so is risen the distinction of seruile & childly feare. I grant indéed that that is true, when we willyngly loue God as a Father, that we are no more vrged with the feare of pu∣nishment: but that doctrine hath no agrée∣ment with this place. For the Apostle dooeth onely teach, that when the loue of God is perceiued and knowen vnto vs by Faith, peace is giuen vnto our consciences, leaste they be any more disquieted. Yet it maye be asked, when perfect Loue casteth out feare: because being indued with some taste onely of the loue of God towards vs, we are neuer altogether delyuered from feare. I aunswere: that albeit that feare is not perfectly done awaye, yet when we flye vnto God, as vnto a quyet hauen, safe and
frée from all daunger of shipwracke, feae is truly done awaye, because it giueth place to Faith. Therefore feare is not so cast out, but that it dooth mooue our mindes: but it is so cast out, that it maye not molest nor hinder our peace, which we perfectly obtaine by Faith. Feare hath painfulnesse. Héere also the Apostle dooth set out the greatnesse of the grace whereof he speaketh. For séeing it is almost miserable condition to suffer continu∣all torments, there is nothing more accep∣table, then with a quiet conscience & peace∣able minde, to present himselfe into the sight of God. Where others saye, that seruants feare, because they set before their eyes, pu∣nishment and scourges, and doo not theyr dutie but constrained, it is nothing to the A∣postles meaning, as is sayde alreadye. So in the nexte parte, when they pounde, that he is not perfect in loue which feareth: be∣cause he submitteth not himselfe willinglye to God, but would rather ridde himselfe out of bondage. Which dooth not agrée with the text. For the Apostle dooth rather teach, that this is a mistrust, wheras a man feaeth, that is, hath an vnquiet minde: because the loue of God
béeing well knowen, dooth quiet the mindes. 19 We loue him, because hee loued vs first. 20 If a man saye I loue God, and hate his brother, he is a liar. For he that loueth not his brother whome he hath seene, howe can he loue God, whome he hath not seene? 21 And we haue this commaundement of him, that he which loueth God, do loue his brother also. 19 THis word [Agappoumen] that is, we loue, may be read as wel in the indicatiue moode, as in the imparatiue, yet the former sense dooth farre better agrée. For the Apostle in my iudgement dooeth repeate the former sentence, because GOD dooeth preuent vs with frée loue, we doo yéelde vnto him our duetie: that he may straight waye gather that hée is to bée beloued in men, or the loue which we ought of duetye to yéelde vnto him, is to be testified by vs towardes men. Yet if any man like the imparatiue moode, the speach shall haue the same sense, Because God hath loued vs fréely, let vs nowe loue
him agayne. But that loue cannot be found, except it bring foorth a brotherly loue among vs. Therefore he sayth, that they doo lye, who bragge that they loue God, when as they hate theyr bretheren. But the reason which he addeth séemeth to be weak, for it is a com∣parison of the lesse and the greater. If (sayth he) we doo not loue our brethren with whom we liue, much lesse can we loue God, who cannot be séene. There is a double exception at hande. For both the loue wherewith wée loue God dooth spring of Faith and not from sight, as it is 1. Pet. 1.8. And also there is a farre other respect to be had of God, then of men, because when as God dooth drawe vs of his great goodnesse to loue him, men are often worthie to be hated. I aunswere, that the Apostle (which no doubt ought to be a∣mongest vs) dooth take héere as a thing con∣fessed, that God dooth offer himselfe vnto vs in men, which doo expressely beare his I∣mage: and that hée dooth requyre of vs that we performe those dueties towardes them which he himselfe doeth not stand in néed of, as we read in the Psalme. 16.1. My goodnes hath not reached vnto thée O Lord, my loue is towards the Saintes which are in earth.
And truely the fellowshippe of the same na∣ure, the vse of so many things, the mutuall ommunication would intice vs vnto loue, nlesse we were verie hard harted. But Iohn eant nothing els, but that it is a deceitfull oasting, if a man saye that he loueth God, nd neglecteth his image which is before his yes. 21 And this commaundement. A stron∣er argument from the authoritie and doc∣rine of Christ, for he doeth not teach of the are loue of God: but commaundeth also to ue our bretheren. Wherefore we must so egin with God, that together there may be  proceeding vnto men. Chap. 5. 1 EVerie one that beleeueth that Iesus is Christ, is borne of God: and euerye ne that loueth him which begot, loueth him lso which is begotten of him. 2 In this we know that we loue the chil∣ren of God, if we loue God & epe his com∣aundements. 3 This is the loue of God that we keepe is commandements: and his commandements
are not greeuous. 4 Because all that is borne of God, doet ouercome the worlde: and this is the victori which ouercommeth the worlde: euen yo faith. 5 Who is he that ouercommeth the world, but he which beleeueth that Iesus is the sonn of God? 1 BY another reason he confir∣meth, that faith and brother∣ly loue are things ioyned to∣gether. For séeing God doth regenerate vs by fayth, it is of necessitie that wée loue him as a Father. But that loue comprehen∣deth all his children. Therefore faith cannot bée separated from loue. The first sentence is, That they are borne of God, whosoeuer beléeue that Iesus is Christ. Where thou féest againe, that Iesus alone is sette forth to bée the scope of faith: euen as it findeth in him righteousnesse, and lyfe, and whatsoeuer good thing canne bée wished, and God who∣ly. Wherefore this is the right waye to be∣léeue, when wée direct our mindes vnto him. But to beléeue that hée is Christ, is to
hope for from him; whatsoeuer thinges are romised of the Messia. For indéede the bare tle of Christ is not attributed vnto him in his place: but rather the office which is in∣oyned him of the Father. And like as in the awe, the full restoring of all things, righte∣usnes and felicitie is promised by the Mes∣ia: so at this daye all the same is more léerely expressed in the Gospell. Therefore esus cannot bée receiued as Christ, but that aluation bée asked of him, séeing that to this nde he is sent of the Father; and dayly of∣ered vnto vs. Wherevpon the Apostle doth worthely pronounce all them to be borne of God, which doe truly beléeue: For fayth is et far aboue the capacitie of the wit of man: hat it behooueth vs to be drawen of the hea∣enly Father vnto Christ: because that ne∣uer anie of vs could of our owne indeauour ascend vnto him. And this is that which the ame Apostle teacheth in ye first chapter of his gospel, That they are not borne of bloud, nei∣ther of flesh, which beléeue in the name of the onely begotten. And Paul saith, yt we are not indued with ye spirit of this world, but with ye spirit which is of God, that we may knowe what things are giuē vnto vs of him, because neither eie hath seene, nor eare hath heard,
nor vnderstanding conceiued what rewar is laide vp in store for them that loue God but onely the spirite hath attained to that s¦crete. Againe, forasmuch as Christ is giue vnto vs for our sanctification, & doeth brin also wt him the spirit of regeneration. Fina¦ly, forasmuch as hée doth ingrafte vs into h bodie: this also is another reason, wh no man can haue faith vnlesse he be borne  God. Doth loue him which is begotten. Augu¦stine and certaine other of the olde writers did drawe this vnto Christ: but falsly. Fo vnder the singular number the Apostle n¦teth all the faithfull. And the Text doet plainely shew, that he hath no other purpose but yt he may deriue mutuall loue towarde the brethren from faith, as from ye fountaine. And the argument is taken from the com∣mon order of nature. But he transferreth yt vnto God, which is séene in men. And it is to be noted, that the Apostle doeth not therefore speake of the faithfull onely, passing by them which are without, because they onely are to be beloued, and that no care or consideration is to be had of the other: but he doeth teach vs by this instruction to loue al men without exception, séeing he doth bidde vs to beginne
ith the godly. 2 In this we knowe. In these wordes e briefly sheweth what is true loue, to wit, hat which is referred vnto God Hetherto he ath taught, that the true loue of God is no here, but where the bretheren are loued al∣o: because this is a perpetual effect. And now e teacheth that men are loued aright, and in rder, when as God hath the first place. And his definition is necessarie. For it commeth ften to passe, that we doe loue men without God, as prophane and carnal friendship doth end to no other end, then to priuate commo∣itie, or other vaine respectes. Therefore as efore he vrged the effect, so now he vrgeth ye ause. For his meaning is, that mutuall loue e so had in account among vs, that God bée preferred. He ioyneth with the loue of God, the obseruation of the lawe: and worthely. For séeing we loue God as the Father and Lord, it cannot be but that reuerence bée ioy∣ned with loue. Further, God cannot be sepa∣rated from himselfe. Therefore séeing hée is the fountaine of all iustice and vprightnesse: it is necessarie that he which loueth him, doe frame all his affections to the obedience of righteousnesse. Therefore the loue of God is no idle thing. But we gather also out of this
place, what is the true obseruation of the lawe. For if we obeye God in kéeping his commaundementes, inforced onely by feare, we are far of from true obedience. Therefore this is first, that our harts do auow thēselues vnto God in a frée reuerence: and then let the life bée framed vnto the rule of the Lawe. This is the meaning of Moses, Deu. 10.12. When in gathering the summe of the lawe, hée sayth: Israel, what doeth the Lorde thy God require of thée, but that thou loue him, and obey him. 3 His commaundements are not gree∣uous. This is added, least the hardnesse (as it commeth to passe) doe disable or diminish our indeauour. For they which enter a godly and holye life with a chéerefull minde, and great zeale, and after hauing experience of their owne inabilitie, doe waxe slowe. Ther∣fore Iohn that he maye stirre vp our indea∣uours, denieth that the commaundements of God are gréeuous. But it may be obiected on the contrary, that we haue experience of a far other thing: and the Scripture doth also wit∣nesse, that the yoke of the lawe is not to bée borne. Act. 15.10. The reason also is many∣fest. For séeing the denying of our selues, is as it were an entraunce to kéepe the Lawe,
shal we say that it is an easie thing for a man to deny himselfe? Yea rather, for as much as the lawe is spirituall, as Paul teacheth Rom. 7.14. & we are nothing but flesh, there must needs be a great strife betwixt vs & the lawe of God. I answere: that this hardnesse is not of the nature of the Lawe, but of the fault of our faith, which Paule also plainelye expres∣seth: because after that he sayd that it is im∣possible for the law to giue vs righteousnes, he by and by layeth the fault vpon the flesh. This answere doth very wel reconcile ye sen∣tences of Paul and Dauid, which in shew doe séeme much to differ. Paul maketh the lawe ye minister of death he saith it worketh nothing but the wrath of God. 2. Cor. 3.7. yt it was gi∣uen yt sinne might increase. Rom. 4.15. that it liueth that it may slaie vs. Rom. 7.10. and 13. Dauid contrarily saith, that it is swéeter vnto him then honnie, and more to bée de∣sired then golde. Psalme. 19.9. Among o∣ther praises thereof, hée setteth these, that it chéereth the heartes, it conuerteth vnto the Lorde, and quickneth. But Paule compa∣reth the law with the corrupt nature of man. Hence is that greate conflict. But Dauid teacheth, howe they are affected whome God hath begotten agayne with his Spirite.
Hence is that swéetnesse and delight, where∣of the flesh tasteth not. Neither truely hath Iohn ouerpassed this distinction. For least a∣nie should take this generally, that the com∣maundements of God are not gréeuous, hée restraineth it to the children of God. Where∣by he signifieth, that this is brought to passe by the power of the spirit, that it is not grée∣uous vnto vs nor troublesome to obey God. Yet the question séemeth not as yet to be al∣together answered. For the faithfull howso∣euer they be gouerned by the spirit of God, yet they abide a hard cōbat with their flesh: and although they sweate, yet they scarce frame themselues vnto theyr duetie by the halfe part. Yea, rather being set, as it were betwéene the sacrifice & the alter (as the say∣ing is) they doe almost faint vnder the bur∣then. We doe sée how that Paule doeth sigh, that he is holden prisoner, and doth crie out that he is vnhappie, because he cannot serue God fréely. I aunswere, that the lawe is cal∣led easie, forasmuch as being indued with he∣uenlye vertue, we doe ouercome the desires of the flesh. For howsoeuer the flesh doth re∣bell, yet the faithfull doe féele that they are delighted so much in no other thing, as that they maye followe God.
Moreouer, it is to be noted, that Iohn do∣eth not speake of the bare law which contei∣neth nothing besides the commaundements: but that he ioyneth with all the fatherlye kindnesse of God, whereby the rigour of the lawe is mittigated. Therefore séeing wée knowe that wée are mercifullye pardoned of the Lorde, if our workes doe not satisfie the lawe, that doth make vs a greate deale rea∣dyer vnto obedience, as it is in Psalme. 130.4. There is mercie with thée that thou maist bée feared. Hence then is the easinesse of the kéeping the Lawe, that the faithfull staide vp by forgiuenesse, if in anye point they faile, doe not despaire. In the meane time the Apostle warneth vs, that wée must striue that wée may serue the Lord. For the whole worlde doeth stande agaynst vs, least wée shoulde goe forwarde whether God cal∣leth vs. Therefore hée in effect shall kéepe the Lawe, which shall stronglye resist the world. 4 This is the victorie. Because hée sayd that all they which are borne of God doe o∣uercome the worlde. Hée expresseth also the meane to ouercome. For it might bée as yet demaunded, whence is the victorie. There∣fore hée placed the victorie of the whole world
in faith. An excellent place: because although Sathan doe dayly giue harde and fearefull assaultes: the spirite of God pronouncing that we are without daunger, doeth encou∣rage vs to striue stoutly, séeing feare is ta∣ken awaie. And the time past is of more force, then the present, or the time to come. For he saith that he hath ouercome, that wée may bée euen so assured as though the eni∣mie were now put to flight. It is true in∣déede, that our warrefare lasteth all our lyfe, that wee haue daylye conflictes, yea, that wée haue euerie moment newe and sundrie bat∣tails on euerie side wt the enimie, but because God doth not arme vs onely for one day, and faith also is not for one daye, but a continu∣all worke of the holy Ghost. Wée are nowe no other wayes conquerours, then if wée had giuen the ouerthrow in the battaile. Neither yet doeth this trust bring retchlesnesse, but that we bée alwayes carefully bent vnto the battaile. For the Lord biddeth his to be assu∣red in such sort, that yet he wil not haue them carelesse. Yea rather, he doeth therefore saye, that they haue ouercome, to the intent that they might fight the more couragiously and more stoutly. The name of the world is héere taken largely, for it comprehendeth whatsoe∣uer
is contrarie to the spirite of God. So the wickednesse of our nature is parte of the world, all lusts, all the sleightes of Sathan, and finally, whatsoeuer doeth drawe vs from God. In so plentifull a band of men, a great waight of the battaile lyeth vpon vs: and we should euen nowe before the conflict be ouer∣come, and daily to be ouercommed an hun∣dreth times, but that God did promise vs the victorie. But GOD on this condition doeth exhort vs to the conflicte, that first hée promiseth the victorie. But as this promise doth arme vs continuallye with the inuinci∣ble power of God: so on the contrarie parte, it bringeth to nothing the strength of men. Neither indeed doth the Apostle héere teach, ye God doth onely helpe vs, that being aided by his help, we may be able to resist: but he pla∣ceth the victorie in faith onely. And faith re∣ceiueth frō another, whereby it maye ouer∣come. Therfore they take from God ye which is due vnto him, which ascribe the victorie to their owne strength. 5 Who is he that ouercommeth the world? A reason of the former sentence, namely, that we therefore ouercome by faith, because wée borrowe strength of Christ. As also Paule sayeth▪ I canne doe all thinges in him
which dooth strengthen mée. Phil. 4.13. Ther∣fore hée in fine shall ouercome the diuell and the worlde, neyther shall hée yéelde vnto his owne flesh, who mistrusting himselfe, shall leane vppon the onelye strength of Christ. For by the name of faith, hée vnderstandeth a liuelye taking holde of Christ, which doth applie his strength and office vnto vs. 6 This is hee which came by water and bloud, Iesus Christ, not in water onely, but in water and bloud. And it is the Spirite that beareth witnesse: for as much as the Spirite is truth. 7 For there are three which beare wit∣nesse in Heauen, the Father, the Worde, and the holie Ghost: and these three are one. 8 And there are three which beare wit∣nesse in Earth, the Spirite, Water, and Bloud: and these three argee in one. 9 If wee receiue the witnesse of men, the witnesse of God is greater, because this is the witnesse of God which he hath witnes∣sed of his sonne. 6 THis is hee which came. That our faith maye rest safely in Christ, hée sayth, that the whole substaunce of the
shaddowes of the Lawe doe consist in him. Neither indéede doe I doubte but that hée dooeth allude to the olde rites of the Lawe in the wordes of Water and Bloud. Fur∣ther, the comparison hath this purpose, not onely that we doe knowe, that the lawe of Moses is done awaie by the comming of Christ. But that we should séeke in him the fulfilling of those thinges which the ceremo∣nies in times past did signifie. And although there were manye figures, yet the Apostle doeth note vnder these two the whole per∣fection of holynesse and ryghteousnesse. For all vncleanenesse was washed awaye with water, that men should not come vnto God, but pure and cleane. In Bloud was the pur∣ging and pledge of a full reconciliation with God. But the lawe did onely shaddowe by outward signes that which was to be perfor∣med soundly and indéed by the Messia. Ther∣fore Iohn doth fitly prooue that Iesus is the annoynted of the Lorde, promised before, be∣cause he hath brought with him wherewith hée maye sanctifie vs in all pointes. And tru∣lye touching the bloud wherewith Christ hath pacified GOD, there is no doubt but it may bée demaunded howe he came by wa∣ter. For it is not probable that this is refer∣red
to Baptisme. Truly I thinke that Iohn doth héere expresse the fruit and effect of that thing which he declareth in the historie of his Gospell. For whereas there hée sayth, that water and bloud did issue out of the side of Christ, no doubt it is to bée accounted for a myracle. I doe knowe that some such thing doth naturally come vnto ye dead: but it came to passe by the determinate counsaile of God, that the side of Christ shoulde be a fountaine of bloud and water: that the faithfull might knowe that true cleannesse (whereof the olde Baptismes were figures) is assured vnto thē in him: that they might knowe also that it is fulfilled which all the sprinklings of bloud did in times past promise. Wherefore, this short diuision hath an excellent grace, be∣cause it sheweth briefly whereto the olde ce∣remonies did chiefly indeauour: to wit, that men béeing purged from defilings, and frd from all offences, might haue God mercifull, and might bée consecrated vnto him. Fur∣thermore, that ye truth was shewed in Christ: because the lawe had nothing but the visi∣ble shaddowes. Of which thing wée haue spoken more in the 9. and 10. Chapter to the Hebrewes. It is the Spirite that beareth witnesse. In
this member he sheweth howe the faithfull may féele that strength of Christ, namely, be∣cause the Spirit doth certifie them: and least their faith should wauer, he addeth, that the full and sound assuraunce doth consist in the witnesse of the Spirit. For the Spirite is called truth, because the authoritie therof is vndoubted, and ought sufficiently to content vs. 7 There are three in heauen. All this hath bene left out by some, Hierome thinketh that that was done of malice rather then of error: and truely of the Latines onely. But séeing that neither indéede the Gréeke copies doe a∣grée betwéen thēselues, I dare scarce affirme any thing: yet because ye the text doth run ve∣ry well, if this part be added, & I sée that it is had in the best and most allowed copies: I doo willingly receiue it, & the sence shal be, ye god to the end he may more plentifully confirme our faith in Christ, doth by a thrée fold means witnesse, that we must rest in him. For as our faith doth acknowledge three persons in one being of God, so it is called vnto Christ by so many means, that it may rest it selfe in him. Whereas he saith that thrée are one, it is not referred vnto ye beeing, but rather vn∣to the consent. As if he should saye, that the
Father, and his euerlasting worde, and the Spirite, doe with one consent equallye ap∣proue Christ. Therefore some bookes haue [Eis En] that is, Into one. But, although thou readest [En Eisen] that is, Are one, as it is in other Copies, yet there is no doubt, but that the Father, the Word, and the Spi∣rite, are sayd to be one, in the selfe same sence, in which afterwards, Bloud, Water, and the Spirite. But whereas the Spirite, which is one witnesse, is twice rehearsed: the repetiti∣on séemeth to be vnfit. I answere: Seing he doth witnesse diuersly of Christ, that a dou∣ble place of witnessing is fitlye giuen vnto him. For the Father, with his euerlasting wisedome and the Spirite, doeth pronounce from heauen as by his absolute power, yt Ie∣sus is Christ. Therefore in ye place the onely maiestie of his diuinitie is to be considered of vs: and bicause ye spirit dwelling in our harts is the earnest, pledge, and seale, to seale vp that decrée: by this meanes he speaketh a∣gaine in earth by his grace. But because it may be, that all men will not receiue this reading: I will so expound those words that follow, as if the Apostle had named these on∣ly witnesses on earth. 8 Are three. He applyeth nowe that
sentence of water and bloud, to his purpose, namely, that they haue no excuse which refuse Christ: forasmuch as he hath prooued with sufficient strong and plaine witnesses, that it is he which was promised long before. For bloud and water, séeing that they are pledges and effects of saluation brought by him, doo truly witnesse that he is sent of God. Fur∣ther the Holy Ghost is added as a third wit∣nesse, whome notwithstanding hath the first place: because otherwise water and bloude shoulde haue issued without profit. For it is he which doth seale vp in our hearts the wit∣nesse of water and bloud: it is he, which brin∣geth to passe by his power, that the fruite of the death of Christ dooth come vnto vs: yea rather, that bloud being shed for our redemp∣tion, dooth pearce euen vnto our soules: or, (that I may speake all in one worde) it cau∣seth that Christ with all his benefits is ours. So Paule Rom. 1.4. After yt he had sayd that Christ was shewed to bée the sonne of God, by the power of his resurrection, doeth imme∣diatly adde by the sanctifieng of the Spirite. Because whatsoeuer tokens of the heauenly glorie doeth shine in Christ: they shoulde bée neuer the lesse darke vnto vs, and should bée farre from our sight, vnlesse the spirite did
open vnto vs the eyes of faith. Now the rea∣ders doo vnderstand, why Iohn hath brought the spirite as witnesse with water & bloud: namely because it is the proper office of the Spirite, to make cleane our consciences by the bloude of Christ: and to cause, that the cleansing brought by him, is effectuall in vs. Of which thing ther is something spoken in the beginning of the first Epistle of Peter, chap. 1. verse. 22. where Peter vseth almost the same speach: to wit, that the holy Ghost doo∣eth purge our soules by the sprinkeling of the bloud of Christ. But by these words we may gather, that faith dooth not take holde of Christ bare or naked: but with all his quic∣kening power. For what profite were it that Christ, was sent into the earth, vnlesse he had pacified God by the sacrifice of his death? vn∣lesse the office of cleansing had bene inioyned him of his father? yet it may be obiected that the distinction is superfluous, which is héere set downe, because Christ by putting awaye sinne, hath made vs cleane. Therefore the Apostle nameth one thing twice. I graunt indéede, that in the putting awaye of sinne, there is also included a washing. Therefore I haue not set a difference of
water and bloud, as though they wer diuers things. But if euery one of vs doo weigh his owne weakenesse, he shall easelye acknow∣ledge, that bloud is not in vaine or without cause discerned from water. Further, as it hath bene alreadie saide, the Apostle alludeth vnto the Rytes of the Lawe. But God did in times paste insti∣tute, not onely Sacrifice but also washings because of the weaknesse of man. The Apo∣stle woulde plainelye expresse that the truth of both parts was offered vs in Christ. By which reason, he sayde a little before, Not in water onely. For hee dooth signifie that not onelye some parte of our saluation is founde in Christ, but also all partes full, so that nothing more is to be sought other∣where. 9 If the witnesse of men. He reaso∣neth from the lesse to the greater, howe vn∣thankfull men are, if they refuse Christ ap∣proued from heauen, so as he hath said. For, if in mens affaires we doo rest in the wordes of men, which can lye and deceiue, how vnséem∣ly shall it be, that God hath losse credit with vs, in his owne matters, wherein he is the cheefe Iudge? Therefore onely iniquitie doth
let, that we receiue not Christ, when as hée giueth creditte to his power by a lawfull proofe. Further, he calleth the witnesse of God, not onely that which the Spirite dooth giue into our harts, but that also which we haue from water & bloud. For that power of purging and putting away sinne, was not earthly but heauenly. Wherefore the bloud of Christ is not to be estéemed after the com∣mon manner of men: but we must rather respect the purpose of God, wherein it was ordained to put awaye sinne, and that hea∣uenlye power, which hath flowed from thence. Further, this is the witnesse of God, which he hath testified of his sonne. 10 He that beleeueth on the sonne of God, hath the witnesse in himselfe. Hee that beleeueth not God, hath made him a lyer: be∣cause he beleeued not the witnesse which god hath testified of his sonne. 11 And this is the witnes, that God hath giuen vs eternall life. And this life is in his sonne. 12 He that hath the sonne, hath life. He that hath not the sonne of God hath not life.
10 THis is the witnesse. The note [O∣ti] doth not note heere a cause, but is onely taken in the way of exposition. For after that the Apostle had taught that God doth deserue much more credite then men: now he addeth that we can giue no creditte vnto God, but by beléeuing in Christ: be∣cause God dooth set him onely before vs, and dooth stay vs in him. Hence he gathereth that we doo beléeue in Christ safely and with qui∣et mindes, because God doth establish our faith by his owne authoritie. Neither dooth he say that God dooth speake outwardly, but that euery one of the godly doth féele him the Authour of his faith inwardly in himselfe. Whereby it appeareth how much an incon∣stant opinion which hangeth vppon some o∣ther thing, doth differ from faith. 10 He that doth not beleeue. As the faithfull haue this commoditie, yt they know themselues to be without daunger of errour, because they are grounded vppon God: so he maketh the vngodly guiltie of great blasphe∣mie, because they accuse God of a lie. Truely nothing is more precious vnto God then his truth: wherfore no greater iniury cā be done vnto him, then when he is spoyled of this ho∣nor. Therfore yt he may stur vs vp to beléeue,
he taketh an argument frō the contrarie. For if it be an horrible and cursed wickednesse, to make God a liar: because then, that which is most proper vnto him is taken awaie: who would not feare to abase the credit of the gos∣pell: wherein God will especially be accoun∣ted true and faithfull? This is dilligently to be noted. Some meruaile why God doth so much commend faith: why vnfaithfulnesse is so sharply condemned. But héere the infi∣nit glorie of God is in question. For séeing he woulde giue forth a speciall shew of his truth in the Gospell, they leaue him nothing, whosoeuer refuse Christ therein offered. Wherefore that we may graunt that some man maye in some other partes of his lyfe, be equall vnto an Angell: yet his holynesse is diuellish, so long as he reiecteth Christ. As we sée certaine in the Papacie much to flat∣ter themselues with I know not what visor of holinesse: when as yet they resist the Gos∣pell most obstinatly. Therefore let vs holde, that this is the beginning of godlynesse, obe∣diently to imbrace that doctrine which hee hath so faythfullye auouched for a wit∣nesse. 11 That hee hath giuen eternall lyfe.
Nowe hée allureth vs to beléeue, by setting before vs the profite thereof. This reue∣rence indéede is due vnto GOD, that whatsoeuer hée sayeth to vs, it be by and by without controuersie. But whereas he offe∣reth vs lyfe fréelye, it is an vnthankfulnesse intollerable, if we doo not receyue so louing and swéete a doctrine with a most stedfast and ready faith. And truly the words of the Apostle haue this drift, that we must not onely reuerently obeye the Gospell, least wée doe iniurye vn∣to God: but also that it is to bée beloued, because it bringeth vnto vs eternall lyfe. From whence also wée doo gather, what is chiefely and most of all to be sought for in the Gospell of Christ, to wit, the free guift of eternall redemption and saluation. For sée∣ing God of his goodnesse dooth there exhorte vs vnto repentaunce and feare, it ought not to be separated from the grace of Christ. And that the Apostle maye staye and detaine vs whollye in the eternall grace of Christ, he repeateth vnto vs again, that euerlasting life is contained in him alone: as if hée shoulde haue sayde, that there is no other meanes at all set downe vnto vs by GOD
the father to obtaine life. And indéede the A∣postle hath briefly héere comprehended thrée things, to wit that we are all appoynted vn∣to death, vntill God of his frée goodnesse doo restore vs to life. For he plainly sayth, that lyfe is giuen by God. Whereby also it fol∣loweth that we are disappoynted of it, and that it cannot be gotten by deserts. Further he teacheth that this life is giuen vnto vs by the Gospell, because there is layde open the goodnesse and fatherly loue of God towardes vs. Lastly he saith, that we are by no other meanes made pertakers of that lyfe, then when we are ingrafted into Christ by faith. 12 He that hath not. It is a confir∣mation of the sentence going before. Indéed that ought to suffice, that God hath placed lyfe no where els but in Christ, that it maye be sought for frō thence. But least any man should decline another way, he shutteth out all men from the hope of life, which séeke it not in Christ. We knowe what it is to haue Christ: for he is possessed by faith. There∣fore he depriueth all men of life, which are not of the bodie of Christ. But this sée∣meth not to agrée with reason. For histo∣ries doo shew, that there haue bene excellent men, and indued with noble vertues, which
notwithstanding haue ben altogether stran∣gers from Christ. And it séemeth vnfit, to giue no honour vnto so great excellencie. I aunswere: that we are farre deceiued, if we thinke that whatsoeuer dooth excel in our eyes is allowed of God. Yea rather, as it is in Luke 16.15. that which is excellent in the sight of men, is abhominatiō before God. Foe because the vncleannesse of the heart is vn∣knowen vnto vs, we are content with the outward shew. But God dooth sée most filthy wickednesse lying hid vnder the same. Ther¦fore it is no meruaile if those vertues which beare an outward shew, doo stink before him, which both procéede from an vncleane heart, and also tende not to a good ende. Further, whence is the cleannesse of the heart, whence is a good indeauour of godlinesse, but from the spirite of Christ? Then nothing is wor∣thie of praise, but in Christ. Although ther is another reason, which taketh away al doubt. For the righteousnesse of men, consisteth in the forgiuenesse of sinnes. If thou take away this, the vndoubted cursse of God, and euer∣lasting death, remaineth for vs all, and it is onely Christ, which reconcileth the father vn∣to vs, as he hath once pacified him by the sa∣crifice of his death.
Whence it followeth, that God is mercifull to man, but in Christ: and that there is no righteousnesse but in him. If any man obiect Cornelius, whō Luke witnesseth to be accep∣table vnto god, before that he was called to the faith of the gospel: I aunswere briefely, that God dooth somtimes so work in vs, that the séede of faith, dooth not by and by the first day appeare. Cornelius had not a cléere and plaine knowledge of Christ: but séeing hée was indued with some féeling of the mercy of God, he must withall holde some thing of the mediator. But, because God hath secrete and wonderfull meanes to worke by, let vs, passing by the shewes that profite not, holde fast only the plaine way to saluation which he sheweth vs. 13 I haue written these things vnto you, which beleeue in the name of the sonne of God, that ye may know that you haue eternall life, and that you may beleeue in the name of the sonne of God. 14 And this is the trust which wee haue in him, that if we shall aske anye thing accor∣ding to his will he heareth vs. 15 And if we know that hee heareth vs,
when we shall aske any thing: we know that we haue the petitions that wee haue asked of him. 13 I Haue written these thinges vnto you. Because there must bée a continuall going forward in faith, therefore he saith, that he writeth to them which haue alreadie beleeued, that they may more sted∣fastly and certainly beléeue: and so may en∣ioye the full assuraunce of eternal life. Ther¦fore, this is the vse of the doctrine, not onelye that he may beginne the ignorant in Christ, but also yt he may more & more cōfirm those, which are alredie taught. Therfore we must euery day diligently indeuour to learn, that our faith may increase all our life long. For both many remnaunts of vnbeléefe doo as yet remaine in vs, and also our faith is so weak, that euen this that we doo beléeue, is not yet to beléeue soundly, vnles there come a grea∣ter confirmation. Furthermore it is woorth the labour to note, what is the true meanes to confirme faith, to wit, when the office and power of Christ is declared. For the Apostle saith, that he did write these things: name∣ly, that eternall life is not to be sought anye wher els but in Christ: yt they which are now
faithfull may beléeue, that is, may profitte by beléeuing. Wherefore it is the duetie of a godly te∣cher, that he may confirme his hearers in the faith, to set forth as much as he can the grace of Christ, that being content therewith, wée desire nothing els. Séeing ye Papists doo hide and abase this by all meanes: they doo be∣wray by this one thing sufficiently, that they haue care of nothing lesse, then of the right doctrine of Faith. Yea for this cause, their schooles are more to be auoyded, then al rocks or quick-sands: because a man can scarce en∣ter into them, without vndoubted shipwrack of faith. Moreouer, the Apostle teacheth in this place, that Christ is the proper scope of faith: and that the assurance of saluation is ioyned with the faith which we haue in his name. For this is the ende of beléeuing, that we may be the children, and heires of God. 14 This is the trust. He commendeth the faith whereof he spake, by the fruite: or he dooth shewe wherein our trust dooth chiefe∣ly consist: to wit, that the godly are bolde to call vpon God with a bolde courage, as Paul also speaketh, Ephe. 3.12. That by faith wée haue accesse vnto God with boldnesse. And Rom. 8.15. that the Spirite dooeth open our
mouths, that we doubt not to crye Abba Fa∣ther. And truly if we be kept from comming to God, nothing is more miserable, then wée. Againe, so this sanctuarie may be opened for vs, we shal be neuerthelesse blessed in all our miseries. Yea, this one thing maketh all our miseries happie, that we are certainlye per∣swaded, that God will be our deliuerer, and trusting in his fatherly good will towardes vs, we flye vnto him. Let vs therefore holde this sentence of the Apostle, that calling vp∣pon God, is the especiall triall of our faith: and that God is not called vpon a right, nei∣ther according vnto faith, but when as wée are perswaded that our prayers shall not be in vayne. For the Apostle dooth denie, that they are indued with confidence, which hang in doubt. Whereby it appeareth, that the doctrine of faith, is buried and almost quen∣ched in the Papacie, where all certaintie is taken away. Indéede they murmure manye prayers there, and they prate much of cal∣ling vpon God: but they pray, & bid to pray with doubtfull and wandring mindes: yea, they condemne this trust, which the Apostle dooth necessarily require. According to his will. By this note hée would briefely teach, what is the true rule
to pray: to wit, when men submit their prai∣ers vnto God. Neither indéede when as the Lord did promise that he would doo, whatso∣euer his should require, did he graunt vnto them an vnbridled libertie to aske whatsoe∣uer came into their minde: but he gaue thē withall a lawe to praye aright. And truely there is nothing more profitable for vs, then this bridle: because if it be lawfull for eue∣rie one of vs to aske whatsoeuer he list, and God doo fauour our prayers, we shall be ve∣ry ill prouided for. For we know not what is profitable: yea, we doo boyle with wicked and hurtfull desires. But God dooth giue a double remedie, that we pray not otherwise then according to the precise rule of his wil: because he dooth both teach vs by his worde, what he wil haue vs to aske, and also he do∣eth appoynt his spirite our guide and gouer∣nour, which may stay our affections, and not suffer them to wander without theyr boundes. For we know not, saith Paul what and how we ought to pray: but the spirite helping our infirmities, dooth stirre vp in vs vnspeakable sighings, Rom. 8.26. In the meane time also we must aske at the mouth of the Lord, that he will direct our praiers. For God in his promises dooth set down vn∣to
vs the lawful meanes to pray, as hath ben said. 15 And if we knowe. The repetiti∣on is not néedlesse, as in shew it séemeth. For the Apostle now speciallye affirmeth, that which he generally pronounced of ye successe of praier, that the godly do wish or desire no∣thing of God, which they do not obtaine, and when as he saith, that all the prayers of the faithfull are heard, he speaketh of sound and modest prayers, and which are framed accor∣ding to the rule of obedience. For the faith∣full do not runne headlong with loose raines or graunt themselues any thing: but they alwayes in their praiers regard what God commandeth. Therefore this is the applying of the generall doctrine to the spirituall and priuate vse of euery man: that the faithfull doo not doubt that they haue God fauourable in all and euery their praiers, that they may with quiet mindes waite vntill ye Lord per∣fourme those things which they haue prayed for: and so being eased of all griefe and care, they cast their cares vpon God. Neither yet this quietnesse and assuraunce, ought to quench in vs the zeale of prayer: that he which is assured of an happie suc∣cesse, should therefore abstaine from calling
vpon God. For the certaintie of faith dooth not bring foorth vntowardnesse or slacknes. But the Apostle onely meaneth that euerye man be quiet minded in his necessities, when he hath laid downe his gronings, in the bo∣some of God. 16 If any man shall see his brother sinne a sinne not vnto death, let him aske, and hee shall giue him life. I say to him that sinneth not vnto death. There is a sinne vnto death. For that I say not that a man should pray. 17 Euery vnrighteousnesse is sinne. And there is a sinne not vnto death. 18 We knowe, that whosoeuer is borne of God, sinneth not: but hee that is borne of God keepeth himselfe, and that wicked one toucheth him not. 16 THe Apostle now extendeth further the fruite of faith, whereof hée had made mention, that our prayers also bée a∣uaileable for our bretheren. That was a great matter, that so soone as we are in di∣stresse. God dooth louingly call vs vnto him∣selfe, and is readie to giue vs helpe: but in that he vouchsafeth to heare vs praying for others also, there ariseth no small confirma∣tion
vnto our faith, that we maye be assured that in our owne cause we shal neuer take the repulse. In the meane time the Apostle dooth exhort vs, that one of vs be mutuallye carefull for the safetie of another. And again he willeth, that the falls of our bretheren, be vnto vs prouocations to pray. And in truth, this hardnesse were passing great, to be tou∣ched with no sense of compassion, when wée sée the soules which are redéemed with the bloud of Christ, perish. And he sheweth that there is a remedie at hand, whereby brethe∣ren may helpe their bretheren He shall giue life he saith, to him that is readie to perish, that shall pray for him. Albeit the word, He shall giue, may be re∣ferred to God: as if it had bene sayde, God shall graunt the life of our bretheren to our prayers. But the sense shall be one still, that so farre foorth the prayers of the faithfull are auaileable, that they maye deliuer a brother from death. If thou doost vnderstande it of man, that he dooth giue life vnto his brother, the speach will be hyperbolicall: yet it will containe no vnseemly thing. For that which is giuen vnto vs by the free grace of god: yea that which for our sake is graunted vnto o∣thers, we are sayd to giue vnto others.
So great a profite ought not to mooue vs a lyttle, to pray that our bretherens sins may be forgiuen them. And when the Apostle cō∣mendeth vnto vs [Sumpathian] a compas∣sion, he dooth withall admonish, how much we are to take héede of crueltie in condemn∣ing our bretheren, and too much sharpnesse in despairing of their safetie. A sinne not vnto death. Least immedi∣ately we cast away all hope of their safetye which sinne, he sheweth that God dooth not so seuerely punish their faults, that therfore he dooth vtterly cast them off. Wherevppon it dooth follow, that we must take them for bretheren, séeing the Lord dooth receiue them in the accompt of children. But he denieth that they are sinnes vnto death, not onelye wherein the Saints doo daily offend: but al∣so if at any time it come to passe that they grieuously prouoke the wrath of God. For so long as there remayneth place to forgiue∣nesse, death dooth not yet wholly raigne. And yet ye Apostle dooth not héere distinguish be∣twixte veniall and deadly sin, as afterwards was commonly done. For that distinction which preuayled in the Papacie, is most vn∣sauorie. The Sorbonnists acknowledge al∣most no sinne to be deadly, except wherein
there appeareth such grose vncleannesse, that it may be felt with hands. So amongst ve∣niall sinnes they accompt the most horrible filthinesse, which lurketh in the minde. Fi∣nally, all the fruites of originall sin, so that they breake not out into externall acte, they thinke to be done away with a light sprink∣ling of holy water. And what maruell when they doo not accompt the blasphemous doub∣tings of the grace of God, and whatsoeuer lusts and concupiscences to be sinne, so that the consent be not withall? If the minde of man be shaken with vnbeléefe, if impatience doo prouoke him, that he murmure agaynst God, how much soeuer monstrous lusts doo mooue him: all this is lighter with the pa∣pists, then that he be ouertaken in sinne, at the least after baptisme. Therefore it is no maruel if of greuous offences they can make venial sins: for they weigh thē wt their own & not with ye ballance of god. But among the faithful this principle must be vndoubted, yt whatsoeuer is cōtrary to ye law of god, is sin, & that deadly by his own nature. For where ye trāsgressiō of ye law is, ther is sin & death. Then what shall be the sense of the apostles words? He denieth those sinnes to be dead∣ly, which albeit they are worthie of death,
Yet God dooth not so seuerely punish them, Therefore he dooth not weigh the sinnes in themselues, but he iudgeth of them according to the fatherly kindnesse of God, which par∣doneth the guiltinesse, where yet there was offence. Finally, he dooth not giue thē ouer to death, yt God hath restored to life by raising them againe, albeit they letted not why they should not haue ben shut out from life. There is a sinne vnto death. I haue sayd alreadie that sinne is called so, whereto there is lefte no hope of forgiuenes. But it is de∣maunded what manner of sinne that is. For it must néedes be very gréeuous, which God so seuerely punisheth. It may be gathered by the course of the text, that the fall was not in part, as they say, nor the transgression of one precept: but a generall falling away, where by men doo vtterlye estraunge themselues from God. For ye apostle addeth afterwards, that the sonnes of God doo not sinne: that is, that they forsake not God, and giue ouer and imbondage themselues whollye vnto Sa∣than. It is no meruaile if such a fallyng awaye be a deadly sinne. For God dooth neuer so de∣priue his children of the grace of his spirite, but that they receiue some sparke of godly∣nesse.
Therefore they must néedes be repro∣bates, and giuen ouer vnto death, who so fall awaie, that they cast away the feare of God. If anie aske whether the waie of saluation be shut vp against their repentaunce: The answere is readie, That séeing they are gi∣uen ouer vnto a reprobate sence, and desti∣tute of the holy Ghost, they can doe no other thing, then runne headlong into worse, and adde sinne vnto sinne. Further, séeing sinne or blasphemie against the Spirit, doth conti∣nually drawe with it such a falling awaie, there is no doubt but it is noted heere. But it is asked againe by what markes we may know that the fall of man is deadly. For ex∣cept there were certaine knowledge of that thing, the Apostle shuld except in vaine, that we must not praie for that kinde of sinne. Therefore it shall bée lawfull sometimes to determine whether he be past hope that hath falne, or that there be yet place to recouerie. I graunt indéed that that is true: and it is proued without controuersie by this place. But because this cōmeth but seldly to passe, & god commending the infinit riches of his grace, commandeth vs by his example to be merciful: the iudgement of eternall death is not rashly to be giuen vppon anie man: ra∣ther
loue dooth incline vs to hope well. But if the desperate wickednesse of some men doo appeare vnto vs no otherwise, then if the Lord did poynt it out with the finger, there is not why we shoulde striue with the iust iudgement of God, or desire to be more fauo∣rable then he. 17 Euery vnrighteousnesse. This place may be expoūded diuersly, for if thou resolue it into the contrarie part, the sense shall not be amisse thus, Albeit all, vnrighteousnesse is sinne, yet ther is some sin not vnto death. Another sense would also likewise agrée, Be∣cause sinne is all vnrighteousnesse: therevp∣pon it followeth, that there is some sinne not vnto death. Others take All vnrighteousnes for whole vnrighteousnesse: as if the Apostle should haue said, that the sinne whereof hée speaketh, is an heap of vnrighteousnesse. Yet I doo more willingly allowe of the first or second exposition: and because they fall both to one end, I leaue the iudgement frée to the readers, which of them be more fit. 18 We know that whosoeuer is of God. If thou takest the children of god to be alto∣gether cleane and frée from sinne, as fantasti∣call men doo faine, the Apostle shall be con∣trarie to himselfe, for by this meanes, hée
should take away from amongst bretheren the indeauour of praying. Therfore he saith they doo not sinne, which fall not vtterly a∣way from the grace of God. And hence hée would inferre, that we must pray for all the children of God: because they sinne not vn∣to death. The proofe is added, Because euery one that is borne of God, kéepeth himselfe, that is, dooth kéepe himselfe in the feare of God: & suffereth not himselfe so to be with violence carried away, that the sense of god∣lynesse béeing extinguished, he whollye gi∣ueth himselfe to the diuell and to the flesh. For when he saith, That he is not touched of that wicked one. It is to be referred to the deadly wound. For the children of GOD are not frée from the woundes of Sathan: but they so beate backe his strokes with the shield of faith, that they pearce not to the ve∣ry heart. Therefore the spirituall life is ne∣uer extinguished in them. This is that Not to sinne, when the godly doo indéede fall tho∣rough the infirmitie of the flesh: but they mourne vnder the burden of sinne, they are displeased with themselues, they cease not to feare God. Keepeth himselfe. That which is proper
to God, he applyeth vnto vs. For it euery of vs be the kéeper of his owne saluation, it wil be a miserable defence. Therfore Christ prai∣eth his father that he wil kéep vs. Iohn. 17.11 signifieng that this is not in our power. The defenders of frée will snatch vp this spéech, that they might therby proue, that wee are deliuered from sinne, partly by the grace of God, and partly by our owne power. But they doe not obserue, that the faithfull haue not of themselues the keeping whereof the Apostle speaketh. Nor indéede doth he héere publish their strength, as if they did kéepe themselues by their owne power: but onely he teacheth that they resist Satan, that they be neuer deadly wounded with his dartes. And we know that we are neuer prepared to battaile with anie other armour then the armour of God. Let therefore the faithfull kéepe themselues from sinne, euen as they are kept of God. 19 We know that we are of God, and the whole world lyeth in wickednesse. 20 But we know that the sonne of God is come, and hath giuen vs a minde to knowe him, which is true: and we are in him which is true: in his sonne Iesus Christ. This is true
God, and life eternall. 21 Little children keep your selues from Idolls. Amen. 19 WE are of God. By the former doc∣trine he taketh occasion to exhort, for that which he had sayd in common of all the children of God, he now applyeth to them vnto whom he wrote: and that, that hée might pricke them forward to auoyde sinne, and in∣courage them to withstande the assaultes of Sathan. Let the readers note, that this in∣déed is true faith, which applieth (that I may speake so) the grace of God vnto vs. For the Apostle dooth not acknowledge anye other to be faithfull, excepte such as assemble them∣selues into the order of the children of God. Neither indéede doth he alledge, a probable coniecture, as the schoolemen speake, for trust. For he saith, That we knowe. The summe hath this drifte, Séeing we are borne of God, that we must indeauour our selues, that bée∣ing seperated from the world, we may prooue by holinesse of life, that we are not in vaine called to so great dignitie. And this admoni∣tion is very néedfull to all ye godly. For whe∣ther soeuer they turne their eyes, Satan hath readie enticements, whereby he maye drawe
them from God. Therefore it would be hard for them to holde a right course, excepte their calling were more of account with them, then all worldly lets. Therefore that we maye bée rightly armed to striue, these two must bée helde: That the world is wicked: and that our calling is of God Vnder the name of the World; there is no doubt but ye Apostle to ∣prehendeth all mankinde. When he sayth, It lyeth in wickednesse. He placeth it vnder the gouernment of Satan. There is no cause therefore, why we should doubt to shunne the world, which contemning God, dooth gaue it selfe into the bondage of Satan: ther is not, why we should feare the disagréement there∣of, because it is a straunger from God. Final∣ly, séeing corruption possesseth the whole Na∣ture, the faithfull must studie to denie them∣selues. Séeing that in the worlde there is no∣thing séene but iniquitie and wickednesse,  is of necessitie, that they giue the farewell to flesh and bloude, that they may followe God. Yet that other must together be added, That it is god who hath called them, that they may set his ayde against al the gins of ye world and of Satan. 20 But we knowe that the sonne of God is come. Because the children of God are
assailed euery way, he dooth as we haue sayde incourage and exhort them by this means to a constant resistaunce, because they fight vn∣der the conduct of God, & doo certainly know that they are gouerned by his spirite. And now he sheweth, from whēce that knowledge is chiefely to be fetched. He saieth therefore, ye God is so made knowen vnto vs in Christ, that now there is no cause of doubting. The Apostle doth not rashly incline into this part. For except our faith were soundly grounded in God, we shall neuer remaine constant in the conflict. For this cause the Apostle teach∣eth, that by the benefite of Christ we haue at∣tained vnto an assured knowledge of ye true God, that we wauer not vnstaide. The True God, he vnderstandeth not him that is true, but him who in very déede is God: that hée may discerne him from all Idolls. For it is, [Alethinos,] not [Alethes.] As Iohn. 17.35. This is life eternall, that they know thée the very true God, and whom thou hast sent, Ie∣sus Christ, that he maye lighten our mindes to the knowledge of God For séeing he is the very image of the inuisible God, séeing the onely interpreter of the father, séeing the one∣ly giuer of life: yea life, the light of ye world, and truth, so soone as we depart from him, it
is of necessitie yt we vanish away in our own inuentions. But Christ is sayd, To haue gi∣uen vs vnderstanding, not onelye because he sheweth by the doctrine of the Gospel who is the true God, & dooth also inlighten vs with his spirit: but because we haue in Christ him selfe God manifested in ye flesh, as Paul saith. Euen as all fulnesse of the Godhead dooeth dwell in him, 1. Tim. 3.16. And all the trea∣sures of knowledge and wisedome are hidde, Col. 2.3. and 9. So it commeth to passe, that the open face of God, after a sorte doeth shine vnto vs in Christ. Not that there was none, or a doubtfull knowledge of God before the comming of Christ: but because now he hath manifested himselfe more fully, & as it wer in a meruailous cléerenes. And this is yt which Paul saith. 2. Cor. 4.6. That god who in time past commaunded the light to shine out of darknesse, in the creation of the worlde, hath now shined in our hearts by the light of the knowledge of his glorie in the face of Christ. And we must note, that this gifte is peculiar to Gods elect onely. Christ indéede hath in∣differently set foorth to al, the light of his gos∣pell, but al haue not séeing mindes to behold: but rather Satan dooth spredde the vaile of blindnesse before the eyes of many. Therfore
the apostle vnderstādeth ye light which Christ kindleth within the harts of his children, and which once being kindled is neuer put out, albeit at some times it come to passe in some that it be hindered for a time. We are in him which is true. By this word he dooth teach, how effectual that know∣ledge is, whereof he hath made mention: that is, because by it we are grafted into Christ, & made one with God. For it hath a liuelye roote, and truly setled in our hearts, whereby it commeth to passe, that God liueth in vs, & we in him. Because he saith without note of coupling together, We are in him that is true, in his sonne, he séemeth to expresse the man∣ner of our coniunction with God: as if hée should haue saide: That we are in God by Christ. This same is very God. Albeit the Arri∣ans haue gone about to abuse this place, and certaine at this daye subscribe vnto them: yet héere we haue an excellent witnesse of the di∣uinitie of Christ. The Arrians referre this to the Father, as if the Apostle should again say that hée were true God. But the repetition should be too fruitlesse. He had twice alreadie testified yt he was the true God, who appered vnto vs in Christ: to what ende should hée
by and by adde, This is true God? But it a∣greeth fitly vnto Christ. For after that he had taught that Christ was the guide by whose direction we were led vnto God: nowe, for amplification sake he affirmeth, that Christ is that God, least we should thinke, that he is to be sought a farre off. And the Epethite, Of eternall life, confirmeth the same. Indéede hée speaketh both of one and the same that he is true God, and eternall life. I ōmit, that ye re∣latiue [Outos] he vseth to be restrained to ye next person. This I say, that Christ is proper∣ly called eternall life; & it cannot be denied, that this manner of speaking is vsuall with Iohn The summe is, when we haue Christ, that we enioy the true and eternall God: be∣cause he is no other where to be sought. Then that we are so made pertakers of eternal life, because being bidde in the father, it is offered vs in Christ. The father indeed is the begin∣ning of life: but the fountaine from whence we may draw it, is Christ. 21 Little children keepe your selues from Idolls. Albeit it is a seuerall sentence, yet it is that which hangeth vppon the former doc∣trine. For the quickening light of the gospel, must not onely scatter and driue awaye the darknesse, but also all cloudes out of ye minds
of the godly. And the Apostle dooth not onely condemne idolatrie, but he commandeth that they take héede vnto themselues of the idolls themselues. Whereby he signifieth, that the sound and sincere worship of God cannot be kept, so soone as men begin to haunt images. For so is superstition bred in vs, that euerye least cause dooth infect vs with the poyson of it. Drie woode will not so soone burne, being laid vpon the coales, as idolatrie wil soone in∣fect and possesse the mindes of men, when oc∣casion is offered them. Who séeth not that I∣mages are sparks? Why doo I cal thē sparks? Yea rather fire-brands, which may suffice to set the whole world on fire. Albeit the Apo∣stle dooth not speake onely of images: but he comprehendeth the altars, & all instrumentes of superstition. Further, the Papists are ri∣diculous, who wrest this to the pictures of Iupiter and Mercurie and such like: as if in∣déed the Apostle doth not generally teach, that it is a corrupting of godlines, where there is vnto God imagined a bodely shape, or where images & pictures are set vp to worship. Let vs therfore remember, that we must so care∣ful continue in ye spiritually worship of God, that we driue far away from vs, whatsoeuer may bend vs to grose & carnall superstitions. FINIS.
The Comētaries of M. Jhon Caluin, vpon the Epistle of Iude. The Argument. ALthough the Olde writers haue diuersly contended cō∣cernyng this Epistle, yet be∣cause it is profitable to bee reade, neither doeth it con∣taine any thyng, contrary vnto the founde∣nesse of the doctrine of the Apostles, and hath receiued aucthoritie of long tyme e∣mong all good men, I doe willyngly nomber it among the reste. Further, the shortnesse thereof doth not require any long treatise of argument: and the whole some almost doeth agree with the second Chaper of the last E∣pistle. For,ij. Peter. ij. because that wicked vnthriftes had crept in, vnder the name of Christia∣nitie, whose whole delite was to drawe light and weake men, into a prophane cōtempt of
God. Jude doeth first shewe, that the faith∣full ought not to be daunted with suche en∣gines, with whiche the Churche hath al∣waies been assailed: And yet he exhorteth them, that thei doe carefully take heede of suche plagues, and that he maie make them the more hated and abhorred, he dooeth sharplie denounce against them, the punish∣ment of God at hande, suche as their wic∣kednesse deserueth. Now, if wee consider what Sathan hath gone aboute in this our age also, from the beginnyng of the Gospell: with what subtilties he doeth yet busie him self to ouerthrowe the Faithe and feare of God: That warnyng whiche was profitable for the tyme wherein Jude liued, is more then necessary for our time. But all this shall bee better learned, by the rea∣dyng of the Epistle.
Ʋpon the Epistle of Sainct Iude. 1 Jude a seruaunt of Iesus Christ, and brother to James, to them whiche are called and sanctified in God the Father, and kept in Jesus Christ. 2 Mercie vnto you, and peace and loue bee multiplied. HE calleth hym self the ser∣uaunt of Christ, not as this name doeth indifferentlie agree vnto all the godlie, but in respecte of his Apo∣stleship. For thei are speciallie accompted the seruauntes of Christ, to whom he hath appointed some publique office. And wee knowe to what ende, the Apostles vse to dignifie them selues with this title. He doeth not rightly arrogate to himself, the right and authoritie of teachyng who soe∣uer is not called. Therefore, their calling is a witnesse vnto the Apostles, that thei doe not thrust in themselues, of their owne priuate braine. Although this alone were not sufficient of it self, that thei are placed in office, vnlesse thei did behaue them sel∣ues
faithfullie in the same. And truelie he comprehendeth bothe, whiche saieth, that he is the seruaunt of God: to witte, that he hath GOD the aucthour of the function, which he exerciseth, and also that he doeth faithfullie execute that whiche is enioy∣ned hym. And because verie many doe fal∣slie pretende this title, and doe falsly boste them selues to bee that, whiche thei are moste farre from, wee muste alwaies see whether the thyng it self dooe agree with the profession. Brother of James, He addeth a name, whiche was more knowne and renoumed to the Churche. For although the credite and authoritie of doctrine, doeth hang vp∣pon no mortall man, yet this is a greate staie vnto faithe, when as the soundenesse of the man is knowne vnto vs, whiche is the teacher. And that the authoritie of Ia∣mes, is not here pretended, as of some pri∣uate manne: but because that among all men, he was taken to be vnto the Churche one of the cheef Apostles of Christe. And he was the Sonne of Alpheus, as I haue saied in an other place. Yea, this place ma∣keth
for me against Eusebius and others, who write that a Disciple, I knowe not who called Oblia, was he of whom Luke speaketh in the Actes 15.13. & 21.18. which was more excellent then the Apostles in that Churche. But there is no doubte, but Iude doeth call hym here his Brother, be∣cause he was famous amongest the Apo∣stles. Therefore it is likely that it was he, vnto whom Luke telleth, that there was speciall honour giuen by the reste. To the whiche are called in God. He noteth all the faithfull by this name, because that the Lorde hath seperated them vnto hym self. But because callyng is nothyng, but the effecte of the eternall election, it is some∣times taken for it. In this place in skilleth little, whether waie thou doe expounde it. For in deede he commendeth the grace of God, whereby he vouchsafeth to chuse thē vnto hymself for a peculiar people. And he signifieth that men doe not pre∣uent God, neither at any tyme doe come vnto hym, vntill he drawe them. He cal∣leth theim also sanctified in God the Fa∣ther, whiche wee maie translate by God
the Father. Yet I haue kept that forme of speeche, that the readers might haue their free iudgement. For, this also maie be the sense, that beyng prophane in themselues, thei haue sanctification in God. Further, the maner of Sanctification is, When he doeth regenerate vs by his Spirite. The other readyng that the cōmon interpreter hath followed, is somewhat harder, , that is to saie, to the beloued in God the Father. Therefore I iudge that it is corrupted, and truely it is founde in fiue bookes. He addeth further, that thei are kept in Christe. For wee should be al∣waies Sathans, subiecte to Death, in so muche as he would catche vs an hundreth tymes, euery momente, as a readie praie, vnlesse wee were safe vnder the defence of Christe: whom the Father hath therefore giuen vnto vs to be our keeper, that none of those thynges should bee loste, whiche he hath receiued into his Faithe and De∣fence. Therefore Iude doeth here shewe a threefold benefite of God in all the godly: That he hath made them pertakers of the Gospell by his callyng, that he hath rege∣nerate
theim into newnesse of life by his Spirite, and that he hath kepte theim by the hande of Christe, that thei should not faile of their Saluation. 2 Mercie vnto you. The name of Mer∣cie doeth signifie almoste thesame, whiche the name of Grace doeth signifie in the sa∣lutations of Paule. If any man desire to haue a more curi∣ous difference, Grace is properly the ef∣fecte of Mercie: because that God dooeth imbrace vs with his loue, not for any o∣ther cause, but because he hath respect vn∣to our miseries. Loue maie be vnderstood as well of God towardes men, as of men emong them selues. If thou referre it to God, the sense shall be, that the trust of the loue of God doeth increase in them, and is established euery daie more and more in their hartes. Yet that other sense doeth not il agree also, that God do then kindle and confirme in them mutuall loue. 3 Beloued, when I gaue all diligence to write vnto you, of the common saluation, it was needefull for mee to write vnto you to exhorte you, that
you should earnestly contende for the maintenaunce of that faithe, which was once giuen vnto the Sainctes. 4 For there are certaine men crept in which before of old were ordained to this condemnation: vngodlie men thei are, whiche tourne the grace of our God into wantonnesse, and deny God the onely Lorde and our Lorde Iesus Christe. 3 WHen I gaue all diligence. I haue translated the Greke  vsyng diligence, it soundeth woorde for woorde to dooe dili∣gence. Further, many interpreters doe o∣pen this sentence thus: That an earnest endeuour did enforce Iude to write. As wee are wont to saie, that thei whiche doe burne with some earnest desire, can not staie them selues, therefore accordyng to theim, there was a necessitie in this, that the desire to write, did not suffer Iude to bee silent. But I rather thinke that there are here twoo seuerall members. That when otherwaies he was readie enough, and
carefully giuen to write, necessitie also did constraine hym. He signifieth there∣fore, that he writeth freely and desirouslie vnto them: but yet that he was vrged also with necessitie that he should dooe it: Be∣cause in déede (as it foloweth in the course of the texte) thei beeyng assaulted of the wicked, were to bee instructed to the bat∣tell. Therefore in this first place Iude te∣stifieth, that he had so greate a care of their Saluation, that he desired to write of his owne accorde, and that in deede withall his harte. Then, that he might stirre vp their attentiuenesse, he saith together that the matter did require it should be so. For necessitie giueth sharpe spurres. Excepte thei had been premonished, how greatelie needefull this exhortation would bee vn∣to them: Thei might haue been slowe and carelesse to read. But when he foretelleth that he doeth write, by meane of their pre∣sent necessitie, it is as if he should sound a retire, to shake of their drousinesse. Of the common Saluation. Certaine copies adde yours, but amisse, in my iud∣gement. For he maketh saluation cōmon
to theim with hym self. And this sorte of doctrine, whiche is to be published, giueth not a little effecte, when one speaketh of his owne feelyng and experience. For the speeche will bee but bablyng, if wee rea∣son of Saluation emongest other menne, whereof wee our selues haue no feelyng. Therefore Iude professeth hym self to bee a teacher, conning in practise, when in the nomber of the godlie, he dooeth assemble hym self into the fellowshipp of the same Saluation. That I might exhorte you to striue. It is worde for worde. Exhortyng you. But when he noteth the ende of his counsell, the speeche must be resolued thus. Wher∣as I haue translated by striuyng to helpe the Faithe, it is as muche, as to endeuour to keepe the faithe, and to endure strong∣ly, the contrary assaultes of Sathan. For he teacheth that to the ende, thei maie re∣maine stedfast in the Faithe, thei must vn∣dergoe many conflictes, and that conti∣nuall trouble waiteth vpō them. He saith The Faithe once giuen. That thei maie knowe, that thei haue attained to it vpon
this condition, that thei neuer faint, or fall awaie. Creptein. Albeeit that Sathan is al∣waies malicious against the godlie, and therefore doeth not cease to prouoke them: yet he admonisheth them to whom he wri∣teth, of the presente necessitie. Now, he saieth, Sathan doeth especially sett vpon you, and prouoke you. You must therefore take Armour to resist hym. Here wee ga∣ther, that a good and faithfull Pastour must wifely foresee, what the present state of the Churche doeth require, that he may thereto applie his doctrine. The woorde  which he vseth, doeth note a sinister and secret creepyng in, whereby the ministers of Sathā deceiue the igno∣rant. For in the night, and when the Hous∣bandmen slepe, Sathan doeth scatter his Tares, that he maie corrupt the pure fede of the Lorde. And together he toucheth that this is a daungerous euill. For heare also is the crafte of Sathan: to raise vp to doe hurte, those that be of the flocke, to the ende thei maie the easelier fall in. Condemned before. He calleth the Iud∣gement,
either damnation, or a reprobate sense, whereby thei are caried to peruerte the doctrine of goodlinesse. And that can no manne dooe, but to his owne destruc∣tion. Further, this Metaphour is taken from thence, whereby the eternall coun∣sell of God (by whiche the faithfull are or∣deined to Saluation) is called a booke. And when the faiethfull heare, that thei are auowed to eternall death, thei ought to take heede to themselues, least thei en∣danger themselues with the same destruc∣tion. Albeit Iude meaneth also to meete with a perill, least the strangenesse of the matter might moue or trouble any. For, if thei were of old ordained it followeth that the Churche is not exercised, but by the assured counsell of God. The grace of our God. Now he sheweth more plainly, what maner of mischeef it was. For he saieth, that thei abused the grace of the Lorde, that thei might giue o∣uer them selues and others to an impure, and prophane libertie to sinne. But the grace of God hath appeared farre to an o∣ther ende, that is, that we should deny vn∣godlinesse,
and worldelie lustes, and liue soberly, iustly, and godlie in this present worlde. Let vs therfore knowe, that there is nothing more pestilent then this kinde of men, whiche by the grace of Christ, pre∣tēde a libertie to sinne. Because we teach that by the free mercie of GOD, wee ob∣taine Saluation, the Papistes accuse vs of this faulte. But what auailes it to refell their impudencie with woordes? when euery where wee vrge Repentance, the feare of God, and newnesse of life: and thei dooe not onely corrupte the whole worlde with moste vile examples, but also thei take from the worlde, by their wicked doctrine, true holinesse, and the right wor¦ship of God? Albeeit I thinke that thei of whom Iude speaketh, were like to the Li∣bertines of our time, as it wil more plain∣ly appeare by the course of the texte. God whiche is onely Lorde. Certaine olde Co∣pies haue, Christe, whiche is onely God and Lorde. And in deede in the second E∣pistle of Peter, there is onely mention of Christe, and there he is called Lorde. He meaneth that Christe is denied, when thei
who were redeemed with his blood, dooe againe embondage them selues to the de∣uill, and make voide, as muche as lieth in theim, that inestimable price. Therefore, that Christe maie retaine vs in his owne possession: let vs remember that he there∣fore died for vs, and rose againe, that he might rule ouer our life and death. 5 J will put you in remembraunce, for as muche as you know this, how that after the Lorde had deliuered his people out of Egipt, he destroyed thē afterwardes whiche beleeued not. 6 And the Angels whiche kepte not their first estate, but left their owne habitatiō: he hath reserued in euer∣lasting chaines vnder darknesse, vn∣to the iudgement of the greate daie. 7 As Sodome and Gomorrha, and the Citees aboute them, whiche in like maner as thei did, commited, and followed straunge fleshe, are set forth for an example and endure the like vengeaunce of eternall fire. 5 To put in mynde. He either excuseth for modestie sake, least he maie seeme to
teache theim, as rude people of thynges, whiche thei knowe not: or in deede (which liketh me better) for the more vehemen∣cie, he testifieth that he dooeth not bryng them any thing, which thei had not heard of before: To the ende that that whiche he was to speake, might haue the more cre∣dite and aucthoritie. He saieth, I onelie bryng to your remembraunce those thyn∣ges, whiche you haue learned alredy. But as he dooeth attribute vnto theim knowe∣ledge, to the ende thei maie bee the more watchfull to take heede: So leaste thei might thinke the labour, whiche he vnder∣tooke towardes them to bee needelesse, he saieth thei haue neede of admonitions. For this is not onely the vse of the worde of God, that wee maie learne those thynges, whiche wee were neuer taught, but also that it maie stirre vs vp to medi∣tate earnestly those thynges, whiche wee knowe alreadie, and maie not suffer vs to bee drousie in fruitlesse knowledge. And this is the effecte, that after we are called of God, wee must not scarcely boste of his grace: but rather walke carefullie in his
feare. Because if any doe mocke God af∣ter this sorte, the contempte of his glorie shall not goe in vaine. He sheweth this by three examples. For firste he calleth to minde the punishement, whiche God exe∣cuted vpon the vnbeleeuers whom beyng redeemed by his power, he had chosen to be his people. Almoste the like compari∣son is in Paule, in his first to the Corinths, the tenth Chapter. The effect is: Those whom God had adorned with greatest be∣nefites, whom he had aduaunced into the same degree of honour, whiche he vouch∣saueth vs at this daie, he afterwardes se∣uerely punished. Therefore, thei in vaine boast of the grace of God, who soeuer do not answere vnto his callyng. The name of People is honourably taken for an holie and chosen Nation. As if he should haue saied, that it did not profite them that thei were taken into the Couenaunt by a singuler Priue∣ledge. When he calleth them vnbeleuers, he noteth the fountaine of all euilles. For from thence, saieth Moises, did proceede all their sinnes, that thei did not yeelde
themselues to bee guided by the worde of God. For where the obedience of faithe is it is together of necessitie, that there re∣maine obedience towardes God, in euery part of this life. 6 Jf not the Angels. An argument from the more to the lesse. For the condition of Angels was of more accompt then ours: and yet God punished that fallyng awaie, for a moste horrible example. Therefore, he will not spare our vnfaithfulnesse, if we fall awaie from the grace, wherevnto he hath called vs. In deede this punishment, whiche was laied vppon the Citizens of Heauen and suche excellent Ministers of God, ought to be daiely conuersant before our eyes: least at any tyme we bee carried into the contempt of the grace of GOD, from whence wee violently fall headlong into destruction:  in this place, iie fitly bee taken as well for the beginnyng, as for cheeflie. For Iude noteth that thei were therfore punished, because despising the goodnesse of God thei fell from their first callyng. And the Exposition follo∣weth immediatly, when he saieth that thei
left their first habitation. For no other waies then vseth to bee doen with runna∣way souldiers, thei left their place where∣in thei were set. The greeuousnesse of the punishment is also to bee marked, whiche the Apostle sheweth. Not onely free spi∣rites, but heauenly Principalities, are now held bounde in perpetuall chaines. Thei did not onely enioye the glorious light of God, but his brightnesse did shine in them, that from thence as it were, he might powre out hymself, as by beames into all partes of the world: Now thei are plunged vnder darkenesse. Further, wee are not to imagine a place wherein the Deuilles are shut. For the Apostle meant to teach plainly, how miserable their con∣dition is, since by their fallyng awaie, thei are depriued of their dignitie. For whe∣ther soeuer thei goe, thei drawe their chai∣nes with them, and remain ouerwhelmed in their darkenesse. In the meane tyme, their extreme punishment is deferred, vn∣to the greate daie. 7 As Sodome and Gomorrha. This e∣xample is more generall. For he sheweth
that God (no sorte of men excepted) did in∣differently execute punishment vppon all the wicked. And Iude himself doeth after make mention, that the burnyng where∣with the fiue Cities perished, was a figure of eternall fire. Therefore God did then appoinct an excellent instruction, whiche might keepe men in feare to the worldes ende. Wherevpon it commeth that there is so often mention thereof in the Scrip∣tures. Yea, so often as the Prophet would set forth some notable and fearfull iudge∣ment of God, setting it forthe vnder the fi∣gure of fire and Brimstone, thei allude to the destructiō of Sodom and Gomorrha. Wherefore, Iude doth not without cause implie a terror to all worldes, by settyng before them suche a spectacle. When he saith, that the neighbor Cities went a who∣ryng in like maner with them, I referre not this to the Israelites and Angels, but mutually to Sodom and Gomorrha Nei∣ther doeth it hinder, that thei pronounce , these, is the Masculine gender. For Iude rather had regarde to the Inha∣bitaunts then to the places.
To followe straunge flesh. He hath put, for to be violently carried vnto monstrous lu∣stes. For wee knowe that the Sodomites not content with a common libertie of vn∣cleannesse, were defiled with more execra∣ble and preposterous filthinesse. It is to be noted, that he maketh them subiect vn∣to eternall fire. For hence we gather that that fearefull spectacle whiche Moises describeth, was onely the image of a grea∣ter punishment. 8 Likewise, these deluded with drea∣mes, doe in deede defile the flesh and despise gouernment, and speake euill of them that be in authoritie. 9 But Michaell the Archangest, when striuyng in iudgement, he di∣sputed about the bodie of Moises, durst not blame hym with cursed speaking, but saieth. The Lorde re∣buke thee. 10 But these speake euill of those thin∣ges which thei know not. But what soeuer thynges thei knowe natural∣ly, thei knowe as brute Beastes, in them thei are corrupted.
LIkewise these &c. This Similitude is not to bee precisely vrged, as if he cōpared those, of whom he speaketh to the Sodomites, or to ye Angels whiche left their saite, or to the vnbeleeuyng peo∣ple, in all thynges. He onely sheweth, that thei are vassalles of wrathe ordained to de∣struction: and that thei can not escape the hande of God, but that in his tyme he will set the like example vppon them. For his purpose is, to withdrawe the godlie, least thei intangle themselues in their fellow∣ship. Further, he beginneth in this place more clearely to describe these deceiuers. And first he saieth, thei doe as it were in dreaming defile their fleshe, by which wor∣des he noteth, a sottishe shamelesnesse: as if he should haue saied, that thei are giuen ouer to all vncleannesse, whiche the very worste did abhorre, except drowsinesse did take from them all shame and feelyng. The speeche therefore is Metaphoricall, whereby he noteth that thei are so block∣ishe, that thei giue ouer them selues to all filthinesse without any shame. But ye An∣tithesis is to bee marked, when he saieth,
thei defile the flesh, that is, that which hath lesse excellencie, thei dishonest: and yet de∣spise as ignominious, that whiche doeth most excell amongst men. By this second member it appeareth that thei were out∣ragious men, which sought to be without gouernment, that beeyng freed from the feare of lawe, thei might sinne more free∣ly. And these two are mostly alwaies ioy∣ned together, that thei that are let loose to wickednesse, together desire that all order were abolished. Further, albeit this was their drift, to plaie the wilde Coltes with out yoke, yet it appeareth by Iudes woor∣des, that thei vsed to speake leudly and cō∣temptuously of those that were in authori∣tie. As at this daie phantasticall fellowes doe not onely grinde their teeth, that thei are restrained by the authoritie of Gouer∣ners: but thei furiously wrastle against all gouernment: thei crie, that the right of the sworde is prophane and contrarie to god∣linesse. Finally, thei proudly abandon out of the Churche of GOD Kynges and all Magistrates. He calleth Dignities, de∣grees endewed with excellencie, and thei
that excell in honour. 9 But Michaell the Archangell. Peter comprehēdeth this argument more breef∣ly, & in generall, that the Angels whiche farre exceade men, yet dare not giue rai∣lyng sentence. Further, because thei haue thought that this Historie, is taken out of an Apocriphall booke, thence it is that the Epistle should bee of lesse accompte. But seeyng the Iewes had many thynges by the Traditions of the Fathers, I see no∣thyng to bee absurde, if we saie, that Iude reported that, whiche was deliuered by hande many yeres before. I knowe in deede, that many foolishe thinges haue béen receiued vnder this pre∣tence, as the Papistes at this daie recken in this accompte, euery sencelesse dotage of the Monkes. But this doeth not lette, but that thei had certaine histories whiche were not written. This is out of contro∣uersie, that Moses was buried of GOD, that is, that his buriall was hid by the as∣sured Counsell of God. And it is not vn∣knowne to any, why his place of buriall was hidd, that is, leaste the Iewes should
drawe his bodie into an occasion of super∣stition. What maruel then, if Sathan en∣deuour to bryng to light, the bodie of the Prophet, that was kept secret by the will of God? But the Angels withstoode it, as their ministerie is alwaies at hande with God. And in deede we see, that almoste in all worldes, Sathan hath vsed this de∣uise, that the bodies of the seruauntes of God might be Idolls to so many foolishe men. Wherfore, for this testimony, although it be not found in Scripture, this Epistle ought not to be called into doubt. Where∣as Michaell alone is alleadged to dispute with Sathan, it is no newe thyng. Wee knowe that the thousandes of Angels are alwaies at hand to serue the Lorde: but he applieth with choice to the performaunce of thynges, this or that, as it pleaseth him. That whiche Iude reporteth that Mi∣chaell spake, is also had in Zacharie. 3.1. God rebuke thée or represse thee, Sathan. It is, as thei call it, a comparison of the more and ye lesse. Michaell durst not more bitterly curse Sathan, who yet was a re∣probate
and damned, then that he might commit hym to God to be suppressed. But these feare not, to speake euill of (with ex∣treme reproches) the powers whom God adorneth with singuler honour. 10 Whiche thei knowe not. He signifieth that thei sauour nothyng but that whiche is grosse and beastly: and therefore not to perceiue what is worth of honor: yet that thei are so impudently mad, that thei feare not to condemne those thynges whiche are beyonde their capacitie. Againe, that thei are toyled in an other euill, that when after the maner of beasts thei runne head∣long to those thynges whiche offer them selues to the outwarde senses, thei keepe no modestie in them: but thei doe vtterly plunge themselues, no other waies then the Swine tumbleth hymself into the fil∣thinesse of mire. The Aduerbe naturally, is set against reason and iudgement. For the only force of nature rageth in brute beastes: but rea∣son ought to guide mē, and to bridle their affections. 11 Wee bee vnto them: for thei haue fol∣lowed
the waie of Caine: and are cast awaie by the deceipt of Balaams wa∣ges, and haue perished in the gainsai∣yng of Core. 12 These are blottes in your loue feastes, feastyng emong them selues, and fee∣dyng them selues without feare, clou∣des without water, caried aboute of windes: corrupt trees without fruite, twise deade, and plucked vp by the rootes. 13 Raging waues of the Sea, fomyng out their owne shame: thei are wandring Starres, to whom is reserued the blac∣kenesse of darkenesse for euer. 11 WOe be vnto them. It is maruell why he doeth so sharplie inueigh against them, seeyng he had saied of late, that an Aungell had not libertie, to giue railyng sentence againste Sathan hym self. But his purpose was to sette doune a generall rule: He onely sheweth breefly by Mi∣chaels example, how intollerable the rage of these fellowes is, whilest thei peeuishe∣ly raile vpon that whiche God dooeth ho∣nour. It was in deede lawfull for Mi∣chael,
to thunder vppon Sathan with ex∣treame cursyng. And wee see how vehe∣mently the Prophetes dooe sometymes enueigh against the wicked. But seeyng Michael abstaineth from extreame sharp∣nesse, otherwaies lawfull, how outrage∣ous is it to keepe no meane againste the Creatures whiche excell in glorie? But when he dooeth pronounce vpon theim, he doeth not so muche wishe euill vnto them, as premonishe, what ende thei shall haue. And that he doeth, least thei might cary any with theim to destruction vnawares. He saieth thei are the followers of Cain, who beeyng vnkinde to God, peruertyng his worshippe with an euill and a wicked harte, did bereaue hym self of the birthe∣right. He saieth thei were deceiued with rewarde as Balaam, because thei corrupt the doctrine of godlinesse for filthie lucre sake. But the Metaphor whiche he vseth, expresseth somewhat more. He saieth thei are caste awaie: That is, because their in∣temperatnesse is cast awaie, as water that is spilte. Thirdlie he saieth, that thei fol∣lowe the gainsaiyng of Chore: Because
thei trouble the good estate of the church. 12 Blottes in your louefeastes. Thei which read, emongst your Charities, doe not, in my iudgement expresse the naturall mea∣nyng sufficiently. For he calleth  Feastes, whiche were vsed emongest the godlie, for to testifie their godlie vnitie. He saieth that suche bankettes are defiled of vncleane men, whiche dissolutely after cramme themselues. For there was great sparyng and moderatiō. It was not ther∣fore meete, that raueners should bee ad∣mitted thether, whiche afterwarde should intemperatlie cramme their paunche o∣therwhere. Many copies haue bākettyng together with you. Whiche readyng if it bee better like, the sense shalbe, that thei were not a reproche, but greeuous and troublesome, as, thei that should without feare stuffe their Bellies, of the common charges of the Churche. Peter saieth somewhat otherwaies, who writeth that thei are fedde in errour, and that thei eate together with the com∣panie of the faithfull. As if he should haue saied, that thei doe vnaduisedly, who nou∣rishe
suche daungerous Serpentes: And that thei are twise fooles, whiche pamper their excessiue riot. And at this daie, I would God there were more iudgement in some good men, who while thei delite to bee too fauoura∣ble towardes the wicked, bryng greate hurte to the whole Churche. Cloudes without water. The twoo simi∣litudes whiche are in Peter, yet to one ende he knitteth into one. For, eche nip∣peth the boasting. Because these varletts, albeit thei promise many thinges, yet thei are barraine, and emptie within. As the Cloudes that are driuen with the stormes giue hope of raine, but by and by thei wast to nothyng. Peter addeth a similitude of a drie and emptie Fountaine. And Iude coupleth diuers Metaphors to one ende: that Corrupt trees: as at gatheryng tyme the strength of trees decreaseth: After he calleth them Trees without fruite, plucked vp by the rootes, twise dead. As if he should haue said, there is no iuyce within, how so∣euer the leaues appeare. 13 Rageyng waues of the Sea. It maie
more plainely bee gathered by the wordes of Peter, why this was added: that is, be∣cause being puffed vp with pride, thei blu∣ster out or rather spue out proude wordes in a loftie stile. In the meane tyme thei do so bryng nothyng that is spirituall, that thei rather cast men doune to bee as voyde of feelyng as brute beastes. Suche, as is alreadie said, are at this daie those phanta∣sticall fellowes, who tearme them selues Libertines. Thou wouldest saie thei doe nothyng but thunder. For despising the common order of speeche, thei feigne vnto themselues I wot not what straunge farr fetched forme of vtteraunce. After thei haue seemed to lift their Disciples aboue the Skies, thei sodainly fall into beastly errors. For thei imagine that that is the state of innocencie. When there is no dif∣ference betweene that which is filthie and cleane. Thei imagine that that is a spiri∣tuall life, while feare beyng set a parte, e∣uery one doeth securely flatter hymself: that we become Gods, because God whol∣ly taketh our spirites departyng out of our bodies. For whiche cause the simpli∣citie
of the Scripture, is with more dili∣gence and reuerence to be esteemed, least more finely plaiyng the Philosophers thē is conuenient, wee approache not to Hea∣uen, but rather bee ouerwhelmed in mani∣folde incomberaunces. He therefore cal∣leth thē wandryng Starres, because thei da∣zle ye eyes with a vanishyng shew of light. 14 And Enoch the seuenth from A∣dam did before Prophesie of them, saiyng: Behold the Lorde commeth with thousandes of his Sainctes. 15 That he might giue Iudgement a∣gainst all men, and might rebuke al the vngodly amōg them, of all their wicked deedes, which thei haue vn∣godly committed, and of all their cruel speakinges, which wicked men haue spoken against God. 16 These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their owne lusts: and their mouth speaketh proude thyn∣ges, hauyng mens persons in admi∣ration for aduauntage. ANd before.  I thinke rather that this Prophesie was not written, then ta∣ken
out of the Apochripha Bookes. For it maie bee that thei of olde tyme did com∣mende this saiyng to their posteritie, as a thing worthie the remembryng. If a man aske (seyng there bee many like saiynges euery where in the Scriptures) why he did not cite this testimonie written out of some one of the Prophets, the aunswere is readie: that he would repeate from the furthest antiquitie what the Spirite hath pronounced of them. And this is the mea∣nyng of the wordes. For he saith by name the seuenth from Adam, that he maie com∣mende the antiquitie of the Prophesie: namely, that it hath beene alreadie in the former worlde. And whereas I haue said, that this Prophesie was knowne vnto the Iewes by reporte: if any man thinke o∣ther waies I doe not striue: as neither of the Epistle also, whether it bee Iudes, or some other mans. Onely I followe that whiche is likely in thynges doubtfull. Behold the Lorde came. The tyme past is put for the tyme to come, after the ma∣ner of the Prophets. He saieth that he shal come with thousands of Sainctes: vnder
whiche wordes he noteth as wel the faith∣full as the Angels. For both shall set forth the tribunall seate of Christ, when he shall come doune to iudge the worlde. He saith thousandes, euen as Daniell also 7.10. doeth saie millions of Angells: least that the multitude of the vngodly, should as a ragyng Sea carrie awaie the children of God, whilest thei thinke that it will come to passe that the Lorde will at length ga∣ther his together, of whiche parte dwel∣lyng in heauen, is now hidden from our eyes, and parte lieth hidden vnder a great heape of chaffe. But the punishement that hangeth ouer the reprobate, ought to staie the electe in feare and watchfulnesse. He speaketh of deedes and woordes: because these corrupters did not onely muche hurt by their wicked life, but by their lewde and vncleane speech. And he calleth them hard speeches, for the shamelesse boldnesse wherewith beyng puffed vp, thei doe ma∣lepertly thrust in them selues. 16 These are murmurers. Because thei flatter them selues in wicked affections, thei are withall harde and frowarde, tht
thei are neuer satisfied: hence it commeth that thei alwaies murmur and complaine, although good men doe beare themselues kindly towardes them. He nippeth their proude speakyng, because thei boast them selues proudly. But in the meane while he sheweth that thei are of a vile disposition: because thei slauishly abase them selues, for aduauntage. And this vneuen dealing is commonly seen in such varlets. Where there is no man whiche maie staie their Pride, or there is no respect whiche maie let it, their Pride is intollerable: thei cha∣lenge any thing vnto themselues so impe∣riously. But thei vilely flatter those, whō thei flatter, or of whom thei hope for some gaine. He taketh persons, for the outward greatnesse or power. 17 But ye beloued remember the wor∣des which were spoken before by the Apostles of our Lorde Iesus Christ: to wit, 18 That thei told you, that ther should be mockers in the last tyme, whiche should walk after the lustes of their owne vngodlinesse.
19 Those are thei which seperate them selues, fleshly, not hauyng the Spirit. BVt ye.  Now he setteth the warnynges of the Apostles whiche were freshe in memorie, after the auncient Prophesie. This worde, , that is remember, it maketh no greate matter, whether you reade it in the Indicatiue moode, or in the Imperatiue moode. For the sence remai∣neth one, that thei which are armed, ought not to bee astonished, with the Prophesie, whiche he citeth He vnderstandeth the last tyme, wherein the state of the Church be∣yng renued, doeth receiue a setled condi∣tion to the ende of the worlde. And it be∣gan from the first commyng of Christ. He calleth them Mockers after the maner of the Scripture, whiche beeyng dronken with a wicked and prophane contempt of God, doe breake out into a beastly despi∣sing of his power: so that no Religiō doth keepe them any more in their duetie: be∣cause no feare of the iudgement to come, no hope of eternall life doeth stick in their myndes. As now a daies the worlde doeth euery where swarme with hauing no God
but their owne bellie Epicures which de∣spise God, who quite castyng a side all re∣uerence, do furiously scoffe the whole doc∣trine of godlinesse as a tale. 19 Whiche seperate. Many Greeke Co∣pies haue a Participle absolute. Others add : but almost in the same sence. For he vnderstandeth that thei make a de∣parture from the Church, because thei can not beare the yoke of discipline, as whiche beyng giuen to the flesh, doe abhorre a spi∣rituall life. The fleshe here is set against the Spirite, that is, the grace of regene∣ration: and therefore it doeth signifie an e∣uill disposition, suche as is in men not yet borne a newe. For in this nature whiche goeth out of kinde, whiche we draw from Adam, is nothing but a grosse and earthly thyng: that no parte of vs doeth aspire vn∣to God, till we be renued with his spirite. 20 But ye, beloued, edifiyng your selues in your moste holy faithe, praiyng in the holy Ghost. 21 Keepe your selues in the loue of God, looking for the mercie of our Lorde Iesus Christ vnto eternall life.
22 And haue mercie on some, putting difference: 23 And others saue through feare, pul∣lyng them out of the fire, hatyng al∣so the garment spotted by the flesh. 24 Now to hym that is able to keepe you free from sinne, and to present you faultlesse before the presence of his glorie with ioye, 25 To God onely wise our Sauiour bee glorie, and maiestie, and dominion, and power, now, and for euer, amen. BVt ye &c.20 He sheweth the waie where∣by thei may ouerturne all the engines of Sathan, to wit, hauyng loue so ioyned with faith, as though thei did watche in a Holde vntill the commyng of Christ. But as he is much and vsuall in borrowed spée∣ches, so here also he hath his maner of speeche whiche must breefly bee noted. He commaundeth in the first place that thei builde themselues in faithe. Whereby he signifieth that the foūdation of faith must be helde fast: but that the first instruction is not sufficient vnlesse thei striue daily to goe forwarde, whiche haue alreadie laied
the foundation in a right faith. He calleth their faithe moste holy, that thei maie rest soundly vppon it, and leanyng vnto the strength thereof, maie neuer wauer. But for as muche as the whole perfection of man doeth consist in faith, it seemeth to be an vnseemely thyng that he biddeth to builde an other buildyng, as though faith did onely begin a man. The Apostle aun∣swereth this question, when he addeth by and by, that men are builded vpon faithe, loue being ioyned withall. Vnleast it may be that some man had rather take it thus, that men are builded in faithe, so farre as thei profite therein. And truely they daily goyng forwarde in faithe, doe cause that it riseth into a full buildyng. By this mea∣nes the Apostle would teach, that we must growe in faithe, that wee must bee earnest in praier, and that wee must holde fast our callyng in loue. Praiyng in the Spirite. This is the waie of continuance, if wee bee instructed with the power of God. Therefore, as often as wee speake of the constantnesse of faithe, we muste flie vnto praier. And because we
commonly praie slaighlie, he addeth, in the Spirite: as if he should saie, that there is so greate slacknesse, and so greate coldnesse of our fleshe, that none can praie a right, vnlesse he bee stirred vp with the Spirite of God, that wee are so readie to mistruste and fearfulnesse, that no man dareth call God Father, except the same Spirite doe teache hym. For, frō hence commeth care∣fulnesse, hence heate andearnestnesse, hēce chearfulnesse, hence hope of obtainyng, hence finally come those vnspeakable gro∣nynges, of whiche Paule speaketh. Rom. 8. Therefore, Iude teacheth not without cause, that no man can praie as he ought, except the Spirite bee his guide. 21 Keepe your selues in Loue. He placeth Loue as the keeper and guide of our life: not that he maie set it against the grace of God, but because this is the right course of our callyng, if we goe forward in Loue. And because many thynges doe intice vs to backsliding, that it is hard to keepe our selues sounde vnto God vnto the ende, he recalleth the faithfull vnto the laste daie. For the verie waityng for that daie, ought
to staie vs vp, that wee neuer fainte. O∣therwaies wee muste needes quaile eue∣rie moment. And it is to bee noted, that he will not haue vs to hope for eternall life, but from the mercie of Christe. For, he shall so bee our Iudge, that he holdeth the free bene∣fite of Redemption, purchased by hym, as a rule to iudge by. 22 And haue compassion on some. He ioyneth an other exhortation, how the faithfull ought to behaue them selues in correctyng their brethren: that thei maie bryng them vnto the Lorde. And he teacheth that thei are diuerslie to bee dealt with, to wit, euery manne, ac∣cordyng to his disposition. For, towardes the gentle, and suche as are willyng to be taught, wee must vse gentlenesse. Others are more hard: therefore, to be brought vn∣der with feare. This is the puttyng of a difference whiche he spake of. The Parti∣ciple , that is puttyng diffe∣rence, I knowe not why Erasmus should rather chuse to translate it Passiuelie, se∣yng it is doubtfull: and the Actiue signi∣fication,
doeth farre better agree with the text. Therefore the somme is, that, if wee will prouide for the safetie of them that do fall. We must consider the inclination of euery manne: that thei whiche are gentle and tractable, bee gently called backe in∣to the waie, as worthie of compassion: but if any be stubberne, let hym bee corrected more sharpely. And because sharpenesse is almoste hurtfull, he excuseth it by the necessitie, because thei cannot otherwaies bee preserued, whiche dooe not followe good counsailes of their owne accorde. Further, he vseth an excellent borowed speeche. For, where there is no daunger of burnyng, wee doubte not with violence to pull hym, whom we desire to haue safe: neither in deede were it inough to beeken with their finger, or gentely to reache out the hande. So also their safetie is to bee prouided for, whiche would not come vn∣to God, vnleast thei were hardly drawne. The old interpretation doeth farre dif∣fer: whiche readyng is yet found in many Greeke copies. Reprooue theim that are iudged, saith the old interpreter. But that
former sence dooeth better agree: and in my iudgemente it is true and naturall. The woorde to keepe, is translated vnto menne: not that thei are authours of safe∣tie, but Ministers. 23 Hatyng. This place, whiche other∣waies dooeth seeme darcke, shall haue no hardnesse, the borowed speeche beyng wel expounded. He willeth that the faithfull doe not onely take heede of the touchyng of vices: But that no infection doe fasten vpon them, he teacheth that whatsoeuer is nere and alied, be auoided. As if we speake of in chastitie, wee will saie that all prouo∣cations to luste muste bee taken awaie. That shalbee yet made more plaine, if the speeche bee made full: to wit, that we hate not onely the fleshe, but the garmēt which is defiled with the touching of it. For this note  i. and, serueth to amplification. Therefore, he doeth not so muche permitt euill to bee nourished by sufferaunce, that rather he bideth all preparations, and all additions as thei call them, to be cutte of. 24 And to hym that is able to keepe. He shutteth vp his Epistle, with the praise
of God: in whiche he sheweth that our ex∣hortations can dooe nothyng, neither our endeuours, except the effecte proceede frō the power of God. Some copies haue (Them) whiche readyng if wee receiue, the sence shalbee, in deede it is your parte to endeuour, that thei maie be safe: but it pertaineth to God onely to performe the same. Yet the other readyng pleaseth me better: in whiche al∣so there is an alludyng vnto the former sentence. For after that he hath exhorted the faithfull, to saue that whiche was lost: to the ende that thei might knowe, that al endeuours will be to none effecte, excepte God woorke: He doeth in deede witnesse that thei can not otherwise bee saued, then by the power of God. Albeeit in this laste parte, there is an other Verbe, that is to saie, , whiche soundeth to keepe. So he should haue respect to that for∣mer member, where he saied, Saue, or Keepe your selues. FINIS.
An Epistle of M. Ihon Caluin, containyng diuers neces∣sarie poinctes of knowledge tendyng to constancie in the truthe in the tyme of affliction: writ∣ten to a Freend. Caluin. N.S.D. To certaine controuersies of godly Bretheren. THE calamitie of ye Church N. doeth not a little greeue vs: but because God doeth now seeme to loose the ra∣ces of Sathan and the wic∣ked, that he maie exercize those that bee his, we must paciently beare our estate. In the meane tyme he is to be intreated, that for his mercies sake he will spare ye weak∣nesse of his tender and little flocke. But who so thinketh that it goeth miserablie
with the Churche, so often as it is assailed with the furie or cruell violence of ene∣mies, doe not yet knowe the very ground of Christiā warfare. Hence is that doubt∣fulnesse that hath crept into the myndes of many, and now doeth possesse them. Whether it bee lawfull for the godlie to haue secrete meetynges, and in the night. For wee see that iudgement is cheefly gi∣uen by the successe, then the whiche, there is nothing more out of order. Of late whē without daunger thei might come toge∣ther, thei also thought that without all controuersie their obedience was accep∣table to God: now when trouble is sprong vp, doe thei dispute whether thei suffer pu∣nishment for their rashnesse? By this mea∣nes will shortly be condemned the confes∣sion of faithe, whiche doeth more kindle the rage of the wicked. Finally, according to these Iudgers it will not be good to fo∣lowe Christ, except in prosperitie. Paule did not without cause,Galat. 4.29. place the scoffings of Israell in the highest degree of perse∣cution: because therein is more daunger by deriding, and reproches, then by armed
crueltie. If the wicked see vs pressed with aduersitie, thei triumph at our afflictions. Here if our cōstancie doth begin to quaile, thei hurt more greeuously with their wor∣des then with sworde. But that saiyng of Paule was to be held: because we trust in the liuing God, wee must not onely suffer persecution, but slaunders. Let vs there∣fore call to remembraunce the example of Christ, whom Sathan laboured to wound with his venemous Darte. He trusted in God, let hym deliuer hym if he will, least we stumble so oft as we séeme to be giuen vnto the desire of the enemies. But if at the first pushe the Bretheren be either fea∣red or disquieted, it is your duetie to staie them vp, least thei fall doune, or also to raise them vp, that thei maie againe reco∣uer their strength: and not therfore to faile from their godlie endeuour, because it gaue the wicked an occasion to be cruell. For if the matter be weighed by it self, the aunswere will be plaine, that their priuate and secrete meetynges, were not laied to the Apostles charge for a fault. The ma∣licious enemies might then also obiect,
that men and women could not come to∣gether in the night and secretly without suspition. And there is no doubte but thei were burdened with many slaunders: and when a Garison of Souldiers kept watch at Ierusalem, this might seeme to be con∣trary to the publique peace. And yet they ceased not for all that.Act. 12.12. We see that when Peter was taken prisoner, thei were ga∣thered together in the house of a widowe. Neither is it needefull here to gather ex∣amples, because it is knowne to haue béen in daiely vse with them: as Histories wit∣nesse, that the godly Martirs haue had ca∣ues for their Churches. All be it this was subiect to no smal reproof, that thei might bee suspected either of theft, or of some o∣ther wickednesse: yet because necessitie did so enforce, thei despised with valiaunt myndes the reproches whiche thei knewe to be commonly spread. So now our bre∣theren are armed with a moste excellent defence, if Magistrates will suffer them freely and openly to call vppon the name of God, that thei will then gladly come a∣broade, nor will thei doe any thyng in se∣crete:
but because by their tyrannie thei are forbid, yet that thei follow that meane whiche is moste farre from tumulte. The same is to bee thought of Matrimonie, whose blessyng (as thei call it) in the Pa∣pacie is meere prophanation. And yet in respect of politicall order, it can not be cal∣led a secrete Mariage, whereof there is a Regester kept. But that ye holinesse there∣of should be polluted and defiled with su∣perstitions, is by no meanes to be suffred. All be it night Burialles are not without cause condemned by the Lawes: yet in vaine doe thei cloake their delicatenesse, who in the Burialles of their freends, do wrapp and intangle them selues with old Sacriledges. The same reason ought to holde in Baptisme. For all be it there bee before them a moste present daunger, yet will not that therefore be lawfull, whiche God doeth manifestly forbid. We knowe that in the Papacie Baptisme is corrup∣ted with many defilynges, and is almoste adulterated. If no feare hinder, it wil easi∣ly bee agreed vnto among all the godlie, that it is not lawfull for Fathers to offer
their childrē to a defiled Baptisme. Ther∣fore, to take an excuse by the daunger is too friuolous, as if the matter it self should thereby chaunge the nature thereof. For wee knowe that the testimonie of Godli∣nesse is more worth before God, then that it ought to giue place either to threatnin∣ges, or terrors, at the least where feare doeth vrge vs to dissimulation, whiche is a secrete approuing of that which is euill. Wherefore, as for charities sake wee la∣ment together with our Bretheren: so it is not in our power to free them from the insoluble lawe of God, whiche by no mea∣nes maie bee broken.Exod. 1.17. And if the Iewishe women in tymes past did not feare in E∣gipt, to deliuer the children of other men from the sworde of Pharao, to put their owne liues into daunger, it is foule for pa∣rentes to bee amazed with feare, that so muche as in them lieth, thei defile the sou∣les of their children. These thynges I haue breefly written to you accordyng to the iudgement of our companie, good sir, and right reuerende Brother, the Lorde guide you alwaies with his Spirit, blesse
your holy labours, and keepe you in safe∣tie with the Churche committed to your charge. My fellowe labou∣rers also doe hartely salute you. At Geneua. FINIS.
