566 99844154 8943
AN APPROVED Medicine against the deserued Plague. ¶Is any among you afflicted? Let him pray. Iames. 5.13. ¶JMPRINTED AT London, by Thomas Est, dwel∣ling in Aldersgate-streete, at the Signe of the black Horse. 1593.
To the honorable and ver∣tuous Lady Scudamore, attendant vppon hir Maiesties most excellent person in hir priuie Chamber, Anthony Anderson, Preacher of Chri∣sts holy gospell, Subdean of hir Maie∣sties Royall Chappell, wisheth all honorable encrease, and heauenly felicitie. ALthough (Honorable Madame) the matter herewith tendred, be of small worth, to some men, & lesse esteemed with many, yet sure I am the right vse thereof, may aduaile moe, then make ac∣compt of it. If in the daies of health & prosperitie, wee thinck it duetifull to pray the Lord, to continue the same, how much more ought wee, in affliction and aduersitie, to practise sound petition, which godlinesse hath this riches, that the faithfull by it in Christ from God, doth re∣ceiue, both temporary good, and eternall comforts. Wee in this Realme, are vnder the rod of affliction, and who doth pray, but those which are taught of God, to vse it. Amongst the number of whome, for that in my knowledge, with many others in Court, your Ladiship doth dayly vse and desire it, and my selfe for your good opinion and Christian kindnesse conceiued and bestowed on mee, to you greatly boūd, I am bold to patronize my poore indeauors present, vnder your Godly protection, assured that
both in Court & country, it shalbe the more in vse, which vndoubtedly will counteruaile their paines, if they pray in faith. The cause mouing this my bold∣nesse, to present the Church here with, is, my dutie to the same in general, & especially, next to the most honorable Court, (whereof I am a poore membre, in hir Maiesties goodnesse,) to my comfortable charge at Stepney, a people of great import, for Ma∣ryne seruice, cheefely zealous in God, loyall to hir Maiestie, well deseruing of the whole Realme, and now vnder the rod of this smart visitatiō, for whom, I humbly besech all them, which may or shall feele any comfort by this poore tender, that in their fer∣uent prayers, they will effectually commēd vs to the Throne of Gods mercies in Christ. And to you good Madame, with the rest of the honorable and godly Ladies and others at Court, I humbly com∣mend mee, beseeching God, to graunt vs mercifull deliuerance of this his louing rod, that wee hir Ma∣iesties seruants, may thether returne to our boūden dutie, as apertaineth, and so humbly I take my leaue. August 1. 1593. Stepney. Your honors deuote in the Lord, Anthony Anderson.
¶To the humble hearted Readers, in the Lord. THE Almightie GOD, the Lord of Hosts (as Father of mercies) deare brethern, for many yéeres past, hath swéetly called vs to vnfained repen∣tance, by the Ministery of his holy woord, but wée haue not hearkened therevnto. Wherefore eftsoones and againe, the same mightie God, doth at this present, sommon vs, by his smart Preacher,Micah. 6.9. the vi∣siting rod. Whose encreasing voyce, cryeth to all in the per∣sons of many, thus. Oh sinfull earth hearken and giue eare: stop thy course, stay thy race, tourne thy selfe to mée, receaue my stripes with pacience, and wisely foresée the plague and hide thée. For he that sent mée saith farther vnto thee.Pro. 22.3. Zoph. 2.1. O Na∣tion not worthie to be loued, how yet, haue I, loued thee? What should I haue done, that I haue not done vnto thée? I haue giuen thée a wonderfull peace, an inuincible protec∣tion, an heauenly doctrine, and the choyse store, of all earthy treasure. The gold of Ophir, Salomon sought after,2. Chron. 8.18. but the Indians gold, I haue powred into thy lap, as vnlooked for. A Prince thou hast, the holy wonder of the world. Else, aske the Ilands which know not God. Thy Realme and rest, is kept by mée, the watchman thereof, and when soeuer the enimie assaileth, I put him back, with great dis∣grace. The heauens doe drop the fatnesse, & the earth doth make thée laugh and sing, what wouldest thou haue more, but a continuance of that spirituall comfort, and corporall pleasures which yet abide with thée, but be wise and consi∣der, sée how I now begin to beate thée, beware therefore, re∣pent in tyme, least I vtterly remoue,Reue. 2.5. thy Candlestick from thée, and then who will pittie thy last dissolution? Behold,
and heare my rod,Micah. 6.9. and mée that sent it. I haue made thée sick with striking, doe not my percing arrows, stick fast in thée?Psal. 38.2.5. Are not thy wounds putrified? Doth not hasty death greatly deuoure thée? Mark it well and the cause therof. Thy sinne is the cause,Micah. 6.13. thy great sinnes, and they passing accompt.Oseas. 9.9.17 Turne therefore vnto mée that am in iust angre comming vnto thée with a mynde of reuenge: prepare thée therefore to méete mée, before the daye of my decrée come foorth.Psal. 106. in all. Lucke. 7.38. Ioel. 2.13. Come to mée, not with Israells hipocrisie, but with Magdalens teares. Rent your harts, and kéepe whole your garments, for I cannot take pleasure, in that bodely exer∣cise, where the penitent spirit, speaketh not for mercie. If any be afflicted let him pray.Iam. 5.13. If many be vnder the rod, let all come together, turne together, mourne together, cry to∣gether and say: O Lord of Hosts, in the midle of thy wars thinck vpon thy promised mercies. Wée come, no more to fight against thée in our sinfull lusts, but to fall before thée, forsaking & confessing our sinnes, swéet Lord haue mercie. And let euery of you,Esa. 1.5.6. Hos. 4.1. Iero. 8.6. from the top to the toe, (for you are sore from the head to the foote) applying profitably the con∣trauersie to your selues, say: Our sinnes O Lord, yea euery man say, my sinnes, as our sinnes are the causes of this ma∣lady. Our rebellions, presumptions, scorning, Atheistical, our Romane sinnes, our carnall apetites, present, past, re∣membred, and forgotten sinnes. Sinnes without remorse, without conscience, against all conscience, euen when ye spi∣rit quaketh in dread: euen thē ye flesh burneth in lust. Sinnes in Court vnbridled, sinnes in the Church not repented of, in the country not cared for.Iero. 17.27. The prophanation of the Sab∣both day, the abhominations in the wéeke day, no truth, lesse trust,Hose. 4.1.2. no faith to God, no loue to our brethern, much fayll of loyaltie to the Prince, and small proofe of due obedience, to hir Magistrates. But a mightie scorne of the Lords Prea∣chers, through an vtter contempt of his woord. Resolute, in league with sinne,Esa. 28. death and hell, and an absolute distrust, of Gods sure promises, either for mercies, or Iudgement.
And what should I say more? Oh how many are the foolish wise, which say in vnpunished boldnesse, they haue no God,Psal. 14.1. There is no God. Oh England, O people, why wilt thou dye? Say to thy selfe, Oh Soule, repent thée of thy sinne,Iero. 18.8. &. 26 3. Psal. 91.4.7. and God will repent him of the plague, will take thée into his protection, and hide thée vnder his wings. They shall fall on both sides thée, but it shall not come to thee. But if thou wilt not hearken to this his voice, O flesh, (of what mould so euer,) but still wilt pamper thy selfe in carnall delights, to a further transgression, (which now ought to be feared) then feare, for he hath not sent this scourage for little purpose, and be sure that he hath his store-house full, of finall instruments, which can and will make quick dispatch. As cleannesse of téeth, barrennesse of earth,Amos. 4.6. brought of heauen, deuouring wormes, fierie feauers, bur∣ning botch, scowring sword, reuenging axe, haylestones and stormes of fier, as of Sodome and Gomorrah, to persecute, to pull downe, to cast out, and into hell, all those which for∣get God. Are the treasures of wickednesse still in your hou∣ses, the false balance, small waights, naughtie wares, coun∣terfaite lights, swéet woords, sowre déedes?Eccle. 10.16.17 Do your heads eate for lust, and not for néede, drinck to surfet, and not for thirst, send their proud seruants, to bring, and neuer satisfi∣ed? Are the daughters of Sion proud, as Esay descryes them?Amos 4.1. Esa. 3.16. Ezech 13.18. Esa. 28.10. 1. cor. 9.26. & 14.9. Ier. 20.9. Micha. 3.12. Be your Prophets chamber groomes, to lay pillowes, vn∣der sinfull elbowes? or doe their tongues cleaue to the roofe of their mouthes? or speake they to the Clowds, or in the Ayre? or is fearefull Ieremy, become an example? Oh for woe. Ah Syon, thou plowed field, sometime, the bewtie of the world? what is become of thée? Oh England the pre∣sent Bride, beware of widowhood,Psal. 19.5. Cant. 6.1. the Bridegroome is come out of his chamber, goe foorth to méete him. He is gon into his beds of spiceries, shall be finde store?Cant. 4.13. He féedeth of flowers, where be his Lillies? Oh thrise happie land, per∣ceaue thy present happinesse, preuent a futuer horror, pray for the lyfe of thy Princely light, and harden not thy hart,2. Sam. 21.17.
being still dayly called in mercie.1. Cor. 11. Lucke. 13.3.5. For this sinne, many are sick, and many are dead, let the Remainder repent, least ye all likewise perish. And now my beloued, and important charge,Ro. 12.1. I besech you by the mercies of God, remember with mee,Amos. 1.2. &. 3.4. there is no plague but for sinne, and the Lyon roareth not, without his pray. Wée are now vnder this growing plague with others,Zeph. 2.3. lette vs repent effectually as others, which truely,Esa. 30.22. séeke the Lord, Cast our sinnes from vs, and draw the Lords mercie to vs. Forget not what godly Si∣rach saith,Eccle. 10.8. because of vnrighteous dealing, and wrongs, and riches gotten by deceipt, the Kingdome, is translated, from one people,Hab. 2.9. to an other. Wo vnto the buylder which buil∣deth with blood. And bewise to vnderstand this. Goods euill gotten, are of no long continuance. Finally let this sen∣tence sommon you, before the last Tromp, sound for you. Go to now,Ia 5.1.2 ye rich men, wéepe and howle, for your mise∣ries, that shall come vpon you. Your riches are corrupt, and your garments are moth eaten, your gold and siluer is canckered, and the rust of them, shalbe a witnesse against you, and shall eate your flesh, as it were fier. Ye heaped vp treasures for the last daies. Behold: the hyer of your labo∣rers, which haue reaped your féelds (roomed your shippes) which is of you kept back, by fraud, cryeth, and their crye, is entred into the eares of the Lord of Hosts. Iames, 5.1.2. &c. Lay your selues open to the Lord, for all things are ap∣parant vnto him,Pro. 28.13. but he will haue thée to accuse thy selfe, that he may forgiue thée. He that hideth his sinnes (saith Salomon) shall not prosper, but he that confesseth his sinnes, and forsaketh them, shall finde mercie. Therefore take a good heart to thée, bring repentance with thée, fall on your knées,1. Tim. 2.8. lift vp pure hands, the whole in Church, in our great assemblies, the sick at home, amids their children and fami∣lies. Take these prayers (or such) into your hands, send them hartely, vp to God, in Christ our onely Mediator, and feare not to finde mercie, with gracious deliuerance, be∣cause,Pro. 50.15. he hath so promised, saying: Call vpon mée in the day
of thy trouble, and I will heare thée, and deliuer thée, and thou shalt glorifie mee.Math. 11.28. And our sauiour Christ doth ten∣derly inuite all penitent sinners thus. Come vnto mée all you that trauell and be heauie loden, and I my selfe will ease you. To whome with the Father and the holy Ghost be alwaies, all honour and glorie, one God euerlasting. Amen. A Prayer to God against the Plague. WE prostrate our souls and bodies, before thy mercy seate, O Father of mercies, & humbly confesse, that we haue most iustly procured, thy heauie indignation against vs. We haue he∣therto, spent our time in wanton ap∣petites, & carelesse abuse, of thy sin∣guler bounties, but thou hast in mer∣cie, curbed the bitte, & straytned the rayne, of our vnbrydled affections, whereby we begin to dread thy threatned Iudgements. Our sinnes are as ma∣nyfold, as manifest, (O Lord) we haue dayly heard ye word of our sauing health, with ye eare of grudge & contempt, ei∣ther deriding or not caring, but neuer truely repenting, at the cry thereof. Thine aboundant blessings erthie, we haue gréedely deuoured, and by our wealth, haue encreased our wickednesse But O swéete Father haue mercie, and pardon our sinnes, (euen the whole trée, with hir braunching fruits,) which at this present, we heartely disclayme, and wherewith, euen the téeth of the whole Land, hath béene set on edge, namely infidelitie, incredulitie, and all impietie. No faith, no truth, no mercy, no knowledge of thée in our
harts, though great pretence of thy Religion in our lippes, but by falsehood, and cunning circumuention, one of another, by lying lips, and decitfull tongues, vanitie, hath béene tos∣sed, one to another, pryuat pilffrie, and open stealth, robbing at home, and rouing abrode, swearing, forswaring, whor∣ring and killing, oppressing, & deuoureing, to all our powers and pollicies, euen blood vnto blood, passing by pleasure to pleasures, from profite to pride, from pride to ambition, and in ambition, to inward contempt, & outward disdaine, each one of another. Our common peace by thée, hath not yet procured our Godly peace with thée, but rather we haue taken occasion thereby, to harden our hearts against thée, which mightilie hath drawen thée to this great contrauer∣sie with vs. O Lord vnbend (in mercy) thy bow of strength, for thy stéeled Arrows, sticke fast in vs, and our putrified wounds, bewray our iniquities. Yea Lord that more is, if we by thée, tourne not spéedely to thee, the wise in thée, doe behold thy sharpned sword, with an outstretched arme, drawne out against vs. O Lord heare vs, and heale vs, for in this our sickenesse and trouble (in our mediator Christ Iesus) we call vnto thée. And Lord it is high time, for our head Citie is sicke, hir Sister Cities grone vnder this burden, their neighbor people are turned to their earth, and no part is frée, from the noysome pestilence. It flyeth by day, it walketh in the darke, it destroyeth at noone tide, & none can resist it, but onely thou O Lord, which sent it, euen thou onely (if thou wilt) canst vtterly restrayne it. O déere father forgiue vs wretched sinners, relieue vs miserable wretches, remember that we are but earth and ashes, yet in thy mer∣cie thy déere children: deliuer vs from death, and worke life in vs. Let this thy louing rodde, ridde vs, of our carnal rust, and quicken vs with thy sanctifying spirit, open our harts to thy holy word, purge our cōsciences from all dead works, and rebuild vs fit, for thy holy seruice, giue vs patience in euerie aduersitie, an humble and regardant eye, in all pro∣speritie, feruent spirits to pray to thée, and now to giue thée
no rest, till thou vouchsafe to haue mercy vppon vs. Our Prince thine holy Anoynted, prayeth for vs, hir potētates, thy preaching ministers, and sanctified people, mourne and lament. Thy wydows, and desolate Orphanes, yea thy smal and tender Infants cry, lifting vp pure hands, swéete Lord, (say they) haue mercy. And now O Lord both one and all, powring out the teares of our hearts vnto thée, most hum∣bly besech thée, relieue vs, release vs, heare vs, forgiue vs, reuiue vs, preserue vs, protect vs, deliuer vs from euill, and receaue vs into thy euerlasting fauor, through Iesus Christ our Lord: To whome with thée and the holy Ghost, thrée distinct persons and one onely our good God, be all honour and glory, for euer and euer. Amen. An earnest prayer for the Queenes most excellent Maiestie. O Lord God holy Father, infi∣nitly wise, omnipotent, and a∣boundant in mercie, mightie in worke, & iust in reuenge, which for the common conuerse, of all men, hast planted them plats, & put them vnder soueraigne auc∣toritie, through which good gouernmēt, they might most firmely, liue and loue one another, most wisely ordaining each one, to haue mutuall need and occa∣sioned entercourse one with another▪ Sondry which Royall staues, of bewtie and bands, eftsoones thou hast broken into shieuers, when by ouermuch pro∣uocation
& contempt, thy awonted long suffering, hath bene abused: as therby vnder a sparing chastise∣ment, to reduce them, or by a deadly blow, vtterly to subuert them. O Lord magnificent, by thee it is, that Kingdomes are, and Kings doe raigne. Puttest downe one, & setteth vp another, as, where, & when it pleaseth thee, in all & euery place, vnder the Coape of heauen. Wee thy chosen children and people of England, magnifie thy mercies, and prayse thy pow∣er, for giueing & preseruing vnto vs, a most rare and pearelesse Queene, our Soueraigne Ladie ELIZA∣BETH, by whose sacred scepter, thy holy Church, this common weale, and many other Nations and people haue found, both celestiall blessings, and ter∣restrial comforts. The faithful Protestant from wher∣soeuer, findeth heere a secure & fertile norcery. The wilfull papist, sitteth vnder his Vyne, & the malcon∣tent carnall, hath long lasting fauour, but euery of which by hir, haue from thee O Lord, thy gospell, to reclayme them, hir Scepter, to protect them, with a sweet rod, in sparing hand to refine them. Hir disloy∣all subiects at home, & hir professed enimies abroad of all sorts, thou hast miraculously brought vnder, or to vtter confusion. For the which wee render vnto thee continuall praise. And inasmuch O Lord, as our life, & the light of the land thy golden Candle∣stick, is deadly darckned in the want of hir, Lord, still giue vs thy bountifull mercie, and therein preserue, hir Highnesse, long to raigne ouer vs. Encrease, thy graces in hir, hir goodnesse to vs, to thaduaunce of vertue, & suppression of vice. Keepe thyne anoynted
our Soueraigne, from the trechery of dissembling subiects, and mallice of the forren foe. Hide hir vn∣der the shadow of thy wings, from the noysome pe∣stilence, and defend hir against the hurtfull sword: that our selues and families, may liue in peace, our land, may yeld hir encrease, & that no inuasion,Psal. 144.10. may empeach vs, or going out may daunt vs, nor any cry∣ing be in our streetes. Deare Father graunt hir our Soueraigne, a swift eye and speedie rescue, from the subtill snare, of eue∣ry wily hunter. Giue hir Lord, fast, and not faylling confederats. Wise and faithfull Councellors, loyall and louing subiects, and so in thy mercie keepe vs from euill, that wee prouoke not, thy iudgements, to depriue vs, of our chiefest comfort. Graunt this O Father, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
The Preface. MY Father hauing speciall care, of Stepny his great charge: Hath made sweet prayers for their cō∣fort their harts to God enlarge. And I desirous of your health, my bretheren, Sisters all: Haue sent you these to traine you vp, rather on God to call. For th'health and wealth of our parents, our selues and neighbours eke: Pray we to God with one accord, for so it is most meete. And so my bretheren fare you well, with all my sisters deere: God graunt that we may giue vnto, gods word attentiue eare. Antony Anderson, Iunior.
A prayer for the infection of the plague. 1593. O Lord our God omnipotent, of mercy wee thee craue: Poure downe thy truth most excellent, that we the same may haue. And cease O Lord thy iry rod, which doth opresse vs sore: And giue vs true repentance Lord, that wee may sinne no more. Cease now O Lord thy heauie hand, the Father wee entreate: And let vs in our harts thy woord, full often times repeate. From thee O Lord wee cannot fly, Thy power doth so excell: But keepe from vs we thee beseech, thy rod which is most fell. But giue to vs O Lord of might, the pardon of our sinne: And take thy plague from vs O Lord, that heere of long hath bin. Giue vs O Lord thy holy word, which alwaies is most true: And giue vs grace to praise thy name, for praise to thee is due. Remember blessed Lord thy flock, which else is like to pyne: And take from vs that heauie clogge, which loads vs at this tyme.
Thy will be done O Lord of might, as seemeth best to thee: For thou wilt strike where thou thinkst best, no man a lette can bee. When it shall please thy maiestie, to take this life away: Receaue our soules vnto thy Throne, to liue with thee for aye. O Lord preserue our noble Queene, our realme and people both: And keep vs from the deadly feare, of thyne eternall wroth. Graunt our request O Lord of might, for Christ his sake thy sonne: And take away thy cruell plague, that now is vs among. Finis qd Anthony Anderson, iunior.
