A1109 12490496 62354
A DISCOURSE Concerning The BEAUTY OF HOLINESS. By the Author of The Duty of Man, Laid down in Express words of Scripture. 1 CHRON. 16.29. Worship the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness. Imprimatur. July 18th, 1678. GUIL. SILL. LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Robert Soliers, at the King's Arms in Ludgate-street. 1679.
THE CONTENTS. CHAP. I. OF the Nature of Holiness. page 7. CHAP. II. Of the Rule of Holiness. 11 CHAP. III. Motives and inducements to the practice of Holiness. 48 Sect. 1. The noble pattern of Holiness. 49
above all things most advanta∣geous. 124 Chap. IV. Frivolous Cavils and Objections removed. 142
THE INTRODUCTION. MAn in his original con∣dition, when he first came out of the hands of his Maker, was a very noble and venera∣ble Creature, adorned with many peculiar ex∣cellencies; and as the Psalmist observes, Onely made a little lower than glori∣ous Angels: But of all his perfections, Holiness, as it was the principal and most oriental, so did it also give a beauty and lustre to the rest; It made his Authori∣ty and Power lovely and desirable, his Wisdom and Knowledge venerable, and every other attribute, which without this is terrible and dreadful, to be comely and praise-worthy. This was that single perfection that raised Man above the beasts
'Tis, indeed, matter of great sadness to consider the lofty and intolerable affronts that are now cast upon Holiness; how men are arrived at that pitch of impietie, to scorn and deride Religion, which for∣mer ages were at some pains to advance; as if Holiness were inconsistent with the principles of Generosity, and onely be∣coming mean and morose spirits. How transcendent a folly and madness this is, will easily appear by what I shall afterwards lay down. Me thinks the na∣ked representation of Holiness, should be motive enough (if not to court it, yet) to engage men to correct their unreaso∣nable prejudices they entertain against it; and even force its greatest Antagonists to become its Advocates. But alas! vice hath cast such a dark shadow upon mens Judgements, that they are become as un∣fit Judges of its beauty, as blinde men are of colours; otherwise we might yet ex∣pect to see contemned Vertue much more in vogue than ever Vice was. To excite our desires, Scripture has re∣presented it under the most comely dress, has discovered its beauty and excellen∣cie, and recommended it by the most endearing motives which are apt to work both upon our hope and fear: Vpon our
hope, by proposing an infinitely-valuable reward to the righteous, besides the pre∣sent advantages that attend it. Vpon our fear, by opening to our view the powers of the world to come, and discovering the in∣supportable misery that the damned suf∣fer day and night; so that if men would but so far actuate their Reason, as soberly to consult their own interest and happi∣ness, I doubt not but this alone should be motive enough to excite them to the practise of Holiness, and scare them from those ways of sin that lead down to the chambers of death. It would make (one would think) the greatest Sensualist to relinquish the momentary pleasures he enjoys here, to be possest of those eternal joys that the pure in spirit shall reap in the Kingdom of their Father: and the most hardened and impregnable sinner tremble, to think of dwelling with devouring flames. Now the onely infallible way to attain those coelestial felicities, and to evite the miserable consequences of vice, and those pains and tortures that it exposeth its vo∣taries to, is to abandon every lust, be it never so impetuous, and to cleanse our selves (as the Apostle adviseth us) from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and to
perfect holiness in the fear of God. For the better directing our present inquisition, I shall first briefly represent the nature of true Holiness, and shew the beauty and excellencie of it. Secondly, I shall discourse of its rule, and more par∣ticularly discover the several branches of Holiness. Thirdly, I shall propound seve∣ral motives and inducements to engage men to the practise of Holiness; and in∣deed this is what I chiefly intend to insist upon. Fourthly, I shall remove all those Cavils and Objections that are urged a∣gainst Holiness. And Lastly, conclude with some short Reflections and Inferen∣ces.
CHAP. I. Of the nature of Holiness. I Intend not here to descend to the con∣sideration of every particular branch of holiness, but to discourse of it in the general, as it is the combination of all Chri∣stian vertues: and as it is thus consider∣ed, I need not, I think, in the description of it, accurately study all those Logical rules Philosophers require in a good de∣finition For my part, it fully enough satisfies me to know, that holiness is a con∣formity to the Divine Law, and a hearty and sincere compliance with those original dictates of humane nature, and the Com∣mands revealed in sacred Writ. So long as man remained obedient to the Laws of his Maker, his holiness was untainted, and his Beauty and primitive congenite comeliness continued; but by his woful apostacy he lost that noble embellishment of his nature, which did indeed give a grace to all his other ac∣complishments, and is now become ugly and deformed. Holiness and purity of Spirit are different words, but of the same signification, and are promiscuously used in Scripture to express the same
present state, expects not more from us than we are able to perform. He is not so rigorous a Lord to require Brick where there is no Straw: the terms of the Go∣spel are accommodated to our capacities, and onely require a holiness which is pos∣sible for the Creature to attain; at least it exacts and expects no more, but that we endeavour sincerely and unfeignedly to obey all those precepts he has enjoyn∣ed; that we habituate our selves to per∣form good actions; that the general pro∣pension and inclination of our wills and appetites be towards the doing of what is imposed upon us, and abstaining from all kinde of evil. By what hath been said, it may appear, that holiness consists not in Speculation, but in Practice: 'Tis not the knowledge of duty, but the actual performance of it that intitles men to be holy; and that too, not superficially, or in a good mode, and rarely performed; but sincerely, and throughout the whole course of our lives. For men to know their duty and not per∣form it, is to inhance their own misery, and to secure to themselves double stripes: and to perform some good actions, and abstain from the grosser pollutions of the world, and yet to be vicious in the ge∣neral
course of their lives, this is such a holiness that will never profit any man. The rule of holiness, to which we must heartily study an actual conformity, does not dispense, no not with the commission of the least sin, nor omission of the smal∣lest duty. But because general descriptions of things are frequently overlooked, I shall not think it unnecessary to descend to a more particular survey, and consider Ho∣liness in its several branches, as they are plainly described by the Christian rule of Holiness. CHAP. II. Of the Rule of Holiness. ALthough the whole Canon of Scri∣pture is useful to instruct us in our duty; yet because many things, if not approved, yet dispensed with under the old dispensation, are now quite antiqua∣ted and abrogate, I shall therefore at present confine my discourse to the Go∣spel-Oeconomy, and by the rule discover wherein the Nature of true Holiness, and undefiled Religion before God con∣sists.
touch. 'Tis an odd and strange ope∣ration, that streams of Love onely meet with contempt and disdain. Sure I am, there is a concurrence of all sorts of motives and arguments to engage us to love God; and those indeed so charming and endearing, that it is strange any body should fail in it. Methinks the work it self is so sweet and delectable, so ravishing and lovely, that men need not be courted to it by perswasion. O what a great deal of satisfaction, of ineffable de∣light, does the devout soul finde in those actings of love towards God! And if the Voluptuous and Sensualist would but abandon those sinful delights he now findes so charming and bewitching, and betake himself to the practice of holiness: If he would change the object of his love, and place it where it ought to be; I doubt not but he should quickly per∣ceive there is more pleasure, more con∣tentment and satisfaction in the love of God, than in the enjoyment of all car∣nal pleasures. That man that shall make a just esti∣mate of things, shall be easily convinced there is nothing worthy of love in com∣parison of God. Alas! the pleasures of this world are but shadows and fan∣cies,
which will soon disappear! Its beau∣ty and splendour is but gilded and delu∣sory: and is it reasonable, nay, is it not extream madness to place the strength of our affections on such uncertain and quickly-removed vanities? The usual arguments of love amongst men, are Relation, Interest, or the Beau∣ty and Excellency of the Object. Now all these lay much stronger obligatios up∣on us to love God. For Relation, is he not our Lord and Maker, who gave us life and being, who as a tender Father kindely compassionates our condition, and in our low estate has carefully min∣ded us, when our other Relations have accounted us aliens and strangers? This the Royal Psalmist experimented; and I make no question but many good men have been, and are living instances of this truth. And indeed, that man that consults his own interest, cannot but be strongly ex∣cited to love that God who is the best benefactor, and equally willing and able to bestow favours upon him. It is an argument of a very base and mean spirit, to despise our benefactors: but thus have we requited God, who daily loadeth us with mercies, and reneweth his blessings
every morning: we have, God knows, most insolently carried our selves, even then, when he has been displaying a ban∣ner of love over us. As for Beauty and Excellency, what in the world can compete with him, who is glorious in holiness, and whose Name is excellent in all the earth? How quick∣ly are all created beauties winked into darkness? At the best they are but streams derived from this glorious being; and is it not hugely reasonable, that he who is the original of these, should be the chief object of our love, and make us with the Psalmist say, Whom have I in the hea∣ven but thee; and there is none upon the earth I desire besides thee? I know there is no man would take it well, nay who would not be highly incen∣sed, and think himself much wronged, to have his Love called in question; but God knows how little reason the far grea∣ter part of Mankinde have to pretend love, who stand not to break his Laws, to cast behinde them, and lightly esteem his precepts, the obedience of which is made the best and surest character of Love. Would God it were as easie to perswade as it is to propose our duty. But how
hard is it to convince men of the folly, the extream and strange madness, of be∣ing lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God? But the truth is, there is such a mire and puddle of pollution in our hearts, that it quite choaks and extinguisheth all sparks of Love, makes us violate the principles of humanity, and become more ungueate than the beasts who have no understan∣ding. But if this Divine flame be kindled in our Hearts, if it be sincere and superla∣tive as it ought to be, it will easily employ all the faculties of our soul in his service; it will engage, and enable us too, to per∣form the several Duties of Piety the Laws of Christianity enjoyn; which be∣cause they are some of the particular branches of Holiness, I shall briefly men∣tion, with their encouragements; and for method and order reduce to four Heads. First, it will instruct and enable us to trust and depend upon God. Secondly, to sub∣mit and obey his Will. Thirdly, to ho∣nour and reverence his great and sacred Name. And Lastly, to worship and a∣dore him according to the method he hath himself prescribed. I begin with the first, namely, That Love where it is sincere, is a noble and gene∣rous
(says our Lord) I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what you shall eat, or what you shall drink; neither for your body, what ye shall put on: Is not the life more than meat? and the body than rai∣ment? Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor ga∣ther into barns; yet your heavenly Fa∣ther feedeth them. Are ye not much bet∣ter than they? &c. Matth. 6.25, 26. 'Tis rejected and condemned as a Pagan and Heathnish sin, to be querulous and sol∣licitous of what we shall eat, or what we shall drink, or wherewithal we shall be clo∣thed: for after all these things do the Gen∣tiles seek, v. 31, 32. I confess, as I cannot sufficiently enough pity the madness of some men, who will trust God with their Souls, but not with their secular Concerns; so could I never yet project what may be the reason why better men than the former are so apt to distrust God in times of danger and want. I wish such men would consider how shrewd a presumption this is of Atheism, at least of establishing the Epicurean notion of a Deity who is quite unconcerned a∣bout inferiour beings, and sequestrated from the care of sublunary affairs. For if we did indeed think that he takes no∣tice
of us, we could not but confidently rely upon his care. Secondly, we are by the perfect rule of Piety and Holiness instructed to submit to the divine Will, and comply with the Go∣spel-precepts, which concerning all things are right. Perhaps the lot infinite Wis∣dom has carved out to us, is no ways re∣lishing to flesh and blood. Whilst others are walking amongst roses, enjoy all secu∣lar advantages, and are placed in the sun∣shine of prosperity; may be we are forced to hang our harps upon the willows, and spend our few days in sorrow and grief. However, let us, not even under these sad circumstances, charge God foolishly, or be impatient under the severity of his cor∣rection; for this is no argument of the hatred of a Father. Let us rather in this case view the unspeakable reward, and the divine promises, which are sufficient arguments to revive our fainting and most languishing hopes, and able to form our souls to true patience. Philosophers, if ever they attained to a perfection in any vertue, it was in their patience under the instability of worldly things; and yet their grounds and motives to patience were sandy and ineffectual, and no ways comparable to the arguments
habit and custome, while this is the very thing that enhances their guilt: neither will it, I think, a whit lessen the crime, that Great persons have given it such a vogue in the world. The Name of God is a sacred thing, which must not be appealed to, but in the most weighty and serious cases: Thou shalt swear (says the Prophet) that the Lord liveth, in truth, justice, and judge∣ment. If we either affirm or promise any thing by oath, it must be after mature deliberation, after we have ascertained our selves of the truth and lawfulness of it: this the very Poet could dictate, Nec Deus intersit, nisi dignus vindice nodus Inciderit— It were to be wished, that the Hectors of this age would learn of the very Hea∣thens more reverence; and that those men that pretend to good breeding, would be so civil, even sometimes for the compa∣nies sake, as to forbear those Oaths that tender ears cannot hear without offence. In the last place, the divine Love, if scattered in our Hearts, will excite us to worship God after the method himself hath prescribed: It will direct us to the
rule of Piety, where we shall finde every thing that relates to our immediate inter∣course with God in divine Ordinances and Worship exactly ordered. I confess, the Heathen-world, as they were confu∣sed in their notions of a Deity, and al∣most quite ignorant of the eternal re∣ward; so were they superstitious in their Worship, and sometimes ignorantly ere∣cted Altars to an unknown God. Their Worship was attended with a great deal of external pomp, was very grateful to their external senses; but it reached not the Heart. But the Christian rule in∣structs us to worship God in Spirit, and prescribes the best method of devotion: It requires that We worship and bow before the Lord our maker, with all possible hu∣mility and reverence; that we possess our Hearts with the greatness and glory of that Majesty we adore; that we be in∣tent in our devotion, and not suffer secu∣lar concerns to intrude and interrupt us; that we act faith upon him, and believe that he is a rewarder of those that dili∣gently seek him; and that we approach the throne of grace in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ. If Devotion were not a duty, yet me∣thinks the advantages thereof should in∣vite
and that which finally excludes from the Kingdom of Heaven, where nothing that pollutes can enter, 2 Cor. 6.9. Rev. 21.27. 'Tis indeed not wonder though the Re∣ligion of the Gentiles, which contained a prodigious mixture of vanity and im∣piety, gratified the inclinations of un∣cleanness: for if we consult their writings, we shall observe, that the most abomina∣ble vice wanted not a Deity to patronize it amongst them; which upon the mat∣ter was an establishing iniquity by Law, and an argument more sufficient to en∣courage than to correct vice: And al∣though the Writings of some Philoso∣phers have been more refined, yet the Lives even of such were full of the foul∣est actions. Nay, the rules which the best Masters of Morality amongst them prescribed, never reached to the purify∣ing of the Heart. I confess, that man that shall take no∣tice (and who, having eyes in his head, can evite this, when men proclaim their sin like Sodom?) of the prodigious un∣cleanness this prophane age has arrived at, shall be strongly tempted to suspect the purity of the Christian Rule, if he make no farther enquiry than to the practices of most that are called Christians. We may
indeed very aptly write to the profes∣sors of this age, as the great Apostle did to the Church of Corinth: It is reported commonly that there is fornication among you, and such fornication as is not so much as named amongst the Gentiles, 1 Cor. 5.1. And I am a little afraid, if the Church should strictly observe that charge that the Apostle gives there, and excom∣municate all such wicked persons, that our Church should not need to brag much of the number of Christians. 'Tis indeed matter of great sadness, to consider how much the Christian Reli∣gion has suffered, upon the account of the scandalous practices of Titular Christians; and I make no doubt but this age has been at more pains than any that precedes it, to increase the scandal: but sure 'tis but a silly artifice to challenge the exactness of the Rule, and with Celsus impudently alleage that the Christian Religion en∣courageth men to the practice of immora∣lity and vice, since of all Religions, the Christian onely can produce the strictest Laws against all filthiness of flesh and spirit. 'Tis a Doctrine, as blessed Apo∣stle tells us, according to godliness, and lays undispensible obligations upon its followers, both to think upon, and to do,
dearing a quality, and so noble an embe∣lishment of our nature, that where this is wanting, all other advantages are little regarded; and not onely men, but the great God also resists the proud, it being a vice which, besides Christianity, Morality also-condemns, as universally unbecoming to Humane nature; and that which not onely disturbs ones self, but also disquiets whole societies: But God gives grace to the humble; he takes such persons into favour, as being more pliable to receive the impress of his love. And as a humble, so also a meek and quiet spirit is in the sight of God of great price. And can there be a more convin∣cing motive than this, to recommend meekness to Christians? And indeed we cannot pretend to be the Disciples of ho∣ly Jesus, if we refuse to learn that lesson he hath copied out to us, Matth. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart. Although a calm and quiet spirit is a reward to it self, as every vertue is; yet it wants not a claim to a temporal felicity also, Matth. 5.5. Blessed are the meek; for they shall inherit the earth. These be the persons to whom by right of pro∣mise this stately Fabrick of earth belongs.
And if we now view that unpleasant vice of Anger opposite to it, this will yet adde more to its lustre, and help to recom∣mend it the more effectually. Anger be∣ing such an unpleasant humour, that it makes those men it possesses unfit for hu∣mane society, it being not unfitly defined by the Poet to be a short madness; which indeed agrees very well with the Wise mans verdict of it, Eccl. Anger rests in the bosom of fools. If then men would but compare the calm and happy sereni∣ty of Meekness, with that inward and outward trouble and disquietment that is the effect of Anger, they could not but esteem the one, and declaim against the o∣ther. In the next place, our Christian rule re∣commends contentment as the most pre∣cious Jewel in the Saints Diadem; 'tis that noble ingredient that makes the most bitter cup sweet and pleasant: it renders things, otherwise unsavory and burthen∣some, to be indeed relishing and easie. This is it that seasons the meanest meal; makes a dish of herbs a feast, and a cup of cold Water please the palate: This is that vertue which makes men in the midst of storms represent a calm, and in the saddest circumstances to sing sweetly. He
us in those duties that concern our selves; so it also teacheth us how to carry towards others. And in the first place, it recommends the Royal Law of love, as the spring and source of all other duties, Rom. 13.9. If there be any other commandment, 'tis briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy self. This, for its excel∣lency and comprehensiveness, is said to be the fulfilling of the Law, as those who neglect it are said to sin against the Law. Now if this rule of Charity were well observed, it would help to correct, first, all undue Thoughts and Wishes. Second∣ly, all injurious Words and Speeches. And thirdly, all unjust Actions and Dea∣lings towards our Neighbours. First, it would very much conduce to the regulating of our wishes, and to the keeping of our mindes in a meek and peaceable temper towards others. Cha∣rity, if sincere, is a noble and generous vertue, which believeth and hopeth the best of all men: It thinketh no evil, as the Apostle amongst many of its other good properties observeth, 2 Cor. 13.5. It eradicates and supplants all censorious thoughts, and is incompatible with those
tormenting passions of Malice and Re∣venge, which, as the Wise man describes, suffer not men to sleep except they have done mischief, Prov. 4.16. And indeed this is but the least part of a Christians duty, 'tis but an evidence of the lowest degree of Charity, to retrench those irregular and undue wishes, which oftentimes do more prejudice to our selves than others: If it be sincere, it will have a further and more important influence; it will help us to govern our tongues also that we may, as the great Apostle adviseth us, speak evil of no man, Tit. 3.2. to lay aside all malice, and all guile and hypocrisie, and evil speaking, 1 Pet. 2.1. and according to this precept did primitive Christians walk. But alas! we have degenerated in no∣thing more conspicuously from their pra∣ctise than in this: In place of their love, we have substituted an industrious search into the iniquities of others, Psal. 64.4. and have fully verified the Apostles de∣scription of the tongue, Jam. 3.8. that it is an unruly evil which no man can tame, a world of iniquity that sets the whole creation on fire. Neither Majesty nor innocency can now guard against its darts; its malignity
blessings, v. 10. and it is noted as an evidence that the love of God dwelleth not in those persons, who having this worlds goods, shut up their bowels of com∣passion from those that have need, 1 Joh 3.17. Alas! little do men know how quickly the balance may change; how soon the richest may be in poverty, and stand in need of that supply that they now in the days of their plenty deny others the instances to prove this, are more numerous than that they can be doubted or need to be related. Indeed the performance of this duty passeth not without a temporal reward God, who accounts it a lending to him∣self, hath promised to repay it; and sure there cannot be better security than his promise. And I question not but all a∣ges can attest the truth of what the Wise man observeth, Prov. 11.24. There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth; and there is that witholdeth more than is meet, but it tendeth to poverty. I confess, I know no vertue more be∣coming a Christian than Charity, and scarce any more scandalously neglected; and I am sorry to think that those good men who compassionate the wants of the indigent, should be so unworthily scan∣dalized,
as if they were but lukewarm Protestants, and established the Popish Merit: but this is a piece of madness I shall rather pity than inveigh against; and although I be no friend to merit, yet I cannot but speak honourably of those whose charity and good works make them lovely in the sight of God, who has accounted it pure religion and unde∣filed, to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, Jam. 1.27. In the next place, the Christian rule requires Justice in our intercourse and commerce, and that in our dealings we be exactly conscientious, according to that great rule of equity, Matth. 7.12. All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them; for this is the law and the prophets. In∣justice is a vice so mean and ignoble, tht I cannot but admire how great men should court it: and if men would but actuate their Reasons, I am sure they should never become guilty of that which, if charged with, they cannot patiently en∣dure, nor be reconciled with the persons which freely reprove them. There is no man, I think, that would be satisfied to be called a Cheat; and is it not unreasona∣ble to think they shall evite this character who practise injustice?
were easie to shew how miserably they failed. The famous Peripatetick plea∣ded for the revenging of Injuries: The divine Plato allowed the community of Wives: The strict Stoicks patronized the lawfulness of Self-murther; and thus pro∣fessing themselves to be wise, they became fools. And yet (to the shame of Christians) how conspicuous was the moral gallan∣try of the Romans! how famous and glo∣rious are they esteemed for their Justice and Constancy in friendship by all suc∣ceeding ages! their vertue did conquer respect and esteem from their Enemies, and made them beloved by those who fear'd their power. And here I cannot but take notice of St. Augustin's commen∣dation of the old Romans: Because God (says he) would not bestow Heaven upon the Romans, they being Pagans, he be∣stowed the Empire of the world upon them, because they were vertuous. And yet the best rules those Illustrious Hero's and Law-givers taught, are not comparable to the Laws of Christianity, upon these three accounts. First, the Pa∣gan Law is deficient in many things, and many particular Laws mightily tend to the promoting of vice; their Law-givers
being ignorant of the introduction of sin, never made any precepts against the first motions to forbidden objects. Secondly, those good Laws they taught, are more clearly revealed in the Gospel, Which hath brought life and immortality to light. As the Gospel commands onely such things that are good, and forbids onely vice; so it more conspicuously manifests what is good, that we may do it, and what is evil, that we may evite it. The good Laws that Epaminondas in Thebes, Lycur∣gus in Lacedemon, and Aristides in Athens taught, are in the Gospel-Oeconomy more excellently confirmed; and we are now undoubtedly secured, that we do well in observing what is commanded, and in abstaining from what is prohibited; which Numa Pompilius, Marcus Antonius, and all the Law-givers either of Greece or Rome, could never be fully ascertained of. Thirdly, we have better encouragements and inducements to obey the Gospel-precepts than any other Religion pre∣scribes. The best motive to vertue a∣mongst the Heathens was, that vertue is a reward to it self; that it is the means to be celebrated by after-ages, and such like; which were but insignificant encourage∣ments, if compared with the eternal and
gives of the Gospel, Rom. 1.16. That it is the power of God to salvation. CHAP. III. Motives and inducements to the practice of Holiness. AS the naked proposal and represen∣tation of an excellent and beauti∣ful object, is motive enough to excite our love, and draw out our affections to it: so methinks Holiness, which of all, things is the most noble, most excellent, and the most lovely, should, even abstracted from the considerations of its utility and ad∣vantages, conquer our esteem. But God knows how much our depraved natures in this lapsed estate stand in need of en∣couragements to excite us to our duty; and I wish common experience did not make it too certain, that all motives are little enough to form us to Holiness. In the former Chapters I have onely laid a foundation to this: for I thought it fit to tell men what I understand by Ho∣liness, before I should excite them to it. In this dark age of the world we want not instances (God knows, too many) of mens too frequent mistaking vice for
vertue; to prevent which errour, it was thought necessary to shew men their du∣ty; and having done this, the next thing I proposed, was to lay down several mo∣tives and inducements to engage men to the practise of Holiness, founded solely upon this, that all those endearing ar∣guments that prevail with us to perform any duty or action relating to our secu∣lar concerns, do more powerfully oblige us to be holy. This is, I confess, a subject which for its nobleness deserves a better judge∣ment, a more clear wit, and a more en∣livened and quick fancy to handle it than I can pretend to: yet if I can but pre∣vail with others to perfect what I have be∣gun, I shall not think I have much mis-em∣ploy'd my time in writing this Discourse. This Chapter is like to be somewhat disproportionable to the rest in length, it being at first the onely designed sub∣ject to be discoursed on; I shall therefore divide it into several Sections. SECT. 1. The noble pattern of Holiness. The great inclination of Mankinde to Imitation, gave ground (I doubt not)
And now, seeing Examples, have so much force, methinks I hear the Captain of our salvation saying, as Abimelek said to the men that were with him, Judg. 9.48. Make haste, and do as I have done. Christ Jesus hath by his example taught us our duty, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. As he which hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation; because it is written, Be ye holy as I am holy. Upon which account we are seriously exhorted in Scripture to look unto Jesus, and to walk as he walked; and can any consi∣deration more abundantly serve to inspi∣rit and excite us to live holy, than this? Methinks our having so brave an example should provoke us to follow his footsteps, who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth. There are two chief reasons that great∣ly prevail with us to imitate other exam∣ples. First, the dignity and greatness of the person. Secondly, Interest and ad∣vantage. Now both these motives should most powerfully prevail with us to make Christ the copy of our lives: For first, if we consider the dignity and worth of his person, is he not the Son of the li∣ving God, who in the days of his humilia∣tion thought it no robbery to be called
equal with God? He was not a person of a mean and low extraction, how meanly soever he lived here, but one of extraor∣dinary worth, who by partaking of hu∣mane nature elevated it to the highest degree of honour: He was not onely the chiefest amongst ten thousands, but the delight of Heaven and Earth, before whom the Princes of the Earth must ap∣pear, and the great men, to give him an account of their works. And as for In∣terest, I shall afterwards make it plain, that we in nothing more cross our advantage, than in walking contrary to Christ. But alas! how little are we moved by this noble president to minde Holiness? how seldom do we express in our actions the vertues of our spiritual King? although there is nothing more rational, more e∣quitable and just, than to follow his foot∣steps who hath called us to his Kingdom and Glory; nothing more honourable, nor can advance our happiness more than to be conform to the image of Christ; yet in opposition to the most endearing en∣couragements, we have as much set at nought his example, as Herod and his men of war did his person, Luke 23.11. Alas! what tears are sufficient to express and set forth this exceeding great madness and insolency?
us to learn meekness and humility of him, Mat. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart. Throughout the whole course of his life he did evidence a spirit full of calmness and quietness. If we trace his footsteps from the Cradle to the Cross, we shall not finde him either by his words or actions discovering the least expression of wrath, or revenge; but the most admirable disposition of gentleness and meekness, even then when his insulting Enemies endeavoured to cast upon him the most ignominious affronts. We read, Numb. 12.3. of Moses his great meekness; but how was he once and a∣gain transported with passion! but ne∣ver did our meek Jesus, by the most in∣sufferable abuses he received, ever disco∣ver a discomposed spirit. Isa. 53.7. He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep be∣fore her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth. He did indeed frequently meet with extraordinary provocations to anger; but yet how sweet were his re∣proofs? when the Samaritans refused to receive him, Luke 9.53. he did not treat them with contumelious speeches, nor revenge himself upon them, although he
could have done it with ease; but being desired by his exasperated Disciples to call for fire from Heaven to consume them, he rebuked their revengeful motion with The Son of man is not come to destroy mens lives, but to save them. It would be too prolix a business to instance the se∣veral examples of his Gentleness and Meekness; onely let us view the last scene of his life, where we shall behold lively instances to confirm this. When he did finde his three Disciples, whom he had commanded to watch, sleeping, he did not upbraid them for their negligence, but gently asks them, What, could not ye watch with me one hour? and when he was treacherously accoasted by his own Disciple, who became leader to a great multitude who came out with Swords and Staves to apprehend him, with what astonishing mildness did he entertain this Traytor, who had the impudence to be∣tray him with a kiss? Friend, wherefore art thou come? Mat. 26.50. or, as another of the Evangelists expresseth it, Judas, be∣trayest thou the Son of man with a kiss? This was all the hard language he treated him with. And after he was apprehended, with what horrid contumelies and affronts
did his barbarous Enemies entertain him? they did spit in his face, and buffet him; (the highest affronts imaginable) they stripped him of his ordinary cloaths, and put upon him a fools robe and a Crown of Thorns; and being thus disguised, they expose him to the mockery and contempt of the Spectators: Notwithstanding of all which, he opened not his mouth; but with a most sedate and serene temper he re∣ceived all these abuses, as the Apostle Peter expresseth it, 1 Pet. 2.23. When he was reviled he reviled not again, when he suf∣fered he threatned not, but committed himself to him that judgeth righteous∣ly. Meekness, I confess, is so noble a ver∣tue, accompanied with so many admira∣ble and charming advantages, that it needs (as one would think) but few words to recommend it to men; but no argument is like to prevail more with generous mindes, then the example of so excellent and perfect a Pattern. Sure I am, it is the most unaccountable thing imaginable, for the Disciples of so meek a Master to be of a disposition and temper quite oppo∣site to his. But as his meekness, so is his humility also recommended to our imitation: As
he was of a meek, so also of a lowly spi∣rit. His first appearance upon earth was but mean and despicable; he was born (as the Scripture informs us) in a low estate, more fit for the meanest of his Disciples, than for so great a Prince. He was not brought forth in some stately Pa∣lace, nor born in a Chamber curiously deckt, but in a vile Stable where the bruit beasts had their residence. Nay, af∣ter he had discovered himself by his Illu∣strious works to be a great Prophet, the true Messiah who enlighteneth every one that cometh into the world, yet how hum∣bly did he walk! his Companions he did chuse were but mean Fishermen; his Oc∣cupation and Employment was no ways honourable; and his Revenues were but small, as he himself did testifie, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air nests; but the Son of man hath not where he may lay his head. Although his descent and extraction was incomparably great, yet he rather en∣deavoured to conceal than to brag of it; and so humble was he, that he chose rather to attribute the praise of his admi∣red works to his Father, than take the honour of them to himself, Joh. 8.28. I do nothing of my self, but as my Father
hath taught me I speak these things. He was not ambitious of Rule and Go∣vernment, but modestly refused to be a Ruler and Judge. Nay, when the multi∣tude thought to make him a King, he shunned their society by an invisible re∣moval, it being quite contrary to his de∣signe in coming into the world, (as he tells us, Matth. 20.28.) he came not to be ministred unto, but to minister. And to correct the insolent pride and ambition of his followers, how did he stoop to wash his Disciples feet! a most admirable evidence of his lowliness of spirit. And now since our great Lord and Master did so wonderfully debase himself to the form of a Servant; since in all his actions he did manifest that he was meek and lowly, how prodigiously incongruous is it for those who profess themselves to be his Disciples to be proud and lof∣ty? I confess, Humility is a grace well be∣coming our state as creatures; we are but dependent beings, having life and motion, and all those endowments we are proud of, from the Father of spirits, from whom every good gifts cometh. The fresh com∣munications of his love we constantly participate of, are freely bestowed; which
he may therefore, when he thinks fit, with an equal freedom and ease remove, with∣out being guilty of injuring us. Humility is that peculiar grace that qualifies and fits us to receive the divine aid and assistance; as the Apostle St. James tells us, he gives grace to the hum∣ble. Upon which account we may with the Wise man well conclude: Better is it to be of an humble spirit with the low∣ly, than to divide the spoil with the proud, Prov. 16.19. I doubt not but every considering man will finde his own Reason suggest a suf∣ficient store of arguments to confute the imperious assaults of Pride and Ambi∣tion: but methinks none can more pow∣erfully prevail with ingenuous spirits, than the consideration of Christ's humility: with this how effectually may he repel e∣very temptation to pride, by saying, Was my Master lowly of spirit, and does it be∣come me to be proud? Thirdly, Christ is also set forth as our Pattern in his sufferings: If when ye do well (saith the Apostle) and suffer for it ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God; for even hitherto were ye cal∣led: for Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his
ther than allays the distemper, though it augments the degrees of our trouble, and disenables us to bear the stroke of Adver∣sity; yet we will not be perswaded to a calm and quiet submission to the divine Will. Though impatience exasperates the pain, yet we think we do well to be angry. If we meet with injuries, our ap∣petite of revenge is stirred up; flesh and bloud we say cannot endure such affronts; we imagine it stains our Reputation and Honour in the world, and is degenerous and servile. Thus do we sew Fig-leaves to cover our nakedness; but the all-seeing God knows that all these repinings are arrows directed against his providence; otherwise we should with the Royal Psalmist say, I will not open my mouth, for thou didst it. To this impregnable Fortress he had his recourse, when causlesly cursed and re∣viled by Shimei: it was this that silenced old Eli, It is the Lord, let him do what seemeth him good: he durst not quarrel at the message, but quietly he submits. There is a secret providence which doth over∣rule the most terrible accidents, and is not accountable to humane Reason. All those calamities and sufferings we undergo, are ordered by infinite Counsel; and in re∣pining
at such dispensations, we indirect∣ly blame Almighty Goodness and Wis∣dome. Is it fit and congruous that God should take measures from men in his Oeconomy of the World? is it reasonable that the whole course of things should be put out of order, to satisfie every private mans humor? can there be any greater madness, than to prescribe rules of Government to infinite Wisdome? Why then are we dissatisfied with our adverse state? why do we repine and complain? If we did indeed compare our Mer∣cies with our Sufferings, our Receipts with our Merits, or our Condition with that of some others, we could not but be convinced of our folly: but we still pore upon the sore; all our thoughts are taken up and in exercise about our affliction: if we would deal rationally, let us view the sufferings of our blessed Redeemer, and see if we dare make a contrary con∣clusion to that of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4.1. Forasmuch then as Christ hath suffered for us in flesh, let us arm our selves like∣wise with the same minde: He suffered patiently and calmly for us; and it is but reasonable that Servants imitate their Master, and suffer the disasters they meet
our rule, yet how ready are we to despise it, if in the least it cross our humours or carnal interest? Alas! little do we consider, that obedience is essen∣tially necessary in order to our supream happiness; and that torments, as severe and intolerable as they are lasting, are the lot of the disobedient. It were to be wished that the rebelli∣ous posterity of Adam would but seri∣ously ponder what they will be able to say in the great day of Audit. Sure I am, the whole Contexture and Harmony of the divine Precepts and Doctrines are e∣quitable and just, and therefore call for our hearty compliance with them. The wise God never issued out any Command which could not be obeyed; he is not like the Aegyptian Task-masters, to require Brick while there is no Straw. Nay in∣deed our duty and interest are coupled to∣gether so closely, that if we disobey and rebel, we may thank our selves for the misery we have chosen. . And as his Obedience is set before us for imitation, so is his Love, Charity, and Compassion also. His whole life was spent in doing good to men: how transcendent is his love in pitying us in our degene∣rate and forlorn estate? when we were at
odds with Heaven, and incapable to help our selves, then, even then, did he commi∣serate our case, and by his own Blood re∣conciled us to the Father. It is the grea∣test demonstration of love imaginable, for a man to lay down his life for his friend, Joh. 15.13. and yet more won∣derful was the love of our Redeemer in passing through so many cruel sufferings for us, who were but Rebels and Ene∣nemies. O how should the remembrance of his boundless compassions transport and ravish us with love? how strange is it, that the highest endearments of Love have not inflamed our spirits, and made Love mutual and reciprocal? Love is a most excellent affection, of a noble original, by which we resemble the best of beings; the great God being by the beloved Disciple described to be Love: and indeed well does this description sute with his dealings with men. But alas! how unlike are we to God in this? there is scarce any duty more frequently incul∣cated by our Saviour than Love, John 15.12. This is my commandment, that ye love one another as I have loved you: and yet how little efficacy has either his precept or example with us? Blessed Redeemer! how unworthy do
since it hath produced so little love in us to himself. But however, I need not take much pains to prove that hereby we de∣monstrate our selves to be of all men the most ungrate, and justly liable to the seve∣rest punishment ever inflicted upon the greatest criminal. It would be too prolix to enumerate the several instances wherein Christ is set forth as our Pattern: sure I am, he hath by his example taught us the exercise of all vertues; and I may say (as himself said in another case) If we know these things, happy are we if we do them. To sum up this Section, it will not be amiss to obviate an Objection, which is in∣deed but very trivial, although it be too commonly urged: the Objection is, How is it possible for men to conform to Christ, and be holy as he is holy? Ans. I have alrea∣dy told, that it is not expected that we should imitate our blessed Redeemer in all and every of those actions he perfor∣med: but in all those moral duties which he hath enjoyned by his righteous pre∣cepts, and encouraged us by his example to perform, these we must by no means neglect: and to manifest the possibility of doing these, we may satisfie our selves by viewing the pious and devout lives of
primitive Christians. It is a great mistake to think we are commanded to a rigorous and strict conversation which cannot be attained; the faithful in former ages have run the same race that is set before us; they have fully enough cleared the possi∣bility of our duty: Wherefore seeing we also (as the Apostle argues) are compas∣sed about with so great a cloud of witnes∣ses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin that doth so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set be∣fore us, Heb. 12.1. For shame, let us ra∣ther imitate the excellent holiness of pri∣mitive Christians, than the impure pra∣ctices of those who are strangers from the sacred Covenant. O the perfect love and imitable kinde∣ness of the first professors of the Gospel! what purity, what integrity and inno∣cence appeared in their lives? how ravish∣ing and splendant were their vertues and graces; their Patience in suffering, their Courage and Magnanimity in death, their Temperance and Moderation, their Cha∣rity and Compassion, their Equality and Justice, and their Contempt of this World and all earthly concerns for the sake and honour of their Master? These were the vertues they were adorned with, which
There is nothing more certain, than that onely holy souls are in a capacity of par∣ticipating of that future felicity; and these may without the least charge of pre∣sumption claim an interest in it: But for those vitious wretches, who are wholly polluted, who have devoted themselves to commit sin with greediness, and take pleasure in doing evil; how utterly in∣capable are they (if they continue such) to dwell in his presence, who is not a God that taketh pleasure in wickedness? And now seeing there is such an insepa∣rable connexion between Happiness and Holiness, it cannot be amiss if we take a short view of the excellency of this coe∣lestial felicity, that it may more plainly appear what a notable encouragement and motive it is to holiness. There be two things that forcibly re∣commend the excellency of that future state of bliss. First, A perfect freedom and immunity from all evils. And Se∣condly, a perpetual enjoyment of the chief good. First, it is a blessedness wholly exempt from evils whether of sense or loss; 'tis a happiness attended with no inconvenien∣cies, nor dismal circumstances, as the hap∣piest state here is: we now walk in the
midst of perplexing doubts and fears; temptations increase our inquietudes, and dangers our continual fears: our com∣plaints are by far more numerous than our joys; nay, what is our whole life, but a scene where sorrow and fears act their parts! Man that is born of a woman is of few days, and full of evil. But our future blessedness quite ex∣cludes all those evils; there is nothing ad∣mitted to imbitter that pleasant state, Rev. 21.4. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain; for the former things are passed away. The holy soul shall then no more complain of any dolorous hours; the heavenly Jeru∣salem is a place unacquainted with every thing that is uneasie and troublesome. And yet this is but the least part of the Saints felicity: for as they shall enjoy a perfect freedom from evil, so shall they al∣so be advanced to the fullest fruition of that God, where all the streams of good∣ness do finally empty themselves: Blessed are the pure in spirit, for they shall see God, Matth. 5.8. They shall see him, not as now through a Glass darkly, but then face to face, 1 Cor. 13.12. they shall, as
the Angels in heaven, always behold the face of their Father, Matth. 18.10. in whose presence (as the Psalmist assures us) is fulness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore, Psal. 16.11. O the unspeakable delectability of the Saints future state! where the most blessed God shines forth in his Glory, where the beams of beauty ravish the be∣holders, who stand continually in his pre∣sence receiving the manifestations of his Glory! Sure if the faint expectation of enjoy∣ing the company of vertuous men in their fancied Elyzium, did instigate some Hea∣thens to imitate their vertues; how much more perswasive should the heavenly Je∣rusalem, and the City of the living God be? where the holy Soul shall be admit∣ted to converse with an innumerable com∣pany of holy Angels, and taken into the blessed Society and Church of the first-born; where all those imperfections that imbitter our communion here, are remo∣ved; where the holy Soul shall see Jesus the blessed Mediator of the new Covenant, Heb. 12. who suffered so much for sin∣ners, now sitting in glory and majesty; not crowned (as once he was) with thorns, nor wearing a purple robe; but having on
his head the most transplendent Diadem, and cloathed with Majesty and Beauty. Methinks the thoughts of beholding this glory, and participating of so much feli∣city, should excite the most lazie to fol∣low Holiness, and to walk worthy of him who hath called us to his Kingdom and glory. But I confess I am not able to express half of the glory of that future felicity: The blessed Apostle seems to intimate, that all Hyperbolical expressions fall short in describing it, 2 Cor. 4.17. where he stiles it, A far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory: and 1 Cor. 2.9. he tells us, Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nei∣ther hath it entred into the heart of man to conceive what God hath pepared for those that love him. For although we may be assured that the reward is of infinite value, and that the righteous shall shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father: yet the most glorious part is hid from the eyes of viators; 'tis onely those who taste the Honey-comb that can best discover its sweetness. And yet it is prodigiously strange that the imperfect glance of future Glory that men may here behold, is so ineffectual to form them to Holiness; that men who
know they may be for ever happy, if they would study and endeavour to be holy in all manner of conversation, yet live as if they thought such a happy state not wor∣thy to be noticed. I confess, if the faithful and true God had not promised this state of blessedness, and discovered by revelation the truth and reality of it, we could never have drea∣med of partaking of so much happiness. The Heathen world could never be ascer∣tained (by Natures dim light) that the Soul is beyond all doubt immortal, and that there is a future state of rewards and punishments. The wisest of their Philo∣sophers, by their most laborious search, were exceedingly confused in their thoughts about it, and could at the most onely entertain some probable guesses and conjectures, founded upon moral argu∣ments, which could never perfectly con∣quer their doubts: They did indeed think it was very reasonable to believe that God (who is holy, just, and good) would in another life (since he did it not in this) reward good men, and punish the bad; but they could not be, beyond all doubt, ascertained that it would be so. The most celebrated Socrates, who parted with this life in expectation of a better, plainly told
his Friends, it was God onely who knew whether there were a future felicity or not; much less could either he or any other, without revelation, discover the nature and quality of the blessedness of that future state. And indeed, although they entertained some imperfect notions of a future life of bliss for the Soul, yet they never thought of the resurrection of the Body: although 'tis true, the felicity they formed, was more congruous by far to satisfie sensual appetites than rational Soule: the Poets Elyzium being much of the same nature with the Mahometan Pa∣radise, exactly accommodated to their flesh and senses. In these thick clouds of darkness and ignorance did the wisest of the Heathens walk: Exceedingly perplexed they were what to think, their doubts being greater than their hopes. But the arising of the Sunshine of Righteousness hath wholly dispelled all that darkness; the Gospel hath brought life and immortality to light, 2 Tim. 1.10. and hath undoubtedly assu∣red us that there is a reward for the Righ∣teous, and that Holiness shall be crowned with Happiness.
SECT. 3. Holiness the onely safe way to escape the wrath to come. Fear is a passion so extreamly violent, and repugnant to Humane nature, that nothing imaginable is of more force to conquer the unruly wills of men to duty. Hence is it, that even humane Laws are much more secured by punishments than rewards: Therefore if the promise of Heaven be not forcible enough to work upon our rebellious Wills, we have a Map of eternal and intolerable torments to excite our fear, and to affright us from the commission of those sins that lead down to the chambers of death; and that drawn so exactly, that it is the greatest miracle, that men will notwithstanding slight Ho∣liness, which is the onely means to evite these lasting tortures. In sacred Writ, the torments of the damned are represented by such terrify∣ing expressions, that it is a wonder they impress not a fear and terrour upon the most daring sinner. The Apostle St. Jude describing Hell, calls it, The vengeance of eternal fire, and the blackness of darkness for ever, Jude 7, 13. And the Apostle
St. John calls it, A lake of fire and brim∣stone, Rev. 20.10, 15. Our Saviour more emphatically describes it to be A fire that can never be quenched, and where the worm dieth not, Mark 9.46. All which phrases do most significantly express the severity and intolerableness of the tor∣ments: for what punishment is so terri∣ble as that of Fire? and how unspeak∣ably does it inhance the misery, in that it is eternal? and that too, as inflicted by an offended God, who is executing his vengeance upon sinners. Would God sinners would seriously consider whether they are able to endure the eternal pains of a gnawing Consci∣ence? or can patiently dwell with devou∣ring Flames? Whether the momentary pleasures of sin, are to be balanced with those furious reflections, those horrid stings and intolerable tortures the damned suffer day and night, where nothing of life remains but the sense of pain? Alas! will no argument prevail with men? how amazing is it to think that the everlasting God has used all the methods of love to excite men to Holiness, and to reclaim them from sin, and all to no purpose? May I not well say to such men, as St. Paul said to the Galatians, Vnwise sinners, who hath bewitched you?
they endure, we may also adde that ce∣lestial felicity they are for ever excluded from. How tormenting will it be to think of an everlasting separation from the di∣vine Presence, and instead of a holy So∣ciety, to keep a continual corresponden∣cy with impure Spirits? Would God that this brief discovery of the powers of the world to come, might prevail with men to be holy in all manner of conversation. But methinks I hear the over-zealous Professor too ignorantly objecting▪ that it is servile, mercenary, and legal, to be holy for love of Heaven, or fear of Hell. Truely if it were so as these men teach, I know not what can be the intent and de∣signe of all the promises and threatnings of the Gospel. And although I question not but it is a generous and Christian principle, to serve God out of pure love; yet I can never be induced to think, that to be holy for love of Heaven and fear of Hell, can be separate from that principle of love to God. God knows how much in need men stand, both of arguments to work upon their hope and fear, to excite them to duty. And since he who knows our na∣tures, has used promises to allure us, and
threatnings to awaken us, we must not pretend to be wiser than God, and reject those motives he has thought fit to pre∣scribe: and indeed, if it were not for the fear of evil, and the hope of good, 'tis to be feared, the pressing of other motives should be but a mere beating of the Air. But that this is not servile and merce∣nary, needs no other argument to prove it, but our Saviour's enduring the Cross, and despising the Shame, for the joy that was set before him; a Scripture sufficient e∣nough to stop the mouths of all oppo∣nents. SECT. 4. Holiness the main designe of the Gospel, and the end of all Christs sufferings. Subjects who know the intent and designe of those Laws issued forth by their Prince, will be loath to contemn his Au∣thority, especially when the whole intent of these is to make them by their obe∣dience the more happy; and sure 'tis the most unaccountable thing that can be, if they notwithstanding despise his Laws, and quite counter-act his designe. Now the main designe of the Christian
help himself, our blessed Lord redeemed us from our captivity, by offering up him∣self a ransom to satisfie divine Justice; and all this, that we might walk in new∣ness of life. And now what ingratitude is it to despise so much love? Sure, If he that despised Moses law died without mer∣cy, of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden un∣der foot the Son of God, and hath counted the Bloud of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified an unholy thing? Heb. 10.28, 29. He must certainly be of a very base and disingenuous spirit, who takes pleasure in sin, when he considers how dearly Christ paid for it. Hath he been at so much pains, undergone such dismal sufferings to purchase our peace, and will we not∣withstanding frustrate his designe? how strange to astonishment is this, that men should prefer captivity to freedom? Alas! is it not enough that our blessed Master was so barbarously and despiteful∣ly used by the Jews and Roman Soul∣diers, but must we be also Actors in the Tragedy, and by our sins crucifie him a∣gain? Did he not die that we might live? and shall we spend our life in offering
despite unto him? Strange, that so much madness should lodge in the breasts of any into whom God hath breathed the breath of life! I might here also adde, that it is a con∣temning, and offering of the greatest de∣spite to the Holy Spirit, to despise Holi∣ness: for upon this account is the third person of the blessed Trinity called the Holy Ghost, because his peculiar office is to enable us to perform holy actions: now if we continue in our rebellion, if we reject the offers of grace, and the internal motions of the Spirit to Holiness, we do hereby become guilty of quenching the Spirit of God, and offering despite unto him; which is so horrid a piece of villa∣ny, that Heaven threatens it with the se∣verest torments. SECT. 5. Holiness the most proper and effectual means for attaining length of days. Of all outward and temporal blessings, length of days hath justly the precedency, since without this all others can afford little or no comfort: The possession and enjoyment of other mercies, can bestow no satisfaction to men lying on their beds
Prov. 23.29, 30. Who hath woe? who hath sorrow? who hath wounds without cause? they that tarry long at the wine, &c. Holiness is repugnant and inconsi∣stent with excess, which naturally puts a period to the lives of men: It forbids all manner of vice, which leads down to the chambers of death; and keeps men within due bounds in their eating and drink∣ing. Before mankinde had corrupted them∣selves by their notorious and impudent vitiousness, we read of their great length of days; but the increase of sin multi∣plied diseases, which hurry men to untime∣ly deaths. I deny not but the great Lord and Ma∣ster of the Universe may, for holy and wise ends known unto himself, cut short the lives of the righteous; yet surely if we consult either Experience or Reason, we shall finde it certain beyond doubt, that vertuous men enjoy, for ordinary, far the longest lives. Some good men may be naturally of a brittle constitution, yet how strangely has their life been protracted by their mode∣ration and sobriety? and how many strong men have had their days shortened by their intemperance and excess?
Indeed, he that considers this well, shall finde, that Holiness is the most effectual means to promote long life, both upon a moral and natural account. Upon a moral account, long life is the reward which the divine promises do secure to such men; and on the contrary, wickedness is threat∣ned with shortness of days. Upon a na∣tural account, the fire doth not more na∣turally produce heat, than Holiness does procure health and length of days; and there is nothing more evident, than that the most of vices have a physical effica∣cy in the shortening of humane life. That this is the necessary product and genuine effect of intemperance and lasciviousness, needs no other argument to prove it, but the daily examples of multitudes, whom those sins have hurried to their graves. And truely there is not any vice which does not like fire in mens bosoms torture and consume them; and so disorders and discomposes them, that they even neg∣lect the necessary means of their health. See Period of Humane life, pag. 111, 124. Edit. 2.
SECT. 6. Holiness that which makes men honoura∣ble; vice rendering men mean and ig∣noble. Honour is an ornament so noble and ve∣nerable, that he is but very sottish, if not quite bruitish, who doth not court and caress it. Upon this account it is no∣thing strange, that ancient Philosophers, who wanted the assistance of revelation, placed mans happiness in it. How many brave and gallant actions have been performed, which if they had wanted the bait of Honour had never been attempted! Gallant souls, who de∣spise all other rewards, have been hereby excited to undergo the greatest dangers. Now, since honour is so highly esteemed, especially by those who pretend to gene∣rositie; I shall, to encourage such to be∣friend Holiness, endeavour to prove, that the most effectual means to procure Ho∣nour, and to be in esteem both with God and man, is to live (as the Apostle advi∣seth men) soberly, righteoously, and god∣ly. Onely before I proceed to prove this, I shall premise one Caution, namely, that
by Honour I do not chiefly understand one dignified with any extrinsecal honour arising either from his Birth or Office; though both these are to be highly e∣steemed, and must not be denied that ex∣ternal respect due unto them: but by Honour I understand that esteem and re∣putation that the best and wisest men do give to any whose Moral honour is con∣spicuous; and under this notion the Sto∣ick-Moralists hath very well expressed it, Nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus. which upon the matter disagrees not much from that sacred position of the Wise man, Prov. 22.1 A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches. Having premised this, I come now to prove that Holiness is the path-way to Honour. And indeed, this is so plainly asserted in Scripture, that it is needless to insist. The God of Heaven hath assured us, that those that Honour him, he will ho∣nour; and those that despise him shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Sam. 2.30. Much like to this, is that inducement to Holiness urged by our Lord Christ, Joh. 12.26. If any man serve me, him will my Father honour. Now men cannot honour God
more, than by being holy: for the word is comprehensive, and includes all those duties that God hath enjoyned; but e∣very vice is a despising of his sacred Au∣thority. If then holy men are those onely whom God will honour, and vitious men those whom he will contemn, we may easily conclude, who are the honourable, and who are the base and ignoble. Sure those men must be honou∣rable, whom the Fountain of Honour e∣steems such. 'Tis upon this account that the Saints are called (in Scripture) the excellent of the earth, and the worthies of the world, (how meanly soever men esteem them) of whom the world is not worthy: And the righteous is said to be more excellent than his neighbour. And indeed, Holiness doth not onely promote the honour and esteem of private persons, but of publick Commu∣nities and Kingdoms also, Prov. 14.34. Righteousness exalteth a nation; but sin is a reproach to any people. This is a truth which the wisest of the Heathens, who yet wanted Revela∣tion, constantly taught, namely, That Honour is the reward of vertue. Hence the large Lectures they have written in the commendation thereof: it would be too
tedious to transcribe even the Elogies that they have written in the praise of Vertue; and indeed it is well worthy of our observation, that as they have illu∣strated Vertue by their large Encomiums of it, so Vertue (which they courted) hath made them venerable to posterity, and transmitted to us their memories un∣der the most amiable Encomiums imagina∣ble: And however their birth was but mean and almost regardless, yet their ver∣tues have made them more famous than Princes and Emperours. The vertues of Aristides, Socrates, Seneca, Marcus Re∣gulus, and many others, have made their renown glorious; whileas many Empe∣rours and great men have had their names buried in silence. Let a man be as rich as ever any of Adam's posterity was, or (that I may extend it farther) as high as his ambitious thoughts can wish; let him be wise as Solomon, and endued with all other per∣fections and advantages; yet if he want vertue, how insipid will his Name be to posterity? It is Vertue alone that con∣duceth to fame. 'Tis true, some wicked men (called in Scripture vile, notwith∣standing their authority) have been set in high places, and honoured for fear,
when alive; yet they never received that honour which hath in all ages accom∣panied the Righteous. They have had the external, (which is indeed due to men by vertue of their Descent or Office) but wanted that internal reverence and honour which is onely due to good men: and I doubt not to say, that there is no∣thing more incongruous and unsuitable, than to see Honour given to such men. As snow in summer, and as rain in har∣vest; so honour is not seemly for a fool, Prov. 26.1. Vice is in the judgement of all consi∣dering men so mean and base, that it casts a stain and reproach upon men; makes their names unsavory, and stink in the no∣strils of after-ages: but Holiness forces a veneration from men, and makes poste∣rity raise Elogies in their memory; but the memory of the wicked shall be forgot∣ten. Virtue was that alone whereby many Kingdoms and Empires have been raised; was that which made them so flourishing and potent, and prevailed more to their establishment and advancement, than Strength or Policy. Thus it was with the old Romans, (for their vertues are a shame to the present state of that Em∣pire)
their Clemencie and Justice con∣quered Kingdoms, and made Rome re∣nowned and glorious beyond all other Kingdoms and Commonwealths: and as Vertue hath raised Kingdoms, so hath it also particular Persons; whileas Vice hath cast Emperours from their Thrones, and made them as unfortunate as they were wicked. Many of the primitive Martyrs, who were renowned by Kingdoms and Com∣monwealths (who keep Festivals in honour of their memories) were but of an inferiour degree, and had nothing to recommend them to posterity but their Holiness and Sanctity; and indeed, any man that consults Reason, will easily finde himself constrained to reverence and e∣steem vertuous men. 'Tis a wonder that any man who pre∣tends to generosity should be vitious, there being nothing so mean and base as Vice, which like to cowards always lur∣keth, and dares not approach the light. I doubt not but this present age hath ar∣rived at as high a confidence in proclai∣ming their sins as Sodom, as ever any for∣mer age acquired; and it may (to the reproach of it) be said, as ever any is like to reach to: yet till men cast quite
off humanity, it cannot be expected that Vice shall have Advocates to plead in its defence. 'Tis a noble saying of the great Moralist Seneca; Licet Deus nesciret nec homo puniret peccatum, non tamen pecca∣rem ob peccati vilitatem. 'Tis no wonder then though Vice ap∣pear (as the Devil in Samuel's mantle) under the cloak of Vertue; though Lust mask it self with the pretence of Love, and Cruelty of Zeal: but by this means it proclaims its timorousness, not daring to own publickly what it really is. It were a large field, to descend to the consideration of every particular vertue and vice, and shew that there is not a∣ny vertue but tends to the advancement of a mans honour and fame, and no vice which is not ungentile, mean, and base: But the brevity I have designed will not allow me to enlarge; onely in brief I shall demonstrate the truth of this by some few Instances. Justice is so gallant a vertue, that it ad∣vanced the renown of those whom it a∣dorned, beyond what riches or preferment could ever bestow. The Romans were more famous, and (where they were E∣nemies) more formidable for their Justice than their Power: it was this vertue
which in a peculiar manner made Sce∣pters and Kingdoms submit to their Go∣vernment. But Injustice is so base and contemptible a vice, that it hath made those who are captivated by it, despised as the unworthiest of men, not deserving to be taken into friendship, but to be ex∣cluded from humane Societies. How un∣savory hath the name of unjust Judges been to posterity, while every one is rea∣dy to strew some Elogies in honour of the just! To this I may annex Constancy in friend∣ship, as a vertue as noble as amiable: For who will not admire and celebrate the man who remains fixt to his friend, what∣ever alterations or changes there may be in his condition? And sure whosoe∣ver fails in his friendship, lays himself o∣pen to the most merciless condition, and needs expect to be left to befriend himself when the wheel of Providence laies him below those he thought unworthy of his favour. Of all vertues, Liberality, Charity, and Compassion are so noble, that common speech adapts this Elogie to them by way of emphasis; and indeed, I think I need not say much to raise an estimate of these: for no man can be so base as to despise
those who bestow favours upon him. Sure there is no vertue that makes men more famous, that wins the hearts and affections of people more, than Liberali∣ty: but Avarice is ungentile and sordid; and so odious a vice, that it ever lessens all other vertues, and makes those it pos∣sesses the most hateful of men. Charity is an obliging vertue; and as it hath its original from, so doth it also ne∣cessarily produce Love, and esteem too: he who prefers the necessities of others before his own superfluities, and who does supply the wants of others, does so chear the languishing hearts of the needy, that nothing can be more generous, nor generally meets with a greater recompence of honour and esteem. To compassionate the case of the Fa∣therless, of the Poor and Needy, is so no∣ble a vertue, that the Apostle makes this qualification alone the evidence of pure and undefiled religion. It is a most un∣natural and more than bruitish sin, to slight and forget such. Meekness and Humility are such noble embellishments of humane nature, as I have formerly shewed, that none but proud and insolent spirits, who have been always condemned as insufferable, durst ever disesteem them.
To these I may joyn Affability or Courtesie, as a vertue near allied to Humi∣lity and Meekness; which being noble in its causes and effects, cannot but deno∣minate the person it illustrates both no∣ble, and amiable, and lovely: 'Tis indeed an evidence of a very base and abject spirit, to be sullen and morose. Persons of a noble education and original, are frequently known by their condescending and obliging behaviour; and I am sure Reputation and Esteem are the apparent effects of Courtesie. Temperance and Moderation are ver∣tues more noble than that they need elo∣quence to advance their value, as its contraries are too mean and beastly to be inveighed against. How bruitish and contemptible is a drunken man, who is rather an object of pity, (as mad-men are) than reproach; who being a more apt resemblance of a beast than a man, deserves as little Honour, as he is igno∣rant what Honour means?
SECT. 7. Holiness attended with the most solid and real pleasures. In all things that concern practice, there is scarce any motive more forcible than Pleasure; and of all plesures, those that entertain the Soul are the most excellent. We indeed need no argument but expe∣rience, to demonstrate how ravishing sen∣sual pleasures and delights are, how much they are caressed and courted, till men be glutted and filled with them. But alas! how inconsiderable are all sensitive de∣lights? the enjoyment of these cannot raise us above the beasts that perish; but those pleasures which are fitted for the rational nature, are noble and lasting; and such are all those delights that arise from a holy conversation; no joy, without this, being able to make a mans life pleasant and delightful. There is in Holiness an internal delecta∣bility, that is better felt, than it can be expressed; but how loathsome and o∣dious is Vice? it is compared in Scripture to the most ugly and unpleasant things: But Holiness is so comely, so delightful, and ravishing, that it is very fitly (ac∣cording
to the Scripture-Epithet of it) called, the Beauty of Holiness. It is this alone that produces a calm and serene Conscience; from which necessarily re∣sults acquiescence and delight: and in∣deed, this is no fantastick and imaginary joy, (as the Atheists of this Age would make men believe) but a true and real one, affording much more complacency and satisfaction, than all the pleasures of sense. To the truth of which, I doubt not but those men who question it should assent, if they would but make the expe∣riment; and till they do this, they give us too evident an instance of their folly, in denying the reality of those raptures of joy resulting from a holy conversa∣tion. But besides Experience, this truth is likewise confirmed by Reason: For who is in more probable circumstances to par∣ticipate of pleasures, than he who is Master of his Passions, who hath subdued his appetites, and freed himself from those imperious Lords, who denied him the li∣berty of tasting and relishing pleasures? The pious Soul may have no large allow∣ance of temporal mercies; yet having Contentment, he is richer than the wicked man whose coffers are full.
But we need not doubt of the reality of those pleasures; the Wise man hath long since put this out of question, Prov. 3.17. Her ways are ways of pleasantness. There is here a concurrence of all those circumstances that contribute to make a∣ny thing delectable: 'tis a way pleasant for its plainness, and desirable for its end. There is not indeed any thing wanting in it, that usually draws out mens de∣light. All beauty falls inconceivably short of this; it being Holiness alone, that makes the righteous shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom of their Father: without this, all natural comeliness is imperfect, and, as the Wise man expresses it, is deceitful and vain, Prov. 3.30. And yet what an universal Empress is external beauty become? nothing being of equal force to attract the eye of be∣holders as it doth. How hath she con∣quered the mighty, and made the Nobles of the Earth Vassals to lacquey after her? There is an almost irresistible power and force in her charmings, which conquer∣eth the hearts of men insensibly. Now if Beauty mixed with so much de∣formity, accompanied with so much at∣tendance and slavery, be so enchanting
and attractive; how much more power∣fully should the Beauty of Holiness, which is every whit perfect and unspotted, and attended with no dismal accidents, raise our admiration, and make us say (as David of Goliah's Sword) There is none like it? Alas! all earthly beauty will be quick∣ly laid in the dust! a little time will de∣face the fairest face, and make its beauty consume like a Moth: an unexpected ac∣cident may disfigure it, and marre the most lovely features; and there is no doubt but old Age, which draws on apace, will make wrinkles in the smoothest face, and make it wither as a flower: But the Beauty of Holiness is lasting; it fades not with time, nor can it be impaired by the most loathsome and nauseating disease. Since then Pleasure is so ready to ex∣cite our affections, and draw out our com∣placency, 'tis pity that the noblest, the most satisfying, and most lasting should be so much contemned. Eccl. 5.10. He that loveth silver, shall not be satisfied with silver; nor he that loveth abundance, with increase. All the caresses of this World are unable to satisfie the Soul; but how ravishing are the joys of a holy conversation? The pleasures of this world
are short and momentary, are onely (as the Apostle phraseth them) for a season, which quickly passeth; but the joy of the Holy Ghost is as lasting as unspeakble; and this joy (saith Christ to his Disci∣ples) no man shall take from you. It is without the reach of the malice of men and Devils too. Alas! how dimunitive does it make the pleasures of the wicked, to say they are short? how exceedingly does this one circumstance diminish them? But indeed this were not so very considerable, if there were a concurrence of no worse circum∣stances; but that which mostly is an al∣lay and damp to temporal pleasures, is the consequence, a painful and lasting eternity of the severest punishments. 'Tis this life that puts a period and conclusion to the joys of wicked men; whileas the pious have Rivers of pleasures for ever∣more to delight and ravish them: 'tis at Death that they enter into joy of their Lord. This is a subject so ravishing and plea∣sant, that I cannot without reluctancy conclude it. O how unsatisfactory are all the delights of Sense, if compared with those Spiritual Joys the holy Soul partakes of! The delights that the Drunkard hath
in his Cups and Companions, the Cove∣tous in his Riches, the Ambitious in his Preferments, &c. fall all incomparable short of that joy that is the lot of the righ∣teous. The delights that the holy man enjoys do upon a double account far over-poise the transitory pleasures of the wicked. First, the present satisfaction that the ho∣ly Soul tastes of in this valley of tears, is incomparably greater than the delights that arise from sense. The soul that hath once tasted of the love of God, findes more pleasure in the very acts of mutual love, than in all the feasts of delight that sense is capable to enjoy. Food is indeed sweet to the hungry, and drink to those who are languishing with thirst: the taste does without doubt finde some meats sweet and relishing, even where there is no extremity of hunger, much more where it is: for, to the hungry every bitter thing is sweet. Beauteous Sights ravish the Eye, melodious Musick the Ear, and Odoriferous things please the Smell: But alas! how far beyond these is the delight which the devout soul receives in Ordi∣nances! the antipasts of joy which their Heavenly Father bestows upon them, are more delightful than the concurrence of
all sensual pleasures. The soul that is in trouble can fetch more consolation from the promises of the Word, than the car∣nal man can from his pleasures: Vnless thy Law had been my delight (saith the Psalmist) I had perished in my affliction. Other things could not avail him, they could afford no relief: but to have ac∣cess to God in prayer, and to pour out our complaints to our willing God, this is more ravishing than I can express. And I am sure there is no man who hath ta∣sted these joys, who would part with them for sensual pleasures; and no man dare inveigh against those spiritual de∣lights, but strangers who intermeddle not with this joy. The very Heathens have taught us, that Vertue is a reward to it self; they expe∣rimented more real satisfaction in mode∣ration and temperance, than in Drinking and Whoring. But Christianity gives us more uncontrolable evidences of the re∣ality of that joy that good men even in this state of absence taste of. Into what a rapture and unexpressible extasie of joy did the abundance of revelation St. Paul met with put him! and the Apostle St. Peter was so transported with joy when he did see Christ in his Transfigu∣ration,
that he could not forbear crying, Master, it is good being here. How full of joy have Martyrs been in the midst of the flames? what comforts have they e∣ven then expressed? And is not all this evidence, that the joy of holy men is more real, more sweet and ravishing, than the transitory pleasures of the wicked, which in several seasons can afford no delight? a little pain or disease is such an allay and damp to their pleasures, that it quite extirps them. But besides those foretastes of joy that the holy Soul experiments here, which, as I have shewed, infinitely overwhelms all trouble and pain; that which con∣tributes most to advance the joy of good men, are those felicities above, which are prepared for them; and to these wicked men can lay no claim, their farthest pro∣spect being confined to temporal de∣lights. What abundance of delights and unex∣pressible pleasures are laid up for the ho∣ly Soul above! How delectable will it be, to be constant residents in the Hea∣venly Jerusalem, whose Streets are pure Gold, and whose Gates are Pearl? how ravishing will it be, to be always in his presence, where there are Streams and
Rivers of perpetual pleasures? How sweet will it be, to be a member of that blessed Society of the first-born in Hea∣ven, where there is a perfect concord and agreement? But I confess, I am not able to express half the joy of this future fe∣licity: Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entred into the hearts of men to conceive, what a store of happi∣ness God hath laid up in Heaven for those who are holy in all manner of conversa∣tion. SECT. 8. Holiness accompanied with Peace. There is nothing more suitable to, and agreeable with Humane nature, that Peace; as those who endure trouble and vexa∣tion can fully attest: Amongst earthly blessings it deserves not the last place, it being a mercy which crowns all others, and without which, the fullest fruition could not prove satisfactory. Those languishing, and much to be pi∣tied, Kingdoms, which now lie bathed in blood, can attest the evils and mischiefs of War, much more pathetically than words can express. How sweet and ac∣ceptable would Peace (a word always sounding sweetly) be to them?
Now the Apostle St. James hath given us a brief, but unquestionably true, ac∣count of the real causes of Wars and Fightings, Jam. 4.1. From whence come wars and fightings among you? come they not hence, even of your lusts that war in your members? From these sinful cau∣ses have all the disorders and jars in King∣domes and private Societies had their real (I speak not of their pretended) original. How impetuous are the lusts of turbulent spirits! like the raging waves of the Sea, they are still in motion, casting forth filth and dirt. Ambition is so un∣quiet and restless a passion, that no man is ignorant what desolations it hath wrought in the earth: How many fa∣mous Kingdoms hath it ruined and de∣stroyed? what inquietudes and disor∣ders are occasioned by discontentment? All these are things so evident, that I need not enlarge upon them: but how repugnant are these vices to Holiness? and can it be rationally imagined that their genuine and proper effects can be more re∣concilable with it? I confess, Religion hath too frequently been pretended as a Cloak to cover the greatest Villanies, Confusions, and Rebel∣lions: but sure I am, nothing imaginable
contains a greater contradiction, than to say these impieties have a warrant from the sacred Laws of the Gospel, the com∣bination of which is the rule of Holiness, as I have formerly explained. Is not Christ called the Prince of Peace, and the Gospel, the Gospel of Peace? and it is cer∣tain, if men would be ruled by the Laws of so peaceable a Prince, they should be of a calm and quiet spirit: then should we indeed see Righteousness and Peace kissing each other. When ever therefore we read in an∣cient prophesies of the great peace that shall be in the Messiahs reign, we must thereby understand, that the nature of the Gospel and its precepts are such, that if men would conform their lives to them, there should be an universal Peace. How strictly are all the causes of Envy, Con∣tention, Ambition, and Rebellion, pro∣hibited? and sure if these causes were removed, their effect should have no place: Then should the Bow be broken, and the Spear cut in sunder: Swords should be turned into Plough shares, and the Instruments of War into more ne∣cessary uses: War should cease unto the ends of the earth, and Peace should be within each wall.
By this it is apparent how much holi∣ness conduceth to the establishment of publick peace. But that which I would more especially take notice of, is, the in∣ternal serenity and calmness of Con∣science, which is the onely effect of holi∣ness: and truely upon this account there is no peace to the wicked. I might here appeal to every mans breast, whether Holiness does not calm and quiet the Consciences of men; while∣as a natural horrour results from the com∣mission of vice, more heavy than the severest lashes ever inflicted by Cedi∣tius or Rhadamanthus. What unspeak∣able peace and ease does attend holiness of life! there is no jar nor contention, no check of Conscience, nor wound of spirit, to disturb the inward repose of the Righteous: but that remorse that results from the commission of sin, even after men have acquired what they sinfully lu∣sted after, is like that hand-writing, Dan. 5.5. which made the stout heart of Bel∣shazzer to tremble, and his knees to smite one against another: It troubles the thoughts of the most daring sinner, and makes him a terrour to himself. There is no imaginable torment that can equal the terrours of an awakened guilty Con∣science;
it hath put men to chuse strang∣ling and death rather than life: all which is fully verified by the Word of truth: The spirit of a man can sustain his infirmity; but a wounded spirit who can bear? O the secret pangs and fears that possess the spirits of wicked men! the severe checks and lashes of Conscience that seize upon transgressors, which all imaginable divertisements cannot quite stifle and suppress! All the attendance of the most dear Relations cannot give ease and com∣fort to them. How dismal and incon∣solable was Spira's condition? how ama∣zing are the very thoughts of those gnaw∣ings and horrours of Conscience he suf∣fered? The fears and apprehensions of a future misery, mar all the joy and mirth of carnal men. In their most flourishing state it continually haunts them, and so fills them with horror and inquietude, that they cannot quietly enjoy themselves. Whilst the Soul acts within the Body, it cannot but present those horrid and dis∣quieting reflections. Hi sunt qui trepidant & ad omnia ful∣gora pallent. These are the men who in the midst of
outward felicity are amazed with tormen∣ting fears, which cannot be eradicated but by a sincere repentance. But the holy Soul, in the extremity of outward troubles, enjoys an internal calm∣ness and quiet of minde: the very Pa∣gan, who could not be beyond doubt as∣sured of the certainty of a future reward, could yet say, — Hic murus ahenaeus esto, Nil conscire sibi, nulla palescere culpa. But the Word of truth hath made this more unquestionably sure: Psal. 119.165. Great peace have they that love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them. SECT. 9. Holiness the best evidence of true Wisdom, and real Worth, and Courage. Wisdom and Courage having their rise and source from nobler Principles than external helps, have therefore in all Ages been esteemed excellent and venerable vertues; and much preferable to those others which depend upon external ad∣vantages. Wisdom is (as the Wise man speaks) the principal thing, Prov. 4.7.
It is that vertue which in a peculiar man∣ner raiseth the Humane nature above that of Bruits, who act without considera∣tion and counsel. And Courage is that which subdueth that ignoble passion of fear, which hindreth men from attempt∣ing ations praise-worthy. Hence it is, that to be called a Fool, or Coward, are such reproachful denominations, that nothing imaginable is more shame∣ful. That Holiness is an infallible evidence of true Wisdom, is more plain than it can be doubted. In sacred Writ, Wis∣dom and Religion are used as convertible terms, as words expressing the same thing. And unto man he said, Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil, that is understanding, Job 28.28. Hence the impious and wicked are fre∣quently called Fools, and men void of understanding and wisdom. And how∣ever this prophane Age of ours hath ac∣counted those men great wits, who have cast off all Religion, and who Burlesque Scripture; who think it the greatest folly to be kept in awe by the fears of future danger, and to be kept in thraldom by the apprehension of an invisible being: yet men who consider things aright, have
in all ages accounted those Atheists both fools and mad-men. Fools, in condemning that which all wise men have assented too. But 'tis no wonder, since sin is that which overclouds and stupifies the judgement, and deprives them of those intellectual abilities where∣by men acquire a right judgement of things. Alas! why should such be ac∣counted wise, who cast themselves in the dirt and puddle, who contaminate and pollute their Souls, who prefer a tempo∣ral to an eternal felicity, who blindly and inconsiderately expose themselves to the wrath of a God revenging sin? Sure the greatest Idiots are not compara∣bly so unwise as these men, who venture their Souls upon such hazards. There is nothing that doth so much de∣base Humane nature, as sin: the Psalmist, who but upon a surprisal vented his im∣patience and envy, yet characterizeth him∣self a fool for doing so, Psal. 73.22. So foolish was I, and ignorant: I was as a beast before thee. 'Tis Religion alone that is the most certain and uncontrovertable dif∣ference betwixt men and bruits. The ve∣ry Pagan Satyrist could say,
— Separat haec nos A grege brutorum — Reason will easily convince every man that will but take pains to consider, that those men who neglect their greatest in∣terest, can never shun to be esteemed fools. Now to be serious and careful a∣bout the Soul, to be ascertained how it shall go with us in the other world, this is the greatest concern of man, about which the greatest care and diligence pos∣sible is little enough: and sure those men who designe happiness (a thing implan∣ted in the natures of men) must either make use of the right means in order to their acquiring of it, otherwise they too plainly proclaim their folly: but the ho∣ly Soul makes Religion its whole business; he knows that it is his greatest interest to be holy, and that without this he can ne∣ver expect to be happy hereafter. And indeed, whatever may be the present ap∣prehensions and thoughts of men, yet they shall ere long pass this verdict of cir∣cumspect walkers, That they were the onely wise men: and the God of wisdom, who can give the best judgement in the case, does account the Saints to be wise
men. Let us then hearken to the Apostles advice, Eph. 5.15. See that ye walk cir∣cumspectly, not as fools, but as wise. But as Holiness doth thus entitle men to wisdom, so doth it also promote true valour; it mightily conduceth to inspirit men with courage and magnanimity: The righteous are bold like a lyon; but the wic∣ked flee when no man pursueth. And the reason of both is plain: the one hath secured his future state; but the other expects no better inheritance. And how∣ever wicked men may be very daring, yet they cannot be said to be truely valiant; for this is always rational and deliberate: but if wicked men should soberly consi∣der the unspeakable hazard they run up∣on, they durst not be so daring; for what considering man would thus expose him∣self to danger to be esteemed gallant, who knows if he miscarry he is everla∣stingly miserable? If this merits the En∣comium of courage, why may not those mad-men who inconsiderately expose themselves to danger, be also accounted valiant? Nay, the Horse that undaunted∣ly, but inconsiderately, runs so many dangers, encounters so many perils in bat∣tle, may be as truely said to be valiant, as those men: But this is to mistake quite the true notion of courage.
That man that is affrighted with a small danger because it is present, but nothing amazed with a future danger which is certain and intolerable, is certainly both Fool and Coward. A Fool, in judging so badly, and mistaking his own interest and well-being: A Coward, in being a∣fraid for a danger because it is present. He who runs from his Colours in time of Battle, proclaims himself to be a coward, although thereby he exposeth himself to a greater danger if he be apprehended, even the severe Sentence of the Martial Law justly inflicted upon Fugitives. How then can those men be accounted valiant, who for fear of some small danger they may run the hazard of here for Holiness, expose themselves to those vials of fury which is the portion of ungodly men hereafter? SECT. 10. Holiness universally profitable, and above all things most advantageous. In all secular affairs that concern pra∣ctice, Gain and Advantage is the great ar∣gument and attracting inducement that prevails upon men; it is like oyl to the wheel, making its motion more easie and
swift. There is no danger so terrifying, but men have hazarded on, who have had this motive to animate them: this is it that prompts the Mariner to expose himself to the dangers of the merciless Ocean, that excites Servants to toil so in∣dustriously, and encourageth Souldiers to fight battles. That men may also be inspirited and allured to court Holiness upon the account of its utility and profit, I shall (abstra∣cting from those advantages I have alrea∣dy instanced) now briefly discover, that Holiness is, first, profitable to men in every condition and state. Secondly, that it is attended with all outward blessings, and wants not a claim to a temporal felicity. Thirdly, That without it all other mer∣cies are useless, and unable to quiet the Soul. Fourthly, That it is the most in∣comparable blessing, and frees the Soul from the worst of evils. Fifthly, That it is the best evidence of our being in favour with God, and of our adoption to Gods Family. And Lastly, That it is the best cordial against the fears of death, and affords the greatest satisfaction to men lying on their beds of languish∣ing. That Holiness is profitable and advan∣tageous
That Holiness is profitable and advan∣tageous to men in every condition and state, seems to be clearly enough asserted by the Apostle, when he says, Godliness is profitable for all things. But besides Scripture, Experience and Reason do joyntly agree in the proof of this. That man that is advanced above others in riches, has no ground to expect honour and reverence from men, if he walk not according to the rule of Holiness; that is, if he be not moderate and compassio∣nate, if he restrains not his ambition and pride: And sure, without this love and reverence from others, his condition is not very happy, he lies exposed to infi∣nite dangers. Again, if a man be exposed to a mean and adverse estate, is environed with an infinite number of perplexing difficulties; yet this case is not altogether hopeless: for if he be not vitious, but on the con∣trary religious, besides the divine aid that is engaged for his relief, the circum∣stances he is stated in are apt motives to stir up bowels of compassion towards such a person. Vnless the Magistrate, who is invested with Supream Power and Authority, imi∣tate God in goodness as well as in great∣ness,
his Authority will produce fear ra∣ther than love. The very Moralist could say, Sine bonitate nulla majestas. Those who will be at the pains to consult Expe∣rience, shall finde that good Princes have always been in the greatest esteem; and sure it is the most unpardonable villany to attempt any evil against religious Kings. Holiness is also profitable for Subjects to teach them obedience, and to submit, not merely upon the account of wrath, but for Conscience sake; which is certainly the onely safe expedient to secure the o∣bedience of Subjects: And, I confess, I know not how that man can be a true Subject to his earthly Prince, who stands not to offend the God of Heaven. I know some who have pretended to much Holiness, have been the greatest villains; but this proves not that the rule of Ho∣liness gives a Supersedeas or allowance to any to disobey Authority. Art thou a Parent? the rule of Holiness (to which holy men conform) will in∣struct thee to be gentle and tender to thy Children, and not to provoke them to wrath, which is the onely thing that lessens their affection. Art thou a Childe? it will teach thee to reverence and ho∣nour
thy parents; in doing of which, thou entitlest thy self to the promise annexed to the fifth Commandment. In a word, it is profitable to make all manner of Relations live in quietness and peace, and to bestow mutual offices of love upon each other. It instructs men to be faithful in every calling and employment: and certainly the good man is to be trusted far rather than the wicked; for Religion lays an awe and restraint upon the one, but the other pretends no such motive to engage him to fidelity, especially if he may de∣ceive and not be noticed. To this pur∣pose Plutarch hath a notable saying: Pie∣tate (saith he; Nat. Deor. lib. 1.) sublata sides etiam & Societas humanae generis, & una excellentissima virtus justitia tolli∣tur. There are several things useful for some men, but altogether unprofitable for o∣thers; but Holiness is equally profitable for all; there are none exempt from tast∣ing its utility, but those who exclude themselves by a vitious conversation. Secondly, Holiness is attended with all outward blessings, and wants not a claim to a temporal felicity, Matth. 6.33. Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righ∣teousness, and all other things shall be ad∣ded
unto you. The promise of inheriting the Earth (by which all temporal feli∣city is meant) is made to the meek: Matth. 5.8. Blessed are the meek; for they shall inherit the earth. And indeed, we finde this blessing even promised to the posterity of those that fear the Lord, Psal. 25.13. And to put this beyond all doubt, we finde the Psalmist repeating this five times in one Psalm, Psal. 37.9, 11, 22, 29, 34. And the great Apostle tells us, that it is Godliness that hath the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come, 1 Tim. 4.8. The God of Hea∣ven hath also assured us, that he will with∣hold no good thing from them that walk uprightly. Upon this account well might Wisdom say, Prov. 8.18. Riches and ho∣nour are with me: a plain instance of which, we have in Solomon, who because of his asking Wisdom to govern his Sub∣jects, when he might as freely have ask'd Riches and Honour, he receives this an∣swer from God, I have also given thee both riches and honour, 1 King. 3.13. But however this discriminating pro∣vidence doth not so discernedly appear here, yet there is no man but can attest Vice hath impoverished thousands; there being several sins that have a natural ten∣dency
to poverty. By means of a who∣rish woman, a man is brought to a piece of bread, Prov. 6.26. The like we may truely enough say of several other sins. I have seen (saith the Psalmist) the wic∣ked great in power, and spreading himself like a green bay-tree; yet he passed away, and lo, he was not: yea, I sought him, but he could not be found, Psal. 37.35, 36. I confess, good men may be reduced to great wants, may be destitute of necessary provisions; nay, how frequently is this the lot of the most excellent and gallant Souls? yet this may be safely said, That a little that a righteous man hath, is better than the riches of many wicked. But then those things that best deserve the name of riches, because of their en∣riching the Soul, which being more ex∣cellent than the Body, must upon that ac∣count be of greater value than these things that onely respect the Body, these are onely peculiar to holy men: and such are the graces of the Holy Spirit, the combination of Christian vertues, the price of which is above that of Rubies. These are riches which are of a more la∣sting nature than those which the igno∣ble of the world call riches; they are not subject to the casualties which Gold
and Silver and precious Stones are; which upon that account cannot be called a mans own, as Pagan Moralists have large∣ly and excellently confirmed: And if we will not dispute with God, and contest his determination, we shall finde one sin∣gle vertue receiving a more ample com∣mendation than ever riches did; 1 Pet. 3.4. The ornament of a meek and quiet spirit is in the sight of God of great price. Although the holy and devout Soul may be reduced to our Saviours straits, not to have where to lay his head; yet how can he be said to be poor, since he possesses him who is All? The most adverse chan∣ces that befal such a Soul, cannot denomi∣nate it poor; there is a Crown and Princely Inheritance which belongs to it. Nay, besides that glorious reversion, we have express promises that such Souls shall not be altogether destitute of neces∣saries to sustain and support them in this their pilgrimage. I have already shewed, that Honour and Pleasures are the attendants of Holiness: What in the world is more glorious, than for a man to conquer those lusts and in∣ordinate appetites that seek the mastery over him? what pleasure is able to con∣test
with those ravishing joys which re∣sult from a holy conversation? There is nothing imaginable that so exhilarates and revives men, as a calm and quiet Con∣science. But I pass this. In the next place I come to shew, that the enjoyment of all other blessings can never profit that man that wants Holi∣ness. This is plainly attested by our Sa∣viour, saying, What hath a man profited if he should gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? To have an affluence of temporal mercies, cannot so much as con∣tribute to a present felicity, where the forementioned qualification is lacking. Outward favours, not attended and chai∣ned with real Holiness, contribute onely to enhance the misery of their possessor; they being proper fewel to increase the flame of inquietude and restlesness, but unfit to allay it. The greatest plenty of riches cannot satisfie the covetous minde, which like the Grave cries, Give, give. The whole world could not satisfie Ale∣xander's insatiable ambition; but, as the Poet speaks, Aestuat infoelix angusto limite mundi. 'Tis indeed impossible for a man to en∣joy
that earthly felicity he designs, if he want Holiness: For, suppose he be posses∣sed of it, yet the secret acknowledge∣ment of a superiour power, impairs the delights that do arise from such a state, and makes him in the height of his fanci∣ed felicity startle and quake. Conscience, upon the apprehension of guilt, and the vengeance due to it, recoils upon the sinner, and disturbs his quiet enjoyment of the pleasures he might otherwise freely e∣nough delight in. O how does it molest and torment him Nocte dieque suum gestare in pectore testem. to have an inward principle of Fear haun∣ting the sinner in his most retired enjoy∣ment of pleasures, which cannot be silenced by his utmost endeavours! This, this is it that torments him with anguish and confusion, that allays the imaginary pleasure of the most charming Lust, and in the midst of laughter makes his heart heavy: which fully verifies the truth of what I said; that the enjoyment of all other blessings can never free a man from torment, nor a whit profit him that is destitute of Holiness. Fourthly, Holiness is the most incom∣parable
blessing, and frees and Soul from the worst of evils. What David said of Goliahs Sword, I may more safely say of Holiness, There is none like it; nothing in the world so apt to remove those disa∣sters and turmoiling fears that inwardly work upon and damp the mindes of men with severe checks and lashes, as Holi∣ness, which being diametrically opposite to sin, which is the worst of evils, must therefore by a necessary consequence be the best of blessings. Now seeing contraries placed near to other are the more discernable, I shall therefore take a short view of the evil and malignity of sin, that hereby the beau∣ty and excellency of Holiness may ap∣pear the brighter, and have the greater force to conquer our affections. To express the evil and malignity of sin, Scripture represents it by the most ug∣ly and abominable things, by the most dangerous and terrible Diseases: Nay, the great Apostle seems to want language and comparisons too, to express the evil of it, when he calls it exceedingly evil, as if he had said, it infinitely transcends all other evils; the malignity of which, no Pen can fully delineate and describe, either in its nature or consequences.
In its Nature; the Scripture-character of it is, it is an enmity against God; a transgression and voluntary violation of his most holy and righteous Law; a dis∣obedience of his Authority, and a wicked contempt of all the divine Attributes: 'tis the woful stain and blemish of our Natures, the disease of our Souls, and the reproach of our Reason. The consequences of sin are fearful and fatal. So bad a cause can never fail to produce the worst effects; for besides all the temporal calamities and mischiefs that befal Mankinde, those unspeakable miseries and extream torments that ac∣company men to the other world, are al∣so the dreadful and sad effects of sin. I have already shewed, that every vice is naturally attended with some particular punishment: but that indeed which is most terrible, which should mightily a∣maze and startle the sinner, are the dread∣ful miseries of another world: Alas! how dismal is the condition of those men who have lost the divine Image, and conse∣quently his love and favour, and are lia∣ble to his fury and wrath? who are pos∣sess'd with a legion of impure lusts, which lead them captive, and hurry them headlong to perdition, where they must
have their everlasting abode with impure spirits and devouring flames. How impossible is it to give a just List and Catalogue of the sad and dreadful consequences of sin, or fully describe the evil and malignity of it! But yet this im∣perfect glance may in part satisfie and in∣form us, that a holy and vertuous life, which excludes all those mischiefs and in∣conveniencies which both in this and the next life attend sin, is the best of bles∣sings, and frees us from the worst of e∣vils. Fifthly, Holiness is the best evidence of our being in favour with God, and of our adoption to Gods Family. How se∣dulous and inquisitive are many good Christians to understand their spiritual state and condition, that they may know into which of the two regions of the o∣ther world they shall be stated after death? This is certainly a matter of the greatest consequence, and deserves every mans most serious consideration; a mistake here being so exceedingly dangerous, like a wound in the vital parts, it proves mor∣tal and incurable if continued in. Now the most infallible mark and character of our being in favour with God, and that which comprehends all others, is that
which the beloved Apostle sets down, 1 Joh. 3.7, 8, 9, 10. Little children, let no man deceive you: he that doth righteous∣ness is righteous. (And every one that doth righteousness is born of God, Chap. 2.29.) He that committeth sin is of the Devil— Whosoever is born of God doth not commit sin— In this the children of God are ma∣nifest, and the children of the Devil: Whosoever doth not righteousness, is not of God. Let men pretend what they will, if they be destitute of righteousness, they are of their Father the Devil, and can claim no interest in God as their Father; seeing it is purity of Spirit that gives us a title to be the Children of the most high; 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. Be ye separate, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty. The whole tenour of the Scripture abounds with so many such instances, that I shall supersede a tedi∣ous citation of texts. This then being so infallible and cer∣tain a character, methinks every rational man may quickly come to the knowledge of his spiritual estate. A bad man may certainly enough know whether he breaks the divine Laws, and goes in a continued
course of sin; and a good man may suf∣ficiently know whether he obeys the di∣vine Laws, and is sincere in his actions. These are things so plain and undeniable, that all doubts of this kinde are ridicu∣lous. Now 'tis no difficulty to draw these plain inferences: I break the divine Laws, therefore I am not of God: or, I obey them, therefore I am a Childe of God. And this every considering man, who im∣partially considers, and exactly examines his life and actions, may be fully enough ascertained whether he be a Childe of God or not. Alas! how useless and dange∣rous is it to ascend unto Heaven to search the secret and eternal Decrees of God, which belong not to us to pry into, that we may know whether our Names be written in the Book of Life or not? He that doth righteousness needs not fear any latent Decree concerning his reprobation; and it is the vainest thing imaginable, for im∣penitent and obstinate sinners to dream that God hath from eternity elected them to life. The pure nature of God is so perfectly opposite to sin, that it is quite impossible there can be any agreement betwixt him and sinners, no more than there can be betwixt light and darkness. The Psalmist acquaints us, That he is not
a God that hath pleasure in wickedness. And the Apostle hath told us, That the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteous∣ness of men. But yet the righteous Lord loveth the righteous: These are the men whom he esteems his Children, to whom the promises of eternal life be∣long. In the last place, there is nothing in the world that will prove so effectual to com∣fort men at the hour of death, as the sweet thoughts of their being separated from the pollutions of the world. How unspeakably comfortable is it for men, when they are just stepping into the o∣ther world, to reflect upon the good life they have led, and that they carry in their bosoms Consciences void of offence both toward God and towards man? This is indeed that noble and Sovereign Cordial that revives the spirits of good men, in their passage through the valley and shadow of death, and makes their com∣forts abound and overflow. Death is not so small a matter as some men think; in Scripture it is not unfitly called the King of terrours: Now no∣thing can free men from the terrour of it, but a good Conscience; and this cannot
be had without Holiness, which makes all calm and serene within. It will afford men little pleasure when they come to die, to reflect upon the earthly pleasures they have enjoyed: these things profit not in the day of wrath; but the Con∣science of well doing makes men salute death without dread and astonishment, and lift up their heads with joy, because the day of their redemption approach∣eth. But with the ungodly and wicked it is not so; then their sins stare them in their face, and so terrifie and affright them, that no wonder though in the extremity of their agony they prefer strangling and death to life. If holy Job doth so heavi∣ly complain of the terrours of God, how much more terrifying shall the apprehen∣sions of a severe and terrible judgement be to the unsanctified and polluted? To think how shortly he must be everlasting∣ly separate from the good things he en∣joyed here, and be cast into utter dark∣ness, to have his portion with the damned in devouring Flames, to be an everla∣sting resident in the Lake of fire and brim∣stone, where he shall be continually tor∣mented with that gnawing worm that ne∣ver dies: These are the amazing thoughts
that will seize upon the sinner: his Con∣science then will not sleep; nothing will be able to allay those Storms and Tem∣pests that are raised by the fearful expe∣ctation of the reward due to sin. At death, men are generally wiser than at o∣ther times; then they begin to consider what they have been doing, and call themselves fool a thousand times for their disobedience and wickedness. The smoak of worldly cares that formerly blinded their eyes, are now dispelled; they see their folly, when it is too late to mend it; and if they do no more, yet Balaam-like, they will cry, O that I might die the death of the righteous!
CHAP. IV. Frivolous Cavils and Objections removed. THe former Chapters having disco∣vered the Beauty of Holiness, and the mighty power and force of Argu∣ments that excite to the practice of it; one who weighs all this by the measures of equity, cannot (as any man would think) but look upon it as the strangest prodigie, that so just a Cause should raiss of its effect, and finde the sons of men, who pretend to be such Masters of Rea∣son, so monstrously foolish in rejecting it upon the account of some frivolous and very fallacious cavils: But the truth is, resolute Impiety is set upon the bench and made Judge; and no wonder though it pass an unjust sentence, and condemn Holiness because of its opposition to Vice. The common imputations and prejudi∣ces which wicked men load Holiness with, I shall reduce to the four following Heads. First, Holiness lays upon men heavy bur∣dens, and grievous to be born, which makes humane life joyless and uneasie, they being so inconsistent, first, with
Peace; and secondly, with Pleasure and Satisfaction. Secondly, Experience informs us, that wicked men enjoy pleasure and satisfa∣ction in their ways, there being no men so jovial and merry as they; and that men who pretend to Holiness are fullen and melancholy, and are exposed to heavy sufferings and trials. Thirdly, 'Tis singularity and ambition that prevail more with men than any other motive to be holy. Fourthly, 'Tis the greatest piece of fol∣ly, ignorance, and impudence, for men to quit with present pleasures for mere un∣certainties. The first being the most material Obje∣ction, I shall therefore more largely and distinctly examine it; and in doing of this, I shall desire these four things may be considered. First, that the di∣vine Laws are not grievous and uneasie. Secondly, that Vice is much more trou∣blesom and difficult than Vertue. Thirdly, that Holiness conduceth both to the Peace and Happiness of humane Societies, and to the temporal Advantage of private persons. And Fourthly, that there is a great deal of more pleasure in the ways of Holiness, than in the commission of sin.
That the divine Laws are not grievous and uneasie, but extreamly reasonable and wise, is a truth I have already made plain, when I discoursed of the rule of Ho∣liness. The whole tenour of the Laws of Christianity being so exceedingly suitable to the very nature of men, it cannot be ra∣tionally supposed that they can be grievous to them. St. Paul to the Philippians, gives us a brief and compendious, but very full and comprehensive, account of what things the Laws of our Christiani∣ty enjoyn, viz. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, and whatso∣ever things are of good report: all which are so agreeable to Reason, that even the light of Nature prompts men to the do∣ing of them, and fully discovers it self to be an irreconcilable Enemy to all kinde of vices. 'Tis not then Reason, but the impe∣tuous Lusts of men, that determines a ho∣ly Law to be grievous and uneasie: and indeed, no wonder though this unjust Judge make Holiness appear formidable, and represent it as grievous to Mankinde; it being so much the interest of this par∣tial Judge to condemn it as criminal,
and to decrie it as a yoak intolerable and grievous to be born. 'Tis not probable that the most innocent shall pass unconde∣mned, when an Enemy is set up in the Judgement-seat to pass Sentence: our blessed Saviour must be pronounced guilty by Pilat, although even this unjust Judge openly profest, he found no fault in him. And seeing our great Law-giver met with so severe a sentence, who can expect any more upright verdicts should pass up∣on his Laws? But that the divine Laws are not in∣deed grievous to be born, may easily ap∣pear from plain Texts of Scripture (which is the onely infallible rule.) Our great Lord hath himself taught his Disciples, That his yoak is easie, and his burden light. And one of his inspired Disciples has assured us, that his commands are not grievous: two Texts sufficient methinks to remove all those prejudices that are cast upon a holy life, as if it were full of fatigue and trouble. But besides Scripture, Reason and Ex∣perience too, come in to witness this truth. First, Reason bears witness that the divine Commands are extreamly reaso∣nable and natural; and is it not against the common vote of Mankinde, to say, What
is natural, is uneasie and difficult? Men who impose hard and grievous tasks up∣on others, are by all men condemned as unreasonable; which certainly implies, that whatever is reasonable, is not grie∣vous and difficult. 'Tis true, sinners, who by their many-repeated acts of disobe∣dience have contracted a habit of sin, do indeed commit it with less trouble than those who first engage to this Tyranny; as Slaves, who by custom look upon that as easie, which at their first entrance up∣on such a slavery was very difficult and grievous: And yet whatever ease the most daring sinner may pretend is to be found in the acts of sin, I durst appeal to his own breast, whether he might not with a great deal of more ease, and less fatigue, have kept the divine Laws, than he met with in breaking of them. I confess, the Laws of Christianity are not natural in a strict and confined sence; but onely in so far as they correspond with, and are suitable to, the nature of Mankinde: hence some sins are said to be unnatural; not because all sins may not adopt to themselves that title, but because upon a more peculiar and spe∣cial account, all men are sensible that they are bruitish, and unbecoming any who
carry in their bosom a rational Soul. There is not any vice, but it infests and prejudges Nature. Anger is a degree of Madness, that violently transports men, and quite mars their inward ease and re∣pose. Revenge, a more lasting and deli∣berate fury, preys upon the Soul where it resides, and so distracts and hurries it with inquietude and restlesness, that no∣thing imaginable can be supposed a grea∣ter Enemy to Nature, how sweet soe∣ver and luscious it may seem to depra∣ved nature. Intemperance, and Vnclean∣ness, are sins which debase Humane na∣ture below that of beasts, and are the cause of many intolerable pains and Di∣seases, which make Humane life but an uneasie burden. But besides all these trou∣bles, we may adde that horrour of Con∣science that haunts the sinner with fear and astonishment. All which contribute to clear the truth of what I assert. Again, Reason tells a man, that it can∣not be grievous to him to perform that which is so much his interest and advan∣tage. Men in their secular concerns finde no difficulties in any undertaking wherein their interest is concerned; and sure it is mans greatest interest to keep the divine Precepts, as I have already at
some length discovered. 'Tis an excel∣lent saying, of as excellent an Author: Reason (says he) must first cease to be Reason, and commence Phrenzie, before 'tis possible it can set it self in defiance of those Laws of Christ, which are accom∣modated to its greatest interest. Causes of the decay of Christian Piety, Chap. 5. But besides Reason, Experience bears also witness to this truth, that the divine Laws are not grievous. But before I proceed to prove this, I shall premise two Cautions: First, when I say that Expe∣rience makes it plain, that the Laws of Christianity are not grievous; I do not mean that a sinner when he first forsaketh his sins, and betakes himself to a holy and vertuous life, shall encounter with no difficulties; no sure, this cannot rea∣sonably be expected: for his former ha∣bit in sin will at the first give him work enough; he has an old custom to op∣pose and struggle with, which will cost him no small pains to overcome. Se∣condly, far less must we fondly imagine that the Law of Christianity is so easie, as supersedes and gives a discharge to humane industry, vigilancy, and care: they are but strangers to a holy life, and never knew what it is to obey Gods
Commands, who never were at any pains, nay who are not very industrious and careful to observe them. When our Sa∣viour says, his yoak is easie, he does not here∣by intend to perswade men to be like So∣lomons sluggard; sure Heaven was never designed for loiterers in Gods Vineyard: but his intent there, is to remove a com∣mon prejudice men were like to enter∣tain against Christianity, as if it were an intolerable yoak, and insupportable task: now this Christ forewarns his Disciples is not true. These two things being premised, I now appeal to Experience (which of∣ten corrects errour in speculation) whe∣ther the Laws of Heaven or Hell are most grievous. And to condescend as far as possible, I shall not here call in the Ex∣periences of good men, who all unani∣mously assent that there is more ease and less fatigue in obeying, than in breaking the divine Laws; but I shall submit to the sinners own testimony, when he is in his most sober state; I mean, when he is under the extremity of some pain infli∣cted by his sins, or when he lies upon his death-bed: at other times, when he is in the pursute of some Lust, no wonder though he pass as unjust a sentence as sick
men do of tastes, who having their pa∣lates infected with some venomous and filthy humour, judge every thing, be it really never so pleasant, to be bitter and harsh. Go then to sinners when they come to themselves (as it is said of the Prodi∣gal, He came to himself, as if he had been before mad or distracted) and ask them whether they finde more trouble in their doing or omitting of sin? Ask the Drun∣kard, who by his intemperance lies smar∣ting under the tormenting pains of the Gout, whether he had been wiser, and suffered less trouble, if he had been tem∣perate, and abstained from excess? Nay, besides the diseases that many, if not most of vices bring upon men; there are some sins that make men sensibly in the time finde pain and trouble. Go to the La∣scivious and Wanton person who is tor∣mented with the Pox, and ask whether his sin be grievous to him or not? There are few sins which are not attended with grievous concomitants. But I shall not in∣sist. I confess, no mens Experiences are so likely to demonstrate this truth, nor are more pertinently appealed to, as theirs who have once experimented the plea∣sures
and pains of both states: Ask there∣fore those who were once Drunkards and Adulterers, but are now sanctified and settled in a course of Holiness; and I am sure they shall verily testifie, that it is onely Satan's Yoak that is uneasie and burthensome. But granting that there is some difficul∣ty in the exact observation of the Laws of Christianity, (as sure any man who consults the corruption of his own na∣ture, and the depraved inclinations there∣of, against which they are levelled, will never deny) yet if this shall be judged a good Argument to cancel the Laws of Christianity, all Laws whatsoever shall be quite dashed out, and banished the world; for who shall be guilty, if he may have the liberty to use this for a relevant excuse? This being then so unreasonable to ima∣gine, (and if it should be admitted, should yet never a whit excuse the sinner, who to his experience findes sin to be so uneasie and troublesome) yet I shall adde two Considerations that demonstrate, the Laws of Christianity are more easie than any other Laws that ever were in∣vented; and that they are not (as car∣nal men represent them) hard sayings
which none can bear. First, the Author of the Gospel-precepts hath offered to us an assistance, able to conquer all the difficulties that can be supposed to at∣tend the keeping of his Mandates. 'Tis true, if Christ had enjoyned his follow∣ers to obey a Law which could not pos∣sibly be kept; I confess, in that case, his Commands had been grievous, and his Yoak insupportable: Or if he had been satisfied with no less than perfect inno∣cency, and unsinning obedience, I don't see how this prejudice and cavil could have been removed. But he who pre∣scribed those Precepts, considered the frailties of our nature, and the weakness of man in this lapsed estate; and there∣fore he has provided help for us, if we will but be at the pains seriously to im∣plore it; For he giveth his Spirit to them that ask it. And upon this account the beloved Apostle encourageth Christians to obey the precepts of the Gospel, be∣cause Greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world. Secondly, The excellency of the Re∣ward that is promised to the obedient, is a most noble consideration to make men (as the Psalmist speaks) run the way of Gods Commandments. The promissory
part of the Gospel, renders the prece∣ptive part easie. Methinks the holy Soul should with comfort thus express it self, when the greatest difficulties offer: Good God! shall I be discouraged to obey the hardest (if any thing proceeding from infinite Wisdom and Goodness can be said to be difficult) of thy Command∣ments, when so glorious a prize is the re∣ward thereof? If a terrene and tempo∣ral felicity animates others to encounter the most Giant-difficulties, how much more unconcernedly should I slight all hazards, and contemn by a fearless cou∣rage all dangers, for that blessed hope that is set before me? Can I remember there is a Kingdom promised, and yet be terri∣fied from it by supposed difficulties, or complain that the way is inaccessible? Do I really know that it is indeed a good Land, and am yet discouraged to attempt the taking of it, because it will require some violence? Shall I, like the Reube∣nites and Gadites, set up my rest on this side of Jordan, notwithstanding this pro∣posal of Canaan? No sure, eternal Life is too noble a prize to be lost, for fear of fighting the Good sight. I regard no difficulties while I eye the Crown; I can∣not think those Precepts grievous, that
are enforced by so many excellent pro∣mises. So great a recompence of reward should, methinks, inspire the dullest Heart, and sweeten the hardest Service; should make any one willing and content to sacrifice his most beloved lusts, to cut off the right Hand, and pluck out the right eye, which stand in the way, and hinder him from entring into Hea∣ven. Having thus endeavoured to explain upon what account the Laws of Christi∣anity are not grievous, I hope I shall not need to insist long upon the follow∣ing particulars. At first sight it seems plain, that since the case is so, Vice must certainly be more troublesome than Ver∣tue; and that it is easier for men to live holily, than wickedly: and yet, I know not by what strange artifice, Holiness has had the bad luck to be represented as being extreamly difficult. I confess, I intend not to inveigh against the sacred Tribe of Levi, who have represented Heaven almost as unaccessible, as the Is∣raelitish Spies did the good Land of Ca∣naan; knowing they thereby onely de∣signe to raise mens endeavours: although I could have wished that they had con∣sidered better, how readily men of cor∣rupt
mindes and vitious practices lay a∣side all care of Gods Commandments, upon this suggestion, that they are grie∣vous; and are deterred from a holy and vertuous life. But that Vice is more troublesome and uneasie than Vertue, will (besides what I have formerly said) appear to be so, from the following Considerations. First, Sacred Records represent sinners as men who weary themselves with sin; and the Prophet Isaiah describes their trouble by a very apt similitude, Isa. 57.20. The wicked is like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. The ways of sin are frequently called crooked paths, and wicked men are said to walk astray; whileas the way of Holiness and Vertue is said to be a streight and high way: All which Phrases plainly enough imply, that the former is full of intricacy and perplexities, and the latter plain and easie. Experiences to prove this, are every day so multiplied, that they may abun∣dantly serve to silence all doubts. The Drunkard can experimentally tell the costliness of his sin, and the tormenting diseases that are frequently the effect of an overcharged Stomach; the uneasie
belchings and overturnings within, the grievous pains of Head and Joynts. The Wanton and Lascivious can produce his painful boils and sores, to witness the uneasiness of Lust; at best, he can onely produce an hectick Body. But besides those loathsome diseases that are the ef∣fects of Lasciviousness, how restless and uneasie is the condition of such persons? But how impossible is it to give a just list of those miseries that Wantonness and Intemperance hurry men to? To what a multitude of amazing difficulties does Pride expose men! what mischiefs, jarrs and contests does it raise? Envy and Re∣venge torment mens spirits, and so dis∣quiet and perturb them, that men may as well take fire into their bosom, and pretend they perceive no torment, as lodge those horrid lusts in their breasts without the sense of their extream misery and pain. The Covetous minde is never at rest, but is ever craving and desirous of more. But to shew how troublesome the practice of every sin is, requires a larger discourse than I can well allow. But how easie is Vertue, if compared with Vice? At what trouble and pains are men, to invent a lie? and when they have contrived it, they cannot but be
afraid lest it be discovered. But how ea∣sie is it to speak the truth? With how much art and pains do men trouble them∣selves to conceal their vices? The Adul∣terer is wearied with watching conve∣nient opportunities, and afraid lest he be discovered; whileas the chast person en∣joys himself quietly, & is troubled with no such attender. The covetous Miser is cru∣ciate and tormented with a desire of what he cannot expect; is extreamly tormen∣ted by an incessant care, lest he lose what he hath, and ever toiling to acquire more; whileas the vertuous Soul is contented with what he enjoyeth, and grudgeth not to bestow a part of what is his to o∣thers. There is no man who is not quite given up to commit all manner of wickedness, and whose conscience is not seared as with a hot Iron, but can tell by his experience, how perplexing and uneasie Vice is. And to make this yet more plain, I shall adde these few following Reasons. First, the nature of Vice is so reproachful, that men are even troubled to coyn shifts to avoid the owning it; and sure this can∣not but be uneasie to men. Secondly, the most viciously inclined persons, who will not practise, yet are force for their inte∣rest
to pretend Vertue, and usually indeed become greater Zealots than those who are really vertuous: But this cannot but be exceedingly troublesome to them, it being against their inclinations, and con∣tradictory to the internal sentiments of their mindes. And besides, at what pains are they to make other men believe that they are real in what they onely pretend? Thirdly, Vice is very perplexing and diffi∣cult, upon the account that it requires hard, if not impossible performances: the Covetous minde is prompted to attempt many difficulties to obtain what it craves, and after all is disappointed. Nay, in∣deed, Covetousness is a vice so uneasie and troublesome, that it proposeth what can never be acquired: for after it hath got what is designed, it is restless, and as ready to say Give, give, as ever. But Lastly, that which contributes most to render Vice uneasie, are those after-pangs of Conscience which fill the Soul with horrour and amazement; the consciousness of guilt stings and torments it, and makes the sinner a terrour to himself. 'Tis im∣possible either to gag or corrupt Con∣science, that it shall never give any check. But now how quieting and solacing is Vertue? no man ever yet complained that
terrours haunted him for living holily. O how do the thoughts of a vertuous life refresh men in the midst of greatest dan∣gers? Let us go to sinners on their death∣bed, and then we shall finde this truth preached to the full; an evidence valid enough to condemn sin as the uneasiest thing imaginable. And thus we have seen how many dif∣ficulties attend sin, both before, and after it is committed. And now what reason can any man alleadge for the pretended easiness of sin? I confess, I know not any thing, except it be custom, that can be pertinently adduced; but how weak is this Plea? for although Custom, which is a second nature, may contribute very much to stupifie the Judgement, and harden the Conscience, and so conse∣quently make Vice the more easie; ye we can hardly suppose that ever Humane nature will so far assimilate the nature of mere Animals, as to be deprived of Rea∣son and Conscience: And sure, so long as any of these remain, Vice must needs meet with opposition. But Secondly, if men will compare the easiness of Vertue and Vice, they must put them in equal circumstances; and then I doubt not but Vice shall stand condemned, as the great
troubler of peace and quietness. For in∣stance, let us suppose that a man is ac∣customed to a holy life, and is habituate to live soberly, righteously, and godly; in this case, let any man make but the expe∣riment, and I am sure he shall ingenu∣ously acknowledge, that a good life af∣fords more tranquillity and peace, than Vice dares lay claim to. And yet, I know not by what bad luck, Holiness has been represented as opposite to mens present welfare, and hurtful to their peace and tranquillity. How ground∣less this prejudice is, I have already en∣deavoured to shew. I shall therefore now onely in a few words make it plain, that Holiness is the most effectual method that can be taken, to exalt the publick peace and happiness of a Nation. And Secondly, that it infinitely conduceth to the happiness, peace, and tranquillity of particular persons; and that nothing is so inconsistent with, and hurtful to both, as sin. How much Holiness tends to the ad∣vancement of publick peace in a King∣dom and Nation, appears very plainly from the Wise mans observation, Prov. 14.34. Righteousness exalteth a nation; but sin is the reproach of any people. And
the Apostle St. James gives us a true ac∣count of the causes of publick jars, Jam. 4.1. From whence come wars and sigh∣tings amongst you? are they not hence, e∣ven from your lusts that war in your mem∣bers? If mankinde had not corrupted their ways, and degenerated from their pristine purity, how peaceable and hap∣py had humane societies been? but in this lapsed state, Ambition, Pride, and Injustice act their tragical parts, and so tend to the destruction of humane socie∣ties, that if there did not remain some sparks and remainders of Religion, 'tis not possible that humane society could evite an utter ruine. And he that well ponders the settled course of divine Pro∣vidence, shall easily assent, that in all A∣ges Righteousness and Vertue have been rewarded with a temporal tranquillity and happiness; and that fruitful lands have been turned into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. And indeed 'tis very reasonable to think that the divine Justice will reward a righ∣teous Nation, and punish a rebellious People. 'Tis true, he may defer his Judgements for a while, yet his Justice will not always give place to mercy and forbearance; but a Nation that conti∣nueth
and increaseth its provocations, must expect to be punished in this world, (which is the onely proper place) as a righteous Land may expect a present re∣ward. That Holiness doth also conduce to the peace and quietness of particular persons, is nothing less evident from Scripture: Psal. 119.165. Great peace have they that love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them: but the wicked is like the trou∣bled sea when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt, Isa. 57.20. I have once and again shewed, that there can be no inward tranquillity and peace, where Holiness is wanting: the very thoughts of God, which above all things are most sweet, are notwithstanding troublesome to wicked men. But because Humane nature is in this degenerate state extream∣ly sunk down into Sense, and more apt to be wrought upon by temporal advanta∣ges, than what onely concern the Soul, and have a prospect to things that are future; I have also in the former part of this Discourse endeavoured to make plain, how advantageous Holiness is upon the foresaid account; and that length of days are in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and honour: That her
ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths peace: That Godliness is great gain, having the promises of the life that now is, as well as of that which is to come. And indeed, any man, who considers the nature and reason of the thing, cannot but be inclined to think it must be so: For how can that man be exposed to trou∣ble and disquietment, who hath gotten the mastery over his Passions? And I dare appeal to the sinners own experience, whether vices have not been prejudicial to his health, macerated his Body, and filled him with tortures and pains? whe∣ther some sins have not brought him to poverty and disgrace, ruined both his e∣state and fame? Can any man produce any good effect that ever sin caused? sure, if men would speak impartially, they should acknowledge all this to be true. That there is a great deal of more plea∣sure in the ways of Holiness than in the commission of sin, (which is the fourth thing proposed to be considered) needs not puzzle any man to prove it. How de∣lightful are all acts of Piety and Ver∣tue? how unexpressible is that comfort that the devout Soul findes in conversing with God? Well might the Psalmist say, Light is sown for the righteous, and glad∣ness
for the upright in heart, Psal. 97.11. he often experienced that sweetness and satisfaction that is the result of obedience; whileas Solomon, who could pass the best verdict of sensual pleasures, yet concludes them to be but vanity and vexation of spirit. There be two things that allay the plea∣sures of sin: First, the unruliness of im∣moderate passions, which fret and vex the mindes of men, and hinder the sinner from tasting its pleasure. Secondly, the fear of an invisible being, armed to pu∣nish them for their misdemeanors: Con∣science, upon the apprehension of guilt, recoils upon the sinner, and mars all the pleasure he promised himself to enjoy: This made Belshazzer, a King, and envi∣roned with his Nobles, tremble and quake in the midst of his cups. But supposing vices did bring as much pleasure along with them as they pretend, yet upon two accounts they are not half so delicious as the pleasure that spring from a good life. First, the pleasures of sin are so interrupted, of a short duration, or, as the Apostle expresseth them, they are but for a season: how quickly will a period be put to all these pleasures, which now make so much noise? They are very fitly
compared by Solomon, to the crackling of thorns under a pot, which are scarce soo∣ner in a blaze, than they vanish; but the joys that spring from a good conversa∣tion, are at their lowest ebb here: they do indeed continue, for no man taketh away this joy; but Heaven is the designed place for the good Soul to feed upon those Rivers of pleasures that are at God's right hand for evermore. Secondly, sen∣sual pleasures do soon cloy mens appe∣tites: we cannot enjoy long any sensual delight, but we are quickly weary of it: but it is not so with spiritual delights; 'tis onely the absence of them, when su∣spended for our sins, that troubles and molests us. 'Tis impossible that sensual pleasures can satisfie the soul of man, which was never framed for a Mahome∣tan Paradise; nor can it be rationally ex∣pected, that he who is conscious to him∣self of guilt, should be free from fear; which being so tormenting, can never permit men to enjoy pleasure freely. But let us descend to sensual pleasures, and we shall finde, that he who is tempe∣rate and moderate, is more likely to re∣lish the pleasantness of Meat, Drink, and Pastime, than the intemperate and immo∣derate. He who relieves the Poor, and
refresheth the Needy, cannot but finde more real sweetness and satisfaction in do∣ing so, than he who drinks away his E∣state. He who speaks the truth, findes not those tormenting checks of Consci∣ence which are the just reward of lying. But all this will more plainly appear, by the Solution of the next Objection. The second Imputation is brought from Experience; namely, that wicked men are for ordinary very jovial and cheerful, and enjoy a great deal of satisfaction in their ways; whereas men who pretend to Piety and Holiness, are very sad and disconsolate. To this I answer; That the Question is not whether wicked men have some plea∣sure in their sins, or not? but, whether that pleasure that ariseth from a good life, be not infinitely preferable to these? Alas! the most promising sensual plea∣sure (supposing it to be lawful) is much inferiour to the satisfaction and comfort that springs from a good Conscience. How much more inconsiderable must sinful plea∣sures be, which are attended with so black and dismal consequences? Indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that doth evil. Sinful plea∣sures are at the best but short; and sure
this consideration contributes very much to lessen their value: But that which makes them so mean, and not worth the enjoying, is the painful Eternity that suc∣ceeds to them. However then the wicked may appear jovial and merry, yet their inward thoughts (if we could discover them) cannot be at quiet and ease: Whatever pleasure they may reap in the present act, yet they cannot afterwards look unto themselves without horrour and amaze∣ment: The after-stings of sin are so pain∣ful, that he buys those present pleasures at a rate no reasonable man would pur∣chase them. But that wicked men cannot really en∣joy that pleasure and contentment they pretend to, seems very plain from Reason. For first, How can any man be satisfied with those actions which are so cross to his very nature, and opposite to Reason, as every sin is? Can a man finde plea∣sure in doing that which he knows he ought not to do? sure the reboundings of Conscience, upon the apprehension of doing amiss, will soon rase out any plea∣sure that sin affords; and a sick man may more rationally expect rest, than those men pleasure and contentment. Second∣ly,
it can afford little pleasure to men, to act quite contrary to their own interests; it is rather like the laughter of fools and mad men, than a real pleasure, that such men can pretend to. Now every sinner quite ruines his interest and happiness, while he runneth headlong to destru∣ction; and for a present pleasure, which is onely grateful to the sensual appetite, loseth those lasting Rivers of pleasure, which, though future, are yet certain, and which are calculated for the Soul. Third∣ly, What pleasure can any man enjoy, who is sure to be eternally tormented? As there is no peace, so no pleasure to the wicked, who are at oddes with God, whose favour is better than life. But what reason have good men to be sad and disconsolate, since all the causes of grief are removed from them? Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart; so that the Apostle had good reason to double that Exhorta∣tion, Rejoyce in the Lord, again I say re∣joyce. O how satisfying and pleasant is it for men to act reasonably, and to be as∣sured that they have done their duty, and have acted for their own interest! Our rejoycing is this, (saith the Apostle) the testimony of our consciences, that in all
simplicity and godly sincerity we have had our conversation in the world. Sure there was never any man who was troubled for living holily, there be∣ing no reason why any should: 'Tis true, good men may be of a melancholy dispo∣sition, and naturally inclined to sadness; but this can be no reflection on Holiness, as if it were the cause of that melan∣choly temper: nay, the best of men have their own failings, and no wonder though these breed some trouble and disquiet: But this is not to be disconsolate for be∣ing good, but for doing evil. And in∣deed, I may adde, that the great abomina∣tions and profanity, the contempt of Re∣ligion, and dishonour that is done to God that abounds, may very rationally make good men with the Psalmist say, Rivers of tears run down my eyes, because men observe not thy Law. And thus this imputation cast upon Holiness, is easily wip'd off. Grief and sadness are not the effect of a good life; but of an imperfect obedience: And while our sins call for mourning and fa∣sting, it were a piece of madness for men to be jovial and merry, and entertain themselves with those deceitful melodies, which will end in weeping and gnashing of teeth.
And yet the sorrow of truely good men is not so obvious to the eye of men, as it is to him who is the searcher of the heart; it is rather the artifice of the for∣mal Penitent, and hypocritical Professor, than the character of the Righteous, to disfigure their faces, and appear sad and demure. A good man chuseth rather, with David, to mourn in secret, and when he appears in publick to wash his face, than with those Hypocrites of whom Isaiah speaks, who bow down their head like a bull-rush, who have chosen affliction rather than innocence. The next imputation cast upon Holi∣ness is, that it is but a piece of singulari∣ty, and a vain ambition to walk alone. Ans. I am heartily sorry that the univer∣sal deluge of Impiety should make good men say as once Elijah did in another case, I am onely left: the few number of good men, compared with the vast mul∣titude and Armies of transgressors, makes them to be esteemed singular and precise; and brings upon them the wrath and fu∣ry of ungodly sinners, because they will not run with them to the same excess of riot, and wallow in the mire as they do. But truely this charge is not more ratio∣nal, than if a company of mad men should
call one a singular fool, because he does not comply with them in all their extra∣vagant actings, which do really rather require pity and compassion than imita∣tion. I doubt not but Singularity in some cases is a very intolerable temper, and unbecoming any man who pretends wis∣dom: but yet, if it be universally con∣demned, and in no case admitted as rea∣sonable, I don't see but the charge will rebound upon the sinner, who in this de∣generate age thinks the worse of him∣self, if he exceed not others in wicked∣ness. But since Holiness is so conformable to Humane reason, so advantageous and be∣neficial to every man; what madness is it to condemn it as singular? Sure, he who intends to walk as a man who is of a good understanding, (as good men are said to be) who intends to minde his interest and happiness, will never be frighted from Holiness, because may be it is not in vogue, nor become the mode of the Kingdome. If a whole Kingdom (ex∣cepting a few) should rebel against their Prince, would it be any blot upon these few Loyal Subjects, that they affected Sin∣gularity?
But this cavil is so insignificant and sil∣ly, that I need not enlarge. Sure, since Holiness is the peculiar excellency and noble embellishment of Humane nature; since it is so venerable and lovely, and of all perfections the most excellent; he must be degenerate to the brutal nature, who condemns Singularity in Holiness; for this is in truth a condemning a man because he is more excellent than his neghbour, as the righteous is said to be in Scripture. The last heavy Charge is, that it is folly and madness for men to quit with their present pleasures, and expose themselves to grievous troubles, for a future reward which is uncertain, and which no body ever saw. To this I Answer, First, it is a great mistake to think that Holiness exposeth men to relinquish temporal and sensual pleasures, there being no men in the world so qualified to experiment the sweetness of these, none who live in so happy and flourishing condition, who are more healthful, and enjoy a greater measure of peace and quietness, than good men. The onely inconveniency they are exposed to, is affliction upon the account of Religion; which when Christianity did commence, was no rare thing, but now is not so ordinary. But supposing
good men were exposed to greater affli∣ctions than other men, yet there is a great deal of satisfaction in submitting to them, since they are but light afflictions, and momentary too, which work for us a far more exceeeding and eternal weight of glo∣ry. These small evils are rather to be endured, than lasting pains and torments. Sure, Of two evils, the least is to be cho∣sen. Secondly, Although the reward of Ho∣liness be future, yet 'tis not uncertain. We have as great assurance that there will be a reward for the Righteous in another world, as the nature of the thing is capa∣ble of: and sure he is an unwise man that asks any other demonstration or proof. Now that there is a reward laid up for good men, which though unseen, is yet as certain as if it were obvious to sense, we have the greatest rational evidence, and the best moral arguments to confirm it. For first, if there be a God; Second∣ly, if the Scriptures be the Word of God, then there is not any thing more certain, than that there is a state of rewards and punishments after this life. First, if there be a God, then we can have no reasona∣ble scruple about the future reward: for since God is holy and just (perfections es∣sential
to a Deity) then certainly he will, as the great Governour of the World, reward Vertue, and punish Vice. But this doth not always fall out so here; therefore it is reasonable to conclude, that he hath reserved the wicked till that great day of wrath, and prepared a reward for the righteous. Secondly, If the Scri∣pture be the Word of God, then he who runs may read this truth. We have then the greatest moral assu∣rance possible, that there is a future re∣ward; which may sufficiently encourage men to hazard all they enjoy here, for the expectation of it. But I shall onely suppose that the future reward is possible; (which I think few will deny, or can prove it to be impossible) yet even up∣on this supposition, good men who part with the transitory things of this life, prove a great deal wiser than those who condemn them: For if there be no life after this, all the loss a good man suffers, is that of temporal conveniency; he hath denied himself the enjoyment of sensual pleasures, so far as he judgeth them sin∣ful; he is not so intemperate as other men, and perhaps is exposed to some ha∣zards for his Religion; at the most, all that he is to hazard is but very small.
But if there be a future reward, in what a dismal state are the wicked, who shall everlastingly be deprived of it, and be irrecoverably plunged into a state of la∣sting and severe torments? But since we are assured of a future reward, and know certainly, that the righteous shall shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom of their Father, and that the wicked shall be cast into utter darkness; What folly and madness is it to be care∣ful for the Body, and careless what be∣comes of the Soul; to provide for Time, and neglect Eternity? Sure 'tis no won∣der though the Wise man does so fre∣quently characterize the sinner a fool, and represents him as one that lacketh under∣standing: And indeed, we may rational∣ly say, This their way is their folly; their foolish choice proclaims, that those wor∣kers of iniquity have no knowledge.
The Conclusion. WE have now seen the Excellency and Beauty of Holiness, have dis∣covered the absolute Perfection of its Nature, and the Compleatness of its Rule; have taken a view of its Allurements and powerful Motives, and have disco∣vered the weakness of those Cavils that are urged against it: and what remains, but that we set about this work with the greatest seriousness imaginable; that we give no sleep to our eyes, nor slumber to our eye-lids, till we forsake our sins, and en∣ter upon a course of Holiness? If God had imposed upon us a heavy and intolerable yoak; if he had com∣manded us to perform some grievous and uneasie service, had we not been obliged to have obeyed? But since he onely commands us to wash and be clean, re∣quires onely our consent to what is so much our own interest, onely exacts that we separate our selves from those lusts that pollute and defile us, that vex and
torments our mindes, and which (if continued in) will certainly ruine and undo us; what fools and mad men are we if we refuse to hear his voice? Almighty God has been drawing us with the Cords of Love; has presented to us the most charming motives to ex∣cite our love and esteem; has carried us (as it were) to the Pinacle of the Tem∣ple, and discovered to us all the glory and beauty of this world; has taken us to Pisgah, and given us a view of the good Land of Canaan, of the City of the li∣ving God, of which glorious things are spoken; and promised, that all these things shall be ours, if we will but be holy in all manner of conversation: And to ex∣cite our fear, he has opened to our view, the powers of the world to come; has plainly told us of the pains and torments that the damned suffer day and night, and that indignation and wrath, tribula∣tion and anguish, remains as the due por∣tion of those that do evil. And now may he not take up that same protestation that he used to his ancient People the Jews; What more can I do for you? But alas! we have in the most insolent man∣ner despised all these charms of Love, and, like the mad man in the Gospel, have
broken to pieces the strongest Fetters and Chains. We are, God knows, as deeply sunk into sensuality and bruitish∣ness, as those to whom the Grace of God that bringeth salvation hath never ap∣peared. 'Tis not credible, (I may say possible) that men could have been more wicked than they now are, supposing they had never heard of Heaven or Hell. 'Tis a wonder (as any one would think) that those very men who profess they be∣lieve in Christ, should so grosly and o∣penly contradict his plain Precepts; that those who believe, that without holiness no man shall see the Lord, and that the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness, yet persist in their abominable wickedness, and are neither awed with fears, nor animated with hopes. What is all this, but for men to expose themselves to the contempt rather than pity of discerning men? We have surveyed the several advan∣tages which attend Holiness; have dis∣covered how much mans temporal as well as his eternal welfare and happiness depends upon it: We have explained how in her right hand is length of days, and in her left hand are riches and ho∣nour:
that her ways are ways of plea∣santness, and all her paths peace: And now may we not give the same testimo∣ny of it which Joshua and Caleb did of Canaan, Numb. 14. The land which we pas∣sed through to search, it is an exceeding good land? The Sons of Anak (I mean the pretended difficulties) are not so strong as some men represent them to be; we need not be discouraged to encounter with them; greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world. Alas! what Objection can men possibly make against a Duty that is so excellent, useful, and necessary, that is founded upon such mighty motives, as may prevail with any who is not quite petrified in desperate Impiety? Good God! what stupid folly is this, that men hide their hands in their bosom, and will not so much as stretch them out to this tree of Life, that they may eat of this fruit, which is pleasant to the eye, and profitable both to our pre∣sent and future happiness. 'Tis indeed pity, that men should be thus permitted to run headlong to destru∣ction. Alas! is perdition so lovely and desirable, that, like Rachel, a double ser∣vitude is thought light for it? and shall wise and discerning men be Eye-witnesses
of the bad bargain those men make, and not warn them of their folly? I know this is a duty chiefly incumbent to our spiritual Watchmen to discharge; I doubt not but many of them stand upon their watch, and warn men of their danger. It were to be wished that all and every of them were thus faithful; but sure e∣very man is in some manner concerned to be his brothers keeper; and he is high∣ly criminal, who should see a mad man running upon danger, and not stop him in his course. I wish some new-coined Doctrines had not an inauspicious influence upon the bad practices of many, had not too much countenanced and authorized vice: but my present designe is so far from controversial, that I shall rather think my self concer∣ned to inveigh against needless disputes, than start any. If I may speak from my own experience, I ingenuously confess, I finde Disputes so insipid and fruitless, and in the review so unsatisfactory, that I am resolved henceforth to bid an eter∣nal adieu to them, and to condemn them as the great underminers of Christian Piety: And if any shall after this fair warning assault any Doctrine I have else∣where owned, I hope discerning men
will neither esteem me nor the Cause the worse, that I draw not my Sword in its defence. And now what shall I say more, but conclude with Moses's passionate Exhor∣tation, Deut. 32.46. Set your hearts to the words which I testifie to you this day: for it is not a vain thing, because it is your life. Let us no longer delay and put off this duty; while it is called to day, let us not harden our hearts through the deceitfulness of sin; but seriously search and try our ways, and turn to the Lord: this is the proper season for so necessary a work; ere long there will be no time left us to consider our ways: O that in this our day we did understand the things that belong to our peace, before they be hid from our eyes! If men would but be induced to imitate the Psalmists Example, Psal. 119.59. I thought on my ways, I doubt not but they should also imitate the course he did take, I made haste and delayed not to keep thy com∣mandments: But men consider not what they are doing, and so no won∣der though they perish, no wonder that they prefer darkness to light, and de∣spise Holiness as a thing of no value. Let us therefore humbly and heartily
invoke the Father of Lights to open the Eyes of men, whom the God of this world hath blinded, that they may flee from the wrath to come, by cleansing them∣selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. FINIS. BOOKS Printed for, and are to be Sold by Robert Sollers, at the Kings Arms in Ludgate-street. SErmons preached upon several occasions before the King at Whitehal. By the Right Reverend Father in God John Wilkins, late Lord-bishop of Chester; to which is added A discourse concerning the beauty of Providence, by the same Author. Rome a-la-mode: or the Sentiments of the Court and Cardinals there, concer∣ning Religion and the Gospel, as they are delivered by Cardinal Palavicini in his History of the Council of Trent. Syncrisis, or the most natural and easie method of learning Latine by comparing it with English. Together with the ho∣ly History of Scripture-war: Or the sa∣cred Art Military, Illustrated in fourteen Copper-plates; with the rude Transla∣tion opposite, for the exercise of those that begin to make Latine. By E. Coles. Cocker's Arithmetick: the second Im∣pression. Cocker's Morals, fitted for the use of all Grammar and Writing-schools: For the Scholars of the first to turn into La∣tine; and for those of the other to tran∣scribe
into all their various and curious Hands. Nugae venales: or, the complaisant Companion; being new Jests Domestick and Forrain, Bulls, Rhodomontado's, plea∣sant Novels and Miscellanies. Asteria and Tamberlain; or, the Distres∣sed Lovers, a Novel. Madam Wheadle: or, the fashionable Miss discovered: with all her modest Pre∣tences, and subtile Stratagems. Scaramouch, a Philosopher, &c. Acted at the Theatre Royal: A Comedy, writ∣ten by Edward Ravenscroft, Gent. A Treatise of the nature of a Minister in all his Offices. To which is annexed, an Answer to Dr. Forbes, concerning the necessity of Bishops to ordain; which is an Answer to a Question proposed in these late unhappy times to the Author, What is a Minister? By William Lucy Lord Bishop of St. Davids.
