A3852 11824618 49628
ARTICLES OF IMPEACHMENT Against George Lord Digby, By the Commons in this present Par∣liament Assembled. In Maintenance of their Accusation whereby hee standeth accused with High Treason in their names, and in the names of all the Commons in ENGLAND. Whereunto is added a strange and unheard of Oraison put by the Papists, found in the pocket of Captaine James Rauley, a Rebell in Ireland. Sent from Dublin, in a Letter of Note by Captaine Edmund Hippisley, to Sir Iohn Hippisley Knight, a Member of the House of COMMONS. London Printed for John Wright, Feb. 28. 1642.
Articles of Impeachment against George Lord Digby, by the Com∣mons in this present Parliament Assembled, 1641. 1. THAT the said George Lord Digby, in or about the moneth of Ianuary 1641. maliciously & Trayterousl endeavoured to perswade the Kings Majesty to levey for∣ces against his Majesties Liege Subjects within this Kingdome, and the said George Lord Digby, did in or about the same moneth actually levey forces within this Realme, to the teror of his Majesties Sub∣jects. 2. That the said George Lord Digby, and a∣bout the said moneth of Ianuary, and at other times falsely, maliciously: and Trayterously, labour to raise a jealousie and disention be∣tweene the King and his people, and to pos∣sesse his Majesty that he could not live with
safety of his Person amongst them, and did thereupon Trayterously endeavour to per∣swade his Majesty to betake himselfe to some place of strength for his defence. 3. That the said George Lord Digby, in or about the same moneth of Ianuary, and at other times, did maliciously and Trayterously endeavour to stirre up Jea∣lousies and discensions, betweene the King and his Parliament, and to that end and pur∣pose did the same moneth of Iann, wickedly ad∣vise the framing of certaine false and scandalous Articles of high Treason against the Lord Kim∣bolton, Dencill Hollis Esq. Sir Arthur Haselrigg Barronet, Iohn Hampden, Iohn Pym, and Master Strowd Esqrs. And did perswade his Majestie accompanied with divers Souldiers and others in warlike manner to come in person to the house of Commons sitting in Parliament, to demande the said members of the said House to the apparent endangering of his Majesties person, and the high violation of the priviled∣ges and being of Parliaments. Al which matters were done by the said Georg Lord Digby trayterously and wickedly to Alia∣nate the hearts of his Majesties Leige people from his Majestie, and set division betweene them, and stir up war within this Kingdome. For wich the Commons doe impeach him the said George Lord Digby of high Treason.
And the said Commons by protestation saving o themselves the libertie of exhibiting at any time hereafter any other o ccation or impeachment against the said George Lord Digby, and also of replying to the answer which hee shall make to the said Articles or any of them; or of offering proofe of the premises or any of them, or of any other impeachment or accusation that shall be exhibited by them, as the case shall according to the course of Par∣liament require. Doe pray that the said George Lord Dighy may be put to answer all, and every the premises in the presence of the Com∣mons, and that such proceedings examinations, Tryalls, Judgments, and executions, may be upon every of them, had and used as is agrea∣ble to Law, and Justice.
Sir, THe Lord of Antrim is not in the Rebel∣lion as yet, but is much mistrusted. hee will bee by reason hee is now gone to the County of Kildare, where at the first this bu∣sinesse was begun: the Rebels would willing∣ly come in: if they could but once heare of a Proclamation, that they should have the liberty of their conscience, for some such thing they much expect, if they be not mi∣staken of their ayme. Sir, this Prayer I took out of a Rebels poc∣ket that I kiled, one Iames Rauley, a Captaine of the Rebels, who cryed for quarter, when I had sheathed my sword in his bowels, fea∣ring I should be too troublesome. I rest now what I alwayes was, Sir, your most obe∣dient and most affectionate servant till death. From Dublin this tenth of February 1641.
THis Oraison was found on the Tombe of our blessed Lady, and is of such effect, that whosoever will have the same, or say it daily, or carry it about him, shall be safe from fire, water, and skirmish of battaile, and also from noysome hanting of spirits. Moreover, whosoever shall say a Pater, Ave, and Creed, daily to the honor of holy and mi∣raculous Virgin Mary, shee will visibly shew her self unto him 3-times before his death. O Most sweet Lord Jesus Christ, only Son of the omnipotent. Father, God of An∣gels, and onely Sonne of the most gra∣cious Virgin Mary, helpe me a sinner, and save me from all present dangers wherein I am. Most excellent and blessed Virgin to be praised, to pray and intercesse for me a miserable sinner to thy welbeloved Son. O chast and honourable womm, thou art the Mother of Angels and Archangels, helpe me from all present evils, and all to come. O flower of Patriarcks. O shining brightnesse of the Apostles. O hope of glory. O beauty fo Virgins. O high thoughts of Angels and Archangels. O most sweet woman, I most humbly beseech thee not to for sake me at the trembling time of my death, when my soule shall be separated from my body, whereby I may see my selfe in everlasting glory by him. O flower and sweetest foundation of sweet∣nesse.
O star of Christ. O haven of health▪ O Queene of penitent offenders, Hope of the faithfull Archangels. Thou whose conversa∣tion is the onely recreation of the Angels & Archangels. O most honourable Lady of all sweetnesse and fortitude, thou art the most wholesom'st medicine for all sores. Thou a the labour of all vertues, through thee doe ever Angels and Archangels rejoyce. O Mo∣ther of mercy, looke on me with thine owne mercifull eyes. And I commit me to thy most blessed armes, to inspire my soule and body, and my thoughts, so thus it pleaseth thee and thine owne beloved Sonne Jesus Christ. Pater, Ave, and Creed. MOst glorious Virgin, let thy flowing grace defend me from the danger of each place, grant that thy merits once may make me rise from Tombe, above the spangled cristall Skie, grant to my Coun∣trey, I may so well end, that I may praise thee eternally. AMEN. I found this in the pocket of a Captaine of the Rebels, Captaine Iames Rauley. FINIS.
