A3885 11687419 48160
THE ARTICLES, Settlement and Offices Of the FREE SOCIETY OF TRADERS IN PENNSILVANIA. Agreed upon by divers MERCHANTS And OTHERS for the better Improvement and Government OF TRADE IN THAT PROVINCE. LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Clark in George-Yard in Lombard-street, Printer to the Society of Pennsilvania, MDCLXXXII.
The PREFACE. READER, Honest and Industrious Traffique has been the Usage and the Praise of many Nations; And in this all Countries seem Agreed, that their Wealth and Strength are Begun, Continued and Increased by it: A Truth common Experience daily Confirms: For this hath made and is making many Princes and States in the World endeavor to have their Subjects prosper in Trade. The very Indian Princes are now convinced of this Truth, which makes the King of Bantam send his Embassadour here. This is like∣wise the Reason, why many considerate men have thought fit to joyn themselves in a Society of Trade in Penn∣silvania; which after some Difficulty they have Accom∣plished. But this may be modestly said, It is a very Unusual Society, for it is an Absolute Free One, and in a Free Country: A Society without Oppression; wherein all may be concerned that will; and yet have the same Liberty of private Traffique, as though there were no Society at all. So that this Society is Calculated both to Promote the Publique Good, and to Encourage the Private. And indeed it seems not possible, that Province should be Im∣proved in many Years without it, as it is like to be in a
few Years by it. However, it is such a Society, as can do harm to none; but may do good to all: Which a seri∣ous perusal of the Government of it will plainly Evince to the considerate and Ingenious. We may add, that 'tis no small Conveniency and Ease to the minds of Planters (happily unacquainted in Trade) that they may have some part of their Estates improving in an united way and Care, whilst they thereby may with less Distraction and more Freedom of Spirit, apply themselves to their par∣ticular Plantations. For here a few Hands do the Work of the whole; and by this honest and free Device, the whole will be furnish'd fresh and fresh, from time to time in the nature of a Bank. This Union of Traf∣fique prevents Emulation; for every One is Interested in every Ones prosperity; and the Profit must be greater and surer; and Navigation, Manufacture and Arts better Improved, than by the Force of private and divided Stocks. To Conclude, 'tis an Enduring Estate, and a lasting as well as certain Credit: a Por∣tion and Inheritance that is Clear and Growing; free from the mischief of Frauds and False Securi∣ties; supported by the Concurrent Strength and Care of a great and prudent Body, a kind of per∣petual Trustees; the Friend of the Widdow and the Orphan, for it takes no advantage of Minority or Simplicity. These and many more great Advantages Accrew to a Society so Freely Constituted as this ap∣pears to be by the ensuing Articles of Agreement, which are Imposed on none, but recommended to all with this assurance, that nothing is hereby Intended, but what is consistent with Justice and Prudence; to the
best of their Skills that were concerned in the Framing of it: And it is hoped that the Improvements which may accrew by it, will prove of no small advantage to that Country, and Old England from whom it takes its Original. To which Reader, it may not be improper to add, that this Society is endowed with divers Immunities and Priviledges, by Grant and Charter from William Penn the Governour of that Province. London, 25. 1st. Mo. called March, 1682. Nicolas More, James Claypoole, Philip Ford.
THE ARTICLES, Settlement and Offices Of the FREE SOCIETY OF TRADERS IN PENNSILVANIA, &c. IT is Agreed, That the First General Court shall be held at London, upon the Twenty Ninth of the Third Month called May, 1682. And for ever after, the General Court shall be held on the First Fifth Day called Thursday in the Ninth Month (November) every Year after in the Capital City in Pennsilvania, where Votes shall be Received by Letters to the Society's Secretary from all that do not appear there personally, for the chusing of Officers: Which Votes shall be Regulated by these following Conditions:
IMPRIMIS. That none in England shall have above One Vote, whatever Sum they Subscribe; unless they have a Share of Land in Penn∣silvania, at least One thousand Acres of their own, with some In∣habitants upon it: In such Cases they shall have their Votes pro∣portionably to their Stocks, as in the following Article. ARTICLE II. That all that are Inhabitants in Pennsilvania, shall have for two Twenty five pounds, one Vote; and each Fifty pound single, one Vote; one hundred pounds, two Votes; three hundred pounds, three Votes, and none more. ARTICLE III. That the Book of Subscriptions shall be open here in England, till the twenty ninth day of the fourth Month called June, One thousand six hundred eighty two, and no longer. And in Penn∣silvania from the Arrival of the first Ship belonging to the So∣ciety for six Months after, paying fifteen per Cent▪ Sterling in Conside∣ration of the Risco Run by the Society by such as Subscribe with∣in thirty daies, and for every Month after one per Cent. to be added to value of the Cargo. ARTICLE IV. That none shall Subscribe in the Societys Stock less than twenty five pounds. Yet if five Joyn together, and make up the twen∣ty five pounds (provided it be subscribed in one man's name) it shall be accepted of but in that Name only. ARTICLE V. That at the first General Court or Assembly held as abovesaid (viz. the twenty ninth of the third Month alias May, 1682.) all the Subscribers here in England shall Confirm their Subscriptions, which shall be by the depositing five per Cent. as a part of that,
which shall then be Agreed on to be paid within a Month after. And at that time shall be Chosen the Officers of the Society, viz. The President, the Deputy, the Treasurer, the Socretary and twelve Committee-men, whereof any Five and the President or his Deputy shall make a Quorum. ARTICLE VI. That all the Committee-men shall have but one Vote a piece in the Committee, whatever their Stock be; and the President or the Deputy, if the Votes be Equal, shall have the Casting Voice. ARTICLE VII. That at seven years end, from the time of shutting the Book in Pennsilvania, it shall be opened again for New Subscribers; and so to Continue for every seven years; a due Valuation of the Stock being first made by the Committee, that so every one may Sub∣scribe according to the Valuation then Agreed on. ARTICLE VIII. That Two hundred Servants be sent away the first Year, of such Trades and Capacities as may be most for the benefit of the Society; which is to be Adjudged by the Committee. ARTICLE IX. That it shall be Lawful for any one that has Subscribed, to add to their Subscription before the Month is out, what Sum they please. ARTICLE X. That none shall be President, Deputy or Treasurer, that have not five thousand Acres of Land in Pennsilvania of their own, and one hundred pound in the Societies Stock. ARTICLE XI. That the General Officers shall continue for the First seven years,
and then a new Election shall be made, they being fixed in their Abode in the Society's-House, there to act for the Society, without change of their power in Priviledges, except they do Commit any act destructive or prejudicial to the Real Interest of the Society, which first is to be proved sufficiently in the Court of Assistants▪ and then the Offender or Offenders are to be dismissed, and the Court of As∣sistants to chuse another, who is to Continue till the General Court; which Court of Assistants shall yearly be Chosen and added to the Committee. ARTICLE XII. That the President shall Call together the Court of Assistants to help and advise in any Emergent occasions relating to the Society, as To receive more Money, To make a Dividend, To chuse new Officers in Case of Death, To settle new Factories, To enter upon Mines, Build Ships, &c. ARTICLE XIII. The Committee shall chuse all Inferiour Ofers as Store-House-Keepers, Clerks, Book-Keepers, Factors, at home and abroad; then they shall direct, what shall be Planted, Built, &c. ARTICLE XIV. That all Forfeitures, that shall arise, shall be Employed upon the Improvement of a parcel of Land alloted for the maintenance of such their Wives and Children, who have been disabled in the ser∣vice of the Society. ARTICLE XV. That the Society's Books, Patents, Records and original Papers be kept in a Convenient place in the House under three Locks and Keys, one whereof shall be kept by the President or Deputy, the other by the Treasurer, the third by the Eldest Committee-man. ARTICLE XVI. That these Books, Papers and Patent, &c. shall not be Intrusted
in the hand of any single person for longer space than to transcribe any part of it in the day time, and in the House before some one or more appointed by the Committee; and that the Book-keeper shall only have Copies of them, which may be Viewed or Perused once a Month by any Member of the Society, who desires it: All Originals to be kept as before. ARTICLE XVII. That Security shall be taken of the Treasurer and of all Servants relating to the Society, that is, such as have any Trust Committed unto them, as Agent, Store-keepers, Ship-Masters, Clerks, Over∣seers and Servants, &c. and those to be given by Persons of known Honesty and Estate. And those servants shall be bound to keep the secrets of the House, that is, not to give Intelligence to any Person, no, not to any Member of the Society (without leave first ob∣tained publickly in the Committee) upon forfeiture of their security. ARTICLE XVIII. That if the Society should receive Blacks for servants, they shall make them free at fourteen years end, upon Consideration that they shall give into the Society's Ware-house two thirds of what they are Capable of producing on such a parcel of Land as shall be allotted them by the Society, with a stock and necessary Tools, as shall be Ad∣judged by the Society's Surveyor. And if they will not accept of these terms, they shall be servants till they will accept it. ARTICLE XIX. That no Mineral Ʋndertaking shall be begun by the Committee without the approbation of the General Assembly. ARTICLE XX. That the Committee shall at every Yearly Meeting of the General Court discover the Incouragement or Discouragement they meet with in the Course of their Trade both at home and abroad.
ARTICLE XXI. That the Society may set up two or more General Factories in Penn∣silvania, one upon Cheasapeak-Bay, and the other upon Delaware River, or where else the Committee shall see necessary for the more speedy Conveyance of Goods in the Country and Mary-land: but that the Government of the whole be in the Capital City of Pennsilvania. ARTICLE XXII. That the Society shall be Assisting to the Indians in their setling in Towns and other places, both by Advice and Artificers. ARTICLE XXIII. That there shall be Twenty four Assistants added to the Com∣mittee, whereof twenty and the President or Deputy makes a Quorum. ARTICLE XXIV. That the First Assembly in the Province of Pennsilvania shall be desired to Ratifie the Patent Granted by the Governour to this So∣ciety by an Act of Assembly. ARTICLE XXV. That all the Members of the Committee and Court of Assistants shall have timely and sufficient notice and summons in writing left at their Dwelling, of every intended Court, to prevent Indirect and unjust Proceedings. ARTICLE XXVI. That all and every one, who have subscribed any sum in the So∣ciety's-stock, and shall not after the second summons bring in their second Payment, shall be incapable of disposing of that part in the stock before disbursed; but the Society shall dispose of the same
unto such who will fulfill the Agreement in all payments; they only being Capable of Receiving their first Penny or disbursement. Al∣waies excepted such, who through any Calamities have been re∣duced to Poverty, whereby they are Rendred Incapable to fulfill the same; that then the thing being proved before a Committee, they shall have power to sell the same to the best Advantage. And as this is Agreed on for the second payment, so it is of all others, if there be more. ARTICLE XXVII. That there shall be in England a Chief Agent, Superiour to all Agents or Factors belonging to the said Society, that are in Europe, unto whom the Society shall direct their Letters and consign their Goods: He shall have a Council of six Factors, one of which shall be his Deputy. This Council shall, with him, Reside in London; and shall on all occasions meet to Advise together, how to dispose of the Society's Goods, and buy such Goods as the Society shall di∣rect to be bought, to Execute all other Orders, as shall be required of him or them. And to give every Factor his Commission, how to proceed in what pertains unto his place: So that all and every one of them shall Act by the Advice of the Chief Agent, and he by the Order of the Committee in Pennsilvania; All these being Chosen by the General Assembly, they giving good and sufficient security to the Society for their true and faithful service. ARTICLE XXVIII. That the President, Deputy, Secretary, Treasurer, Surveyor and all the Servants of the Society shall bring into the Society's Ware∣house, what Peltry they buy of the Indians in their Respective Plan∣tations with their own private Goods: This shall be Entred in the Books of the several Offices to prevent Fraud. Those Goods shall be sent over with the Society's Goods, and shall have what Return they will for the same, allowing to the Society, Fraight, Facto∣rage, &c.
ARTICLE XXIX. That it shall be Lawful for all, who will bring their Goods to the Society's Ware-house, so to do and to have the same Returns, as they shall desire. This being granted and Allowed, will bring in most of the Countries Goods in the Society's hands, which will in time prove the great Advantage of the Society; and most Emi∣nently to the Planters, who are not able to send into England, where possibly they may be deceived by their Factors or Attorneys, they having in the Society the greater security Imaginable for their Effects. Some of the Officers and Offices for the SOCIETY, Viz. President, Deputy, Treasurer, Agent, Secre∣tary, Surveyor, Twelve Committee-men, Chyrur∣gion, Factors, Clerks, Overfeers, Messengers, Por∣ters, Butchers, Water-men, Carr-men, &c. The Four Offices for the Society. The Secretary Office. TO this Office shall belong the Book-Keeper, the Factors, Chyrurgeon, Clerk of all Offices, Messengers, Overseers, Water-men. The Secre∣tary shall be alwaies ready to receive Orders of the President or Deputy for the Execution of all Warrants to be Issued out abroad, to write all Letters, &c. for the Society's Service, and to direct the Plantations in their Duties, as the President and Courts are Agreed on to be done: As when any Ships are going Out, then to write to Factors abroad, &c. When any Factors are wanting Supplies of Goods, to give Warrnts in the Treasury-Office for the same under the Presidents own Hand and Seal, or his Deputy; and nothing delivered without this Method. And when Goods are brought in, then to take Account of the same, and give an Acconnt to the President of them, and Enter them in that Office also. If any Servant Dyeth, to receive Informati∣on of it, and make Record. If any Run away, to receive Information, and take Order of the President about it, &c. If any be Sick, to Issue Warrants for their help by the Presidents Order, &c. If Cattle Dye, to Re∣cord it; If any be Increased, to Record the Place, Kind, Number. To
receive every Week a particular Account of all Overseers, Factors, &c. of all Increases and Decreases of Trade, &c. The Treasury Office. TO this Office shall belong the TREASURER, Two Clerks, Por∣ters, Butchers, Water-men, Carr-men, Chyrurgeon, Husbandmen, Handicrafts, &c. every one of them giving Account to the Treasurer of their Works, and all to be Recorded in the Treasury-Office, and to be Trans∣mitted into the Secretary's-Office every Seven daies, and all those Officers and Servants to be directed in their Proceedings by Warrants from the Pre∣sident or his Deputy, and nothing to be delivered out without the same, to prevent Deceit, &c. And that there shall be Two Ware-houses, one for Ex∣portation, and the other for Importation: Unto each of them shall belong a Clerk to keep Journals of Goods Come In and Gone Out; and to keep the Warrants▪ from the President for their Security. And that if any Goods are received in, and not Recorded in the Secretary and Treasury-Office within two dates, it shall be a Forfeiture of such Penalty thought fit to be Imposed by the Court of Assistants. The Surveyor's Office. TO this Office shall belong the Surveyor, an Assistant, a Clerk, a Searcher. This Surveyor shall View all Ships, and what is thereunto belonging, whe∣ther fit to be made use of for the Society's Service or no; and make Re∣port to the President. He shall Oversee all Overseers, Servants, their Works, and make Record of them all, giving Information of all things in the Secre∣tary-Office, and to the President or his Deputy; and keeping Record in his Office of the same. He shall see all Goods Shipped Safely and others Landed; He shall view all Ware-houses, their Goods that they be kept well, &c. That all Warrants from the President, be duly put in Execution, Survey all Entries and Invoyces, all Buildings, all Cattles, &c. that the Society may not suffer by any; keeping a Journal of all things which are every seven daies to be Compared with the Secretary-Office, where all things are to be Re∣corded. And Record being duly made, all the Books to be signed by the President or his Deputy, and afterwards to stand for good and Just Actings in
the Court of Committee and Assistants: And this being p assed, never more to be recalled. The Miner's Office. TO this Office shall belong an Agent, Clerks, Miners, Refiners, Brick-makers, Tile-makers, Potters, Lime-burners, &c. The Agent shall daily receive Informations from the Miners, &c. of what is done, and make Record of it in his Office, and shall be Signed by the Clerk and himself. Then to send it to the Secretary-Office every seven daies there to be Recorded; the President or Deputy having approved the same. And the Agent shall Answer for all Defaults and Wrong done to the Society in any of the things, that are under his Custody, until they are Re∣corded and Received in the Custody of the Treasurer. These are the Heads, upon which the Society is to be Governed, and the Offices by which all is Administred and secured from Fraud and Deceit. What further is necessary for the same, must be left to the Wisdom of the President and Court of Assistants, who in time may give an Exact Account of other things relating thereunto. For the Conveniency of such who are desirous to Subscribe to The Stock of this Society, if they please to Apply themselves to Philip Ford in Bow-Lane near Cheap-side, there their Subscriptions may be Entred. THE END.
