A3934aA 13060413 97019
CAROLINA; OR A DESCRIPTION Of the PRESENT STATE of that COUNTRY, AND The Natural Excellencies thereof, viz. The Healthfulness of the Air, Pleasantness of the Place, Advantage and Usefulness of those Rich Commo∣dities there plentifully abounding, which much encrease and flourish by the Industry of the Plan∣ters that daily enlarge that Colony. Published by T. A. Gent. Clerk on Board his Majesties Ship the Richmond, which was sent out in the Year 1680. with particular Instructions to enquire into the State of that Country, by His Majesties Special Command, and Return'd this Present Year, 1682. LONDON, Printed for W. C. and to be Sold by Mrs. Grover in Pelican Court in Little Britain, 1682.
TO THE READER. READER, YOƲ may please to understand, that the first Discovery of this Country was at the Charge of King Henry the the Seventh, as you will find in this Book; and that as it hath pleased God to add such a Jewel to the Crown of England, so I doubt not but in a few years it will prove the most Beneficial to the Kingdom in General of any Colony yet Planted by the English, which is the more probable from the great Concourse that daily arrives there. From the other Plantations, as well as from England, Ireland, &c. being drawn and invited thither by the Healthfulness of Air, Delicacy of Fruits, the likelyhood of Wines, Oyls and Silks, and the great Variety of other Natural Commodities within specified, which well considered, will sufficiently evi∣dence
the Truth of what I Assert; that I may contribute what lies in my Power for a further Satisfaction to those Gentlemen that are curious concerning the Country of Carolina, they may find a small Description thereof, with a Map of the first Draught, Published by Mr. Richard Blome, and Printed for Dorman Newman in the Year 1678. in Octavo, and one larger in Mr. Ogleby's America; since the publishing of these, there is by Order of the Lords Proprietors newly published in one large Sheet of Paper, a very spacious Map of Carolina, with its Rivers, Harbors, Plantati∣ons, and other Accommodations, from the latest Survey, and best Informations; with a large and particular Description of the Entrances into Ash∣ley and Cooper Rivers; this Map to be sold for 1 s. by Joel Gascoyne, near Wapping Old Stairs, and Robert Green in Budge Row London, 1682.
A COMPLEAT DISCOVERY OF THE State of Carolina, In the YEAR 1682. THE Discourses of many Ingenious Travellers (who have lately seen this part of the West Indies) have for Salubrity of Air, Fertility of Soyl, for the Luxuriant and Indulgent Blessings of Nature, justly rendred Carolina Famous. That since my Arrival at London, I have observed many with pleasing Idaeas and Con∣templations, as if ravisht with Admiration, discourse of its Pleasures: Whilst others more actively prest and stimulated, have with ve∣hement and ardent Desires willingly resolved
to hazard their Lives, Families, and Fortunes, to the Mercy of Wind, Seas and Storms, to enjoy the Sweets of so desirable a Be∣ing. Having spent near three Years Abroad, in which time I had a fair Opportunity of a Survey of great part of our English A∣merica. You my Worthy Friend, knowing in what Character I went abroad, and un∣derstanding of my being at Carolina, did ob∣ligingly request (that at Leisure) I would collect such Notices of my own whilst there, with those Remarques and Observations which I had learnt from the most Able and Ingenious Planters, who have had their Re∣sidence on the place from its first being Co∣loniz'd: You desiring to be assured whether the true State of the Country did answer the Reports of Common Fame. Which in Compliance with, and in Obedience to your Commands, I have undertaken. Carolina derives her name either from our present Illustrious Monarch, under whose glo∣rious
Auspices it was first establisht an Eng∣lish Colony, in the Year One Thousand Six Hundred and Seventy, and under whose be∣nign and happy Influence it now prospers and flourishes. Or from Charles the Ninth of that Name King of France, in whose Reign a Colony of French Protestants were transported thither, at the encouragement of Gaspar Coligni, Admiral of that Kingdom; the place of their first Settlement named in Honour of their Prince Arx Carolina; but not long after, that Colony, with Monsieur Ribault their Leader, were by the Spaniard at once cut off and destroy'd. Since which, nor French, nor Spaniard have made any Attempt for its Re-Settlement. Carolina is the Northermost part of the spacious and pleasant Province of Florida; it lies in the Northern temperate Zone, between the Lati∣tude of Twenty Nine, and Thirty Six De∣grees, and Thirty Minutes: It's boun∣ded on the East, with the Atlantick, or Nor∣thern, on the West, with the Pacifick or Sou∣thern
Ocean, on the North, with Virginia, on the South, with the remaining part of Flori∣da. The Air of so serene and excellent a tem∣per, that the Indian Natives prolong their days to the Extremity of Old Age. And where the English hitherto have found no Distem∣pers either Epidemical or Mortal, but what have had their Rise from Excess or Origine from Intemperance. In July and August they have sometimes Touches of Agues and Fe∣vers, but not violent, of short continuance, and never Fatal. English Children there born, are commonly strong and lusty, of sound Constitutions, and fresh ruddy Complexions. The Seasons are regularly disposed according to Natures Laws; the Summer not so torrid, hot and burning as that of their Southern, nor the Winter so rigorously sharp and cold, as that of their Northern Neighbours. In the Evenings and Mornings of December and Ja∣nuary, thin congealed Ice, with hoary Frosts sometimes appear; but as soon as the Sun e∣levates her self, above the Horizon, as soon
they disappear and vanish; Snow having been seen but twice in ten Years, or from its first being settled by the English. The Soil near the Sea, of a Mould Sandy, farther distant, more clayey, or Sand and Clay mixt; the Land lies upon a Level in fifty or sixty Miles round, having scarce the least Hill or Eminency. It's cloathed with odoriferous and fragrant Woods, flourishing in perpetual and constant Verdures, viz. the lofty Pine, the sweet smelling Cedar and Cy∣prus Trees, of both which are composed good∣ly Boxes, Chests, Tables, Scrittores, and Ca∣binets. The Dust and Shavings of Cedar, laid amongst Linnen or Woollen, destroys the Moth and all Verminous Insects: It ne∣ver rots, breeding no Worm, by which ma∣ny other Woods are consumed and destroy∣ed. Of Cedar there are many sorts; this in Carolina is esteemed of equal Goodness for Grain, Smell and Colour with the Bermudi∣an Cedar, which of all the West Indian is esteem∣ed the most excellent; that in the Caribbe I∣slands
and Jamaica being of a courser kind, Oyl and the Spirit of Wine penetrating it; but with this they make Heading for their Cask, which the sharpest and most searching Liquors does not pierce. With the Berry of the Tree at Bermudaz, by Decoction, they make a very wholesome and sovereign Drink. This Tree in the Sacred Writ is famous, e∣specially those of Lebanon, for their Stately Stature; but those in the West Indies I obser∣ved to be of a low and humble height. The Sassafrass is a Medicinal Tree, whose Bark and Leaves yield a pleasing Smell: It profits in all Diseases of the Blood, and Liver, par∣ticularly in all Venereal and Scorbutick Di∣stempers. There are many other Fragrant smelling trees, the Myrtle, Bay and Lawrel, several Others to us wholly unknown. Fruit Trees there are in abundance of various and excel∣lent kinds, the Orange, Lemon, Pomegra∣nate, Fig and Almond. Of English Fruits, the Apple, Pear, Plumb, Cherry, Quince,
Peach, a sort of Medlar, and Chesnut. Wall∣nut Trees there are of two or three sorts; but the Black Wallnut for its Grain, is most esteem'd: the Wild Wallnut, or Hiquery-Tree, gives the Indians, by boyling its Ker∣nel, a wholesome Oyl, from whom the Eng∣lish frequently supply themselves for their Kitchen uses: It's commended for a good Remedy in Dolors, and Gripes of the Bel∣ly; whilst new it has a pleasant Taste; but after six Moneths, it decays and grows acid; I believe it might make a good Oyl, and of as general an use as that of the Olive, if it were better purified and rectified. The Chin∣copin Tree bears a Nut not unlike the Hazle, the Shell is softer: Of the Kernel is made Chocolate, not much inferiour to that made of the Cacoa. The Peach Tree in incredible Numbers grows Wild: Of the Fruit express'd, the Planters compose a pleasant refreshing Liquor; the Remainder of the Fruit serves the Hogg and Cattle for Provision. The Mulberry
Tree every-where amidst the Woods grows wild: The Planters, near their Plantations, in Rows and Walks, plant them for Use, Ornament and Pleasure: What I observed of this Fruit was admirable; the Fruit there, was full and ripe in the latter end of April and beginning of May, whereas in England and Europe, they are not ripe before the lat∣ter end of August. A Manufactory of Silk well encouraged might soon be accomplisht, considering the numerousness of the Leaf for Provision, the clemency and moderateness of the Climate to indulge and nourish the Silk∣worm: To make tryal of its Success, was the Intention of those French Protestant Passengers transported thither in His Majesties Frigat the Richmond being Forty Five the half of a greater Number design'd for that place; but their Design was too early anticipated: the Eggs which they brought with them being hatch'd at Sea, before we could reach the Land, the Worms for want of Provision were un∣timely lost and destroyed. The Olive Tree
thrives there very well. Mr. James Colleton, Brother to Sir Peter, one of the Honourable Proprietors, brought an Olive Stick from Fy∣all, (one of the Western Islands) cut off at both Ends to Carolina, which put into the Ground, grew and prospered exceedingly; which gave so great an Encouragement, that since I left the place, I hear that several more were brought there, there being great Hopes, that if the Olive be well improved, there may be expected from thence perhaps as good Oyl as any the World yields. Vines of divers sorts, bearing both Black and Gray Grapes, grow, climbing their high∣est Trees, running and over-spreading their lower Bushes: Five Kinds they have alrea∣dy distinguish'd, three of which by Re-plan∣tation, and if well cultivated, they own, will make very good Wine; some of which has been transported for England, which by the best Pallates was well approved of, and more is daily expected, 'tis not doubted, if the Plan∣ters as industriously prosecute the Propagati∣on
of Vineyards as they have begun; but Ca∣rolina will in a little time prove a Magazine and Staple for Wines to the whole West Indies; and to enrich their Variety, some of the Pro∣prietors and Planters have sent them the No∣blest and Excellentest Vines of Europe, viz. the Rhenish, Clarret, the Muscadel and Canary, &c. His Majesty to, improve so hopeful a Design, gave those French we carried over their Pas∣sage free for themselves, Wives, Children Goods and Servants, they being most of them well experienced in the Nature of the Vine, from whose Directions doubtless the English have received and made considerable Advantages in their Improvements. Trees for the Service of building Houses and Shipping, besides those and many more which we have not nam'd; they have all such as we in England esteem Good, Lasting, and Serviceable, as the Oak of three sorts, the White, Black and Live Oak, which for Toughness, and the Goodness of its Grain is much esteemed: Elm, Ash, Beech, and Po∣plar,
&c Into the Nature, Qualities and Ver∣tues of their Herbs, Roots and Flowers, we had little time to make any curious Enquiry: This we were assured by many of the know∣ing Planters, that they had Variety of such whose Medicinal Vertues were rare and admi∣rable. The China grows plentifully there, whose Root infus'd, yields us that pleasant Drink, which we know by the Name of Chi∣na Ale in England: in Medicinal Uses it's far more excellent. Monsieur Tavernier, in his late Voyages to Persia, observes that Nation, by the frequent use of Water in which this Root is boyl'd, are never troubled with the Stone or Gout: It mundifies and sweetens the Blood: It's good in Fevers, Scurvy, Go∣norrhaea, and the Lues Venerea. They have three sorts of the Rattle-Snake Root which I have seen; the Comous or Hairy, the Smooth, the Nōdous, or Knotted Root: All which are lactiferous, or yielding a Milkie Juice; and if I do not very much in my Observations err, the Leaves of all these Roots of a Heart
had the exact Resemblance: They are all So∣vereign against the Mortal Bites of that Snake, too frequent in the West Indies: In all Pestilen∣tial Distempers, as Plague, Small Pox, and Ma∣lignant Fevers, it's a Noble Specifick; when stung, they eat the Root, applying it to the Venemous Wound; or they boyl the Roots in Water; which drunk, fortifies and corro∣borates the Heart, exciteing strong and gene∣rous Sweats; by which endangered Nature is relieved, and the Poyson carried off, and expelled. Gardens as yet they have not much impro∣ved or minded, their Designs having other∣wise more profitably engaged them in settling and cultivating their Plantations with good Provisions and numerous Stocks of Cattle; which two things by Planters are esteemed the Basis and Props of all New Plantations and Settlements; before which be well accom∣plished and performed, nothing to any pur∣pose can be effected; and upon which all In∣tentions, Manufactories, &c. have their neces∣sary
Dependance. But now their Gardens begin to be supplied with such European Plants and Herbs as are necessary for the Kitchen, viz. Potatoes, Lettice, Coleworts, Parsnip, Tur∣nip, Carrot and Reddish: Their Gardens also begin to be beautified and adorned with such Herbs and Flowers which to the Smell or Eye are pleasing and agreable, viz. The Rose, Tu∣lip, Carnation and Lilly. &c. Their Provision which grows in the Field is chiefly Indian Corn, which produces a vast Increase, year∣ly, yielding Two plentiful Harvests, of which they make wholesome Bread, and good Bis∣ket, which gives a strong, sound, and nourish∣ing Diet; with Milk I have eaten it dress'd various ways: Of the Juice of the Corn, when green, the Spaniards with Chocolet, aromatiz'd with Spices, make a rare Drink, of an excellent Delicacy. I have seen the English amongst the Caribbes roast the green Ear on the Coals, and eat it with a great deal of Pleasure: The Indians in Carolina parch the ripe Corn, then pound it to a Pow∣der,
putting it in a Leathern Bag: When they use it, they take a little quantity of the Powder in the Palms of their Hands, mixing it with Water, and sup it off: with this they will travel several days. In short, it's a Grain of General Use to Man and Beast, many thousands of both kinds in the West Indies having from it the greater part of their Sub∣sistence. The American Physicians observe that it breeds good Blood, removes and o∣pens Oppellations and Obstructions. At Caroli∣na they have lately invented a way of make∣ing with it good sound Beer; but it's strong and heady: By Maceration, when duly fer∣mented, a strong Spirit like Brandy may be drawn off from it, by the help of an Alembick. Pulse they have of great Variety, not on∣ly of what Europe yield, viz. Beans, Pease, Callavance, Figolaes, and Bonavist, &c. but many other kinds proper to the place, and to us unknown: Green Pease at the latter end of April, at my being there, I eat as good as ever I did England. Strawberries Rasberries, Bill∣berries,
and Blackberries grow frequently up and down the Woods. Hemp and Flax thrives exceeding well; there grows a sort of wild Silk Pods, call'd Silk-Grass, of which they may make fine and durable Linnen. What Wheat they have planted has been rather for Experiment and Observation, whe∣ther it would be agreeable to the Soil and Climate, than for any substance for themselves, or for Transportation abroad; what they have sown, the Planters assured us grew ex∣ceeding well; as also Barly, Mr. Linch an ingenious Planter, having whilst we were there very good growing in his Plantation, of which he intended to make Malt for brewing of English Beer and Ale, having all Utensils and Conveniencies for it. Tobacco grows very well; and they have of an excellent sort, mistaken by some of our English Smoakers for Spanish Tobacco, and valued from 5 to 8 s. the Pound; but finding a great deal of trouble in the Planting and Cure of it, and the great Quantities which Virginia, and other
of His Majesties Plantations make, rendring it a Drug over all Europe; they do not much regard or encourage its Planting, having al∣ready before them better and more profitable Designs in Action. Tarr made of the resinous Juice of the Pine (which boyl'd to a thicker Consistence is Pitch) they make great quanti∣ties yearly, transporting several Tuns to Barba∣does, Jamaica, and the Caribbe Islands. Indigo they have made, and that good: The rea∣son why they have desisted I cannot learn. To conclude, there grows in Carolina the fa∣mous Cassiny, whose admirable and incompa∣rable Vertues are highly applauded and ex∣tolled by French and Spanish Writers: It is the Leaves of a certain Tree, which boyl'd in Water (as we do Thea) wonder∣fully enliven and envigorate the Heart, with genuine easie Sweats and Tran∣spirations, preserving the Mind free and serene, keeping the Body brisk, a∣ctive, and lively, not for an hour, or two but for as many days, as those Authors
report without any other Nourishment or Subsistance, which, if true, is really admirable; they also add, that none amongst the Indians, but their great Men and Captains, who have been famous for their great Exploits of War and Noble Actions, are admitted to the use of this noble Bevaridge. At my being there I made Enquiry after it; but the Ignorance of the Planter did not inform me. Sponges growing on the Sandy Shoars, I have gather∣ed good and large; for which Samos in times past was famous, supposed by the Ancients to be the only place in the World where they grew: a courser sort I have seen pull'd up by Fishers, fishing among the Rocks of the Island of Berbadoes. Ambergrise is often thrown on their Shoars; a pretious Commodity to him who finds it, if Native, and pure in Worth and Value It surpasses Gold; being estima∣ted at 5 and 6 Pound the Ounce, is not a∣dulterated. What it is I shall not decide, lea∣ving it to the Judgment of the more Learned, whether it be the Excrement of the Whale,
because sometimes in dissecting and opening their Bodies it's there discovered. I think as well it may be argued the Excrements of other Creatures, Birds and some Beasts greedily desireing and affecting it, especially the Fox, who eating it, by Digestion it passes through his Body; after some Alteration it's again recover'd, and is that which we call Fox Am∣bergrise. Others, that it is a bitumious Sub∣stance, ebullating or boiling up from the Bot∣tom of the Sea, and floating on the Surface of the Waters, is condensed by the circumam∣bient Air: of which Opinion is the Learned Sennertus. Some that it is a Plant of a viscous oleaginous Body, really growing at the bot∣tom of the Sea, the swift and violent Moti∣on of the Waters in Storms causing an Era∣dication or Evulsion of the Plant, forcing it to the adjacent Shoars; that its most plenti∣fully found after Storms is certain: if true, as an intelligent man informed me, who lived many years at the Bermudaz, and among the Behama Islands, who saw at the Behama a piece
of Ambergrise weighing thirty pound (for its bigness famous in those Parts) having perfect and apparent Roots, equal to the Body in worth and goodness. Others, that it's the li∣quid resinous Tears of some odoriferous Tree, hanging over Seas or Rivers, coagulated in that Form which we find it. Dr. Trapham, an ingenious Physitian in Jamaica, differs lit∣tle from this last opinion, thinking it the Gum∣mous Juice of some fragrant Plant which grows on Rocks near the Sea, whose Trunks broken by the rude and boysterous Waves, emit that precious Liquor. In Medicinal and Physical uses it has a high esteem, being pre∣scribed in the richest Cordials, admirable in the languishes of the Spirit Faintings, and Deliquium of the Heart; given as the last re∣medy to agonizing Persons. In Perfumes of Linnen Wollen, Gloves, &c. there is none esteemed more costly or precious. Its of dif∣ferent Colors, Black, Red, the Nutmeg, and Gray Color are held the best. The great encrease of their Cattel is rather
to be admired than believed: not more than six or seven years past the Country was almost destitute of Cows, Hogs and Sheep, now they have many thousand Head. The Planter in Winter takes no care for their Provision, which is a great Advantage; the Northern Planta∣tions obliging the Planters to spend great part of their Summer to provide Fodder and Pro∣vision for their Cattle, to preserve them from starving in the Winter. The Cows the Year round brouzing on the sweet Leaves growing on the Trees and Bushes, or on the whole∣some Herbage growing underneath: They u∣sually call them home in the Evening for their Milk, and to keep them from running wild. Hogs find more than enough of Fruits in the Summer, and Roots and Nuts in the Winter; from the abundance of their Feeding, great numbers forsake their own Plantations, run∣ning wild in the Woods, the Tyger, Wolf, and wild Cat, by devouring them, oftentimes goes Share with the Planter; but when the Stock encreases and grows strong, the older
surround the younger, and boldly oppose, and oftentimes attack their Invaders. Their Sheep bears good Wooll; the Ewes at a time often have 2 or 3 Lambs; they thrive very well, the Country being so friendly to their Natures, that it's observed, they are neither liable or in∣cident to any known Disease or Distemper. Of Beasts bearing Furrs, they have great store of Variety, whose Skins serve the Indi∣ans for Cloathing and Bedding, and the Eng∣lish for many uses, besides the great Advan∣tage made of them, by their being sent for England. Deer, of which there is such infinite Herds, that the whole Country seems but one continued Park, insomuch, that I have often heard Captain Matthews, an ingenious Gen∣tleman, and Agent to Sir Peter Colleton for his Affairs in Carolina, that one hunting In∣dian has yearly kill'd and brought to his Plan∣tation more than an 100, sometimes 200 head of Deer. Bears there are in great numbers, of whose Fat they make an Oyl which is of great Vertue and Efficacy in causing the Hair to
grow, which I observed the Indians daily used, by which means they not only keep their Hair clear and preserved from Vermine, but by the nourishing faculty of the Oyl, it usually exten∣ded in length to their middles. There are Bevors, Otters, Foxes, Racoons, Possums, It's a little creature feeding on Sweet Herbs, whose Codds scent as sweet and strong as Musk, last∣ing a long time, if handsomly inclosed in Cotton Wooll. Musquasses, Hares and Coneys, Squirrels of five kinds, the flying Squirrel, whose delicate Skin is commended for comforting, if applied to a cold Stomack, the Red, the Grey, the Fox and Black Squirrels. Leather for Shoes they have good and well tann'd: The Indians have also a way of dressing their Skins rather softer, tho' not so durable as ours in England. Birds the Country yields of differing kinds and Colours: For Prey, the Pelican, Hawk, and Eagle, &c. For Pleasure, the red, copped and blew Bird, which wantonly imitates the various Notes and Sounds of such Birds and Beasts which it hears, wherefore, by way of Allusion, it's call'd the mocking Bird; for which pleasing Property it's there esteem'd a
Birds for Food, and pleasure of Game, are the Swan, Goose, Duck, Mallard, Wigeon, Teal, Curlew, Plover, Partridge, the Flesh of which is equally as good, tho' smaller than ours in England. Pigeons and Parakeittoes: In Win∣ter huge Flights of wild Turkies, oftentimes weighing from twenty, thirty, to forty pound. There are also great Stocks of tame Fowl, viz. Geese, Ducks, Cocks, Hens, Pigeons and Turkies. They have a Bird I believe the least in the whole Creation, named the Humming Bird; in bigness the Wren being much supe∣riour, in Magnitude not exceeding the Humble Bee, whose Body in flying much resembles it, did not their long Bills, between two and three Inches, and no bigger than Needles, make the difference. They are of a deep Green, shadow'd with a Murry, not much unlike the color of some Doves Necks, they take their Food humming or flying, feeding on the ex∣uberant Moistures of sweet odoriferous Leaves and Flowers. I have frequently seen them in many parts of the West Indies, but never
observed them to have any Musical Air, but a loud Note to Admiration, crying Chur, Chur, Chur, &c. which at the distance of half a mile is plainly heard: their Eggs, of which they produce three or four young at a time, not unlike small white Pease: they con∣tinue between the Tropiques the whole year round, as I have observed at Berbadoes and Jamaica; but I am informed, that in the more Northern parts of America they sleep the whole Winter; at Berbadoes the Jews curiously skin these little Birds, filling them with fine Sand, and perfuming their Feathers, they are sent into Europe as pretty Delicacies for Ladies, who hang them at their Breasts and Girdles. There are in Carolina great numbers of Fire Flies, who carry their Lan∣thorns in their Tails in dark Nights, flying through the Air, shining like Sparks of Fire, enlightning it with their Golden Spangles. I have seen a larger sort at Jamai∣ca, which Dr. Heylin in his Cosmography, enu∣merates amongst the Rarities and Wonders
of Hispaniola, an Island under the King of Spain, distant between 20 and 30 Leagues from Jamaica: These have two Lights above their Eyes, and a third in their Tails; in dark-nights they shine like Candles: for which I have often at a distance mistaken them, supposeing them to have been the Lights of some adja∣cent Plantation; and in this I have not been the first that has been so deceived. Amongst large Orange Trees in the Night, I have seen many of those Flies, whose Lights have ap∣peared like hanging Candles, or pendant Flambeaus, which amidst the Leaves and ripe Fruit yielded a Sight truly glorious to be∣hold: with 3 of these included in a Glass Bot∣tle, in a very dark Night I have read very small Characters: When they are kill'd, their Igneous, or Luminous Matter does not immedi∣ately, (till half an hour, or an hour after their Deaths) extinguish. As the Earth, the Air, &c. are enrich'd and replenished with the Blessings of the most High, the Seas and Rivers of the same boun∣ty
equally participate in the Variety of excel∣lent and wholesome Fish which it produces, viz. Sturgeon, of whose Sounds, Iceing glass, of whose Roes Caviare are made: Mullet, a delicious sweet Fish, of whose Roes or Spawn Botargo is made: Whale, Salmon, Trouts, Bass, Drum, Cat-fish, whose Head and glaring Eyes resemble a Cat; it's esteem'd a very good Fish; it hath a sharp thorny Bone on its Back, which strikes at such as endeavor to take it: which by Seamen is held venemous; yet I saw one of our Seamen, the back of whose Hand was pierced with it, yet no poysonous Symptoms of Inflammation or Rancor ap∣pear'd on the Wound, which quickly heal'd, that I concluded it was either false, or that of this Fish there were more kinds than one: Plaice, Eels, Crabs, Prawns twice as large as ours in England: Oysters of an Oblong or O∣val Form; their number inexhaustible; a man may easily gather more in a day than he can well eat in a year; some of which are mar∣giritiferous, yielding bright round Oriental Pearl.
The Tortoise, more commonly call'd by our West Indians the Turtle, are of three sorts, the Hawks-Bill, whose Shell is that which we call the Turtle or Tortoise Shell; the Green Turtle, whose Shell being thin is little regarded; but its Flesh is more esteemed than the Hawks-bill Tortoise: The Loggerhead Turtle, or Tortoise has neither good Shell or Flesh, so is little minded or regarded. They are a sort of crea∣tures which live both on Land and Water. In the day usually keeping the Sea, swiming on the Surface of the Water, in fair Wea∣ther delighting to expose themselves to the Sun, oftentimes falling asleep, lying, as I have seen several times, without any Motion on the Waters, till disturbed by the approach of some Ship or Boat, being quick of hear∣ing, they dive away. In the Night they oft∣en come ashore to feed and lay their Eggs in the Sand, which once covered, they leave to the Influence of the Sun, which in due time pro∣duces her young ones, which dig their Pas∣sage
out of the Sand immediately making their way towards the Water. At this Sea∣son, when they most usually come ashore, which is in April, May and June, the Seamen or Turtlers, at some convenient distance watch their opportunity, getting between them and the Sea, turn them on their Backs, from whence they are unable ever to rise, by which means the Seamen or Turtlers sometimes turn 40 or 50 in a night, some of 2, 3, 400 weight: If they are far distant from the Har∣bor or Market to which they design to bring them, they kill, cutting them to pieces, which Salted, they Barrel: This is the way of kil∣ling at the Caymana's, an Island lying to Leeward of Jamaica. Turtle, Barrel'd and Salted, if well condition'd, is worth from 18 to 25 shillings the Barrel. If near their Market or Harbor they bring them in Sloops alive, and afterwards keep them in Crauls, which is a particular place of Salt Water of Depth and Room for them to swim in, pallisado'd or staked, in round above
the Waters Surface, where, upon occasion they take them out, and kill them, and cut∣ting them to pieces, sell their Flesh for two pence or three pence the pound: the Belly, which they call the Callope of the Turtle, pep∣per'd and salted, or roasted and baked, is an ex∣cellent Dish, much esteemed by our Nation in the West Indies: the rest of the Flesh boil'd, makes as good and nourishing Broath, as the best Capon in England, especially if some of the Eggs are mixt with it; they are some white, and others of a yellow or golden Co∣lour, in largeness not exceeding a Walnut, wrapt in a thin Skin or Membrane, sweet in Taste, nourishing and wholesome: and of this property, that they never grow hard by boil∣ing: the Liver is black; it freely opens and purges the Body: if little of it be eaten, it dies the Excrements of a deep black Colour: The Fat in Color inclines to a Sea Green; in Taste it's sweet and luscious, equalling, if not surpassing the best Marrow, if freely eaten it deeply stains the Urine of its Color: It's of
a very penetrating piercing quality, highly comended in Strains and Aches: Of it the Turtlers oftentimes make an Oyl, which in Lamps burns much brighter and sweeter than common Lamp or Train Oyl. In general, the Flesh is commended for a good Antiscor∣butique and an Antivenereal Diet; many in the former, and some that have been far gone in Consumptions, with the constant use alone of this Diet, have been thoroughly recovered and cured in 3 or 4 months. It hath 3 Hearts, by thin Pellicules only separated, which has caused some to Philosophize on its Amphibious Nature, alluding to those participating and assimulating Qualities which it has to the rest of the Uni∣verse, it swiming like a Fish, laying Eggs like a Fowl, and feeding on Grass like an Ox. This I am assured of, that after it's cut to pieces, it retains a Sensation of Life three times longer than any known Creature in the Creation: Before they kill them they are laid on their Backs, where hopeless of Relief, as if sensible of their future Condition, for some
hours they mourn out their Funerals, the Tears plentifully flowing from their Eyes, ac∣companied with passionate Sobs and Sighs, in my Judgment nothing more like than such who are surrounded and overwhelmed with Troubles, Cares and Griefs, which raises in Strangers both Pity and Compassion. Com∣pleatly six hours after the Butcher has cut them up and into pieces, mangled their Bo∣dies, I have seen the Callope when going to be seasoned, with pieces of their Flesh ready to cut into Stakes, vehemently contract with great Reluctancy rise against the Knife, and sometimes the whole Mass of Flesh in a visi∣ble Tremulation and Concussion, to him who first sees it seems strange and admirable. There is farther to the Southward of Carolina, especially about the Shoars and Rivers of His∣niola and Cuba a Fish in Nature something like the former, call'd the Manacy or Sea-Cow, of an extraordinary Bigness, sometimes of 1000 pound weight: It feeds on the Banks and Shoar sides on the grassy Herbage, like a
Tortoise; but that which is more wonderful of this Creature is, that she gives her young Ones Suck from her Duggs; she is headed like a Cow, of a green Colour, her Flesh by some esteem∣ed the most delicate in the World, sweeter than the tenderest Veal, sold at Jamaica, where it's sometimes brought for 6 d. the pound: It hath a Stone in the Head which is a gallant Remedy against the Pains and Dolors of the Stone; so are the Bones of its Body to provoke Urine, when pulveriz'd and exhibited in convenient Liquors. Its Skin makes excel∣lent Whips for Horses, if prudently us'd, which are very serviceable and lasting; with one of these Manaty Strapps, I have seen a Bar of Iron cut and dented: It cuts so se∣vere and deep, that by the Publick Autho∣rity at Jamaica, Masters are forbidden and prohibited with it to strike their White Ser∣vants. There is in the mouth of their Rivers, or in Lakes near the Sea a Creature well known in the West Indies, call'd the Alligator or Cro∣codile,
whose Scaly Back is impenitrable, refusing a Musquet Bullet to pierce it, but under the Bel∣ly, that or an Arrow finds an easie Passage to de∣stroy it: it lives both on Land and Water, be∣ing a voracious greedy Creature, devouring whatever it seizes on, Man only excepted, which on the Land it has not the courage to attacque, except when asleep or by surprize: In the Wa∣ter it's more dangerous; it sometimes grows to a great length, from 16 to 20 foot, having a long Mouth, beset with sharp keen Teeth; the Body when full grown as large as a Horse, de∣clining towards the Tail; it's slow in motion, and having no Joynt in the Vertebraes or Back Bone, but with its whole length is unable to turn, which renders it the less mischievous; yet Nature by Instinct has given most Creatures timely Caution to avoid them by their strong musky Smell, which at a considerable distance is perceiveable, which the poor Cattle for their own Preservation make good use of: their Flesh cuts very white; the young ones are eatable; the Flesh of the older smells so strong of Musk▪ that it nauseates; their Stones at least so called,
are commended for a rich lasting Perfume. Mettals or Minerals I know not of any, yet it's supposed and generally believed, that the A∣palatean Mountains which lie far up within the Land, yields Ore both of Gold and Silver, that the Spaniards in their running Searches of this Coun∣try saw it, but had not time to open them, or at least, for the present were unwilling to make any farther Discovery till their Mines of Peru and Mexico were exhausted, or as others, that they were politically fearful that if the Rich∣es of the Country should be exposed, it would be an Allure to encourage a Foreign Invader, Poverty preserving, Riches oftentimes the cause that Property is lost, usurped and invaded; but whether it be this or that reason time will disco∣ver. The Natives of the Country are from time immemorial, ab Origine Indians, of a deep Ches∣nut Colour, their Hair black and streight; tied various ways, sometimes oyl'd and painted, stuck through with Feathers for▪ Ornament or Gal∣lantry; their Eyes black and sparkling, little or no Hair on their Chins, well limb'd and fea∣tured,
painting their Faces with different Figures of a red or sanguine Colour, whether for Beauty or to render themselves formidable to their Ene∣mies I could not learn. They are excellent Hun∣ters; their Weapons the Bow and Arrow, made of a Read, pointed with sharp Stones, or Fish Bones; their Cloathing Skins of the Bear or Deer, the Skin drest after their Country Fashion. Manufactures, or Arts amongst them I have heard of none, only little Baskets made of pain∣ted Reeds and Leather drest sometimes with black and red Chequers coloured. In Medicine, or the Nature of Simples, some have an exqui∣site Knowledge; and in the Cure of Scorbutick, Venereal, and Malignant Distempers are admira∣ble: In all External Diseases they suck the part affected with many Incantations, Philtres and Charms: In Amorous Intrigues they are excellent either to procure Love or Hatred: They are not very forward in Discovery of their Secrets, which by long Experience are religiously trans∣mitted and conveyed in a continued Line from one Generation to another, for which those skill'd in this Faculty are held in great Venera∣tion
and Esteem, Their Religion chiefly con∣sists in the Adoration of the Sun and Moon: At the Appearance of the New Moon I have observed them with open extended Arms then folded, with inclined Bodies, to make their Adorations with much Ardency and Passion: They are divided into many Divisions or Na∣tions, Govern'd by Reguli, or Petty Princes, which our English call Cacicoes: Their Diet is of Fish, Flesh, and Fowl, with Indian Maiz or Corn; their Drink Water, yet Lovers of the Spirits of Wine and Sugar. They have hither∣to lived in good Correspondence and Amity with the English, who by their just and equi∣table Cariage have extreamly winn'd and ob∣liged them; Justice being exactly and imparti∣ally administred, prevents Jealousies, and main∣tains between them a good Understanding, that the Neighbouring Indians are very kind and serviceable, doing our Nation such Civilities and good Turns as lie in their Power. This Country was first discover'd by Sir Se∣bastian Cabott, by the order, and at the expence of King Henry VII. from which Discovery our
Successive Princes have held their Claim, in pur∣suance to which, in the Seventeenth Year of His Majesties Reign it was granted unto his Grace George Duke of Albemarle, unto the Right Honourable Edward Earl of Clarendon, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkley, Anthony Lord Ashley, now Earl of Shaftsbury, to the Honourable Sir George Carteret, and Sir John Colleton Knights and Baronetts, to Sir William Berkley Knight, with a full and pleni∣potentiary Power, to Colonize, Enact Laws, Execute Justice, &c. The Regalia's of Premier Sovereignty only reserved. The Principal place where the English are now settled lies sci∣tuated on a point of Land about two Leagues from the Sea, between Ashly and Cooper Rivers, so named in Honour to the Right Honourable the Earl of Shaftsbury, a great Patron to the Affairs of Carolina. The place called Charles Town, by an express Order from the Lord Pro∣prietors in the Year One thousand six hundred and eighty, their Ordnance and Ammunition being removed thither from Old Charles Town, which lay about a League higher from Ashly
River, both for its Strength and Commerce It's very commodiously scituated from many other Navigable Rivers that lie near it on which the Planters are seated; by the Advantage of Creeks, which have a Communication from one great River to another; at the Tide or Ebb the Planters may bring their Commo∣dities to the Town as to the Common Mar∣ket and Magazine both for Trade and Ship∣ping. The Town is regularly laid out into large and capacious Streets, which to Buildings is a great Ornament and Beauty. In it they have reserved convenient places for Building of a Church, Town-House and other Publick Stru∣ctures, an Artillery Ground for the Exercise of their Militia, and Wharfs for the Conve∣nience of their Trade and Shipping. At our being there was judged in the Country a 1000 or 1200 Souls; but the great Numbers of Fa∣milies from England, Ireland, Berbadoes, Jamai∣ca, and the Caribees, which daily Transport themselves thither, have more than doubled that Number. The Commodities of the Country as yet proper for England, are Furrs and Cedar:
For Berbadoes, Jamaica and the Caribbee Islands, Provisions, Pitch, Tarr and Clapboard, for which they have in Exchange Sugar, Rumm, Melasses and Ginger, &c. such things which are proper and requisite for the Planter to be sto∣red with before he leaves England for his better Settlement there at his Arrival, chiefly Servants: All kind of Iron Work for the clearing of Land, pruning of Vines, for the Kitchen and for Building. Commodities proper for the Merchant to Transport thither for his Advantage, Cloath∣ing of all kinds, both Linnen and Woollen, Hats, Stockins, Shoes; all kind of Ammunition, Guns, Fowling-pieces, Powder, Match, Bullet, Nails, Locks & Knives; all Haberdashers Ware; Cor∣dage, and Sails for Shipping, Spirits and Spi∣ces, viz. Cloves, Nutmegs▪ and Cinnamon. Finally, to encourage People to Transport themselves thither, the Lord Proprietors give unto all Masters and Mistresses of Families, to their Children, Men-Servants and Maid-Ser∣vants, if above sixteen years of Age, fifty to all such under forty Acres of Land to be held for ever, annually paying a Peny an Acre to
the Lord Proprietors to commence in 2 Years after it's survey'd. Sir, Thus in an Abstract I have given you the Draught of this excellent Country, begining with its Name, Scituation, &c. and when first set∣tled, regularly proceeding to the Nature of the Soil, Quality of the Air, the Diseases and Lon∣gaevity of its Inhabitants, the Rarity of its pro∣duce in Trees, Fruits, Roots and Herbs, Beasts, Fish, Fowl and Insects; the Nature and Dispo∣sition of the Indians, the Progress the English have made since their first Settlement, what Commodities they abound with, in what defe∣ctive; in all which from the Truth I have nei∣ther swerved nor varied: Indeed in some other things I might have farther enlarged and expatiated, which I shall refer to a Personal Dis∣course, when I have the Honour to wait upon you again; in the mean time I am Your humble Servant T. A. FINIS.
