A846 13044424 96880
General Monck's LAST LETTER TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE Lord Fleetwood. Declaring his resolution to send Col. Wilkes, Lieut. Col. Clobery, Major Knight, by way of Treaty, in order to a happy Union between the two Armies of England and Scotland. With two other Letters from Persons of Honour, signifying great hopes of Peace, and a prohibition of either Armies proceeding any fur∣ther in their March. Published by his Excellencies special Command. LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Elelphant and Castle near Temple-Barre, 1659.
General Moncks Last LETTER to His EXCELLENCY THE Lord Fleetwood. My Lord, AFter I had Answered the Letter, your Lordship did me the favour to send me by Col. Talbot, I received another from your Lordship, of the 29th of October, wherein your Lordship is pleased to express much of your Lordships Affection and Friend∣ship to me, for which I shall ever acknow∣ledge my self engaged to you; but truly I must assure your Lordship, no personal Discouragements (although I have had my
share of them) have induced me to the Iu∣stification I make of the Parliaments Autho∣rity, but the tie of duty to which I am in my Conscience obliged, and I shall be heartily sorry, if your Lordship makes any other Interpretation of it, for your Lordship knows my Command has been offered of∣ten up to those that had power to place it better: We are all I bless the Lord, very u∣nanimous here, and I am confident when the Gentlemen we send from hence have gi∣ven your Lordship a true understanding of our Actions, you will not have so severe an opinion of them, as you seem to have in your late Letters: The persons names are, Col. Wilkes, Lieut. Col. Clobery, and Major Knight, all well known to your Lordship, to whom I beseech your Lordship to give Credit, in what they shall propose from the Army here, and I beseech you to believe, I am still with a sincere heart, Edinb. Nov. 3. 1659. My Lord, Your Lordships very humble Servant. George Monck.
A SECOND LETTER TO THE Lord Fleetwood. SIR, VVE think sit to acquaint you, that the Lord has so prosper'd our en∣deavours here, that my Lord Ge∣neral Monck and the Officers have accepted of our Overtures of mediation, and they have appointed Colonel Wilkes, Lieutenant Colonel Clo∣bery, and Major Knight, to repaire to London Com∣missioners, to treat with the like number of Officers there for a firme Peace and unity amongst the Forces of both Nations, for which we doubt not but the Pray∣ers of all good men will be poured forth to the Throne of Grace. We have prevailed with my Lord General, to dis∣patch Order this night to his remotest Quarters, that they advance not further South-wards during this Treaty, and we desire you will do the like, that none
of yours may March more Northward then they are; and truly for as much as we can perceive, none of these Forces had so hastily marched out of Scot∣land, if yours had not gathered this way. In a few dayes we shall see you, and in the mean time desire you to believe we are, Dalkeish this 4th. of Novemb. 1659. SIR, Your affectionate: SERVANTS, Thomas Clarges. Thomas Talbot.
A THIRD LETTER TO THE Lord Fleetwood. May it please your Excellency, I Have for some dayes forborne writing, be∣cause what came to my hand, was fully Com∣municated to you by Colonel Lilburn; your Excellencies, of the 27th past, as also that of the first instant, came safe to hand, and what was commanded, shall be faithfully obeyed according to my weak ability. Your Forces in these partes are now, blessed be God, in good condition, and well resolved; Colonel Lilburn, I know hath acquaint∣ed you with General Monck's Letter, about his sending up Wilkes, Clobery, & Knight, for an Accom∣modation: Northumberland fails him, and his Soul∣diers (as all our intelligence faith) fails him, and its no wonder if their hearts fail them, when they are carryed forth by no better principles, then the Iu∣stice of such a cause will afford, I am perswaded your Excelency knows, what manner of person you have
to deal with, and I doubt not but the intercepted Letters sent you from Northallerton, will direct your thought to look West, as well as North; If those Gentlemen that are coming to you, insist upon the bringing in again of those Gentlemen to Westmin, your friends hear both of the Army and Country; think it will be little better then to in∣sist upon the bringing in of — — but we cannot doubt in the least, but that God will guide you only to such a condescension as may secure the Cause and add somewhat to the comfortable be∣ing of your friends, who have suffered for their ad∣herence to you in this great day of Tryal: I shall continue hear until I see some probability of being more serviceable in another place; That the Lord may direct your wayes, and strengthen you for his work, is the prayer of, Newcastle, Nov. 5. 1659. Your Excellencies most Obedi∣ent and faithful Se Iohn Pearson FINIS.
