B400 13017807 96592
A SPEECH made by Master BAGSHAWE IN PARLIAMENT Concerning the Triall of the Twelve Bishops on Munday the Seven∣teenth of January, Anno 1641. AS ALSO, The Articles, now in agitation, objected against them. London, Printed for T. T. 1642.
A Speech made by Master Bagshawe in Parliament, concerning the Triall of the twelve Bishops on Mun∣day the seventeenth of Ja∣nuary, Anno 1641. M. Speaker, WE are now upon the Grand businesse the Bishops Tryall expected of all men, and much desired their▪ crimes for which they are accused are two fold. 1 The first consisting of misdemeanour and great offences committed by them against their Country, whereof they have been but unprofi∣table members. 2 The second consisting of Crymes of the highest nature and most dangerous consequence that can be committed by any subject, and that is Treason in the highest degree, both against their lawfull Prince his rightfull power and just prerogatives, and against the whole body politique of this kingdome. Upon the first of these we have proceeded against them by Le∣gall charge▪ proving them guilty of the same,
and by vote of this House, condemned them in a premunite and misprission of Treason. Upon the last we are now in agitation, which is our Accusation and Impeachment of them of high Treason. M. Speaker. I doe verily beleeve that this is a thing marvel∣led at and taken notice of even over the Chri∣stian World, not their occusation, for it is an ordinary thing in Common-wealthes to accuse and punish misdoers in the same, but the num∣ber of delinquents at one time accused never in myreading can I shew president of the like of onesocietie linked all together in one Function and Profession joyned in one cause bent, and I conceave Covenanted together to worke mis∣cheife: Bishop that have beene heretofore ma∣ny of them (though one or two perchance have beene retrograde▪) have beene glorious lamps in the Curch that have sealed the truth of God with the shedding of their most precious bloud in those times, you see there were some good ones, nay of the greater number; but sithence vniversally corrupted and stayned with all man∣ner of pollutions even all of that function and Office Bookes a generall falling away from the truth, a generall endeavour to seduce others to doe the like, It is ordinary for all Kingdomes and States whatsoever to have amongst them
some wicked and perverse wights, yoa and of the greater accompt and worth in the same, but for the most part their Prophets Priests and other Religious and holy men that have beene as they conceaved their spirituall Pastors and Teachers of them in their Religion, have beene free and cleare from all attempts and enter∣prices that might prove dangerous and destruc∣tive to their severall places of Nativitie where∣in they r subjects or inhabitant, nay shall I bring forth as examples the lives of the very Hethen whose wisedome and understanding was meerely naturally voide of all heavenly and spirituall light, that never heard or beleeved the word of God concerning Christ and his Gospell, onely beleeve a Heven and a Hell, plce be teir interpretation conteyning ever∣lasting felicitie or perpetull miserie after the dissolution and ending of their naturall lives these men I say which doe know nothing but by the instinct of nture, yet ever held and taught that piety and vertue in their lives and con∣versations was the onely meanes to obtaine af∣ter Death everlasting selicitie, and that wick∣edness impietie and ungodline produced per∣peull miserie: what then shall we sy M. spea∣ker. of tese Prelates that have not onely by nature knowledge and understanding as these heatens had, but have the knowledge of the truth and pure word of God revealed unto them that have obtained favour of God, to be dispen∣sers
and destributers Teachers and Preachers of the same that have turned this truth of God into a lye, the grace of God into wantoures and perverted the wayes of godlinesse by their owne vitions and ungratious live have led in igno∣rance and blindnesse the Flocke of Christ over which they have been placed as Shepheards, thereby permitting and suffering them to walk in strange waies, according to their own inven∣tions, how thinke they that they will answer these things to their Master Christ, when they shall be called to an account for the same, be∣fore his Tribunall. But to leave this discourse concerning their abuses in Religion, as they ought to have beene the onely servants and Mssengers of God, for the building up of his Kingdome and the overthrow of the Kingdome of Antichrist, and come to their abuses and misdemeanour in this Kingdome as they have usurped to themselves Temporall power and jurisdiction in offices of civill Judicature for which they stand now accused and charged and proceeded against by vote of this House upon the said accusation and charge, and their despe∣rate and malitious attempt, in presuming to pe∣tition his Majestie, and protest in the same a∣gainst our proceedings, to bring them to deser∣ver punishment for their offences, upon which they now stand accused of high Treason: and our charge proving the same now made com∣pleat,
and exhibited to them for their speedy answer thereto; which is this daies businesse to consider of. M. Speaker, The answer they have put in to our charge, is now to be taken into our consi∣derations whether the some be sufficient, or no, which I conceive is insufficient, for these Reasons. First, their Impeachment is for matter of Fact, which cannot be answered, as I conceive by any circumstance whatsoever, though never so pregnant and impertinent. Secondly, Although never so cleere and per∣spicuous to answer Treason by way of Plea and demurre, I conceive to be contrary to the rules of Parlimentary proceedings. Thirdly and lastly, To answer joyntly toge∣ther when their charge is perticular and seve∣rall, is not agreeable to Parliament procee∣dings. And thus much, Master Speaker, concerning this our present businesse, which I humbly de∣sire may be expedited, and no longer procra∣stinated by any dilatory plea of the Bishops▪ but that we may proceed with all convenient expedition to their finall sentence. FINIS.
