B778 10543607 45226
Consilium Anti-Pestilentiale: OR, Seasonable Advice, CONCERNING Sure, Safe, Specifick, and Experi∣mented MEDICINES, both for the Preservation from, and Cure of this Present PLAGUE. Offered for the Publick Benefit of this Afflicted Nation, BY RICHARD BARKER, Med. Lond. Gloriam da Deo pro Misericordiâ, & verêre Judicia ejus. London, Printed for the Author, Anno 1665.
To the Right Honourable Sir JOHN LAWRENCE, Knight, Lord Maior of the City of London: And to the Right Worshipful, the Court of ALDERMEN of the same City. THe great Abuse of many who pretend the Publick Good, when as indeed their chief aim is only their private In∣terest, (Multi res suas agunt communium praetextu) made me for a great while unwilling to appear upon the Stage, lest I should incur the censure of some Zoilus or other, but that the daily numerous Addresses unto me (for relief not only for the present dire∣ful Sickness, but also in divers other great
Distempers) by those who have been too often frustrated in their expectations from others; and the love I bear to this famous City, of which I am a member; as also the late encrease in the weekly Bill of Mor∣tality, notwithstanding the Directions pub∣lished by the Colledge, constrained me at length to cast in this Mite, whereby I have been, through the Mercy of the Almigh∣ty, instrumental to many for their recove∣ry. For though those Directions, and ma∣ny other Medicines, are reported to have been useful in former days; yet now fail∣ing, there is a general longing and earnest desire for some more powerful and more effectual means; and if such be not spee∣dily brought forth, a general Calamity is seared likely to befall this City. And therefore, spurr'd on by our Royal Sove∣raign's most gracious care; as over all his Subjects in general, so especially over this famous City; as also his Majesties Prince∣ly Countenance to all Ingenious persons, that are able to lend a helping hand; and your own ready compliance with his Ma∣jesties
Royal Care and Orders for his Ma∣jesties Subjects health and preservation, I thought good to present this Paper to your Lordship and Worships, out of my tender Love and Care of the Publick Wel∣fare, which I did upon mature deliberati∣on and consultation with other very able and understanding Physicians, (Plus eni vident oculi, quà oculus); For I would not appear before you but with such Remedies as are built upon so∣lid grounds of sound Reason and mani∣fold Experience. I do not intend to enlarge my self in words at this time, the present necessity (and daily encrease of the Sick∣ness, even in the City it self aswell as in the Suburbs) calling rather for deeds and effectual help. It is true, that it is the great Judgment of God which afflicts us, our Prophaneness and manifold sins, pro∣voking the just Indignation of Divine Justice: However, the Lord even in the midst of his Anger being not forgetful of his Mercy, it behoveth both Divines and
those of our Profession, in the common Calamity to stand in the Breach, and be∣come Instruments to allay his Wrath, and procure his Mercy, all according to our several stations and sphears of activity; and that all, of whatever degree, authori∣ty or capacity, take heed, that we may not oppress the Innocent, lest thereby we ex∣asperate the Wrath kindled against us, but rather asswage the same by mercy and mildness. When it shall please God that these Afflictions be over, I shall then publish another Tract, concerning four Diseases predominant in this City, which I indeed intended to be first of all, but that by this present very urgent necessity I am prevented. In the mean time praying for your temporal and eternal bliss, I rest, Right Honourable and Right Worshipful, Your Lordships and Worships Most faithful humble Servant, Richard Barker.
Epistle to the Reader. Loving Reader, WHereas there hath been a report, that my House is visited, and that divers dyed out of it; this is to let thee un∣derstand that the same is a meer false slander and fiction, maliciously inven∣ted by some of my Profession, on set∣purpose to divert Patients from me, and to mar my Practice. Both my self and Family are all in perfect health, (God be praised for it) and I hope to live to the comfort of my Friends, and conversion of my Enemies. In the Parish where I live, there hath been as much affliction, by the current Epidemical Disease, as in other Parishes, but that by the use of such Me∣dicines as they had from me, they escaped, the Al∣mighty in his mercy giving his blessing thereunto. According to the compute of the last weeks Bill of Mortality there died no more but seven out of it, and all the time before but four; which I do not doubt but that by the help of God they might have also escaped, if they had not been frighted from com∣ing to my House by that groundless aspersion. It is true, that Medicines formerly used, and now prescri∣bed again in the Printed Directions, have been bene∣ficial in those dayes; but now a certain Malignity,
like a furious Lion, infesting in the present Calami∣ty, will not be curbed by such usual Directions, but requireth other helps more Astral and powerful, such as those were which the Patients in this Parish, and di∣vers in the City besides, had from me. Variatto temporis▪ & circumstantiarum Indicat variationem remediorum. There have been strange and various faces of the Heavens of late years, especially this last, wherein three Blazing-Stars, or Comets, appeared; the fashion of their appearance I need not describe, it having been obvious unto, and noted by many thousands; Only, it is generally agreed on, that Plagues and such like Judgments use to follow upon such Signs. I have made many Observations of the Heavens, since I un∣derstood something of that Learning, and could wish there were more frequent Observations made by better Understandings than my own, and that the enemies of that Learning would be more moderate, and forbear to condemn what they are not skill'd in. For according to the Opinion of our Physicians if there be any Contagion in the Air, the same naturally springeth forth from the Configuration of the Hea∣vens; which I will not discourse of at this time, nor trouble thy head, when thy heart should mind the One thing necessary. Let them that flee from the City, not think themselves the safer from the Judgment; nor let those in the Country flatter themselves with vain hopes: for I fear they will taste as deeply of the Cup of this Indignation, as those in the City. It is a strange
time, people are afraid one of another; yea, even the best friends keep themselves aloof from one another. Yea, such a spirit reigns all over the Country, that they could be contented to block up all the Citizens, and rather let them perish than come forth into the Air to refresh themselves. And therefore you which are re∣maining in the City, have great reason to love one another as you are Neighbours, and to make provi∣sion of convenient places, where no body can resist you; as also of fit means, and able men, that may make it their business to study your preservation. You plainly see, that this grievous Disease not only endan∣gereth your Lives, but also your Repute and Trading, and marreth your Fortunes, insomuch that you lose that esteem and courtship which you were wont to have from those that wanted your goods and moneys; yea, those that flattered you, do now frown upon you and scarce own you. All which might be easily re∣medied, and your Reputation and Trading preserved, if you pleased but to consider of it, and love one an∣other, and take counsel of such as are able to advise. For which end I could wish, that there might be cho∣sen a select number of persons, to advise and direct to the best means conducing to this purpose, in regard that the old and ordinary courses fall far short of what may be devised and advised. I make no question but that having been a Practitioner in Physick in this City these fifteen years, I may be credited concerning the things I propose; for, whoever tryeth my Medicines, will find them speak for themselves, and need no fur∣ther commendation from my self or any one else. The Ingredients of the Medicines here offered are no Mi∣nerals,
though chymically prepared, and I do assure thee that they are very safe even before they are pre∣pared. Chymical Medicines have been ever, and espe∣cially now at this time, found so necessary, and beyond the ordinary usual Medicines, that the Physicians of the Colledge themselves have given order for prepa∣ring of a Chymical Medicine to Johnson their Chymist in Amen-corner. In the next Book which I do intend to put forth, I shall give an account of my Rise and Pedigree, and how I came to the atchievment of these things which I now profess, the late infortunate times obstructing me from aspiring to variety of Languages and other Acquirements, which else I might have en∣joyed. How-ever, as to my Abilities in what I pro∣fess, my Practice and Successes upon my Patients will speak sufficiently on my behalf. And I would have thee take notice, that my Medicines proved very be∣neficial to divers that came out of Prison this last Win∣ter, where I suppose (as my Observations upon the said persons induce me to believe) this Plague had its first rise. Thus wishing thee health and happiness, I remain, Thine ready to serve. R. B.
Directions to be observed, to prevent this of all most terrible Sickness. 1. IN the morning do not go forth with an empty Stomach, but first refresh your self by breaking your fast, and filling your Stomach (so far as you can endure it) with any convenient Food, drinking af∣ter it a draught of small Beer, mixt with two or three drops of true Oyle of Sul∣phur, such as is not sophisticated, or else six drops to twelve of the true Spirit of Salt. 2. Carry about you a Ball, made of Tobacco-leaf, roll'd up and tyed in some Tiffiny or Lawn, and so dipt in Vine∣gar: smell often to it, and sometimes clap it to the temples for some few minutes of time. 3. Those that use to smoke Tobacco, let them mix it with its fourth part of Flower of Sulphur, and seven or eight drops of Oyl of Amber for one Pipe, and take three such Pipes every day, viz. in the morning, in the afternoon, and at night. 4. At night, take one scruple of Flower of Brimstone, in a glass of Canary, perfumed with the Smoak of Brimstone, which is to be done as followeth: Take Flower of Brimstone, melt it in an earthen pan, dip therein some pieces of Packthred, or small wooden sticks, that they be covered over with the Brimstone, which reserve for use. Then take a Glass-bottle, holding a quart, or pottle, or gallon, according as you will prepare more or less of the Canary, turn it with the nozel downwards: light your Match or piece of Packthred, or wooden stick covered over
with Brimstone, and thrust it up into the nozel, that the smoak may ascend up into the bottle; and when the same is filled with smoak, so that it will receive no more (the sign whereof is when it bloweth out the fire of the Match); then take out your Match, and thrust up a Funnel, and turn the Glass, and fill it half full of Canary, and having taken out the Funnel, quickly stop the orifice of the Glass with your hand, and shake it up and down until it hath drunk up the smoak. Then stop the Glass close, and keep it for your use as above directed. 5. Be sure to smoke all the Rooms of your House every day twice or thrice with Brimstone, using half an ounce of it at a time, more or less, according to the bigness of the house, and as far as you can endure it, keeping the Brimstone burn∣ing with Coals kindled in an earthen Chafing-dish or pan, or with a red-hot Iron; for this cleareth the Air from Infection above any thing else: And though by some Pretenders the Brimstone be altered by the addition of something else, yet the Sulphur (as it is of it self) being best, that alteration sig∣nifieth nothing else but to conceal it from the vulgar, and to make them pay dear for that which they may have at a cheap rate; for they shall certainly find the Brimstone alone of it self to do as well, yea rather better than the other. Further Direction for Preservation, fit for all, as well Children as Old folks, especially such as are of a weak nature. Let them take of the Elixir vitae every morning, from half a spoonful to a whole spoonful, which being of a very Balsa∣mick nature, will as it were embalm and preserve all the vi∣tals from corruption and infection, and from all other distem∣pers that may give occasion thereunto. Note. If this Preservative be diligently taken, and yet the party chance to be over-powered by an extraordinary force of the Pestilent disease now reigning, they will then be so much the easier cured by the Medicine following.
Directions for the Cure of those that are infected. You may know the coming of the Disease upon you by a squeamishness of the stomach, faintings, giddiness in the head, yea an universal consternation of all the faculties and functions of your body. Which when you perceive, take in hand these Medicines following, and you will be infallibly cured (by the blessing of God) with two doses, yea sometimes with one (as it hath often hapned with many) unless there be an extraordinary Commission from Divine Vengeance to the contrary, which is in no Medicines power to resist. 1. So soon as you find your self ill, take of the clear white Liquor so much as is contained in one Glass, sealed up with a red thred, and the letters R. B. pour it out in a silver or earthen dish, or in a drinking-glass, and drink it off leisure∣ly, and then lay your self down, and within a quarter or half an hour you will find its operation either by stool, urine, sweat, vomit, bleeding at the nose; sometimes by most, and sometimes by all these: which operations either by all, or one, or some of them, are a certain sign of your Cure. This proportion is for a man or woman at age, but to one of twelve years old give but half a glass; to a child but a quarter, and so proportionably according to their several ages. Note, that when you have taken this Medicine, and suspect that it may come up again, then hold in your mouth a bit of Sugar-candy, or any other thing you like best. 2. Three hours after the operation, let them take half a spoonful, or one spoonful of the above-mentioned Elixir vitae; which though it be mark'd with the same letters, and sealed up after the fashion of the former Medicine, yet you may know it by the colour, it being towards an orange. 3. Twelve hours after the taking of the first dose of the white Liquor, let him ke the second half; and again twelve hours after, another ; which in all will be two whole doses. 4. When the Patient hath a drowth, let him take some
small Beer warm'd, in his mouth, and spit it out again. But in case necessity forceth him to drink, let him take Posset∣drink wherein Dandelion hath been boyled, with two or three drops of Spirit of Sulphur, or six of Spirit of Salt put into it. And let him be sure to keep himself warm, not only for that day, but also the dayes following; for its operation will hold on divers dayes after, till he find himself well. 5. In case he should throw up the Medicine presently, or before a quarter of an hour (after the taking of it) be past, let him take another dose presently. And in case you judge, that it be not all come up, then give him but half another Glass or Dose, and twelve hours after the other half. These Medicines being so rare and infallible in their ef∣fects, all Masters of Families will do well to provide some quantity of them in time, that they may have them in readi∣ness, and be not to seek for it in time of need; for they are such Jewels for the recovery and preservation of health, as there can be no better; and all circumstances well considered; they are the cheapest Medicines they can buy for this purpose. The Spirit of Salt (not that dropsical one, ushe'd in un∣der the specious names of [Philosophick, and of the World] Instar Asini sub pelle Leonis, but the true and genuine) as also the Spirit or Oyl of Sulphur per Campanam, are likewise to be had in the same places where the other Medicines are. Both of them mightily resist putrifaction. The Spirit of Salt is diuretick and very balsamick, and of excellent use in most Diseases. The Spirit of Sulphur is the Soboles of a most pure Vitriol contained in the Sulphur, which the same robb'd from the Venerial Marcasite or Oar, when it was melted and severed from it. It is both diuretick and diaphoretick, and mightily strentheneth the Stomach; and as it resisteth all putrifaction, and what ariseth therefrom, so it killeth the Worms, preser∣veth from the Scurvy, and all other diseases that have their rise from putrifaction, and so causeth life to hold on to a great age, the party living temperately, and using it two drops twice a day in a little draught of small Beer. Many other oc∣casions
there are, in which the said Spirits are very useful; but being unwilling to be too prolix at present, I forbear, re∣serving the further speaking of them to another time. Whereas there hath been enquiry made by many worthy persons of this City for Dr. Trigg's Medicine; whereby the said Doctor did great Cures in the last great Plague in London, and preserved himself and his Family from it, and continu∣ed also thereby free from all sorts of diseases, (notwithstand∣ing his sedentary life) to his dying-day, which he spun out to a very great age, to the wonder of all men. I do give you to understand, that the same Medicine (marked and sealed up as the former, onely with this difference, that Dr. Trigg's hath blue thred, and the others red) may also be had in those places whither you are directed unto for the former Medi∣cines. The said Doctor was a man of singular parts and en∣dowments, and greater worth than any man was aware of, or his enemies believed in his life-time. Virtutem incolumem odimus, Sublatam ex oculis quaerimus Invidi— There hath been lately set forth a Book, under the name of Dr. Trigg's Secrets, Arcana's, and Panacaea's; but let the Reader be advertised by me, that they are all wrongfully fathered upon him, not one of them all being his (as pre∣tended) nor in the least deserving those glorious names. And that they are none of the Doctors, his Kinsman Timothy Woodfield (to whom he imparted all his Secrets) can testifie, who living now with me, is preparing the said Doctor's Me∣dicines, which I intend for the service of the Publick when there shall be occasion. The Use of Dr. Trigg's great Cordial, or Medicine against the Plague. For Preservation, take half a spoonful of it in the morning before you go forth, and as much at night going to bed.
For Cure; so soon as you imagine to be surprized by the malignity of this Infection, take two spoonfuls of the said Medicine, and go into your warm bed, and sweat upon it, and continue sweating for the space of two hours. And this you may repeat once or twice more (keeping twelve hours distance betwixt the times of sweating) according as you shall see occasion. The places where these Medicines are to be had. 1. At the Author's own house in Barbican, next door to the three Crowns. 2. At Mr. Hutchinsons, Upholster, in Birchin-Lane, at that end of the Lane which is near the Royal Exchange. 3. At Mr. Devonshires the Chyrurgeans house in Drury-lane (next to the Earl of Clare) at the sign of the Chyrurgean. The Price of  Medicines.   l. s. d. A Glass of the white Liquor, containing two ounces 0 3 0 A Glass of the Elixir vitae, containing two ounces 0 3 0 A little Glass of Spirit of Sulphur, con∣taining half an ounce 0 2 6 A little Glass of the Spirit of Salt, con∣taining one ounce 0 1 6 Note. There are that sell the Spirits of Salt, and of Sulphur, at lower rates, but such as are adulterated; but these which I do expose to sale, are genuine and true. FINIS.
