C4377 12538181 62890
THE DIFFERENCE Of the CASE, Between the Separation of Prote∣stants from the Church of Rome, And the Separation of Dissen∣ters from the Church of England. LONDON,Printed for Thomas Basset at the George in Fleetstreet,and Fincham Gardiner at the White Horse in Ludgate-street. 1683.
The Difference of the Case, between the Se∣paration of Protestants from the Church of Rome, and the Separation of Dissenters from the Church of England. SInce the happy Reformation of this Church, they of the Romish Perswasion have with their utmost Art insinuated, that our Reformation proceeded upon Principles Destructive of all Order and Government in the Church; and that it naturally tends to endless Separations. To this end they have laid hold upon that advantage which the Divisions amongst Protestants have offered them, and said that the Reasons upon which we ground our Separation from the Church of Rome will hold to justify the Separation of the Dissenters from the Church of England. And the Truth is some of the Dis∣senters have been so Indiscreet, to say no more, as to alledge the same thing. And I am very sorry that Men of the same Perswasion with us in Opposition to the Impious Errors and Practices of the Roman Church, should give so much Countenance to that grievous Charge upon the Reformation, as some of them have done. The Papists are too much beholden to them for giving the Occasion of this Accusation: but to joyn with them in the same Charge, is too great a kindness in all Rea∣son, and indeed Destructive of the Common Cause
of the Reformation, by insinuating one of these two things, either that there was no Reason for this Se∣paration on either part; or else that notwithstanding our pretended Reformation, we are still as bad as the Church of Rome; for otherwise they cannot have the same Reason to separate from us, that we had at first to separate from that Church. I shall endeavour with Gods help to shew in a short and plain Discourse upon this subject, that the Cases are vastly different; and that we have very good Reasons wherewith to justify our Separation from the Church of Rome; and that the Dissenters who forsake our Communion cannot by any good Conse∣quence from those Reasons, warrant their separation from our Church. In this attempt, I am sensible that I have Ad∣versaries on both sides; and that it often happens to be a nice and hazardous business to determine between two Extremes. But I hope there is no reason to ap∣prehend great Danger in this Case; since it is the same false Charge against the Reformation, in which these Extreme Parties agree; and it is of that nature, that 'tis all one whether I confute it against the Papists, or against the Protestant Separatists, for if it be disproved against one, 'tis shewn to be unjust in both. This is our Case, that as we Charge those of the Separation from our Church with Schism, so do the Romanists Charge us of the Church of England with Schism too: But with this Difference, as we pretend, that we have good Reason for that, so have not they for this. For Schism is a Causeless Separation from a Church. And we think we may appeal to all Disinteressed and Judicious Christians, that we have shewn our Separa∣tion from Rome to be grounded upon Just and Neces∣sary Causes; but that the Dissenters have shewn none
such for their Separation from us. And when all is done it should not incline any Man to think that the Truth is either with the Romanist or with the Dissenter, because the Charge of Schism is laid by the Romanist against us, and by us against the Separtist with equal Confidence, unless he sees withal that it is laid with equal Justice. For it was not indeed to be expected, but that when some Protestants demanding a farther Reformation, se∣parated from our Church, this pretence would soon after be set on foot both by those of the Church of Rome, and by those of the Separation. It lay fair for them both, and right or wrong was likely to be taken up by both; since it would serve exceedingly well to help a bad Cause and to give popular colours to the weak Arguments, both of the one and of the other side. The Romanist was not likely to forego such an advantage as the Separation of our Dissenters gave him, to disgrace the Reformation amongst those that loved Unity. Nor was the Separatist likely to omit that ad∣vantage, which our Reformation gave him, to com∣mend his Separation from us under the notion of a far∣ther Separation from Rome, to those that abhorred Popery. And therefore it will stand all Discreet persons in hand to weigh the merits of the Cause on both sides, and not to admit any prejudice against our Commu∣nion in favour either of the Papist or the Sectary, meerly because they both say that in justifying our Separation from the Papist, we vindicate the Separation of the Sectary from our selves. I must not in this narrow Compass pretend to enter upon a Discussion of the several Questions controverted between us and our Adversaries on both sides: But shall take it for Granted, that what has been said in Answer to the several Objections of the Dissenters against our
Communion has been well argued against them: And like∣wise that in charging the Church of Rome with those several Corruptions in Doctrine and Practice, which have made her Communion Intolerable, we have said upon each point no more than what has been well proved against that Church; and which upon all fit Occasions, we shall, by the Grace of God, be ready to make good again. But my principal design is to shew that there is no manner of Inconsistence in the way we take to vindicate our selves from Schism charged upon us by the Church of Rome, with those principles upon which we accuse our Dissenting Brethren of that fault, who separate from the Church of England: And that the Romanist cannot take our Arguments a∣gainst the Separation of the Dissenters, to condemn our Reformation; nor the Separatist our Reasons a∣gainst the Communion of the Romanist, to acquit him∣self in forsaking the Communion of our Church. This I conceive will be made to appear. 1. by lay∣ing down the Reasons on both sides; those by which we pretend to justify our Separation from the Church of Rome; and those upon which the Dissenters lay the stress of their Separation from us. 2. By Comparing them together, that we may Judg wherein and how far these Cases agree with, or differ from one another. In laying down the Reasons on both sides, I shall begin with the grounds upon which this Church se∣parated from the Church of Rome; and then proceed to those upon which the Dissenters separate from us. 1. To the Church of Rome charging us with Schism we Answer in general: That our Separation from her was necessary by Reason of those Corruptions in her Communion, which we could not comply with against
the Conviction of our Consciences. More particularly we say, That this Church of England had no dependence upon the Authority of the Church of Rome, which She might not lawfully throw off, and that She does not owe any Subjection to the Bishop of Rome, but had just Power without asking his leave, or staying for his Consent, to Reform Her self. And withal that the Church of Rome ought to have Reformed Her self, as we have done, since there were most necessary Causes for so doing; the Communion of that Church being defiled with the profession of those damnable Errors, and the practice of those Superstitions and I∣dolatries which we have done away. To this purpose we challenge those of that Communion with the par∣ticulars of their Doctrine of Transubstantiation, their Sacrifice of the Mass, their Service in an unknown Tongue, their half Communion, their Worship of Images, their Adoration of the Host, and the rest of those Abomina∣tions, whereof the Communion of that Church doth in great part Consist. We acknowledge that we se∣parated from them in these things, when we Reformed our selves; but in so doing we were not guilty of Schism from the Church of Rome, and that if nothing else were to be said, because this Church owes no Subje∣ction to that: but withal that the Causes of the Refor∣mation being so necessary as we pretend them to be, the Separation of Communion that ensued upon our being, and their hating to be Reformed, was on our side just and necessary upon that account also, and therefore not Schismatical. So that our Answer is twofold. 1. That the Church of England being by no kind of Right, subject to the Roman, or any Forreign Bishop, had full Power and Authority without asking leave of For∣reigners
to Reform her self. And this we say would have cleared her from the Imputation of Schism, if the causes of the Reformation had not been so necessary as in∣deed they were. If before the Reformation there had been no Unlawful conditions of Communion required in the Western Churches, and all the fault that could have been found in them, had amounted to no more than bare Inconveniences and Imprudence in the manner of their Discipline, or in ordering the outward Mode of Worship; it had yet been free for the Church of England to have Reformed those lesser faults within her self, though no other Church would have done the like. And though for such defects remaining in other Chur∣ches abroad she ought not to have Separated from their Communion; yet she might very justly and Commen∣dably free her self from them at home. But if a Forreign Church suppose that of Rome, should hereupon have abstained from the Communion of this Church, till we had returned to the former Inconvenient, though Lawful Rites, and Customs, that Forreign Church had been guilty of Schism in so doing. And if the Church of Eng∣land not willing to part with her Liberty and to prostitute her Authority to the Usurpation of the See of Rome, should have adher'd to her own Reformation, she had not been guilty of the breach of Communion, following that her Resolution; because she had done nothing, but what was within the compass of her just Power to do, and in which she was not liable to be controuled by any other Church. We say with St. Cyprian, that the Episcopal Govern∣ment of the Church ought to be but one,Ad Antoni∣anum, Ep. 52. spread abroad a∣mongst Bishops, many in number, but heartily agreeing toge∣ther.But with the same excellent Man we say too, that it is Equal that every one of them should have a part of the Flock assigned to him,Ad Cornclium, Ep. 55. which he is to Govern, re∣membring
that he is to give an account of his management to God. Which he said, in asserting the Freedom of the African Churches from Subjection to theRoman. This we think is justly applicable to our Case. The Church of England is a National Church, once indeed under the Usurpation of the Roman Bishop, and at length rescued from that servitude; we are at present United together by Common Rules for Government and Worship, Consulted upon and agreed unto by the Bishops and Presbyters in Convocation, and then made Laws to all the particular Churches of this Kingdom, by the Authority of the Soveraign. These Laws shew the Reformation of the Church; And they do not want any Authority they ought to have, for wanting the consent of the Roman Bishop, upon whom we have neither Ecclesiastical nor Civil Dependence. For if any one single Bishop of the African Church might deter∣min Causes, and judge matters of Ecclesiastical cogni∣sance (which yet was seldom done in things of mo∣ment without the advice of Collegues when the Church had rest from Persecution) and this without allowing Appeals to Rome; much more may the Bishops of a whose Christian Kingdom confederate together to or∣der Church matters Independently upon the See of Rome, especially being required thereunto by their Christian Soveraign to whom they all owe Subjection and Obedience in all things, saving their Common Christianity. So that if the Causes of the Reformation had not been so weighty as indeed they were, yet con∣sidering the Authority by which it was effected; our Separation from Rome thereupon ensuing was wholly Guiltless on our part, it being necessary unless we would submit to the Unjust and Tyrannous Claims of a For∣reign Bishop.
2. To the charge of Schism laid against us by the Romanist, we Answer also, that the conditions of Commu∣nion required in the Roman Church, were many of them Ʋnlawful to be submitted unto; since we could not Com∣municate with her without professing Doctrines that are plainly contrary to Gods Word, nor without doing se∣veral things that are clearly and particularly forbidden by it. And since it is not in the Power of any Man or Church, to dispense with our Obligations to the Laws of God, we could not be obliged to preserve Com∣munion with the Bishop of Rome and his Adherents, upon those Terms. But because Catholick Communi∣on ought to be preserved, they ought to have put a∣way those Scandals from amongst themselves, which since they have not done, though the Separation is e∣qual on both sides, yet the Schism is not ours but theirs only. And therefore we farther say that if the Corruptions of the Roman Church (which God forbid) should ever come to be establisht in this Church of England again by the same Authority that has abolisht them; it were not only Lawful, but a necessary Duty to separate from the Communion of this Church in that Case. We have that Reverence of Church Authority, and of the Su∣preme Magistrate, that we will submit to their Deter∣minations in all things wherein God has left us to our own Liberty. But if they Command us to do things contrary to his Determination, and to take that liberty which he has not given us, we must remember that we are to obey God rather than Man. We have that sense also of the mischief of Divisions and Separations, and of the Duty of maintaining Church-Communion, that if the Laws of God be but observed, we are not only ready to comply with what our own Superiours im∣pose upon us, for the sake of Peace and Unity at home;
but if we were to go abroad, we should observe the Customs of other Churches, though perhaps very dif∣ferent from ours, and this for the sake of maintaining one Communion of Christians every were. But neither abroad, nor at home can we purchase Unity of Com∣munion at so dear a rate as to break Gods Command∣ments for it. We know it is a good thing for all the parts of the Church to have but one Communion, but we must not do evil, that even this good may come: And least of all that evil which Church Communion and Church Au∣thority were in great part designed to prevent. For as we believe that Christ formed his Disciples into a Spiritual Society, so we have great reason to conclude that one main end hereof was, that by the Communi∣on of Christians under their Governours, the holy Truths and Laws of God concerning his Worship and our Salvation might be more advantageously held forth to the World, and more effectually guarded and main∣tained. And therefore to keep this Communion one as much as in us lies, we will do any thing required by our Superiors that God has left us free to do or not: But to deny that Holy Truth or any part of it, or to break any of those Divine Laws, for the sake of which this Communion it self was Instituted, neither of these things dare we do to prevent Divisions and Separati∣ons. And we are as sure that Transubstantiation, Adoration of the Host, Worshiping of Images, Praying to the Dead and Praying in an unknown Tongue, are Repugnant to se∣veral express Texts of Scripture, not to say to Com∣mon Sense and Reason: We are I say as sure that they are the plain Laws and Truths of God to which these things are contrary; and withal that to guard these Truths God Instituted a Church, and a Communion of Saints, as we are that there was any such thing as a
Church Instituted, or Church Communion required. And truly if Separation, when there is such cause for it, as we pretend, were not a necessary Duty, it might becom the Duty of Christians to be United in Scanda∣lous Impieties and Damnable Errors. And I think no body will say that in such things one Communion is either to be desired or excused, but rather to be broken, and that every Man is concerned as much as his Sal∣vation is worth to break away from it. And we are certain it can never be necessary to any Mans Salvation to be a Schismatick. Upon this account, we say, that they who in Queen Mary's days chose to lay down their lives, rather than return to the Communion of the Roman Church, were so far from being Schismaticks that they were Gods Martyrs in so doing. And had it been, or should it be our lot to have this choice so hard to Flesh and Blood offered to us; we trust, that through the mighty Grace of God, we should follow the Faith and Patience of those holy Men and Women, who Sealed this Cause with their Blood, meekly suffering under the Displeasure of that Just Authority, the Unjust Commands where∣of they could not honestly obey. This plain, though Ge∣neral account, we give of the Separation of the Church of England from the Church of Rome. And if we pre∣tend no more in our own Defence against that Church, than we can prove, we have Reason to think our selves safe on that side. 2. Let us now see upon what Principles and by what pleas the Dissenters Defend their Separation from the Church of England. To us therefore charging them with Schism upon this account, they Answer also, That our Communion is Corrupt, and that they cannot with a safe Conscience continue in it; and that they are bound
for greater Purity of Worship and Ordinances, to divide from us. But in making out this general Answer they do not all go the same way, nor do some of them al∣low those to be good Reasons for a Separation, which others think substantial enough. That in which most of them do agree is in assigning some Ceremonies injoined in our Church, concerning which some of them say that they are Unlawful to be used in Gods Worship; others of them, that there is great cause to doubt whe∣ther they be Lawful or not; And these dare not join in our Communion with Scrupulous and Unsatisfied minds. The things of this sort are the Sign of the Cross in the office of Baptism, (though this be made by the Minister only) Kneeling in the Act of Receiving the Eu∣charist, and the Ministers wearing a Surplice in Publick Worship. The other Faults they find with the Litur∣gy, however they are thought by the Generality of Dissenters to be a Reason sufficient to ground Separation upon, are not I think produced by those that should best understand the Cause, as amounting to make our Communion directly Unlawful. But yet there are that say, they ought not to prefer a worse mode of serving God before a better: And the mode which themselves observe being better they are to prefer that before ours, and therefore to separate from us for the most part. Others go yet further from us, and take Liturgies, and prescribed Forms of Prayer to be Unlawful to be used, or at least suspect them so to be. And all these do Ge∣nerally dislike the Form of Diocesan Episcopacy: How∣ever they seem not to lay the stress of their Separation upon that, since they acknowledge our Churches to be true Churches of Christ, and if it were not for other things, might be Lawfully Communicated with, although they are governed by Bishops. And because the Civil Authority concurs with the Ecclesiastical in requiring
Conformity to our Church Laws, they do not pretend those Laws to be enforced by an Authority to which they are not bound to submit. And therefore as far as I can find they rather chuse to Justify their Separati∣on upon the account of the Unlawfulness, or suspected Unlawfulness of the things Imposed, or upon the prefe∣rence of a better Communion then ours is. But out of these I must except the Independents who acknowledge no other Church to be agreeable to the Word of God, but such a Company of Christian People United one to another by a particular Covenant under Officers of their own chusing, as can at once Assemble in the same place for the Worship of God. And these Men think the very Constitution of our Church to be reason enough for a Separation from it. I will take notice of no other Dissenters at present, but those that Separate upon some one, or more of these grounds; which may be reduced to three. 1. That a National Church Authority, is an Usur∣pation upon particular Congregations, which are pre∣tended to be the only Churches of Christs Institution, and that every such Church has full Power in it self to order all things relating to Worship and Discipline, and is not of right accountable to any other Authority for the order it shall take to govern it self in these things; And therefore the Independents, as I said, think themselves clear of the Guilt of Schism as having Separated from a Church which is not of Christs Institution. For they take an Independent Congregation only, to be such. But yet these are willing to come in with the other Dissenters for their Interest in the next ground of Sepa∣ration, upon which all of them, as far as I can Judge, hope to find the surest Footing; And that is, 2. That the conditions of our Communion, those
namely before mentioned, are not Lawful for a Christi∣an to Submit unto. And here I include those that do but Scruple the Lawfulness of those things which are injoined in our Church. For they that say positively they are Unlawful, and they that but suspect them to be Unlawful, produce the same Arguments, the former to justify their Peremptoriness, the latter their Scruples. The Reasons I say upon which they go are the same, only they work up some of them to a greater height of con∣fidence then others are come to; and some again they leave altogether doubtful what to say, whether to con∣clude for us or against us. They agree in blaming our Church for requiring things to be done in Gods Wor∣ship which he has not Commanded, some also of which have been and still are done by Papists in their Idolatrous Services, from whom we ought to depart in all things that are not necessary to be done. Upon these grounds some pretend to be sure, others to be afraid that to suf∣fer their Children to be signed with the sign of the Cross, to Kneel at the Communion, to be present at Divine Ser∣vice where a Surplice is worn, and to submit to Liturgies and prescribed Forms of Worship, are Unlawful. And these Reasons I find owned in the Case of Indifferent Things used in Gods Worship, Stated on the behalf of Dissen∣ters, just now published. For thus that Author declares in their behalf, We cannot, saith he, conceive it Possible that in things of Di∣vine Worship, things of an Indifferent Nature should be the Just matter of any Human Determination,Case on behalf of Diss. farther than the particular Practice of the Person determining.P. 5. And again,P. 17. Where in matters of Worship God hath wrote Ors, whether by his Pen in Sacred Writing or by his not pre∣scribing the particular Circumstances, no Man can blot them out; though themselves may as to their own Practice, for this or that Time or Act, where they cannot use more
than one of those Postures or Circumstances. That is; where God hath left Men at their Liberty to do this,Or that, they may Determin themselves, but no Hu∣man Authority may Determin for them. Farther, As to things in Gods Worship not Determined by God, they Judge every Man is Sui Juris and ought to be Determined by God alone to this, Or that; i. e. he can be obliged to this or that Part by God only. And he says plainly that, most of them are Confident that in matters of Wor∣ship no Superiors may restrain what God hath left at Li∣berty. In Pursuance of this general Principle he says, some Posture in an Human Action being necessary, and none by God Determined in every Act of Worship; where there is no Determination, they believe themselves at Li∣berty,P. 16. 17. and think they ought not to be Determined by any thing but their own practical Judgment, according to pre∣sent Circumstances: It is a Liberty with which God hath made them free. Again, He acknowledges that they Judge itƲunlawful to obey Laws concerning Words in prayer which God hath left at Liberty,P. 9. and concerning Habits and Gestures, supposing them to be left at Liberty, and that none who is to use them verily Judgeth them Ʋnlaw∣ful.And he intimates more then once that things not necessary,P. 20. &c. and Ordinarily used in Idolatrous and Super∣stitious Services may not, in their Judgment, be lawfully used: How well he has proved these Positions I am not concerned to examine; but leave him for that to his Learned Antagonist. These Observations are par∣ticular enough for my purpose, which is to shew the Difference between the ground of our Separation from the Roman Church, and those of their Separation from us whom this Gentleman defends. 3. There are those who, for all this, seem not to think our Communion Unlawful in it self, since they
can sometimes Communicate with us in our whole Service. But they Judge the way of the Separate Meetings to be more perfect, and a better means of Edification; and the ground of their Separation is this, that it is Unlawful to Communicate Ordinarily in a more imperfect way of Worship and enjoying the Or∣dinances of the Gospel, where a better may be had. 2. I come now to the second Point which is to com∣pare the grounds of Separation on both sides together; that we may Judge wherein they differ or how far they agree. 1. I do acknowledge that the most general ground of all is the same on both sides, or at least may be so; that is, that we Separate from the Church of Rome, in a full Perswasion of Conscience, that so we ought to do; And that the Dissenters Separate from the Church of England with the like Perswasion. But how far this Agreement makes the Case of Separation the same on both sides; and whether it will equally justify the the Church of England's Separating from Rome, and the Dissenters Separating from the Church of England, will be Considered, time enough after all the other Reasons are compared. 2. The next general Reason on both sides alledged is, that Separation was necessary for greater Purity of Worship and Ordinances. We for greater Purity Sepa∣rated from Rome: The Dissenters for greater Purity Se∣parated from us. Now whether this may or may not reasonably be pretended by the Dissenters in their Case, as well as by the Church of England in Hers, will best oppear when we have laid together the particulars ex∣aepted against on both sides, by us with Reference to the Communion of the Church of Rome, by the Dis∣senters, with Reference to the Communion of the
Church of England; and have also Considered the way of maintaining Objections against the Terms of Com∣munion with Rome or England, that is peculiar to each side. But, 3. There is not the same Plea offered to justify the Separation in both Cases with Respect to that Authority by which the Conditions of Communion are prescribed. For we of the Church of England do unanimously deny that the Bishop of Rome hath any Just Authority to make Rules for the Communion, or to prescribe Laws for the Government of our Church. But all the Dissenters do not question the Lawfulness of that Au∣thority by which our Liturgy is Establisht, and those things which they Object against are required. For those of the Presbyterian Perswasion amongst us, how∣ever they dislike Diocesan Episcopacy, yet seem not to insist upon it in their late Writings, as a ground of Separation from this Church; but if other things were Reformed according to their mind, they would Sub∣mit to our Bishops, and by their Conformity contri∣bute to uphold the Order of this National Church. But then the Independents indeed must in Consequence of their Principles, deny that Bishops singly or jointly, whether with the Civil Authority or without it, have any right to prescribe to their Congregations in mat∣ters Ecclesiastical, since in these things they hold their Members to be accountable to no Authority un∣der God, but that of the Congregation to which they belong. And now I shall compare the two Cases of Separa∣tion with respect to three things which will, I conceive, Comprehend all the forementioned Pleas on both sides; that is with respect, 1. to Authority. 2. To Terms of Communion, and under this head to the Common pretence
of Separating for greater Purity. 3. To the Plea of Con∣science. 1. With respect to Authority. We are divided from the Church of Rome as one particular Constituted Church from another, neither of which has any Au∣thority to prescribe to the other in matters Ecclesiastical. And therefore as I said before, tho the Terms of the Communion of that Church were not Unlawful, yet if She would have no Communion with us, unless we would be govern'd by Her Laws: And if our Church Gover∣nours should use their own Liberty and Authority to prescribe to us what they Judged more Sutable to the General Rules of Scripture and more Conducible to the great ends of Christianity: The Separation ensuing upon that Churches affecting an Usurpation over us, could not be Schismatical on our Part, who are not the Subjects of the Bishop of Rome: but upon the Part of that Church it would be so for Her exercising an Au∣thority, where She has no right so to do. But the Case of the Dissenters is far otherwise, who Separate from this National Church in which they were Born and Baptized, and where they live. For by thus doing we say that they withdraw their Obe∣dience from their Lawful Governours; from whom if they Divide, especially if they set up a Communion distinct from that of their Superiors, and of the Con∣gregations under them, they are guilty of manifest Schism, unless the Terms of Communion be Unlawful. For it is by no means sufficient to clear them of this fault, that those things which fall within the Compass of Church Authority are not well order'd; because, although this were true, yet in these things their practice is to be Determined by that Authority. For we think it very Evident that no Society can be united and maintained without this Principle, that a Lawful Authority is to
be Submitted unto and Obeyed by Inferiors in all Law∣ful things, and that the mere Imprudence or Inexpedi∣ence of its Determinations, cannot absolve them from their Obligation to comply therewith. Now that it is a Lawful Authority upon which the Constitutions of this National Church stands, I think no Man can deny that will grant a National Church it self to be but a Lawful Constitution. For there is the Concurrence both of Civil and Ecclesiastical Superi∣ors to give them force. The Bishops and Presbyters first agreed upon the same Rule and Order for Church Government and Worship, which being afterward ap∣proved by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, was then made a Law by the King. so that if the Con∣federation of the particular Churches of this Kingdom to govern themselves and to serve God in Religious Assemblies, by the same Rule, and according to the same Term, can become the matter of a Law obliging all Christians amongst us to Conformity; here is no Au∣hority wanting to induce such an Obligation. And it is to be Consider'd that every one who Se∣parates from that Parochial Congregation where he lives, and betakes himself to an Opposite Communion, had been guilty of Schism in so doing, although the Churches of this Kingdom had not been United as they are into a National Form; but each Bishop with his Presbyters had made Rules for Religious Assemblies Independently upon the Rest. But now the fault of such Separation is heinously Aggravated as the Case stands by these two Considerations. 1. That those Orders or Impositions upon the ac∣count whereof he Separates from the Parish where he lives, were made by the Common advice of the Pastors of Christs Flock in this Kingdom; and that for a Com∣mon Rule to them All: Which method was a most
proper means to Unite their particular Churches more closely one to another, and to Edify and Strengthen them by such Union. Therefore that Separation which would have been blameable of it self, is so much the worse as it tends to break so profitable an Union, and to expose the Authority of so many Church Gover∣nours to Contempt, as contributed towards it by their Advice and Consent. 2. That since the Rules thus agreed upon are made Laws also by the Soveraign Power; such Schism is aggravated farther by Disobedience to the Lawful Com∣mands of the Civil Authority under which we live, and to which all particular Churches in this Kingdom do owe Obedience in all Lawful things. And now I be∣lieve our Presbyterian Brethren will grant that upon these accounts there is a vast difference between the Cases of Separation from the Church of England and from the Church of Rome in point of Authority. But then I must confess the Independents are likely enough to say, that these Impositions are as truly U∣surpations upon particular Congregations, as if they had been enforced upon this Kingdom by a pretended Au∣thority from Rome. And if there were no difference between saying and proving, we might here be at a considerable loss. However this must be granted, that an English Bishop may have good Authority to Govern his Diocess, and a Presbyter his Parish here in England; and yet it may be foolish and unjust in a Forreign Bi∣shop to claim any Authority over the one or the other. And I hope they will not deny that the King has good Authority here, though the Pope has none; nor that the Laws of the Land concerning Religion and Gods Worship, do bind the Consciences of the Kings Subjects something more, than if they had wanted the Authori∣ty of the Legislative Power at home, and came to us from
abroad with nothing but the Seal of the Fisherman to recommend them; i. e. that in this latter case we might have refused them as wanting Authority, but not so in the Former; but that the matter of them being sup∣posed to be Lawful, they ought to be complied with. And whereas the Independents suppose the Independen∣cy of their Congregations to be of Divine Right, both in Opposition to Episcopal Superiority, and to National Church-Government, this we must leave to the merits of the cause between them and us. And I may as well take it for granted, that their pretended Right to Inde∣pendency has been as clearly argued of Novelty and Weakness, as the Popes pretended Right to Supremacy has been; argued I say of more Novelty, and almost as much Weakness. But to step a little out of the way of my present business; I may appeal to all understanding persons, who cannot judge of the Learning used on both sides; whether that Notion of a Church or of Church-Communion is likely to be true, which makes it impossible for the par∣ticular Churches of a Christian Kingdom to be United un∣der the Soveraign Authority in the observation of the same Rules advised upon, and the same Laws made for the benefit of them all. In the mean time I conclude this head with saying, that though the Pope has no Authority in this Kingdom, yet it follows not that every particular Congregation must be Independent. And I challenge any Man to take any one Argument used by any of our Church to prove the Independency of our Church upon the Bishop of Rome, and make it hold to prove the Independency of a Congregation, either upon a National or Episcopal Church if he can. Wherefore supposing the Decrees of the Bishop of Rome to be of no good Au∣thority amongst us; and our own Laws in matters Ec∣clesiastical to want no good Authority, the conditions of
Communion being otherwise Lawful on both sides; then the Separation ensuing upon our refusal to submit to those Decrees, would not be Schismatical on our part; but the Separation of our Independents, and all others amongst us refusing to Submit to these Laws would be so on their part. And thus much for the Difference in point of Authority. 2. We are to compare the Cases also with respect to the Terms of Communion relating to matters of Faith and Worship. And in the first place the Dissenters acknowledge that the Faith professed in this Church is pure and intire, and that she does not require the profession of any Do∣ctrine in Order to her Communion, which a good Christian has reason to suspect. And this makes a great difference between the Terms of Communion with our Church, and the Terms thereof with the Church of Rome, which requires the profession of Gross and Pal∣pable Errors, of all whom she admits to her Commu∣nion. But the great ossence is taken at our Forms of Divine Service, and the Ceremonies thereunto belonging. And the offended parties are of three sorts. 1. Those that do not directly charge any of our practices in Worship as Sinful, but suppose some of them to be Inexpedient and Ʋnedifying: And they that Se∣parate upon this account must acknowledge this Dif∣ference in the Case, that whereas we separating from Rome forsook an Unlawful Communion for one that was Lawful; they Separating from us forsake a Law∣ful Communion for one that they believe to be bet∣ter. And of these I shall take notice again in a fitter place. 2. Another sort are they who pretend something
more, that is, that they Scruple the Lawfulness of the things enjoined, and that they ought not to Commu∣nicate with us so long as they remain under these doubts. And these Men also must confess a great dif∣ference between the reason upon which they Separate from us, and that for which we Separate from the Church of Rome: Since we are past doubting in the case, and positive∣ly affirm those conditions of Communion with the Church of Rome, which we complain of, to be in them∣selves Unlawful. And in Consequence hereof, they must not deny that there is a great difference also between those grounds upon which they and we pretend against that Church the Unlawfulness of her Impositions, and those up∣on which they suspect the like of ours; And that is, that the Roman Church is by us attacqued with clear and unquestion∣able evidence of Reason and Scripture against her; but that it remains doubtful whether there be any good evi∣dence in Scripture against us; concerning which more will be said under the next head. In the mean time it does by no means follow, that because Separation is Just and Necessary, where some things are required to be done which we certainly know God has forbidden; therefore it is Just and Necessary also where other things are required, concerning which we do not know but they may be Lawful. 3. The third sort are they that pretend these Forms of Worship, and Ceremonies, which the former either Scruple, or judge only Inexpedient, to be indeed Sin∣ful, and to render our Communion not only suspected, and less desirable, but plainly Ʋnlawful. And I grant that these are the Men who come up to the point; And if they could but make good what they say, they would shew their Separation from our Church to be grounded upon one General Reason of our Separation from the Church of Rome, which would sufficiently
clear us from the Imputation of Schism, if no other rea∣son were to be given. But I believe a very wide dif∣ference of the case will appear when we come to con∣sider, 1. The particular Practices themselves which are by us said to be Unlawful in the Communion of the Ro∣man Church; and those which by the Dissenters are said to be Unlawful in ours. And 2. The way and means by which we pretend to prove those, and that by which they pretend to prove these Unlawful. 1. Let us Consider the particulars themselves. The Dissenters do with us Condemn as Unlawful, Prayers in an unknown Tongue; the Adoration of the Host; Wor∣shipping the Cross, and the like Practices of the Roman Church in Her Forms of Worship, from which they acknowledge also that we have Purged our Communion. But they say we have retained other Practices something akin to these, though not quite so bad; for Instance Kneel∣ing at the Communion; wearing the Surplice; Signing with the Sign of the Cross; and some of them add, the Publick use of Forms of Prayer. Now all that I design under this head in Comparing the former and the later particulars together, is to shew, that the Unlawfulness of the former being supposed, the Unlawfulness of the latter cannot be from thence inferr'd; And that for this plain Reason, because the Questions concerning the one and the other, are perfectly distinct from one ano∣ther. For as the Bishop of Rome's having no Authority here in England, shall not hinder the Authority which our Bishops exercise in England from being Lawful and Good: So to pray in an unknown Tongue may be ab∣surd and contrary to Scripture, but for all this Forms of Prayer in a Language understood by the whole Con∣gregation, may not only be Lawful but Profitable, and
in most Cases necessary. The Adoration of the Host may be an Idolatrous Practise; yet to Kneel in the Act of receiving the Eucharist, where such Adoration is disclaimed, shall be no such Practise. We may Sign the Baptized, Insant with the Sign of the Cross; and yet not Worship that Sign: we may do the former in token of the Obligation which Baptism layeth upon us: without Attributing any of that Virtue or Efficacy thereunto, which makes the Popish use of it Foolish and Superstitious. What Practice is there in the Ro∣man Church which we as Unlawful have abandoned, from whence the Unlawfulness of Wearing a Surplice, or seeing it worn, can with any Colour of Reason be drawn? In a word, what Erroneous Doctrine in the Church of Rome, or Unlawful Practice confess'd by the Dissenters to be by us rejected, can be assign'd, from which the Unlawfulness of any of those things excepted against in our Liturgy can be inferr'd? Let them take any one Argument used by us to prove such or such a particular Condition of Communion Un∣lawful which that Church requires, and by that Ar∣gument prove some Condition Unlawful in ours, if they can. But perhaps they will say, That if they can prove this by other Arguments, the Case in general will still be the same. This I confess and therefore I proceed to the second Point which was, 2. To shew the Difference between the way and means by us used to prove those Conditions of the Ro∣man Communion Ʋnlawful, which we except against; and the manner of arguing used by the Dissenters against us. Now our way is plain and direct; for we prove those particulars in the Roman Worship Unlawful which we Condemn, by this Argument that they are forbidden in Gods Word, and this we prove by those express and
particular places of Holy Scripture to which they are repugnant. And if we fail not of producing such Testimonies against the Corruptions of that Church, we have the Advantage against the Papists. And if the Dissenters charge any Condition of our Communion with Repugnancy to Gods Law, and can as clearly shew where he hath forbidden it, they have the like Ad∣vantage against us. Now indeed they say that the things Imposed upon them, however weesteem them but Indifferent, are by themselves Judged Unlawful.Case on be∣half of Diss. Thus the forementioned Author saith Could they [Dissenters] but look upon the Forms and Rites of our Worship under that Notion [of things Indifferent] possibly their Contest would nei∣ther be great nor long.P. 2. I do not like these words, for that which may be may not be; and possibly the Contest would be great and long, though they should look upon these things as Indifferent. However he saies,P. 3. that we suppose those things indifferent which they cannot but Judge Ʋnlawful, as they have often told their Brethren. But how do they prove them Unlaw∣ful? Do they shew where God hath forbidden them? As we, for Instance, produce the second Commandment to tshew that in that Commandment God hath forbidden he Worship of Images, so do they; or can they produce any such Testimony of Scripture against Kneeling when we receive the Eucharist? And as we alledge, 1 Cor. against praying in an unknown Tongue; can they shew us any Text in all the Bible against praying by a Form of Words? No; this is not what they pretend to do. But then we are apt to Conclude, that if these things be not forbidden, that they are at least Indifferent, and therefore Lawful. And which is something more, we have their leave also thus to Conclude,P. 3. seeing there is none of them but agreeth with us in our Notion of In∣different
things viz. that they are such things as by the Divine Law are neither enjoyned nor forbidden: Things undertermined by the Law of God in Nature or Scripture. How then do they prove those things Unlawful to be done in Gods Worship, which God hath not for∣bidden either in the Law of Nature or Scripture? To make short Work of it: Those particulars in our Com∣munion which they except against, are Unlawful, be∣cause they are not necessary to Worship, nor Com∣manded by any express Law of God. Which is as much as to say, that though they are Indifferent be∣cause they are neither enjoyned nor forbidden by the Law of God in Nature or Scripture; yet they are not Indiffe∣rent, and that because they are not enjoyned. So that whilst our Brethren allow the Determination of In∣different things to Authority, they take away with one hand, what they give with the other. For ac∣cording to their Principles there is nothing left for Au∣thority to Determin, as to the ordering of Gods Pub∣lick Worship. For one would think that the matter of such Determination should be those things, which God hath left to our Liberty. But you are mistaken if you think so; since for this very Reason that they are left at Liberty, it is Unlawful for one Man be his Authority what it will, so long as it is but Human Au∣thority, to Determin in them for another; and it is Unlawful for this other Man to Submit to his Deter∣mination. For we are told that the Light of Nature directeth us to use the most Convenient Circumstances for the Worship of God, and the Law of Nature will enforce Men in doing Actions, to use Time and Place. For o∣ther things, such as the Postures of Prayer, or Words used in Prayer, the Holy Scripture is every where as sufficient to us as the Law of Moses was to the Jews, which Commanded as to the Passover the offering a Lamb
or a Kid, and left it to the Discretion and Conveniency of the Offerer to Determin which—. So for Standing, Sitting, or Kneeling at Prayer, God indeed hath left the one or the other of them to us not Determined, leaving it to our Choice or Conveniency which to use,Case. who sometimes cannot use Standing,P. 29, 30. another time cannot use Kneeling. He hath Commanded us to pray, and that with our Voice, as well as our Hearts; But that he hath not told us what Words we should always use—. God hath therefore left us at Liberty what Words to use, as he left the Jews at Liberty whether to offer a Lamb or a Kid—And Moses might by the same Authority have tied up all the Jews to Offer none but Kids, or none but Lambs, as Su∣periors can tye up Inferiours to use none but such or such Words in Prayer. And the Jews might every whit as Lawfully have Obeyed Moses in such a Command, as we can Obey any Superiors in such a Case. That is, it had been Ʋnlawful in the Jews to have Obeyed Moses in such a Case, and it would be Ʋnlawful in the Dissenters, and it is Ʋnlawful in us to Obey our Superiors in any of their Determinations Concerning things in Gods Wor∣ship which God hath left at Liberty. How this Author hath pursued his Argument, is not my business to Consider. It is sufficient for my design to shew the vast difference between the grounds upon which we charge the Church of Rome with re∣quiring Unlawful Terms of Communion with her in her Worship, and those upon which the same fault is im∣puted to the Church of England by the Dissenters. we prove our charge, by shewing, that God hath forbidden what that Church requires to be done: They prove theirs against us by shewing that God hath left those things at Liberty which are required in this Church. We shew that the Church of Rome injoyns Practices that are Ʋnlawful for any Man to Determin himself to:
They shew that this Church enjoyns Practices which are not Ʋnlawful for a Man to choose for himself; but for Au∣thority to choose for him. The things they except a∣gainst in our Communion are in themselves Indifferent, and they cannot make them Unlawful otherwise then by fetching a Compass about, and pretending that they are then Unlawful to be done, when our Superiors re∣quire us to do them. And now I may leave it to the Judgment of all Men that can Consider a Case without great Prejudice, whether there be Reason to forsake the Church of England upon the account of Unlawful Terms of Communion pretended to be in her Worship; as well as upon the same account to leave the Communion of the Church of Rome; that is, whether a thing may become Unlaw∣ful in Gods Worship for not being Commanded by God, and for being enjoyned by Man; because every thing that God hath forbidden is neither Lawful to be Com∣manded by Man; nor to be done, though it be so Com∣manded. I know not whether some of our Brothers party may not think that he hath given us too much Advantage by reducing the Question to this State. But I think it is not his Weakness but the Weakness of his Cause that has led him to it. For they are not able to prove the Unlawfulness of the present Impositions in Order to Communion, but upon such Principles as these are. And I may appeal to Mankind Concerning the Dif∣ference of the Case between them against us, and us a∣gainst the Church of Rome in this matter; that the Rea∣son of our Separation from Rome will not justify their Separation from us, nor that the Reason upon which we challenge them of Schism, can fly in our own Faces, when the Church of Rome challengeth us of the same Crime. But I shall say no more of this Point at pre∣sent,
because I foresee Occasion of resuming it pre∣sently in another place. But this Author offereth another Reason also of the Ʋnlawfullness of those things that are required, and that because they have been and still are used in I∣dolatrous Services, and are not of themselves necessary to be used by us. I think I may venture to say that this Reason has been sufficiently exposed. But my business is to note the Difference of the Case: We Separate from Rome, because otherwise we must Communicate with her in her Idolatry, which is necessary not to be done: The Dissenters Separate from us, because otherwise they must do some things not necessary to be done, which have been and still are done by Idolaters. Again the Dissenters, as he says Scruple Kneeling in the Act of Receiving the Communion, because there is an Objectum Motivum, as he calls it, before their eyes. I think he means because the Elements are Worshipped by the Papists, who say they believe them to be no longer Elements, but God himself. And to Kneel therefore when we take these into our hands, is to give some oc∣casion to others to think that we Worship the Elements; and therefore the Dissenters Question the Lawfulness of an Adoration of God under these Circumstances. I am glad if it be but Question and Scruple, though I am sorry 'tis so much. But whether they only Scruple Kneeling up∣on this account, or more than Scruple it, for this Gen∣tleman does not always speak so distinctly as I could wish: There is however this difference in the Case; that whereas one principal Reason why we Separate from the Papists, is because we dare not Worship Bread, which without all Question is Idolatry; one reason why the Dissenters Separate from us, is because we who have so loudly declared against that Idolatry, do Wor∣ship (not the Bread, which we believe to retain its
own Nature, but) God only, as they themselves con∣fess, when we partake of that Bread. And here I may be content to let the matter rest, that whether we consider the Particulars pretended to be Unlawful in both Communions; or the way taken by us to prove those Unlawful which the Church of Rome would impose upon us, and that way which the Dis∣senters use to make out the like charge against the Church of England, the difference is so great, that the charge of Schism which, upon this account, viz. of Terms of Communion in Worship, we bring against the Dissenters for Separating from us, cannot with Reason and Modesty be returned upon our selves for Separating from the Church of Rome. I have now compared the two Cases with Respect to Authority and Terms of Communion. But before I pro∣ceed to compare them with respect to the Plea of Con∣science; I shall endeavour to represent some other Dif∣ferences of the Case that are plainly consequent upon one or both of those Differences which we have already considered. And they are these three; 1. The Difference of the Case, with respect to Se∣paration for greater purity of Worship and Ordinances. 2. The Difference with respect to that Common Question who shall be the Judge? 3. The Difference of the principles upon which ei∣ther side Separates, as to their tendency either to main∣tain, or to overthrow one Communion amongst Christians. 1. With respect to Separation, for greater purity of Worship and Ordinances. The Dissenters say, that if for greater purity England Separated from Rome, others also may for greater purity Separate from England. And because I perceive this Consequence is insisted upon, not only by well meaning People, but by some that would
not be thought the meanest of the party, I shall ex∣amin it as throughly as I can; hoping to gain the Readers Pardon, if I repeat some things that have been already Discoursed; but which are necessary to be observed in order to a right understanding of this matter. The ground I shall proceed upon in Discoursing of this Consequence, is that we and the Dissenters do not understand the same thing by greater purity. By the Impurity or Corruption of the Roman Communion which is the principal Reason of our departing from it, we understand the Sinfulness thereof; and by Separating from that Church for greater purity we therefore mean forsaking her Communion that we might not partake in her Sins; which otherwise we could not avoid. To make good this charge, that her Communion was and still is Corrupted in this Sense, we have but that one plain way already declared. We shew that there are several Doctrines which she Professeth; several Things in her Worship which she Practiseth, that are plainly contrary to the Truth which God hath revealed and to the Laws which he hath delivered to us: And that those Errors and these Practices are not of a slight Nature, but that they grate upon the very Foundations of Christi∣anity: And moreover, that she exacteth the profession of the one, and the doing of the other from all her Members. So that when we say, that we Separate from that Church for greater purity, we mean that there are several Impure, or Sinful conditions of Communion required in that Church, with which, as she has ordered the matter, we must pollute our selves, and of which we our selves must be guilty, if we Communicate with her at all: And therefore it was necessary for us to depart from her, because it is most necessary not to deny the Truths or break the Laws of God. Therefore also by
saying that we Separated for greater purity, we mean not that we have forsaken but some Corruptions only of the Roman Worship, as if our Communion were now indeed purer then theirs though not so pure as it ought to be. This is not our meaning: For we contend that this Church hath purged away all those Practices, and abolisht all those Rules relating to Gods Worship, which are contrary to his Word; and by Consequence that there is no Impurity left in the conditions of our Com∣munion; so that any Man whose Conscience is right∣ly informed may Communicate with us without Sin. Wherefore this comparative expression of Separating for greater purity from the Roman Church, respecteth the State of that Church, supposing indeed that all the conditions of that Churches-Communion were not im∣pure, but withal implying that some of them, and those truly not a few, were so; And therefore that her Com∣munion was not pure enough for any Christian to join in it with a good Conscience. Thus I have shewn what we understand by Separating for greater purity, and how we maintain this Plea in Answer to the Church of Rome. Now therefore although the Dissenters use the same Plea in Words, in Answer to us, yet if they do not un∣derstand the same thing by it that we do, nor attempt to make it out by shewing wherein our Communion is Corrupted with such conditions as oblige the Mem∣bers of this Church to do what God hath forbidden, or to neglect what he hath Commanded them to do, or to contradict what he hath revealed; This Plea I say if it be not made out by such particulars as these, is by them weakly brought to justify their Separation from us, by our example in Separating from Rome. And though the general pretence may serve to delude Injudicious People, who have not learnt to distinguish
between Reasons and Colours; yet it will neither ac∣quit them before God, nor in the Judgment of Wise Men who can easily discern and will Impartially con∣sider the Difference of the Case. It is indeed a plausi∣ble Colour for their Separation from us, that we Sepa∣rated from Rome for greater purity; and but a Colour unless they could shew wherein our Communion is Im∣pure, or which is all one, what are those conditions thereof which be Sinful or Repugnant to the Laws of God. But what is it that they mean by this greater purity of Worship for which they Separate? Wherein doth this purity consist? Let Reasonable Men Judge. Extemporary Prayers are more pure than Forms of Prayer: To Re∣ceive the Communion Sitting or Standing is more pure than to Receive it Kneeling. To omit the Sign of the Cross after Baptism, is more pure than to use it. And the Ministers Praying in a Coat or a Cloak, is more pure then to Pray in a Surplice. But till they can shew that our way in any of these instances is forbidden by God, either they cannot justly pretend that it is Impure; or at least they must confess that they mean by Impurity, some∣thing else when they charge it upon us, than what we mean by it, when we charge it upon the Communion of the Romish Church, and therefore that they do not use the same Plea against us, that we produce against that. For with us Impurity is Sin, and an Impure Com∣munion is a Communion in which we cannot Communi∣cate without Sin, i. e. without transgressing the Law of God. But as far as I can see, Impurity with them must go for something else, that is, either for doing things that God hath not forbidden, or for the omitting of things that he hath not Commanded. And if the Church hath Power in Indifferent things; and that be pure, against which there is no Law; their pretence of Sepa∣rating
for greater purity is altogether groundless, un∣less they can prove that they cannot have Communi∣on with us, without neglecting to do what God Com∣mands, or doing what he forbids. Therefore the former discourse concerning Terms of Communion shews that there is a vast difference between this Plea as it is used by us, and as it is used by the Sepa∣ratists against us. For we do not Separate from the Communion of the Roman Church upon this principle that the Church hath no Power to make Orders for the Worship of God in matters that are left to our Liberty, or to prescribe Rites and Ceremonies that are not contrary to Gods Word. But upon this principle as far as we can Judge, do the Dissenters Separate from us; and the main controversie we have with them is, whether it be within the compass of Human Authority to prescribe in things of this sort; and consequently whether it be part of the Duty of Christians to submit unto, and in their Practice to comply with such prescriptions. They will not deny, that we shew the Church of Rome where the Scripture forbids what that Church requires, and this, through all those instances of their Corruption in Worship, for which we pretend it necessary for us to depart from her Communion. Now if the Dissen∣ters can shew the like of any condition in our Com∣munion I promise to recant all that I have said in be∣half of the Church of England, under this head of the purity of her Communion, and instead of Vindicating my Defence of our Church as to this particular, to depart from her Communion in that thing, whatever may come of it, from this time forwards. And I trust that through the Grace of God I should not for the sake of any Worldly Interest, either resist the Evidence of any clear Argument tending to my conviction, or act in
contradiction to a convinced conscience and judgment, in a matter of this high nature. But to deal plainly, the Dissenters seem to be very sensible of the uncasiness of this task, that is, of pro∣ceeding in the same method to convince us of Ʋnlaw∣ful Terms of Communion, which we use against the Church of Rome. They go another way to work, and it would make an Indifferent Man suspect their cause, to see what shifts they use to make good their pretence. They demand of us where Scripture Commands, or what need there is of those things, which our Church re∣quires. They pretend that the Liberty of Christians does in great part consist in this, that they ought not by Man to be determined to any practice in Gods Worship, to which God, or the Nature of the thing has not de∣termined them. They say, that the appointment of Significant Rites and Ceremonies is a derogation from the Royalty of Christ, and the sufficiency of the Scriptures. And to give some countenance to these pretences they would perswade us that the Scripture it self intimates some such thing, as if nothing were to be done in Gods Worship but what is by God himself Commanded, excepting always those circumstances necessary to acti∣on, the choice whereof must yet be left to every Man, and, as we are now taught, Authority must not so much as meddle with them. To this purpose we are told of the Pattern in the Mount, of Strange Fire that was not Commanded, and of the Unlawfulness of adding to, or diminishing from the Law of Moses: As if these places of Scripture made all impositions concerning the Order of Divine Worship, as Unlawful, as the ex∣press Word of God shews so many particular practices of the Roman Church in her Worship to be. But leaving these attempts of theirs to be examined in the more par∣ticular Controversies: Who sees not what a wide dif∣ference
there is in the particular management and appli∣cation of this general Proposition, that we must not Communicate with any Church in Impurity, between the Church of England against the Papists, and between the Dissenters against the Church of England? For we are secure against all just accusation from the Church of Rome if this one Proposition be true, That it is not in the Power of any Church to dispense with the Laws of God, or to absolve us from our Obligation to keep them. But the Dissenters cannot avoid the Justice of our charge against them, unless this proposition be true also, That the Church hath no Authority in things of an Indifferent Na∣ture, to prescribe such in Divine Service, as shall be thought most agreeable to the general Rules of Reason and Scripture, and most Sutable to the great ends of Chrstiani∣ty. Now if what we say in these things will hang well together, that is, if the former Proposition be true, and if the Truth thereof, shall not hinder the latter from being false; then with very good Reason may we pre∣tend that it was necessary for us to Separate from Rome for greater purity, or for the avoiding of Sin: But the Dissenters will have no just ground from our example to pretend the same, in their Separation from the Church of England. And, I think, the Difference is plainly enough confess'd by those of the Separation that hold occasional Commu∣nion with our Church to be Lawful, that is who think it Lawful to Communicate actually with us upon oc∣casion, though they are all the while Members of Se∣parate Churches. For if our Communion is pol∣luted with Sinful conditions, how comes it to pass that this occasional Communion as they call it, should be more Lawful then Constant Communion? Unless they will say it is Lawful sometimes to break Gods Command∣ments, but not Lawful to do it ordinarily. But I know
they will not say so. And therefore when they say that they cannot without Sin become Members of our Churches, though without Sin they can sometimes join in our Publick Worship; they seem to suppose that the way of Worship in the Separate meetings, is more per∣fect than ours in respect of those things which do not fall under any particular Law of God, but may be ordered better or worse, as Men are more or less prudent, or as they take greater or less heed to the general Rules of Reason and Scripture concerning things Indifferent. And withal that there is so much more gravity, De∣cency, Simplicity and Tendency to Edification in the outward mode of their Worship, that it would be a Sin to let it fall, or in practise to prefer ours before it. But by this I think any body may see what a Difference there is between what we, and these Men mean by the same pretence of refusing to Communicate, where it can∣not be done without Sin. For our meaning is, that there are such conditions of Communion in the Church of Rome, that as the Case stands, it would be a Wickedness to Communicate with her at any time. But they mean no such thing against us, since without Scruple they can sometimes Communicate with us; only they sup∣pose they have set up a more perfect Communion; and they do not forsake our Communion as Unlawful in it self, but they think it their Duty to prefer a bet∣ter before it. So that in this pretence for Separation, these Men do not understand purity in opposition to Sin, or breaking any of Gods Commandments; but purity in opposition to a less Convenient or Prudent or∣dering of the outward mode of Worship. That is, they do not understand the same thing by Separating from the Communion of a Church for greater purity, that we understand by it: Nor can they urge that pre∣tence for Separation from us, as we do urge it against
the Church of Rome: And consequently our Reason of Separating from that Church for greater purity, does not hold to justify their Separation from us. Upon consideration of the whole matter I hope the Papists will find no Protestant of our Church easy and silly enough to be deluded by such Superficial Colours as these are. You see, say they, what is become of leaving the Communion of the Church for greater purity. The Protestants at first forsook the Catholick, i. e. Roman Church for greater purity. And do not the Presbyterians forsake the Church of England for greater purity? And so do the Independents set up their Congregations for greater purity. And the Ana∣baptists for the same reason depart from them: And the Quakers from them All: And there is no end of breaking Communion upon such pretences as these are; which are as good against your selves, as they are against us: And therefore you may choose whe∣ther you will return to the Church from which you first brake away under pretence of Reformation, or whether you will follow your Principle till you are Refined into Quakers, or it may be into a more ab∣surd and mad sort of People than the Quakers them∣selves are. It is a lamentable thing to see Men of Common un∣derstanding couzened by such Palpable Fallacies as these are; though it is not to be wondred at, that the A∣gents of the Roman Church make the best use of them, they can; since a Foul Cause must be beholden to such Artifices as these, to blanch it over. But I pray might there not be such Corruptions in your Church, that we with good Reason might pretend it necessary to forsake your Communion for one that was purer; and yet there may be none in ours to give any Man Just Cause to leave us upon that pretence? Is it
impossible that it should ever be just and necessary to depart from the Communion of a Church upon the ac∣count of her Corruptions, because every Man that has a mouth, and can speak, may say if he please, that he Separates for greater purity, though there be no reasonable Cause to say so? Or does it follow that be∣cause our Dissenters are mistaken in Believing that we have given them sufficient cause to deal by us, as we have done by you, that is, to forsake our Communion for greater purity, as we have forsaken yours upon the same account; that therefore we also must needs pro∣ceed upon mistakes in so doing? What if some of them are Erroneously perswaded that they ought not to sub∣mit to Human Orders in the performance of Gods Wor∣ship, if there be no particular Warrant in Gods Word for them; may not we for all this be sure that your Church requireth Men to do things which God hath particularly forbidden? And if we be sure of this upon the plain Grounds of Reason and Scripture; should we be afraid to reject your Communion in these things, because another sort of Men are so unreasonably wilful as to reject our Communion for the sake of things that are nothing like to these? What if they conceiving that our Forms of Prayer are not so Edifying, that our Rites and Ceremonies are not so expedient, but rather Ʋnlawful as being Human Inven∣tions; what, I say, if they lay so great a stress upon these things as to set up a Communion which they Fancy to be more refined and unexceptionable? May they not be to blame in all this, and yet the Church of England not be liable to blame, but worthy of com∣mendation for departing from you in your Latin Ser∣vice, your half Communion, your Praying to Dead Men and Women, your giving Divine Honors to a Wafer and your other Gross Superstitions and Idolatries?
Although our Church had not ordered her publick Worship so discreetly and carefully, but that in sundry things it might be reformed to good purpose; it might yet by no means be necessary for any of her Members to forsake her Communion; but it would on the other hand be their great fault so to do, so long as she holds forth all the necessary means of Salvation and requires nothing to be professed, or to be done that is contrary to Gods Word. But yet it would be necessary to re∣nounce the profession of your Impious Errors, and to forsake you in all things wherein your selves have de∣parted from the plain Truths of Reason and Christianity, and contradicted the plain Word and Laws of God. Though it may happen that a Man may do so Foolish∣ly, as to run himself upon great inconvenience in forsak∣ing his Habitation, because there is some petty Disease reigning thereabouts, which is known to endanger no Mans Life; yet it may be Wisely done by another Man to run his Country when the Plague is raging in every corner of it, especially if he could know that it were impossible for him to escape, if he should tarry there any longer: And yet, I suppose, you will not deny but the one as well as the other may pretend that he left his dwelling for the sake of better health, and more safely: But I hope you will grant that the later pretends this like a Wise-Man, though the other does it like a Fool. The case we are upon is much what the same. From you it was necessary to depart for the sake of greater purity; but so it is not necessary for you or others to depart from us; and yet others may take the same Plea into their mouths against us, and we may not be able to help it; though we can well shew, that they have no good reason for it. And thus much for the Difference of the Case with respect to Separation for greater purity.
2. I proceed next to consider the Difference with respect to that common Question, Who shall be the Judge? The Church of Rome arrogating to her self an Infalli∣bility in determining all Questions of Faith, doth in pursuance of this claim deny private persons the Liber∣ty of examining her Definitions by the Holy Scriptures; and requireth them to acquiesce therein without more ado, as there is great reason they should, if indeed they have reason to believe her Infallible. The Church of England pretendeth not to Infallibility; But we say that she is not deceived in those points which she pro∣pounds to be believed as necessary to Salvation nor in rejecting those other Articles which the Roman Church propounds under that notion: And agreeably to this pretence she hath Translated the Holy Scriptures into plain English, which are the best means whereby to Judge, if what she says be not true; she not only al∣loweth the People to Read them, but exhorteth and re∣quireth them so to do, and causeth them to be Publick∣ly Read to the People in all Religious Assemblies. By this means she traineth up her Members to an Abili∣ty of Judging, according to their several Capacities; not only concerning All that she teaches them to be∣lieve, but also concerning All that she teaches them to do as their Duty to God or Man; so that she does not bring them up, as the Church of Rome Educates her Children to an Implicit Faith, and a Blind Obedience. But yet the Superiors of our Church do challenge a Right to Judge in some things for the People commit∣ed to their charge, and will not allow that in those things they should Judge for themselves; and they are All things that relate to Publick Order, and which may without Sin be determined one way or another, but are capable of a better or worse Determination;
that is, All Indifferent things. We say that things of this nature being determined by a Competent Authority, ought without farther inquiry into the Reasons of such Determination, to be done by all that are under that Au∣thority. As for the Peoples Faith in God, and their Obe∣dience to him in doing what he hath Commanded and a∣voiding what he hath Forbidden, our Church does not resolve that into her own Authority, but into those very Reasons upon which they that are in Authority do build their own Faith and Obedience; which Reasons are in∣cluded in the Holy Scriptures. But as to her Appoint∣ments and Orders in all things neither injoined by God himself, nor by him forbidden, she expecteth Submission to them upon the Account of her own Authority; and alloweth not us to Judge of the Expediency or Inexpedien∣cy of them before we will Conform our Practice to them. All which is so to be understood that still her Authority in these things is supposed to be of God, and the Duty of Submitting thereunto required in the general precepts of Obedience to Superiors. But if any Man ask,Case in be∣half of Dissen∣ters. Who is to be Judge of things In∣different as to a Mans practice, whether his own Conscience or his Superior?P. 2. I Answer that as to a Mans own practice, himself is to be Judge what things are Indifferent, and which consequently come within the compass of Hu∣man Authority to Determin. For it is plain enough that by the same Rule which sheweth us what is Duty, and what is Sin, we come to Judge of what is Indifferent. And therefore when we grant to Private Persons a Judgment of Discretion concerning Sin and Duty, we cannot deny them the right to Judge what is neither Duty nor Sin, but Indifferent; which is the Sum of what the Author of the Case in behalf of Dissenters hath said upon that matter.P. 3. But then how can Authority pretend to abridge pri∣vate
Persons of Judging, as to their own practice con∣cerning Indifferent things? To this I Answer in the Words of the same Author, where he acknowledges his Adversary to have said well to those who cannot comply with some things required in the Liturgy and can say no more then that they think them not Decent,P. 36. not Expedient, not Orderly, for, says he, no Private Person is a Judge of these things. Which is an excellent saying, but so directly contrary to the main principles of his Book, that I wonder how it fell from him. We are then to Judge whether the things required by Authority be In∣different, that is, Lawful; and then to Judge no farther as to our own Practice: But for the Decency and Expedien∣cy and Orderliness of those things to leave our Superiors to Answer to God for that. Our doing them is War∣ranted by our Rule, which is to obey Authority in all Lawful things. Now it is things of this sort only, and with re∣spect to Order and Decency, and Prudent Determinati∣on of what is most likely to Edify, that our Superiors pretend to Judge for us what is, and what is not to be done; so as to allow us no right to Judge for our selves, about them. They claim Obedience to their Constituti∣ons in these things, upon the Account of their Autho∣rity, which, when the matter is Lawful, should with∣out more ado conclude our Practice. Indeed they Judge also what Faith we are to profess, what Worship we are to offer up to God, and what Life we are to lead, in order to our receiving the benefit of Church Communion; and by consequence they do take upon them to Judge in our behalf, what are the Articles of the Christian Faith, what is the true Christian Worship, and what it is to lead a Christian Life. For otherwise it were impossible that the Mini∣sters of Christ, should discreetly and honestly use that
Authority which he hath left them to take into the Church those that are duly qualified for it, and to turn out those that are no longer fit to be continued in it. But still there is a great difference between their Judging for us in those things, and in the matters aforementi∣oned. For they suppose that the Articles of the Christian Faith, and the Commandments of God, are the same that ever they were from the beginning of the Church; and that it is not in the Power of Man to make any alterati∣ons in these standing Rules of Christianity, and that Obedience is not due to any Authority of Man going about to make such alterations. From whence it fol∣lows that Private Persons should be able to Judge where∣in true Christianity consinsts as well as their Superiors, that they also may offer up unto God a Reasonable Service. To which end the Bible is put into all Mens hands; the meaning of the Scriptures is opened in our Religi∣ous Assemblies; the People are trained up to under∣stand the particulars of Christian Faith and Obedience, with the Reasons and Motives thereof, that as we said before, they may be able to resolve their Faith into the same grounds of Divine Authority, upon which the Bi∣shops and Pastors of the Church do themselves believe. And we do Unanimously acknowledge, that if this Church makes the profession of false Doctrine, or the braking of any of Gods Commandments, a condition of her Communion; they that upon this account Se∣parate from her Communion are before God clear of the Guilt of Schism in so doing. And here she makes all Private Persons Judges for themselves, whether she doth this or not, and that by training them up the best way she can, to be able to inform themselves in these matters.
But the case is otherwise with respect to Indifferent things relating to Gods Worship. For though our Su∣periors profess that they are not to meddle, in adding to or taking from the Faith and the Commandments of God; and though they appeal to Private Persons, that they do not in Fact usurp an Authority to this purpose, which they profess to disclaim; yet in these Indifferent things, they claim a Power to add, or diminish, or to make such expedient alterations, as they shall think fit to be made; and this without being any way account∣able to the People for their discretion in so doing, be∣fore their Orders be obeyed: And we say that whoever they are, that will not be concluded by Authority in these things, but upon any pretence whatsoever taken from them, do break away from the Communion of the Church, they are Guilty of Schism in so doing. And this must be truly said, if what that Author him∣self hath said be true, that no Private Person is Judge of those things. And now I think any one may see a vast difference be∣tween the claim of the Church of Rome, to be the on∣ly Judge of what she imposes upon her Members, and the claim of the Church of England to the same with reference to hers; that in the former case it is unjust and unreasonable; but in the later very equal and necessary, and which no Man that is not over-ruled by a fit of passion and prejudice, but must allow to a Com∣petent Authority. Whereas therefore we have considered the points in Question between the Dissenters and our selves, with respect to Prudence, Expedience, and Better Edification: We say withal that this is more than we were bound to do in order to the Conviction of Dissenters, that it is their Duty to conform to the Liturgy and the Laws of the Church. And that because the Authority by
which they are Establisht obligeth us to Submission (if there be nothing in them to make our Communion with the Church Sinful) though we should be so arro∣gant as to think we could have ordered these matters with more discretion, if our Advice had been taken. But if, setting aside the consideration of Authority, we have moreover shewn that upon all accounts of Decency and Expediency, Forms of Prayer are to be preferred before Extemporary Prayers, and that the particulars now ex∣cepted against are so far from betraying any want of Judgment in those that prescribed them, that they are Indications of the great Wisdom and Caution where∣with they proceeded; we have not, I say, performed this, believing it necessary to prove the Separation to be Ʋnjustifiable, but intending to shew thereby that it is more Inexcusable. And although it was no part of our Design to render those of the Separation more Inexcusa∣ble by this performance, yet I beseech them to take care that it happens not so in the Event. If after all, it be asked what an Inferior is to do, that Judgeth those things to be Ʋnlawful, which his Su∣periors in full Perswasion that they are Indifferent at least, require him to do? I Answer, as all Men that have a Sense of Honesty will Answer; That whilest he is perswaded that they are Unlawful, he ought to for∣bear them. But then, as no Man of Understanding will deny, he is yet a Sinner before God for refusing that Obedience to a Lawful Authority, which he ought to perform; since in order to the performance of it, he might and ought to understand his Duty bet∣ter than he does. For as the forementioned Author says, Things Indifferent and Things Commanded and For∣bidden are not Things which we Fancy,P. 3. but which indeed are so. If the Light of Nature, and the Holy Scrip∣tures are a Rule of what is Duty, and what is Sin, they
are a Rule also of what is Indifferent: And the same Light that shews what is necessary to be done, and what is necessary not to be done, does withal shew what is Lawful to be done or to be forborn. And as an Errone∣ous perswasion that something is Lawful which God hath forbidden, will not acquit any Man, that hath the means of better Information, from Sin, in doing accor∣ding to his Perswasion of the Lawfulness of what he does: So neither will any Mans Erroneous Perswasi∣on that his Superiors require him to do what is Ʋnlaw∣ful, when the thing it self is Lawful, acquit him of the Guilt of Disobedience in following that Perswasi∣on. In what degrees this or that Mans Ignorance in these things is culpable, God only knoweth for the most part, and therefore he only can Judge the World in Righteousness. But more or less culpable it is in All that have means of Knowledge. And it concerns every one of us, as we love our own Souls, to consider Impartial∣ly, what God hath Commanded and what he hath for∣bidden in his Word, and consequently what he has left to our Liberty; and that because his Word is a Rule sufficiently plain as to these things. For if those to whom God hath given Authority, being corrupted in their Judgments by Passion or any Worldly Interest, take those things to be Lawful which God hath forbidden, and impose them upon All that are sub∣ject to their Rule; their Perswasion shall not hinder their being grievous Sinners against God, nor Exempt them from being answerable to him for abusing their Autho∣rity, and for all the pernicious consequences thereof in drawing some Men into Wicked Practices, and in punish∣ing others for well doing. And by like Reason, if Sub∣jects not rightly attending to the Rule of their Duty, are grown to a Perswasion that those things are Ʋnlawful, which their Superiors injoin them to do; whereas in∣deed
they are Indifferent; and thereupon refuse to do them: This Perswasion shall not acquit them before God, nor hinder them from being answerable for Abu∣sing their Liberty, and for all the pernicious Consequences of their Disobedience, in Setting a bad Example, in Breaking the Peace of the Church, in Disturbing Publick Order, and, which very often happens, in Giving occa∣sion to the worst of Men to profane the Name of God, and to speak Evil and Blasphemous things of his Holy Religi∣on. I say, Ignorance will help no more in this later case than in the former, because it is as easie for the Subject to know what is Indifferent, as for the Ruler to know what is Ʋnlawful. These considerations I confess do more properly belong to the last Plea of Conscience; but it was very convenient to touch upon them here, where we have been inquiring what things they are, in which Authority is to over-rule private Judgment, and to determine the Practice of Inferiors; and withal how great a difference there is between the Church of Rome, and the Church of England in Answering this Common Question: Who shall be the Judge? 3. I come now to the last Difference consequent upon the two first respecting Authority, and Terms of Commu∣nion,and that is the Difference of the Principles upon which each side Separates, as to their tendency either to main∣tain, or to overthrow one Communion amongst Christians. This will fall under a double Consideration. 1. That of maintaining one Communion amongst Christians in this Kingdom. 2. That of maintaining one Commu∣nion with Forreign Churches. I shall begin with the First. 1. As to Ʋnity at home. The Romanist pretends that upon the grounds of our Reformation, Divisions and Se∣parations
will be endless amongst us; We also pretend that the principles of the Separation from the Church of England, tend to the same: But with what difference of Reason on each side, it is easy to Judge by what has been said already. We have Reason to think there would be no end of Divisions, if a Competent Authority, injoining nothing but what is Lawful to be done in the Communion of Christians, is not to be obeyed: And certainly this may be very true, although it be false, that to Submit to the Authority of the Roman Church, and that too in things Unlawful to be done by any Christian, or by any Man, is necessary to prevent Divisi∣ons. We say farther, that there can be no need of an Ecclesiastical Tyranny on the one hand, and a blind Obedience on the other, to keep those Christians together in one Communion that live within one Jurisdiction; if a due use of Authority in Lawful Superiors on the one hand, and a Dutiful Subjection of Inferiors thereun∣to, on the other, would do the business, as most cer∣tainly it would. But if some Men will be Stubborn, we cannot help that, any more than we can hinder other Men from being Tyrants. But we are sure it concerns both the one and the other, as much as their Salvati∣on concerns them, not to be so. And if this considerati∣on will not keep them within bounds, and make them Wise and Honest; they must Answer it to God one day. And in the mean time Subjects that Suffer Ʋn∣justly for refusing to Obey the Wicked Commands of their Superiors, must bear it as patiently as they can, and by their Prayers to God, and their Meek Obedience to their Rulers in all Lawful things, endeavour to reco∣ver themselves into their good Opinion. And Superi∣ors that are vexed with Froward and Disorderly Sub∣jects who break Christian Communion when no just Cause is given them, must do what they can to lay
the Truth before them; and if this be to no purpose, they must use their Authority as Prudently as they can to prevent the Evil Example from going farther. We are sensible what advantages the Papists make to themselves against our Reformation by the examples of Dissenters, and the Dissenters by the Papists. When the Papists have Men and Women of weak understand∣ings to deal with, they tell them, that the Reformation is run out into several Sects and Parties, and no Man can tell where Separation will end: If therefore you Love Ʋnity, return to the Church of Rome where we are all of one Faith and Communion. The Separatists on the other side set off their claims to an unrestrain∣able Liberty of choosing in what Communion to Wor∣ship God, by shewing to their Proselytes the Tyranny of the Roman Church. Now we of the Church of Eng∣land are as much against the Tyrannical Ʋsurpations of that Church as the Dissenters, and as much for Ʋnity against causless Separation, and for Obedience to Lawful Authority against Stubbornness, as the Romanists. And both these upon principles that consist well with one a∣nother. We say on the one side that a Foreigner should not affect an Authority over us, and that those who have the Authority, ought to require nothing in the Communion of Christians, but what is agreeable to Gods Word, and Lawful to be done: And on the other side, that in such things we ought to do what is Com∣manded, and by no means to run into a Separate Com∣munion. Upon these principles we departed from Rome, and stick where we are; and I trust that through the Grace of God, we shall neither go back to Rome, nor run after the Separation, there being no need, either of the former to preserve Ʋnity, or of the later to avoid Tyranny. To draw to a conclusion of this matter; The main
Reason of our Separation from Rome was this, that we could not continue in her Communion, without doing things that God hath plainly forbidden: The Refor∣mation of our Church was at first effected by, and hath all along stood upon Good and Just Authority: She does not only hold forth all necessary means of Salvation, but she requires nothing to be done in her Communion that is contrary to Gods Word. And therefore we hold our selves bound under the pain of Schism to continue in her Communion. Now I do not understand how upon these principles Men must run into Endless Separations, unless it be impossible for us (whatever we pretend) to know who are our Lawful Governours, and to know what God hath Commanded, and what he hath Forbidden us to do. And I must confess if these things be Impossible to be known 'tis a Foolish thing for any Man to trouble his Conscience with Cases of Communion and Separation. As for the Dissenters (to omit the Independents whose Churches are in their very Constitution inconsistent with Submit∣ting to a Common Authority in matters of Worship) they have forsaken us for nothing but because the Forms of our Worship, or our two or three Ceremonies in it, are not Commanded in Gods Word, and because in things left otherwise to our Liberty, we are deter∣mined by the Authority of our Superiors: Or because these things might be better ordered, and because the Communion which they have taken upon them to set up in Opposition to the Church of England is purer than ours, though ours be a Lawful Communion. Now these principles do indeed tend to Endless Separations unless these Men could tell us either how we could be United in one Communion, though all of us believed it Ʋnlawful to Obey a Competent Authority that should presume to determin any Indifferent things relating to Gods Worship;
or what particular Communion that is from which it would be Ʋnlawful to Separate even upon this principle; That there is no Obligation to Communion, where there is any thing possible to be mended in the outward mode of Gods Worship. In a Word, they that Separate upon Just and Necessary cause as the Church of England hath done from the Church of Rome, and stop there, are not to be charged with the consequence of their practice, who Separate without such Causes, as the Dissenters do from our Church. And if they have proceeded farther than they are able to justify themselves by the princi∣ples of our Reformation, they must Answer for it themselves. 2. The principles of our Reformation do not obstruct our Communion with any true Church of Christ a∣broad, where there are no Unlawful Terms of Commu∣nion. But so do the principles of the Dissenters Se∣paration. By the same reason that our Governours determin one Common order of Worship and Discipline for the Churches over which they have Authority; The Go∣vernours of other Churches also may determin in these things according to their Prudence for the People sub∣ject to their Authority. And we, who blame the Church of Rome for interposing her Authority amongst us, with whom she has no more Right to meddle than any other Forreign Church has, must in all things that come within the Liberty of Christians, leave other Churches that are as Independent upon Ʋs as we are upon Rome, to their Authority and Liberty. And this is what our Church has expresly declared. In these our doings we condemn not other Nations nor prescribe any thing but to our own People only, for we think it convenient that every Country should use such Ceremonies as they shall think
best to the setting forth of Gods Honor and Glory,Preface to the Liturgy. and to the reducing of the People to a most Perfect and Godly living without Error or Superstition, and that they should put away other things, which from time to time they per∣ceive to be most abused, as in Mens Ordinances it often chanceth diversly in divers Countries. In pursuance of which excellent and truly Catholick Declaration, I would not only Communicate with Foreign Churches, who differ from us in nothing but matters of From and Ce∣remony; but if I were amongst them, I should observe their Establish'd Modes and Forms of Worship; and though I thought our own way at home, worthy upon all the accounts of Order and Decency and Tendency to Edifica∣tion, to be preferred before theirs; yet I should not only conform to their way; but Religiously abstain from creating any prejudice against it in the minds of Christi∣an People in those places; and rather do all that Ho∣nestly I could to bring those to a favourable Opinion of it, who were prejudiced against it. This is that Rule which St. Austin thought should take place, not only in respect of those Orders which were Establish'd by Synods of Bishops, but in respect also of those Cu∣stoms which had crept into particular Churches though it was hard to tell why or how they came in. In things of this Nature saith he there is one most wholesom Rule to be observed,Ad Januarium. That wherever we see any of them obtain which are neither contrary to Faith nor good Manners,Ep. 119. and have some tendency to Edification, we should not only abstain from finding fault with them, but Commend and Practise them our selves. And yet he complains in this very E∣pistle of the multitude of Ceremonious Observations, in which particular Churches differed from one another, and wishes that a Reformation were made by Autho∣rity. Thus in the foregoing Epistle, speaking of the diffe∣rent observations of divers places, for Instance, that some
fast upon the Saturday and some do not,Ep. 118. &c. and of all o∣ther things of this kind which are to be accounted Indif∣ferent; Nothing, says he, does more become the Gravity and Prudence of a Christian, then to do after the manner of that Church into which he shall happen to come. Then he relates St. Ambrose his celebrated Answer to Monica about things of this sort: When I am at Rome I Fast on the Saturday, when I am here at Milan I do not Fast. And so when thou comest into any Church, observe its Cu∣stoms if thou wouldest neither give just Cause of Offence, nor take Offence without Cause. This advice St. Austin magnified highly, and the more he thought of it the better he liked it. For, says he, I have often with great sorrow considered how the minds of Weak Christians have been disturbed, by the Quarrelsom humour and Superstiti∣ous Niceness of some of the Brethren, who upon very slight grounds of Reasoning, or being addicted to their own Customs at home, or fond of what they have observed abroad, raise such Wrangling Disputes about things that cannot be clear∣ly Determined either by the Authority of Holy Scripture, or the Ʋniversal Tradition of the Church Catholick, or by the Consideration of what is best for Reformation of Life, that they seem to reckon nothing well done, but what they do themselves. I shall add no more but that plain Rule he gives elsewhere to this purpose: As to things in which the Scripture defines nothing certain one way or the other,Ad Casula∣num. the Custom of the Church,Ep. 86. and the Decrees of our Ancestors, are to be held for Law. Now by this and much more that might be produ∣ced, we may see what the true Notion of that Liberty was which the Ancient Church allowed in matters of Indif∣ference. Not that there was no Rule in the particu∣lar Churches for the Ordering and Regulating of things of this sort: For we find the Bishops did use their Au∣thority in these things, over their charges, as St. Am∣brose's
Words to St. Austin's Mother about the foremen∣tioned case do plainly imply.Ep. 86. Resist not thy Bishop in this matter; but what he does, that do thou without any Scruple or Dispute: And besides those particular Customs, the Variety and Multitude of which St. Austin com∣plains of,Ep. 119. there were the Determinations of Episcopal Sy∣nods concerning things not Determined in Scripture, which he does not complain of. But their Liberty con∣sisted in this, that the Rules of this sort establisht in the Communion of any Church, were not imposed up∣on Foreign Churches▪ and Catholick Communion was not broken upon the account of different Rites, and Customs. For though St. Austin was sorry to see the minds of some Weak Christians troubled about Questi∣ons of this kind, yet I do not find that he had any occasion given him to complain that Communion was broken upon these accounts; as before his time it had been, by Pope Victors rashness in presuming to Excom∣municate the Asiatick Bishops for observing Easter upon the fourteenth of March; had not Irenaeus and other Wise and Moderate persons seasonably interposed. To apply all this to the matter in hand: Since the Church of Rome has made such things conditions of Communion with her as are in St. Austin's phrase con∣trary to Faith and Good Manners, our Separation from her upon this account, does not at all hinder us from Communicating with any true Church in the World, that does not bar us out by Unlawful Terms of Com∣munion. For in things that God hath left at Liberty, this Church persumes not to interpose her Authority abroad; nor refuses the Communion of those Chur∣ches whose Customs and Observations are different from ours meerly because they are different. Nay, let the Church of Rome her self make an end of Imposing False Doctrines and Wicked Practices, and there will be an
end of our Separation from her: Let her give over Com∣manding things that God hath Forbidden, and make∣ing Articles of Faith of things that are not revealed, but are indeed contrary to Sense and Reason; and she may for us use her Authority at home in things Indifferent; and though she be guilty of great Abuses even in this kind, which need a Reformation; yet I for my part should not break Communion with her for these things, if she would throughly Purge her self from the other. In the mean time we are of one Communion with all Foreign Churches that presume not to change the Faith, nor to contradict the Laws of God; and this we should de∣monstrate by actual Communion with them, if we had occasion to go abroad amongst them. But this makes our case very Different from that of the Dissenters who Separate from the Church. For so long as they withdraw from our Communion for the sake of Ecclesiastical Order that are not contrary to Gods Word, and Separate from us upon this principle, that every thing is Unlawful in Gods Worship which is not Commanded in Scripture, but enjoined by our Su∣periors only; they must not upon those principles have Communicated with any Church in the Primitive times, when there were far more Ʋncommanded Rites and Ʋ∣sages Establish'd, for the regulating of Worship, than now there are in our Church. And upon these principles they must not Communicate with any Reformed Chur∣ches abroad, since how different so ever the External Mode of their Worship may be from ours, yet some they all have, and that consisting of Rules not Determined by Gods Word, but by the Law or Custom of Man. To New England they must not go, hoping to find a Com∣munion there Lawful to be embraced upon these prin∣ciples. The Nonconformists to our Liturgy and Disci∣pline that are there, will stand to their own censures
concerning Worship and Discipline, and will make out by their Church Authority such as it is, what they can∣not shew Chapter and Verse for. Our Separatists if they go thither shall find no other use of their Liberty allowed there, but Conformity and Compliance with that way of Worship and Government which there obtains. It is a plain case that they who Separate from our Church upon the account of Unommanded Rites and Practices in Gods Worship, are something more obliged by this principle to avoid Communion with all Foreign Churches; if Rules for Customs concern∣ing things Indifferent are to be found amongst them all, as most certainly such Rules more or fewer all of them have: For in the former case our Separatists are disobedient to their proper Governours and Pastors, whose Authority over them is some thing more clear and in∣disputable, than that of the Governours of other Chur∣ches where they might happen to go. And therefore if they will not in things of this Nature, be Deter∣mined by an Authority at home, there is less reason to be∣lieve their Consciences will suffer them to be Deter∣mined therein by one abroad. I conclude therefore that though our Reformation leaves usfree to Commu∣nicate with all Churches abroad, that do not require Sinful Terms of Communion as the Church of Rome does; yet the Separation of the Dissenters from us pro∣ceeds upon grounds destructive of Communion with any Church in the World. Indeed I believe, most of our Dissenters would Com∣municate with several Reformed Churches abroad, but in so doing they must depart from the principles upon which they Separate at home; unless they can find a Reformed Church, which exerciseth no Authority in Forms of Prayer, nor in any Indifferent things for the external Regulation of Publick Worship. But where
such a Church is to be found, I am yet to be inform∣ed. And thus much concerning those Differences of the Case, that are Consequent upon the Difference in point of Authority and of Terms of Communion. 3. I come now to consider the last Plea I propoun∣ded which I confessed was not only Common to both sides, but which also may be as truly alledged on the one side, as on the other. And that is the Plea of Con∣science. The Dissenters say that they Separate from us, being perswaded that they ought so to do. And I must needs say that some Degree of Integrity is implyed in this Plea, if honestly it be made; and such a Degree it is, as without which no Man can be an honest Man. And therefore instead of going about to make it question∣able whether indeed it be out of Conscience, that they generally Separate from us; I shall here admit it, ad∣ding only that it stands every one of them in hand, to be as sure as they can be, that there is this Reason at least for their Separation from us. And I hope none of them will take this admonition in ill part; since I charge my self and desire all the People of our own Communion to be careful that we be fully perswaded in our own minds that in Duty to God we are bound to Separate even from the Church of Rome; and that we do not either chuse one Communion or refuse another for Carnal and Worldly Interest. For we say the very same thing, viz. That in Conscience we are perswaded, that to forsake the Communion of the Church of Rome, and of every Church in her Com∣munion, as the Terms of her Communion now stand, is a necessary Duty. But then if we had no more to say for our selves then this comes to, we should make
but a very Weak Apology for our Separation from the Roman Church, and have some Reason to be ashamed of it. For, to deal plainly, this is no more then what a Turk or a Jew may say for refusing to become a Christi∣an, and no more then what he may truly say too, that is, that his Conscience will not let him be a Christian, since he is verily perswaded that Christianity is not from God, so far as it is contrary to the Religion by him professed. Now this, if it be truly said, shall make him a more honest Turk or Jew, than another that is in his Conscience convinced of the Truth, which with his mouth he denies, yet it shall not make that which he professes to be more true in his mouth, than it is in the mouth of a Hypocrite. And I suppose no Christi∣an will say that his pretence of Conscience though it be not meer pretence, will acquit him of Sin in reject∣ing the Gospel of Christ when it's offered to him with reasonable Evidence. From whence I think it follows, that the Misinformation of his Conscience, or his Erroneous perswasion is his Sin. And therefore though it be true that we do Separate from the Roman Communion out of Conscience; yet whether we do well upon the whole matter in this or not, must be judged of by those rea∣sons upon which we are perswaded that so we ought to do, and not meerly by our perswasion it self. For o∣therwise we should lay down a principle that would Vindicate a Man in the greatest Errors that can be profess'd, and justify him in the most Wicked things that can be done under an Erroneous perswasion that those are not Errors and that these are not Wicked Things. Wherefore I beseech all those that forsake the Com∣munion of the Church of England, upon a general and loose perswasion of which they are able to give little or no particular account, that they do well in forsaking us,
and that they should Sin in Communicating with us: I beseech them, I say, to lay this to heart, and a most evident truth it is, that if their perswasion be Errone∣ous, they are notwithstanding their perswasion guil∣ty of Schism: And withal, that if they are perswaded, this is no great matter, as I plainly perceive they are for the most part, yet if Schism be a very great and aggravated Sin; neither will their Ignorance acquit them of guilt proportionable to the heinous Nature of the Sin. For my part I should not envy their safety, could I believe they had reason to be secure, upon giving this account of their Separation and that honestly too, that they are satisfied in Conscience about it; and there is an end. But I have reason to warn them of the Danger of such Presumption; since many of the Jews and Heathens that delivered up the Servants of Christ to be Killed for their profession, were doubtless satis∣fied in Conscience, that they did God Service in so doing. And for ought I know some that have served the ends of the Bloody Church of Rome, may have been so perswaded too. But do you think that God will give them thanks for what they did, because of their good meaning? And if you do not think so; you have no reason to conclude that you shall be acquitted from your Separation, if a Sin it be, and a great one too, meerly because you do not believe it to be a mat∣ter of any great Consequence, or indeed any fault at all, but rather a Duty. I do not know to what purpose Divine Truth is made known to us by Nature and by Scripture, and the Laws of God are Written upon our Hearts, and these and more Laws besides Written in the Gospel, if we might yet be safely Ignorant of our Duty as we are Men, or as we are Christians, and of that Truth which is necessary to the performance of that Duty. To what
end hath God made known his Will, and given us the means of knowing it, and a Reasonable Nature to make us capable of using those means, if Ignorance might still be Pleaded in our Justification? For my Part I cannot tell, and let him that cannot look to it, that no Prejudice nor Passion, nor Laziness, nor Worldly Interest lye at the bottom of his Heart either to hin∣der his searching, or if he searches, to hinder his find∣ing out that Divine Truth, which is the Rule of his Duty. I say this the rather, because no body will de∣ny that it is well said. But it fares with this as it does with many other good Sayings, it is still by all ac∣knowledged to be good, but it is by few well applied. But thus far at least I may desire those of the Sepa∣ration to apply it to themselves, that if they Ʋnneces∣sarily Divide themselves from the Communion of this Church, the perswasion of their Conscience that they are bound to divide from us, will by no means bring them off in so doing from the Condemnation that be∣longs to that Sin. To break the Communion of Christians is quite con∣trary to the Ordinance and Institution of Christ, who made his Church one Body; and the Consequences of it are very Destructive of all the great ends of Christi∣anity, and in such Cases, the blame is very great, wherever it lies; and I will be bold to say, it could not be very great, if it were hard for an honest and unprejudiced mind to find what ought, and what ought not to be done to maintain Ʋnity of Com∣munion amongst Christians. And therefore it concerns every Man as he tenders the Salvation of his Soul, to look to it, that the Cause of his Separation be Just. For this is one of those Cases wherein a meer Per∣swasion of Conscience, will not secure a Man acting ac∣cording to it from sinning against God. And from
hence it is evident that this Plea that we cannot in Conscience hold Communion with the Church of Rome, may in our mouths be a very good Plea against the Papists, as without question it is if our Consciences are rightly informed as to the Points controverted between them and us: But the same Plea in the mouths of the Dissenters against the Church of England, may not be good, as most certainly it is not, if they are perswaded that our Church hath given them just Cause for their Separation, when there is indeed no such matter. And therefore we may at least hope that they will all of them now seriously apply themselves to consider the merits of the Cause between them and us, which they are now in an especial manner bound to do, since the Charity of the Ministers of this City hath made the doing of it easie to all Persons, that will be at the Pains to Judge for themselves, and that by bring∣ing down the particular Questions in Controversy be∣tween them and us to the Capacity of Ordinary Christians. And if they will not use this Opportunity that is given them to Consider these things they will have the more to Answer to God; and they most of all that disswade them from it. To conclude this Point: whereas the Papists de∣claim against our Separation from them, under pretence of Conscience, as if this had shewn the way to all sorts of Sectaries to Separate from us upon the same pre∣tence: We hope that all Persons who are not willing to be deceived, will be able to Distinguish between a misguided Conscience on the one hand, and a well In∣formed Conscience on the other; and then proceed to examine the Reasons of our Separation, whether they be not Just and Necessary; and if they find them so to be, that they will acquit us from all their blame, who Separate without such Reasons. For it is very Foolish
and unjust not to allow the pretence of Conscience to be good in any Case, because it is not so in all Cases. Surely if one Mans Conscience tell him that he may and ought to Rebel, while himself does not believe that 'tis Rebellion he is going about; this hinders not, but another Man may Lawfully and justly pretend Con∣science for his Loyalty, and Duty to the Government. And though in some Places of the World, there are Sovereign Princes, who extend their Authority for the maintaining of Damnable Errors, and the suppressing of Gods Holy Truth, and all the while believe that they use their Power as they ought to do; yet this shall not hinder but that Princes who believe and profess the true Religion, and withal protect and encourage it with their Authority as much as they can, being fully per∣swaded that so they ought to do, that they, I say, shall for this receive Gods thanks and rewards, while the former shall go without them. In like manner Con∣science may be pretended for Disobeying the just Laws of that Authority which God hath set in the World, and in the Church; but this shall not hinder his Plea from being good, who pretends Conscience for re∣fusing to Commit Idolatry, though all the Powers under Heaven should require him so to do. Men may by mistake, think they do God good Service in murdering his Servants; For this has been done by you of the Church of Rome. And if in such Plain Cases as these, your understandings have been so foully Corrupted, it is not so greatly to be wondred at, that the Judg∣ments of other Men are so perverted by Interest and Passion, as to believe themselves Countermanded by God in things required by their Superiors; but in which it would not be their Sin, but a Performance of their Duty to obey. And yet I hope this Answer whether it be better to Obey God or Man, Judge ye, was once Truly and
Pertinently made; and may be so again. And so much for the Difference of the Case with respect to Con∣science; which was the last thing to be considered. And now I know that all this will signify very little to any Man that brings not an honest mind with him to Consider it, or who had rather take his Opinions in these things upon Trust, than be at the Pains to Judge for himself. But why should a Man disparage himself so much, as not to use that Understanding which God hath given him in matters that Concern his Salvation? Why should he be such an Enemy to him∣self, as not to let go a Dangerous mistake, when he may enjoy the Truth instead of it, if he will use Rea∣sonable Diligence to Consider what is said on both sides? Give me leave to put you in mind of your Duty in this Case, in the Words of an Ancient Christian Writer In all matters of Practice and Duty it Concerns every Man to use his own Judgment and Discretion, in searching for Truth, and in weighing what is fit to be done, rather then to be betrayed into Error and Sin,Lactant. lib 2. De Origine Erroris. Sect. 7. by such a Cre∣dulous reliance upon others, as if himself had not the Rea∣son of a Man, and were incapable of Consideration. God has given to every Man his share of Wit both to find out some things by himself, and to weigh those which he hears from others. 'Tis Natural to all men to love Wisdom, and to desire the Knowledge of the Truth. And they make Fools of themselves, who without Discretion take the Words of their Leaders for all that they say, and follow them more like Beasts, than like Reasonable Creatures, which words are not so to be taken, as if it were Dishonourable or Dangerous to any Man to make use of the help of others in Learning the Truth: For this were to destroy the use of the Ministry in the Church of Christ, and to take away the benefit of mutual endeavours to lead
one another into a right Understanding of our Duty. But for all this, it may be a very Foolish and Unman∣ly part, and it may betray us into very Dangerous Errors, not to use our own Judgment at all in matters of Sin and Duty, and in Opinions leading to the one or the other; but instead thereof to rely altogether upon their Authority whom we have taken for our Guides. This is what we say both to the People of the Popish, and of the Dissenting Party; that if they would apply themselves with Ordinary Diligence, and with a sincere mind, to find out the Truth in thse Cases they would not meet with any great Difficulty to Perplex them in the way; especially if they whose Authority they very much rely upon, would speak as plainly and clearly to the Points in Question as, with∣out Vanity I may say, we have hitherto done. We do not desire them to stop their Ears against those whom they follow at present: All that we beg of them is, that they would not take every thing upon Trust, that others tell them in these matters, but hear what we also have to offer to them, and not only hear, but consider and weigh it with the best Judgment they have. And let me say this to all those whom I now speak of, whether Papists or Dissenters, that if you set your selves with a sincere desire of being rightly In∣formed, to compare our Reasons, with them whom hitherto you have trusted, some Advantage you will gain by it, whatever the Success be. For if the Truth be not on our side, you will in all likelihood get this benefit by it, to be Confirmed in your own way, upon better grounds than you had before. But if it be, it is then to be hoped that through the Grace of God you will discorn it, and entertain it, for which blessing you and we shall have great reason to
yield our hearty Thanks and Praises to the Father of Lights; who giveth Wisdom to them that ask him. But if you should be so unhappily Prejudiced on the wrong side as to miss this benefit, yet let me tell you it will turn to some good account for you at last, that you took Pains to be better informed; and that you were not altogether wanting to your selves to come to a right Understanding of your Duty in these Particu∣lars, by disposing your selves to Impartiality, and by Reading, and Meditating, and Praying in all this, for the Illumination of Gods Holy Spirit. And now, I trust, there is little need to tell you, that if your Leaders discourage you from taking this pains, it may justly make you suspect that your Cause will not bear the Trial. If they would keep up your Confidence by their own, and all the while divert you from comparing one thing with another, and from trying what is said on both sides; you have sufficient Cause to Question either their Honesty or their Un∣derstanding. And the more unwilling they are that you should examin what we and they say, the more Reason do they give you to resolve that you will do so. I have shewn how greatly different the Case of the True English Protestant is from that of the Papist on the one hand, and that of the Separatist on the other. And though the difference be so very notorious as it is, yet we know the Popish Priests have represented our Reformation under such Colours, as to make it look like Fanaticism, and the Dissenters are made to be∣lieve on the other hand that our Reformation is but a better sort of Popery. And some little popular things are said on both sides to make these pretences look like
Truth. But now I have brought these Colours into the Light; and if you will but take upon your selves to use your own Eyes, you may, I think, easily dis∣cern that you have been all this while abused. At least I have given you Reason enough to make farther In∣quiries, and to Consider more particular Questions. But if upon Reading this general Discourse, you should resolve to keep where you are, and to trouble your selves no farther; I am Confident the true Reason there∣of must be this, that you are afraid to proceed, lest you should be convinced; and this is nothing less than Wilfully to bar up your minds against the Knowledge of the Truth. For though I have no conceit of this performance, as if I had done any great matter in it; yet I am Conscious to my self that I intended honestly all along, and I am sure I have Written plainly, and have laid some things together that may give just oc∣casion to any well meaning Papist or Sectary to Questi∣on the safety of the way he is in at present; especi∣ally if he has never troubled himself to Consider these things before. And now I do heartily desire you all, for I cannot desire this too often or too earnestly; that you would take the Word of God for your Rule, and propound the Rewards of another Life for your end, and set the Fear of God before your Eyes, whilest you Consider and Examin these things. It is our concern for the safety of your Souls, as well as for the Welfare of this Poor Church so distressed with Adversaries on both sides, that putteth us forward upon all occasions, to lay these things before you. Do not therefore Read these Books which are indeed publisht for your sakes, as if they were Written against you. There is not one of us, I am Confident but is troubled to see you expose
your selves to the penalties of the Laws of the Land that are against you: But we are more sorry to con∣sider, that at the same time you do also incur the high dis∣pleasure of God. We would sain have you to avoid both the one and the other. And if you would heark∣en to us, the worst you would get by it, is to live with less Disturbance in this World, but whether that should prove true or not, you would walk in a more Safe and Plain way to Heaven, than that which any of you are in at present. And I hope you would not grudge that good which this Church should receive by your return to us, when you would do your selves so much more by it. If therefore you think our Importunity troublesom, pray remember what it is that makes us Importunate; and let no misconstruction of the Design of your Friends, render their honest endeavours Ineffectual to your con∣viction. We would have you understand the Truth, and do your Duty; And as this end is Charitable, so you must needs grant those means to be Charitable also, by which we are contributing towards it. It is in∣deed our Concern that these means should take place, but it is yours something more, if you are under great and dangerous, mistakes as I am perswaded you are. But if you should be so prejudiced against us as to think that we Write these Controversies more in Concern for the Temporal Interests of this Church, than for your Spiritual Good, Pray will you make this profitable use of that hard thought, as to excel us in this matter, by being more careful not to mix any Carnal and Worldly affection with your Judgment in Reading these things, then you imagine us to be in Writing of them. Be as strict as you will in Examining what we say in be∣half of our Church; only be willing that Truth should
Overcome; and Consider that if that prevails against your Errors, you indeed are the Conquerours, and that the greatest Gain will be yours, both in this World and in the World to come. I have no mind to prejudge which Party it is that we may hope to win more of to the Truth than of the other; being very willing to believe that there is no Cause of despairing to do good on either side. As for the Dissenters; methinks, it should not be hard to disswade the most of them, from breaking the Communion of that Church any longer, with which they agree in the Substance of Faith and Worship, and from differing with Authority for the future about things Indifferent. The Cause of the Separation, as it is managed by themselves is so very Slight, that one would hope they should be of themselves something afraid to venture their being Schismaticks upon it, and consequently that they should be ready to consider what has been said to shew that there is indeed no Just Cause given them to Separate from our Church; and that there is no Reason to call any thing Popery which they dislike in our Communion; as some of them have done to the great disadvantage of the Protestant Religion; since as much as in them lay, they have made the World believe that the Cause of Popery is better than it is; and that it doth not consist only of Opinions and Practices that cannot be defended, but of some also that may. And it is not the least kindness that the indiscreet Zeal of some Protestants hath done to the Church of Rome, that they have inveighed against some things, which may be easily justified, as if they also were Popish Corruptions. And the Learned Men of that Church have not been behind hand in making use
of this advantage, and that by straining their utmost Wit, to represent the Protestant Religion under such Colours, as if it stood in Opposition to Episcopacy and Liturgy, and to all Ecclesiastical Canons and Constituti∣ons. And I am perswaded the Dissenters cannot do the Protestant Religion a greater kindness, than by forbear∣ing to give them this occasion for the Future. For let a Cause be never so good in it self, it is never like∣ly to thrive in their hands, who instead of pressing their Adversaries with what they can never maintain, are still forward to deny what they are well able to prove. As for the Papists amongst us, their mistakes in Faith and Worship are so Gross and Foul that if they would give themselves a little time to Consider what has, and what may farther be said to convince them; I do not doubt but all of them that are endued with a Compe∣tent Understanding, and an Honest Sense of things, would soon feel those palpable Errors, into the belief and practise of which they have been hitherto de∣luded, by an unreasonable deference to the Authority of the Church of Rome; and no longer stand off from the Communion of the Church of England. The big∣ger any fault is, one would think, it should be more easily spied. Now these Men Separate from us meerly because we have abandoned those wicked Doctrines and Practices, which are of themselves a most necessary Cause of Separation from any Church in the World, that should Impose them. And therefore they of all Men are the most Notorious Schismaticks that can be imagined. And I beseech God to open their Eyes to see it; and to recover into the way of Truth all such as have Erred and are Deceived; that those who have hitherto been obstinate may prove all things,1 Thess. 5. 21. and that those who can
be perswaded to Consider these things, may hold fast that which is good. Rom. 15. 5, 6. And the God of Patience and Consolation grant us to be like minded one towards another according to Christ Jesus. That We may with one Mind and one Mouth Glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus. Amen. FINIS. ERATA. Page 18. line 18. for Term read Form. p. 15. l. 31. for cppear r. appear p. 25. l. 27. r. l Cor. 14.
