C6219 15597930 104020
A Copy of the Presentment and Indictment Found and Exhibited by the Grand-Jury of Middlesex, in the UPPER BENCH at WESTMINSTER, On the last day of Hillary Term, 1659. Against Collonel Matthew Alured, Collonel John Okey, (the Captains of the Gards) and Edmond Cooper (one of the Door keepers) for assaulting and keeping Sir Gilbert Gerrard Baronet, one of the Knights of the Shire for their County, by force and arms out of the Commons House of Parliament, on the 27. day of Decem∣ber last; when 21. Members more were in like sort secluded and kept out of the House by them: which will serve as a President for other Counties, and future Secluders of the Members. THE Jurors, &c. do present, That whereas by the Laws of England, and the Custom and Privileges of the Parliaments thereof, every Knight, Citizen and Burgess duly chosen and retorned to sit in the Par∣liaments of England, ought to have free accesse and entrance into the Com∣mons House of Parliament, and therein freely to sit and Vote during the continu∣ance of the said Parliaments, without any forcible interruption or hinderance; And whereas there was a Parliament duly summoned to meet at Westminster, within the County of Middlesex on the Third day of No∣vember in the year of our Lord, (after the computation of England) 1640. And whereas Sir Gilbert Gerrard of Harrow on the Hill in the County of Middlesex aforesaid Baronet, was by the Freeholders of the said County, duly elected, and retorned one of the Knights of the said County, with full and suffi∣cient power for himself, and the Commonalty of the said County, to sit and vote in the said Commons House of Parliament, and to doe and consent to all such things as should be ordai∣ned by Common Council of Parliament, during the continuance of the said Parliament, without any forcible interruption or hinderance; Neverthelesse, Colonel Matthew Alured, late of Westminster in the County of Middlesex aforesaid Gent. Colonel John Okey, late of Westminster aforesaid in the said County Gent. and Edmond Cooper late of VVestminster aforesaid in the said County Laborer, together with divers other persons to the said Iurors yet unknown, on the 27. day of December, in the year of our Lord 1659. at VVestminster aforesaid, in the County afore∣said, with force and arms, &c. in and upon the said Sir Gilbert Gerrard Baronet, in the peace of God and in the publike peace then and there being, and going to and endeavouring to enter in∣to the House of Commons of Parliament aforesaid, at Westminster aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, then and there being and sitting, to sit and discharge his Duty therein, as one of the Knights of the said County of Middlesex and a Member of the said Commons House of Parlia∣ment, an assault did make, and then and there with force and arms aforesaid, him the said Sir Gilbert Gerrard did forcibly and unjustly keep out of the said Commons House of Parliament, and hinder him from entring into the said House to discharge his duty aforesaid therein; to the high violation of the Privileges of Parliament, the great and pernicious example of other Malefactors, and against the peace of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND. LONDON, Printed for EDWARD THOMAS at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain, 1660.
