c6492 12684198 65726
THE FORME OF GOVERNEMENT OF THE KINGDOME OF ENGLAND: Collected out of the fundamental Lawes and Statutes of this Kingdome. Wherin is manifested the customary uses of the Kings of England upon all occasions, either of Marriage, Peace or Warre, to call their Peeres and Barons of the Realme to be bartners in Treatizes, and to give their juditious advice: the State and security of the whole Kingdome depending upon such Counsells and determinations. Likewise the names of the Kings, and the times when such Parliaments were called, and the Acts that passed upon those and the like occasions. Henry 1 Iohn Henry 3 Edward 1 Edward 2 Edward 3 Richard 2 Henry 4 Henry 5 Henry 6 Edward 4 Henry 7 Henry 8 Pulished for the satisfaction of all those, that desire to know the manner and forme of the Governement of the Land, and the fundamentall Lawes of the Kingdome. London, Printed for Tho. Bankes, 1642.
That the Kings of England have beene pleased usually to consult in their great Counsells of Marriage, Peace, and Warre with their Peeres and Com∣mons in PARLIAMENT. TO search so high as the Norman Conquest, it is necessary to lay downe the forme of Government of those times, wherein the State of affaires led in another forme of publique Councels: For the people (wrought under the Sword of the first William,William the Conqueror. and his followers, to a subjected Vassaladge) could not possesse in such Assemblies the Right of their former Liberties, Divisions and Power having mastered them, and none of their old nobility and Heads, being left either of credit or fortunes.Domesday. What he retained not in providence as the Demeas∣nes of the Crowne) or reserved in Piety (as the main∣tenance of the Church) he parted to those Strangers that sayled along with him, in that Barque of his Adventure;Edmerus. leaving the Natives for the most part (as it appeares by his Survey) in no better condition, then villany; moul∣ding their Customes to the manner of his owne Coun∣trey; and forbore to grant the Lawes of Saint Edward,Huntington. so often called for.
Ex Libro feodorum in Sccio.To supply his occasions of men, money, and po∣on; hee ordered that all those, that enjoyed any fruit of his Conquest, should hold their Lands propor∣tionable by so many Knights fees of the Crowne; admit∣ted them to enseoffe their followers of such part (as they pleased) of their own portions,Hen. 1. stat. Ex Libro rubro Sccij. Chronicon de Durstble. which to ease their charge they did in his and his sonnes time by two Feoffments, the one de novo, the other de veteri. This course provided him of the body of his warre; the money and Provision was by headage assested the common people by the co∣sent of their Lords; who held in all their Seigniories such Right of Regalitie, as to their Vassalles; so as (saith Pa∣ris) quot Domini,Paris. Benedict. monac. in vita. Hn. 2. Gervasins Doubo. tot Tyranni: and proved to the King so great a curbe and restraint of power, that nothing fll into the Care of Maiestie afterward more, then o re∣trench the force of this Aristocracy, that was in time like to strange the Monarchy. Though others foresaw the mischiefe betimes, yet none attempted the remedy,Iohn. untill King Iohn, whose o∣verhastie undertaking brought in those broyles of te Barrons warres.Roger Wen∣don. There needed not before this any cae to advise with the Commons in all publique Assembly, when every man in England by Tenure, held himsele o his great Lords will, whose presence was ever required in those Councells; and in whose assent his dependant Te∣nants consent was ever included. Before this Kings time then we seeke in vaine for any Commons called, they were called ever for making of Lawes, but not to consult touching warre or Peace Te fist (as may bee gathered) though darkely) by the Re∣cords) that used their Counsells and Assents, was tis King in the sixt yeare of his Raigne:Claus. 6. Io. in dors. here are the first summons on record to the Peeres or Barrons, tractaturi de magnis & ardius negotiis. It was about a warre of de∣fence
against the French. And that the Commons were admitted at this time, may fitly be gathered by the ordi∣nance; Provisum est communi assensu Archiepiscoporum,Claus. 6, Io. pt. 2. in dors. Co∣mitam, Baronum, & aliorum fidelium nostrorum Angliae, quod nomen milites Angliae invenirent decimum, &c. And this was directed to all the Shirefs in England. The auncient use in publique lawes. From this time, there is a breach untill 18. Hen. 3. where the next Summons extant, is in a Plea Rolle of that year,Hen. 3. Plita de Bau co. 18. Hen. 3 but the ordinances are lost, from thence the Records afford us no light untill the 49 of the same King, where then the Summons to the Bishops, Lords, Knights, and Burgesses are much in manner,Claus. 49. Hen. 3. iij. An. 11. Dors though not in matter alike to the use in our times, this Parliament was called to ad∣vise with the King pro pace assecuranda & firmanda, they are the words of the writt; and where advice is required, consultation must be admitted. To this King succeeded Edward the first, his Sonne,Edw. 1. a wise, just, and fortunate Prince. In his Raigne we have no light of publique Councell of this kind; And so along to the fourth of his Granchild,Ex Rot. part in Archinis Loud. but what we borrow out of the Rolles of Summons, wherein the forme stood vari∣ous according to the occasions, untill it grew constant in the forme it is, about the entring of Richard the second, the Journall Rolles being spoiled by the injury of time or private ends. This King in the fift of his Raigne called a Parliament,Claus 5. Edw. 1. iij. 12. Dors. and therein advised with his Lords and Commons, for suppressing Llewellin Prince of Wales: And hearing that the French King intended to invade some peeces of his inheritance in France,Claus. 7. E. 1 iij. 3. Dors. summoned a Parliament ad tractan∣dum, ordinandum, & faciendum cum Prelatis, Proceris & aliis Incois Regni, quomodo huiusmodi periculis & excogitatis mili∣tiis
sit obviandum; inserting in the writt, that it was Lex notissima & provida circumspectione stabilita, that that quod omnes tangit,Claus. 34. E. 1. Dors. abomnibus approbaretur. In the thirty fourth of his Raigne super ordinatione & stabilimento Regni Scotie, he made the like convention. His Sonne,Edw. 2. the second Edward, pro solempnitate Sponsa∣lium & Coronationis, consulted with his people in his first yeare,Claus. 1. E. 2. iij. 19. in his sixth yeare, super diversis negotiis statuum Regni & expeditione Guerre Scotie specialiter tangentibus, he assem∣bled the States to advise:Claus. 6. E. 2. iij. 3. the like he did in his eight yeare. The French King having invaded Gascoigne in the thir∣teenth yeare,Claus. 8. E. 2. iij. 3. the Parliament was called super arduis nego∣tiis Statuum ducatus Vasconie tangentibus;Claus. 13, E. 2. iij. 13. Dors. And in the six∣teenth to consult ad refraenandum Scotorum obstinantiam & malitiam.Claus. 16. E. 2. iij. 27. Before Edward the third would resolve in his first year, whether Peace or warre with the Scotish King;Edw. 3. Claus. 1. E. 3. he sum∣moned the Peeres and Commons super praemissis tractare & concilium impendere. The Chancellour Anno the fifth declareth from the King,Rotl. Parl. 5. Edw. 3. the cause of that Assemby, that it was to consult and resolve, whether the King should proceed with France for recoverie of his Seignories, by Allyance of marriage, or by warre? And whether to redresse the disobedience of the Irish, he should passe in person or noe? Parl. 6. E. 3.The year following he resembled his Lords and Com∣mons, and required their advice, whether he should un∣dertake the holy Expedition with the French King, or no? The Bishops and Proctors of the Clergie would not be present, as forbidden by their Canons such Coun∣cels. The Peeres and Commons consult, applauding the Religious and Princely forwardnesse of their Soveraigne to this holy enterprise, but humbly advise forbearance this year, for urgent reasons.
The same yeare though at another Session, the King demaunding the advice of his people, whether he should passe into France to an enterview as was desired,Rotl. Parl. 6. Edw. 3. Ses. 2 ij. 6. for ex∣pediting the treatie of Marriage: the Prelates by them∣selves, the Earles and Barons by themselves, and the Knights of Shires by themselves, consulted apart, for so are the Records, and in the end resolved, that to prevent some dangers likely to arise from the North: it would please the King to forbeare his journey, and to draw tow∣ards those parts where the perils were feared, his pre∣sence being the best prevention; which advise he fol∣lowed. In the following Parliament at York, the King sheweth,Rotl. Parl, 7 Edw. 3. how by their former advice he had drawn himselfe tow∣ards the North parts, and now againe he had assembled them to advise further for his proceedings. To which the Lords and Commons having consulted apart, pray fur∣ther time to resolve, untill a full assembly of the States, which the King graunting, adjourneth that Session. At their next meeting they are charged upon their Allegiance and Faith,Rotl. Parl. 7. Edw. 3. Sess. 2. ij. 6. to give the King their best advice; the Peeres and Commons consulting apart, delivered their opinions; And so the Parliament ended. In the thirteenth yeare, the Grandees and Commons are called to consult, and advise,Parl. 13. Edw. 3. how the domestique quiet may be preserved, the maches of Scotland de∣fended, and the Sea scoured from enemies. The Peeres and Commons having apart consulted, the Commons after a desire not to be charged to counsell in things de queux ils n'ount pas cognizance, answers that the Guardians of the Shires assisted by the knights may effect the first, if pardons of felons bee not granted: The care of the
marches they humbly leave to the King and his Councel, And for the safeguard of His Seas, they wish that the Cinque Ports and Maritine Townes; discharged for the most part from many Burthens of the Inland parts, may have that left to their charge and care: and that such as have Lands near the Courts be commanded to reside on those possessions. Rot. Parl. 13. Edw. 3. Sess. 2. da.The Parliament is the same yeare reassembled, advisa∣mento Prelatorum, Proceram, nec non Communitatis, to advise de expeditione Guerrae in partibus transmarini. At this Ordi∣nance are made for provision of Ships, arraying of men for the marches and defence of the Ile of Iersey, naming such in the Records, as they conceived fit for those im∣ployments. Parl. 14. E. 3The next yeare de la poole accompteth the expences of the warre; a new ayde is granted, and by severall Com∣mittes, in which divers were named that were not Peeres of Parliament, the safeguard of the Seas, and defence of the Seas are consulted of. Parl. 15. E, 3.In the fifteenth yeare de assensu Praelatorum Procerum. & alioram de Concilio, the Kings passage into France is resol∣ved of. Parl. 17. E. 3Anno. 17. Badlesmore in place of the Chancellour declareth unto the Peeres and Commons; that whereas by their assents the King had undertaken the warres in France,Iohn 21. and that by the mediation of the Pope a Truce was offred: which then their Soveraign forbore to entertain without their allowance. The Lords apart consult, and also the Commons, returning by Sir William Trussell in answer their advise, and desireing to compose the Quarrell, approve the Truce and the Popes mediati∣ons, The Popes undertaking proving fruitlesse, and de∣layes to the French advantagious, who in the mean time with Scotland and others practised to roote out the
English nation in France: The King againe assembled his Parliament the yeare following:Parl. 18. Edw. 3. in which the Peares and Commons after many dayes of deliberation, resolve to end it, either by Battaile or Peace, and no more to trust upon the mediation or message of his Holinesse.Parl. 21. Ew. 3. In the 21. yeare the Chiefe Iustice Thorpe declaring to the Peeres and Commons, that the French Warres be∣gan by their advice: the Truce after by their assnts ac∣cepted and now ended. The Kings pleasure was to have their Counsells in the procecution. The Commons bee∣ing commanded, que ils se devoient faire assembler, & fils essent agree le devoient monetre an Roy & al Grandees de son Councell, after 4. daies consultation, humbly desire of the King, that he would bee advised herein by his Lords and and others of more experience then themselves in such affaires. To advise the King the best for his French Imploy∣ments,Parl. 25. Edw. 3. a Parliament was summoned Anno 25. herein the King by a more publique dispatch willeth the Com∣mons to elect 24. or 30. of their House to consult with the Lords, these to relate to their fellowes, and the Con∣clusion generall to the King. In the 27. a great Councell is assembed, many of the Lay Peeres, few of the Clergy: and of the Shires and Burroughs but one a piece. This was for the prosecu∣tion of the French warres, when an honourable Peace could not bee gotten. But the yeare following a Truce being offered, the King forbore to entertaine it, untill he had the consent of his Peeres and Commons which they in Parliament accorded unto before the Popes notary by publique Instrument. The dallying of the French in the conclusion of Peace;Parl. 27. Edw. 3. and the falling off of the Duke of Brittaine (having
wrought with France by the reputation of the English suc∣cours) is the yeare following declared in Parliament, and their advice and ayde required for the Kings pro∣ceedings. Parl. 36. Edw. 3.In the thirty sixth yeare he calleth his Parliament to consult whether Warre or Peace by David the King of Scotts, then offered, should be excepted. Parl. 4. Ew. 3.In the Fortieth yeare the Pope demanding the Tri∣bute of King Iohn, the Parliament was assembled; where after consutation apart,Vrbane 5. the Prelates, Lords, and Com∣mons advised the deniall, although it bee by dint of sword. Parl. 43. Edw. 3.In the forty third yeare the King declared to the Peeres and Commons, that the French, against the Articles of the Truce, refused payment of the monies, and delivery of the Townes, summoning La Brett, and others of the Kings Subiects in Gascoigne, to make at Paris their ap∣peales, and had forraged his Countrie of Poitiers: requi∣ring in their breach, whether hee might not resume the Style and quarrell of France. The Lords and Commons having apart consulted, advise the King to both, which he approving, altered the inscription and figure of his Seale. Parl. 45. Edw. 3.Two yeares after it was declared to the Peeres and Commons, that by their advise he had resumed the Style and Quarrell of France; and therefore desired their ad∣vise for the defence of the Reame against the French, se∣curing of the Seas, and pursuing of the Warres. Of which they consult,Parl. 46. Edw. 3. and resolve to give the King an ayde. The like Counsell and supply was the very next yeare following.Parl. 50. Edw. 3. In the Fiftieth yeare, a Parliament to the purpose of
the former two, was sommoned;Parl. 51. and the yeare follow∣ing,Edw. 3. the King in Parliament declaring how the French had combined underhand against him with Spaine and Scotland, required their advice, how peace at home, the Teritories abroad, securitie of the Seas, and charge of the Warre might be maintayned. I have the longer insisted in observing the carriage of these times so good and glorious,Rich. 2. after ages having not left the Iournall entries of Parliament so full, which therefore with a lighter hand I will passe through. Richard the second,Parl. 1. the Grandchild succeeded to the Crowne and troubles, having nothing worth his great fortunes, but his great Birth. The first of his Raigne,Ric. 2.▪ anno 5. stat. 6. hee pursued the steps of his wise Grandfather, advising with his Peeres and Commons, how best to resist his enemies that had lately wronged divers of his Subiects on the Sea coasts. In the second yeare hee againe consulted with his peo∣ple, how to withstand the Scotts,Parl. 2. Ric. 2. anno 2. who then had combi∣ned with the French to breake the Truce. In the third yeare hee called the advise of his Parlia∣ment, how to maintaine his Regality,Parl. 3. Ric. 2. anno 7. impared by the Popes Provisions, who to resist Spayne, France, and Scotland, that had raised Warres against him,Ʋrban, 6. how to sup∣presse his Rebells in Guyon and Ireland, and to defend the Seas. In the fourth yeare of his Raigne, he called the like at Windsor. The yeare following in a great Councell,Parl. 4. Ric. 2. anno 2.3. the King having purposed a Voyage Royall into France, now called his Parliament to determine further of it.Parl. 5. Ric. 2. Sess. 1. And it is worthey your observation, that for the most pat be∣fore any propositions of warre or Peace wre vented to the Commons, a debate thereof precedeth in the great
Councell to shape in fitter for popular advise.Parl. 5. Ric. 2. Sess. 2. The quar∣rell with Spaine continuing the Duke of Lancaster offe∣reth a voyage against them, so as the State will lend him money: after consultation they grant an aide, but not to binde them to any continuance of warre with Spaine. Parl. 6. Ric. 2. Sess. 1.In the sixth the Parliament was called to consult about the defence of the Borders, the Kings possions beyond the Seas, Ireland and Gascoyne, his Subiects in Portugall. The Lords approve the Dukes intentions for Portugall, and the Commons that the Bishop of Norwich having the Popes Crosyer should invade France.Parl. 6. Ric. 2. Sess. 2. The same yeare the State was called againe to consult, whether the King should goe in person to rescue Gaunt or send his Army. The Commonsafter two dayes debate, craved a confe∣rence with the Lords. The effect is not entred in the Rolle onely they by Sir Thomas Puckering their Speaker, protest that Councells for war did aptly belong to the King and his Lords, yet since the Commons were commanded to give their advice, they humbly wished a voyage by the King, if not, that the Bishop of Norwich might with the advantage of the Popes Crosier be used in that Service, who accepted, the charge with ill successe, he further for the Commons prayeth, that the Kings Vncles should not be spared out of the Realme before some Peace was set∣led with the Scotts; And that the Lord de Lars-par sent with Propositions of Peace from Spaine might first bee heard.Parl. 7. Ric. 2. Sess. 1. The Chancellors in the seventh yeare in name of the King willeth the Lords apart, and so the Commons to consult, whether Peace or Warre with Scotland, and whe∣ther to resist or assault the Kings Adversaries of Spaine, France, and Flanders: Their opinions are not entred in the
Rolles, an omission usuall to the Clarkes neglect, onely their Petitions are recorded, that the Bishop of Norwich may accompt in Parliament the expence of the money, and be punished for his faults in the service, which hee undertooke, both which are granted.Sess. 2. And at the next Session in the same yeare, the Commons are willed to advise upon view of the Articles of peace with the French whether Warre or such Amitie should bee accepted? They modestly excuse themselves as to weake to Coun∣sell in so weighty causes; But charged againe as they did tender their honour, and the right of the King, they make their Answer, giving their opinions rather for Peace then Warre. Peace with France not succeeding, in the eighth year,Parl. 8. the body of the State was called to advise,Rich. 2. whether the King in his owne person; or by sending forces against the French, Spaine, Flaunders and Scotland, should proceed. The King haveing this yeare assembled at Oxon his great Councell to advise,Claus. 9. whether he should passe the Seas or no, with an Army Royall;Rich. 2. and they not daring to assent without a greater Councell:Parl. 10. A Parliament the tenth yeare was called to have the advice of the Com∣mons, aswell as of the Lords,Rich. 2. how the Realme should be governed in their Soveraignes absence. The Truce with France now neare expired,Parl. 13. the Parli∣ament was called in the thirteenth yeare to advise upon what condition it should be renewed:Rich. 2. otherwise how the charge of warre should be sustained. At this Assembly and by consent of all,Claus. 13. Rich. 2. the Duke of Lancaster is created Duke of Aquitaine, the Statutes of provision were now pased, and the Commons are named a party,Boniface 9. in the let∣ter to the Pope.Parl. 14. The yeare succeeding a Parliament is called,Rich. 2. for that
the King would have the advice of his Lords and Com∣mons for the warre with Scotland, and would not with∣out their Counsell conclude a finall peace with France. Parl. 15.The like Assembly for the same causes was the yeare ensuing,Rich. 2. wherein the Commons desire the King to use a moderation in the Law of provision, to please at this time their Holy Father, So as the Statute upon their dislike might again be executed, And that to negotiate the peace with France, the Duke of Aquitaine might rather then any other, be imployed. Parl. 17.To consult of the Treaty with France for the King in the seventeenth calleth a Parliament,Rich. 2. the answer of the Lords is left unentred in the Rolle, but the Commons upon their faith and allegiance charged, advise that with good moderation, homage may be made for Guyen, an appenage of the French Crowne, so as it intrench not to involve the other peeces of the English conquest, their answer is modest, large, and worthy of marke. Hen. 4th.Now succeeded a man that first studied all popularity, as needing all to support his Titles,Parl. 5. H. 4. He in the fifth year called a Parliament, to suppresse the malice of the Duke of Orleance, and to advise for the warres in Ireland and Scotland, neither counsels or supplies are entred in the Rolle,Parl. 6. H. 4. and to resist an Inovation intended by France and Brittaine, he assembleth the State againe. Claus. 7.The like was in the two yeares following for Fraunce. In this the Commons conferr with the Lords for Guard of the Sea,Hen. 4. iii 33 and make many Ordinances to which the King assented: the Peace with the merchants of Pruce, and the Hanstowns is debated, and a Proclamation pub∣lished,iii. 57 as they resolve, by the Speaker the Commons complain of 96. peeces of Ordinance lost in Guyen the yeare before, the need of defence for the Borders, and
Guard of the Sea coasts. To suppresse the Rebellion in Wales, and the disloyalty of the Earle of Northumber∣land, they humbly desire,iii. 59. that the Prince may be dis∣patched into those parts with speed: and to have a vigi∣lent eye of the Scottish Prisoners. In the tenth the Parliament is commanded to give their advice about the truce of Scotland,Parl. 10. Hen. 4. and preparation against the malice of the French. His Sonne, the wise and happy undertker,Hen. 5. Parl. 1. consulteth with the Parliament in his first yeare,Hen. 5. how to cherish his Allies, and restrain his Enemies, for this there wa a se∣lect Committee of the Commons, appointed to confer with the Lords, the matter being entered into a Sche∣due. Touching Ireland, Wales, Scotland, Calice,Anno 9. Guyen, Shipping, Guard of the Seas, and wary provisi∣on to repulse the Enemy. In the Second he openeth to the Parliament his title to France, a quarrell he would prosecute to death:Parl. 2. Hen. 5. if they allowed and ayded, death is in this Assembly, en∣acted to all, that either break the Truce, or the Kings safe conduct. The year following peace being offred by the French King,Rot. Parl. An. 3. Hen. 5 and the King of the Romanes arrived to effect the worke, the King refuseth any conclusion, untill he had thereunto the advice and assent of his Lords and Com∣mons, which occasion the Chancellour declareth to that Assembly. In the fourth and fifth,Parl. 4. & 5. Hen. 5.no peace concluded with France, the King calleth the State together to consult a∣bout the Warre, concluding a Treaty of Amitie with Si∣gismund King of the Romanes, by the allowance of the three States, and entreth the Articles in the Iournall Rolle. In the same yeare by the Duke of Bedford,Parl. 5. H. 5. in the
Kings absence a Parliament was called to the former purposes, as it appeareth by the Summons, though in the Rolle omitted. Parl. 7. H. 5.The like in the seaventh year. And the Treaty with France is by the Prelates, Nobles and Commons of the Kingdome perused and ratified in the tenth yeare of this King.Parl. 10. Hen. 5. His Sonne more holy then happy succeeded,Hen. 6th. and ad∣viseth in the second year with the Lords and Commons for the well keeping of the peace with France,Rot. Parl. 2. Hen. 6. consult∣eth with them about the delivery of the Scottish King, and the conclusion is confirmed by common assent.Rot. Parl. 3. Hen. 6. In the third yeare they are called to advise and consent to a new Article in the league with Scotland, for charge of Hostage, and in the ninth yeare conclude of certain per∣sons by name, to treate a peace with the Dolphin of France.9. Hen. 6. The Treaty of Arras,Eugenius 4.14. Hen. 6. whether the Pope had sent as mediators two Cardinals, not succeeding the King in Parliament, Anno 14. sheweth that he must either loose his Title, Style, and Kingdome of France, or else defend it by force: the best meanes for provision whereof he wil∣leth them to advise him. He summoneth again the next year the same Councel to advise how the Realme might be best defended,Parl. 15. Hen. 6. and the Sea kept safe against the Enemies. In the twentith the Commons exhibite a Bill for Guard of the Se,Anno. 20. Hen. 6. the number of ships, assesse wages, and dispose of Prizes if any fortune, To which the King accordeth. And that the Genowaies might be declared Enemies, for ssisting the Turk in spoyle of the Knights of Rhodes, And that the priviledge of the Pruce and Hanstownes might be suspended, untill composition be
made to the English for wrongs they had done them. To the which in part the King accordeth.Anno. 23. The King by the Chancellour declareth in Par∣liament,Hen. 6. that the Marriage with Margaret the King of Sicily his daughter was contracted. For induce∣ing the peace made with France. Against the which the Lords not by their advise effected, make a pro∣testation, and enter it on the Rolle.Parl. 25. The King intending to passe in person into France, there to treat of Peace with the King,Hen. 6. ad∣viseth with His Lords and Commons in Parlia∣ment,Anno 3. and letters of Mart are granted against the Brittaines for spoyles done to the English Mar∣chants. The Lord Hastings and the Abbot of Glou,Anno. 27. de∣clare in Parliament the preparation of the French,Hen. 6. the Breach by them of the Peace, the weake de∣fence of Normandy, and the expiration shortly of the Truce: requiring speedy advice and re∣medie. It injoyned the Parliament to provide for the Defence of the Sea and Land,Anno 29. Hen. 6. against the French. It was commanded by the King to the States assembled,Anno. 33. Hen. 6. to advise for the well ordering of his House, payment of his Souldiers at Calice, Guard of the Seas, raysing of the Seige at Berwike made by the Scots against the Truce: Disposing of 1300. Souldiers arrayed the last Parliament: According of differences amongst the Lords, restraining the transportation of Gold and Silver, and quieting the disorders in Wales, of all which Com∣mittees
are appointed to frame Bills. Edw. 4.Edward the fourth by the Chancellour decla∣reth to the Lords and Commons,Anno 7. that having made peace with Scotland; entred league with France and Denmark, contracted with Burgundy and Brittaine for their aide for the recovery of his right in France, he had now assembled them to give their Cousell in proceeding, which charge in a second Session was again pressed unto them.Anno 11. The like was at another Parliament held in the eleventh yeare.Edw. 4. Hen. 7.After this time the Journals of Parliament have bin either not well preserved,Parl. 1. or not carefully en∣tred,Hen. 7. for I can find of this nature no Records, un∣till the first of Henry the seaventh, wherein the Commons by Thomas Lovll their speaker, peti∣tion the King to take to wife Elizabeth the daugh∣ter of Edward the fourth, to which the King at their request doth agree. The next is the third of Henry the eighth in which from the King,Hen. 8, Rot. Parl. 3. the Chancellour declareth to the States the cause of that Assembly to be first,Hen. 8. to advise a course for resisting the innovation of the Scots:Iulius 2. the next, how to quiet the quarrell be∣tween the King of Castile, and the Duke of Gel∣ders, lastly for assisting the Pope against Lewes of France, whose Bull expressing the injuries done the Sea Apostolique, was read by the Master of the Rolles in open Parliament, after which the Chancellour, There and other Lords were sent downe unto the Commons to confer thereof. Rot Parl. 32. Hen 8.The last is in the two and thirtieth yeare where∣in the Chancellour remembring the many trou∣bles
the State had undergone in doubtful Titles of Succession, declareth, that although the convoca∣tion had judged void the marriage with Anne of Cleve, yet the King would not proceed without the Counsell of the States,Ex instru∣ment. Origi∣nal. whereupon the two Arch-bishops are sent downe to the Commons with the sentence sealed, which being there discus∣sed, they passe a Bill against the Marriage. In all these passages of publique Counsels, I still observe, that the Soveraigne Lord either in best advise, or most necessitie would entertaine the Commons with the weightiest causes, either forreine or domestique, thereby to apt them and bind them to a readines of Charge And they as warily avoiding it to shine expence. FJNJS.
