D2302 11774834 48939
Love Triumphant; OR, NATURE will PREVAIL.
Love Triumphant; OR, NATURE will PREVAIL. A Tragi - Comedy. As it is Acted at the Theatre Royal, By Their MAJESTIES SERVANTS. Quod optanti Divum promittere nemo Auderet, volvenda dies, en, attulit ultrò. Virg. Written by Mr. DRYDEN. LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson, at the Judges Head near the Inner-Temple-Gate in Fleet-street. 1694.
To the Right Honourable JAMES Earl of Salisbury, &c. My Lord, THIS Poem being the last which I intend for the Theatre, ought to have the same Provision made for it, which Old Men make for their youngest Child, which is commonly a Favourite: They who were born before it carry away the Patrimony by Right of Elder∣ship. This is to make its Fortune in the World; and since I can do lit∣tle for it, Natural Affection calls upon me to put it out, at least, into the best service which I can procure for it. And as it is the usual practice of our decay'd Gentry, to look about them for some Illustrious Family, and there endeavour to fix their young Dar∣ling, where he may be both well Educated, and Supported: I have herein also follow'd the Custom of the World, and am satisfi'd in my Judgment, that I cou'd not have made a more Worthy Choice. 'Tis true, I am not vain enough to think that any thing of mine can in any measure be worthy of Your Lordship's Patronage: and yet I shou'd be asham'd to leave the Stage, without some acknow∣ledgement of your former Favours, which I have more than once experienc'd. Besides the Honour of my Wife's Relation to Your Noble House, to which my Sons may plead some Title, though I cannot; You have been pleas'd to take a particular notice of me, even in this lowness of my Fortunes, to which I have voluntarily reduc'd my self: and of which I have no reason to be asham'd.
This Condescension, my Lord, is not only becoming of Your An∣cient Family, but of Your Personal Character in the World. And if I value my self the more for your Indulgence to me, and your Opinion of me; 'tis because any thing which you like, ought to be consider'd as something in it self. And therefore I must not undervalue my present Labours, because I have presum'd to make you my Patron. A Man may be just to himself, tho he ought not to be partial. And I dare affirm, that the several Man∣ners which I have given to the Persons of this Drama, are truly drawn from Nature; all perfectly distinguish'd from each other. That the Fable is not injudiciously contriv'd; that the turns of Fortune are not manag'd unartfully; and that the last Revolution is happily enough invented. Aristotle, I acknowledge, has de∣clar'd, that the Catastrophe which is made from the change of Will is not of the first Order for Beauty: but it may reasonably be al∣ledg'd, in defence of this Play, as well as of the Cinna (which I take to be the very best of Corneille's) that the Philosopher who made the Rule, copy'd all the Laws, which he gave for the Theatre, from the Authorities and Examples of the Greek Poets, which he had read: And from their Poverty of Invention he cou'd get nothing but mean Conclusions of wretched Tales: where the mind of the chief Actor was for the most part chang'd without Art or Preparation; only because the Poet could not otherwise end his Play. Had it been possible for Aristotle to have seen the Cinna, I am confident he would have alter'd his Opinion; and concluded, that a simple change of Will might be manag'd with so much Judgment, as to render it the most agreeable, as well as the most surprising part of the whole Fable: Let D'acier, and all the rest of the Modern Criticks, who are too much Bigotted to the Ancients, contend never so much to the con∣trary. I was afraid that I had been the Inventor of a new sort of designing, when in my Third Act, I make a discovery of my Alphonso's true Parentage. If it were so, what wonder had it been, that Dramatick Poetry, tho a limited Art, yet might be capable of receiving some Innovations for the better. But afterwards I casually found, that Menander and Terence, in the Heauton∣timoroumenos, had been before me; and made the same kind of discovery in the same Act. As for the Mechanick Vnities, that of Time is much within the compass of an Astrological Day, which begins
at Twelve, and ends at the same hour the Day following. That of Place is not observ'd so justly by me, as by the Ancients; for their Scene was always one, and almost constantly some Publick Place. Some of the late French Poets, and amongst the Eng∣lish, my most Ingenious Friend, Mr. Congreve, have observ'd this Rule strictly; though the Place was not altogether so publick as a Street. I have follow'd the Example of Corneille, and stretch'd the Latitude to a Street and Palace, not far distant from each other in the same City. They who will not allow this Liberty to a Poet, make it a very ridiculous thing, for an Audience to suppose themselves, sometimes to be in a Field, sometimes in a Garden, and at other times in a Chamber. There are not indeed so many Absurdities in their Supposition, as in ours; but 'tis an Original Absurdity, for the Audience to suppose themselves to be in any other place, than in the very Theatre, in which they sit; which is neither Chamber, nor Garden, nor yet a Publick Place of any Business, but that of the Representation. For my Action, 'tis evidently dou∣ble; and in that I have most of the Ancients for my Examples. Yet I dare not defend th way by Reason, much less by their Autho∣rity: for their Actions, though double, were of the same Species; that is to say, in their Comedies two Amours: And their Persons were better link'd in Interests than mine. Yet even this is a fault which I shou'd often practise, if I were to write again; because 'tis agreeable to the English Genius. We love variety more than any other Nation; and so long as the Audience will not be pleas'd without it, the Poet is oblig'd to humour them. On condition they were cur'd of this publick Vice, I cou'd be content to change my Me∣thod, and gladly give them a more reasonable Pleasure. This Di∣gression, my Lord, is not altogether to the purpose of an Epistle Dedicatory: Yet 'tis expected that somewhat shou'd be said even here, in relation to Criticisme; at least in Vindication of my Ad∣dress, that you may not be desir'd to Partronize a Poem which is wholly unworthy of your Protection. Tho, after all, I doubt not but some will liken me to the Lover in a Modern Comedy, who was combing his Peruke, and setting his Cravat before his Mistress; and being ask'd by her, when he intended to begin his Court? reply'd, he had been doing it all this while. Yet thus it happens, my Lord, that Self will come into all Addresses of this Nature, tho 'tis the
most unmannerly word of the World in civil Conversation, and the most ungrateful to all Hearers. For which reason, I, who have nothing to boast of, but my Misfortunes, ought to be the first to banish it. Especially since I have so large a Field before me, as Your Inborn Goodness, Your Evenness of Temper, Your Humility in so ample a share of Fortune as you possess; Your Hu∣manity to all Men, and Your Kindness to your Friends: Besides Your Natural and Acquir'd Endowments, and Your Brotherly Love to Your Relations. Notus in Fratres animo Paterno, was the great Commendation which Horace gave to one of his Patrons: And 'tis that Praise which particularly Crowns your other Vertues. But here, my Lord, I am oblig'd in common Prudence to stop short; and to cast under a Veil some other of your Praises, as the Chymists use to shadow the Secret of their great Elixir; lest if it were made publick, the World shou'd make a bad use of it. To enjoy our own Quiet, without disturbing that of others, is the practice of every Moral Man: And for the rest, to live chearfully and splendidly, as it is becoming of Your Illustrious Birth, so 'tis like∣wise to thank God for his Benefits in the best manner. 'Tis un∣necessary to wish you more Worldly Happiness, or Content of Mind, than you enjoy: But the continuance of both, to Your Self, and Your Posterity, is earnestly desir'd by all who have the Honour to be known to You, and more particularly by, MY LORD, Your Lordship's most Obedient and most Humbly Devoted Servant, JOHN DRYDEN.
PROLOGUE. Spoken by Mr. Betterton. AS when some Treasurer lays down the Stick; Warrants are Sign'd for ready Mony thick: And many desperate Debentures paid; Which never had been, had his Lordship staid: So now, this Poet, who forsakes the Stage, Intends to gratifie the present Age. One Warrant shall be Sign'd for every Man; All shall be Wits that will; and Beaux that can: Provided still, this Warrant be not shown, And you be Wits, but to your selves alone. Provided too; you rail at one another: For there's no one Wit, will allow a Brother. Provided also; that you spare this Story, Damn all the Plays that e're shall come before ye. If one by chance prove good in half a score, Let that one pay for all; and Damn it more. For if a good one scape among the Crew, And you continue Judging as you do; Every bad Play will hope for Damning too. You might Damn this, if it were worth your pains, Here's nothing you will like; no fustian Scenes, And nothing too of—you know what he means.
No double Entendrès, which you Sparks allow; To make the Ladies look they know not how; Simply as 'twere; and knowing both together, Seeming to fan their Faces in cold Weather. But here's a Story which no Books relate; Coin'd from our own Old Poet's Addle-pate. The Fable has a Moral too, if sought: But let that go; for upon second Thought, He fears but few come hither to be Taught. Yet if you will be profited, you may; And he would Bribe you too, to like his Play. He Dies, at least to us, and to the Stage, And what he has, he leaves this Noble Age. He leaves you first, all Plays of his Inditing, The whole Estate, which he has got by Writing. The Beaux may think this nothing but vain Praise, They'l find it something; the Testator says: Tor half their Love, is made from scraps of Plays. To his worst Foes, he leaves his Honesty; That they may thrive upon't as much as he. He leaves his Manners to the Roaring Boys, Who come in Drunk, and fill the House with noise. He leaves to the dire Critiques of his Wit, His Silence and Contempt of all they Writ. To Shakespear's Critique, he bequeaths the Curse, To find his faults; and yet himself make worse. A precious Reader in Poetique Schools, Who by his own Examples damns his Rules. Last for the Fair, he wishes you may be, From your dull Critiques, the Lampooners free.
Tho' he pretends no Legacy to leave you, An Old Man may at least good wishes give you. Your Beauty names the Play; and may it prove, To each, an Omen of Triumphant Love.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE. VEramond, King of Arrragon, Represented by Mr. Kynnaston. Alphonso, his suppos'd Son, Mr. Betterton. Garcia, King of Navarre, Mr. Williams. Ramirez, King of Castile, Mr. Alexander. Sancho, Carlos, Two Colonels, Mr. Dogget. Mr. Powell. Lopez, An old Courtier, Mr. Vnderhill. WOMEN. Ximena, Queen of Arragon, BY Mrs. Betterton. Victoria, Eldest Daughter to the King and Queen, Mrs. Barry. Celidea, Her Sister, Mrs. Bracegirdle. Dalinda, Daughter to Lopez, Mrs. Montfort. A Nurse, with two Children, Mrs. Kent. SCENE SARRAGOSSA in Spain.
Love Triumphant; OR, NATURE will PREVAIL. A Tragi - Comedy. ACT I. SCENE I. At the Drawing up of the Curtain, Veramond King of A∣ragon appears: Ximena the Queen by him: Victoria their eldest Daughter on the Right Hand; and Celidea their younger Daughter on the left: Courtiers stand attending in File on each side of the Stage. The Men on one hand, the Ladies on the other. Amongst the Men, Don Lopez, amongst the Women, Dalinda his Daughter. The Scene is suppos'd a Presence-Chamber. Vera. NOW the long Wars betwixt Castile and Arragon Are ended in the ruin of our Foes. And fierce Ramirez, the Castilian King, Who tugg'd for Empire, with our WarlikeSon,
In single Combat taken, adds his Lawrels To the young Victor's Brow: Our tender Maids And trembling Children, shall with Scorn behold The haughty Captive, who had made his Vaunts To lay their Dwellings level; and with Salt To sow the place, where Sarragossa stood. Xime. Processions, Prayers, and Publick Thanks to Heav'n, Were fit to be decreed. Vera. Your Sex is ever formost in Devotion. But for our brave Confederate, young Navarre, He shall receive the Prize reserv'd within My Breast; and such a one, His Youth and Valour have right-well deserv'd. Xime. I hear he comes along with our Alphonso, And next our Son, did best. Vera. Perhaps as well: Alphonso's Action was indeed more Glorious, To buckle with a King in single Fight, And take him Prisoner; but his fiery temper Still hurries him to daring rash Attempts. Xime. Alphonso is Impetuous, but he's Noble; He will not take one Atome from Navarre Of what's his Right, nor needs he. Vera. If he shou'd— Xime. You take too bad Impressions of your Son. Vera. No more, Ximena, for I hear their Trumpets Proclaim their Entry: And our own their Welcome. [Trumpets from each side of the Stage. Enter Alphonso and Garcia, hand in hand. After them, the Prisoner K. Ramirez alone: Then the two Colonels, Sancho and Carlos: After them, other Officers of the Army. Ve∣ramond advances to meet them: The Queen and the two Princesses follow him. Alphonso first kneels to his Father and Mother, and immediately runs to salute his Sister Victo∣ria tenderly; then slightly salutes Celidea, and returns to Victoria. In the mean time Veramond embraces Don Garcia, who afterwards kisses the Queen's hand.
Vera. The Triumphs of this Day, auspicious Prince, Proclaim themselves Your Gift, to us and Arragon: From you they are deriv'd; to you return; For what we are, you make us. Gar. May Heav'n and your brave Son, and, above all, Your own prevailing Genius, guard your Age From such another Day of doubtful Fate: But if it comes, then Garcia will be proud To be again the Foil of Great Alphonso. Vera. It might, and well it had become my Son [Looking about for Alphonso. To speak your words; But you are still before him, As in the Fight you were. Xime. Turn to your Father, and present your Duty; [Pulling Alphonso by the sleeve. He thinks himself neglected, and observes ye. Here Garcia, after bowing to the King and Queen, goes to the two Princesses and salutes them. After a little dumb Court∣ship, he leads out Victoria and Celidea, the Ladies follow; Alphonso observes it with discontent, and then turns to his Father. Alphon. I saw you, Sir, engag'd in Ceremonies, And therefore thought I might defer this Office, To give you time for decent Thanks to Garcia. Vera. You rather went where more affection call'd ye. Alphon. I may have been too slack in outward show, But when your Service, and my Honour call'd, None was more forward in the fighting part. Vera. The rugged Business of the War is o'er: Softness and Sweetness, and a gentler Air Wou'd make a mixture, that wou'd temper well That inborn Fierceness of your boyling Mind. Alph. I stand corrected, Sir, and let me tell ye now, That sweetness which so well you have advis'd, Fortune has put in your own hand to practise Upon this Royal Souldier; till we fought [Showing Ramirez.
Your Equal, now your Prisoner of the War; And once, (alas! that still it is not so) The Partner of your Thoughts, and Bosom Friend. Xime. (aside.) Heav'n that inspir'd thee with this Pious thought, Add Vertue and Perswasion to thy words, And bend my stubborn Lord. Vera. Say, have you more to speak on his behalf? Alphon. Much more, his fair Behaviour in the War, Not plundering Towns, nor burning Villages; His Bravery of Mind, his Dauntless Courage, When Hand to Hand, he made me stoop beneath His weighty blows, and often forc'd to doubt The Fortune of my Youth, against his Age. Vera. Proceed, proceed, for this is but to say, That thou wert almost worsted in the Combat. Alphon. I have already said much more, than needs To move a Noble Mind; Such as my Father's is, or ought to be. Vera. Come, let me hear my Duty from my Son. Alphon. If more be wanting on so plain a Theam, Think on the slippery State of Humane Things, The strange vicissitudes, and suddain turns Of War, and Fate recoiling on the Proud, To crush a Merciless and Cruel Victor. Think there are bounds of Fortune, set above; Periods of Time, and progress of Success, Which none can stop before th' appointed limits, And none can push beyond. Ximena. He Reasons justly, Sir. Alphon. Ramirez is an Honourable Foe, Use him like what he is, and make him yours. Vera. By Heav'n I think, That when you cop'd with him in single Fight, You had so much ado to Conquer then, You fear t' ingage him in a second Combat. Alphon. The World knows how I Fought: But Old Men have Prerogative of Tongue, And Kings of Power, and Parents that of Nature.
Your Pardon, Royal Sir. Vera. I give it you; Your Battel now is paid at the full price. [Ximena whispers Alphonso for a moment. Alphon. Fear not, I curb my self. [To Ximena. Ramir. (to Veram.) Your Son has mention'd Honourable Terms. Propose 'em Veramond, and for his sake (So much his Valour and rare Courtesie, Have wrought upon my Soul,) I will accept 'em. Vera. Who gave you leave. To speak of Terms, or even to speak at all? Ramir. And who shou'd give me liberty of speaking, But Heav'n, who gave me Speech? Veram. How dares my Captive Assume this boldness to his Conqueror? Ramir. You have not Conquer'd me, you cou'd not, Veramond; 'Tis to Alphonso's Arms that I am Prisoner. Veram. Under my Auspices Alphonso fought, He led my Forces. Ramir. Yes, and made 'em too By his Example, else they ne're had Conquer'd. Veram. A Bargain! A plain Compact! A Confederacy! Betwixt my Son and thee, to give me part, Of what my better Stars, make all my own. Alphon. Sir, I must speak— Veram. Dare not, I charge thee, dare not. Alphon. Not vindicate my Honour? By Heav'n I will, to all the World, to you; My Honour is my own, and not deriv'd From this frail Body, and this Earth you gave me; But that Aetherial Spark, which Heav'n inspir'd, And kindl'd in my New Created Soul. You tell me, I have bargain'd with Ramirez, To make his Ransome cheap. Vera. To make it nothing, To rob thy Father of his Victory, And, at my cost, oblige my Mortal Foe; Fool, dost thou know the value of a Kingdom? Alphon. I think I do, because I won a Kingdom.
Veram. And know'st not how to keep it. Ramirez. What Claim have you? What Right to my Castile? Veram. The Right of Conquest, for when Kings make War; No Law betwixt two Soveraigns can decide, But that of Arms, where Fortune is the Judge, Soldiers the Lawyers, and the Bar the Field. Alphon. But with what Conscience can ye keep that Crown, To which, ye claim no Title but the Sword? Vera. Then ask that question of thy self, when thou Thy self art King; I will retain my Conquest; And if thou art so mean, so poor of Soul, As to refuse thy Sword in keeping it; Then Garcia's Aid; Whose share of Honour, in that Glorious day, Was more than thine; during my Life, shall Guard it, And at my Death, shall Heir it. Alphon. Don Garcia is indeed a Valiant Prince, But this large Courtesie, this over-praise You give his Worth, in any other Mouth, Were Villany to me. Ximena. That was too much Alphonso, shew the Reverence That Sons shou'd bear to Fathers. Alphon. (to her.) Did I not say in any other Mouth, The King excepted still? Ramir. Had I a Son; a Son like your Alphonso, The Pride of War, and Darling of the Field; I shou'd not thus receive him, nor detract From such High Actions: Let me tell you, Sir, (For I who felt his Arm, can best report him;) There lives not one, who breaths this Vital Air, That e're cou'd boast, he made Ramirez bend, Before Alphonso undertook the Task. Veram. Confederacy again! How they enhance Their mutual worth, and bandy Fame betwixt 'em, Into each other's hand.— [Looks on Ramirez, and starts back. What's this I see? Nay, now I wonder not, the Captive prates With so secure presumption to his King,
Well may he brave me, while his murd'ring Sword Sits as before, insulting on his side, Who gave thee back that weapon? Alphon. I, who took it. Vera. A careful Son, to trust a Foe with Arms So near his Father. Haste, disarm the Prisoner. Alphon. E're you dishonour me, first hear me speak; I took his Royal Word, to be my Prisoner; And on his Honour, I restor'd his Sword, Because I thought, that mark of Sovereign Justice And Awful Power, shou'd not for one short moment Be wanting to a Monarch. Vera. Then when he lost the Power, he lost the Claim, And marks of Sovereign Right: Nor without my Consent, cou'dst thou dispose Of him, or of his Sword, or of his Life: Once more disarm him: What, am I betray'd? [Guards look amaz'd, but stir not. Have I no Subject left? Xime. Submit, Alphonso. I, who am partial to you, must condemn This Carriage as undutious to your Father. Ramir. (to Alphon.) Brave Prince, too warmly you assert my Cause, Tho' 'tis indeed the common Cause of Kings: But to prevent what ills on my account May hence ensue betwixt a Son and Parent, Take here the Sword, you trusted in my Hands, Which you alone cou'd take—Now, Veramond, [Presents his Sword to Alphonso. Dispose of old Ramirez as thou pleasest; [He presents it sullenly to Veramond, who puts it into the hand of an Officer. Secure thy Hate, Ambition, and thy Fear, And give Ramirez Death, who scorns a Life Which he must owe to thee. Vera. (to the Guards.) Go bear him to the Castle; at more leisure His Doom shall be decreed.
Ramir. When e're it comes 'tis welcome, only this (If Enemies be suffer'd to request) Forgive th' Imprudent Zeal thy Son has shown On my behalf, and take him to thy Bosom: A noble Temper shines even through his faults, And gilds them into Virtues. Vera. Take him hence— [Ramirez is led off by San∣cho and Carlos, and follow'd by the Guards. Alphonso looking frowningly. The rest stay. Alphon. (aside.) How I abhor this base Inhumane Act! But Patience! he's my Father. Veram. Thus all his Praises, are thy Accusations, And even that very Sword, Punish me Heav'n, if I believe not so, Is far less dangerous in his Hand than thine. Xime. Forgive the hasty Sallies of his Youth. Vera. He never lov'd me. Alphon. You never gave me cause. Xime. (to Alphon.) Come, you both lov'd, But both were jealous of each other's kindness. His silence shows, he longs to pardon you. And did not you, my Lord, observe Alphonso, [Turning to Veram. How, tho' at first he cou'd not rule his Passion? Not at the very first, for that's impossible To hasty blood, like his and yours, my Lord; Yet in the second moment, he repented, As soon as Thought had leisure to be born. Veram. For ought I see, you do him better Office Than he desires, Ximena. Alphon. (kneeling.) Sir, your Pardon; And if you please, your Love. Vera. Receive the first, The last as you deserve.
Re-enter Don Garcia, with Victoria, Celidea, and the Ladies. Veramond sees 'em at a distance. Vera. This had not been thus easily o're-past, But that I see Don Garcia with your Sisters; A fair occasion offers you this hour To cancel your Offences; mark, and take it. The K Q. and Alphonso entertain Garcia in dumb show, while Victoria and Celidea speak at a distance. Celid. What think you, Sister, of this Youthful Hero? Victo. Our dear Alphonso? Celid. No; I mean Navarre. Victo. As of a Valiant Prince; what wou'd you more? Celid. Methinks you give him a short Commendation; Yet all his Applications were to you. Victo. I minded not his words. Celid. He made a warm beginning of a Love. Victo. It seems my thoughts were otherwise employ'd. Celid. Neither your thoughts, nor eyes cou'd be employ'd Upon a Nobler Object. Victo. That's your Judgment. Celid. His every Action, nay, his every Motion Were graceful, and becoming his high Birth. Victo. All of a piece, and all like other Men: He seems to me a common kind of Creature, One that may pass among a crowd of Courtiers And not be known for King. Celid. Sure you forget the Troops he brought our Father; Besides his Personal Valour in the Fight. Victo. You more forget Alphonso's greater Actions, When the young Hero, yet unfledg'd in Arms, Made the tough Age of bold Ramirez bend: He fought like Mars, descending from the Skies, And look'd like Venus rising from the Waves. Celid. Navarre had done the same; 'twas Fortune's fault
That show'd him not Ramirez. Victo. You are too young to judge of Men or Merits; You praise the Vulgar Flight a Faulcon makes, When Jove's Imperial Bird, that bears the Thunder, Is tow'ring far above him. Re-enter Carlos, Sancho, and the rest of the Officers. Vera. Are my Commands perform'd? Carlos. With all exactness. Vera. Approach Victoria, and you Celidea, That in your presence I may pay some part Of what I owe your brave Deliverer. Celid. We cannot show too much of Gratitude. Vera. Victoria, what say you? Victo. He did the Duty of a brave Allie: I do not know the War, nor dare I load His modesty with larger Commendations. Garci. Even those are much too large, when giv'n by you, To whom my Soul, with all my future Service, Are with Devotion offer'd. Vera. I have indeed disclos'd to her alone Th' important Secret of th' intended Match. And that perhaps has made her fear to praise A Prince who shortly is to be her own. Alphon. (aside.) Oh Heav'ns! what bode these words? [The Queen and Celidea shew amazement, Alphonso and Victoria discontent. Vera. Now therefore I declare the wisht alliance; Ximena, you may give your Daughter joy; And you your Sister, of th' Imperial Crown [To Celid. Which Garcia puts on our Victoria's Head. Your share, Alphonso, in this happy day [To Alphon. Is not the least, nor will you be the last T' applaud my worthy choice of such a Son. Alphon. A sudden damp has seiz'd my Vital Spirits; I see but through a mist, and hear far off: Nay, trouble not your selves, a little time
Of needful rest, and solitary thought, Will mend my health, till when excuse my presence. [Exit Alphonso, and looks back on Victoria. Xime. (aside.) He's much disturb'd, a sickness of the Soul; Or I mistake, he does not like this Marriage. Assist us, Heav'n, if I divine aright, And prosper thy own work. Vera. (aside.) I like not this, But must dissemble, till I clear my doubts. Fortune, brave Prince, has given us this allay; [To Garci. Our Joys were else too full: An hour of sleep will bring him back restor'd; Mean time we may withdraw. Garci. (to Victo.) Come, my fair Mistress, by your Father's leave I seize this precious Gage. Victo. Then thank my Father; He may dispose of all things but my Heart, And that's my own—(aside.)—Alas! I wish it were. [Exeunt Vara. Xime. Celid. Garci. Victo. and all the Courtiers. Men and Women. The Guards follow: San. and Carl. remain. San. Good news, Cartos, the old Jew is dead. Carl. What Jew? Sanch. Why the rich Jew, my Father. He's gone to the Bosom of Abraham his Father, and I, his Christian Son, am left sole Heir. Now do I intend to be monstrously in love. Carl. With whom, Colonel? Sanch. That's not yet resolv'd, Colonel; but with one of the Court Ladies. You may stand a Man's Friend, Carlos, in such a business. Carl. You may depend on me, Sancho, because my depen∣dance is on you: You got Plunder in the Battel; while I was hack'd and hew'd, and almost laid asleep in the damn'd Bed of Honour. Sanch. Nay, I confess I am a lucky Rogue, for I was born with a Caul upon my Head. Carl. I'm sure I came bare enough into the World, and live as barely in it.
Sanch. Make me but lustily in love, and I'll adopt thee into my Fortune; but thou stand'st shall I, shall I, till all the Ladies are out of sight: Here, take that Billet Doux which I have pull'd out by chance from amongst twenty, that I al∣ways wear about me for such occasions. Carl. But to which of 'em shall I deliver it? Sanch. Even to her thou can'st first overtake. Nay, do not lose thy time in looking on't, there's no particu∣lar Direction, Man; Fortune ever superscribes my Letters to the Fair Sex; I let her alone to find me out a handsome Mi∣stress; and let me alone to make her kind afterwards. Carl. But suppose I shou'd happen to deliver it to my own Mistress, for she was in the presence with her Father. Sanch. Then I suppose thou wilt be the first that shalt re∣pent it, for she will certainly fall in Love with me. [Lopez and Dalinda re-enter, and walk softly over the Stage. Look, there's one of 'em already; my Heart beats at the very sight of her; this must and shall be she, by Cupid. Carl. And by Venus the very she I love. Sanch. Prithee no more words then, for Fate will have it so. Carl. (aside.) I know it's impossible for her Father to receive him, or her to love him, and yet his good Fortune, and my Rascally three penny Planet, make me suspicious without Reason: But hang Superstition, I'll draw such a Picture of him, as shall do his business. Sanch. Now will I stand by Incognito, like some mighty Potentate, and see my own Embassy deliver'd. [Carlos overtakes Lopez and Dalinda just going off, and salutes them. Lop. Cozen Carlos, you are welcome from the Wars; I think I saw you in the Show to day. Carl. The Ceremony hinder'd me from paying my re∣spects; but I made haste, you see— Lop. I hope you'll no more be a Stranger to my House, than you have been formerly: Your Mistress here will be proud to entertain you; and then you shall tell me the whole Expedition: I love Battels wonderfully, when a Man may hear 'em without Peril of his Person.
Sanch. (aside.) Nothing of my Letter all this while; Why, when Carlos? [Whispering aloud to him. Carlos. (aside.) Now I dare not but deliver it, because he sees me. Don Lopez, I have a foolish kind of Petition to you. [To Lopez. Lop. Why do you call it a foolish Petition? Carl. Because I bring it from a Fool. There's a Friend of mine, of a plentiful Fortune, that's desperately in Love with your Fair Daughter, Dalinda; and has Commanded me, by your permission, to deliver this Letter to her. Lopez. A Rich Man's Letter may be deliver'd. [Carlos gives her the Letter. Dalinda. What's here? A Note without a Superscription. [She seems to Read. As I Live, a Bill of Exchange for 200 Pistols, Charg'd upon a Banker, and payable to the Bearer; An accomplisht Cavalier, I warrant him; He writes finely, and in the best manner. Carlos. (aside.) There's the Covetous Sex, at the first Syllable, The Fool's good Planet begins to work already; but I shall stop its Influence. Lop. Good Cozen Colonel; what manner of Man is my Son-in-Law, that may be? Carl. D'ye see that sneaking Fellow yonder? Lop. Who, that Gallant Cavalier? Dalind. I wish it were no worse. Carl. Plague, ye make me mad betwixt ye. His outside's Tawdry, and his inside's Fool. He's an Usurer's Son, and his Father was a Jew. Dalind. No matter for all that, he's Rich. Carlos. He was begot upon the Wife of a desperate Debtor, Out of pure good Husbandry, to save something: He's Cove∣tous by the Father's side; A Blockhead by the Mother's; And a Knave by both. Lopez. I see nothing like your description of him, at this distance.
Call him hither, I wou'd fain speak with him. Carl. Come hither, Don Sancho, and make good the Character I have given of you. [Sancho comes up, and salutes 'em awkwardly. Lop. Cavalier, I shall be glad to be better known to you. Sanch. (to Carlos.) You see I have Luck in a Bag, Carlos. Carlos. (aside.) Ay, in a Bag of Money, I see it to my sorrow. Try his Wit, Signior, you'll find him as heavy as Lead. [Aside to Lopez. Lop. (to Sanch.) So his Mony be Silver, I care not. Come Cavalier, what say you to my Daughter? Sanch. Why, I say, I was resolv'd to Love the first Fair Lady that I met. Dalind. Oh Lord, Sir! Carlos. (to Lopez.) Do but mark his Breeding. Lop. I like him never the worse for his Plain-Dealing. Dalin. Bluntness, methinks, becomes a Souldier. Carlos. (aside.) How Naturally Old Men take to Riches, and Women to Fools. Lopez. (to Sanch.) You have made a Noble Declaration of your Love, Sir, With a handsome Present of two hundred Pistols. Sanch. What, I hope I have not mistaken Papers, and sent you my Letter of Exchange for 200 Pistols, charg'd upon the Banker Porto Carrero: Pray return that Letter, Madam; and I'll look out for another, that shall Treat only of dry Love, without those terrible Appendixes. Dalind. Why, did not ye intend this for me, Cavalier? Sanch. No, you shall hear me rap out all the Oaths in Christendom, that I am wholly Innocent of this Accusation. Dalind. Come, you bely your Noble Nature; look upon me agen Cavalier, (she makes the Doux Yeux to him.) And then Examine your own Heart, If you meant it not to me. Sanch. Nay, I confess my Heart beats a charge towards ye: (To Carl.) And yet Two Hundred Pistols, is a swinging Summ for one kind Look, Carlos!
Carlos. (to him.) A Damnable hard Penny-worth! hold you there, Don Sancho. [Dalinda looks upon him agen, more sweetly. Sanch. She has two Devils in her Eyes, that last Ogle was a lick-penny. Well, Madam, I Dedicate those fair Two Hundred Pistols, to your more fair Hand: And now you have Receiv'd 'em, I meant 'em to you. Dalind. And, in requital, I receive you for my Servant, Cavalier. Carlos. (aside.) Damn him for his awkward Liberality, he's always Covetous, But when 'tis to do me a mischief. Lopez. (to Dalind.) He's come on again, my Heart was almost at my Mouth. Now, Mrs. Minion, let me take you to task in private. [Draws her aside a little. What hope have you, of the Conde Don Alonzo De Cardona? Dalind. Little or none; a bare possibility. You know what has pass'd betwixt us. Lop. But suppose he shou'd renew his Love; had you ra∣ther Marry that Rich Old Conde; or, this poor Young Rogue, Don Carlos? Dalind. This Poor Young Rogue, if you please, Father. Lop. I thought as much, good Madam; but to come closer to the present Business, betwixt Don Carlos and Don Sancho, That is to say, a Poor Young Wit, and a Rich Young Fool; put the Case Gentlewoman, which of'em wou'd you chuse? Dalind. If it were not for meer Necessity, I have a kind of a loathing to a Fool. Lopez. The more Fool you, Madam. Dalind. Wou'd you have a Race of Booby Grandsons? Lopez. That's as your Conscience serves ye; I say only, that your Husband shall be a Fool, I say, not your Childrens Father shall be one. Sancho. (to Carlos.) This is a plaguy long whisper, I do not like it. And yet now I think on't, my left Eye itches, some good luck is coming towards me.
Lopez. (to them.) I'll be short and pithy with ye, Don Sancho, I think they call ye? If out of my abundant Love, I shou'd bestow my Dutiful Daughter on you, what kind of Husband wou'd you make? Sanch. Husband, Sennor? Why, none at all. None of my Predecessors were ever Marry'd: My Father and my Mother never were, and I will not be the first of my Family that shall degenerate; I thought my 200 Pistols would have done my business with Dalinda, and a little winking Mony with you. Lop. What, wou'd you make me a Pimp to my own Daughter? Dalind. And imagine my Chastity cou'd be corrupted with a petty Bribe. Sanch. Nay, I am not so obstinate neither, against Mar∣riage; Carlos gave me this wicked Counsel, on purpose to banish me; and in revenge to him, I will Marry. Lop. I hope you'll ask her leave first? Sanch. Phoo! I take that for granted; no Woman has the power to resist my Courtship. Lop. Suppose then, as before suppos'd; what kind of Husband wou'd you make? Sanch. Then to deal roundly with you; I wou'd run a rambling my self, and leave the drudgery of my House to her management: All things shou'd go at Sixes and Sevens, for Sancho; In short, Sennor, I will be as Absolute, as the Great Turk, and take as little care of my People, as a Heathen God. Lop. Now, Don Carlos, what say you? Carlos. (aside.) I'll fit 'em for a Husband: (To Lopez) Why, Sennor, I wou'd be the most careful Creature of her Business; I wou'd inspect every thing, wou'd manage the whole Estate to save her the trouble; I wou'd be careful of her Health, by keeping her within doors; she shou'd neither give nor receive Visits; nor kneel at Church among the Fops, that Look one way, and Pray another. Dalind. Oh abominable!
Lopez. Why, thou ungrateful Fellow! wou'dst thou make a Slave of my Daughter? And leave her no Business; that is to say, no Authority in her own House? Dalind. Ay, and to call Fine Young Gentlemen Fops too? To lock me up from Visitants, which are the only Comfort of a Disconsolate, Miserable, Married Woman! Lopez. And 'twere not for fear thou shou'dst beat me, I cou'd find in my Heart to beat thee. Don Sancho I have an Olla at home, and you shall be welcome to it. Farewel Kinsman. [To Carlos. [Exeunt Lopez, and Sancho, leading out Dalinda. Carlos. Now, If I had another Head, I cou'd find in my Heart, to run this Head against that wall. Nature has given me my Portion in Sense, with a Pox to her, and turn'd me out into the wide World to starve upon it. She has given Sancho an empty Noddle; but Fortune in revenge has fill'd his Pockets: just a Lord's Estate in Land and Wit. Well, I have lost Dalinda; and something must be done to under∣mine Sancho in her good Opinion: Some pernicious Counsel must be given him: He is my Prince, and I am his States-Man; and when our two Interests come to clash, I hope to make a meer Monarch of him: And my Hunger is somewhat in my way to quicken my Invention. Want whets the Wit, 'tis true; but Wit not blest With Fortune's Aid, makes Beggars at the best. Wit is not fed, but sharpn'd with Applause, For Wealth is solid Food, and Wit but hungry Sause. Exit.
ACT II. SCENE I. The Scene is a Bed-Chamber, a Couch prepar'd, and set so near the Pit that the Audience may hear. Alphonso enters with a Book in his hand, and sits; reads to himself a little while: Enter Victoria, and sits by him, then speaks. Victo. IF on your Private Bus'ness I intrude, Forgive th' excess of Love that makes me rude: I hope your sickness has not reacht your Heart; But come to bear a suff'ring Sister's part: Yet, lest I shou'd offend you by my stay, Command me to depart, and I obey. Alphon. The Patient who has pass'd a sleepless night, Is far less pleas'd with his Physician's sight: Welcome thou pleasing, but thou short Reprieve; To ease my Death, but not to make me live. Welcome, but welcome as a Winter's Sun, That rises late, and is too quickly gone. Victo. You are the Star of Day, the publick Light: And I am but your Sister of the Night: Eclips'd when you are absent from my sight. Alphon. Death will for ever take me from your Eyes; But grieve not you, for when I Sett, you Rise. Don Garcia has deserv'd to be your Choice, And 'tis a Brother's Duty to rejoyce. Victo. And yet methought you gave him not your Voice. Alph. You saw a sudden Sickness left me weak; I had no Joy to give, nor Tongue to speak: And therefore I withdrew, to seek Relief In Books, the fruitless Remedies of Grief.
Victo. But tell me what Philosopher you found To cure your Pain? Alph. The fittest for my Wound; Who best the gentle Passions knows to move; Ovid, the soft Philosopher of Love: His Love Epistles for my Friends I chose; For there I found the Kindred of my Woes. Victo. His Nymphs the Vows of Perjur'd Men deplore; One in the Woods, and one upon the Shoar: All are at length forsaken or betray'd; And the false Hero leaves the faithful Maid. Alphon. Not all: for Linus kept his Constancy: And one, perhaps, who more resembled me. Victo. That Letter wou'd I view: in hope to find Some Features of the Fair that rules your Mind. Alph. Read, for the guilty Page is doubled down: The Love too soon will make the Lover known. [Giving her the Book. Read, if you dare, and when the Crime you see, Accuse my cruel Fate, but pity me. Victo. (aside.) 'Tis what I fear'd, th' unhappy Canace! Read you; for to a Brother 'twas design'd, [To him. And sent him by a Sister much too kind. Alphonso takes the Book, and reads. Why did thy Flames beyond a Brother's move? Why lov'd I thee with more than Sister's Love? [He looks upon her, and she holds down her Head. He reads again. My Cheeks no longer did their Colour boast: My Food grew loathsom, and my Strength I lost: Still, e're I spoke, a sigh wou'd stop my Tongue: Short were my slumbers, and my Nights were long. I knew not from my Love those Griefs did grow: Yet was, alas! the thing I did not know. [She looks on him, and he holds down his Head.
Forc'd at the last, my shameful pain I tell. Victo. No more: We know our mutual Love too well. [Both look up, and meet each others Eyes. Alph. Two Lines in reading had escap'd my sight: Shall I go back, and do the Poet right? Victo. Already we have read too far, I fear: But read no more than Modesty may bear. Alphonso reading. For I lov'd too, and knowing not my wound, A secret Pleasure in thy Kisses found. [He offers to kiss her, and she turns her Head away. May we not represent the Kiss we read? Victo. Alphonso, no: Brother, I shou'd have said! Alphonso reading again. When half denying, more than half content, Embraces warm'd me to a full Consent: Then, with tumultuous Joys, my Heart did beat: And Guilt that made 'em Anxious, made 'em Great. [She snatches the Book, and throws it down, then rises and walks, he rises also. Victo. Incendiary Book, Polluted Flame, Dare not to tempt the Chast Victoria's Fame. I love, perhaps, more than a Sister shou'd: And Nature prompts; but Heav'n restrains my Blood. Heav'n was unkind, to set so strict a Bound: And Love wou'd struggle to forbidden Ground. Oh let us gain a Parthian Victory; Our only way to conquer, is to fly. Alph. No more, Victoria; tho my Love aspires More high than yours, and fiercer are my Fires: I cannot bear your looks; new Flames arise From ev'ry Glance; and kindle from your Eyes. Pure are the Beams which from those Suns you dart; But gather blackness from my sooty Heart: Then let us each with hasty steps remove; Nor spread Contagion, where we meant but Love.
Victo. Hear Heav'n and Earth, and witness to my Vows; And Love, thou greatest Power that Nature knows; This Heart, Alphonso, shall be firmly thine; This Hand shall never with another joyn. Or if by force my Father makes me wed; Then Death shall be the Bridegroom of my Bed. Now let us both our shares of Sorrow take; And both be wretched for each others sake. Alph. By those relentless power that rule the Skies; And by a greater Power, Victoria's Eyes, No Love but yours shall touch Alphonso's Heart; Nor Time, nor Death, my vow'd Affections part. Nor shall my hated Rival live to see That hour which envious Fate denies to me. Now seal we both our Vows with one dear Kiss. Victo. No, 'tis a hot, and an incestuous Bliss! Let both be satisfi'd with what we swore; I dare not give it, lest I give you more. [Exit Victoria looking back on him, and he gazing on her. Alph. Oh Raging, Impious, and yet hopeless Fire; Not daring to possess what I desire. Condemn'd to suffer what I cannot bear; Tortur'd with Love, and Furious with Despair. Of all the Pains which wretched Mortals prove, The fewest Remedies belong to Love: But ours has none: for if we shou'd enjoy, Our fatal Cure must both of us destroy. Oh Dear Victoria, cause of all my Pain! Oh Dear Victoria, whom I wou'd not gain! Victoria, for whose sake I wou'd survive: Victoria, for whose sake I dare not live. Enter Garcia with Attendants. The two Princes salute, but Alphonso very coldly. Garci. I come to shew my grief for your Distemper: For if my Noble Brother saw my Heart,
There shou'd you find a Plain, a Holy Friendship, Unmixt with Interest, equally partaking Of what affects you, both of good and ill. Alphon. I thank you; but my Malady increases At your approach; I have no more to say, But wish you better health than I can boast; And to my self a lonely Privacy. Garci. I find I am not welcome to your sight: But know not from what cause. Alphon. (angrily.) My surest Remedy is in your absence: 'Tis hard my Lodgings cannot be my own; But importun'd with Visits, undesir'd; And therefore, I must tell you, troublesom. Garci. 'Tis an odd way of entertaining Friends. But since I find you discompos'd with sickness, That shall excuse your Humours; where I go I hope for better Welcome. Alphon. Sir, I must ask whom you pretend to visit? Garci. My Mistress, Prince. Alphon. Your Mistress! who's that Mistress? Garci. What need I name Victoria? Alphon. Who? my Sister? Garci. Whom else cou'd you imagine? Alphon. Any other. Garci. And why not her? Alphon. Because I know not if she will admit you. Garci. Her Father has allow'd it. Alph. But not she; Or if both have, yet my consent is wanting. You take upon you in a Foreign Kingdom, As if you were at home in your Navarre. Garci. And you, methinks, As if you had no Father, or no King. Farewell, I will not stay. Alphon. You shall not go: Thus as I am, thus single, thus unarm'd, And you with Guards attended—
Gar. You Teach me to forget the Rule of Manners. Alph. I mean to Teach you better. [As Garcia is going to pass by him, Alphonso runs to one of his Attendants, and snatches his Sword away, then steps between Garcia and the Door. Enter Veramond and Ximena, Attended. Vera. What means this rude Behaviour in my Court? As if our Arragon were turn'd to Thrace; Unhospitable to her Guests, and thou Alphonso, a Lycurgus. Alphon. He would pass Without my Sister's leave, into her Lodgings. By Heav'n, if this be suffer'd to proceed, The next will be, to Treat the Royal Maid As coursly, as she were some Suburb Girl. Gar. (to Vera.) Had I not your Permission, Sir? Vera. You had. But these, Alphonso, are thy Ruffian Manners. How dar'st thou, Boy, to break my Orders, And then asperse thy Sister with thy Crime? Alphon. She said his Presence was unpleasing to her. Vera. Come, thou bely'st her Innocence and Duty: She did not, durst not, say it. Alph. If she did not, I dare, and will maintain to all the World, That Garcia, is not worthy of my Sister. Vera. Not worthy? Alphon, No; I say once more, not worthy. Garcia. Not in my self; for who deserves Victoria? But, since her Royal Father bids me hope, Not less unworthy than another Prince. (To Ver.) And none, with your permission, Sir, shall dare To interpose, betwixt my Love and Me. Alph. Sure a less Price than our Infanta's Bed, Might pay thee for thy Mercenary Troops. Vera. Peace, Insolent, too long I have indur'd
Thy Haughty Soul, untam'd and turbulent: But, if I Live, this shall not pass unpunisht; Darkness and Chains, are Medicines for a Madman. Ximena. My Lord, I humbly beg you, spare your Son; And add not Fury to a Raging Fire. He soon will recollect his scatter'd Reason; Which Heat of Youth, and Sickness, and Fatigues, Have dissipated in his boyling Blood. Give him but time, and then his Temperate Humour Will soon return into the Native Channel; And, unoppos'd, be calm. Vera. No, never more: The Moon has roul'd above his Head, and turn'd it; As Peals of Thunder sow'r the generous Wine. (To Alph.) Hence from my Presence thou, no more my Son. Ximena. If he be Mad, be Madness his excuse; And Pardon Nature's Error, not his own. Vera. Ximena, you have fonded him to this; I Prophesied; and now 'tis come to pass. Gar. Perhaps, I interrupted him too rudely: And since I caus'd, my self, that ill Reception, Forgive our mutual Faults. Vera. You shall prevail; Tho' he deserves not such an Intercessor: (To Alphon.) Retire, Alphonso, to your inmost Lodgings; And there inclose your self, and mourn your Crimes: Be this your last Relapse; the next is Fatal. Alphon. I will retire. But, if I am a Madman, as you say; And as I half believe, expect no Cure, But in Alphonso's Death. [Alphonso goes in. Ximena. (aside.) It works apace: But whither it will tend, Heaven only knows. [Veramond sees the Book upon the Ground, and takes it up. Vera. This Book he left; go bear it after him. Yet stay, I know not why, but somewhat prompts me To Read this folded Page. (To Garcia.) Go, Royal Youth,
I wou'd my self conduct you to Victoria: But Lovers need no Guide to their Desires: And Love no Witness, but himself Requires. [Exeunt the King and Queen one way, with their Attendants, and Don Garcia with his, another. The SCENE, A Street. Enter Carlos, before Don Lopez his Door. Carlos. That's the Door of Lopez, and Sancho must come out this way; now Fool sit fast, for thou shalt not want for pestilent Advice: But first, I must know, how far thou hast proceeded with the Father and the Daughter, that I may know what Drugs I must prepare, for the present Condition of my Patient; oh, the Door opens already, and he bolts out single, as I wisht. Enter Sancho, picking his Teeth. Sancho. What, Carlos, you have Din'd before me; but, it may be, you ha' not far'd so well. Carlos. The best part of your Entertainment, I suppose, was the Dessert of the Fair Dalinda after Dinner; and how, and how, go Matters? Sancho. Better than thou wou'dst have 'em, thou wou'dst have put a spoke in my Wheel, I know it. Carlos. No, Fortune always sets those of your Admirable Understanding uppermost; but remember, Dalinda was once mine, however. Sancho. Thou wou'dst not have me give the Box away, when I have thrown Seven? Come, set upon it what thou dar'st, and I'le give thee leave to do thy worst. Carlos. You are very confident of your good Luck. Sancho. Thou know'st, I have a perpetual ascendant over thee.
Carl. And you are sure to carry her? Sanch. She is fond of my Person; she ogled me all Din∣ner time; she put her foot under the Table, and trod upon mine; and if these are not certain Symptoms of Passion, the Devil's in Womankind. Carl. And her Father? Sanch. The goodest Old Man; he drank my Health to his Daughter; and I, to comply with my Obligation, an∣swer'd the Challenge; there I think I was with her a∣gain. Carl. You have no more to do but to take out a Li∣cence. Sanch. Indeed I have her Licence for it. Carl. What, quibbling too in your Prosperity? If you let another I shall be inrag'd. But you have not told me that her Father is consenting. Sanch. In a manner: But— Carl. But what; is he not absolutely yours? Sanch. There's a small demur upon the matter; in short, he hit me in the Teeth with a damnable Rich Old Conde; who, I find, has been dabbling with this Covetons Old Huncks; but, bating him, Don Lopez tells me I shall be the welcomest Man alive. Carl. Do you know that Conde's Name? Sanch. Don something de Cardona, whom the Devil con∣found. Carl. My old Acquaintance; he charged with me in the Battel, but what became of him I know not; if he be the Man, despair betimes, Sancho, he'll revenge my Quarrel, and carry her in spight of you. Sanch. I am cunning, you know; and I believe he nam'd that cursed Conde, only to draw me on the faster. Carl. And do you think a Gentleman can succeed against a Conde, with a Woman? Sanch. Why not? Carl. No more than a Conde against a Duke, and so up∣wards.
Abandon her, I say. Sanch. No; I am resolute. Carl. To be the Shoeing-horn for the Conde? Sanch. I confess, I wou'd not be the Shoeing-horn to draw him on. Carl. No; for that's to be a Pimp for him. Sanch. Right; therefore I will leave her. Carl. Then go back; and quarrel with her and her Fa∣ther; Go, I say, immediately before your Virtue cools. Sanch. I'll give 'em their own, I'll warrant 'em: what, make a Shoeing-horn of a Man of Honour? [Exit Sancho. Carl. (alone.) If the Conde be in Love, then why shou'd Lopez admit of Sancho for a Suitor; if not, the Fool is in the right, that it was only feign'd to draw him on. However, my advice will strike on both sides; for if Sancho quarrels he's discarded, and for the Conde—stay a little—What if I shou'd play this Conde? I know him, and can Mimmick him exactly, 'tis but a Jest if I am discovered; and if the Conde loves her, and she him, then I marry her in his shape—Oh, they are coming out to quarrel in the open Air; for the House is grown too hot for 'em; but I dare not stay to see the Battel, for fear of getting blows on both sides. [Exit Carlos. Enter Lopez, Dalinda, and Sancho. Lopez. I'll wait upon you out of my House, howe∣ver. Sanch. Father-in-Law, that might have been, no more Ceremonies, I'll be no Shoeing-horn for any Man. Lop. You wou'd not be my Daughter's hinderance? Sanch. There's no more to be said on't; but either a Bar∣gain, or no Bargain. Lop. A Bargain, if the Conde comes not on. Sanch. Then as he comes on, I must go off, with a Pox to you; and to your Daughter.
Dalind. At least it shall not be a Pox of your giving. Sanch. The Conde's Pox take you then; that's an Honou∣rable Pox descended in a right Line from Don Rodoric the Goth, I'll warrant you. Lop. Indeed, if your Estate were as great as his— Sanch. Nay, for that matter I can drop Gold with him, as little as I care for her. Dalind. But then his Title? Sanch. I have more Gold yet, to weigh down his Parch∣ment. And then my Wit against a Conde's Wit, that's for Overplus; for tho I say it— Lop. Who shou'd not say it. Sanch. Yet I do say it, and will say it, especially as Lords go now: Come, there's no more to be said, Lopez; but take back your Trumpery, I mean your Daughter; or I'll send for the Scavenger with a Dung Cart. Lop. This is insufferable: and by this Honourable Beard— Sanch. Which I'll pull off by handfuls, if you swagger— Lop. (aside to Dalinda.) What shall we do with this Mad∣man, Daughter? Dalind. You shou'd send for an Alguazile to order him, if I were sure that the Conde wou'd come on again; but since that's uncertain, go in, Father, and let me alone with him, if I make him your Son-in-Law, that's Punishment sufficient for him. Lop. Well, Cavalier, you may chance to hear of me. [Exit Lopez. Sanch. Yes, and of your Daughter too, in the next Lam∣poon, I doubt not—(To Dalinda.) Why don't you follow him? What do you and I together, Madam Coun∣tess? Dalind. Nay, I know not. Sanch. Nor I neither. Dalind. I hope you will not beat me. [She looks languishingly upon him. Sanch. I can't tell that—Thou hast a damnable kind of lear that wou'd provoke me to something—I say not what,
Dalind. Beat me with my own hand, if I deserve it, there 'tis for you. [Gives him her hand, and squeezes his. Sanch. If I should beat thee now, as thou hast deserv'd richly, I cou'd make thee satisfaction. Dalind. Indeed, they say an old Man shou'd never beat a young Woman, because he cannot make her satisfa∣ction. Sanch. Abominable Chuck. If I did not hate thee mor∣tally, I cou'd be content to love thee for a quarter of an hour, or so—Why, what's here to do? You are at your old tricks again: Prithee, sweet Devil, do not ogle me, nor squeeze my Palm so feelingly, thou dear Infernal, do not. Dalind. Why, do I hurt you? Sanch. No, but thou ticklest me to the very Heart-strings, most wickedly. Dalind. You command me then to leave you? [Seems to be going. Sanch. Not command you neither, not absolutely. Dalind. I go then— Sanch. Then I do command thee—I mean, to stay a little longer. Thou hast fir'd my blood most horribly, with that squeezing; hast not thou the Itch? speak, Dam∣nation, I think I have got the Infection of thee— [He shakes his hands. Dalind. I'll go and comfort my poor old Father, for the Affront you gave him. Sanch. No, Perverseness; I'll make thee stay, in very spight of thy proud Sex I'll humble thee. Dalind. But was not you a grievous Man to use him so? You shall tell me, or I break your Fingers. Sanch. Not a word, to save thee from Perdition; I am as dumb as a Heathen Oracle. Dal. Then I must squeeze it out of you— [Pressing his hand again. Sanch. Ah, ah, it runs through me like Wild Fire— [Panting.
Dal. Did not Carlos give you this naughty Counsel? San. I shou'd not answer thee, I know it. Heartlykins, this is just cramping a Man when he's asleep, to make him tell his Dream; let go my hand, and Carlos did not advise me, but hold it, and he did; now will you be at quiet with me? Dal. Not, till you promise me to be Friends with my Father. San. Well, confound thee, I am Friends with him. Dal. And to banish Carlos for an Evil Counsellor. San. Upon condition, you'l discharge the Count from see∣ing you. Dal. No Conditions, either surrender upon Discretion, or I'le put you to the Sword. San. Pox on thee, for being so Tyrannical, but I can't help my self, and therefore I totally submit. Dal. Now then, you shall perceive how Gracious a Prin∣cess I intend to be; my Father dotes upon this Count, but I despise him. San. That's a good Girl; for Love of me, I'le warrant you. Dal. You think I cokes you now. San. No, I know my own Merit too well for that. Dal. Then do what I advise you; my Father has not often seen this Count; what if you shou'd pass for him? San. Hum, I do not apprehend thee. Dal. A Man of your Wit, and be so stupid; you shall counterfeit the Count. Sanch. Counterfeit the Count, that's a pure quibble, but I can make no more on't. Dal. He's an Old Fellow, and a Fool; now, you shall take upon you to be this Count, to deceive my Father; and I'le keep your Counsel, and Teach you how to Represent him. San. Oh, now I understand you; but 'tis impossible for me to counterfeit a Fool. Dal. I'le warrant you, trust Nature. San. A Man of my Sense, can never hide his Parts. Dal. No, but you may shew 'em; go back to your Lodg∣ings, I'le provide you Cloaths, and send you Directions in
Writing, how to behave your self before my Father—One word more, be sure you manage this in private, and shut out Carlos, lest he should discover our Intriegue. San. Well, I will strive for once to get the better of my Wit, and play the Natural as naturally as I can, but you had better come your self and Teach me, for you have put me in a pure way of taking your Instructions. [Exit Sancho. Dalind. (alone.) When I consider what has pass'd between the Count and me, there's little Reason to believe, a Man shou'd put on a foul Shirt again, when he has put it off al∣ready, and has change of Linnen by him; however, my Father shall know nothing of this Disguise, for he that sold my first Maidenhead to the Lord, may sell my second to the Fool; and that wou'd be too much in Conscience, that a Woman once in twice, shou'd not have the Letting her own Freehold; and therefore, I will have the Selling of my self, and Sancho, shall have the refusal of the Bargain. Wise Heav'n, in pity to the Sex, design'd Fools, for the last Relief of Womankind. Two Married Wits, no quiet can enjoy: Two Fools together wou'd the House destroy. But Providence, to level Humane Life, Made the Fool Husband, for the Witty Wife. [Exit Dalinda.
ACT III. SCENE I. The Scene, Victoria's Chamber. Enter Alphonso, with Musick. A Song is Sung: when it is beginning, Victoria Enters. Song of Jealousie. 1. WHat State of Life can be so blest As Love, that warms a Lover's Breast? Two Souls in one, the same desire To grant the Bliss, and to require! But if in Heav'n a Hell we find, 'Tis all from thee, O Jealousie! 'Tis all from thee, O Jealousie! Thou Tyrant, Tyrant Jealousie, Thou Tyrant of the Mind! 2. All other ills, tho sharp they prove, Serve to refine, and perfect Love:' In absence, or unkind disdain, Sweet Hope relieves the Lover's pain: But ah, no Cure but Death we find, To set us free From Jealousie: O Jealousie! Thou Tyrant, Tyrant Jealousie, Thou Tyrant of the Mind.
3. False, in thy Glass all Objects are, Some set too near, and some too far: Thou art the Fire of endless Night, The Fire that burns, and gives no Light. All Torments of the Damn'd we find In only thee O Jealousie! Thou Tyrant, Tyrant Jealousie, Thou Tyrant of the Mind! [Exeunt Musitians. Alphon. 'TIS true, my Tyrant Father has confin'd me; But Love, who traverses the World at will, Who knows not Awe, nor Law, nor Parentage, Has broke my Tedder, and enlarg'd my bounds. Vict. Retire betimes, the Court is full of Eyes; As Eagles sharp, fatal as Basilisques; Who Live on Looking, and who See to Death. Alphon. I come but to depart, and go for ever: Because denied the common Rights of Nature; Which the First Brother, and First Sister had. Why, were not you and I that Happy Pair? But Nature doats with Age. Vict. What-e're it be, 'tis past redress, Alphonso. Alphon. But then, shall Gareia take thee in his Arms? Glutted with Joys, which I wou'd dye to Tast: No, let me stab the Wretch in every Vein; And leave him dry of Pleasure, e're we part. Vict. Alphonso, no, you cannot Kill Don Garcia, But you declare the Cause, and own your Love. Alphon. And what care I, what after Ages say Alphonso did, to make Alphonso Happy? But oh, you Love; and wou'd preserve his Life To be for ever his. Vict. My Dearest Brother: I Hate your Rival, and I Dye for you. All but my Spotless Honour shall be yours. Alphon. By Heaven! but that word Heaven comes cross
my Thoughts— Vict. Beware; for by my own, I guess your Passion. You wou'd I fear— Alphon. Enjoy my Heaven one moment.— Vict. And part with it for ever: Think on that. Alphon. That moment were Eternity in little: A mighty Summ, but taken on content; To save the tedious telling o're and o're. Vict. Oh, we are too long together. Alphon. Fear you that? Vict. I ought to fear it; but I trust my Virtue. Depart, my Soul, I will not ask you whither; For fear, I shou'd Repent of my Repentance; And follow you to Death. Alphon. I go, Victoria: But Love's cold Fit of Jealousie returns; You must not be Don Garcia's; Swear, you will not. Vict. I Swear I will not, by my own consent. Alphon. You may be forc'd; oh, cursed Jealousie, Thou Bastard Son of Love, unlike thy Father, Why dost thou still Torment me? Vict. Trust my Honour. Alphon. That may be chaft into a warmth, Victoria. Talk, Seeing, Touching, are Incendiaries. And these may mount your Young Desires, like Straw To meet the Jett that draws you. Vict. Trust my Love. Alphon. I Swear I trust it, but I fear your Beauty: 'Tis a fair Fruit that hangs upon the Bough: Tempts and is Tempted. Vict. 'Tis indeed a Fruit; Seen and desir'd of all, while yet unpull'd, But can be gathered by one only Hand. Alphon. That one, is Garcia; still the Fit returns; I wish my Jealousie cou'd quench my Love. Vict. It cannot, if I measure yours by mine: Or if extinguisht, like a trail of smoak From a Wax Taper, soon wou'd light again.
Alphon. 'Tis so, for when I say I will not Love, Then I Love most: Farewell my only Joy, I go to hide me from the World and you. Victo. As when the Sun is down, His Light is clipt into a thousand Stars, So your sweet Image, tho you shine not on me, Will guild the horrour of the Night, and make A pleasing Scene of solitary Grief. Enter Veramond and Ximena, he with an Ovid in his hand. Vera. How dar'st thou, Rebel, thus provoke my Patience, Beyond all sufferance, and transgress thy Bounds? Alphon. When Kings and Fathers, on their Sons and Subjects Exact intollerable things to bear, Nature and Self-defence dispence with Duty. Vera. Oh Heaven, what horrid Sin have I committed! That I was punish'd to beget this Son? Alph. I cou'd ask Heaven another Question too; But that 'tis not so decent: In few words, Hither I came to take my latest leave Of dear Victoria, then depart for ever. And buried in some solitary Cave, Forgetting and forgotten, end my Days. Vera. 'Tis what thou hast deserv'd: perform thy Pennance. Ximen. So hard a Sentence for so small a Fault? Are you a Father, Sir? Vera. Is he a Son? Thou know'st not his Offence. But mark the glowing Blood, the guilty Flush Upon Victoria's Face, and read it there. Ximen. I know not what you mean. Vera. Victoria, speak And clear your self—She answers not a word. Nay then my fears are true, on both sides guilty. Victo. (aside.) 'Tis found; and we are lost.
Vera. But what needs more Conviction: Know you this? [Shewing the Ovid to Alphonso. This Book the Tutor of Incestuous Love? The Page is doubled down, and points thee to thy Crime. I fear'd, before, from every rolling glance; How quick they shot upon thy Sister's Face: And she receiv'd them all, like smoaking Flax; Confess'd the Fire, and answer'd to the Flame. Vict. I Love my Brother, and avow that Fire: His Love to me, has rais'd his Noble Thoughts To Brave Atchievements, for your Crown and you. For Love's the Steel, that strikes upon the Flint: Gives Coldness Heat, exerts the hidden Flame; And spreads the Sparkles round, to warm the World. Vera. Oh Heav'ns, she makes a Merit of her Crime. Victoria, I wou'd yet think better of thee, And therefore dare I not enquire too far; Willing to doubt the Guilt I fear to find. Depart, and Answer not. [Exit Victoria. For thee, whom I abhor to call my Son, [To Alphonso. And wish thou wert a Stranger to my Blood— Ximena. (aside.) That was a happy hint; I must improve it. Vera. One way, and only one, remains to clear thee: If, with a Holy Fire, thou Lov'st thy Sister, Aspiring but to Fame, not sinking down Into th' abyss of Lust unnatural, Consent that she may be Don Garcia's Wife; Else give the Lye to all thy fair Pretences; And stand expos'd a Monster of Mankind: Foul as the Fiends, which fell from Heaven's high Towers, Fall thou from Empire so; and from my sight; Depart, Accurst for ever. Alph. Gladly I leave you; but shall go more lightly, If eas'd of this your dreadful Imprecation: O! let me go unloaded with your Curse; And I will bless you for my Banishment. Vera. So may that Blessing or that Curse o'retake thee, As thou Obey'st or Disobey'st my Will.
Alph. Guiltless of Sin, with Conscience to my Friend, I go, to shun that fatal Hour, that shews me Victoria Married, and Alphonso lost. [He's going. Ximena. Stay yet, Alphonso; for one moment stay: For somewhat, if I durst, I have to speak, Which wou'd at least take half thy load away; And free thy shoulders from the weight of Sin. Vera. Ximena, dar'st thou hope to palliate Incest, And gild so black a Crime? Ximena. I gild it not; but if I prove it none, You may be kind, Alphonso may be happy, And these Domestick Jarrs, for ever cease. Vera. Explain your self. Ximena. Afford me then your Patience. A mighty Secret labours in my Soul, And like a rushing Stream breaks down the Dam; This day must give it vent, it rests in you To make it end in a Tempestuous Night, Or in a Glorious Evening. Vera. No more Preface. Ximena. You wonder at Alphonso's haughty Carriage, His fiery Temper, and his awless Mind. Vera. Too true, Ximena. Ximena. And he wonders more At your harsh Nature, and your rugged usage, On each side unbecoming Son and Father; And yet the cause of both is to be found. But e're I farther shall proceed to speak; Command your Royal Prisoner to be brought; For I must be confronted with Ramirez: And in his Presence tell you wondrous things; Which if he vouch not, let Ximena Dye. Vera. I sent for him to hear his final Doom: And think he waits without. Admit the Prisoner. [He goes to the Door and speaks.
Enter Ramirez, Guarded. Now, Sir, is yet your Haughty Soul resolv'd To quit your empty Title for your Freedom? Ximena. Ramirez, answer not, to raise his Passion: For now th' important Secret of our Lives Must come to Publick view; and on that hinge Depends thy Crown, thy Liberty, and Life, My Honour and thy Son's. Alpho. (aside.) What means my Mother? Vera. A Son, Ramirez? Ram. Yes, a Son I had. Vera. He Dyed an Infant here in Saragossa. Ram. A living Son I have; and since the Queen Is pleas'd t' expose my Life, Before a Judge so prejudic'd as you: Undaunted in the Face of Death I speak; And claim Alphonso mine. Vera. There needs no more; I spare thee all the rest: My Wife's Adultery, thy foul Interloping; My own Dishonour, and that Bastard's Birth. Ximena. Injurious words, unfitting you to speak; And me, my Lord, and those concern'd to hear. Alph. (to Vera.) Tho' I wou'd give what e're the Sun beholds Not to be yours; yet, when my Mother's Fame Is question'd, none shall wrong her Innocence: Nor shall Ramirez go Unpunisht for that Infamous Aspersion. Ramir. Alphonso, Peace, your Father bids you Peace. Vera. Then, what am I? Ramir. His Foster-Father. Vera. Impudently said: And yet I hope 'tis true; so much I hate him, That I cou'd buy the Publick Scorn, to be An Alien to his Blood. Ximena. Have patience, Sir; And you shall have your wish, on cheaper Terms,
But hear me speak. Vera. Good Heav'n, then give me patience. Ximena. When you and brave Ramirez, then your Friend, Me and my Sister Married, four full Years We pass'd in Barren Wedlock, Childless both; Ramirez, you remember, brought his Queen To Saragossa on a friendly Visit: Then as we both were Married on one day; We both Conceiv'd together. Vera. I observe it: That when Ramirez came, you both Conceiv'd. Mark that; and if thou hast the Face, proceed. Ximena. My Lord, I dare; You took me once aside; and as your Rage Inspir'd your Soul, spoke thus; Ximena, know That if the Fruit thou bear'st, be not a Son, Henceforth, no more my Queen, we part for ever. The word was hard, I bore it as I cou'd; I Pray'd, and Heav'n in pity heard my Vows: Two Boys in one fair Morning were disclos'd; By me, and by my Sister. And both the Fathers equally were Blest. Vera. Say one was Blest with two; and speak more truly. Ximena. Forbear this Language, Sir; or I am Dumb; It seems that you deserv'd not him you had: For, in sev'n days, Heav'n Ravisht your Alphonso; My Sister's little Veramond surviv'd, And she's a Living Witness of this Truth. Great was my Grief; but greater was my Fear, From your (alas) too much experienc'd Anger. Thus low reduc'd, and urg'd by anxious Thoughts, Of what I might expect from your unkindness. Now speak, Ramirez; and relate the rest; For my Tongue falters, and denies its Office; So much I fear my Lord shou'd take offence. Ramir. Then like, or disapprove it, thus it was. She told my Wife and me this mournful Story, Her Fears for thy Resentment for thy loss,
If by misfortune it shou'd reach thy Ears: Begg'd Secresie, and then Implor'd our Aid, To substitute the Living for the Dead; And make our Veramond pass for thy Alphonso. A hard Request, but with compassion mov'd, At length, 'twas granted. Vera. Is this true, Ximena? Ximen. So Heav'n and you forgive my Pious Fraud, As what he says is certain. Alph. Oh Joyful News, Oh Happy Day; too good To end in Night,—My Father, and my King. [Runs to Ramirez, kneels to him, and kisses his Hand. My Soul foreknew you with a sure presage Of Native Duty, and Instinctive Love. Ramir. Arise, my Son. Vera. You own him then? Ramir. I do. Vera. A welcome riddance; Mean time, in prospect of a double Crown, You gave the Sparrow leave to brood upon The Cuckoo's Egg. Ramir. The advantage was to you; He prov'd his Blood upon me when we fought. Fierce Eagles never procreate fearful Doves: I sent him word he was my Son, before The Battel, but the Hand of Fate was in it: The Note miscarried, and we blindly met. Ximena. Past Accidents imbitter both your Minds. Think forwards on your mutual Interests; Alphonso Loves Victoria: I saw it in the Seeds, before disclos'd To other Eyes; conniv'd at it, approv'd it. Vera. A most commodious Mother! Ximena. Blame me not; Guilt there was none, but in their apprehension: And both their Virtues bar'd ill consequences. Now take the blest occasion by the foretop; And, on their Marriage found a lasting Peace.
Ramir. A trivial Accident begot this War. Some paltry bounds of ill distinguisht Earth; A clod that lay betwixt us unascertain'd; And Royal Pride, on both sides, drew our Swords: Thus Monarchs quarrel, and their Subjects bleed. Remove your Land-marks, set 'em where you please: Stretch out your Arragon on my Castile; And be once more my Brother. Alph. I implore it: And prostrate, beg your Pardon, and your Grace; I have offended in my Proud Behaviour; But make Victoria mine, and what your Son In Duty wanted, by your Son-in-Law Shall doubly be supply'd. Ximena. What, wou'd you more? Vera. (to her.) Are you the Mediatrix of this Peace? Ximen. It well becomes the sostness of my Sex; To mediate for sweet Peace, the best of Blessings, And like a Sabine Wife, to run betwixt Relations lifted Swords. Vera. A rare Chaste Sabine, you! To save th' Adulterer of thy Husband's Bed: See there Alphonso's Father, that Old Goat, Who on, Two Sisters propagated Lust: And Got two Children, for himself and me. Suppose thee Chaste, a favourable Guess To any of thy Sex, these are my Foes. (To Ramirez.) Thou first, the former sharer of my Sheets: A King without a Kingdom, thine is Conquer'd; And Garcia with Victoria shall enjoy it. Ramirez. So monstrously you wrong your Wife and me— Vera. No more, my Will is Law. Ramir. So Tyrants say. Vera. I will not hear thee speak, conduct him hence; And stew him in the Dungeon's depth with Toads. [The Guards carry off Ramirez. (To Alphon.) For thee the worthy Son of such a Father— [Walks by himself.
Ximen. (to Alphon.) 'Tis desp'rate now; and I with ill-tim'd zeal, Have hastn'd your destruction. Alphonso. (to her.) You have Sav'd me. Vera. (aside.) Say I shou'd put th' ungrateful Wretch to Death, He's thought my Son, and whilst so thought, 'tis dangerous. Imprison him; the People might Rebel: He's Popular, and I am ill-Belov'd. Then Banish him, that's best, but yet unsafe: He may with Foreign Aid Reconquer all. I'll venture that, with Garcia to my Friend; He shall recall his Troops, mine are at hand And ready prest for Service. [He comes to Alph. and Ximena. Ximen. Now the storm— Vera. (To Alph.) Thy Doom's resolv'd: too gentle for thy Crimes: I spare thy Life, depart to Banishment; To morrow leave the Realm, this day the Town: And like the Scape-Goat driv'n into the Desart, Bear all ill Omens with thee. Alph. Proud of my Exile, with erected Face, I leave your Court, your Town, and your Dominions. Pleas'd that I Love, at least without a Crime; Lighter by what I lost: I tread in Air Unhappy, but Triumphant in despair. [Exit Alphonso. Vera. Behold how haughtily he strides away, Lofty and bold; as if not Banisht hence, But seeking for some other place to Reign. I think he cannot hope; but lest he shou'd, Victoria soon shall be Don Garcia's Bride. (To Ximen.) Go, Madam, for I know you are in haste, To greet your Daughter with this goodly News. Tell her, Alphonso is no more my Son. But tell her too, he shall not be her Husband. Bid her prepare her self to Wed Navarr: Whether by force or by consent, I care not: To morrow shall determine that Affair.
Nor shall my Will be frustrate, or delay'd: Kings are not Kings, unless they be obey'd. [Exeunt Ambo. The Scene is in the Street, before Lopez's House. Enter Sancho, Habited like Don Alonzo de Cardona. Dalinda meeting him. Dalin. I watch'd your coming at the Window, and told my Father: He's coming out to welcome you. Sanch. But if I chance to break out into a little Wit some∣times, you'll excuse my frailty. Dalin. Pugh, you are so suspicious of your self, and have so little reason for't: be as witty as you can; I fear you not. Enter Don Lopez, and salutes him. Lop. Noble Conde, you are welcome from the Wars: and who did best in the Battel, I beseech your Honour? Sanch. Why, next my Honour, one Colonel Sancho did best. Lop. Who, Sancho? he's little better than a Coxcomb. Sanch. Nay, he has too much Wit; if he had as much Grace, 'twou'd be better for him. Lop. But he's your Lordship's Rival in my Daughter. Sanch. Is he so? then make much of him, Old Gentleman. Lop. You wou'd not have me prefer him to your Excel∣lency? Sanch. Faith, you can hardly chuse amiss betwixt us two; he's my other self, Man. Lop. I make a vast difference betwixt you. Sanch. That shall be a very good Jest between you and me another time. Dalin. (aside.) The Fool's too much a Fool, he's going to discover himself, if I prevent it not. (To Lopez.) Make
haste, Father, and put him upon the Point, or he'll give me up to Sancho. Lop. Let Sancho be no Fool, since your Lordship pleases, for he is not bound to make my Daughter any satisfaction, as you are. Sanch. And satisfaction she shall have: What, I hope you don't think I am an Eunuch? Dal. (aside.) Oh Heaven! I shall be ruin'd between them, I forgot to instruct my Father not to meddle with that Point. (To Lopez.) Say no more of it, I beseech you, Sir. Lop. (to her.) 'Tis for thy good; let me alone: You know you have injur'd the poor Girl, my Lord. Sanch. Not to my Remembrance, Sennor; You and I may have quarrel'd, I confess, and I think I may have given you some hard words to day. Dal. (aside.) Now has he forgotten he's my Lord, and is harping upon the Quarrel he had with him as Sancho: this must end in my Destruction. Lop. Your Lordship and I can have had no Quarrel to day, for I have not seen you this Twelve-month. Sanch. That's true; now I remember my self, you have not. Lop. But that you have wrong'd my Daughter is manifest. Dal. (to Sanch.) Sir, I must needs speak a word with you in private; if you love me, confess you have enjoy'd me; for I told my Father so on purpose to make him the more condescending to the Match. San. (to her.) A word to the Wise, I understand you; Now you shall see me top upon the old Fellow. (To Lopez.) Well, Sennor, I won't stand with you for a Night's Lodging with your Daughter; I acknowledge I have been a little familiar with her, or so: but to make her amends I will marry her, and consummate with her most abundantly. Lop. Then all shall be set right, and the Man shall have his Mare again.
Enter Carlos habited like Sancho. Lop. What, another Don Alonzo? this is Prodigious! Carl. (aside, seeing Sancho.) Bless me, the Post is taken up already, and the true Count is here before me. Dal. (aside.) This is not my Conde: but some other Coun∣terferfeit. (To Sancho.) You are as true a Count as he: Stand to your Likeness. Sanch. Wou'd I were out of my Likeness. [Sneaking back. Dal. Put forward, Man, I'll second you. Sanch. But what a Devilish high Back he has gotten too, he'll carry me away a pick a pack, that's certain. Carl. (aside.) I find him now: by their whispering, and by his aukwardness, this must be Sancho; and I'll out∣face him. (To Lopez.) Sennor Don Lopez, I am come by your Per∣mission, to renew my Addresses to your fair Daughter. Lop. Your Lordship is most welcome. Sanch. Whose Lordship? Lop. Why, one of your Lordships; I know not which; for by your Backs you are both my Lords: That's as you two can agree the matter. Sanch. (to Carlos.) Sirrah, where did you steal that Back of mine? Carl. Sirrah, I was born with it; but what He Cammel has your Mother been dealing withal, that you are begot∣ten in my Resemblance? Sanch. What, I hope you won't pretend to pafs for the true Conde? Carl. I am Don Alonzo de Cardona. Sanch. And so am I. Carl. If you stay a little longer, I'll stretch your Bones till you are as streight as an Arrow. Sanch. Do not provoke me; I am mischievously bent. Carl. Nay, you are bent enough in Conscience, but I have a bent Fist for Boxing.
Sanch. And I have a streight Foot for Kicking. [They come up to each other. Lop. Here will be Blood-shed immediately; hold Noble∣men both; will ye be content that I should examine ye; and then stand to my award which is the true Conde. Sanch. Well, to save Christian Blood, I will. Carl. And to save Jewish Blood, that's your Blood, Sirrah, I am contented too. Lop. (to Carlos.) What Command had you, my Lord, in the last Battel? Carl. I had none; I was a Volunteer, and Charg'd with Honourable Colonel Carlos in the Fight. Lop. (to Sancho.) And what Command had your Lordship there? Sanch. I had none neither; and I charg'd with that Rogue, Carlos. Lop. (aside.) So far they are both right, as I have heard. (To Sancho.) And what became of you afterwards? Sanch. Now I am pos'd; for Carlos told me he knew no∣thing of the Count afterwards: Sennor, I do not well re∣member what became of me, for I was in a very great Passion; but I did prodigious things, that's certain. Carl. (to Lop.) Sennor, you may see he's a Counterfeit, because he knows nothing of himself; but I, the true Conde, was trodden under the Horses Feet, and lay for dead above half an hour. Sanch. Well; and now I remember my self, I was laid for dead too for just about half a year. Lop. (to Dalind.) This is the wrong Lord, he can say nothing but what the other Lord has said before him. Dalin. Then he's the likelier to be the true Conde, for he's a Fool, Father. Carl. You see, Sennor, he does not remember what be∣came of him, as I said before. Sanch. How wou'd you have a Man remember, when he was laid for dead? Carl. But I recover'd, Rogue, and pursu'd the Enemy. Sanch. And I recover'd, and pursu'd 'em too, for above an hundred miles together, at full speed.
Lop. That's farther than you needed by three score miles; for 'tis but forty from the place of Battel to the City. Carl. Yes, at full speed upon the same Horse, and never drew Bit neither. Sanch. (to Dalin.) Help me, dear Dalinda! I am Bogg'd, you see. Dalin. (to him.) That's with pursuing your Enemies too far; but I'll help you out again—(To Lopez.) Pray, Sir, let me examine 'em a little. Lop. You'll make nothing of that first Conde. Dalin. Yes, a Son-in-Law, I warrant you. (To them.) Which of you two promis'd me Marriage? Both. I did. Dalin. (to Carl.) And did you enjoy me? Carl. Heaven forbid, Madam: what, before Marriage? Dalin. (to Sanch.) And what did you? Sanch. I did enjoy her, so I did: and there I was before you, for a false Conde as you are. Carl. Speak for your self, Madam, and clear your Repu∣tation, from that scandalous Companion. Dalin. (with her Fan before her face.) I must confess the true Conde has enjoy'd me; the more my Frailty. Lop. The matter mends on that side. Sanch. Now Good man Goose-cap, who's the most a Man of Honour, he who has enjoy'd a fair Lady, or he who has only lickt his Lips, and gone without her? Carl. (aside.) I see she takes his part; this is all a Lye contriv'd betwixt 'em. Enter a Messenger. Mess. (to Dalind.) Madam, I am sent to you on a sad Errand from the late Conde Don Alonzo, who was kill'd in the last Battel. Lop. You are mistaken, Friend; for here he stands alive, and well. [Pointing to Sancho. And for fear of failing, here's a Counterpart of him. [Pointing to Carlos.
Mess. Do not abuse your self, Sennor; neither of these is the true Conde: I took him from under the Horses Feet, and he had only life enough to say, Remember me to my fair Dalinda. Lop. (to Sanch.) What does your Lordship say to this? Sanch. He was fairly kill'd, I must confess: but I can give you a better account of his Lordship afterwards. Lop. You? why, who are you? Sanch. Nay, I am he too. Mess. You see he's a Counterfeit; and so is the other. Lop. 'Tis too true. Dal. Did the Conde leave me nothing in his Will? Mess. Not a Cross, Madam. Dalin. There's the same Payment for your News; be gone, poor Fellow. [Exit Messenger. Carl. At least I have the satisfaction that he's discover'd as well as I am. [Throwing off some part of his Disguise. Now, Sancho, you are welcome to the discovery of your fine Intrigue. Lop. Then, Sancho, I make good my word to you; since the Conde is dead, you stand fairest for my Daughter; and you, Cousin Carlos, with your Wit and your Poverty, are in Statu Quo: Come away, Son-in-Law, and leave the for∣saken Lover to make himself a Willow Garland. [Exeunt Sancho, Lopez, and Dalinda. Carl. Yet if I cou'd hinder Sancho from marrying her, I shou'd make my self some satisfaction. I'll think on't far∣ther; and something comes into my head already. [Stands musing. Enter Alphonso. Alph. Now Carlos, what make you here in this Disguise? I have been looking for you at least half an hour. Carl. Only a Masquerade, Sir, an innocent Diversion in times of Peace. Alph. No, Carlos, these are times of War, not Peace: I must abruptly tell you what is past:
I am Ramirez Son, not Veramond's. I love Victoria, and for her am banisht. Carl. Just my own condition: I have had a Revolution in my small Affairs too; I am banisht, and going to look for the next commodious Tree to make a wry Face upon it. Alph. I know you Brave; and if you love me still, Follow my Fortune; yours shall be my Care, Our Army lies Encamp'd without the Walls: Your Regiment is Quarter'd in the Town: I think I can with ease Revolt the Troops, Because they love me; and with their Assistance, Release my Father; and redeem my Mistress: While you and yours, at an appointed Signal, Procure me Entrance. Carl. Right; and force the Gate.— Alph. That's all I ask: I think my self as worthy To wed Victoria, as this Foreign Prince: But if you find Reluctance to this Action, Now speak, that I may seek some other Friend. Carl. No, Sir; I shall never break with you for so small a matter as a Rebellion, I warrant you for my Souldiers, they'll never flinch, when there's a Town to Plunder. Alph. The Signal and the Time shall be concerted: Victoria be the Word— That happy Name our bold Attempt shall bless; And give an Omen of assur'd Success. [Exeunt severally.
ACT IV. SCENE I. The Scene a Street; with a Temple at a distance. Enter Garcia, with a Letter in his Hand; Ximena and Celidea. Garcia. MAY I believe you, 'tis Victoria's Hand? For 'tis a strange Request. Ximen. So may it move your Noble Mind to pity, As what the Paper tells you is most true. She gave it me; and with a thousand sighs, Begg'd me to recommend her Life, her Love, And all her hopes of Happiness to you. Garc. To break my Marriage off, renounce her Bed, To stand excluded from my promis'd Bliss, And as my proper Act to do all this? Disdainful, Faithless, and Ungrateful Maid! Celid. Disdainful and Ungrateful; but not Faithless. Because she never vow'd nor promis'd Love; But only to Alphonso. Xime. They lov'd not as a Brother and a Sister, But as the Fair and Brave each other Love. For sympathy of Souls inspir'd their Passion. Gar. That sympathy which made him Love Victoria, Has caus'd the same effect of Love in me. Celid. But not in her: She Lov'd him first, my Lord; And you Besieg'd a Town already his. As you for her, others may Dye for you; And plead that Argument to hope your Love, If the same Reason hold. Gar. No doubt it wou'd, Were not my Soul already prepossest.
Celid. So is Victoria's Soul, for her Alphonso. And that's her Plea for Constancy to him. Gar. My Reason is convinc'd, but not my Passion. For I must Love, and Loving must Enjoy. Celid. Others must not Enjoy, and yet must Love. Xime. You cannot Wed Victoria but by force: And force can only make her Person yours. Think what a fatal Doom you pass on her, To make your self half happy. Gar. When she's mine I will persue her with so dear a Passion, So chafe her coldness with my warm Embraces, That she shall melt at length, hard as she is; And run like stubborn Mettal. Celid. No, my Lord, Victoria is not form'd of Steel, but Marble, Which is not made to melt, but flies the Fire; And neither yields nor softens to the flames. Gain her Esteem at least, her Love is hopeless. Gar. Esteem, a scanty, mean Reward of Passion, That pays not half the value of the loss. Celid. Pay Scorn, with Scorn, and make Revenge a Pleasure; So Generous Minds shou'd do, and so shou'd I; What needs there more, You see who Loves you not—And— Xime. And she wou'd say, you may behold who Loves you; But Maiden Bashfulness has ty'd her Tongue: Look on her Eyes, they speak. Celid. (softly.) A Language which they never spoke before. Xime. Mark how she whispers, like a Western wind Which trembles thro' the Forest; she, whose Eyes Meet ready Victory where e're they glance; Whom gazing Crowds admire, whom Nations Court, And (did her Praise become a Mother's Mouth) One who cou'd change the Worship of all Climates, And make a New Religion where she comes; Unite the differing Faith of all the World;
To Idolize her Face. Gar. And well she may: Her Eyes, her Lips, her Cheeks, her Shape, her Features, Seem to be drawn by Love's own Hand; by Love Himself in Love; but oh, 'tis now too late, My Eyes have drank a Poison in, before; A former Basilisk has seen me first. Yet know, Fair Princess, if there were a part In all my Breast, that cou'd receive a wound, Your Eyes cou'd only give it. Celid. So helpless Friends, when safe themselves a-shoar, Behold a Vessel driv'n against a Rock, They Sigh, they Weep, they Counsel, and they Pray, They stretch their unassisting Hands in vain, But none will plunge into the raging Main, To save the sinking Passenger from Death. Xime. Already see the Joyless Bride appears; Grief, Rage, Disdain, Distraction and Despair Are equal in my Daughters diff'rent Fates: In one, to be constrain'd to be your Wife; In one, to be refus'd. Enter Veramond and Victoria; led as to Marriage, a Train fol∣lows; and after it a Guard. Celid. Great Nature break thy Chain, that Links together The Fabrick of this Globe, and make a Chaos Like that within my Soul; Oh Heaven unkind That gives us Passions, strong and unconfin'd; And leaves us Reason for a vain Defence; Too Pow'rful Rebels, and too weak a Prince. [Garcia, Ximena, Celidea, mix with the Train, which walk as in Procession, towards the Temple.
Enter on the sudden Alphonso and Carlos at the head of their Party; the Souldiers attack the Guards, and King; and drive 'em off the Stage: Alphonso fights with Garcia, grap∣ples with him and gets him under; in the mean time Ximena, Victoria, and Celidea, retire to a corner of the Stage: when Garcia is fall'n Celidea runs, and kneels to Alphonso. Celid. Oh spare him, spare the Noble Garcia's Life: Or take the Forfeit in the loss of mine. How happy shou'd I be to dye for him, Who will not live for me! Alph. (to Garcia.) Rise, and be safe: If you have any Thanks to pay, reserve 'em To give this Royal Maid. Gar. (rising.) You'd been more kind To take my Life, for I wou'd throw it off; Dishonour'd as I am, 'tis worn to Rags, Not worth a Prince's wearing. [Exit Garcia follow'd by Celidea. Re-enter Veramond disarm'd, and led by Carlos. Vera. Ungrateful Traytor! Alph. Hold thy peace, Old Man: I do not love t'insult on thy Misfortunes. Tho thou hast brought this Ruine on thy self. Vera. Avenging Heav'n— Alph. I prithee curse me not, Because I held thee for my Father once. Vera. Then wou'd I were thy Father, that my Curse Might take the surer place, and— Alph. Guard him hence; But use no Violence to his Royal Person: Call back the Souldiers, Carlos, from the Spoil.
I have my wish in having my Victoria, And wou'd no more of him, nor what is his. [Carlos restores to Veramond his Sword, with Respect, and conducts him off; Ximena follows him: Alphonso waits on them to the Door, and returns. Vict. What have you done, Alphonso? Alph. What I ought. Obtain'd the Glorious Prize for which I fought; Redeem'd you from a Father's Tyranny; And from a hated Rival set you free. Remove, my Fair, from this unhappy place; The Scene of Sorrows, Suff'rings, and Disgrace: To my Victorious Camp with me remove: The Scene of Triumph, and Rewarded Love. Vict. Mars has been present with your Arms to day, But Love and Hymen have been far away: You forc'd me from a Rival's Pow'r, I know; But then you forc'd me from a Father's too. Alph. What words are these! I feel my Vital Heat Forsake my Limbs, my curdl'd Blood retreat: Too much amaz'd to speak, in this Surprize, With silent Grief, on yours I fix my Eyes: To learn the reasons of your Change from thence; To read your cruel Doom, and my Offence. Vict. Your Arms, and Glorious Action, I approve: Esteem your Honour, and Embrace your Love. Alph. My Soul recovers, as a gentle Show'r Refreshes and revives a drooping Flow'r. I'm yours so much, so little am my own; Your Smiles are Life; and Death is in your Frown. Vict. But oh, a hard request is yet behind; Which, for my sake, endure with equal Mind: Your Debt of Honour you have clear'd this day; But mine of Duty, still remains to pay: Restore my Liberty, and let me go To make a full Discharge of all I owe.
Alph. What Debts but those of Love have you to clear? Are you not free, are you not Soveraign here? And were you not a Slave, before I broke Your fatal Chains, and loos'd you from the Yoke? Vict. 'Tis trne, I was; but that Captivity, Tho hard to bear, was more becoming me. A Slave I am; but Nature made me so, Slave to my Father, not my Father's Foe: Since, then, you have declar'd me Free, this hour I put my self within a Parent's Power. Alph. Cruel Victoria! wou'd you go from hence, And leave a desolate, despairing Prince? Is this the Freedom you demand from me; Are these the Vows, and this the Constancy? Put off the Mask: for I too well perceive Whom you resolve to love, and whom to leave: Go, teach me at my own Expence, to find What change a day can make in Womankind. Vict. Think not a day, or all my Life, can make Victoria's Heart her stedfast Love forsake: I plighted you my Faith: and I renew My Vows once more, to love but only you. Alph. You vow'd no time our Fortune shou'd divide: And well 'twas kept, like all your Vows beside; When ev'n this hour you went to be a Bride. Vict. I went; but was securely first prepar'd: For this was my Redemption or my Guard. [Pulls out a Dagger. Let this your causeless Jealousie remove; And learn no more to doubt Victoria's Love. Alph. That satal Proof I never did desire. Vict. And yet a Proof more fatal you require. Which wou'd, with Infamy, my Name persue; To fly my Father, and to follow you. Alph. Your Love you forfeit, if you go away. Vict. I forfeit my Obedience if I stay. Alph. You may transfer your Duty, and be mine. Vict. Yes, when my Father shall his Claim resign:
For when the Nuptial Knot our Love assures; All that was his before, is, after, yours. Alph. Then, when you vow'd your Love, you falsly swore. Vict. I love you much, but love my Honour more. Alph. You hate my Rival, yet you take the way To make you his inevitable Prey. Vict. Beasts fear not more to be the Hunter's Spoil. Alph. Then sure you wou'd not run into the Toyl. How ill your Actions with your Words agree! Vict. This Friend is still at hand to set me free. [Holding up the Dagger. Alph. Let me not live to see that Fatal Hour: Rather return into your Father's Pow'r. Rather return into his Arms again, For whom your Lost Alphonso you disdain. If one must dye, to set your Honour free, You have already cast the Lot on me. Death is my only way to clear my Fame; Which must be Branded with a Coward's Name, If basely I resign Victoria's Charms, And tamely give you to my Rival's Arms. Vict. To give me to my Father is no Crime. Alph. 'Tis still the same; your Father gives you him. Ungrateful Woman! Vict. More ungrateful Man! More than I ought I give, and all I can: But if my Duty I prefer to you, Be satisfi'd with all that Love can do. Alph. Not satisfi'd; but yet your Will shall be Like Fates inviolable Law to me. Since my Unhappy Stars will have it so, Depart from hence, and leave your Father's Foe. Go then; but quickly go; for while you stay, As on a Rack I find my self decay; And every Moment looks a part of me away. Vict. I wish I with my Duty cou'd dispence: Heav'n knows how loath I am to part from hence:
So, from the Seal is soften'd Wax disjoyn'd: So, from the Mother Plant, the tender Rind: But take the latest Pledge that Love can give; Have Courage; and for your Victoria Live. [She offers him her Hand, he Kisses it: Exit Victoria, he Looking after her. Enter Ramirez, Attended by Carlos, Ramirez Embraces Alphonso. Ram. Prop of my Age, and Pattern of my Youth, But such as far excels th' Original; Ten Thousand Blessings on thee, for this Deed. Alph. Heav'n and my Fate speak other Language to me; No Blessings, none, but millions of their Curses, Like burning Glasses, with contracted Beams, Are pointed on my Head. Ram. What words are these, on this Auspicious Day! Alph. Oh fly me, fly me, Sir. Lest the Contagion of my Woes, Pollute my Father's Joys; Victoria's gone, And with her, went Alphonso's Life, and Soul. Ram. You had her in your Pow'r; and were too easie. Alph. Or rather she too cruel. Her Duty forc'd her hence, in scorn of Love. Ram. You must resume your Arms; And force her Father's Will, to make her yours. Why, like a Woman, stand you thus complaining, Born to the Strength, and Courage of a Man? Rouze up your Spirits to a just Revenge: Like Lightning wastful, and like Thunder loud. Rivers of Blood shall run about the Town; For which you were so lavish of your own. Garcia shall Dye; and, by his Death, remove The cause of Jealousie, and Injur'd Love. The King himself, th'ungrateful King, shall fall; Of all our Ills, the curst Original.
Alph. Beseech you, Sir, no more. Ram. Your Reason, Son? Alph. For you have giv'n my Soul so large a swing, That it bounds back again with double force: Only because you carried it too far. You've set an Image of so vast destruction Before my sight, that Reason shuns th' approach; And dares not view the fearful precipice. Ram. Is Vengeance, which is said so sweet a Morsel That Heav'n reserves it for its proper Tast, Is it so soon dis-relisht? Alph. What have the People done? The Sheep of Princes, That they shou'd perish for the Shepherd's Fault? They bring their yearly Wool, to cloath their owners, And yet when bare themselves, are cull'd for Slaughter. Shou'd I do this, what cou'd the Wolf do more, Than what the Master did? Ram. Then Garcia, must he scape? Alph. 'Tis true, I had him at my Mercy once; I shou'd have Kill'd him then, or once forgiven, Shou'd spare him now. Ram. (aside.) His Noble Soul relents! Alph. But then I give Victoria to his Arms; And make my own Destruction my own Act— That fires my Blood again—yet if she Love him, Is Killing him she Loves, the way to gain her? No, let him Live—But Veramond shall Dye; Who, when he was my Father as he thought, When I deserv'd his Love; then hated me. Ram. (aside.) Oh! now the Tempest drives another way. Alph. No more deliberation, there it goes: I'le Kill him first, to satisfie my Vengeance: And then t' Attone her Anger, Kill my self. [Seems going hastily. Ram. Hold, hold, Alphonso, Heav'n and Earth and I, Who have a Father's Title to your Life, Forbid that Parricide.
Alph. Wou'd you refuse a Mad-Man leave to Sleep? 'Tis Sleep must cure me, and that Sleep is Death. Ram. A Mad-Man must be cool'd, to make him Sleep. I have prepar'd a gentle Opiat for you, One Moment's Patience, and I will infuse it: You see me dispossest of all my State— Alph. Yes, to my Grief: and to enhance that Grief, 'Tis to my Sword, my Father ows his Ruin. Ram. And 'tis that only Sword that can restore me. It must, and ought: you owe it to your Duty. Alph. Duty was what Victoria urg'd to me: I hate that fatal word, because she us'd it; And for a Cruel Father, left her Love. Ram. Cou'd she do that, for Veramond, a Tyrant, Which you refuse to me? The Conquering Troops of Arragon are yours: You are their Life, their Idol, and their Soul. Conduct me Home, and with their Aid Restore me; And that once done, we shall not need to Treat, For Veramond himself will send; and sue For that Alliance, which his Pride now scorns. Alph. Long e're that time, Victoria will be Garcia's: Her Father will not lose one moment's space, To gratifie his Vengeance with my Ruine: If I wou'd force him, this must be the time: Which since I now refuse, 'tis lost for ever. Hear then; and take it as my last resolve; Lead you the Troops: you need not fear their Faith: The Guilt of their Rebellion make 'em yours. With them, and with your own, Restore your self. Ram. Then what becomes of you? Alph. No matter what. Provide your self of some more worthy Heir. For I am lost, beyond Redemption lost; Farewel the Joys of Empire from this moment: Farewel the Honours of the dusty Field; Here lay I down this Instrument of Death. [Vngirds his Sword, and lays it down.
And may it gird some Happier Souldier's side: For nothing it cou'd gain, can countervail To me, the loss of my Victoria's Love. Your Blessing, and farewel— [Kneels. Ram. Alas, I fear some fatal Resolution Is harbour'd in your Soul: if thus you leave me, My Mind forbodes, we never more shall meet. Alph. Give not so black an Omen to this parting. For we may meet again, if Heav'n thinks fit— A Beam of Comfort, like the Moon thro' Clouds, Gilds the brown Horrour, and directs my way. Blast not my purpose, by refusing leave, Nor ask the means: but know I will not Dye Till I have prov'd th' extreamest Remedy. And, if Unarm'd, I go to tempt my Fate: Think my despair is from Victoria's Hate. [Exit Alphonso. Ram. I might have us'd the Pow'r Heav'n gives to Parents, And hindred his departure: But somewhat of Divine controul'd my Tongue; For Hero's Souls, irregular to us, Yet move like Planets in their proper Sphere; Performing even course, In Paths uneven to beholders Eyes.— [Pauses a little. (To Carlos) His words, mysterious as they were, imported, Some desperate Design, which I must watch, And therefore dare not lead the Forces far: But Camp'd without the Town at some small distance; T' expect the Issue, and prevent his Death. Carlos. Sir, what Orders give you? for you are now our General. Ram. Follow, and you shall know— [Exit Ramirez. Carl. Follow! whither? No Plunder when the Town was fairly taken, there's a hopeful General to follow; the Son and Father are both gone away, without providing for me, who betray'd the City to 'em; a fine Incouragement for Virtue;
Well, these Monarchs make no more of us Souldiers, when their turn is serv'd, than we make of our old batter'd Horses; to put us off for Stallions, is the best that can become of us: and those indeed are my present Circumstances: Dalinda will none, and Sancho is just mounting; if I get not between, and thrust him off: for which purpose I have insinuated to him that I have left Dalinda for his sake, and am upon another Scent,—Yonder he comes: This, and another Lye which I have ready coin'd, will go near to spoil his Market. Enter Sancho. Sanch. Well, Carlos, the Hurly Burly's quite over; I met Ramirez marching off the Army; and just afterwards appear'd a Fellow in a Fool's Coat on Horse-back, with three Trumpets; Herod, I think they call'd him; or some such Jewish Name. Carl. A Herauld at Arms you mean. Sanch. It may be so; but I shou'd have taken him for some Pardonner, for he scatter'd Indulgences by handfuls to the People, but only they paid nothing for 'em. Carl. But did he Proclaim nothing? Sanch. Oh, yes; and now I remember, he began his Speech with, O Yes, too; he Proclaim'd a General Pardon to all Rebels, of which number, you know, you and I, Carlos, were two Ring-leaders. Carl. Then farewell Ramirez, e'en trudge on by your self, for there's an end of my Expedition; I will lay down my Arms like a Dutiful Subject; and submit to his Majesty when I can rebel no longer. Sanch. Very good; and try t'other touch for Dalinda, will you? Carl. You know I have quitted her for your sake, and now am altogether for—Let me see, what Lady am I for? Sanch. Pump, pump, Carlos; for that's to be invented yet.
Carl. Only out of my Head a little: 'Tis the dead Count's Sister; a great Fortune since her Brother died, but somewhat homely: She has already made some Advances to me, or else I lye. Sanch. And will you say To Have and to Hold, with an ugly Woman? Carl. Yes, and For Better for Worse, that is, for Virgin or for Whore, as you will, Sancho; who are listing your self into the Honourable Company of Cuckolds. Sanch. What, a Hero as I am, to be a Cuckold? Carl. Do not disdain your Calling; Julius Caesar was one before you: The Count has had her by her own Confes∣sion; so she's a Nobleman's Dowager for your Comfort. Sanch. Pugh, she deny'd it afterwards; that was but a Copy of her Countenance. Carl. What if it prove a Copy of the Conde's Counte∣nance, do yout think she had not a Bastard by him? Sanch. That was only a Plot betwixt us to cheat her Father. Carl. Did her Father know nothing of it? Sanch. Not a Syllable. Carl. Then when he believ'd you to be the Count, how came he to charge you with enjoying her? Sanch. That is something to the purpose; but now I think on't, 'tis nothing neither; 'tis but asking her the Question, and I know she'll satisfie me. Carl. And you are resolv'd to take her word? Sanch. Rather than yours; for you may have a mind to have a lick at the Honey-pot your self. Carl. Farewel; you know I have other business upon the Stocks. [Seems going out. Sanch. Stay, Carlos; I'm afraid you know something more of this bawdy business than you confess. Carl. Fecks, not I. Sanch. Fecks! what a sneaking Oath is that for a Man of Honour? Swear me bloodily like a Souldier, if you wou'd be believ'd.
Carl. Without Swearing, I believe her honest; therefore make sure of her immediately. Sanch. That is, take a Rival's Counsel, and make sure of being an Antedated Cuckold. Carl. If you won't believe me, I can't help it; but marry Dalinda, and be happy; for I may prevent you, if you make not haste. Sanch. Thou hast cheated me so often, that I can't cre∣dit one Syllable thou say'st. Carl. (going out.) Then take your Fortune. [Carlos pulls out his Handkerchief to wipe his Face, and drops a Letter. Yonder comes Dalinda; I know her by her Trip. I'll watch their Greeting. [Exit. Sanch. The Rogue's malicious, and wou'd have me mar∣ry her in spight; besides he's off and on at so Devilish a rate, a Man knows not where to have him: Well, I am resolv'd in the first place not to follow the Rogue's Counsel, I will not marry her because he advis'd me to't; and yet I will marry her because he counsel'd me not to marry her: Hey day, I will marry her, and I will not mar∣ry her: what's the meaning of this, Friend Sancho? That's taking the Rogue's advice one way or t'other. [Sees the Letter, and takes it up. What, has he dropt a Letter! To whom is it directed? to Don Carlos D'Ybarra, that's himself. Mutters, as reading to himself. Dalinda's Fair. and a Fortune; but marry her not; for to my knowledge (Pox confound him for his knowledge) she has had a—(What A—Mr. Friend?) why, a Ba∣stard, by the late Conde: (Ay, I thought as much.) But his Sister Leonora is in Love with you. Damn it, I'll read no more: It agrees with what he first told me; and therefore it must be all Orthodox: Here she
comes too, just in the nick of my Revenge; but I shall be very Laconnick with her. Enter Dalinda. Dal. Now Servant. Sanch. Now Cockatrice. Dal. You're pretty familiar— Sanch. So have you been— Dal. With your Mistress. Sanch. With the Conde, of Whoring Memory. Dal. A fine Salutation! Sanch. A final parting. Dal. What's the meaning of this! will you come in? Sanch. Will you go in? Dal. Come, look upon me. [She makes the Doux Yeux to him. Sanch. I have no Eyes. Dal. Then I must take you by the Hand. [She offers, and he pulls back. Sanch. I have no Hands neither. Dal. How's this! I have been but too kind— Sanch. Yes, to the Conde. Dal. Pugh, that was a Jest, you know. Sanch. 'Tis turn'd to earnest. Dal. You know 'twas of my Conception. Sanch. And of your bringing forth too. Dal. What did I bring forth? Sanch. A Bastard. Dal. Oh Impudent! Sanch. Woman. Dal. What Proof have you of that Scandal? Sanch. This, with a Pox to ye. [Throws her the Letter. [Exit. Patience, oh ye Gods! [She takes up the Note, and as she is reading it, Re-enter Carlos.
Carl. Much good may do you with your Note, Madam; now I think I am Reveng'd at full; your Cully has forsaken you. Dal. Well, I did not expect this from you, Cozen Carlos. Carl. What did you take me for? King Log in Aesop's Fa∣bles, for you to insult me, and play at leap Frog over me? Did not you forsake me for a Fool? Dal. But was not this a terrible Revenge of yours? must you needs shew him the Letter which has ruin'd my Reputa∣tion, and lost my Fortune? Am I the first frail Creature, that had the Misfortune of two Great Bellies, and yet after∣wards, was Decently Married, and pass'd for a Virgin? Carl. Nay, don't aggravate the Matter: consult your Note, and you find but one Bastard charg'd upon you; you see I was not for laying loaders. Dal. A great Curtesie to bate me one, as if that was not enough to do my Business. Carl. Well, suppose I shou'd discover this Contrivance of mine; and set all right again? Dal. (aside.) Contrivance; oh Heaven! I've undone my self, by confessing all too soon. Carl. If I shou'd prove you Innocent, you'd prove ungrateful? Dal. No, you know I always Lov'd you. Carl. You've shewn it most abundantly, in chusing Sancho! Dal. You speak more truly than you think: I have shewn it. For, since I must confess the Truth to you, I am no For∣tune: my Father, tho' he bears it high to put me off, has Mortgag'd his Estate: We keep Servants for shew, and when we shou'd pay their wages, pick a Quarrel with their Service, and turn 'em off Pennyless. There's neither Sheet nor Shirt in the whole Family; the Lodging Rooms are fur∣nisht with Loam: and bare Mattresses are the Beds. The Dining Room, plays the Hypocrite for all the House; for all the Furniture is there: when Strangers Dine with us, we Eat before the Servants, and then they Fast; but when we Dine alone, 'tis all a muss: They scramble for the Victuals, before 'tis serv'd up, and then we Fast.
Carl. The Spirit of Famine comes upon me, at the very description of it. Dal. Now, since neither you nor I have Fortunes, what shou'd we do together, unless we shou'd turn Canibals, and Eat up one another? But if you wou'd make up this foul Busi∣ness, and help me to that Rich Fool Sancho, I say no more, But— Carl. But thou wou'dst be kind to me; speak out; for I dare not trust thee; thou'rt such a Woman. Dal. You shou'd.— Carl. What shou'd I? Dal. Why, you shou'd— Carl. Well, well, I will believe thee, tho my Heart mis∣gives me plaguily. And therefore, in the fst place, I beg your pardon for the Scandal I have laid upon you: In the next, I restore your Virginity, and take away your Bastard. Dal. And you'l tell Sancho 'twas a forg'd Letter. Carl. No doubt on't; for I wrote it to my self; and out of Revenge invented the whole Story. Dal. But suppose, Dear Cozen; that Sancho shou'd not believe all this to be your Invention; and shou'd still suspect the Letter to be true? Carl. I can easily convince him, by Writing the same Hand again, in which that Letter was Indited. Dal. That's an excellent Expedient; but do it now; for a Woman can never be clear'd too soon. Carl. But when you are clear'd, you'l forget your Promise to me— Dal. But if I am not clear'd, I cannot Marry him; nor be put in a way to keep my Promise. Come, I'le hold my Hand, Write upon it, I always carry Pen and Ink about me. Carl. Let me Seal my Affection first: [Kisses her Hand. Now, what shou'd I write? Dal. Only these words at the bottom of the Note, in the same Character. This Letter was wholly forg'd by me, Carlos. [He Kneels and Writes. Carl. There 'tis— [Gives it her, she puts it in her Pocket.
But now tell me truly; what made you confess a couple of Bastards, have you indeed been dabbling? Dal. Who, I confess it! Oh thou Impudent Fellow! I only sooth'd thee up in thy Villany, to make thee betray thy own Plot. I confess'd seemingly, to make thee confess really. Hea∣v'n and thy own Conscience, know I did. [Seems to weep. Carl. But when you're Married, you'l remember your Promise? Dal. What Promise? Carl. That I shou'd— Dal. Shou'd what? Carl. Must I tell you? Dal. No, I'le tell you; I said you shou'd; and so you shall, be cozen'd in your Expectation. Carl. I foreboded this; and yet was Fool enough to trust thee; give me back my Letter. Dal. What, deliver up my Evidence, that's the Testimony of my Virtue, and thy Wickedness. Carl. I'le search your Petticoat. Dal. Dare but touch my Petticoat, and I'le cry out a Rape against thee. Carl. Oh thou Eve of Genesis; thou wou'dst have Tempted the Serpent, if thou hast bin there. Dal. The next News you hear, is of my Wedding; be Pa∣tient, and you shall be Invited to the Dinner. Carl. I say no more, but I'le go Home and Indite Iambicks; thou shalt not want for an Epithalamium; I'le do thy busi∣ness in Verse. [Exit. Dal. My Comfort is, I have done your Business in Prose, already. The Wittiest Men, are all but Womens Tools, 'Tis our Prerogative, to make 'em Fools. For one Sweet Look, the Rich, the Beaux, the Braves, And all Mankind, run headlong to be Slaves. Ours is the Harvest which those Indians mow; They Plough the Deep; but we Reap what they Sow. [Exit.
ACT V. SCENE I. The SCENE, Lopez's House. Sancho, Lopez, Dalinda. Carlos meeting them. Carl. GIve you Joy Mr. Bridegroom and Mrs. Bride, you see I have accepted your Invitation. Sanch. And thou art welcome, as a Witness of my Tri∣umph. Carl. I cou'd tell Tales, that wou'd spoil your Appetite, both to your Dinner and your Bride: You think you are married to a vast Fortune. Dal. A better, perhaps, than you imagine. Lop. For if Sancho looks into his Writings, he'll find that my Estate was mortgag'd to his Father. Sanch. Then wou'd I had lookt into my Writings before I had lookt so far into your Daughter. Dal. My Father's Fortune will be yours at last: and I have but redeem'd it for you. Sanch. I'm sure I'm married without Redemption! Carl. You must take the good and the bad together; he that keeps a tame Cat must be content to be scratcht a little. Dal. The Count's Sister, I hope, has Claws for you too. Carl. That was invented only in hopes of you, Dalin∣da: tho now I thank my Stars that I have miss'd you: for two Wits without Fortunes, wou'd be like two Mil∣stones without Corn betwixt 'em; they wou'd only grind upon one another, and make a terrible noise, but no Meal wou'd follow.
Enter a Nurse leading a Boy and a Girl. Nurse. Madam, here are two poor Orphans, that hearing you are married, come to dine with you. Dal. (aside.) My two Bastards! I am undone: what shall I do with 'em? Lop. (aside.) The Devil take my damn'd Grand-children for their unseasonable Visit. Sanch. Welcome, welcome: They're come a mumming to grace my Wedding, I'll warrant you. Carl. I begin to suspect they come to Sup and Lodge as well as Dine here. Lop. (to Nurse.) There's two Pistols for you; take 'em away, and bring 'em again to Morrow Morning. Nurse. Thank your Honour: Come away, Children; but first I must deliver a Note to this Gentleman: Don Carlos, I'm sure you remember me. [Gives him a Note. Carl. Did not you wait on Donna Leonora, the Conde's Sister? Nurse. Have you forgotten Ynez the faithful Trustee of your Affection? Read your Letter; there's better News than you deserve. [Carlos reads his Letter to himself. Dal. (to Nurse.) Steal away, dear Nurse, while he's reading, and there's more Money for you; fear not, you shall be duly paid; for I am married to one who can provide for them. Nurse. (to her.) Well, I'll keep your Credit: but re∣member. [Exit Nurse with the Children. Carl. (after Reading.) Poor loving Creature, she is e'en too Constant; I cou'd never have expected this from her: Look you here, you shall see I have no reason to envy your Fortune, Sancho. [Looks about him. How now, what's become of the Nurse and the two Chil∣dren?
Dal. They wou'd have been but too troublesome Guests, and are gone away. Carl. By your Favour I shall make bold to call 'em back again. [Exit Carlos. Dal. (to Lopez.) Oh Barbarous Villain! he'll discover all. Lop. The best on't is, you're already married. Dal. But we have not Consummated; I cou'd have so wheedled Mr. Bridegroom to Night, that e're to Morrow Morning he shou'd have forgiven me. Re-enter Carlos with Nurse and Children. Carl. Come, Nurse, no more mincing Matters; your Lady's Orders in my Letter must be obey'd: I must find a Father and Mother for the Children in this Company. Sanch. Whose pretty Children are these, Carlos, that you are to provide for? Carl. E'en your Bride's, Sancho, at your service: Children, do your Duty to your Mother. Children. (kneeling.) Mamma, your Blessing. Sanch. Hey day, what's here to do? Are these the Issue of your Body, Madam Bride? Carl. Yes; and they are now your Children by the Mo∣ther's side: The late Conde presents his Service to you, with these two Pledges of his Affection to your Wife. Sanch. Is it even thus, Dalinda? Lop. Christian Patience, Son-in-Law. Sanch. Christian Patience! I say Pagan Fury: This is enough to make me turn Jew again, like my Father of Hebrew Memory. Carl. You may make your Assault, Colonel, without dan∣ger; the breach is already made to your hands. Sanch. Ay, the Devil take him that storm'd it first. Carl. Speak well of the Dead. Dal. (kneeling.) And forgive the Living. Sanch. Oh Dalinda! no more Dalinda, but Daliah the Phi∣listine: Cou'd you find none but me to practice on?
Carl. Sooner upon you than upon any Man; for Nature has put a Superscription upon a Fool's Face, and all Cheats are directed thither. Lop. There's no recalling what's past and done. Sanch. You never said a truer word, Father-in-Law; 'tis done, indeed, to my Sorrow. Carl. If you cou'd undo it, Sancho, it were something; but since you cannot, your only Remedy is to do it a∣gain. Sanch. That's true: But the Memory of that damn'd Conde is enough to turn ones Stomach to her: Do you re∣member what a Devilish hunch Back he had when you and I play'd him? Carl. For that Reason you may be sure she'll loath the thought of him. Sanch. Do you think so, Carlos? Dal. How can I do otherwise, when I have in my Arms so handsome, so sweet, and so charming a Cavalier as you? Sanch. Well, I am I know not howish; she has a de∣licious Tongue of her own, and I begin to mollifie. Carl. Do, Sancho: Faith, you've held it out too long, in Conscience, for so slight a quarrel; this is nothing among great Ladies, Man; how many Fathers have I known that have given their Blessings to other Mens Children: Come, bless 'em, bless 'em, honest Daddy: Kneel down, Chil∣dren. Children. (kneeling.) Your Blessing, Pappa. [Children cry. Sanch. It goes against the grain to give it them. Carl. For shame, Sancho, take 'em up: you'll break their pretty Hearts else: 'twou'd grieve a Man's Soul to see 'em weep thus. Sanch. Ay, they learnt that trick of their Mother; but I cannot be obdurate, the fault was none of theirs, I'm sure. [Crying. Heav'n e'en bless you, and I'll provide for you: Nay, and
it shall go hard, but I'le get you some more Play-Fellows: if your Mother be as Fruitful as she us'd to be. Lop. Why this is at it shou'd be. Dal. Heav'n Reward you; and I'le study Obedience to you. Sanch. They say, Children are great Blessings; if they are, I have two great Blessings ready gotten to my hands. Carl. For your Comfort, Marriage they say, is Holy. Sanch. Ay, and so is Martyrdom, as they say; but both of 'em are good for just nothing, but to make an end of a Man's Life. Lop. Chear up, Son-in-Law, your Children are very to∣wardly, you see they can ask Blessing already. Dal. If he does not like 'em, he may Get the next him∣self. Carl. I will not trouble the Company, with Reading my Letter from the Dead Count's Sister; 'Tis enough to tell you, that I Lov'd her once, and forsook her, because she was then no Fortune: but she has been kinder to me, than I deserve: and has offer'd me her Brother's Estate in Dowry with her. Dal. Which I hope you will accept. Carl. Yes, and release you of a certain Promise to me, without explaining. She only recommended to me her Brother's Children by Dalinda. And I think I have taken a decent care in providing them a Rich Father. Sanch. I always Lov'd a Harlot, and now I have one of my own, I'le e'en take up with her; for my Youth is going; and my days of Whoring, I mean emphatical Whoring, are almost over: but for once, we'll have a Frolick; come Off∣spring, can either of you two Dance? 1 Child. Yes, forsooth Father, and my Sister can Sing too like a little Angel. Sanch. Then foot it featly; that you may say hereafter, you remember when your Mother was first Married, and Danc'd at her Wedding. Carl. Hold a little; you may remember too, Madam Bride, that I promis'd you an Epithalamium: 'Twas meant
a Satire; but Fortune has turn'd it to a Jest; I have giv'n it to the Musicians, and brought 'em along with me; strike up, Gentlemen. [The Dance is first, then the Song, the last words of which are Sung while the Company is going out, and the Musick Plays before them. Song: By Mr. Congreve. 1. HOW Happy's the Husband, whose Wife has been try'd! Not Damn'd to the Bed of an Ignorant Bride? Secure of what's left, he ne're misses the rest, But where there's enough, supposes a Feast; So foreknowing the Cheat, He escapes the Deceit, And in spite of the Curse, resolves to be Blest. 2. If Children are Blessings, his Comfort's the more, Whose Spouse has been known to be Fruitful before; And the Boy that she brings ready made to his Hand, May stand him instead, for an Heir to his Land, Shou'd his own prove a Sot, When he's Lawfully Got, As when e're 'tis so, if he don't, I'le be hang'd.
Song for a GIRL. 1. YOung I am, and yet unskill'd How to make a Lover yield: How to keep, or how to gain, When to Love; and when to feign: 2. Take me, take me, some of you, While I yet am Young and True; E're I can my Soul disguise; Heave my Breasts, and roul my Eyes. 3. Stay not till I learn the way, How to Lye, and to Betray: He that has me first, is blest, For I may deceive the rest. 4. Cou'd I find a blooming Youth; Full of Love, and full of Truth, Brisk, and of a janty meen, I shou'd long to be Fifteen. [Exeunt Omnes.
A Royal Chamber is discover'd, by drawing the former Scene; Ve∣ramond, Garcia, Ximena, Victoria, Celidea, with a full Train of Courtiers and Guards; amongst the Croud, Ramirez Disguis'd, with some of his Party. Vera. (to Vict.) No more delays, but go. Ximen. This is Inhumane, To press her to a Marriage made by Force. At least allow your self and her this day, That each of you may think, and one may change. Vera. You mean the Times or Accidents may change, And leave her for Alphonso. Ximen. Your Enemies are but without your Gates, And soon they may return: forbear for fear. Vera. The sooner then I must prevent th' effect of their return. What now remains, but to compleat my Vows, And Sacrifice to Vengeance? Ximen. Your own Daughter! Vera. Even her, my self, and all the World together. Vict. Can you refuse me one poor day to Live? Vera. Obey me, and be Blest; if not, Accurst. A Father's Curse has wings, remember that; Thro this World and the next, it will pursue thee; And sink thee down, for ever. Vict. 'Tis enough, I know how far a Daughter owes Obedience; But Duty has a bound like other Empires: It reaches but to Life, for all beyond it Is the Dominion of another World, Where you have no Command. For you, Don Garcia, You know the Pow'r a Mistress ought to have; But since you will be Master, take your Hour, The next is mine.
Gar. I grant the Debt of Service which I owe you: But 'tis a Summ too vast to pay at sight. If now you call it in, I must be Bankrupt To all my future Bliss. Vict. I find by you, The Laws of Love, are like the Laws of Heav'n; All know, but few will keep 'em—To the Temple, Where I my self am Victim. Enter Alphonso, Vnarm'd; all seem Amaz'd. Alph. Stay, Veramond. Vera. (aside.) Alphonso here! then all my Hopes are blasted. The Town is his, and I once more a Slave. Alph. Dismiss thy fears and tremble not, Old Man, I neither come with purpose, nor with Power T'avenge my wrongs, but single and unarm'd: This Head is necessary to thy Peace, And to Victoria's violated Vows: Who, while I Live, can never be Don Garcia's. Take then this odious Life; securely take it, And glut thy Vengeance with Alphonso's Blood. Behold the Man who forc'd thee in thy Strength, In thy Imperial Town made thee a Captive. Now give thy Fury scope: Revenge th' Affront, And shew more pity not to spare my Life, Than I in sparing thine. Ximen. (to Celidea.) Oh boundless Courage, or extream Despair! Celid. (to her.) I tremble for th' event; see the King reddens. The Fear which seiz'd him at Alphonso's sight, And left his Face forsaken of his Blood, Is vanisht now; And a new Tide returns upon his Cheeks: And Rage and Vengeance sparkle in his Eyes. Vera. (aside.) All things are husht; no noise is in the Streets; Nor shouts of Souldiers, nor the cries of Matrons, To speak a Town in plunder—Then I take
(To Alph.) A Traytor's Counsel once, and thou shalt Die; Condemn'd by thy own Sentence, go to Death; Nor shall thy seeming Generosity, And feign'd assurance, save thee; 'tis despair, To see thy frustrate Hopes, that brought thee hither; To meet my just Revenge. Alph. Yes, I will Dye, because I chuse to Dye. Which had I not desir'd, I had not come Unarm'd, Unguarded, and alone, to tempt Thy known Ingratitude, and barb'rous hate. Boast not th' advantage, which thou hold'st of me, But know thy self for what thou art; no more Than the mean Minister of my despair. Vera. Whether to Heav'n's Jnstice, or thy Choice, I owe this happy Hour of sweet Revenge, I'le not be wanting to the wisht occasion. Vict. You shall not Dye alone, my dear Alphonso, Tho much I blame this desp'rate Enterprize: You shou'd have stay'd, to see Th' Event of what I promis'd to perform: For had I been so base to be another's, That baseness might have cur'd your ill-plac'd Love. But this untimely rashness, makes you Guilty, Both of your Fate, and mine. Alph. While I believ'd My Life was precious to my dear Victoria, I valu'd and preserv'd it for her sake. But when you broke from your Deliv'rer's Arms, To put your self into a Tyrant's Power; I threw a worthless, wretched Being from me; Abandon'd first by you. Vict. Oh Cruel Man! Where, at what moment did that Change begin, With which you tax my Violated Vows? I left your Lawless Pow'r, to put my self Into a Father's Chains, my Lawful Tyrant. If this be my upbraided Crime, even this, On that occasion, wou'd I do once more.
But, cou'd I, with my Honour safe, have stay'd In your dear Arms, bear witness Heav'n and Earth, Nor Threats, nor Force, nor Promises, nor Fears Shou'd take me from your Love. Alph. Oh, I believe you. Vanish my fears, and causeless Jealousies; Live my Victoria: for your self, not me; But let th' unfortunate Alphonso Dye; My Death will glut your Cruel Father's Rage; When I am gone, and his Revenge compleat, Pity perhaps may seize a Parent's Mind; To free you from a hated Lover's Arms. Celid. (to Ximen.) Speak Mother, speak: my Father gives you time, He stands amaz'd, irresolute, and dumb: Like the still Face of Heav'n before a Storm; Speak, and Arrest the Thunder e're it rowls. Ximen. I stand suspected: but you, Celidea, The Favourite of his Heart, his Darling Child, May speak, and ought, your Int'rest is concern'd: For if Alphonso Dye, your hopes are lost. I see your Father's Soul, like glowing Steel Is on the Anvil; strike, while yet he's hot: Turn him, and ply him, set him straight betimes, Lest he for ever warp. Celid. I fear, and yet wou'd speak; but will he hear me? Ximen. For what is all this silence, but to hear? Bring him but to calm Reasoning, and he's gain'd. Celid. Then Heav'n inspire my Tongue— Sir, Royal Sir— He hears me not; he lifts not up his Eyes: But fixt upon the Pavements looks the way That points to Death. [She pulls him. Oh hear me, hear me, Father. Have you forgot that dear indulgent Name, Never before in vain pronounc'd by me? Vera. Ha! who disturbs my Thoughts? Celid. (kneeling.) 'Tis Celidea. Alas I wou'd relieve you, if I durst;
If ever I offended, even in Thought, Or made not your Commands The bounds of all my Wishes, and Desires, Bid me be dumb, or else permit me Speech. Vera. Oh rise, my only unoffending Child, Who reconciles me to the Name of Father! Speak then; but not for her, and less for him. Celid. Perhaps I wou'd accuse 'em, not defend; For both are Guilty, dipt in equal Crimes: And are obnoxious to your Justice both. Vera. True, Celidea; thou confirm'st my Sentence; 'Tis just Alphonso Dye. Ximen. (aside.) Forgive her, Heav'n! she aggravates their Faults; And pushes their destruction. Celid. Speak Alphonso: Can you deny, when Royal Veramond, Then thought your Father, and by you so deem'd, When he requir'd your Captive, old Ramirez, And order'd his Confinement; did you well Then to controul the Pleasure of that King, Under whose just Commands you Fought and Conquer'd? Alph. I did not well: but heat of boyling Youth, And ill-weigh'd Honour, made me disobey. Vera. That Cause is gain'd; for he confesses Guilt. Proceed, most equitable Judge, proceed. Celid. (to Alph.) Next I reproach you, with a worse Rebellion. The King's first Promise to Don Garcia made, You dar'd t' oppose: forbad his fair Addresses; Then made a Ruffian Quarrel with that Prince. And last, were guilty of Incestuous Love. I will not load my Sister with Consent; But, in strict Virtue, listning to a Crime, And not rejecting, is it self a Crime. Vict. Is this a Sister's Office? Peace for shame: We Lov'd without transgressing Virtues bounds; We fixt the limits of our tend'rest Thoughts; Came to the verge of honour, and there stopt: We warm'd us by the Fire; but were not scorcht:
If this be Sin, Angels might Love with less; And mingle Rays of Minds, less pure than ours. Our Souls enjoy'd; but to their Holy Feasts, Bodies on both sides, were forbidden Guests. Celid. Now help me, Father; or our Cause is lost: For much I fear their Love was innocent. Vera. With my own Troops Alphonso seiz'd my Person; In my own Town, to my perpetual Shame: Pass on to that; and strike the Traytor Dead. Celid. Yes, Proud Alphonso, you were banisht hence; Your Father was confin'd; and doom'd to Death; The Beauty you Ador'd was made another's. How durst you, then, attempt t'avenge your wrongs, And force your Mistress from your Rival's Arms? Rather than Dye contented, as you ought. Alph. Even for those very Reasons you alledge. Ximen. (aside.) At last I find her drift. Vera. Thou Justifiest, and not Accusest him. Celid. Patience, good Father, and hear out the rest. [To Alph. Thought you, because you bravely Fought, and Conquer'd For Royal Veramond, nay, sav'd his Life, And set him free, when you had Conquer'd him, Only because he was Victoria's Father, Thought you for such-slight Services as these, That he shou'd spare you now? O Generous Madman, To give your Head to one, who ne're forgave. Vera. (aside.) Oh, she stings me. Celid. And you, Don Garcia, witness to this Truth: You were his hated Rival, fairly vanquisht; And yet he spar'd your Life. Garc. At your request: I owe it to you both. That he dismist my Sister, 'twas her Fault: I charge it not on him; but 'twas his Folly. A Capital Fool he was, in that last Error; For which he justly stands Condemn'd to Death. Your Sentence, Royal Sir?
Vera. That he shou'd Live; Shou'd Live Triumphant over Veramond, And shou'd Live Happy in Victoria's Love— Oh, I have held as long as Nature cou'd; Convinc'd in Reason, obstinate in Will; I saw the Pleader's aim, found her design, I long'd to be o'recome, and yet resisted. What have I done against thee, my Alphonso? And what hast thou not done for Veramond? Ximen. Oh fortunate Event! Vict. Oh happy Day! Alph. Oh unexpected Bliss, and therefore double! Vera. (to Alph.) Can you forgive me, yes, I know you can: Alphonso can forgive Victoria's Father. But yet, in pity, Pardon not too soon: Punish my Pride a while; And make me linger for so great a Good. Lest extasie of Joy prevent the Blessing; And you, instead of Pardon, give me Death. [He offers to kneel to Alphonso: Alphonso tales him up, and kneels himself. Alph. Oh let me raise my Father from the ground! Vera. (rising.) 'Tis your peculiar Virtue, my Alphonso, Always to raise me up. Alph. Here let me grow, till I obtain your Grace: My Life has been, one Universal Crime; And you, like Heav'n, accepting short Repentance, Forgive my length of Sins. Vera. (raising him.) Let us forget from whence offence began. But since to fave my shame, thou wilt be Guilty, Impute thy hate for me, to sure instinct; That show'd thee thy True Father in my Foe; Now Grafted on my Stock, be Son to both. (turning to Garc.) To you, Don Garcia, next. Garc. Before you speak; Permit me, Sir, t' assume some little Merit In this days Happiness; your Promise made Victoria mine—
Alph. What then? Garc. Nay, hear me out. He kept his Royal Word; he gave her me; I lost her, when I fell beneath your Sword. Or if I have a Title, I resign it, And make her yours. Alph. I take her as your Gift. Garc. (to Vera.) Make me but Blest in Celidea's Love; She sav'd my Life, and hers it is for ever. 'Tis pity she who gain'd another's Cause, Shou'd lose her own. Vera. (presenting Celidea.) She's yours. Celid. My Joys are full. Vict. And mine o're-flow. Alph. And mine are all a Soul can bear, and Live. Vera. Then seek we out Ramirez; To make him Partner of this happy day; That gives him back his Crown, and his Alphonso. Ram. Behold me here, unsought: with some few Friends; [Taking off his Vizard. (Resolv'd to Save my Son, or Perish with him) Thus far I trac'd, and follow'd him, unknown, And here have waited, with a beating Heart, To see this blest Event. Vera. Just like the winding up of some Design, Well form'd, upon the crowded Theatre. Where all concern'd surprizingly are pleas'd; And what they wish, see done. Lead to the Temple; Let Thanks be paid; and Heav'n be prais'd no less For private Union, than for publick Peace.
Epilogue. NOW, in Good Manners, nothing shou'd be sed Against this Play, because the Poet's dead. The Prologue told us of a Moral here: Wou'd I cou'd find it, but the Devil knows where. If in my Part it lyes, I fear he means To warn us of the Sparks behind our Scenes: For if you'l take it on Dalinda's Word, 'Tis a hard Chapter to refuse a Lord. The Poet might pretend this Moral too, That when a Wit and Fool together woo; The Damsel (not to break an Ancient Rule,) Shou'd leave the Wit, and take the Wealthy Fool. This he might mean, but there's a Truth behind, And since it touches none of all our Kind, But Masks and Misses; faith, I'le speak my Mind. What, if he Taught our Sex more cautious Carriage, And not to be too Coming before Marriage: For fear of my Misfortune in the Play, A Kid brought home upon the Wedding day: I fear there are few Sancho's in the Pit, So good as to forgive, and to forget; That will, like him, restore us into Favour, And take us after on our good Behaviour. Few, when they find the Mony Bag is rent, Will take it for good Payment on content.
But in the Telling, there the difference is, Sometimes they find it more than they cou'd wish. Therefore be warn'd, you Misses and you Masks, Look to your hits, nor give the first that asks. Tears, Sighs, and Oaths, no truth of Passion prove, True Settlement alone, declares true Love. For him that Weds a Puss, who kept her first, I say but little, but I doubt the worst: The Wife that was a Cat may mind her house, And prove an Honest, and a Careful Spouse; But faith I wou'd not trust her with a Mouse. FINIS.
