D2458 12112190 54218
De Arte Graphica. THE Art of Painting, BY C. A. DU FRESNOY. WITH REMARKS. Translated into English, Together with an Original Preface containing A PARALLEL betwixt PAINTING and POETRY. By Mr. DRYDEN. As also a Short Account of the most Eminent PAINTERS, both Ancient and Modern, continu'd down to the Present Times, according to the Order of their Succession. By another Hand. Vt Pictura Poesis erit— Hor. de Arte Poetica. LONDON, Printed by I. Heptinstall for W. Rogers, at the Sun against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. MDCXCV.
PREFACE OF THE TRANSLATOR, With a Parallel, Of Poetry and Painting. IT may be reasonably expected, that I shou'd say something on my own behalf, in respect to my present Undertaking. First, then, the Reader may be pleas'd to know, that it was not of my own choice that I undertook this Work. Many of our most Skillfull Painters, and other Artists, were pleas'd to recommend this Authour to me, as one who perfectly under∣stood the Rules of Painting; who gave the best and most concise Instructions for Performance, and the surest to inform the Judgment of all who
lov'd this noble Art. That they who before were rather fond of it, than knowingly admir'd it, might defend their Inclination by their Reason: that they might understand those Excellencies which they blindly valu'd, so as not to be farther impos'd on by bad Pieces, and to know when Nature was well imitated by the most able Ma∣sters. 'Tis true indeed, and they acknowledge it, that beside the Rules which are given in this Treatise, or which can be given in any other, that to make a perfect Judgment of good Pictures, and to value them more or less when compar'd with one another, there is farther requir'd a long conversation with the best Pieces, which are not very frequent either in France or England; yet some we have, not onely from the hands of Holbein, Rubens, and Vandyck, (one of them ad∣mirable for History-painting, and the other two for Portraits,) but of many Flemish-Masters, and those not inconsiderable, though for Design, not equal to the Italians. And of these latter also, we are not unfurnish'd with some Pieces of Ra∣phael, Titian, Correggio, Michael Angelo and others. But to return to my own undertaking of this Translation, I freely own, that I thought my self uncapable of performing it, either to their Sa∣tisfaction, or my own Credit. Not but that I
understood the Original Latine, and the French Au∣thour perhaps as well as most Englishmen; But I was not sufficiently vers'd in the Terms of Art: And therefore thought that many of those persons who put this honourable task on me, were more able to perform it themselves, as undoubtedly they were. But they assuring me of their assi∣stance, in correcting my faults where I spoke im∣properly, I was encourag'd to attempt it; that I might not be wanting in what I cou'd, to sa∣tisfie the desires of so many Gentlemen who were willing to give the world this usefull Work. They have effectually perform'd their promise to me; and I have been as carefull on my side, to take their advice in all things; so that the Reader may assure himself of a tolerable Translation. Not Elegant, for I propos'd not that to my self: but familiar, clear and instructive. In any of which parts, if I have fail'd, the fault lies wholly at my door. In this one particular onely I must beg the Readers pardon. The Prose Translation of the Poem is not free from Poetical Expressions, and I dare not promise that some of them are not fustian, or at least highly metaphorical; but this being a fault in the first digestion (that is, the Original Latine) was not to be remedy'd in the second (viz.) the Translation. And I may confi∣dently
say, that whoever had attempted it, must have fallen into the same inconvenience; or a much greater, that of a false Version. When I undertook this Work, I was already ingag'd in the Translation of Virgil, from whom I have bor∣row'd onely two months, and am now return∣ing to that which I ought to understand better. In the mean time I beg the Readers pardon, for entertaining him so long with my self: 'Tis an u∣sual part of ill manners in all Authours, and al∣most in all Mankind, to trouble others with their business; and I was so sensible of it before∣hand, that I had not now committed it, unless some concernments of the Readers had been inter∣woven with my own. But I know not, while I am attoning for one Error, if I am not falling into another: for I have been importun'd to say something farther of this Art; and to make some Observations on it in relation to the likeness and agreement which it has with Poetry its Sister. But before I proceed, it will not be amiss, if I copy from Bellori (a most ingenious Authour, yet living) some part of his Idea of a Painter, which cannot be unpleasing, at least to such who are conversant in the Philosophy of Plato. And to avoid tediousness, I will not translate the whole Discourse, but take and leave as I find occasion.
God Almighty, in the Fabrique of the Universe, first contemplated himself, and reflected on his own Excellencies; from which he drew, and constituted those first Forms, which are call'd Idea's. So that every Species which was afterwards express'd was pro∣duc'd from that first Idea, forming that wonderfull contexture of all created Beings. But the Coelestial Bodies above the Moon being incorruptible, and not sub∣ject to change, remain'd for ever fair, and in perpetu∣al order: On the contrary, all things which are sublu∣nary are subject to change, to deformity, and to decay. And though Nature always intends a consummate beau∣ty in her productions, yet through the inequality of the Matter, the Forms are alter'd; and in particular, Humane Beauty suffers alteration for the worse, as we see to our mortification, in the deformities, and dis∣proportions which are in us. For which reason the Artfull Painter and the Sculptour, imitating the Di∣vine Maker, form to themselves as well as they are able, a Model of the Superiour Beauties; and reflecting on them endeavour to correct and amend the common Nature; and to represent it as it was first created without fault, either in Colour or in Lineament. This Idea, which we may call the Goddess of Pain∣ting and of Sculpture, descends upon the Marble and the Cloth, and becomes the Original of those Arts; and being measur'd by the Compass of the Intellect, is it
self the Measure of the performing Hand; and being anmated by the Imagination, infuses Life into the Image. The Idea of the Painter and the Sculptour, is undoubtedly that perfect and excellent Example of the Mind; by imitation of which imagin'd form, all things are represented which fall under humane sight: Such is the Definition which is made by Cicero in his Book of the Oratour to Brutus. "As therefore in Forms and Figures there is somewhat which is Excel∣lent and Perfect, to which imagin'd Species all things are referr'd by Imitation which are the Objects of Sight, in like manner we behold the Species of Eloquence in our Minds, the Effigies, or actual Image of which we seek in the Organs of our Hear∣ing. This is likewise confirm'd by Proclus in the Dialogue of Plato call'd Timaeus: If, says he, you take a Man, as he is made by Nature, and compare him with another who is the effect of Art; the work of Nature will always appear the less beau∣tifull, because Art is more accurate than Nature." But Zeuxis, who from the choice which he made of Five Virgins drew that wonderfull Picture of He∣lena, which Cicero in his Oratour beforemention'd, sets before us as the most perfect Example of Beauty, at the same time admonishes a Painter, to contemplate the Idea's of the most Natural Forms; and to make a judicious choice of several Bodies, all of them the most
Elegant which he can find. By which we may plainly understand that he thought it impossible to find in any one Body all those Perfections which he sought for the accomplishment of a Helena, because Nature in any individual person makes nothing that is perfect in all its parts. For this reason Maximus Tyrius also says, that the Image which is taken by a Painter from seve∣ral Bodies produces a Beauty, which it is impossible to find in any single Natural Body, approaching to the perfection of the fairest Statues. Thus Nature on this account is so much inferiour to Art, that those Artists who propose to themselves onely the imitation and likeness of such or such a particular person, without election of those Idea's before-mention'd, have often been reproach'd for that omission: Demetrius was tax'd for being too Natural; Dionysius was also blam'd for drawing Men like us, and was commonly call'd' , that is, a Painter of Men. In our times Michael Angelo da Caravaggio, was esteem'd too Natural. He drew persons as they were; and Bambovio, and most of the Dutch Painters have drawn the worst likeness. Lysippus of old, upbraided the common sort of Sculptours, for making Men such as they were found in Nature; and boasted of himself that he made them as they ought to be: which is a Precept of Aristotle, given as well to Poets as to Painters. Phidias rais'd an admiration even to asto∣nishment,
in those who beheld his Statues, with the Forms, which he gave to his Gods and Heroes; by imitating the Idea rather than Nature. And Ci∣cero speaking of him affirms, that figuring Jupiter and Pallas, he did not contemplate any Object from whence he took the likeness, but consider'd in his own mind a great and admirable form of Beauty, and accor∣ding to that Image in his Soul, he directed the operation of his Hand. Seneca also seems to wonder, that Phidias having never beheld either Jove or Pallas, yet cou'd conceive their divine Images in his Mind. Apollonius Tyanaeus says the same in other words, that the fancy more instructs the Painter than the imi∣tation; for the last makes onely the things which it sees, but the first makes also the things which it never sees. Leon Battista Alberti tells us, that we ought not so much to love the likeness as the beauty, and to choose from the fairest Bodies severally the fairest Parts. Leonardo da Vinci instructs the Painter to form this Idea to himself: And Raphael, the greatest of all modern Masters, writes thus to Castiglione, concer∣ning his Galatea: "To paint a Fair one, 'tis necessary for me to see many Fair ones; but because there is so great a scarcity of lovely Women, I am constrain'd to make use of one certain Idea, which I have form'd to my self in my own fancy." Guido Reni sending to
Rome his St. Michael which he had painted for the Church of the Capuchins, at the same time wrote to Monsignor Massano, who was Maestro di Casa (or Steward of the House) to Pope Urban the Eighth, in this manner. I wish I had the wings of an Angel, to have ascended into Paradise, and there to have be∣held the Forms of those beatify'd Spirits, from which I might have copy'd my Archangel: But not being able to mount so high, it was in vain for me to search his resemblance here below: so that I was forc'd to make an Introspection, into my own mind, and into that Idea of Beauty, which I have form'd in my own imagination. I have likewise created there the contrary Idea of de∣formity and ugliness; but I leave the consideration of it, till I paint the Devil: and in the mean time shun the very thought of it as much as possibly I can, and am even endeavouring to blot it wholly out of my re∣membrance. There was not any Lady in all Antiquity, who was Mistress of so much Beauty as was to be found in the Venus of Gnidus, made by Praxiteles, or the Minerva of Athens by Phydias; which was therefore call'd the Beautifull Form. Neither is there any Man of the present Age, equal in the strength, proportion, and knitting of his Limbs, to the Hercules of Farnese, made by Glicon: Or any Woman who can justly be compar'd with the Medicean Venus of Cleo∣menes. And upon this account, the noblest Poets
and the best Oratours, when they desir'd to celebrate any extraordinary Beauty, are forc'd to have recourse to Statues and Pictures, and to draw their Persons and Faces into Comparison. Ovid endeavouring to express the Beauty of Cillarus, the fairest of the Centaures, celebrates him as next in perfection, to the most admirable Statues. Gratus in ore vigor, cervix, humeri{que} manus{que} Pectora{que} Artificum laudatis Proxima Signis. A pleasing Vigour his fair Face express'd; His Neck, his Hands, his Shoulders, and his Breast, Did next in Gracefulness and Beauty stand, To breathing Figures of the Sculptour's Hand. In another place he sets Apelles above Venus. Si Venerem Cois nunquam pinxisset Apelles, Mersa sub aequoreis illa lateret Aquis. Thus vary'd. One Birth to Seas the Cyprian Goddess ow'd, A Second Birth the Painter's Art bestow'd: Less by the Seas than by his pow'r was giv'n; They made her live, but he advanc'd to Heav'n.
The Idea of this Beauty, is indeed various, accor∣ding to the several forms which the Painter or Scul∣ptour wou'd describe: As one in Strength, another in Magnanimity; and sometimes it consists in Chearfulness, and sometimes in Delicacy; and is always diversify'd by the Sex and Age. The Beauty of Jove is one, and that of Juno ano∣ther: Hercules, and Cupid are perfect Beauties, though of different kinds; for Beauty is onely that which makes all things as they are in their proper and perfect Nature; which the best Painters always choose by contemplating the Forms of each. We ought farther to consider, that a Picture being the representation of a humane action, the Painter ought to retain in his mind, the Examples of all Affections, and Passions, as a Poet preserves the Idea of an Angry man, of one who is fearfull, sad or merry, and so of all the rest. For 'tis impossible to express that with the Hand, which never enter'd into the Imagination. In this manner as I have rudely and briefly shewn you, Painters and Scul∣ptours, choosing the most elegant natural Beauties, per∣fectionate the Idea, and advance their Art, even above Nature it self, in her individual productions, which is the utmost mastery of humane performance. From hence arises that astonishment, and almost ado∣ration which is paid by the Knowing to those divine re∣mainders of Antiquity. From hence Phydias, Ly∣sippus,
and other noble Sculptours, are still held in veneration; and Apelles, Zeuxis, Protogenes, and other admirable Painters, though their Works are pe∣rish'd, are and will be eternally admir'd; who all of them drew after the Idea's of Perfection; which are the Miracles of Nature, the Providence of the Under∣standing, the Exemplars of the Mind, the Light of the Fancy; the Sun which from its rising, inspir'd the Statue of Memnon, and the fire which warm'd into life the Image of Prometheus: 'Tis this which causes the Graces, and the Loves to take up their habitations in the hardest Marble, and to subsist in the emptiness of Light, and Shadows. But since the Idea of Elo∣quence is as far inferiour to that of Painting, as the force of Words is to the Sight; I must here break off abruptly, and having conducted the Reader as it were to a secret Walk, there leave him in the midst of Silence to contemplate those Idea's; which I have onely sketch'd, and which every man must finish for himself. In these pompous Expressions, or such as these the Italian has given you his Idea of a Painter; and though I cannot much commend the Style, I must needs say there is somewhat in the Matter: Plato himself is accustom'd to write loftily, imi∣tating, as the Critiques tell us, the manner of Ho∣mer; but surely that inimitable Poet, had not so much of Smoke in his writing, though not less of
Fire. But in short, this is the present Genius of Italy. What Philostratus tells us in the Proem of his Figures is somewhat plainer; and therefore I will translate it almost word for word. "He who will rightly govern the Art of Painting, ought of necessity first to understand Humane Nature. He ought likewise to be endued with a Genius to express the signs of their Passions whom he represents; and to make the dumb as it were to speak: He must yet further understand what is contain'd in the con∣stitution of the Cheeks, in the temperament of the Eyes, in the naturalness (if I may so call it) of the Eye-brows: and in short whatsoever belongs to the Mind and Thought. He who throughly possesses all these things will obtain the whole. And the Hand will exquisitely represent the action of every particu∣lar person. If it happen that he be either mad, or angry, melancholique, or chearfull, a sprightly Youth, or a languishing Lover; in one word, he will be able to paint whatsoever is proportionable to any one. And even in all this there is a sweet errour without causing any shame. For the Eyes and Minds of the beholders being fasten'd on Objects which have no real Being, as if they were truly Existent, and be∣ing induc'd by them to believe them so, what pleasure is it not capable of giving? The Ancients, and other Wise Men, have written many things concer∣ning
the Symmetry which is in the Art of Paint∣ing; constituting as it were some certain Laws for the proportion of every Member, not thinking it possible for a Painter to undertake the expression of those motions which are in the Mind, without a con∣current Harmony in the natural measure. For that which is out of its own kind and measure, is not receiv'd from Nature, whose motion is always right. On a serious consideration of this matter it will be found, That the Art of Painting has a wonderfull affinity with that of Poetry; and that there is betwixt them a certain common Imagination. For as the Poets introduc the Gods and Heroes, and all those things which are either Majestical, Ho∣nest or Delightfull, in like manner the Painters, by the virtue of their Out-lines, Colours, Lights and Shadows, represent the same Things and Persons in their Pictures." Thus, as Convoy Ships either accompany, or shou'd accompany their Merchants till they may prosecute the rest of their Voyage without danger, so Philostratus has brought me thus far on my way, and I can now sail on without him. He has begun to speak of the great relation betwixt Painting and Poetry, and thither the greatest part of this Discourse by my promise was directed. I have not ingag'd my self to any perfect Method,
neither am I loaded with a full Cargo. 'Tis sufficient if I bring a Sample of some Goods in this Voyage. It will be easie for others to add more when the Commerce is settled. For a Trea∣tise twice as large as this of Painting cou'd not contain all that might be said on the Parallel of these two Sister Arts. I will take my rise from Bellori before I proceed to the Authour of this Book. The business of his Preface is to prove, that a learned Painter shou'd form to himself an Idea of perfect Nature. This Image he is to set before his Mind in all his Undertakings, and to draw from thence as from a Store-house, the Beauties which are to enter into his Work; thereby cor∣recting Nature from what actually she is in indi∣viduals, to what she ought to be, and what she was created. Now as this Idea of Perfection is of little use in Portraits (or the resemblances of par∣ticular persons) so neither is it in the Characters of Comedy, and Tragedy; which are never to be made perfect, but always to be drawn with some specks of frailty and deficience; such as they have been described to us in History, if they were real Characters; or such as the Poet began to shew them at their first appearance, if they were onely ficti∣tious, (or imaginary.) The perfection of such
Stage-characters consists chiefly in their likeness to the deficient faulty Nature, which is their Origi∣nal. Onely, as it is observ'd more at large here∣after, in such cases there will always be found a better likeness, and a worse; and the better is constantly to be chosen: I mean in Tragedy, which represents the Figures of the highest form amongst Mankind. Thus in Portraits, the Pain∣ter will not take that side of the Face which has some notorious blemish in it; but either draw it in profile (as Apelles did Antigonus, who had lost one of his Eyes) or else shadow the more imper∣fect side. For an ingenious flattery is to be al∣low'd to the Professours of both Arts; so long as the likeness is not destroy'd. 'Tis true that all manner of Imperfections must not be taken away from the Characters, and the reason is, that there may be left some grounds of pity for their mis∣fortunes. We can never be griev'd for their mi∣series who are thoroughly wicked, and have there∣by justly call'd their calamities on themselves. Such Men are the natural Objects of our hatred, not of our commiseration. If on the other side their Characters were wholly perfect, (such as for Example, the Character of a Saint or Martyr in a Play,) his, or her misfortunes, wou'd produce impious thoughts in the Beholders: they wou'd
accuse the Heavens of injustice, and think of lea∣ving a Religion, where Piety was so ill requited. I say the greater part wou'd be tempted so to do, I say not that they ought: and the consequence is too dangerous for the practice. In this I have accus'd my self for my own St. Catharine, but let truth prevail. Sophocles has taken the just medium in his Oedipus. He is somewhat arrogant at his first entrance; and is too inquisitive through the whole Tragedy: Yet these Imperfections being ba∣lanc'd by great Vertues, they hinder not our com∣passion for his miseries; neither yet can they de∣stroy that horrour which the nature of his Crimes have excited in us. Such in Painting are the Warts and Moles, which adding a likeness to the Face, are not therefore to be omitted. But these pro∣duce no loathing in us. But how far to proceed, and where to stop, is left to the judgment of the Poet and the Painter. In Comedy there is some∣what more of the worse likeness to be taken. Be∣cause that is often to produce laughter; which is occasion'd by the sight of some deformity: but for this I referr the Reader to Aristotle. 'Tis a sharp manner of Instruction for the Vulgar who are never well amended, till they are more than sufficiently expos'd. That I may return to the beginning of this Remark, concerning perfect
Idea's, I have onely this to say, that the Parallel is often true in Epique-Poetry. The Heroes of the Poets are to be drawn accor∣ding to this Rule. There is scarce a frailty to be left in the best of them; any more than is to be found in a Divine Nature. And if Aeneas some∣times weeps, it is not in bemoaning his own mi∣series, but those which his people undergo. If this be an Imperfection, the Son of God when he was incarnate shed tears of Compassion over Ie∣rusalem. And Lentulus describes him often weep∣ing, but never laughing; so that Virgil is justify'd even from the Holy Scriptures. I have but one word more, which for once I will anticipate from the Authour of this Book. Though it must be an Idea of Perfection, from which both the Epique Poet, and the History Painter draws; yet all Per∣fections are not suitable to all Subjects: But eve∣ry one must be design'd according to that per∣fect Beauty which is proper to him. An Apollo must be distinguish'd from a Iupiter, a Pallas from a Venus: and so in Poetry an Aeneas from any other Heroe: for Piety is his chief Perfection. Homer's Achilles is a kind of Exception to this Rule: but then he is not a perfect Heroe, nor so intend∣ed by the Poet. All his Gods had somewhat of humane imperfection; for which he has been
tax'd by Plato, as an Imitatour of what was bad. But Virgil observ'd his fault, and mended it. Yet Achilles was perfect in the strength of his Bo∣dy, and the vigour of his Mind. Had he been less passionate, or less revengefull, the Poet well foresaw that Hector had been kill'd, and Troy ta∣ken at the first assault; which had destroy'd the beautifull contrivance of his Iliads, and the moral of preventing Discord amongst Confederate Princes, which was his principal intention. For the Moral (as Bossu observes) is the first business of the Poet, as being the ground-work of his In∣struction. This being form'd, he contrives such a Design, or Fable, as may be most suitable to the Moral. After this he begins to think of the Persons, whom he is to employ in carrying on his Design: and gives them the Manners, which are most proper to their several Characters. The thoughts and words are the last parts, which give Beauty and Colouring to the Piece. When I say, that the Manners of the Heroe ought to be good in perfection, I contradict not the Marquess of Nor∣manby's opinion, in that admirable Verse, where speaking of a perfect Character, he calls it A Fault∣less Monster, which the World ne'er knew. For that Excellent Critique, intended onely to speak of Dra∣matique Characters, and not of Epique. Thus at
leat I have shewn, that in the most perfect Poem, which is that of Virgil, a perfect Idea was requir'd, and follow'd. And consequently that all succee∣ding Poets ought rather to imitate him, than even Homer. I will now proceed as I promis'd, to the Authour of this Book. He tells you almost in the first lines of it, that the chief end of Painting is to please the Eyes: and 'tis one great End of Poetry to please the Mind. Thus far the Parallel of the Arts holds true: with this difference, That the Principal end of Painting is to please; and the chief design of Poetry is to instruct. In this the latter seems to have the advantage of the former. But if we con∣sider the Artists themselves on both sides, certain∣ly their aims are the very same: they wou'd both make sure of pleasing, and that in preference to instruction. Next, the means of this pleasure is by Deceipt. One imposes on the Sight, and the other on the Understanding. Fiction is of the Es∣sence of Poetry as well as of Painting; there is a resemblance in one, of Humane Bodies, Things and Actions which are not real, and in the other, of a true Story by a Fiction. And as all Stories are not proper Subjects for an Epique Poem, or a Tra∣gedy, so neither are they for a noble Picture. The Subjects both of the one, and of the other, ought to have nothing of immoral, low, or filthy in
them; but this being treated at large in the Book it¦self, I wave it to avoid repetition. Onely I must add, that though Catullus, Ovid and others were of a∣nother opinion, that the Subject of Poets, and even their thoughts and expressions might be loose, pro∣vided their lives were chast and holy, yet there are no such licences permitted in that Art any more than in Painting, to design and colour obscene Nudities. Vita proba est, is no excuse, for it will scarcely be admitted, that either a Poet or a Painter can be chast, who give us the contrary examples in their Writings and their Pictures. We see nothing of this kind in Virgil: that which comes the nearest to it, is the adventure of the Cave, where Dido and Aeneas were driven by the Storm: Yet even there the Poet pretends a Marriage before the Consum∣mation; and Iuno her self was present at it. Nei∣ther is there any expression in that Story, which a Roman Matron might not reade without a blush. Besides the Poet passes it over as hastily as he can, as if he were afraid of staying in the Cave with the two Lovers, and of being a witness to their Actions. Now I suppose that a Painter wou'd not be much commended, who shou'd pick out this Cavern from the whole Eneids, when there is not another in the Work. He had better leave them in their obscurity, than let in a flash of
Lightning to clear the natural darkness of the place, by which he must discover himself as much as them. The Altar-Pieces, and holy Decorati∣ons of Painting, show that Art may be apply'd to better uses, as well as Poetry. And amongst many other instances, the Far∣nesian Gallery, painted by Hannibal Carracci, is a sufficient witness yet remaining: the whole Work being morally instructive, and particularly the Herculis Bivium, which is a perfect Triumph of Vertue over Vice, as it is wonderfully well de∣scrib'd by the ingenious Bellori. Hitherto I have onely told the Reader what ought not to be the subject of a Picture or of a Poem: what it ought to be on either side; our Author tells us: it must in general be great and noble: and in this, the Parallel is exactly true. The subject of a Poet either in Tragedy or in an Epique Poem is a great action of some illustrious Hero. 'Tis the same in Painting; not every a∣ction, nor every person is considerable enough to enter into the Cloth. It must be the Anger of an Achilles, the Piety of an Aeneas, the Sacrifice of an Iphigenia (for Heroins as well as Heroes are comprehended in the Rule;) but the Parallel is more compleat in Tragedy, than in an Epique Poem. For as a Tragedy may be made out of
many particular Episodes of Homer or of Virgil, so may a noble Picture be design'd out of this or that particular Story in either Author. History is also fruitfull of designs both for the Painter and the Tragique Poet: Curtius throwing himself into a Gulph, and the two Decii sacrificing themselves for the safety of their Country, are subjects for Tra∣gedy and Picture. Such is Scipio restoring the Spa∣nish Bride, whom he either lov'd or may be sup∣sos'd to love, by which he gain'd the Hearts of a great Nation, to interess themselves for Rome against Carthage: These are all but particular Pieces in Livy's History; and yet are full com∣pleat Subjects for the Pen and Pencil. Now the reason of this is evident. Tragedy and Picture are more narrowly circumscrib'd by the Mechanick Rules of Time and Place than the Epique Poem. The time of this last is left indefinite. 'Tis true, Homer took up onely the space of eight and for∣ty days for his Iliads; but whether Virgil's action was comprehended in a year or somewhat more, is not determin'd by Bossu. Homer made the place of his action Troy, and the Grecian Camp besieging it. Virgil introduces his Aeneas, sometimes in Si∣cily, sometimes in Carthage, and other times at Cu∣mae, before he brings him to Laurentum; and even after that, he wanders again to the Kingdom of
Evander and some parts of Tuscany, before he re∣turns to finish the War by the death of Turnus. But Tragedy according to the Practice of the Anci∣ents, was always confin'd within the compass of 24 hours, and seldom takes up so much time. As for the place of it, it was always one, and that not in a larger Sence; as for example, A whole City or two or three several Houses in it; but the Market or some other publick place, com∣mon to the Chorus and all the Actours. Which establish'd Law of theirs, I have not an oppor∣tunity to examine in this place, because I cannot do it without digression from my subject, though it seems too strict at the first appearance because it excludes all secret Intrigues, which are the Beau∣ties of the modern Stage: for nothing can be car∣ry'd on with Privacy, when the Chorus is suppos'd to be always present. But to proceed, I must say this to the advantage of Painting, even above Tragedy, that what this last represents in the space of many Hours, the former shows us in one Mo∣ment. The Action, the Passion, and the man∣ners of so many Persons as are contain'd in a Picture, are to be discern'd at once, in the twink∣ling of an Eye; at least they would be so, if the Sight could travel over so many different Objects all at once, or the Mind could digest them all at
the same instant or point of time. Thus in the famous Picture of Poussin, which represents the Institution of the Blessed Sacrament, you see our Saviour and his twelve Disciples, all concurring in the same action, after different manners, and in different postures, onely the manners of Iudas are distinguish'd from the rest. Here is but one indivisible point of time observ'd: but one acti∣on perform'd by so many Persons, in one Room and at the same Table: yet the Eye cannot comprehend at once the whole Object, nor the Mind follow it so fast; 'tis consider'd at leisure, and seen by intervals. Such are the Subjects of Noble Pictures: and such are onely to be un∣dertaken by Noble Hands. There are other parts of Nature, which are meaner, and yet are the Subjects both of Painters, and of Poets. For to proceed in the Parallel, as Comedy is a representation of Humane Life, in inferiour per∣sons, and low Subjects, and by that means creeps into the nature of Poetry, and is a kind of Iuni∣per, a Shrub belonging to the species of Cedar, so is the painting of Clowns, the representation of a Dutch Kermis, the brutal sport of Snick or Snee, and a thousand other things of this mean inventi∣on, a kind of Picture, which belongs to Nature, but of the lowest form. Such is a Lazar in com∣parison
to a Venus; both are drawn in Humane Figures: they have Faces alike, though not like Faces. There is yet a lower sort of Poetry and Painting, which is out of Nature. For a Farce is that in Poetry, which Grotesque is in a Picture. The Persons, and Action of a Farce are all unnatural, and the Manners false, that is, inconsisting with the characters of Mankind. Grotesque-painting is the just resemblance of this; and Horace begins his Art of Poetry by describing such a Figure; with a Man's Head, a Horse's Neck, the Wings of a Bird, and a Fishes Tail; parts of different species jumbled together, according to the mad imagi∣nation of the Dawber; and the end of all this, as he tells you afterward, to cause Laughter. A ve∣ry Monster in a Bartholomew-Fair for the Mob to gape at for their two-pence. Laughter is indeed the propriety of a Man, but just enough to di∣stinguish him from his elder Brother, with four Legs. 'Tis a kind of Bastard-pleasure too, ta∣ken in at the Eyes of the vulgar gazers, and at the Ears of the beastly Audience. Church-Pain∣ters use it to divert the honest Countryman at Pub∣lick Prayers, and keep his Eyes open at a heavy Sermon. And Farce-Scriblers make use of the same noble invention to entertain Citizens, Country-Gentlemen, and Covent-Garden Fops. If they are
merry, all goes well on the Poet's side. The bet∣ter sort goe thither too, but in despair of Sense, and the just Images of Nature, which are the ade∣quate pleasures of the Mind. But the Authour can give the Stage no better than what was given him by Nature: and the Actors must represent such things, as they are capable to perform, and by which both they and the Scribbler may get their living. After all, 'tis a good thing to laugh at any rate, and if a straw can tickle a man, 'tis an instrument of happiness. Beasts can weep when they suffer, but they cannot laugh. And as Sir William Davenant observes in his Preface to Gon∣dibert, 'Tis the wisdom of a Government to permit Plays (he might have added Farces) as 'tis the pru∣dence of a Carter to put Bells upon his Horses, to make them carry their Burthens chearfully. I have already shewn, that one main end of Poetry and Painting is to please, and have said something of the kinds of both, and of their Sub∣jects, in which they bear a great resemblance to each other. I must now consider them, as they are great and noble Arts; and as they are Arts, they must have Rules which may direct them to their common end. To all Arts and Sciences, but more particularly to these may be apply'd what Hippocrates says of
Physick, as I find him cited by an eminent French Critique. "Medicine has long subsisted in the World. The Principles of it are certain, and it has a certain way; by both which there has been found in the course of many Ages, an infinite num∣ber of things, the experience of which has confirm'd its usefulness and goodness. All that is wanting to the perfection of this Art, will undoubtedly be found, if able Men, and such as are instructed in the An∣cient Rules will make a farther enquiry into it, and endeavour to arrive at that, which is hitherto un∣known, by that which is already known. But all, who having rejected the Ancient Rules, and taken the opposite ways, yet boast themselves to be Masters of this Art, do but deceive others, and are them∣selves deceiv'd; for that is absolutely impossible." This is notoriously true in these two Arts: for the way to please being to imitate Nature; both the Poets and the Painters, in Ancient times, and in the best Ages, have study'd her: and from the practice of both these Arts, the Rules have been drawn, by which we are instructed how to please, and to compass that end which they obtain'd, by following their Example. For Nature is still the same in all Ages, and can never be contrary to her self. Thus from the practice of Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides, Aristotle drew his Rules
for Tragedy; and Philostratus for Painting. Thus amongst the Moderns, the Italian and French Cri∣tiques by studying the Precepts of Aristotle, and Horace, and having the Example of the Grecian Poets before their Eyes, have given us the Rules of Modern Tragedy: and thus the Critiques of the same Countries, in the Art of Painting have given the Precepts of perfecting that Art. 'Tis true that Poetry has one advantage over Painting in these last Ages, that we have still the remaining Ex∣amples both of the Greek and Latine Poets: where∣as the Painters have nothing left them from Apel∣les, Protogenes, Parrhasius, Xeuxis and the rest, but onely the testimonies which are given of their incomparable Works. But instead of this, they have some of their best Statues, Bass-Relievo's, Columns, Obilisques, &c. which were sav'd out of the common ruine, and are still preserv'd in Ita∣ly: and by well distinguishing what is proper to Sculpture, and what to Painting, and what is com∣mon to them both, they have judiciously repair'd that loss. And the great Genius of Raphael, and others, having succeeded to the times of Barbarism and Ignorance, the knowledge of Painting is now arriv'd to a supreme perfection, though the per∣formance of it is much declin'd in the present Age. The greatest Age for Poetry amongst the Romans
was certainly that of Augustus Caesar; and yet we are told that Painting was then at its lowest Ebb, and perhaps Sculpture was also declining at the same time. In the Reign of Domitian, and some who succeeded him, Poetry was but meanly cul∣tivated, but Painting eminently flourish'd. I am not here to give the History of the two Arts; how they were both in a manner extinguish'd, by the Irruption of the barbarous Nations, and both re∣stor'd about the times of Leo the Tenth, Charles the Fifth, and Francis the First; though I might observe, that neither Ariosto, nor any of his Con∣temporary Poets ever arriv'd at the Excellency of Raphael, Titian, and the rest in Painting. But in re∣venge at this time, or lately in many Countries, Po∣etry is better practis'd than her Sister-Art. To what height the Magnificence and Encouragement of the present King of France may carry Painting and Scul∣pture is uncertain, but by what he has done, before the War in which he is ingag'd, we may expect what he will do after the happy Conclusion of a Peace, which is the Prayer and Wish of all those who have not an interest to prolong the miseries of Europe. For'tis most certain, as our Author amongst others has observ'd, That Reward is the Spur of Vertue, as well in all good Arts, as in all laudable Attempts: and Emulation which is the
other Spur, will never be wanting either amongst Poets or Painters, when particular Rewards and Prizes are propos'd to the best deservers. But to return from this digression, though it was almost necessary; all the Rules of Painting are methodi∣cally, concisely, and yet clearly deliver'd in this present Treatise which I have translated. Bossu has not given more exact Rules for the Epique Po∣em, nor Dacier for Tragedy in his late excellent Translation of Aristotle and his notes upon him, than our Fresnoy has made for Painting; with the Parallel of which I must resume my Discourse, following my Author's Text, though with more brevity than I intended, because Virgil calls me. The principal and most important parts of Painting, is to know what is most beautifull in Nature, and most proper for that Art: that which is the most beauti∣full is the most noble Subject: so in Poetry, Tra∣gedy is more beautifull than Comedy; because, as I said, the Persons are greater whom the Poet in∣structs, and consequently the instructions of more benefit to Mankind: the action is likewise great∣er and more noble, and thence is deriv'd the great∣er and more noble Pleasure. To imitate Nature well in whatsoever Subject, is the perfection of both Arts; and that Picture and that Poem which comes nearest to the resem∣blance
of Nature is the best. But it follows not, that what pleases most in either kind is therefore good; but what ought to please. Our deprav'd Appetites, and ignorance of the Arts, mislead our Judgments, and cause us often to take that for true imitation of Nature, which has no resem∣blance of Nature in it. To inform our Judgments, and to reform our Tasts, Rules were invented, that by them we might discern when Nature was imitated, and how nearly. I have been forc'd to recapitulate these things, because Mankind is not more liable to deceit, than it is willing to con∣tinue in a pleasing error strengthen'd by a long habitude. The imitation of nature is therefore justly constituted as the general, and indeed the onely Rule of pleasing both in Poetry and Paint∣ing. Aristotle tells us, that imitation pleases, be∣cause it affords matter for a Reasoner to enquire into the truth or falshood of Imitation, by com∣paring its likeness or unlikeness with the Original. But by this Rule, every Speculation in Nature, whose truth falls under the enquiry of a Philoso∣pher, must produce the same delight which is not true; I should rather assign another reason. Truth is the Object of our Understanding as Good is of our Will: And the Understanding can no more be delighted with a Lye, than the Will can
choose an apparent Evil. As Truth is the end of all our Speculations, so the discovery of it is the pleasure of them. And since a true know∣ledge of Nature gives us pleasure, a lively imita∣tion of it, either in Poetry or Painting, must of necessity produce a much greater. For both these Arts as I said before, are not onely true imitati∣ons of Nature, but of the best Nature, of that which is wrought up to a nobler pitch. They pre∣sent us with Images more perfect than the Life in any individual: and we have the pleasure to see all the scatter'd Beauties of Nature united by a happy Chymistry, without its deformities or faults. They are imitations of the passions which always move, and therefore consequently please: for without motion there can be no delight; which cannot be consider'd, but as an active passion. When we view these Elevated Idea's of Nature, the result of that view is Admiration, which is always the cause of Pleasure. This foregoing Remark, which gives the rea∣son why imitation pleases; was sent me by Mr. Walter Moyle, a most ingenious young Gentleman, conversant in all the Studies of Humanity, much above his years. He had also furnish'd me (ac∣cording to my request) with all the particular passages in Aristotle and Horace, which are us'd
by them to explain the Art of Poetry by that of Painting: which if ever I have time to retouch this Essay, shall be inserted in their places. Having thus shewn that Imitation pleases, and why it pleases in both these Arts, it follows that some Rules of Imitation are necessary to obtain the end: for without Rules there can be no Art; any more than there can be a House without a Door to conduct you into it. The principal parts of Painting and Poetry next follow. Invention is the first part, and absolutely neces∣sary to them both: yet no Rule ever was or ever can be given how to compass it. A happy Ge∣nius is the gift of Nature: it depends on the in∣fluence of the Stars say the Astrologers, on the Or∣gans of the Body say the Naturalists; 'tis the par∣ticular gift of Heaven say the Divines, both Chri∣stians and Heathens. How to improve it many Books can teach us; how to obtain in none; that nothing can be done without it all agree. Tu nibil invitâ dices faciesve Minervâ. Without Invention a Painter is but a Copier, and a Poet but a Plagiary of others. Both are allow'd sometimes to copy and translate; but as our Au∣thour tells you that is not the best part of their Re∣putation.
Imitatours are but a Servile kind of Cattle, says the Poet; or at best, the Keepers of Cattle for other men; they have nothing which is pro∣perly their own; that is a sufficient mortification for me while I am translating Virgil. But to co∣py the best Authour is a kind of praise, if I per∣form it as I ought. As a Copy after Raphael is more to be commended, than an Original of any indifferent Painter. Under this head of Invention is plac'd the Dispo∣sition of the Work, to put all things in a beautifull order and harmony; that the whole may be of a piece. The Compositions of the Painter shou'd be conformable to the Text of Ancient Authours, to the Customs, and the Times. And this is exact∣ly the same in Poetry; Homer, and Virgil, are to be our guides in the Epique; Sophocles, and Eu∣ripides, in Tragedy: in all things we are to imi∣tate the Customs, and the Times of those Persons and Things which we represent. Not to make new Rules of the Drama, as Lopez de Vega has attempted unsuccessfully to do; but to be con∣tent to follow our Masters, who understood Na∣ture better than we. But if the Story which we treat be modern, we are to vary the Customs, according to the Time and the Country where the Scene of Action lies: for this is still to imitate
Nature, which is always the same, though in a different dress. As in the Composition of a Picture, the Pain∣ter is to take care that nothing enter into it, which is not proper, or convenient to the Subject; so likewise is the Poet to reject all incidents which are foreign to his Poem, and are naturally no parts of it: they are Wenns, and other Excrescences, which belong not to the Body, but deform it. no person, no incident in the Piece, or in the Play, but must be of use to carry on the main Design. All things else are like six fingers to the hand; when Nature which is superfluous in no∣thing, can do her work with five. A Painter must reject all trifling Ornaments, so must a Poet re∣fuse all tedious, and unnecessary Descriptions. A Robe which is too heavy, is less an Ornament than a Burthen. In Poetry Horace calls these things, Versus ino∣pes rerum, nugaeque canorae; these are also the lucus & ara Dianae, which he mentions in the same Art of Poetry. But since there must be Or∣naments both in Painting and Poetry, if they are not necessary, they must at least be decent: that is, in their due place, and but moderately us'd. The Painter is not to take so much pains about the Drapery as about the Face, where the princi∣pal
resemblance lies: neither is the Poet who is working up a passion, to make similes which will certainly make it languish. My Montezuma dies with a fine one in his mouth: but it is ambitious and out of season. When there are more Figures in a Picture than are necessary, or at least orna∣mental, our Authour calls them Figures to be lett: because the Picture has no use of them. So I have seen in some modern Plays above twenty Actours; when the Action has not requir'd half the num∣ber. In the principal Figures of a Picture, the Painter is to employ the sinews of his Art, for in them consists the principal beauty of his Work. Our Authour saves me the comparison with Tragedy, for he says that herein he is to imitate the Tragique Poet, who employs his utmost force in those pla∣ces wherein consists the height and beauty of the Action. Du Fresnoy, whom I follow, makes De∣sign or Drawing the second part of Painting: But the Rules which he gives concerning the Posture of the Figures, are almost wholly proper to that Art; and admit not any comparison that I know with Poetry. The Posture of a Poetique Figure is as I conceive, the Description of his Heroes in the per∣formance of such or such an Action: as of Achilles just in the act of killing Hector: or of Aeneas who has Turnus under him. Both the Poet and the
Painter vary the Postures according to the Action, or Passion which they represent of the same per∣son. But all must be great and gracefull in them. The same Aeneas must be drawn a Suppliant to Dido with respect in his Gestures, and humility in his Eyes: But when he is forc'd in his own de∣fence to kill Lausus, the Poet shows him compas∣sionate, and tempering the severity of his looks with a reluctance to the Action, which he is go∣ing to perform. He has pity on his Beauty, and his Youth; and is loath to destroy such a Master∣piece of Nature. He considers Lausus rescuing his Father at the hazard of his own life; as an Image of himself when he took Anchises on his Shoulders, and bore him safe through the rage of the Fire, and the opposition of his Enemies. And therefore in the posture of a retiring Man, who avoids the Combat, he stretches out his Arm in sign of peace, with his right Foot drawn a little back, and his Breast bending inward, more like an Oratour than a Souldier; and seems to disswade the Young man from pulling on his destiny, by attempting more than he was able to perform: take the passage as I have thus translated it. Shouts of Applause ran ringing through the Field, To see the Son, the vanquish'd Father shield:
All, fir'd with noble Emulation, strive; And with a storm of Darts to distance drive The Trojan Chief; who held at Bay, from far On his Vulcanian Orb, sustain'd the War. Aeneas thus'o erwhelm'd on every side, Their first Assault undaunted did abide; And thus to Lausus, loud with friendly threatning cry'd, Why wilt thou rush to certain death, and rage In rash attempts beyond thy tender Age, Betray'd by pious love? And afterwards. He griev'd, he wept, the Sight an Image brought Of his own Filial Love; a sadly pleasing thought. But beside the Outlines of the Posture, the Design of the Picture comprehends in the next place the forms of Faces which are to be different: and so in a Poem, or a Play, must the several Characters of the Persons be distinguish'd from each other. I knew a Poet, whom out of respect I will not name, who being too witty himself, cou'd draw nothing but Wits in a Comedy of his: even his Fools were infected with the Disease of their Au∣thour. They overflow'd with smart Reperties, and were only distinguish'd from the intended Wits by being call'd Coxcombs; though they de∣serv'd not so scandalous a Name. Another, who
had a great Genius for Tragedy, following the fury of his natural temper, made every Man and Wo∣man too in his Plays stark raging mad: there was not a sober person to be had for love or money. All was tempestuous and blustering; Heaven and Earth were coming together at every word; a meer Hurrican from the beginning to the end, and every Actour seem'd to be hastning on the Day of Judgment. Let every Member be made for its own Head, says our Authour, not a wither'd Hand to a young Face. So in the Persons of a Play, whatsoever is said or done by any of them, must be consistent with the manners which the Poet has given them distinctly: and even the Habits must be proper to the degrees, and humours of the Persons as well as in a Picture. He who enter'd in the first Act, a Young man like Pericles Prince of Tyre, must not be in danger in the fifth Act, of com∣mitting Incest with his Daughter: nor an Usurer, without great probability and causes of Repen∣tance, be turn'd into a Cutting Moorcraft. I am not satisfy'd that the comparison betwixt the two Arts in the last Paragraph is altogether so just as it might have been; but I am sure of this which follows.
The principal Figure of the Subject must appear in the midst of the Picture, under the principal Light to distinguish it from the rest which are onely its atten∣dants. Thus in a Tragedy or an Epique Poem, the Hero of the Piece must be advanc'd foremost to the view of the Reader or Spectator; He must out-shine the rest of all the Characters; He must appear the Prince of them, like the Sun in the Co∣pernican System, encompass'd with the less noble Planets. Because the Hero is the Centre of the main Action; all the Lines from the Circumfe∣rence tend to him alone: He is the chief object of Pity in the Drama, and of Admiration in the E∣pique Poem. As in a Picture, besides the principal Figures which compose it, and are plac'd in the midst of it, there are less Grouppes or Knots of Figures dispos'd at proper distances, which are parts of the Piece, and seem to carry on the same Design in a more inferiour manner. So in Epique Poe∣try, there are Episodes, and a Chorus in Tragedy, which are Members of the Action, as growing out of it, not inserted into it. Such in the ninth Book of the Eneids is the Episode of Nisus and Eu∣ryalus: the adventure belongs to them alone; they alone are the Objects of Compassion and Admi∣ration; but their business which they carry on,
is the general Concernment of the Trojan Camp, then beleaguer'd by Turnus and the Latines, as the Christians were lately by the Turks. They were to advertise the chief Hero of the Distresses of his Subjects occasion'd by his Absence, to crave his Succour, and sollicite him to hasten his Re∣turn. The Grecian Tragedy was at first nothing but a Chorus of Singers, afterwards one Actor was in∣troduc'd, which was the Poet himself, who enter∣tain'd the people with a discourse in Verse, betwixt the Pauses of the Singing. This succeeding with the People, more Actors were added to make the variety the greater; and in process of time, the Chorus onely sung betwixt the Acts; and the Co∣riphaeus, or Chief of them spoke for the rest, as an Actor concern'd in the business of the Play. Thus Tragedy was perfected by degrees, and be∣ing arriv'd at that Perfection, the Painters might probably take the hint from thence, of adding Grouppes to their Pictures. But as a good Pi∣cture may be without a Grouppe; so a good Tra∣gedy may subsist without a Chorus: notwithstand∣ing any reasons which have been given by Dacier to the contrary. Monsieur Racine has indeed us'd it in his Esther, but not that he found any necessity of it, as
the French Critique would insinuate. The Chorus at St. Cyr, was onely to give the young Ladies an occasion of entertaining the King with vocal Mu∣sick, and of commending their own Voices. The Play it self was never intended for the publick Stage, nor without disparagement to the learned Author, could possibly have succeeded there, and much less the Translation of it here. Mr. Wi∣cherly, when we read it together was of my opini∣on in this, or rather I of his; for it becomes me so to speak of so excellent a Poet, and so great a Iudge. But since I am in this place, as Virgil says, Spatiis exclusus iniquis; that is, shorten'd in my time, I will give no other reason, than that it is impracticable on our Stage. A new Theatre much more ample and much deeper must be made for that purpose, besides the cost of some∣times forty or fifty Habits, which is an expence too large, to be supply'd by a Company of Actors. 'Tis true, I should not be sorry to see a Chorus on a Theatre, more than as large and as deep a∣gain as ours, built and adorn'd at a King's Charges, and on that condition, and another, which is, That my Hands were not bound be∣hind me, as now they are; I should not despair of making such a Tragedy, as might be both in∣structive and delightfull, according to the man∣ner of the Grecians.
To make a Sketch, or a more perfect Model of a Picture, is in the Language of Poets, to draw up the Scenary of a Play, and the reason is the same for both; to guide the Undertaking, and to preserve the Remembrance of such things, whose Natures are difficult to retain. To avoid Absurdities and Incongruities, is the same Law establish'd for both Arts. The Painter is not to paint a Cloud at the Bottom of a Picture, but in the uppermost parts: nor the Poet to place what is proper to the end or middle in the begin∣ning of a Poem. I might enlarge on this, but there are few Poets or Painters, who can be sup∣pos'd to sin so grosly against the Laws of Nature, and of Art. I remember onely one Play, and for once I will call it by its name, The Slighted Maid: where there is nothing in the First Act, but what might have been said or done in the Fifth; nor any thing in the Midst, which might not have been plac'd as well in the Beginning or the End. To express the Passions which are seated in the Heart by outward Signs, is one great Precept of the Painters, and very difficult to perform. In Poe∣try, the same Passions and Motions of the Mind are to be express'd; and in this consists the prin∣cipal Difficulty, as well as the Excellency of that Art. This, says my Author, is the Gift of Iupi∣ter:
and to speak in the same Heathen Language, we call it the Gift of our Apollo: not to be obtain'd by Pains or Study, if we are not born to it. For the Motions which are studied are never so natu∣ral, as those which break out in the height of a re∣al Passion. Mr. Otway possess'd this part as tho∣roughly as any of the Ancients or Moderns. I will not defend every thing in his Venice preserv'd; but I must bear this testimony to his Memory, That the Passions are truly touch'd in it, though perhaps there is somewhat to be desir'd both in the Grounds of them, and in the Height and Elegance of Expressi∣on; but Nature is there which is the greatest Beauty. In the Passions, says our Author, we must have a very great regard to the quality of the Persons who are actually possess'd with them. The Joy of a Mo∣narch for the news of a Victory, must not be ex∣press'd like the Ecstasy of a Harlequin on the Re∣ceipt of a Letter from his Mistress; this is so much the same in both the Arts, that it is no longer a Comparison. What he says of Face-painting, or the Protrait of any one particular Person; con∣cerning the likeness is also as applicable to Poetry. In the character of an Hero, as well as in an inferi∣our Figure, there is a better or worse likeness to be taken; the better is a Panegyrick if it be not false, and the worse is a Libel: Sophocles. says A∣ristotle
always drew men as they ought to be, that is better than they were; another, whose name I have forgotten, drew them worse than naturally they were. Euripides alter'd nothing in the Cha∣racter, but made them such as they were repre∣sented by History, Epique Poetry or Tradition. Of the three, the draught of Sophocles is most com∣mended by Aristotle. I have follow'd it in that part of Oedipus, which I writ, though perhaps I have made him too good a man. But my Cha∣racters of Anthony and Cleopatra, though they are favourable to them, have nothing of outrageous Panegyrick, their Passions were their own, and such as were given them by History, onely the de∣formities of them were cast into Shadows, that they might be Objects of Compassion; whereas if I had chosen a Noon-day Light for them, somewhat must have been discover'd, which would rather have mov'd our Hatred than our Pity. The Gothique manner, and the barbarous Orna∣ments, which are to be avoided in a Picture, are just the same with those in an ill order'd Play. For example, our English Tragicomedy must be confess'd to be wholly Gothique, notwithstanding the Success which it has found upon our Theatre, and in the Pastor Fido of Guarini; even though Corisca and the Satyr contribute somewhat to the main Action.
Neither can I defend my Spanish Fryar, as fond as otherwise I am of it from this Imputation: for though the comical parts are diverting, and the se∣rious moving, yet they are of an unnatural min∣gle. For Mirch and Gravity destroy each other, and are no more to be allow'd for decent, than a gay Widow laughing in a mourning Habit. I had almost forgotten one considerable resem∣blance. Du Fresnoy tells us, That the Figures of the Grouppes, must not be all on a side, that is, with their Face and Bodies all turn'd the same way; but must contrast each other by their several positions. Thus in a Play, some characters must be rais'd to op∣pose other; and to set them off the better, ac∣cording to the old Maxim, Contraria juxta se po∣sita, magis elucescunt. Thus in the Scornfull Lady, the Usurer is set to confront the Prodigal. Thus in my Tyrannicque Love, the Atheist Maximin is op∣pos'd to the character of St. Catharine. I am now come, though with the omission of many Likenesses, to the third Part of Painting, which is call'd the Cromatique or Colouring. Ex∣pression, and all that belongs to words, is that in a Poem, which Colouring is in a Picture. The Colours well chosen in their proper places, toge∣ther with the Lights and Shadows which belong to them, lighten the Design, and make it pleasing
to the Eye. The Words, the Expressions, the Tropes and Figures, the Versification, and all the other Elegancies of Sound, as Cadences, Turns of Words upon the Thought, and many other things which are all parts of expression, perform exactly the same Office both in Dra∣matique and Epique Poetry. Our Author calls Co∣louring, Lena Sororis, in plain English, The Bawd of her Sister the Design or Drawing: she cloaths, she dresses her up, she paints her, she makes her appear more lovely than naturally she is, she pro∣cures for the Design, and makes Lovers for her. For the Design of it self, is onely so many naked lines. Thus in Poetry, the Expression is that which charms the Reader, and beautifies the De∣sign which is onely the Out-lines of the Fables. 'Tis true, the Design must of it self be good; if it be vicious or (in one word) unpleasing, the cost of Colouring is thrown away upon it. 'Tis an ugly woman in a rich Habit set out with Jew∣els, nothing can become her: but granting the Design to be moderately good, 'tis like an ex∣cellent Complexion with indifferent Features; the white and red well mingled on the Face, make what was before but passable, appear beautifull. Operum Colores is the very word which Horace uses, to signify Words and elegant Expressions, of which
he himself was so great a Master in his Odes. A∣mongst the Ancients, Zeuxis was most famous for his Colouring. Amongst the Moderns, Titian and Correggio. Of the two Ancient Epique Poets, who have so far excell'd all the Moderns, the In∣vention and Design were the particular Talents of Homer. Virgil must yield to him in both, for the Design of the Latine was borrowed from the Grecian: But the dictio Virgiliana, the expression of Virgil; his Colouring was incomparably the bet∣ter, and in that I have always endeavour'd to copy him. Most of the Pedants I know main∣tain the contrary, and will have Homer excell e∣ven in this part. But of all people, as they are the most ill manner'd, so they are the worst Judges; even of words which are their Province, they seldom know more than the Grammatical construction, unless they are born with a Poetical Genius; which is a rare Portion amongst them. Yet some I know may stand excepted; and such I honour. Virgil is so exact in every word, that none can be chang'd but for a worse: nor any one remov'd from its place, but the harmony will be alter'd. He pretends sometimes to trip; but 'tis onely to make you think him in danger of a fall, when he is most secure. Like a skilfull dancer on the Ropes (if you will pardon the
meanness of the similitude) who slips willingly and makes a seeming stumble, that you may think him in great hazard of breaking his neck; while at the same time he is onely giving you a proof of his dexterity. My late Lord Roscomon was often pleas'd with this reflection, and with the examples of it in this admirable Author. I have not leisure to run through the whole Comparison of Lights and Shadows with Tropes and Figures; yet I cannot but take notice of Metaphors, which like them have power to lessen or greaten any thing. Strong and glowing Colours are the just resemblances of bold Metaphors, but both must be judiciously apply'd; for there is a difference be∣twixt daring and fool-hardiness. Lucan and Sta∣tius often ventur'd them too far, our Virgil never. But the great defect of the Pharsalia and the The∣bais was in the Design; if that had been more per∣fect, we might have forgiven many of their bold strokes in the Colouring; or at least excus'd them: yet some of them are such as Demosthenes or Cice∣ro could not have defended. Virgil, if he could have seen the first Verses of the Sylvae, would have thought Statius mad in his sustian Description of the Statue on the brazen Horse. But that Poet was al∣ways in a Foam at his setting out, even before the Motion of the Race had warm'd him. The so∣berness
of Virgil, whom he read it seems to little purpose, might have shown him the difference be∣twixt, Arma virum{que} cano, and Magnanimum AEa∣cidem, formidatam{que} tonanti Progeniem. But Virgil knew how to rise by degrees in his expressions: Statius was in his towring heights at the first stretch of his Pinions. The description of his running Horse just starting in the Funeral Games for Ar∣chemorus, though the Verses are wonderfully fine, are the true Image of their Author. Stare adeo nescit, pereunt vestigia mille Ante fugam; absentem{que} ferit gravis ungula campum. Which would cost me an hour, if I had the lei∣sure to translate them, there is so much of Beauty in the Original. Virgil, as he better knew his Colours, so he knew better how and where to place them. In as much hast as I am, I cannot for∣bear giving one example. 'Tis said of him, That he read the Second, Fourth and Sixth Books of his Aeneids to Augustus Caesar. In the Sixth, (which we are sure he read, because we know Octavia was present, who rewarded him so boun∣tifully for the twenty Verses which were made in honour of her deceas'd Son Marcellus) in this sixth Book I say, the Poet speaking of Misenus the Trumpeter, says,
—Quo non praestantior alter, Aere ciere viros,— And broke off in the Hemystick or midst of the Verse: but in the very reading siez'd as it were with a divine Fury, he made up the latter part of the Hemystick, with these following words; —Martem{que} accendere cantu. How warm, nay how glowing a Colouring is this! In the beginning of the Verse, the word Aes, or Brass, was taken for a Trumpet, because the In∣stument was made of that Metal, which of it self was fine; but in the latter end, which was made ex tempore, you see three Metaphors, Martemque, —accendere,—cantu. Good Heavens! how the plain sence is rais'd by the Beauty of the words. But this was Happiness, the former might be on∣ly Judgment: this was the curiosa felicitas, which Petronius attributes to Horace; 'tis the Pencil thrown luckily full upon the Horses mouth to express the Foam which the Painter with all his skill could not perform without it. These hits of words a true Poet often finds, as I may say, without seeking: but he knows their value when he finds them, and is infinitely pleas'd. A bad Poet may
sometimes light on them, but he discerns not a Diamond from a Bristol stone; and would have been of the Cocks mind in Aesop, a Grain of Bar∣ley would have pleas'd him better than the Iewel. The Lights and Shadows which belongs to Colouring, put me in mind of that Verse in Horace, Hoc a∣mat obscurum, vult hoc sub luce videri: some parts of a Poem require to be amply written, and with all the force and elegance of Words: others must be cast into Shadows; that is, pass'd over in si∣lence, or but faintly touch'd. This belongs wholly to the Judgment of the Poet and the Pain∣ter. The most beautifull parts of the Picture and the Poem must be the most finish'd, the Colours and Words most chosen; many things in both which are not deserving of this care, must be shif∣ted off; content with vulgar expressions and those very short, and left as in a shadow to the imagi∣nation of the Reader. We have the Proverb, manum de tabulâ, from the Painters; which signifies, to know when to give over, and to lay by the Pencil. Both Ho∣mer and Virgil practis'd this Precept wonderfully well, but Virgil the better of the two. Homer knew that when Hector was slain, Troy was as good as already taken; therefore he concludes his Action there. For what follows in the Funerals
of Patroclus, and the redemption of Hector's Bo∣dy, is not (properly speaking) a part of the main Action. But Virgil concludes with the death of Turnus: sor after that difficulty was remov'd, Ae∣neas might marry and establish the Trojans when he pleas'd. This Rule I had before my Eyes in the conclusion of the Spanish Fryar, when the discove∣ry was made, that the King was living, which was the knot of the Play unty'd, the rest is shut up in the compass of some few lines, because no∣thing then hinder'd the Happiness of Torismond and Leonora. The faults of that Drama are in the kind of it, which is Tragi comedy. But it was given to the people; and I never writ any thing for my self but Anthony and Cleopatra. This Remark I must acknowledge is not so pro∣per for the Colouring as the Design; but it will hold for both. As the words, &c. are evidently shown to be the cloathing of the Thought, in the same sense as Colours are the cloathing of the Design, so the Painter and the Poet ought to judge ex∣actly, when the Colouring and Expressions are perfect, and then to think their work is truly finish'd. Apelles said of Protogenes, That he knew not when to give over. A work may be over∣wrought as well as under-wrought: too much Labour often takes away the Spirit by adding to
the polishing; so that there remains nothing but a dull correctness, a piece without any considerable Faults, but with few Beauties; for when the Spi∣rits are drawn off, there is nothing but a caput mor∣tuum. Statius never thought an expression could be bold enough; and if a bolder could be found he rejected the first. Virgil had Judgment enough to know daring was necessary; but he knew the difference betwixt a glowing Colour and a glaring: as when he compar'd the shocking of the Fleets at Actium to the justling of Islands rent from their Foundations, and meeting in the Ocean. He knew the comparison was forc'd beyond Nature and rais'd too high: he therefore softens the Metaphor with a Credas. You would almost believe, that Mountains or Islands rush'd against each other. —Credas innare revulsas Cycladas: aut montes concurrere montibus aequos. But here I must break off without finishing the Discourse. Cynthius aurem vellit & admonuit, &c. the things which are behind are of too nice a consideration for an Essay, begun and ended in twelve Morn∣ings, and perhaps the Iudges of Painting and Poe∣try, when I tell them, how short a time it cost
me, may make me the same answer, which my late Lord Rochester made to one, who to com∣mend a Tragedy, said it was written in three weeks; How the Devil could he be so long about it? For that Poem was infamously bad; and I doubt this Parallel is little better; and then the shortness of the time is so far from being a Commendation, that it is scarcely an Excuse. But if I have really drawn a Portrait to the Knees, or an half length with a tolerable Likeness, then I may plead with some Justice for my self, that the rest is left to the Imagination. Let some better Artist pro∣vide himself of a deeper Canvas, and taking these hints which I have given, set the Figure on its Legs, and finish it in the Invention, Design and Colouring.
THE PREFACE OF THE French Author. AMong all the beautiful and delightful Arts, that of Painting has always found the most Lovers; the number of them almost including all Mankind. Of whom great multitudes are daily found, who value themselves on the knowledge of it; either because they keep company with Painters, or that they have seen good Pieces; or lastly, because their Gusto is naturally good. Which notwith∣standing, that Knowledge of theirs (if we may so call it) is so very superficial, and so ill ground∣ed, that it is impossible for them to describe in what consists the beauty of those Works which they admire, or the faults which are in the greatest
part of those which they condemn: and truly 'tis not hard to find, that this proceeds from no other cause, than that they are not furnish'd with Rules by which to judge, nor have any solid Foundati∣ons, which are as so many Lights set up to clear their understanding and lead them to an entire and certain knowledge. I think it superfluous to prove that this is necessary to the knowledge of Painting. 'Tis sufficient, that Painting be ac∣knowledg'd for an Art; for that being granted it follows without dispute, that no Arts are with∣out their Precepts. I shall satisfy my self with telling you, that this little Treatise will furnish you with infallible Rules of judging truly: since they are not onely founded upon right Reason but upon the best Pieces of the best Masters, which our Author hath carefully examin'd during the space of more than thirty years; and on which he has made all the reflections which are necessary to render this Treatise worthy of Posterity: which though little in bulk, yet contains most judicious Remarks, and suffers nothing to escape that is es∣sential to the Subject which it handles. If you will please to read it with attention, you will find it capable of giving the most nice and deli∣cate sort of Knowledge, not onely to the Lovers, but even to the Professors of that Art.
It would be too long to tell you the particular advantages which it has above all the Books which hath appear'd before it in this kind: you need onely to read it, and that will convince you of this truth. All that I will allow my self to say, is onely this, That there is not a word in it, which carries not its weight; whereas in all others, there are two considerable faults which lie open to the sight, (viz) That saying too much, they always say too little. I assure my self, that the Reader will own 'tis a work of general profit, to the Lovers of Painting, for their instruction how to judge exactly; and with Knowledge of the Cause, which they are to judge. And to the Painters themselves, by removing their difficulties, that they may work with pleasure; because they may be in some manner certain that their Productions are good. 'Tis to be used like Spirits and preci∣ous Liquours, the less you drink of it at a time 'tis with the greater pleasure: read it often, and but little at once, that you may digest it better; and dwell particularly on those passages which you find mark'd with an Asterism* For the observations which follow such a Note, will give you a clearer Light, on the matter which is there treated. You will find them by the Numbers which are on the side of the Translation, from five
to five Veres; by searching for the like Number in the Remarks which are at the end of it, and which are distinguish'd from each other by this note ¶. You will find in the latter Pages of this Book, the Judgment of the Author on those Painters, who have acquir'd the greatest Repu∣tation in the World. Amongst whom, he was not willing to comprehend those who are now living: They are undoubtedly his, as being found among his Papers written in his own hand. As for the Prose Translation which you will find on the other side of the Latine Poem, I must inform you on what occasion, and in what manner it was perform'd. The Love which I had for Pain∣ting, and the pleasure which I found in the Ex∣ercise of that noble Art, at my leisure hours, gave me the desire of being acquainted with the late Mr. du FRESNOY; who was generally reputed to have a through knowledge of it. Our Ac∣quaintance at length proceeded to that degree of Intimacy; that he intrusted me with his Poem, which he believ'd me capable both of understan∣ding, and translating; and accordingly desir'd me to undertake it. The truth is, that we had convers'd so often on that Subject, and he had communicated his Thoughts of it so fully to me; that I had not the least remaining difficulty con∣cerning
it. I undertook therefore to translate it, and imploy'd my self in it with Pleasure, Care, and Assiduity; after which, I put it into his hands, and he alter'd in it what he pleas'd, till at last it was wholly to his Mind. And then he gave his Consent that it should be publish'd: but his Death preventing that Design, I thought it a wrong to his Memory, to deprive Mankind any longer of this Translation, which I may safe∣ly affirm to be done according to the true sence of the Author, and to his liking: Since he him∣self has given great Testimonies of his Approba∣tion to many of his Friends, and they who were acquainted with him, know his humour to be such, that he wou'd never constrain himself so far, as to commend what he did not really approve. I thought my self oblig'd to say thus much, in vin∣dication of the faithfulness of my Work, to those who understand not the Latine: for as to those who are conversant in both the tongues, I leave them to make their own judgment of it. The Remarks which I have added to his work, are also wholly conformable to his opinions; and I am certain that he wou'd not have disapprov'd them. I have endeavour'd in them to explain some of the most obscure passages, and those which are most necessary to be understood; and
I have done this according to the manner wherein he us'd to express himself, in many Conversations which we had together. I have conin'd them also to the narrowest compass I was able, that I might not tire the patience of the Reader, and that they might be read by all persons. But if it happens, that they are not to the tast of some Readers (as doubtless it will so fall out) I leave them entirely to their own discretion, and shall not be displeas'd that another hand shou'd suc∣ceed better. I shall onely beg this favour from them, that in reading what I have written, they will bring no particular gusto along with them, or any prevention of mind, and that whatsoever judgment they make, it may be purely their own, whether it be in my favour, or in my condem∣nation.
A TABLE of the Precepts Contain'd in this TREATISE. OF what is Beautiful. p. 7 Of Theory and Practice. 8 Concerning the Subject. 11 Invention the first part of Painting. 12 The Disposition of the whole Work. ib. The Faithfulness of the Sub∣ject. ib. Whatsoever palls the Subject to be rejected. 15 Design, or Drawing the se∣cond part of Painting. 16 Variety in the Figures. 19 The Members and Drapery of every Figure to be suita∣ble to it. ib. The Actions of Mutes to be imitated. ib. Of the principal Figure of the Subject. ib. Grouppes of Figures. 20 The Diversity of Postures in the Grouppes. ib. Equality of the Piece. ib. Of the number of Figures. 23 Of the Ioints and Feet. ib. The Motions of the Hands and Head must agree. ib. What must be avoided in the di∣stribution of the Figures. ib. That we must not tie our selves to Nature, but accommo∣date her to our Genius. 24 Ancient Figures the Rules of imitating Nature. 27 A single Figure how to be treated. ib. Of the Draperies. ib. What things contribute to a∣dorn the Picture. 31 Of precious Stones and Pearls for Ornament. ib. The Model. ib. The Scene of the Picture. ib. The Graces and the Nobleness. ib. Let every thing be set in its proper place. ib. Of the Passions. 32 Gothique Ornamens to be a∣voided. ib. Colouring the third part of Painting. 35
The Conduct of the Tones of Lights and Shadows. 39 Of dark Bodies on light grounds. 40 That there must not be two e∣qual Lights in a Picture. 43 Of White and Black. 44 The Reflection of Colours. 47 The Vnion of Colours. ib. Of the Interposition of Air. ib. The relation of Distances. 48 Of Bodies which are distanc'd. ib. Of Bodies which are contigu∣ous, and of those which are seperated. ib. Contrary extremities to be a∣voided. ib. Diversity of Tones and Co∣lours. ib. The Choice of Light. 51 Of certain things relating to the practical part. ib. The Field, or Ground of the Picture. ib. Of the Vivacity of Colours. 52 Of Shadows. ib. The Picture to be of one Piece. ib. The Looking-glass the Pain∣ters best Master. ib. An half Figure, or a whole one before others. ib. A Portrait. 55 The place of the Picture. ib. Large Lights. 56 What Lights are requisite. ib. Things which are vicious in Painting to be avoided. ib. The prudential part of a Pain∣ter. ib. The Idea of a beautiful Piece. 59 Advice to a young Painter. ib. Art must be subservient to the Painter. 60 Diversity and Facility are pleasing. ib. The Original must be in the Head, and the Copy on the Cloth. ib. The Compass to be in the Eyes. ib. Pride an Enemy to good Painting. 63 Know your self. ib. Practise perpetually. 64 The Morning most proper for Work. ib. Every day do something. ib. The Passions which are true and naural ib. Of Table-Books. 67 The method of Studies for a young ainter. 71 Nature and Experience per∣fect Art. 76
THE ART OF PAINTING.
DE ARTE GRAPHICA LIBER. UT PICTURA POESIS ERIT; similisque Poesi Sit Pictura, refert par aemula quae{que} sororem, Alternantque vices & nomina; muta Poesis Dicitur haec, Pictura loquens solet illa vocari. Quod fuit auditu gratum cecinere Poetae, Quod pulchrum aspectu Pictores pingere curant: Quaeque Poetarum numeris indigna fuêre, Non eadem Pictorum operam studiumque merentur: Ambae quippe sacros ad Relligionis honores Sydereos superant ignes, Aulamque Tonantis Ingressae, Divûm aspectu, alloquioque fruuntur; Oraque magna Deûm & dicta observata reportant, Coelestemque suorum operum mortalibus ignem. Inde pe hunc orbem studiis coêuntibus errant,
Carpentes quae digna sui, revolutaque lustrant Tempora. Quaerendis consortibus Argumentis. Denique quaecumque in coelo, terraque, marique Longius in tempus durare, ut pulchra, merentur, Nobilitate sua claroque insignia casu, Dives & ampla manet Pictores atque Poetas Materies, inde alta sonant per saecula mundo Nomina, magnanimis Heroibus inde superstes Gloria, perpetuoque operum miracula restant: Tantus inest divis honor Artibus atque potestas. Non mihi Pieridum chorus hic, nec Apollo vocandus, Majus ut eloquium numeris aut gratia fandi Dogmaticis illustret opus rationibus horrens: Cum nitida tantum & facili digesta loquelâ, Ornari praecepta negent; contenta doceri. Nec mihi mens animusve fuit constringere nodos Artificum manibus, quos tantum dirigit usus; Indolis ut vigor inde potens obstrictus hebescat,
Normarum numero immani Geniumque moretur: Sed rerum ut pollens Ars cognitione gradatim Naturae sese insinuet, verique capacem Transeat in Genium, Geniusque usu induat Artem. Praecipua imprimis Artisque potissima pars est,Primum Prae∣ceptum. De Pulchro. Nôsse quid in rebus Natura creârit ad Artem Pulchrius, idque Modum juxta, Mentemque Vetustam, Qua sine barbaries caeca & temeraria Pulchrum Negligit, insultans ignotae audacior Arti, Ut curare nequit, quae non modo noverit esse, Illud apud Veteres fuit, unde notabile dictum, Nil Pictore malo securius atque Poeta.
Cognita amas, & amata cupis, sequerisque cupita; Passibus assequeris tandem quae fervidus urges: Illa tamen quae pulchra decent; non omnia casus Qualiacumque dabunt, etiamve simillima veris: Nam quamcumque modo servili haud sufficit ipsam Naturam exprimere ad vivum, sed ut Arbiter Artis Seliget ex illa tantùm pulcherrima Pictor. Quodque minus pulchrum, aut mendosum corriget ipse Marte suo, formae Veneres captando fugaces. Utque manus grandi nil nomine practica dignum Assequitur,Praecep∣tum. De Speculati∣one & Praxi. purum arcanae quam deficit Artis Lumen, & in praeceps abitura ut caeca vagatur; Sic nihil Ars operâ manuum privata supremum Exequitur, sed languet iners uti vincta lacertos; Dispositumque typum non linguâ pinxit Apelles.
Ergo licet totâ normam haud possimus in Arte Ponere, (cùm nequeant quae sunt pulcherrima dici) Nitimur haec paucis, scrutati summa magistrae Dogmata Naturae, Artisque Exemplaria prima Altiùs intuiti; sic mens habilisque facultas Indolis excolitur, Geniumque scientia complet, Luxuriansque in monstra furor compescitur Arte: Est modus in rebus, unt certi denique fines, Quos ultra citraque nequit consistere rectum. His positis, erit optandum Thema nobile,Praecep∣tum. De Argu∣mento. pulchrum, Quodque venustatum circa Formam atque Colorem Sponte capax amplam emeritae mox praebeat Arti Materiam, retegens aliquid salis & documenti.
Tandem opus aggredior, primoque occurrit in Albo Disponenda typi concepta potente Minervâ Machina, quae nostris Inventio dicitur oris. Illa quidem priùs ingenuis instructa Sororum Artibus Aonidum,INVEN∣TIO prima Pictu∣rae pars. & Phoebi sublimior aestu. Quaerendasque inter Posituras, luminis,Dispositio, si∣ve operis to∣tius Oecono∣mia. umbrae, Atque futurorum jam praesentire colorum Par erit harmoniam, captando ab utrisque venustum. Sit Thematis genuina ac viva expressio juxta Textum Antiquorum,Fidelitas Ar∣gumenti. propriis cum tempore formis.
Nec quod inane, nihil facit ad rem,Inane rejici∣ndum. sive videtur Improprium, minimque urgens, potiora tenebit Ornamenta operis; Tragicae sed lege sororis Summa ubi res agitur, vis summa requiritur Artis. Ista labore gravi, studio, monitisque Magistri Ardua pars nequit addisci rarissima: namque Ni priùs aethereo rapuit quod ab axe Prometheus Sit jubar infusum menti cum flamine vitae, Mortali haud cuivis divina haec munera dantur, Non uti Daedaleam licet omnibus ire Corinthum. Aegypto informis quondam Pictura reperta, Graecorum studiis & mentis acumine crevit: Egregiis tandem illustrata & adulta Magistris Naturam visa est miro superare labore. Quos inter Graphidos gymnasia prima fuêre, Portus Athenarum, Sicyon, Rhodos, atque Corinthus, Disparia inter se, modicùm ratione Laboris;
Ut patet ex Veterum statuis, formae atque decoris Archetypis,GRAPHIS seu Positura, Secunda Pi∣cturae pars. queis posterior nil protulit aetas Condignum, & non inferius longe Arte, Modoque: Horum igitur vera ad normam Positura legetur, Grandia, inaequalis, formosaque Partibus amplis Anteriora dabit membra, in contraria motu Diverso variata, suo liberataque centro: Membrorumque Sinus ignis flammantis ad instar Serpenti undantes flexu, sed laevia plana Magnaque signa, quasi sine tubere subdita tactu Ex longo deducta fluant, non secta minutim, Insertisque Toris sint not a ligamina juxta Compagem Anathomes, & membrificatio Graeco Deformata Modo, paucisque expressa lacertis, Qualis apud Veteres; totoque Eurithmia partes
Componat, genitumque suo generante sequenti Sit minus, & puncto videantur cuncta sub uno; Regula certa licet nequeant Prospectica dici, Aut complementum Graphidos; sed in arte juvamen Et Modus accelerans operandi: ut corpor a falso Sub visu in multis referens mendosa labascit: Nam Geometralem nunquam sunt corpora juxta Mensuram depicta oculis, sed qualia visa. Non eadem formae species,Varietas in Figuris. non omnibus aetas Aequalis, similisque color, crinesque Figuris: Nam variis velut orta plagis Gens disparevultu. Singula membra suo capiti conformia fiant Unum idemque simul corpus cum vestibus ipsis:Figura situna cum Mem∣bris & Vesti∣bus Mutorumque silens Positura imitabitur actus.Mutorum a∣ctiones imi∣tandae. Prima Figurarum,Figura Prin∣cps. seu Princeps Dramatis ultro Prosiliat media in Tabula sub lumine primo Pulchrior ante alias, reliquis nec operta Figuris.
Agglomerata simul sint membra,Figurarum Globiseu Cu∣muli. ipsaeque Figurae Stipentur, circumque globos locus usque vacabit; Ne, mal dispersis dum visus ubique Figuris Dividitur, cunctisque operis fervente tumultu Partibus implicitis crepitans confusio surgat. Inque figurarum cumulis non omnibus idem Corporis inflexus,Positurorum diersitas in cumulis. motusque, vel artibus omnes Conversis pariter non connitantur eodem, Sed quaedam in diversa trahant contraria membra Transversque aliis pungent, & caetera frangant. Pluribus adversis aversam oppone figuram, Pectoribusque humeros, & dextera membra sinistris, Seu multis constabit Opus, paucisve figuris. Altera pars tabulae vacuo ne frigida Campo Aut deserta siet,Tabulaelibra∣mentum. dum pluribus alter a formis Fervida mole sua supremam exurgit ad or am: Sed tibi sic positis respondeat utraque rebus, Ut si aliquid sursum se parte attollat in unâ, Sic aliquid parte ex alia consurgat, & ambas Aequiparet, geminas cumulando aequaliter oras.
Pluribus implicitum Personis Drama supremo In genere ut rarum est;Numerus Fi∣gurarum. multis ita densa Figuris Rarior est Tabula excellens; vel adhuc ferè nulla Praestitit in multis quod vix bene praestat in unâ: Quippe solet rerum nimio dispersa tumultu Majestate carere gravi requieque decorâ; Nec speciosa nitet vacuo nisi liber a Campo. Sed si Opere in magno plures Thema grande requirat Esse figurarum Cumulos, spectabitur unà Machina tota rei, non singula quaeque seorsim. Praecipua extremis raro Internodia membris Abdita sint:Internodia & Pedes exhi∣bendi. summa Pedum vestigia nunquam.Motusmanu∣um motui ca∣pitis jungen∣dus. Gratia nulla manet,Quaefugienda in Distributi∣one & Com∣positione. motusque, vigorque Figuras Retro aliis subter majori ex parte latentes, Ni capitis motum manibus comitentur agendo. Difficiles fugitoa spectus, contractaque visu Membra sub ingrato, motusque, actusque coactos,
Quodque refert signis, rectos quodammodo tractus, Siva Parallelos plures simul, & vel acutas, Vel Geometrales (ut Quadra, Triangula,) formas: Ingratamque pari Signorum ex ordine quandam Symmetriam: sed praecipu in contraria semper Signa volunt duci transversa, ut diximus anté. Summa igitur ratio Signorum habeatur in omni Composito; dat enim reliquis pretium, atque vigorem. Non ita naturae astanti sis cuique revinctus, Hanc praeter nihil ut Genio studioque relinquas;NaturaGenlo accommo∣danda. Nec sine teste rei natura, Artisque Magistra Quidlibet ingenio memor ut tantummodo rerum Pingere posse putes; errorum est plurima sylva, Multiplicesque viae, bene agendi terminus unus, Linea recta velut sola est, & mille recurvae: Sed juxta Antiquos naturam imitabere pulchram, Qualem forma rei propria, objectumque requirit.
Non te igitur lateant antiqua Numismata, Gemmae,Signa Anti∣qua Naturae modum con∣stituunt. Vasa, Typi, Statuae, caelataque Marmora Signis; Quodque refert specie Veterum post saecula Mentem; Splendidior quippe ex illis assurgit imago, Magnaque se rerum facies aperit meditanti; Tunc nostri tenuem saecli miserebere sortem, Cùm spes nulla siet rediturae aequalis in aevum. Exquisita siet formâ dum sola Figura. Pingitur,Sola Figura quomodotra∣ctanda. & multis variata Coloribus esto. Lati amplique sinus Pannorum,Quid in Pan∣nis observan∣dum. & nobilis ordo Membra sequens, subter latitantia Lumine  Umbra Exprimet, ille licet transversus saepe feratur, Et circumfulos Pannorum porrigat extra Membra sinus, non contiguous, ipsisque Figurae Partibus impressos, quasi Pannus adhaereat illis; Sed modic expressos cum Lumine servet & Umbris:
Quaeque intermissis passim sunt dissita vanis Copulet, inductis subtérve, lacernis. Et membra ut magnis paucisque expressa lacertis. Majestate allis preastant forma atque decore; Haud seus in Pannis quos supra optavimus amplos Perpaucos sinuum flexus, rugasque, striasque, Membra super versu faciles inducere praestat. Naturaeque rei proprius sit Pannus, abundans Patriciis, succinctus erit crassusque Bubulcis Mancipiisque; levis, teneris, gracilisque Puellis. Inque cavis maculisque umbrarum aliquando tumescet Lumen ut excipiens operis quá Massa requirit Latius extendat, sublatisque aggreget umbris.
Nobilia Arma juvant virtutum,Quid mul∣tu conferat ad abulae or∣namentum. ornantque Figura, Qualia Musarum, Belli, Cultusque Deorum: Nec sit opus nimiùm Gemmis Auroque refertum; Rara etenim magno in pretio,Ornamen∣tum Auri & Gemmarum. sed plurima vili. Quae deinde ex Vero nequeunt praesente videri,Prototypus. Prototypum prius illorum formare juvabit. Conveniat locus atque habitus,Convenientia rerum cum Scena. ritusque decusque Servetur; sit Nobilitas, Charitumque Venustas, (Rarum homini munus,Charites & Nobilitas. Coelo, non Arte petendum.) Naturae sit ubique tenor ratioque sequenda.Res quaeque locum suum teneat.
Non vicina pedum tabulata excelsa tonantis Astra domus depicta gerent nubesque notosque; Nec mare depressum Laquearia summa vel orcum; Marmoreamque feret cannis vaga pergula molem: Congrua sed propriâ semper statione locentur. Haec praeter motus animorum & corde repostos Exprimere Affectus,Affectus. paucisque coloribus ipsam Pingere posse animam, atque oculis praebere videndam, Hoc opus, his labor est: pauci quos aequus amavit Juppiter, aut ardens evexit ad aethera virtus: Dîs similes potuere manu miracula tanta. Hos ego Rhetoribus tractandos desero tantum Egregii antiquum memorabo sophisma Magistri, Verius affectus animi vigor exprimit ardens, Solliciti nimiúm quam sedula cura laboris. Denique nil sapiat Gotthorum barbara trito Ornamenta modo,Gotthorum ornamenta fugienda. saeclorum & monstra malorum; Queis ubi bella, famen & pestem, Discordia, Luxus, Et Romanorum res grandior intulit Orbi,
Ingenuae periere Artes, periere superbae Artificum moles, sa tunc miracula vidit Ignibus absumi Pictura, latere coacta Fornicibus, sortem & reliquam confidere Cryptis, Marmoribusque diu Sculptura jacere sepultis. Imperium interea scelerum gravitate fatiscens Horrida nox totum invasit, donoque superni Luminis indignum, errorum caligine mersit, Impiaque ignaris damnavit saecla tenebris: Unde Coloratum Graiis huc usque Magistris Nil superest tantorum Hominum quod Mente Modoque Nostrates juvet Artifices,CHROMA∣TICE Tertia pars Picturae. doceatque Laborem; Nec qui Chromatices nobis hoc tempor partes Restituat, quales Zeuxis tractaverat olim.
Hujus quando magâ velut Arte aequavit Apellem Pictorum Archigraphum meruitque Coloribus altam Nominis aeterni famam toto orbe sonantem. Haec quidem ut in Tabulis fallax sed grata Venustas, Et complementum Graphidos (mirabile visu) Pulchra vocabatur, sed subdola Lena Sororis: Non tamen hoc lenocinium; fucusque, dolusque Dedecori fuit unquam; illi sed semper honori, Laudibus & meritis; hanc ergo nosse juvabit. Lux varium vivumque dabit, nullum Umbra Colorem. Quo magis adversum est corpus lucisque propinquum, Clarius est Lumen; nam debilitatur eundo. Quo magis est orpus directum oculisque propinquum, Conspicitur meliùs; nam visus hebescit eundo.
Ergo in corporibus quae visa adversa rotundis Integra sint,Tonorum, Luminum & Umbrarum ratio. extrema abscedant perdita signis Confusis, non praecipiti labentur in Umbram Clara gradu, nec adumbrata in clara alta repente Prorumpant; sederit sensim hinc atque inde meatus Lucis & Umbrarum; capitisque unius ad instar Totum opus, ex multis quamquam sit partibus unus Luminis Umbrarumque globus tantummodo fiet, Sive duo vel tres ad summum, ubi grandius esset Divisum Pegma in partes statione remotas. Sintque ita discreti inter se ratione colorum, Luminis umbrarumque anteorsum ut corpora clara Obscura umbrarum requies speetanda relinquat; Claroque exiliant umbrata atque aspera Campo.
Ac veluti in speculis convexis eminet ante Asperior reipsa vigor & vis aucta colorum Partibus adversis; magis & fuga rupta retrorsum Illorum est (ut visa minùs vergentibus oris) Corporibus dabimus formas hoc more rotundas, Mente Modoque igitur Plastes & Pictor eodem Dispositum tractabit opus; quae Sculptor in orbem Atterit, haec rupto proul abscedente colore Assequitur Pictor, fugientiaque illa retrorsum Iam signata minùs confusa coloribus aufert: Anteriora quidem directè adversa, colore Integra, vivaci, summo cum Lumine & Umbra Antrorsum distincta refert velut aspera visu. Sicque super planum inducit Leucoma Colores. Hos velut ex ipsa natura immotus eodem Intuitu circum Statuas daret inde rotundas. Densa Figurarum solidis quae corpora formis Subdita sunt tactu non transluent,Corpora den∣sa & opaca cum translu∣centibus. sed opaca In translucendi spatio ut super Aera, Nubes
Lympida stagna Undarum, & inania caetera debent Asperiora illis prope circumstantibu esse, Ut distincta magis firmo cum Lmine & Umbra, Et gravioribus ut suste a coloribus, inter Aëreas species subsistent semper opaca: Sed contra procul abscedant perlucida densis Corporibus leviora; uti Nubes, Aër & Undae. Non poterunt diversa locis duo Lumina eâdem In Tabulâ paria admitti,Non duo ex Coelo Lumi∣na in Tabu∣lam aequalia. aut aequalia pingi: Majus at in mediam Lumen adet usqe Tabellam Latius infusum, primis qua summa Figuris Res agitur, circumque oras minuetur eundo: Utque in progressu Iubar attenuatur ab ortu Solis ad occasum paulatim, & cessat eundo; Sic Tabulis Lumen, tota in compage Colorum, Primo à fonte, minus sensim declinat eundo.
Majus ut in Statuis per compita stantibus Urbis Lumen habent Partes superae, minus inferiores, Idem erit in tabulis, majorque nec umbra vel ater Membra Figurarum intrabit Color atque secabit: Corpora sed circum Umbra cavis latitabit oberrans: Atque ita quaeretur Lux opportuna Figuris, Ut late infusum Lumen lata Umbra sequatur: Unde nec immeritò fertur Titianus ubique Lucis & Umbrarum Normam appellasse Racemum. Purum Album esse potest propius{que} magis{que} remotum: Cum Nigro antevenit propiùs,Album & Ngrum. fugit absque remotum; Purum autem Nigrum antrorsum venit us{que} Propinquum. Lux fucata suo tingit miscetque Colore Corpora, sicque suo, per quem Lux funditur, aër
Corpora juncta simul,Colorum re∣flectio. circumfusosque Colores Excipiunt, propriumque aliis radiosa reflectunt. Pluribus in Solidis liquidâ sub Luce propinquis Participes,Unio Colo∣rum. mixtosque simul decet esse Colores. Hanc Normam Veneti Pictores rité sequuti, (Quae fuit Antiquis Corruptio dicta Colorum) Cùm plures opere in magno posuêre Figuras, Ne conjuncta simul variorum inimica Colorum Congeries Formam implicitam & concisa minutis Membra daret Pannis, totam unamquamque Figuram Affini aut uno tantùm vestire Colore Sunt soliti, variando Tonis tunicamque togamque Carbaseosque Sinus, vel amicum in Lumine & Umbra Contiguis circum rebus sociando Colorem. Quà minus est spatii aërei,Aer interpo∣situs. aut quà purior Aër, Cuncta magis distincta patent, speciesque reservant:
Quque magis densus nebulis, aut plurimus Aër Amplum inter fuerit spatium porrectus,Distantia∣rum Relatio. in auras Confundet rerum species, & perdet inanes. Anteriora magis semper finita remotis Incertis dominentur & abscedentibus, idque More relativo, ut majora minoribus extant. Cuncta minuta procul Massam densantur in unam,Corpora pro∣cul distantia. Ut folia arboribus sylvarum, & in Aequore fluctus. Contigua inter se coëant,Contigua & Dissita. Distabuntque tamen grato & discrimine parvo. Extrema extremis contraria jungere noli; Contraria ex∣trema fugi∣enda. Sed medio sint usque gradu sociata Coloris. Corporum erit Tonus atque Color variatus ubique Quaerat amicitiam retro,Tonus & Color varii. ferus emicet ante.
Supremum in Tabulis Lumen captare diei Insanus labor Artificum;Luminis de∣lectus. cùm attingere tantùm Non Pigmenta queant; auream sed vespere Lucem, Seu modicam mane albentem, sive aetheris actam Post Hymem nimbis transfuso Sole caducam, Seu nebulis fultam accipient, tonitruque rubentem. Laevia quae lucent,Quaedam circa Praxim. veluti Chrystalla, Metalla, Ligna, Ossa & Lapides; Villosa, ut Vellera, Pelles, Barbae, aqueique Oculi, Crines, Holoserica, Plumae; Et Liquida, ut stagnans Aqua, reflexaeque sub Undis Corporeae species, & Aquis contermina cuncta, Subter ad extremum liquide sint picta, superque▪ Luminibus pereussa suis, signisque repostis. Area vel Campus Tabulae vagus esto,Campus Ta∣bulae. levisque Abscedat latus, liquideque bene unctis amicis Tota ex mole Coloribus, una sive Patellâ: Quaeque cadunt retro in Campum confinia Campo.
vividus esto Color nimio non pallidus Albo,Color vivi∣dus, non ta∣men pallidus. Adversisque locis ingestus plurimus ardens; Sed leviter parcéque datus vergentibus oris. Cuncta Labore simul coëant,Umbra. velut Umbrâ in eadem. Tota siet Tabula ex unâ depicta Patellâ.Ex una Pa∣tella sit Ta∣bula. Multa ex Natura Speculum praeclara docebit; Speculum Pictorum Magister. Quaeque procul serò spatiis spectantur in amplis. Dimidia Effigies, quae sola,Dimidia Fi∣gura vel in∣tegra ante alias. vel integra plures Ante alias posita ad Lucem, stet proxima visu, Et latis spectanda locis, oculisque remota, Luminis Umbrarumque gradu sit picta supremo.
Partibus in minimis imitatio justa juvabit Eigiem,Eigies. alternas referendo tempore eodem Consimiles Partes, cum Luminis atque Coloris Compositis justisque Tonis, tunc parta Labore Si facili & vegeto micat ardens, viva videtur. Visa loco angusto tenerè pingantur,Locus Ta∣bulae. amico Iuncta Colore graduque, procul quae picta feroci Sint & inaequali variata Colore, Tonoque. Grandia signa volunt spatia ampla ferosque Colores.
Lumina lata unctas simul undique copulet Umbras Extremus Labor.Lumina lata. In Tabulas demissa fenestris Si fuerit Lux parva,Quantitas Luminis loci in quo Tabu∣la est expo∣nenda. Color clarissimus esto: Vividus at contra obscurusque in Lumine aperto. Quae vacuis divisa cavis vitare memento:Errores & vi∣tia Picturae. Trita, minuta, simul quae non stipata dehiscunt; Barbara, Cruda oculis, rugis fucata Colorum, Luminis Umbrarumque Tonis aequalia cuncta; Foeda, cruenta, cruces, obscoena, ingrata, chimeras, Sordidaque & misera, & vel acuta, vel aspera tactu, Quaeque dabunt formae temerè congesta ruinam, Implicitasque aliis confundent miscua Partes. Dumque fugis vitiosa,Prudentia in Pictore. cave in contraria labi Damna mali, Vitium extremis nam semper inhaeret.
Pulchra gradu summo Graphidos stabilita Vetustae Nobilibus Signis sunt Grandia,Elegantium Idaea Tabula∣rum. Dissita, Pura, Tersa, velut minime confusa, Labore Ligata, Partibus ex magnis paucisque efficta, Colorum Corporibus distincta feris, sed semper amicis. Qui bene coepit, uti facti jam fertur habere Dimidium;Pictor Tyro. Picturam ita nil sub limine primo Ingrediens Puer offendit damnosius Arti, Quàm varia errorum genera ignorante Magistro Ex pravis libare Typis, mentemque veneno Inficere, in toto quod non abstergitur aevo. Nec Graphidos rudis Artis adhuc cito qualiacumque Corpora viva super studium meditabitur ante Illorum quam Symmetriam, Internodia, Formam Noverit inspectis docto evolvente Magistro Archetypis, dulcesque Dolos praesenserit Artis. Plusque Manu ante oculos quàm voce docebitur usus.Ars debet ser∣vire Pictori, non Pictor Arti.
Quaere Artem quaecumque juvant,Oculosrecre∣ant diversitas & Operis fa∣cilitas, quae speciatim Ars dicitur. fuge quaeque repug∣nant. Corpora diversae naturae juncta placebunt; Sic ea quae facili contempta labore videntur: Aethereus quippe ignis inest & spiritus illis. Mente diu versata, manu celeranda repenti. Arsque Laborque Operis grata sic fraude latebit. Maxima deinde erit ars, nihil artis inesse videri. Nec prius inducas Tabulae Pigmenta Colorum, Expensi quàm signa Typi stabilita nitescant,Archetypus in mente, A∣pographum in tela. Et menti praesens Operis sit Pegma futuri. Praevaleat sensus rationi quae officit Arti Conspicuae,Circinusin o∣culis. inque oculis tantummodo Circinus esto.
Utere Doctorum Monitis, nec sperne superbus Discere quae de te fuerit Sententia Vulgi.Superbia pi∣ctori nocet plurimúm. Est coecus nam quisque suis in rebus, & expers Iudicii, Prolemque suam miratur amatque. Ast ubi Consilium deerit Sapientis Amici, Id tempus dabit, atque mora intermissa labori. Non facilis tamen ad nutus & inania Vulgi Dicta levis mutabis Opus, Geniumque relinques: Nam qui parte sua sperat bene posse mereri Multivaga de Plebe, nocet sibi, nec placet ulli. Cumque Opere in proprio soleat se pingere Pictor, (Prolem adeo sibi ferre parem Natura suevit).
Proderit imprimis Pictori ; Ut data quae genio colat, abstineatque negat is. Fructibus utque suus nunquam est sapor at que venustas Floribus insueto in fundo praecoce sub anni Tempore, quos cultus violentus & ignis adegit; Sic nunquam nimio quae sunt extorta labore, Et picta invito Genio, nunquam illa placebunt. Vera super meditando,Quod ment conceperis manu com∣proba. Manus, Labor improbus adsit: Nec tamen obtundat Genium, mentisque vigorem. Optima nostrorum pars matutina dierum,Matutinum tempus La∣bori aptum. Difficili hanc igitur potiorem impende Labori. Nulla dies abeat quin linea ducta supersit.Singulis die∣bus aliquid faciendum. Perque vias vultus hominum, motusque notabis Libertate sua proprios,Affectus in∣observati & naturales. positasque Figuras Ex sese faciles, ut inobservatus habebis.
Mox quodcumque Mari,Non desint ugillares. Terris & in Aëre pulchrum Contigerit, Chartis propera mandare paratis, Dum praesens animo species tibi fervet hianti. Non epulis nimis indulget Pictura, meroque Parcit, Amicorum quantum ut sermone benigno Exhaustum reparet mentem recreata, sed inde Litibus & curis in Coelibe libera vita Secessus procul à turba strepituque remotos Villarum rurisque beata silentia quaerit: Namque recollecto tota incumbente Minerva Ingenio rerum species praesentior extat, Commodiusque Operis compagem amplectitur omnem. Infami tibi non potior sit avara peculî Cura, aurique fames, modicâ quam sorte beato Nominis aeterni & laudis pruritus habendae,
Condignae pulchrorum Operum mercedis in aevum. Iudicium, docile Ingenium, Cor nobile, Sensus Sublimes, firmum Corpus, florensque Iuventa, Commoda Res, Labor, Artis amor, doctusque Magister; Et quamcumque voles occasio porrigat ansam, Ni Genius quidam adfuerit Sydusque benignum, Dotibus his tantis, nec adhuc Ars tantaparatur: Distat ab Ingenio longè Manus. Optima Doctis Censentur quae prava minus; latet omnibus error, Vitaque tam longae brevior non sufficit Arti;
Desinimus nam posse senes cùm scire periti Incipimus, doctamque Manum gravat aegra senectus, Nec gelidis fervet juvenilis in Artubus ardor. Quare agite, ô Iuvenes, placido quos Sydere natos Paciferae studia allectant tranquilla Minervae, Quosque suo fovet igne, sibique optavit Alumnos! Eja agite, atque animis ingentem ingentibus Artem Exercete alacres, dum strenua corda Iuventus Viribus extimulat vegetis, patiensque laborum est; Dum vacua errorum nulloque imbuta sapore Pura nitet mens, & rerum sitibunda novarum Praesentes haurit species, atque humida servat. Ordo Studio∣rum. In Geometrali priùs Arte parumper adulti
Signa Antiqua super Graïorum addiscite formam; Nec mora nec requies, noctuque diuque labori Illorum Menti atque Modo, vos donec agendi Praxis ab assiduo faciles assueverit usu. Mox ubi Iudicium emensis adoleverit annis Singula quae celebrant primae Exemplaria classis Romani, Veneti, Parmenses, atque Bononi Partibus in cunctis pedetentim atque ordine recto, Ut monitum suprà est vos expendisse juvabit. Hos apud invenit Raphael miracula summo Ducta modo, Veneresque habuit quas nemo deinceps. Quidquid erat formae scivit Bonarota potenter. Iulius à puero Musarum eductus in Antris Aonias reseravit opes, Graphicaque Poësi Quae non visa priùs, sed tantùm audita Poëtis Ante oculos spectanda dedit Sacraria Phoebi:
Quaeque coronatis complevit bella triumphis Heroüm fortuna potens, casusque decoros Nobilius reipsa antiqua pinxisse videtur. Clarior ante alios Corregius extitit, ampla Luce superfusa circum coëuntibus Umbris, Pingendique Modo grandi, & tractando Colore Corpora. Amicitiamque, gradusque, dolosque Colorum, Compagemque ita disposuit Titianus, ut inde Divus appellatus, magnis sit honoribus auctus Fortunaeque bonis: Quos sedulus Annibal omnes In propriam mentem atque Modum mira arte coegit.
Plurimus inde labor Tabulas imitando juvabit Egregias,Natura & Experientia Artem perfi∣ciunt. Operumque Typos; sed plura docebit Natura ante oculos praesens; nam firmat & auget Vim Genii, ex illaque Artem Experientia complet. Multa supersileo quae commentaria dicent. Haec ego, dum memoror subitura volubilis aevi Cuncta vices, variisque olim peritura ruinis, Pauca Sophismata sum Graphica immortalibus ausus Credere Pieriis. Romae meditatus: ad Alpes Dum super insanas moles inimicaque castra Borbonidum decus & vindex Lodoicus Avorum Fulminat ardenti dextrâ, Patriaeque resurgens Gallicus Alcides, premit Hispani ora Leonis.
THE Art of Painting *PAinting and Poesy are two Sisters, which are so like in all things,The Passages which you see mark'd with an Asterism * are more am∣ply explain'd in the Re∣marks. that they mu∣tually lend to each other both their Name and Office. One is call'd a dumb Poesy, and the other a speaking Picture. The Poets have never said any thing but what they believ'd wou'd please the Ears. And it has been the constant endeavour of the Painters to give pleasure to the Eyes. In short, those things which the Poets have thought unworthy of their Pens, the Painters have judg'd to be unworthy of their Pencils. * For both of them, that they might contribute all within their power to the sacred Honours of Religion, have rais'd them∣selves to Heaven, and, having found a free ad∣mission into the Palace of Iove himself, have en∣joy'd the sight and conversation of the Gods; whose Majesty they observe, and contemplate the wonders of their Discourse; in order to relate them to Mankind; whom at the same time they inspire with those Coelestial flames, which shine so gloriously in their Works. From Heaven they
take their passage through the world; and are neither sparing of their pains nor of their study to collect whatsoever they find worthy of them. * They dive (as I may say) into all past Ages; and search their Histories, for Subjects which are proper for their use: with care avoiding to treat of any but those which, by their nobleness, or by some remarkable accident, have deserv'd to be consecrated to Eternity; whether on the Seas, or Earth, or in the Heavens. And by this their care and study it comes to pass, that the glory of Heroes is not extinguish'd with their lives: and that those admirable works, those prodigies of skill, which even yet are the objects of our ad∣miration, are still preserv'd. *So much these Di∣vine Arts have been always honour'd: and such authority they preserve amongst Mankind. It will not here be necessary to implore the succour of Apollo, and the Muses: for the gracefulness of the Discourse, or for the Cadence of the Verses: which containing only Precepts, have not so much need of Ornament, as of Perspicuity. I pretend not in this Treatise to tye the hands of Artists, whose skill consists only in a certain practice, or manner which they have affected; and made of it as it were a Common Road. Neither wou'd I stifle the Genius by a jumbled
heap of Rules: nor extinguish the fire of a vein which is lively and abundant. But rather to make this my business, that Art being strength∣ned by the knowledge of things, may at length pass into Nature by slow degrees; and so in pro∣cess of time may be sublim'd into a pure Genius which is capable of choosing judiciously what is true; and of distinguishing betwixt the beauties of Nature, and that which is low and mean in her; and that this Original Genius by long exer∣cise and customs, may perfectly possess all the Rules and Secrets of that Art. * The principal and most important part of Painting,Precept I. Of what is Beautifull. is to find out and thoroughly to un∣derstand what Nature has made most beautifull, and most proper to this Art; * and that a choice of it may be made according to the gust and manner of the Ancients, * without which all is nothing but a blind, and rash barbarity; which rejects what is most beautifull, and seems with an audacious insolence to despise an Art, of which it is wholly ignorant; which has occasion'd these words of the Ancients: That no man is so bold, so rash, and so overweening of his own works, as an ill Painter, and a bad Poet, who are not conscious to themselves of their own Ignorance.
* We love what we understand; we desire what we love; we pursue the enjoyment of those things which we desire; and arrive at last to the possession of what we have pursu'd, if we con∣stantly persist in our Design. In the mean time, we ought not to expect that blind Fortune shou'd infallibly throw into our hands those Beauties: For though we may light by chance on some which are true and natural, yet they may prove either not to be decent or not to be ornamental. Because it is not sufficient to imitate Nature in every circumstance, dully, and as it were literally, and meanly; but it becomes a Painter to take what is most beautifull, * as being the Soveraign Judge of his own Art; and that by the progress which he has made, he may understand how to correct his errours, and * permit no transient Beauties to escape his observation. * In the same manner, that bare practice,Of Theory, and Practice. de∣stitute of the Lights of Art, is always subject to fall into a precipice like a blind Traveller, with∣out being able to produce any thing which con∣tributes to a solid reputation: So the speculative part of Painting, without the assistance of manual operation, can never attain to that perfection which is its object: But sloathfully languishes as in a Prison: for it was not with his Tongue that
Apelles perform'd his Noble Works. Therefore though there are many things in Painting, of which no precise rules are to be given (* because the greatest Beauties cannot always be express'd for want of terms) yet I shall not omit to give some Precepts which I have selected from among the most considerable which we have receiv'd from Nature, that exact School-mistress, after ha∣ving examin'd her most secret recesses, as well as * those Master pieces of Antiquity, which were the first Examples of this Art: And, 'tis by this means that the mind, and the natural disposition are to be cultivated; and that Science perfects Genius, * and also moderates that fury of the fancy, which cannot contain it self within the bounds of Reason; but often carries a man into dangerous extremes: For there is a mean in all things; and a certain measure, wherein the good and the beautifull consist; and out of which they never can depart. This being premis'd, the next thing is to make choice of * a Subject beautifull and noble;Concerning the Subject. which being of it self capable of all the charms and graces, that Colours, and the elegance of Design can possibly give, shall afterwards afford, to a perfect and consummate Art, an ample field of matter wherein to expatiate it self; to exert all
its power, and to produce somewhat to the sight which is excellent, judicious, * and well sea∣son'd; and at the same time proper to instruct, and to enlighten the Understanding. Thus at length I enter into the Subject-matter of my Discourse; and at first find only a bare strain'd Canvass: * on which the whole Machine (as it may be call'd) of the Picture is to be dis∣pos'd; and the imagination of a powerfull, and easy Genius; * which is what we properly call Invention. * INVENTION is a kind of Muse,Invention the first part of Painting. which being possess'd of the other advantages common to her Sisters; and being warm'd by the fire of Apollo, is rais'd higher than the rest, and shines with a more glorious, and brighter flame. * 'Tis the business of a Painter,The Disposi∣tion or Oeco∣nomy of the whole Work. in his choice of Postures, to foresee the effect, and harmony of the Lights and Shadows, with the Colours which are to enter into the whole; taking from each of them, that which will most conduce to the pro∣duction of a beautifull Effect. * Let your Compositions be conformable to the Text of Ancient Authours,The faithful∣ness of the Subject. to Customs, and to Times.
* Take care that whatsoever makes nothing to your Subject,Whatsoever palls the Sub∣ject to be re∣jected. and is improper to it, be not admitted into your Work, or not possess the chief place in it. But on this occasion, imi∣tate the Sister of Painting, Tragedy: which em∣ploys the whole orces of her Art in the main Action. * This part of Painting, so rarely met with, and so difficult to be found, is neither to be ac∣quir'd by pains or study, nor by the Precepts or Counsels of any Master. For they alone who have been inspir'd at their birth with some por∣tion of that Heavenly fire * which was stollen by Prometheus, are capable of receiving so divine a present. As the Proverb tells us, * that it hap∣pens not to every one to see Corinth. Painting first appear'd in Egypt: but wholly different from the truth, till having travell'd into Greece, and being cultivated by the Study, and sublime Genius of that Nation, *it arriv'd at length to that height of perfection, that it seem'd to surpass even Original nature. Amongst the Academies, which were com∣pos'd by the rare Genius of those Great men, these four are reckon'd as the principal: namely, the Athenian School, that of Sicyon, that of Rhodes, and that of Corinth. These were little different
from each other, onely in the manner of their work; as it may be seen by the Ancient Sta∣tues, which are the Rule of Beauty, and to which succeeding Ages have nothing that is equal: * Though they are not very much inferiour either in Science, or in the manner of their Exe∣cution. * A Posture therefore must be chosen accor∣ding to their gusto:Design, the second part of Painting. * The Parts of it must be great * and large, * unequal in their position, so that those which are before must contrast (or oppose) those others which are hindermost, and all of them be equally balanc'd on their Centre. * The Parts must have their out-lines in waves resembling flames, or the gliding of a Snake up∣on the ground: They must be smooth, they must be great, they must be almost imperceptible to the touch, and even, without either Eminen∣ces or Cavities. They must be drawn from far, and without breaks, to avoid the multiplicity of lines. Let the Muscles be well inserted and bound together * according to the knowledge of them which is given us by Anatomy. Let them be * design'd after the manner of the Grecians: and let them appear but little, according to what we see in the Ancient Figures. In fine, * let there be a perfect relation betwixt the parts and
the whole, that they may be entirely of a piece. Let the part which produces another part, be more strong than that which it produces; and let the whole be seen by one point of Sight. * Though Perspective cannot be call'd a certain rule or a finishing of the Picture, yet it is a great Succour and Relief to Art, and facilitates the means of Execution; Yet frequently falling into Errors, and making us behold things under a false Aspect; for Bodies are not always represented according to the Geometrical plane, but such as they ap∣pear to the Sight. Neither the Shape of Faces, nor the Age, nor the Colour ought to be alike in all Figures,Variety in the Figures. any more than the Hair: because Men are as different from each other, as the Regions in which they are born, are different. * Let every Member be made for its own head,The Members and Drapery of every Fi∣gure to be sui∣table to it. and agree with it. And let all together compose but one Body, with the Draperies which are proper and suitable to it. And above all, let the Figures to which Art cannot give a voice, imitate the Mutes in their Actions.The Actions of Mutes to be imitated. * Let the principal Figure of the Subject ap∣pear in the middle of the Piece under the strong∣est Light,Of the princi∣pal Figure of the Subject. that it may have somewhat to make it more remarkable than the rest, and that the Fi∣gures
which accompany it, may not steal it from our Sight. * Let the Member be combin'd in the same manner as the Figures are,Grouppes of Figures. that is to say, coupled and knit together, And let the Grouppes be se∣parated by a void space, to avoid a confus'd heap; which proceeding from parts that are dis∣pers'd without any Regularity, and entangled one within another, divides the Sight into many Rays, and causes a disagreeable Confusion. * The Figures in the Grouppes,The diversity of postures in the Grouppes. ought not to be like each other in their Motions, any more than in their Parts: nor to be all on the same side, but let them contrast each other: bearing them∣selves on the one side, in Opposition to those which are set against them on the other. Amongst many Figures which show their fore∣parts let there be some one whose hinder parts may be seen; opposing the Shoulders to the Stomach, and the right side to the left. * One side of the Picture must not be void,Equality of the piece. while the other is fill'd to the Borders; but let matters be so well dispos'd, that if one side of the Piece be full, the Painter shall find some oc∣casion to fill the other; so that they shall appear in some sort equal whether there be many Figures in it, or but few.
* As a Play is very seldom good,Of the num∣ber of Fi∣gures. in which there are too many Actors, so 'tis very seldom seen and almost impossible to perform, that a Picture should be perfect in which there are too great a number of Figures. And we cannot wonder that so few Painters have succeeded who have introduc'd into their works many Figures. Because indeed there are not many Painters to be found, who have succeeded happily, when even they have intro∣duc'd but few. Many dispers'd Objects breed confusion, and take away from the Picture that grave Majesty, that soft silence and repose, which give beauty to the Piece, and satisfaction to the sight. But if you are constrained by the subject, to admit of many figures, you must then conceive the whole together; and the effect of the work at one view; and not every thing sepa∣rately and in particular. * The extremities of the Ioints must be seldom hidden,Of the Joints and Feet. and the extremities or end of the Feet ne∣ver.The motions of the hands and head must a∣gree. * The Figures which are behind others, have neither Grace nor Vigor, unless the Motions of the hands accompany those of the Head. Avoid the views which are difficult to be found,What must be avoided in the distribution of the Figures. and are not natural, as also forc'd Actions and Motions. Show no parts which are ungracious
to the Sight, as all fore shortnings, usually are. * Avoid also those Lines and Out-lines which are equal; which make Parallels, or other sharp pointed and Geometrical Figures; such as are Squares and Triangles: all which by being too exact give to the Eye a certain displeasing Sym∣metry, which produces no good effect. But as I have already told you, the principal Lines ought to contrast each other: For which reason in these out-lines, you ought to have a special regard to the whole together: for 'tis from thence that the Beauty and Force of the parts proceed. * Be not so strictly ty'd to Nature,That we must not tie our selves to Nature, but accommodate her to our Ge∣nius. that you allow nothing to study, and the bent of your own Genius. But on the other side, believe not that your Genius alone, and the Remembrance of those things which you have seen, can afford you wherewithall to furnish out a beautifull Piece, without the Succour of that incomparable School∣mistress, Nature; * whom you must have al∣ways present as a witness to the Truth. We may make a thousand Errors of all kinds; they are every-where to be found, and as thick set as Trees in Forests, and amongst many ways which mislead a Traveller, there is but one true one which conducts him surely to his Journey's end;
as also there are many several sorts of crooked lines; but there is one only which is straight. Our business is to imitate the Beauties of Na∣ture,Ancient Fi∣gures the rules of imitating Nature. as the Ancients have done before us, and as the Object and Nature of the thing require from us. And for this reason we must be carefull in the search of Ancient Medals, Statues, Vases and Basso Relievo's: * And of all other things which discover to us the Thoughts and Inventions of the Graecians; because they furnish us with great I∣deas, and make our Productions wholly beautifull. And in truth after having well examin'd them, we shall therein find so many Charms, that we shall pity the Destiny of our present Age without hope of ever arriving at so high a point of Perfe∣ction. * If you have but one single Figure to work upon,A single Fi∣gure how to be treated. you ought to make it perfectly finish'd and diversify'd and with many Colours. * Let the Draperies be nobly spread upon the Body; let the Folds be large,Of the Dra∣peries. * and let them fol∣low the order of the parts, that they may be seen underneath, by means of the Lights and Shadows, notwithstanding that the parts should be often travers'd (or cross'd) by the flowing of the Folds which loosely incompass them, * without sitting too straight upon them, but let them mark the
parts which are under them, so as in some man∣ner to distinguish them, by the judicious ordering of the Lights and Shadows. * And if the parts be too much distant from each other, so that there be void spaces, which are deeply shadow'd, we are then to take occasion to place in those voids some Fold to make a joining of the parts. * And as the Beauty of the Limbs consists not in the quantity and rising of the Muscles, but on the contrary, those which are less eminent have more of Majesty than the others; in the same manner the beauty of the Draperies, consists not in the multitude of the folds, but in their natural or∣der, and plain simplicity. The quality of the persons is also to be consider'd in the Drapery. * As supposing them to be Magistrates, their Dra∣peries ought to be large and ample: If Country Clowns or Slaves they ought to be course and short: * If Ladies or Damsels, light and soft. 'Tis sometimes requisite to draw out, as it were from the hollows and deep shadows, some Fold, and give it a Swelling, that receving the Light, it may contribute to extend the clearness to those places where the Body requires it; and by this means we shall disburthen the piee of those hard Shadowings which are always ungracefull.
* The Marks or Ensigns of Vertues contribute not little by their nobleness to the Ornament of the Figures. Such,What things contribute to adorn the Pi∣cture. for example as are the Deco∣rations belonging to the Liberal Arts, to War or Sacrifices. * But let not the work be too much enrich'd with Gold or Jewels,Of precious Stones and Pearls for or∣nament. because the rarest are ever the dearest and most precious; and those which serve only to increase the number, are of the common sort, and of little value. * 'Tis very expedient to make a Model of those things,The Model. which we have not in our Sight, and whose Nature is difficult to be retain'd in the Me∣mory. * We are to consider the places, where we lay the scene of the Picture; the Countries where they were born whom we represent; the manner of their Actions,The Scene of the Picture. their Laws and Customs, and all that is properly belonging to them. * Let a nobleness and grace be remarkable through all your work. But to confess the truth,The Graces and the No∣bleness. this is a most difficult undertaking; and a very rare Present which the Artist receives rather from the hand of Heaven, than from his own Industry and Studies. In all things you are to follow the order of Nature,Let every thing be set in its proper place. for which reason you must beware of drawing or painting Clouds, Winds and Thun∣der
towards the bottom of your Piece; and Hell, and Waters, in the uppermost parts of it: You are not to place a Stone Column on a oundation of Wood; but let every thing be set in its proper place. Besides all this, you are to express the moti∣ons of the Spirits,Of the Passi∣ons. and the affections or Passions whose Center is the Heart: In a word, to make the Soul visible, by the means of some few Co∣lours; * this is that in which the greatest difficulty consists. Few there are whom Iupiter regards with a favourable eye in this Undertaking. So that it appertains only to those few, who parti∣cipate somewhat of Divinity it self, to work these mighty Wonders. 'Tis the business of Rhetori∣cians, to treat the characters of the Passions: and I shall content my self with repeating what an excellent Master has formerly said on this Subject, That the studied motions of the Soul, are never so na∣tural as those, which are as it were struck out of it on the sudden by the heat and violence of a real Passion. We are to have no manner of relish for Go∣thique Ornaments,Gothique Or∣naments are to be avoided. as being in effect so many Monsters, which barbarous Ages have produc'd: during which, when Discord and Ambition caus'd by the too large extent of the Roman Empire, had produc'd Wars, Plagues and Famine through the
World, then I say, the stately Buildings fell to Ruin, and the nobleness of all beautifull Arts was totally extinguish'd; then it was that the admi∣rable and almost supernatural Works of Painting were made fuel for the Fire: But that this won∣derfull Art might not wholly perish, * some Re∣liques of it took Sanctuary under ground, and thereby escap'd the common Destiny. And in the same profane age, the noble Sculpture was for a long time buried under the same Ruines, with all its beautifull Productions and admirable Sta∣tues. The Empire in the mean time under the weight of its proper Crimes and undeserving to enjoy the day, was invelop'd with a hideous night, which plung'd it into an Abyss of errors, and co∣ver'd with a thick darkness of Ignorance those unhappy Ages, in just revenge of their Impieties: From hence it comes to pass, that the works of those great Graecians are wanting to us; nothing of their Painting and Colouring now remains to assist our modern Artists, either in the Invention, or the manner of those Ancients; neither is there any man who is able to restore * the CHRO∣MATIQUE part or COLOURING,Colouring the third part of Painting. or to renew it to that point of excellency to which it had been carry'd by Zeuxis: who by this part which is so charming, so magical, and which so admi∣rably
deceives the sight, made himself equal to the great Apelles, that Prince of Painters; and deserv'd that height of reputation which he still possesses in the World. And as this part which we may call the Soul of Painting and its utmost perfection, is a deceiv∣ing Beauty, but withal soothing and pleasing: So she has been accus'd of procuring Lovers for * her Sister, and artfully ingaging us to admire her. But so little have this Prostitution, these false Colours, and this Deceit, dishonour'd Paint∣ing, that on the contrary, they have only serv'd to set forth her Praise, and to make her merit far∣ther known, and therefore it will be profitable to us, to have a more clear understanding of what we call Colouring. *The light produces all kinds of Colours, and the Shadow gives us none. The more a Body is nearer to the Eyes, and the more directly it is oppos'd to them, the more it is enlightn'd. Be∣cause the Light languishes and lessens the farther it removes from its proper Source. The nearer the Object is to the Eyes, and the more directly it is oppos'd to them, the better it is seen, because the Sight is weaken'd by distance.
'Tis therefore necessary that round Bodies, which are seen one over against the other in a right An∣gle, should be of a livery and strong Colouring, and that the extremities turn, in losing them∣selves insensibly and confusedly, without preci∣pitating the Light all on the sudden into the Sha∣dow; or the Shadow into the Light. But the passage of one into the other must be common and imperceptible, that is by degrees of Lights in∣to Shadows and of Shadows into Lights. And it is in conformity to these Principles that you ought to treat a whole Grouppe of Figures, though it be compos'd of several parts, in the same manner as you would do a single Head: or if your Com∣position requires, that you should have two Grouppes, or even three (* which ought to be the most) in your Piece, take heed that they may be detach'd, that is separated or distinguish'd from each other by the Colours, the Lights and the Shadows, which are so dextrously to be manag'd, * that you may make the Bodies appear en∣lighten'd by the Shadows which bound the sight; which permit it not suddenly to go farther; and which cause it to repose for some space of time, and that reciprocally the Shadows may be made sensible by enlightning your ground.
The raising and roundness of a Body, ought to be given it * in the same manner as we behold it in a Convex Mirrour, in which we view the Fi∣gures and all other things, which bear out with more Life and strength than Nature it self. * And let those which turn, be of broken Colours, as being less distinguish'd, and nearer to the borders. Thus the Painter and the Sculptor, are to work with one and the same intention, and with one and the same conduct. For what the Sculptor strikes off, and makes round with his instrument of Steel, the Painter performs with his Pencil; casting behind, that which he makes less visible by the Diminution, and breaking of his Colours; and drawing forward by his most lively Colours and strongest Shadows, that which is directly op∣pos'd to the Sight, as being more sensible, and more distinguish'd, and at last enriching the naked Canvass, with such Colours as are borrow'd from Nature; in the midst of which he seems to sit; and from thence with one glance of  and without removing his seat, he takes  part of her which she represents to his Sight, and turns as in a Machine about his work. When solid Bodie,Of dark Bo∣dies on light grounds. sensible to the feeling, and dark, are plac'd on Light, and transparent grounds, as for example, The Heavens, the
Clouds and Waters, and every other thing which is in Motion, and void of different Objects, they ought to be more rough and more distinguish∣able than that with which they are incompass'd, that being strengthen'd by the Lights and Sha∣dows, or by the more sensible Colours, they may subsist and preserve their Solidity amongst those aereal and transparent Species, and that on the contrary those grounds which are, as we have said, the Sky, the clouds and the Waters being clearer and more united, may be thrown off from the Sight to a farther distance. We are never to admit two equal Lights in the same Picture; but the greater Light must strike for∣cibly on the middle; and there extend its greatest clearness on those places of the Picture, where the principal Figures of it are, and where the strength of the action is perform'd, diminishing by degrees as it comes nearer and nearer to the Borders; and after the same manner that the Light of the Sun languishes insensibly in its spreading from the East, from whence it begins, towards the West where it decays and vanishes; so the Light of the Picture being distributed over all the Co∣lours, will become less sensible the farther it is re∣mov'd from its Original.
The experience of this is evident in those Sta∣tues which we see set up in the midst of Publique Places, whose upper parts are more enlighten'd than the lower; and therefore you are to imitate them in the distribution of your Lights. Avoid strong Shadows on the middle of the Limbs; least the great quantity of black which composes those Shadows, should seem to enter into them and to cut them: Rather take care to place those shadowings round about them, there∣by to heighten the parts, and take so advantage∣ous Lights, that after great Lights, great Sha∣dows may succeed. And therefore Titian said, with reason that he knew no better rule for the distribution of the Lights and shadows, than his Observations drawn from a *Bunch of Grapes. * Pure or unmix'd white either draws an ob∣ject nearer,Of White and Black. or carries it off to farther distance: It draws it nearer with black, and throws it back∣ward without it. *But as for pure black, there is nothing which brings the object nearer to the Sight. The light being alter'd by some Colour, ne∣ver fails to communicate somewhat of that Co∣lour to the Bodies on which it strikes, and the same effect is perform'd by the Medium of Air, through which it passes.
The Bodies which are close together,The reflection of Colours. receive from each other that Colour wich is opposite to them  and reflect on each other that wich is na∣tur and properly their own. 'Tis also consonant to reason, part of those Bodies which are under a Light, is extended and distributed equally through all, should participate of each others Colours. The Venetian School having a great regard for that Max∣im (which the Ancients call'd the Breaking of Colours) in the quantity of Figures with which they fill their Pictures, have always endeavour'd the Union of Colours, for fear that being too different, they should come to incumber the Sight by their con∣fusion with their quantity of Members separated by their Folds, which are also in great number; and for this reason they have painted their Dra∣peries with Colours that are nearly related to each other, and have scarce distinguish'd them any other way, than by the Diminution of the Lights and Shadows joining the contiguous Ob∣ject by the participation of their Colours, and thereby making a kind of Reconciliation or Friend∣ship betwixt the Lights and Shadows. The less aereal space which there is betwixt us and the Object,Of the Inter∣position of Air. and the more pure the Air is, by so much the more the Species are preserv'd and di∣stinguish'd;
and on the contrary the more space of Air there is, and the less it is pure, so much the more the Object is confus'd and embroyl'd. Those objects which are plac'd foremost to the view,The relation of Distances. ought always to be more finish'd, than those which are cast behind; and ought to have dominion over those things which are confus'd and transient. *But let this be done relatively, (viz.) one thing greater and stronger, casting the less behind and rendring it less sensible by its op∣position. Those things which are remov'd to a distant view,Of Bodies which are di∣stanced. though they are many, yet ought to make but one Mass; as for example the Leaves on the Trees, and the Billows in the Sea. Let not the Objects which ought to be conti∣guous be separated,Of Bodies which are con∣tiguous, and of those which are separated. and let those which ought to be separated be apparently so to us; but let this be done by a small and pleasing difference. * Let two contrary extremities never touch each other,Contrary ex∣tremities to be avoided. either in Colour or in Light, but let there always be a Medium partaking both of the one and of the other. Let the Bodies every-where be of different Tones and Colours; that those which are behind may be ty'd in Friendship together,Diversity of Tones and Co∣lours. and that those which are foremost may be strong and lively.
* 'Tis labour in vain to paint a High-noon, or Mid-day light in your picture,The choice of Light. because we have no Colours which can sufficiently express it, but 'tis better counsel, to choose a weaker light; such as is that of the Evening, with which the Fields are gilded by the Sun; or a Morning-light, whose whiteness is allay'd: or that which appears after a Shower of Rain, which the Sun gives us through the breaking of a Cloud: or during Thunder, when the Clouds hide him from our view,Of certain things rela∣ting to the practical part. and make the light appear of a fiery colour. Smooth bodies, such as Chrystals, polish'd Metals, Wood, Bones, and stones; those which are cover'd with Hair, as Skins, the Beard, or the Hair of the Head; as also Feathers, Silks, and the Eyes, which are of a watery nature; and those which are liquid, as Waters, and those cor∣poreal species, which we see reflected by them; and in fine, all that which touches them, or is near them, ought to be much painted and united∣ly on their lower parts, but touch'd boldly above by the light and shadows which are proper to them. *Let the Field, or Ground of the Picture,The field or ground of the Picture. be clean, free, transient, light, and well united with Colours which are of a friendly nature to each other; and of such a mixture, as there may
be something in it of every colour that composes your work, as it were the contents of your Pa∣lette. And let the bodies mutually partake of the colour of their ground. *Let your Colours be lively, and yet not look (according to the Painter's Proverb) as if they had been rubb'd or sprinkled with meal: that is to say,Of the vi∣city of Co∣lours. let them not be pale. *Let the parts which are nearest to us, and most rais'd, be strongly colour'd, and as it were sparkling; and let those parts which are more re∣mote from sight, and towards the borders, be more faintly touch'd. * Let there be so much harmony, or consent,Of Shadows. or consent, in the Masses of the Picture, that all the shadow∣ings may appear as if they were but one. Let the whole Picture be made of one piece,The Picture to be of one piece. and avoid as much as possibly you can, to paint drily. *The Looking-glass will instruct you in ma∣ny Beauties,The Looking-glass the Pain∣ter's best Master. which you may observe from Na∣ture: so will also those objects which are seen in an Evening in a large prospect. If you are to paint a half figure or a whole one,An half fi∣gure, or a whole one, be∣fore others. which is to be set before the other figures, it must be plac'd nearer to the view, and next the light. And if it is to be painted, in a great place,
and at a distance from the Eyes; be sure on that occasion not to be sparing of great lights, the most lively colours, nor the strongest shadows. *As for a Portraict, or Pictures by the Life,A Portraict. you are to work precisely after Natue, and to express what she shows you, working at the same time on those parts which are resembling to each other: As for example, the Eyes, the Cheeks, the Nostrils and the Lips: so that you are to touch the one, as soon as you have given a stroke of the Pencil to the other, lest the inter∣ruption of time cause you to lose the Idea of one Part, which Nature has produc'd to resemble the other: and thus imitating Feature for Feature with a just and harmonious Composition of the lights and shadows, and of the colours, and giving to the Picture that liveliness which the freedom and force of the Pencil make appear, it may seem the living hand of Nature. The works which are painted to be seen in little or narrow places,The place of the Picture. must be very tender and well united with tones, and colours; the degrees of which ought to be more different, more une∣qual, and more strong and vigorous, as the work is more distant: and if you make great figures, let them be strongly colour'd, and in very spaci∣ous places.
* You are to paint the most tenderly that pos∣sibly you can;Large Lights. and endeavour to lose insensibly the * large lights in the shadows which succeed them, and incompass them about. If the Picture be set in a place which is enligh∣ten'd,What Lights are requisite. but with a little light, the colours must be very clear; as on the contrary very brown, if the place be strongly enlighten'd, or in the open Air. Remember to avoid objects which are full of hollows,Things which are vicious in painting to be avoided. broken in pieces, little, and which are separated, or in parcels: shun also those things which are barbarous, shocking to the Eye and party-colour'd, and all which is of an equal force of light and shadow: as also all things which are obscene, impudent, filthy, unseemly, cruel, fan∣tastical, poor and wretched; those things which are sharp and rough to the feeling: In short, all things which corrupt their natural forms, by a confusion of their parts which are intangled in each other: For the Eyes have a horrour for those things which the Hands will not condescend to touch. But while you endeavour to avoid one vice,The pruden∣tial part of a Painter. be cautious lest you fall into another: for Vertue is plac'd betwixt two extreams, which are on both sides equally blameable.
Those things which are beautiful in the ut∣most degree of Perfection,The Idea of a beautifull piece. according to the Axi∣om of ancient Painters, * ought to have some∣what of greatness in them; and their out-lines to be noble: they must be disintangled, pure and without alteration, clean and knit together; com∣pos'd of great parts, yet those but few in num∣ber. In fine, distinguish'd by bold Colours; but of such as are related, and friendly to each other: And as it is a common saying, that He who has begun well,Advice to a young Pain∣ter. has already perform'd half his work; so * there is nothing more pernicious to a Youth, who is yet in the Elements of Painting, than to engage himself under the discipline of an igno∣rant Master; who depraves his taste, by an in∣finite number of mistakes; of which his wretched works are full, and thereby makes him drink the poyson, which infects him through all his future life. Let him who is yet but a Beginner, not make so much haste to study after Nature, every thing which he intends to imitate; as not in the mean time to learn Proportions, the connexion of the parts, and their out-lines: And let him first have well examin'd the Excellent Originals, and have thoroughly studied all the sweet deceipts of his Art, which he must be rather taught by a know∣ing
Master, than by practice; and by seeing him perform, without being contented onely to hear him speak. * Search whatsoever is aiding to your Art,Art must be subservient to the Painter. and convenient, and avoid those things which are re∣pugnant to it. * Bodies of divers natures which are aggroup'd (or combin'd) together,Diversity and facility are pleasing. are agreeable and plea∣sant to the sight; * as also those things which appear to be perform'd with ease. Because they are ever full of Spirit, and seem animated with a kind of Coelestial fire: But we are not able to compass these things with facility, till we have for a long time weigh'd them in our judgment, and thoroughly consider'd them: By this means the Painter shall be enabled to conceal the pains, and study which his Art and work have cost him, under a pleasing sort of deceipt: For the great∣est secret which belongs to Art, is to hide it from the discovery of Spectatours. Never give the least touch with your Pencil till you have well examin'd your Design, and have settled your out-lines,The Original must be in the Head, and the Copy on the Cloth. * nor till you have present in your mind a perfect Idea of your work. The Compass to be in the Eyes. * Let the Eye be satisfy'd in the first place, even against and above all other reasons, which
beget difficulties in your Art, which of it self suffers none; and let the compass be rather in your Eyes than in your Hands. * Profit your self by the Counsels of the know∣ing: Pride an E∣nemy to good Painting. And do not arrogantly disdain to learn the opinion of every man concerning your work. All men are blind as to their own productions; and no man is capable of judging in his own cause; but if you have no knowing friend, to assist you with his advice, yet length of time will never fail; 'tis but letting some weeks pass over your Head, or at least some days, without looking on your work, and that intermission will faithful∣ly discover to you the faults, and beauties; yet suffer not your self to be carried away by the opi∣nions of the Vulgar, who often speak without knowledge; neither give up your self altogether to them, and abandon wholly your own Genius, so as lightly to change that which you have made: For he who has a windy Head, and flatters him∣self with the empty hope of deserving the praise of the common people, whose opinions are inconsi∣derate, and changeable, does but injure himself and pleases no man. Since every Painter paints himself in his own works (so much is Nature accustom'd to produce her own likeness) 'tis advantageous to him toKnow your self.
know himself, * to the end that he may cultivate those Talents which make his Genius, and not unprofitably lose his time in endeavouring to gain that which she has refus'd him. As nei∣ther Fruits have the taste, nor Flowers the beauty which is natural to them when they are transplan∣ted in a foreign soil, and are forc'd to bear be∣fore their season by an artificial heart: so 'tis in vain for the Painter to sweat over his works in spight of Nature and of Genius; for without them 'tis impossible for him to succeed. * While you meditate on these truths,Perpetually practise, and do easily what you have con∣ceiv'd. and observe them diligently, by making necessary re∣flections on them; let the labour of the Hand accompany the study of the Brain; let the for∣mer second and support the latter; yet without blunting the sharpness of your Genius; and aba∣ting of its vigour by too much assiduity. * The Morning is the best,The Morning most proper for work. and most proper part of the day for your business; employ it therefore in the study and exercise of those things which require the greatest pains and application.Every day do something. * Let no day pass over you without a line.The Passions which are true and na∣tural. Observe as you walk the Streets, the Airs of Heads; the natural Posturs and Expressions; which are always the most free the less they seem to be observ'd.
* Be ready to put into your Table-bookOf Table-books. (which you must always carry about you) what∣soever you judge worthy of it; whether it be up∣on the Earth, or in the Air, or upon the Waters, while the Species of them is yet fresh in your I∣magination. * Wine and good Cheer are no great Friends to painting, they serve only to recreate the Mind, when 'tis opprest and spent with Labour; then indeed 'tis proper to renew your Vigour by the conversation of your Friends: Neither is a true Painter naturally pleas'd with the fatigue of busi∣ness, and particularly of the Law, but delights in the liberty which belongs to the Batchelour's Estate. Painting naturally withdraws from Noise and Tumult, and pleases it self in the en∣joyment of a Country Retirement: because Si∣lence and Solitude set an edge upon the Genius, and cause a greater Application to work and stu∣dy, and also serve to produce the Ideas, which, so conceiv'd, will be always present in the Mnd, even to the finishing of the work; the whole com∣pass of which, the Painter can at that time more commodiously form to himself than at any other. * Let not the covetous design of growing rich, induce you to ruin your reputation, but rather sa∣tisfy your self with a moderate fortune; and let
your Thoughts be wholly taken up with acqui∣ring to your self a glorious Name, which can ne∣ver perish, but with the World, and make that the recompence of your worthy Labours. * The qualities requisite to form an excellent Painter, are, a true discerning Judgment; a Mind which is docible, a noble Heart, a sublime Sense of things, and Fervour of Soul; after which fol∣low, Health of Body, handsomeness, a conveni∣ent share of Fortune, Youth, Diligence, an affe∣ction for the Art, and to be bred under the disci∣pline of a knowing Master. And remember, that whatsoever your Subject be, whether of your own Choice, or what chance or good fortune shall put into your hand, if you have not that Genius or natural Inclination, which your Art requires, you shall never arrive to per∣fection in it, even with all those great advantages which I have mention'd; for the Wit, and the manual operation are things vastly distant from each other. 'Tis the Influence of your Stars, and the happiness of your Genius, to which you must be oblig'd for the greatest Beauties of your Art. Nay, even your excellencies sometimes will not pass for such in the opinion of the learned, but only as things which have less of Error in them, for no man sees his own failings; and Life is so
short, that it is not sufficient for so long an Art. Our strength fails us in our old Age, when we begin to know somewhat: Age oppresses us by the same degrees that it instructs us, and permits not that our mortal Members which are frozen with our years, should retain the Vigor and Spi∣rits of our Youth. * Take courage therefore, O ye Noble Youths! you legitimate Off-spring of Minerva, who are born under the influence of a happy Planet, and warm'd with a Celestial Fire, which attracts you to the Love of Science; exercise while you are young, your whole forces, and employ them with delight in an Art which requires a whole Painter. Exercise them I say, while your boyl∣ing Youth supplies you with Strength, and furni∣shes you with Quickness and with Vigour; while your Mind, yet pure and void of Error, has not taken any ill habitude to vice, while yet your Spi∣rits are inflam'd with the Thirst of Novelties, and your Mind is fill'd with the first Species of things which present themselves to a young Imaginati∣on, which it gives in keeping to your Memory; and which your Memory retains for length of time, by reason of the moisture wherewith at that Age the Brain abounds:The method of Studies for a young Paint∣er. * you will do well to begin with Geometry, and after having made
some progress it it, * set your self on designing after the Ancient Greeks, * and cease not day or night from labour, till by your continual practice you have gain'd an easy habitude of imitating them in their invention, and in their manner. * And when afterwards your judgment shall grow stronger, and come to its maturity with years, it will be very necessary to see and examine one after the other, and part by part, those works which have given so great a Reputation to the Masters of the first form in pursuit of that Me∣thod, which we have taught you here above, and according to the Rules which we have given you; such are the Romans, the Venetians, the Parmesans, and the Bologneses. Amongst those excellent Persons, Raphael had the Talent of In∣vention for his share, by which he made as ma∣ny Miracles as he made Pictures. In which is observ'd * a certain Grace which was wholly na∣tural and peculiar to him, and which none since him have been able to appropriate to themselves. Michael Angelo possess'd powerfully the part of Design, above all others. * Iulio Romano (edu∣cated from his childhood among the Muses) has open'd to us the Treasures of Parnassus and in the Poetry of Painting has discover'd to our Eyes the most sacred Mysteries of Apollo, and all the rarest
Ornaments which that God is capable of commu∣cating to those works that he inspires, which we knew not before, but only by the Recital that the Poets made of them; he seems to have painted those famous Wars which He∣roes have wag'd, and ended with Victory over crown'd Heads, whom they have led in tri∣umph; and those other glorious Events which Fortune has caus'd in all ages, even with more Magnificence and Nobleness, than when they were acted in the World. Correggio has made his Memory immortal by the Strength and Vi∣gour he has given to his Figures, and by sweet∣ning his Lights and Shadows, and melting them into each other so happily, that they are even im∣perceptible. He is also almost single in the great manner of his Painting, and the Facility he had in the managing of his Colours. And Titian under∣stood so well the Union of the Masses, and the Bo∣dies of Colours, the Harmony of the Tones, and the Disposition of the whole together, that he has deserv'd those Honours, and that wealth which were heap'd upon him, together with that at∣tribute of being surnam'd the Divine Painter. The laborious and diligent Annibal Carracci, has taken from all those great Persons already men∣tion'd, whatsoever excellencies he found in them,
and, as it were, converted their Nourishment in∣to his own Substance. 'Tis a great means of profiting your self to co∣py diligently those excellent Pieces,Nature and Experience perfect Art. and those beautifull designs; But Nature which is present before your Eyes, is yet a better Mistress: For she augments the Force and Vigour of the Geni∣us, and she it is from whom Art derives her ulti∣mate perfection by the means of sure Experience; * I pass in silence many things which will be more amply treated in the ensuing Commentary. And now considering that all things are sub∣ject to the vicissitude of Time, and that they are liable to Destruction by several ways, I thought I might reasonably take the boldness * to intrust to the Muses (those lovely and immortal Sisters of painting) these few Precepts which I have here made and collected of that Art. I employ'd my time in the study of this work at Rome, while the honour of the Bourbon Fami∣ly, and the just Avenger of his injur'd Ancestors, the Victorious Lovis▪ was darting his Thunder on the Alpes, and causing his Enemies to feel the force of his unconquerable Arms, while he like another Gallique Hercules, born for the benefit and Honour of his Country, was griping the Spa∣nish Geryon by the Throat, and at the point of strangling him.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE Art of Painting OF Charles Alphonse du Fresnoy. PAinting and Poesy are two Sisters,¶1. The Number at the head of every Obser∣vation serves to find in the Text the par∣ticular Pas∣sage on which the Observati∣on was made. &c. 'Tis a receiv'd truth, that the Arts have a cer∣tain relation to each other. "There is no Art (said Tertullian in his Treatise of Idola∣try) which is not either the Father or the near Re¦lation of another. And Cicero in his Oration for Archias the Poet, says, That the Arts which have respect to human life, have a kind of Alliance a∣mongst themselves, and hold each other (as we may say) by the hand." But those Arts which are the nearest related, and claim the most ancient Kin∣dred with each other, are Painting and Poetry;
and whosoever shall throughly examine them, will find them so much resembling one another, that he cannot take them for less than Sisters. They both follow the same bent, and suffer them∣selves rather to be carry'd away, than led by their secret Inclinations, which are so many seeds of the Divinity. "There is a God within us (says Ovid in the beginning of his Sixth Book de Fa∣stis, there speaking of the Poets) who by his A∣gitation warms us. And Suidas says, That the fa∣mous Sculptor Phidias, and Zeuxis that incompa∣rable Painter, were both of them transported by the same Enthusiasm, which gave life to all their works." They both of them aim at the same end, which is Imitation. Both of them excite our Passions; and we suffer our selves willingly to be deceiv'd, both by the one, and by the other; our Eyes and Souls are so fixt to them, that we are ready to persuade our selves that the painted Bodies breath, and that the Fictions are Truths. Both of them are set on fire by the great Actions of Heroes; and both endeavour to eternize them: Both of them in short, are supported by the strength of their Imagination, and avail themselves of those licences, which Apollo has equally bestow'd on them, and with which their Genius has inspir'd them.
—Pictoribus atque Poetis Quidlibet audendi, semper fuit aequa potestas. Painters and Poets free from servile awe, May treat their Subjects, and their Objects draw. As Horace tells us in his Art of Poetry. The advantage which Painting possesses above Poesie is this; That amongst so great a Diversi∣ty of Languages, she makes her self understood by all the Nations of the World; and that she is neces∣sary to all other Arts, because of the need which they have of demonstrative Figures, which often give more Light to the Understanding than the clearest discourses we can make. Segnius irritant animos demissa per aurem, Quam quae sunt oculis commissa fidelibus. Hearing excites the Mind by slow degrees, The Man is warm'd at once by what he sees. Horace in the same Art of Poetry. For both of them that they might contribute, &c.¶9. Poetry by its Hymns and Anthems, and Painting by its Statues, Altar-pieces, and by all those Decorati∣ons
which inspire Respect and Reverence for our Sacred Mysteries, have been serviceable to Religion. Gregory of Nice, after having made a long and beautifull Description of Abraham sacrificing his Son Isaac, says these words, "I have often cast my eyes upon a Picture, which represents this moving object, and could never withdraw them with∣out Tears. So well did the Picture represent the thing it self, even as if the Action were then ¶24. passing before my Sight." So much these Divine Arts have been always honour'd, &c. The greatest Lords, whole Cities and their Magistrates of Old (says Pliny lib. 35.) took it for an honour to obtain a Pi∣cture from the hands of those great Ancient Painters. But this Honour is much fallen of late amongst the French Nobility: and if you will understand the cause of it, Vitruvius will tell you that it comes from their Ignorance of the charming Arts. Pro∣pter ignorantiam Artis, virtutes obscurantur: (in the Preface to his Fifth Book.) Nay more, we should see this admirable Art fall into the last de∣gree of Contempt, if our Mighty Monarch, who yields in nothing to the Magnanimity of Alexan∣der the Great, had not shown as much Love for Painting as Valour in the Wars: we daily see him encouraging this noble Art, by the considerable Presents which he makes to hisMr. Le Brun. chief Painter.
And he has also founded an Academy for the Progress and Perfectionating of Painting, which hisMr. Col∣bert. first Minister honours with his Protection, his care, and frequent Visits: insomuch that we might shortly see the age of Apelles reviving in our Country, together with all the beauteous Arts, if our generous Nobility, who follow our incompa∣rable King with so much Ardour and Courage in those dangers to which he exposes his Sacred Per∣son for the Greatness and Glory of his Kingdom, would imitate him in that wonderfull Affection which he bears to all who are excellent in this kind. Those Persons who were the most considerable in Ancient Greece, either for Birth or Merit, took a most particular care, for many ages, to be instru∣cted in the Art of Painting: following that lau∣dable and profitable custom which was begun and establish'd by the Great Alexander, which was to learn how to Design. And Pliny who gives te∣stimony to this in the tenth Chapter of his 35th. Book tells us farther (speaking of Pamphilus the Master of Apelles) That it was by the authority of A∣lexander, that first at Sicyon, and afterwards thro' all Greece, the young Gentlemen learn'd before all o∣ther things to design upon Tablets of Boxen-wood; and that the first place among all the Liberal Arts was gi∣ven to Painting. And that which makes it evident,
that they were very knowing in this Art, is the love and esteem which they had for Painters. Demetrius gave high testimonies of this when he besieg'd the City of Rhodes: For he was pleas'd to employ some part of that time, which he ow'd to the care of his Arms, in visiting Protogenes, who was then drawing the Picture of Ialisus. This Ia∣lisus, , (says Pliny) hinder'd King Demetrius from taking Rhodes, out of fear, lest he should burn the Pictures; and not being able to fire the Town on any other side, he was pleas'd rather to spare the Painting, than to take the Victory which was already in his hands. Protogenes at that time had his Work-house in a Garden out of the Town, and very near the Camp of the Enemies, where he was daily fi∣nishing those Pieces which he had already begun; the noise of Soldiers not being capable of inter∣rupting his studies. But Demetrius causing him to be brought into his Presence, and asking him what made him so bold as to work in the midst of Enemies: He answer'd the King, That he un∣derstood the War which he made, was against the Rho∣dians and not against the Arts. This oblig'd Deme∣trius to appoint him Guards for his Security, be∣ing infinitely pleas'd that he could preserve that hand, which by this means he sav'd from the barbarity and insolence of Soldiers. Alexander
had no greater pleasure, than when he was in the painting room of Apelles, where he commonly was found. And that Painter once receiv'd from him a sensible Testimony of Love and Esteem which that Monarch had for him: for having caus'd him to paint naked (by reason of her admirable beauty) one of his Concubines call'd Campaspe, who had the greatest share in his affections, and perceiving that Apelles was wounded with the same fatal dart of Beauty, he made a present of her to him. In that age so great a deference was pay'd to Paint∣ing, that they who had any Mastery in that Art, never painted on any thing but what was porta∣ble from one place to another, and what could be secur'd from burning. They took a particu∣lar care, says Pliny, in the place above-cited, not to paint any thing against a Wall, which could onely belong to one Master, and must always remain in the same place; and for that reason could not be remov'd in case of an accidental Fire. Men were not suffer'd to keep a Picture, as it were in Prison, on the Walls: It dwelt in common in all Cities, and the Painter himself was respected, as a Common Good to all the World. See this Excellent Author, and you shall find that the 10th. Chapter of his 35th. Book is fill'd with the praises of this Art, and with the Honours which
were ascrib'd to it. You will there find that it was not permitted to any but those of noble Blood to profess it. Francis the First, as Vasari tells us, was in love with Painting to that degree, that he allur'd out of Italy all the best Masters, that this Art might flourish in his own Kingdom. Amongst o∣thers Leonardo da Vinci, who after having continu∣ed for some time in France, died at Fontainbleau, in the Arms of that great King, who could not behold his death, without shedding Tears over him. Charles the Fifth has adorn'd Spain with the noblest Pictures which are now remaining in the World. Ridolphi in his life of Titian, says, that Emperor one day took up a Pencil, which fell from the hand of that Artist, who was then drawing his Picture, and upon the Compliment which Titian made him on that occasion, he said these words, Titian has de∣serv'd to be serv'd by Caesar. And in the same life 'tis remarkable, That the Emperour valued himself not so much in subjecting Kingdoms and Provinces, as that he had been thrice made immortal by the hand of Titian. If you will but take the pains to read this famous life in Ridolphi, you will there see the relation of all those honours which he receiv'd from Charles the Fifth. It would take up too much time here to recount all the particulars: I will onely observe that the greatest Lords who compos'd the Court
of that Emperour, not being able to refrain from some marks of Jealousy, upon the preference which he made of the Person, and Conversation of Titian, to that of all his other Courtiers; he freely told them, That he could never want a Court or Courtiers, but he could not have Titian always with him. Accordingly he heap'd Riches on him, and whensoever he sent him Money, which, ordi∣narily speaking, was a great Summ, he always did it with this obliging Testimony, That his design was not to pay him the value of his Pictures, because they were above any price. After the example of the Worthies of Antiquity, who bought the rarest Pictures with Bushels of Gold, without counting the weight or the number of the pieces, In nummo aureo, mensurâ accepit, non numero, says Pliny, speak∣ing of Apelles. Quinctilian inferrs from hence, that there is nothing more noble than the Art of Paint∣ing; because other things for the most part are Merchandice, and bought at certain Rates; most things for this very reason, (says he) are vile be∣cause they have a price, Pleraque hoc ipso possunt videri vilia, quod pretium habent: see the 34th. 35th. and 36th. Books of Pliny. Many great persons have lov'd it with an extream Passion, and have exercis'd themselves in it with delight. Amongst others, Lelius Fabius, one of those famous Ro∣mans,
who, as Cicero relates, after he had tasted painting and had practis'd it, would be call'd Fabius Pictor: as also Turpilius a Roman Knight; Labco Praetor & Consul, Quintus Pedius, the Poets Ennius and Pacuvius; Socrates, Plato, Metrodorus, Pirrho, Commodus, Nero, Vespasian, Alexander Seve∣rus, Antoninus, and many other Kings and Empe∣rours, who thought it not below their Majesty to employ some part of their time in this honou∣rable Art. ¶37.The principal and most important part of Painting, is to find out and thoroughly to understand what Nature hath made most beautifull and most proper to this Art, &c. Observe here the rock on which the greatest part of the Flemish Painters have split: most of that Nation know how to imitate Nature, at least as well as the Painters of other Countries, but they make a bad choice in Nature it self; whe∣ther it be, that they have not seen the Ancient pieces to find those beauties; or that a happy Genius, and the beautifull Nature is not of the growth of their Country. And to confess the truth, that which is naturally beautifull is so very rare, that it is discover'd by few persons; 'tis difficult to make a choice of it, and to form to our selves such an Idea of it, as may serve us for a Model.
¶39.And that a choice of it may be made according to the gust and manner of the Ancients, &c. That is to say, according to the Statues, the Basso Relie∣vo's, and the other Ancient Pieces, as well of the Grae∣cians as of the Romans; Ancient (or Antique) is that which has been made from the time of Alexander the Great, till that of Phocas; during whose Em∣pire the Arts were ruin'd by War. These Anci∣ent works from their beginning have been the rule of Beauty; and in effect, the Authors of them have been so carefull to give them that perfecti∣on, which is still to be observ'd in them, that they made use not onely of one single Body, where∣by they form'd them, but of many, from which they took the most regular parts to compose from them a beautifull whole. "The Sculptors, says Maximus Tyrius in his 7th. Dissertation, with admirable Artifice chose out of many Bodies those parts which appear'd to them the most beauti∣full, and out of that diversity made but one Statue: But this mixture is made with so much prudence and propriety, that they seem to have taken but one onely perfect Beauty. And let us not imagine that we can ever find one natural Beauty which can dis∣pute with Statues, that Art which has always some∣what more perfect than Nature." 'Tis also to be presum'd, that in the choice which they made of
those parts, they follow'd the opinion of the Phy∣sicians, who at that time were very capable of instructing them in the rules of Beauty: Since Beauty and Health ordinarily follow each other. "For Beauty, says Galen, is nothing else but a just Accord and mutual Harmony of the Members, a∣nimated by a healthfull constitution. And men, said the same Author, commend a certain Statue of Polycletus, which they call the rule, and which deserves that name for having so perfect an agree∣ment in all its parts, and a proportion so exact, that it is not possible to find a fault in it." From what I have quoted, we may conclude, that the Anci∣ent Pieces are truly beautifull, because they re∣semble the Beauties of Nature; and that Nature will ever be beautifull which resembles those Beau∣ties of Antiquity. 'Tis now evident upon what account none have presum'd to contest the pro∣portion of those Ancient Pieces, and that on the contrary, they have always been quoted as Mo∣dels of the most perfect Beauty. Ovid in the 12th. Book of his Metamorphosis, where he describes Cyl∣larus, the most beautifull of all the Centaures, says, That he had so great a Vivacity in his Countenance, his Neck, his Shoulders, his Hands and Stomach were so fair, that it is certain the manly part of him was as beautifull as the most celebrated Statues. And
Philostratus in his Heroiqnes, speaking of Protesi∣laus and praising the beauty of his face, says, "That the form of his Nose was square, as if it had been of a Statue;" and in another place speaking of Euphorbus, he says, "That his beauty had gain'd the affections of all the Greeks, and that it resem∣bled so nearly the beauty of a Statue, that one might have taken him for Apollo." Afterwards also speaking of the Beauty of Neoptolemus, and of his likeness to his Father Achilles, he says, "That in beauty, his Father had the same advantage over him, as Statues have over the beauty of living Men." This ought to be understood of the fairest Statues, for amongst the multitude of Sculptors which were in Greece and Italy, 'tis impossible but some of them must have been bad work-men, or rather less good: for though their works were much inferiour to the Artists of the first form, yet somewhat of greatness is to be seen in them, and somewhat of harmonious in the distribution of their parts, which makes it evident; that at this time they wrought on Common Principles, and that every one of them avail'd himself of those Princi∣ples according to his Capacity and Genius. Those Statues were the greatest Ornaments of Greece; we need onely open the Book of Pausanias to find
the prodigious quantity of them, whether within or without their Temples, or in the crossing of Streets, or in the Squares and publique Places, or e∣ven the Fields, or on the Tombs, Statues were ere∣cted to the Muses, to the Nymphs, to Heroes, to great Captains, to Magistrates, Philosophers and Poets: In short, they were set up to all those who had made themselves eminent either in defence of their Country, or for any noble action which deserv'd a recompence; for it was the most ordinary and most authentique way, both amongst the Greeks and Romans, thus to testifie their gratitude. The Romans when they had conquer'd Graecia, tran∣sported from thence, not onely their most admira∣ble Statues, but also brought along with them the most excellent of their Sculptors, who instructed others in their Art, and have left to posterity the immortal Examples of their knowledge, which we see confirm'd by those curious Statues, those Vases, those Basso-Relievo's, and those beautifull Columns call'd by the names of Trajan and Anto∣nine: They are those Beauties which out Author proposes to us for our Models. And as the true Fountains of Science, out of which both Painters and Statuaries are bound to draw for their own use, without amusing themselves with dipping in streams which are often muddy, at least troubled;
I mean the manner of their Masters, after whom they creep, and from whom they are unwilling to depart, either through negligence, or through the meanness of their Genius. "It belongs onely to heavy minds, says Cicero, to spend their time on streams, without searching for the Springs from whence their materials flow in all manner of abun∣dance." ¶40. Without which all is nothing, but a blind and rash barbarity, &c. All that has nothing of the An∣cient gust, is call'd a barbarous or Gothique man∣ner, which is not conducted by any rule, but onely follows a wretched fancy, which has no∣thing in it that is noble: we are here to observe, that Painters are not oblig'd to follow the Antique as exactly as the Sculptors, for then their Picture would favour too strongly of the Statue, and would seem to be without Motion. Many Pain∣ters, and some of the ablest amongst them, be∣lieving they do well, and taking that Precept in too literal a Sence, have fallen thereby into great inconveniencies; it therefore becomes the Painters to make use of those Ancient Patterns with discre∣tion, and to accommodate the Nature to them in such a manner, that their Figures which must seem to live, may rather appear to be Models for the Antique, than the Antique a Model for their figures.
It appears that Raphael made a perfect use of this conduct, and that the Lombard School have not precisely search'd into this Precept, any fur∣ther than to learn from thence how to make a good choice of the Nature, and to give a certain grace and nobleness to all their works, by the ge∣neral and confus'd Idea, which they had of what is beautifull; as for the rest, they are sufficiently licentious, excepting onely Titian, who, of all the Lombards has preserv'd the greatest purity in his works. This barbarous manner of which I spoke, has been in great vogue from the year 611 to 1450. They who have restor'd Painting in Germany, (not having seen any of those fair Re∣liques of Antiquity) have retain'd much of that barbarous manner. Amongst others Lucas van Leyden, a very laborious man, who with his Scholars has infected almost all Europe with his designs for Tapestry, which by the ignorant are call'd Ancient Hangings, (a greater honour than they deserve:) these I say are esteem'd beautifull by the greatest part of the World. I must acknow∣ledge that I am amaz'd at so gross a stupidity, and that we of the French Nation should have so barbarous a Tast, as to take for beautifull those flat, childish and insipid Tapestries. Albert Du∣rer, that famous German, who was contempora∣ry
to that Lucas, has had the like misfortune to fall into that absurd manner, because he had ne∣ver seen any thing that was beautifull. Observe what Vasari tells us in the life of Marc Antonio (Ra∣phael's Graver) having first commended Albert for his skill in graving, and his other Talents: "And in truth, says he, if this, so excellent, so exact, and so universal a Man, had been born in Tus∣cany, as he was in Germany, and had form'd his studies according to those beautifull pieces which are seen at Rome, as the rest of us have done, he had prov'd the best Painter of all Italy, as he was the greatest Genius, and the most accomplish'd which Germany ever bore." ¶45.We love what we understand, &c. This period informs us, that though our inventions are never so good, though we are furnish'd by Nature with a noble Genius, and though we follow the impulse of it, yet this is not enough, if we learn not to un∣derstand what is perfect and beautifull in Nature, to the end that having found it, we may be able to imitate it, and by this instruction we may be capacitated to observe those errors which she her self has made, and to avoid them, so as not to copy her in all sorts of subjects; such as she ap∣pears to us without choice or distinction.
¶50.As being the Sovereign Iudge of his own Art, &c. This word of Sovereign Iudge or Arbiter of his own Art, presupposes a painter to be fully instructed in all the parts of Painting; so that being set as it were above his Art, he may be the Master and Sovereign of it, which is no easie matter. Those of that profession are so seldom endow'd with that supreme Capacity, that few of them arrive to be good Judges of Painting: and I should many times make more account of their judgment, who are men of Sence, and yet have never touch'd a Pencil, than of the opinion which is given by the greatest part of Painters. All Painters therefore may be call'd Arbiters of their own Art, but to be Sovereign Arbiters belongs one∣ly to knowing Painters. ¶52.And permit no—transient Beauties to escape his observation, &c. Those fugitive or transient Beau∣ties are no other than such as we observe in Nature with a short and transient view, and which remain not long in their subjects. Such are the Passions of the Soul. There are of these sort of Beauties which last but for a moment; as the different Aires of an Assembly, upon the Sight of an un∣expected and uncommon Object, some particu∣larity of a violent Passion, some gracefull Action, a Smile, a Glance of an Eye, a disdainfull Look,
a Look of Gravity, and a thousand other such like things; we may also place in the Catalogue of these flying Beauties, fine Clouds, such as or∣dinarily follow Thunder or a Shower of Rain. ¶54.In the same manner that bare practice destitute of the Lights of Art, &c. We find in Quinctilian, that Pythagoras said, "The Theory is nothing with∣out the practice. And what means (says the young∣er Pliny) have we to retain what has been taught us," if we put it not in practice: we would not allow that Man to be an Orator who had the best thoughts imaginable, and who knew all the rules of Rhetorique if he had not acquir'd by ex∣cercise the Art of using them, and of composing an excellent Discourse. Painting is a long Pil∣grimage; what avails it to make all the necessa∣ry preparatives for our Voyage, or to inform our selves of all the difficulties in the rode, if we do not actually begin the journey, and travel at a round rate, we shall never arrive at the end of it. And as it would be ridiculous to grow old in the study of every necessary thing, in an Art which comprehends so many several parts; so on the other hand to being the practice without knowing the rules, or at least with a light Tincture of them is to expose our selves to the scorn of those who can judge of Painting, and to make it apparent
o the World that we have no care of our repu∣tation. Many are of opinion, that we need one∣ly work and mind the practical part to become skilfull and able Painters; and that the Theory onely incumbers the mind, and tyes the hand: Such Men do just like the Squirrel, who is perpetually turning the Wheel in her Cage; she runs apace and wearies her self with her continual Motion, and yet gets no ground. 'Tis not enough for doing well to walk apace, says Quinctilian, but it is enough for walking apace to do well. 'Tis a bad excuse to say, I was but a little while about it: That gracefull Easiness, that celestial Fire which animates the work, proceeds not so much from having often done the like, as from having well understood what we have done. See what I shall farther say, in the 51st. Rule, which concerns easiness. Others there are who believe the Precepts and Spe∣culation, to be of absolute necessity, but as they were ill instructed, and what they knew rather en∣tangl'd than clear'd their understanding, so they oftentimes stop short; and if they perform a work, tis not without Anxiety and Pain. And in truth, they are so much the more worthy of Compassi∣on because their intentions are right, and if they advance not in knowledge as far as others, and are sometimes cast behind, yet they are ground∣ed
upon some sort of reason; for 'tis belonging to good ence, not to go over fast when we appre∣hend our selves to be out of the way, or even where we doubt which way we ought to take. Others on the contrary, being well instructed in good Maximes, and in the rules▪ of Art, after having done fine things yet spoil them all by endeavou∣ring to make them better, which is a kind of o∣ver-doing, and are so intoxicated with their work and with an earnest desire of being above all o∣thers, that they suffer themselves to be deceiv'd with the appearance of an imaginary good. A∣pelles one day admiring the prodigious Labour which he saw in a Picture of Protogenes,Pliny 35. 10. and knowing how much sweat it must have cost him, said, That Pro∣togenes and himself were of equal strength; nay, that he yielded to him in some parts of Painting, but in this he surpass'd him, that Protogenes never knew when he had done well, and could never hold his hand; he also added in the nature of a Precept, that he wish'd all Painters would imprint this lesson deeply in their Me∣mory, that with over-straining and earnestness of finish∣ing their Pieces they often did them more harm than good.10. 3. There are some (says Quinctilian) who ne∣ver satisfie themselves, never are contented with their first Notions and Expressions, but are continually chang∣ing all, till nothing remains of their first Ideas. Others
there are (continues he,) who dare never trust them∣selves, nor resolve on any thing, and who being as it were intangl'd in their own Genius, imagine it to be a laudable correctness, when they form difficulties to them∣selves in their own work. And to speak the truth, 'tis hard to discern whether of the two is in the greatest Error; he who is enamour'd of all he does, or he whom no∣thing of his own can please. For it has happen'd to young Men, and often even to those of the greatest Wit, to waste their Spirits, and to consume themselves with Anxiety and Pain of their own giving, so far as even to doze upon their work with too much eagerness of doing well; I will now tell you how a reasonable man ought to carry himself on this occasion: 'Tis certain that we ought to use our best endeavour to give the last Perfection to our works; yet it is always to be un∣derstood, that we attempt no more than what is in the compass of our Genius, and according to our Vein: for to make a true Progress, I grant that diligence and stu∣dy are both requisite, but this study ought to have no mixture, either of Self-opinion, Obstinacy, or Anxiety; for which reason, if it blows a happy Gale we must set up all our Sails, though in so doing it sometimes happens that we follow those Motions where our natural heat is more powerfull than our care and our correctness, provided we abuse not this licence, and suffer not our selves to be deceiv'd by it, for all our productions cannot fail to
please us at the moment of their Birth, as being new to us. Because the greatest Beauties cannot always be experss'd for want of terms,¶61. &c. I have learn'd from the mouth of Monsieur du Fresnoy, that he had oftentimes heard Guido say, That no man could give a rule of the greatest Beauties, and that the knowledge of them was so abstruse, that there was no manner of speaking which could express them. This comes just to what Quinctilian says,Declam. 19. That things incredible wanted words to express them: for some of them are too great and too much elevated to be comprehended by human discourse. From hence it proceeds that the best Iudges when they admire a noble Picture, seem to be fasten'd to it; and when they come to themselves you would say they had lost the use of Speech. Pausiacâ torpes, insane, Tabellâ, saysLib. 2. Sat. 7. Horace, andLib. 10. Ep. 22. Symmachus says, that the greatness of astonish∣ment hinders men from giving a just applause. The I∣talians say Opera da stupire, when a thing is wonder∣fully good. Those Master-pieces of Antiquity, which were the first Examples of this Art, &c.¶63. He means the most knowing and best Painters of Antiquity, that is to say, from the last two Ages to our times. And also moderates that fury of the Fancy,¶66. &c. There is in the Latine Text, which produces onely
Monsters, that is to say, things out of all proba∣ble resemblance. Such things as are often found in the works of Pietro Testa: It often happens, says Dionysius Longinus, a grave Author, That some men imagining themselves to be possess'd with a divine Fu∣ry; far from being carry'd into the rage of Baccha∣nalians, often fall into toys and trifles which are only Puerilities. ¶69.A subject beautifull and noble, &c. Painting is not onely pleasing and divertising, but is also a kind of Memorial of those things which Antiqui∣ty has had the most beautifull and the noble in their kinds, re-placing the History before our Eyes; as if the thing at that time were effectually in A∣ction, even so far that beholding the Pictures wherein those noble deeds are represented, we find our selves stung with a desire of endeavour∣ing somewhat which is like that Action there ex∣press'd, as if we were reading it in the History. The Beauty of the subject inspires us with Love and Admiration for the Pictures. As the fair mixture causes us to enter into the subject which it imitates and imprints it the more deeply into our Imagination and our Memory: these are two Chains which are interlink'd, which contain, and are at the same time contain'd, and whose matter is equally precious and estimable.
And well season'd,¶72. &c. Aliquid salis, somewhat that is ingenious, fine and picquant, extraordina∣ry of a high relish, proper to instruct and to clear the Understanding. The Painters ought to do like the Orators,De Opt. Gen. Orat. says Cicero. Let them instruct, let them divertise, and let them move us; this is what is properly meant by the word Salt. On which the whole Machine (as it may be call'd) of the Picture is to be dispos'd, &c.¶74. 'Tis not with∣out reason, nor by chance, that our Author uses the word Machine. A Machine is a just assembling or Combination of many pieces to produce one and the same effect. And the Disposition in a Pi∣cture is nothing else but an Assembling of many parts, of which we are to foresee the agreement with each other: And the justness to produce a beautifull effect, as you shall see in the fourth Precept, which is concerning the Oeconomy. This is also call'd the Composition, by which is meant the distribution and orderly placing of things, both in general and in particular. Which is what we properly call Invention, &c.¶75. Our Author establishes three parts of Painting, the INVENTION, the DESIGN or DRAWING, and the COLOURING, which in some places he also calls the CRO∣MATIQUE. Many Authors who have writ∣ten
of Painting, multiply the parts according to their pleasure; and without giving you or my self the trouble of discussing this matter, I will onely tell you, that all the parts of Painting which others have nam'd, are reducible into these three which are mention'd by our Author. For which reason, I esteem this division to be the justest: and as these three parts are Essential to Painting, so no man can be truly call'd a Painter who does not posses them all together: In the same manner that we cannot give the name of Man to any Creature which is not compos'd of Body, Soul, and Reason, which are the three parts necessarily constituent of a Man. How there∣fore can they pretend to the Quality of Painters, who can onely copy and purloyn the works of others who therein employ their whole industry, and with that onely Talent would pass for able Painters. And do not tell me that many great Ar∣tists have done this; for I can easily answer you that it had been their better course, to have abstain'd from so doing; that they have not thereby done themselves much honour, and that copying was not the best part of their reputation. Let us then conclude that all Painters ought to acquire this part of Excellence; not to do it, is to want cou∣rage and not dare to shew themselves. 'Tis to
creep and grovel on the ground, 'tis to deserve this just reproach, O imitatores servum pecus: 'Tis with Painters, in reference to their productions, as it is with Orators. A good beginning is al∣ways costly to both: much sweat and labour is requir'd, but 'tis better to expose our works and leave them liable to censure for fifteen years, thn to blush for them at the end of fifty. On this account 'tis necessary for a Painter to begin early to do somewhat of his own, and to accustom him∣self to it by continual excercise; for so long as endea∣vouring to raise himself, he fears falling, he shall be always on the ground. See the following ob∣servation. Invention is a kind of Muse,¶76. which being possess'd of the other advantages common to her Sisters, &c. The Attributes of the Muses are often taken for the Muses themselves; and it is in this sence, that Invention is here call'd a Muse. Authors ascribe to each of them in particular the Sciences which they have (say they) invented; and in genra the belle lettere, because they contain almost all th others. These Sciences are those advantages which our Author speaks, and with which h would have a Painter furnish himself sufficiently and in truth, there is no man, though his under standing be very mean who knows not and who
finds not of himself how much Learning is neces∣sary to animate his Genius, and to compleat it. And the reason of this is, that they who have stu∣died, have not onely seen and learn'd many ex∣cellent things in their course of studies, but that also they have acquir'd by that exercise a great Facility of profiting themselves by reading good Authors. They who will make profession of Painting, must heap up treasures out of their read∣ing and there will find many wonderfull means of raising themselves above others, who can onely creep upon the ground, or if they elevate them∣selves, 'tis onely to fall from a higher place, be∣cause they serve themselves of other Men's Wings, neither understanding their Use nor Vertue: 'Tis true that it is not the present Mode for a Painter to be so knowing: and if any of them in these times be found to have either a great Wit or much Learning, the multitude would not fail to say, that it was great pity, and that the Youth might have come to somewhat in the practical part, or it may be in the Exchequer, or in the Families of some Noble-men. So wretch'd is the Destiny of Painting in these later ages. By Learning 'tis not so much the knowledge of the Greek and Latine Tongue, which is here to be understood as the eading of good Authors, and understanding those
things of which they treat: for Translations being made of the best Authors, there is not any Painter who is not capable in some sort of understand∣ing those Books of Humanity, which are com∣prehended under the name of the belle lettere. In my opinion the Books which are of the most ad∣vantage to those of the Profession, are these which follow. The Bible. The History of Iosephus. The Roman History of Coeffeteau, (for those who understand the French,) and that of Titus Li∣vius, translated by Vigenere, with the Notes which are both curious and profitable. They are in two Volumes. Homer, whom Pliny calls the Fountain-head of Invention and noble thoughts. Virgil, and in him, particularly his Aeneids. The Ecclesiastical History of Godeau, or the Abridgement of Baronius. Ovid's Metamorphoses, translated into French by Du Rier, and in English by Sandys. Tableaux. The Pictures of Philostratus. Plutarch's Lives, translated from the Greek by several hands, in 5 Volumes. Pausanias, though I doubt whether that Author be translated. He is wonderfull for giving of
great Ideas; and chiefly, for such as are to be plac'd at a distance, (or cast behind) and for the com∣bining of Figures. This Author in conjunction with Homer, make a good mingle of what is plea∣sing and what is perfect. The Religion of the Ancient Romans, by Du Choul; and in English, Godwin's Roman Antiqui∣ties. Trajan's Pillar, with the discourse which ex∣plains the Figures on it, and instructs a Painter in those things with which he is undispensibly to be acquainted. This is one of the most prin∣cipal and most learned Books, which we have for the Modes, the Customs, the Arms, and the Reli∣gion of the Romans. Iulio Romano made his chief studies on the Marble it self. The Books of Medals. The Bass-Reliefs of Perrier and others, with their Explanations at the bottom of the Pages, which give a perfect understanding of them. Horace's Art of Poetry, by the Earl of Rosco∣mon, because of the relation which there is betwixt the Rules of Poetry and those of Painting. And other Books of the like Nature, the read∣ing of which are profitable to warm the Imaginati∣on: such as in English, are Spencer's Fairy Queen; The Paradise lost of Milton; Tasso translated by
Fairfax; and the History of Polybius, by Sir Hen∣ry Shere. Some Romances also are very capable of en∣tertaining the Genius, and of strengthening it by the noble Ideas which they give of things; but there is this danger in them, that they almost al∣ways corrupt the truth of History. There are also other Books which a Painter may use upon some particular occasions and onely when he wants them: Such are, The Mythology of the Gods. The Images of the Gods. The Iconology. The Tables of Hyginus. The practical Perspective. And some others not here mention'd. Thus it is necessary, that they who are desirous of a name in Painting, should read at leisure times these Books with diligence, and make their obser∣vations of such things as they find for their pur∣pose in them, and of which they believe they may sometime or other have occasion; let the Imagi∣nation be employ'd in this reading, and let them make Sketches and light Touches of those Ideas which that reading forms in their Imagination. Quinctilian, Tacitus, or whoever was the Author of that Dialogue which is call'd in Latine De cau∣sis
corrupae eloquentiae, says, That Painting resem∣bles Fie which is ed by the Fuel, inflam'd by Moti∣on, and gahers strength by burning: For the pow∣er of the Genius is onely augmented by the abundance of matter to supply it; and 'tis impossible to make a great and magnificent work, if that matter be wanting or not dispos'd rightly. And therefore a Painter who has a Genius, gets nothing by long think∣ing and taking all imaginable care to make a noble Composition if he be not assisted by those studies which I have mention'd. All that he can gain by it, is onely to weary his Imagina∣tion, and to travel over many vast Countries without dwelling on any one thing, which can give him satisfaction. All the Books which I have named may be ser∣viceable to all sorts of Persons as well as to Pain∣ters. As for those Books which were of particu∣lar use to them, they were unfortunately lost in those Ages which were before the Invention of Printing. Neglecting the Copyers probably out of ignorance to transcribe them, as not finding themselves capable of making theThat is to the Eye by Diagrams and skeches, &c. demonstrative Figures. In the mean time, 'tis evidently known by the reltaion of Authors, that we have lost fifty Vo∣lumes of them at the least. See Pliny in his 35th. Book; and Franc. Iunius in his 3d. Chapter of
the 2d. Book of the Painting of the Ancients. Ma∣ny Moderns have written of it with small suc∣cess, taking a large compass without coming di∣rectly to the point, and talking much without saying any thing: yet some of them have acquit∣ted themselves successfully enough. Amongst o∣thers Leonardo da Vinci (though without method;) Paulo Lomazzo, whose Book is good for the great∣est part, but whose discourse is too diffusive and very tiresome. Iohn Baptist Armenini, Franciscus Iunius, Monsieur de Cambray, to whose Preface I rather invite you than to his Book; we are not to forget what Monsieur Felebien has written of the Picture of Alexander by the hand of Monsieur Le Brun: besides that the work it self is very elo∣quent, the Foundations which he establishes for the making of a good Picture are wonderfully so∣lid. Thus I have given you very near the Libra∣ry of a Painter, and a Catalogue of such Books as he ought either to read himself or have read to him, at least if he will not satisfie himself with possessing Painting as the most sordid of all Trades and not as the noblest of all Arts. 'Tis the business of a Painter in his choice of Po∣stures, &c.¶77. See here the most important Precept of all those which relate to Painting. It belongs pro∣perly to a Painter alone, and all the rest are bor∣row'd
either from Learning, or from Physick, or from the Mathematicks, or in short, from other Arts, for it is sufficient to have a natural Wit and Learning to make that which we call in Painting a good Invention, for the design we must have some insight into Anatomy, to make Buildings, and other things in Perspective, we must have know∣ledge in the Mathematicks, and other Arts, will bring in their Quota's to furnish out the matter of a good Picture; but for the Oeconomy or ordering of the whole together, none but onely the Painter can understand it, because the end of the Artist is plea∣singly to deceive the Eyes, which he can never accomplish if this part be wanting to him. A Picture may make an ill effect, though the Inven∣tion of it be truly understood, the Design of it cor∣rect and the Colours of it the most beautifull and fine that can be employ'd in it. And on the con∣trary we may behold other Pictures ill invented, ill design'd and painted with the most common Colours, which shall make a very good effect, and which shall more pleasingly deceive; No∣thing pleases a man so much as order,In Oecono∣mico. says Xenophon: And Horace, in his Art of Poetry. Singula quaeque locum teneant sortita decenter.
Set all things in their own peculiar place, And know that Order is the greatest Grace. This Precept is properly the use and applica∣tion of all the rest; for which reason it requires much judgment. You are therefore, in such manner to foresee things, that your Picture may be painted in your Head: i. e. before it come up∣on the Canvas. When Manander (says a cele∣brated Authour)Comm. vetus. had order'd the Scenes of his Co∣medy, he held it to be, in a manner, already made; though he had not begun the first Verse of it. 'Tis an undoubted truth, that they who are endu'd with this foresight, work with incredible pleasure and facility; others on the contrary are perpetually changing and rechanging their work, which when it is ended leaves them but anxiety for all their pains. It seems to me that these sorts of Pictures remind us of those old Gothique Castles, made at several times, and which hold together onely as it were by Rags and Patches. It may be inferr'd from that which I have said, that the Invention and the Disposition are two several and distinct parts in effect, though the last of them depends upon the first, and that common∣ly 'tis comprehended under it: yet we are to take
take great care that we do not confound them. The Invention simply finds out the subjects, and makes a choice of them suitable to the History which we treat; and the Disposition distributes those things which are thus found each to its pro∣per place, and accommodates the Figures and the Grouppes in particular, and the Tout Ensemble (or whole together) of the Picture in general: so that this Oeconomy produces the same effect in relation to the Eyes, as a Consort of Musick to the Ears. There is one thing of great consequence to be observ'd in the Oeconomy of the whole work, which is, that at the first Sight we may be given to un∣derstand the quality of the subject: and that the Picture at the first Glance of the Eye, may in∣spire us with the principal passion of it: for Ex∣ample, if the subject, which you have undertaken to treat be of joy, 'tis necessary that every thing which enters into your Picture should contribute to that Passion, so that the Beholders shall im∣mediately be mov'd with it. If the Subject be mournfull, let every thing in it have a stroke of sadness; and so of the other Passion and Quali∣ties of the Subjects. Let your Compositions be conformable to the Text of Ancient Authors,¶81. &c. Take care that the Licences.
of Painters be rather to adorn the History, than to corrupt it. And though Horace gives permis∣sion to Painters and Poets to dare every thing,Art of Potry. yet he encourages neither of them, to make things out of nature or verisimility; for he adds immediate∣ly after, But let the Bounds of Licences he fix'd, Not things of disagreeing Natures mix'd; Not Sweet with Sowre, nor Birds with Serpents joyn'd, Nor the fierce Lyon with the fearfull Hind. The Thoughts of a Man endued with good Sence are not of kin to visionary madness; Men in Feavers are onely capable of such Dreams. Treat then the Subjects of your Pictures with all possible faithfulness, and use your Licences with a becoming boldness, provided they be ingeni∣ous, and not immoderate and extravagant. Take care that whatsoever makes nothing to your Subject,¶83. &c. Nothing deadens so much the Com∣position of a picture, as Figures which are not appertaining to the Subject: We may call them pleasantly enough, Figures to be let. This part of Painting so rarely met with, and so difficult to be found,¶87. &c. That is to say, Invention.
Which was stollen by Prometheus, &c.¶89. The Po∣ets feign that Prometheus from'd out of Clay, so fair a Statue, that Minerva one day having long admir'd it, said to the workman, that if he thought there was any thing in Heaven which could add to its perfection, he might ask it of her; but he being ignorant of what might be most beautifull in the Habitation of the Gods, de∣sir'd leave that he might be carry'd thither, and being there to make his choice. The Goddess bore him thither upon her Shield, and so soon as he had perceiv'd that all Celestial things were animated with Fire, he stole a Parcel of it, which he carry'd down to Earth, and applying it to the stomach of his Statue enliven'd the whole Bo∣dy. That it happens not to every one to see Corinth,¶92. &c. This is an Ancient Proverb which signefies, that every man has not the Genius not the Dispo∣sition that is necessary for the Sciences, neither yet a Capacity fit for the undertaking of things which are great and difficult. Corinth was hereto∣fore the Centre of all Arts, and the place whither they sent all those whom they would render ca∣pable of any thing.Pro lege Man. Cicero calls it the Light of all Graeci.
It arriv'd at length to that height of perfection,¶95. &c. This was in the time of Alexander the Great, and lasted even to Augustus; under whose reign Paint∣ing fell to great decay. But under the Emperors, Domitian, Nerva and Trajan, it appear'd in its primitive lustre, which lasted to the time of Phocas the Emperor, when vices prevailing over the Arts, and War being kindled through all Europe, and especially in Lombardy, (occasion'd by the irruption of the Hunns,) Painting was totally ex∣tinguish'd. And if some few in the succeeding Ages strain'd themselves to revive it, it was ra∣ther in finding out the most glaring, gawdy and costly Colours, than in imitating the harmoni∣ous Simplicity of those illustrious Painters who preceded them. At length, in the fourteenth Century, some there were who began to set it again on foot. And it may truly be said, that about the end of the fifteenth Age, and the be∣ginning of our Sixteenth it appear'd in much Splendor by means of many knowing Men in all parts of Italy, who were in perfect possession of it. Since those happy times which were so fruitfull of the noble Arts, we have also had some knowing Painters but very few in number, because of the little inclination which Sovereign Princes have had for Painting: but thanks to the zeal of our
Great Monarch, and to the care of his first Mi∣nister, Monsieur Colbert, we may shortly behold it more flourishing than ever. Though they are not very much inferior,¶102. &c. Our Author means this of Michael Angelo, and other able Sculptors of that time. A Posture therefore must be chosen according to their gusto,¶103. &c. This is the second part of Painting, which is call'd Design or Drawing; as the Ancients haue sought as much as possible whatsoever con∣tributes to the making of a perfect Body, so they haue diligently examin'd in what consists the beau∣ty of good postures, as their works sufficiently in∣form us. The parts of it must be great,¶104. &c. Yet not so great as to exceed a just proportion. But he means that in noble posture, the greatest parts of the Body ought to appear foremost rather than the less, for which reason in another passage he vehe∣mently forbids the foreshortinings, because they make the parts appear little, though of themselves they are great. Large or ample,¶104. &c. To avoid the dry man∣ner, such as is most commonly the Nature which Lucas van Leyden and Albert Durer have imi∣tated.
Unequal in their Position,¶105. so that those which are before must contrast or oppose those others which are him∣dermost, and all of them be equally balanc'd on their Centre, &c. The Motions are never natural, when the Members are not equally balanc'd on their Centre: and these Members cannot be ba∣lanc'd on their Centre in an equality of weight, but they must contrast each other. A Man who dances on the Rope, makes a manifest Demon∣stration of this Truth. The Body is a weight balanc'd on its Feet, as upon two Pivots, And though one of the Feet most commonly bears the weight, yet we see that the whole weight rests Centrally upon it. Insomuch, that if, for Exam∣ple, one Arms is stretched out, it must of necessity be either that the other Arm, or the Leg be cast backward, or the Body somewhat bow'd on the opposite Side, so as to make an Equilibrium, and be in a Situation which is unforc'd. It may be, though seldom (if it be not in old Men) that the Feet bear equally; and for that time half the weight is equally distributed on each Foot. You ought to make use of the same Prudence, if one Foot bear three parts in four of the Burthen, and that the other Foot bore the remaining part. This in general is what may be said of the Balance, and the Libration of the Body. In particular, there
may many things be said which are very usefull and curious, of which you may satisfie your selves in Leonardo da Vinci. He has done wonder∣fully well on that subject, and one may truly say that the Ponderation, is the best and soundest part of all his Book of Painting. It begins at the 181st. Chapter, and concludes at the 273d. I would also advise you to read Paulo Lomazzo in his 6th. Book, Chapter 4th. Del moto del Corpo humano, that is, the motions of a human Body. You will there find many things of great profit; for what concerns the Contrast, I will onely say in general, that no∣thing gives so much grace and life to Figures. See the 43d. Precept, and what I say upon it in the Remarks. The parts must have their out lines in Waves re∣sembling Flames,¶107. or the gliding of a Snake upon the ground, &c. The reason of this proceeds from the action of the Muscles, which are as so many Well-buckets; when one of them acts and draws, 'tis necessary that the other must obey; so that the Muscles which act, drawing always towards their principle, and those which obey stretching in length and on the side of their insertion, it must needs follow that the parts must be design'd in Waves: but beware lest in giving this form to the parts you do not break the Bones which su∣stain
them and which always must make them appear firm. This Maxim is not altogether so general, but that actions may be found where the masses of the Muscles are situate one over against another, but this is not very common. The out-lines which are in waves, give not only a grace to the Parts, but also to the whole Body, when it is only sup∣ported on one Leg. As we see in the Figures of Antinous, Meleager, the Venus of Medices, that of the Vatican, the two others of Borghese, and that of Flora, of the Goddess Vesta, the two Bacchus's of Borghese, and that of Ludovisio, and in fine of the greatest number of the Ancient Figures, which are standing, and which always rest more upon one Foot than the other. Besides, that the Figures and their Parts, ought almost always to have a ser∣pentine and flaming form naturally, these sorts of out-lines have, I know not what of life and see∣ming motion in them, which very much resem∣bles the activity of the Flame, and of the Serpent. According to the knowledge of them,¶112. which is given us by Anatomy, &c. This part is nothing known at present amongst our modern Painters. I have shewn the profit and even the necessity of it in the Preface of a little Epitome which I have made, and which Monsieur Torrebat has Publish'd. I
know there are some who think this Science a kind of Monster, and believe it to be of no Advan∣tage, either because they are mean spirited, or that they have not consider'd the want which they have of it; nor reflected as they ought, on its importance: contenting themselves with a certain track, to which they have been us'd. But cer∣tain it is, that whoever is capable of such a thought, will never be capable of becoming a great Designer. Design'd after the manner of the Graecians,¶113. &c. that is to say, according to the Ancient Statues, which for the most part come from Greece. Let there be a perfect relation betwixt the parts and the whole,¶114. &c. or let them agree well together, which is the same thing. His meaning in this place, is to speak of the justness of proportions; and of the harmony which they make with one another. Many famous Authours have thorough∣ly treated this matter. Amongst others Paulo Lomazzo, whose first Book speaks of nothing else: But there are so many subdivisions, that a Reader Must have a good Brain, not to be turn'd with them. See those which our Author has remark'd in general, on the most beautifull Statues of the Ancients. I believe them to be so much the bet∣ter, as they are more conformable to those,
which Vitruvius gives us, in the first Chapter of his third Book: And which he tells us, that he learn'd from the Artists themselves: because in the Pre∣face to his Seventh Book, he makes his boast to have had them from others, and particularly from Architects and Painters. The Measures of a Humane Body. The Ancients have commonly allow'd eight Heads to their Figures; though some of them have but even. But we ordinarily divide the Fi∣gure intoThis depends on the Age & Quality of the persons. The Apollo and Venus of Me∣dices have more than ten Faces. ten Faces: that is to say, from the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Foot in the following manner. From the Crown of the Head to the Forehead, is the third part of a Face. The Face begins, at the root of the lowest Hairs, which are upon the Forehead; and ends at the bottom of the Chin. The Face is divided into three proportionable parts; the first contains the Forehead, the second the Nose, and the third the Mouth and the Chin. From the Chin, to the pit betwixt the Collar∣bones are two lengths of a Nose. From the pit betwixt the Collar-bones, to the bottom of the Breast one Face.
The Appolo has a Nose more. From the bottom of the Breasts, to the Na∣vel one Face. The Apollo has half a Nose more: and the upper half of the Ve∣nus de Med∣ces is to the lower part of the Belly, and not o the Pri∣vy parts. From the Navel to the Genitories, one Face. From the Genitories to the upper part of the Knee, two Faces. The Knee contains half a Face. From the lower part of the Knee to the Anckle, two Faces. From the Anckle to the Sole of the Foot, half a Face. A Man, when his Arms are stretch'd out, is, from the longest Finger of his Right hand, to the longest of his left, as broad as he is long. From one side of the Breasts to the other, two Faces. The bone of the Arm call'd Humerus is the length of two Faces, from the Shoulder to the Elbow. From the end of the Elbow to the root of the little Finger, the bone call'd Cubitus, with part of the Hand, contains two Faces. From the box of the Shoulder-blade, to the pit betwixt the Collar-bones, one Face. If you would be satisfy'd in the Measures of breadth, from the extremity of one Finger to the other; so that this breadth shou'd be equal to the length of the Body, you must observe that the
boxes of the Elbows with the Humerus, and of the Humerus with the Shoulder-blade, bear the proportion of half a Face, when the Arms are Stretch'd out. The Sole of the Foot is the sixth part of the Figure. The Hand is the length of a Face. The Thumb contains a Nose. The inside of the Arm, from the place where the Muscle disappears, which makes the Breast, call'd the Pectoral Muscle, to the middle of the Arm, four Noses. From the middle of the Arm to the begining of the Hand, five Noses. The longest Toe, is a Nose long. The two utmost parts of the Teats, and the pit betwixt the Collar-bones of a Woman make an equailateral triangle. For the breadth; of the Limbs no precise mea∣sures can be given; because the measures them∣selves are changeable according to the quality of the persons; and according to the movement of the Muscles. If you wou'd know the Proportions more par∣ticularly, you may see them in Paulo Lomazzo: 'tis good to read them, once at least, and to make Remarks on them; every man according to his
own judgment, and according to the occasion which he has for them. Though Perspective cannot be call'd a certain Rule,¶117. &c. That is to say, purely of it self, without pru∣dence, and discretion. The greatest part of those, who understand it, desiring to practise it too re∣gularly, often make such things as shock the sight, though they are within the Rules. If all those great Painters, who have left us such fair Plat∣forms, had rigorously observ'd it in their Figures, they had not wholly found their account in it. They had indeed made things more regularly true, but withall very unpleasing. There is great appearance that the Architects, and Statuaries of former times, have not found it to their purpose always; nor have follow'd the Geometrical Part so exactly as Perspective ordains. For He who wou'd imitate the Frontispiece of the Rotunda ac∣cording to Perspective, wou'd be grosly deceiv'd; since the Columns which are at the extremities have more diameter, than those which are in the middle. The Cornish of the Palazzo Farnese, which makes so beautifull an effect below, when view'd more nearly, will be found not to have its just measures. In the Pillar of Trajan, we see that the highest Figures are greater than those be∣low; and make an effect quite contrary to Per∣spective,
increasing according to the measure of their distance. I know there is a Rule which teaches a way of making them in that manner; and which though 'tis to be found in some Books of Perspective, yet notwithstanding is no rule of Perspective. Because 'tis never made use of, but onely when we find it for our purpose; for if (for example) the Figures which are at the top of Trajan's Pillar, were but as great as those which are at the bottom, they wou'd not be for all that against Perspective: and thus we may say, with more reason, that it is a rule of Decorum in Perspective to ease the sight, and to render ob∣jects more agreeable: 'Tis on this general obser∣vation, that we may establish in Perspective, the rules of Decorum (or convenience) whensoever occasion shall offer. We may also see another Example in the base of the Farnesian Hercules; which is not upon the level, but on an easie de∣clivity on the advanc'd part, that the feet of the Figure may not be hidden from the sight, to the end that it may appear more pleasing: which the noble Authors of these things have done, not in contempt of Geometry and Perspective, but for the satisfaction of the Eyes, which was the end they propos'd to themselves in all their works.
We must therefore understand Perspective, as a Science which is absolutely necessary; and which a Painter must not want: Yet without Sub∣jecting our selves so wholly to it, as to become slaves of it. We are to follow it, when it leads us in a pleasing way, and that it shows us pleasing things; but for some time to forsake it, if it lead us through mire, or to a precipice. Endeavour af∣ter that which is aiding to your Art, and conve∣nient, but avoid whatsoever is repugnant to it; as the 59th rule teaches. Let every Member be made for its own Head,¶126. &c. That is to say, you ought not to set the Head of a Young man on the Body of an Old one; nor make a white Hand for a wither'd Body. Not to habit a Hercules in Taffeta; nor an Apollo in course stuff: Queens and persons of the first qua∣lity, whom you wou'd make appear Majestical, are not to be too negligently dress'd or indisha∣bile, no more than Old men: The Nymphs are not to be overcharg'd with drapery: in fine, let all that which accompanies your Figures, make them Known for what effectively they are. Let the Figures to which Art cannot give a Voice,¶128. imitate the Mutes in their Actions, &c. Mutes having no other way of speaking (or expressing their thoughts) but onely by their ge∣stures.
and their actions, 'tis certain that they do it in a manner more expressive than those who have the use of Speech, for which reason the Pi∣cture which is mute ought to imitate them, so as to make it self understood. Let the principal Figure of the Subject,¶129. &c. 'Tis one of the greatest blemishes of a Picture, not to give knowledge at the first Sight of the Subject which it represents. And truly nothing is more perplexing, than to extinguish as it were, the prin∣cipal Figure by the opposition of some others, which present themselves to us at the first view, and which carry a greater lustre. An Orator, who had undertaken to make a Panegyrick on Alexan∣der the Great, and who had emply'd the strong∣est Figures of his Rhetorique in the praise of Buce∣phalus, would do quite the contrary to that which was expected from him; Because it would be be∣liev'd that he rather took the Horse for his Sub∣ject than the Master. A Painter is like an Orator in this. He must dispose his matter in such sort, that all things may give place to his principal Subject. And if the other Figures, which accom∣pany it, and are onely as Accessaries there, take up the chief place, and make themselves most remarkable, either by the Beauty of their Colours, or by the Splendour of the Light, which strikes upon them, they will catch the Sight, they will
Stop it short, and not suffer it to go further than themselves, till after some considerable space of time to find out that which was not discern'd at first. The principal Figure in a Picture is like a king among his Courtiers, whom we ought to know at the first Glance, and who ought to dim the Lustre of all his Attendants. Those Painters who proceed otherwise, do just like those who in the relation of a story ingage themselves so foolishly in long digressions, that they are forc'd to conclude quite another way than they began. Let the Members be combin'd in the same manner as the Figures are,¶132. &c. I cannot better compare a Grouppe of Figures than to a Consort of Voices, which supporting themselves all together by their different parts make a Harmony, which pleasing∣ly fills the Ears and flatters them; but if you come to separate them, and that all the parts are equally heard as loud as one another, they will stun you to that degree, that you would fancy your Ears were torn in pieces. 'Tis the same of Figures; if you so assemble them, that some of them sustain the others, and make them appear; and that all together they make but one entire Whole, then your Eyes will be fully satisfied: But if on the contrary, you divide them, your Eyes will suffer by seeing them all together dis∣pers'd,
or each of them in particular. All together, because the visual Rays are multiply'd by the Multiplicity of Objects. Each of them in particular; because, if you six your Sight on one, those which are about it will strike you and attract your Eyes to them, which extremely Pains them in this sort of Separation and Diversity of Ob∣jects, The Eye, for example, is satisfied with the Sight of one single Grape, and is distracted, if it carries it self at one view, to look upon many se∣veral Grapes which lie Scatter'd on a Table, we must have the same regard for the Members; they aggrouppe and contrast each other in the same manner as the Figures do. Few Painters have observ'd this Precept as they ought, which is a most solid Foundation for the Harmony of a Picture. The Figures in the Grouppes ought not to be like each other in their Motions,¶137. &c. Take heed in this con∣trast to do nothing that is extravagant, and let your Postures be always natural. The Draperies, and all things that accompany Figures, may enter into the contrast with the Members, and with the Figures themselves: And this is what our Poet Means in these words of his Verses, Caetera frangant.
One side of the Picture must not be void,¶145. while the other is fill'd &c. This sort of Symmetry, when it appears not affected, fills the Picture pleasing∣ly; keps it in a kind of balance; and infinitely delights the Eyes, which thereby contemplate the Work with more repose. As a Play is seldom good,¶152. in which there are too many Actors, &c. Annibal Caracci did not be∣livee that a Picture cou'd be good, in which there were above twelve Figures. It was Albano who told our Authour this, and from his mouth I had it. The Reasons which he gave were, first, That he belive'd there ought not be above three great Grouppes of Figures in any Picture; And Second∣ly, That Silence and Majesty were of necessity to be there, to render it beautifull; and neither the one nor the other cou'd possibly be in a multitude and crowd of Figures. But nevertheless, if you are constrain'd by the Subject: (As for Example, If you Painted the Day of Iudgment, the Massacre of the Innocents, a Battel, &c.) On such occasions you are to dispose things by great masses of Lights and Shadows, and union of Colours, without trou∣bling your self to finish every thing in particular, indpendently one of the other, as is usual with Painters of a little Genius; and whose Souls are uncapable of embracing a great Design, or a great Composition.
Aemylium circa ludum, Faber imus & ungues Exprimet, & molles imitabitur aere capillos; Infelix Operis Summâ, quia ponere totum Nesciet. The meanest Sculptor in th' Emylian Square, Can imitate in Brass, the Nails and Hair; Expert in Trifles, and a cunning Fool, Able t' express the Parts, but not dispose the whole. Says Horace in his Art of Poetry. The Extremities of the Ioints must be seldom hidden,¶162. and the Extremities or End of the Feet never, &c. These Extremities of the Joints are as it were the Hafts or Handles of the Members. For example, the Shoulders, the Elbows, the Thighs, and the Knees. And if a Drapery should be found on these ends of the Joints, 'tis the duty of Science and of Decorum, to mark them by Folds, but with great discretion; for what concerns the Feet, though they should be hidden by some part of the Drapery; nevertheless, if they are mark'd by Folds, and their shape be distinguish'd, they are suppos'd to be seen. The word never, is not here to be taken in the strictest Sense; he means but this, so rarely, that it may seem we should
avoid all occasions of dispensing with the Rule. The Figures which are behind others,¶164. have neither Grace nor Vigour, &c. Raphael and Iulio Roma∣no, have perfectly observ'd this Maxime, and Ra∣phael especially in his last Works. Avoid also those Lines and Contours which are e∣qual,¶169. which make Parallels, &c. He means prin∣cipally to speak of the Postures so order'd, that they make together those Geometrical Figures which he condemns. Be not so strictly tied to Nature,¶176. &c. This Precept is against two sorts of Painters; first a∣gainst those who are so scrupulously tied to Na∣ture, that they can do nothing without her, who copy her just as they believe they see her, without adding or retrenching any thing, though never so little, either for the Nudities or for the Drape∣ries. And secondly, against those who Paint e∣very thing by Practice, without being able to subject themselves to retouch any thing, or to examine by the Nature. These last, properly speaking, are the Libertines of Painting, as there are Libertines of Religion; who have no other Law but the vehemence of their Inclinations which they are resolv'd not to overcome: and in the Same man∣ner the Libertines of Painting, have no other mo∣del but a Rhodomontado Genius, and very irragu∣lar,
which violently hurries them away. Though these two sorts of Painters, are both of them in vicious Extremes, yet nevertheless the former sort seems to be the more supportable; because though they do not imitate Nature as she is accompa∣ny'd by all her Beauties, and her Graces, yet at least they imitate that Nature, which we know and daily see. Instead of which the others show us a wild or salvage Nature, which is not of our acquaintance, and which seems to be of a quite new Creation. Whom you must have always present as a witness to the truth,¶178. &c. This passage seems to be won∣derfully well said. The nearer a Picture ap∣proaches to the truth, The better it is; and though the Painter, who is its Author, be the first Judge of the Beauties which are in it, he is nevertheless ob∣lig'd not to pronounce it, till he has first consult∣ed Nature, who is an irreproachable evidence, and who will frankly, but withall truly tell you its Defects and Beauties, if you compare it with her Work. And of all other things which discover to us the Thoughts and inventions of the Graecians,¶188. &c. As good Books, such as are Homer and Pausanias; the prints which we see of the Antiquities, may extremely contribute to from our Genius, and to
give us great Ideas; in the same manner as the Writings of good Authors, are capable of form∣ing a good Style in those who are desirous of writing well. If you have but one single Figure to work upon,¶193. &c. The reason of this is, That there being nothing to attract the Sight but this onely Figure, the Visual Rays will not be too much divided by the Diver∣sity of Colours and Draperies; but onely take heed to put in nothing, which shall appear too sharp or too hard; and be mindfull of the 4th. Precept, which says, that two Extremities are ne∣ver to touch each other either in Colour or in Light; but that there must be a mean, partaking of the one and of the other. Let the Drapery be nobley Spread upon the Body;¶195. let the Folds be large, &c. As Raphael practis'd, after he had forsaken the manner of Pietro Perugi∣no, and principally in his latter Works. And let them follow the order of the parts,¶196. &c. As the fairest pieces of Antiquity will show us. And take heed, that the folds do not only follow the order of the parts, but that they also mark the most considerable Muscles; because that those Fi∣gures, where the drapery and the naked part are seen both together, are much more gracefull than the other.
Without sitting too streight upon them, &c. Paint∣ers ought not to imitate the Ancients in this cir∣cumstance; the ancient Statuaries ma their Draperies of wet Linen, On purpose to make them sit close and streight to the parts of their Figures, for doing which they had great reason; and in following which the Painters would be much in the wrong: and you shall see upon what grounds those great Genius's of Antiquity, finding that it was impossible to imitate with Marble the fineness of stuffs or garments which is not to be discern'd but by the Colours, the Reflexes, and more espe∣cially by the Lights and Shadows, finding it I say out of their power to dispose of those things, thought they could not do better nor more pru∣dentially, than to make use of such Draperies as hinder'd not from seeing through their Folds, the delicacy, of the Flesh, and the purity of the Out∣lines; things which truly speaking they possest in the last perfection, and which in all appearance were the subject of their chief study. But Painters, on the contrary, who are to deceive the Sight, quite otherwise than Statuaries, are bound to imi∣tate the different sorts of Garments, such as they naturally seem; and such as Colours, Reflexes, Lights and Shadows (of all which they are Ma∣sters) can make them appear: Thus we see that
those who have made the nearest imitations of Nature, have made use of such Stuffs (or Gar∣ments) which are familiar to our Sight, and these they have imitated with so much Art that in beholding them we are pleas'd that they de∣ceive us; such were Titian, Paul Veronese, Tin∣toret, Rubens, Van Dyck, and the rest of the good Colourists, who have come nearest to the truth of Nature: Instead of which, others who have scru∣pulously tied themselves to the practice of the An∣cients, in their Draperies, have made their works crude and dry; and by this means have found out the lamentable secret how to make their Fi∣gures harder than even the Marble it self. As An∣drea Mantegna, and Pietro Perugino have done, and Raphael also had much of that way in his first Works, in which we behold many small foldings often repleited, which look like so many Whip∣cords. 'Tis true these repetitions are seen in the Ancient Statues, and they are very proper there. Because they who made use of wet Linen, and close Draperies, to make their Figures look more tender, reasonably foresaw that the Members would be too naked, if they left not more than two or three Folds, scarce appearing such as those sorts of Draperies afford the Sight, and therefore have us'd those Repetitions of many Folds, yet
in such a manner that the Figures are always soft and tender, and thereby seem opposite to the hardness of Marble. Add to this, that in Scul∣pture, 'tis almost impossible that a Figure cloath'd with course Draperies, can make a good effect on all the sides; and that in Painting the Draperies of what kind soever they be, are of great advan∣tage, either to unite the Colours and the Grouppes, or to give such a ground as one would wish to unite or to separate, or farther, to produce such reflections as set off, or for filling void spaces, or in short for many other advantages, which help to deceive the Sight, and which are no ways ne∣cessary to Sculptors, since their Work is always of Relievo. Three things may be inferr'd from what I have said concerning the rule of Draperies. First, that the Ancient Sculptors had reason to cloath their Figures as we see them. Secondly, that Painters ought to imitate them in the order of their Folds, but not in their quality nor in their num∣ber. Thirdly, That Sculptors are oblig'd to follow them as much as they can, without desi∣ring to imitate unprofitably or improperly the manners of the Painters, and to make many ample Folds, which are insufferable hardnesses, and more like a Rock than a natural Garment.
See the 211th. Remark about the middle of it. And if the parts be too much distant from each o∣ther,¶202. &c. 'Tis with intent to hinder (as we have said in the rule of Grouppes) the visual Rays, from being too much divided, and that the Eyes may not suffer by looking on so many objects, which are separated. Guido was very exact in this observation. See in the Text the end of the Rule which relates to Draperies. And as the Beauty of the Limbs consists not in the quantity and rising of the Muscles,¶204. &c. Raphael in the beginning of his Painting, has somewhat too much multiply'd the Folds; because being with reason charm'd with the graces of the Ancients, he imitated their Beauties somewhat too regularly; but having afterwards found that this quantity of Folds glitter'd too much upon the Limbs, and took off that Repose and Silence which in Paint∣ing are so friendly to the Eyes; he made use of a contrary conduct in the works which he painted afterwards, which was at that time when he began to understand the effect of Lights, of Grouppes, and the oppositions of the Lights and Shadows, so that he wholly chang'd his manner, (this was about eight years before his death) and though he always gave a Grace to whatsoever he painted, yet he made appear in his latter works, a Great∣ness,
a Majesty, and a Harmony quite other than what we see in his first manner: And this he did by lessening the number of his Folds, making them more large and more opposing them, and by making the Masses of the Lights and Shadows, greater and more disentagl'd. Take the pains to examine these his different man∣ners in the Prints which we see of that Great Man. As supposing them to be Magistrates,¶210. their Drape∣ries ought to be large, &c. Yet make not your Draperies so large that they may be big enough to cloath four or five Figures, as some there are who follow that method. And take heed that the folding be natural and so dispos'd, that the Eye may be directed to discover the Folds from the beginning of them to the end. By Magistrates, he means all great and grave Persons, and such as are advanc'd in age. If Ladies or Damsels, light and soft,¶211. &c. By this name of Ladies, Maids, or Damsels, he means all young persons, slender, finely shap'd, aery and delicate. Such as are Nymphs, and Naiades, and Fountains. Angels are also comprehended under this head, whose Drapery should be of pleasing Colours, and resembling those which are seen in the Heavens, and chiefly when they are suspended in the Air. They are only such
sorts of light habits as are subject to be ruffl'd by the Winds, which can bear many Folds; yet so that they may be freed from any hardnesses. 'Tis easie for every one to judge that betwixt the Dra∣peries of Magistrates, and those of young Maids; there must be some mediocrity of Folds, such as are most commonly seen and observ'd, as in the Draperies of a Christ, of a Madonna, of a King, a Queen, or a Dutchess, and of other persons of Consideration and Majesty; and those also who are of a middle age with this distinction, that the Habits must be made more or less rich, accor∣ding to the dignity of the Persons; and that Cloth Garments may be distinguish'd from those of Silk, Sattin from Velvets, Brocard from Embroidery, and that in one word the Eye may be deceiv'd by the truth and the difference of the Stuffs. Take no∣tice if you please, that the light and tender Drape∣ries having been onely given to the Female Sex, the Ancient Sculptors have avoided as much as they could to cloath the Figures of Men, because they thought, (as we have formerly said) that in Scul∣pture Garments could not be well imitated, and that great Folds made a very bad effect. There are almost as many examples of this truth, as a∣mongst the Ancients there are Statues of na∣ked men. I will name only that of Laocoon, which
according to all probability ought to have been cloath'd: And in effect what likelihood can there be, that the Son of a King, and the Priest of Apollo should appear naked in the actual Cere∣mony of Sacrifice. For the Serpents pass'd from the Isle of Tenedos to the Trojan Shore, and sur∣priz'd Laocoon and his Sons while they were sa∣crificing to Neptune on the Sea Shore, as Virgil witnesses in the second of his Eneids. Notwith∣standing which, thePolydorus, Athenodorus, and Agesander, all Rhodians. Sculptors who were Au∣thors of this noble work had well consider'd, that they could not give Vestments suitable to the qua∣lity of the Persons represented, without making as it were a heap of Stones, whose Mass would rather be like a Rock, than those three admirable Figures, which will ever be the Admiration of all Ages. And for this reason of two inconveni∣ences, they judg'd that of Draperies to be great∣er, than that which was against the truth it self. This observation well confirms what I have said in the 200th. Remark. It seems to me, that it deserves you should make some reflection on it; and to establish it the better in your mind, I will tell you, that Michael Angelo, following this Ma∣xim, has given the Prophets which he painted in the Chappel of the Pope, such Draperies whose
Folds are large, and whose Garments are course, instead of which the Moses, which he has made in Sculpture, is habited with a Drapery much more close to the parts and holding more of the Ancients. Nevertheless he is a Prophet as well as those in the Chappel, a man of the same quality, and to whom Michael Angelo ought to have given the same Draperies, if he had not been hinder'd by those very reasons which have been given you. The Marks or Ensigns of Vertues,¶215. &c. That is to say of the Sciences and Arts. The Italians call a man a Vertuoso, who loves the noble Arts, and is a Critick in them. And amongst our French Painters, the word Vertueux, is understood in the same Signification. But let not the work be too much enrich'd with Gold or Iewels,¶217. &c. Clemens Alexandrinus relates, That Apelles having seen a Helena,Lib. 2. Paedag. cap. 12. which a young Scholar of his had made and adorn'd with a great quan∣tity of Golden Ornaments and Iewels, said to him, My good Friend, though thou couldst not make her beauti∣full, at least thou hast made her rich. Besides that, these glittering things in Painting, as precious Stones prodigally strew'd over the habits are de∣structive to each other, because they draw the Sight to several places at the same time, and that
they hinder round Bodies from turning and ma∣king their due effect; 'tis the very quantity which often makes us judge that they are false. And be sides it is to be presum'd, that precious things are always rare.Plutarch. Corinna, that learned Theban Lady, reproach'd Pindar, whom she had five times overcome in Poetry, that he scatter'd through all his works the Flowers of Parnassus too pro∣digally, saying to him, That men sow'd with the Hand, and not with the Sack: for which reason a Painter ought to adorn his Vestments with great discretion. And precious Stones look exceed∣ingly well, when they are set in those places which we would make to come out of the Picture; as for example, on a Shoulder, or an Arm to tie some Drapery, which of it self is of no strong co∣louring. They do also perfectly well with white and other light Colours, which are us'd in bring∣ing the Parts or Bodies forward, because Jewels make a show and glitter through the opposition of the great Lights in the deep brown, which meet together. 'Tis very expedient to make a model of those things which we have not in our Sight,¶220. and whose nature is difficult to be retain'd in the Memory, &c. As for example, the Grouppes of many Figures, the Po∣stures difficult to be long kept, the Figures in
the Air, in Ceilings, or much rais'd above the Sight; and even of Animals, which are not ea∣sily to be dispos'd. By this rule we plainly see how necessary it is for a Painter to know how to model, and to have many Models of soft Wax. Paul Veronese had so good store of them, with so great a quantity of different sorts, that he would paint a whole histori∣cal Composition on a perspective Plan, how great and how diversified soever it were. Tinto∣ret practis'd the same, and Michael Angelo (as Giovan. Bapt. Armenini relates) made use of it, for all the Figures of his day of Iudgment. 'Tis not that I would advise any one who would make any very considerable work, to finish after these sorts of Models, but they will be of vast use and advantage to see the Masses of great Lights, and great Shadows, and the effect of the whole together. For what remains, you are to have a A Figure made of wood or cork, turning upon joints. Lay-man almost as big as the life, for every Figure in particular, besides the natural Figure before you, on which you must also look, and call it for a witness, which must first confirm the thing to you, and afterwards to the Spectators as it is in reality. You may make use of these Models with de∣light, if you set them on a Perspective Plan, which
will be in the manner of a Table made on purpose. You may either raise or let it down according to your convenience; and if you look on your Fi∣gures through a hole so contriv'd, that it may be mov'd up and down, it will serve you for a point of Sight and a point of Distance, when you have once fix'd it. The same hole will further serve you to set your Figures in the Ceiling and dispos'd upon a Grate of Iron-wire, or supported in the Air by little Strings rais'd at discretion, or by both ways together. You may joyn to your Figures what you see fitting, provided that the whole be proportion'd to them; and in short what you your self may judge to be of no greater bigness than theirs. Thus, in whatsoever you do there will be more of truth seen, your work it self will give you infinite de∣light, and you will avoid many doubts and dif∣ficulties which often hinder you, and chiefly for what relates to lineal perspective, which you will there infallibly find, provided that you remember to proportion all things to the greatness of your Figures and especially the points of Sight and of Distance; but for what belongs to aerial perspe∣ctive, that not being found, the judgment must supply it. Tintoret, as Ridolphi tells us in his life,
had made Chambers of Board and Past board, proportion'd to his Models with Doors and Win∣dows, through which he distributed on his Fi∣gures artificial Lights, as much as he thought reasonable, and often pass'd some part of the night to consider and observe the effect of his Compo∣sitions. His Models were of two Foot high. We are to consider the places where we lay the Scene of the Picture,¶221. &c. This is what Monsieur de Chambray, calls, to do things according to Decorum. See what he says of it, in the Interpretation of that word in his Book of the Perfection of Painting. 'Tis not sufficient that in the Picture there be nothing found which is contrary to the place, where the action which is represented, passes; but we ought besides, to mark out the place and make it known to the Spectator by some particular Address, that his mind may not be put to the pains of discovering it, as whether it be Italy, or Spain, or Greece, or France; whether it be near the Sea shore, or the Banks of some River, whether it be the Rhine, or the Loyre; the Po, or the Tyber; and so of other things, if they are essential to the History. "Nealces, a man of Wit and an inge∣nious Painter,L. 25. 12. as Pliny tells us, being to paint a Naval Fight betwixt the Egyptians and the Per∣sians, and being willing to make it known that the
Battle was given upon the Nile, whose waters are of the same Colour with the Sea, drew an Ass drink∣ing on the Banks of the River, and a Crocodile en∣deavouring to surprize him." Let a Nobleness and Grace,¶222. &c. It is difficult enough to say what this Grace of Painting is; 'tis to be conceiv'd and understood much more easi∣ly than to be explain'd by words. It proceeds from the illuminations of an excellent Mind, which cannot be acquir'd, by which we give a certain turn to things which makes them pleasing. A Figure may be design'd with all its proporti∣ons, and have all its parts regular, which not∣withstanding all this, shall not be pleasing, if all those parts are not put together in a certain manner, which attracts the Eye to them, and holds it fix'd upon them: For which reason there is a difference to be made betwixt Grace and Beauty. And it seems that Ovid had a mind to distinguish them, when he said (speaking of Venus) Multaque cum formâ gratia mista suit. A matchless Grace was with her Beauty mix'd. And Suetonius speaking of Nero, says, he was rather beautifull than gracefull. Vultu pulchro,
magis quam venusto. How many fair women do we see, who please us much less than others, who have not such beautifull Features? 'Tis by this grace that Raphael has made himself the most re∣nown'd of all the Italians, as Apelles by the same means carry'd it above all the Greeks. This is that in which the greatest difficulty consists,¶233. &c. For two reasons, both because great study is to be made as well upon the ancient Beauties and on noble Pictures, as upon nature it self: and also because that part depends entirely on the Ge∣nius, and seems to be purely the gift of Heaven, which we have receiv'd at our Birth, upon which account our Author adds, Undoubtedly we see but few, whom in this particular, Jupiter has regarded with a gracious Eye, so that it belongs only to those elevated Souls, who partake somewhat of Divinity to work such mighty wonders. Though they who have not altogether receiv'd from Heaven this pre∣cious Gift, cannot acquire it without great La∣bour, nevertheless 'tis needfull in my opinion, that both the one and the other should perfectly learn the character of every Passion. All the Actions of the sensitive Appetite are in Painting call'd Passions, because the Soul is agi∣tated by them, and because the Body suffers through them, and is sensibly alter'd. They are
those divers Agitations and different Motions of the Body in general, and of every one of its parts in particular, that our excellent Painter ought to understand, on which he ought to make his stu∣dy, and to form to himself a perfect Idea of them. But it will be proper for us to know in the first place, that the Philosophers admit eleven, Love, Hatred, Desire, Shunning, Ioy, Sadness, Hope, Despair, Boldness, Fear and Anger. The Painters have multiply'd them not onely by their different Degrees, but also by their different Species, for they will make, for example, six persons in the same degree of Fear, who shall express that Pas∣sion all of them differently. And 'tis that diver∣sity of Species which distinguishes those Painters who are able Artists, from those whom we may call Mannerists, and who repeat five or six times over in the same Picture the same Hairs of a Head. There are a vast number of other Passions, which are as the Branches of those which we have nam'd: we might for example, under the Notion of Love, comprehend Grace, Gentle∣ness and Civility; Caresses, Embraces, and Kisses, Tranquillity and Sweetness; and without exami∣ning whether all these things which Painters com∣prize under the name of Passions, can be reduc'd to those of the Philosophers, I am of opinion that
every one may use them at his pleasure, and that he may study them after his own manner; the name makes nothing. One may even make Pas∣sions of Majesty, fierceness, Dissatisfaction, Care, A∣varice, Sloathfulness, Envy, and many other things like these. These Passions (as I have said,) ought to be learnt from the life it self, or to be studied on the Ancient Statues and excellent Pictures: we ought to see, for example, all things which belong to Sadness, or serve to express it to design them carefully, and to imprint in our Memories after such a manner, as we may distinctly understand seven or eight kinds of them more or less, and im∣mediately after draw them upon Paper without any other Original than the Image which we have conceiv'd of them. We must be perfect Masters of them: but above all, we must make sure of pos∣sessing them throughly. We are to know that it is such or such a stroke, or such a Shadow stronger or weaker, which make such or such a Passion in this or that degree. And thus, if any one should ask you, what makes in Painting the Majesty of a King, the Gravity of a Hero, the Love of a Christ, the Grief of a Madonna, the Hope of the good Thief, the Despair of the bad One, the Grace and Beauty of a Venus, and in fine the Character of any Passion whatsoever, you may answer posi∣tively,
on the spot, and with assurance, that it is such a Posture or such lines in the parts of the Face, form'd of such or such a fashion, or even the one and the other both together: for the parts of the Body separately, make known the Passions of the Soul or else conjoyntly one with the other. But of all the parts the Head is that which gives the most of Life, and the most of Grace to the Passion, and which alone contributes more to it, than all the rest together. The others separately can onely express some certain Passions, but the Head expresses all of them; nevertheless there are some which are more particular to it; as, for ex∣ample, Humility, which it expresses by the stoop∣ing or bending of the Head. Arrogance, when it is lifted, or as we say, toss'd up. Languishment, when we hang it on one side, or lean it upon one Shoulder. Obstinacy (or as the French calls it O∣piniatreté,) with a certain stubborn, unruly, bar∣barous Humour, when 'tis held upright, stiff, and poiz'd betwixt the Shoulders. And of the rest, there are many marks more easily conceiv'd than they can be express'd; as, Bashfulness, Admiration, Indignation, and Doubt. 'Tis by the Head that we make known more visibly our Supplications, our Threatnings, our Mildness, our Haughtiness, our Love, our Hatred, our Ioy, our Sadness, our
Humility; in fine, 'tis enough to see the Face, and to understand the Mind at half a word. Blushing and Paleness speak to us, as also the mixture of them both. The parts of the Face do all of them contri∣bute to expose the Thoughts of our Hearts; but above the rest, the Eyes, which are as it were the two Windows through which the Soul looks out and shows it self. The Passions which they more particularly express, are Pleasure, Languish∣ment, Disdain, Severity, Sweetness, Admiration and Anger. Ioy and Sadness may bear their parts, if they did not more especially proceed from the Eye-brows and the Mouth. And the two parts last nam'd agree more particularly in the expres∣sion of those two Passions; nevertheless if you joyn the Eyes as a third, you will have the Product of a wonderfull Harmony for all the Passions of the Soul. The Nose has no Passion which is particular to it, it onely lends its assistance to the others before nam'd, by the stretching of the Nostrils, which is as much mark'd in Ioy, as it is in Sad∣ness. And yet it seems that Scorn makes us wrin∣kle up the Nose and stretch the Nostrils also, at the same time, drawing up the upper Lip to the place which is near the corners of the Mouth. The
Ancients made the Nose the seat of Derision; eum subdolae irrsioni dicaverunt, says Pliny; that is, they dedicated the Nose to a cunning sort of Mockery. We read in the 3d. Satyre of Persius, Disce, sed ira cadat Naso, rugosaque sanna; Learn; but let your Anger fall from your Nose and the sneering Wrinkles be dismounted. And Philostratus in the Picture of Pan whom the Nymphs had bound, and scornfully insulted over, says of that God; "that before this, he was accustom'd to sleep with a peaceable Nose, softning in his slumbers the Wrinkles of it, and the Anger which commonly mounted to that part; but now his Nostrils were widen'd to the last degree of Fury." For my own part, I should rather believe that the Nose was the seat of Wrath in Beasts than in Mankind, and that it was unbecoming of any God but onely Pan, who had very much of the Beast in him, to wrinkle up his Nose in Anger, like other Ani∣mals. The moving of the Lips ought to be but moderate, if it be in Conversation, because we speak much more by the Tongue than by the Lips: And if you make the Mouth very open, 'tis one∣ly when you are to express the violence of Passion, and more properly of Anger. For what concerns the Hands, they are the Ser∣vants of the Head, they are his Weapons and his
Auxiliaries; without them the action is weak, languishing, and half dead, their Motions which are almost infinite, make innumerable expressi∣ons: Is it not by them, that we desire, that we hope, that we promise, that we call towards us, and that we reject? besides, they are the instruments of our Threats, of our Petitions, of the Horror which we show for things, and of the Praises which we give them: By them we fear, we ask Questions, we approve, and we refuse, we show our Ioy and our Sadness, our Doubts, and our Lamentations, our Concernments of Pity, and our Admirations. In short, it may be said, that they are the Language of the Dumb, that they contri∣bute not a little to the speaking of the universal Tongue, common to all the World, which is that of Painting. Now to tell you how these parts are to be dis∣pos'd, so as to express the different Passions, is im∣possible; no precise Rules can be given of it, both because the task it self is infinite, and also be∣cause every one is left to the Conduct of his own Genius, and to the Fruit of his former Studies; onely remember to be carefull, that all the acti∣ons of your Figures must be natural. "It seems to me, says Quinctilian, speaking of the Passions, That this part which is so noble and so great, is
not altogether unaccessible, and that an easie way may be found to it; 'tis to consider nature and to copy her, for the Spectators are satisfied, when in artificial things they can discern that nature which they are accustom'd to behold." This passage of Quinctilian is perfectly explain'd by the words of an excellent Master which our Author proposes to us for a rule: they are these which follow. That the studied Motions of the Soul, are never so natural as those which we see in the transport of a true passion. These Motions will better be express'd, and be much more natural, if we enter into the same thoughts, become of the same piece, and imagine our selves to be in the same circumstances with those whom we would represent. "For Nature, says Horace in his Art of Poetry, disposes the in∣side of Mankind to all sorts of Fortunes, sometimes she makes us contented, sometimes she drives us in∣to Choler, and sometimes she so oppresses us with Grief, that she seems to tread us down and plunge us into mortal Anxieties; and on all these occasions, she drives outwards the Motions of the Heart by the Tongue which is her Interpreter." Now in∣stead of the Tongue, let the Painter say by the Acti∣ons, which are her Interpreters. "What means have we, (says Quinctilian,) to give a Colour to a thing if we have not the same Colour; 'tis ne∣cessary
that we our selves should first be touch'd with a Passion before we endeavour to move others with it. And how, continues he, can we be touchd, since the Passions are not in our power? This is the way in my opinion; We must form to our selves the Visions and Images of absent things, as if they were in reality before our Eyes; and he who conceives these Images with the greatest strength of Imagination, shall possess that part of the Passions with the most advantage and the greatest ease." But we must take care, as I have already said, that in these visions, the Motions may be natural, for there are some who imagine they have given abun∣dance of Light to their Figures, when they have made them do violent and extravagant Actions, which we may more reasonably call the Convulsi∣ons or Contorsions of the Body, than the Passions of the Mind; and by this means often put themselves to much pains, to find a strong Passion, where no Passion is requir'd. Add to all that I have said concerning the Passions, that we are to have a very serious regard to the quality of the Persons who are to be express'd in Passions. The Ioy of a King ought not to resemble that of a Serving-man. And the Fierceness of a private Soldier must not be like that of an Officer. In these differences con∣sists all the Fineness and Delicacy of the Passions.
Paulo Lomazzo has written at large on every Passion in particular, in his second Book, but be∣ware you dwell not too long upon it, and endea∣vour not to force your Genius. Some Reliques of it took Sanctuary under ground,¶247. &c. All the ancient Painting that was in Italy perish'd in the Invasion of the Hunns and Goths, excepting those works which were hidden under ground or there painted, which by reason they had not been much expos'd to view, were pre∣serv'd from the insolence of those Barbarians. The Cromatique part or Colouring,¶256. &c. The third and last part of Painting, is call'd the Cro∣matique or Colouring. Its object is Colour, for which reason, Lights and Shadows are therein al∣so comprehended, which are nothing else but white and brown (or dark,) and by consequence have their place among the Colours. Philostratus says in his life of Apollonius, "That it may be truly call'd Painting which is made only with two Colours, provided the Lights and Shadows be observ'd in it: for there we behold the true resemblance of things with their Beauties; we also see the Passions, though without other Colours: so much of life may be also express'd in it, that we may perceive even the very Bloud: the Colour of the Hair and of the Beard, are likewise to be discern'd, and we can distinguish
without confusion, the fair from the black, and the young from the old, the differences betwixt the white and the flaxen hair; we distinguish with ease betwixt the Moors and the Indians; not onely by the Ca∣mus Noses of the Blacks, their woolly Hair and their high Iaws, but also by that black Colour which is natural to them." We may add to what Phi∣lostratus has said, that with two onely Colours, the Light and the Dark, there is no sort of Stuff or Habit but may be imitated; we say then, that the colouring makes its observations on the Masses or Bodies of the Colours, accompany'd with Lights and Shadows more or less evident by degrees of diminution, according to the Acci∣dents. First of a luminous Body; as for exam∣ple, the Sun or a Torch. Secondly, of a diapha∣nous or transparent Body, which is betwixt us and the object, as the Air either pure or thick, or a red Glass, &c. Thirdly, of a solid Body illu∣minated, as a Statue of white Marble, a green Tree, a black Horse, &c. Fourthly, from his part, who regards the Body illuminated, as be∣holding it either near or at a distance, directly in a right Angle, or aside in an obtuse Angle, from the top to the bottom, or from the bottom to the top. This part in the knowledge which it has of the vertue of Colours, and the Friendship
which they have with each other, and also their Antipathies, it comprehends the Strength, the Re∣lievo, the Briskness, and the Delicacy which are ob∣serv'd in good Pictures, the management of Colours, and the labour depend also on this last part. Her Sister,¶263. &c. That is to say, the Design or Drawing, which is the second part of Painting; which consisting onely of Lines, stands altoge∣ther in need of the Colouring to appear. 'Tis for this reason, that our Author calls this part her Si∣sters Procurer, that is, the Colouring shows us the Design, and makes us fall in love with it. The Light produces all kinds of Colours,¶267. &c. Here are three Theorems successively following, which our Author proposes to us, that from thence we may draw some conclusions. You may like∣wise find others, which are in the nature of so ma∣ny Propositions to which we ought to agree, that from thence we may draw the Precepts contain'd in the following part of this Treatise; they are all founded on the Sense of Seeing. Which ought to be the most,¶280. &c. See the Remark of number 152. That you may make the Bodies appear enlightned by the shadows which bound your Sight,¶283. &c. That is properly to say, that after the great Lights, there must be great Shadows, which we call reposes:
because in reality the Sight would be tired, if it were attracted by a Continuity of glittering ob∣jects. The Lights may serve for a repose to the Darks, and the Darks to the Lights. I have said in another place, that a Grouppe of Figures ought to be consider'd, as a Choir of Musick, in which the Bases support the Trebles, and make them to be heard with greater pleasure. These reposes are made two several ways, one of which is Natural, the other Artificial. The Natural is made by an extent of Lights or of Shadows; which naturally and necessarily follow solid Bodies, or the Masses of solid Bodies aggroupp'd when the Light strikes upon them. And the Artificial consists in the Bo∣dies of Colours, which the Painter gives to cer∣tain things, such as pleases him; and composes them in such a manner, that they do no injury to the objects which are near them. A Drapery, for example, which is made yellow or red on some certain place, in another place may be brown, and will be more suitable to it, to pro∣duce the effect requir'd. We are to take occa∣sion as much as possibly we can, to make use of the first manner, and to find the repose of which we speak, by the Light and by the Shadow, which naturally accompany solid Bodies. But since the Subjects on which we work are not al∣ways
favourable to dispose the Bodies as we de∣sire, a Painter in such a case may take his advan∣tage by the Bodies of Colours, and put into such places as ought to be darken'd, Draperies or o∣ther things which we may suppose to be natural∣ly brown and sully'd, which will produce the same effect and give him the same reposes as the Shadows would which could not be caus'd by the disposition of the objects. Thus, an understanding Painter will make his advantages both of the one manner and the other. And if he makes a design to be grav'd, he is to remember that the Gravers dispose not their Co∣lours as the Painters do; and that by consequence he must take occasion to find the reason of his Design, in the natural Shadows of the Figures, which he has dispos'd to cause the effect. Ru∣bens has given us a full information of this in those prints of his which he caus'd to be engrav'd; and I believe that nothing was ever seen more beau∣tifull in that kind: the whole knowledge of Grouppes, of the Lights and Shadows, and of those Masses which Tiian calls a Bunch of Grapes, is there expos'd so clearly to the Sight, that the view of those Prints and the carefull observation of them, might very much contribute to the forming of an able Painter. The best and fairest
of them are graven by Vorsterman, Pontius, and Bolsvert, all of them admirable Gravers, whose works Rubens himself took care to oversee, and which without doubt you will find to be excel∣lent if you examine them. But expect not there the Elegance of Design, nor the Correctness of the Out-lines. 'Tis not but the Gravers can, and ought to imitate the Bodies of the Colours by the degrees of the Lights and Shadows, as much as they shall judge that this imitation may produce a good ef∣fect: on the contrary, 'tis impossible in my opi∣nion to give much strength to what they grave, after the works of the School, and of all those who have had the knowledge of Colours and of the Contrast of the Lights and Shadows, without imitating in some sort the Colour of the Objects, according to the relation which they have to the degrees of white and black. We see certain Prints of good Gravers different in their kinds, where these things are observ'd, and which have a won∣derfull strength. And there appears in publick of late years, a Gallery of Arch-duke Leopold, which though very ill graven, yet shows some part of the Beauty of its Originals, because the Gravers who have executed it, though otherwise they were sufficiently ignorant, have observ'd in
almost the greatest parts of their Prints, the Bo∣dies of Colours in the relation which they have to the degrees of the Lights and Shadows. I could wish the Gravers would make some reflecti∣on upon this whole Remark, 'tis of wondefull consequence to them; for when they have at∣tain'd to the knowledge of these reposes, they will easily resolve those difficulties which many times perplex them: And then chiefly when they are to engrave after a Picture, where neither the Lights and Shadows, nor the Bodies of the Colours are skilfully observ'd, though in its o∣ther parts the Picture may be well perform'd. In the same manner as we behold it in a Convex Mirror,¶286. &c. A Convex Mirror alters the objects which are in the middle, so that it seems to make them come out from the Superficies. The Pain∣ter must do in the same manner in respect of the Lights and Shadows of his Figures, to give them more Relievo and more Strength. And let those which turn be of broken Colours,¶290. as being less distinguish'd and nearer to the borders, &c. 'Tis the duty of a Painter, even in this also, to imitate the Convex Mirror, and to place nothing which glares either in Colour or in Light at the borders of his Picture; for which, there are two reasons, the first is, that the Eye at the first view
directs it self to the midst of the object, which is presented to it, and by consequence, must there necessarily find the principal object, in order to its satisfaction. And the other reason is, that the sides or borders being overcharg'd with a strong and glittering work attract the Eyes thither, which are in a kind of Pain, not to behold a continuity of that work, which is on the sudden interrupted, by the borders of the Picture; instead of which the borders being lighten'd and eas'd of so much work, the Eye continues fixt on the Center of the Picture, and beholds it with greater pleasure. 'Tis for the same reason, that in a great composition of Figures, those which coming most forward, are cut off by the bottom of the Picture, will al∣ways make an ill effect. A bunch of Grapes,¶329. &c. 'Tis sufficiently ma∣nifest, that Titian by this judicious and familiar comparison, means that a Painter ought to col∣lect the objects, and to dispose them in such a manner, as to compose one whole; the several contiguous parts of which, may be enlighten'd; many shadow'd and others of broken Colours to be in the turnings, as on a Bunch of Grapes, ma∣ny Grapes, which are the parts of it, are in the Light, many in the Shadow, and the rest faintly colour'd to make them go farther back. Titian
once told Tintoret, That in his greatest works, a Bunch of Grapes had been his principal rule and his su∣rest guide. Pure or unmix'd white,¶330. either draws an object nearer or carries it off to farther distance. It draws it nearer with black, and throws it backward without it, &c. All agree that white can subsist on the fore-ground of the Picture, and there be us'd without mixture; the question therefore is to know, if it can equally subsist and be plac'd in the same manner, upon that which is backward, the Light being universal and the Figures suppos'd in a Campaign and open Field. Our Author concludes affirmatively, and the reason on which he establishes his rule is this, That there being nothing which partakes more of the Light than Whiteness, and the Light being capa∣ble of subsisting well in remoteness (or at a long distance, as we daily see in the rising and setting of the Sun) it follows that white may subsist in the same manner. In Painting, the Light and a white Colour are but one and the same thing. Add to this, that we have no Colour, which more resembles the Air than white, and by con∣sequence no Colour which is lighter, from whence it comes that we commonly say, the Air is hea∣vy, when we see the Heavens cover'd with black
Clouds, or when a thick fog takes from us that clearness, which makes the Lightness or Serenity of the Air. Titian, Tintoret, Paul Veronese, and all those who best understood Lights, have ob∣serv'd it in this manner, and no man can go a∣gainst this Precept, at least without renouncing any skill in Landtschape, which is an undoubted confirmation of this truth. And we see that all the great Masters of Landtschape, have follow'd Titian in this, who has always employ'd brown and earthly Colours upon the fore-part, and has reserv'd his greatest Lights for remotenesses and the back parts of his Landtschapes. It may be objected against this opinion, that white cannot maintain it self in remotenesses, be∣cause it is ordinarily us'd to bring the Objects nearer, on the advanc'd part. 'Tis true, that so it is us'd, and that to very good purpose, to ren∣der the Objects more sensible, by the opposition of the Dark, which must accompany it; and which retains it, as it were by force, whether the Dark serves it for a ground, or whether it be combin'd to it. For example, If you wou'd make a white Horse on the fore-ground of your Picture, 'tis of absolute Necessity, that the ground must be of a mixt brown, and large enough, or that the Furniture must be of very sensible Colours; or
lastly, that some Figure must be set upon it, whose Shadows and the Colour may bring it for∣ward. But it seems (say you) that blue is the most flying or transient Colour, because the Heavens and Mountains, which are at the greatest distance, are of that Colour. 'Tis very true that blue is one of the lightest and sweetest Colours: But it is al∣so true, that it possesses these qualities so much the more, because the white is mingled in it, as the example of the distances demonstrate to us. But if the Light of your Picture be not universal, and that you suppose your Figures in a Chamber, then recall to your Memory that Theorem which tells you that the nearer a Body is to the Light, and the more directly 'tis oppos'd to us, so much the more it is enlighten'd, because the Light grows languishing, the farther it removes from its original. You may also extinguish your white, if you suppose the Air to be somewhat thicker, and if you foresee that this supposition will make a good effect in the Oeconomy of the whole work; but let not this proceed so far, as to make your Fi∣gures so brown, that they may seem as it were in a filthy Fog, or that they may appear to be part of the ground. See the following Remark.
But as for pure black,¶332. there is nothing that brings the Object nearer to the Sight, &c. Because black is the heaviest of all Colours, the most earthly, and the most sensible. This is clearly understood by the qualities of white which is oppos'd to it, and which is, as we have said, the lightest of all Colours. There are few who are not of this opi∣nion; and yet I have known some, who have told me, that the black being on the advanc'd part, makes nothing but holes. To this there is little else to be answer'd, but that black always makes a good effect, being set forward, provi∣ded it be plac'd there with Prudence. You are therefore so to dispose the Bodies of your Pictures which you intend to be on the fore-ground, that those sorts of holes may not be perceiv'd, and that the blacks may be there by Masses, and in∣sensibly confus'd. See the 47th. Rule. That which gives the Relievo to a Bowl, (may some say to me) is the quick Light, or the white, which appears to be on the side, which is near∣est to us, and the black by consequence distances the Object: we are here to beware, not to con∣found the turnings with the distances: the questi∣on is onely in respect of Bodies, which are sepa∣rated by some distance of a backward Position, and not of round Bodies, which are of the same
Continuity: the brown which is mingled in the turnings of the Bowl, makes them go off, rather in confounding them, as we may say, than in blackning them. And do you not see, that the reflects are an Artifice of the Painter, to make the turnings seem more Light, and that by this means the greatest blackness remains towards the middle of the Bowl, to sustain the white, and make it deceive us with more pleasure. This Rule of White and Black is of so great con∣sequence, that unless it be exactly practis'd, 'tis impossible for a Picture to make any great effect, that the Masses can be disentangl'd, and the dif∣ferent distances may be observ'd at the first Glance of the Eye without trouble. It may be inferr'd from this Precept, that the Masses of other Colours, will be so much the more sensible, and approach so much the nearer to the Sight the more brown they bear; provi∣ded this be amongst other Colours which are of the same Species. For example, A yellow brown shall draw nearer to the Sight, than another which is less yellow. I said provided it be a∣mongst other Colours, which are of the same Species, because there are simple Colours, which naturally are strong and sensible, though they are clear, as Vermillion; there are others also,
which notwithstanding that they are brown, yet cease not to be soft and faint, as the blue of Ul∣tramaine. The effect of a Picture comes not one∣ly therefore from the Lights and Shadows, but also from the nature of the Colours. I thought it was not from the purpose in this place to give you the qualities of those Colours which are most in use, and which are call'd Capital, because they serve to make the composition of all the rest, whose number is almost infinite. Red Oker is one of the most heavy Colours. Yellow Oker is not so heavy, because 'tis clearer. And the Masticot is very Light, because it is a very clear yellow, and very near to white. Ultramarine or Azure, is very light and a very sweet Colour. Vermillion is wholly opposite to Ultramarine. Lake is a middle Colour betwixt Ultramarine and Vermillion, yet it is rather more sweet than harsh. Brown Red is one of the most earthy and most sensible Colours. Pinck is in its nature an indifferent Colour, (that is) very susceptible of the other Colours by the mixture: if you mix brown-red with it, you will make it a very earthy Colour; but on the contrary, if you joyn it with white or blue, you
shall have one of the most faint and tender Co∣lours. Terre Verte (or green Earth) is light; 'tis a mean betwixt yellow Oker and Ultramarine. Umbre is very sensible and earthy; there is no∣thing but pure black which can dispute with it. Of all Blacks, that is the most earthly, which is most remote from Blue. According to the Principle which we have establish'd of white and black, you will make every one of these Colours before-nam'd more earthy and more heavy, the more black you mingle with them, and they will be light the more white you joyn with them. For what concerns broken or compound Colours, we are to make a judgment of their strength by the Force of those Colours which compose them. All who have thoroughly understood the agreement of Colours, have not employ'd them wholly pure and simple in their Draperies, unless in some Fi∣gure upon the fore-ground of the Picture; but they have us'd broken and compound Colours, of which they made a Harmony for the Eyes, by mixing those which have some kind of Sympathy with each other, to make a Whole, which has an Union with the Colours which are neighbouring to it. The Painter who perfectly understands the force and power of his Colours, will use them most suitably
to his present purpose, and according to his own Discretion. But let this be done relatively,¶355. &c. One Body must make another Body fly off in such a man∣ner that it self may be chas'd by those Bodies which are advanc'd before it. "We are to take care and use great attention, says Quinctilian, not onely of one separate thing, but of many which fol∣low each other: and by a certain relation which they have with each other, are as it were continued in the same manner, as if in a straight Street, we cast our Eyes from one end of it to the other, we discover at once those different things which are presented to the Sight, so that we not onely see the last, but whatsoever is relating to the last." Let two contrary extremities never touch each o∣ther,¶361. &c. The Sense of seeing has this in com∣mon with all the rest of the Senses, that it ab∣horrs the contrary Extremities. And in the same manner as our hands, when they are very cold feel a grievous pain, when on the sudden we hold them near the Fire, so the Eyes which find an extreme white, next to an extreme black, or a fair cool Azure next to a hot Vermillion, cannot behold these extremities without Pain, though they are always attracted by the Glareing of two contraries.
This rule obliges us to know those Colours which have a Friendship with each other, and those which are incompatible, which we may easily discover in mixing together those Colours of which we would make trial. And if by this mixture, they make a gracious and sweet Colour, which is pleasing to the Sight, 'tis a Sign that there is an Union and a Sympathy betwixt them: but if, on the contrary, that Colour which is produc'd by the mixture of the two be harsh to the Sight, we are to conclude, that there is a Contrariety and Antipathy betwixt these two Colours. Green, for example, is a pleasing Colour, which may come from a blue and a yellow mix'd to∣gether, and by consequence blue and yellow are two Colours which sympathize: and on the contrary, the mixture of Blue with Vermillion, produces a sharp, harsh, and unpleasant Colour; con∣clude then that Blue and Vermillion are of a con∣trary Nature. And the same may be said of o∣ther Colours of which you make the experiment. And to clear that matter once for all, (see the Conclusion of the 332d. Remark, where I have taken occasion to speak of the force and quality of every Capital Colour,) yet you may neglect this Precept, when your Piece consists but of one or two Figures, and when amongst a great number
you would make some one Figure more remark∣able than the rest. One I say, which is one of the most considerable of the Subject, which otherwise you cannot distinguish from the rest. Titian in his triumph of Bacchus, having plac'd Ariadne on one of the Borders of the Picture, and not being able for that reason to make her remarkable by the brightness of Light, which he was to keep in the middle of his Picture, gave her a Scarf of a Vermillion Colour, upon a blue Drapery, as well to loosen her from his ground, which was a blue Sea, as because she is one of the principal Figures of his Subject, upon which he desir'd to attract the Eye. Paulo Veronese, in his Marriage of Canaa, because Christ who is the principal Figure of the Subject, is carry'd somewhat into the depth of the Picture, and that he cou'd not make him distinguishable by the strength of the Lights and Shadows, has cloath'd him with Vermillion and Blue, thereby to conduct the Sight to that Fi∣gure. The hostile Colours may be so much the more ally'd to each other, the more you mix them with other Colours, which mutually sympathize; and which agree with those Colours, which you desire to reconcile.
'Tis labour in vain to paint a High-noon,¶365. &c. He said in another place, Endeavour after that which aids your Art, and is suitable to it, and shun whatsoever is repugnant: 'tis the 59th. Pre∣cept. If the Painter wou'd arrive to the end he has propos'd, which is to deceive the ight, he must make choice of such a Nature, as agrees with the weakness of his Colours; because his Colours cannot accommodate themselves to every sort of Nature. This Rule is particularly to be observ'd, and well consider'd, by those who paint Landt∣schapes. Let the Field or Ground of the Picture,¶378. &c. The reason of it is, that we are to avoid the meeting of those Colours, which have an Antipathy to each other, because they offend the Sight, so that this Rule is prov'd sufficiently by the 41st. which tells us, that two contrary Extremities are never to touch each other, whether it be in Colour, or in Light, but that there ought to be a mean be∣twixt them, which partakes of both. Let your Colours be lively,¶382. and yet not look (accor∣ding to the Painters Proverb) as if they had been sprinkled with Meal, &c. Donner dans la farine, is a Phrase amongst Painters, which perfectly ex∣presses what it means, which is to paint with clear, or bright Colours, and dull Colours to∣gether;
for being so mingled, they give no more life to the Figures, than if they had been rubb'd with Meal. They who make their flesh Colours very white, and their Shadows grey or inclining to green, fall into this inconvenience. Red Co∣lours in the Shadows of the most delicate or finest Flesh, contribute wonderfully to make them live∣ly, shining and natural; but they are to be us'd with the same discretion, that Titian, Paul Vero∣nese, Rubens and Van Dyck, have taught us by their example. To preserve the Colours fresh, we must paint by putting in more Colours, and not by rubbing them in, after they are once laid; and if it could be done, they should be laid just in their proper places, and not be any more touch'd, when they are once so plac'd; it would be yet better, be∣cause the Freshness of the Colours is tarnish'd and lost, by vexing them with the continual Drudge∣ry of Daubing. All they who have colour'd well, have had yet another Maxim to maintain their Colours fresh and flourishing, which was to make use of white Grounds, upon which they painted, and of∣tentimes at the first Stroke, without retouching any thing, and without employing new Colours.
Rubens always us'd this way; and I have seen Pictures from the hand of that great Person paint∣ed up at once, which were of a wonderfull Viva∣city. The reason why they made use of those kind of Grounds, is, because white as well preserves a Brightness, under the Transparency of Colours, which hinders the Air from altering the white∣ness of the Ground, as that it likewise repairs the injuries which they receive from the Air, so that the Ground and the Colours assist and pre∣serve each other. 'Tis for this reason that glaz'd Colours have a Vivacity which can never be imi∣tated by the most lively and most brillant Co∣lours, because according to the common way, the different Teints are simply laid on each in its place one after another. So true it is, that white with other strong Colours, with which we paint at once that which we intend to glaze, are as it were, the Life, the Spirit, and the Lustre of it. The Ancients most certainly have found, that white Grounds were much the best, because, not∣withstanding that inconvenience, which their Eyes receiv'd from that Colour, yet they did not forbear the use of it; as Galen testifies in his tenth Book of the use of the parts. "Painters, says he, when they work upon their white Grounds, place be∣fore
them dark Colours, and others mixt with blue and green, to recreate their Eyes, because white is a glareing Colour, which wearies and pains the Sight more than any other." I know not the reason why the use of it is left off at present, if it be not that in our days there are few Painters who are curious in their Colouring, or that the first Strokes which are begun upon white, are not seen soon enough, and that a more than French Patience is requir'd to wait till it be accomplish'd; and the Ground, which by its whiteness tarnishes the Lu∣stre of the other Colours, must be entirely cover'd to make the whole work appear pleasingly. Let the parts which are nearest to us and most rais'd,¶383. &c. The reason of this is, that upon a flat su∣perficies, and as much united as a Cloth can be, when it is strain'd, the least Body is very appear∣ing, and gives a heightning to the place which it possesses; do not therefore load those places with Colours, which you would make to turn; but let those be well loaded, which you would have come out of the Canvass. Let there be so much Harmony or Consent in the Masses of the Pictures,¶385. that all the shadowings may appear as if they were but one, &c. He has said in another place, that after great Lights, great Sha∣dows are necessary, which he calls Reposes. What
he means by the present Rule, is this, That whatso∣ever is found in those great Shadows, should par∣take of the Colours of one another, so that the different Colours which are well distinguish'd in the Lights seem to be but one in the Shadows, by their great Union. Let the whole Picture be made of one Piece,¶386. &c. That is to say, of one and the same Continuity of Work, and as if the Picture had been painted up all at once; the Latin says all of one Pallet. The Looking Glass will instruct you,¶387. &c. The Painter must have a principal Respect to the Mas∣ses, and to the Effect of the whole together. The Looking-Glass distances the Objects, and by conse∣quence gives us onely to see the Masses, in which all the little parts are confounded. The Evening, when the Night approaches, will make you bet∣ter understand this observation, but not so commodiously, for the proper time to make it, lasts but a quarter of an hour, and the Looking-Glass may be usefull all the day. Since the Mirror is the rule and Master of all Painters, as showing them their faults by distan∣cing the Objects, we may conclude that the Pi∣cture which makes not a good effect at a distance cannot be well done; and a Painter must never finish his Picture, before he has examin'd it at
some reasonable distance, or with a Looking-Glass, whether the Masses of the Lights and Shadows, and the Bodies of the Colours be well distribu∣ted. Giorgione and Correggio have made use of this method. As for a Portrait,¶393. or Pictures by the Life, &c. The end of Portraits is not so precisely as some have imagin'd, to give a smiling and pleasing Air together with the resemblance; this is indeed somewhat, but not enough. It consists in expres∣sing the true temper of those persons which it re∣presents, and to make known their Physiognomy. If the Person whom you draw, for example, be na∣turally sad, you are to beware of giving him any Gayety, which would always be a thing which is foreign to his Countenanc. If he or she be merry, you are to make that good Humour appear by the expressing of those parts where it acts, and where it shows it self. If the Person be grave and majestical, the Smiles or Laughing, which is too sensible, will take off from that Majesty and make it look childish and undecent. In short, the Painter, who has a good Genius must make a true Discernment of all these things, and if he un∣derstands Physiognomy, it will be more easie to him, and he will succeed better than another. Pliny tells us, "That Apelles made his Pictures so
very like, that a certain Physiognomist and Fortune∣teller, (as it is related by Appion the Gramma∣rian) foretold by looking on them the very time of their Deaths, whom those Pictures represented, or at what time their Death happen'd, if such persons were already dead." You are to paint the most tenderly that possibly you can,¶403. &c. Not so as to make your Colours die by force of tormenting them, but that you should mix them as hastily as you can, and not retouch the same place, if conveniently you can avoid it. Large Lights,¶403. &c. 'Tis in vain to take pains if you cannot preserve large Lights, because without them, your work will never make a good effect at a distance; and also because lit∣tle Lights are confus'd and effac'd, proportiona∣bly, as you are at a distance from the Picture. This was the perpetual Maxim of Correggio. Ought to have somewhat of Greatness in them,¶417. and their Out-lines to be noble, &c. As the Pieces of Antiquity will evidently show us. ¶422. There is nothing more pernicious to a Youth, &c. 'Tis common to place our selves under the Dis∣cipline of a Master of whom we have a good opi∣nion, and whose manner we are apt to embrace with ease, which takes root more deeply in us,
and augments the more we see him work, and the more we copy after him. This happens of∣tentimes to that degree, and makes so great an Impression in the Mind of the Scholar, that he can∣not give his approbation to any other manner whatsoever, and believes there is no man under the Cope of Heaven, who is so knowing as his Master. But what is most remarakble in this point is, that nature appears to us always like that manner which we love, and in which we have been taught, which is just like a Glass through which we behold Objects, and which communicates its Colour to them without our perceiving it. After I have said this, you may see of what consequence is the choice of a good Master, and of following in our beginning the manner of those who have come nearest to Nature. And how much injury do you think have the ill manners which have been in France, done to the Painters of that Nation, and what hindrance have they been to the knowledge of what is well done, or of arriving to what is so when once we know it. The Italians say to those whom they see infected with an ill manner, which they are not able to forsake, "If you knew just nothing, you would soon learn something."
Search whatsoever is aiding to your Art and conve∣nient,¶433. and avoid those things which are repugnant to it, &c. This is an admirable Rule; a Painter ought to have it perpetually present in his Mind and Memory. It resolves those difficulties which the Rules beget; it loosens his hands, and assists his understanding. In short, this is the Rule which sets the Painter at liberty, because it teaches him that he ought not to subject himself servilely, and be bound like an Apprentice to the Rules of his Art; but that the Rules of his Art ought to be Subject to him, and not hinder him from follow∣ing the Dictates of his Genius, which is superior to them. Bodies of diverse Natures which are aggroupp'd or combin'd together are agreeable and pleasant to the Sight,¶434. &c. As Flowers, Fruits, Animals, Skins, Sattins, Velvets, beautifull Flesh, Works of Silver, Armors, Instruments of Musick, Ornaments of Anci∣ent Sacrifices, and many other pleasing Diversi∣ties which may present themselves to the Painters imagination. 'Tis most certain that the diversi∣ty of Objects recreates the Sight, when they are without confusion; and when they diminish no∣thing of the Subject on which we work. Expe∣rience teaches us, that the Eye grows weary with poring perpetually on the same thing, not one∣ly
on Pictures, but even on Nature it self. For who is he who would not be tir'd in the Walks of a long Forest, or with beholding a large plain which is naked of Trees, or in the Sight of a Ridge of Mountains, which instead of Pleasure, give us onely the view of Heights and Bottoms. Thus to content and fill the Eye of the Understanding, the best Authors have had the Address to sprin∣kle their Works with pleasing Digressions, with which they recreate the Minds of Readers. Dis∣cretion, in this as in all other things is the surest Guide: and as tedious Digressions, which wander from their Subject, are impertinent, so the Pain∣ter who under Pretence of diverting the Eyes, would fill his Picture with such varieties as alter the truth of the History, would make a ridiculous Piece of Painting, and a mere Gallimaufry of his Work. As also those things which appear to be perform'd with ease,¶435. &c. This ease attracts our Eyes, and Spirits so much the more, because it is to be pre∣sum'd that a noble work, which appears so easie to us, is the product of a skilfull Hand which is Master of its Art. It was in this part, that A∣pelles found himself superior to Protogenes, when he blam'd him, for not knowing when to lay down his Pencil (and as I may almost say) to make
an end of finishing his Piece. And it was on this account he plainly said, "That nothing was more prejudicial to Painters than too much exact∣ness; and that the greatest part of them knew not when they had done enough:" as we have likewise a Proverb, which says, An Englishman never knows when he is well. 'Tis true, that the word enough is very difficult to understand. What you have to do, is to consider your Subject thoroughly, and in what manner you intend to treat it accor∣ding to your rules, and the Force of your Genius; after this you are to work with all the ease and all the speed you can, without breaking your head so very much, and being so very industri∣ous in starting Scruples to your self, and creating difficulties in your work. But 'tis impossible to have this Facility without possessing perfectly all the Precepts of the Art, and to have made it ha∣bitual to you. For ease consists in making pre∣cisely that work which you ought to make, and to set every thing in its proper place with speed and Readiness, which cannot be done without the Rules, for they are the assur'd means of con∣ducting you to the end that you design with Plea∣sure. 'Tis then most certain, (though against the opinion of many,) that the Rules give Facility, Quiet of Mind, and readiness of Hand to the flow∣est
Genius, and that the same Rules increase, and guide that ease in those who have already receiv'd it at their Birth from the happy influence of their Stars. From whence it follows that we may consider Facility two several ways, either simply, as Dili∣gence and a readiness of Mind and of the Hand; or as a Disposition in the Mind, to remove readily all those difficulties which can arise in the work. The first proceeds from an active temper full of Fire; and the second from a true knowledge and full possession of infallible Rules; the first is plea∣sing, but it is not always without Anxiety, be∣cause it often leads us astray, and on the contra∣ry, the last makes us act with a Repose of Mind, and wonderfull Tranquillity; because it ascer∣tains us of the goodness of our work. 'Tis a great advantage to possess the first, but 'tis the height of perfection to have both in that man∣ner which Rubens and Van Dyck possessed them, excepting the part of Design or Drawing, which both too much neglected. Those who say that the Rules are so far from giving us this Facility, that on the contrary they puzzle and perplex the Mind and tie the hand, are generally such people who have pass'd half their lives in an ill practice of Painting, the ha∣bit
of which is grown so inveterate in them, that to change it by the Rules, is to take as it were their Pencils out of their hands, and to put them out of condition of doing any thing; in the same manner as we make a Country-man dumb whom we will not allow to speak, but by the Rules of Grammar. Observe, if you please, that the Facility and Diligence of which I spoke, consists not in that which we call bold strokes and a free handling of the Pencil, if it makes not a great effect at a di∣stance. That sort of Freedom belongs rather to a Writing-Master than a Painter. I say yet fur∣ther, that 'tis almost impossible that things which are painted should appear true and natural, where we observe these sorts of bold strokes. And all those who have come nearest to nature, have ne∣ver us'd that manner of Painting, those tender Hairs, and those hatching strokes of the Pencil, which make a kind of minced meat in Painting, are very fine I must confess, but they are never able to deceive the Sight. Nor till you have present in your Mind a perfect Idea of your work,¶442. &c. If you will have pleasure in Painting, you ought to have so well consi∣der'd the oeconomy of your work, that it may be entirely made and dispos'd in your head before
it be begun upon the Cloath. You must I say, foresee the effect of the Grouppes, the ground and the Lights and Shadows of every thing, the Harmony of the Colours, and the intelligence of all the Subject, in such a manner, that whatsoe∣ver you shall put upon the Cloth, may be onely a Copy of what is in your Mind. If you make use of this Conduct, you will not be put to the trouble of so often changing and rechanging. Let the Eye be satisfied in the first place,¶443. even a∣gainst and above all other Reasons, &c. This pas∣sage has a respect to some particular Licences which a Painter ought to take: And as I despair not to treat this matter more at large; I adjourn the Reader to the first opportunity which I can get for his farther satisfaction on this point to the best of my Ability: but in general he may hold for certain, that those Licences are good which contribute to deceive the Sight, without corrup∣ting the truth of the Subject on which the Painter is to work. Profit your self by the Counsels of the knowing,¶445. &c. Parrhasius and Cliton thought themselves much ob∣lig'd to Socrates for the knowledge which he gave them of the Passions. See their Dialogue in Xeno∣phon towards the end of the third Book of Memoirs:8. 20. "They who the most willingly bear reproof, says Pliny
the Younger, are the very men in whom we find more to commend than in other people." Lysippus was extremely pleas'd when Apelles told him his opinion; and Apelles as much, when Lysippus told him his.5. 8. That which Praxiteles said of Nicias in Pliny, shows the Soul of an accomplish'd and an humble man. "Praxiteles being ask'd which of all his Works he valued most? Those, says he, which Nicias has retouch'd." So much account he made of his Criticisms and his opinions. You know the common practice of Apelles, when he had finish'd any work, he expos'd it to the Sight of all Passengers, and conceal'd himself to hear the Censure of his faults, with the Prospect of ma∣king his advantage of the Informations which un∣knowingly they gave him. Being sensible that the people would examine his works more rigo∣rously than himself, and would not forgive the least mistake. The Opinions and Counsels of many together are always preferable to the advice of one single person.Tuscul. lib. 5. And Cicero wonders that any are besot∣ted on their own Productions, and say to one a∣nother, Very good, if your works please you, mine are not unpleasing to me. In effect there are many who through Presumption or out of Shame to be reprehended, never let their works be seen. But
there is nothing can be of worse consequence; for the disease is nourish'd and increases,Georg. 3. 1. 5. says Virgil, while it is conceal'd. There are none but Fools, says Horace, who out of Shamefac'dness hide their Ul∣cers, which if shown might easily be heal'd. Stul∣torum incurata malus pudor ulcera celat:Ep. 16. There are others who have not altogether so much of this foolish Bashfulness, and who ask every ones opi∣nion with Prayers and Earnestness; but if you freely and ingenuously give them notice of their Faults, they never fail to make some pitifull ex∣cuse for them, or which is worse, they take in ill part the Service which you thought you did them, which they but seemingly desir'd of you, and out of an establish'd Custom amongst the greatest part of Painters. If you desire to get your self any honour, and acquire a Reputation by your works, there is no surer way than to show them to persons of good Sense, and chiefly to those who are Criticks in the Art; and to take their Counsel with the same Mildness and the same Sincerity, as you desir'd them to give it you. You must also be industrious to discover the opinion of your Enemies, which is commonly the truest, for you may be assur'd, that they will give you no quarter, and allow nothing to complaisance.
But if you have no knowing Friend,¶449. &c. Quincti∣lian gives the reason of this, when he says, "That the best means to correct our faults, is doubtless this, To remove our designs out of Sight, for some space of time, and not to look upon our Pi∣ctures, to the end, that after this interval, we may look on them as it were with other Eyes, and as a new work which was of another hand, and not our own." Our own Productions do but too much flatter us; they are always too pleasing, and 'tis impossible not to be fond of them at the moment of their Conception. They are Children of a tender age, which are not capable of drawing our Hatred on them. 'Tis said, That Apes, as soon as they have brought their Young into the World, keep their Eyes continually fasten'd on them, and are never weary of admiring their Beauty: so amorous is Nature of whatsoever she produces. To the end that he may cultivate those Talents which make his Genius,¶458. &c. Qui sua metitur pondera, ferre potest. "That we may undertake nothing beyond our forces,Offic. B. 1. we must endeavour to know them." "On this Pru∣dence our reputation depends. Cicero calls it a
good Grace, because it makes a man seen in his greatest Lustre.1 Off. "'Tis, (says he) a becoming Grace, which we shall easily make appear, if we are carefull to cultivate that which Nature has given us in propriety, and made our own, provided it be no Vice or Imperfection: we ought to undertake nothing which is repugnant to Nature in general; and when we have paid her this duty, we are bound so reli∣giously to follow our own Nature, that though many things which are more serious and more important, present themselves to us, yet we are always to con∣form our Studies and our Exercises to our natural Inclinations. It avails nothing to dispute against Nature, and think to obtain what she refuses; for then we eternally follow what we can never reach; for, as the Proverb says, There is nothing can please, no∣thing can be gracefull which we enterprize in spight of Minerva; that is to say, in spight of Nature. When we have consider'd all these things attentively, it will then be necessary, that every man should re∣gard that in particular, which Nature has made his portion, and that he should cultivate it with care; 'tis not his business to give himself the trouble of try∣ing whether it will become him to put on the Nature of another man; or as one would say, to act the per∣son of another: there is nothing which can more be∣come us, than what is properly the Gift of Nature.
Let every one therefore endeavour to understand his own Talent, and without flattering himself, let him make a true judgment of his own Vertues, and his own Defects and Vices; that he may not appear to have less judgment than the Comedians, who do not always chuse the best Plays, but those which are best for them; that is, those which are most in the compass of their acting. Thus we are to fix on those things for which we have the strongest Inclination. And if it sometimes happen that we are forc'd by necessity to apply our selves to such other things to which we are no ways inclin'd; we must bring it so about by our Care and Industry, that if we perform them not very well, at least we may not do them so very ill as to be sham'd by them: we are not so much to strain our selves to make those Vertues ap∣pear in us which really we have not, as to avoid those Imperfections which may dishonour us." These are the Thoughts and the Words of Cicero, which I have translated, retrenching onely such things as were of no concernment to my Subject: I was not of opinion to add any thing, and the Rea∣der I doubt not will find his satisfaction in them. While you meditate on these Truths,¶464. and observe them diligently, &c. There is a great Connexion betwixt this Precept and that other, which tells you, That you are to pass no day without drawing a line.
'Tis impossible to become an able Artist, without making your Art habitual to you: and 'tis im∣possible to gain an exact Habitude, without an infinite number of Acts, and without perpetual Practice. In all Arts the Rules of them are learn'd in little time; but the perfection is not acquir'd without a long Practice and a severe Diligence. We never saw that Laziness produc'd any thing which was excellent,Diss. 34. says Maximus Tyrius: and Quincti∣lian tells us, That the Arts draw their beginning from Nature; the want we often have of them causes us to search the means of becoming able in them, and exercise makes us entirely Masters of them. The morning is the best and most proper part of the day,¶466. &c. Because then the Imagination is not clouded with the Vapours of Meat, nor distracted by Visits which are not usually made in the morn∣ing. And the Mind by the Sleep of the forego∣ing Night, is refresh'd and recreated from the Toyls of former Studies. Malherbe says well to this purpose. Le plus beau de nos jours, est dans leur matinee. The sprightly Morn is the best part of Day.
Let no day pass over you without drawing a line,¶468. &c. That is to say, without working, without giving some strokes of the Pencil or the Crayon. This was the Precept of Apelles; and 'tis of so much the more necessity, because Painting is an Art of much length and time, and is not to be learn'd with∣out great Practice. Michael Angelo at the Age of fourscore years, said, That he learn'd something every day. Be ready to put into your Table-book,¶473. &c. As it was the custom of Titian and the Carraches; there are yet remaining in the hands of some who are curious in Painting; many thoughts and obser∣vations which those great Men have made on Pa∣per, and in their Table-books which they carry'd continually about them. Wine and good Cheer are no great Friends to Paint∣ing,¶475. they serve onely to recreate the Mind when it is oppress'd and spent with Labour, &c. "During the time, says Pliny, that Protogenes was drawing the Picture of Jalysus, which was the best of all his Works, he took no other nourishment than Lupines mix'd with a little water, which serv'd him both for Meat and Drink, for fear of clogging his Imagination by the Luxury of his Food." Mi∣chael Angelo, while he was drawing his day of Judg∣ment, fed onely on Bread and Wine at Dinner.
And Vasari observes in his life, that he was so so∣ber that he slept but little, and that he often rose in the Night to work, as being not disturb'd by the Vapours of his thin Repasts. But delights in the liberty which belongs to the Bat∣chelors Estate,¶478. &c. We never see large and beau∣tifull and well-tasted Fruits proceeding from a Tree which is incompass'd round, and choak'd with Thorns and Bryars. Marriage draws a world of business on our hands, subjects us to Law-suits, and loads us with multitudes of do∣mestick Cares, which are as so many Thorns that encompass a Painter, and hinder him from producing his works in that perfection of which otherwise he is capable. Raphael, Michael Angelo, and Hannibal Carracci were never marry'd: and amongst the Ancient Painters we find none recorded for being marry'd, but onely Apelles, to whom Alexander the Great made a present of his own Mistress Campaspe; which yet I would have understood without offence to the Institution of Marriage, for that calls down many Blessings up∣on Families, by the Carefulness of a vertuous Wife. If Marriage be in general a remedy against Concupiscence, 'tis doubly so in respect of Paint∣ers; who are more frequently under the occasi∣ons of Sin than other Men; because they are un∣der
a frequent necessity to seeing Nature bare-fac'd. Let every one examine his own strength upon this point: but let him preferr the interest of his Soul to that of his Art and of his Fortune. Painting naturally withdraws from noise and tu∣mult,¶480. &c. I have said at the end of the first Re∣mark, that both Poetry and Painting were up∣held by the strength of Imagination. Now there is nothing which warms it more than Repose and Solitude: Because in that estate, the Mind being freed from all sorts of business, and in a kind of San∣ctuary undisturb'd by vexatious Visits, is more capable of forming noble Thoughts and of Appli∣cation to its Studies. Carmina secessum scribentis & otia quaerunt. Good Verse, Recess and Solitude requires: And Ease from Cares, and undisturb'd Desires. We may properly say the same of Painting, by reason of its conformity with Poetry, as I have shown in the first Remark. Let not the covetous design of growing rich,¶484. &c. We read in Pliny,1500. l. that Nicias refus'd Sixty Ta∣lents from King Attalus, and rather chose to make a free Gift of his Picture to his Country.
"I enquir'd of a prudent man,Petron. Ar biter. (says a grave Author) in what times those noble Pictures were made which now we see; and desir'd him to explain to me some of their Subjects, which I did not well understand. I ask'd him likewise the reason of that great negligence which is now visible amongst Painters: And from whence it proceeded, that the most beautifull Arts were now bury'd in Oblivion, and principally Paint∣ing, a faint Shadow of which is at present remaining to us. To which he thus reply'd, That the immode∣rate desire of Riches had produc'd this change: For of old, when naked Vertue had her Charms, the no∣ble Arts then flourish'd in their Vigour: and if there was any contest amongst men, it was onely who should be the first Discoverer of what might be of ad∣vantage to posterity. Lysippus and Myron, those renown'd Sculptors, who could give a Soul to Brass, left no Heirs, no Inheritance behind them, because they were more carefull of acquiring Fame than Ri∣ches. But as for us of this present Age, it seems by the manner of our Conduct, that we upbraid An∣tiquity for being as covetous of Vertue as we are of Vice: wonder not so much therefore, if Painting has lost its Strength and Vigour, because many are now of opinion, that a heap of Gold is much more beautifull than all the Pictures and Statues of Apelles and Phidias, and all the noble Performances of Greece."
I would not exact so great an act of Absti∣nence from our modern Painters, for I am not ignorant that the hope of gain is a wonderfull sharp spur in Arts, and that it gives industry to the Artist; from whence it was that Iuvenal said even of the Greeks themselves, who were the In∣ventors of Painting, and who first understood all the Graces of it and its whole perfection; Graeculus esuriens, in Coelum, jusseris, ibit. A hungry Greek, if bidden, scales the Skies. But I could heartily wish, that the same hope which flatters them did not also corrupt them: and did not snatch out of their hands a lame, imperfect Piece, rudely daub'd over with too lit∣tle Reflection and too much haste. The qualities requisite to form an excellent Painter,¶487. &c. 'Tis to be confess'd that very few Painters have those qualities which are requir'd by our Au∣thor, because there are very few, who are able Pain∣ters. There was a time when onely they who were of noble Blood, were permitted to exercise this Art; because it is to be presum'd, that all these Ingredi∣ents of a good Painter, are not ordinarily found in men of vulgar Birth. And in all appearance, we may
hope that though there be no Edict in France which takes away the Liberty of Painting from those to whom Nature has refus'd the Honour of being born Gentlemen, yet at least that the Royal Acade∣my will admit hence-forward onely such who being endu'd with all the good Qualities and the Ta∣lents which are requir'd for Painting, those en∣dowments may be to them instead of an honoura∣ble Birth. 'Tis certain, that which debases Paint∣ing, and makes it descend to the vilest and most despicable kind of Trade, is the great multitude of Painters who have neither noble Souls nor any Talent for the Art, nor even so much as com∣mon Sence. The Origin of this great Evil, is that there have always been admitted into the Schools of Painting all sorts of Children promis∣cuously, without Examination of them, and without observing for some convenient space of time, if they were conducted to this Art by their inward Disposition, and all necessary Talents, rather than by a foolish Inclination of their own, or by the Avarice of their Relations, who put them to Painting, as a Trade which they believe to be somewhat more gainfull than another. The qualities properly requir'd, are these follow∣ing.
A good Iudgment, That they made do nothing a∣gainst Reason and Verisimility. A docible Mind, That they may profit by in∣structions, and receive without Arrogance the opinion of every one, and principally of know∣ing Men. A noble Heart, That they may propose Glory to themselves, and Reputation rather than Ri∣ches. A Sublimity, and Reach of Thought, To conceive radily, to produce beautifull Ideas, and to work on their Subjects nobly and after a lofty manner, wherein we may observe somewhat that is delicate, ingenious and uncommon. A warm and vigorous Fancy, To arrive a least to some degree of Perfection, without being tir'd with the Pains and Study which are requir'd in Painting. Health, To resist the dissipation of Spirits, which are apt to be consum'd by Pains-taking. Youth, Because Painting requires a great Expe∣rience and a long Practice. Beauty or Handsomeness, Because a Painter paints himself in all his Pictures, and Nature loves to produce her own Likeness. A convenient Fortune, That he may give his whole time to study, and may work chearfully,
without being haunted with the dreadfull Image of Poverty, ever present to his Mind. Labour, Because the Speculation is nothing without the Practice. A Love for his Art, We suffer nothing in the Labour which is pleasing to us: or if it hap∣pen that we suffer, we are pleas'd with the Pain. And to be under the Discipline of a knowing Master, &c. Because all depends on the Beginnings, and because commonly they take the manner of their Master, and are form'd according to his Gusto: See Verse 422, and the Remark upon it. All these good qualities are insignificant and un∣profitable to the Painter, if some outward dispo∣sitions are wanting to him. By which I mean favourable times, such as are times of Peace, which is the Nurse of all noble Arts; there must also some fair occasion offer to make their Skill manifest by the performance of some considera∣ble Work within their power: and a Protector, who must be a Person of Authority, one who takes upon himself their care of the Fortune, at least in some measure; and knows how to speak well of them in time and place convenient. 'Tis of much importance, says the Younger Pliny, in what times Vertue appears. And there is no Wit, how∣soever excellent it may be, which can make it self im∣mediately
known. Time and Opportunity are necessary to it, and a person who can assist us with his favour and be a Moecenas to us. And Life is so short,¶496. that it is not sufficient for so long an Art, &c. Not onely Painting but all other Arts consider'd in themselves require almost an infinite time to possess them perfectly. 'Tis in this Sense that Hippocrates begins his Aphorisms with this saying, That Art is long and Life is short. But if we consider Arts, as they are in us, and ac∣cording to a certain degree of Perfection, suffici∣ent enough, to make it known that we possess them above the common sort, and are compara∣tively better than most others, we shall not find that Life is too short on that account, provided our time be well employ'd. 'Tis true, that Pain∣ting is an Art which is difficult and a great under∣taking. But they who are endu'd with the quali∣ties that are necessary to it, have no reason to be discourag'd by that apprehension.Veget. de re Milit. lib. 2. Labour always appears difficult before 'tis try'd. The passages by Sea, and the Knowledge of the Stars, have been thought impossible, which notwithstanding have been found and compass'd, and that with ease by those who endeavour'd after them.Lib. 1. de fin.'Tis a shamefull thing, says, Cicero, to be weary of Enquiry, when what we search is excellent. That which causes
us to lose most of our time, is the repugnance which we naturally have to Labour, and the Igno∣rance, the Malice, and the Negligence of our Masters: we waste much of our time in walking and talking to no manner of purpose, in making and receiving idle Visits, in Play and other Plea∣sures which we indulge, without reckoning those hours which we lose in the too great care of our Bodies; and in Sleep, which we often lengthen out till the day is far advanc'd: and thus we pass that Life which we reckon to be short, because we count by the years which we have liv'd, ra∣ther than by those which we have employ'd in stu∣dy. 'Tis evident that they who liv'd before us, have pass'd through all those difficulties to arrive at that Perfection which we discover in their Works, though they wanted some of the Advantages which we possess, and that none had labour'd for them as they have done for us. For 'tis certain that those Ancient Masters, and those of the last preceding Ages, have left such beautifull Patterns to us, that a better and more happy Age can ne∣ver be than ours; and chiefly under the Reign of our present King, who encourages all the noble Arts, and spares nothing to give them the share of that Felicity of which he is so bountifull to his Kingdom: and to conduct them with all man∣ner
of advantages to that supreme Degree of Ex∣cellence, which may be worthy of such a Master, and of that Sovereign Love which he has for them. Let us therefore put our hands to the work, with∣out being discourag'd by the length of time, which is requisite for our Studies; but let us seriously contrive how to proceed with the best Order, and to follow a ready, diligent, and well understood Method. Take Courage therefore,¶500. O ye noble Youths! you legitimate Offspring of Minerva, who are born under the influence of a happy Planet. &c. Our Author intends not here to sow in a barren, ungratefull Ground, where his Precepts can bear no Fruit: He speaks to young, Painters, but to such onely who are born under the Influence of a happy Star; that is to say, those who have receiv'd from Nature the necessary dispositions of becoming great in the Art of Painting: and not to those who follow that Study through Caprice or by a sottish Inclination, or for Lucre, who are either incapable of receiving the Precepts, or will make a bad use of them when receiv'd. You will do well,¶509. &c. Our Author speaks not here of the first Rudiments of Design; as for ex∣ample, The management of the Pencil, the just relation which the Copy ought to have to the O∣riginal,
&c. He supposes, that before he begins his Studies, one ought to have a Facility of Hand to imitate the best Designs, the noblest Pictures and Statues, that in few words he should have made himself a Key, wherewith to open the Clo∣set of Minerva, and to enter into that Sacred Place, where those fair Treasures are to be found in all abundance, and even offer themselves to us, to make our advantage of them by our Care and Genius. You are to begin with Geometry,¶509. &c. Because that is the Ground of Perspective, without which nothing is to be done in Painting: besides, Geome∣try is of great use in Architecture, and in all things which are of its dependence; 'tis particularly ne∣cessary for Sculptors. Set your self on designing after the Ancient Greeks,¶510. &c. Because they are the Rule of Beauty, and give us a good Gusto: For which reason 'tis ve∣ry proper to tie our selves to them, I mean ge∣nerally speaking; but the particular Fruit which we gather from them, is what follows. To learn by heart four several Ayres of Heads: of a Man, a Woman, a Child, and an Old Man. I mean those which have the most general Ap∣probation; for example those of the Apollo, of the Venus de Medices, of the little Nero, (that is,
when he was a Child,) and of the God Tiber. It would be a good means of learning them, if when you have design'd one after the Statue it self, you design it immediately after from your own Ima∣gination, without seeing it; and afterwards ex∣amine, if your own work be conformable to the first Design. Thus exercising your self on the same Head, and turning it on ten or twelve sides; you must do the same to the Feet, to the Hands, to the whole Figure. But to understand the Beauty of these Figures, and the justness of their Outlines, it will be necessary to learn Anatomy: when I speak of four Heads and four Figures, I pretend not to hinder any one from designing many others after this first Study, but my mean∣ing is onely to show by this, that a great Varie∣ty of things undertaken at the same time, dissipates the Imagination, and hinders all the Profit; in the same manner as too many sorts of Meat are not easily digested, but corrupt in the Stomach instead of nourishing the parts. And cease not Day or Night from Labour,¶511. till by your continual Practice, &c. In the first Princi∣ples, the Students have not so much need of Pre∣cepts as of Practice: And the Antique Statues be∣ing the rule of Beauty, you may exercise your selves in imitating them without apprehending
any consequence of ill Habits and bad Ideas, which can be form'd in the Soul of a young Be∣ginner. 'Tis not, as in the School of a Master, whose Manner and whose Gust are ill, and under whose Discipline the Scholar spoils himself the more he exercises. And when afterwards your Iudgment shall grow stronger,¶514. &c. 'Tis necessary to have the Soul well form'd, and to have a right Judgment to make the Application of his rules upon good Pictures, and to take nothing but the good. For there are some who imagine, that whatsoever they find in the Picture of a Master, who has acquir'd Repu∣tation, must of necessity be excellent; and these kind of people never fail when they copy to fol∣low the bad as well as the good things; and to observe them so much the more, because they seem to be extraordinary and out of the com∣mon road of others, so that at last they come to make a Law and Precept of them. You ought not also to imitate what is truly good in a crude and gross Manner, so that it may be found out in your works, that whatsoever Beauties there are in them, come from such or such a Master. But in this imitate the Bees, who pick from every Flower that which they find most proper in it to make Honey. In the same manner a young
Painter should collect from many Pictures what he finds to be the most beautifull, and from his several Collections form that Manner which thereby he makes his own. A certain Grace which was wholly natural and pecu∣liar to him,¶520. &c. Raphael in this may be compar'd to Apelles, who in praising the Works of other Painters, said That Gracefulness was wanting to them: and that without Vanity he might say, it was his own peculiar portion. See the Remark on the 218th. Verse. Julio Romano,¶522. (educated from his Childhood in the Country of the Muses,) &c. He means in the Studies of the belle lettere, and above all in Poe∣sy, which he infinitely lov'd. It appears, that he form'd his Ideas and made his Gust from read∣ing Homer; and in that imitated Zeuxis and Po∣lignotus, who, as Tyrius Maximus relates, treated their Subjects in their Pictures, as Homer did in his Poetry. To these Remarks I have annex'd the Opini∣ons of our Author upon the best and chiefest Painters of the two foregoing Ages. He tells you candidly and briefly what were their Excel∣lencies, and what their Failings. I pass in Silence many things which will be more am∣ply treated in the ensuing Commentary.¶541. 'Tis evi∣dent
by this, how much we lose, and what da∣mage we have sustain'd by our Authors death, since those Commentaries had undoubtedly con∣tain'd things of high Value and of great instru∣ction. To intrust with the Muses,¶544. &c. That is to say, to write in Verse, Poetry being under their Protection, and consecrated to them.
THE JUDGMENT OF Charles Alphonse du Fresnoy, On the Works of the Principal and Best PAINTERS of the two last Ages. PAINTING was in its Perfection amongst the Greeks. The principal Schools were at Sy∣cion, afterwards at Rhodes, at Athens, and at Corinth, and at last in Rome. Wars and Luxury having overthrown the Roman Empire, it was totally extinguish'd, together with all the noble Arts, the Studies of Humanity, and the other Sciences. It began to appear again in the Year 1450 a∣mongst some Painters of Florence, of which DO∣MENICO GHIRLANDAIO was one, who was Master to Michael Angelo, and had some kind of Reputation, though his manner was Gothique and ve∣ry dry.
MICHAEL ANGELO his Scholar, flourish'd in the times of Julius the second, Leo the tenth, Paul the third, and of eight successive Popes. He was a Painter, a Sculptor, and an Architect, both Civil and Military. The Choice which he made of his Po∣stures was not always beautifull or pleasing: His Gust of Designing was not the finest, nor his Out-lines the most elegant: The Folds of his Draperies, and the Ornaments of his Habits, were neither noble nor grace∣full. He was not a little fantastical and extravagant in his Compositions; he was bold even to Rashness, in taking Liberties against the Rules of Perspective. His Colouring is not over true or very pleasant. He knew not the Artifice of the Lights and Shadows: But he design'd more learnedly, and better understood all the Knittings of the Bones, with the Office and Situation of the Muscles, than any of the modern Painters. There appears a certain Air of Greatness and Severity in his Figures, in both which he has oftentimes succeeded: But above the rest of his Excellencies, was his won∣derfull skill in Architecture, wherein he has not onely surpass'd all the Moderns, but even the Ancients also: The St. Peter's of Rome, the St. John's of Flo∣rence, the Capitol, the Palazzo Farnese, and his own House, are sufficient Testimonies of it. His Scholars were Marcello Venusto, Andrea de Vater∣ra, Il Rosso, Georgio Vasari, Fra. Bastiano, (who
commonly painted for him) and many other Florentines. PIETRO PERUGINO design'd with sufficient knowledge of Nature, but he is dry and his manner little. His Scholar was RAPHAEL SANTIO, who was born on Good Friday, in the Year 1483, and died on Good Friday, in the Year 1520: So that he liv'd onely 37 years compleat. He surpass'd all modern Painters, because he possess'd more of the excellent parts of Painting than any other; and 'tis believ'd, that he equall'd the Ancients, excepting onely that he design'd not naked Bodies with so much Learning, as Michael Angelo: But his Gust of Designing is purer and much better. He painted not with so good, so full, and so gracefull a manner as Correggio; nor has he any thing of the Contrast of the Lights and Shadows, or so strong and free a Colouring, as Titian; but he had a better dis∣position in his Pieces without comparison, than either Titian, Correggio, Michael Angelo, or all the rest of the succeeding Painters to our days. His Choice of Postures, of Heads, of Ornaments, the Sui∣tableness of his Drapery, his manner of Designing, his Varieties, his Contrasts, his Expressions, were beau∣tifull in Perfection; but above all, he possess'd the Graces in so advantageous a manner, that he has ne∣ver since been equall'd by any other. There are Protraits (or single Figures of his) which are fi∣nish'd
Pieces. He was an admirable Architect. He was handsome, well made, and tall of Stature, civil, and well-natur'd, never refusing to teach another what he knew himself. He had many Scholars, amongst others, Julio Romano, Polydore, Gaudens, Gi∣ovanni d'Udine, and Michael Coxis. His Gra∣ver was Marc Antonio, whose Prints are admira∣ble for the correctness of their Out-lines. JULIO ROMANO was the most excellent of all Raphael's Scholars; he had Conceptions which were more extraordinary, more profound, and more eleva∣ted, than even his Master himself. He was also a great Architect, his Gust was pure and exquisite. He was a great Imitator of the Ancients, giving a clear Testimony in all his Productions, that he was desirous to restore to Practice the same Forms and Fabricks which were an∣cient. He had the good Fortune to find great persons who committed to him the care of Edifices, Vestibu∣les and Portico's, all Tetrastyles, Xistes, Theatres, and such other places as are not now in use. He was wonderfull in his Choice of Postures. His manner was drier and harder than any of Raphael's School. He did not exactly understand the Lights and Sha∣dows or the Colours. He is frequently harsh and ungracefull: The Folds of his Draperies are neither beau∣tifull nor great, easie nor natural, but all extravagant and too like the Habits of fantastical Comedians. He
was very knowing in humane Learning. His Scho∣lars were Pirro Ligorio, (who was admirable for An∣cient Buildings, as for Towns, Temples, Tombs, and Trophies, and the Situation of Ancient Edifices) Aeneas Vico, Bonasone, Georgio Mantuano, and others. POLYDORE, Scholar to Raphael, design'd admirably well, as to the practical part, having a par∣ticular Genius for Freezes, as we may see by those of white and black, which he has painted at Rome. He imitated the Ancients, but his manner was greater than that of Julio Romano: Nevertheless Julio seems to be the truer. Some admirable Grouppes are seen in his Works, and such as are not elsewhere to be found. He colour'd very seldom, and made Landt∣schapes of a reasonable good Gusto. GIO. BELLINO, one of the first who was of any consideration at Venice, painted very drily accor∣ding to the manner of his time. He was very know∣ing both in Architecture and Perspective. He was Titian's first Master, which may easily be observ'd in the first Painting of that noble Scholar, in which we may remark that Propriety of Colours which his Ma∣ster has observ'd. About this time GEORGIONE the Contempora∣ry of Titian came to excell in Portraits or Face-paint∣ing, and also in great Works. He first began to make
choice of Glowing and Agreeable Colours; the Perfe∣ction and entire Harmony of which were afterwards to be found in Titian's Pictures. He dress'd his Fi∣gures wonderfully well: And it may be truly said, that but for him, Titian had never arriv'd to that height of Perfection, which proceeded from the Rivalship and Iealousy of Honour betwixt those two. TITIAN was one of the greatest Colourists, who was ever known; he design'd with much more Ease and Practice than Georgione. There are to be seen Wo∣men and Children of his hand, which are admirable both for the Design and Colouring: the Gust of them is delicate, charming and noble, with a certain pleasing Negligence of the Head-dresses, the Draperies and Or∣naments of Habits, which are wholly peculiar to him. As for the Figures of Men, he has design'd them but moderately well. There are even some of his Draperies, which are mean and savour of a little gust. His painting is wonderfully glowing, sweet and delicate. He made Portraicts, which were extremely noble; the Postures of them being very gracefull, grave, diver∣sify'd, and adorn'd after a very becoming fashion. No man ever painted Landtschape, with so great a man∣ner, so good a colouring, and with such a resemblance of Nature. For eight or ten years space, he copy'd with great labour and exactness whatsoever he under∣took; thereby to make himself an easy way, and to esta∣blish
some general maximes for his future conduct. Besides the excellent gust which he had of Colours, in which he excell'd all Mortal Men, he perfectly under∣stood how to give every thing the touches which were most suitable, and proper to them, such as distin∣guish'd them from each other; and which gave the greatest Spirit, and the most of Truth. The Pictures which he made in his beginning, and in the declension of his Age, are of a dry, and mean manner. He liv'd ninety nine years. His Scholars were Paulo Vero∣nese, Giacomo Tintoret, Giacomo da Ponte, Bassano, and his Brothers. PAULO VERONESE was wonderfully graceful in his Airs of Women: with great variety of shining Draperies; and incredible vivacity, and ease. Never∣theless his Composition is sometimes improper; and his Design is uncorrect. But his colouring, and whatso∣ever depends on it, is so very charming in his Pictures, that it surprizes at the first sight, and makes us totally forget those other qualities which are wanting in him. TINTORET was Scholar to Titian, great in the practical part of Designing; but sometimes also sufficiently extravagant. He had an admirable Ge∣nius for Painting, if he had had as great an affection to his Art, and as much patience in undergoing the difficulties of it, as he had fire and vivacity of Nature:
He has made Pictures, not inferiour in beauty to those of Titian: his Composition and his Dresses, are for the most part improper; and his Out-lines are not cor∣rect: But his Colouring, and the dependencies of it, like that of his Master, are most admirable. The BASSANS had a more mean and poorer gust in Painting than Tintoret; and their Designs were also less correct than his. They had indeed an excellent gust of Colours; and have touch'd all kinds of Animals with an admirable manner: But were notoriously im∣perfect in the Composition and Design. CORREGGIO painted at Parma two large Cupo∣lo's in Fresco, and some Altar-pieces. This Artist, found out certain natural and unaffected Graces, for his Madonnas', his Saints, and little Children, which were particular to him. His Manner is exceed∣ing great, both for the design and for the work, but withall is very uncorrect. His Pencil was both easie and delightfull, and 'tis to be acknowledg'd, that he painted with great Strength, great Heightning, great Sweetness, and liveliness of Colours, in which none sur∣pass'd him. He understood how to distribute his Lights in such a manner as was wholly peculiar to himself, which gave a great force and great roundness to his Figures. This manner consists in extending a large Light, and then making it lose it self insensibly in the dark shadowings,
which he plac'd out of the Masses. And those give them this great roundness, without our being able to perceive from whence proceeds so much of force, and so vast a pleasure to the Sight. 'Tis probable, that in this part the rest of the Lombard School copied him: he had no great choice of gracefull Postures, nor of distribution for beautifull Grouppes: his Design often∣times appears lame, and the Positions are not much ob∣serv'd in them. The Aspects of his Figures are many times unpleasing; but his manner of designing Heads, Hands, Feet, and other parts, is very great, and well deserves our imitation. In the conduct and finishing of a Picture, he has done wonders; for he painted with so much Union, that his greatest Works seem'd to have been finish'd in the compass of one day; and appear, as if we saw them from a Looking-glass. His Landt∣schape is equally beautifull with his Figures. At the same time with Correggio, liv'd and flou∣rish'd PARMEGIANO; who besides his great man∣ner of well Colouring, excell'd also both in Invention and Design, with a Genius full of gentleness and of spirit, having nothing that was ungracefull in his choice of Postures and in the dresses of his Figures, which we cannot say of Correggio: there are Pieces of his to be seen, which are both beautifull and cor∣rect.
These two Painters last mention'd, had very good Scho∣lars, but they are known onely to those of their own Pro∣vince; and besides there is little to be credited of what his Country-men say, for Painting is wholly extin∣guish'd amongst them. I say nothing of LEONARDO da VINCI, because I have seen but little of his, though he re∣stor'd the Arts at Milan, and had many Scholars there. LUDOVICO CARRACCI, Uncle to Han∣nibal and Augustine, studied at Parma after Cor∣reggio; and excell'd in Design and Colouring, with such a Gracefulness, and so much Candour, that Gui∣do the Scholar of Hannibal, did afterwards imitate him with great success. There are some of his Pi∣ctures to be seen, which are very beautifull, and well understood. He made his ordinary residence at Bo∣logna, and it was He, who put the Pencil into the hands of Hannibal his Nephew. HANNIBAL in a little time excell'd his Master, in all parts of Painting: He imitated Correggio, Titian, and Raphael, in their different manners as he pleas'd, excepting onely that you see not in his Pi∣ctures, the Nobleness, the Graces, and the Charms of Raphael, and that his Out-lines are neither so pure, nor so elegant as his. In all other things, he is won∣derfully accomplish'd, and of an Universal Genius.
AUGUSTINO, Brother to Hannibal, was also a very good Painter, and an admirable Graver. He had a Natural Son, call'd ANTONIO, who dyed at the age of 35, and who according to the general opinion, wou'd have surpass'd his Uncle Hannibal: for by what he left behind him, it appears that he was of a more lofty Genius. GUIDO chiefly imitated Ludovico Carracci, yet retain'd always somewhat of the manner which his Ma∣ster Lawrence the Flemming taught him. This Lawrence liv'd at Bologna, and was Competitor and Rival to Ludovico Carracci: Guido made the same use of Albert Durer, as Virgil did of old Ennius: borrow'd what pleas'd him, and made it afterwards his own: that is, he accommodated what was good in Al∣bert to his own manner: which he executed with so much gracefulness and beauty, that He alone got more Money, and more Reputation in his time, than his own Masters, and all the Scholars of the Carraches, though they were of greater capacity than himself. His Heads yield no manner of precedence to those of Raphael. SISTO BADOLOCCHI design'd the best of all his Scholars: but he dy'd young. DOMENICHINO was a very knowing Painter, and very laborious, but otherwise of no great Natural Endowments: 'tis true, he was profoundly skill'd in all the parts of Painting, but wanting Genius, as I said,
he had less of nobleness in his Works than all the rest who studied in the School of the Carraches. ALBANO was excellent in all that belong'd to Painting, and adorn'd with variety of Learning. JOHN LANFRANC, a Man of a great and sprightly wit, supported his Reputation for a long time with an extraordinary gust of Design and Colouring. But his foundation being onely on the practical part, be at length lost ground in point of correctness: so that many of his Pieces appear extravagant and fantastical. And after his Decease, the School of the Carraches went dayly to decay in all the parts-Painting. GIO. VIOLA was very old before he learn'd Landtschape, the knowledge of which was imparted to him by Hannibal Carracche, who took pleasure to instruct him, so that he painted many of that kind which are wonderfully fine and well colour'd. If we cast our eyes towards Germany and the Low-Countries, we may there behold ALBERT DU∣RER, LUCAS VAN LEYDEN, HOLBEIN, ALDEGRAVE, and ISBIN, who were all Con∣temporaries. Amongst these, Albert Durer and Hol∣bein, were both of them wonderfully knowing and had certainly been of the first form of Painters, had they travell'd into Italy: For nothing can be laid to their charge, but onely that they had a Gothique Gust. As for Holbein, he perform'd yet better than Raphael;
and I have seen a Portrait of his Painting, with which one of Titian's could not come in Competition. Amongst the Flemmings, we had RUBENS, who deriv'd from his Birth, a lively, free, noble and uni∣versal Genius. A Genius which was capable not one∣ly of raising him to the rank of the Ancient Painters, but also to the highest employment in the Service of his Country: so that he was chosen for one of the most important Embassies of our Age. His Gusto of De∣signing savours somewhat more of the Flemming than of the Beauty of the Antique, because he stay'd not long at Rome. And though we cannot but observe in all his Paintings, somewhat of great and noble; yet it must be confess'd, that generally speaking, he design'd not correctly: But for all the other parts of Painting, he was as absolute a Master of them, and possess'd them all as throughly as any of his Predecessors in that noble Art. His principal Studies were made in Lombardy, after the Works of Titian, Paul Veronese and Tin∣toret; whose Cream he has skimm'd (if you will allow the Phrase) and extracted from their several Beau∣ties many general Maxims and infallible Rules, which he always follow'd, and by which he has acquir'd in his Works, a greater Facility than that of Titian; more of Purity, Truth and Science, than Paul Veronese; and more of Majesty, Repose and Moderation, than Tintoret. To conclude, His manner is so solid, so
knowing, and so ready, that it may seem, this rare accomplish'd Genius was sent from Heaven to instruct Mankind in the Art of Painting. His School was full of admirable Scholars, amongst whom VAN DYCK was he, who best comprehend∣ed all the Rules and general Maxims of his Master; and who has even excell'd him in the delicacy of his Colouring and in his Cabinet Pieces; but his Gust in the designing Part, was nothing better than that of Ru∣bens.
A Short Account Of the most Eminent PAINTERS BOTH Ancient and Modern, Continu'd down to the PRESENT TIMES According to the Order of their Succession. LONDON, Printed for W. Rogers at the Sun against St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. 1695.
THE PREFACE. THE Title having onely promis'd a short Account of the most Eminent Masters, &c. the Reader must expect to find very little more in the small Compass of these few Sheets, than the Time when, the Place where, by whose Instruc∣tions, and in what particular Subject each of those great Men became Famous. In the first part, which comprehends the prime Masters of Antiquity, I have follow'd Pliny: yet not blindly, or upon his Authority alone, but chiefly in those places, where I have found his Evidence con∣firm'd by the concurrent Testimony of other Writers. The Catalogue of Fran. Junius I have diligently per∣us'd, and examin'd most of the Records cited in it. I have also read over the Lives of the Four Principal Painters of Greece, written in Italian, by Carlo Dati of Florence, together with his learned Annotations upon them: and in a word, have left nothing unregard∣ed, that cou'd give me any manner of Assistance in this present Undertaking. In the Chronological part, because I foresaw that the Olympiads, and the Years of Rome, would be of
little use to the generality of Readers, I have adjusted them to the two Vulgar Aeras (viz.) the Creation of the World, and the Birth of Christ. The Greek Ta∣lents I have likewise reduc'd into English Money: but to justifie my Account, must observe, that here (as in most Authors, where a Talent is put absolutely, and without any other Circumstance) the Talentum Atticum Minus is to be understood; which according to the near∣est Computation comes to about 187 l. 10 s. of our Mo∣ney, the Majus being about 62 l. 10 s. more. In the latter part, which contains the Masters of great∣est Note amongst the Moderns, I have been equally di∣ligent, not onely searching into all the most considerable Writers, who have left us any Memorandums relating to them; but also in procuring from Rome, and other pla∣ces, the best Advice that possibly I could get, concerning those Painters who are but lately deceas'd, and whose Lives have never yet appear'd in Print. In Italy I have taken such Guides, as I had reason to believe, were best acquainted in that Country: and in France, Germany, Flanders, and Holland, have been govern'd by the Au∣thors who have been most conversant in those Parts. For the Roman, Florentine, and some other particular Masters, I have apply'd my self to the Vite de' Pittori, &c. of Giorgio Vasari, and that excellent Treatise of Gio: Pietro Bellori on the same Subject. For the Lom∣bard School, I have consulted the Maraviglie dell'
Arte of Cavalier Ridolfi. For the Bolognese Pain∣ters, the Felsina Pittrice of Conte Carlo Cesare Mal∣vasia. For those of Genoua, the Vite de' Pittori, &c. of Rafaelle Soprani nobile Genouese. For the French Masters, the Entretiens sur les Vies, &c. of Felibien. For the German, Flemish, and Dutch Painters, (of whom I have admitted but very few into this Collecti∣on) the Academia nobilissimae Artis Pictoriae, of Sandrart, and the Schilder-Boeck of Carel van Man∣der. For those of our own Country, I am asham'd to acknowledge how difficult a matter I have found it, to get but the least Information touching some of those In∣genious Men, whose Works have been a Credit and Reputation to it. That all our Neighbours have a greater value for the Professors of this noble Art, is sufficiently evident, in that there has hardly been any one Master of tolerable Parts amongst them, but a Crowd of Writers, nay some Pens of Quality too, have been imploy'd in adorning their Lives, and in transmitting their Names honourably to Posterity. For the Characters of the Italians of the first Form, I have all along referr'd the Reader to the Judgment of Monsieur du FRESNOY in the preceding Pages. But for the rest, I have from the Books above-menti∣on'd, and the Opinions of the Learned, briefly shewn, wherein their different Talents and Perfections consi∣sted: chusing always (in the little Room to which I have
been confin'd) to set the best side forwards, especially where their few Faults have been over-balanc'd by their many Virtues. By the Figures in the Margin it will easily appear, how careful I have every-where been, to preserve the Or∣der of Time, which indeed was the thing principally intended in these Papers. Some few Masters how∣ever must be excepted; whom yet I have placed next to their Contemporaries, tho' I could not fix them in any particular Year. In all of them I have been very exact in setting down their respective Names, just as they themselves us'd to do, when they did not write them in Latine. If it should be Objected, that several of the Masters herein after-mention'd, have already appear'd amongst us, in an English Dress: I can onely answer, That as the Method here made use of, is more regular, and quite different from any thing that has been hither to publish'd in this kind; so, whosoever shall think it worth his while to compare these little Sketches with the Originals from which I have copy'd them, will find, that I have taken greater Care in drawing them true, and that my Out-lines are generally more correct, whatever De∣fects may be in the Colouring part.
Ancient Masters. BY whom, and in what particular Age the Art of Painting was first invented in Greece, Ancient Authors are not agreed. Aristotle ascribes the honour of it to EUCHIR,An. Mun. 2730. a Kinsman of the famous Daedalus, who flourish'd Anno 1218 be∣fore the Birth of Christ; Theophrastus pleads for POLIGNOTUS the Athenian, Athenagoras for SAURIAS of Samos; some contend for PHILO∣CLES the Egyptian, and others again for CLEAN∣THES of Corinth. But howsoever the Learned may differ in their Opinions touching the Inventer, yet as to the Art it self, all of them are unanimous, that its first appearance amongst the Greeks, was in no better a dress than the bare Shadow of a Man, or some other Body, circumscrib'd with a single line onely, call'd by them Sciagraphia, and by the Latines, Pictura Linearis. The first step made towards the advancement of Painting, was by ARDICES the Corinthian, and TELEPHANES of Sicyon, or CRATO of the
same City; who began to add other lines, by way of shadowing their Figures, to make them appear round, and with greater strength. But so inconsiderable were the advantages, which the Authors of this Manner (call'd Graphice) gain'd by their Invention, that they still found it neces∣sary, to write under each piece, the name of eve∣ry individual thing which they endeavour'd to represent, least otherwise the Spectators shou'd ne∣ver be able to discover what they intended by it. The next Improvement, was by CLEOPHAN∣TUS of Corinth, who first attempted to fill up his Out-lines with a single Colour: from whence his Pieces, and those of HYGIEMON, DINIAS, and CHARMAS his followers, got the name of Mo∣nochromata, (viz.) Pictures of one colour. EUMARUS the Athenian, began to paint Men and Women in a manner different from each other, and ventured to imitate all sorts of Ob∣jects: but was far excell'd by his Disciple. CIMON the Cleonaean, who found out the Art of Painting Historically, design'd his Figures in variety of Postures, distinguish'd the several parts
of the Body by their Joints, and was the first who took notice of the folds of Draperies in his Pieces. In what Century the Masters abovemention'd liv'd, Antiquity has given us no Account: yet cer∣tain it is,An. Mun. 3198. that about the time of the Foundation of Rome, Anno 750 ante Chr. the Grecians had car∣ry'd Painting to such a height of Reputation, that Candaules King of Lydia, sirnam'd Myrsilus, the last of the Heraclidae, and who was kill'd by Gyges Anno quarto Olymp. 16. for a Picture made by BULARCHUS, representing a Battel of the Mag∣nesians, gave its weight in Gold. PANAENUS of Athens, liv'd Olymp. 83. Anno 446 ante Chr. and is celebrated for having pain∣ted the Battel at Marathon,3502. between the Athenians and Persians, so very exactly, that Miltiades, and all the General Officers on both sides, were easily to be known, and distinguish'd from each other in that Piece. PHIDIAS his Brother, the Son of Charmidas, flourish'd Olymp. 84. Anno 442 ante Chr. and was famous both for Painting and Sculpture:3506. but par∣ticularly in the latter so profoundly skill'd, that his Statue of Iupiter Olympius was by the Ancients
esteem'd one of the Seven wonders of the World, as his Minerva, in the Citadel of Athens, made of Ivory and Gold, was (by way of Eminence) call'd the Beautiful Form. He was very intimate with Pericles, the Athenian General; and so much en∣vy'd upon that account, and for the Glory which he acquir'd by his Works, that his Enemies cou'd never be at rest till they had plotted him into a Prison, and had there (as some say) taken away his Life by Poison. POLYCLETUS, a Native of Sicyon, and the most renowned Sculptor in his time,An. Mun. 3518. liv'd Olymp. 87. Anno 430 ante Chr. and beside the Honour which he gain'd, by having brought the Bass-Relievo to perfection, is commended for divers admirable pieces of work; but chiefly, for being the Author of that most accomplish'd Model, call'd the Canon: which comprehending in it self alone all the several perfections, both of Feature, and Proportion, in Humane Bodies, by the joint consent of the most eminent Artists, as well Painters as Sculptors, then in being, was unani∣mously agreed upon to be handed down to Po∣sterity, a the Standard, or infallible Rule of true Beauty.
In this Olympiad also were MYRON, and SCO∣PAS, both excellent in Sculpture; and in some respects equal even to Polycletus himself. POLYGNOTUS the Thasian, was the Disciple of his Father Aglaophon, and particularly famous for representing Women; whom he painted in lightsom and shining Draperies, adorning their heads with dresses of sundry colours, and giving a greater freedom to his Figures, than had been us'd by any of his Predecessors. His principal Works, were those which he made gratis in the Temple at Delphi, and the grand Portico at Athens, call'd the Various; in honour of which it was so∣lemnly decreed, in a great Council of the Am∣phictyons, that where-ever he should travel in Greece, his charges should be born by the Publick. He died sometime before the 90 Olymp.An. Mun. 3530. which was Anno 418 ante Chr. APOLLODORUS the Athenian, liv'd Olymp. 94. Anno 402 ante Chr. and was the first who inven∣ted the Art of mingling his Colours, and of ex∣pressing the Lights and Shadows.3546. He was ad∣mir'd also for his judicious choice of Nature, and in the beauty and strength of his Figures surpassed all the Masters who went before him. He ex∣cell'd
likewise in Sculpture, but was surnam'd the Madman, from a strange humour which he had, of destroying even his very best Pieces, if after he had finish'd them, he cou'd discover any fault, thô never so inconsiderable. ZEUXIS of Heraclea,An. Mun. 3553. flourish'd Anno quarto Olymp. 95. Anno 395 ante Chr. and was fam'd for being the most excellent Colourist of all the Ancients; though Cicero, Pliny, and other Authors tell us, there were but four Colours then in use (viz.) white, yellow, red and black. He was censur'd by some, for making his Heads too big; and by Aristotle, for not being able to express the Man∣ners, and Passions. He was very famous not∣withstanding for the Helena which he painted for the People of Crotona; in the Composition of which he collected from five naked Virgins (the most beautiful the Town cou'd produce) whatever he observ'd Nature had form'd most perfect in each, and united all those admirable parts in that single Figure. He was extoll'd like∣wise for several other Pieces; but being very rich, cou'd never be prevail'd upon to fell any of them, because he thought them to be above any price; and therefore chose rather to give them away freely to Princes, and Cities. He died (as
'tis generally said) of a fit of Laughter, at the sight of a Comical old Woman's Picture, which he had drawn. PARRHASIUS a Native of Ephesus, and Ci∣tizen of Athens, was the Son and Disciple of Evenor, and the Contemporary of Zeuxis, whom he over∣came in the noted Contest between them, by de∣ceiving him with a Curtain, which he had painted so excellently well, that his Antagonist mistook it for the Nature it self. He was the first who ob∣serv'd the Rules of Symmetry in his works; and was much admired for the liveliness of his expres∣sion, and for the gayety and graceful Airs of his Heads: but above all, for the softness and elegance of his Out-lines, and for rounding off his Figures, so as to make them appear with the greater strength and relievo. He was wonderfully fruitful of In∣vention, had a particular talent in small pieces, especially in wanton Subjects, and finish'd all his works to the last degree of perfection. But withall was so extravagantly vain and arrogant, that he commonly writ himself Parrhasius the Beau, the Sir Courtly (,) went cloath'd in purple, with a Crown of Gold upon his Head, pretended to derive his Pedigree from A∣pollo, and styl'd himself the Prince of his Profession.
Yet, to his great affliction, was humbl'd at last by TIMANTHES of Sicyon (or as some say, of Cythnus) who in a Dispute betwixt them, was by the majority of Votes declared the better Painter: And besides was as eminent for the singular mode∣sty and sweetness of his Disposition, as for the agreeable variety of his Invention, and peculiar happiness in moving the Passions. His most ce∣lebrated works were the sleeping Polyphemus, and the Sacrifice of Iphigenia; in both which (as in all his other Performances) his distinguishing Cha∣racter appear'd, in making more to be under∣stood, than was really express'd in his Pieces. In this time also flourish'd EUPOMPUS of Sicyon, an excellent Artist, and whose Authority was so very considerable, that out of the two Schools of Painting, the Asiatick and the Greek, he made a third, by dividing the last into the Attick and the Sicyonian. His best Disciple was PAMPHILUS a Native of Macedonia, who to the Art of Painting joyn'd the Study of the Liberal Arts, especially the Mathematicks: and us'd to say, that without the help of Geometry, no Painter could ever arrive at perfection. He was the first who
taught his Art for set rates, but never took a Scho∣lar for less time than ten years. What reputation and interest he had in his own Country, and what use he made of it, for the honour and advance∣ment of his Profession, see Pag. 83. PAUSIAS of Sicyon, a Disciple of Pamphilus, was the first who painted upon Walls and Ceil∣ings: and amongst many rare qualities, was ex∣cellent at fore-shortening his Figures. His most fa∣mous Piece was the Picture of his Mistress Glycera, in a sitting posture, composing a Garland of Flowers: for a Copy of which L. Lucullus, a noble Roman, gave two Talents (375 lib.) EUPHRANOR the Isthnian, flourish'd Olymp.An. Mun. 3586. 104, Anno 362 ante Chr. He was an Universal Master, and admirably skill'd both in Sculpture and Painting. His Conceptions were noble and ele∣vated, his Style masculine and bold; and he was the first who signaliz'd himself by representing the Majesty of Heroes. He writ several Volumes of the Art of Colouring, and of Symmetry, and yet notwithstanding fell into the same Error with Zeuxis, of making his Heads too big in proporti∣on to the other parts.
PRAXITELES the fam'd Sculptor, particu∣larly celebrated for his Venus of Gnidus, and other excellent performances in Marble, was the Con∣temporary of Euphranor. CYDIAS of Cythnus,An. Mun. 3594. liv'd Olymp. 106, Anno 354 ante Chr. and rais'd his reputation so much by his works, that Hortensius the Roman Orator, gave 44 Talents, (8250 lib.) for one of his Pieces, con∣taining the Story of the Argonauts, and built a noble Apartment on purpose for it, in his Villa at Tusculum. APELLES the Prince of Painters, was a Na∣tive of Coos, an Island in the Archipelago (now known by the name of Lango) and flourish'd O∣lymp. 112,3618. Anno 330 ante Chr. He improv'd the noble talent which Nature had given him, in the School of Pamphilus; and afterwards by degrees became so much in esteem with Alexander the Great, that by a public Edict he strictly commanded, that no other Master shou'd presume to make his Portrait; that none but Lysippus of Sicyon shou'd cast his Statue in Brass; and that Pyrgoteles onely shou'd grave his Image in Gems and Precious Stones. And in farther testimony of his particular respect to this Artist, he presented him, even with his
most beautiful and charming Mistress Campaspe, with whom Apelles had fall'n in Love, and by whom 'twas suppos'd he copy'd his Venus (Anadyo∣mene) rising out of the Sea. Grace was his pecu∣liar portion, as our Author tells us, Page 150, and 211. In which, and in knowing when he had done Enough, he transcended all who went before him, and did not leave his Equal in the world. He was miraculously skill'd in taking the true li∣neaments and features of the Face: Insomuch that (if Apion the Grammarian may be credited) Physi∣ognomists upon sight of his Pictures onely, cou'd tell the precise time of the parties death. He was admirable likewise in representing people in their last Agonies. And in a word, so great was the veneration paid by Antiquity to his Works, that several of them were purchas'd with heaps of Gold, and not by any set number or weight of pieces. He was moreover extremely candid and obliging in his temper, willing to instruct all those who ask'd his advice, and generous even to his most potent Rivals. PROTOGENES of Caunus, a City of Caria sub∣ject to the Rhodians, was by the Ancients esteem'd one of the four best Painters in Greece: but liv'd miserably poor, and very little regarded in his
own Country, till Apelles having made him a visit, to bring him into Reputation, bought up several of his Pictures, at greater rates than he ask'd for them; and pretending, that he design'd to sell 'em again for his own work, the Rhodians were glad to redeem them upon any terms. Whose Disciple he was, is not certainly known; but 'tis general∣ly affirm'd, that he spent the greatest part of his life in painting Ships, and Sea-pieces onely: yet applying himself at last to nobler Subjects, he be∣came an Artist so well accomplish'd, that Apelles confess'd he was in all respects at least equal to himself, excepting onely, that never knowing when to leave off, by overmuch diligence, and too nice a correctness, he often dispirited and deaden'd the Life. He was famous also for several Figures which he made in Brass: but his most celebrated piece of Painting, was that of Ialysus, which cost him seven years study and labour, and which sav'd the City of Rhodes from being burnt by Demetrius Poliorcetes. Vide Page 84. Of MELANTHIUS we have nothing certain, but that he was brought up at Sicyon, (the best School of Greece) under Pamphilus, at the same time with Apelles. That he contributed both by his Pen, and Pencil, to the Improvement of his
Art; and amongst many excellent Pieces, painted Aristratus the Sicyonian Tyrant, in a Triumphal Chariot, attended by Victory, putting a wreath of Laurel upon his Head; which was highly esteem'd. ARISTIDES of Thebes, the Disciple of Euxeni∣das, liv'd in the same Olympiad with Apelles, and was the first who by the Rules of Art, attain'd a perfect knowledge of expressing the Passions and Affections of the Mind. And though his colour∣ing was somewhat hard, and not so very beauti∣ful as cou'd be wish'd, yet notwithstanding so much were his Pieces admir'd, that after his de∣cease, Attalus King of Pergamus, gave an hun∣dred Talents (18750 lib.) for one of them. His Contemporary was ASCLEPIODORUS the Athenian, equally skill'd in the Arts of Sculpture and Painting; but in the latter, chiefly applauded for the beauties of a correct Style, and the truth of his Proportion: In which Apelles declared himself as much inferior to this Artist, as he was to AM∣PHION, in the ordering, and excellent dispositi∣on of his Figures. The most famous Pictures of As∣clepiodorus, were those of the twelve Gods, for which Mnason the Tyrant of Elatea, gave him the value of about 300 l. Sterl. a-piece.
About the same time also were the several Ma∣sters following (viz.) THEOMNESTUS, fam'd for his admirable talent in Portraits. NICHOMACHUS, the Son and Disciple of Aristodemus, commended for the incredible facility and freedom of his Pencil. NICOPHANES, celebrated for the Elegance of his Design, and for his grand Manner, and Ma∣jesty of Style; in which few Masters were to be compar'd to him. PYREICUS was famous for little pieces only; and from the sordid and mean Subjects to which he addicted himself (such as a Barbers, or Shoe∣makers Shop, the Stil-life, Animals, Herbage, &c.) got the surname of Rhyparographus. Yet though his Subjects were poor, his Performance was ad∣mirable; And the smallest Pictures of this Artist, were esteem'd more, and sold at greater Rates, than the larger Works of many other Masters. ANTIDOTUS the Disciple of Euphranor, was extremely diligent, and industrious, but very slow at his Pencil; which as to the colouring part was generally hard and dry. He was chiefly remarkable for having been the Master of
NICIAS of Athens,An. Mun. 3626. who painted Women in Perfection, and flourish'd about the 114. Olymp. Anno 322 ante Chr. being universally extoll'd for the great variety and noble choice of his Subjects, for the force and relievo of his Figures, for his great skill in the distribution of the lights and shadows, and for his wonderful dexterity in re∣presenting all sorts of four-footed Animals, beyond any Master in his time. His most celebrated Piece was that of Homer's Hell; for which having refused 60 Talents (11250 lib.) offer'd him by King Ptolemy the Son of Lagus, he generously made a Present of it to his own Country. He was likewise much esteem'd by all his Contemporaries for his excellent Talent in Sculpture; and as Pliny reports, by Praxiteles himself: which yet seems highly improbable, considering, that by his own account, there were at least 40 years betwixt them. ATHENION of Maronea, a City of Thrace, a Disciple of Glaucion the Corinthian, was about this time also as much in vogue as Nicias: and though his colouring was not altogether so agree∣able, yet in every other particular he was even superior to him, and wou'd have mounted to the highest pitch of Perfection, if the length of his Life
had been but answerable to the great extent of his Genius. FABIUS a noble Roman,An. Mun. 3647. painted the Temple of Health in Rome, Anno U. C. 450, ante Chr. 301: and glory'd so much in his Performances there, that he assum'd to himself for ever after, the sur∣name of Pictor, and thought it no disparagement to one of the most Illustrious Families in Rome, to be distinguish'd by that Title. NEALCES liv'd Olymp. 132, Anno 250 ante Chr.3698. in the time of Aratus the Sicyonian General, who was his Patron, and intimate Friend. His particular Character, was a strange vivacity of thought, a fluent fancy, and a singular happiness in explaining his intentions (as appears Pag. 148.) He is besides frequently mention'd by Writers, for that having painted a Horse, and being weary'd with often trying in vain to express the foam pro∣ceeding from his Mouth, he flung his Pencil in a great passion against the Picture, which lighted so luckily, that to his amazement he found, Chance had finish'd his Design, much better than he with all his art and labour cou'd have done.
METRODORUS flourish'd Anno 168 ante Chr.An. Mun. 3780. and liv'd in so much credit and reputation at Athens, that Paulus Aemilius, after he had overcome Per∣seus King of Macedon, Anno 3 Olymp. 152. having desir'd the Athenians to send him one of their most learned Philosophers to breed up his Children, and a skilful Painter to adorn his Triumph, Metro∣dorus was the person unanimously chosen, as the fittest for both Employments. MARCUS PACUVIUS of Brundusium,3797. the Ne∣phew of old Ennius, was not onely an eminent Poet himself, and famous for several Tragedies which he wrote, but excell'd also in Painting: Witness his celebrated Works, at Rome, in the Temple of Hercules, in the Forum Boarium. He flourish'd Anno U. C. 600, ante Chr. 151, and died at Tarentum, almost 90 years of age. TIMOMACHUS of Byzantium (now Constanti∣nople) liv'd Anno U. C. 704,3901. ante Chr. 47, in the time of Iulius Caesar, who gave him 80 Talents (15000 lib.) for his Pieces of Ajax and Medea, which he placed in the Temple of Venus, from whom he deriv'd his Family. He was commen∣ded also for his Orestes and Iphigenia: but his Ma∣ster-piece was the Gorgon, or Medusas Head.
About the same time also ARELLIUS was fa∣mous at Rome, being as much admir'd for his ex∣cellent talent in Painting, as he was condemn'd for the scandalous use which he made of it, in ta∣king all his Idea's of the Goddesses from common Strumpets, and in placing his Mistresses in the Heavens, amongst the Gods, in several of his Pieces. LUDIUS liv'd in great Reputation,An. Mun. 3907. under Au∣gustus Caesar, who began his Reign Anno U. C. 710, ante Chr. 41. He excell'd in grand Compositions, and was the first who painted the Fronts of Houses, in the Streets of Rome: which he beautify'd with great variety of Landtschapes, and pleasant Views, together with all other sorts of different Subjects, manag'd after a most noble manner. TURPILIUS a Roman Knight,An. Dom. 69. liv'd in the time of Vespasian, who was chosen Emperour, An. Dom. 69. And though he painted every thing with his left hand, yet was much applauded for his admi∣rable Performances at Verona. His Contemporaries were CORNELIUS PI∣NUS, and ACTIUS PRISCUS, who with their Pencils adorn'd the Temples of Honour and Virtue,
repair'd by Vespasian. But of the two, Priscus came nearest in his style and manner of Painting, to the purity of the Grecian School. And thus have I given the Reader a short Ac∣count, of all the most eminent Masters who flourish'd in Greece, and Rome, in the compass of more than a thousand Years. 'Tis true indeed, that for a long time after the Reigns of Vespasian, and Titus his Son, Painting and Sculpture continu'd, in great reputation in Italy. Nay, we are inform'd, that under their Successors Domitian, Nerva, and Trajan, they shin'd with a Lustre almost equal to what they had done under Alexander the Great. 'Tis true also, that the Roman Emperours Adrian, An∣tonine, Alexander Severus, Constantine, and Valenti∣nian, were not onely generous Encouragers of these Arts, but in the pracice of them also so well skill'd, that they wrought several extraordinary Pieces with their own hands; and by their Ex∣ample, as well as their Patronage, rais'd up ma∣ny considerable Artists in both kinds. But the Names of all those excellent Men being unhappily lost with their Works, we must here conclude our Catalogue of the ANCIENT MASTERS: and shall onely take notice, that under that Title, All those are to be comprehended, who practised
Painting or Sculpture either in Greece or Rome;An. Dom. 580. be∣fore the year of our Lord 580. At which time the Latine Tongue ceasing to be the common Language of Italy, and becoming mute, All the noble Arts and Sciences (which in the two preceding Centu∣ries had been brought very low▪ and by the con∣tinual Invasions of the Northern Nations reduc'd to the last extremities) expir'd with it: and in the Reign of Phocas the Emperour, soon after, lay bu∣ry'd together, as in one common Grave, in the Ruins of the Roman Empire.
Modern Masters. GIOVANNI CIMABUE, nobly descended, and born at Florence, Anno 1240,1240. was the first who reviv'd the Art of Painting in Italy. He was a Disciple of some poor ordinary Painters, sent for by the Government of Florence from Greece: whom he soon surpass'd, both in Drawing, and Colouring, and gave something of strength and freedom to his Works, at which they cou'd never arrive. And though he wanted the Art of managing his Lights and Shadows, was but little acquainted with the Rules of Perspective, and in divers other particulars but indifferently accom∣plish'd; yet the Foundation which he laid for fu∣ture Improvement, entitled him to the name of the Father of the First Age, or Infancy of the Mo∣dern Painting. Some of his Works are yet re∣maining at Florence, where he was famous also for his skill in Architecture,Aet. 60. and where he died ve∣ry rich, Anno 1300.
GIOTTO his Disciple, born near Florence, Anno 1276,1276. was a good Sculptor and Architect, as well as a better Painter than Cimabue. He began to shake off the stiffness of the Greek Masters; endea∣vouring to give a finer Air to his Heads, and more of Nature to his Colouring, with proper Postures to his Figures. He attempted likewise to draw after the Life, and to express the different Passions of the Mind: but cou'd not come up to the live∣liness of the Eyes, the tenderness of the Flesh, or the strength of the Muscles in naked Figures. He was sent for, and employ'd by Pope Benedict IX. in St. Peter's Church at Rome, and by his Succes∣sor Clement V. at Avignon. He painted several Pieces also at Padoua, Naples, Ferrara, and in o∣ther parts of Italy; and was every where much admir'd for his Works: but principally, for a Picture which he wrought in one of the Churches of Florence, representing the Death of the B. Virgin, with the Apostles about her: the Attitudes of which Story, M. Angelo Buonaroti us'd to say, cou'd not be better design'd. He flourish'd in the time of the famous Dante and Petrarch, and was in great esteem with them,Aet. 60. and all the excellent Men in his Age. He died Anno 1336.
ANDREA TAFFI, and GADDO GADDI were his Contemporaries, and the Restorers of Mosac-work in Italy: which the former had learnt of Apol∣lonius the Greek, and the latter very much improv'd. At the same time also was MARGARITONE, a Native of Arezzo in Tuscany, who first invented the Art of Gilding with Leaf-gold, upon Bole-arme∣niac. SIMONE MEMMI, born at Siena, a City in the borders of the Dukedom of Florence, Anno 1285,1285. was a Disciple of Giotto, whose manner he improv'd in drawing after the Life: and is par∣ticularly celebrated by Petrarch, for an excellent Portrait, which he made of his beloved Laura. He was applauded for his free and easie Invention, and began to understand the Decorum in his Com∣positions.Aet. 60. Obiit Anno 1345. TADDEO GADDI, another Disciple of Giotto1300. born at Florence, Anno 1300, excell'd his Master in the beauty of his Colouring, and the liveliness of his Figures. He was also a very skilful Archi∣tect, and much commended for the Bridge which he built over the River Arno,Aet. 50. at Florence. He died Anno 1350.
TOMASO,1324. call'd GIOTTINO, for his affecting and imitating Giotto's manner, born also at Flo∣rence, Anno 1324, began to add strength to his Figures,Aet. 32. and to improve the Art of Perspective. He died Anno 1356. IOHANNES ab EYK,1370. commonly call'd IOHN of BRUGES, born at Maseech on the River Maez in the Low-Countries, Anno 1370, was a Disciple of his Brother Hubert, and a considerable Pain∣ter: but above all things famous for having been the happy Inventer of the ART of PAINTING IN OYL, Anno 1410, (thirty years before Print∣ing was found out by Iohn Guttemberg, of Stras∣burgh.) He died Anno 1441,Aet. 71. having some years before his decease communicated his Invention to ANTONELLO of Messina, who travell'd from his own Country into Flanders on purpose to learn the Secret: and returning to Sicily, and afterwards to Venice, was the first who practised, and taught it in Italy. He died Anno Aetat. 49. In the preceding Century flourish'd several other Masters of good Repute: but their Manner being the same, or but very little different from that of Giotto, it will be sufficient to mention the Names
onely of some of the most Eminent, and such were Andrea Orgagna, Pietro Cavallino, Stefano, Bo∣namico Buffalmacco, Pietro Laurati, Lippo, Spinello, Casentino, Pisano, &c. And thus the Art of Pain∣ting continu'd almost at a stand for about an hundred years; advancing but slowly, and ga∣thering but little strength, till the time of MASACCIO,1417. who was born in Tuscany, Anno 1417, and for his copious Invention, and true manner of Designing; for his delightful way of Colouring, and the graceful Actions which he gave his Figures; for his looseness in Draperies, and extraordinary Judgment in Perspective, is rec∣kon'd to have been the Master of the Second, or Middle Age of Modern Painting: which 'tis thought he wou'd have carry'd to a much higher degree of Perfection,Aet. 26. if death had not stopp'd him in his Career (by Poyson, as it was suppos'd) An. 1443. GENTILE, and GIOVANNI, the Sons and Disciples of GIACOMO BELLINO,1421. were born at Venice, (Gentile, Anno 1421.) and were so emi∣nent in their time, that Gentile was sent for to Con∣stantinople, by Mahomet II. Emperour of the Turks: for whom having (amongst other things) paint∣ed the Decollation of S. Iohn Baptist, the Emperour,
to convince him that the Neck after its separation from the Body, cou'd not be so long as he had made it in his Picture, order'd a Slave to be brought to him, and commanded his Head to be immediately struck off in his presence: which so tetrifi'd Gentile, that he cou'd never be at rest, till he got leave to return home: which the Empe∣rour granted, after he had Knighted him, and nobly rewarded him for his Services. The most considerable Works of these Brothers are at Venice, where Giovanni liv'd to the age of 90 years, ha∣ving very rarely painted any thing but Scripture-Stories and Religious Subjects, which he perform'd so well, as to be esteem'd the most excellent of all the Bellini.Aet. 80. See more of him Pag. 217. Gentile died Anno 1501. ANDREA MANTEGNA, born at Padoua, Anno 1431,1431. a Disciple of Squarcione, was very correct in Designing, admirable in fore short'ning his Figures, well vers'd in Perspective, and arriv'd to great knowledge in the Antiquities, by his con∣tinu'd application to the Statues, Bass Relievo's, &c. Yet however his neglect of seasoning his Studies after the Antique, with the living Beauties of Na∣ture, has given him a Pencil somewhat hard and dry: And besides, his Drapery is generally stiff,
according to the manner of those times, and too much perplex'd with little folds. The best of his Works (and for which he was Knighted, by the Marquess Lodovico Gonzaga, of Mantoua) are the Triumphs of Iulius Caesar, now at Hampton-Court. He died Anno 1517, having been the first (ac∣cording to Vasari) who practised the Art of Gra∣ving in Italy.Aet. 86. ANDREA VERROCCHIO a Florentine, born Anno 1432,1432. was well skill'd in Geometry, Optics, Sculpture, Music, and Painting: but left off the last, because in a Piece which he had made of St. Iohn Baptizing our Saviour, Leonardo da Vinci, one of his Scholars, had by his order, painted an An∣gel, holding up some part of our Saviour's Gar∣ments, which so far excell'd all the rest of An∣drea's Figures, that inrag'd to be out-done by a Young-man, he resolv'd never to make use of his Pencil any more. He was the first who found out the Art of taking and preserving the likeness of any Face, by moulding off the Features in Plaister. He died Anno 1488.Aet. 56. LUCA SIGNORELLI of Cortona, a City in the Dukedom of Florence,1439. born Anno 1439, was a Disciple of Pietro S. Sepulchro, and so exellent
at designing Nakeds, that from a Piece which he painted in a Chappel of the great Church at Or∣vieto, M. Angelo Buonaroti transferr'd several entire Figures into his LastIudgment. He died very rich,Aet. 82. Anno 1521. PIETRO di COSIMO a Florentine, born Anno 1441,1441. was a Disciple of Cosimo Rosselli (whose name he retain'd) and a very good Painter; but so strangely fantastical, and full of Caprichio's, that all his delight was in painting Satyrs, Fauns, Harpies, Monsters, and such like extravagant Fi∣gures: and therefore he apply'd himself, for the most part, to Bacchanalia's, Masquerades,Aet. 80. &c. Obiit Anno 1521. LEONARDO da VINCI, born in a Castle so call'd,1445. near the City of Florence, Anno 1445, was bred up under Andrea Verrocchio, but so far sur∣pass'd him, and all others his Predecessors, that he is own'd to have been the Master of the Third, or Golden Age of Modern Painting. He was in every respect one of the compleatest Men in his time, and the best furnish'd with all the perfections both of Body and Mind: was an excellent Sculptor and Architect, a skilful Musician, an admirable Poet, very expert in Anatomy and Chymistry, and
throughly learned in all the parts of the Mathema∣ticks. He was extremely diligent in the perfor∣mance of his Works, and so wonderfully neat, and curious, that he left several of them unfinish'd, believing his hand cou'd never reach that Idea of perfection, which he had conceiv'd of them. He liv'd many years at Milan, highly esteem'd for his celebrated Piece of Our Saviours Last Supper, and some of his other Paintings; and as much ap∣plauded for his Art in contriving the Canal, that brings the Water from the River Adda, to that City. He was a great Contender with M. Angelo Buonaroti, and upon account of the enmity be∣twixt them, went into France (Anno Aet. 70.) where after several considerable Services done for Francis I. he expir'd in the Arms of that Monarch, being taken speechless the very moment, in which he wou'd have rais'd up himself, to thank the King for the honour done him in that Visit.Aet. 75. Anno 1520. PIETRO PERUGINO, so call'd from the place where he was born in the Ecclesiastical State,1446. Anno 1446, was another Disciple of Andrea Verrocchio. What Character he had, see Pag. 215. He was so very miserable and covetous, that the loss of his Money by Thieves,Aet. 78. broke his Heart, Anno 1524.
DOMENICO GHIRLANDAIO, a Florentine born,1449. Anno 1449, was at first design'd for the Profession of a Goldsmith; but follow'd his more prevailing inclinations to Painting with such success, that he is rank'd amongst the prime Ma∣sters in his time. See farther Pag. 213.Aet. 44. He died Anno 1493. FRANCESCO RAIBOLINI, commonly call'd FRANCIA,1450. born at Bologna, Anno 1450, was at first a Goldsmith, or Ieweller, afterwards a Graver of Coins and Medals, but at last applying himself to Painting, acquir'd great Reputation by his Works: And particularly, by a Piece of St. Se∣bastian, whom he had drawn bound to a Tree, with his hands tied over his head. In which Fi∣gure, besides the delicacy of its Colouring, and gracefulness of the Posture, the proportion of its Parts was so admirably just and true, that all the succeeding Bolognese Painters, even to Hannibal Carrache himself, study'd its measures as their Rule, and follow'd them in the same manner as the An∣cients had done the Canon of Polycletus. It was un∣der the Discipline of this Master, that Marc' Anto∣nio, Raphaels best Graver, learnt the Rudiments of his Art. He died about the year 1526, and not Anno 1518,Aet. 76. as Vasari erroneously has recorded.
FRA BARTOLOMEO,1469. born at Savignano, a Village about ten miles from Florence, Anno 1469, was a Disciple of Cosimo Rosselli: but much more beholden to the Works of Leonardo da Vinci, for his extraordinary Skill in Painting. He was very well vers'd in the fundamentals of Design: and be∣sides, had so many other laudable Qualities; that Raphael, after he had quitted the School of Perugi∣no, apply'd himself to this Master, and under him, study'd the Rules of Perspective, together with the Art of Managing, and Uniting his Colours. He turn'd Dominican Fryar, Anno 1500, and after some time, was by his Superiors sent to the Con∣vent of St. Mark, in Florence. He painted both Portraits and Histories, but his scrupulous Consci∣ence wou'd hardly ever suffer him to draw Naked Figures. He died Anno 1517, and is said to have been the first who invented,Aet. 48. and made use of a Lay-man. ALBERT DURER, born at Nuremberg, An∣no 1470, by the Instructions of his Father,1470. a cu∣rious Ieweller; the Precepts of Michael Wolgemuth, a considerable Painter; and the Rules of Geometry, Architecture, and Perspective, became the most excellent of all the German Masters. And not∣withstanding that his manner of Designing is ge∣nerally
hard, stiff, and ungraceful, yet however he was otherwise so very well Accomplish'd, that his Prints were had in great esteem all over Italy; copy'd at Venice, by the famous Marc' Antonio, and so much admir'd even by Raphael himself, that he hung them up in his own Chamber, and us'd frequently to lament the misfortune of so great a Genius, to be brought up in a Country where nothing was to be seen, that might furnish him with noble Idea's, or give him any light into things necessary for grand Compositions. His prin∣cipal Works were made at Prague, in the Palace of the Emperour Maximilian I. who had so great a respect for him, that he presented him with a Coat of Arms, as the Badge of Nobility. He was also much in favour with the Emperour Charles V. and for his modest and agreeable temper belov'd by every body, and happy in all places, but onely at home; where 'twas thought, the penu∣rious and sordid humours of a miserable wretch his Wife,Aet. 58. shorten'd his days, Anno 1528. Vide Pag. 95. ANTONIO da CORREGGIO, so named from the place where he was born,1472. in the Dukedom of Modena, Anno 1472, was a Man of such admirable natural parts, that nothing but the unhappiness of
his Education (which gave him no opportuni∣ties either of seeing Rome, or Florence; or of con∣sulting the Antiquities, for perfecting himself in the Art of Designing) hinder'd him from being the most excellent Painter in the world. Yet ne∣vertheless, he was Master of a Pencil so wonder∣fully soft, tender, beautiful and charming, that Iulio Romano having seen a Leda, and a naked Ve∣nus painted by him, for Frederick Duke of Mode∣na (who intended them a present for the Emperour) declar'd, he thought it impossible for any thing of Colours ever to go beyond them. His chief Works are at Modena, and Parma: at the last of which places he spent most of his Life, retir'd and little taken notice of, working hard to maintain his Family, which was somewhat large. He was extremely modest and obliging in his Behaviour: and died very much lamented, about the year 1512; having thrown himself into a Fever, by drinking cold water, when his body was over∣heated, with bringing home some Copper Money, which he had receiv'd for one of his Pieces.Aet. 40. See more Pag. 220 and 221. MICHELANGELO BUONAROTI, nobly de∣scended,1474. born near Florence, Anno 1474; was a Disciple of Domenico Ghirlandaio, and most pro∣foundly
skill'd in the Arts of Painting, Sculpture, and Architecture. He has the name of the greatest Designer who ever has been: and 'tis universally allow'd him, that never any Painter in the World understood Anatomy so well. He was also an ex∣cellent Poet, and not onely highly esteem'd by several Popes successively; by the Grand Duke of Tuscany, by the Republick of Venice, by the Em∣perour Charles V. by King Francis I. and by most of the Monarchs and Princes of Christendom: but was also invited over into Turky, by Solyman the Magnificent, upon a Design he then had of making a Bridge over the Hellespont, from Constantinople to Pera. His most celebrated Piece of Painting, is that of the Last Iudgment, in the Popes Chapel. He died in great Wealth at Rome, from whence his Body was translated to Florence, and there ho∣nourably interr'd,Aet. 90. Anno 1564. Vide Pag. 214. GEORGIO del CASTEL FRANCO, call'd GEORGIONE, because of his noble and comely Aspect, was born at Trevisano, a Province in the State of Venice, Anno 1477;1477. and receiv'd his first Instructions from Giovanni Bellino: but having afterwards studied the Works of Leonardo da Vinci, he soon arriv'd to a manner of Painting superior to them both; design'd with greater Freedom,
colour'd with more Strength and Beauty, gave a better Relievo, more Life, and a nobler Spirit to his Figures, and was the first who found out the admirable effects of strong Lights and Sha∣dows, amongst the Lombards. He excell'd both in Portraits and Histories: but his most valuable Piece in Oyl, is that of Our Saviour carrying his Cross, now at Venice; where it is had in wonder∣full Esteem and Veneration. He died young of the Plague (which he got in the Arms of his Mi∣stress, who was infected with it) Anno 1511: ha∣ving been likewise as famous for his performances in Music,Aet. 34. as his productions in Painting. Vide Pag. 217, and 218. TITIANO the most universal Genius of all the Lombard School,1477. the best Colourist of all the Mo∣derns, and the most eminent for Histories, Landt∣schapes, and Portraits; was born at Cadore in the Venetian Territories, Anno 1477, being descended from the ancient Family of the Vecelli. He was bred up in the School of Gio. Bellino, at the same time with Georgione: but improv'd himself more by the Emulation that was betwixt him and his Fellow-Disciple, than by the Instructions of his Ma∣ster. He was censur'd indeed by M. Angelo Buo∣naroti, for want of correctness in Designing, (a
fault common to all the Lombard Painters, who had not been acquainted with the Antiquities) yet that defect was abundantly supply'd in all the o∣ther parts of a most accomplish'd Artist. He made three several Portraits of the Emperour Charles V. who lov'd him so intirely, that he ho∣nour'd him with Knighthood, created him Count Palatine, made all his Descendents Gentlemen, as∣sign'd him a considerable Pension out of the Chamber of Naples, and what other remarkable proofs of his Affection he shew'd him, see pag. 86, 87. and a Character of his Works, pag. 218, and 219. He painted also his Son Philip II. So∣lyman Emperour of the Turks, two Popes, three Kings, two Empresses, several Queens, and almost all the Princes of Italy, together with Lud. Ariosto, and Peter Aretine, the fam'd Italian Wits, his inti∣mate Friends. Nay, so great was the Name and Reputation of Titian, that there was hardly a per∣son of any Eminence then living, from whom he did not receive some particular mark of Esteem: and besides, being of a temper wonderfully obli∣ging and generous, his house at Venice was the constant Rendezvous of all the Virtuosi, and Peo∣ple of the best Quality. He was so happy in the constitution of his Body, that he never had been sick till the year 1576, when he died of
the Plague, full of Honour, Glory and Riches, leaving behind him two Sons and a Brother, of whom Pomponio the eldest was a Clergyman,Aet. 99. and well preferr'd, but ORATIO, the youngest Son, painted several Portraits that might stand in Competition with those of his Fathers. He was famous also for ma∣ny History-pieces which he made at Venice in con∣currence with Paul Veronese, and Tintoret. But bewitch'd at last with the hopes of finding the Phi∣losophers Stone, he laid aside his Pencil, and ha∣ving reduc'd most of what had been got by his Father into Smoke; died of the Plague soon after him. FRANCESCO VECELLIO, Titian's Brother, was an Artist so well instructed in the fundamen∣tal Maximes of Design, that Titian grew jea∣lous of him; and fearing, that he might in time come to eclipse his Reputation, sent him upon pretended business to Ferdinand King of the Ro∣mans: and there found such means to divert him from Painting, that he quite gave over the study of it, and never any farther attempted it, unless it were to make a Portrait now and then, at the request of his particular Acquaintance.
ANDREA del SARTO,1478. (so call'd, because a Taylor's Son) born at Florence, Anno 1478; was a Disciple of Pietro di Cosimo, very careful and di∣ligent in his Works, and his Colouring was wonderfully sweet: but his Pictures generally want Strength and Life, as well as their Author, who was naturally mild, timorous, and poor-spiri∣ted. He was sent for to Paris, by Francis I. where he might have gather'd great Riches, but that his Wife and Relations would not suffer him to con∣tinue long there. He lived in a mean and con∣temptible condition, because he set but a very lit∣tle value upon his own Performances: yet the Flo∣rentines had so great an Esteem for his Works; that during the ury of the Popular Factions a∣mongst them, they preserv'd his Pieces from the Flames, when they neither spared Churches or any thing else. He died of the Plague, Anno 1520.Aet. 42. RAFAELLE da URBINO, born Anno 1483,1483. was one of the handsomest and best temper'd men living. See some account of him Pag. 215, and add to it, That by the general consent of Mankind, he is acknowledged to have been the Prince of the Modern Painters: and is oftentimes styl'd the Divine Raphael, for the inimitable Graces of his Pencil, and for the excellence of his Genius, which
seem'd to have something more than Humane in its Composition. That he was belov'd in the highest degree by the Popes Iulius II. and Leo X. That he was admir'd and courted by all the Prin∣ces and States of Europe, and particularly by Hen∣ry VIII. who would fain have oblig'd him to come over into England. That his Person was the won∣der and delight of Rome, as his Works are now the Glory of it. That he liv'd in the greatest State and Splendor imaginable, most of the eminent Masters in his time being ambitious of working under him: and that he never went a∣broad without a Croud of Artists, and others, who attended and follow'd him purely out of re∣spect. That he declin'd Marriage (tho' very ad∣vantageous offers had been made him) in hopes of a Cardinals Cap, which he expected: but fall∣ing sick in the mean time, and concealing the true cause of his distemper from his Physicians, Death disappointed him of the reward due to his most extraordinary Merits,Aet. 37. Anno 1520. GIO. ANTONIO LICINIO da PORDENONE,1484. born at a place so call'd, not far from Udine in the Venetian Territories, Anno 1484, after some time spent in Letters and Music, apply'd himself to Painting; yet without any other Guide to con∣duct
him, beside his own prompt and lively Ge∣nius, and the Works of Georgione: which he stu∣died at Vence with so much attention, that he soo arriv'd to a manner of Colouring nothing in∣rior to his Pattern. But that which tended yet more to his improvement, was the continued E∣mulation betwixt Titian and himself: which in∣spir'd him with noble Designs, quicken'd his In∣vention, and produc'd several excellent Pieces in Oyl, Distemper, and Fresco. From Venice he went to Genoua, where he undertook some things in com∣petition with Pierino del Vaga: but not being able to come up to the perfections of Pierinos Pencil, he return'd to Venice, and afterwards visited se∣veral other parts of Lombardy: was Knighted by the Emperour Charles V. and at last being sent for to Ferrara, was so much esteem'd there, that he is said to have been poison'd by some who en∣vy'd the Favours which he receiv'd from the Duke, Anno 1540.Aet. 56. SEBASTIANO del PIOMBO, a Native of Ve∣nice, Anno 1485,1485. took his name from an Office given him by Pope Clement VII. in the Lead-Mines. He was design'd by his Father for the Pro∣fession of Music, which he practis'd for some time; till following at last the more powerful Dictates of
Nature, he betook himself to Painting, and be∣came a Disciple of Gio. Bellino: continued his stu∣dies under Georgione, and having attain'd his ex∣cellent manner of Colouring, went to Rome; where he insinuated himself so far into the favour of Mi∣chael Angelo, by siding with him and his Party, a∣gainst Raphael; that pleas'd with the sweetness and beauty of his Pencil, he immediately fur∣nish'd him with some of his own Designs, and letting them pass under Sebastians name, cry'd him up for the best Painter in Rome. And indeed so universal was the Applause which he gain'd by his Piece of Lazarus rais'd from the dead, (the de∣sign of which had likewise been given him by Mi∣chael Angelo) that nothing but the famous Trans∣figuration of Raphaels could eclipse it. He has the name of being the first who invented the Art of preparing Plaister-walls for Oyl-painting: but was generally so slow, and lazy in his Performances, that other hands were oftentimes employ'd in fi∣nishing what he had begun.Aet. 62. He died Anno 1547. BARTOLOMEO (in the Tuscan Dialect call'd BACCIO) BANDINELLI,1487. a Florentine Painter and Sculptor, born Anno 1487; was a Disciple of Gio. Francesco Rustici, and by the help of Anatomy, joyn'd with his other Studies, became a very ex∣cellent
and correct Designer: but in the Colou∣ring part was so unfortunate, that after he had heard Michael Angelo condemn it, for being hard and unpleasant, he never could be prevail'd upon to make any farther use of his Pencil, but always ingag'd some other hand in Colouring his Designs. Yet however, in Sculpture he succeded better: and for a Descent from the Cross, in Mezzo Relievo, was Knighted by the Emperour. He was likewise much in favour with Francis I. and acquir'd great Re∣putation by several of his Figures: which yet are more admir'd for their true Out-line, and Propor∣tion, Aet. 72. than for being either graceful or gentile. He died Anno 1559. GIULIO ROMANO, born Anno 1492,1492. was the greatest Artist, and most universal Painter of all the Disciples of Raphael: belov'd by him as if he had been his Son, for the wonderful sweetness of his temper; and made one of his Heirs, upon condition, that he should assist in finishing such things as he had left imperfect. He was profound∣ly learn'd in all the parts of the Antiquities: and by his conversation with the works of the most excellent Poets, and particularly Homer, had made himself an absolute Master of the qualifications necessary requir'd in a great Designer. He con∣tinu'd
for some years at Rome, after the death of Raphael: and by the directions of Pope Clement VII. wrought several admirable Pieces in the Hall of Constantine, and other publick places. But his principal performances were at Mantoua: where he was sent for by the Marquess Frederico Gonza∣ga; and where he made his name illustrious, by a noble and stately Palace built after his Model, and beautified with variety of Paintings after his Designs. And indeed in Architecture he was so eminently skilful; that he was invited back to Rome, with an offer made him of being the chief Architect of St. Peters Church: but whilst he was debating with himself, whether or no he should accept of this opportunity, of returning gloriously into his own Country, Death interpos'd,Aet. 54. Anno 1546. Vide Pag. 216. GIACOMO da PUNTORMO, so call'd from the place of his Birth, Anno 1493,1493. studied under Leonardo da Vinci, Mariotto Albertinelli, Pietro di Co∣simo, and Andrea del Sarto: but chiefly follow'd the manner of the last, both in Design and Co∣louring. He was of so unhappy a temper of mind, that though his Works had stood the Test even of Raphael and Michael Angelo, the best Judges, yet he could never order them so as to please himself:
and was so far from being satisfied with any thing he had ever done, that he was in great danger of losing the gracefulness of his own manner, by imitating that of other Masters, and particularly the Style of Albert Durer in his Prints. He spent most of his time at Florence, where he painted the Chapel of St. Laurence: but was so wonderfully tedious about it, that in the space of eleven years he would admit no body to see what he had per∣form'd. He was also of so mean and pitiful a spirit, that he chose rather to be imploy'd by Or∣dinary People, for inconsiderable gains; than by Princes and Noblemen, at any rates: so that he died poor,Aet. 63. Anno 1556. GIOVANNI D'UDINE,1494. so nam'd from the place where he was born (being the Metropolis of Frioul) Anno 1494; was instructed by Georgione at Venice, and at Rome became a Disciple of Ra∣phael: and is celebrated, for having been the first who found out the Composition of Stucco-work, in use amongst the ancient Romans, and discover'd in the Subterranean Vaults of Titus's Palace; which he restor'd to its full Splendor and Perfection. He was employ'd by Raphael, in adorning the Apart∣ments of the Vatican; and afterwards by several Princes, and Cardinals, in the chief Palaces of Rome
and Florence: and by the agreeable variety and richness of his Fancy, and his peculiar happiness in expressing all sorts of Animals, Fruit, Flowers, and the Still-life, both in Bass relievo, and Colours, ac∣quir'd the reputation of being the best Master in the world, for Ornaments in Stucco, and Grotesque. He died Anno 1564, and was bury'd, according to his desire, in the Rotunda,Aet. 70. near his dear Master Raphael. BATTISTA FRANCO his Contemporary, a Native of Venice, was a Disciple of Michael Angelo; whose manner he follow'd so close, that in the cor∣rectness of his Out-line, he surpass'd most of the Masters in his time. His Paintings are somewhat numerous, and dispers'd all over Italy, and other parts of Europe: but his Colouring being very dry, they are not much more esteem'd than the Prints which he etch'd. He died Anno 1561. LUCAS van LEYDEN,1494. so call'd from the place where he was born, Anno 1494, was at first a Disciple of his Father, a Painter of note, and af∣terwards of Cornelius Engelbert: and wonderfully cry'd up in Holland, and the Low-Countries, for his skill in Painting, and Graving. He was prodigi∣ously laborious in his Works, and a great Emula∣tor
of Albert Durer: with whom he became at length so intimate, that they drew each others Picture. And indeed their Manner, and Style are in all respects so very much alike, that it seem'd as if one and the same Soul had animated them both. He died Anno 1533, after an interview be∣twixt him and some other Painters at Middleburgh: where disputing, and falling out in their Cups, Lucas fancying they had poyson'd him,Aet. 39. languish'd by degrees, and pined away purely with conceit. QUINTIN MATSYS of Antwerp, was the Con∣temporary of Lucas; and famous for having been transform'd from a Blacksmith to a Painter, by the force of Love, and for the sake of a Mistress, who dislik'd his former profession. He was a painful and diligent Imitator of the ordinary Life, and much better at representing the defects, than the Beau∣ties of Nature. One of his best Pieces is a Descent from the Cross (in a Chapel of the Cathedral at Ant∣werp) for which, and a multitude of other Histo∣ries, and Portraits, he gain'd a great number of ad∣mirers; especially for his Curiosity and Neatness, which in truth, was the principal part of his Cha∣racter. He died Anno 1529.
Beside the two Masters last mention'd, there were several other History-painters, who flourish'd in Germany, Flanders, and Holland about this time. But their manner being generally Gothique, Hard, and Dry; more like the Style of Cimabue, in the Dawning of the Art of Painting, than the Gusto of Raphael, in its Meridian Lustre; we shall onely give you the names of some of the most noted; and such were Mabuse, Aldegraef, Schoorel, Frans Floris, Martin Hemskerck, Chris. Schwarts, &c. POLIDORO of CARAVAGGIO, in the Dutchy of Milan, was born Anno 1495,1495. and brought up to no better an imployment than carrying Stone and Mortar, in the New-buildings of Pope Leo X. But being tempted at last by the performances of Gio. d'Udine, to try his Talent in Designing: by the assistance of one of his Scholars, and his own con∣tinued Application to the Antiquities, in a little time he became so skilful an Artist, that he had the honour of contributing much to the finishing those glorious Works in the Vatican. He associa∣ted himself both in the Study and Practice of his Art with one MATURINO, a Florentine; and their Genius being very conformable, they liv'd toge∣ther like Brothers, working in Fresco upon several Frontispieces of the most noble Palaces in Rome:
whereby they acquir'd great reputation; their In∣vention being the richest, and their Design the easi∣est that could any where be seen. But Maturino dying Anno 1527, and Rome being then in the hands of the Spaniards, Polidoro retir'd to Naples, and from thence to Messina; where his excellent Talent in Architecture also being highly commend∣ed, he was order'd to prepare the Triumphal Arches for the reception of the Emperour Charles V. from Tunis; for which he was nobly rewarded: and being afterwards desirous of seeing Rome once more; in his return thither was murther'd by his Servant and Accomplices, for the sake of his Mo∣ney, and bury'd at Messina,Aet. 48. Anno 1543. Vide Pag. 217. ROSSO (so call'd from his red Hair) born at Florence, Anno 1496;1496. was educated in the study of Philosophy, Music, &c. and having learnt the first Rudiments of Design from the Cartoons of Mi∣chael Angelo, improv'd himself by the help of Ana∣tomy; which he understood so very well, that he compos'd two Books upon that Subject. He had a copious Invention, great skill in the mixture of his Colours, and in the management of his Lights and Shadows: was very happy also in his Naked Figures, which he express'd with a good Relievo, and
proper Attitudes; and would have excell'd in all the parts of Paintinig, had he not been too licenti∣ous and extravagant sometimes, and suffer'd himself rather to be hurry'd away with the heat of an un∣bounded Fancy, than govern'd by his own Iudg∣ment, or the Rules of Art. From Florence his Cu∣riosity carry'd him to Rome and Venice, and after∣wards into France; where by his Works in the Galleries at Fountainbleau, and by several proofs which he gave of his extraordinary knowledge in Architecture, he recommended himself so effectu∣ally to Francis I. that he made him Super-intendent General of all his Buildings, Pictures, &c. and gave him other opportunities of growing so vastly rich; that for some time he liv'd like a Prince himself, in all the Splendor and Magnificence imaginable: till at last being rob'd of a considerable Summ of Money, and suspecting one of his intimate Friends (a Florentine who frequented his house) he caus'd him to be imprison'd, and put to the Torture, which he underwent with courage; and having in the highest extremities maintain'd his innocence with so much constancy, as to procure his Release; Rosso, partly out of remorse for the barbarous treatment of his Friend, and partly out of fear of the ill consequence from his just Resentment,Aet. 45. made himself away by Poison, Anno 1541.
FRANCESCO PRIMATICCIO, a famous Pain∣ter and Architect of Bologna, succeeded Rosso in the Honours and Imployments which he enjoy'd by the favour of Francis. I. and besides, being very well descended, was made Abbot of St. Martin de Troy, in Champagne. He finish'd all the several Works begun by his Predecessor at Fountainbleau, by the assistance of NICOLO dell' ABBATE, an ex∣cellent Artist, his Disciple: and enrich'd that Palace with abundance of noble Statues, and other Pieces of Antiquity, which he brought purposely from Italy by the Kings order. He had been bred up at Mantoua under Iulio Romano, as well to Stucco-work as Painting: and by studying his manner, to∣gether with the Performances of other great Ma∣sters, became perfect in the Art of Designing, and well vers'd in grand Compositions. He continued in France during the remainder of his Life: liv'd in Pomp and State, more like a Nobleman than a Painter; and was very well esteem'd in four seve∣ral Reigns. DON GIULIO CLOVIO, the celebrated Lim∣ner, born in Slavonia, Anno 1498,1498. at the age of eighteen years went to Italy: and under the Con∣duct of Iulio Romano, apply'd himself to Miniature with such admirable Success, that never did anci∣ent
Greece, or modern Rome produce his Fellow. He excell'd both in Portraits and Histories: and (as Vasari his Contemporary reports) was another Ti∣tian in the one, and a second Michael Angelo in the other. He was entertain'd for some time in the service of the King of Hungary: after whose de∣cease he return'd to Italy; and being taken Pri∣soner at the sacking of Rome, by the Spaniards, made a Vow, to retire into a Convent, as soon as ever he should recover his Liberty; which he according∣ly perform'd not long after in Mantoua: but up∣on a Dispensation obtain'd from the Pope, by Car∣dinal Grimani, soon laid aside the religious Habit, and was receiv'd into the Family of that Prince. His Works were wonderfully esteem'd through∣out Europe; highly valu'd by several Popes, by the Emperours Charles V. and Maximilian II. by Philip King of Spain, and many other illustrious Personages: and so much admir'd at Rome; that those Pieces which he wrought for the Cardinal Farnese (in whose Palace he spent the latter part of his Life) were by all the Lovers of Art, rec∣kon'd in the number of the Rarities of that City.Aet. 80. Ob. Anno 1578. HANS HOLBEIN, born at Basil, in Swit∣zerland, Anno 1498,1498. was a Disciple of his Fa∣ther;
by whose assistance and his own industry, he made a wonderful Progress in the Art of Pain∣ting: and acquir'd such a name by his Piece of Deaths-dance, in the Town-hall of Basil, that the fa∣mous Erasmus, after he had oblig'd him to draw his Picture, sent him over with it into England, and gave him Letters recommendatory to Sir Thomas Moore then Ld. Chancellour; who receiv'd and enter∣tain'd him with the greatest respect imaginable, im∣ploy'd him in making the Portraits of himself and Family; and which the sight of them so charm'd King Henry VIII. that he immediately took him into his service, and by the many signal Instances which he gave him of his Royal Favour and Boun∣ty, brought him likewise into esteem with all the Nobility, and People of Eminence in the King∣dom. One of his best Pieces, is that of the said King with his Queen, &c. at White-hall; which with divers other admirable Portraits of his hand (some as big, and others less than the Life; and as well in Water-Colours, as Oyl) may challenge a place a∣mongst those of the most fam'd Italian Masters: Vid. Pag. 224. He was eminent also for a rich vein of Invention, very conspicuous in a multitude of Designs, which he made for Gravers, Sculptors, Iewellers, &c. and was particularly remarkable for having (like Turpilius the Roman) perform'd
all his Works with his Left hand.Aet. 56. He died of the Plague, at London, Anno 1554. PIERINO del VAGA, was born at Florence, Anno 1500,1500. of such mean Parentage; that his Mo∣ther being dead at two months end, he was af∣terwards suckled by a Goat. The name of Vaga he took from a Country Painter, who carry'd him to Rome: where he left him in such poor circum∣stances, that he was forc'd to spend three days of the week in working for Bread; but yet setting a∣part the other three for his improvement; in a lit∣tle time, by studying the Antique, together with the Works of Raphael, and Michael Angelo, he be∣came one of the boldest and best Designers of the Roman School: and understood the Muscles in na∣ked Bodies, and all the difficulties of the Art so well; that Raphael took an affection to him, and imploying him in the Popes Apartments, gave him a lucky opportunity of distinguishing him∣self from his Fellow-disciples, by the marvellous beau∣ty of his Colouring, and his peculiar Talent in Gro∣tesque. His chief Works are at Genoua: where he grew famous likewise for his skill in Architecture; having design'd a noble Palace for Prince Doria, which he also painted, and adorn'd with his own hand. From Genoua he remov'd to Pisa, and af∣terwards
to several other parts of Italy; his ram∣bling humour never suffering him to continue long in one place: till at length returning to Rome, he had a Pension settled on him, for looking after the Pope's Palace, and the Casa Farnese. But Pierino having squander'd away in his Youth, that which should have been the support of his old Age; and being constrain'd at last to make himself cheap, by undertaking any little Pieces, for a small Summ of ready money; fell into a deep Melancholy, and from that extreme into another as bad, of Wine and Women, and the next turn was into his Grave,Aet. 47. Anno 1547. FRANCESO MAZZUOLI, call'd PARME∣GIANO, because born at Parma, Anno 1504,1504. was an eminent Painter when but sixteen years old, famous all over Italy at nineteen, and at twenty three perform'd such wonders; that when the Em∣perour Charles V. had taken Rome by Storm, some of the common Soldiers in sacking the Town, ha∣ving broke into his Apartments, and found him intent upon his work, were so astonish'd at the charming Beauty of his Pieces, that instead of Plunder and Destruction, which was then their business, they resolv'd to protect him (as they af∣terwards did) from all manner of violence. But
besides the perfections of his Pencil (which was one of the gentilest, the most graceful, and the most elegant of any in his time) he delighted much in Music, and therein also excell'd. His princi∣pal Works are at Parma; where, for several years he liv'd in great Reputation, till falling unhappi∣ly into the study of Chymistry, he wasted the most considerable part of his Time and Fortunes in search of the Philosophers-Stone, and died poor, in the flower of his age, Anno 1540. See farther Page 221: and note, that there are extant ma∣ny valuable Prints,Aet. 36. etch'd by this Master. GIACOMO PALMA, Senior, commonly call'd PALMA VECCHIO, was born at Serinalta, in the State of Venice, Anno 1508;1508. and made such good use and advantage of the instructions which he re∣ceiv'd from Titian, that few Masters are to be nam'd, who have shewn a nobler Fancy in their Composi∣tions, a better Iudgment in their Designs, more of Nature in their Expression, or of Art in finishing their Works. Venice was the place where he usual∣ly resided, and where he died, Anno 1556. His Pieces are not very numerous, by reason of his having spent much time, in bringing those which he has left behind him to such wonderful perfecti∣on.Aet. 48.
DANIELE RICCIARELLI, surnam'd da VOL∣TERRA, from a Town in Tuscany where he was born, Anno 1509,1509. was a person of a melancho∣ly and heavy temper, and seem'd to be but mean∣ly qualified by Nature for an Artist: Yet by the instructions of Balthasar da Siena, and his own continued Application and Industry, he surmoun∣ted all difficulties, and at length became so excel∣lent a Designer, that his Descent from the Cross, in the Church of the Trinity on the Mount, is rank'd amongst the principal Pieces in Rome. He was chosen by Pope Paul IV. to cloath some of the Nudities, in Michael Angelo's Last Iudgment; which he perform'd with good success. He was as emi∣nent likewise for his Chisel, as his Pencil; and wrought several considerable things in Sculpture.Aet. 57. Ob. Anno 1566. FRANCESCO SALVIATI, a Florentine, born Anno 1510,1510. was at first a Disciple of Andrea del Sarto, and afterwards of Baccio Bandinelli; and very well esteem'd both in Italy, and France, for his several works in Fresco, Distemper, and Oyl. He was quick at Invention, and as ready in the exe∣cution; Graceful in his Naked Figures, and as Gen∣tile in his Draperies: Yet his Talent did not lie in great Compositions; And there are some of his
Pieces in two Colours onely, which have the name of being his best Performances. He was natu∣rally so fond and conceited of his own Works, that he could hardly allow any body else a good word: And 'tis said, that the Jealousie which he had of some Young men then growing up into reputation, made him so uneasie, that the very apprehensions of their proving better Artists than himself,Aet. 53. hasten'd his Death, Anno 1563. PIRRO LIGORIO, a Neapolitan, liv'd in this time: and tho' he address'd himself chiefly to the study of Architecture, and for his skill in that Art was imploy'd, and highly encourag'd by Pope Pi∣us IV. yet he was withall an excellent Designer; and by the many noble Cartoons which he made for Tapestries, &c. gave sufficient proof, that he was more than indifferently learn'd in the Antiqui∣ties. There are several Volumes of his Designs preserv'd in the Cabinet of the Duke of Savoy; of which some part consists in a curious Collection of all the Ships, and other sorts of Vessels, in use amongst the Ancients. He died about the year 1573. Vide Pag. 217. GIACOMO da PONTE da BASSANO,1510. so call'd from the place where he was born in the Marca Tre∣visana,
Anno 1510, was a Disciple of Bonifacio, a noted Painter, at Venice; by whose Assistance, and his own frequent copying the Works of Titian, and Parmegiano, he brought himself into a pleasant and most agreeable way of Colouring: but returning in∣to the Country, upon the death of his Father, he apply'd himself wholly to the imitation of Nature; and from his Wife, Children and Servants, took the Ideas of most of his Figures. His Works are very numerous, all the Stories of the Old and New Testament having been painted by his hand, be∣sides a multitude of other Histories. He was fa∣mous also for several excellent Portraits, and par∣ticularly those of the celebrated Poets Ludovico Ariosto, Bernardo Tasso, and Torquato his Son. In a word, so great was the Reputation of this Artist at Venice, that Titian himself was glad to purchase one of his Pieces (representing The en∣trance of Noah and his Family into the Ark) at a ve∣ry considerable Price. He was earnestly solici∣ted to go over into the service of the Emperour: but so charming were the pleasures which he found in the quiet enjoyment of Painting, Music, and good Books, that no Temptations whatsoever could make him change his Cottage for a Court. He died Anno 1592,Aet. 82. leaving behind him four Sons, of whom
FRANCESCO the Eldest, settled at Venice, where he follow'd the manner of his Father, and was well esteem'd, for divers Pieces which he made in the Ducal Palace and other publick places, in conjunction with Paul Veronese, Tintoret, &c. But his too close Application to Painting having ren∣der'd him unfit for all other business, and igno∣rant even of his own private Affairs; he contra∣cted by degrees a deep Melancholy, and at last became so much craz'd, that fancying Sergeants were continually in pursuit of him, he leap'd out of his Window, to avoid 'em (as he imagin'd) and by the fall occasion'd his own Death, Anno 1594, Aet. 43. LEANDRO, the Third Son, had so excellent a Talent in Face-painting, (which he principally studied) that he was Knighted for a Portrait which he made of the Doge Marin Grimano. He like∣wise finish'd several things left imperfect by his Brother Francesco; compos'd some History-pieces also of his own, and was as much admir'd for his perfection in Musick, as his skill in Painting. Obiit Anno 1623, Aet. 65. GIO. BATTISTA, the Second Son, and GI∣ROLAMO the Youngest, apply'd themselves to co∣pying
their Fathers Works; which they did so very well, that they are oftentimes taken for Originals. Gio. Battista died Anno 1613, Aet. 60; and Gi∣rolamo Anno 1622, Aet. 62: See more of the Bassans Pag. 220. GIACOMO ROBUSTI, call'd TINTORETTO, because a Dyers Son, born at Venice, Anno 1512;1512. was a Disciple of Titian; who having observ'd something very extraordinary in his Genius, dis∣miss'd him from his Family, for fear he should grow up to rival his Master. Yet he still pursu'd Titians way of Colouring, as the most natural; and studied Michael Angelos Gusto of Design, as the most correct. Venice was the place of his constant Abode; where he was made a Citizen, and won∣derfully belov'd, and esteem'd for his Works; the Character of which see Pag. 219. He was call'd the Furious Tintoret, for his bold manner of Paint∣ing, with strong Lights and deep Shadows; for the rapidity of his Genius, and grand vivacity of Spi∣rit, much admir'd by Paul Veronese. But then, on the other hand, he was blam'd by him, and all others of his Profession, for under-valuing himself, and his Art, by undertaking all sorts of business for any Price; thereby making so great a difference in his several Performances, that (as Hannibal Carrach
observ'd) he is sometimes equal to Titian, and at other times inferior even to himself. He was ex∣tremely pleasant and affable in his Humour: and delighted so much in Painting and Music, his be∣lved Studies, that he would hardly suffer him∣self to tast any other Pleasures. He died Anno 1594, leaving behind him a Daughter,Aet. 82. and a Son, of whom the Eldest MARIETTA TINTOREITA, was so well in∣structed by her Father in his own Profession, as well as in Music, that by her Pencil she got great Reputation; and was particularly eminent for an admirable Style in Portraits. She died young, Anno 1590, Aet. 30. DOMENICO TINTORETTO his Son, gave great hopes in his youth, that he would one day render the name of Tintoret yet more illustri∣ous than his Father had made it: but neglecting to cultivate by study the Talent which Nature had given him, he fell short of those mighty things expected from him, and became more considera∣ble for Portraits, than Historical Compositions. He died Anno 1637, Aet. 75.
PARIS BORDONE, well descended, and brought up to Letters, Music, and other gentile Accomplshments, was a Disciple of Titian, and flourish'd in the time of Tintoret: but was more commended for the Delicacy of his Pencil, than the Purity of his Out lines. He was in great favour and esteem with Francis I. for whom, besides abun∣dance of Histories, he made the Portraits of seve∣ral Court Ladies, in so excellent a manner, that the Original Nature was hardly more charming. From France he return'd home to Venice, laden with Honour and Riches; and having acquir'd as much Reputation in all the parts of Italy, as he had done abroad, died Anno Aet. 75. GEORGIO VASARI, born at Arezzo a City in Tuscany, Anno 1514,1514. equally famous for his Pen and Pencil, and as eminent for his skill in Ar∣chitecture, was a Disciple of Michael Angelo, and Andrea del Sarto; and by his indefatigable diligence in studying and copying all the best Pieces of the most noted Artists, improv'd his Invention and Hand to such a degree, that he attain'd a wonder∣ful Freedom in both. He spent the most conside∣rable part of his Life in travelling over Italy; lea∣ving in all places marks of his Industry, and ga∣thering every where materials for his History of the
Lives of the most excellent Painters, Sculptors, Archi∣tects, &c. which he publish'd at Florence, about the year 1551: a work, in the opinion of Hannibal Caro, written with much exactness and judgment; tho' Felibien, and others tax him with some mi∣stakes, and particularly with flattering the Ma∣sters then alive, and with partiality to those of his own Country.Aet. 64. He died Anno 1578. ANTONIO MORE, born at Utrecht in the Low-Countries, Anno 1519,1519. was a Disciple of Iohn Schoorel, and in his younger days had seen Rome, and some other parts of Italy. He was re∣commended by Cardinal Granville, to the service of the Emperour Charles V. and having made a Portrait of his Son Philip II. at Madrid, was sent upon the same accout to the King, Queen, and Princess of Portugal, and afterwards into England, to draw the Picture of Queen Mary. From Spain he retir'd into Flanders, where he became a migh∣ty Favourite of the Duke of Alva (then the Go∣vernour of the Low-Countries.) And besides the noble Presents and Applause which he gain'd in all places by his Pencil, was as much admir'd for his extraordinary Address, being as great a Courtier as a Painter. His Talent lay in Designing very justly, in finishing his Pieces with wonderful care
and neatness, and in a most natural imitation of Flesh and Bloud, in his Colouring. Yet after all, he could not reach that noble Strength and Spirit, so visible in the Works of Titian, and to which Van Dyk has since arriv'd. He made several At∣tempts also in History-pieces, but understood no∣thing of grand Compositions, and his manner was tame,Aet. 56. hard, and dry. He died at Antwerp, Anno 1575. PAOLO FARINATO, born at Verona, Anno 1522;1522. was a Disciple of Antonio Badile, and an admirable Designer, but not so happy in his Co∣louring: tho' there is a Piece of his in St. Georges Church at Verona, so well perform'd in both parts, that it does not seem to be inferior to one of Paulo Veronese, which is plac'd next to it. He was very considerable likewise for his knowledge in Scul∣pture, and Architecture, especially that part of it which relates to Fortifications,Aet. 84. &c. Obiit Anno 1606. ANDREA SCHIAVONE, so call'd from the Country where he was born, Anno 1522;1522. was so very meanly descended, that his Parents after they had brought him to Venice, were not able to allow him a Master: and yet by great study and pains,
together with such helps as he receiv'd from the Prints of Parmegiano, and the Paintings of Georgi∣one and Titian, he arriv'd at last to a degree of Excellence very surprizing. 'Tis true indeed, that being oblig'd to work for his daily Bread, he could not spare time sufficient for making him∣self throughly perfect in Design: but however, that Defect was so well cover'd by the singular Beauty and Sweetness of his Colours, that Tintoret us'd oftntimes to say, no Painter ought to be with∣out one Piece (at least) of his Hand. His principal Works were compos'd at Venice, some of them in concurrence with Tintoret himself, and others by the directions of Titian, in the Library of St. Mark. But so malicious was Fortune to poor An∣drea, that his Pictures were but little valued in his life-time, and he never was paid any otherwise for them, than as an ordinary Painter: tho' after his Decease, which happen'd Anno 1582, his Works turn'd to a much better account, and were e∣steem'd answerable to their Merits, and but lit∣tle inferior to those of his most famous Contem∣poraries.Aet. 60. FREDERICO BAROCCI, born in the City of Urbin, Anno 1528,1528. was train'd up in the Art of Designing by Baptista Venetiano, and having at
Rome acquir'd a competent Knowledge in Geo∣metry, Perspective, and Architecture, apply'd him∣self to the Works of his most eminent Predecessors: and in a particular manner studied Raphael, and Correggio; one in the charming Ayrs, and graceful Out-lines of his Figures, and the other in the admirable Union, and agreeable Harmony of his Colours. He had not been long in Rome, be∣fore some malicious Painters, his Competitors, found means by a Dose of Poyson convey'd into a Sallet, with which they had treated him, to send him back again into his own Country, attend∣ed with an Infirmity so terribly grievous, that for above fifty years together it seldom permitted him to take any Repose, and never allow'd him above two hours in a day to follow his Painting. So that expecting, almost every Moment, to be re∣mov'd into another World, he imploy'd his Pen∣cil altogether in the Histories of the Bible, and o∣ther Religious Subjects, of which he wrought a con∣siderable number, in the short Intervals of his pain∣ful Fits,Aet. 84. and notwithstanding the Severity of them, liv'd till the year 1612. TADDEO ZUCCHERO, born in the Dut∣chy of Urbin, Anno 1529,1529. was initiated in the Art of Painting at home, by his Father, and at
Rome instructed by Gio. Pietro Calabro; but im∣prov'd himself most by the Study of Anatomy, and by copying the Works of Raphael. He excell'd chiefly in a florid Invention, a gentile Manner of Designing, and in the good Disposition and Oecono∣my of his Pieces: but was not so much admir'd for his Colouring, which was generally unpleasant, and rather resembled the Statues than the Life. He liv'd for the most part in Rome and Urbin, where he left many things unfinish'd,Aet. 37. being taken away in his Prime, Anno 1566. PAOLO CALIARI VERONESE, born Anno 1532,1532. was a Disciple of Antonio Badile, and not only esteem'd the most excellent of all the Lom∣bard Painters, but for his copious and admirable Invention, for the Grandeur and Majesty of his Composition, for the Beauty and Perfection of his Draperies, together with his noble Ornaments of Architecture, &c. is styl'd by the Italians, Il Pittore felice (the happy Painter.) He spent most of his time at Venice; but the best of his Works were made after he return'd thither from Rome, and had studied the Antique. He could not be pre∣vail'd upon, by the great Offers made him by the King of Spain, to leave his own Country; where his Reputation was so well establish'd, that most
of the Princes of Europe sent to their several Em∣bassadours, to procure them something of his Hand at any Rates. He was a Person of an ingenuous and noble Spirit, us'd to go richly drest, and ge∣nerally wore a gold Chain, which had been pre∣sented him by the Procurators of St. Mark, as a Prize which he won from several Artists his Com∣petitors. He was highly in favour with all the principal Men in his time, and so much admir'd by all the great Masters, as well his Contempo∣raries, as those who succeeded him, that Titian himself us'd to call him the Ornament of his Pro∣fession: and Guido Reni being ask'd, which of the Masters his Predecessors he would chuse to be, were it in his power; after a little pause, cry'd out Paulo, Paulo. He died at Venice, Anno 1588,Aet. 56. leaving great Wealth behind him to his two Sons GABRIELLE and CARLO, who liv'd ve∣ry happily together, joyn'd in finishing several Pieces left imperfect by their Father, and follow'd his manner so close in other excellent things of their own, that they are not easily distinguish'd from those of Paulos hand. Carlo would have perform'd wonders, had he not been nipt in the Bud, Anno 1596, Aet. 26: after whose Decease Gabriel ap∣ply'd
himself to Merchandizing; yet did not quite lay aside has Pencil, but made a considerable number of Portraits, and some History-pieces of a very good Gusto. Obiit Anno 1631, Aetat. 63. BENEDETTO CALIARI liv'd and study'd with his Brother Paulo, whom he lov'd intirely; and frequently assisted him, and his Nephews, in finishing several of their Compositions; but especi∣ally in Painting Architecture, in which he chief∣ly delighted. He practised for the most part in Fresco: and some of his best Pieces are in Chiaro-Scuro, or two Colours onely. He was besides, Master of an indifferent good stock of Learning, was Poetically inclin'd, and had a peculiar Ta∣lent in Satire. He died Anno 1598, Aet. 60. See more of Paulo pag. 219. GIOSEPPE SALVIATI, a Venetian Painter, was born Anno 1535,1535. and exchang'd the name of Porta, which belong'd to his Family, for that of his Master Francesco Salviati, with whom he was plac'd very young at Rome by his Uncle. He spent the greatest part of his Life in Venice; where he apply'd himself generally to Fresco: and was oftentimes imploy'd in concurrence with Paul Ve∣ronese
and Tintoret. He was well esteem'd for his great skill both in Design and Colouring; was likewise well read in other Arts and Sciences, and particularly so good a Mathematician, that he writ several Treatises very judiciously on that Subject. He died Anno 1585.Aet. 50. FREDERICO ZUCCHERO, born in the Dutchy of Urbin, Anno 1543,1543. was a Disciple of his Brother Taddeo, from whom he differ'd but very little in his Style and Manner of Painting, tho' in Sculpture and Architecture he was far more ex∣cellent. He fled into France to avoid the Popes Displeasure, which he had incurr'd by an Affront put upon some of his Officers: and from thence passing through Flanders and Holland, came over into England, drew Queen Elizabeths Picture, went back to Italy, was pardon'd by the Pope, and in a little time sent for to Spain by the Philip II. and imploy'd in the Escurial. He labour'd very hard at his return to Rome, for establishing the Academy of Painting, by virtue of a Brief obtain'd from Pope Gregory XIII. Of which being chosen the first Prince himself, he built a noble Apart∣ment for their Meeting, went to Venice to print some Books which he had compos'd of that Art, and had form'd other Designs for its farther Ad∣vancement,
which yet were all defeated by his Death (at Ancona) Anno 1609.Aet. 66. GIACOMO PALMA Iunior, commonly call'd GIOVANE PALMA, born at Venice, Anno 1544,1544. was the Son of Antonio the Nephew of Palma Vec∣chio. He improv'd the Instructions which his Fa∣ther had given him, by copying the Works of the most eminent Masters, both of the Roman and Lombard Schools; but in his own Compositions chief∣ly follow'd the Manner of Titian and Ttoret. He spent some years in Rome, and was imploy'd in the Galleries and Lodgings of the Vatican: but the greatest number of his Pieces is at Venice, where he studied night and day, fill'd almost every place with something or other of his Hand; and (like Tintoret) refus'd nothing that was offer'd him, upon the least Prospect of any Gains. He died Anno 1628.Aet. 84. DOMENICO FETI, a Roman, flourish'd in this time. He was a Disciple of Lodovico Civoli, of Florence; and excell'd in Figures and Historical Compositions, but died young, Anno Aet. 35. BARTHOLOMEW SPRANGHER, born at Antwerp, Anno 1546,1546 was chief Painter to the
Emperour Maximilian II. and so much respected by his Successor Rodolphus, that he presented him with a Gold Chain and Medal, allow'd him a Pen∣sion, honour'd him and his Posterity with the Ti∣tle of Nobility, lodg'd him in his own Palace, and would suffer him to paint for no-body but himself. He had spent some part of his Youth in Rome, where he was imploy'd by the Cardinal Farnese, and afterwards preferr'd to the Service of Pope Pius V. but for want of Iudgment in the Conduct of his Studies, brought little with him, besides a good Pencil from Italy. His Out-line was generally stiff and very ungraceful, his Postures forc'd and ex∣travagant; and in a word, there appear'd nothing of the Roman Gusto in his Designs. He obtain'd leave from the Emperour (after many years continu∣ance in his Court) to visit his own Country; and accordingly went to Antwerp, Amsterdam, Haerlem, and several other places, where he was honoura∣bly receiv'd: and having had the satisfaction of seeing his own Works highly admir'd, and his man∣ner almost universally follow'd in all those parts, as well as in Germany, return'd to Prague, and di∣ed Anno 1602, or thereabout. In the same Form with Sprangher we may place his Contemporaries, Iohn van Ach, and Ioseph Heints, both History Pain∣ter of note,Aet. 56. and much admir'd in the Emperours Court.
MATTHEW BRIL was born at Antwerp, Anno 1550,1550. but studied for the most part at Rome; and was famous for his Performances in History and Landtschape, in the Galleries of the Vatican, where he was imploy'd by Pope Gregory XIII. He died young, Anno 1584.Aet. 34. PAUL BRIL, of Antwerp also, born Anno 1554,1554. follow'd his Brother Matthew to Rome, painted several things in conjunction with him, and after his Decease, brought himself into Repu∣tation by his Landtschapes: but especially by those which he compos'd in his latter time (after he had studied the manner o Hannibal Carrach, and had copied some of Titians Works, in the same kind) the Invention in them being more pleasant, the Disposition more noble, all the parts more a∣greeable, and painted with a better Gusto, than those in his former days. He died at Rome, Anno 1626.Aet. 72. ANTONIO TEMPESTA, his Contemporary, a Native of Florence, was a Disciple of Iohn Strada, a Fleming. He had a particular Genius for Battels, Calvacades, Huntings, and for design∣ing all sorts of Animals: but did not so much re∣gard the Delicacy of Colouring, as the lively ex∣pression
and Spirit of those things which he repre∣sented. His ordinary Residence was at Rome; where, in his younger days he had wrought seve∣ral Pieces by order of Pope Gregory XIII. in the Apartments of the Vatican. He was full of Thought and Invention, very quick and ready in the Exe∣cution, and famous also for a multitude of Prints, etch'd by himself. He died Anno 1630. LODOVICO CARRACCI, the Uncle of Augusti∣no and Hannibal, was born at Bologna, Anno 1555,1555. and under his first Master Prospero Fontana, dis∣cover'd but an indifferent Genius for Painting: but however, Art supply'd the defects of Nature, and by constant and unwearied diligence in studying the Works of Parmegiano, Correggio, Titian, and other great Men, he brought himself at last to a degree of Perfection hardly inferior to any of them. He assisted his Nephews in Founding and Settling the famous Academy of Design at Bologna, and afterwards in Painting the Palazzo Farnese at Rome; and having surviv'd them both, died Anno 1619,Aet. 64. Vide pag. 222. AGOSTINO CARRACCI, a Bolognese also, was born Anno 1557,1557. and by the care and instructi∣ons of Domenico Tebaldi, Alessandro Minganti and
others, became not onely a very good Designer and Painter, but in the Art of Graving surpass'd all the Masters in his time. He had an insight likewise into all the parts of the Mathematics, Na∣tural Philosophy, Rhetoric, Music, and most of the Liberal Arts and Sciences. He was besides, an admirable Poet, and in all other particulars ex∣tremely well accomplish'd. From Bologna he went to Venice, where he contracted an intimate Friendship with Paul Veronese, Tintoret, and Bas∣san; and having grav'd a considerable number of their Works, return'd home, and soon after∣wards follow'd his Brother Hannibal to Rome, and joyn'd with him in finishing several Stories in the Farnese Gallery: But some little difference arising unluckily betwixt them, Augustino remov'd to the Court of the Duke of Parma, and in his Service died Anno 1602, Vide pag. 223. His most ce∣lebrated Piece of Painting, is that of the Commu∣nion of St. Ierom, in Bologna: a Picture so com∣pleat in all its parts, that it was much to be la∣mented, that the excellent Author of it should withdraw himself from the Practice of an Art in which his Abilities were so very extraordinary,Aet. 45. to follow the inferior Profession of a Graver.
ANNIBALE CARRACCI, born likewise at Bologna, Anno 1560,1560. was a Disciple of his Uncle Ludovico; and amongst his other admirable qua∣lities, had so prodigious a Memory, that whatever he had once seen, he never fail'd to retain and make his own: so that at Parma, he acquir'd the Sweetness and Purity of Correggio; at Venice the Strength and Distribution of Colours of Titian; and at Rome, the Correctness of Design, and beautiful Forms of the Antique: And by his wonderful Per∣formances in the Palazzo Farnese, soon made it ap∣pear, that all the several Perfections of the most eminent Masters his Predecessors, were united in himself alone. In his Conversation he was friend∣ly, plain, honest, and open-hearted; very commu∣nicative to his Scholars, and so extremely kind to them, that he generally kept his Money in the same box with his Colours, where they might have recourse to either as they had occasion. But the unhappi∣ness of his Temper inclining him naturally to Me∣lancholy; the ill usage which he receiv'd from the Cardinal Farnese (who through the Persuasions of an ignorant Spaniard his Domestic, gave him but a little above 200l. Sterl. for his eight years study and labour) so confirm'd him in it, that he re∣solv'd never more to touch his Pencil: and had undoubtedly kept his resolution, had not his Ne∣cessities
compell'd him to resume it. Yet not∣withstanding, so far did his Distemper by degrees gain upon him, that at certain times it depriv'd him of the right use of his Sences; and at last made him guilty of some Irregularities, which concealing from his Physicians, he met with the same fate as Raphael (in the like case) had done before him, and seem'd to copy that great Master as well in the manner of his Death, as he had imi∣tated him all his Life long in his Works. Nay, such was the Veneration he had for Raphael, that it was his Death-bed Request, to be bury'd in the very same Tomb with him: which was according∣ly done in the Pantheon, or Rotunda at Rome, Anno 1609.Aet. 49. See more pag. 222, and besides take notice, that there are extant several Prints of the B. Vir∣gin, and of other Subjects, etch'd by the hand of this incomparable Artist. ANTONIO CARRACCI, the natural Son of Au∣gustino, was brought up under the Care and Tui∣tion of his Uncle Hannibal: after whose Decease, he apply'd himself so successfully to the study of all the Capital Pieces in Rome, that he would have surpass'd even Hannibal himself, if Death had not prevented him, Anno 1618, Aet. 35.
CAMILLO, GIULIO CESARE, and CARL' ANTONIO, the Sons and Disciples of ERCOLE PROCACCINI, flourish'd in this time. They were Natives of Bologna, but upon some misun∣derstanding between them and the Carraches, re∣mov'd to Milan, where they spent the greatest part of their Lives. Of these, CAMILLO the Eldest, abounded in Invention and Spirit: but was a great Mannerist, and ra∣ther study'd the Beauty, than Correctness of his De∣signs. GIULIO CESARE, was both a Sculptor and Painter, and famous in Genoua, as well as Bologna and Milan, for several admirable things of his hand. He was the best of all the Procaccini, and surpass'd his Brother Camillo in the exactness and purity of his Out-lines, and in the strength and bold∣ness of his Figures. CARL' ANTONIO was an excellent Musician, and as well skill'd in the Harmony of Colours as of Sounds: yet not being able to arrive to the Perfe∣ction of his Brothers in Historical Compositions, he apply'd himself wholly to Landtschapes and Flowers, and was much esteem'd for his Performances that way.
ERCOLE the Son of Carl' Antonio, was a Dis∣ciple of his Uncle Iulio Cesare, and so happy in imitating his manner, that he was sent for to the Court of the Duke of Savoy, and highly honour'd, and nobly rewarded by that Prince for his Services. GIOSEPPED'ARPINO, commonly call'd Ca∣valier GIOSEPPINO, born in the Kingdom of Na∣ples, Anno 1560,1560. was carry'd very young to Rome, and put out to some Painters, then at work in the Vatican, to grind their Colours: but the quick∣ness of his Apprehension having soon made him Master of the Elements of Design, he had the fortune to grow very famous by degrees; and besides the respect shewn him by Pope Gregory XIII. and his Successors, was so well receiv'd by the French K. Lewis XIII. that he made him a Knight of the Order of St. Michael. He has the character of a florid Invention, a ready Hand, and a good Spirit in all his Works: but yet having no sure Foundation, either in the Study of Nature, or the Rules of Art, and building onely upon those Chimeras and fan∣tastical Ideas, which he had form'd in his own Head, he has run himself into a multitude of Errors, being guilty of those many Extravagancies, ne∣cessarily attending such as have no better Guide than their own capricious Fancy.Aet. 80. He died at Rome, Anno 1640.
HANS ROTTENHAMER was born at Mun∣cen, the Capital City of Bavaria, Anno 1564,1564. and after he had studied some time in Germany, went to Venice, and became a Disciple of Tintoret. He painted both in Fresco and Oyl, but his Talent lay chiesly in the latter, and his peculiar excellence was in little Pieces. His Invention was free and easie, his Design indifferently correct, his Postures gentile, and his Colouring very agreeable. He was well e∣steem'd both in Italy and his own Country, and by his Profession might have acquir'd great Wealth; but was so wonderfully extravagant in his way of living, that he consum'd it much faster than it came in, and at last died so poor, that his Friends were forc'd to make a gathering to bury him, Anno 1604.Aet. 40. Cavalier FRANCESCO VANNI, born at Siena in the Dukedom of Tuscany, Anno 1568,1568. was a Painters Son, but quitted the manner which he had learnt from his Father, to follow that of Barocci; whom he imitated in his choice of Religious Subjects, as well as in his Gusto of Painting. The most considerable Works of this Master are in the several Churches of Siena, and are much commended both for the Beauty of their Colouring, and Cor∣rectness of their Design. He died Anno 1615.Aet. 47.
MICHELANGELO MERIGI born An. 1569,1569. at CARAVAGGIO, from whence he deriv'd his Name, was at first (like his Countryman Polidore) no better than a Day-labourer; till having seen some Painters at work, upon a Brick-wall, which he had prepar'd for them, he was so charm'd with their Art, that he immediately address'd him∣self to the study of it: and in a few years made so considerable a progress, that in Venice, Rome, and several other parts of Italy, he was cry'd up, and admir'd by all the Young men, as the Author of a new Style of Painting. Upon his first coming to Rome, his Necessities compell'd him to paint Flowers and Fruit, under Cavalier Gioseppino: but being soon weary of that Subject, and return∣ing to his former practice of Histories, with Fi∣gures drawn to the middle onely, he made use of a Method, quite different from the conduct of Gioseppino, and running into the contrary extreme, follow'd the Life as much too close, as the other went wide from it. He affected a way particu∣lar to himself, of deep and dark shadows, to give his Pieces the greater relievo, and despising all other help, but what he receiv'd from Nature alone (whom he took with all her faults, and copy'd without judgment or discretion) his Invention be∣came so poor, that he could never draw any thing
without his Model before his eyes; and therefore understood but little either of Design, or Decorum in his Compositions. He had indeed an admira∣ble Colouring, and great strength in all his Works: But those Pictures which he made in imitation of the manner of Georgione, were his best, because they have nothing of that blackness in them, in which he afterwards delighted. He died in his return from Malta, (where he had been Knighted by the Grand Master, for some things which he had wrought for him) Anno 1609.Aet. 40. His chief Disciples were Bartolomeo Manfredi of Mantoua, Carlo Saracino, commonly call'd Venetiano, Valen∣tino a French-man, and Gerard Hunthorst of U∣trecht. FILIPPO d' ANGELI was a Roman born, but call'd NEAPOLITANO, because his Father sent him to Naples, when he was very young. At his re∣turn to Rome, he apply'd himself to the Antiquities; but unhappily left that study too soon, and fol∣low'd the manner of his Contemporary M. Angelo da Caravaggio. He practis'd for the most part in Landtschapes, and Battels, was every where well esteem'd for his Works, and imploy'd by several Princes in many of the Churches and Palaces of Rome, Naples and Venice; at the last of which pla∣ces he died Anno Aetat. 40.
IAN BRUEGHEL, the Son of old Peter, and the younger Brother of Helsen Brueghel, was born in Brussels, Anno 1569,1569. and call'd FLUWEELEN because of the Velvet Garments which he generally affected to wear. He began his Studies at home, under Peter Goe-kindt, and continu'd them in Italy with such success, that of all the German, Dutch, or Flemish Masters, Elsheimer onely was superior to him in Landtschapes, and Histories with small Figures. He painted both in Water-colours and Oyl, but in the latter chiefly excell'd; and especially, in representing Wakes, Fairs, and other frolicksom and merry meetings of Country-people. His Inven∣tion was easie and pleasant, his Out-lines firm and sure, his Pencil loose and free: and in short, all his Compositions were so well manag'd, that Nature in her plain Country Dress, was always to be seen in his Works. He died Anno 1625.Aet. 56. ADAM ELSHEIMER born at Frankfort upon the Mayn, Anno 1574,1574. was at first a Disciple of Philip Uffenbach a German: but an ardent desire of Improvement carrying him to Rome, he soon became a most excellent Artist in Landtschapes, Histories, and Night-pieces, with little Figures. His Works are very few; and for the incredible Pains and Labour which he bestow'd upon them, valu'd
at such prodigious rates, that they are hardly any where to be found but in the Cabinets of Princes. He was a Person by Nature inclin'd to Melancholy, and through continu'd study and thoughtfulness, was so far settled in that unhappy temper, that neg∣lecting his own domestic concerns, Debts came thick upon him, and Imprisonment follow'd: which struck such a damp upon his Spirits, that though he was soon releas'd, yet he did not long survive it, and died in the year 1610,Aet. 36. or thereabout. GUIDO RENI was born at Bologna, An. 1575,1575. and having learnt the Rudiments of Painting, under a Flemish Master, was refin'd and polish'd in the School of the Carraches: and to what degree of Excellence he arriv'd, see pag. 223. He acquir'd great perfection in Music, by the instructions of his Father, an eminent Professor of that Art. In his behaviour he was modest, gentile, and very ob∣liging; liv'd in great splendor, both at Bologna, and Rome, and was onely unhappy in his im∣moderate love of Gaming: to which, in his latter days, he had abandon'd himself so intirely, that all the Money which he cou'd get by his Pencil, or borrow upon Interest, being too little to supply his losses, he was at last reduc'd to so poor and mean a condition, that the consideration of his
present circumstances, together with reflections on his former reputation, and high manner of li∣ving, brought a languishing Distemper upon him, which occasion'd his Death, Anno 1642.Aet. 67. Note, that there are several Designs of this great Master, in print, etch'd by himself. GIO. BATTISTA VIOLA, a Bolognese, born Anno 1576,1576. was a Disciple of Hannibal Carrach, by whose assistance he arriv'd to an excellent man∣ner in Landtschape-painting, which he chiefly study'd, and for which he was well esteem'd in Rome, and several other parts of Italy. But Pope Gregory XV. having made him Keeper of his Palace, to reward him for the Services which he had done for him, when he was Cardinal, he quitted his Pencil, and died soon after, Anno 1622.Aet. 46. Sir PETER PAUL RUBENS, born at Co∣logne, Anno 1577,1577. was the best accomplish'd of all the Flemish Masters; and wou'd have rival'd even the most celebrated Italians, if his Parents, in∣stead of placing him under the tuition of Adam van Noort, and Octavio Venus, had bred him up in the Roman and Lombard Schools. Yet notwith∣standing, he made so good use of that little time which he spent in those places, that perhaps none
of his Predecessors can boast a more beautiful Co∣louring, a nobler Invention, or a more luxurious Fancy in their Compositions, of which see a farther account pag. 225. Bt besides his talent in Pain∣ting, and his admirable skill in Architecture (very eminent in the several Churches, and Palaces, built after his Designs, at Genoua.) He was a Per∣son possess'd of all the Ornaments and Advanta∣ges, that can render a man Valuable: was uni∣versally Learned, spoke seven Languages very perfectly, was well read in History, and withall so excellent a Statesman, that he was imploy'd in several public Negotiations of great Importance; which he manag'd with the most refin'd Prudence, and Conduct. And was particularly famous for the Character with which he was sent into England, of Embassadour from the Infanta Isabella, and Phi∣lip IV. of Spain, to K. Charles I. upon a Treaty of Peace between the two Crowns, confirm'd Anno 1630. His principal Performances are in the Banquetting-house at Whitehall, the Escurial in Spain, and the Luxemburgh Galleries at Paris, where he was imploy'd by Queen Mary of Medicis, Dowa∣ger of Henry IV. and in each of those three Courts had the honour of Knighthood conferr'd upon him, besides several magnificent Presents, in testimony of his extraordinary Merits. His usual abode was
at Antwerp, where he built a spacious Apartment, in imitation of the Rotunda at Rome, for a noble Collection of Pictures which he had purchas'd in Italy: some of which, together with his Statues, Medals, and other Antiquities, he sold, not long after, to the Duke of Buckingham, his intimate Friend, for ten thousand pounds. He liv'd in the highest Esteem and Reputation imaginable, was as great a Patron, as Master of his Art; and so much admir'd all over Europe, for his many singular Endowments, that no Strangers of any Quality cou'd pass through the Low-Countries, till they had first seen Rubens, of whose Fame they had heard so much. He died Anno 1640,Aet. 63. leaving vast Riches behind him to his Children, of whom Albert the Eldest, succeeded him in the Office of Secretary of State, in Flanders. ORATIO GENTILESCHI, a Native of Pisa, a City in Tuscany, flourish'd in this time: and after he had made himself known in Florence, Rome, Genoua, and other parts of Italy, remov'd to Savoy, from thence went to France, and at last, upon his arrival in England, was so well receiv'd by K. Charles I. that he appointed him Lodgings in his Court, together with a considerable Salary, and imploy'd him in his Palace at Greenwich, and
other public places. He made several Attempts in Face-painting, but with little success, his Talent lying altogether in Histories, with Figures as big as the Life: In which kind, some of his Compositi∣ons have deservedly met with great Applause. He was much in favour with the Duke of Buck∣ingham, and many others of the Nobility: and af∣ter twelve years continuance in this Kingdom, died Anno Aetat. 84. and was bury'd in the Queens Chapel in Somerset-house. ARTEMISIA GENTILESCHI his Daughter, excell'd her Father in Portraits, and was but little inferior to him in Histories. She liv'd for the most part at Naples, in great splendor: and was as famous all over Europe for her Amours, and Love-Intrigues, as for her talent in Painting. FRANCESCO ALBANI a Bolognese, born Anno 1578,1578. was a Disciple of the Carraches well vers'd in polite Learning, and excellent in all the parts of Painting; but principally admir'd for his performances in little. He had a particular Ge∣nius for naked Figures: and the better to accom∣plish himself in that Study, marry'd a beautiful Lady of Bologna, with little or no fortune; by whom (upon all occasions) he us'd to design
naked Venus's, the Graces, Nymphs, and other God∣desses: and by her Children little Cupids, playing, and dancing, in all the variety of Postures imagi∣nable. He spent some time at Rome, was im∣ploy'd also by the Grand Duke of Tuscany, but compos'd most of his Works in his own Country; where he died, Anno 1660.Aet. 82. His most famous Disciples were Pier Francesco Mola, and Gio. Battista his Brother, both excellent Masters in Figures and Landtschapes. FRANCIS SNYDERS, born at Antwerp, Anno 1579,1579. was bred up under Henry van Balen his Country-man; but ow'd the most considerable part of his Improvement, to his Studies in Italy. He painted all sorts of Wild Beasts, and other Ani∣mals, Huntings, Fish, Fruit, &c. in great Perfe∣ction: was often imploy'd by the King of Spain, and several other Princes, and every-where much commended for his Works. DOMENICO ZAMPIERI, commonly call'd DOMENICHINO, born in the City of Bologna An. 1581,1581. was at first a Disciple of a Flemish Master, but soon quitted his School, for a much better of the Carraches; being instructed at Bologna by Lu∣dovico, and at Rome by Hannibal, who had so
great a Value for him, that he took him to his assi∣stance in the Farnese Gallery. He was extremely labo∣rious and slow in his Productions, applying himself always to his work with much study and thoughtful∣ness, and never offering to touch his Pencil till he found a kind of Enthusiasm, or Inspiration upon him. His talent lay principally in the correctness of his Style, and in expressing the Passions and Af∣fections of the Mind. In both which he was so ad∣mirably judicious, that Nicolo Poussin, and Andrea Sacchi us'd to say, his Communion of St. Ierome, in the Church of the Charity, and Raphaels celebra∣ted Piece of the Transfiguration, were the two best Pictures in Rome. He was made the chief Archi∣tect of the Apostolical Palace, by Pope Gregory XV. for his great skill in that Art. He was likewise well vers'd in the Theory of Music, but in the Pra∣ctice of it had little success. He had the misfor∣tune to find Enemies in all places whereever he came; and particularly at Naples was so ill treated by those of his own Profession, that having agreed among themselves to disparage all his Works, they would hardly allow him to be a tolerable Master: And were not content with having frighted him, for some time, from that City, but afterwards, upon his return thither, never left persecuting him, till by their tricks and contrivances they had quite weary'd
him out of his Life, Anno 1641.Aet. 60. Vide pag. 223. His Contemporary, and most malicious Enemy GIOSEPPE RIBERA, a Native of Valencia, in Spain, commonly known by the name of SPAGNOLETTO, was an Artist perfect in Design, and famous for the excellent manner of Colouring which he had learnt from Michael Angelo da Cara∣vaggio. His way, was very often in Half-Figures onely, and (like his Master) he was wonderfully strict in following the Life; but as Ill-natur'd in the choice of his Subjects, as in his Behaviour to poor Domenichino, affecting generally something very terrible and frightful in his Pieces, such as Pro∣metheus with the Vulture feeding upon his Liver, Ca∣to Uticensis weltering in his own Bloud, St. Bartho∣lomew with the Skin flea'd off from his Body, &c. But however in all his Compositions, Nature was imitated with so much Art and Iudgment, that a certain Lady big with Child, having accidentally cast her Eyes upon an Ixion, whom he had re∣presented in Torture upon the Wheel, receiv'd such an Impression from it, that she brought forth an Infant with Fingers distorted just like those in his Picture. His usual abode was at Naples, where he liv'd very splendidly, being much in fa∣vour with the Viceroy his Countryman, and in
great Reputation for his Works in Painting, and for several Prints etch'd by his own hand. GIOVANNI LANFRANCO, born at Parma, Anno 1581,1581. was a Disciple of the Carraches, and besides a zealous Imitator of the Works of Raphael and Correggio. His character see pag. 224. He was highly applauded at Naples for several excel∣lent Pieces which he wrought there, and was so much esteem'd in Rome, that for his Performances in the Vatican he was Knighted by Pope Urban VIII. He died Anno 1647.Aet. 66. SISTO BADALOCCHI his Fellow-disciple, was of Parma also, and by the Instructions of the Carraches at Rome, became one of the best De∣signers of that School. He had also many other commendable Qualities, and particularly Facility, but wanted Diligence. He joyn'd with his Coun∣tryman Lanfranco in etching the Histories of the Bible, after the Paintings of Raphael, in the Vati∣can, which they dedicated to Hannibal their Master. He practised mostly at Bologna, where he died Young. SIMON VOUET, born at Paris, Anno 1582,1582. was bred up to Painting under his Father, and
carry'd very young to Constantinople by the French Embassador, to draw the Picture of the Grand Signior, which he did by strength of Memory onely. From thence he went to Venice, and af∣terwards settling himself at Rome, made so consi∣derable a Progress in his Art, that besides the Fa∣vours which he receiv'd from Pope Urban VIII. and the Cardinal his Nephew, he was chosen Prince of the Roman Academy of St. Luke. He was sent for home Anno 1627, by the order of Lewis XIII. whom he serv'd in the quality of his chief Painter. He practised both in Portraits and Histories, and furnish'd some of the Apartments of the Louvre, the Palaces of Luxemburgh and St. Germains, the Galleries of Cardinal Richlieu and other public places with his Works. His greatest Perfection was in his agreeable Colouring, and his brisk and lively Pencil, being otherwise but very indifferently qualify'd; he had no Genius for grand Compositions, was unhappy in his Invention, unacquainted with the Rules of Perspe∣ctive, and understood but little of the Union of Co∣lours, or the Doctrine of Lights and Shadows: yet nevertheless he brought up several eminent Scholars, amongst whom, was CHARLES ALFONSE du FRESNOY, Author of the preceding Poem. But his chief Disciple was the KING himself, whom he had the Honour to instruct in the Art of Design∣ing. He died An. 1641.Aet. 59.
PIETER van LAER, commonly call'd BAM∣BOCIO, or the Beggar-painter, was born in the City of Haerlem, Anno 1584:1584. and after he had laid a good Foundation in Drawing and Perspective at home, went to France, and from thence to Rome; where by his earnest application to Study, for six∣teen years together, he arriv'd to great Perfection in Histories, Landtschapes, Grottos, Huntings, &c. with little Figures and Animals. He had an ad∣mirable Gusto in Colouring, was very judicious in the ordering of his Pieces, nicely just in his Propor∣tions, and onely to be blam'd, for that he gene∣rally affected to represent Nature in her worst Dress, and follow'd the Life too close, in most of his Compositions. He return'd to Amsterdam, Anno 1639, and after a short stay there, spent the Re∣mainder of his days with his Brother, a noted School-master in Haerlem. He was a Person very serious and contemplative in his humour, took Plea∣sure in nothing but Painting and Music: and by indulging himself too much in a melancholy Re∣tirement, is said to have shorten'd his Life, Anno 1644.Aet. 60. CORNELIUS POELENBURCH, born at Utrecht, Anno 1590,1590. was a Disciple of Abraham Blomaert, and afterwards for a long time, a Stu∣dent
in Rome and Florence. His Talent lay altoge∣ther in small Figures, naked Boys, Landtschapes, Ruins, &c. which he express'd with a Pencil agree∣able enough, as to the Colouring part, but general∣ly attended with a little stiffness, the (almost) inse∣parable Companion of much Labour and Neatness. He came over into England, Anno 1637; and af∣ter he had continu'd here four years, and had been handsomly rewarded by K. Charles I. for several Pieces which he wrought for him, retir'd into his own Country, and died Anno 1667.Aet. 77. Cavalier GIO. FRANCESCO BARBIERI da CENTO, commonly call'd GUERCINO, (be∣cause of a Cast which he had with his Eyes) was born near Bologna, Anno 1590,1590. and bred up un∣der Benedetto Gennari his Country-man: by whose Instructions, and the Dictates of his own excellent Genius, he soon learnt to design gracefully and with Correctness; and by conversing afterwards with the Works of Michael Angelo da Caravaggio, became an admirable Colourist, and besides, very famous for his happy Invention and Freedom of Pencil, and for the Strength, Relievo, and becoming Boldness of his Figures. He began, in the Declension of his Age, to alter his Style in Painting: and (to please the unthinking Multitude) took up another
manner more gay, neat and pleasant, but by no means so great and noble as his former Gusto. He compos'd several considerable Pieces in Rome: but the greatest number of his Performances is in, and about Bologna, where he died, Anno 1666,Aet. 76. very rich, and highly commended for his extraordina∣ry Piety, Prudence and Morality. NICOLO PUSSINO, the French Raphael, was the Descendent of a noble Family in Picardy, but born at Andely, a Town in Normandy, Anno 1594.1594. He was season'd in Literature at home, instructed in the Rudiments of Design at Paris, learnt the Principles of Geometry, Perspective and Anatomy at Rome, practised after the Life in the Academy of Domenichino, and study'd the Antiquities in com∣pany with the famous Sculptor Francesco Fiammingo, who was born in the same year, and lodg'd in the same house with him. His way, for the most part, was in Histories, with Figures about two or three feet high; and his Colouring inclin'd rather to the Antique than to Nature: but in all the other parts of Painting, he was profoundly excellent; and particularly the Beauty of his Genius appear'd in his nice and judicious Observation of the Decorum in his Compositions, and in expressing the Passions and Affections with such incomparable skill, that all
his Pieces seem to have the very Spirit of the Action, and the Life and Soul of the Persons whom they represent. He had not been in Rome above six∣teen years, before his Name became so universally celebrated, that Cardinal Richlieu resolving to ad∣vance the noble Arts in France, prevail'd upon him (by means of an obliging Letter, written to him by Lewis XIII. himself, Anno 1639) to return to his own Country: where he was receiv'd with all possible demonstrations of Esteem, was declar'd First Painter to the King, had a considerable Pen∣sion appointed him, was imploy'd in several pub∣lic Works, and at last undertook to paint the Grand Gallery of the Louvre. But the King and Cardinal both dying in the time that he went back to settle his affairs in Italy, and bring his Family from thence; he quite laid aside the Thoughts of returning any more to France, and ended his days in Rome, Anno 1665:Aet. 71. having for some years before his Decease, been so much subject to the Palsie, that the effects of his unsteddy Hand are visible in several of his Designs. PIETRO TESTA, his Contemporary, was a Native of Lucca, a City in the Dukedom of Flo∣rence, and so miserably poor upon his first arrival at Rome, that he was forc'd to make the public
Streets his School, and the Statues, Buildings, Ru∣ins, &c. the Lessons which he studied. He was a Man of a quick Head, a ready Hand, and a live∣ly Spirit in most of his Performances: but yet for want of Science, and good Rules to cultivate and strengthen his Genius, all those hopeful Qualities soon ran to Weeds, and produced little else but Monsters, Chimeras, and such like wild and extra∣vagant Fancies: Vid. pag. 102. He attempted very often to make himself perfect in the Art of Colouring, but never had any Success that way; and indeed was onely tolerable in his Drawings, and the Prints which he etch'd. He was drown'd (as 'tis general∣ly reported) in the Tyber, having accidentally fall'n off from the Bank, as he was endeavouring to re∣gain his Hat, which the Wind had blown into the Water. Sir ANTHONY VAN DYCK, was born at Antwerp, Anno 1599,1599. and gave such early proofs of his most excellent Endowments, that Rubens his Master, fearing he would become as Universal as himself, to divert him from Histories, us'd to com∣mend his Talent in Painting after the Life, and took such care to keep him continually imploy'd in business of that Nature, that he resolv'd at last to make it his principal study; and for his Improve∣ment
went to Venice, where he attain'd the beauti∣ful Colouring of Titian, Paulo Veronese, &c. And after a few years spent in Rome, Genoua and Sicily, return'd home to Flanders with a manner of Pain∣ting, so noble, natural, and easie, that Titian him∣self was hardly his Superior, and no other Master in the world equal to him for Portraits. He came over into England soon after Rubens had left it, and was entertain'd in the Service of King Charles I. who conceiv'd a marvellous esteem for his Works, honour'd him with Knight hood, presented him with his own Picture set round with Diamonds, assign'd him a considerable Pension, sate very often to him for his Portrait, and was followed by most of the Nobility and principal Gentry of the Kingdom. He was a person low of stature, but well-proporti∣on'd; very handsome, modest, and extremely obli∣ging; a great Encourager of all such as excell'd in any Art or Science, and Generous to the very last degree. He marry'd one of the fairest Ladies of the English Court, Daughter of the Lord Ruthen Earl of Gowry, and liv'd in State and Grandeur answerable to her Birth: His own Garb was gene∣rally very rich, his Coaches and Equippage magni∣ficent, his Retinue numerous and gallant, his Ta∣ble very splendid, and so much frequented by People of the best Quality of both Sexes, that his
Apartments seem'd rather to be the Court of some Prince, than the Lodgings of a Painter. He grew wea∣ry, towards the latter end of his Life, of the conti∣nu'd trouble that attended Face-Painting; and being desirous of immortalizing his Name by some more glorious Undertaking, went to Paris in hopes of being imploy'd in the Grand Gallery of the Louvre; but not succeeding there, he return'd hither, and propos'd to the King (by his Friend Sir Kenelm Digby) to make Cartoons for the Banqueting house at White-hall: the subject of which was to have been the Institution of the Order of the Garter, the Procession of the Knights in their Habits, with the Ceremony of their Installment, and St. Georges Feast. But his Demands of fourscore thousand pounds, be∣ing thought unreasonable, whilst the King was upon treating with him for a less Summ, the Gout and other Distempers put an end to that Affair and his Life, Anno 1641;Aet. 42. and his Body was in∣terr'd in St. Pauls Church. See farther, pag. 226. And note, that amongst the Portraits of Illustrious Persons, &c. printed and publish'd by the parti∣cular directions of this Master, some were etch'd in Aqua-fortis by Van Dyck himself. BENEDETTO CASTIGLIONE, a Genouese, was at first a Disciple of Battista Paggi and Ferrari
his Countrymen; improv'd himself afterwards by the instructions of Van Dyck (as long as he continu'd in Genoua) and at last became an Imi∣tator of the Manner of Nicolo Poussin. He was commended for several very good Prints of his own etching: but in Painting his Inclinations led him to Figures, with Landtschapes and Animals; which he touch'd up with a great deal of Life and Spi∣rit, and was particularly remarkable for a brisk Pencil, and a free handling in all his Compositions. He was a Person very unsettled in his Temper, and never lov'd to stay long in one place: but being continually upon the ramble, his Works lie scat∣ter'd up and down in Genoua, Rome, Naples, Ve∣nice, Parma, and Mantoua, where he died. VIVIANO CODAZZO, generally call'd VI∣VIANO delle PROSPETTIVE, was born at Ber∣gamo in the Venetian Territories, Anno 1599:1599. and by the Instructions of Augustino Tasso his Master, arriv'd to a most excellent manner of painting Buildings, Ruins, &c. His ordinary Residence was at Rome, where he died, Anno 1674,Aet. 75. and was bury'd in the Church of S. Lorenzo in Lucina. He had a Son call'd Nicolo, who pursu'd his Fa∣thers steps, and died at Genoua, in great Reputati∣on for his Performances in Perspective.
MARIO NUZZI,1599. commonly call'd MARIO de' FIORI, born at Orta in the Terra di Sabina, was a Disciple of his Uncle Tomaso Salini, and one of the most famous Masters in his time for painting Flowers. He died in Rome, (where he had spent great part of his Life) and was also bury'd in S. Lorenzos Church, Anno 1672.Aet. 73. MICHELANGELO CERQUOZZI, was born in Rome, Anno 1600,1600. and bred up in the School▪ of Antonio Salvatti, a Bolognese. He was call'd delle BATTAGLIE, from his excellent Ta∣lent in Battels; but besides his great skill in that particular Subject, he was very Successful in all sorts of Figures, and painted Fruit incomparably beyond any Master in Europe. He was bury'd in the Choire of S. Maries Church in Rome, Anno 1660.Aet. 60. CLAUDIO GILLE of LORAIN, born Anno 1600,1600. was by his Parents sent very young to Rome; and after he had been grounded in the Elements of Design, and the Rules of Perspective, under Augustino Tasso, he remov'd his Study to the Banks of the Tyber, and into the open Fields, took all his Lessons from Nature her self, and by many years diligent Imitation of that excellent Mistress, climb'd up to the highest step of Perfection in
Landtschape painting: and was universally admir'd for his pleasant and most agreeable Invention; for the delicacy of his Colouring, and the charming va∣riety and tenderness of his Tints; for his artful Di∣stribution of the Lights and Shadows; and for his wonderful Conduct, in disposing his Figures for the ad∣vantage and Harmony of his Compositions. He was much commended for several of his Performances in Fresco as well as Oyl, was imploy'd by Pope Ur∣ban VIII. and many of the Italian Princes in adorn∣ing their Palaces: and having by his Pencil made his Name famous throughout Europe, died An. 1682,Aet. 82. and was interr'd in the Church of Trinita de Monti, in Rome. GASPARO DUGHET, was of French Extra∣ction, but born in Rome, Anno 1600.1600. He took to himself the name of POUSSIN, in gratitude for many Favours, and particularly that of his E∣ducation, which he receiv'd from Nicolo Poussin, who married his Sister. His first Imployment under his Brother-in-Law, was in looking after his Colours, Pencil, &c. but his excellent Genius for Painting soon discovering it self, by his own In∣dustry and his Brothers Instructions was so well im∣prov'd, that in Landtschapes (which he principal∣ly studied) he became one of the greatest Ma∣sters
in his Age; and was much in request, for his easie Invention, solid Iudgment, regular Disposition, and true Resemblance of Nature in all his Works. He died in his great Climacterical year 1663, and was bury'd in his Parish-Church of S. Susanna,Aet. 63. in Rome. In his time, liv'd and flourish'd ANDREA SACCHI, a celebrated Roman Master, highly ex∣toll'd for his general Accomplishments in all the parts of Painting; but more particularly eminent for his extraordinary skill in the Elegance of Design, the Harmony of Order, and the Beauty of Colouring. His Competitor PIETRO BERETTINI da CORTONA, was also of great consideration in this time; and much applauded for his magnifi∣cent Works in several of the Churches and Palaces of Rome and Florence. He excell'd both in Fresco and Oyl, was profoundly read in the Antiquities, had a noble and rich Imagination, and a Genius far beyond any of his Contemporaries, for Ornaments and grand Historical Compositions. He was very well esteem'd by Pope Urban VIII. Innocent X. and most of the Persons of the first Rank in Italy.
GEERART DOV, born at Leyden, about the year 1607,1607. was a Disciple of Rembrandt, but much pleasanter in his Style of Painting, and supe∣rior to him in little Figures. He was esteem'd in Holland the best Master in his way: and tho' we must not expect to find in his works that Elevation of Thought, that Correctness of Design, or that noble Spirit, and grand Gusto, in which the Italians have distinguish'd themselves from the rest of Mankind; yet it must be acknowledg'd, that in the Manage∣ment of his Pencil, and the Choice and Beauty of his Colours, he has been curious to the last degree; and in finishing his Pieces, laborious and patient be∣yond example. He died circa Annum 1674,Aet. 67. leaving behind him many Scholars, of whom MIERIS the chief, was in several respects equal to his Master. But for the rest of his Imitators, ge∣nerally speaking, we may place them in the same Form with the cunning Fools, mention'd pag. 133. ADRIAEN BROUWER was born in the Ci∣ty of Haerlem, Anno 1608;1608. and besides his great Obligations to Nature, was very much beholden to Frans Hals, who took him from begging in the Streets, and instructed him in the Rudiments of Painting; And to make him amends for his kind∣ness, Brouwer, when he found himself sufficiently
qualified to get a Livelyhood, ran away from his Master into France, and after a short stay there, return'd, and settled at Antwerp. Humour was his proper Sphere, and it was in little Pieces that he us'd to represent Boors, and others his Pot com∣panions, drinking, smoking Tobacco, gaming, fight∣ing, &c. with a Pencil so tender and free, so much of Nature in his Expression, such excellent Draw∣ing in all the particular parts, and good Keeping in the whole together, that none of his Countrymen have ever been comparable to him in that Sub∣ject. He was extremely facetious and pleasant o∣ver his Cups, scorn'd to work as long as he had any Money in his Pockets, declar'd for a short Life and a merry one: and resolving to ride Post to his Grave, by the help of Wine and Brandy, got to his Iourneys end, Anno 1638; so very poor, that Contributions were rais'd to lay him privately in the Ground, from whence he was soon after taken up, and (as 'tis commonly said) very handsome∣ly interr'd by Rubens,Aet. 30. who was a great Admirer of his happy Genius for Painting. SAMUEL COOPER, born in London, Anno 1609,1609. was bred up (together with his elder Bro∣ther Alexander) under the Care and Discipline of Mr. Hoskins his Uncle: but derived the most con∣siderable
advantages, from the Observations which he made on the Works of Van Dyck. His Pencil was generally confin'd to a Head onely; and in∣deed below that part he was not always so success∣ful as could be wish'd: but for a Face, and all the dependencies of it (Viz.) the graceful and becom∣ing Air, the Strength, Relievo and noble Spirit, the Softness and tender liveliness of Flesh and Blood, and the loose and gentile management of the Hair, his Talent was so extraordinary, that for the Honour of our Nation, it may without Vanity be affirm'd, he was (at least) equal to the most famous Itali∣ans; and that hardly any of his Predecessors has ever been able to shew so much Perfection in so narrow a Compass. Answerable to his Abilities in this Art was his skill in Music: and he was reckon'd one of the best Lutenists, as well as the most excellent Limner in his time. He spent several years of his Life abroad, was personally acquainted with the greatest Men of France, Holland, and his own Country, and by his Works more universally known in all the pars of Christendom. He died Anno 1672,Aet. 63. and lies bury'd in Pancras Church, in the Fields. WILLIAM DOBSON,1610. a Gentleman descend∣ed of a Family very eminent (at that time) in St. Albans, was born in St. Andrews Parish, in Hol∣bourn,
Anno 1610. Who first instructed him in the use of his Pencil is uncertain: of this we are well assur'd, that he was put out very early an Apprentice to one Mr. Peake, a Stationer and Tra∣der in Pictures; and that Nature, his best Mistress, inclin'd him so powerfully to the practice of Pain∣ting after the Life, that had his Education been but answerable to his Genius, England might justly have been as proud of her Dobson, as Venice of her Titi∣an, or Flanders of her Van Dyck. How much he was beholden to the latter of those great Men, may easi∣ly be seen in all his Works; no Painter having ever come up so near to the Perfection of that excellent Master, as this his happy Imitator. He was also farther indebted to the Generosity of Van Dyck, in presenting him to King Charles I. who took him into his immediate Protection, kept him in Oxford all the while his Majesty continu'd in that City; sat several times to him for his Picture, and oblig'd the Prince of Wales, Prince Rupert, and most of the Lords of his Court to do the like. He was a fair, middle siz'd Man. of a ready Wit, and pleasing Con∣versation; was somewhat loose and irregular in his way of Living, and notwithstanding the many Op∣portunities which he had of making his Fortunes, died very poor,Aet. 37. at his house in St.Martins-lane, Anno 1647.
MICHAELANGELO PACE, born Anno 1610,1610. and call'd di CAMPIDOGLIO (because of an Of∣fice which he had in the Capitol) was a Disciple of Fioravanti, and very much esteem'd all over Italy, for his admirable Talent in painting Fruit and the still Life. He died in Rome, Anno 1670, leaving behind him two Sons; of whom Gio. Battista the eldest, was brought up to History painting under Francesco Mola, and is now in the Service of the King of Spain: But the other call'd Pietro, died in his Prime, and only liv'd just long enough to shew that a few years more would have made him one of the greatest Masters in the World.Aet. 60. SALVATOR ROSA, a Neapolitan, born An. 1614,1614. in both the Sister-Arts of Poesy and Painting, was esteem'd one of the most excellent Masters that Italy has produc'd in this Century. In the first, his Province was Satire; in the latter, Landtschapes, Battels, Havens, &c. with little Figures. He was a Disciple of Daniele Falconi his Countryman, and Artist of good repute; whose instructions he very much improv'd by his Study after the Antiquities, and the Works of the most eminent Painters who went before him. He was fam'd for his copious and florid Invention, for his profound Iudgment in the ordering of his Pieces, for the gentile and uncommon
Management of his Figures, and his general Know∣ledge in all the parts of Painting: But that which gave a more particular stamp to his Compositions, was his inimitable Liberty of Pencil, and the noble Spirit with which he animated all his Works. Rome was the place where he spent the greatest part of his Life; highly courted and admir'd by all the Men of Note and Quality, and where he died Anno 1673;Aet. 59. having etch'd abundance of valuable Prints with his own hand. GIACOMO CORTESI, the famous Battel-pain∣ter, commonly call'd The BORGOGNONE, from the Country where he was born, was the Con∣temporary of Salvator Rosa, and equally applaud∣ed for his admirable Gusto, and grand Manner of Painting. He had for several years been conver∣sant in Military Affairs, was a considerable Officer in the Army, made the Camp his School, and form'd all his excellent Ideas from what he had seen per∣form'd in the Field. His Style was roughly noble, and (Souldier like) full of Fire and Spirit. He re∣tir'd, towards the latter end of his Life, into the Convent of the Iesuits in Rome: where he was forc'd to take Sanctuary (as they say) to rid his hands of an ill Bargain, which he had unhappi∣ly got in a Wife.
Sir PETER LELY was born Anno 1617,1617. in Westphalia, where his Father, being a Captain, happen'd to be then in Garrison. He was bred up for some time in the Hague, and afterwards com∣mitted to the care of one de Grebber of Haerlem. He came over into England, Anno 1641, and pursu'd the natural bent of his Genius in Landtschapes with small Figures, and Historical Compositions: but find∣ing the practice of Painting after the Life general∣ly more encourag'd, he apply'd himself to Por∣traits with such success, as in a little time to sur∣pass all his Contemporaries in Europe. He was ve∣ry earnest in his younger days, to have finish'd the course of his Studies in Italy: but the great bu∣siness in which he was perpetually ingag'd, not allowing him so much time; to make himself amends, he resolv'd at last, in an excellent and well chosen Collection of the Drawings, Prints, and Paintings, of the most celebrated Masters, to bring the Roman and Lombard Schools home to him. And what benefit he reap'd from this Expedient, was sufficiently apparent in that admirable Style of Painting, which he form'd to himself by dayly conversing with the Works of those great Men: In the correctness of his Drawing, and the beauty of his Colouring; but especially in the graceful Airs of his Figures, the pleasing Variety of his Postures, and
his gentile negligence and loose manner of Draperies: in which particular as few of his Predecessors were equal to him, so all succeeding Artists must stand oblig'd to his happy Invention, for the noble Pat∣tern which he has left them for Imitation. He was recommended to the favour of King Charles I. by Philip Earl of Pembroke, then Lord Chamber∣lain; and drew his Majesties Picture, when he was Prisoner in Hampton-Court. He was also much in esteem with his Son Charles II. who made him his Painter, conferr'd the honour of Knighthood upon him, and would oftentimes take great plea∣sure in his Conversation, which he found to be as a∣greeable as his Pencil. He was likewise highly re∣spected by all the People of Eminence in the King∣dom; and indeed so extraordinary were his natural Parts, and so great his acquir'd Knowledge, that it would be hard to determine whether he was a bet∣ter Painter, or a more accomplish'd Gentleman: or whether the Honours which he has done his Pro∣fession, or the Advantages which he deriv'd from it were the most considerable. But as to his Art, certain it is, that his last Pieces were his best, and that he gain'd ground, and improv'd himself every day, even to the very Moment in which Death snatch'd his Pencil out of his hand in an Apo∣plectic Fit,Aet. 63. Anno1680.
SEBASTIAN BOURDON, a French-man, born at Mompellier, Anno 1619,1619. study'd seven years in Rome, and acquir'd so much Reputation by his Works both in History and Landtschape, that upon his return to France, he had the honour of being the first who was made Rector of the Royal Acade∣my of Painting and Sculpture at Paris. He spent two years also in Sweden, where he was very well esteem'd, and nobly presented by that great Pa∣troness of Arts and Sciences,Aet. 54. Queen Christina. He died,Anno. 1673. LUCA IORDANO, was born in Naples, Anno 1626,1626. and by his Studies under Pietro da Cortona at Rome, joyn'd with his continu'd Application to all the noble Remains of Antiquity, became one of the best accomplish'd, and most universal Masters in his time. He was wonderfully skill'd in the practical part of Designing, and from his incredible Facility, and prodigious Dispatch, was call'd by his Fellow-Painters, Luca fà Presto. He was besides very happy in imitating the different Styles of other great Men, and particularly follow'd the manner of Titian, Bassan, Tintoret, Guido, &c. so close in several of his Pieces, that it is not the talent of every Pretender to Painting, to distinguish them from Originals of those Hands. He was famous
for his many excellent Performances in Rome and Florence: And being continually imploy'd in working for Princes, and People of the first Quality all over Europe, grew so vastly rich, that at his re∣turn to Naples, he purchas'd a Dutchy in that King∣dom, marry'd and liv'd splendidly, kept a noble Palace, and a numerous Retinue, with Coaches, Lit∣ters, and all other imaginable State. Being grown Old, he was earnestly press'd by the Viceroy to go over into Spain, and serve the King his Master: He had no fancy for the Voyage, and therefore rais'd his Terms very high: was not content with twen∣ty thousand Crowns paid him down, and the Gol∣den Key given him, as Groom of the Bed-chember; but besides, having heard, that by the Statutes of St. Iago, and the other Military Orders of Spain, it was expresly provided, that no Painter should be admitted into any of them, because their Profession was generally look'd upon as Mechanic; he re∣solv'd, for the Honour of his Art, not to stir a foot, till he himself was first made a Knight of St. Iago, and his two Sons Knights of Alcantara and Calatrava. All which being granted, he set out for Madrid, where he was receiv'd very kind∣ly by the King, and having adorn'd the grand Stair-case of the Escurial, with the Story of the Bat∣tel of St. Quintin, (which is perhaps one of the best
things in its kind, that has been any where perform'd in this Age) he fell to work upon the great Church belonging to that Palace; but the Climate being too severe for his Constitution of Body, and his Mind not so well satisfy'd as at Naples,Aet. 68. he sickned and died in the Winter of the year 1694. In the same year died FILIPPO LAURO, a Master equal to him in all respects, excepting one∣ly that by confining himself to small Figures, and Histories in little, he contracted his admirable Ta∣lent into a narrower Compass. He liv'd for the most part in Rome; and was highly valu'd for the Riches of his Fancy, and the Accuracy of his Iudg∣ment; for the Elegance of his Out-lines, and the Propriety of his Colouring; and for the graceful Freedom of his Pencil, in all his Compositions. IOHN RILEY, born in the City of London, Anno 1646,1646. was instructed in the first Rudi∣ments of Painting by Mr. Zoust and Mr. Fuller, but left them whilst he was very Young, and began to practise after the Life: yet acquir'd no great Reputation, till upon the death of Sir Pe∣ter Lely, his Friends being desirous that he should succeed that excellent Master in the favour of King Charles II. ingag'd Mr. Chiffinch to sit to
him for his Picture; which he perform'd so well, that the King, upon sight of it, sent for him, and having imploy'd him in drawing the Duke of Graf∣tons Portrait, and soon after his own, took him into his Service, honour'd him with several obliging Testimonies of his Esteem, and withal gave this Character of his Works, that he painted both Inside and Outside. Upon the Accession of K. William and Q. Mary to the Crown, he was sworn their Ma∣jesties Principal Painter; which place he had not in∣joy'd in the preceding Reign, tho' K. Iames and his Queen were both pleas'd to be drawn by his Hand. He was very diligent in the Imitation of Nature; and by studying the Life, rather than following any particular manner, attain'd a pleasant and most agreeable Style of Painting. But that which eminently distinguish'd him from all his Contem∣poraries, was his peculiar Excellence in a Head, and especially in the Colouring part; wherein some of his Peices were so very extraordinary, that Mr. Riley himself was the onely Person who was not charm'd with them. He was a Gentleman ex∣tremely courteous in his Behaviour, obliging in his Conversation, and prudent in all his Actions. He was a dutiful Son, an affectionate Brother, a kind Master, and a faithful Friend. He never was guilty of a piece of Vanity (too common amongst
Artists) of saying mighty things on his own behalf, but contented himself with letting his Works speak for him; which being plentifully dispers'd over other Nations as well as our own, were in∣deed everywhere very Eloquent in his Commendati∣on. He had for several years been violently persecuted by the Gout; which after many ter∣rible Assaults, flying up at last into his Head, brought him to his Grave, Anno 1691, exceed∣ingly lamented by all such as had the happiness of being acquainted either with his Person or his Works.Aet. 45. FINIS.
Ancient Masters Contain'd in the preceding ACCOUNT. A. ACtius Priscus. pag. 250 Amphion. 245 Antidotus. 246 Apelles. 242 Apollodorus. 237 Ardices. 233 Arellius. 250 Aristides. 245 Asclepiodorus. ib. Athenion. 247 B. Bularchus. 235 C. Charmas. 234 Cimon. 234 Cleanthes. 233 Cleophantus. 234 Cornelius Pinus. 250 Crato. 233 Cydias. 242 D. Dinias. 234 E. Euchir. 233 Eumarus. 234 Euphranor. 241 Eupompus. 240 F. Fabius Pictor. 248 H. Hygiemon. 234
L. Ludius. 250 M. Marcus Pacuvius. 249 Melanthius. 244 Metrodorus. 249 Myron. 237 N. Nealces. 248 Nicias. 247 Nicomachus. 246 Nicophanes. ib. P. Pamphilus. 240 Panaenus. 235 Parrhasius. 239 Pausias. 241 Phidias. 235 Philocles. 233 Polignotus Atheniensis 233 Thasius. 237 Polycletus. 236 Praxiteles. 242 Protogenes. 243 Pyrecus. 246 S. Saurias. 233 Scopas. 237 T. Telephanes. 233 Theomnestus. 246 Timanthes. 240 Timomachus. 249 Turpilius. 250 Z. Zeuxis. 238
Modern Masters. A. ALbani. pag. 320 Albert Durer. 263 Andrea Mantegna. 258 Sacchi. 336 del Sarto. 270 Schiavone. 296 Tai. 255 Verrocchio. 259 Annibale Carracci. 308 Antonello da Messina 256 Antonio Carracci. 309 da Correggio. 264 More. 295 Tempesta. 305 Artemisia Gentileschi. 320 Agostino Carracci. 306 B. Badalocchi (Sisto.) 324 Bandinelli (Baccio.) 273 Bamboccio. 326 Barocci (Frederico.) 297 Bartolomeo (Fra.) 263 Bassano Francesco. 291 Giacomo. 289 Gio. Battista. 291 Girolamo. ib. Leandro. ib. Battaglie (M. Angelo.) 334 Battista Franco. 277 Bellino Gentile. 357 Giovanni. ib. Benedetto Caliari. 301 Castiglione. 332 Bordone (Paris.) 294 Borgognone. 342 Bourdon (Sebastian.) 345 Brueghel (Fluweelen.) 315 Bril Matthew. 305 Paul. ib. Brouwer. 337 Buonaroti (M. Angelo.) 265 C. Caliari Benedetto. 301 Carlo. 300 Gabrielle. ib. Paolo. 299 Camillo Procaccini. 310
Campidoglio (M. Angelo.) 341 Carl Antonio Procaccini. 310 Carracci Annibale. 308 Antonio. 309 Agostino. 306 Lodovico. ib. Caravaggio (M. Angelo.) 313 Castiglione (Benedetto.) 332 Cimabue. 253 Claudio Gille (Lorain.) 334 Cooper (Samuel.) 338 Correggio. 264 D. Daniele da Volterra. 288 Dobson. 339 Domenichino. 321 Domenico Feti. 303 Ghirlandaio. 262 Tintoretto. 293 Dou. 337 Durer (Albert.) 263 E. Elsheimer. 315 Ercole Procaccini. 311 F. Feti (Domenico.) 303 Farinato (Paolo.) 296 Filippo Lauro. 347 Neapolitano. 314 Francesco Albani. 320 Barbieri. 327 Bassano. 291 Francia. 262 Mazzuoli. 286 Primaticcio. 282 Salviati. 288 Vanni. 312 Vecellio. 269 Franco (Battista.) 277 Frederico Barocci. 297 Zucchero. 302 Fresnoy (C. Alphonse.) 325 G. Gaddi Gaddo. 255 Taddeo. ib. Gasparo Poussin. 335 Gentileschi Artemisia. 320 Oratio. 319 Giorgione. 266 Giorgio Vasari. 294 Ghirlandaio (Domenico) 262 Giacomo Bassano. 289 Cortesi. 342 da Puntormo. 275 Tintoretto. 292 Gio. Battista Bassano. 291 Gioseppe Ribera. 323 Salviati. 301 Gioseppino. 311 Giottino. 256 Giotto. 254
Girolamo Bassano. 291 Giulio Cesare Procaccini. 310 Giulio Clovio. 282 Romano. 274 Guercino da Cento. 327 Guido Reni. 316 H. Hans Holbein. 283 I. Iohn of Bruges. 256 Iordano (Luca.) 345 L. Lanfranco. 324 Lauro (Filippo.) 347 Leandro Bassano. 291 Lely (Sir Peter.) 343 Leonardo da Vinci. 260 Lodovico Carracci. 306 Luca Iordano. 345 Signorelli. 259 Lucas van Leyden. 277 M. Mantegna (Andrea.) 258 Margaritone. 255 Marietta Tintoretta. 293 Mario di Fiori. 334 Masaccio. 257 Matthew Bril. 305 Michel-angelo delle Battaglie. 334 Buonoroti. 265 di Campidoglio. 341 da Caravaggio. 313 More (Antonio.) 295 N. Neapolitano (Filippo.) 314 Nicolò dell' Abbate. 282 Pussino. 328 O. Oratio Gentileschi. 319 Vecellio. 269 P. Palma Giovane. 303 Vecchio. 287 Paris Bordone. 294 Parmegiano. 286 Paolo Farinato. 296 Veronese. 299 Paul Bril. 305 Pierino del Vaga. 285 Pieter van Laer. 326 Pietro da Cortona. 336 di Cosimo. 260 Perugino. 261 Testa. 329 Pirro Ligorio. 289 Polenburch. 326 Polidoro. 279 Pordenone. 271 Primaticcia. 282
Procac∣cini Camillo. 310 Carl' Antonio. ib. Ercole. 311 Giulio Cesare. 310 Puntormo (Giacomo.) 275 Pussino Gasparo. 335 Nicolò. 328 Q. Quintin Matsys. 278 R. Rafaelle da Vrbino. 270 Ricciarelli (Daniele.) 288 Riley (John.) 247 Rotenhamer. 312 Rosso. 280 Rubens. 317 S. Sacchi (Andrea.) 336 Salvator Rosa. 341 Salviati Francesco. 288 Gioseppe. 301 Sarto (Andrea del.) 270 Schiavone (Andrea.) 296 Sebastian Bourdon 345 Sebastiano del Piombo. 272 Singnorelli (Luca.) 259 Simone Memmi. 255 Sisto Badalocchi. 324 Snyders. 321 Spagnoletto (Ribera.) 323 Sprangher. 303 T. Taddeo Zucchero. 298 Taffi (Andera.) 255 Tempesta (Antonio.) 305 Testa (Pietro.) 329 Tintoretta (Marietta.) 293 Tintoretto Domenico. ib. Giacomo. 292 Titiano. 267 V. Van Dyck. 330 Vanni (Francesco.) 312 Vasari (Giorgio.) 294 Vdine (Giovanni da.) 276 Vecellio Francesco. 269 Oratio. ib. Veronese (Paolo.) 299 Verrocchio (Andrea.) 259 Vinci (Leonardo da.) 260 Viola. 317 Viviano. 333 Volterra (Daniele da.) 288 Vouet (Simon.) 324 Z. Zampieri (Domenico.) 321 Zucchero Frederico. 302 Taddeo. 298
ERRATA. Page Line Instead of Read. vij 21 Bambovio. Bamboccio. 17 7 liberata{que} librata{que} 21 Marg positurorum. positurarum. 41 18 transluent. translucent. 98 17 51st. rule. 60th. Rule. 110 21 Neglecting the Copiers. The Copiers neglecting. ib. 25 reltaion. relation. 120 14 43d. Precept. 13th. Precept. 128 19 indishabile. en dishabillee. 136 11 4th. Precept. 41st. Precept. 161 2 it comprehends. comprehends. 219 12 his Brothers. his Sons. 221 21 gentleness. gentileness. 237 14 great. general. 254 12 Benedict IX. Benedict XI. 325 15 Richlieu. Richelieu. 329 5
