E3250 12589731 63857
A BRIEFE NOTE OF The Benefits that grow to this Realm by the observation of Fish-Dayes. With a reason and cause where∣fore the Law in that behalfe made, is ordained: Very necessary to bee kept in the houses of all men; espe∣cially common Victuallers. Together with an estimate of what Beefes might be spared in a yeare, in the Citie of London, by one dayes abstinence in a weeke. Collected out of severall Statutes in the Reigne of Queene ELIZABETH. Published by Iohn Erswicke Gentleman. London printed for Tho: Bankes. 1642.
A briefe note of the benefits that grow to this Realme by the observa∣tion of Fish-dayes. WHere heretofore by the Queenes most excellent Majestie, of her clemency and care conceived, for divers private benefits that might grow to her loving Sub∣jects, especially for the Navy of this Land, hath with the assent of the whole State of her Realme, caused to be made and published sundry Statutes, Lawes, and Procla∣mations for the expence of fish, and observation of fish-dayes, with great penalties to be laid on the of∣fendors; that by the certaine observation thereof, fisher-men (the chiefest Nurse for Marriners) might be increased and maintained. The common sort of people contemning this observation, to a∣void the ceremony in times past therein used, and not certainly knowing the benefits thereby growing to this Realme; nor remembring the penalties by the same Lawes appointed, doe not onely fall into the danger of the said Lawes, but by the same hath caused a great decay to fishing, whereby groweth many other great detriments to the Common∣wealth of this Realme: For the better instruction therefore of such persons, as for the benefit of their
Country will be perswaded: In this briefe Table is set downe the punishment appointed for the of∣fendors, the discommodities that happen to the Realme by the said contempt, and the great benefit that might grow to the people by the observation hereof, with the opinion that ought to be concei∣ved in the eating of fish at the dayes and times pre∣scribed, being briefly set downe as hereafter fol∣loweth. The breaches of the Statutes. In the fift yeare of her Majesties most gracious raigne, it was ordained that it should not be lawfull for any person within this Realme, to eate any flesh upon any dayes then usually observed as fish-dayes, upon paine to forfeit three pounds for every time he offended; or suffer three moneths of imprison∣ment, without baile or maine prize. And every person within whose house any such offence shall be done, being privy, and knowing thereof, and not ef∣fectually punishing or disclosing the same to some publique officer, having authority to punish the same, to forfeit for every such offence forty shil∣lings: The said penalty being great, and many of poore estate favoured by reason thereof, but the of∣fence thought necessary not to be left unpunished: The Queenes Majestie of Her great clemencie in the Parliament holden in the 34. yeare of Her most gracious raigne, hath caused the forfeiture for the eater to bee but twenty shillings; and for him in whose house it is eaten▪ but 13s. 4d which being executed, will prove very damageable to the offen∣ders.
In the 17. yere of Her Highnesse raigne it is further ordained, and remaineth still in force; That no Inholder, Vintner, Ale-house-keeper, common Victualler, common Cooke, or common Table∣keeper, shall utter or put to sale, upon any Friday, Saterday, or other dayes appointed to be fish dayes, or any day in time of Lent, any kinde of flesh victu∣all, upon paine of the forfeiture of five pounds, and shall suffer ten dayes imprisonment, without baile, mainprize, or remove, for every time so offending. The cause and reason. First, forasmuch as our Country is (for the most part) compassed with the Seas, & the greatest force for defence under God, is the Kings Majesties Navy of Ships, for maintenance and increase of the said Navy, this Law for abstinence hath been most care∣fully ordained, that by the certaine expence of fish, fishing and fisher-men might be the more increased and the better maintained, for that the said Trade is the chiefest Nurse, not onely for the bringing up of youth for Shipping, but great numbers of Shippes therein are used, furnished with sufficient Marri∣ners, men at all times in readinesse for his Majesties service in those affaires. The second cause, for that many Townes and Vil∣lages upon the Sea coasts grow of late wonderfully decayed, and some wonderfully depopulated, which in times past were replenished; not only with fisher men and great store of shipping, but sundry other Artificers, as Shipwrights, Smiths, Rope-makers, Nett-makers, Saile-makers, Weavers, Dressers, Carriers, and Utterers of Fish, maintained chiefly
by fishing, that they hereby againe might be re∣newed, the want thereof is, and hath beene cause of great numbers of idle persons, with whom this Realme at this time is greatly damaged: and this happeneth by reason of the uncertainty of the sale of fish, and the contempt which in eating of fish is conceived. Furthermore it is considered, that the Trade for grasing of cattell, through the excessive expence of flesh, is so much increased, that many Farme-houses and Villages, wherein were maintained great num∣bers of people, and by them the Markets plentifully served with corne and other victuals, is now utterly decayed, and put downe for the feeding and grasing of Beefes and Muttons onely, by means whereof the people which in such places were maintained, are not only made vagrant, but also Calves, Hogs, Pigs, Geefe, Hens, Chickens, Capons, Egges, Butter, Cheese, and the like things, doe become exceeding scarce and deare, by want of their increase in those places, so that the Markets are not, nor cannot be served, as in times past it hath beene. Many other things for confirmation hereof might be spoken, as the great number of Ships decayed, which hath been maintained by fishing; the wealth and commodity that fishing bringeth to this Realm; the cause that certaine dayes and times for expence of fish, must of necessity be observed, grown by rea∣son the provision of flesh for the peoples diet must be certainely provided, whereof the gentle Reader shall bee more at large instructed in a little booke, published to that effect; with sundry other argu∣ments,
which for brevitie is omitted, in hope the consideration hereof will be sufficient to perswade such persons as esteeme more the benefit of the Countrey then their owne lust or appetite; setting before their eyes the feare of God, in obedience to the Kings Commandement, especially in such things as concerne the benefit of a Commonwealth; considering S. Paul sayth, There is no Power but of God: The Powers (sayth he) that be, are ordained of God; and those that resist these Powers, resist the Ordinance of God. It is further to be considered, that there is no con∣science to be made in the kind or nature of the meat being Flesh or Fish, as in times past a famed Cere∣monie therein was used, neyther is the meat concer∣ning it selfe unlawfull to be eaten at any time, but the use thereof unlawfull, being forbidden to eate by the Prince, having power and authoritie from God, and done by the consent of the Parliament: For a Common-wealth, wherein obedience ought to be shewed, not for feare of punishment onely, as S. Paul sayth, but for conscience sake; not esteeming the meat, nor the day, but obedience to the Law, and benefit to our Countrey and poore Brethren; re∣membring, that the Magistrate beareth not the Sword for nought, but to take vengeance upon them that doe evill: For S. Paul sayth further, Hee that will live without feare of punishment, must doe well, and so shall he have prayse for the same. And although feare of punishment will not re∣forme such persons as by affection continued hath beene addicted from the expence of Fish, and the
observation of Fish-dayes; yet the foresaid things considered, let obedience to their Prince, and bene∣fit to their Countrey, perswade them to bridle their affectioned lust for a small time, so shall they both see and feele the great benefits thereby growing, and escape the punishment for the offence appointed. And for that the commodities may in some part more plainely appeare, hereafter followeth an Esti∣mate of the Beeves that were killed and uttered in the Citie of London and Suburbs for a yeare, and what number of them might be spared in the said yeare by one dayes abstinence in a weeke; by which also may be conjectured, what may be spared in this whole Realme. An Estimate what Beeves might be spared in a yeare, in the Citie of London, by one dayes abstinence in a weeke; Collected out of severall Statutes in the Reigne of Queene Elizabeth. FIrst, in the yeare are 52 weekes, for every weeke seven dayes, in all 365. The Lent, with Fri∣day and Saterday in every weeke, and the other accustomed Fish-dayes, being collected together, extends to 153. So, in the yeare is 153 Fish-dayes, and 212 Flesh-dayes, that is, 59 Flesh-dayes more then Fish. So the yeare being 52 weekes, abate seven for the time of Lent, wherein no Beeves ought to be killed, and there remaineth but 45 weekes. Then let us say, there be 60 Butchers that be Free-men within the Citie, and every Butcher to kill weekely the one
with the other five Beeves a peece; that same amoun∣teth to 13500 Beeves. The Forrainers in the Suburbs, and such as come out of the Countrey to serve the Markets in the Ci∣tie, as it is credibly affirmed, kill and utter in the Citie weekely four times so many as the Free-men▪ which amounteth to 54000. So joyning the Beeves uttered by the Free-men and Farriners together, they extend to 67500. If wee will now know, what number of Beefes might be spared in a yeare, by one dayes abstinence in a weeke; let us say, in the weeke are five dayes ac∣customably served with Flesh, (for that Friday and Saterday by the Law are dayes of abstinence) where∣of one being taken away, the rest but foure; in like case, divide the said 67500 into five parts, and the fifth part spared by the fifth dayes abstinence, is 13500. By this is not meant, that any more Fish-dayes should be ordained then already are, but that Friday and Saterday might be in better sort observed, for that Flesh Victuals on those dayes, in most places, are as commonly spent as on Flesh-dayes, and ther∣fore may well be accounted for the expence of one Flesh-day; the due observation whereof would spare the number of Beeves aforesaid, or more, besides those things sold by the Poulterers, and other small Cattell, as Calves, Sheepe, and Lambs innumerable killed by the Butchers. Seene and allowed by the most Honorable Privie Coun∣cell in Anno 1642. the 22 of February. FINIS.
