E3546 12565855 63333
ENCOURAGEMENT FOR Seamen & Mariners. In Two Parts. Being a proposed Method for the more speedy and effectual furnishing their Majesties Royal Navy with able Seamen and Mariners. And for saving those immense Sums of Money, yearly expended in attending the Sea-press. In order to prevent those many Mischiefs and Abuses daily committed (by disorderly Press-masters) both at Sea and Land, to the great Prejudice of their Ma∣jesties, and Injury of the Subject. By GEORGE EVERETT, Shipwright. London, Printed in the Year, MDCXCV.
TO THE Right Honourable THE Lords Spiritual and Temporal, AND COMMONS of England, Assembled in Parliament. With Submission, IN humble Respect to his Majesties most gracious Speech, I do most humbly offer these following Proposals, for the encouraging of Seamen, in order to fur∣nish their Majesties Royal Navy on all Occasions: Wherein is briefly set forth
the great Hardships and Sufferings of those imployed in Sea-Service, together with proper Remedies to prevent the same; whereby their Majesties, and the Pub∣lick, may save those immense Sums of Money yearly expended on such Occasi∣ons; the Seamen be happy and easy in such Service; the Merchants enjoy a free Trade, without Interruption; the whole Nation be happy under the present Influ∣ence of a War, many Grievances attend∣ing thereon be redress'd, Vice punish'd, Vertue promoted, our Enemies terrified, and our selves encouraged, by the Blessing of the Almighty, to prosecute this so great and glorious Ʋndertaking, and there∣by regain our former Honour of being Master of the British Seas, to the Glo∣ry of their Majesties, the Peace and Hap∣piness of the whole Nation: Most humbly begging your Honours to pardon this my
Ʋndertaking, to pass by my Errors with Patience, and to correct all that is amiss with Prudence, and to consider my former Proposals, humbly offered for the saving 100000l. per Annum in building and repairing the Royal Navy; which by his Majesty's Order of the 22d of March last, was referred to the Right Honoura∣ble the Lords Commissioners of the Admi∣ralty, and at the writing hereof is yet ly∣ing under their Lordships Consideration. All which (out of a hearty and zealous Incli∣nation of serving their Majesties and the Publick) I do most humbly recommend to your Honours Consideration (as the on∣ly Physicians under God, from whom a Redress of all our Grievances are desired and expected) in Hopes of your favoura∣ble Acceptance and Encouragement there∣of, for the Service of their Majesties, the Benefit of the Subject, and the Good and
Welfare of the whole Nation, most hum∣bly praying that a Committee may be ap∣pointed to examine and consider the same; and that I may be admitted to give Reasons, and answer to all Objections. I humbly submit my self, Your Honours most faithful and obedient Servant, GEO. EVERETT.
PROPOSALS▪ Consisting of two Parts, Most humbly offered for the Encouragement of Seamen, and for supplying their Majesties Royal Navy with able Seamen and Mariners on all Occasions. Part the First. FOrasmuch as it is altogether needless to give an Ac∣count of the particular Charge of the Nation in impressing of Seamen for their Majesties Service, that being already performed by others; and it be∣ing well known that after all the Charge and Trouble there∣in, many of the most able and fittest for Sea-Service do lie lurking and conceal'd, taking an Opportunity to make a Voyage or two to Newcastle, or otherwise, as theysee most convenient for their own Advantage, to the great Hindrance of their Majesties Service, the Discouragement of others belonging to the Fleet, and great Prejudice of many, who being unfit for Sea-Service, are forced to supply in such Case:
Proposal 1. For Remedy thereof (upon the especial Ap∣probation of the Honourable Admiral Russel, and several other eminent Persons of known Experience in Maritime Affairs) it is humbly proposed, That in every Seaport-Town (according to the Greatness thereof) an Office and Officers (being Persons of known Integrity and good Repute) may be erected and settled, for taking and keep∣ing a Register of Seamen and Mariners: And to that end the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of every Parish within ten Miles of any Sea-Coast▪ or navigable Ri∣ver, within this Kingdom, shall within fourteen Days af∣ter Notice given (by Proclamation) be sworn duly to en∣quire and take a List of all Seamen and Mariners, inha∣biting and residing within their respective Parishes, being between the Age of 16 and 60, whether at home or a∣broad, and shall deliver the same under their Hands to the Sheriff of the County to which they do belong; which said Sheriff shall within twelve Days after the Re∣ceipt thereof, transmit a Copy of the same to the next Port-Office, where the same shall be carefully en∣tered Alphabetically, for every Parish and County di∣stinctly, in a Book or Books for that purpose to be pro∣vided. ☞This cannot be accounted any great Trouble, there being in every Parish four or six such Officers at least, who dividing themselves, with their Beadle, who is generally acquainted with all the Parishioners, may perform the same effectually in one Day. ☞Neither can it be accounted troublesom to the She∣riffs, it being not expected to be more than once a Year at most; and may, by their Directions, be perform'd by their Servants: And, being a National Concern, ought to have
a National Assistance, which will partly be effected by such Officers changing Places every Year. Prop. 2. And that all Masters of Ships and other Vessels using the Sea, or trading from Port to Port Coast-wise, (except such Vessels as are or shall be employed in the home Trade of Fishery for supplying the several Markets of this Kingdom) shall, at the Beginning of their Voyage, and be∣fore they depart the first Port, give into that Port-Office a true List of the Names of all Seamen and Mariners re∣tained to serve on Board their said Ships or Vessels, together with their Age, and what outward Marks may be found, as also their Place of Residence or Habitation, if any such they have: which being performed, the said Masters (if not restrained by Imbargo or other Order) may with their Company have Liberty to proceed on their intended Voy∣age, both out and home, without Danger of being im∣press'd, one of the said Officers first giving a Certificate un∣der his Hand and Seal, as a Protection for the Use of each Seaman thereunto belonging, being between the Age of 16 and 60 Years, as aforesaid; and also a Duplicate there∣of to the Master, for which he shall pay unto the said Officer, if a Coaster, 2s. and 6d. and if a Trader to fo∣reign Parts, 5s. per Head for every Person therein nomi∣nated; which said Monies may be allowed for and towards the Maintenance and Encouragement of such Officers. ☞By the aforesaid Means it may be possible to obtain a full Register of all the Seamen of England, and thereby know who is in Service and who is not, whereby the Royal Navy, upon all Occasions, may be ready manned with able Seamen, and no Hiding-place left for Deserters or others: And the Head-Money proposed will be gladly paid to avoid those great Perils and Losses which too often happen, to
the great Prejudice of their Majesties, and all others con∣cern'd at Sea, by means of the Sea-Press. Prop. 3. And upon Return of the said Ship or Vessel to her Port of Delivery or Unlading, that then the said Ma∣ster thereof shall be further obliged (if belonging to a Ship or Vessel using the Coast-Trade) within four Days, or if a Merchant-Ship trading to foreign Parts, within ten Days or more (as may be thought convenient) to pay such his Ship's Company in the Presence of one of the aforesaid Officers at a Place and Day prefix'd. And if it happen that any Change or Alteration hath been made amongst the said Company during the said Voyage, that then the said Master do give an Account to the said Offi∣cer, who may be impowered to make Inquiry therein; and whosoever of the said Company, shipped outward or homeward, appeareth not in Person to receive his Wages at such Time and Place prefixed (without some lawful Cause or Let shewed to the contrary, being such as may be allowed by the Directors of such Office, or Officers) shall lose and forgo his whole Wages, one half to the Use of their Majesties, and the other to the Chest of Cha∣tham, or otherwise, as may be thought convenient. ☞And the said Officers (being impower'd to make In∣quiry as aforesaid) will cause Masters to be more cautious how they do imprison and pack their Seamen off in foreign Countries; an Abuse too much practised, even to the Ruin of many Families, which brings much Poverty on the Na∣tion, especially about Rivers and Sea-port-Towns. Prop. 4. And if it should happen that any of the said Ships or Vessels should deliver or unlade at any other Port within this Kingdom, that then the Officer of such Port
may, by the Master's Duplicate, (he being obliged to pro∣duce the same, or otherwise by a Copy of the Register from the other first Officer) be enabled to procede in all Respects as aforesaid. ☞For Conveniency a Copy of all Registers may be transmitted from all Ports to Yarmouth and Portsmouth, for the ready Dispatch of all such Affairs; but more especially to the Port-Office of London. Prop. 5. And that every Officer, in his respective Place, (at the Time of paying such Seamen as aforesaid) shall then cause all such as are fit for their Majesties Service to be forthwith sent on board some Ship belonging to the Fleet, as Occasion shall require; the Charge thereof to be paid by their Majesties: And all such as are so sent on board their Majesties Ships shall have equal Benefit with those Seamen who do or shall enter themselves as Volun∣teers. ☞By such Means there will be a constant supplying of the Royal Navy with able Seamen: And by this Means such who use to steal a Voyage or two, will unavoidably be brought into their Majesties Service without Prejudice to any; which will be an Encouragement to others belonging to the Fleet, and will prevent the pressing of Tradesmen from their Business. Prop. 6. And as every Merchant-Ship or Vessel hath a Carpenter or two belonging unto it, who for great Wages go voluntarily to Sea, their Majesties Ships may by the Means aforesaid, be plentifully supplied with able Shipwrights, the most experienced and fittest for Sea-Service.
Prop. 7. And at the End of every Year the said Officers shall present their Majesties with a general List of all Sea∣men and Shipwrights so sent on board of every particular Ship; and, if thought convenient, shall have an additio∣nal Allowance from their Majesties of two Shillings and Sixpence per Head, as an Encouragement and Maintenance for such their Service. Prop. 8. And whatsoever Officer or Ship-master offendeth herein, contrary to the true Intent and Meaning thereof, shall forfeit Pounds to the Use of their Majesties, Pounds whereof may be allowed to the Informer. ☞This Charge cannot be accounted great, for by this Means the prodigious Expence of hiring Smacks and Ketches to attend the Press will determine; and 1000 Men and Boys commonly imployed therein may be at liberty to serve their Majesties on board the Fleet, besides the Charge allowed and expended by Captains and Lieutenants on such Occa∣sions. ☞And the Seamen and Shipwrights belonging to Mer∣chants Ships, being so secured for their Majesties Service, may enjoy the Benefit of selling and disposing what they have as an Adventure on board their respective Ships, together with the Happiness of receiving their Wages, and provi∣ding themselves with Apparel, and other Necessaries fit for Sea-Service, and be sent on board the Fleet like Men, who otherwise, after a long and tedious Voyage, without Recruit or Money, are forced on board their Majesties Ships in a poor and ragged Condition, which is one main Occa∣sion of Sickness and Distempers on board the Fleet; and for such Reasons many refuse to go to Sea, and others for∣sake their Ships in foreign Nations.
☞And by such Means as aforesaid Merchants Ships at Sea, and under Convoy, may be secure from the Rage and ill Usage of some Commanders; who, if denied their un∣reasonable Demands for Light or Convoy-Money, do often cause the Seamen to be impress'd, whereby such Ships or Vessels are too often disabled, and the Ship and Goods, with the small and helpless Number of Men left on board, do often miscarry or perish at Sea; whereby the Merchants lose their Goods, their Majesties lose their Customs, the Subjects lose their Lives, the Owners their Ship or Ves∣sel, and many become Widows and Fatherless thereby; which brings great Complaints and Poverty throughout the Nation.
PROPOSALS. Part the Second. Prop. 1. ;AND as the Honour and Glory of the En∣glish Nation doth so much depend upon the Strength and good Conduct of the Royal Navy, so it may be highly necessary, at such time when the Common Enemy is so potent and powerful, that all due Encouragement be given to Seamen and Ma∣riners. And to that end it is most humbly proposed, That no Offices belonging to the Fleet be bought or sold, but that every Person may be preferred according to his De∣serts and Merits. Prop. 2. That the said Seamen be allowed their full Share of all Prizes that shall be taken, and that some Law be passed to prevent Imbezlements therein; and that those Persons, in what Station soever, that shall endea∣vour to defraud them of such Parts and Shares as have by Custom, or may hereafter be allowed, shall (being con∣victed thereof) forfeit his said Office or Employment. Prop. 3. That if any Seamen be dismembred in their Majesties Service, such Smart-Money as hath been for∣merly allowed may be advanced, and be forthwith duly
paid. And further, that there may be an additional Al∣lowance made for all such Pensioners as shall be dismem∣bred in their Majesties Service. Prop. 4. That if any Seamen be killed in their Majesties Service, that the Bounty-Money generally allowed on such Occasions be forthwith paid to those who shall pro∣duce a just Right to receive the same. Prop. 5. That all Profaneness, which having by long Custom gotten the Ascendant on board the Fleet, be forthwith suppress'd and abolished, and all Offenders (being Officers) may be displaced, and others receive such Punish∣ment as may be appointed by Authority of Parliament. Prop. 6. And that no Seaman or Mariner that hath served twelve Months in any of their Majesties Ships, shall be turn'd over to serve on board any other of their Majesties Ships before he be paid all Wages due to that time. Prop. 7. That when and so often as their Majesties (by their Royal Proclamation) shall require the Service of such Seamen on board the Royal Navy by such a Day or Time prefix'd, that all able Seamen who shall in obedience thereunto voluntarily enter themselves, by applying to the next Port-Officer or Officers, shall be allowed, during the whole Voyage, 28s. per Month, according to the Course of the Navy; and that so often as any of their Majesties Ships shall arrive into any Harbour to lay up for any time, that then the Seamen and Mariners there∣unto belonging shall be forthwith discharged; and that all Wages to them then due for such Service be fully paid, not in Tickets, but in Money: And if the Voyage be
long, that then their Wives or Friends, having a lawful Power to receive the same, may be paid six Months Wages out of every nine Months that such Ship shall be abroad. Prop. 8. That all such Sea-men now belonging to the Royal Navy as shall be continued on board the Fleet at such time as the Service of others shall be required by Proclamation as aforesaid, may have and receive the full Benefit of such as shall then enter themselves as Volunteers. Prop. 8. That there be one Clerk at the Navy-Office to attend all accidental Business that may happen touching the Premises, and that he be allowed by their Majesties l. per annum, to answer and receive Money for all such Per∣sons as shall employ him on such Occasion; and that he may be allowed 6d. or 12d. per Pound, as shall be thought fit, for all such Money as he shall so receive: and the said Clerk making Default therein, to be displaced, and suffer such Fine or other Punishment as the Parliament shall think fit. ☞ By such Payments as aforesaid Seamen may be ena∣bled to provide for themselves and Families, and to pay their Debts, which is one Means to make Money plenty throughout the Nation, and will encourage them, when oc∣casion shall require, freely and gladly to enter themselves into their Majesties Service, without the Charge of being pressed or continued in Pay for the whole Year. And be∣ing certain of such Provision made for the Maintenance of themselves and Families, it will make them bold and daring, not being afraid to look Death in the very Face of their Enemies.
☞It is to be observed, that for want of such Payment as aforesaid, the Seamen are greatly injured and discou∣raged; first especially when instead of Money they are put off with Tickets, whilst many of them and their Families wanting Food and Rayment, are compelled to sell such Tickets at one third parr, and sometimes one half Loss; so that thereby the Seamens Pay is very small and insignifi∣cant, who after having exposed themselves to the greatest Dangers, are so cut off, being but as Slaves and Drudges to the common Ticket-Buyers and their Upholders, who for supplying them so with Money do carry away the greatest part of their Labour, when many of their poor Families are ready to perish. Secondly, The paying such their Wages on board the Fleet at such time as they are rea∣dy to sail, is very injurious both to Seamen and others; for by such Means they have not the Opportunity to serve themselves or Families, but are obliged to buy all their Ne∣cessaries on board the Common Higlers or Boomboats, (and they not many) who, making it their Business to attend the Fleet, do, by their Extortion, bring away the greatest part of the Seamens Wages. So that a great part of the Treasure of the Nation, which ought to be divided a∣mongst all, falls into the Hands of a few private Per∣sons; whereas, if such Payment were to be made on shore, as aforesaid, they may have the Benefit to buy all they want at the best Hand, to pay their Debts and relieve their Families. And by this Means all such Money would, as from a Fountain, pleasantly distil it self into so many Sil∣ver Streams, until it returns again to its first Rise: which would be a great Encouragement to Seamen and all other their Majesties good Subjects, who being now obliged to give them and their Families Credit, are forc'd to sit down by Loss, which is one great Cause of the Decay and Detri∣ment of Trade.
☞If it should be objected, that paying the Seamen their Wages on shore (upon the Discharge of their Service as aforesaid) will cause them to desert their Majesties Ser∣vice, 'tis humbly answered, that there being in England a sufficient Number to serve both their Majesties Royal Na∣vy and Merchants Ships at one time, as by sufficient Testi∣mony did appear this last Summer, it is impossible to be∣lieve the Royal Fleet should ever want Seamen, if good Payment was to be made, and Encouragement given as aforesaid, for these Reasons following. First, They being in such Service are more secure from the Enemy than in Merchants Ships. Secondly, Being allowed thirteen Months to the Year, without After-claps, or paying Damages, which (in Merchants Ships) often cuts off one Months Pay in three. Thirdly, If a Ship of their Majesties happen to be lost, the Seamens Wages stand good. Fourthly, Being out of all Danger of being impress'd, during the whole Voyage; by Means whereof in Merchants Ships they often lose both their Wages and Adventure. Fifthly, Having a Prospect in making Advantage by taking of Prizes. Sixthly, If Loss of Members happen, Smart-Money is al∣lowed, with a yearly Pension during Life. Seventhly, If killed in Fight, a considerable Bounty-Gift is bestowed on their Families, according to the Greatness thereof; when Seamen in Merchants Ships, running all Risques as afore∣said, fall far short of these so great Advantages. Prop. 9. Furthermore it is proposed, that if any Diffe∣rence should happen within the Term of the said Voyage between the Master of such Merchant's Ship or Vessel, and any of the Seamen belonging thereunto, for or by reason of any Wages due, or Goods damaged by Leekage of the Ship or Vessel, such Differences may be determined
by such Officer as aforesaid, who may be impowered to call to his Assistance two, three or more honest and in∣different Men, being sufficient House-keepers, who may have Power to hear and determine all such Differences as aforesaid, which would be of great Advantage to poor Seamen; who, by reason of Poverty and the Press, being not in a Capacity to maintain or attend a Suit of Law, are often ruined and undone. ☞If it should be objected that this may prove prejudi∣cial to the Government, it is humbly answered, That the Seamen in general, by such Injuries, and for such Reasons as aforesaid, are not in a Capacity to go to Law; so that where nothing is, nothing can be expected. ☞So that by thus civilly impressing of some, and paying and encouraging of others as aforesaid, it may be presumed their Majesties Royal Navy may at all times be readily and plentifully provided with the most able Seamen and Mari∣ners on all Occasions, and all extraordinary Charge of im∣pressing and maintaining them on board the Fleet the Win∣ter-Season (which by Captain St. Lo was computed at 504000l. for one Winter-Season, besides 60000l. expended for Conduct, Bounty, and Impress-Money) avoided, and saved, as well now as in former times. And to this all the Seamen and faithful People of England will say, Amen. ☞If any Objection should be made, that in manning the Royal Navy according to the Methods of this second Proposition, their Majesties Affairs may be prolonged or prejudiced thereby, then it is humbly proposed, that a Recourse may be had to the aforesaid Register, as fol∣loweth. Prop. 10. That the Right Honourable the Lords Com∣missioners of the Admiralty calling to the Port-Officers of
London for a general List of all Seamen in each County (taken as aforesaid) may direct their Warrants to the se∣veral Sheriffs of the Counties aforesaid, requiring them to direct their Precepts to the several Constables of each Parish as aforesaid, who with the Assistance of the Church∣wardens and Overseers of the Poor shall forthwith (to the utmost of their Power) cause such and so many as are re∣quired (by an equal Quota) to appear before the next Port-Officer who shall dispose of them on board their Ma∣jesties Ships, as shall be most meet and convenient for their Majesties Service: And such as press Men to be al∣lowed but 24s. per Month. And what Seamen soever shall abscond from their Habitation, or usual Place of Be∣ing, at such time as the Service of their Majesties shall re∣quire them on board the Fleet, shall suffer Imprisonment, or as the Parliament shall think fit. And that the Port-Officer do then forthwith pay unto the said Constables, for travelling and other necessary Charges, the Sum of 2s. 6d. per Head, for every Person by them delivered or produced as aforesaid; and that the said Port-Officer be allowed the same (with other necessary Charges for send∣ing such on board the Fleet) out of their Majesties Treasury. By what hath been proposed I hope it will appear, that the impressing of Seamen and others by Sea-Officers may be wholly laid aside, which hath hitherto been very charge∣able to their Majesties, and injurious to the Subjects, as is briefly summed up as followeth. 1. That several Vessels imployed in that Service, after having laid twelve or fourteen Days in the River of Thames on that occasion, have by the ill Management of some Lieutenants thereunto belonging, been sent on board their Majesties Ships with twenty or thirty Men at one time, who being not fit or useful in such Service, have been often dis∣charged
and turned ashore, by which Means their Majesties Treasure hath been vainly expended; and many Land∣men and Tradesmen have been often carried from their Ha∣bitations to the Downs, Portsmouth and Plimouth, to their great Charge and Prejudice. 2. That the impressing and detaining Seamen in their Majesties Service on such hard Terms as before specified, causeth many to desert their Majesties Service, who by such Means come to an untimely Exit. And many Seamen there be, who having Families, will rather expose themselves to such vile and shameful Ends, than leave their Families to perish for want of Food and Raiment. 3. Many other Inconveniences there be attending the present Discipline of the Navy, as paying the Fleet at Portsmouth, &c. whereby their Majesties Affairs are often re∣tarded, and the Seamen whose Wives or Friends are very populous about the River of Thames, do, by travelling and attending at such remote Parts, often expend more than they receive, whereby many Families are ruined and un∣done: And many others there be, who for want of Money are obliged to take up all they want upon Trust, paying one Shilling for the Value of nine Pence, losing thereby 25l. per Cent. and by selling their Tickets, as aforesaid, they generally lose 30, 40, or 50l. per Cent. so that by a modest Computation their whole Loss amounts to 60l. per Cent. out of their small Wages. 4. The turning of Seamen over from one Ship to another, after having been in such Service one, two, or three Years without Money, produceth the same Effect as the former. 5. For the aforesaid Reasons the Seamen, their Wives and Friends, are at a great Charge and Trouble by petition∣ing and attending the Admiralty and Navy-Board, (on such Occasions) who spend great part of their Time in hearing and examining these and such like Grievances.
6. Whereas if Seamen were paid and encouraged as afore∣said, these Mischiefs and Disorders, with many others, oc∣casioned by several indirect Practices of the Clerks of the Navy, &c. would soon cease and be abolished. 7. And for promoting the same it is further proposed, That a sutable Fund of Money be raised and set apart for such Uses and Purposes: And if the same should fail, or fall short of what is intended, that then they may be sup∣plied with such Funds as shall be appropriated to pay Mer∣chant-Dealers and Tradesmen, who being under no Com∣pulsion in making Agreement for their Commodities, are in a Capacity to help themselves. 8. And if a Sufficiency of Money cannot be raised as aforesaid, that then it may be borrowed; and suppose at 10l. per Cent. per Annum, yet will be of so great Use in an∣swering these Ends, that its presumed their Majesties will thereby save 200000l. per Annum, or more: but if the late ingenious Proposals to supply their Majesties with Money at 3l. per Cent. per Annum, be put into practice, the Advan∣tages accruing to their Majesties by this proposed Method will be much greater, and the Doubts and Objections that may arise touching the Insufficiency of making such orderly Payments as aforesaid, will be removed. 9. Thus by preferring Frugality, and abolishing Extrava∣gancy, their Majesties, with the usual Funds generally raised and allowed for such Occasions, will soon be in a Capacity of paying and providing with ready Money all things useful and necessary for carrying on the War; and the Enemy ta∣king notice of our Industry and Abilities, the usual Fore∣runners of great Actions, will be thereby discouraged, as they are certain Presages of their approaching Downfal. 10. And that by such Means the general Trade of the Nation will be better supplied at home, and secured abroad; and the Subjects thereby inabled and encouraged to give
Supplies to carry on the War, and their Majesties thereby be the better supported to prosecute and continue the same. 11. Thus having, as I humbly conceive, proposed a sure and certain Method to prevent those Evils occasioned by the Sea-press, which (if put in practice) I dare affirm, will be a useful Instrument to vanquish and overcome all our Enemies both Foreign and Domestick; it being observa∣ble, that since my former Proposals made for performing of Shipwrights Work, the impressing of Workmen for that Service hath been little practised. In all that hath been most humbly offered I have studied Brevity more than Curiosity, my Design being to serve my Country rather than to shew my Skill in Learning; and therefore do present the same, not as the Labour of my spare Minutes, but as the Fruit of a labourious Brain, that hath and will be always ready to serve their Majesties and the Government upon all Occasions. I shall only offer these following Queries, most humbly praying they may be considered. 1. Whether the Nation under the present Circumstances of a War, can long continue a sutable Supply of Money to carry on the same, under the pernicious Effects of Extrava∣gancy? 2. Whether Money raised in Parliament with Care, col∣lected with Trouble, and paid with Tears, requires not the most serious Thoughts and Endeavours of all its Disposers, for converting the same, in all Circumstances, to the most useful and advantagious Purposes? 3. Whether the King exposing his Royal Person in so many Dangers abroad, for promoting the Happiness and Well-being of the Nation, doth not expect the due Assi∣stance of all other his Officers and Subjects, indispensibly to use their utmost Endeavours for the full accomplishing his Royal Purposes?
4. Whether the saving those immense Sums of Money, as aforesaid, will not settle the Minds of their Majesties good Subjects, and stop the Mouths of the most disloyal and restless Spirits, who raise Animosities amongst us, and instil wicked Notions into the Minds of their Majesties Subjects, representing the Government as under an unsettled Condi∣tion, and groaning under Oppression, by reason of great Taxes, and a lingring and expensive War, and a want of Trade, and raising their Expectations of a speedy Change, who finding their Hopes defeated by an unanimous Resolu∣tion of rooting out the Evils occasioning the same, can have no future Pretence to such calumniating Reflections on the Government for bringing to pass their evil Purposes? 5. Whether the buying and selling of publick Places be not an undoubted Inlet to bring their Majesties Enemies into such Stations, being of dangerous Consequence to the Government? 6. Whether it will not be for their Majesties and the Na∣tion's Interest to advance Persons to Places of Trust accord∣ing to their Merits, and not permit those to be discounte∣nanced, and to labour under Difficulties, who expose Frauds and Extravagancies, and propose proper Remedies for the Cure of those Evils? and whether the brow-beating and discouraging those who endeavour to make such Discove∣ries, is not an effectual Means to prevent all others from ap∣pearing in such like Cases? Much more might be added, which for Brevity sake is omitted. I shall humbly conclude with the following Admonition of King Henry the IVth, who upon his Death-bed spake to his Son as followeth; So long as English-men have Wealth, so long shalt thou have Obe∣dience from them; but when they are poor, they are then ready for Commotions and Rebellions: from which, and all other Evils, good Lord deliver us both now and for evermore. FINIS.
