F1364A 99830496 34948
THE MANNERS OF THE Israelites, IN THREE PARTS. 1 Of the Patriarchs. 2. Of the Israelites after their coming out of Egypt until the Captivity of Babylon. 3 Of the Jews after their Re∣turn from the Captivity until the Preaching of the Gospel. SHEWING Their Customs Secular and Religious, their Generous Contempt of Earthly Gran∣deur. And the great Benefit and Ad∣vantage of a plain Laborious, Frugal, and Contented Life. I am a Stranger with thee, and a Sojourner as all my Fathers were. Psal. 39. 12. London Printed for William Freeman over against the Devil-Tavern near Temple Bar in Fleet-street. 1683.
THE INTRODUCTION. THe People,The De∣sign of this Treatise. whom God chose to preserve the true Religion until the preaching of the Gos∣pel, may serve for an Excellent Model of a Man's Life, most con∣formable to Nature. We see in their manners the most Rational ways of Subsisting, of employing our time, and of living in Society; and we are capable of Learning from 'em not only Morality but also Oeconomy and Policy. Yet those manners are so diffe∣rent from ours, that they offend us at the first blush. We see among the Israelites neither those Titles of Nobility, nor that Multi∣tude of Oices, nor that Diversity
of Conditions, which is found a∣mong us: There are none amongst them but Labourers and Husband∣men; all working with their Hands, all married, and counting the mul∣titude of Children for a great Happiness. The Distinction of Meats and living Creatures Clean and Unclean, & their frequent Purifi∣cations seem to us odd and Caprici∣ous Ceremonies, and their bloody Sa∣crifices give us a disgust. Moreover, we see, that this People were very Inclinable to Idolatry; that the Scripture upon that account ofte reproaches them with their Indocility and hardness of Heart; and tha the Fathers treat them as Gross and Carnal. All this, joyned to a Confused Prepossession, that what is most Ancient is always most Imperfect, does easily perswade us▪ that those men were brutal and ig∣norant, and that their Manner rather deserv'd contempt tha Admiration, From whence it proceeds i part, that the Holy Scriptures, es∣pecially those of the old Testament, are so little read or wit
so little Profit. The good Chri∣stian, who has not yet rid himself of those Prepossessions, is dis∣gusted with is Scene of strange Manners. He attributes all without Distinction to the Imperfection of the old Law, or believes, that under that veil are concealed Mysteries, which he does not understand. Those who have not sufficient faith and uprightness of Heart are tempted upon these appearances to despise Scripture it self, which seems to 'em filled with low things, or from thence to draw such ill consequences, as may in some mea∣sure Authorise their vices. But when we compare the manners of the Israelites with those of the Ro∣mans, Grecians, Egyptians and other People of antiquity whom we most esteem, those Prejudices immedi∣ately vanish. Visible it is, that there was in them a noble simplicity better than all the Refinements in the world; that the Israelites had all that was good in the manners of the other People of their time; that they were exempt from most of their Defects; and that they
had beyond others the incompara∣ble advantage of Knowing, whi∣ther was to be referred all the Con∣duct of Life: since they were ac∣quainted with the true Religion, which is the foundation of Mo∣rality. We learn then to distinguish amidst what their manners have of Offensive, and That which is Really blameable; That which proceeds only from the distance of Times and Places, being of it self indifferent; and that which being good in it self displeases us solely through the corruption of our Manners. For a great part of the difference between them and us, does not proceed from our being more enlightned by Christianity; but the reason is, we are less Rational. 'Tis not Christianity, has introdu∣ced that great inequality of condi∣tions, that contempt of Labour, that love of Sports, that Authori∣ty of women and young Persons, that aversion of a plain and frugal Life, which renders us so different from the Ancients. Those shepherds and Plough-men, whom we meet withal
in their Histories, and amongst whom money was of so little use, and great Fortunes so rare, might more easily have been made good Christians, than our Courti∣ers, Lawyers, Trades-men, and many People who spend their lives in an idle, inglorious and uneasy Poverty. For the rest, I do not pretend here to make a Panegyrick but a ve∣ry plain Relation, such as those of Treavellers, who have seen very distant Countries. I shall set down for good, what is good; for Evil, what is Evil; for Indifferent, what is Indifferent. I only demand, that the Reader may lay aside all manner of Prepossessions, that he may judge of these manners only by right reason and good sense. I desire him to quit the Particular Ideas of his Country, and his Age to consider, the Israelites in the times and places, wherein they lived, to compare 'em with the adjacent Nations, and by those means to understand their ways and Maxims. For 'tis to be altogether Ignorant of History not to see the
great difference, which the Di∣stance of Times and Places produce in manners. The French inhabit the same Country, that was Inha∣bited by the Galls and afterwards by the Romans. How far are the French now from either of their ways of Living; and how different from their own Country-men, who lived three or four hundred years ago? And in this very age what coherence is there between our manners and those of the Turks, In∣dians or Chineses? So that if we joyn those two kinds of distance we shall not need to wonder, that the men who lived in Palestine had manners different from ours; we shall rather admire at what we find conformable. We must not however Imagine, that those changes are Regular, and always go in an equal Progress. Of∣tentimes very neighbouring Coun∣tries are very different through the Diversity of Religions and Go∣vernments; as at present Spain and Africa, which under the Roman em∣pire were much united. On the contrary, a near Relation there is
between Spain and Germany, which had none in the time of the Romans. 'Tis the same thing by Proportion in the difference of times. Those who know not History, having heard say, that the men of former ages were more plain than us, sup∣pose the World to refine dayly more and more, and that the far∣ther we look back into Antiquity, the more gross and Ignorant we shall find the Wretches to have been. Yet it is not so in those Countries, that have been inhabited successive∣ly by divers Nations: The Revo∣lutions there happening, have from time to time brought Misery and Ignorance into them after Prospe∣rity and Politeness. Thus Italy is in a much better condition than it was eight Hundred years ago: but eight hundred years before un∣der the first Caesars it was more hap∣py and more magnificent, than it is now. And truly to mount up eight hundred years higher, to∣wards the time of the foundation of Rome, we shall find the same Italy very poor and savage. Na∣tions have their age in Proportion
as well as men: the most flourish∣ing Estate of the Grecians was un∣der Alexander; of the Romans under Augustus, of the Israelites under So∣lomon. We must therefore distinguish in each People their beginning, their greatest Prosperity and their Fall from it. We will thus consi∣der the Israelites in all the extent of time wherein they have subsist∣ed from the call of Abraham to the last ruine of Jerusalem. 'Tis a space of above two thousand years which I divide into three parts according to the three very diffe∣rent Estates of that Nation. The first of the Patriarchs; the Second of the Israelites after their coming out of Egypt untill the Captivity of Babylon; the third of the Jews after their Return from the Captivity, un∣till the Preaching of the Gospel.
THE MANNERS OF THE Israelites. PART I. Of the Patriarchs. CAP. I. Their Nobility. THe Patriarchs lived nobly in much Liberty and great A∣bundance: and yet their Life was plain and laborious. Abraham
knew all the order of his Ance∣stours, and did not alter his Nobi∣lity, seeing he marryed in his own Family. He took great care to give a wife of the same Race to those Sons, whom God had promised him: and Isaac caused Jacob to ob∣serve the same law. The Long lives of the Fathers fur∣nished them the means of wel educat∣ing their Children, and of render∣ing 'em betimes solid and serious Abraham had lived above an age with Sem, and might learn from him the State of the World before the Deluge. He all along lived with his father Thara, and was at least Seventy years old, when he lost him. Isaac was Seventy five, when Abraham dyed, nor did he ever quit him that we know of. And it is the same in Proportion with the other Patriarchs. Living so long a time with their Fathers, they took advantage of their Experi∣ence and their Inventions; they pursued their Designs and confirmed themselves in their Maxims; they remained constant and equal in their conduct. For it was not easy
to change, what had been well esta∣blished by men who were still liv∣ing: and the old men kept up their Authority not only over the young people, but also over those old men, who were not so far advanced in Age as themselves. The memory of past things might easily be preserved by the Tradition only of Old men, who na∣turally love to tell Stories, and had so much leisure to do so. Thus they had no great need of writing, and the truth is, we see no mention of writing before Moses. How∣ever it seems difficult, that so ma∣ny numbers he tells us of should be kept in the memory of man,Gen. 5. 7. 11. 8. 13. 6. 15. 4. 22. as the Age of all the Patriarchs since A∣dam; the exact dates of the be∣ginning and end of the Deluge; and the measures of the Ark. I see not here any necessity of having recourse to Miracle and divine In∣spiration. 'Tis More probable, that writing was found out before the Flood as well as Instruments of Mu∣sick, that were not so necessary. Moreover the Patriarchs were careful to preserve the memory of
the most considerable things which happened to 'em, by Altars, setting up of Stones and other solid Monu∣ments. Thus Abraham raised Altars in divers places, where God had appeared to him.Gen. 12. 8. 13. 18. 28. 18. Jacob con∣secrated the Stone, which he made use of for a Pillow during the my∣sterious dream of the Ladder, and called that heap of Stones Galeed,31. 48. 26. 18. &c. which was the sign of his▪ Allyance with Laban. Of this kind was the Sepulcher of Rachel, the Well called Shebah, and all the others, which the History of Isaac makes mention of. Sometimes they contented themselves with giving new names to places without making any change in them. The Greeks and Ro∣mans say as much of their Hero's, of whom the most Ancient come near the time of the Patriarchs: All Greece was full of their Monuments, and Aeneas alone did give names to sundry places in Sicily and Ita∣ly. The names of the Patriarchs were also a kind of more plain and familiar Monuments. They all signifyed something, and usually
shewed some Particular circumstance of their birth, or some blessing of God. Thus it was as an abridged History; for they took care to ex∣plain to their Children the Reason of those names, so as they could not afterwards pronounce them without refreshing their memory. This care of Posterity, and this foresight of the future shews great and noble Spirits. The Patriarchs were perfectly free,Family. and their Family was a State, where∣of the Father was King. For what did Abraham want of that which makes up a Sovereign, but vain Titles and troublesome Ceremo∣nies? To no body he was subject: Kings made allyances with him; and when he pleased, he made War and Peace. Princes did court the Allyance of Isaac:Gen. 26. 28. and Ismael Jacob and Esau were preserved in the same Independency. Where∣fore words must not impose upon us; nor must we look upon Abra∣ham as Inferiour to Amraphel or Abimelech, because the Scripture does not call him King as well as them. He was surely of as great
Estimation as one of those four Kings which he defeated with his Domestical troops, and the help of his three Allyes. The greatest diffe∣rence is, he did not confine himself like them within walls, and his State followed him, wherever he was pleased to Encamp. All the Histories we have that are worthy of credit, shew us in those times but very small Kingdoms in the East it self: And in other Countries we shall find 'em much smaller a long time afterwards. CAP. II. Their Estates and Occupations. THe riches of the Patriarchs consisted principally in Cattle, whereof Abraham must have had a vast Stock, when he was obliged to part from his Nephew Lot, by reason that the Land could not con∣tain them together.Gen. 136. 32. 14. &c. Jacob had likewise a great number, when he returned from Mesopotamia; since
the Present that he made to his Bro∣ther Esau was of five hundred and ninety head of Cattle; and the Scri∣pture shews what sort of Cattle they were, which they bred, Goats, Sheep, Camels, Kine, and Asses. There were neither Horses nor Hogs. It was that great number of Herds and Flocks, which made them so much esteem Wells and Cysterns in a Country that has no other River than that of Jordan, and where it rains but very seldom. They had Slaves too, of whom A∣braham must needs have had an huge number; seeing of those who were born in his own house, and whom he himself had exercised, he armed three hundred and Eighteen.Gen. 14. 14. 13. 2. 24. 22▪ 16. Thus there must have been pro∣portionably bought Children old men Women and Slaves. 'Tis said, when that he returned from Egypt, he was Rich in Gold and in Silver. The Bracelets and Pendants, which his Servant Eliezer gave on his be∣half to Rebecca, were of six ounces of Gold: And they had at that time coyned money, as is manifest by the Purchase of his Sepulcre.
We see, they used Perfumes and precious Rayment by those of Esau, which Jacob made use of at the reception of his Father's Bles∣sing.27. 27. With all these Riches, very La∣borious they were in their Husban∣dry. They lodged always in the Field, in Tents, changing their a∣bode according to the conveniency of their Pasturage: And by con∣sequence were frequently employ∣ed in Camping and decamping; for they could make but small Days Journies with so great and comber∣some a Train. Not but that they might have built houses as well as the other Inhabitants of the same Country, but they preferred that manner of Life. Which is undoubt∣edly the most Ancient, since it is more easie to set up Tents than to build houses: And has ever past for the most perfect, as fixing men least to the Earth. It does likewise better shew the state of the Patriarchs, who only Inhabited that land as Travellers in expecta∣tion of God's Promises, which were not to be fulfilled till after
their Deaths. The first Cities, whereof mention is made, were built by the most profligately wicked Cain and Nimrod.Gen. 4. 17. 10. 10. They were the first, who shut themselves up in walls, and used fortifications to a∣void the punishment of their crimes, and to commit new ones with Im∣punity. But the good and honest people lived openly and without any Fear. The principal occupation of the Patriarchs was the care of their Herds and Flocks; which is appa∣rent through all their History, and by the express Declaration, the Children of Israel made thereof to the King of Egypt.Gen. 47. ver. 3. How innocent soever Agriculture may be, the Pastoral life is the most perfect; the first was the share of Cain and the other of Abel. It has some∣thing more plain and more noble: 'Tis less painful; tyes men less to the Earth, and yet is the most pro∣fitable. Old Cato plac'd the Breed∣ing of Cattle before tilling of the ground; which yet he preferred before the other ways of growing rich. The just reproaches, which
Jacob makes to Laban, shew, that the Patriarchs took that Employ∣ment upon 'em, and manag'd it with the greatest and most serious Indu∣stry; and that they spared their pains on no occasions.Gen. 31. 40. 41. Thus was I in the day the draught consumed me, and the Frost by Night; and my sleep de∣parted from mine eyes.24. 15. Thus have I been twenty years in thy house, &c. We may judge of the pains the men took by what the Women did▪ Rebecca went a great way to fetch water and carryed it upon her Shoul∣ders.29. 9. And Rachel her self kept her Fathers flock, neither their Beauty nor their Nobility rendering them the more nice and delicate. The Grecians, whose politeness w with so much reason Esteem, di for a long while retain that ancient Simplicity. Whereof Homer fur∣nishes us with examples on all occa∣sions: And upon this foundation it is, that all Pastoral Poems are grounded. And verily in Syria, Greece and Sicily there was above Fifteen hundred years after the Pa∣triarchs People of good quality, who made it their business to breed Cattle
and who in the greatest leisure of that kind of life, and the fine hu∣mour, which those Countries in∣spire, made Songs mighty natural and pleasant. CAP. III. Their Frugality. AS for their food and the other necessaries of Life, the Pa∣triarchs were not at all nice. The pottage, which Jacob had prepared and which was so tempting to Esau▪ may make us judge of their ordi∣nary Diet:Gen. 25. 29. But we have an Exam∣ple of a magnificent Repast in that which Abraham made to the three Angels.18. 6. &c. He set before them a Calf, new cakes, but baked upon the Hearth,27. 9. together with butter and milk. They had, it seems, some kind of Ragousts by that which Re∣becca made to Isaac; but his great age may excuse that Delicacy. This
same toothsome and Savoury meat was composed of two Kidds; and Abraham set before the Angels a whole Calf with a loaf of three measures of Meal, which is more than two Bushels, and near Fifty six pound in weight. From whence we may conclude, they were great eaters; and indeed they used much exercise, and were perhaps much taller and bigger than we are, as well as longer lived. The Greeks were of opinion, that the men of the Heroical times were much greater and Homer makes 'em great Eaters▪ When Eumaeus receives Ʋlysses,Odyss. 14. he prepares a great Hog of five years old for five persons. The Heroes of Homer serve them∣selves on the ordinary occasions of Life; and we see the same done by the Patriarchs. Abraham who had so many Menial Servants, and who was near an hundred years old,Gen. 18. 14. did himself fetch water to wash the feet of his Divine Guests, goes and hastens his wife to make them Bread▪ ran himself to fetch meat for 'em, and return'd to serve them Standing▪ I grant, he might on such an occasion
be animated through his zeal to ex∣ercise hospitality: but all the rest of their lives were answerable to this. Their Servants served to help 'em, not to dispense them from La∣bour. And truely what could ob∣lige Jacob going into Mesopotamia to take a journey of above an hun∣dred and Fifty Leagues alone on foot with a Staff in his hand,32. 10. were it not his Laudable Simplicity and love to Labour? which made him likewise take a Lodging on the ground, where the Night surpriz∣ed him, and put a stone under his head to supply the place of a Pil∣low. Thus tho he had a tender love for Joseph, yet he sent this fa∣vorite of his at the age of sixteen all alone from Hebron to seek out his Brethren in Sichem,37. 15. which was a long days journey; and the young Stripling having not found 'em there, continues his Journey a day longer as far as into Dothan. I no less admire their moderation in regard of women, when I consider their Liberty of having several, and their desire of a numerous posteri∣ty.August. de civ. 16. 25. Abraham, to whom God had
promised, that he should be father of an innumerable progeny, tho he had a barren wife, yet entertained no thoughts of taking another, and was resolutely bent to have left his Estate to the Principal of his Do∣mesticks.Gen. 15. 2. 16. 15. Only from the hand of his wife it was, that he took a Second, and that at the age of four∣score and six years. We must not say, he was still young in proporti∣on to his life, which was of an hun∣dred and Seventy five years; fo that thirteen years afterwards, he and Sarah,18. 11. who was ten years young∣er, are named Old, and when God promised them a Son, She laughed as at an Incredible Wonder. How old soever Abraham was, and how desirous soever he might be to se the Children of Isaac, yet he did not Marry him, till he was forty years old: And tho Rebecca was twenty years barren, and then brought forth two Children at a Birth, which were All She ever had yet Isaac never had any other wife. True, that Jacob had at the same time two Wives and two concubines but 'tis fit we should see how. He
remained Seventy Seven years with his Father, waiting for that blessing, which was due to him by the Pro∣mise of God and by the concession of his Brother.Gen. 29. At that age began he to entertain thoughts of Marry∣ing. He courted Rachel, but could not obtain her till after Seven years Service. Thus was he at length marryed at Fourscore and four years old. Leah is given him against his will: Her he kept, that he might not leave her dishonoured: But as there was no law, which pro∣hibited the having of several wives, or the marrying of two Sisters, he likewise took her, whom he had promised to marry. As she was found to be barren, She presented her Husband with a Slave, that he might have Children. This was a kind of Adoption, practised in those days; and her Sister did the same for the encrease of their fami∣ly. From all which St. Augustin draws this Inference: We do not read, that Jacob demanded more than one Wife, or that he made use of seve∣ral, but as he kept exactly the laws of Cnjugal Fidelity:Civit. 18. 38. and we must not
think, he had any other wife before for why should only the last be mad mention of? Notwithstanding which, I do no pretend to justify all the Patriarch in this matter:Gen. 38. The History o Judah and of his Sons affords bu too many examples to the Contra∣ry. I aimed only at shewing, tha we ought not to accuse those o Lewdness, and Incontinencie, whom the Scripture points out as Th Friends of God. For (in short,) sure I am, that men were very much corrupted about that time▪ Such was then in general the first Estate of the People of God. A immense Liberty without other Government than that of a Father who exercised an Absolute Monar∣chy in his Family; a Life very natu∣ral and very commodious in a great abundance of necessary, and a grea contempt of superfluous things and an honest labour attended with care and industry, without disquiet and without Ambition. Proceed we now to the Second Estate, which is that of the Israelites after their coming out of Egypt until the Cap-Captivity
of Babylon. It lasted a∣bove nine hundred years; and the greatest part of the Holy Scriptures do refer thereto. PART. II. Of the Israelites. CAP. I. Their Nobility. THo the People was already nu∣merous, yet still were they called the Children of Israel, as being still but one Family: And the same was said of the Children of Edom, the Children of Moab, and so of o∣thers. And indeed all that people was not yet mingled; every one knew his Original, and took a pride to preserve the name of his Author. From whence it come, the name of Children was taken a∣among
the Ancients for a Nation or a certain kind of People. H∣mer very often says, the Children o the Greeks and the Children of th Trojans. The Grecians would say the Children of Physicians and Gram∣marians. Among the Hebrews th Children of the East were the Ea∣stern People, the Children of Beli were the wicked: And in the Go∣spel we frequently find the Childre of the Bridegroom, meaning thos who are invited to the Nuptials▪ and the Children of Darkness and Light. The Children of Israel were divid∣ed into twelve Tribes.Gen. 25. 6. In like man∣ner were there twelve Tribes of th Ismaelites,Xenoph. Cyrop. and of the Persians. For Tribes at first comprehended all th Inhabitants of Athens: Who we afterwards divided into ten, whom were given the names of ten Heroes,Demos. Te nocr. Leptin∣ & ibi Ul∣ian. who were for that reson styled the Eponymi, and who Statues were erected in the publi Market place. The People Rome was likewise distributed at into three or four Tribes: these were in process of ti mea
augmented to the number of thirty five, whose names we are now ac∣quainted withal. But those tribes of Athens and Rome were composed of Families gathered together to keep good order in Assemblies and in suf∣frages; whereas those of the Israel∣ites were distinguished Naturally, and were but twelve Families de∣scended from twelve Brethren, that is to say Relatives, according to the Language of the Eastern People, and truly noble, if ever any men upon Earth were noble. They had preserved in it's purity the nobless of the Patriarchs; the Law having renewed the Prohibition of Marry∣ing Strangers: And if in some en∣counter this was not observ'd,Mat. 1. 5 they took care to mark out those Mar∣riages as Irregular, which we may see in the Genealogy of JESUS CHRIST. Their families were very setled and bound by the law to certain Lands, where they of neces∣sity remain'd during the nine hun∣dred years, we speak of. Now we should (methinks) Esteem a Fami∣ly very noble, that could shew so long a Train of Generations with∣without
mis-allyance, and without change of abode. Few great men there are in Europe, who can prove so much. That which deceives us, is, we do not see among the Israelites Ti∣tles like to those of our Nobility. Each man was called plainly by his own name: But their names signified great things as well as those of the Patriarchs. They often added the name of the Father ei∣ther to make distinction or for Hon∣or's sake, to shew that the Father was a man of Reputation.Ib. 10. v. 68. We see in Homer the Grecians took it likewise for a mark of honor. Some∣times they gave for Surname the name of the mother, as when the Father had sundry wives, or when the mother was more illu∣strious. Thus Joab and his Bre∣thren are ever called the Children of Zerviah, who was David's Sister. They also distinguished 'emselves sometimes by the top of their Particular Branch, by their City, or their Country, or by their Nation, if they were Originall Strangers; as Ʋriah the Hittite, and
Ornan the Jebusite. Neither had the Greeks any other Surnames than those they drew from their Father or their Country. The Romans had Family-names, to which they only added the marks of some great Office or of some Illustrious Victo∣ry: But in the Publique acts they evermore put their Fathers name. Several Nations of Europe still do the same: And a great part of our Surnames come from the proper names of Fathers, which have con∣tinued to the Children. As for Ti∣tles of Lordships, they are but of a∣bout seven hundred years Antiquity as well as the Lordships themselves. We must not then wonder to see in the Scripture David the son of Jess, and Solomon the son of David, no more than to see Alexander the son of Philip, and Ptolomy the son of Lagus in Greek or Latin Au∣thors. The principal distinction, which Birth made among the Israelites was that of the Priests and Levites. All the tribe of Levi was consecrated to God, and had no other share than the Tenths and the first fruits,
which it received from the other Tribes. Amongst all the Levites none but the Descendants of Aaron were Priests or Sacrificers; the rest, who were only Levites, were em∣ployed in the other Functions of Religion, in the Singing of Psalms, in looking to the Taber∣nacle or the Temple and in instruct∣ing of the People. The most illu∣strious was always that of Judah; and it was the most numerous of all too: and from thence Kings and the Messiah himself was to come,Gen. 49. 10 according to the Prophecy of Ja∣cob. That of Ephraim held the se∣cond rank by reason of Joseph. Moreover, in each tribe the eldest Branches and the heads of each Fa∣mily were considered; and all this made Saul say, being surprized at the honours he received from Sa∣muel; Am not I a Benjamite, of the smallest of the Tribes of Israel?1 Sam. 9. 21. and my Family the least of all the Family of the tribe of Benjamin? Age did likewise make a great Distinction, and the name of Old men in Scripture ordinarily signifies Dignity. And indeed nothing but
Age and experiences could distin∣guish men, who were equally No∣ble and almost equally Rich, of the same Profession, and brought up after the same Manner. CAP. II. Their Occupations. Agriculture: FOr among the Israelites there were no distinct Professions. From the head of the tribe of Judah to the youngest of that of Benjamin, they all were Husbandmen and Shepherds,Judg. 19. 16. going themselves to plow, and looking after their own flocks. The old man of Gi∣beah, who lodged the Levite, whose Wife was violated, was returning in the Evening from his Labour out of the Field,Judg. 19. 11. when he invited him to come to his house. Gideon was himself thrashing his corn when an Angel told him, that he should deliver the People. Ruth
found favour in the sight of Boaz by gleaning after his Reapers. When Saul received news of the danger, the City of Jabish Gilead was in, he was coming after the herd out of the field notwith∣standing his being a King.1 Sam. 11. 5. 'Tis well known, David was keeping sheep, when Samuel sent to seek him out for the anointing of him King:16. 11. And he returned to his flock after his having been call'd to play upon his Harp before Saul.2 Sam. 13. After he was King, his Sons made a great Feast, when they sheared their sheep.1 Kings 19. 19. Elisha was called to prophecy, as he was driving one of his Fathers twelve Ploughs. The Scripture being crowded with such examples. Without doubt 'tis this which most of all palls those, who are not acquainted with Antiquity, and on∣ly esteem our Manners. When we talk to 'em of Ploughmen and Shepherds, they figure to them∣selves, such Peasants and Country Fellows as ours, leading a gloomy and painful life in Poverty and con∣tempt, without Valour, wit or educa∣tion.
They do not consider, that what renders our Peasants so mise∣rable is their being as the Servants of all other men; not only labouring for their own Subsistance, but for the furnishing of things necessary to all those, whom are look'd upon to be above them in the World. For the Country-man it is, who nourisheth the Citizen, the Officer of Justice, the Gentleman & the Ecclesiastick; and what means soever are made use of to convert money into commo∣dities or commodities into money, they must all still have relation to the Fruits of the Earth, and the liv∣ing Creatures which it nourishes. Yet when we compare together all those different degrees of conditi∣ons, we place in the lowest Form those who till the ground and look to Cattle, and have more Esteem for gross and useless Citizens, without vigor of body, without industry, without any merit; because hav∣ing more money, they lead a more easy and more pleasurable life. But if we fancy a Country, where the difference of Conditions was not so great; and where doing no∣thing
was not to live Nobly, but to preserve carefully ones Liberty, that is, to be subject only to the Laws and the Publick Power, standing on ones own Bottom without depen∣dance on any body, and contenting ones self with a little rather than doing any low paltry base thing to grow rich; a Country, where they despised Idleness, Effeminacy, and the Ignorance of things necessary for Life, and where they had a less value for Pleasure than for Health and Strength of Body: In such a Country it would be much more De∣cent and Gentile to Plough or keep a Flock (let the words sound ne∣ver so odly) than to play and sport away a mans whole life. Now we need not have recourse to the Common wealth of Plato to find men of this quality and condi∣tion; since thus it was, that the greatest part of the world lived, during near Four thousand years. To begin with what we are best acquainted, such were the Maxims of the Greeks and Romans. In Homer we see every where, Kings and Princes living upon the Fruits
of their Lands and their Flocks, and labouring with their own hands. Hesiod has made a Poem on purpose to recommend the Country-life and toil, as the only honest means of subsisting and growing rich. And he blames his Brother, to whom he addresses it, for living at the expence of others by pleading causes and soliciting Affairs. That employment he brands with the name of Laziness, which among us is the calling of so many People. And we may see by the Oeconomicks of Xenophon, that the Grecians had diminished nothing of that Esteem for Agricul∣ture, even in the time of their greatest Politeness. We ought not therefore to attri∣bute the Assiduities of the Ancient Romans in the improvement of their lands, to their Barbarity and gros∣ness in learning: 'Tis rather a sign of their good sense. As all men are born with arms and bodies proper for Labor, they believed that all were obliged to make use of them, and that they could not employ 'em better, than in drawing
from the Earth a certain subsist∣ance, and so growing Innocent∣ly rich. Nevertheless it was not Avarice which engaged them in that way of living, seeing they (as 'tis well known) despised Gold, and the Presents of Forreign∣ers. Neither did this hinder them from being a brave and a War∣like People; in regard it was at the same time, that they subdued all Italy, and acquired those im∣mense Forces, which they employ∣ed afterward in the conquest of the World. On the contrary, a pain∣ful and frugal Country-life was the Principal cause of their great Strength, making their Bodies ro∣bust, & hard'ned to Labour, and accu∣stoming them to svere Discipline. Whoso knows the life of Cato the Censor cannot suspect him guilty of baseness of heart or of Low∣ness of Spirit. Yet that great man, who had passed through all the Offices of the Republick, when it was in it's greatest Force, who had govern'd Provinces and com∣manded Armies; a great Oratour; a great Lawyer, and great Politi∣cian;
This great man did not dis∣dain to write a Treatise concerning all the ways, that are necessary for the emproving of Lands and Vineyards, and how Stables and Houses were to be built for the se∣veral sorts of Cattle, and how a Press was to be made for Wine or Oyl; and all these to the most minute Circumstances: Insomuch as we may see, that he was per∣fectly acquainted with them, and that he wrote for Use and not for Ostentation. Let us then confess seriously, that the contempt we have for the Country toyl and labour, is not founded upon any solid reason; see∣ing that Labour perfectly well suits with courage, with all the Virtues of War and Peace, and likewise with true Policy. But from whence comes this Contempt? 'Tis requisite to discover it's true source. It only proceeds from the Customes and ancient Manners of (our) Nation. The Franks and other German People lived in Coun∣tries covered with Woods; where they had neither Corn nor Wine
nor good Fruits. Thus they were forc'd to live on Hunting, as the Salvages of the Northern parts of America do at this Day. But having passed the Rhine and setled themselves in better Territories, they were willing to take advantage of the conveniencies of Agricul∣ture Arts and Commerce; but they were loath to take the pains necessary thereunto. They left those Occupations to the Romans, whom they for their own parts had subdu∣ed, and remained in their primitive Ignorance, which at length they took a pride in, and fixed to it an Idea of Nobility, which (we) can hardly rid our selves of. But as much as they debased Agriculture, so much they extoll'd Hunting, which the Ancients had a much less Value for. They have made a great Art of it, and improv'd it with all manner of artifice; they have neither spared pains nor Cost in it, and have made it one of the most general Professions of their Nobility Yet, to consider things in themselves, The labour, which tends to the Cultivating of Lands
and to the breeding of Domestique Animals, is assuredly as much to be valued, as that which only makes to the taking of wild Beasts, of ten times at the expence of cul∣tivated Lands. The moderate ex∣ercise of a man, who looks to a great Farm, is without question as beneficial as the violent and uneven exercise of the Hunter, and Oxen and Sheep are Creatures at least as useful to life as Dogs and Horses. So that we may doubt, if our man∣ners be more Rational in this point than those of the Ancients. Besides not only the Greeks and Romans honoured Agriculture as well as the Hebrews; The Cartha∣ginians too (Phenicians originally) made a mighty study of it, as ap∣pears by the Eight and twenty Books,Vanon Prf, which Magon wrote upon that Argument. The Egyptians honour'd it to that degree,Xenoph. O∣econ as to adore those living Creatures, which were made use of in the Manage∣ment of this Affair. In the greatest Power of the Persians, they had in each province Super∣intendants to look to the Tillage
of Lands; and Cyrus the younger took delight to planting and cultivat∣ing a Garden with his own hands. As for the Chaldeans we cannot doubt, but they were great Hus∣band-men,Heod. 1. if we consider the fer∣tility of the Plains of Babylon, which brought forth two or three hundred Grains for one. In Short, the History of China tells us, that Agriculture was there likewise ve∣ry much in vogue in their best and most Ancient times. It was only the Conquests of the Northern Peo∣ple, which have caused the Coun∣try Labourer to be slighted through the whole World. Let us then lay aside those low and scurvy Ideas, which we have taken up from our Infancy. Instead of our Villages, where we see on one side Halls and Houses of Plea∣sure, and on the other Miserable Cottages, let us figure to our selves those great Farms, which the Romans called Ʋillas, that compre∣hended the Masters house, the outward Court, the Barns, the Stables, and the Lodgings for Slaves; all these in symmetry well
built, well lookt after, and very neat. Descriptions hereof may be seen in Varro and Columella. Those Slaves were for the most part much more happy than (our) Peasants; well fed, well cloath'd, without any care of their Wives and Children. The Masters, not∣withstanding they were Farmers, Lived more at their ease than our Gentlemen.Xenoph. O∣n. In Xenophon you see a Citizen of Athens early in the Morning a walking in his Lands and visiting his workmen, Labouring the same time for his health by the Exercise of his Body, and for the encrease of his Estate by his Indu∣stry in it's improvement: Insomuch as he was rich enough to contribute to his Religion, to the Service of the State, and to his Friends. Ci∣cero speaks of Several Husbandmen in Sicily so rich and so Magnificent,Lib. 4. in Verr. sign. that their Houses were adorned with Statues of great price, and they made use of Vessels of Silver and Gold curiously wrought. Finally, we must acknowledge, that as long as the most rich of each Country have not disdained this
Profession, which of all is the most Ancient, their lives were much more happy, because they were more Natural. They lived much Longer and in better Health; they had Bodies more adapted to the Fatigues of War and of Voyages; and their Wits were more solid and more serious. Being less idle, the time was less irksome to 'em; and they did not make it so much their cue to tast of Pleasures; Labour rendring them sensible of the least divertisement. They thought less of what is e∣vil, and had less Interest to do it: For their plain and frugal life gave no occasion for great Expences or great Debts. And consequently there were not so many Law suits nor Destructions of Families; not so many frauds and violences; nor so much of every Crime, that ima∣ginary or real Beggary causes those to commit, who neither can nor will Work. The worst is, the Examples of the Rich and Noble hurries away all others, and is the occasion, that all those, who fancy 'emselves situated above the dregs
of the People, are asham'd to work, especially in Lands. This is the cause of so many efforts to subsist by industry; this is what makes us daily invent new artifices for the passage of money from one Purse to ano∣ther. How innocent all these same forced ways of Living are, God knows: For the most part they are at least very brittle and uncer∣tain; whereas the Earth will ever nourish those, who cultivate it, if others deprive them not, of what it bestows. The Israelites only sought their subsistance in the most natural Goods, Lands and Cattle, from whence all must necessarily be drawn that makes men rich by the Manufactures of Merchandise, the Rents or Commerce of money.
CAP. III. The quality of the Holy Land, and it's Fruitfulness. THeir Land was that Land pro∣mised to the Patriarchs, whereof the Scripture so often say's, that it Flowed with Milk and Hony, to denote it's great Fertility. This Country, which is so hot in compa∣rison of ours, is very far in the Temperate Zone between the 31 and the 33 degree of Latitude. It is bounded on the South by great Mountains, which put a stop to the burning air of the Desarts of Arabia, and they continue very far to the East as well as those De∣sarts. The Mediterranean Sea, which bounds it on the West, sends thither refreshing breezes: And mount Libanus seems to have been plac'd more towards the North to make the Colder blasts keep their due distance. The Midland Sea it
is, what the Scripture usually calls the great Sea; for the Hebrews were little acquainted with the Ocean, and so they gave the name of Sea to Lakes and to any large conflux of waters. The Inner part of the Country is diver∣sifyed with Mountains and Hills, ad∣vantageous for Vines, Fruit-trees and small Cattle: And the frequent Valleys gave way to a number of Torrents very necessary to water the Country, which had no other River besides Jordan. The Rains there fall very seldom, but are ve∣ry Regular; coming in the Spring and Autumn; which the Scripture calls the Rain of the Morning and the Evening, considering the year as a Day. In Summer the abundant dews supply the rarity of the Showers. There are Plains pro∣per for Husbandry and Pasture; and that variety of the Earth in a little space does form Landskips very agreeable to the View, especially when a Country is well inhabited and well cultivated. For we must not judge of the Holy Land by the State we see it in
at this Day. Since the time o the Croisadoes, it was ravaged by continual Wars, untill it fell un∣der the Dominion of the Turks. Thus it is almost desert: nothing to be seen but baleful Villages▪ ruines, unmanur'd and abandon'd Lands. The Turks neglect it, a they neglect all their Provinces and several families of Arabia Bedovins may encamp and pillag there with impunity. Wherefor to know, what it was formerly 'tis necessary, to consult ancient Authors, as Strabo, Pliny, Jose∣phus, and above all the Holy Scri∣pture. See but the relation th Spyes of Moses gave thereof and the prodigious cluster of Grapes which they brought.Numb. 13. 24. Which tha you may not wonder at; compa the Grapes of France with those o Italy, which is a cold Country i proportion to Palestine. 'Tis th same thing with most of our Europe∣an Fruits. The greatest part o their Names still shew that they cam to us from Asia and Africa; but wit their names they have not conserv∣ed their bigness and natural savour▪
The Israelites gathered a great quantity of Wheat and Barly; and the pure Bread-corn is counted for the chief Merchandise, which they carried to Tyre. Oyl they had and honey in abundance.Ezech. 27. 17. The Moun∣tains of Juda and of Ephraim were places of great Vineyards: Round about Jericho there were Palme-trees of vast Revenue, through their suddain springing up, after they were lopp'd or fell'd: and it was the only part of the World where true Balm was to be found. This Fruitfulness of the Coun∣try and the care which they took to cultivate it, may make us con∣ceive, how that being so little it could nourish so great a number of men: For it will at first require Faith to believe all that the Scri∣pture says in this case. When the People entred first into that Coun∣try, there were above six hundred thousand men bearing arms, from twenty years old to Sixty. In the War of Gibeah the only Tribe of Benjamin,Jud. 20. 51. 17. the least of all, had an Army of twenty six thousand men: And that of the rest of the
People mounted to four hundred thousand. Saul had two hundred and ten thousand men against the Amalekites, when he extirpated them. David kept continually on foot twelve Bodies of twenty four thousand apiece, who served by months, which was in all two hun∣dred and Fourscore thousand men. And in the Numbring of the Peo∣ple, which brought the anger of God upon him, there were found thirteen hundred thousand able men.2 Sam. 24. 9. Jehoshaphat went much far∣ther in proportion; for albeit he had but little more than the third part of David's Kingdome, he had several Bodies of very good Troops, which altogether made up Eleven hundred and Sixty thousand men effectively, all under his hand, without reckoning the Garrisons of his Holds. In all this there is nothing incre∣dible: We see the like examples in Profane Histories.Tacit. An∣nal. 2. The great Thebes of Egypt furnished Seven hundred thousand brave Soldiers of it's own Inhabitants alone.Liv. 1. c. 24 At Rome in the first year of Servins
Tullus, being the hundred and eighty eight of it's Foundation, there were counted Fourscore thousand Citizens capable of bearing Arms. Yet they could only subsist by the lands in the Vicinage of Rome, and whereof the most part is now barren and uninhabited: For their Domination extended no farther than eight or ten Leagues. Herein the Ancients lay'd the principal foundation of their Policy. They relyed much less upon Cunning than upon downright force. Instead of applying themselves to maintain correspondence among their Neigh∣bours, Instead of fomenting Divi∣sions amongst them, and Procur∣ing to 'emselves a Reputation by false reports, they endeavoured to people and manure their Country, and to improve it as much as they could, whether it was little or great. They studyed to render Marriages happy, and life easy, to procure Health and Abundance, and to draw from their Land all that it could produce. They exercised their Citizens by labour, inspired them with a love of their Coun∣try,
of union between them∣selves and submission to the Laws. This is what they called Policy. These Maxims, perchance some one will say, are very pretty: But let us come to particulars, and shew how 'tis possible, so small a Coun∣try as Palestin should nourish so great a number of men. Which to make appear, we must have the Pati∣ence to calculate and undertake the work by Retail: Tho it may seem a low thing and be offensive to nice Readers. An Acre of good Land bringsforthComes to about five Quarters, a Combe, & a Bushel of corn Lon∣don mea∣sure. un muid de bled, mesure d Paris; which would easily nourish four men: For a man consume butContains about three Bushels. un minot a month, giving him two pound and six ounces o Bread every Day. This is the but threetwelve Bushels o∣ver or un∣der. Septiers a year. But a our Israelites were great Eaters, will allow them double the nourish∣ment, that is to say, four poun twelve ounces of Bread a day▪ Thus an Acre will be sufficient feed two men, and by this account we shall have land still remaining▪ For a League square makes fi
thousand six hundred and twenty five Acres, by reckoning 3000 Geo∣metrical Paces in a League, five Foot in a Pace, twenty Feet in a Rod, and a hundred Roods in an Acre. The Kingdome of Judea was at least thirty Leagues in length, above twenty in breadth,See Frag. of  Hecat. in Josephus counting the length from East to West, which was six hundred Leagues,1 Cont. Ap. 8. and by consequence three Millions three hundred and sixty five thousand Acres, which according to my Calculation might nourish twice as many men; that is, six millions Se∣ven hundred and Fifty thousand. But half of the Lands I deduct for those, that may prove barren, for the Rocks, Sands, and little De∣serts here and there intermingled, for Yineyards and Pastures, and for the repose, which the Land re∣quires at least every Seventh year. There remains enough to nourish a number of men equal to the Sum total of the Acres, that is to say, three millions three hundred threescore & five thousand. So it was easy to Appoint twelve hundred thousand Sword-men in a Coun∣try
Country, where all people bore arms; and still to have Corn to sell to Strangers towards the pur∣chase of Cattle: For we may doubt, if the nourishment, that Country produced, did sufficient∣ly furnish 'em with wool and eat∣ables of Flesh. Yet otherwise the Tributary Strangers brought them many Cattle. Jehoshaphat beside the Tribute of Moneys, which he exacted from the Philistins, received from the Arabians seven thousand five hundred Rams and as many Goats; and there are other exam∣ples of the like Tributes. Add to this, that the Israelites lived plain∣ly, and that all the good land they had, was carefully cultivated; since there were few woods, they had nei∣ther Parks for hunting, nor avenues nor bowling-greens and grass-plats. We see by the Canticles of Solomon, their Gardens were full of Fruit-trees and aromatick plants. And they must needs be in less pain to provide Lodging than nourishment, for as much as not only half an A∣cre of Land but a Quarter, is more than sufficient to lodge at large not
only a man, but a whole Family. CAP. VII. The Estates of the Israelites. THus each Israelite had his field to cultivate, being the same that had been allotted to his Ance∣stors in the time of Josuah. They could neither change Place, nor ruine themselves, nor grow too rich. The Law of the Jubile had pro∣vided against such like encounters, revoking every fifty years all such alienations, and annulling all obli∣gations. By these means Disquiet and Ambition were retrenched: Every individual person applyed himself with affection to the im∣provement of his Inheritance, knowing, it would never go out of his Family.1 King. 21. 3. This Appli∣cation was likewise a Religi∣ous Duty, founded upon the Law of God: And from hence came the generous Resistance of Naboth, when King Ahab would have per∣swaded
him to have sold the Inheritance of his Fathers. More∣over the Law says, that they were but the Ʋsufructuaries of their Lands,Levit. 25. 23. God being the true Proprie∣tor. For this reason, they were charged with no other payment than the tenths and first fruits. Thus all the Israelites were almost equal in their estates as well as in Nobility: And if the multiplying of a Family obliged 'em to share the Lands into more portions, the Cattle might supply the want of Lands. Thus Cattle and other moveables were that which mainly occasioned the inequality of estates. That was all the substance of the Levites, seeing they had no Lands, and had preserved the Pastoral life so much esteemed of by the Patriarchs. They bred the same kinds of ani∣mals and ever more Females than Males: Other wise it would have re∣dounded to their damage,Levit. 22. 24. the Law prohibiting to cut them. They had no horses, neither are they of great use in mountainous places: Their Kings were supplyed from Egypt,
when they had occasion for 'em. Asses were most commonly used, as they are still through all the Levant: But they are there much finer and stronger than in our cold Countries. To give a great Idea of Jair, one of the Judges, who ruled the People,Jud. 10. 4. the Scripture says, that he had thirty Sons mounted on thir∣ty asses, and they were Heads of thir∣ty Cities. 'Tis said of Abdon, a∣nother of the Judges, that he had forty Sons and thirty Grand-sons, mounted upon sixty and ten Asses.12. 14. It does not appear that they had a∣ny great number of Slaves: Nor indeed had they any great occasion for them, being themselves so labo∣rious and so numerous in so small a Country. They chose rather to set their Children to work, whom they were obliged to maintain, and they were the better served by them. The Romans at length found themselves highly incommoded by that infinite multitude of Slaves of all Nations, whom Luxury and ef∣feminacy had brought amongst them: And it was one of the pirncipal causes of that Empires
ruine. Ready money could not be very common among the Israelites▪ it was of no great use in a Coun∣try, where immoveable Goods could not be Alienated, nor debts contracted but only for a time,Levit. 25. 8. commonly very short,Deut. 15. 1. 3. and never longer than fifty years, and where there was little Traffick.Levit. 25. 36. &c. Usury was forbidden amongst the Israelites, but permitted with Strangers.Deut. 23. 19. But according to the Law 'twas not easy to have commerce with those without, and there tarryed none in the Country but who were Prosely∣tes, that is to say, Circumcised and incorporated with the People of God. Thus their estates (as I have said) consisted chiely in Lands and in Cattle.
CAP. VIII. Of the Arts and Trades of the Israelites. I Know no people, who addict∣ed themselves more entirely to Agriculture than the Israelites. The Egyptians and Syrians joyned Manufacture thereunto, as also Navigation and commerce; Especi∣ally the Phenicians, who finding themselves too closely coopt up on the coasts, since that the Israelites had drove them from the Inlands, were forc'd to live by their industry, and to be as the carryers and Factors of all other nations. The Greeks imita∣ted them, and particularly excelled in Arts and Sciences. On the con∣trary, the Romans had these in no great value, but addicted them∣selves very much to commerce. As for the Israelites their Land was sufficient to nourish them,Jos. 1. cont. App. 4. and the sea-coasts were for the most part
possessed by the Philistins and Cana∣anites, who are the Phenicians. There was only the Tribe of Zebu∣lon, whose share being upon the Sea, invited 'em to traffick, which me∣thinks is shown in the blessings of Jacob and Moses.Gen. 49. 13. Neither do I see, that they applyed themselves to Manufacture.Deut. 33. 19. Not but that those Arts were invented, the greatest part of 'em, being more ancient than the Deluge; and it appearing also, that the Israelites did not want excellent work men even in the time of Moses. Besaleel and O∣holiab,Exod. 31. 4 5. 36. 37. &c. who made the Tabernacle and all that was necessary for the service of God, are an Illustrious example hereof: 'Tis astonishing, how many very different and most difficult arts they understood. They knew how to cast and work up mettals; they knew, how to cut and engrave precious Stones: They were Joyners, Embroyderers, Ta∣pestry-makers and Perfumers. A∣mong those Arts, two there are, which I principally admire; The cutting of Stones, and the casting of Figures, such as were the Che∣Cherubins
of the Ark and the Golden Calf,Exod. 3 4. which was made much about the same time. Those, who have but the least knowledge in Arts, know how much Arti∣fice and how many Machines are required for works of that nature. If from that time they were found out, they had already very much refined them, and such arts too, as only serve for ornament, and if they had some secret to do things more easily and with less clutter, it was undoubtedly a great perfecti∣on. Let this be said by the by, for to show, that Antiquity at so monstrous a distance, was not gross and ignorant, as some fondly ima∣gine: And truly the World was now above two thousand five hun∣dred years old in the time of Mo∣ses. But whether those two famous Workmen had been instructed by the Egyptians, or their knowledge was miraculous and inspired by God, as the Scripture seems to in∣timate; it does not appear, that they had Successours, nor that, even in the time of their Kiugs,
there were a midst the Israelites any Artificers by Profession, who wrought for the Publick. When Solomon undertook the building of the Temple,1 Kings 5. 6. he demanded workmen of the King of Tyre. You know, said he to him, that I have no body amongst my people, who knows how to work in wood like the Sydonians: and he sent for an excellent founder of Mettals, Hiram by name, to make the sacred Vessals.7. 13. In the begin∣ning of Sauls Reign 'tis shown, that there was not any workman,1 Sam. 13. 19. who knew how to forge Iron through all the Land of Israel; and that they were forced to go down to the Philistins to refit their instru∣ments of Husbandry. The truth is, this was an effect of the Philistins oppression to hinder them from making of arms. But several years after, David was constrained in his flight to take Goliah's sword, which must have been somewhat heavy for him, and that out of the Tabernacle of the Lord, where it was hung up as an eternal Monument of his Victory. This makes me believe, there were no
Arms to be bought. It is also probable, that they sold no Bread, since on the same occasion, the Priest Abimelech was reduced to give David of the hallowed Bread: Which also shews, they kept little bread in their Houses, peradventure by reason of the vio∣lent heat of the Country.1 Sam. 28. 24. In like manner the Witch, whom Saul ad∣dressed himself to, made Bread on purpose to give him to eat, that she might recover him from his weakness. At Rome there were no Bakers till the year five hundred and eighty of it's Foundation.Plin. 17. 11. Entring into the particulars of Trades, we should know, that most were of no use at all to them. Their plain way of Living, and the sweetness of their Climate ex∣empted them from that great train of Conveniences, which, we be∣lieve, we cannot well be without, and wherewith our womanish vani∣ties rather than any real Hard∣straits do trouble and perplex us. And as to things in their own na∣ture necessary, there were very few, but which they knew how to make
'emselves. Whatsoever served for nourishment, was prepared in their houses. The women made and pre∣pared Bread to eat; they Spun, they made Stuffs and Cloaths:Odys. 14. The men did the rest. Homer describes the good man Eumeus amaking his own shooes, and says, he had built for his Herds very gallant and mag∣nificent Stables.Odys. 23. Ʋlysses himself built his own house, and made that bed with great art, the stru∣cture whereof served to make him known to his Lady. When he de∣parted from Calypso's house,Od. 5. it was he alone that built and rigged out his own ship. By which we may see the wit & humou of those ancient times. 'Twas an honour for every one to know, how to do every thing himself, that was useful to life, and not to depend on another: And this is, what Homer, mostly calls Knowledge and wisdom. Now the Authority of Homer seems to me very great in all this.Marm. A∣rundel. He lived in the time of the Prophet Elias to∣wards the coast of Asia minor: And what ever he sets down of the Principles and Manners of the
Greeks and Trojans has a marvel∣lous coherence, with what the Scripture tells us of the Hebrews and other Oriental nations: were it not, that the Grecians being of a later date, were likewise less Po∣lite. After Solomon and the division of the Kingdoms, when Luxury was patroniz'd and encreased, very cre∣dible it is, that there were then more Artificers. And indeed men∣tion is sometimes made of them in those latter times. I see in the Genealogy of the Tribe of Judah a place called the Valley of Crafts∣men: because saies the Scripture, Serviah begat Joab,1 Chron. 4. 14. 21. 23. the father of the valley of Carasim, for they were Crafs-men. I see there a Family of workmen of fine linnen, and a∣nother of Potters, who wrought for the King, and dwelt in his Garden. All this shows the hon∣our that was paid to arts, and the care which was taken to preserve the memory of such Persons, who applyed themselves that way.Isai. 3. 3. The Prophet Isaiah in his menaces against Jerusalem foretells that
God would take away her Artifi∣cers: And when that City was taken, 'tis said several times, that the Enemy carryed away all the Craftsmen.2 Kings 24. 14. But for a proof, that they had never any great Manufa∣ctures, is that of the Prophet Eze∣chiel, who describing the affluence of the Merchandises, which came to Tyre, makes nothing to be brought thither from the Land of Judah and Israel,Ezech. 27. than pure Wheat, Oyl, Grapes, and Balm, all Merchandises, which the Earth it self produces. Such were the Occupations of the Israelites and their Manner of Subsistance. Let us now go on to something more particular, and describe as far as possible their Ha∣bits, their Lodgings, their Movea∣bles, their Food, and all their way of Living. They rose betimes in the morning▪ as the Scripture shows in an infinite number of Places, that is to say, as often as mention is made of any important action. From whence it proceeds, that in it's style. To rise betimes, signifies to do a thing with care and
with affection:2 Chorn. 36. 15. And thus it says fre∣quently,Jerem. 7. 13. that God rose betimes to send Prophets to his People, to exhort them unto Repentance.11. 7. 35. 14. This is a consequence of a Country life: and the Greeks and Romans followed the same custome. They rose early, and Laboured till the E∣vening: About five aclock they bathed, went afterwards to Sup∣per, and then betimes to bed. CAP. IX. Their Apparel. AS to the Habits of the Israelites we cannot know exactly the form of them. They made no figures, and we cannot be well in∣structed of such things but only by the eyes. But we may guess at them by the Images we have left us of the Greeks and other Ancients. As for the modern Pictures, most of them serve only to give us false I∣Ideas
I do not only speak of those Gothick Pictures, wherein all persons of what time and Country soever are cloathed like those, whom the Painter was used to see, that is, French and Almains two or three hundred years ago: I speak of the works of the greatest Painters, ex∣cept Rafael, Poussin, with some few others, who have studyed An∣tiquity and the manners of all ages. The rest of the Painters under∣stood no other Artifice than just to paint the Levantines, such, as they saw them at Venice, and other Ports of Italy, and the Histories of the Jews in the new Testament in the garb of their own Country. How∣ever as most part of the figures of the holy History are copyed from these kinds of originals, they have filled us with impressions from our infancy, and we are ac∣customed to represent the Patriarchs to our selves with Turbants and Beards down to their girdle, and the Pharisees in the Gospel with Bonnets and Pouches. In all this there's no great harm to be mistak∣en: but 'tis much better not to
be deceived. The Ancients usual∣ly wore long habits, as most people in the world do still at this day, & as they in France did but two hundred years ago. It is much easier and sooner done to cover our selves at one bout, than to cloath each part of the body, one after another: And those long Vestments have more dignity in 'em and more real beauty. In hot Countries they have ever worn their habits large, and have been in little pain to co∣ver their arms or legs, or to wear any other sort of shooes than Bus∣kins tyed after different ways. Thus their cloaths hardly had any fashion; being only pieces of Stuff, that were made according to the Largeness and figure, which the habit was to have, where there was nothing to cut, and little to sow. They did not alter their modes, as at this day they do not change them throughout all the Levant. Besides, women and young People, who usually invent Modes, had there very little Authority. From thence it comes, that they kept such great Magazeens of Cloaths,
and that it was so common to make presents of them.Horat. l 1. Epist. 6. In the ward∣robe of Lucullus there were found five thousand Chlamydes, which were a kind of warlike cloaks. And hereby we may judge of the rest. They usually gave two changes of Rayment, that they might have wherewith to vary, and might wear one, while the other was washing, being in this like our Shifts. Their Stuffs were for the most part made of wool. In Egypt and Syria they wore linnen and cotton: But silk was still unknown in the time of the Israelites: The use of which did not become common on this side the Indies, until above five hundred years after JESUS CHRIST. The beauty of cloaths consisted in the colour or fineness of the Stuffs. The white, the Purple-red, and the Violet were most esteemed; and it seems, that white was the most ordinary colour among the Israelites as well as the Romans;Eccl. 9. 8. since Solomon saies, Let thy Garments be always white, that is, be always neat. And in∣indeed
nothing is more plain and simple, than to make ue of wool or linnen, such as nature produces without dying. The young-men and maids wore striped garments of divers colours.Gen. 37. 23 Such was the Robe of Joseph, which his Brethren stript him of, when they resolved to sell him; and such were the Robes of the Kings Daughters in the time of David.2 Sam. 19. 18. The orna∣ments of cloaths were fringes and borders of Purple or Embroidery, with some Clasps of Gold or Jewels in places where they were neces∣sary. Their magnificence consist∣ed in often changing, and in wear∣ing none, but what were very neat and whole. Besides we shall not doubt, but the Israelites were cloathed very plainly, if we con∣sider, how plain the Garments were of the Greeks and Romans e∣ven in the time of their greatest Luxury. We may see the Antique Statues, the Trajan Column, and other Bas-reliefs. The Habits, which the Scripture usually mentions, are the Tunick and the Cloak. In these two the
Grecian and Roman Habit did only consist. The Tunick was large; but when they were to walk or be in action, they made use of a Gir∣dle. Hence comes that Phrase so frequent in Scripture, Arise, Gird up thy Loins, and do this. The He∣brews had their heads cover'd with a kind of a round and wreathed ornament as well as the Persians and Chaldeans; for it was a token of mourning to go bare-headed: And they wore their hair; since to shave the head was another mark of mourning. As for the Beard 'tis very certain, they wore it long, by the example of the Ambassa∣dors,2 Sam. 10. whom David sent to the King of the Ammonites, and whom that ill-advised King caus'd to be shaved by way of affront: Insomuch as they were compell'd to remain some time at Jericho to let their beards grow, before they durst show their faces. He also caused their Garments to be half cut off after a manner, which makes it ap∣pear, they wore 'em long. They bathed often, as People still do in hot Countries, and washed their feet
oft'ner than they bathed: for that wearing only Sandals, they could not walk without gathering up dust. And upon this account the Scripture frequently speaks of their washing of their feet, when they came into a House, or went to eat or to sleep▪ Now as water dries the skin and hair, they anointed themselves either with plain Oyl or aromatick Unguents, which we may call Essences or Pomatums, and which they still make great use of in the Indies. We see in several places of the Scripture, how the women dress'd and deckt themselves. God re∣proaching Jerusalem with it's Infi∣delities under the figure of a Hus∣band,Ezech. 16. 9. who has drawn his wife from the utmost misery to heap fa∣vours upon her, saies by the pro∣phet Ezechiel, that he had given her very fine stuffs and those of di∣vers colours, a girdle of fine linnen,Pictâ Lupa barbara mi∣trâ. Juv. Sat▪ 3. purple shoes, bracelets, necklaces, pendants, and a crown or rather a miter, such as the Syri∣an women wore a long time after; and that he had adorned her with
Gold, Silver, and fine Linnen. When Judith deckt her self to go find out Holofernes, 'tis said, she washed and anointed her self; she put her hair in order,Jud. 10. 3. &c. and a crown upon her head; she took her habit of joy, put on Sandals, and loaded her self with bracelets, pendants, and rings. In short, a more par∣ticular account we cannot desire of these ornaments of women than that which we read in Isaiah,Isai. 3. 16. when he reproaches the Daughters of Sion with their Luxury and vanity. And indeed Corruption was then mounted to it's highest point. CHAP. X. Of their Moveables and their Houses. THere is less need of moveables in hot Countries than in ours, and the simplicity of the Israelites in all the rest gives us occasion to
believe, that they had but very few. The Law speaks much of wooden and earthern vessels: And the lat∣ter was very common with the Greeks and Romans, before that Luxury had obtained among them. Mention is made thereof, when the refreshments are specifyed, that were brought to David during the war of Absolom.1 Sam. 17. 20. We see the movables, that were look't upon as most necessary, in those words of the Sunamite who lodged the prophet Elisha:2 Kings 4. 18. let us make I pray thee, said she to her Husband, a little chamber on the wall, and let us set for him there a bed, and a Table, and a stool, and a candlestick. Their Beds were only Couches without hangings or cur∣tains, except slight Pavilions, which the Greeks call'd Canopies, because they served to keep off flies and gnats. The most magnificent had beds of Ivory,Am. 6. 4. as the prophet Amos reproaches the rich of his time; and the most nice made their beds of Down, garnished 'em with preci∣ous Stuffs, and sprinkled them with sweet-scented waters.Prov. 7 16. They also set their beds against thew alls. It is
said, that King Ezechias having heard the menaces of his approching death turned towards the Wall to weep▪1 King. 21. 4. And the same is said of Ahab in re∣gret, that Naboth had refused him his Vine-yard. The Candlestick, which we find in the inventory of Elisha's mova∣bles, was apparently one of those great Candlesticks, that were placed on the ground to hold one or more Lamps. Till then and a long time afterwards, that is to say, in the time of the Romans, nothing was burnt but Oyl to give light. And for this reason we meet so fre∣quently in Scripture with the ex∣pression of Lamp, for all, that enlightens the body or mind, that conducts, and that makes men to rejoyce. There's no likelihood, they had Tapistries in their houses: None such are used in any of the hot Countries, in regard naked Walls are much cooler.Ezech. 27. 2▪ They on∣ly made use of Foot-carpets to sit or lye down on; and the use of them is shewn in Ezechiel amidst the Merchandizes, which the Arabians brought to Tyre. Mention is like∣wise
made of Carpets among the Refreshments, that were carried to David: Which gives us reason to believe, the  made use of them in the  for in their hous∣es they had seats. Their houses were different from ours, in all that we still see in hot Countries. Their roofs are ter∣rassed; their windows only shut with Lattcies or with curtains: there are no Chimnies: They lye as low as possible. That the roofs were flat in the Land of Israel and in the Countries round about, many proofs there are in Scripture Ra∣hab conceal'd the spies of Joshua up∣on the roof of her house.Jos. 2. 6. When Samuel declared to Saul,1 Sam. 9. 25. that God had chosen him for King, he made him lye all night upon the roof, a thing still usual in hot Countries. David was walking upon the roof of his Palace, when he saw Bathshe∣ba washing her self.2 Sam. 11. 2. Absolom caus∣ed a Tent to be pitch'd on the roof of the same Palace, when he abused his fathers Concubines,2 Sam. 16. 22. that no body might be ignorant of that action, which was as the tak∣ing
possession of the Kingdom. They went upon the roofs in great Alarums, as we may see by a couple of passages in Isaih.Isai. 15. 3. 22. 1. All this does shew the reason of that Law, which ordered a Wall to be made round about the roofs for leaning, lest that some might be kill'd by falling down, and also does explain that expression in the Gospel, What has been told you in the ear, pub∣lish it on the House-tops. Each House was a Scaffold ready set up for any that had a mind to make themselves heard afar of. The barrs of the Windows are shown in the Proverbs and Canti∣cles of Solomon,Prov. 7. 6. and in the Histo∣ry of the death of Ahaziah King of Israel.Cant. 2. 9. When King Johachim burnt the book,2 King. 1. 2. which Jeremiah had written by command Divine,Jerem. 36. 22. he was in his winter apartment, seated before a fire of a Pan of coals: From whence we may con∣clude, they had no Chimnyes, which truely are the inventions of cold Countries. In hot ones they con∣tent themselves, in case they have Furnaces for the Kitchin. They
built very much with Stone, and knew how to cut it into large por∣tions. In the Edifices of Solomon, we have mention made of Stones of eight and ten cubits, which are twelve and Fifteen Feet,1 Kings 7. 9. 10. and by what is there named costly Stones, unquestionably is meant a certain sort of Marble. The beauty of their Buildings consisted less in or∣naments placed in some parts than in the intire form of the whole in the cut and joyning of the Stones. They took care, that all should be well united and in good proportion to the lead square and compass. Thus Homer speaks of the Build∣ings, which he commends; and we still admire this kind of beauty in the structures of the Ancient Egyp∣tians.1 Kings 6 18. 7. 2 3▪ &c. The Israelites made use of sweet scented-woods, as Cedar and Cyprus to wainscote the buildings of the Wealthy,Cant. 3. 6. in their making of Pillars and Columns.2 Sam. 7. 2. Which we see by the Temple and the Palaces of Solomon: And David says, he dwelt in an house of Cedar, to im∣port, that he was lodged magnifi∣cently.
CAP. XI. Their Food. AS for what concerns their Ta∣ble, they ate sitting, as the Greeks in the days of Homer: And 'tis necessary to observe it for the distinction of times. For after∣wards it is said, since the Reign of the Persians,Esth 1. 6, 7, 8. that they did eat lying upon beds like the Persians and the Eastern people, from whom the Greeks and Romans borrowed like∣wise that custom. The Regular people did eat after having wrought,Eccl. 10. 16. and that very late. For this cause to eat and drink in the morn∣ing denotes Disorder and Debauch∣ery.Isai. 5. 11. Very plain was their Food: For the most part they talked only of eating bread and drinking water. From whence it comes, that the word Bread is usually taken in Scri∣pture for all manner of meats. They broke their bread without cutting it, because they only made little
long or thin loaves, as is still done in several Countries. The first favour,Ruth 2. 9. 14. Boaz granted to Ruth, was to drink of the same water with his People, to come eat with him and to dip her bread in vine∣gar: And we see by the Comple∣ments she made him, that this fa∣vour was no small one.1 Sam. 25. 18. We may judge of their most ordinary Victuals by the entertainments,2 Sam. 16. which David received on sundry occasions form Abigail,2 Sam. 19. from Ziba and from Barzillai, and by the Pro∣visions those people brought, who came to him in Hebron. The different kinds shewn there, are bread and wine, wheat and barley, flower of them both, beans and len∣tels,1 Chron: 12. V. dryed Pease, Grapes and Figs, Honey,mlen. Al. 2 Paedag. 1 in. Butter, Oyl, Sheep, Oxen, and fatted Calves. Among these particulars were several sorts of grain and pulse; which were indeed the most ordinary food of the An∣cient Egyptians: And the Romans in the best times, and when they most of all applyed themselves to Agriculture, did scarcely live on any thing else. 'Tis well known,
from whence comes the illustrious names of Fabius, Piso, Cicero, and Lentulus. We see the use, that the Israelites made of Milk by the counsel (and command) of the wise-man:Prov. 27. 27. Thou shalt have Goats Milk enough for thy food and for the maintenance of thy Household. Tho it was permitted them to eat fish, I don't see, there is mention made of their doing so, but in the latter times. 'Tis believed, that the Ancients despis'd it as a sustenance too light and delicate or robust and hearty men: nor is there indeed any report made thereof in Homer, or in any Grecian Writer of the Heroitick times.Plat. Rep. 3. Neither do we find among the Hebrews any Sauces or Ragousts: Their feasts were composed of fat and solid meats. They reckon'd Milk and Honey for the greatest Delicacies imagi∣nable. And truly, before that Su∣gar was brought from the Indies, no∣thing was known more pleasing to the tast than honey.Levit. 24. 5. &c. The Offer∣ings commanded by the Law, shew that in the days of Moses they had di∣vers sorts of Pastries, some mingled
with and others fryed in Oyl. Here is now an occasion to speak of the distinction of meats allowed or prohibited by the Law. It was not peculiar to the Hebrews to ab∣stain from certain living Creatures out of a Principle of Religion: The people round about 'em did the same. The Syrians did eat no flesh; and some have been of O∣pinion,Herod. 2. that it was likewise out of Superstition, that the Greeks did ab∣stain from it. The Egyptians of Thebes ate no mutton, because they adored Amnon under the i∣gure of a Ram. Besides they ab∣stained from Goats,Porphyr. Abstin. 4. and Sacrificed sheep. The Egyptian Priests abstain∣ed from all meats and drinks, that were fetch'd from abroad: And as to what the Country produc'd, they abstain'd from Creatures, whose Feet were round or divid∣ed into several toes or claws, or which had no horns; as also from Birds of Prey. Several ate no∣thing, that had life: And in their times of Purification they abstain∣ed likewise from Eggs.Herod. . In Egypt Swine's flesh was held for unclean.
Whosoever had toucht an Hog but as he past by, went presently to wash himself and his cloaths. So∣crates forbad the breeding of them in his Republick, as creatures rendring no Service, and of no far∣ther use than for the Table. All the World knows, that still at this Day the Indian Bramins neither eat nor kill any kind of Living thing: And 'tis certain, they have conti∣nued this Humour for above two thousand years. Therefore the Law of Moses had nothing new or extraordinary in this point: But it was necessary to restrain the people within reasona∣ble bounds, to hinder them from imitating the Superstitions of their neighbours, without giving them on the other side an entire Liberty which they might have abused. For this abstinence from certain meats was useful both for Health and for Manners. It serv'd not only to quell their unruly Spirits, that God had impos'd upon 'em that Yoke, but likewise to divert them from things hurtful. They were forbidden to eat of blood
or of Fat; both being difficult to digest. Swines flesh is also very heavy upon the Stomach. The same holds good with those Fish, that have no scales, whose Flesh is oily and fat, whether it be deli∣cate as that of Eeles, or it be hard as that of Tunnies, Whales and other Fishes of that kind.Paedag. 2. 1. Thus we might render natural reasons for the greatest part of these Pro∣hibitions, as Clemens Alexandrinus has well observed. As to the moral reasons, the Ingenious have ever counted Gluttony for a Vice, that was first to be subdued,Caffin. In∣stit 5. as being the source of most others. The Socratick Philosophers preach∣ed up Sobriety so very much, that Plato did not believe,Plat. . 7. init. that any thing was to be done in Sicily to∣wards the correction of manners, as long as people ate there two great Meals aday. And it is observed, that the aim of Pythagoras his abstinence was to render men Just and Disinteressed, by accustoming them to live on a little. Now one of the chief branches of Glutto∣ny is the desire of Variety of Meats.
A too great quantity does very soon disgust: But as the diversi∣ty is Infinite, the desire of 'em is Insatiable. CAP. XII. Purifications. THe Purifications commanded by the Law had the same grounds with the Distinction of Meats. Neighbouring Nations practis'd them or such like others; and they were useful for Health and for Manners. The cleanness and neatness of the Body is a Symbol of the purity of the Soul, and is a pretty natural consequence of it: since that nastiness does commonly proceed from Sloth, from a contempt of others, and a lowness of Heart. The external purification is in Scripture called Sanctification; be∣cause it makes men sensible of the
Interiour purity, wherewith we ought to approach holy things. Neatness is otherwise necessary to maintain Health and prevent Di∣seases especially in hot Countries. And indeed men naturally are there more cleanly: The heat inviting them to strip themselves to bath, and change their cloaths often: Whereas in cold Climates People dread the Water and Air, and prove more dull and Lazy. Certain it is, that the Sluttishness, wherein most of our common people live, especi∣ally the poorer sort, and those within Cities, does cause and keep on foot many and many Diseases. What would it be in hot Coun∣tries, where the air is more easily corrupted, and where water is more scarce? Moreover the Anci∣ents made little use of Linnen, and Woollen is not so easily to be cleans∣ed. Let us admire herein the Wis∣dom and goodness of God, who had given his People Laws so ma∣ny ways profitable: Since they served at once to accustome them to Obedience, to restrain them
from Superstition, to regulate their manners, and to preserve their Health. It is thus, that in the Structure of Animals and Plants we see so many parts, which serve for several uses. Now it was im∣portant, that the precepts of neat∣ness should make a part of Religi∣on: For that considering the inner Corners of Houses, and the most se∣cret actions of life, there was no∣thing but the fear of God, could cause them to be observed. How∣ever by these sensible things God formed their Conscience, and wont∣ed them to acknowledge that no∣thing was concealed from him, and that it was not sufficient to be pure only in the eyes of men. This is the foundation of those Laws,Levit. 11. 3. 22. which commanded bathing and washing of cloaths,Numb. 3. 24. after the having toucht a dead body or,Lev. 14. 35. an unclean Creature,Lev. 13. and in several the like encounters. Hence pro∣ceeds the Purifications of Vessels by Water or by Fire;August. 2. Quest. of Houses, where there appeared any corrup∣tion of Women after their lyings in;Evang. 40. and the Separation of Lepers:
Tho the white Leper, which the Scripture only mentions, is rather a Deformity than a Disease. The Separation from Strangers was a necessary consequence of these Laws. For altho most of the ad∣joyning People had likewise their Rules for the choice of Meats and for their Purifyings, they were not the same. So that an Israelite had always a right to presume, that the Stranger he met withal, had eaten of Swines flesh, or of meats offer'd to Idols, or had toucht some unclean Beast. And there∣fore he was not permitted to eat with Aliens, nor to enter into their houses. And this separati∣on was likewise useful for man∣ners; serving as a Barrier against their being too much with strang∣ers, which is ever pernicious to the Commonalty, and which was much more so in those conjunctures of time by reason of Idolatry. The Egyptians were extremely ad∣dicted to this Maxime: the Scri∣pture shewing that they would not eat with the Hebrews;Gen. 43. 32. and Hero∣dotus testifying,Herod. 2. that they would
neither Kiss a Greek, nor make use of his Knife or his Vessel. Se∣veral such like practices the Maho∣metans have still at this day: But those, who have most of 'em, and are tyed to them with the greatest Superstition, are the In∣dians. Yet the Israelites did not equal∣ly shun all manner of Strangers; tho they comprehended them all a∣like under the name of Gojim or Gentiles. All Idolaters they ab∣horred, particularly the Uncir∣cumcised. For they were not the only people, who practis'd Circum∣cision; it was in use among the Egyptians, and among all the De∣scendants of Abraham, as the (Ishmaelites) the Medianites, and the Idumeans. As to the uncircum∣cised, who worshipped the true God, they suffer'd them to live in the Holy Land, with this Proviso, that they observ'd the Law of Na∣ture, and Abstinence from Blood. But if they Circumcised them∣selves,Selden de jure nat. they were reputed the Chil∣dren of Abraham, and consequent∣ly obliged to keep all the Law of
Moses. These last the Rabies cal∣led the Proselytes of Righteousness: And the uncircumcised Faithful they call'd the Proselytes of Habita∣tion, whom they otherwise termed Noachidians, as being only obliged by the Precepts, which God deli∣ver'd to Noah at his coming out of the Ark. CAP. XIII. Marriages. Women. AFter that way the Israelites liv'd, Marriage was no great trouble to 'em: it was rather an ease according to it's Institution. Laborious were the Women as well as the men, and work't with∣in Doors, while their Husbands were imployed in the Field. The Women dress'd the meat, and serv∣ed it up to the Table; which is seen in Homer and several parts of Scripture. When Samuel repre∣sented the manners of Kings to the people:1 Sam. 8. 13. The Kings, said he,
will take your daughters and make them Confectionaries, Cooks and Bakers. The Pretext, which Amnon the son of David us'd to get his Si∣ster Tamor to his House, when he would viciate her, was to take broths from her hands, which she indeed had prepared her self, tho she was the Daughter of a King. It was the Women, that made cloaths. And their ordinary occu∣pation was to weave Stuffs, as they work now adays in Linnen and Tapestry.Theocr. Idyl. 15. In Homer we see the Examples of Penelope,Ter. Heau∣tont. Calypso, Circe; we see the same in Theocri∣tus,Sueton. Aug. 73. Terence, and in all Authors: And what seems to me the more remarkable, is, that this Custome did still continue at Rome among the greatest Ladies in a very cor∣rupt age, Augustus usually wear∣ing Cloaths made by his Sister and his Daughters. If we would have proofs hereof out of Scri∣pture,1 Sam. 2. 19. 'tis said, the Mother of Samuel made him a little coat,Prov. 31. 13. 19. &c. which she brought him on solemn days; and we see the virtuous
wife of Solomon industriously a∣plying her Linnen and woollen, a turning the wheel and spinning, and giving two Suits of Cloaths to all her Domesticks. All these works are done pri∣vately in the house, and do not require any great strength of bo∣dy. Wherefore the Ancients did not fancy them worthy to employ men; and very kindly left 'em to women, naturally more neat, more sedentary,Jud. 8. 5. and more addicted to Little businesses. They lived apart from the men and much retired, principally the Widows. Judith remained thus shut up with her Women in an high apartment, like the Penelope of Homer. The Marriages of the Israelites were not accompanied with any Ce∣remony of Religion, that I know of, unless it were the Prayers of the Father of the Family, and of the assistance for drawing the blessing of God upon the Bride. We have examples hereof in the marriages of Rebecca with Isaac,Gen. 4. 60. of Ruth with Boaz,Ruth. 4. 11. of Sarah with Tobias.Tob. 7. 15. I do not see, they
offer'd Sacrifices upon this occasi∣on, or went to the Temple, or sent for Priests: All passed a∣midst their Friends or Relations; nor was it other than a civil con∣tract. As for the Circumcision of Children, that was in truth an Act of Religion, and very necessa∣ry, when any one was to enter in∣to the allyance of Abraham: But it was likewise performed within doors by Relations, without the ministry of any publick person. In all these Ceremonies take care we must, not to let our selves be de∣ceiv'd by modern Pictures, as I have already said of Apparel. Far from fearing the Mul∣titude of Children, the Israel∣ites did hugely desire it. Besides their natural Inclination, the Law gives great motives to it. They knew, that God in creating the World, and in repairing it after the Deluge, had said to mankind: Encrease and Multiply, and fill the earth. They knew, that to Abra∣ham he had Promised an innume∣rable posterity; and finally that amidst them was to be born the
SAVIOUR of the World. And by those sordid Interests they were not press'd, which in this age make people look upon the blessing of Marriage as a great misfortune. Their frugal way of living was the occasion, that as long as their Children were little, they cost 'em little to feed, and yet less to cloath; for in hot Countries they often let 'em go naked: And when they were bigger, they helped them in their Labour, and spared them Slaves and hired Ser∣vants. Wherefore they had few slaves in proportion.2 Sam. 9. 10. Ziba the Servant of Saul cultivated the Pa∣trimony of Mephibosheth with his Fifteen Sons and twenty slaves. They were not in pain to provide for their Children; since there was no Fortune to be made a∣mongst them, and all their ambi∣tion was to leave to their Sons the Inheritance, they had receiv∣ed from their Progenitors, better cultivated, if possible, and with some Herds more.Numb. 27. 8. And their Daughters, as they did not suc∣ceed in defect of Males, were
accordingly marryed rather for allyance than for estate. Thus it was a Conveniency to have many Children; as it was an honour too. They deem'd that man happy, who saw himself Fa∣ther of a large Family, and envi∣roned with a great number of Children and Grand-children, al∣ways ready to receive his Instructi∣ons, and to execute his orders: and they did not fear his name would be Forgotten as long as his Posterity subsisted. Thus when the Scripture sets down the num∣ber of Children, 'tis usually for to commend the Fathers: as those two Judges of Israel,Judg. 10. 4. 12: 14. of whom one had thirty sons,2 Chron. 11. 21. the other forty with thirty Grand-sons; as David,Ibid. 13. 21 of whom it reckons nine∣teen sons, bating those by Concu∣bines; as Rehoboham, who had twenty eight sons and sixty Daughters; and Abijah, who had two and twenty Sons and six∣teen Daughters. Thus did the Poets crack of the fifty Children of Priam: for the Greeks had e∣cundity in no less esteem. As
Virginity was not yet known for a virtue, in this State they only considered the mischief of Barren∣ness: and they thought those maids unhappy, who dyed without being marryed.Jud. 11. 38. Electra complains ex∣presly hereof in Sophocles, and it was the subject of the Regrets of Jephtha's Daughter. Wherefore it was a shame for a marry'd wo∣man to be barren; as we see in the mother of Samuel and many others; and this misfortune they looked upon as a curse of God. This care of Posterity and pre∣serving the memory of the Dead was the foundation of that Law, which commands the Brother to marry his Brother's widow, in case he dyed without Children. This right was established in the time of the Patriarchs, as appears by the History of Thamar,Gen. 38. 8. and they look'd upon it as a pious duty,Deut. 25. 6. that the name of the deceased might not fall into oblivion. So the Children were attributed to him by a kind of adoption. From thence come the two Genealogies
of JESUS CHRIST accord∣ing to St. Matthew and St. Luke▪Mat. 1. For thus it was that Joseph had two Fathers;Luke 3. 23. the one by Birth, and the other by this Adoption of the Law. Besides, this same marriage with a Sister-in-law was not con∣trary to the first natural right, which allowed even the marrying one's own Sister, before God had forbidden it. The desire it was of having a great number of Children, which moved the Israelites to take seve∣ral wives at a time: altho they were reserv'd enough as to the use of marriage. From it they ab∣stained not only during the big∣bellies and the other unfitness of their wives, but during all the time they were nurses, that is to say, most commonly during three years: And we do not see, they could dispence themselves from nursing their own Children. Wherefore we ought not to think it strange, that God tolerated Poligamy,Jud. 4. 19. which had been introduc'd before the Deluge, tho it was contrary to the first institution of marriage.
For when it was instituted in the Terrestrial Paradice, there was not yet any Concupiscence: And since that by the new law it was raised to the dignity of a Sacra∣ment,As the Pa∣pists▪ hold. 'tis accompany'd with very Strong graces; but in the interval when grace was much less, and that sin reigned, it was the good∣ness of God to use a greater In∣dulgence. Wherefore 'tis with Polygamy as with divorce, of which JESUS CHRIST told the Jews,Mat. 19. 8. that in them it was suffer'd for the hardness of their hearts. Besides their Wives they were allow'd to have Concubines, who usually were Slaves. Above them the Legitimate wives had nothing more than the dignity, which rendred their Children heirs. So that the name of Concu∣binage did not signify Incontinency as among us: it was only a less solemn marriage. Furthermore, this Liberty was so far from making Wed-lock more commodious, that the Yoke was the more heavy. An husband could not so equally share his
heart amidst several wives, as to give 'em all contentment. He was fain to govern them with an absolute authority, as the Levan∣tins do still at this day. In mar∣riage there was no longer an equali∣ty of Friendship and of Society. It was yet more difficult, that Rivals could agree among them∣selves. There must needs have been continual Divisions, Cabals, and Domestick Wars. All the Children of one woman had as many Step-mothers, as the Father had other wives. Each one es∣poused his mother's Interests and look'd upon the Children of other Women as Strangers or enemies. Hence comes that manner of Speaking so frequent in Scripture: He is my Brother and the son of my Mother. We see examples of these divisions in the Family of David, and still much worse in that of Herod. As to the Liberty of Part∣ing by Divorce, it had likewise ill consequences. They more lightly engaged and venturd 'emselves the less for one another; and the multiplicity of marriages might
rise to such an excess, as to be∣come a Palliated Debauch. 'Tis well known, what a disturbance it occasion'd at Rome after the fall of the common-wealth; whereas that as long as good manners were kept up there,Gell. 4. 3. no Divorce was seen untill the year 523: Notwith∣standing the Laws permitted it. The Children also suffer'd very much by it; they remained Or∣phans in their Parents life-time: And hard it was for 'em to pre∣vent the becoming odious to one of the two, and the not siding with the one or other. CAP. XIV. Education of Children. Exercises. Studies. THe Education of Children seems to have been much the same among the Israelites, as among the Egyptians and the most ancient Greeks. They formed their bodies by Labour and Exercises, and
their minds by Learning and Mu∣sick. A great value they had for strength of Body; and 'tis the most usual commendation, that the Scripture gives to warlike men;2 Sam. 2 3. as to David's brave and stout Soul∣diers.Ejusd. 18. 27. Foot-races must have been one of their principal exercises, since they knew people by seeing them run afar off, as those who brought the news of Absolom's de∣feat: Most surely they must have seen them run often. 'Tis also said of Asahal Joab's Brother,2. 18. Zach. 12. 3. that he ran like a wild Roe. The Prophet Zachariah speaks of an heavy stone, which St. Jerome takes for one of those Stones that served to try the Strength of men, by essaying who should raise it highest. So that we may believe, they had too that kind of exercise.1 Sam. 20. The ex∣ample of Jonathan shews, they us∣ed archery. But bodily exercis∣es they never made an important Occupation, as the Grecians, who reduc'd it to an art, which they term'd Gymnastick: because they exercised themselves all naked, and they sought the utmost perfection
in it. At great charges they built places very spacious and magnificent for exercises: They had masters, and under them a great number of men for the teaching young People. In short, there were among them Athletae by profession, taking up all their life-time with those exercises. To fall into those curiosities the He∣brews were too serious: And it was an odious novelty, when un∣der the most renown'd Antiochus they built a Gymnasium after the Grecian mode in Jerusalem.1 Mat. 1. 15. They contented themselves with the La∣bour of a Country-life,2 Mac. 4▪ 91. 2. and with some military exercises, as did likewise the Romans. Neither had they need of great Study to form their wits, if by Stu∣dy we understand the knowledge of Sundry Languages, and the read∣ing of many Books, as we com∣monly understand it. Their Mo∣ther-tongue was sufficient for them, and that was the Hebrew, such as we see it in the Scripture. For∣reign Histories and Poems were of no use to 'em,Psal. 16. 4. since these were
full of the names of the False Gods, which they were not so much as to utter. So that all their Grammar consisted, as that of the ancient Greeks, in speaking their own tongue well, in reading and writing correctly, with this diffe∣rence, it did not appear, that they had reduced it into Art, or learnt it by Rules. Their Letters were those, we now call Samaritan, for that the Samaritans have preserved them. And as they are neither smooth nor easy to form, we may question, whether the art of writ∣ing was very common among the Israelites; so much the more in that the Learned are called in Scri∣pture Sopherim i.e. Scribes accord∣ing to the most ancient Translati∣ons. And indeed a people given to Husbandry have less need of writing than Merchants and men of business.Deut. 66. 7. &c. But 'tis credible, the most part knew how to read;Jos. 2. contr. App. 6. since to all it was recommended to learn the Law of God, and to meditate on it day and night;Orig. cont. Celsum. lib. 4. and this Study was their sole Occupation on the Sab∣bath-day.
That book was sufficient to in∣struct them perfectly. In it they saw the History of the World till their establishment in the Land of Promise, the Origine of all nations, that were known to 'em, and more peculiarly of those, whom they had most occasion to know, the Descendants of Lot, Abraham, Ishmael, and Esau. In it they saw all their Religion, the Tenets, Ce∣remonies, and Precepts of Morali∣ty: It contain'd also their Civil Laws. Thus that Book alone, which is the Pentateuch or the five Books of Moses, included all they were to know. Not but they had many other Books. For, that I may not speak of the Books of Joshuah, of the Judges, of Samuel, and of other Sacred Writings, which were made afterwards. In the time of Moses mention is made of a Book of the Warrs of the Lord,Numb. 21. 14. as also of a Book of Jasher. The Books of Samuel and Kings do often refer to the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah and Israel.Josh. 10. 13. Solomon wrote three thou∣sand Parables, and five thousand Can∣ticles:
He made Treatises of all Animals and Plants: And he him∣self complains of the Infinite num∣ber of Books, that were composed. All those Books,Eccls 12. 12. and perhaps many others we know not of, are lost, as well as those of the Egyptians, Syrians and other Eastern people. The only Books, which remain of that antiquity, are those which God himself dictated to his Pro∣phets, and which he had preserved by a Particular Providence. The other part of Studies was Musick, I judge thereof by the Greeks, who from the Orientals had taken all their Studies and all their Politeness. Now certain it is, that the Greeks had all their Children taught to sing and play upon Instruments: This study is the most ancient of all. Before ever Letters were us'd, the memo∣ry of great things was preserv'd by Songs. The Gauls and Germans had that Custome in the time of the Romans: And the same Custome is still kept up by the wild Inhabi∣tants of America. Altho the He∣brews had Letters, they knew, that
words in measure and put into a Song are always easilier remem∣bred; and from thence the great care arose, which they took to compose Canticles upon any thing considerable that happened to them; such are the two,Exod. 15. which Mo∣ses made,Deut. 32. the one at the passage of the Red-sea,Jud. 5. and the other, when he lay adying,1 Sam. 2. to recommend the observation of the Law. Such is the Song of Deborah, that of Sa∣muel's Mother, and many others; and especially the Psalms of David. These Poems are of a wondrous Instruction, full of God's Practi∣ses, of the Memory of his Benefits, of Moral Precepts, and all the Sentiments which a good man ought to have in all the different States of Life. So that the most important Truths, and the most ex∣act thoughts agreeably enter'd into the minds of Children with Tunes and Words. If we may judge of the goodness of their Tunes by that of their Words, they must have been alto∣gether excellent, grave and so∣lid, but touching and various. If
we judge of 'em by the effects Scripture seems to attribute to 'em, such as were supernatural. We see their Musick charm'd evil Spi∣rits, by the example of Saul, who found himself better, when David play'd upon the Harp. We see that the sound of Instruments did help the Spirit of God, which moved the Prophets, by the exam∣ple of those,1 Sam. 10. 5. whom Saul met with according to the Prediction of Sa∣muel, and with whom he himself enterd into Heavenly transports of Joy; and by the example of Eli∣sha,2 Kings. 3. 15. who call'd for a Ministrel, that he might Prophecy. This shews, that Musick appeas'd the motions of the Spirits and humours, which the Devil had raised in those Persons, God had permitted him to possess; and that on the con∣trary meeting with calm and de∣seate hearts, it raised them up to God, and inflamed 'em with De∣votion, disposing them thus for the better receiving the powerful impressions of his Spirit. In like manner the Greeks relate to us the prodigious effects of their Musick
for exciting or for calming Passi∣ons: And we must either give all Histories the Lye, or confess, the Musick of the Ancients was much more charming than ours. Not that it was rare amongst them; they were all Musicians: And to confine my self to the Hebrews, and not to speak of those who were Musicians by profession, there were in David's time Four thousand Le∣vites destin'd to that employ only, under the conduct of 288 Masters; the chief of whom were Asaph,1 Chr. 23. 5. 25. 7. He∣man and Jeditshun, so often named in the Inscriptions of the Psalms. Da∣vid himself was a great Poet and a great Musician: And 'tis well known, how much the inclination of Kings serves to the advancement of Arts. A great Diversity they had of wind and other Instruments, whereof some had eight or ten Strings, and their Tunes were ac∣companyed with dances: for this is the meaning of the word Chorus, which the Latins have taken from the Greeks, and which amongst them signifyed a company of Danc∣ers, dress'd and cloathed in one
and the same manner. They Sang together, and danc'd a kind of Brawles. They were coupled according to their age and sex, young men, Maids, Women, Old∣men, without intermixture with one another. Now 'tis improba∣ble, that the dances of the Hebrews offended the Rules of Modesty. There is mention made of Choirs at the Procession, which David made to transfer the Ark into Sion, and on several occasions of victories, when the Maids went out of the City Dancing and Singing. But the greatest part of their studies did not consist in Reading & Regu∣lar Lessons, but in the Discourses of their Fathers and of their old men. Who were obliged to inform their Children of the great things, God had done for them and their Fore∣fathers: And it is for this reason, that the Law commanded them so often to explain to their Children the Reasons of the Feasts and the other Ceremonies of their Religi∣on.Deut. 6. 7. 20. Wherefore those Instructions applyed to sensible Objects, being so frequently repeated, could not
fail of being sound and solid. They likewise taught them all that con∣cerned Agriculture, joyning to their Lessons a perpetual Practice: And we shall not doubt, but they were very knowing therein, if we consider, that during so many ages they made it their sole occu∣pation. Now altho this art be ex∣ercis'd among us by people of gross and unthinking Souls, yet it contains a vast extent of Know∣ledge much more useful to mankind, than these Notions of the greater part of Speculative men, who are esteem'd Learned. And tho for knowledge we should reckon on∣ly what is written in Books, the Ancients and Moderns have written enough of this to give us a good opinion of it. Thus an Israelite, who by the Tradition of his Fore fa∣thers, by his own experience, and some reading had inform'd him∣self of his Religion, the Laws which were to regulate his life, and the History of his Nation; who knew, how to procure to himself all things necessary; who perfect∣ly understood the several qualities
of Earth, and of Plants proper to each; what course was to be tak∣en with 'em, and in what Season; what precautiong were to be used against the diverse Accidents which cause the Fruits of the Earth to perish, how they were to be ga∣thered and preserved; who knew the nature of Cattle, their Food, their Diseases, their Remedies, and so many other the like things, which most of those are ignorant of, who among us go for well-bred and learned men: This hon∣est Israelite, methinks, is as much to be valued, as a man brought up either in Law or the Disputes of our Schools. But nevertheless there were some Israelites, who more particularly set themselves to Study, and who may have the appellation of Learn∣ed, even according to our Ideas. 'Tis said,1 Chron. 12. 32. that in the time of Da∣vid there were in the Tribe of Es∣sachar Learned men, who had un∣derstanding of the times, what Israel was to do. And by these words Interpreters understand men, that observed the Stars, and regulated
the Feasts, and all the order of the year. The Prophet Malachi saies of the Priests in general, That their Lips should keep Knowledge,Mal. 2. 7. and that they should seek the Law at his mouth. So that one of the Prin∣cipal Functions of the Priests was to teach the People: As also the Prophets applyed themselves that way. It was they alone, who took upon them to write and e∣specially Histories. For among the Hebrews as well as other Orientals, Private persons were not suffered to have that Liberty,Joseph. cont. App. 1. 2. which the Greeks allowed them. None but the Doctors deputed by publick order, or the Prophets inspired by God were permitted to write. Thus the most ancient Histories of the Romans were the Annals of the Pontifices. We see by the works of those Hebrew Authors, how much they excell'd in Elo∣quence and Poetry. For I here term Eloquence the Art of Writ∣ing well on all manner of Subjects, Histories, Laws, Precepts, Exhor∣tations. In point of History they do no
more than relate matter of Fact, as clearly as is possible, without mixture of Reasoning or Reflecti∣on. But when we examine the business well, we shall find, that they have with a marvellous Judg∣ment chosen the Deeds, which serve for their Design: By which means their Histories are very short; tho in places of Importance they come to the least Particular, setting the Action before the eye, and making their Personages speak directly, which renders their Nar∣ration very lively. We see, that they on purpose retrench all Re∣flections and aggravations, in that they know very well how to em∣ploy them in discourses, where they would raise emotions. Thus in Deuteronomy does Moses with the greatest and strongest figures rise and amplify, what he had related very plainly in the fore-going Books. Thus does the Prophet I∣saiah barely rehearse the Defeat of Sennacherib, after having exagge∣rated it by foretelling it in a Style that amounts even to Poetry.
The Laws are written with clearness and brevity; the Maxims of Morality are contain'd in short Sentences, adorn'd with fit Figures, and express'd with a measured Style. All which does likewise serve to make them be remembred. In short, their Poetry is sublime, the Descriptions lively, the Metaphors bold, noble the Expressions, and the figures miraculously diversifyed. But whole Volumes it would re∣quire to speak worthily of their Eloquence and their Poetry. Tho they wrote by divine Inspiration, I don't believe it necessary to attri∣bute all their Eloquence to that su∣pernatural Cause. The difference of Styles, shews, that the Holy Ghost did make use of their natu∣ral expression to explain the truths, which to them he dictated. And what moreover shews this style to be natural is, that the most Anci∣ent of Profane Authors come very near it. Homer, Herodotus, Hip∣pocrates speak after the same man∣ner. We see in Pindar and in the Chorusses of Tragedies the boldness and variety of Songs. The more
Ancient the Grecian Authors are, the more they resemble the Hebrews, in the difference of Styles accord∣ing to the nature of Works, and in the brevity and propriety of Expression. You may, if you please, believe, that the Hebrews wrote after this manner by the sole force of their Genius and their exact judgment, which made them reject all that was not for the design of each work, and employ what was pro∣per to instruct or to move. For my part, seeing they so constant∣ly observed the Distinction of Styles, and so much to the purpose employed all the ornaments of true eloquence, I chuse rather to believe, that they had then some rules drawn from the experience of their Fathers, whether they were written, or delivered dow only by Tradition among the Learn∣ed. Let us not fancy the Greeks invented Eloquence, and Poety. At most they did but invent the names of Figures, and that Art of the Grammarians and Rhetoricians, which never made Oratour or Poet.
Long before them were found out the grounds of that Art. And indeed the World was then pretty old. It had lasted three thousand years before Solomon; and it has continued as long since with∣in a little more than three hun∣dred years. Until that time the Life of man was long; and there had not yet been any Deluges of Barbarous Nations in those Coun∣tries, where Arts and Sciences did begin. CAP. XV. The Politeness of the Israelites. TO return to the Hebrews in general, being so well in∣structed and so well born, that is, in a Country, where men are na∣turally endowed with Wit, they could not want Politeness. For you must not imagine, that it is incompatible with a Country-life and with the Labour of the Body: The example of the Greeks does
but too well evince the contrary. But the Greeks, living for the most part in Common-wealths, were so jea∣lous of their Liberty, that they all carried themselves as equals; and their Complements only tend∣ed to the testifying Esteem and Friend-ship, wherein they were imitated by the Romans. The Ci∣vility of the Orientals suited more with ours, and shewed more Respect. Those they treated as Lords whom they had a mind to honour, made them Protestations of Ser∣vice, and bowed before 'em even to the prostrating themselves on the Earth, which the Scripture calls Worshiping. The Hebrew did the like, even before they had Kings, and in the days of the Pa∣triarchs: Which did apparently proceed from the Manners of th People round about, who had long time been subjected to Master To Kiss, was common in thei Salutations. Whereas we uncove our heads out of respect, the put off their Shoes to go into Ho∣ly Places; it being a sign of mour∣ing to have the head uncovere
We see examples of their com∣plements in those of Ruth,Ruth. 2. 11. 13. of Abigael,1 Sam. 25. 23. 41. of that Woman of Teko∣ah, whom Joab employed to re∣call Absolom,2 Sam. 14. 17. and lastly of Judith. All these examples are of Women,Judith 11. 5. 6. usually more Flattering than men. Willingly and with delight they made use of Parables and ingeni∣ous aenigmas or riddles in their discourses. Their language was very modest, and conformable to bashfulness, tho after a man∣ner different from ours. For they used Far fetcht Circumlocutions for things, which we bluntly speak of and with less caution. As when they said, The water of the Feet, meaning urine; To open one's Feet, meaning, to go to Stool; and when they name the Thighs for the neighbouring part, which is not to be named. On the con∣trary they have expressions, which sound to us very harsh. They speak often of certain secret Infir∣mities in Men and Women, that we should not dare to name; and without scruple name some things, the names of which we
very carefully avoid. All these differences do only proceed from the distance of times and places. The greatest part of words, which are uncivil according to the pre∣sent use of our Tongue, were for∣merly civil, having other sorts of Ideas annext to 'em: And at this day the Levantines, especially the Mahometans have ridiculous niceties for certain beastly things, which do nought concern manners, while they give themselves all manner of Liberty in the most infamous Pleasures. But to come to the Israelites, 'tis likewise ob∣servable, that they spoke more freely of what concerns the me∣terial of Marriage, in regard none among 'em renounced it, and those who wrote were very Serious men, and generally advanced in years. CAP. XVI. Of their Pleasures. THeir mild and quiet life joyn'd to the beauty of the Coun∣try did incline them to Pleasures.
But their Pleasures were sensible and easy; having few others, but those of good Chear and Musick. Their Feasts, as I have said, were of plain Meats, which they took at home, and their Musick cost them less, most of 'em being Skill'd in playing upon Instruments. The good old Barzillai only reckon'd these two Pleasures,2 Sam. 19. 25. when he said, he was too old to Relish Life; and the Son of Syrach compares that entertainment to a Carbuncle set in Gold.Eccles. 32. 78: Thus Ʋlysses did frank∣ly vow amongst the Phaeaces, that he knew no other felicity than a Feast accompanied with Musick. The same pleasures we see in the Rebukes which the Prophets gave to those Persons,Amos 6. who misused them. But they added thereto the excess of Wines,Isai. 5. 11. 12. Crowns of Flowers, and perfumes,Isa. 28. as we see was practis'd by the Greeks and Romans. We see the particulars of their Perfumes in the Canticles, and other parts of Scripture: But chiefly in the Law,Exod. 30. 29. where it prescribes the com∣position of two sorts, which were to be offer'd to God, the one dry,
the other Liquid; and those druggs were the most Odoriferous that were known, before the find∣ing out of Musk and Amber. They took delight to eat in Gardens un∣der Trees and Arbours. For 'tis natural in hot Countries to seek out Air, and love the Fresco. So that, when Scripture would shew a time of Prosperity, it says, Every one did eat and drink under his own Vine and own Fig-tree; which are Fruit-trees, whose Leaves are largest. Their application to Husban∣dry did not permit them to make Feasts every day, and every day to take their pleasures, as most part of our wealthy People do now: But it served to make 'em relish them the better. Thus they had times of Rejoycing, their Sabbath-days; and all the other Feasts set down by the Law, Marriage, sharing of booty after the Victory, Sheep∣shearing, the Harvest and the Vin∣tages in each particular Territory,Isai. 9. 3. 16. 10. where the Neighbours assembled to help one another. Well known it is, that the Festivals of Bacchus▪
and Ceres had their rise among the Grecians from such occasions of Joy whereof there are Traces still seen in Countries where Vine-yards are. The Israelites had no prophane sights. They contented themselves with the Ceremonies of Religion and the preparation of Sacrifices; which must needs have been very magnificent; since the Temple was the most stately building in all the Country, and there were above thirty two thousand Levites de∣stined to serve therein. I do not see, they used either Gaming or Hunting, which we reck∣on among our greatest. divertisment As for Gaming, it seems, they were absolutely ignorant of it, the very name being not so much as found in all the Scripture. Not but that the Indians had already in∣vented Games,Herod. 1 if, what we are told of them, be true: But still at this day the Arabians and other Oriental Nations do not Play at any Games of Hazard. As for Hunting or Fowling, they were not unknown to the Israelites: But they applyed themselves that way
less for pleasure than for the ad∣vantage of furnishing their Tables, and the saving and preserving their Corn and their Vineyards. For of Traps and Snares they speak often; and we do not find, that even their Kings were provided of Dogs and other equipages for that Sport. Undoubtedly they would have rendred themselves very o∣dious, should they have rid or run over their till'd Lands, or kept any creature, that might have done mischief. The great chaces are plac'd in the vast Forrests and un∣cultivated Lands of cold Coun∣tries. CAP. XVII. Their Mourning for the Dead▪ AFter their Rejoycings, let us speak of Mourning, and the marks of Affliction. The Anci∣ents went not into Mourning only for the death of their Relations, but as often as any misfortune hap'ned to them: And their
Mourning did not solely consist in changing Cloaths. The causes of Mourning were either publick Calamities, as a Mortality, a ge∣neral Famine, or an invasion of e∣nemies, or particular Misfortunes, the death of a Relation or a Friend; if he was dangerously sick, or in Captivity; or if one was accused of an hanious crime. The signs of Mourning among the Iraelites were to rent their Garments, as soon as they heard of Ill-news, or when they hap'ned to be present at some great evil, as a Blasphemy or a∣ny other sin against God; to beat the Breast, to put their hands upon their head, to uncover it, and to cast dust and ashes there∣on instead of Perfumes, which they us'd on occasions of Joy; and lastly to shave the Beard and Head. On the other side, the Romans, who were wont to shave, let their hair grow in time of Mourning. As long as that lasted, they were neither to anoint or wash them∣selves, but to wear sordid and torn apparel, or Sack-cloath, that is to say, a straight and narrow suit,
without foldings, and by Conse∣quence disagreeable. They call'd them Cilices, because they were made of coarse Camlet, or of some such like coarse and heavy Stuff. They had their feet bare as well as their heads, but their Faces covered. Their Mourning was attended with fasting: That is,Ezech. 24. 17. as long as it continued, they either did eat nothing at all, or they did not eat till after the Sun's setting, and then very common Meats and some Pulse, and drank nothing but Water. They remain∣ed shut up, sitting on the Ground, or lying on ashes; kept a pro∣found silence; never opened their mouths, unless to lament, or Sing Doleful Songs. The Mourning for the Deceased generally lasted seven days, and seldom any long∣er. But Widows there were, who continued their Mourning all their days, as Judith and Anna the Prophetess. Thus their Mourning was not as ours, a meer Ceremony, of which only People of Qualty do regu∣larly acquit themselves. It con∣tain'd
all the natural Consequences of a real Grief; for men in great afflictions take no care to deck or keep themselves neat; hardly e∣ver speak, without it be in Plaints; do not shew themselves openly, but shun all Divertisements. I believe in∣deed there were amongst them, who only as it were mimicked Mourning & did all these things without being much concern'd. But at least those that were really so, might freely satisfy themselves. Now in gene∣ral both the Israelites and all the Ancients were more natural, than we are in these matters, and con∣strained themselves much less as to the exteriour Demonstrations of their passions. They Sang, they Danc'd on occasions of Joy: On those of grief they wept, they groaned aloud. When they were in fear, they ingenuously confest they were so: When they were in choler, they vented it in re∣proaches. Homer and the Tragick Poets afford us examples hereof on all occasions. Philosophy and Christianity have since very much corrected that outside in all those,
who have had Education and Po∣liteness: They are exercised from their Youths to speak like Heroes or like Saints: But the most part are never the better at the Bottom but only dissemble their Passions without striving against them. Funerals will suit well with Mourning. All the Ancients took a particular care of them; and lookt upon it as a great Mis∣fortune, when the Bodies of Per∣sons, who had been near and dear to them, remain'd expos'd to be torn and devour'd by Beasts or Birds, or to be corrupted openly, and infect the Living. Whereas the Greeks burn the corps to keep the ashes, the Hebrews interred the common People, and embalmed the most considerable Personages to put them into Sepulchers. They embalmed much after the same fashion as the Egyptians, surround∣ing the corps with a great quan∣tity of drying drugs: Then put them into Tombs, which were lit∣tle Caves or Closets cut out in Rocks, whereof each had a Table of the same Stone, on which they
laid the Body. Several of those Sepulchers still remain, whereof we may see descriptions in the Re∣lations of Travellers. Altho Fune∣rals were a pious Duty, yet they were not attended with any Cere∣mony of Religion: On the con∣trary, it was a proane action, which rendred all those unclean, who had any share therein, untill they were purify'd: Which pro∣ceeds from that Dead Bodies are either in a state of Corruption, or in a Disposition approaching there∣to. Wherefore so far were they from having occasion for Priests at their Funerals, that thy were forbidden to assist at them, were it not at those of their near Kins∣folk.Levit. 21. 23. When Josias fell to abo∣lishing Idolatry, he caus'd the Bones of the False Priests to be burnt upon the Altars;2 Chron. 34. 5. to the in∣tent, those Altars might be had in the greater Detestation.
CAP. XVIII. Religion. THis is, what concerns the Pri∣vate life of the Israelites. Let us now proceed to their Religion and their State Politick. As to Religion I shall not enlarge much in explaining their Belief. We ought to know it, since 'tis com∣prehended in ours. I shall only shew, that certain truths were clearly reveal'd to them, while o∣thers were still obscure, tho they were already revealed. What they knew,Vide Jseph cont. was, That there was but one God, who Created Hea∣ven and Earth:App. l. 2. c. 8. that he governs all things by his Providence; that we ought to put no trust,Deut. 4. 39. 6. 4. save in him,Ps. 104. 127. nor hope for any good but from him; that he sees all things even the very secrets of our hearts;Ps. 62. 71. that he moves our wills within,Is. 36. and turns them which way he pleases;Jerem. 17. that all men are born in sin,Psal. 93. 138. and naturally prone to evil;1 Kings 8. 39. that, not∣withstanding,
they may do well with the help of God;1 Sam. 10. 26. that they are free,Prov. 21. 1▪ and have the choice to do good or evil;Ps. 51. 7. that God is very just,Gen. 6. 5. and punishes or rewards ac∣cording to merit;Ps. 52. 4. that he is mer∣ciful,Deut. 30. 6. and pardons those,Ezech. 36. 27 who have a sincere regret for their sins past;Deut. 30. 19, 20. that he judges all the acti∣ons of men after Death:Ps. 18. 9. 62 13. From whence it follows,Ex. 34. 6. that the Soul is immortal,Deut. 30. 1. 2. and that there is ano∣ther Life. They knew, however, that God out of his meer good∣ness had chosen them amongst all men to be his faithful People;Ps. 73. 17. that among them,Eccl. 8. 11. 9. 2. 11. 9. 12. 14. of the Tribe of Judah and of the race of David was a SAVIOUR to be born,Wisd. 2. 13▪ who should deliver them from all their Sufferings,Deut. 7. 6. 7, 8. and draw all Na∣tions to the knowledge of the true God.Ibid. 9. 5. 6. This is,Gen. 49. 10. what they di∣stinctly knew,2 Sam. 7. 12. and was the most or∣dinary Subject of their meditati∣ons and their prayers.Ps. 22. 28. This is that high and most glorious Wis∣dom,Psal. 72. 11. which distinguished themIs. 11. 1. 10.Ezech. 34. 23.Deut. 4. 6.Vid. Orig. contra. els. 5. et Jos. 2. in Ap. 6.
from all the Nations of the whole Earth. For whereas among the rest of the World none there were but the wise men, who knew any of these great Truths, and that too very imperfectly, and with a great Diversity of Opinions; All the Israelites were taught these Doctrines, even the very Women and Slaves. All had the same Sentiments. The Truths,Gen. 1. 26. which were taught them more obscurely,Ps. 33. 6. were that in God there are three Persons,Prov. 30. 4. Father,Isai. 48. 16. Son,Ps. 3. 7. and Holy Ghost; that the Saviour,Ps. 110. 3. whom they expected,Ps. 45. 78. should be God, and the Son of God;Gen. 22. 18. that he should be both God and man;Is. 53. 11. that God gave to men his grace and necessary help for the accomplishing his Law,Ibid. 5. 6. &c. only,Ps. 60. 19. 64. 4. by that Saviour and in view, of his merits;Tob. 13. 21 &c. that he should suffer death to expiate the Sins of Mankind.Job. 19. 26. That his Kingdom should be whol∣ly Spiritual;Dan. 12. 2. that all men should rise again;Wisd. 30. 10. &c. 5. 1. &c. that in the other life shall be the true Recompence of the good and Punishment of the Wicked.Tob. 2. 18. 4. 23. All this is taught in the
Scriptures of the Old Testament, (and in the Apocrypha;) but not so clearly, as that all the People knew it. Nor indeed were men yet capable of receiving such ele∣vated truths. But according to my Design, I must only explain, what their external practises of Religion had most different from our Principles and Manners. They had but one Temple and one Altar, where it was permitted them to offer Sa∣crifices to God; which was a sensi∣ble mark of God's Unity: And for the representing likewise his Sovereign Majesty, that Building was the most magnificent in all that Country. The Temple within the Veil was on the in-side adorned with Sculptures, and all overlaid with Plates of Gold. True, it was not very large: But the Courts, Galleries and diverse Apart∣ments, which belong'd to it, for the Lodging of Priests and Levites, for the keeping Treasures and sa∣cred Vessels; the Magazines of Oblations, the Kitchins, the Rooms to eat in, and the rest; all
this together made a great mass of buildings, which being form'd in symmetry and rare Architecture gave a mighty Idea of that great King, who was served in that sa∣cred Palace. And to render it's Sanctity the more sensilbe, none but those who were pure, were allowed to go upon the mount of the Temple. The Women had their place apart: The Gentiles were only in the outward Court: The Israelites were plac'd in one more advanced. That, where the Altar was, was only for the Priests: They did not go into the Temple within the Veil, but on∣ly to offer Incense and Loaves, and to kindle the Lamps: But none, save the High-Priest entred into the most Holy Place, and that too but once a year. We are offended at the Bloudy Sacrifices, which made the Temple a Slaugher-house and Kitchin: But the same thing was done by all Nations. Besides, the proper functions of the Priests were only to sprinkle the Blood, kindle the Fire, and put those portions upon
it, which were to be offered up. It was the parties, that kill'd the Sacrifices, who prepared them, cut 'em to pieces, and caused them to be broil'd:Levit. 15. 11. &c. Which we see in the Law and in the History of the Sons of Heli.1 Sam. 12. 13. However the Priests did the same functions at the pub∣lick Sacrifices,Jerem. 1. 13. that were offer'd for all the People. Hence come those Figures,Ezech. 24. 3, 4. &c. which might seem to us low and mean in Jeremy and Ezechiel, to whom God represents Jerusalem by the Image of a Pot. Those two Prophets were Priests, and accustomed to see the Sancti∣fy'd Meats made ready. Now whatsoever served to the worship of God and the execution of his Law, they esteemed great and no∣ble: And besides it was ordinary for the best sort of people to work with their own hands, and for them∣selves to do, as I have said, the things necessary for life. So in Ho∣mer the great King Agamemnon kill'd the Lambs himself,Iliad. 3. the blood of which were the seal of the Treaty, he made with the Trojans. So King Nestor Sacrifi∣cing
to Minerva,Odyss. 2. in fin. his Sons killed the Victime, cut it to pieces, and broyl'd them, Homer is full of the like examples. Moreover, all that is prescrib'd in the Law touching the quality; and form of Sacrifices, did tend more to hinder Superstition and reduce the Israelites to so small a number of Ceremonies, than to in∣troduce new ones. The Idolaters Sacrific'd many more sorts of Liv∣ing Creatures and in many more places; since they had Temples and Altars every where, and each Family had it's Domestick Gods and particular Superstitions. Thus God a long while before-hand prepared his People to abolish those bloody Sacrifices, often telling them at the same time by his Prophets, that they were not ne∣cessary nor essential to Religion,1 Sam. 15. 22. and that the worship,Ps. 50. 8. &c. most pleasing to him, lay in praises and the con∣version of the Hearts. It was necessary, that the Priests should be marryed, (if it were only upon this account;) since the Priest-hood was established in
the Family of Aaron: But they were parted from their Wives, during the time of their Service. We do not see, that any function of civil life was interdicted them; and they bore arms as well as others.Deut. 20. They performed the ve∣ry Office of Trumpeters both in the Army and every where else.2 Chron. 13. 12. For they made use of Silver Trum∣pets to give notice of the Feasts,Numb. 10. and to call the People to publick prayers:Jos. Bel. 5. 9. And the name of Jubi∣ly comes from a Rams-horn which was sounded to make known the opening of that Feast. The An∣cient Monks of Egypt kept up this Custome of Sounding the Trum∣pet, to shew the hours of Pray∣er: For the use of Bells is of a later Date. The Feasts of the Israelites were the Sabbath of each week,Levit. 23. the first day of each month,Numb. 28. 29. call'd with us the Calends or Nehomenis, because they reckoned their moneths at least in the later times from the day the Moon began to appear. They had likewise three Solemn days, the Passeover, Pen∣tecost,
and the Feast of Taberna∣cles, established in memory of three great blessings, which they had received from God, their going forth out of Egypt, the Publica∣tion of the Law, and their esta∣blishment in the Land of promise. The Sacrifices were multiplyed on Feast-days: But they offered eve∣ry day two Lambs for an Holocaust both Morning and Evening:Tad. En∣tlechesmos Jug. Sacrif. And this is, what they called the per∣peual Sacrifice. Their year con∣sisted of twelve months, of thir∣ty days each, much like to ours. It was thus regulated ever since Noah, as appears by the dates of the Deluge; but 'tis credible, that it then began at the Autum∣nal Equinox. Moses was command∣ed to begin it in the Spring in the Month Abib, which was that of the Passeover: And with refe∣rence it is to that Month, that the others are computed, which are only named by their number. They correspond much with our Roman Months, the names whereof come from the Ancient year, which be∣gan in the Month of March.
Thus the eight Month is October at least in part, the ninth is No∣vember, and so of others. CAP. XIX. Fast. Vow. THe Fasts of the Israelites were attended with all I have set down, when I spoke of their Mourning: for Fasting and Mourn∣ing were the same thing. So that it did not consist in only eating later, but in afflicting them∣selves all manner of ways. The wholeday they spent without drink∣ing or eating until night: And this is not only still practis'd by the Jews, but both they and the primitive CHRISTIANS have been imitated herein by the Ma∣hometans.Isa. 58. 5: They remain'd silent in Sack-cloath and ases, and did all the rest of what I have said about Mourning.1 King 21. 12. By sound of Trumpet the Publick Fasts as well as Feasts were proclaim'd.Joel. 2. 15. 16. &c. All the People
assembled in the Temple of Jerusa∣lem; at other Cities in the Pub∣lick place. Lectures of the Law were held there, and the most venerable Elders exhorted the Peo∣ple to confess their Sins and re∣pent. On those days were kept no Weddings, and even Husbands abstained from their Wives. The Law had commanded but one day alone for Fasting,Levit. 16. and 27. the Tenth of the seventh Month,Zach. 8. 19. which was the Feast of Expiation: But in and from the time of the Pro∣phet Zechariah they reckon'd two others, one in the fifth Month and the other in the Tenth. They had several extraordinary ones, some in the publick calamities, as was the Famine Joel speaks of; others in particular afflictions, as the Fasts of David for the sick∣ness of the Child,2 Sam. 12. 16. that issue of his crime,2 Sam. 3. 35: and for the Death of Ab∣ner, and on many other occasions, which he mentions in the Psalms.Ps. 35, 12. 13. In short, there were Fasts, that were kept out of meer Devotion for the performing of some Vow.Ps. 69. 21. 12.
They were very Religious in observing their Vows and their Oaths. As for their Vows,Jud. 11. 35. the example of Jephta is but too strong;Jos. 9. 29. and for their Oaths, Jo∣shua kept the promise he had made to the Gibconites, tho it was founded upon a manifest deceit, be∣cause he had Sworn to 'em in the name of the Lord.1 Sam. 24. 17. Saul would have put his Son Jonathan to death for having violated the pro∣hibition, he had made with an Oath; tho Jonathan only sin'd out of Ignorance. We find among them several other the like exam∣ples. Very seriously they made those Solemn Promises, and gave themselves no Liberty to inter∣pret them. To swear by the name of God was an act of Re∣ligion; since that Oath distin∣guished,Deut. 6. 13. 10. 20. the Israelites from those, who swore by the name of false Gods.Ps. 63. 11. Which must be under∣stood of Lawful and necessary Oaths.Levit. 27. Their vows did ordinarily con∣sist in offering to God some part of their estates, whether to serve
for Sacrifices, or to be kept in reserve. Hence came those vast treasures in the Temple of Solo∣mon,1 Chron. 26. 28. which besides the offerings of David contain'd those of Solomon, Saul, Abner, and Joab. For those oblations principally consisted of Spoils, taken from their enemies. The like did the Pagans in the Temples of their Gods, whether after Victories or on other occa∣sions: Whereof I will give no other example than the Temple of Delphos, and the riches, which Craesus sent thither to make the Oracle favour him. The most considerable Vow was that of the Nazarites,Herod. 1. which for a time ob∣liged it's votaries neither to drink Wine,Numb. 6. nor any thing that inebriates, nor to cut their hair; and to keep themselves very charily from all Legal Impuri∣ties, particularly from the approach of Dead Bodies. The rule of the Recabites seems to have had it's foundation from such kind of Vows.2 Kings 10. 15. The Author of that Rule was Jonadab the Son of Rachab, who lived in the time of Jehu King of
Israel and of Elisha the Prophet.Jerem. 35. 6. He forbad his Children to drink Wine, to build houses, to sow, or have Lands or Vineyards. So that they dwelt in Tents; in all probability employing themselves as the Levites did in breeding Cattle, and in perfectly imitating the Pastoral life of the Patriarchs. They were marryed, and invio∣lably kept that Rule in their Family during at least an hundred years; for we do not find what became of them after the Cap∣tivity. CAP. XX. Prophets. ANother kind of the Religious, and much more considerable were the Propmets. There was a great number of them in the time of Samuel,1 Sam. 20▪ 5. witness that company, which Saul met with,Ibid. 19. 20. who prophe∣cy'd at the sound of Instruments, be∣ing Transported with the Spirit
of God; and that other troop, which prophecy'd in the presence of Samuel, and which seems to have been of his Disciples. But it does not appear, there were e∣ver so many as from the time of Elias and Elishah until the Capti∣vity of Babylon. They lived seque∣stred from the World, distinguish∣ed by their apparel, and their way of Life.2 Kings 4. 10. They dwelt upon Mountains, as Elias and Elisha on Mount Carmel and in Galgal. The rich woman, who took Elisha into her house, when he went to Stunam, as I have said, made a Chamber to be built and furnished for him, where he liv'd so reti∣red, that he did not so much as speak with his Hostess, but gave her to understand, what he had to say, by his Servant Gehazi; and when that Woman desir'd him to raise her Son from the Dead,Ibid. . 27. Gehazi would have hindred her from touching the feet of the Prophet.2 King. 10. When Nahaman Gene∣ral of the armies of Syria came to him to be cured of his Lepro∣sie, he sent him his Orders with∣out
showing himself.Ibid. 4. 10. Two other Miracles of that Prophet shew, that his Disciples lived in Society, that of the Pottage of herbs, when he took away it's bitterness, and that of the Barly-loaves, which he multiplyed; wherein we may likewise see the Frugality of their diet. There were even an Hundred Prophets, who lived in that Community and Fellow-ship. They workt with their own hands: For finding themselves too much crowded in their Lodgings, they went themselves and cut wood to build withal, and they were so poor, that one of them was fain to Borrow an Ax. The apparel of the Prophets was Sack-cloath, the habit of Mourning, to notify, they did penance for the sins of all the People. So in the Description of Elijah 'tis said, He was an hairy man,2 Kings 1. 8. and girt with a girdle of Leather about his Loyns.Isai. 20. 2. So when God commands Isaiah to strip himself, he orders him to loose his Sack-cloth from off his Loyns. The two great Pro∣phets mention'd in the Revelati∣ons,
appear'd cloathed in Sack∣cloth.Rev. 11. 3. The Prophets, at least some of them, were marryed; and that widow,2 King 4. 1. whose oyl Eli∣sha multiplyed, was the widow of a Prophet. It seems also their Children followed the same Pro∣fession: For the Prophets are often called the Sons of the Pro∣phets; which made Amos say, I was no Prophet,Amos. 7. 14. neither was I a Pro∣phets Son, but I was a Herdsman; for to show, he did not Prophecy by profession, but by an extraor∣dinary call. For altho most com∣monly God made use of those, who led a Prophetical Life, to make his will known; yet he did not impose upon himself a Law of not making Revelations to others. In the mean while they only ac∣counted those for Prophets, who lead their kind of life: From whence it comes, that the Books of David, Solomon and Daniel are not placed in the rank of Prophe∣cies; by reason, the two former were Kings living in great delights and splendour, and the Latter was a Potentate Living likewise
at Court and amidst great People. These were the men, who after the Patriarchs preserved the pu∣rest Tradition of the true Religi∣on. They spent their time in meditating on the Law of God, in praying to him several times day and night for themselves and o∣thers, and exercised 'emselves in the Practice of all Virtues. They instructed their Disciples, disco∣vered to them the meaning of the Law, and explained the divine sence, which concerned the State of the Church after the coming of the Messias either upon Earth or in Heaven, couched under Alle∣gories of sensible things, and low in appearance. They also in∣structed the people, who came to them on Sabbath-days and other Feasts.2 Kings 2. 23. They chid them for their Sins, and exhorted 'em to Repen∣tance, and often in the name of God foretold what should befall them. This Liberty of speaking the harshest truths, even to Kings, made them odious, and cost seve∣ral of them their Lives.
However there were many Im∣postors, who counterfeited the out-side of true Prophets, wore Sack-cloth as well as they, and spoke in the same Style, saying of them∣selves likewise, that they were inspired by God:Zech. 13. 4. But they took care not to make any Predictions, but such as were acceptable to the Prince and his People. The false Gods had also their Prophets, as the 850,1 Kings 18. 19. whom Elijah caused to be put to death. Of the same Leven were those Sooth-sayers a∣mong the Grecians, whom they call'd Manties, as Calchas and Ti∣resias in the Heroical Times. Such were those, who uttered Oracles, or who spread them abroad, and the Poets, who pretended to be in-blown by the Gods. For they did not say it in a Poetical sense, but to have it really believ'd: And indeed those false Prophets, whether by the Operation of the Devil, or by artifice, entred into a fury and spoke in an extraordi∣nary Style, to emulate the sensible ef∣fects, which the Spirit of God made in the true Prophets. Now
the temptation was great to the Israelites, so weak in virtue, to consult those Sooth-sayers and false Oracles; and it was a Branch of that Idolatry, where∣to they were very subject, du∣ring all the time we speak of. CAP. XXI. Idolatry. THis Crooked inclination to I∣dolatry appears to us very strange and very absurd in the Manners of the Israelites: and it is that, which does most of all perswade us, they were a gross and brutish People. We scarcely see now any Idolaters: We only hear say, that there remain some in the Indies and other far distant Countries: But all the People, who surround us, Jews, Mahome∣tans, Hereticks, and Papists, profess the Unity of an Almighty God: The meanest sort of Women, the
most ignorant and heavy Louts, know distinctly this truth; so that we conclude, those, who believ∣ed several Gods, and worshipped Stocks and Stones, ought to be placed in the lowest form of the most ignorant, dunsical, and bar∣barous men. Nevertheless Barba∣rous we cannot term the Romans, Greeks, Egyptians, Syrians, and the other people of Antiquity; all whose Arts, Sciences and Poli∣teness are derived down to us, and for which we are much behol∣den to them: And we cannot de∣ny, but that Idolatry domineer'd among them with an absolute Em∣pire at a time, when as to other things they were most ingenious and polite. Wherefore we must pawse a little here, and dive into the Source and Fond of this Evil. The Wit of man is so much darkned since the Fall, that he re∣mains in the state of corrupted nature. He does not apply him∣self to any Spiritual Idea: He on∣ly thinks of Body and Matter, and reckons all that does not fall
under his senses, for nothing. Nought appears solid to him, but what strikes his grossest Senses, the Tast and Feeling. We see it but too plainly in Children and men, who follow their Passions: They have no value but for what is Visible and Sensible: All other things seem to 'em meer Castles in the Air. And yet these men are brought up in the true Religion; in the knowledge of one God, of the Souls Immortality, and of a Future life. What then could those Ancient Gentiles think, who had never heard a Syllable of these things, and to whom their great Sages only presented sensible and material Objects? Read Homer, as long as you please, that great Divine and great Prophet of the Grecians; and you will not find the least tittle therein to conjecture, that he thought of any thing Spi∣ritual or Incorporeal. And truly all their Wisdom ap∣plyed it self to what concerns the body and the senses. The Gym∣nastick exercises of the body, which they made so much their
business did only aim at preserving and augmenting Health, Strength, Dexterity, and Beauty, and they brought that Art to the highest pitch of Accomplishment. Scul∣pture, Painting▪ and Architecture regard the pleasure of the Eye; and such great Masters were they in those Arts, that their Houses, their Cities and all their Countries, were full of agreeable Objects, as we may see by the Descriptions of Pausanias. They also excelled in Musick; and tho Poetry seems to reach further than the Sences, it is stinted to the Imagination, which has the same Objects and produces the same Effects. Their most Ancient Laws, and their Rules of Morality do all likewise refer to bodily things, that each parti∣cular Person should have where∣with to live handsomely; that men should marry sound and fruit∣full Women; that the Children should be brought up to have stout Bodies, and that chiefly for War; that every one might be in securi∣ty in respect of Strangers or Ill-Citizens.
They thought so little of the Soul and 'its Spiritual Goods, that they did it a great deal of harm for the prefectionating of the Body. It is evidently against modesty, that the Young-men should appear all naked in publick to exercise themselves in the Eyes of all the World: This was re∣puted nothing; and the Women too in Lacedemon exercised them∣selves in that manner. Very dan∣gerous also it was to expose Sta∣tues and Pictures every where of all kind of Nudities, even the most infamous; and the danger was very great, especially for Painters and Carvers, who work to the Life: However they were oblig'd to content the pleasure of the Sight. Thus we know, to what point of Dissoluteness and Lubricity the Greeks attained by those means. Among them the most abominable Wantonness was not only in use but in Honour. Musick and Poetry, besides their fomenting of those Vices, did like∣wise excite and maintain Jealou∣sies and mortal hatred among the
Poets, the Actors and the Specta∣tors: And particular persons were often branded, Lampoon'd, and exposed by Forgeries and cru∣el Raileries. But they were not much netled or scandaliz'd, pro∣vided they had fine Songs and a∣greeable Sights. It was the same, as to their Religion: It only consisted in sen∣sible Ceremonies, and was injurious instead of being advantageous to good manners. And the source of all these mischiefs was, that man had forgot himself, and his imma∣terial substance. There was kept up among all people a constant Tradition, that there was a more excellent Being than man, capable of doing him good or evil. Know∣ing nothing but Body, they would needs have that Being, h. e. the Deity, to be also Corporeal, and by consequence, that there were several Gods; to the intent there might be some of them in each part of nature; that each Nation, each Town, each Family might have their peculiar Deities. They imagin'd them like immortal
men; and to make 'em happy, they attributed to them all the pleasures, without which they fancy'd no happiness, and that even to the most shameful Debaucheries: Which afterwards served to au∣thorize their Passions by the ex∣ample of their Gods. It was not enough to imagine them either in Heaven or upon Earth; they would see and touch them: Where∣fore they honour'd their Idols as the Gods themselves, being per∣swaded they were thereto fixed and therein incorporated: And they reverenc'd those Statues so much the more, as they were more sine or more Ancient, or had some other Singularity, which made them the more Recommen∣dable. Their Worship was conforma∣ble to their Belief. It wholly turned upon two Passions, the Love of Pleasure, and the fear of sensible Ill. Their Sacrifices were ever∣more followed by Feasts and ac∣companied with Musick and Dances. Comedy and Tragedy began at their Rejoycings in the time of
Vintage, sacred to the honou of Bacchus.Terul. de Spect. Au∣gust. de Civ. Dei 2. The Olympick Games, and those other so much celebra∣ted Combates were made in hon∣our of the Gods: in short, all the Shews of Greece were Acts of Religion; and according to them it was an high piece of Devoti∣on to assist at the most Lewd Plays of Aristophanes. And indeed their greatest business in time of Peace was to take care of sacred Com∣bates and Stage-plays; and fre∣quently in time of War they ap∣plyed themselves more, and were in greater expence for those things than for the War it self. Thus their Religion was not a Doctrine of Morality,Demosth. Philip. Aug de verâ Rel. as the true Religion was. In case some Justice was ob∣served, Oaths, Hospitality and A∣syles were not violated. In case men acquitted themselves faithful∣ly of their vows, and they were at expence for Sights and Sacrifi∣ces, they were then Religious e∣nough of Consciuence. Debauch∣ery was so far from being con∣demn'd by their Religion, that it was in some measure commanded.
'Twas necessary to be drunk for the righteous celebrating of the Bacchanals; and Women prostitu∣ted themselves in honour of Ve∣nus,Clem. Alex. Prom. in particularly in Corinth. Al∣most every one knows, what was the God of Gardens, and what were the Mysteries of Ceres and Cy∣bele. Thus it was that they honoured the Gods, whom they esteemed favourers of Mankind and doers of good. But as to the Infer∣nal, Deities, Hecate, the Eumeni∣des, Destinies and others, of whom their Fables made them a∣fraid, they were to be appeased by Nocturnal Sacrifices and the most horrible and inhumane Ce∣remonies. Some there were, who buried men alive: Others offer'd up Children, and sometimes their own, as those Adorers of Moloch did, so much detested in Scripture. 'Tis to that fear and dread, we must refer all their cru∣el and troublesome Superstitions, as to let out their own blood with lan∣cets or to cut themselves with Knives, as did the false Prophets of
and the Priests of Cybele, and to fast, to bath in cold water, and the like. Thereby they thought to divert the private mischiefs or publick calamities, with which they were threatned by Oracles, Dreams or Prodigies according to the explication of their Divines. They believed them to be Reme∣dies against Diseases, the Pestilence, Hail, and Famine. Now in those matters they chose rather to do use∣less things, than to omit what are useful. All their Lustration or Expiation of Sins lay in that kind of painful Ceremonies: It consisted in purifying the Body by Water or by Fire, and in making certain Sacrifices: But there was no talk of Repentance or Conver∣sion. Perhaps it will seem strange, that a people so enlightned as the Greeks, should fall into such gross Super∣stitions, and should suffer them∣selves to be so easily amused by Astrologers, Augurs and so many other sorts of For∣tune-tellers. But we must consi∣der, that until the time of Alexan∣der
and the reign of the Macedo∣nians, they had not made any great progress in those Sciences, which might cure Superstition. They had improv'd the Arts very much; they had very good Laws: in a word, they had brought to an high perfection, whatever renders Life commodious and a∣greeable. But they had not so much applyed themselves to Specu∣lative Sciences as Astronomy, Geome∣try, and Physicks. The Anatomy of A∣nimals and Vegetables, the Search of Minerals and Meteors, the Fi∣gure of the Earth, the course of the Stars, and the whole Systeme of the World were still very ob∣scure Mysteries. The Chaldeans and Egyptians, who only now knew something of 'em, made them a great Secret, and only spoke of them in Riddles, and blended an infinite number of Superstitions and Fables with them. As those Sciences principally de∣pend on the Experiments of the Phaenomena, the following Ages do always add to them; and they are at present in a greater Perfection,
than they have ever been. They are taught publickly to all, that will apply themselves that way, and they suit mighty well with our holy Religion, which condemns all Superstition, Divination and Ma∣gick. And yet we find too many who listen to Astrologers and that kind of Impostors. I do not only speak of Peasants and I∣deots, the Dregs of the People, but of Women, who pretend to a large State of Wit, Politeness and Knowledge, and of men brought up in the light of the best Educa∣tion, who in other points show themselves great & daring wits, and will not yield to the Authority of the true Religion. What was it then, when all these Fooleries composed a great part of Religion? when Sooth-sayers really pass'd for Di∣vine men? when Astrology, Pyroman∣cy, Necromancy and the rest were Divine Sciences? How could peo∣ple resist the Authority of Priests and False Prophets, who ve∣ry seriously related a great number of former Tryals in confirmation of their Doctrine, and whom
whole Nations so blindly follow'd? They must needs give credit to them, seeing they knew not, how things could naturally come so to pass, and tho any one should have had that knowledge, he must be very bold, that durst have contra∣dicted them. Thus this Inclination to Idolatry was not peculiar to the Israelites; it was an Universal evil: And that hardness of heart, for which the Scripture so often rebukes them, does not consist in their be∣ing more addicted to sensible things than other Nations, but in their being as much as they were, after having received particular fa∣vours from God, and having seen great Miracles. Most assured∣ly it was requisite to have a strong force of mind to resist the ill example of all other Nations. When an Israelite was out of his own Country among Infidels, they seeing him neither offer Sacrifices nor worship Idols, accused him of having no Religion at all; and when he spoke to them of his God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth,
they had him in derision and asked, from whence he came. These reproaches were hard to be sup∣ported: David himself does testi∣fie,Ps. 42▪ 3 that during his Exile, his Tears were his meat day and night, while they continually said unto him, where is thy God? Weak Spirits were staggered by these Attacks, and often could not cope with them. The Propensity we have to pleasure, augmented the Temp∣tation: For the Feasts of the Pagans were both magnificent and frequent. Curiosity easily carries away young People, especially Maidens, to go see Pomps and Processions, the order and tricking of the Victims, the dances and Choirs of Musick, and the orna∣ments of the Temples. There still was found some officious Stranger or other, who engag'd them to take place in the Feast, and to eat of the meats offered to Idols, or to come and Iodge in his House. This gave occasion to ac∣quaintance and Amours, which ter∣minated either in a meer Debauch or in a Marriage against the Law.
Thus did Idolatry insinuate it self; the ordinary Charms whereof were good Victuals and bad Women. Thus in the time of Moses the Daug∣ters of the Medianites engaged the Israelites in those detestabl Mysteries of Belphegor.Fumb. 29. And thus Strange Women perverted Solomon. Furthermore, the Law of God might seem to them too Severe. It did not Permit them to Sacrifice but in one place by the hands of the Priests, and according to cer∣tain very strict rules: And there were but three great Feasts through the whole Year, the Passeover, the Pentecost, and the Feast of Tabernacles. This was but a small thing for People, who lived in Abundance, and in a Climate that inspires Pleasures. However, dwelling in the Country, and being employed in Husbandry, they could not assemble conveniently but at Feasts. Wherefore they must either borrow from Strangers, or invent new ones. We, who believe our selves so Spiritually given, and who without doubt ought to be so, if we were really
Christians, do not we often prefer the Possession of sensible benefits before the hopes of eternal good? and do not we strive to reconcile with the Gospel sundry Divertise∣ments, which all Antiquity has judg'd incompatible therewith, and against which our Instructors never cease to declaim? True, we abhor Idolatry; but we do not see it any where (without it be a∣mong the Papists,) it having been entirely decryed for above a thou∣sand years. We must not there∣fore believe, the Israelites were more stupid than other People, because the repeated favours, which they received from God, did not cure them of Idolatry: But we must acknowledge, that the wound of Original sin was ve∣ry deep, since such holy Instructi∣ons and such great wonders were not sufficient to elevate men above sensible things. And Besides, we see, that other People the most illuminated in other things, as the Greeks and Egyptians, were also without Comparison more blinded herein.
CAP. XXII. State Politick Liberty Domstick Power. AFter the Religion, we must say a word or two of the Politick State of the Israelites. They were perfectly a free People, and chiefly before they had Kings. In their Country were neither Homages, nor Censives, nor con∣straints for Hunting or Fishing, nor any of those different sorts of Subjection, which among us are so usual, that great men themselves are not exempt from them; since we see Soveraigns, who are Vas∣sals, and even Officers of other Soveraigns, as in Germany and Ita∣ly. Thus they enjoy'd that Li∣berty so much cherish'd by the Greeks and Romans; and it was their own fault, that they did not always preserve, and enjoy it. It was the intention of God, as ap∣pears by the reproaches Samuel made them on his behalf,1 Sim. 10. 18. when
they demanded a King. Gideon was well inform'd of this; for that when they would have made him King, and setled the Kingdom on his Posterity,Jud. 8. 23. he generously re∣turn'd Answer: I will not rule o∣ver you, neither shall my son rule o∣ver you; the Lord shall rule over you. So that their State was neither Monarchical nor Aristocratical, nor Demccratical;2 Contr. App. 6. but (as Josephus calls it) a Theocracy, that is to say, God himself govern'd them imme∣diately by the Law he had given them. So long as they were faithful in observing it, they lived in safety and in Liberty. As soon as they broke it to follow their par∣ticular Inclinations, they fell into Anarchy and Confusion.Jud. 17. 6. 21. 25. This is, what the Scripture shows, when it sets it down for the Cause of the greatest crimes: In those days there was no King in Israel, but every man did that which was right in his own eyes. This Anarchy divided and weakned them, and gave them up a Prey to their Enemies, until that re∣turning to themselves, they had recourse to God, who sent 'em
deliverers.Jud. 2. 11. 12. &c. Thus it was that they lived under the Judges, falling from time to time into Idolatry and Disobedience to the Law of God, and by those means into con∣fusion and slavery, still recovering themselves from time to time. In short, they chose rather to have a Ma∣ster, than to remain in Liberty by faithfully keeping the Law of God. Their Liberty, being reduced to it's just bounds, consisted in be∣ing able to do all that the Law of God did not prohibit, and in not being obliged to do but what it commanded, without being subject to the Will of any Particular man. But the Domestical Power of the Fathers of Families was very great over their Slaves and their Children. Some Hebrews were slaves to their Brethren, and the Law set down two causes, which might bring 'em into that condition, Poverty, which constrained them to sell themselves,Levit. 25. 39. or the Trespass of a Thief,Exod. 22. 3. who had not wherewith to make Restitution. It seems, this latter cause does extend to other
Debts by the example of that Widow,2 Kings 4. 1. whose Oyl Elisha Multi∣plyed, to the end she might have wherewith to pay her Creditors, and keep her Children from bon∣dage; nevertheless those Hebrew slaves might become free after six years,Exod. 21. 2 to wit, in the Sabbatical year:Levit. 25. 40. And if they would not make use of that Priviledge, they had that of the Jubile, to be free after fifty years, and to preserve their Childrens freedom. It was recommended to treat them gent∣ly, and rather to make use of for∣reign slaves. The Israelites might kill their slaves with impunity;Instit. de Fur Pers. 3. §. 3. and that right was then common to all Nations. For Slavery proceeded from the right of War, when in∣stead of killing Enemies, they chose rather to spare their lives, that they might have their Service. So they supposed, that the Conque∣rour had always a right of taking away their lives, if they rendred themselves unworthy of them; that he acquired the same right over their Children in regard they
could not have been born, if he had not preserved the Father; and that he transmitted that right, when he alienated his Slave. This is the foundation of the Absolute Power of Masters, and it was seldom, that they misused it: For their own Interest obliged them to preserve their Slaves,Exod. 21. 20. 21. who made part of their estate. This is the reason of that Law of God for not punnishing him, who had struck his Slave after such a manner that he dyed thereof some days after. He is his money, said the Law; meaning his own Loss did suffici∣ently punish him. But if he kills him down-right upon the Spot, it declares him culpable. Where∣in it is more Humane than the Laws of other People, who made not that distinction.Instit. de his qni sui. v. al. 1. The Romans had during above five hundred years the Right of putting their Slaves to Death and their Debtors in∣to Irons in default of Payment,Instit. quib. mod. jus▪ pat. § 6. and of selling their own Children even thrice, before they went out of their Power, and all this by virtue of those wise Laws of the Twelve
Tables, which they brought from Greece at the same time, when the Jews reestablished themselves at their Return from the Captivity, that is to say, about a thousand years after Moses. As to the Paternal Power of the Hebrews,Exod. 21. 7. the Law permitted 'em to sell their Daughters: But that sail was a kind of Marriage, and if a Son was disobedient and debaucht the Elders of the City condemned him to dy,Deut. 21. and he was according∣ly stoned to death.Heliod. 1. That very Law was practised at Athens, but at Rome the Fathers had a long time the Power of life and Death over their Children as well as o∣ver their Slaves. This so rigorous right was grounded upon the Children's holding their Lives from their Parents, and they supposed there would be none found so un∣natural, as to cause their Children to perish, if they did not commit the most horrible Crimes. How∣ever that fear was very useful to keep Children in an intire submissi∣on. The Romans Law was really excessive in giving to the Fathers
of Families that power of life and Death by their private Authority without participation of the Ma∣gistrate or of the Publick. But fallen we are to the opposite ex∣tremity, suffering that Paternal Power to sink to nothing. How young soever a Son be, as soon as he is Married, or has means of subsistance without his Father presently he pretends he owes him nothing more than a little Res∣pect. From thence comes the in∣finite Multiplication of Little Fa∣milies, and of People, who live alone, or in Places, where all are equally Masters. Those young in∣dependent People, if they be poor, become Vagabonds, and unac∣comptable persons, capable of all manner of Crimes; if they be rich, they plunge themselves into riot∣ous vices, and are ruin'd. Besides the corruption of Manners this Independence may also cause great Mischiefs in the State: It being much more difficult to govern such a multitude of Seperate and unru∣ly men, than a small number of Heads of Families, each of whom
did answer for a great Number of men, and was usually an old man instructed in the Laws. CAP. XXIII. The Authority of the Old men. NOt only the Fathers, but all the old men had a great Authority among the Israelites, and among all the People of Antiqui∣ty. In every Country of the World, they chose at first Judges for private Affairs, and Councel∣lours for the Publick from among the most aged men. Hence came the names of Senate and Fathers at Rome,Gell. 2. c. 5. and that great Respect for Elders which they had taken from the Lacedemonians. Nothing is more conformable to nature: Youth is only proper for Motion and Action; Old age knows how to instruct, counsel, and com∣mand. It rarely happens, that in a Young man Study or force of
Mind supplies Experience; and an old man, provided he has good natural Sense, is knowing on∣ly by his Experience. All Histories do bear, that the best governed States have been those, where old men have had the Principal Authority, and that the Reigns of Princes too young have been the most unfortunate. It is, what the Wise∣man say's,Eccle. 16. 16. Wo unto thee, O Land, when thy King is a Child; and it is this Misfortune, which God threatens the Jews withal, when he lets 'em know by Isaiah,Isa. 3. 4. that he will give them Children to be their Princes. And indeed Youth has neither patience nor foresight: 'Tis an enemy to Rule, and seeks only Pleasure and Change. As soon as the Israelites began to form themselves into a People, they were governed by Old men. When Moses came into Egypt to promise them Liberty on God's be∣half,Ex. 4. 29. he assembled the Elders,18. 12. and in their presence did Miracles, which were the proofs of his Missi∣on. All the Elders of Israel came to the Feast, which he made for
Jethro his Father in Law. When God was pleased to appoint him a Council for the easing him in the management of that great People; Choose out,Numb. 11. 16. said he to him, Seaven∣ty men, whom thou knowest to be the Elders of the People, and Officers o∣ver them. So that already they were in Authority, before the Law was given, or the State had receiv∣ed it's form. In all the sequel of Scripture, every time, that mention is made of Assemblies and of Publick affairs, the Elders are placed in the first rank, and sometimes they only are named. From whence the expression comes in the Psalm,Ps. 107. 31. which exhorts to Praise God in the congregation of the People, and in the Seats of the Elders, that is, in the Publick Council. These two parts com∣posed all the ancient Republicks; The Assembly, which the Greeks Styl'd Ecclesia, and the Latins Con∣scio, and the Senate. The name of Elders did afterwards pass in∣to Titles of dignity: From the Greek word comes the name of Priest, and from the Latin one by
Contraction the name of Sir. We may judge of the Age, whereat the Hebrews thought fit to reckon a man in the number of those that were Aged, by that passage in Scripture, where those are term∣ed Young men, whose Councils Rehoboam followed.1 King. 12. 8. For it is said, they were brought up with him, and we may conclude thence,2 Chron. 12. 13. that they were about his age, and he was then Fourty years old. CAP. XXIV. Administration of Justice. JUstice was administred by two sorts of Officers Shophetim and Shoterim,Deut. 16. 18. established in each City by the order,Magistri. which Moses had given at God's command.Prafecti. 'Tis certain,Duces. the word Shophetim sig∣nifies Judges:Praeones. But Shoterim is va∣riously translated in the Vulgar,Jos. 3. 2. yet the Tradition of the Jews ex∣plains it of Ministers of Justice,Deut. 3 3. 10. 1 Chron. 26. 29. 23. 4.
Door-keepers, Serjeants,2 Chron 19 5. Attendants to Courts, and the like. Those Offices were given to Levites,Ibid. 8. of whom 6000 were that way em∣ployed in the time of David.Deut. 178. These Judges were the same, Sanhedr.  1 § 6. § 4. §. 1. &c. whom Jehoshaphat reestablished in each City, and to whom he gave such excellent Instructions. The Scripture adds, that at Jerusalem he established a company of Le∣vites, Priests, and Heads of Fami∣lies for the judging great Causes. It is that Council of Seventy El∣ders erected in the days of Moses, wherein the high-Priest presided, and to which all questions were brought, that were too difficult to be decided by the Judges of Les∣ser Cities. The Tradition of the Jews is, that these Judges of par∣ticular Cities were to the number of twenty three; that they were all to be assembled in Capital Causes; and that three were suf∣ficient for Matters Pecuniary, and for other Affairs of less Conse∣quence. The chief Judge was the King, according to those words of the People to Samuel;1 Sam. 8. 6. Give
Give us a King to Judge us. The place where those Judges kept their Court, was the Gate of the City For as the Israelites were all Husbandmen, who went out in the Morning to go to their Work, the City-gate was the place where they most commonly met. And we ought not to wonder, that they Workt in the Fields and dwelt in Cities. They were not such Cities as the Metropolises of our Countries, that can hardly sub∣sist upon what twenty or thirty Miles round about do furnish them withal. They were Habitations for as many Labourers as were necessary to cultivate the Lands, that lay nearest them; from whence it came, that the Country being well peopled, those towns were very numerous. The Tribe of Judah alone counted 115 for it's share,Jos. 15. 7 &c. when it entred into possessi∣on, besides what was afterwards built, and each one had Villages in it's dependence. So that they must needs have been small and near one another, like great Villages walled and well built, hav∣ing
also what ever is to be had in the Country,1 Chron. 21. 19. since in Jerusalem it self there were Barnes where Corn was thrashed, as that of Ornan the Jebusite, which David bought for the building of the Temple. In like manner among the Greeks and Romans the Ren∣devous for all affairs was the Mark∣et-place, by reason they were all Merchants. In the time of the Ancient Francks, the Vassals of each Lord assembled in the Court of his Castle, and hence are deriv∣ed the Courts of Princes. In the Levant as the Princes live more Retired, Affairs are dispatch'd at the Gate of their Seraglio: And that Custome of making a Court at the Palace-gate, was in use in the days of the Ancient Kings of Persia,Esth. 2. 19. 21. 3. 2. 3. as we may see more than once in the Book of E∣sther. The City-gate was the Place, where all Publick and Private Bu∣siness was canvass'd in the time of the Patriarchs. Abraham made the acquisition of his Sepulchre in the Presence of all those,Gen 23. 10. 18. who entred
into the Gate of the City of Hebron. When Hamor and his Son Sichem, who had carried away Dina, proposed to make an Ally∣ance with the Israelites,Gen. 34 20 it was at the City-gate, they spoke thereof to the People. The form of those Publick Acts we see well parti∣culariz'd in the History of Ruth. Boaz being desirous to Marry her,Ruth. 4. caused her to be yeilded up to him by the Person, who had a right to do so, as her nearest Relation. For that purpose he sat down at the Gate of Bethlehem, and seeing that Kinsman pass by, he stayed him. Then he took ten of the Elders of the City, and after they were all seated, he ex∣pressed his Pretension, and obtained of her Kinsman the Declaration he demanded, in the form set down by the Law. To which he took not only the Elders but all the People to witness; which shows, a great number of Spectatours were assembled. 'Tis also high∣ly probable, that Curiosity stopt all passengers: They had seldome very pressing business; they all
knew one another, and were all a∣kin, and they must needs have had an Interest in one anothers con∣cerns. Perhaps those Acts were redu∣ced into Writing:Jerem. 31. 10. Scripture makes no mention of their being so,Tob. 1. 19. 7. 16. 8. 24. but in Jeremiah a little before the De∣struction of Jerusalem. In Tobit we read of a promise for money lent, of a Contract of Marriage, and of a Donation in favour of the Match:Deut. 24. 1. In Jeremiah 'tis a Contract of Purchase. Moses his Law only orders Writing in an act of Di∣vorce: But tho they should not have written im the Primitive times, their Contracts notwith∣standing would have been very sure and steddy, being made in so Publick a manner. If the Relative of Boaz should have Gainsay'd the Concession, which he had made all the Inhabitants of Bethlehem would have convicted him of Deceit: Some had been there present, and others had learnt it immediately. The Romans were a long while writing the proceedings betwixt particular Persons, as appears by
the obligatorie force of Words, which they called Stipulation. They did not fear, that an Act should want proof, when they had utter∣ed certain solemn Words in the Market-place in the midst of all the People, and they had call'd some Citizens to witness in particular, who were of an Honest, i.e. hon∣ourable Condition, and of an untaint∣ed Reputation. Those Acts were also as publick, as those which pass at present in private Houses before a Notary, who often knows not the Persons, or before a Justice of Peace with a couple of Knights o' the Post for Evi∣dences. We may say, that among the Hebrews the Gate was the same thing with the Exchange or the Forum amongst the Romans. The Market for Commodities was held at the City-Gate.2 King. 7. 1. Which we see by the Prophecy of Elisha, who soretold, that on the Morrow Victuals should be at a low rate at the Gate of Samaria. That Gate had a place, which must have been spacious, since King Ahaeh assem∣bled
there four hundred false Pro∣phets.2 King. 22. 10. I believe, it was the same with orher Cities; and those Gates had some building where were seats for the Judges and El∣ders. For it is said, that Boaz went up to the Gate, and sat down there;2 Sam. 18. 33. and when David had learnt the Death of Absolom, he went up to the Chamber over the Gate to weep. That Cham∣ber might be the place of Privy Council, and secret Deliberations. After all these examples we need not wonder, that the Scripture Idiome has the Gate so often for the Judgement-seat or the Publick Council of each City, or for the City or State it self; and that in the Gospel the Gates of Hell signi∣fie the Kingdome or Power of the Devil. As the Law of God regulated both Temporal and Religious Matters there was no distinction of Tribunals: The same Judges de∣cided cases of Conscience, and de∣termin'd Civil or Criminal Proces∣ses. So that their Officers were few in comparison of those at this
day in France, where 'tis a shame∣ful thing to be a meer private Person, and to have no other em∣ploy than of improving one's E∣state and governing one's Family. Every body would be in a Publick Capacity, would have honours, prerogatives, and priviledges: And Offices are considered either as Trades, which maintain men, or as Titles, that distinguish them. But if we would only eye, what is Essential in 'em, that is, the Publick Functions real and necessa∣ry; we should see, they, might be officiated by a small number of Persons, leaving them also time to bestow on their Private Affairs. This was the Practice of all People of Antiquity, and Principally of the Hebrews, among whom I find no other publick Officers than the El∣ders,Nasim Ra∣sim the Princes of Tribes, the Heads of Families, and the Judges, and those that look't to the execution of Justice.Ex. 18. 25▪ For as for the rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties; and rulers of tens, whom Moses had establish'd by the Council of Jethro they only were
in the Armies, after the Journey through the Wilderness. CAP. XXV. War. AFter the Administration of Justice, we must speak of War, no Israelite was there, but bore Arms, even to the Priests and Levites. The Priest Benajah Son of Jehoiada was one of the most illustrious of David's valiant men.2 Sam 1. 3 20. Thus they reckoned for men of War all those, who were at the age of bearing Arms; and that age was fixed from twenty years old,Numb 1. 3 2. &c. and upwards: Being like the trained Bands of some Countries, ever ready to assemble at the first order. The difference is, that among us the use of Weapons is forbidden to all such as are consecrated to God, and that we have an infinite number of People useless for War, Lawyers, Physici∣ans, Citizens, Merchants, and
Handicraftsmen: Whereas they were all Husbandmen and Shep∣herds, accustomed to Fatigue from their youth up. It likewise ap∣pears they exercised themselves in handling their Arms, atleast since the time of Solomon. For he made no use of Israelites, when he built those prodigious Structures, whe∣ther for the Defence, or the Orna∣ment of his Kingdom. He em∣ploy'd therein those Canaanites, that were left, whom he caused to pay him Tribute. As for the Is∣raelites they were men of war (say's the Scripture) Officers and Captains in his Troops.2 Chron. 8. 5. So at Rome all the Citizens of such an age were obliged to serve a num∣ber of Campaignes, when they were commanded: Wherefore they did not say, to raise Forces, but to choose them,Delectum habere. because there were always many left behind. It was no hard matter for the Israelites to procure subsistance for their Ar∣mies: The Country was so small, and the enemy so near, that they often return'd to quarter in their own Houses, or had
but the March of a Day or two. Their Arms were much the same with those of the Greeks and Romans; Swords, Bows and Arrows, Darts and Lances. Their Swords were of broad and short blades, hanging upon their Thighs. They likewise made use of Slings, wit∣ness the Inhabitants of Gibeah in Benjamin,Exod. 32. 27. who could even hit an Hair; and those same Gibeonites would have equally fought with both Hands.Ps. 45. 4. Saul held usually a Javelin in his hand,Cant. 3. 8. as Homer makes his Heroes do,Jud. 20. 16. and as the Romans dealt with Quirinus and the other Gods. Sam. 18. 11. 22. 16. Besides they did not wear Arms but upon occasion, no not so much as a Sword. When Da-vid commanded his men to March a∣gainst Nabal,1 Sam. 25. 13. he bid them first to take their Swords, tho they were in a State of continual Alarums. The custome of wearing always a Sword by one's side was peculiar to the Gauls and Germans. As for Defensive Arms, they wore the Shield, Buckler, Headpiece and Cuirasses. We view the Example
of a compleat armour in that of Goliah:1 Sam. 17. 5. 6. &c. But those Arms (it seems) were rare among the Israelites at that time,Ibid. 18. in regard King Saul would have lent his to David.2 Chron. 26. 14. They afterwards became very com∣mon:Ibid. 15. and Ʋzziah had sufficient wherewith to arm all his forces that were above three hundred thousand men. The same King set Engines on the Towers and Bulwarks of Jerusalem to shoot Ar∣rows and great Stones withal; and several Cities were fortifyed by him as well as most of the other Kings. Thus War was made then much after the same manner, as it was made until the latter times, ere Fire-arms were found out. The Israelites had none but In∣fantry, as mostly the Inhabitants of hot Country have, where they always March on dry foot. Horses are of no use there, particularly in Mountainous Countries. They are rather necessary in cold ones to pass through bad ways, and to make great Marches in barren and almost desolated Lands, as in
Poland and Trtary. 'Tis manifest; the Israelites had no horses in Da∣vid's time,2 Sam. 18. 9▪ since Absolom having lost the battle, wherein he perished, mounted on a Mule to make his escape. And indeed the Country did not produce them: But Solo∣mon, who could furnish himself at great expence, had 'em from Egypt, and kept above fourty thousand with twelve thousand Chariots. Those Chariots of War apparently resembled those of the Grecians, that is,2 Chron. 9. 25. they were small with two Wheels, carrying a man or two, standing or leaning forwards. The subsequent Kings could not keep up to that high expence of Solomon, but from time to time sent for Succours from Egypt: And upon those occasions mention is e∣vermore made of Horses. The Scripture teaches us no∣thing particular touching the E∣volutions and the form of Batali∣ons, and the general order of Battles. But for the Art of encamping and Marching in due order, the Jour∣ney through the Desert under theNumb. 12. &c. Conduct of Moses is a most glori∣ous
Example. By exact rules they knew the number of that prodi∣gious Army. Each one was rang∣ed in his Tribe in it's Quarter, un∣der one of the four Principals, ac∣cording to the Brithright of the Patriarchs, and the Quality of their Mothers.Numb. 5. 12. &c. They Marched at the sound of Trumpets, always fol∣lowing the same order; and they had their Standerds in the same Situation round the Tabernacle of the Congregation, which was the Center of the camp. They pro∣vided for the neatness of their Tents, which was so necessary in so hot a Country,Deut. 23. 10. 11. &c. and so difficult in so great a Multitude. In fine, we see, that the order of the Greeks and Romans Encampings was taken as well as all the rest from these ancient Models of the Orientals. The Hebrews set a great value upon Spoils and Booty with the other Ancients, they being marks of Honour. From the time of Joshua unto the Kings, the command of the Armies belonged to those, whom the People elected, or whom
God raised up in an extraordina∣ry way, as Othoniel, Barak, Gideon: But they were only obeyed by that part of the People, who had chosen them, or to whom God had given 'em for Deliverance. The rest of the People abusing their Liberty were frequently ex∣pos'd to the Insults of their Ene∣mies.1 Sam. 8. 20. This made them desire a King,, not only to administer Justice▪ but also to have the ge∣neral conduct of their Armies, and to wage War for them. And truly from that time they were in greater security: The King assembled the People, when he judg'd fit, and kept always on foot a certain number of troops.1 Sam. 13. 2. 'Tis set down in the be∣ginning of Sauls reign,1 Chron. 27. he kept three thousand men. David had twelve bodies consisting of four and twenty thousand,2 Chron. 17. 14. who by months served all in their turns. Jehosophat had but the third part of Davids kingdom, and yet he had eleven hundred and sixty thousand mighty men of valour under his hand with∣out reckoning his Garrisons.
CAP. XXVI. Of Kings and their Power. THe King had power of Life and Death, and might put Criminals to Death without the formality of Justice. David made use of that Right against the Per∣son,2 Sam. 1. 15. who had killed Saul, and a∣gainst them, who had assassinated Ishbosbeth.Ibid. 4. 12, The Roman Emperours had also that power. The power of the Israelitish Kings was in o∣ther cases very much limited: They were oblig'd to observe the Law as much as Private Per∣sons; they could neither derogate from, nor add to it: And there is no example specifyed of any one of them,1 Sam. 8. 13. that made a new Law. Their Domestick life was very plain;2 Sam. 4. 3. as we see in the De∣scription, that Samuel makes in the Manners of Kings, lest they should disgust the People. He al∣lows them only Women to serve them; and when Ishbosheth was
Murdered, there was none but a Maid to guard his Gate, who was fallen asleep, as she was winnow∣ing Corn. Those Kings lived on Husbandry as well as private Persons: All the difference is, they had more Lands and more Herds. In the account of David's Riches, there are indeed reckoned Trea∣sures of Gold and Silver;1 Chron. 17. but there are likewise reckon'd Tilled Lands and Vine-yards, Magazines of Wine and Oyl, Plats of Olive and Fig-trees, Herds, Oxen, Ca∣mels, Asses and Sheep. 'Tis in this way,Odys. 14. that Homer Characteri∣zes the Wealth of Ʋlysses. He gives on the Continent twelve great Droves of each kind of Cat∣tle, besides what he had in his Islands. From this great Husban∣dry they had all that was necessary for House-keeping.1 Kings. 4. 7. In the days of Solomon twelve Intendants were distributed into all the Coasts of Israel, who sent by turns, each during his Month, Provision for th Kings House-hold, amounting one day to thirty three Measure of ine Flower,Ibid. 22. thirty Beefs, and
an hundred sheep; which is suffi∣cient to feed at least five thousand men. As this Maintenance was made in the kinds, which the same Coun∣try afforded, nothing needed to be bought, and there was no occasi∣on either for Purveyours, or Trea∣surers, or Comptrollers, and that vast number of Officers, which con∣sume great Lord-ships: Insomuch as Gold and Silver were kept in reserve, or served to their most natural use, either for Plate or Or∣nament.1 Chron. 29. From hence came the great Riches of David, and Solo∣mon. David prepared what ever was necessary for the Building of the Temple, the Charges of which amounted to three thousand Milli∣ons of Gold. Moreover he lay'd up great Treasures, and caused much likewise to be shut up in his Sepulchre. Solomon built several Palaces, fortifyed diverse Cities, and made a great number of Publick Works. All his Vessels and the Move∣ables of his House of Lebanon were of pure Gold,1 King. 10. 14. not to count his two hundred Targets of Gold, six hun∣dred
shekels of Gold going to one Target. His Revenues were like∣wise great. Commerce and Traf∣fick alone brought him every year six hundred sixty six Talents of Gold, which make above Eleven Millions. He made all Strangers under his O∣bedience to pay him Tribute, the Hivites, the Amorites, and the o∣ther primitive Inhabitants of the Land of Israel, the Idumeans, a great part of Arabia, and all Syria. For his Empire extended from the entrance into Egypt as far as Eu∣phrates: And from all those Rich Countries they sent him every year Vessels of Gold and of Silver, Stuffs, Armes, Perfumes, Horses, and Mules, these Reflections may make us Comprehend, from whence came the Riches of Cresus in a State much of the same extent with that of Solomon. Gold and Sil∣ver were not yet so common in the World: There was but little of those Metals in Greece, none in I∣taly, nor in the rest of Europe, ex∣cept in Spain, where there were Mines 'Tis fit, we should spend a lit∣tle time in considering this prospe∣rity
of Solomon; the Survey where∣of is extreamly delightful. Let us peruse all Histories, and we shall not find so perfect an Assembly of all the Blessings, that can be enjoy'd on this side the Stars. A Young Prince in the Flower of his Age, of a God-like presence, and most amiable in his Person, of mighty Parts, very Learned, and very Ac∣tive; Master of great Dominions in a profound Peace; of so great a Reputation, that it caused a Queen to take a long and tedi∣ous Journey to come and see him; inhabiting the finest Country in the World, Magnificently Lodged, well served, crowned with Riches, and Swimming in Pleasures;Eccl. 2. 4. &c. re∣spsing himself nothing as he him∣self confesses, and applying all that great Wit to the contentment of his desires: This is he, whom we should call an Happy man according to our natural Ideas; yet certain it is, he was not so, since he was not contented. 'Tis he himself that saies it: Then I looked on all the works that my Hands had wrought, and on the Labour,Ibid. 2. 11. that I had La∣boured
to do: And behold all was va∣nity and vexation of Spirit, and there was no profit under the Sun. In this Prosperity of Solomon and of his People, God has at the same time given to Man-kind two Important Instructions. First, he hath shewn his Veracity in accom∣plishing his promises, so Liberally giving to the Israelites all the Bles∣sings, which he had promised to their Fore-fathers in the possessi∣on of that Land, to the intent no body might thence-forward doubt of his well recompencing those, who applyed themselves to him, and observed his Commandments. Men being entirely muled up in the darkness of Sensible things, had an hint from this Pledge to believe one day the Invisible fa∣vours, and rewards of another life. But moreover in granting to the Israelites the possession of those sensible goods, and in profusely heaping upon them whatever might compose the felicity of this Life, God has given to all man∣kind the means of being disabu∣sed, and of conceiving much more
Elevated hopes. For who can pretend to be happy under the Sun if Solomon was not so? Who can question, but all that passes here, is vanity after the Assertion he has made? Does not this Example make us sufficiently see, that Tem∣poral goods are not only vain but dangerous, not only unfit to fill the heart of man, but proper to corrupt it? What reason have we to flatter our selves, that we shall make a better use of them, than that People so cherished by God, and so well instructed, who seem to have more right to those kind of Blessings, since they were propo∣sed to 'em for a Reward? What a madness would it be in us to be∣lieve our selves stronger, than the wise Solomon? He abandon'd him∣self so to the Love of Women, that he had to the number of a Thousand, contrary to the Pro∣hibition of God's Law:Deut. 17. 17. And the Complaisance, he had for 'em, carry'd him even to Idolatry. His Subjects followed so great an Example, and from this time the Manners of the Israelites
fell more and more into Corrup∣tion. The Division of the two King∣domes of Israel and Judah did still Augment the Mischief. The cor∣ruption was much greater in Israel, where Idolatry reigned, the source of all manner of Sins: Revolts and Teasons were frequent there. In Judah the Scepter departed not from the Family of David: There were sundry pious Kings, Priests, and Levites, who retired thither, and kept up there the Observation of the Law much purer, with the Tra∣dition of the true Religion. In those Later times, when the Law was contemned, Commerce and In∣tercourse with Strangers became very frequent, and chiefly to pro∣cure Succours in War; which is the foundation of the manifold Reproaches, that the Prophets made 'em of the little Confidence, they had in God. The Strangers, they most sought to, were the As∣syrians and the Egyptians, two the most powerful Nations at that time. And to please them, they imitated their Manners and their Idolatry;
and the ruine of the Israelites fol∣lowed the fortune of those Nati∣ons, when Egypt fell, and Assyria got the uppermost. PART. III. Captivity. CAP. I. Of the Jews. THis is, what seemed to me most Remarkable in the Prin∣ciples and Manners of the Israelites, as long as they lived with full Li∣berty in their own Country, with∣out being mingled among Aliens, or being the Subjects of Infidels. Let us now take a prospect of their last estate from the Captivity of Babylon until their last Dispersion. Tho they were still the same Peo∣ple, and had still the same Maxims and Manners at the bottom, yet we shall find considerable Differences.
And First they were only called Jews in those latter times, for that indeed none but the Kingdom of Judah did then subsist. Samaria was ruin'd, and Salmanasser had carryed away the ten Tribes, to whom was given the name of Is∣rael, above an Age before the Destruction of Jerusalem. And altho the Kingdom of Judah did likewise include the entire Tribes of Benjamin and Levi with several particular Families of all the Rest, whom Zeal for Religion had brought thither; after the Schisme of Jeroboam, all were jumbld to∣gether and confounded in the name of Judea and the Jews. After the death of Josias as that Kingdom did evidently tend to it's ruine, a great number of the Jews dispersed emselves on all side, and were harbour'd among the Ammonites, the Moabites, the Idumeans, and other Neighbour∣ing People.Jerem. 40. 1. Of them, who stay'd at Jerusalem when it was taken, the Chaldeans carryed the most considerable away Captive, and left only the poorer sort to
Manure and till the Lands; and yet those that were left,Ibid. 4. 3 were hur∣ried away into Egypt a little while after. As to those, who were carryed to Babylon, they were Slaves to the King and to his Sons,2 Chron. 36. 20. as we find in Scripture. For such was then the Law of War. All that were taken in Arms, all the Inha∣bitants of a City forced or rendred upon Discretion: and of the open Country dependant thereon, were Slaves to the Conquerour, and ap∣pertain'd to the Publick or the private Person, who had taken them, according to the Laws set∣led in every Country for the Ac∣quisition, and the Dividend of the Booty. So at the Sacking of Troy all that remained alive, were made Slaves, even Queen Hecuba and the Princesses her Daughters. The Gre∣cian and Roman Histories are Stufft with the like examples. The Ro∣mans put Irons on the Kings, who had obstinately resisted them, and Slew them, after they had shown 'em in Triumph. They sold the People by Inch of Candle, and
distributed the Lands among their Citizens, whom they sent thither to settle Colonies; which was undoubtedly a means to secure their Conquests. Nor the Jews nor the Israelites were so hardly treated by the Assyrians:Tob. 1. 13▪ Some had a great liberty, as Tobit under King Enemessar; and ome were very Rich, as Tobit himself, his kinsman Raguel, and his friend Ga∣bael, and at Babylon Joacim Susan∣nas Husband. It appears also by the History of Susanna, that the Jews, tho Captives, had the ex∣ercise of their Law even to the establishing of Judges, who sat up∣on life and Death. However it was impossible, but that their being thus intermingled with Strangers should cause a great change in their Manners, and Prin∣ciples: Whereof one of the most fundamental was to be seperate from Strangers. Several were pre∣vailed with to worship Idols, to eat forbidden Meats, to Marry strange Women; and they all conform'd themselves to their Masters in Indifferent things, as is
the Language. Thus during the seventy years of the Captivity, they forgot Hebrew; so that none but the Learned understood it: And their vulgar Tongue was Sy∣riack or Chaldee, such as we meet withal in Daniel, and in the Para∣phrases on the Scripture, which were afterwards made, that the People might understand it. They changed also their Letters: In∣stead of the Ancient ones, which the Samaritans have preserved, they took those of the Chaldeans, which we call Hebrew. CAP. II▪ The Return of the Jews and their State under the Persi∣ans. WHen Cyrus had given them their Liberty with a Per∣mission to return into Judea, and to rebuild the Temple, they did not all return, nor all those that did,
at one time. A great number of 'em still remained at Babylon and other places, where they found themselves setled. Those who returned, were not all Jews: Some few of the ten Tribes were joyned to them; and yet taken all together, they made up but a small company. The first, whom Zorobabel conducted,1 Esdr. 2. 64. did not a∣mount to Fifty thousand, including Slaves; and we may Guess at their Poverty by the small parcel of their Slaves and their Cattle. What comparison of Fifty thousand souls with what there must have been in the time of Jehoshaphat to make up twelve hundred thousand Fight∣ing-men? There likewise came back about fifteen hundred,Ibid. 8. and we may judge, there were several other Troops. Under the first Kings of Persia they were very Feeble; hated by Strangers their Neighbours, chief∣ly by the Samaritans, exposed to their affronts and Calumnies, and ready to have their throats cut by their Enemies upon the least order of the great King, as
we see by that cruel Edict, which Haman obtained against them,Esth. 3. 12. and from the direful Effects whereof they were preserved by Esther. Unable were they to finish the building of the Temple untill twenty years after their first Return; and it took 'em up above sixty years more to compleat the Walls of Jerusalem, which was thus fourscore years in Re-establishing. They did what they could to find out their ancient Inheritances, and to keep up the old divisions of their Fami∣lies. For that purpose Esdras gathers all the Genealogies, that are in the beginning of the Chronicles, where he principally enlarges up∣on the three Tribes of Judah, Levi and Benjamin, and very carefully and warily sets down their Habi∣tations.1 Esdr. 11. 3. For the peopling Jeru∣salem, they received all such as were willing to dwell there; which without doubt distracted the order of the Partages: Yet it was just, that those present should possess the Lands of those, who would not return, or who were no more to be found. So in the
later times Joseph resided at Naza∣reth in Galilee, tho his Family was originally of Bethlehem. Anna the Prophetess, tho of the Tribe of A∣ser dwelt at Jerusalem; but they still knew, of what Tribe they were; they had preserved their Genealogies, as we may see by that of Joseph, who was but a poor Artisan. The Priests especially were very careful to ally them∣selves only to Women of their own Tribe;1 Contr. App. 2. and Josephus shows the precautions, they used therein e∣ven in his time. To return to their Reestablishment, the Coun∣try must needs have been very poor, since Herodotus, who lived at the same time, comprizes Syria, Phaenicia, Palestine, and the Isle of Cyprus under one Government, which payed to Darius no more than three hundred and fifty Ta∣lents Tribute, as one of the lesser Provinces, whereas that of Baby∣lon alone did pay a thousand. By little and little the Jews Reestablished themselves, and in the rest of the Persian Monarchy they lived very peaceably in a kind of
Republick, govern'd by the High Priest and the Council of Seventy one Elders. They had never been so faithful to the true God; and since their Return from the Cap∣tivity, there was no more talk of Ido∣latry amongst them. So sensible had they been made by that severe punishment, and the accomplish∣ment of so many Prophecies. 'Tis true, the Apostates had the Liber∣ty to continue among the Infidels; yet thus there appeared no Jews, but such as were really so. The Greeks began then to be ac∣quainted with the Jews in Egypt and Syria, whither they often tra∣velled, and they gained much by this commerce, if we may believe the most ancient Christian Authors, as Justin Martyr and Clemens Alex∣andrinus. For they assure us, that the Greek Poets, Legislators and Philosophers learnt their best Doctrines of the Jews. And in∣deed Solon made a Voyage into Egypt; and the Laws, which he gave the Athenians, had a great coherence with the Laws of Moses. Pythagoras was a long time in E∣Egypt,
and went to Babylon in Cambyses's time; so that he had seen the Jews, and might have conversed with them. Plato studi∣ed several years in Egypt, and he makes Socrates speak so many ex∣cellent things, founded upon the Principles, which Moses taught, that we may conjecture, he had a knowledge of them. The Jews did really practise, what he pro∣poses best in his Common-wealth and in his Laws; every one to live by his own Labour, without Luxury and Ambition, without being liable to be ruined, and growing too Rich, Counting Justice for the greatest good, avoiding all change and novelty. In the Per∣sons of Moses, David, and Solomon we find examples of that Wise-man, whom he wished for the Govern∣ment of a State, and the rendring it happy, and whom he durst not hope for in the Train of all Ages. In divers places he relates certain Traditions, without supporting 'em with any proof, the Autho∣rity of which he Reverences, and which manifestly are parts of the
true Doctrine, touching the Judg∣ing of men after their Death, and the State of another Life. If Pla∣to and the other Grecians had not learnt those great truths imme∣diately from the Jews, they had learnt them at least from the other Orientals, who being much nearer the source of Mankind, and hav∣ing writings much more Ancient than the Greeks, had preserved many Traditions more of the first men, tho involved in many Fables. CAP. III. The State of the Jews under the Macedonians. THe Conquest of Alexander made the Jews much more known to the Greeks, whose Sub∣jects they became. Josephus brings Proofs thereof from the Testimo∣nies of Clearchus the Disciple of Aristotle, and of Hecateus the Ab∣derite. They continued to live ac∣cording
to their Laws under the Protection of the Macedonian Princes, as they had done under the Persian. But as they were be∣twixt the Kings of Syria and of Egypt,Jos. 1. con∣tr. Ap. 8. sometimes they obey'd the one,2 Cont. Ap. and sometimes the other, acording as those Kings were strongest: They were well or ill used according to the humour or interest of the Kings, and the cre∣dit of their Enemies. Alexander the Great being satisfyed of their Affection and Fidelity, gave them Samaria, and exempted 'em from Tribute: And when he built A∣lexandria, he setled Jews there with the other Citizens, inso∣much as they went likewise un∣der the name of Macedonians. Indeed,Josep. 12. Antiq. the first of the Ptolomys having taken Jerusalem by surprize, carryed away a great number of the Jews Captive into Egypt, and scattered them as far as into the Country of Cyrene. But after∣wards knowing how Religious and faithful they were to their Oaths, he put 'em into his Garri∣sons, and treated them so kindly
that he engaged several others to come into his service. His Son Philadelphus set all the Jews free, who were Slaves in his Domini∣ons,Ibid. 12. and sent great Presents to Je∣rusalem in favour of the Translati∣on,Antiq. 2. which he caused to be made of their Law. They were likewise favoured by several Kings of Syria, Seleucus Nicanor gave them the right of Citizens in the Towns he built in the Lesser Asia and the lower Syria, even in Antioch his Capital Ci∣ty, with priviledges, which were perpetuated under the Romans. Antiochus the great, having receiv∣ed many services from the Jews, granted Immunities and a very gra∣cious Charter to the City of Jeru∣salem: And for to secure Lydia and Phrygia, which were not firm e∣nough in their Obedience to him, there he establisht Colonies of Jews; granting 'em places to build in, and Lands to Cultivate. The first Pri∣viledge, which the Jews ever crav∣ed on those occasions, was the li∣berty of exercising their Religion, and observing their Law. But o∣therwise
they could not exempt themselves from being much tainted with the Manners of the Greeks, as they had been with those of the Chaldeans, and others: especially they were obliged to speak the Greek Tongue, which then became the Ʋniversal one through the East, and did always obtain as long as the Roman Empire subsisted there. From whence it proceeds, that se∣veral took Grecian names, as Ari∣stobulus, Philo, Andrew, Philip, or disguised with Greek the Hebrew names, as Jason for Jesus, Simon for Simeon, Hierosolyma for Jeru∣salem. I believe, it was about that time, that the Jews passed the Seas, and setled in Europe. For those, who could speak Greek, and were already accustom'd to live with the Grecians in Asia, Syria and E∣gypt, might easily dwell in all the Countries of the Grecian Empire, even in Macedonia and Achaia, ac∣cording as they found most Conve∣nience and liberty. We see like∣wise, that St. Paul met with a vast number in all the Cities of Grecce,
when he went to Preach the Gos∣pel there, near two hundred and fifty years after the time of Antio∣chus the Great. These Half Gre∣cian Jews were those, whom the Orientals called Hellenists: And to the Gentiles they applyed the name of Hellenes, which properly signi∣fies Grecians: So that with St. Paul Greek and Gentile are the same things. The Jews could not thus be in∣termixt with the Greeks, but the Grecians, being then very curious, would pry into their Religion and their Laws, and chiefly, since the sacred Books were Translated. The Sages and the true Philosophers admired them, as we may judge by what Strabo has written thereof a longtime after:Strab. lib. 16. But most of the Greks of that Age, were uncapable of re∣lishing the Manners and Maxims of the Jews. These were too Grave and serious for them, who were effeminated by the Asiatic Luxury,Ut primum positisnuga ri Greciabel lis Horat. 2. Epist. 1. and who no longer em∣ployed their time but in Gimcracks and trifles. The truth is, they had a vast Multitude of Philoso∣phers;
but most of 'em conten∣ed themselves with barely discou∣sing of Virtue, and heating them∣selves in Dispute. All the Rest of the Grecians were taken up with the curiosity and love of fine Art▪ and they had a peculiar Knac that way. Some set themselves to Rhetorick, others to Poetry or Musick. The Painters, Engravers and Architects were thought very considerable and lofty People. O∣thers gave themselves wholly over to Gymnasticks for the forming their Bodies, lest they should be worsted in wrastling. Others pitcht upon Geometry, Astronomy and natural Philosophy. There were none but Scholars, and fine Wits, such as were curious and I∣dle, of all sorts. The Manners and Principles, of the Romans were then much more solid.Romae dulce diu fuit & solenne re∣culsa mane domo, &c. They only applyed them∣selves to Agriculture, to the Stu∣dy of the Law, and to Tacticks, and willingly relinquish'd the Glo∣ty of excelling in the Politer Arts and curious Sciences to the Grecians,Horat. Ibid. excudent a∣lii spirantia mollius ra. An. v. 847. for to Govern Kingdoms, and
ut Chains on the necks of Con∣er'd Nations,Jos. cont. App. l. 1. c. 4. & l. 2. c. 6. making that (as irgil saies) their prime business. The serious humour of the Jews proceeded much farther,Orig. cont. Cels. l. 5. since they placed their Principal Study in Morality and in the service of God.Judeorum mos tristis absurdusque Tacit. 5. Hist. init. Whereof we have a rare example in the Book of Ecclesiasti∣cus, written at that time. Yet it was for this very reason, that the Greeks termed them Ignorant, see∣ing they only aimed at the know∣ledge of their own Law. They called them Barbarians, a name which they gave to all those, that were not Greeks, and despis'd them more than other Strangers, by rea∣son of their Religion, which seemed to them morose and absurd. They saw the Jews abstain from Debauchery, not out of Oeconomy and Policy, but a Principle of Conscience. To them this seemed too severe; and above all they were offended at the repose of the Sab∣bath, at their feasts, and the di∣stinction of Meats. Add to this, that the horrour of Idolatry made the Jews reject
Sculpture and Painting, and kept them from listning to the Fable of the Poets, and reading of their Writings. What an indignati∣on would it raise in a Grammari∣on or a Rapsodist to see a Jew tram∣ple upon Homer, and term him a false Prophet and an Impostour shew the Lewd and absurd things in the Genealogies of the Gods, in their Metamorphoses, & their Amours. How could it be endur'd, that he should detest the Infamies of the Stage, and the Abominations in the Ceremonies of Bacchus and Venus▪ In short that he should maintain, that there was no God but his, who was the true God, and that they were the only People upon Earth, who knew the truth as to Religi∣on and the conduct of Manners? The Jews were so much the less hearkned to, in that they were not skill'd in making excellent Haran∣gues, or in forming and Figuring of Arguments; and that for a proof of those great truths, they only alledged matters of Fact, i.e. the mighty Miracles that God had done in the sight of their Forefathers:
Now the commonalty of the Greeks did not distinguish those Miracles from the Prodigies, they also re∣lated in their Fables: And the Phi∣losophers believed them impossible, because they did not argue but from the Rules and methods of nature, which they held necessary of an absolute Necessity. The Greeks being thus disposed,See the two whole Books of Josephus against Ap∣pion. very willingly open'd their Ears to the Calumnies of the Phenicians, Egyptians, and other Enemies of the Jews. And from hence with∣out question came those silly and impertinent Fables, which Tacitus so seriously tells us, when he would unfold the Origine of the Jews,5 Hist. and act the learned Histori∣an, and which we likewise see in Justin, who had been also doused in the same Spring. But beside those lyes, which might easily be slighted, the Greeks went on to Violence and Persecu∣tion. Thus Ptolomee Philopater af∣ter having lost the battle of Raphia discharged his choler against them, and his Son Epiphanes irritated at his having been hindred from en∣tring
into the Sanctuary, would needs expose them to Elephants Under Seleucus Philopater King of Syria,2 Macc. 3. 7. &c. Heliodorus came to pillage the sacred Treasures, and was on∣ly lett from doing so by a Miracle. In a word, under Antiochus his Suc∣cessours began the greatest Persecu∣tion,1 Mac. 1. 43. &c. they ever suffered, which may at least be equall'd with any the Christians afterwards under∣went. And indeed among the Jews were the first Martyrs, that we know of, for the cause of God and his holy Law, to Wit, the three Companions of Daniel,Dan. 3. 16. 616. 14. 30 who were put into the Furnace; and himself, when exposed to the Li∣ons, had the merit of Martyrdome, but God perform'd Miracles in their Preservation:2 Macc. 6. 18. 2. Eleazar, the Seven Brethren, and others, whom the History of the Maccabees does mention, gave up their Lives for God and for the Law of their Fore∣fathers; and 'tis the first example, that I meet withal, in all Story of that kind of Vertue. We can see no infidels before that time, nor e∣ven Philosophers, who chose rather
to suffer Death by the most cruel Punishments, than to violate their Religion, and the Laws of their Country. True, there were Jews, who gave way to the Persecution, but such as had so intirely renounc'd their Religion and Laws, as to make use of Artifices to hide their Circumcision; so that they were no longer counted Jews. And those, who continued faithful, were so Zealous for their Law and Liberty, that at last they took up Arms to defend it against the Kings of Syria, who openly violated all the Priviledges, which the Persian Kings had grant∣ed them, and which had been allowed 'em by Alexander and the other Macedonian Kings.
CAP. XXX. The Reign of the Asmonians. THus are we come to the time of the Maccabees, when the Jewish nation did recover it self, and appear with a new Lustre. They were no longer those poor People, who only thought of Liv∣ing in peace under the conduct of their High-Priest and Elders; ve∣ry happy in having the Liberty to cultivate their Lands, and serve the God of Heaven after their own Mode. A State it was wholly In∣dependent, and supported it self by good Troops, Strong Places▪ and Allyances not only with the Neighbouring Princes, but with far distant States, and with Rome it self. The Egyptian and Syria Kings, who had treated 'em so illwere afterwards constrained to Court their Friendship.Joseph. Antiq. 13, 17. The Jews made great Conquests. John Hyr∣can took Sichem and Gerizem, and
ruin'd the Temple of the Sama∣ritans: So absolute was he in all the Land of Israel. He extended his Conquests into Syria, where he took many Cities after the Death of Antiochus Sidetes, and into Idu∣mea, which he so entirely subdu∣ed, as to oblige the Idumeans to Circumcise themselves, and to ob∣serve the Mosaical Law, as being incorporated with the Nation of the Jews. His Son Aristobulus add∣ed the marks of Royalty to the real Power, taking the Diadem, and the title of Kings,Ibid. 13. 20 21. 22. and Alex∣ander Jaddaeus made likewise sundry Conquests But this glory of the Jews was of a short continuance. Where∣as the weakning of the Kingdoms of Syria and Egypt had made ve∣ry much for their Elevation, the total ruine of those two Kingdomes drew theirs along with it through the immense increase of the Ro∣mans power. And their Dome∣stick divisions also much contribu∣d thereto by the perpetual Misun∣derstanding of the two Sons of A∣xander Jannaeus, Hyrcanus and A∣ristobulus.
In short, they enjoy'd their Liberty but eighty years since Simon had been declared Head of the Nation,1 Mac. 14. 41. after having cast off the Yoak of the Grecians, untill that Pompey's being called in by Hir∣canus took Jerusalem, entred into the Temple, and made the Jews tributary. They were afterwards above twenty years in a miserable condition, divided by the Parties of the two Brothers, and pillaged by the Romans, who carryed away above 700 Millions at several times.Jos. Antiq. 14. 12. After the defeat of Brutus and Cassius, the Parthians taking ad∣vantage of the weakness of Mark, Anthony, who governed the East rendred 'emselves Masters of Syria and Palestine, and carryed way Hyr∣canus. In all that time of the Ro∣man Civil Wars, and the Odds which the Parthians got of them Palestine was exposed to great De∣solations by the Passages of so ma∣ny Armies of divers Nations, an by the Incursions of the Neigh∣bouring People, particularly of th Arabians.Ib. l. 15. 'Tis true, it recruited it self
little under Herod. He brought thither Peace and Abundance: He was Powerful, Rich, and Magni∣ficent. But we cannot say, the Jews were a free People in his time. He was not free himself, but wholly depended on the Roman Emperours. He was a Stranger, Originally an Idumean: He had no Religion, and only kept up an out∣side of it, as an Instrument of his Policy. He utterly pull'd down the Succession of High-Priests, making one Hananeel to come from Babylon, a contemptible Wretch, tho of the Sacerdotal Race. Since which time there were no High-Priests, but whom and as long as the King pleased. After the Death of Herod, we must no longer reckon any Power in Judea: His Children only con∣served parts of his Kingdome, nor did they keep 'em long. Judea it self had Roman Governours, depend∣ing on the Proconsul of Syria. In a word, the Jews were banish'd from thence, and reduced to the State they are in at this day. So this is the last Posture, we must
consider them in, since their Liber∣ty under Simon and the Asmonians, untill their ruine under Vespasian. Which is a space of 200 years, com∣prehending the greatest part of the History of the Maccabees, and all that of the New Testament, where∣in the Manners of the Jews are different, from what they were in former times. CAP. XXXI. Manners of the Jews in the later times. WIth several Nations were the Jews intermingled. Some of 'em were setled in every nation under Heaven, as the Scripture say's; of whom divers came to dwell in Judea,Act. 2. 5. or at least took thither some Journey of Devotion, to Sa∣crifice in the Temple, where it was only permitted them so to do. Moreover, there were always from time to time some Gentiles, who were converted, and became Pro∣selytes.
So that the Jews were no longer (properly speaking) one sole People, using the same Tongue and the same Manners, but seve∣ral Nations, who began to reas∣semble under the same Religion: However they consider'd one ano∣ther as Brethren, and helped one another, in whatsoever part of the World they were dispersed. They exercised Hospitality towards all Travellers their Country-men, and assisted the poor of all Provinces, but chiefly of Judea. As those, who lived afar off, could not pay the Tenths and first Fruits in their Kind, nor come to the Temple to make their oblations at all the Feasts, they converted into Money all that was God's due: And all those Contributions being gathered toge∣ther made a considerable Tribute, which each Province sent every year to Jerusalem for the Charge of Sacrifices,Jos. 14. the Maintenance of the Priests and the poor.Ant. 12. This is that Judaic Gold which Tully speaks of.Pro flacco. In Judea the Jews were govern'd (as before) by the council of 71
old men which they called the Sanhedrim, from a corrupted Greek word: And these were the Elders of the People, mention'd in the Gospel. There were likewise (as has been said) three and twenty Judges in each City. 'Tis to that time we must principally refer all that the Talmud say's of the Form of Judgments,C Sanhedr. Maccoth. and the Execution of Justice. The Jews of Judea were ever much addicted to Husbandry, to the breeding of Cattle, and to the Management of a Country-Farm. There are some Medals yet remain∣ing of the Time of the Maccabees, wherein we see Ears of Corn and Measures, to shew the Fertility of the Country, and the honour they set upon cultivating it. Most of the Parables in the Gospel are drawn from a Country-life; The Sow∣er, the good Corn, the Tares, the Vine, the good Tree, the Fruitless-tree, the strayed Sheep, the good Shepherd; and all this oft spoken in Cities, and Jerusalem it self. The old bottom and ground-work of Principles and Manners
do never change in any Nation. There are still Husband-men of good Quality in Sicily and Italy: and there will evermore be Hun∣ers among the Germans. Several Parables show, that the Traffick of money was very com∣mon amongst the Jews, and that they had Bankers and Usurers by Profession. Several turned Publi∣cans, that is, Farmers of Tri∣butes and Impositions; tho that Employ brought a Publick Odium upon them.Joseph. 12. We have a famous Example hereof in that Joseph Son of Tobias,Antiqu. 4. who under Ptolomee E∣piphanes got to be chief Commissio∣ner of the Tributes of all Syria and henicia, and became extraordina∣ry Rich. There were also divers Handicraftsmen amongst the Jews, whereof the Apostles and JESUS CHRIST himself are illustri∣ous Examples. But what is most remarkable, is, that St. Paul, tho brought up in Learning knew a Trade too: And the Jews relate the same thing of their most famous Rabbins.
CAP. XXXII. Sects and Superstitions. THen it was, that the difference of Sects came into play. A little after the Death of Judas Macchabaeus and under his Brother Jonathas,Jos. 12. An∣tiq. 9. 18. they began to talk of Pharisees and Sadducees. To the Text of the Law the Pharisees joyn∣ed the Traditions of their Fathers,2 War. 12. which had been preserved with∣out writing; and tho at the bottom they maintained sound Doctrine, they huddled in it many Superstiti∣ons. The Sadducees took the Scri∣pture literally, and pretended, it did not oblige 'em to believe the Resurrection or the Immortality of the Soul; or that there were An∣gels or Spirits. So that they only served God for Temporal Rewards, and gave scope to the Pleasures of sence. Most part of the Grandees and the Rich men were Sadducees, and several among the Priests. The Populace was more favourable
to the Pharisees for their external show of Piety; and Queen Alex∣andra gave them a great power during the Minority of her Chil∣dren. There was a third Sect that of the Essens,See. Jos. 2. whose Doctrine we don't see was different from the Pharisees,H. War. 12. but their Manners were more pure. In good earnest they applyed themselves to the Study and Practice of Virtue, they lived very retir'd, far from Cities: Their Estates were in common, their Food very plain. They spent much time in prayer, and the Meditation of the Law. Their way of Living did much resemble that of the Prophets and Rechabites▪ Some of them abstain'd from Wo∣men, and led a life wholly Con∣templative, so perfect, that seve∣ral of the Fathers have taken 'em for Christians. Being the same, that Philo has describ'd under the name of Therapeutae. The Pharisees lived in the Commerce of the World: Most part addicted to their interests, Ambitious, Stingy.
They pretended to an extream exact∣ness in the outward Practice of the Law. The Tenths they gave not only of greater Fruits but of Lesser Herbs, Cummin,Mat. 23. 23 Mint, and Annis. They took mighty Care to wash them∣selves;Mar. 7. 4. and to purify their Cups; their Vessels, and all their Move∣ables. They kept the Sabbath with so much Scruple, that they took it ill, if People should rub Ears of Corn as they past by.Mat. 12. They fasted often,Luk. 18. 12 and many of 'em twice aweek, Monday and Thurs∣days. On their Forehead and their left Arm they wore Writings, wherein were some Passages of the Law: For it was thus, that ac∣cording to the letter they took the Commandment of having al∣ways the Law of God before their Eyes and in their Hands; and they wore those Scroles much bigger than the other Jews. At the Bor∣ders of their Vestments also they wore Fringes of different Colours, to satisfie another Commandment, and they wore them much larger than others did,Numb. 15. 38. that their Devoti∣on might be known to the People.
They gave Alms in publick,Mat. 6. 2. 5. 16. they prayed in the Market Places and they coloured their face with yellow, that they might seem to fast the more. They thought it a great Injury to be toucht by an Impure Wretch, and they held for such not only the Gentiles and the Notorious Sinners, but all those that exercised odious Professions. In short, all their Devotion was only Pride and Inte∣rest: They seduced Ignorant Peo∣ple by their fine Discourses, and bigotted Women, who threw a∣way their Estates,Mat. 23. 14. to enrich them: and under the Pretence, they were the People of God, and the Depo∣sitors of his Law, they despised the Greeks and Romans, and all the Nations of the Earth. In the Jewish Books we see still those Traditions of the Pharisees whereof they made then so horri∣ble a Mystery, and which were written about an Hundred years after the Resurrection of JESUS CHRIST. 'Tis impossible for those, that have been brought up in other Maxims to imagine the
frivolous and impertinent Questi∣ons, wherewith those Books are stuffed, viz. Whether it be permit∣ted on the Sabbath day to mount on an Ass to carry him to Water, or whether you must hold him by the Neck; whether one might walk the same day Lands newly sowed, since he runs a hazard of carrying away some Grains with his feet, and consequently of sow∣ing them. Concerning the Purifi∣cation of old Leven before the Passeover; whether it be necessary to renew the purifying of an House, when you have seen a Mouse pass in it with a Crum of Bread; whether it be Lawful to keep pasted Paper, or a Plaister, wherein there is any Flower; whe∣ther after the old Leaven is burnt, it be permitted to eat, what has been baked with the coals, which remains thereof. And a million of other cases of Conscience of the like force, which the Talmud is full of with it's Commentaries. Thus the Jews forgot the no∣ble Grandeur of the Law of God, to apply themselves to low and
pitiful things: And they were found very gross and very igno∣rant in Comparison of the Greeks, who in their Schools treated of more useful and more elevated Questions, or in Physicks or Mora∣lity, and who had at least a sweet Politeness, if they had not Vertue. Not but that there were alway some Jews more curious than others to speak Greek well, who read the Books of the Grecians, and imbibed their Learning in Grammer, Rheto∣rick and Philosophy. Such was Ari∣stobulus a Peripatetick Philosopher and Preceptor of Ptolomee Philo∣metor. Such were Eupolemus, Demetrius, and the two Philo's. There were Historians also, who wrote in Greek, and after the Gre∣cian manner, as Jason the Cyrene∣an and the Authour of the Second Book of Maccabees,2 Mac. 2. 24. who has a∣bridg'd it, and as Josephus. It was at Alexandria, where most of those Jews were, who Studied the learn∣ing of the Greeks. The other Jews contented themselves with speaking Greek, to be understood, that is, grosly, and keeping the na∣tural
turn of their own Tongue. And 'tis in that Barbarous Greek the New Testament is written. The Apostles and Evangelists con∣tented themselves with a clearness and brevity of Style, despising all the Ornaments of Language, and making use of what words were the most proper to be understood by the Common People of their na∣tion: Insomuch as for the well apprehending their Greek, 'tis re∣quisite to know Hebrew and Syriack. The Jews of these latter times were much exercis'd in reading of the Law and the holy Scripture. They thought it not enough to explain it literally: They found out there∣in several figurative senses by Alle∣gories and divers Appropriations. We see it not only in the new Te∣stament and the Writings of the most Ancient Fathers, who have disputed against them,V Justin. in Tryph. Bere∣sith. rabba. &c. but in the Talmud, and the oldest Hebrew Commentaries on the Law, which they call the great Genesis, the great Exodus, and so of others. Those Figurative senses they held by Traditions from their Fathers.
But in short, the Manners of those Jews were very bad and ve∣ry much corrupted. They were sillily proud of being of the Race of Abraham, & pufft up with the promi∣ses of the Messias his Reign, which they knew to be at hand, and which they formed to themselves all full of Vanquishments and Tem∣poral Prosperity. They were in∣teressed, avaricious and sordid, espe∣cially the Pharisees, the greatest Hypocrites. They were unfaith∣ful and inconstant, always ready for Sedition and Revolt, under pre∣tence of casting off the Yoak of the Gentiles. In a word, they were violent, Boysterous and cru∣el, as we see by what they made JESUS CHRIST and his A∣postles suffer, and by the unheard of Mischiefs they did to one ano∣ther, both during all the Civil Wars and the last Siege of Jerusalem.
CAP. XXXIII. The true Israelites. IT was however among that Peo∣ple, the Tradition of vertue as well as that of Doctrine and Re∣ligion was preserved. In those later times they had still very rare Examples of Godliness; Zacharias, old Simeon, the Learned Gamaliel, and many others set down in the History of the New Testament. All those holy Personages, and generally all Spiritual Jews, cir∣cumcised in Heart as well as Bo∣dy, were Children of Abraham, much rather by imitation of his Faith than by their own Extracti∣on. With a most steady Faith they believed in the Prophesies and Promises of God: They waited impatienly for the Redemption of Israel, and the coming of the Messi∣as, after which they long'd and sighed. But they were sensible, that it behoov'd them not to con∣fine their Hopes to this life; they
belived the Resurrection, and the Kingdom of Heaven. So that the Blessing of the Gospel coming upon such holy Dispositions, it was easy to make perfect Christi∣ans of those true Israelites. FINIS. Some Books Printed for and Sold by W. Freeman over against the Devil-Tavern by Temple-Bar in Fleet-street. SCarrons Novels. viz. The Fruitless Precaution. The Hy∣ocrites. The Innocent Adultery. The Judge in his own Cause. The ival Brothers. The Invisible istriss. The Chastisement of varice. The unexspected Choice. endred into English with some dditions. By John Davis of Kid∣elly. In Oct. 1683. The Clarks Manual, or an Ex∣act
Collection of the most approv∣ed Forms of Declarations, Pleas, general Issues, Judgments, Demur∣rers, and most kind of Writs now used in the Court of Kings Bench. With necessary Instructions to all Clerks, Attornies and Sollicitors in the use of the same. The second Edition in Octav. 1682. An Infallible way to Content∣ment in the midst of Publick or Personal Calamities. Together with the Christians Courage and Encouragement against evil Tid∣ings, and the fear of Death. In 12. The Court of the Gentiles, Part 4, of Reform'd Philosophy Book 3, of Divine predetermination; where∣in the nature of Divine Predetermina∣tion is fully Explicated and Demon∣strated, both in the general, as also more Particularly as to the substrate matter or Entitative Act of Sin: With a Vindication of Calvinists and others from that Blasphemous Impu∣tation of making God the Author of Sin. By Theophilus Gale in Quart 1682.
