H2070 12684902 65750
THE PROTESTANTS Wonderment, OR, A strange and unheard of Orai∣son put up by the Papists, found in the pocket of Captain Iames Rauley, a Rebell in Ireland: Sent from Dublin, in a Letter of Note by Captain Edmond Hippisley, to Sir Iohn Hippisley Knight, a Mem∣ber of the House of Commons. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Franke, and are to be sold at his shop next doore to the Kings head in Fleetstreet, 1642.
Sir, THe Lord of Antrim is not in the Rebellion as yet, but is much mi∣strusted, hee will be by reason hee is now gone to the County of Kil∣dare, where at the first this businesse was begun: the Rebels would willingly come in: if they could but once heare of a Pro∣clamation, that they should have the liber∣ty of their Conscience, for some such thing they much expect, if they bee not mistaken of their ayme. Sir, this Prayer I tooke out of a Rebels pocket that I killed, one Iames Rauley, a
Captaine of the Rebels, who cryed for quarter, when I had sheathed my sword in his bowels, fearing that I should bee too troublesome. I rest now what I al∣ways was, Sir, your most obedient and most affectionate servant till death. From Dublin this tenth of February, 1641.
THis Oraison was found on the Tomb of our blessed Lady, and is of such ef∣fect, that whosoever will have the same, or say it daily, or carrie it about him, shall be safe from fire, water, and skirmish of battaile, and also from noysome hanting of spirits. Moreover, whosoever shall say a Pater, Ave, and Creed, daily to the honour of holy and miraculous Virgin Mary, shee will visably shew her selfe unto him three times before his death. O Most sweet Lord Iesus Christ, onely Son of the omnipotent Father, God of Angels, and onely Son of the most gra∣cious Virgin Mary, help me a sinner, and save me from all present dangers wherein I am. Most excellent and blessed Virgin to be praised, to pray and intercesse for me a miserable sinner to thy welbeloved Son. O chast and honourable woman, thou art the Mother of Angels and Archangels, help me from all present evills, and all to come. O flower of Patriarks. O shining
brightnesse of the Apostles, O hope of glory. O beauty of Virgins. O high thoughts of Angels and Archangels. O most sweet woman, I most humbly be∣seech thee not to forsake mee at the trem∣bling time of my death, when my soule shall be seperated from my body, where∣by I may see my selfe in overlasting glory by him. O flower and sweetest foundati∣on of all sweetnesse. O star of Christ. O haven of health. O Queene of penitent offenders, hope of the faithfull Archangels, thou whose conversation is the onely re∣creation of the Angels and Archangels. O most honourable Lady of all sweetnesse and fortitude, thou art the most whole∣som'st medicine of all sores. Thou are the labour of all vertues, through thee doe ever Angels and Archangels reioyce. O Mother of mercy look on me with thine owne mercifull eyes. And I commit me to thy most blessed armes, to inspire my soule and body, and my thoughts, so thus
it pleaseth thee and thine owne beloved Sonne Iesus Christ. Pater, Ave, and Creed. MOst glorious Virgin, let thy flowing grace defend mee from the danger of each place, grant that thy merits once may make mee rise from Tombe, a∣bove the spangled Christall Skie, grant to my Countrey, I may so well end, that I may prayse thee eternally. AMEN. I found this in the pocket of a Captain of the Rebels, Captain Iames Rauley. FINIS.
