H2373 R34943 14913097 102884
THE LEARNED READINGS OF Sir Robert Holbourne, Knight, Attorney General to King Charles I. UPON The STATUTE of 25 Edw. 3. Cap. 2. Being the Statute of TREASONS. To which is added, Cases of Prerogative. Treason. Misprision of Treason. Felony, &c. Written by the Right Honourable FRANCIS BACON, Lord Verulam, Viscount St. Alban. And now Reprinted for the Publick Benefit. Indici conjurationis praemia constituta. Salust. in Conjur. Catil. LONDON, Printed for Sam. Heyrick, at Grayes-Inn-Gate in Holborn, and Matthew Gilliflower, in Westminster-Hall, 1681.
ERRATA. PAge 5. Line 4. for Dejective, read Directive. pag. 20. lin. ult. for kill, read kills. pag. 21. lin. 12. for Case, r. Care. pag. 23. l. 14. for mysteries are, read mistress is. ibid. l. 15. for there read she. p. 35. l. 19. for without, read within. p. 36, l. 7. for Regne, read Rigne. p. 37. l. 10. for Aid, r. Ayel. ibid. l. 18. for Heires Facus, r. Haeres Factus. p. 49. l. 15. for I. S. r. I. D. p. 55. l. 6. for word, r. Ward. ibid. l. 14. l. 15. l. 17. for Costigase, read Cesty que use.
THE LEARNED Readings OF Robert Holbourne, Esq; Lecture I. BEfore the Statute, Tres∣passes were made Fe∣lonies, & Felonies were made Treasons; and we could
not judge which were Felo∣nies, and which were Treasons, but it did rest in the breast of the Judges that were in those days. For the prevent∣ing of which mischief, this Statute, which I now Read upon, was made, which hath two Parts:The parts of the Sta∣tute are first De∣clarative. A Declarative part; and that doth declare what shall hereafter be judg∣ed Treason: And Treason also is commonly divided into two parts; that is, First,High Trea∣son. High Treason, that is, against the Person of the King; and that will fall out for this days Work. Second∣ly,Petty Trea∣son. Petty Treason, which is in the latter part of the Sta∣tute,
as will appear here∣after. The second part of this Statute is the Dejective part,And se∣condly Dejective High Trea∣son. and directs the Judges how far to proceed upon a Fact that is not within the Sta∣tute. High Treason is against the person of the King, or against his Government, viz. as against his Judges, Seals, and Coyns. These are the Divisions that I shall make of this Law. The definition of Treason. It is Lesa Majest.The defi∣nition of Treason. which comprehends the Person of
the King, and his Officers of Justice. For the Person of the King and the Treasons that are committed more im∣mediately against his Person and they are Acts and Per∣sons. Persons, they are of two sorts; Persons against whom and the Persons by whom these Treasons are committed The Acts, and they are di∣vers. As first, Compassing th Death of the King: And fo explanation of this word Compassing, it is an old word signifying not a bringing t pass only, but a going about as you shall find it in Britto
and the Mir. of Just. but it is since called in Latine Machi∣natio, and a going about,1 Mar. Bro. tit. Treas. 24. or compassing is Treason, though no effect do follow; as a compassing to kill the King, though he be not kild; so a compassing without any other Act is Treason: But there may be an Act done that doth effect the death of the King, and yet no Treason, if there be no compassing: as in the Case of Sir Walter Terril, who shooting at a Deer, his Ar∣row glanced against a Tree, and struck King William Ru∣fus upon the breast that he died:Hollings∣head. and this was not Trea∣son, because there was no
compassing. And so it is in the Case of a Physitian, as if the King takes Physick and dyes of the Physick working, yet if it be not notoriously gross, and it doth not ap∣pear that he did any way compass the Death of the King, this is not treason with∣in this Law; for in the Case of a common person, if a Physitian give one Physick, whereof he dyes, this is not Felony in him, although the Physitian had no License to practice Physick; for it is his fault that he will take Physick of him; and volenti non fit injuria. If the Prince in person assaults a man, and
drives him so hard against the Wall, that if he do not defend himself he will kill him, and he cannot do it without danger to the Prince; in that Case he ought not to defend himselfe, but ought rather to dye than hazard the person of the Prince, because he is Caput & salus Reipub. and yet Nature doth teach a man to defend himselfe a∣gainst all danger. And thus much for Acts without com∣passing. And yet some of these Acts that are without compas∣sing are left to the Jury to judge of, and some others are left to the Judges to judge of, as by presumption of
Law; as in Murder, the ought to be malice forethought, and yet if an Officer in executing of his Office b slain, this is Murder by th Law, and yet in this Cas there do not appear any ma¦lice fore-thought, and so in this Case the Law makes an Evidence for the Jury, and so in deeds of the like Cases. The second Act is Viola∣ting; and this word is deri∣ved of vi perdendo, but yet it may be done without any force at all. The third Act is Levying War against the King: And what shall be said of Levy∣ing War? that may be divers
ways; As if the Inhabitants of a Town will gather them∣selves together to pull down the Fences of a Common,See Saint John's ar∣gument in Sherly of Shefield's Case. in which they have no Interest or Common, nor ever had, this is Treason within this Law; but if they had an In∣terest or Common there, then it is no Treason: but if they shall do it by Force of Arms in a War-like manner, Qu. but in the first Case it is a Levying of War against this Government. Another Levying of War may be against the King,Nota. as if it be to the displacing of his Officers, as in the Earl of Essex his Case, in his com∣ing
to the City of London for to remove Officers that were about the Queen, this was Treason: and so it is also to the same purpose in 1 Mar. Dyer 24. and so it ap∣pears,1 Mar. Dy∣er 24. A man may Levy War against the King, although he hath no intent to meddle with the person of the King, or any way to hurt him; and so you shall find also in Bro. Tit. Treason 14.Brok tit. Treason 14. And if any Levy War without the King, this is a Levying of War within the Law,8 Hen. 8. 8 H. 8. If two conspire to Levy War, and one alone doth it, this is Treason in both. The fourth part is to Ad∣here
to the King's Enemies;Nota.nd first, who shall be said o be Enemies within this Law. econdly, who shall be said Adhering to them that are E∣emies within this Law. This word Enemy cannot extend o Subjects, for they are Re∣bels and no Enemies, and so it is exprest in the Irish Statutes:See Irish Statutes. and this Statute cannot be taken according o Equity, for it is a Penal Law, and of the greatest pe∣alty that is; and therefore he aiding of Rebels cannot be meant any way the aiding of he King's Enemies within this Law. Aiding the Enemies within or without is an aid∣ing
of those that come into the Land, or of those that are without. A Subject is of two sorts,Subjects two sorts. ratione originis, and a Subject ratione loci. A Subject ratione originis,1. Ratione originis. cannot be an Enemy, al∣though he doth Levy War (in respect of his Obedience) but a Rebel he shall be. A Subject ratione loci,2. Ratione loci. du∣ring his residence here, he can be no Enemy neither, but if he goeth over Sea, and then Levy War against this King∣dom, or any other of his Ma∣jesties Kingdoms, he is then an Enemy within this Law, and no Rebel.Dominium duplex. There is also Dominium
rectum, & Dominium utile, for f a man be born within the Dominium rectum, as that of Scotland in ancient time, and here he Levy War, he is an Enemy and no Rebel: but if e be born within the Domi∣ium utile, and Levy War, e is a Rebel, and not an E∣nemy. Aiding, is by sending them Aid, as of Victuals, or of Weapons, and the like, by giving of them Counsel, or y any other way, whereby hey may receive strength or comfort from him. Now for the persons by whom this Levying of War may be, and as to that all
Levies are within this Law as well Women as Men, for Women are comprehended under this word Man. Secondly, Persons of all Nations, that are within this Land, are within this Law▪ for as they shall have prote∣ction by the Laws of the Land, so they ought at their peril to take notice of the Law, so soon as they come into the Land; for they ought to have notice given them, and cannot alledge igno∣rance if it be not given them, especially in such Laws as this, that are so beneficial both the King and Kingdom. Thirdly, Persons of all De∣grees,
as a Queen that is mar∣ried to the King attempting he death of the King, is within this Law. A Forreign Ambassador is also within his Law; but if a Foreign King should come into this Land, by License, and here ompass the death of the King, he question will be how he hall be tried? for, he is a King here, and therefore ught to be tried per Pares, which he cannot be, for o∣her Honours are not allow∣ed here. Fourthly, all Ages are with∣n this Law, as in Folks which have knowledge, or men of non sanae memoriae, and
a mad man is also within this Law, as to that part of the Statute which concerns more immediately the Person of the King; for if any of them afore mentioned in this di∣vision shall compass his death it is Treason within the firs Clause, but not in the Clause of Levying War, as I shal shew you afterwards: but a man that is surdus, caecus & mutus, is not within this Law for it is impossible for him to have understanding. Now for the persons a∣gainst whom; a King befor his Coronation is within thi Law,Northum∣berland's Case. as it is in the Duke o Northumberland's Case, for h
is presently a King, as soon as the other King deceaseth, and there is no Interregnum; for the King, quatenus a King, never dieth, but he is said to Demise, when he departs this Life; and the King is Crown∣ed because he is a King, and not a King because he is Crowned; a King de facto, and not de jure, is a King within this Law;See 4 E. 4.1. 9 E. 4.12. as it is in 4 E. 4.1. and 9 E. 4.12. A King con∣jugal or marital, that takes to Wife the Queen of Eng∣land, is within this Law; a Queen that is married, al∣though the marriage be void, yet that Queen is within this Law; so is a Queen married
by Proxy; a Queen within Age is also within this Law. The first Case. I. S. after the Divorce of the Wife of the Grandchild,First Case. and Heir apparent to the Queen, doth violate her, and imagine the Death of the hus∣band, and declares this to I. D. and after kills the hus∣band of the Queen, and con∣spir'd to Levy War against the Queen, and delivers to I. D. money to buy Arms, and af∣ter becomes mad, and Aids the Enemies of the Queen within the Realm, and then kills the Queen.
The Conclusion is, First, I. S. is a Traytor within this Law, for killing the Hus∣band of the Queen, and for conspiring to Levy War, and for killing of the Queen, and in every one of these. The second Conclusion is, that I. S. is not a Traytor with∣in this Law, for imagining the death of the Grandchild; and yet he is within the Case of the Law, not for violating of his Wife, nor for aiding of the Enemies. I. S. is a Traytor within this Law, for killing the hus∣band of the Queen, but not within these words, That who∣soever shall conspire or compass
the death of the King; for as to that Clause he is not King, for the Queen is Regent, and not he, and so not within that Clause, nor the meaning of it, but he is within this word Companion; for he is as good a Companion to the Queen, as the Queen is to the King; and so within the same Rea∣son of Law: For the husband of the Queen, in such a Case, is in a better condition and plight than a Queen to a King, and so upon a stronger Rea∣son; but this you must take as a Rule that I have said be∣fore, viz. that this Statute is not to be taken by Equity; and this you shall find as an∣other
Rule, as well for the ex∣pounding this Statute as any other:Bro. Treas. for. 12.12. ass. pl. 30. that those Cases that stand upon the same Rea∣son shall be within the same Law, although not taken by Equity; for where there is the same identity, parity or majority of Reason in any Cases, there ought to be the same Law; as it is in the Sta∣tute of Gloucester concerning Waste, and in this our Sta∣tute, the mysteries are not named; yet there is within this Law, for if the Servant kills the Wife of his Master, knowing her to be his Ma∣sters Wife, this is adjudged Petty Treason by the Judge∣ment
of all the Judges of both Benches,Com. 87.6. Fitz. Com. 7.118. Brook tit. treas. 8. 19 H. 6.47. Com. 87.6. Fitz. Com. 7.118. Bro. Tit. Treason 8. For as well the Mistress as the Ma∣ster hath affiance in him, and he ought to give Reverence to his Mistress as well as his Master, and yet the Master is only named in this Statute; but in our Case, the express words are, That if any man shall Compass the death of the Kings Companion, it shall be Treason; and so there is an express proviso for him, being the Companion; for he is a Com∣panion to the Queen. A se∣cond Difference between our Case, and the Case of the Mi∣stress,
is, that she is his Mi∣stress, but gratia, and under the power of her Husband; but in our Case the King ma∣rital hath a Superiority over his Wife, as he is her Husband; and so our Case is a farre stronger Case. If a Child kills his Father, or Mother, this is Petty Trea∣son; and so it was also at the Common Law, before the ma∣king of this Statute,21 E. 3.17 Bro. tit. Sanctuar. 2. Bro. tit. Treas. 6. 21 E. 3.17. Bro. Tit. Sanct. 2. and Bro. Tit. Treas. 6. because there is a higher majority of Reason than that of a Servant, which is the Reason of the Submis∣sion and Duty that is to the Father and Mother from the
Child, and where there is a majority of Reason, or a pa∣rity of Reason for the one Case as there is for the other, there is always the same Law. But you will Object,1 & 2 Ph. & Mar. c. 9. there is a Statute made 1 & 2 Phil. & Mar. cap. 9. that if any shall imagine the death of the King, that it shall be Treason; and therefore he was not pro∣vided for before this Statute, and therefore this Statute was made: if it were Trea∣son before this Statute, then this Statute was made in vain and to no purpose. That that Statute doth pro∣vide as well for the preser∣vation of the Queen,Answ. as for
the King, and makes it Trea∣son for any to compass the death of the Queen, and therefore t cannot be concluded from hence, that it was not Trea∣son to compass her death be∣fore that Statute. The second Reason is, because that Statute doth provide for other mat∣ters, as it doth there appear. The next Point is the de∣claring of this his imaginati∣on to I. D. which is an Overt Act;1 Mar. Bro. tit. treas. 24. The se∣cond point for an overt Act is the de∣claring of his Mindand Inten∣tions to others, by such words as imply an Act to follow, or by bidding a man to do what he hath intended, or to do any thing that may tend to
his purpose, or by writing to declare his mind: but if a man have a thought of Kil∣ling the King, this is onely Primus motus; and although he afterwards tells another that he had such a thought this is no Overt Act; but i he doth cherish this thought then it becomes his own, and then he tells it to another, that he hath such an intention this is an Overt Act; for the words he doth speak, are words executory, and imply that he will do such an Act▪ Or if A. conspire with B. to kill the King, this is an Overt Act; but to imagine with himself is not, because it can∣not
come to be known: words of encouragement to others is an Overt Act also. For conspiring to levy War, is the next, and this is Trea∣son within this Law, al∣though it be not within the words of the Statute; but yet it is within the meaning and reason of the Statute: for how is it possible for any to Levy War, but he must con∣spire the death of the King,Nota.or his deposing at least? and the conspiring to do either of these, is Treason within this Law, as aforesaid; and that within this word Compas∣sing; which, as I said before, s of a very large extent, but
I must confess the Intention is not so bad as an actual Le∣vying of War, and yet it is as bad in him that doth in∣tend it. And this Levying o War doth mediately look a the person of the King▪ though not immediately; and so in that respect it is Trea∣son, and so it is of deposing; and so is the Statute of 1 E. 6. cap. 12. and so you shall find it in Doctor Storie's case, 13 Eliz: Dyer 298. b.1 E. 6.12. Dyer. Sto∣ry 's Case. 13 Eliz. Dyer 298. who did conspire with a Foreign Prince to invade this Land, and shewed him a means how to conquer this Kingdom, and yet there was no Act done by that Prince against
the Queen, yet this is adjudg∣ed Treason; and the reason there yielded, was, because this Invasion could not pos∣sibly be without great hazard and peril to the person of the Queen, which is a very full Case in proving of this point.19 H. 6.47. But a conspiring to Coyn Money, is not Treason within this Law, because it is not against the person of the King; but yet if two shall conspire to coyn Money, and one doth it alone without the other, yet this is Trea∣son in both. The third point is, that I. S. after he became mad, kills the Queen, this is Trea∣son
within this Law; first, because a man may counter∣feit himself to be mad, and he may do it so cunningly as it cannot be discerned whether he be mad or no. The second Reason, is, in respect of the great esteem that the Law gives to the per∣son of the King; for he is the Fountain of Justice: and for the proof of this point, that it may be understood, we ought to see what the Com∣mon Law was, before the ma∣king of this Statute, as to this Point; and then we ought to enquire and see how the Law is altered since the making of the Statute; and
by this means, we shall find out the Law and the reason thereof; it is true, that the Law, without special words, will not bind an Insant or a Mad-man, as to the punish∣ment of their Bodies, but yet it will extend to their Lands and Estates; but this our Law is no new Law, but on∣ly a Declarative Law, and in that Case general words will bind an Infant or a Mad∣man without any special words. That it was Treason at the Common Law is ap∣parent in Britton, and the Mirrour of Justice; and this Statute doth not declare who shall be Traytors, but what
shall be Treason, and there∣fore by this Act it is Treason in a Mad-man, or whomso∣ever shall commit it; for a Mad-man is not excepted out of this Law: and to make this appear more fully, you may be pleased to read the Case of Beverly,See Bever∣leys Case. Com. 124. in Com. 124. That a man that is non compos¦mentis may commit High Treason, although he can∣not commit Petty Treason, nor Felony:Daltons Just. 206. and so it is al∣so in Dalton's Justice of Peace 206. that if a man that is non compos mentis, shall kill the King, this is High Treason. Nay, Beverley's Case goes far∣ther, and sayes, That if he
shall offer only to kill the King, this is High Treason,Nota. because the King is Caput & salus Reipub. & à Capite bona valetudo transit in omnes: and for this Cause his person is so Sacred, that none must offer the least violence to him; but he is Reus criminis laesae Maje∣statis, & pereat unus, ne pe∣reant omnes. The second Conclusion, is, That I. S. is not a Traytor within this Law, for imagin∣ing the death of the Grand∣child; yet he is within the Care and Protection of the Law; for he is not within the Words of the Law, but with∣out the Intention and Reason
of the Law: for the words are, That if any man shall com∣pass the death of the Kings Eldest Son, that is Treason; but in the French Language, in which this Law was first written, it is Le Regne fils & heir, and yet if the Eldest Son dyes, the second Son is within the Law, because he is then the Eldest Son; and so it is of the third Son, for then he is also Heir Apparent, and he is within the intenti∣on and meaning of this Law. And so to this purpose is the Princes Case in Report 8. where it is,Princes Case 8. Report. that the Second Son shall be Duke of Cornwal after the death of the Eldest,
and yet it is only limited to the Eldest Son. A collateral Heir is also within this Sta∣tute, because, as he concei∣veth, this Statute intends to provide that the next Heir to the Crown shall be secured from danger. And the Case that may be likened to this, is that, where a Writ of Aid may be brought by the next Heir; for the Writ saith, Cujus haeres ipse est,F. N. B. 221 F. N. B. 221. so that it appears, that it lies only for the Heir Lineal or Collateral, Male or Female. The Eldest Daughter is also within our Law, Heires Facus is also a grand Heir within this Law; but this
imagining or compassing the Death of the Grandchild, or of any other Heir, is not Trea∣son, unless there be a suffici∣ent Declaration of it to an∣other: for no man can judge of the thoughts; for the ima∣gination only can be no O∣vert Act: and this Declara∣tion of his imagination or compassing to I. D. is not a sufficient Overt Act to make him a Traytor within this Law: for he told him that he had only such an imaginati∣on, which is but Primus mo∣tus; for he doth not say that he will do it in the Future Tense, for that may be Trea∣son, for that it doth imply
an Act to be done afterward; but the other is onely a∣gainst that is past. Then for violating the Wife after she is divorc'd, this is not Trea∣son within this Law. And yet the divorce is but a men∣sa & thoro, but it is such a divorce as deprives her of his Company, and so she is not his Companion within this Law: but yet she is his Wife, and a Wife divorc't a mensa & thoro shall have her divorce; because that divorce doth not dissolve the Mar∣riage, but she remains his Wife still; but yet if she hath any Children during that divorce, they are all
Bastards, because she is not to keep her Husband Com∣pany. A Queen Dowager is not within this Law, because she is not Companion to the King; that then is, and is not provided for by this Law: for the words of the Statute are, If any shall vio∣late the Kings Companion.
Lecture II. THE Second Lecture,The Se∣cond Le∣cture. according to my first Division is concerning the Government; and that is, First, in the Seal, which is Clavis Regni. The Second in his Money and Coyn. The Third, in his Offices. For the First, which are the Seals; and they are, first, The Great Seal. Secondly, the Privie Seal. And, Thirdly, the Seal of the Exchequer. And of all these Seals the Common Law takes special notice, as that
the King may grant to one Power to make one Attorney under the Privie Seale; and so is 37 H. 3.27. b. Co. 2.17. Lams Case;37 H. 3.27. Co. 2.17. Lams Case. and so of the other Seals: but our Law takes notice of the great Seal only as for point of Treason; for the words are exclusive to all other Seals; for that being the greatest, excludes all o∣ther inferior Seals that are the least. Now what shall be said of counterfeiting of this Great Seal? and that must be by making another Seal like to this, and for to Seal Patents with it: for, to make a Seal like the Great Seal, to put this to a piece of Wax onely,
is no counterfeiting of the Great Seal; but there ought to be a Writing annexed un∣to it, and then it is a Coun∣terfeiting within this Law:Nota. but if the Lord Keeper doth Seal a Patent without special Au∣thority from the King, yet this is no Counterfeiting with∣in this Law; or if any one do find this Great Seal, or other wayes obtain it, and Seals Patents therewith, this is not Counterfeiting neither, within this Law: for, if the Seal be truly and in due man∣ner put to a Patent, and af∣terwards the Patentee doth raze or add to the Patent in any place, this is no Counter∣feiting,
as it is in Lakes Case,Lakes Case 4 Jac.4 Jac. and yet the razing of a Deed is the forging of a Deed. Secondly, concerning coun∣terfeiting the Kings Coyn; and this ought to be intended on∣ly of the Kings own Money, for that only is meant by this Law, and not any Foreign Money; but Foreign Money is provided for by another Law. The coyning of Cop∣per, if it be made Currant, is also within this Law: for it is only in the power of the King to imbase Coyn, as it is apparent in the Case of Money in Davices Reports;Case of Money in Davices Reports. for the King is Master of the
Coyn: but in the Mirrour of Justice, it is said the King cannot alter his coyn; for those things are not in this Law, because they are not Currant within this Realm. Foreign Money is not within this law, because at the time when this Law was made, all Fo∣reign Money that was brought into this Realm, was but Bullion; because it was a great deal worser than that of this Nation: and Foreign∣ers afterwards did make their Coyn finer, and than it was made Currant here by a Sta∣tute, and so within this Law. If any that have Authori∣ty and Power to Mint or
Coyn, and he coyn pieces that are less in weight than they ought to have been, by the Authority by him given, this is a counterfeiting, be∣cause he hath not pursued his Authority, and so is as if he had no Authority to make it of that weight, which he hath made it. And so is the 3 H. 7. c. 10. to coun∣terfeit Foreign Money,3 H. 7. c. 10 and to bring it over, is not a coun∣terfeiting within this Law: but if one counterfeit the Coyn of this Kingdom be∣yond the Sea, and brings it over and Merchandizes with it,6 H. 7.13. and thereby deceive our Merchants, this is a counter∣feiting,
as in the Book afore∣said. And if one counter∣feit the Coyn of this King∣dom, although he doth not put it to others, yet this is a counterfeiting within this Law. 6 H. 7.13. 1 H. 31. Bro. Tit. Treas. 27. Stamf. Pleas 3. D.1 R. 3.1. Bro. Tit. Treas. 27. Stam. pl. 3. D. What shall we say to the bringing in of Money, what not? the bringing in of Fo∣reign Money, ought to be in∣tended of Money that is coun∣terfeited in another Realm, and like unto ours; for the words are so, Money, and not of Foreigners Money. If two conspire to Coyn and Coun∣terfeit, and one of them doth
it,19 H. 6.43. Stam. pl. 3. it is Treason in both, 19 H. 6.43. Stamf. Pleas 3. a. but an intention to counterfeit, is not Treason within this Law. The Barons of the Exche∣quer are within this Law, and it is agreed in Tanfields Case (who was one of the Barons of the Exchequer) that he was within the words of the Sta∣tute; and the words of Oyer and Terminer are within this Law, but all other Judges are not; as the Ecclesiastical Judges are not within this Law; for they hold with the Court of Rome, and did de∣rive their Authority from him in ancient Time. Nei∣ther
is a Constable within this Law. The second Case. I. S. Slits the Great Seal,The se∣cond Case. and closeth it to a Commission, and coyns Money in the form of Shillings, invertendo the Arms, kills the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal in Chancery, and brings in false Money like English, to Merchandize, knowing it to be false, but doth not offer it, and I. S. knowing this doth succour him. The Conclusion is, that I. D. is a Traytor in omnibus, and I. D. also within this Law;
the first Act is slitting of the Seal, and putting of it to the Commission, and that is Trea∣son; first, because that is slit, whereby it is become now no Seal at all; it cannot be said that this half is the Broad Seal, or that the other half is the Broad Seal; for they both together make but one Broad Seal; and when he hath closed them together again, and joyned them to a Commission, he hath made the Seal a new, for it was no Seal when it was slit, but now it is. The second Reason is, in respect of the mischief that doth come by this translating
of an old Seal to a new Com∣mission; for both the King and his Subjects are as much abused, as if it had been coun∣terfeited: and the Reason of Laws and not Authority ought to be our Rule to go by; for judicandum est legi∣bus,40 Ass. 33. & Bro. Tit. Treas. 17. Brit. cap. 4. fol. 10. non exemplis, and so he conceiveth the Case in Bro. Tit. Treas. . to be no grand Law. This was Treason also at Common Law, as you shall find it exprest in Britton, cap. 4. fol. 10. and in the Mirror of Justice cap. 1. sect. 6. and since the Statute in the same Kings time that this Statute was made in, and they who knew best the Reasons and
Grounds of this Statute, and the meaning thereof, and were at the making thereof, by all likelihood, did adjudge it Treason, to take an old Seal from an old Patent, and to put it to a new one, as in 40 Ass. pl. 33. and 2 H. 4.33. and Stamford saith,40 Ass. pl. 33. & 2 H. 4.33. that it was so adjudged in his time. In all Treasons that do concern the person of the King, the judgement ought to be, That he shall be hanged, drawn, and quartered; but for other Treasons that do not immediately concern the person of the King, the judg∣ment ought to be, That he
shall be drawn and hanged on∣ly; and not that he shall be quartered.1 H. 6.5. 19 H. 6.47. 6 H. 7.13. As it is in 1 H. 6.5. 19 H. 6.47. The second Act is, The Counterfeiting of the Kings Money, and the inverting of the Arms of the King, whereby the Kings Liege people and others may be deceived: for that is a sufficient Alteration to make it Treason, although it be such a one as cannot be discerned without special no∣tice taken of it. And this doth appear by the judgment given in the Star-Chamber, for the counterfeiting of Far∣things. And it is Treason for any man to bear the
Kings Arms, as it appears in the Earl of Surreys Case. The third Act is, The kil∣ling of the Officers of the King, as of the Lord Keeper, and that is Treason within this Law; for the Lord Keeper is now Chancellor, although at that time when this Statute was made, the Lord Chancel∣lors Office, and the Lord Kee∣pers Office were two several and distinct Offices, yet they are made now both one Of∣fice;5 Eliz. c. 18 15 E. 3. c. 2 and that is by the Sta∣tute of 5 Eliz. cap. 18. and this Statute of 15 E. 3. cap. 2. may and doth extend to that Statute of 5 Eliz. which comes after, as is very fully exprest
to the purpose, though not to this Case, in Co. 4. fol. 4. Vernon's Case, the Statute of Marleborough, which was made 52 H. 3. gave the word of the Tenant that held by Knight-service, notwith∣standing he had made a Feoffment by collusion: from which time, and for 200 years and more, till the Sta∣tute of the 4. of H. 7. cap. 17. which gave the Ward of the Heir of Costigase, the Heir of Costigase was not in Ward, and yet it is held in the 27 of H. 8.9. that if Costigase, after the Statute of 4 H. 7. makes a Feoffment in Fee by collusion, to defraud the Lord
of his Ward, that this is ta∣ken within the Equity of the Statute of Marleborough, and so of divers other Cases that you may see there cited in Vernon's Case above mentio∣ned. The Fourth Act is, The bringing in of false Money, like unto our English Money, for to Merchandize withal; and this is Treason: for here is not only an intent, but there is also an Act joyned with this intent; for he brings over this Money, which is the Act, with an intent to Merchan∣dize. The second Conclu∣sion is, that I. D. is a Tray∣tor within this Law, and his
Treason doth go or extend to all the other four Treasons that were committed by I. S. for this succouring of him after the Fact committed, makes him a Traytor within this Law. And at the Com∣mon Law, before the making of this Statute, if a man had succoured one that had com∣mitted Treason, knowing him to have committed it, he had been a Traytor. And so if one doth now succour a Fe∣lon, it is Felony in the Suc∣courer. And why should it not be so in our Case? For the Reason of Law in our Case is far stronger, that the Succou∣rer of a Traytor, should be a
Traytor; than the succour∣or of a Felon should be a Fe∣lon, because the Offence is greater; and therefore it is an aggravation of his punish∣ment, to make him that no man shall receive or succour him: for we see the Law in∣flicts a greater punishment upon a Traytor than upon a Felon; and that is to deterr men from such Acts as those are. And so it appears that there is Reason why he should be a Traytor, although he be not within the words of the Statute. And therefore it is in the Reason of the Statute. Another Reason is, because the Statute doth not say who
shall be Traytors, but what shall be Treason, and this word Treason shall be taken with all its Concomitants and Accidents, as it was at Common Law; and then that was a concomitant to Treason that the Succourer should be a Traytor. But it is so in 3 H. 7. fol. 10.Object. that the Succourer in Treason is no Traytor. The Reason of that Case is,Answ. because the Judgement was, that he knowing eam proditionem praedictam perpe∣trdffe felonice hospitalis fuit: and this was not grand, be∣cause he was in that Case in∣dicted as an Accessary, and
was not indicted as a Tray∣tor; for there can be no Ac∣cessaries in Treasons, as there is in Felonies. See Fitz. Tit. Cor. 55.Fitz. Tit. Coron. 55. Bro. Tit. Coron. 135. Bro. Tit. Coron. 135. and for express Authority it is in 1 H. 6.5. for if this Statute had made Felony Treason, and one doth commit that Treason, and A. succours him, knowing of it, it had been absurd for to have said, that the Succourer should have been only a Felon: but our Case is stronger; for this Law doth not make any one a Traytor, but only declares what shall be adjudged Trea∣son; but if this Statute had exprest, that all Abettors
should have been Traytors, then the Receivers or Succou∣rers should not have been Traytors within this Law; for then the intent of the Ma∣kers would plainly appear, that it was not intended that the Receivers or Succou∣rers after the Fact should have been within this Law, but only the Abettors before and at the Fact.
Lecture III. THis Lecture is of Petty Treason, and Petty Treasons doth very little differ from Felonies; for by the pardon of all Fe∣lonies, all Petty Treasons are pardoned,Stamf. fol. 2. b. Stam. fol. 2. b. but it hath some correspon∣dency with other Treasons; and that is in respect of the Duty and Obedience that is due to each other; as it is from the Subjects to the King, so from the Servant to the Master. All Servants, although
they receive no Wages, but only Meat and Drink, are within this Law. A Servant that is not compellable to serve by this Statute, yet if he doth serve, he is within this Law. And so is a Bayliff of a Mannor; for if he kill the Lord of the Mannor, it is Pet∣ty Treason within this Law. A Steward of a Court Leet or Court Baron is not within this Law. A Wife divorc'd for Adultery, is within this Law; although a Queen di∣vorc'd for Adultery be not within this Law, as ye have heard before. Ordinaries are of two sorts, Ordinarius loci, Ordina∣rius
Dioces.Ordinarius leci, Ordi∣narius Di∣oces. and the Superior Ordinaries they are all with∣in this Law, Ordinarius loci, as that of the Dean of West∣minster. Ordinarius Dioces. is the Bishop of the Diocess, and the Superior Ordinary is the Archbishop; they are all within this Law, in respect of Obedience that is due to them. A Child killing his Father or his Mother, he is within this Law, as you heard before, although he he be not named in it: yet there is a majority of Trea∣son in it more than that of a Servant, and therefore is with∣in that intent and reason of the Law. And so it is in
Dalton; If one command an∣other to kill his Master, who doth it, yet it is not Treason within this Law, unless he be there present when the Fact is done,40 Ass. 25. 40 Ass. 25. If a Wife command a Servant to kill her Husband, and he doth it; it is Treason in both within this Law: and so it appears that Abettors and Partners are within the first Part of this Statute concerning Petty Treasons, although they are not named. If a Servant goes from his Master, and then kills him, this is Petty Trea∣son within this Law; for it shall be intended that he had such an intention to kill him
before he departed out of his Service,Bro. Tit. Treas. 15. 33 Ass. 7. 33 Ass. 7. And so is a Quarrel in Westminster-Hall, the Courts sitting, and then go out of the Hall into the Pallace-yard, and then one strikes the other, this is pu∣nishable with the same pu∣nishment, as if he had struck him in the Hall; for the pu∣nishment shall be to the loss of his hand, and the forfei∣ture of his goods, and per∣petual imprisonment, as it is in Darcies Case,1 & 2 Eliz. Dyer. 188. in the 1 & 2 of Eliz. Dyer 188. But some of these Offences were Trea∣son at the Common Law, as the Son killing of the Father, 21 E. 3.17.21 E. 3.17. and of a Maid-servant
killing her Mistress, 21 Ass. 30.21 Ass. 30. If a Servant kill his Mistress, this is Petty Trea∣son within this Law, and yet she is not named, but is to be intended upon the same rea∣son with his Master, and the Obedience is due to the one as well as the other,19 H. 6.37. 19 H. 6.37 Treason ought to be fully proved, as it appears by the words of the Statute, and that is to be by two Witnesses, for the proving of every Trea∣son. And the Statute of 1 E.1 E. 6.6. is not repealed, as to this Point, by the Statute of Phil. and Mar. but only the Trials in the Counties, and not con∣cerning Witnesses, as by that
Statute more at large appears. And in the 14 of Eliz. in the Lord Lumley's Case,14 Eliz. Lumley's Case. it was agreed; that the Statute 1 E 6. was not reversed by the old Statute. The Tryal of Lords of Parliament ought to be per Pares; but in some Cases he shall not have his Tryal per Pares,13 H. 8.11, 12. Bro. Tit. Treas. 29, 33. as in an Appeal, but in an Indictment he shall, and the Indictment shall be received into Parliament, be∣cause an Indictment is the Kings Suit; and the Statute of Magna Charta is nec fuper eum ibimus, nec super eum mit∣timus, and this is to be inten∣ded in the Kings suit,10 E. 4. b. 10 E. 4. b.
But a Lord may refuse his Tryal per Pares, if he will, as it was adjudged 1 Phil. & Mar. Bro. in the L. Gray's Case;1 Phil. & Mar. Bro. Lord Grays Case 13 Jac. but in the Lord of Castlehaven's Case it was held the contrary, If a man be kill'd in Rebelli∣on, he shall forfeit his Lands, and is a Traytor: but there ought to be an Inquisition taken of him, and that shall be a suf∣ficient Tryal. As the Case in 13 Jac. Br. If a man do cast himself into the Water, and never is found after; yet if it be presented by the Justice of Peace, this is sufficient to make him forfeit his Goods. As for those Treasons which are not here declared, the
Judges Authority takes In∣dictments of them, but they ought not to be proceeded a∣gainst to Judgment; for no∣thing is to be done in point of Judgement in such a Case, till it be adjudged and de∣clared in Parliament. And all other Treasons that are not here declared, ought to be Fe∣lonies at the least, because Fe∣lonies were made Treasons be∣fore the Stattute; and because the words of the Statute are, that it ought to be Treason or Felony: but if it be but once declared in Parliament, un∣less there be a Proviso that the Judges shall not proceed up∣on the like Cases, they may
afterwards proceed by force of this Statute. There are Treasons at the Common Law, notwithstand∣ing the Stat. of 1 Mar. for that did take away those Treasons, and Declarations of Treasons that were made in Parliaments from the time of our Statute, to 1 Mar. but doth not take away the declarative Power in our Statute mentioned, nor the Common Law, but they do remain still as before. FINIS.
CASES OF TREASON. CHAP. I. WHERE a man doth com∣pass or imagine the Death of the King, the King's Wife, the King's eldest Son, and Heir apparent, if it appear by any overt act, it is Treason. Where a man doth violate the King's Wife, the King's eldest Daughtter, unmarried, the Wife
of the King's eldest Son, and Heir apparent, it is Treason. Where a man doth levie War against the King in the Realm, it is Treason. Where a man is adherent to the King's Enemies, giving them aid and comfort, it is Treason. Where a man counterfeiteth the King's Great Seal, Privy Signet, Sign Manual, it is Treason: like∣wise his Money. Where a man bringeth into this Realm false money, counterfeited to the likeness of English, with intent to merchandise or make payment thereof, and knowing it to be false money, it is Treason. Where a man counterfeiteth any Coyn current in payment within this Realm, it is Treason.
Where a man doth bring in any money, being current within the Realm, the same being false and counterfeit, with intent to utter it, and knowing the same to be false, it is Treason. Where a man doth clip, waste, round, or file any of the King's money, or any Foreign Coyn, cur∣rent by Proclamation, for gain∣sake, it is Treason. Where a man doth any way im∣pair, diminish, falsifie, skale, or lighten money, current by Procla∣mation, it is Treason. Where a man killeth the Chan∣cellor, the Treasurer, the King's Ju∣stices in Eire, the King's Justices of Assises, the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, being in their several Pla∣ces and doing their Offices, it is Treason.
Where a man procureth or con∣senteth to Treason, it is Treason. Where a man doth persuade or withdraw any of the Kings Sub∣jects from his obedience, or from the Religion by his Majesty established, with intent to withdraw any from the Kings obedience, it is Treason. Where a man is absolved, re∣conciled, or withdrawn from his obedience to the King, or promi∣seth obedience to any Foreign Power, it is Treason. Where any Jesuit, or any other Priest, ordained since the first year of the Reign of Qu. Elizabeth, shall come into, or remain in any part of this Realm, it is Treason. Where any Person, being brought up in a Colledge of Jusuits, or Se∣minaries, shall not return within
six months after Proclamation made, and within two dayes after his return, submit himself to take the Oath of Supremacy; if other∣wise he do return, and not within six months after Proclamation made, it is Treason. Where a man, committed for Treason, doth voluntarily break Prison, it is Treason. Where a Jaylor doth voluntarily permit a man committed for Trea∣son, to escape, it is Treason. Where a man relieveth or com∣forteth a Traitor, and knoweth of the Offence, it is Treason. Where a man doth affirm or maintain any Authority of Jurisdi∣ction Spiritual, or doth put in ure or execute any thing for the ad∣vancement of setting forth there∣of,
the third time, it is Treason. VVhere a man refuseth to take the Oath of Supremacy, being ten∣dred by the Bishop of the Diocese, if he be any Ecclesiastical Person; or by Commission out of the Chan∣cery, if he be a temporal Person; such Offence the second time is Treason. CHAP. II. The Punishment, Tryal, and Pro∣ceeding in Cases of Treason. IN Treason, the Corporal Punish∣ment is, by drawing on an hurdle from the place of the Prison to the place of Execution, by hanging and being cut down alive, bowel∣ling, and quartering, and in VVo∣men burning.
In Treason there ensueth a cor∣ruption of blood in the Line ascen∣ding and descending. In Treason, Lands and Goods are forfeited, and Inheritance, as well intailed as Fee-simple, and the profits of Estates for Life. In Treason, the Escheats go to the King, and not to the Lord of the Fee. In Treason, the Land forfeited shall be in the Kings actual posses∣sion, without Office. In Treason there be no Accessa∣ries, but all are Principals. In Treason no Sanctuary, nor benefit of Clergy, or peremptory Challenge is allowed. In Treason, if the Party stand mute, yet nevertheless Judgment and Attainder shall proceed all one as upon Verdict.
In Treason no Counsel is to be allowed, nor Bail permitted to the Party. In Treason no Witnesses shall be received upon Oath for the Parties Justification. In Treason, if the Fact be com∣mitted beyond the Seas, yet it may be tryed in any County where the King will award his Commission. In Treason, if the Party be non sanae memoriae, yet if he had for∣merly confessed it before the Kings Council, and that it be certified that he was of good Memory at the time of his Examination and Confession, the Court may proceed to do Judgment without calling or arraigning the Party. In Treason, the death of the Par∣ty before Conviction, dischargeth
all Proceedings and Forfeitures. In Treason, if the Parties be once acquitted, he should not be brought in question again for the same Fact. In Treason, no new Case, not expressed in the Statute of 25 E. 3. or made Treason by any special Sta∣tute since, ought to be judged Trea∣son, without consulting with the Parliament. In Treason, there can be no Prosecution but at the King's suit, and the Kings Pardon dischargeth. In Treason, the King cannot grant over to any Subject Power and Authority to pardon it. In Treason, a Trial of a Peer of the Kingdom is to be by special Commission before the Lord high Steward, and those that pass upon him to be none but Peers: The
Proceeding is with great Solemni∣ty, the Lord Steward sitting under a cloth of Estate, with a white rod of Justice in his hand, and the Peers may conferr together, but are not any ways shut up; and are deman∣ded by the Lord Steward their Voi∣ces one by one, and the plurality of Voices carries it. In Treason, it hath been an anci∣ent Use and Favour from the Kings of this Realm, to pardon the Exe∣cution of hanging, drawing, and quartering; and to make Warrant for their beheading. The Proceeding in case of Trea∣son, with a common Subject, is in the Kings Bench, or by Commission of Oyer and Terminer.
CHAP. III. Cases of Misprision of Treason. WHere a man concealeth high Treason only, without any consorting or abetting, it is mispri∣sion of Treason. Where a man counterfeiteth any Foreign Coyn of Gold or Silver, not current in this Realm, it is mispri∣sion of Treason. Where a man fixes an old Seal to a new Patent, it is misprision of Treason. CHAP. IIII. The Punishment, Tryal and Proceed∣ing in cases of misprision of Treason. THE Punishment of Misprision of Treason, is by perpetual
Imprisonment, loss of the Issues and Profits of their Lands during Life, and loss of goods and Chattels. The Proceeding and Trial is, as in cases of High Treason. In misprision of Treason Bail is not admitted. CHAP. V. Cases of Petty Treason. WHere a Servant killeth his Ma∣ster, the Wife the Husband, the Spritual man his Prelate, to whom he is subordinate, and ow∣eth Faith and Obedience, it is pet∣tie Treason. Where a Son killeth the Father or Mother, it hath been questioned whether it be petie Treason, and the
late experience and opinion seem∣eth to sway to the contrary, tho against Law and Reason in my judgment. Where a Servant killeth his or her Master or Mistress, after they are out of Service, it is petie Trea∣son. CHAP. VI. The Punishment, Tryal and Proceed∣ings in cases of Petie Treason. IN Petie Treason, the Corporal Punishment is by drawing on an hurdle, and hanging, and in a Woman burning. In petie Treason, the Forfei∣ture is the same with the Case of Fe∣lony.
In petie Treason, all Accessaries are but in case of Felony. CHAP. VII. Cases of Felony. WHere a man committeth Mur∣der or Homicide, of Malice prepensed, it is Felony. Where a man committeth Mur∣der (that is) breaking of an House with an intent to commit Felony, it is Felony. Where a man committeth man∣slaughter, that is Homicide of sud∣den heat, and not of Malice pre∣pensed, it is Felony. Where a man rideth armed with a felonious intent, it is Felony. VVhere a man doth maliciously
and feloniously burn any man's house, it is Felony. VVhere a man doth maliciously, &c. burn corn upon the ground, or in stack, it is Felony. VVhere a man doth maliciously cut out another man's Tongue, or put out his Eyes, it is Felony. VVhere a man robbeth or steal∣eth, viz. taketh away another man's Goods, above the value of 12 d. out of his possession, with intent to conceal it, it is Felony. VVhere a man imbezelleth and withdraweth any of the King's Re∣cords at Westminster, whereby a Judgment is reversed, it is Fe∣lony. VVhere a man, having the custo∣dy of the King's Armour, Munition, or other Abiliments of VVar, doth
maliciously convey away the same, it is Felony, if it be to the value of twenty shillings. VVhere a Servant hath Goods of his Masters delivered unto him, and goeth away with them, it is Felony. VVhere a man conjures, or in∣vokes wicked Spirits, it is Felony. VVhere a man doth use or pra∣ctise VVitchcraft, whereby any Per∣son shall be killed, wasted, or la∣med, it is Felony. VVhere a man practiseth any VVitchcraft, to discover Treasure hid, or to discover stollen goods, or to provoke unlawful Love, or to impair or hurt any mans Cattel or Goods, the second time, having been once before convicted of like offence, it is Felony.
VVhere a man useth the craft of multiplication of Gold or Silver, it is Felony. VVhere a man receiveth a Semi∣nary Priest, knowing him to be such a Priest, it is Felony. VVhere a man taketh away a VVoman against her VVill, not claiming her as his VVard or Bond∣woman, it is Felony. VVhere a man or woman marri∣eth again, his or her former Hus∣band or VVife being alive, it is Fe∣lony. VVhere a man committeth Bug∣gery with man or Beast, it is Felo∣ny. VVhere any Persons, above the number of twelve, shall assemble themselves with intent to put down Inclosures, or bring down prices
of Victuals, &c. and do not depart after Proclamation, it is Felony. Where a man shall use any words to encourage or draw any People together, ut supra, and they do as∣semble accordingly, and do not de∣part after Proclamation, it is Fe∣lony. Where a man, being the King's sworn Servant, conspireth to mur∣der any Lord of the Realm, or any Privy Councellor, it is Felony. VVhere a Souldier hath taken a∣ny parcel of the King's wages, and departeth without Licence, it is Felony. Where a Recusant, which is a Seducer, and Perswader, and Enti∣cer of the King's Subjects against the King's authority in Ecclesiasti∣cal Causes, or a perswader of Con∣venticles,
or shall refuse to abjure the Realm, it is Felony. Where Vagabonds be found in the Realm, calling themselves Egy∣ptians, it is Felony. Where a Purveyor doth take without Warrant, or otherwise doth offend against certain special Laws, it is Felony. Where a man hunts in any Fo∣rest, Park, or Warren, by night or by day, with Vizard or other dis∣guisements, and is examined there∣of, and concealeth his Fact, it is Felony. Where one stealeth certain kind of Hawks, it is Felony. Where a man committeth Forge∣ry the second time, having been once before convicted, it is Felony. Where a man transporteth Rams,
or other sheep out of the Kings Do∣minions, the 2d time, it is Felony. VVhere a man being imprisoned for felony, breaks Prison, it is Felony. VVhere a man procureth, or con∣senteth to Felony to be done, it is Felony, as to make him accessary before the Fact. Where a man receiveth or reliev∣eth a Felon, it is Felony, as to make him accessary after the Fact. VVhere a Woman, by the con∣straint of her Husband, in his pre∣sence, joyneth with him in commit∣ting of Felony, it is not Felony in her, neither as Principal nor as Accessary. Homicide, or the killing of a man, is to be considered in four kinds. Chance-medley. Se defendendo. Man-slaughter. Wilful Murder.
CHAP. VIII. The Punishment, Tryal, and Proceed∣ings in Cases of Felony. IN Felony, the corporal Punish∣ment is hanging, and it is doubt∣ful whether the King may turn it into beheading, in case of a Peer, or other Person of Dignity, because in Treason, the striking off the Head is part of the Judgment, and so the King pardoneth the rest: but in Felony, it is no part of the Judgment, and the King can∣not alter the execution of Law; yet Presidents have been both wayes: If it be upon Indictment, the King may, but upon an Appeal he cannot.
In Felony there followeth cor∣ruption of Blood, except it be in cases made Felony by special Sta∣tutes, with a Proviso, that there shall be no corruption of blood. In Felony, Lands in Fee simple, and goods and Chattels are forfeit∣ed, and the profits of Estates for Life are likewise forfeited, but not Lands intailed: and by some Cu∣stoms, Lands in see simple are not so forfeited; The Father to the Bough, The Son to the Plough, as in Gavel-kind in Kent, and o∣ther places. In Felony, the Escheats go to the Lord of the Fee, and not to the King, except he be Lord: But pro∣fits for the Estates for Lives, or in Tail, during the Life of Tenant in
Tail, go to the King; And the King hath likewise annum, & diem, & vastum. In Felony, Lands are not in the King, before Office, nor in the Lord, before Entry or Recovery in a Writ of Escheat, or Death of the Party attainted. In Felony, there can be no pro∣ceeding with the Accessary, before there be a proceeding with the Prin∣cipal: If he dye, or plead his Par∣don, or have his Clergy before At∣tainder, the Accessary can never be dealt with. In Felony, if the Party stand mute, and will not put himself up∣on Tryal, or challenge perempto∣rily above that the Law allows, he shall have Judgment, not of hanging, but of penance, of pres∣sing
to death; but there he saves his Lands, and forfeits only his Goods. In Felony, at the Common Law, the benefit of Clergy or Sanctuary was allowed; but now by Stat. it is taken away in most cases. In Felony, Bail may be admitted where the Fact is not notorious, and the Person not of ill name. In Felony, no Councel is to be allowed to the Party, no more than in Treason. In Felony, if the fact be commit∣ted beyond the Seas, or upon the Seas, super altum mare, there is no Tryal at all in one case, nor by course of Jury in the other, but by the Ju∣risdiction of the Admiralty. In Felony, no witness shall be re∣ceived upon Oath for the Parties Ju∣stification, no more than in Treason.
In felony, if the Party be non sanae memoriae, although it be after the fact, he cannot be tryed nor adjudg∣ed, except it be in course of Out∣lawry, and that is also erroneous. In felony, the Death of the Party before Conviction, dischar∣geth all Proceedings and Forfei∣tures. In felony, if the Party be once acquit, or in peril of Judgment of Life, lawfully he shall never be brought in question again for the same fact. In felony, the prosecution may be either at the King's Suit, or by way of Appeal; the Defend∣ent shall have his course, and pro∣duce Witnesses upon Oath, as in Civil Causes. In Felony, the King may grant
hault Justice to a Subject, with the Regality of Power to pardon it. In Felony, the Tryal of Peers is all one, as in case of Treason. In Felony, the Proceedings are in the King's Bench, or before Com∣missioners of Oyer and Terminer, or of Goal-delivery, and, in some case, before Justices of the Peace. CHAP. IX. Cases of Felony, de se, with the Pu∣nishment, Tryal, and Proceedings. IN the Civil Law, and other Laws, they make a difference of Cases of Felony de se; for where a man is called in question upon any ca∣pital Crime, and killeth himself to prevent the Law, there they give
the Judgment in all points of for∣feiture, as if they had been attaint∣ed in their Life-time: And, on the other side, where a man killeth him∣self upon impatience of Sickness, or the like, they do not punish it at all: but the Law of England ta∣keth it all in one degree, and pu∣nisheth onely with loss of Goods, to be forfeited to the King, who ge∣nerally grants them to his Almo∣ner, where they be not sormerly granted unto special Liberties. CHAP. X. Cases of Premunire. WHere a man purchaseth, or accepteth any provision, that is, collation of any Spiritual
Benefice or Living from the See of Rome, it is Premunire. Where a man shall purchase any Process to draw any People of the Kings Allegiance out of the Realm, in plea whereof the cogni∣zance pertains to the Kings Court, and cometh not in Person to an∣swer his contempt in that behalf, before the King and his Coun∣cil, or in his Chancery, it is Pre∣munire. Where a man doth sue in any Court which is not the King's Court, to defeat or impeach any Judgment given in the Kings Court, and doth not appear to answer his Contempt, it is Premunire. Where a man doth purchase, or pursue in the Court of Rome or elsewhere, any Process, Sentence
of Excommunication, Bull, or In∣strument, or any other thing which toucheth the King in his Regality, or his Realm, in prejudice, it is Premunire. Where a man doth affirm or maintain any Foreign kind of Ju∣risdiction Spiritual, or doth put in ure or execution any thing for the advancement or setting forth there∣of; such Offence the second time committed, is Premunire. Where a man refuseth to take the Oath of Supremacy, being tendred by the Bishop of the Diocese, if it be an Ecclesiastical Person; or by a Commission out of the Chancery, if he be a Temporal Person, it is premunire. Where a Dean and Chapter of any Church upon the Conge de
Lier of an Archbishop or Bishop, doth refuse to elect any such Arch∣bishop or Bishop, as is nominated unto them in the Kings Letters mis∣sive, it is Premunire. Where a man doth contribute, or give relief to any Jesuit or Se∣minary Priests, or to any Person brought up therein, and called home, and not returning, it is case of Premunire. Where a man is a Broker of an usurious contract above ten in the hundred, it is Premunire. CHAP. XI. The Punishment, Tryal, and Proceed∣ing in Cases of Premunire. THe Punishment is by Impri∣sonment during Life, forfei∣ture
of Goods, forfeiture of Lands in fee simple, & forfeiture of the pro∣fits of Lands Intailed, or for Life. The Trial and Proceeding is as in cases of Misprision of Treason, and the Tryal is by Peers, where a Peer of the Realm is the Offender. Striking any man in the face of the King's Courts, is forfeiture of Lands, perpetual Imprisonment, and loss of that hand. CHAP. XII. Cases of Abjuration and Exile, and the Proceedings therein. WHere a man committeth any Felony, for the which at this day he may have priviledge of San∣ctuary, and confesseth the Felony
before the Coroner, he shall abjure the Liberty of the Real, and chuse his Sanctuary; and if he commit any new offence, or leave his San∣ctuary, he shall lose the Priviledge thereof, and suffer as if he had not taken Sanctuary. Where a man not coming to the Church, and being a Popish Recu∣sant, doth perswade any the Kings Subjects to impugn his Majesties Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, or shal perswade any Subject to come to any unlawful Conventicles, and shall not after conform him∣self within a time, and make his submission, he shall abjure the Realm, and forfeit his Goods and Lands during Life; and if he de∣part not within the time prefixed,
or return, he shall be in the degree of a Felon. Where a man, being a Popish Recusant, and not having Lands to the value of 20 Marks per annum, nor goods to the value of 40 l. shall not repair to his dwelling, or place where he was born, and there con∣fine himself within the compass of five miles, he shall abjure the Realm; and if he return, he shall be in case of a Felon. Where a man kills the King's Deer in Chases or Forests, and can find no Sureties after a years Im∣prisonment, he shall abjure the Realm. Where a man is a Trespasser in Parks, or in Ponds of fish, and af∣ter three years Imprisonment can∣not find Sureties, he shall abjure the Realm.
Where a man is a Ravisher of any Child, whose Marriage belongs to any Person, and marrieth the said Child after years of consent, and is not able to satisfie for the Marriage, he shall abjure the Realm. CHAP. XIII. Cases of Heresie, and the Trial and Proceedings therein. THE Declaration of Heresie, and likewise the Proceedings and Judgment upon Hereticks, is, by the Common Laws of this Realm, referred to the Jurisdiction Eccle∣fiastical, and the Secular Arm is reached to them by the Common Laws, and not by any Statute for
execution of them by the Kings Writ de Haeretico comburendo. CHAP. XIV. The Kings Prerogative in Parlia∣ment. THE King hath an absolute ne∣gative Voice to all Bills that pass the Parliament, so as without his Royal Assent they have a meer nul∣lity, and not so much as Authoritas praescripta, or Senatus consulta had, notwithstanding the Intercession of Tribunes. The King may summon Parlia∣ments, dissolve them, prorogue them, and adjourn them at his Plea∣sure. The King may add Voices in the
Parliament at his Pleasure, for he may give Priviledge to Borough Towns as many as he will, and may likewise call and create Barons at his pleasure. No man can sit in Parliament except he take the Oath of Alle∣giance. CHAP. XV. The Kings Prerogative in matters of War or Peace. THE King hath power to de∣clare and proclaim War, and to make and conclude Peace and Truce at his pleasure. The King hath power to make Leagues and Confederacies with Foreign States, more straight and
less straight, and to revoke and disannull them at his pleasure. The King hath power to com∣mand the Bodies of his Subjects for the service of his Wars, and to mu∣ster, train, and levy men, and to transport them by Sea or Land at his pleasure. The King hath power in time of War to execute Marshal Law, and to appoint all Officers of War at his pleasure. The King hath power to grant his Letters of Mart and Reprisal for re∣medy to his Subjects upon foreign wrongs at his pleasure. The King hath power to declare Laws by his Letters Patents for the government of any place conquer∣ed by Arms, at his pleasure. The King may give Knight-hood,
and thereby mable any Subject to perform Knights Service at his pleasure. CHAP. XVI. The Kings Prerogative in matters of Moneys. THE King may alter his Stand∣ard in baseness or fineness of his Coyn, at his pleasure. The King may alter his stamp in form at his pleasure. The King may alter the valua∣tions of his Coyn, and raise and fall Moneys at his pleasure. The King by his Proclamation may make Moneys of his own cur∣rent, or not current, at his plea∣sure.
The King may take or refuse the Subjects Bullion, and Coyn, more or less money. The King by his Proclamation may make Fereign money current, or not current. CHAP. XVII. The Kings Prerogative in matters of Trade and Traffick. THE King may constrain the Person of any of his Sub∣jects not to go out of the Realm at all. The King may restrain any of his Subjects to go out of the Realm into any special Part fo∣reign.
The King may forbid the expor∣tation of any Commodities out of the Realm. The King may forbid the im∣portation of any Commodities into the Realm. The King may set a reasonable Impost upon any Foreign Wares that come into the Realm, and so of Native Wares that go out of the Realm. CHAP. XVIII. The Kings Prerogative in the Persons of his Subjects. THE King may create any Cor∣poration or Body Politick, and enable them to purchase, and grant, and to sue, and be sued, and
that with such restrictions and mo∣difications as he pleases. The King may denizen and en∣able any Foreigner for him and his Descendents after the Charter, though he cannot naturalize nor enable him to make pedegree from Ancestors Paramount. The King may enable any at∣tainted Person (by his Charter of Pardon) to purchase and to purge his Blood for the time to come, though he cannot restore his Blood for the time past. The King may enable any dead Person in Law, as men professed, to take and purchase to the King's Benefit.
CHAP. XIX. An Answer to the Question proposed by Sir Alexander Hay Knight, touching the Office of Constables. TO the first; Of the Original of the Authority of Consta∣bles, it may be said, Caput inter nublia condit, for the Authority was granted upon the Ancient Laws and Customes of this Kingdom, practised long before the Con∣quest, and intended and institu∣ted for the conservation of the Peace, and repressing all manner of disturbance and hurt of the Peo∣ple, and that as well by way of prevention as punishment; but yet so, as they have no Judicial pow∣er,
to hear and determine any cause, but onely a Ministerial power, as in the answer of the seventh Article more at large is set down. As for the Office of the High Constable, the original of that is yet more obscure; for though the High Constables Authority hath the more ample Circuit, he being over the hundred, and the pety Constable over the Village; yet I do not find that the pety Consta∣ble is subordinate to the High Con∣stable, or to be ordered or com∣manded by him: and therefore, I doubt, the High Constable was not ab origine, but that when the busi∣ness of the Countrey increased, the Authority of the Justices of Peace was inlarged by divers Statutes; then, for conveniency sake, the Of∣fice
of High Constables grew in use for the receiving of the Commands and Precepts from the Justices of Peace, and distributing them to the petie Constables; and in token of this, the Election of High Consta∣bles in most parts of the Kingdom is by the appointment of the Justi∣ces of Peace, whereas the election of the pety Constable is by the Peo∣ple. But there be two things unto which the Office of Constable hath special reference, and which of ne∣cessity, or at least a kind of congrui∣ty, must precede the Jurisdiction of that Office, either the things them∣selves, or somewhat that hath a simi∣litude or analogy towards them. 1. The one is the division of the Territory, or gross of the Shires in∣to
Hundreds, Villages, and Towns; for the High Constable is Officer over the Hundred, and the pety Con∣stable is over the Town or Village. 2. The other is the Court Leet, unto which the Constable is a pro∣per Attendant and Minister, for there the Constables are chosen by the Jury, there they are sworn, and there that part of their Office which concerneth Information, is princi∣pally to be performed; for the Ju∣ry is to present Offences, and the Offenders are chiefly to take light from the Constables, of all matters of Disturbance and Nusance of the People, which they (in respect of their Office) are presumed to have best and most particular know∣ledge of.
CHAP XX. Three ends of the Institution of the Court Leet. 1. THe first end of the Instituti∣on of the Court Leet is, To take the Oath of Allegiance of all Males above the Age of twelve years. 2. The second, To enquire of all offences against the peace; and for those that are against the Crown and Peace both, to enquire of onely, and certifie to the Justi∣ces of Goal Delivery; but those that are against the peace simply, they are to enquire and punish. 3. The third is, To enquire of, punish, and remove all publick
Nusances and grievances, concer∣ning Infection of Air, corruption of Victuals, ease of chaffer, and contract, of all other things that may hurt or grieve the people in general, in their health, quiet, and welfare. And to these three ends, as mat∣ters of policy subordinate, the Court Leet hath power to call up∣on the pledges that are to be taken for the good behaviour of the Re∣sidents that are not Tenants, and to enquire of all Defaults of Officers, as Constables, Ale-tasters, &c. and for choice of Constables, as afore∣said. The Jurisdiction of these Leets is ever remaining in the King, and in that case exercised by the She∣riff in his turn, which is the grand
Leet granted over to Subjects; but yet it is still the Kings Court. 2. To the second, as was said, The Election of the pety Consta∣ble is at the Court Leet, by the In∣quest that makes the Presentments; the Election of the Head Consta∣bles is by the Justices of the Peace at their Quarter Sessions. 3. To the third, The Office is annual, except they be removed. 4. To the fourth, They be men (as it is now used) of inferiour, yea, of base condition, which is a meer abuse or degenerating from the first Institution; for the pety Constables in Towns ought to be of the better sort of Resiants in the said Town, save that they ought not to be Aged, or sickly, but men of able Bodies, in respect of keeping
Watch, and toil of their place, nei∣ther ought they to be in any mans Livery: And the High Constables ought to be of the ablest sort of Free∣holders, and of the substantiallest sort of Yeomen, next to the degree of Gentlemen; but they ought to be such as are not incumbred with any other Office, as Mayor, Under∣sheriff, Bailiff, &c. 5. To the fifth, They have no al∣lowance, but are bound by Duty to perform their Offices gratis, which may the rather be endured, because it is but Annual, and they are not tyed to keep or maintain any Servants, or under-ministers, for that every one of the King's People are bound to assist them. 6. To the sixth; Upon complaint made (of his refusal) to any
one Justice of Peace, the said Ju∣stice may bind him over to the Sessions, where (if he cannot ex∣cuse himself by some just allegati∣on) he may be fined and imprison∣ed for his Contempt. 7. To the seventh, The Autho∣rity of Constables, as it is substan∣tive, and of it self, or substituted and astricted to the Warrants and Commands of the Justices of Peace; so again, it is Original or Additio∣nal; for either it was given them by the Common Law, or else an∣nexed by divers Statutes. And as for subordinate Power, wherein the Constable is onely to execute the Commandments of the Justices of Peace, and likewise the additional power which is given by divers Statutes, it is hard to comprehend
them in any brevity; For that they do correspond to the Office and Authority of the Justices of Peace, which is very large, and are crea∣ted by the branches of several Sta∣tutes, which are things of divers and dispersed natures: But for the original and substantive Power of a Constable, it may be reduced to three heads. 1. For matter of Peace only. 2. For matter of Peace and the Crown. 3. For matter of Nusance, Distur∣bance, and Disorder, although they be not accompanied with violence and breach of Peace. For pacifying of Quarrels be∣gun, the Constables may, upon hot words given, or likelihood of breach of peace to ensue, command them
in the Kings name to keep the Peace, and to depart, and forbear: and so he may where an Affray is made, part the same, and keep the Parties asunder, and arrest, and commit the Breakers of the Peace, if they will not obey, and call Pow∣er to assist him for the same purpose. For punishment of breach of Peace past, the Law is very sparing in giving any Authority to Consta∣bles, because he hath no power ju∣dicial, and the Use of his Office is rather for preventing or staying of Mischief, than for punishing of Offences; for in that part he is rather to execute the Warrants of the Justices, or when suddden matter ariseth upon his view, or notorious circumstances, to appre∣hend Offenders, and carry them be∣fore
the Justice of Peace, and ge∣nerally to imprison in like cases of necessity, where the case will not endure the present carrying before the Justices. And thus much for the matters of Peace. For matters of the Crown, the Office of the Constable consisteth chiefly in four parts. 1. The first is Arrest. 2. The second is Search. 3. The third is Hue and Cry. 4. And the 4th is Seisure of goods. All which the Constable may perform of his own Authority, without any Warrant of the Justi∣ces of Peace. 1. For first, If any man will lay Murder or Felony to another's charge, or do suspect him of Mur∣der or Felony, he may declare it to
the Constable, and the Constable ought, upon such Declaration or Complaint, carry him before a Ju∣stice, and if by common voice or Fame any man be suspected, the Constable, of Duty, ought to arrest him, and bring him before a Ju∣stice, though there be no other ac∣cusation. 2. If any house be suspected for the receiving or harbouring of any Felon, the Constable, upon com∣plaint, or common fame, may search. 3. If any fly upon the Felony, the Constable ought to raise Hue and Cry, and search for his goods, and keep them safe without impair∣ing, and to inventary them in the presence of honest neighbours. 4. For matters of common Nu∣sance
and grievance, they are of a very variable nature, according to the several comforts which mans Life and Society requireth, and the contraries which infest the same. In all which, be it matter of cor∣rupting Air, Water, or Victuals, or stopping, straitning, or indanger∣ing passage, or general deceits in Weights, Measures, Sizes, or coun∣terfeiting Wares, and things vendi∣ble; the Office of the Constable is to give (as much as in him lies) Information of them, and of the offenders in Leets, that they may be presented. But because Leets are kept but twice in the year, and ma∣ny of these things require present or speedy remedy, the Constable, in things of notorious and vulgar nature, ought to forbid and re∣press
them in the mean time. 8. To the eighth, They are for their Contempt to be fined and im∣prisoned by the Justices in their Sessions. 9. To the ninth: The Oath they take is in this manner. YOƲ shall swear, that you shall well and truly serve the King, and the Lord of this Law-day; and you shall cause the Peace of our Lord the King to be well and duely kept, to your power: And you shall arrest all those that you see committing Ri∣ots, Debates, and Affrayes in breach of Peace: And you shall well and duely endeavour your self to your best knowledge, that the Statutes of Win∣chester for Watch, Huy and Cry, and the Statutes made for the punishment
of sturdy Beggars, Vagabonds, Rogues, and other idle Persons, coming with∣in your Office, be truly executed, and the Offenders punished; And you shall endeavour, upon complaint made, to apprehend Barreters and riotous Per∣sons, making Affrays, and likewise to apprehend Felons; and if any of of them make resistance with force, and multitude of mis-doers, you shall make Out-cry, and pursue them till they be taken; and shall look un∣to such Persons as use unlawful Games; and you shall have regard unto the maintenance of Artillery; And you shall well and duely exe∣cute all Process and Precepts sent unto you from the Justices of Peace of the County; and you shall make good and faithful presentments of all Blood-sheds, Out-cries, Affrays, and Rescues made
within your Office; and you shall well and duely, according to your Power and knowledge, do that which belong∣eth to your Office of Constable, to do for this year to come. So help &c. 10. To the tenth, The Authori∣ty is the same in substance, differ∣ing onely in extent; The pety Con∣stable serving onely for for one Town, Parish, or Borough, the Head Constable serving for the whole Hundred; Neither is the pet∣ty Constable subordinate to the Head Constable for any command∣ment that proceeds from his own Authority, but it is used, that the Precepts of the Justices be deliver∣ed unto the High Constables, who being few in number, may better attend the Justices, and then the Head Constables by vertue thereof,
make their Precepts over to the pet∣ty Constables. 11. To the eleventh, In case of necessity he may appoint a De∣puty, or in default thereof, the Steward of the Court Leet may; which Deputy ought to be sworn. Now to conclude, the Office of Constables consists wholly in these three things; viz. Their Of∣fice con∣cerning 1. The conservation of the Peace. 2. The serving the Pre∣cepts and Warrants of the Justices. 3. Their attendance for the execution of Sta∣tutes.
CHAP. XXI. Of the Jurisdiction of Justices Itine∣rantes in the Principality of Wales. THese Justices have power to hear and determine all cri∣minal Causes, which are called, in the Laws of England, The Pleas of the Crown; and herein they have the same Jurisdiction that the Justices have in his Majesties Bench, commonly called the Kings Bench. They have Jurisdiction to hear and determine all civil Causes, which are called in the Laws of England, Common Pleas; and do take knowledgement of all Fines, levied of Lands or Hereditaments,
without suing out any Dedimus po∣testatem; and herein they have the same Jurisdiction that the Justices of the Common Pleas do execute at Westminster. Also they may hear and deter∣mine all Assises upon Disseisins of Lands or Hereditaments, wherein they equal the Jurisdiction of the Justices of the Assize. Justices of Oyer and Terminer may hear and determine all nota∣ble Violences and Outrages perpe∣trated or done within their several Precincts of the Principality of Wales. In the Kings Gift are, 1. The Prothonotory, his Of∣fice is to draw all Pleadings, and to enter and engross all Re∣cords
and Judgments in civil Cau∣ses. 2. The Clerk of the Crown, his Office is to draw and engross all Proceedings, Arraignments, and Judgments in criminal causes. In the disposing of the Judge. 1. The Marshal, whose Office is to attend the Persons of the Judges at their coming, sitting, and going from the Sessions or Court. 2. The Crier, He is, tanquam pub∣licus Praeco, to call forth such Per∣sons whose appearances are neces∣sary, and to impose silence to the People. There is a Commission under the great Seal of England, to certain Gentlemen, giving them power to
preserve the Peace, and to resist and punish all turbulent Persons, whose misdemeanours may tend to the disquiet of the People; and these be called the Justices of the Peace, and every of them may well and truly be called and termed Eire∣narcha. The chief of them is called Cu∣sos Rotulorum, in whose custody all the Records of their Proceedings are resident. Others there are of that number called Justices of Peace and Quo∣rum, because in their Commission they have power to sit and deter∣mine Causes concerning breach of Peace, and misbehaviour; the words of their Commission are conceived thus, Quorum, such and such, unum vel duos, &c. esse volumus; and with∣out
some one or more of them of the Quorum, no Sessions can be hold∣en: And for the avoiding of a superfluous number of such Justi∣ces (for through the Ambition of many, it is counted a credit to be burthened with that Authority) the Statute of 38 Hen. 8. hath ex∣presly prohibited, that there shall be but eight Justices of Peace in every County. These Justices, be∣ing appointed by the Lord Keeper, do hold their Sessions quarterly. In every Shire, where the Com∣mission of the Peace is established, there is a Clerk of the Peace, for the Entring and Engrossing of all Pro∣ceedings before the said Justices. And this Officer is appointed by the Custos Rotulorum.
Every Shire hath its Sheriff, which word being of the Saxon English, is as much to say, as Shire Reeve, or Minister of the County: His Function or Office is twofold. 1. Ministerial. 2. Judicial. As touching his Ministerial Of∣fice, he is the Minister and Execu∣tioner of all the Process and Pre∣cepts of the Courts of Law, and thereof ought to make Return and certificate. 34 H. 8. c. 16. As touching his Judicial Of∣fice, he hath Authority to hold two several Courts of distinct na∣tures: The one called the Tourne, because he keepeth his turn and circuit about the Shire, and hold∣eth the same Court in several pla∣ces, wherein he doth enquire of all
Offences perpetrated against the Common Law, and not forbidden by any Statute, or Act of Parlia∣ment; and the Jurisdiction of this Court is derived from Justice di∣stributive, and is for criminal of∣fences, and is held twice every year. The other is called the County Court, wherein he doth determine all petty and small Causes civil, under forty shillings, arising with∣in the said County, and thereof it is called the County Court. The jurisdiction of this Court is derived from Justice Commutative, and is held every Month: The Of∣fice of the Sheriff is annual, and in the Kings gift, whereof he is to have a Patent.
Every Shire hath an Officer called an Escheator, which is an Office to attend the Kings Revenue, and to seize into his Majesties hands all Lands, either escheated Goods, or Lands forfeited, and therefore is called Escheator; And he is to in∣quire, by good Inquest, of the death of the King's Tenants, and to whom their Lands are descended, and to seize their Bodies and Lands for Ward, if they be within age, and is accountable for the same; and this Officer is named by the Lord Treasurer of England. There are in every Shire two o∣ther Officers, called Crowners, or Coroners: they are to enquire by Inquest, in what manner, and by whom every Person dyeth of a vio∣lent death, and to enter the same
of Record, which is matter crimi∣nal, and a Plea of the Crown, and therefore they are called Coroners, or Crowner as one hath written, be∣cause their enquiry ought to be pub∣lick, in corona populi. 34 H. 8.20. These Officers are chosen by the Free-holders of the Shire, by ver∣tue of a Writ out of the Chancery, De Coronatore elegendo: And of them I need not to speak more, because these Officers are in use elsewhere. Forasmuch as every Shire is di∣vided into Hundreds, it is also by the said Statute of 34 H. 8. cap. 26. ordered, that two suffici∣ent Gentlemen, or Yeomen, shall be appointed Constables of every Hundred.
Also there is in every Shire one Goal, or Prison, appointed for the restraint of Liberty of such Per∣sons as for their offences are there∣unto committed, until they shall be delivered by course of Law. In every Hundred of every Shire, the Sheriff thereof shall nominate sufficient Persons to be Bailiffs of that Hundred, and Under-mini∣sters of the Sheriff; and they are to attend upon the Justices in eve∣ry of their Courts and Sessions.
THE CONTENTS. Of the Readings, &c. LEcture I. Pag. 3. The Definition of Treason, 5. The first Case, 20. Lecture II. 41. The Second Case, 49. Lecture III. 62. The Contents of the Cases of Treason, &c. CHAP. I. CAses of Treason, Pag. 73. Chap. II. The Punishment, Tryal, and Proceeding in Cases of Treason, 78. Chap. III. Cases of Misprision of Treason, 83. Chap. IV. The Punishment, Tryal, and pro∣ceeding
in Cases of Misprision of Trea∣son, ibid. Chap. V. Cases of pety Treason, 84. Chap. VI. The Punishment, Tryal, and proceedings in cases of Pety Treason, 85. Chap. VII. Cases of Felony, 86. Chap. VIII. The Punishment, Tryal, and proceedings in cases of Felony, 93. Chap. IX. Cases of Felony de se, with the Punishment, Tryal and Proceedings, 98. Chap. X. Cases of Premunire. 99. Chap. XI. The Punishment, Tryal, and pro∣ceeding in Cases of Premunire, 102. Chap. XII. Cases of Abjuration and Exile, and the Proceedings therein. 103. Chap. XIII. Cases of Heresie, and the Tryal and Proceedings therein. 106. Chap. XIV. The King's Prerogative in Parliament, 107. Chap. XV. The Kings Prerogative in mat∣ters of War or Peace. 108. Chap. XVI. The Kings Prerogative in mat∣ters of Moneys, 110. Chap. XVII. The Kings Prerogative in matters of Trade and Traffick. 111. Chap. XVIII. The Kings Prerogative in
the Persons of his Subjects, 112. Chap. XIX. An Answer to the Question pro∣posed by Sir Alexander Hay, Knight, touching the Office of Constables, 114. Chap. XX. Three ends of the Institution of the Court Leet, 118. Chap. XXI. The Jurisdiction of Justices Itinerantes in the Principality of Wales, Pag. 132. FINIS.
