l1037a 12328427 55119
AN APPENDIX TO A COURSE OF Chymistry. BEING Additional REMARKS To the former OPERATIONS. TOGETHER WITH The Process of the Volatile salt of Tartar, and some other Useful Preparations. Writ in FRENCH by Monsieur NICHOLAS LEMERY. Translated by WALTER HARRIS Doctor of PHYSICK. LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's Church-Yard, 1680.
THE PREFACE. READER, THE Course of Chymistry, to which this is an Appendix, was received so well, that I shall forbear using many reasons, why I now cause this to be Pub∣lished. I am sure all such as have more in them of the Physician than Chymist, and whose designs are Truely and Methodically to Cure, by having laid a Solid Foundation for Physick by good Prin∣ciples, and who do not expect as many Miracles from a Spirit, or Salt, as some Women boast of from a simple Receipt for the Ague, or the like; such Rational Physicians, I dare say, will gladly enough receive some hints of this Appendix. The Gentleman, though a Chymist to the purpose, and one that has spared no manner of pains to find out the Mysteries of this Art, yet is so extreamly Can∣did, as to speak of Chymical Remedies, like a third person unconcerned, any further than real truth lies at stake. He makes few Panegyricks of the Remedies herein, or before mentioned, and discourses of them so, as to search out their nature by nothing but matter of fact, and rejecting all No∣tions
that his hand cannot touch, or his eye see. This present Supplement is the effect of his work∣ing Brain, since the first Edition of his Book, of which the Translation was made, the Author having since sent me two other Editions, out of which I have collected these Additions, for your further Curiosity. One thing particularly is here taken notice of, which I can never repent the read∣ing, nor the being an instrument in making it bet∣ter known; it is, that divers things do by Calci∣nation and Distillation not only receive an impressi∣on of fire, but even fiery parts into their composi∣tion to a very great quantity, nay to a considera∣ble augmentation of their weight and substance. If you Calcine Lead in a Crucible, although you see a great many Vapours arise out of the matter during the Calcination, yet the Calx being at last weighed, will be found considerably heavier than the Lead was at first, which the wit of man can never explicate, but by admitting the recepti∣on of fiery parts into the Calx, see p. 33, 34. Calcine four ounces of the common Regulus of Antimony, stirring it all the while with a Spatule; there will rise up a vapour for an hour and halfs time, or thereabouts, and when it fumes no longer, weigh it, and there will be two drachms and a half more than the Regulus weighed at first, see p. 60. Distil in a Retort the Burning Spirit of Sa∣turn out of Salt of Saturn, and let the Salt you distil be six ounces, you'l thence draw an ounce and six drachms of liquor, and there will remain in the Retort six ounces and six drachms of matter.
Now nothing in nature can here make this Addi∣tion of two ounces and a half, but the entrance of Fire, fire imbodied into the matter, see p. 35. of this Appendix. The instances here mentioned may suffice to prove, how that subtil, dangerous, and too active Principle, Fire, does predominate in abundance of Remedies, that are commonly used. I shall add one word concerning the manner of the Distillation of Acid Spirits, by which we may the better guess at their Nature and Capacity. A Retort is placed so in a Furnace, that the Fire may Rever∣berate, or beat back again upon the vessel, great fires are kindled, and continued for 2, 3, 4 dayes together, they are made as exceeding violent as Art can make them, the Retort and the Ingredi∣ents in it, if you look into the Furnace, do all ap∣pear of a live coal, they turn into as true a fire as the Wood it self, and there seems to be not the least difference but in the Figure, and thus by the violent force of this most active, vigorous, searching, but destructive Principle, Fire, the acid Spirits are driven out into a large Receiver, in White or Red clouds, and there having room to play a while, they at last condense into fiery Spirits, or a spirituous fire. These Spirits, when the vessels are cold, are taken out, and stopt up carefully (hardly any thing but glass stopples will serve the turn) and though they are fixt Spirits, the fire contained in them will needs tend upwards, and afterwards, as occasion serves, these nimble Spirits are not only used for Dissolution of Me∣tals (which they do well for) but are given Chri∣stians
inwardly, too too often, nay, by some Chy∣mical Practisers, especially such as love Chymi∣stry so dearly, that they are in continual hopes of the Philosophers stone, these same Spirits shall be given with as much freedom, and as little regret of Conscience as a draught of Small beer. Now does it not deserve serious consideration what these Spirits are made of, what is the nature of fire taken inwardly, and what miraculous effects must needs happen from these elaborate, and so powerful remedies! Nature is a tender thing, and must be used very gently if you would help her, she's a composition of flesh and bloud, and uses wonderful moderation in every thing she does; offer her any thing injurious or distasteful, and she's never quiet till she has thrown it off; a draught of Milk and water will do her good to the very heart, when her functions are disturb'd; and she pants for burning heat. I know you may force her to be con∣pented with Acid, cooling, (and yet fiery) Spirits given in Juleps, or the like, but whether they are really agreeable and beneficial to Nature, we may have no small reason to doubt. I know the common universal practice of the world now-a daies will plead more for Acids than any thing I can say against them. Yet this is plain to my understanding, that all Big-worded Reme∣dies, and such as are most popular, have their cer∣tain Fate, they have their beginning, their time of flourishing, and their Period. Once Spirit of Salt was all in all, every body must be dropping it into their drink. Now 'tis almost forgot; other Master pieces in Quackery have come in its place.
Who would have thought lately, that Rabels drops (supposed to be Oyl of Vitriol sweetned) should so soon be no more talkt of? One would have thought at first, that this wonderful Monsieur would have spoiled utterly every Physicians practice, and that they would have had no more to do, he so Monopo∣lized the whole Art by his Remedy. And yet we see he's return'd long since for France, and Physicians are just where they were before his coming. I would not be understood, by what I have said, to condemn the use of Natural Acids, the Acid Fer∣ment of the stomach speaks their excellency suffici∣ently, and want of Appetite is immediately assisted by them; and besides all, Natural salts, of which Aliments are full, are known to be Acid, and there is no other salt in nature, but the Acid, as is at large proved in the following Treatise. So that Acids have their use, and benefit beyond question. But it is the frequent and continual use of Artificial Acids, such as are drawn by fire, and become of a fiery nature, that I presume to tax and question. A Citron in a Feaver may be of greater help and comfort, and allay the boiling Heat, and resist the prevailing malignity, more than can be thought. The Juyce of Lemmons, not that crude Juyce, which is com∣monly vended, and of which the Syrop is too too often made, but the Juyce of good Lemmons; and so of Oranges, might be put into Juleps to give them an Acidity, instead of Spirit of Vitriol, and no harm done. But a few drops, forsooth, of that suspected Spirit are more gentile, and neat, and, for the great honour of Chymistry, are grown into common use, almost as much as salt for our meat.
Natural Remedies will prevail, when we have tried as many pretty conceits as we please. Nature will provide us Herbs and Roots, when Chy∣mists, and Chymistry, as to great part of it, are dead and buried, and have undergone the same Fate that all particular Remedies of Hectors, and great Boasters have hitherto done, by the wise disposal of all-seeing Providence. They dye commonly with their Masters, or if they do out∣live their thread of time, they soon decline more and more, till they come to lose all their Esteem. Nevertheless upon urgent occasions, when Symptoms are exceeding violent, and are not to be conquer'd with ordinary means, Acid Spirits may, and perhaps ought to be used. As in a Pox or Gonorrhea, when Defluxions are violent, and Symptoms accidentally high, when the Pa∣tient is almost in despair, and frightned with un∣usual Symptoms, we must have recourse to Mer∣cury, let us say what we will, and exhibite that quantity which otherwise we should not, if the per∣son had been rightly treated at first; as we are forced to use Actual Cauteries, to prevent Gan∣grenes, and burn to the purpose, when there's a necessity for it: So in cases of the like nature, the disguised fire in Acids may be given inwardly, with safety enough. Pestilential Feavers, where the Bloud is wholly fluid, and the Fibres that gave it consistence, and made it condense, when grown cold, are destroyed by the Subtile Malignity, may perhaps require better or stronger Acids than Vinegar can give.
Having spoken thus much in reference to Acid fiery Spirits, it may well be enquired, whether or no in the Distillation of such Spirits, there is any addition of weight, as there is most sensibly in the instances forenamed. To which I Answer, that Acid Spirits come forth with such Heat and Violence, that it is almost Impossible to lute the Junctures so exactly well, as not to lose some of them, they are so exceeding fiery, and of so piercing a nature, that some of them will break out, do what you can. How will a room smell of Nitrous Spirits, while they are a Distilling! they'l try what Lungs you are made of, let the Receiver be never so big or thick. And this is the reason, that the Ingredients weigh no more than when they were first put in; for as fast as the fire comes in through the Retort, some Spirits break out at the Junctures. To prove the nature of these Spirits to be as Hot as I say, I could here instance an Experi∣ment of this Author. 'Twas in short this: he Distilled Vitriol three dayes and three nights to∣gether, and there came forth an Acid Spirit, as it uses to do; when the vessels were cold, he found in the Receiver nothing but a Mass of salt, or Oyl of Vitriol congealed. This salt was so exceeding Caustick, that if he offered to touch the least part of it, it burnt like fire, and he was fain immediately to put his hand in water; and when he threw a little of it into the water, it made just such a hissing noise as burning coals do; it likewise made the water very hot, hotter than common Oyl of Vitriol will do. See p. 94, 95.
And now I have done with Acids, it will be expedient to speak something of Alkali's. Knife and Sheath go together. Alkali salts, whether they be made by burning Plants into Ashes, or by Calcination in a Retort or Crucible, and so making of them a Lixivium, &c. they all lose the nature they were endowed with at first, and from Natural Acid Salts become Porous; the fire by opening them drives out the Acid part, and leaves them full of Pores, ready to receive, and make an Ebullition with any Acids they shall afterwards meet with; they are partly the remaining ter∣restrious, and fixt part of what they were, and partly an additional supplement of fire. Now there are Natural Alkali's (though not Alkali. salts) which perform the good effect of Al∣kali's, such as Perle, Coral, Crabs-eyes, &c. and these may be used to answer the Indication of sweetning Acids, without any need of having re∣course to those productions of fire, to wit, Alkali salts, unless there be extraordinary occasion; as I said before concerning the use of Natural Acids, unless the greatness of Symptoms required the Artificial. Speaking to this purpose to a most Ingenious Physician, he was pleased to ask me, whether I did not Roast, and Boil the meat that I eat, or whether that did terrifie me from eating my meat. But I think there's a great deal of difference be∣tween a warmer sort of Infusion, as Boiling is, and heat at a distance, which in aleasure tract of time dries, and prepares meat to be fit for the Stomach, which insinuates gently, and which
loses the destructive quality of fire, by reason of the distance, as is the manner of Roasting; there's a vast difference, I say, between these Heats, and turning Ingredients into a Coal fire, as is done both in Retorts and Crucibles in the making of Artificial acids and alkali's. And as for meat, I cannot much approve; and few Physicians, I think, do, that which is Broil'd on the Coals, and so nearly partakes of the Impression of fire; it digests ill, I am sure, and breeds Melancholick unwholsome nourishment. Chymical Digestions are of most excellent use, to draw out the True and Natural virtue of things; they are made in a Sand-heat, or else in a Balne∣um, mild and tender wayes of opening bodies; and the Remedies lay no such force upon Nature, as upon the Disease. Remedies were at first or∣dered by Nature so well, as to need but little of our help, they were intended to help those poor harmless souls, who knew no better than to make an ordinary fire to keep themselves warm by, and these could gather a proper Herb to heat, or boil in a little water, and there often came rare feats of it too. Volatile Spirits and Salts do rise with a gentler fire, and may for that good reason claim prefe∣rence to all Fixt Alkali's, whether Spirits or Salts. Ʋpon great occasions they will seem to work Mira∣cles, raise Dead to Life, and when the mild flame of the Bloud, (in which Life is said to consist) seems to be quite extinguished, these Volatile Spirits shall light it again a-fresh, and add new vigour to the languishing efforts of Nature.
But these Volatiles too must be given with great caution, either the humours must be Prepa∣red, or the Spirits very low, , or else they may Translate the humours to the Brain, from the parts below, and give the Disease a Nobler Seat than it had before. The Spirit of Sal Armoniack is an excellent thing, and though it is derived from Urinous, and seeming uncleanly Principles, yet if well drawn and rectified from Phlegm, has oftentimes great effects, and especially if Cohobated upon Castor and Amber, will yield to few Volatiles, unless that most Noble nay Royal Preparation of God∣dard's drops, Prepared by that Ingenious and Learned Physician, Dr. Goodall; who upon en∣quiry into the nature of those Medicines, has been so free as to acquaint me, that they are separated with that moderate and gentle degree of fire, that the Balneum, in which the Glass bodies are placed, are never to exceed the heat of humane bloud circulating in the vessels, or that of an Egg, upon Incubation: by which means there is a most exact, and even Natural separation of the Vo∣latile and Spirituous parts, from the fixt and Phlegmatick. Whereas if this mild degree of heat were not observ'd, he saies the Principles would be confounded together. After this, the seve∣ral Principles, with which this Noble Prepara∣tion is endowed, are by much labour, and proper degrees of heat, both in their repeated Sublimati∣ons, Rectifications, and Circulations, made all with a gentle fire, advanced to that degree of Volati∣lity, that I have reason to esteem it one of the best
Nervous, Cephalick, and Hysterick Medicines, that is used in Chymistry, and much more effectual than others to answer all those Indications in our Art, where Volatiles, or Diaphoreticks are thought to be useful. Of this Preparation there are se∣veral sorts, differing secundum magis & minus, being Impregnated with one or more of the Origi∣nal constituent Principles, in a higher or lower degree; so that they may be the better suited to variety of Constitutions, and answer very diffe∣rent Indications. Perhaps some will say, I Prevaricate with my Design, in Prefacing such Cautions to a Book of Chymistry, and making great part of Chymistry a little too much suspected; and especially conside∣ring what I said in praise of this Art before the COURSE OF CHYMISTRY. But I would have it consider'd, that I never thought this sort of Remedies of much use in Feavers, and that Chronical distempers might possibly find some greater relief from those Active Medicines, espe∣cially after the tryal of others, by virtue of that Maxime, à mitioribus ad fortiora progredien∣dum. These things may require some longer Dis∣course, and perhaps I may urge them further here∣after, when I may speak more at large concerning Remedies, and give some Practical Observations upon them. What I have now said, is not inten∣ded to discourage from using them upon very great occasions; only if plain things will do, what need we puzle? where we can use safe, and innocent Remedies, such as are Natural, and in the way of Nature, easily Prepared, why should we
Neglect them, for sake of such as are, or may prove dangerous? For my part, I shall never so pin my Practice to the Authority of any one, no nor many Great Names, that I must forfeit the use of my own Reason, and Observation. What does good, I'le follow, though a silly Igno∣rant should teach me; what does bad, I'le avoid, though never so Magisterial.
THE OPERATIONS Added in this APPENDIX. OTher Precipitates of Mercury, Page 56 Remarks. Page 57 Chap. 13. Of the Stone Haematites, Page 68 Sublimation of the Stone Haematites, Page 69 Remarks. Page 70 Valatile Salt of Amber, Page 99 Remarks. Page 100 Soluble Tartar, Page 108 Remarks. Page 109 Chalybeated, or Martial Cryftals of Tartar, ib. Remarks. Page 110 Soluble Tartar Chalybeated, Page 111 Remarks. ib. Volatile Salt of Tartar, Page 122 Remarks. Page 124 Chap. Of Myrrhe, Page 132 Tincture of Myrrhe, Page 133 Remarks. ib. Oyl of Myrrhe per Deliquium. Page 134 Remarks. ib.
AN APPENDIX TO A COURSE of CHYMISTRY, CONTAINING The easiest manner of performing those Ope∣rations that are in use in Physick. ADD to Page 6. Line 26. In the Re∣marks upon the Principles of Chymi∣stry. Nothing but the Oyl, can proper∣ly be said to be Inflammable, and the Oyl is so much the more so, as the Salts, with which it is closely united, have been more or less spiri∣tualized. For that which I call Spirit in the Oyl, is nothing but an Essential or Volatile Salt; this Salt is not of it self Inflammable, but serves to Rarifie and Exalt the parts of the Oyl to render them the more susceptible of Motion, and conse∣quently of Flagration; after the same manner as when Salt-peter is put to mix with some Oyly substance, this Oyly matter fires much more easi∣ly than when it is alone; though Salt-peter of it self is not at all Inflammable, as I shall prove hereafter. We have Examples of the truth of what I say in Spirit of Wine, Oyl of Turpentine,
and all other Inflammable Liquors; for they are only Oyls subtilized and refined by the Volatile Salts they contain. Sticks, and other parts of Vegetables have a great deal of Salt much like to Salt-peter; this Salt being straitly united with their Oyl makes them the more apt to flame, than if it had not been a part. The Fat of Animals is full of a Volatile Acid falt; Wax, Rosine, and all other matters that are inflammable, are im∣pregnated with an Acid Salt, Essential or Vola∣tile. I say the Salt which causes the flagration of Oyls, must be either Volatile or Essential, for if it were a fixt Salt, 'twould have a contrary ef∣fect, it would allay in some measure the quick motion of the parts of an Inflammable body; and this we see happens when Sea-salt is flung in∣to the fire, it serves to put it out. Common Sul∣phur yields us another instance of the same kind: consisting of one part Sulphurous or Oyly, and another Saline or fixt Acid, which plainly ap∣pears in the opening of it, the Oyly part fires, and would soon rise like other Oyls into a great White Flame, but that the Acid part being a load to its activity hinders it from rising, and so forces it to cast but only a small Blew Flame; and a proof of what I affirm may be had from mixing Salt-peter with Sulphur; for the Volatile Salt of Salt peter does Volatilize the Salts of Sulphur, and causes a White flame to burn violently, as I shall shew hereafter in the Opera∣tion of Salt Polychrest.
Add to Pag. 7. Lin. 22. Is it not likely enough that the bottom of the Sea, or its shores, may be much like the surface of the Earth we inhabit, and that there may be Mountains, Rocks, diffe∣rent sorts of earth, and consequently inexhausti∣ble Mountains of Salt in a Million of places at the bottom of the Sea, whence it receives its Brackishness? And it may be there are Waters, which after taking Salt from several earths, do at last dis∣charge themselves into the sea through an infinite number of subterranean channels, which do much contribute likewise to making Sea-water salt. That which confirms me in this opinion is, because there are Lakes in Italy, Germany, E∣gypt, the Indies, and many other places, which are as Salt as the Sea, and can have no other cause but that their waters have hapned to run through Mines of Salt. I doubt not but many will be apt to object against my Opinion, that the Sea being of so prodigious boundless an extent, all the Salt I have spoken of, would not be able to salt it as it is; but if they please to consider, that this great extent of the Ocean may meet with Mines of Salt in abundance of places, and what is once dis∣solved can never be separated from it, I am per∣swaded their doubt will soon vanish. Add to what is said, that Sea-water does not contain so great a quantity of Salt as is commonly imagined: and this is easily prov'd, if you take the pains to
evaporate some of it over the fire, or dissolve salt in that water; for it will receive a conside∣rable quantity into it, which is a certain sign, that the water was not so salt before, as it might have been, for if it had been impregnated with as much as it could, 'twould have dissolved no more. Therefore we have good reason to believe, that the Sea, which may be called a large Lake, becomes Salt through the Mines that are there∣in, and the Salt Currents that in several places empty into it. Add to Pag. 7. Lin. 30. It may be objected that Salt-peter is found in places where no Acid liquor can be thought to come; but no body can doubt but that there is an Acid in the Air; which though a very insensible body, is able enough to enter into Stones and Earths, the truth whereof is seen every day in Earths that have lost their Salt as much as could be drawn by Art, which upon being exposed some time to the open air get new additions of Salt, and encrease their weight considerably. Now the liquor that I speak of, which runs in some places of the earth, receives its Acidity from this Acid Spirit of the Air, which condenses in some places better than in others, by reason of the coolness, or some other disposition it finds there. I conceive therefore that Salt-peter is form'd in Stones and Earths by the Acid Spirit of the Air, after the same manner as Sal Gemme in Mines by an Acid liquour, and that this Aerial
Acid entring insensibly into the body of Stones produces a Salt at first much like Sal Gemme; but afterwards new Acid Spirits still coming and mixing with it makes it of a middle nature between Volatile and Fixt. And it is for this reason that a great deal of Salt-peter is taken from old ruined buildings, for the Stones there continuing a long time exposed to the Air, re∣ceive greater quantity of Spirits than other stones; it is likewise to be found in Cellers and other places where the Sun casts no heat, because the Spirit of the Air does there easily condense by reason of the coolness and moisture. Add to Pag. 8. line 3. All Earths being im∣pregnated with an Acid Salt, as I have said, 'tis not hard to conceive how that the Salt of Vegetables is communicated to them from the earth wherein they grew. Their Growth must needs have proceeded from a Salt juice of the Earth they grew in, which having opened the Seed through the Fermentation it caused, infinu∣ates and filters it self into the Fibers that con∣stitute the Plant; and the leaving grounds Fal∣low some years, is in order to preserve and retain the Salt that is continually encreased in them by the Acid Spirit of the Air. Likewise Dung, and other matters, which are said to fatten and fructifie Lands, do so by nothing else but their Salt. Neither need we wonder at the barren∣ness of Sandy and stony soils, for that the Acid of the Air cannot unite and fix with them in sufficient quantity to render them fertile. Ne∣vertheless
'tis worth observation, that there are Lands which remain barren too through too great an abundance of Salt they contain, and for this reason in Egypt they are forced to temper their grounds with Sand after the Ebbing of the River Nile, to make them Fertile; because the Earth, 'till that is done, is so full of Salt, that its pores are quite choaked up with it. So that instead of causing any Fermentation in the Seed, the Salt fixes and depresses it, that it can't have its motion free enough to rarifie, and raise a stalk; but now when Sand is mingled with it, it is able to divide and extend the Salt, which not having then such power of fixing the Seed, it Ferments and rises into a Plant. Whence it may be seen, that too much Salt is as Offensive to the Earths fertility, as too little, and that it is the same thing with other Fermentable matters as it is with Earths, they come to ferment by means of a moderate quantity of Salt mixed with them, for if you add too much, the Fermenta∣tion will be spoil'd. Again, every kind of Salt is not fit to ferti∣lize lands, it must be a Volatile Salt, or ap∣proaching to the nature of Salt-peter, to serve for Vegetation; a Salt too fixt would rather spoil it, and it has been observ'd that places which should fructifie, have brought forth no∣thing, when Sea-salt has been sprinkled upon them; the reason of which is for that this Fixt Salt hinders the Fermentation that was necessary to produce fertility.
Nevertheless it sometimes happens, that the Ashes of Vegetables, though full of a fixt salt, do serve to fertilize; and this Countrey men are well acquainted with, who in some places where they find their Lands too lean and barren to yield any thing without assistance of Art, do use at certain seasons of the year to burn Fern and Turfs upon them, and spread about the Ashes. Now it is by reason of a Lixivious salt in the Ashes, that the Lands are hereby improv'd. But this happens for the same reason as I said before, for the fixt salt of Vegetables that lies in the Ashes is very Porous, as I shall prove hereafter; and so does very well mix with the Spirits or Acid Salts of the Air, and turns easily into Salt-peter, as when the Spirit of Salt-peter mixt with an Alkali salt, makes a good Salt-peter. As for sea-salt, possibly it might happen, that if it were left in the Earth for some considera∣ble time, 'twould impregnate with the Spirit of the Air, and so being at length Volatilized would render a place fertile. But because it is a very compact body, and its parts closely united, the Volatilizing of it would be a tedious business, and so the present requisite Fermentation fail∣ing, the place would remain barren too long to gratifie our expectations. 'Tis very likely that the Volatile or Nitrous salt meets in the Earth with some Sulphurous or fat matter, that is continually raised by the Sub∣terranean heat toward the Surface of the Earth, and unites with it. This mixture of a Volatile
salt and Sulphur together may much contribute towards explicating the manner of Vegetation; for just as the mixture of Sulphur and Salt-peter does excellently dispose to an Exaltation by heat, which will not happen while they are separated; so the Bituminous or fat part of the earth mix∣ing with Salt-peter, which all Earths have, the subterranean heat exalts them much more easily, than if the Salt were alone. And now let us see what happens from this Exaltation to the production of Plants. Some part of this Sulphurous salt, meeting with seed in the earth proper to grow, does en∣ter into the seed, and cause a Fermentation, that is to say, suppling the parts of the seed, disposes it to open it self. Now 'tis very certain, and what has been sensibly demonstrated by Micro∣scopes, that each grain of seed contains in little the whole Plant with all its parts. Wherefore this opening the body of the seed is by reason that the sulphurous salts entring at the pores of the Root of this small Plant, and by their Vo∣latile quality insinuating all along the Fibres which constitute the Plant, do orderly display before us what was before but very confused in respect of us. These salts do never enter at the head of the Plant, and so descend to the Root, though often the Root of the Seed lies uppermost, and the head or stalk downwards, because the Pores of the stalk are not of such a Figure as is proper to receive them, whereas those of the Root have a proper contexture.
The Volatility of these Salts does also cause the stalk, though seated downwards, to rise up∣wards, and follow their tendency, which is al∣ways up; and this is that which by extending and enlarging the Fibres of the Plant, makes it grow to that height which their nature requires. 'Tis probable that this fat part of earth insinu∣ating with the salt, as I have said, does make the Oyl of a mixt body; for we find that those matters which help best to fertilize, are full of Volatile salt and Oyl, as Dung, Ʋrine, and Plants corrupted. 'Tis fit to observe here, that the salt does act after another-guise manner than the Oyl in hin∣dring the Fermentation or corruption of the matter 'tis mixed with; for it does not only stop the pores, and hinder the air from entring, but fixes it likewise by its hooked parts, that it can neither have motion nor rarefaction, for which reason 'tis that Meat is salted in order to keep it sweet, and does thereby remain firm and com∣pact for some time. Three kinds of salt are drawn from Vegeta∣bles, an Acid salt called Essential, a Volatile, and a Fixt salt. The first is like Salt-peter, and some∣times like Tartar, according as it contains more or less earth; this salt is drawn from the juice of the Plant, as I said before; for after ex∣pression and purifying this juice, 'tis set in a vessel in some cool place a few daies without stirring, and the salt shoots into Crystals all about. This Acid salt may be said to be the true salt that was in the Plant, because the means
that are used in drawing it are Natural, and such as cannot change its nature; but this can't be said of those others, because the violent fires that are used about them make impressions of another nature, and their effects are very diffe∣rent, so that the fire seems to alter and disguise them, as I shall shew in the following discourse. The second salt, or the Volatile salt of Plants is usually drawn from seeds or fruits Fermenting. While it remains in the Vegetable, it differs from the Essential salt only in this, that being driven up higher by Spirits, it becomes more Volatile. The Fermentation that is caused in fruits by beating and bruising them, does very much as∣sist in Volatilizing the salt; for it sets the parti∣cles at work, and disposes them for an easier separation; but it happens that in the great cir∣culation, or continual motion this salt is in, it unites so strongly with the Oyl that Fruits and Seeds are full of, that they can't be separated by Crystallizing the juice, as they can in drawing them from other parts of the Plant. We must therefore have recourse to the help of fire. The Fruit or seed which contains the Volatile salt, as I shall prove in its proper place, is Distilled by a Retort, and Water comes forth in the first place, then an Oyl, and lastly a most keen ill scented Salt (that easily flies away) upon en∣creasing the fire to purpose, is driven into the Receiver. Now 'tis plain that fire has changed, or else added some thing to this salt; for when 'twas in the Plant, it had no manner of smell like that it gets by distillation. But to shew there's
a strange Alteration in this salt, as soon as 'tis mixed with an Acid, there presently appears an Ebullition, or Effervescency, which remains until the Acid has throughly entred into the salt. Which circumstance does not happen to it in its Natural being, 'tis this Ebullition that gave it the name of a Volatile Alkali, to distinguish it from a Fixt Alkali, of which I shall speak here∣after. The Chymists will needs have this Volatile Alkali to be in the Plant, just the same as when it is drawn; that is to say, they make this a diffe∣rent species of salt, lying hid under the Acid, until it is laid open by the force of fire. But this opinion is founded on no credible experience, for Anatomize the Plant how you think fit, with∣out using fire, and you shall never find any other but an Acid salt. Doubtless 'twill be said, that all other ways of diffecting Plants even into their salts, prove too weak without the assistance of this grand dissolvent fire. But if we consi∣der impartially how fire acts, we shall be forc'd to acknowledge that it rather destroyes, and con∣founds the greatest part of the bodies it opens, and does not leave them in the natural state they were in before, and especially when 'tis driven with that force which is necessary to draw this salt. So that I see no reason why the Species of things should be multiplied without necessity, by admitting many kinds of salts in Plants, and I conceive with much more probability, that the Volatile Alkali salt is a part of the Acid Essen∣tial salt I spoke of, which having been first dis∣posed to a Volatile nature, and afterwards driven
by the force of fire, draws along with it a por∣tion of Empyreumatical Oyl, that gives it such a disagreeable smell, and some terrestrious cal∣cined matter, with which it is so strongly united, and which changes its nature, by breaking the Saline points, and rendring them Porous, so that any Acid liquor being cast upon it, enters into the Pores and violently divides the parts, whence follows the Effervescency. Perchance likewise this Calx or Calcined earth may have retained igneous particles, and so the edges of the Acid beginning to open the Pores of Salt, these little igneous bodies being in a violent motion do strike about, and break open all their small prisons, and from thence it may be, the violent Ebullition happens. Such as are preju∣diced with the Sentiments of ancient Chymists, will rellish very hardly this new Opinion of mine; but I am perswaded if any one will take the pains to examine the matter near at hand, and make some Experiments on the salts of Plants, he shall find my Discourse come near enough to truth. The last salt or the fixt salt of Plants remains united with the earthy part after Distillation of the other substances; the matter is taken out of the Retort, and calcined in an open fire, for to free it from the soot that blackens it; afterwards the salt is drawn by a Lixivium as I have shewn before. This salt is called fixt, in comparison with others, because this can't sublime. The Chymists do assure us, but with little foundation for it, that in Terrestrial bodies, in Metalls, Corals, Pearls, and generally in all
bodies that Ferment with Acids, there is an hid∣den Alkali in them, which is one of the Prin∣ciples of Fermentation, wherefore they give them the name of Alkali's; but because no man∣ner of Salt can be drawn from them, to prove their Opinion, and they have no other rational Argument to perswade me, they must give me leave to think otherwise than they have done, and I conceive that the contrary to what they have established will serve me better to explicate the truth. Following therefore the Principle I have laid, I believe that those Terrestrial bodies are them∣selves Alkali's, rather than that the Ebullition of Acid and Alkali proceeds from a salt supposed to be contained in them; and further that the salts are never Alkali's 'till they have undergone the force of fire, and been reduced into a Calx. I have proved, speaking of the nature of Vola∣tile salt, that the fire did very much change the substances of things; and as I have shewn there is good reason to think there is but only one species of salt in Plants, and the Volatile salt is but a change wrought by fire, I shall proceed upon the same Principle, and affirm that there is no fixt Alkali salt in Plants, but that by Calcina∣tion the fire has fixt a part of the Acid Essential salt with the earthy part that has serv'd to break the keenest of its points, and rendred them Po∣rous, like a Calx. 'Tis by reason of these Pores that this kind of salt grows humid and melts so easily when exposed to the Air; and the Ter∣restrious parts do turn it into an Alkali, for if
they were not mixed with it, 'twould continue still an Acid salt, and opposed to Alkali. But to clear up this point the better, we must consider as nicely as may be the nature of an Acid and an Alkali. Whenas the nature of a thing so obscure as that of salt, can't better be explicated, than by admit∣ting to its parts such figures as are answerable to the effects it produces; I shall affirm, that the Acidity of any liquor does consist in keen particles of salts, in motion; and I hope no body will offer to dispute whether an Acid has points or no, seeing every ones experience does demonstrate it, they need but taste an Acid to be satisfied of it, for it pricks the tongue like any thing keen and finely cut; but a demonstra∣tive and convincing proof that an Acid does con∣sist of pointed parts is, that not only all Acid salts do Crystallize into edges, but all Dissolu∣tions of different things, caused by acid liquors, do assume this figure in their Crystallization; these Crystalls consist of points differing both in length and bigness one from another, and this diversity must be attributed to the keener or blunter edges of the different sorts of Acids; and so likewise this difference of the points in subtilty is the cause that one acid can penetrate and dissolve well one sort of mixt, that another can't rarifie at all: thus Vinegar dissolves Lead, which aqua fortis can't: Aqua fortis dissolves Quick-silver, which Vinegar will not touch; Aqua Regalis dissolves Gold, whenas Aqua fortis can't meddle with it; on the contrary Aqua
fortis dissolves Silver, but can do nothing with Gold, and so the rest. As for Alkali's, they are soon known by pour∣ing an Acid upon them, for presently, or soon after, there rises a violent Ebullition, which re∣mains until the Acid finds no more bodies to ra∣rifie. This effect may make us reasonably con∣jecture that an Alkali is a terrestrial and solid matter, whose pores are figured after such a man∣ner that the Acid points entring into them do strike at and divide whatsoever opposes their mo∣tion, and according as the parts of which the Alkali is compounded, are more or less solid, the Acids finding more or less resistance, do cause a stronger or weaker Ebullition. So we see the Effervescency that happens in the dissolu∣tion of Coral is very much milder than that in the dissolution of Silver. There are as many different Alkali's, as there are bodies that have different pores, and this is the reason why an Acid will Ferment one strong∣ly, and another not at all; for there must be a due proportion between the Acid points, and the Pores of the Alkali. The nature of Alkali's being thus established, there will be no need of flying to an imaginary salt in Plants for explication of the Effervescen∣cy; and 'twill be easily conceived that if an Al∣kali salt is full of a terrestrial matter that renders it porous like other Alkali's, it must cause an E∣bullition. That which I said, speaking of Vola∣tile salts, may here be added, that the Igneous particles breaking out through the Pores of the
Alkali salt, where they became imprisoned in the Calcination, do much contribute to the rais∣ing this Effervescency. And really when the Acid Spirit of Vitriol, or Aquafortis is cast up∣on an Alkali salt, there happens as strong an Ebullition, as when this liquor is flung into the fire. The Fermentation that happens to Dow, to New Wine, and such like things differs from that I now spoke of, in that it is more gentle, and slow; this is caused by the Acid Natural salt contained in them, which expanding and exalting it self by its motion, does rarifie and raise up the grosser and sulphurous part that endeavours to allay its motion, from whence it comes that the matter swells up. The reason why an Acid does not make Sul∣phurous things Ferment, with so much noise and suddenness as Alkali's, is, because that Oyls con∣sist of pliant parts that yield and make no re∣sistance to the points of Acids, as a piece of Wool or Cotton will yield and give way to needles that are thrust into it. Thus methinks two sorts of Fermentations may be admitted of, the one of an Acid with an Alkali, which may be called Ebullition, and the other, when an Acid does by little and little rarifie some softish matter, as Dow, or clear and Sulphurous, as Muste, Sy∣der, and all other juices of Plants. This last sort may rather be called Fermentation. 'Tis further remarkable that the Acid and Alkali do so destroy one another in their con∣flict, that when as much Acid has been by de∣grees
poured as is necessary to penetrate the Al∣kali in all its parts, it is then no more an Alkali, nor can it be so again, though you wash it to carry off the Acid, because it has no longer that disposition of Pores which is requisite in an alka∣li; and the Acid breaks and loses its points in the contest especially when the alkali is pretty compact and solid; so that if you would reco∣ver your Acid again, you'l find it has in a man∣ner lost all its acidity, and retains only a sharp∣ness. But the Sulphur or Oyl consisting of supple yielding parts does only receive some Acid im∣pression, and no such close union, so that it can be drawn from Sulphureous bodies much the same as when it was mixt. The Salt of Animals does differ but little from the Volatile salt of Seeds and Fruits, both which are drawn in a Retort; they have the same kind of smell, taste, and other virtues. The Volatile salt of animals keeps dry a longer time than the others, because it carries away with it more fixt salt than those others. As for fixt salt, animals do yield but a very little of it, and in some animals you shall find none at all; it is drawn as the fixt salt of Plants; they are both alkali's. There is no salt that can be called alkali, to be found in the parts, or humors of animals, un∣til they have passed the fire; a Saline serosity may be observed in them, but that salt is acid; and it proceeds doubtless from the Aliments that are taken for nourishment. Now as I have shewn that there is only an acid salt in Earths
and Vegetables, so I may say the same of Ani∣mals, and the rather because no other kind of salt can be found in them in their Natural state; the alkali salts that are drawn from them, are only several mutations of an Acid salt, made by fire, which mingles with them earthy particles after the manner I have spoken of treating of the Al∣kali's of Plants. But it is observable, that whereas there is a greater proportion of Spirits in Animals than Seeds, these Spirits do serve to exalt all the Salt; which is the reason that less fixt salt is to be found in Animals than Plants. As for what many do say that Choler causes an Effervescency like an alkali, when an acid is cast upon it, 'tis a mistake through want of right Observation, for no Ebullition at all happens for some time. Nevertheless I will not say, that an Acid produces no Fermentation in Cho∣ler, Bloud, and other parts of the body, for it does very often really do that; but that is no more than uses to be done in New Wine, Beer, and other liquors of the like nature. I have al∣ready explicated this sort of Fermentation. We should not omit speaking of the Coagula∣tion that's made in Milk after a Fermentation caused either by Heat, or some Acid put into it. Methinks here is no need at all of supposing an Alkali salt, that ferments with the Acid of this liquor, as many suppose for explicating this Effect, since if we consider but the natural com∣position of Milk, we shall find nothing but a
Creamy substance swimming on the Serum, and mixed only superficially with it, by the inter∣mixture of some salt; so that it is in a fitting state of separation, as soon as the salt gains a little more motion than it had, whether it be by Fermentation, or by encreasing its activity by an acid of its own nature. Thus when the Heat of the Summer, or fire has stirred up the acid that is in the Milk, or else some acid is poured into it, the edges of the acid do cut and divide the Creamy part, to gain a free motion in the Serum, and separate into Curd all the Butter and Cheese. Now there's no strangeness in the Precipitation of the Curd, especially when an acid has been poured upon the Milk, for be∣sides the weight it gains by thickning, some part of the acids do mix with it, and encrease its weight; for according as the acid that was mingled is stronger or weaker, the Curd does Precipitate more or less. Perhaps some will say, for as much as acid is always the cause of Coagulation in Milk, there's no great likelihood that a salt of the same nature should be the instrument of uniting the several parts of Milk. But it must be considered, that although there is an acid in Milk (as no body can doubt, seeing it sowres of it self, when stale) this acid is as it were tyed up in the ramous parts of the Oyl, so that there it loses all its motion and can't come to action but by rarifying the Oyl, and making it fit to mix with the serous part; 'tis the due proportion of this salt, Oyl, and serum, that
makes the Butter and Cheesy part of Milk. Now I hope I have said enough to establish what I have affirmed, that there's no salt in na∣ture besides the acid, out of which all other salts are made, and that the Alkali salt has no Na∣tural existence in mixt bodies. My discourse will be the better conceiv'd of, speaking of the Ope∣rations of Chymistry, and you'l find that by this Principle, which I may call the most Natural and disengaged of all that have been laid 'till now, I shall be able to give account of many Phaeno∣mena's that have never been explicated by com∣mon Principles. Add to Pag. 19. lin. 1. Of Minerals. Whatsoever is found Petrified in the Earth, or on its surface, is called Mineral. Petrification is made by a Coagulation of acid or salt spirits, that are found in the pores of the Earth. This Petrification differs according to the di∣vers dispositions, or different nature of the Earth, and according to the time that Nature uses in its perfection. The growth of Minerals proceeds from an accumulation, or from several veins of congeled Waters, that do as it were glue together, and these veins are the cause that all the adjacent parts have their Sinus, and meetings a travers one another, and not running directly downwards. These Sinus, like so many joints, are of great help to Labourers to cut in the Quarries; for
by those cavities the stones are in great measure separated before-hand, whereas 'twould be ex∣tream hard working them out, if nature had not so concurred. The growth of Minerals is very different from that of Vegetables, and Animals; for whereas the former does happen through an ag∣glutination of congeled waters, as I have said; the latter is performed by means of juyces that insinuate and spread in the vessels and fibres, that Animals and Plants do consist of. Metals do differ from Minerals in being malleable, which the others are not. They are counted seven, Gold, Sylver, Iron, Tinn, Copper, Lead, and Quicksylver, this last is not malleable of it self, but is so mingled with the others; but because this is thought to be the Seed of Metals, 'tis numbred with the rest. Astrologers have conceited that there was so great an affinity and correspondence between the Seven Metals before named, and the seven Pla∣nets, that nothing happened to the one, but the other shared in it; they made this correspon∣dence to happen through an infinite number of little bodies that past to and from each of them; and they suppose these corpuscles to be so figured that they can easily pass through the pores of the Planet and Metal they represent, but cannot en∣ter into other bodies because their pores are not figured properly to receive them; or else if they do chance to get admittance into other bo∣dies, they can't fix and stay there to contribute
any nourishment; for they do imagine that the Metal is nourished and perfected by the Influence that comes from its Planet, and so the Planet again the same from the Metal. For these reasons they have given these seven Metals the name of the seven Planets, each ac∣cordingly as they are governed: and so have called Gold the Sun, Sylver the Moon, Iron Mars, Quicksylver Mercury, Tinn Jupiter, Copper Venus, and Lead Saturn. They have likewise fancied that each of these Planets has his day apart to distribute liberally his Influence on our Hemisphere; and so they tell us that if we work upon Sylver on Munday, Iron on Tuesday, and so of the rest, we shall at∣tain our end much better than on other daies. Again they have taught us that the seven Pla∣nets do every one govern some particular prin∣cipal part of our bodies; and because the Me∣tals do represent the Planets, they must needs be mighty specifick in curing the distempers of those parts, and keeping them in good plight. Thus they have assigned the Heart to Gold, the Head to Sylver, the Liver to Iron, the Lungs to Tinn, the Reins to Copper, and the Spleen to Lead. Thus you see in short what some of the sober∣est Astrologers do fancy concerning Metals, and they draw consequences from hence, which 'twould be too long here to relate. I have told you what the soberest among them say; for no∣thing can be so absurd as what some of them would have us believe.
'Tis no hard matter to disprove these conceits, and shew how groundless they are; for no body ever yet got near enough to the Planets, to sa∣tisfie himself whether they are really of the same nature with Metals, or whether any Effluvi∣ums of bodies do fall from them to us. Nevertheless some can conceit that these things are proved by Experience; but in truth there's nothing to confirm their Opinion, and we find it every day plain enough, that the Faculties and Virtues are utterly false, which they do attri∣bute to the Planets and Metals; the Metals indeed are of good use in Physick, and excellent Remedies may be drawn from them; but their effects may better be explicated by Causes near at hand than the Stars. Add to Pag. 19. Lin. 10. Gold is found in Mines in several places, both in Europe, and other parts of the World; it is usually attended with Water and very hard stones, such as are extream hard to dig; there are likewise several stones that contain particles of Gold, such as are called Golden Marcassites, the Lapis Lazuli, and La∣pis Armenus. Covetousness that has always prevail'd on the minds of men, has not forborn to possess the Chymists in hopes to make Gold; they have conceited that the production of Gold was the End that Nature always aims at in all her Mines, and that she's hindred in her design, as oft as she produces other Metals which are called Im∣perfect.
And upon this fancy they have spared no time, nor pains, nor cost, in exalting and perfecting these other Metals, and turning them into Gold; this is that which they call the Grand Ope∣ration of all, or the search after the Pholosphers stone. Some of them to compass their End do make a mixture of Gold with such other matters as serve to purifie them from their grosser parts, and work their Preparations with great fires, others do put them a Digesting in Spirituous liquors, in imitation of Nature that always uses a gentle Heat in her Operations, and so do re∣duce them into a state of Corruption, to draw thereby their Mercury, which they think to have the aptest disposition to turn into Gold. Others again do search after the seed of Gold, in Gold it self, and these make no doubt to find it there, as the seed of a Vegetable is more likely to be found in the Vegetable it self than otherwhere; in order to this they open the body of Gold by proper Dissolvents, then set it a digesting either by a Lamp-fire, or the heat of the Sun, or that of Dung, or some other degree of Fire, to be kept all along at an equal height, and such as is nearest to a Natural heat, and this to draw out the Mercury of Gold; for they are perswaded that if they could once obtain this same Mercury, sowing it in the Earth, it would bring forth Gold, as certainly as a seed does a Plant. Another sort of these men do take wonderful pains to find out the seed of Gold in Minerals, as in Antimony for example, thinking there's a
sulphur and Mercury in it as like to those in Gold as can be. Others hope to find it out in Vegetables, and things that come from them, as in Honey, Manna, Sugar, Wine, Rosa solis, Rosemary, spleenwort. And others are hot after it in Animals, and in their Gums, Bloud, Urin. But the most Curious and delicate of all, who think all the rest but Fools in comparison with them, do hunt after the seed of Gold in the Sun, and in the Dew; for the wisdom of Astrologers has found out that the Sun is a Body all of Gold melted in the Center of the World, and Coppel'd by the fire of the stars that environ it about, nay they dare affirm that this same Gold when it was a purifying did sparkle as Gold does in the Coppel. I should never make an end of this subject, if I should speak of the labours, and pains, watch∣ings, vexations and frettings, and especially the cost these unfortunate men do plunge themselves into, in following their several fancies; they are so extremely prepossessed with the conceit of becoming Rich all of a sudden, that they are al∣together uncapable of any sober admonition, and they shut their ears to any thing than can be said to disabuse them; so that all other Philosophers, that are not besotted with their fantastical opini∣ons, are by them thought and called Prophane, re∣serving to themselves the name of the only True Philosophers, or Philosophers paramount. But the saddest consideration of all is, to see a great many of them, who have spent all the flower of their years, in this desperate concern,
in which nevertheless they pertinaciously run on, and consume all they have, at last instead of re∣compence for their miserable fatigues, reduced to the lowest degree of Poverty. Penotus will serve us for an instance of this nature, among thousands of others, he died a hundred years old wanting but two, in the Hospital of Yverdon in Switzerland, and he used to say before he died, having spent his whole life in vainly search∣ing after the Philosophers stone, that if he had a mortal Enemy he did not dare to encounter openly, he would advise him above all things to give up himself to the Study and Practice of Alchymy. Though I deny not absolutely, that some cer∣tain Artist, by a particular method, might have got the way of making Gold heretofore, nor that some body may be as lucky in time to come; yet there is more appearance of Impossibility than Possibility in the case, because of the small know∣ledge that any of us have of the Natural Com∣position of this Mixt; for seeing that Gold as well as Sylver is drawn from Mines environed with Waters, it is very probable that these Wa∣ters do bring along with them some Saline Prin∣ciples that congele and incorporate in Earths of a particular composition, and whose Pores are disposed in such a manner as 'tis impossible for Art to imitate. Nevertheless in order to make Gold, a perfect knowledge of the Salts that the Waters of the Mines do convey, is very requi∣site, as well as the disposition of the Matrixes or Earths in which they do congeal. Thus we
see that working after Gold is working in the dark, and Alchymy seems very well defined by one thus: Ars sine arte, cujus principium men∣tiri, medium laborare, & finis mendicare, an Art without any Art, whose beginning is Lying, middle is nothing but Labour, and whose end is Beggery. Gold taken inwardly is thought to be a most potent Cordial, because Astrologers tell us it re∣ceives its Influence from the Sun, which is as it were the Heart of the World, and by the com∣munication of those Influences to the Heart, it serves to fortifie and cleanse it from all impuri∣ties; upon which ground a great many Opera∣tions have been invented in order to open this Metal, and separate its Sulphur from its Salt. Moreover this Operation by way of bravery is called Aurum Potabile, because this Salt or this Sulphur dissolving in a Liquor, can be taken by way of Potion: And because this Aurum Po∣tabile can be thought to be distributed into all parts of the body, they fancy it can drive out every thing that interrupts the Functions of Na∣ture, that it can free him that takes it from all fear of any Diseases for a long time, and can pro∣long life. But this Opinion is built upon a weak foun∣dation, and Experience does not confirm any of these great effects; for what assurance can one have or what Evidence is there, that the Sun is such a great friend of Gold, or that it be∣stows more Influences on it, than other mixt bo∣dies; 'tis a thing that can never be prov'd, and
we see that the Sun casts it light and heat in ge∣neral upon all bodies, without making any dif∣ference. Who can understand, that the Pores of Gold are so disposed, as to have a greater facility of retaining the Suns Influences, than other Metals or things? This will be full as hard to prove as the other. But though we should grant the Astrologers this supposition concerning the Suns Influence on Gold, the consequence they draw from it, that therefore it Fortifies the Heart, would be ne're a whit the truer; for all that we are able to apprehend in Gold is, that it is a most compact and weighty body, the union of whose Princi∣ples is extraordinary close; which is proved from hence, that no Art can instruct us to dissolve it Radically, so as to separate its salt, and its sul∣phur. This Gold being beaten into the thinnest Leaves that can be imagined, and taken inwardly receives not the least change in our bodies, and is voided the very same it was before, except∣ing when Quicksylver has been taken before∣hand, for it unites with that, as I have said. Wherefore we must conclude, that if Gold has received more Influence from the Sun than other Metals, yet it is never the fitter to dissolve in our Bodies, nor to produce those rare effects that are talkt of. I know that stories are told to prove, that Gold does communicate virtue to the bodies of those who have taken it, and that it loses in the body some of its quantity; and among other stories 'tis said, that several persons, who had
fed upon Capons, nourished with a Paste made of a mixture of Vipers and Gold together, have been cured that way of several Diseases; but there's a great deal more reason to attribute this effect rather to the Vipers than Gold; for we know by experience that Vipers taken inwardly without any thing else, do use to produce di∣verse sensible effects, whereas we observe none at all in Gold, when 'tis given alone. As for the Loss of Gold in bodies, they prove it by their gathering together all the Excrements of those Capons, and Calcining them, for they could obtain again but the fourth part of the Gold that was used in the Paste the Capons had fed upon. But this proof is as weak as the for∣mer; for the Excrements of the Capons being full of a Volatile Salt, that Salt may have Vola∣tiliz'd and carried away the greatest part of the Gold during the Calcination, after the same man∣ner as we see several Volatile liquors to sub∣lime Gold. I know well enough by my own Ex∣perience, that there are such Volatiles as are able to carry away Gold; for having one day mixed three ounces of Gold with about three pounds of matter consisting of diverse Volatile Ingredi∣ents; I put the mixture about a moneth after∣wards into the Coppell, and the Gold appeared very resplendent in the middle of the mixture; but blowing, as we use to do, in its purification, I was astonished to see it Exalt away by little and little into the air, until there was not a grain of it left.
Thus no body can be assured that Gold did nourish those Capons; but besides, though some of it should be dissolved in the body, as it does in Aqua Regalis, which is very hard to con∣ceive; though some of it should exalt, nay though some should plainly glitter in the Chyle, here's no proof nevertheless that it produces such wonderful effects. Now although I have asserted that Gold taken alone does not receive any change as for health, yet I value very much several preparations of Gold made with Spirits; for 'tis these Spirits that give certain determinations to Gold according to their nature, and make it operate as it does. When I speak of Aurum Fulminans, I shall give an instance of what I now say. Add to Pag. 29. The last line of the Remarks upon Aurum Fulminans. We need not fear lest Aurum Fulminans taken inwardly, and heated by the stomach, should cause such a Detonation there, as it does when set over the fire in a spoon; for so much the more moisture as comes to it, so much the less noise does it make. Now it can't be question'd, but there is liquidity enough in the stomach, besides the liquid ve∣hicle 'tis usually given in. There is no need then of calling in the acids of the stomach, as some do, to unite with the salts of Aurum Fulminans, and drive them out of the body of this Metal: for besides that the most clear and disinterested
Explications and such as fall most under our sense, ought always to be preferr'd, 'twould be too hard a matter to maintain that; 'tis true if you wet Aurum Fulminans with the spirit of Vitriol, or Salt, or Sulphur, the Fulmination is thereby hindred, but this happens from the acids fixing by their weight the Volatility of those Salts that remain in the Pores of the Gold. In the Chapter of Gold I could reckon up several other Preparations that have been inven∣ted, but because they are out of use, I shall not swell this Book with an account of them. Add to pag. 51. Remarks upon the Magistery of Bismuth. You must use a large Bolt-head to dissolve the Bismuth in, because the great Ebullition that happens, as soon as Spirit of Niter is cast upon it, requires room to move in. You must like∣wise have a care, as much as you can, of re∣ceiving the Vapours at your Nose or Mouth, for they are very offensive to the breast. This quick and violent Ebullition proceeds from the acids quick penetration of the large pores of Bismuth as soon as thrown upon it, and the acid violently divides all that opposes its motion. It happens also that the Bolt-head grows so hot, that one can't endure ones hand upon it, because the points of the Menstruum do chafe against the solid body of Bismuth with such force, that you may observe from thence
much the same heat, as when two solid bodies are rub'd against one another. Add to this, that the great store of igneous particles contained in Spirit of Niter, may much increase this heat. If the Dissolution becomes turbid through some impurities in the Bismuth, you must pour into it about twice as much Water and filter it; for if you should go to filter it without Water, it would coagulate like salt in the Filter, and not pass through. This Coagulation proceeds from the acid spirits of Niter that are included in the particles, of Bismuth, which finding too little liquor to swim in and disperse, do gather to∣gether into Crystals, when the dissolution is cold. This Magistery may be made by pouring in great quantity of Fountain water without any salt, into the dissolution, but it is made the quick∣er, when you use salt, and the Precipitation is the better because salt does encounter and break some of the acids that water alone was not able to weaken sufficiently. Now some difficulty appears here in conceiving how plain water alone comes to precipitate Bis∣muth, Lead, Antimony, which the acid had dis∣solv'd, and yet can do nothing at all to the Pre∣cipitating Gold, Sylver, or Mercury, without the assistance of some salt or other body; I do imagine that the former having large Pores, Acids can stick so close in them that water may force them out; but Gold, Silver, and Mer∣cury, having finer Pores in comparison than the other, do retain acids so very closely that the weak impulses of water alone can make no
separation; some more active body is requisite to do it. The Augmentation which happens to Bismuth when made into a Magistery, does come from some part of Spirit of Niter that remains still in it, notwithstanding the Precipitation and Lo∣tion. Add to pag. 52. Chap. Of Lead. Lead serves to Purifie Gold and Sylver, and may be said to act in the Coppell, much after the same manner as the white of an Egg does in Clarifying a Syrop; that's boyled in a Bason; for as the gross and terrestrious impurities of a Syrop do stick to the white of an Egg by reason of its glutinous nature, and are driven to the sides of the Bason in the stirring, so do the Hetèrogeneous parts that were mixt with Gold and Sylver, stick unto the Lead, and by the fire are driven to the sides of the Coppell like unto a Scum. Add to pag. 53. Remarks upon Calcination of Lead. There happens an observation in the Calcina∣tion of Lead, as well as several other things, which very well deserves some reflection. 'Tis that although the Sulphurous or Volatile parts of Lead fly away in the Calcination, which loss
should indeed make it weigh the less, neverthe∣less after a long Calcining 'tis found, that instead of losing it increases in weight. Some trying to explicate this Phaenomenon do say, that as long as the violence of the flame does open and divide the parts of the Calx of Lead, the acid of the Wood or other matter that burns, does insinuate into the pores of this Calx, where 'tis stopt or fixt by the Alkali; but this reason will not hold, when 'tis considered that this Aug∣mentation comes to pass as well when Lead is Cal∣cin'd with Coals as Wood, for Coals contain only a fixt Salt that rises not at all. 'Tis better therefore to refer this effect to the disposition of the pores of Lead in such a manner, that part of the fire insinuating into them does there remain imbodied, and can't get forth again, whence the weight comes to be encreased. If you would revive this Calx of Lead by way of Fusion, its parts do squeez and express the igneous particles that were inclosed, and the Lead does thereby weigh less than it did when reduced into a Calx, for by this means the Sul∣phureous parts are separated and lost. Add to pag. 60. Remarks upon the Burning Spirit of Saturn. If you use six ounces of Salt of Saturn in your Distillation, you'l draw an Ounce and six drachms of liquor, and there will remain in the
Retort six ounces and six drachms of a blackish and yellow matter; and if you put this matter into a Crucible, setting it in the fire, 'twill melt, and you'l regain four ounces of Lead, and half an ounce, or it may be six drachms of a yellow earth coloured like Litharge of Gold. 'Tis evident from this Operation that an ounce and six drachms of the more Acid parts of Vine∣gar are sufficient to impregnate four ounces and two drachms of Lead, to reduce it into Salt; but the strangest thing that happens to it, is the great change that Acids do give it, insomuch that 'tis not to be known again in the least. The Augmentation that the Lead in the Retort does here receive, is as plain as may be; for six drachms are taken out of it at last, more than were put in of Salt of Saturn, besides an ounce and six drachms of liquor that were drawn out. So that we must necessarily conclude, that the four ounces and two drachms of Lead are grown encreased two ounces and an half. 'Tis probable enough that the more rarified the Lead becomes, the more capable 'twill be of igneous particles; for although the Salt of Saturn is not suffer'd to remain long in the fire, yet the Lead encreases apace. Possibly it may be that as fast as the Acids go out of it, igneous bodies enter in their place, and open like∣wise the Pores of Lead by their nimble motion; but these Pores must needs be so disposed as to shut again like valvules, and hinder the return back of those fiery parts.
When this Calx is Calcined in an open fire in a Crucible, without stirring it, the parts of Lead close together and expel the fiery particles, so that the Lead revives as it was before, and re∣covers its Natural gravity. The matter when shut up in the Retort would never be able to revive, let the fire be made ne∣ver so strong, because the igneous particles would find no liberty to get out. The Yellow earth that's found in the Crucible seems to be of a Golden colour, 'tis a terrestrious and bituminous impurity that the Lead is sepa∣rated from. There should be indeed but two drachms of it, because four ounces of Lead are drawn off, wherefore the Augmentation must needs be from the fiery parts that remained in it as in a Calx. Add to pag. 61. Chap. 6. lin. 7. Of Copper. Because Copper contains in it a Corrosive quali∣ty, I would advise no body to use it inwardly. Copper takes Rust very easily, for if you leave but a drop of Water some hours upon a piece of it, it creates a Verdegrease. Have a care of drinking water, that has lain in Copper vessels, for it always dissolves some portion of it, which appears easily from the taste it leaves in it. 'Twill not be altogether amiss to make mention here of an effect that is no less strange than usual. 'Tis that Water or any other liquor that's heated
or boil'd in a Copper vessel for a whole day to∣gether, savours not at all, or not so much of the Copper, provided 'tis not remov'd off the fire all the time, as other Water warm'd in a like vessel, and put from the fire but an hour; for whereas water alone can dissolve something of the Copper, it would seem that being aided with the heat of the fire, it should partake of its na∣ture the more easily. Now in my opinion this is the most rational explication that can be given of this matter. Every body may perceive that when the water begins to heat in a Bason or other Copper vessel, that's set over the fire, little Atoms do rise at bottom like the stirring of a powder, and these Atoms do encrease according as the water re∣ceives more heat, so that at length they make it boil a high; these little Atoms can have no other cause than the fiery particles, which passing through the Bason, do drive the water up∣wards apace, and rarifie its parts; for this reason 'tis that the water is not able to dissolve any of the Copper, for being continually raised upwards, it can make no impression upon the bottom of the Bason. Perhaps some will tell me, the liquor might take the impression of the Copper, at the sides of the Bason; but it is easie to imagine that though there don't pass through the sides so ma∣ny fiery particles as do at the bottom, there do pass nevertheless enough to hinder the liquor from sticking to or dissolving any particles of the vessel.
But now on the contrary the Bason being re∣mov'd from off the fire, and the motion of the igneous particles being quite ceased, the liquor impregnates of the Coppery nature with ease, nay and so much the more easily as the fire has rarified the metal, and rendred it the more proper for dissolution. Every thing seems to confirm this Opinion, for if any liquor is put boiling over a strong fire in a Copper vessel, 'twill not impregnate in the least, but if you place it upon a small fire, and leave it so for some time, then because there will not pass enough fiery particles, to cover all the surface of the vessel, and raise up the liquor, 'twill take some taste of Copper; but this taste will not be so strong as if you had left it the same length of time in such a vessel off the fire, after it had been warm'd. Liquors that are full of Salts do take the im∣pression of Copper much more easily than those that are not. Thus Confectioners do take notice of what I have mentioned; for though they boil their Confections in vessels of Copper for a considerable time, they find 'em taste nothing of the Copper, but they know that if they should leave them but half an hour in the vessel taken off the fire, they would be tainted with a most loathsom Copper taste. We may learn from this Discourse, not to use a Copper vessel, when we have a mind to boil or heat a liquor gently, and when we do think fit to use it, to be sure to keep a good brisk fire underneath, and not to let what we have boil'd,
cool afterwards in a vessel of this nature. Another difficulty does here offer it self on this subject, and it is to know why a Kettle that has been taken off the fire, is not so hot at bottom as at the sides, so that assoon as 'tis removed from off the fire, one may touch it at bottom with∣out burning ones finger, which can't de done at the sides without present scalding. The reason of which is, that the fiery parti∣cles tending upwards through the bottom of the kettle, which is flat, in a direct line, don't make any stop in passing through, having but a little distance to conquer before they come into the liquor; but those that rise on the sides, finding a longer space to make upon the kettle, do many of them stop in the pores of the Copper. 'Tis not the same thing in Kettles that are made in another form, whose bottom is Globular, because the fiery particles rising up in an indirect line, do find more to do to pass it through, than in a flat bottom, and so by consequence more of them do stop in the vessel it self. Yellow Copper is a mixture of Lapis Calami∣naris and Copper, and vessels that are made of it give less impression to liquors than the others. Add to pag. 68. lin. 6. Chap. Of Iron. Iron is found in many Mines in Europe, in form of a Stone or Marcassite, which much re∣sembles the Loadstone, but this last is more heavy
and brittle than Iron. The Loadstone is also found in Mines of Iron, and may be reduced into Iron by a strong fire. Iron for its part does easily acquire the virtue of the Loadstone, as every body knows, so that these bodies do seem to differ only in the figure of their Pores, as has been very well observed by our Modern Phi∣losophers. Iron in the stone is melted in large Furnaces made on purpose, both to purifie it from some earth, and to bring it into the Form we desire. Having continued some time in Fusion, it Vitri∣fies as it were, and much resembles an Email of several colours; and it enters indeed into the composition of ordinary Emails, with Lead, Tinn, Antimony, Sand, the Saphire, the Stone of Perigord, (a Province in France) Gravelled ashes, and the ashes of a Plant called Kali. Although Mars does contain an Acid Vitriolick Salt, yet it ceases not being an Alkali, for it ferments with Acids; and no body needs wonder at this effect, when they consider there is more Earth than Salt in this Metal, and this Earth confining this Salt within it, retains Pores enough to receive the Points of Acids when thrown upon it, and so do the office of an Alkali; for as I have said speaking of the Principles, it is sufficient for a body to be called an Alkali, if it has its Pores so disposed as that the Acids may be able through their motion violently to divide whatsoever stands in their way. Mars is almost always Astringent by Stool, by reason of its Terrestrious parts, and Aperi∣tive
by Ʋrine, not only by reason of its piercing Salt, but also because when the body is bound, the humidities do more easily filter by way of Ʋrine. Add to pag. 70. The last line of the Remarks upon Opening Saffron of Mars. Seeing some persons have pleased to contra∣dict the Remarks I have made upon the Effects of Mars, and particularly concerning the pre∣ference I have given Iron to Steel for Physical uses, I have thought it not convenient to end this Chapter, before I have laid down and Answered all their Objections. First then they say, that because the different substances of Mars cannot be separated, as those of Animals and Vegetables can, 'tis in vain an Aperitive virtue is attributed to its Salt. Answer. I grant all the substances of Mars can't be separated so easily as those of Animals and Vegetables; but because we find Salts to be Aperitive, and commonly Remedies that are so, are full of Salts, and that water in which Rust of Iron has steeped for some time, is proper to open by way of Ʋrine, it seems to me rational enough to attribute this effect of Mars princi∣pally to its Salt; for if the water has carried off any taste or penetrating quality from Iron, there's nothing at all in Mars that is able to con∣tribute such a virtue to it, besides the Salt there∣in dissolved.
Secondly, they say, the Earth and Salt of Mars being united and in a manner inseparable, cannot act but by consent of both, and receive together joyntly the good or bad impressions, that may happen to them. I Answer, there's no reason to think the Salt of Mars absolutely inseparable from the Earth, for the water in which this Metal has steeped or boiled, after Filtration does contain a Vitriolick taste, and Aperitive quality. Now 'tis the ef∣fect of Salt to dissolve imperceptibly in Water and drive by Ʋrine, as I have said; but if any body would take the pains to steep and boil gen∣tly the rust of Iron a good while in water, then Filter it, and so Evaporate the liquor over a small fire to a Pellicule, he'l by Crystalli∣zation or by an entire evaporation of the humidity, gain a small quantity of Salt; and 'tis probable enough there was much more in the water, as may be collected from the strong taste it had of Mars, but it being of a pretty Volatile nature, if fum'd away in the Evaporation. I do not say nevertheless that the close connexion of Earth with the Salt of Mars is altogether unuseful for this effect; on the contrary, I do conceive that this Earth rendring the Salt more heavy than otherwise it would be, does help to drive it forwards, and causes the Mars sometimes to penetrate as much by its gravity as by its Salt; but we must attribute the principal virtue to the Vehicle which is Salt, since without that, the Earth would be a dead matter, and would have no more action than other Earths bereaved of their Salts.
Thirdly, They object, we must not think the hardness of the parts of Steel above Iron, whose Pores are more open, does render it less proper for all sorts of Preparations, seeing Spirit of Vitriol, and many other Acids are found to dis∣solve with the same ease both Iron and Steel. I Answer, that if Corrosive Spirits do dis∣solve Steel, they can dissolve Iron more easily; and whereas a smaller quantity of them can ope∣rate upon Iron than Steel, a better effect does thence follow. Fourthly, 'Tis objected that the solidity of Steel may be an advantageous circumstance to it, for the better fixing the dissolving Juices that are in the stomach, and that for Metals the pure are to be chosen before those that are not so. I Answer, that instead of the solidity of Steels being helpful to the stomach, 'tis certainly of great prejudice to it, as well as to those other parts 'tis distributed into; for the juices that are found in the stomach being but weak dissolvents, are not able to penetrate nor rarifie this metal, if it is too hard; so that they leave it crude and indigest, heavy and incommodious to this part: Wherefore it passes away by Stool, without any good effect, as often happens. But now if a little of this Steel does happen to pass along with the Chyle, it rather causes than takes away Obstructions, for by insinuating into small vessels, it stops in the narrow passages, and causes grie∣vous pains. For what is said concerning the Purity of me∣tals, it is of great use to Tradesmen, for they
by Purifying metals from their more rarified and Volatile parts, do make them the less Po∣rous, and so the less liable to suffer prejudice from the Air or time. Thus Steel is much fitter for Ʋtensils than Iron, because its Pores are closer laid together, and it takes not rust so soon as Iron; but in Remedies 'tis not the same thing, for those metals that are more Rarified, and are easilier dissolved in the Body, are such as we find best effects from, for the reason I have given. So that what Workmen call Purity, is often but an impurity in Remedies. Fifthly, They say, if one would hope to find a distinct Salt in Mars, 'twould be more likely to find it in that which is Purified, than in the Faeces which are separated from it, and which are indeed but the Impurities of Iron, that Steel is made of. I Answer, there would be some reason to think that Salt might be more easily found in Steel than Iron, if in the making of Steel, Iron were simply Calcined, without adding Nails and Horns of Animals in the Calcination; for then it might be said that the Sulphur of Iron being in part evaporated, its salt would be the more Soluble: but we must consider that the Volatile Salts which come from these parts of Animals, being piercing Alkali's, do destroy the Acid salts of Iron, and do thereby render the Steel more compact, and unfit to take rust, because the salts which by their motion did ra∣rifie the metal, are fixed, and as it were morti∣fied, and have not the capaciay of acting as they
did. This is the reason why a Plate of Steel that has infused in Water will not give so great Impression to it, as a Plate of Iron Calcined, of the same weight, infusing the same time, will do. Another thing remarkable in the Calcination of Iron to turn it into Steel, is that it is thereby deprived of its more Volatile salt, which should have most effect with it, in hopes to free it from Impurities, and that which is called the Scories, is the better part of Iron that has been rarified by its salt. Thus for the same reason that some are pleased to call the rust of Iron its dross, the whole metal may deserve the same appellation, all of it being capable of rusting, if it is but laid in the open air. Add to pag. 92. To the end of the Remarks upon Reviving Cinnabar into Quicksylver. I could attribute the invention of this discourse to my self, being the very first that thus treated of this matter in France, and maintained it in publick meetings; but I am not possessed with that vanity of Authors, I leave it to those that love it: I had no affectation to make a Book on purpose concerning it, but have only mentioned it as a thing incident to the Subject I treated of. I shall only say by the by, that those who make pretence of first finding it out, have hapned to make their complaints a little too late, having
Printed their Book a year after mine, and three years after I held a Publick Discourse of it at Monsieur Launay's, not to speak of what I taught a long time before in the first Courses of Chy∣mistry that I shewed. Those who desire to be further instructed upon this Subject may read Monsieur Blegny's Book Treating of Venereal distempers. 'Twas Transla∣ted into English 3 or 4 years ago, and Printed for Mr. Burrel the Bookseller under S. Dunstans Church. Some thinking to invalidate what I established in the first Edition of my Book, do say that mercury can∣not be absolutely called an alkali, because the alkali that is in mercury is but one part of its Compositi∣on, and is not to be separated from its other parts. To Answer this difficulty you need but only read in the Remarks that I have made upon the Principles, how it is I do explicate the nature of an Alkali, and you'l find that although the name Al∣kali comes from the Salt of a Plant called Kali, that is, soapwort, yet all bodies that cause a sudden Effervescency with Acids are called Alkali's, with∣out any need of their containing any Alkali salt within. So that I have no occasion to enlarge this Book without reason, by Answering all the little Objections that have been made to me upon the supposition of Mercury's being a pure Al∣kali. 'Tis likely enough that those who have rais'd them, have not read with Attention what I have said in my Remarks upon Mercury. For there are Solutions enough. I shall speak ne∣vertheless to some of the Principal ones.
First, It is Objected that if Mercury is an Al∣kali, and the Venereal venom an Acid, this same Acid should certainly fix it, whereas the Disso∣lutions of it that are made by the Juyces, do on∣ly serve to encrease its Volatility, and render it Corrosive, instead of being at all sweetned by it. I Answer, it is as false to say, that Mercury is Volatilized by the Acid Juices of the Venereal venom, as it is that Mercury mixed with Acid Spirits to render it Corrosive, should be Volati∣lized by the same Spirits. On the contrary, Mercury alone does easily Volatilize by the heat of the body, and nothing but Acids are able to fix it at all. I thought I had sufficiently expli∣cated my self as to this when I said that some∣times Mercury, finding not in the body enough Acid Spirits to fix it, does pass by Transpira∣tion. As for the Corrosive nature that Mercury re∣ceives, we must attribute it to the Disposition of its Pores, and the abundance of Acid points it impregnates with, and seeing it will not sweeten the Acidity of Salt and Vitriol, with which it is mixed to make a Sublimate Corrosive, why should we expect it to sweeten the Acid juices of the body? I do not pretend nevertheless that it never Dulcifies at all; for I do conceive it may destroy much of their force by dividing and breaking their points, when the Acids are but few, as does happen in Mercurius dubois. Secondly. 'Tis Objected that if the venom of the Pox were an Acid, it might then be Cured by the use of Alkali Salts, either fixt or Volatile,
as by Crabs-Eyes, Perles, Corals, and such like bodies as are wont to kill and sweeten Acid hu∣mours. I Answer, we often find that Volatile salts do give some ease to those that are troubled with the Venereal distemper, whether it be by open∣ing the Pores, and so making the subtler part of it perspire away, or that by being Alkali's, they do absorbe some part of it. For this reason some do use to give their Patients the Volatile Salt of Vipers several mornings together, but these Al∣kali's are in truth of too weak a nature to carry off such an Acidity, after they are impregnated with it, as Mercury is able to do without losing its nature. They are Nets of too fine a make, to catch such keen and active bodies; if these Salts do destroy some part of the Acidity, they destroy themselves likewise in the conflict, that they can have no further operation, wherefore there's need of a more powerful Volatile Alkali than these Salts are, to eradicate the Acidity of Venereal Poyson. As for Fixt Salts and Alkali bodies, as Perle, Coral, Crabs-eyes, whereas they have no Volatile quality in them, and their tendency is wholly downwards, 'tis very uncertain whether ever they reach to Venereal tumors which com∣monly rise in the Joints, by reason of the long way they have to pass thither, and the Juices they have to encounter in their passage, which may in all likelihood change their nature; but suppose they were carried to those Tumors with the same qualifications they were taken with,
they would only serve to weaken a little this A∣cidity, without being able to carry it off, and so they would only give a little ease, without re∣moving Radically the Ferment of the Distemper, as Mercury is able to do. It may be further asked why Sublimate does not fill the substance of the Brain with Ʋlcers, as well as it does the Mouth. I Answer that this Sublimate being in the Brain, finds it self so clog'd with a Mucilaginous moisture, that it is fain to lose there some parts of its Acidity; so that it can do nothing else but cause a Fermentation, which makes the Flegm purge away through the Salivating vessels, and this it is that causes the Spittle of those who have a Flux, to be so sharp and stinking. This sharp Flegm may also, as it passes in the Mouth, encrease the number of Ʋlcers, for the mouth is as it were the sink of the whole body upon this occasion. Add to pag. 94. the beginning of the Remarks upon Sublimate Corrosive. Not half the Spirit of Niter is requisite to dissolve a pound of Mercury, as is for the same weight of Bismuth, though the Pores of this last are larger, and its parts more disposed for divi∣sion; the reason of which is, that Mercury being a Volatile, and the parts very little united toge∣ther, it divides almost of it self, and is much more easily born up by Acids, than would
a body that has union in its parts, and whose tendency is downwards, such as Bismuth. This Operation may be done if one will, by only mixing crude Mercury with Salt and Vitri∣ol, without the trouble of dissolving it with Spirit of Niter; but there's a great deal of time requisite to incorporate them together, for to make the Quicksylver quite disappear. Again there's a fume that rises up to the Nose that is very unwholsom. Now that which is aim'd at in dissolving it, and reducing it into a white Mass, is only to fit it the better for mixture. Add to pag. 96. the end of the same Remarks. Those who have thought fit to Criticize upon what I have said about the effects of Mercury, would methinks, have spoken more to the pur∣pose than they have done, if they had objected to me a difficulty that I have made to my self since the first Edition of my Book. 'Tis this, If the Mercury that is given in order to raise a Flux, does joyn with the Acid salt of the humors, and so makes a Sublimate Corrosive, after the same manner as 'tis made in the Matrass, when 'tis mixt with Salt and Vitriol; this Sublimate of the body can't be perfected, as long as there is any watry humor in the part, wherein Mercury is mixt with Acids; just as none of it can be made in a Matrass, until all the Phlegm that's in it, is evaporated away. Now it is not to be
conceived, that there should ever happen such a Desiccation to the body, for it would be Corro∣ded by Mercury loaded with Acids, before it could Sublime. To answer this Objection I say, That although I have made a comparison between the sublima∣tion of mercury that's made in the body, and that which is done in a Matrass; nevertheless there is this difference between them, that the first is not only made with Salts extremely Volatile, but is likewise assisted or carried on by the mo∣tion of the humours with all their humidity up to the Head, whereas this other is made with Fixt Salts, whose Acidity is so strongly rooted in the Earthy part, that it can't be separated from it, without a very considerable fire. Nor must we think that the Mercury in the body is loaded with as many and as strong Acids, as that in the Matrass; for if it were so, it would carry destruction, and cause a Gangrene, wheresoever it came; but it is enough, that its Pores are in part impregnated with them, suffi∣cient to diminish a little of its Volatility, and cause those prickings and pains which do happen during the Salivation. Add to pag. 97. The Remarks upon Mercurius Dulcis. The sweet Sublimate that is made in a Matrass, loses half an ounce each sublimation; so that an ounce and a half is lost in 3 times when the Ope∣ration is done.
Six drachms of Scories and light earth are found at bottom and consequently there is but two drachms of matter carried off each Sublima∣tion. But if you would try this Operation in Viols, and sublimate would lose half an ounce more, as having a larger aperture to fly out at, than in a Matrass. Add to pag. 101. The Remarks on White Precipitate. The Dose of White Precipitate must be less than that of sweet sublimate, because it contains more Acid Spirits; but if you would Sublime this Precipitate all alone in a Matrass, over a gentle fire, you'd obtain a Sublimate quite as sweet as the other; because the fire having acted upon it breaks most of its points, and then it may be given in as great a Dose as ordinary Mercurius Dulcis. The Volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack con∣taining an Alkali Salt, does much help the Precipitation, for its agility carries it into every recess of the liquour, where the Sea-salt, whose parts are not of so active a nature, was not able to go: which is proved from hence, that if you make use only of Sea-salt dissolved in water to make this Precipitation with, it will then happen that if after pouring off the clear liquor, which swims upon the Precipitate, into another vessel, you drop the Spirit of Sal Armoniack into the liquor, there falls a considerable quantity of
Mercurial Precipitate, which may serve like the other. If instead of the Volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack you'd use the Oyl of Tartar made per Deliqium, the Precipitate would then be Reddish. Add to pag. 102. The Remarks upon Red Precipitate. Many Authors have thought they could en∣crease mainly the Redness of this Precipitate, by Cohobating it, or distilling Spirit of Niter three times upon the white mass; but I have found by experience in both these ways of Operation that these Circumstances are to no purpose. The white Mass which remains after Evapo∣ration of the humidity is a mixture of Mercury with a great many Acid Spirits, for it weighs three ounces more than the Mercury did which was dissolved; it is extreme Corrosive, and fiery, if applied to the flesh, but according as it is Cal∣cined in order to make it Red, the edges of the Spirit of Niter which caused the Corrosion do pass off, and fly into the Air; whence it comes to pass, that the more we desire to encrease the Redness in the Calcination, the less it weighs, and the less it corrodes. Some Chirurgeons observing this effect do choose the Precipitate that is not so Red as usual, when they would make a quick Eschar. If you still continue the fire some hours under the Red mass, it will sublime, and still retain its
colour; this sublimate is not so Corrosive as the other; which makes me think that the points of Spirit of Salt are necessary to make a sublimate very Corrosive. The reason why it will sublime, is because the Mercury being discharged of a great many Acid Spirits, that held it fixed, has power to rise with those that remain. But because these remaining Spirits do moderate a little its Volatility, it makes a stop in the middle of the Viol. Some do put Red Precipitate into an Earthen Pot, and pour upon it Spirit of Wine well Recti∣fied, then fire it, and when the Spirit is con∣sumed, they add more, and burn it as before; they repeat Spirit of Wine, and burn it six times together, and then they call this Preparation Ar∣canum Corallinum. The Spirit of Wine by burn∣ing does carry off some edges of the Precipitate and joyns it self to the rest, so that this Precipi∣tate is sweetned and rendred fit to be taken in∣wardly. If by way of curiosity you pour Spirit of Vi∣triol upon common Red Precipitate, such as I have described, a Dissolution will soon follow, because Spirit of Vitriol joyning with the Spirit of Niter that remained in the Precipitate, an Aqua Fortis must happen from their union, which is able to dissolve imperceptibly the parts of Mercury; but this Dissolution will happen without any Ebullition, because the Mercury has been already rarified by an acid, so that the Spirit of Vitriol does only dissolve them without making any commotion. The Dissolution is clear
like other Dissolutions of Mercury, without any manner of appearance of Redness, and the same Preparations may be made with it as are used to be done by the Dissolution of Quicksylver in Aqua fortis. If instead of Spirit of Vitriol you pour Spirit of Salt upon the Red Precipitate, it turns pre∣sently into a curious white, because the Spirit of salt breaks the force of the Spirit of Niter that was in the Red Precipitate; and the same thing must happen here as when Spirit of salt is poured upon the Dissolution of Quicksylver; for al∣though Red Precipitate is a Dry body, yet it is nothing else but a mixture of Quicksylver, and Spirit of Niter. As for the sudden change of Colour, it is in∣deed somewhat strange, that a matter which is grown Red by Calcination, should in a minutes time turn so exceeding white. This Effect can be attributed only to the dis∣location which the Acid Spirit of salt does cause in the parts of Red Precipitate, and to the dispo∣sition it puts them anew into, so that their Su∣perficies is put into a capacity of Reflecting the Light in a right line to our eyes, to give the ap∣pearance of a white colour; for if by means of an∣other sort of liquour or else by fire and some Alkali body, the Disposition of the parts of your Precipitate is again changed, it will obtain some other Colour, or else it will return and revive into Quicksylver. If you pour the Volatile spirit of Sal Armo∣niack upon Red Precipitate, it turns into a grey
powder, but if you throw a great deal of water upon it, it becomes a milk, though none of the whitest. The same thing happens, when you drop Spirit of Sal Armoniack into the dissolution of Quicksylver made with Spirit of Niter; for soon after the Effervescency is over, a grey pow∣der is seen to Precipitate, and if you add to it water, it becomes a milk of the same whiteness as the other. Common Red Precipitate therefore is subject to the same alterations as the Dissolution of Mer∣cury, the Red colour giving no particular im∣pression to it; which truly is a good proof that Colour is no real thing, but wholly depends upon the modification of the parts. Other Precipitates of Mercury. Mix 7 or 8 ounces of Sublimate Corrosive powdered, in a glass or marble Mortar with 16 or 18 ounces of warm water, stir them about for half an hour, then let the liquor settle, and pour it off by Inclination, filter it, and divide it into 3 parts to be put into so many Viols. Pour into one of these Viols some drops of the Oyl of Tartar made per Deliquium, there falls immediately a Red Precipitate. Drop into another of these Viols some Vola∣tile spirit of Sal Armoniack, and you have a white Precipitate. Pour into the last of these Viols about a spoon∣ful of Lime-water, you have a Yellow-water that is called Phagaedenick-water, or a water for Ʋl∣cers,
because it is good to cleanse and heal Ʋl∣cers, the Chirurgeons do very frequently use it, especially in Hospitals; if you let the liquor settle, 'twill let fall a Yellow precipitate. To obtain these three Precipitates, you have only to pour off the water by Inclination, wash them, and dry them apart. Red precipitate may be used like that I descri∣bed before, but it is not so strong; 'tis the truest Red precipitate of any. White precipitate has the same virtues as the other. Yellow precipitate may be used in Pomatums for the Itch, half a drachm or a drachm of it is mixed with an ounce of pomatum. The Sublimate which remains at the bottom of the Mortar, being dried may be used in pomatums for the Itch like Yellow precipitate. Remarks. Sublimate being mercury loaded with Acids, common water is able to dissolve some of it, because these Acids do rarifie it, and make a kind of salt of it; but because there are not Acids enough in it to dissolve all the mercury, the most compact part of it remains at bottom, the li∣quor is filtred to clear and purifie it the more, it is as clear and transparent as Fountain water. If by further way of Curiosity, you should drop into the Viol of Red precipitate, that I now described, some spirit of Sal Armoniack, and would shake the liquor a little, it would present∣ly
turn white, and your precipitate would be white; but if instead of Spirit of Sal Armoniack you would use spirit of Vitriol, an Ebullition would rise in it, and the Red liquor would become clear and transparent as common water. Because the Oyl of Tartar is an Alkali salt dissolved, it breaks the edges of the Acid which held up the mercury imperceptible, and serv'd as Swimmers to it in the Water, so that this mercury having nothing left to bear it up, must needs precipitate by its own weight. The same thing happens when the Spirit of Sal Ar∣moniack is thrown upon the other part of the Dissolution of sublimate Corrosive. For this spi∣rit being in like manner an Alkali, produces the same effect as the Oyl of Tartar. But although Alkali's do all agree in this that they all break and destroy Acids, nevertheless there is always some difference in their action. And this evidently appears in those differently coloured precipitates, for this diversity can be attributed only to this, that they having in seve∣ral manners wrought upon Acids, do dispose and modifie the parts of the precipitated body, so as they may be capable of making different Refractions of Light. These precipitates are no longer poisons, though they come from sublimate Corrosive, and there's the same reason for it as there is for the precipi∣tations; for seeing that which gave the Corrosion was an Acid, when this Acid is destroyed by such powerful Alkali's as are the spirit of Sal Armoniack, and Oyl of Tartar, that which re∣mains must become sweet.
When spirit of Vitriol is thrown upon the li∣quor of Red precipitate, there rises an Ebullition, because the Acid does penetrate the Alkali salt of the Oyl of Tartar, and this Alkali being de∣stroyed, the Acid dissolves what was precipitated before, whence it comes that the liquor clears up, and turns into poison as it was before. If you would again pour Oyl of Tartar, then spirit of sal armoniack upon it, there would hap∣pen new Red and White precipitates, which might again be dissolved, and the liquor made clear again, by adding to it spirit of Vitriol, but a greater quantity of Spirit must be used than before. Add to Chap. 9. Of Antimony. Although nothing but a Metallick substance mixt with Sulphur can be perceived in the ana∣lyzing of Antimony; nevertheless considering its Figure, somewhat like that of salt-peter, and its Emetick quality, which can proceed from no∣thing but some punction of the stomach, there's reason to think it contains an Acid salt; but be∣cause the edges of this Salt are sheathed in a great deal of sulphur, it cannot exert its activi∣ty, without opening a way for it, either by salts which divide the sulphur, or by Calcination which carries off its grosser part. Notwith∣standing it is not to be understood that the Eme∣tick faculty of Antimony does consist in this salt
alone; for if it were alone, it would no more produce this Effect than other Acid salts do, but it is assisted by the sulphur, which serves for a Vehicle to exalt it towards the upper Orifice of the stomach. Thus Antimony may be said to Vomit, by reason of the Saline sulphur it con∣tains. Add to pag. 109. The Remarks upon Common Regule of Anti∣mony. If by way of curiosity you would Calcine four ounces of Regule of Antimony powdered, in an Earthen cup unglazed, stirring it all the while with a Spatule, there will rise up a vapour for an hour and a halfs time, or thereabouts, and when the matter fumes no longer, it turns into a grey powder, that weighs two drachms and a half more than the Regule did at first. This Augmentation of quantity is the stranger, for that the fume which ascended from it during the Calcination, should seem rather to have di∣minished its weight. It must be therefore, that a great many fiery particles have entred into it, in the room of that which fum'd away. This Fume proceeds from some grosser sul∣phur, that remained in the Regulus, and indeed it smells strong of the sulphur.
Add to pag. 112. to the Remarks upon Regulus of Antimony with Mars. After the first Purification, ten ounces of Re∣gulus, and thirteen ounces of scories do remain; after the second Purification, nine ounces and a halfe of Regulus do remain; after the third, eight ounces and two drachms of Regulus; and after the fourth you'l have seven ounces, and six drachms of Regulus. The Star which appears upon the Martial Regulus of Antimony when it is well Purified, has given occasion to the Chymists to reason upon the matter; and the greatest part of these men being strongly perswaded of the Planetary In∣fluences, and a supposed correspondence between each of the Planets, and the Metal that bears its name, they have not wanted to assert, that this same Star proceeded from the impression which certain little bodies flowing from the Planet Mars do bestow upon Antimony for sake of the remaining Iron that was mixed with it; and for this reason, they wonderfully recom∣mend the making this Preparation upon Tuesday rather than another day, between 7 and 8 a clock in the morning, or else between 2 and 3 in the afternoon, provided the weather be clear and fair, thinking that day which is denominated from Mars to be the time that it lets fall its In∣fluences most plentiful of any. They have like∣wise
conceited a thousand things of the like na∣ture, which 'twould be too much trouble to relate here. But all opinions of this kind have no manner of probability, for no bodies Experience did ever evince, that the Metals have any such cor∣respondence with the Planets, as I have main∣tained otherwhere; much less can they prove that the Influences of the Planets do imprint such and such Figures to Metals, as these men do determine. It would be no hard matter for me here to shew how little reason or founda∣tion there is in discourses of that nature, and how very weak and uncertain are the Principles of Judicial Astrology; but this would be too long a Digression for this place, and serve only to swell this Book with things that may be found treated of at large elsewhere, and particularly in the Epitome of Gassendus made by Monsieur Bernier. My fancy therefore shall not soar so high as these mens do; and though I may seem dull and mean in their eyes, I shall not search in the Coelestial Bodies for an explication of the Star we now contend about; seeing that I can find it out in causes near at hand. There have been who gazing too earnestly upon the Stars above, have not perceived the stone at their feet, that causes them to stumble. I say then that the Star which appears upon the Martial Regulus of Antimony, does pro∣ceed from the Antimony it self; for this Mineral runs all into Needles; but because before it is
Purified, it is loaded with sulphureous and impure parts, which make it softish, these Needles do not appear but confusedly. Now when it is Pu∣rified with Mars, not only a great many of the more sulphureous parts of Antimony, and such as are fittest to hinder its Crystallization, are carri∣ed away, but also there remains the hardest and most compact part of the Iron, which makes the Antimony firmer than it was. So that the Puri∣fication does serve to lay open the Natural Cry∣stals of Antimony in form of a star, and the Iron by its hardness does expatiate these Crystals, from whence it comes that the Martial Regulus of Antimony is harder than the other Regulus. The Crystals then do appear in form of a star in the Martial Regulus of Antimony, because they were so Naturally in the Antimony before. This star does not appear exactly the same in the com∣mon Regulus of Antimony, let it be Purified never so much, because its parts have not the same ten∣sion as those of the other. Add to pag. 116. lin. 28. in the Remarks upon Crocus Metallorum. The strong Detonation which happens when the matter is fired, is not caused from the accen∣sion of Salt-peter, as people generally do ima∣gine, for want of due reflection. I shall prove in its proper place that it can't flame at all, and that by its Volatile parts it serves instead of a Bellows or Vehicle to rarifie and exalt the sul∣phurs of Antimony.
A Liver of Antimony is prepared with equal quantities of Antimony, Niter, and Sea-salt decre∣pitated; and because these salts do give it a Red colour like unto the Opale, this Preparation has been called Magnesia Opalina; it is less Emetick than the other, by reason of the addition of sea-salt, which fixes the saline sulphur of antimony. Several other ways of preparing the Liver of antimony have been invented; but I am well enough satisfied in having given you the best of all, and the easiest to prepare. If you use ordinary salt-peter in this Opera∣tion, you'l obtain eight ounces and two drachms of Liver of antimony; but if you use Purified salt-peter, you'l get but six ounces and a half. This difference of quantity proceeds from the nature of salt-peter, for the more Volatile parts this Mineral salt contains, the more apt it is to carry off some parts of the antimony. Now Pu∣rified salt-peter is much more Volatile than the common sort, wherefore the Liver of antimony, where it is used, is in lesser quantity. The Liver of antimony that's made with common salt-peter is the Redder, and comes nearer to the co∣lour of an Animals Liver, than that which is made with Purified salt-peter; this happens through the fixt-salt which is in this Preparation more than in the other; for common salt-peter contains much fixt salt, as I shall shew in its proper place; this salt does likewise make the matter the heavier. As for the virtues of, these Livers of antimony, the difference is not very great, but only that which is made with Purified salt-peter is a little more Emetick than the other.
I cannot pass by here the false imagination of some men, who think that Preparation of the Liver of antimony, of which half a drachm, or two scruples may be given, is much better than that whereof 3 or 4 grains perform the same effect; for there's no doubt but the taking so great a quantity of antimony will give an im∣pression to the stomach, that a lesser quantity is not able to do. Furthermore, seeing these Preparations do commonly open the antimony but little, or half fix the saline sulphurs, it is to be feared lest some salt they may meet with in the Stomach, should open them too much, or Volatilize them, and so produce unhappy conse∣quences. Add to pag. 141. Chap. 11. Of Quick-lime. When the stone, that Quick-lime is made of, is grown red hot in the Furnaces, the Workmen have a special care to keep up the fire at an equal height, until the stone is quite Calcin'd; for if the flame which has begun to burn among the stones, should be suffered to lessen for a while, and so the heat be check't before the end of the work, they would never afterwards be able to make Quick-lime with those stones any more, though they should be at the charge of burning fifty times as much Wood as is commonly re∣quired; and this, because in that interval of heat the Pores of the stone, which were begun to be
opened, do close and shut, and the matter sinks down in a lump to the destruction of the whole. And then again the Flame can't rise in it any more, for it finds none of those interstices, or spaces between, which were frequent before, for it to pass through. The matter therefore is rendred uncapable of receiving the fire any more, because all the small cells that were useful for it, are shut up and destroyed in this confusion. 'Tis Objected, that if igneous bodies were they that caused the Corrosion of Quick-lime, Tiles, Bricks, and all Stones that are not of the nature of Lime-stone, and Iron, Copper, Silver, Gold, and many other bodies should be as Caustick as Quick-lime, after having endured the fire as long if not longer than it. But this does not follow, for Tiles, and other Calcined stones have not the Pores disposed like those of Quick-lime, to retain fiery particles; and if some metals are found to impregnate with them during their Calcination, they are known to retain them so well by the solidity of their parts, that neither the heat nor moisture of the flesh are able to draw them out of the places they are fixt in, to cause a Corrosion upon the part. It is easie here to give you an example; for if you take the Calx of Lead that encreased its weight in the Calcination, as I have said before, and steep it in water, the water will not act at all upon it, and the Calx may be taken from the water in the same weight it was put in; you must melt it by fire, if you would separate the igneous bodies: but now as for common
Quick-lime, a small matter of moisture is able to separate the tender parts of the stone, and drive out the fiery particles in abundance. 'Tis said likewise that the boiling of the water which happens when flung upon quick-lime, must not be imputed to fiery bodies, seeing neither spirit of Wine, nor Oyl, when thrown upon it, do hear or sti as all, although they are both of them Inflammable bodies, nay on the contrary they are observed to quench the hear that uses to happen to quick-lime when water comes to it. I Answer that these effects do proceed from this, that Oyl, spirit of wine, and other Sulphu∣reous liquors of the same nature, instead of sepa∣rating the parts of quick lime, as water does, do rather hinder any separation from being made, by stopping up the Pores. That which withdrew me from the Sentiment of those who will have all the effects of quick-lime derived from its salt, was, that I could never find any of it, though I sought after it with care enough, for some through a mistake do take a certain Bituminous scum, which often swims upon the Lime-water, for a Salt. Neither can I be of the opinion of those who will needs have an Acid to be in quick-lime, which being drawn out by the water, and meeting an Alkali, does cause the Effervescency which is observed, when water is poured upon quick-lime; for although according to appearance an acid does enter into the Natural composition of the stone that quick-lime is made of, this acid has lost its nature, no only by breaking its poi
in its strict union with earth at the Petrification, but also in the violent Calcination that is given to this stone to reduce it to a Calx. So that we may here say, the same thing happens to the acid which enters into the composition of the stone, as I have said did happen to the salt of Vegetables and other mixt bodies, which though naturally an acid salt, changes into an alkali by means of its union with earth, and the fiery particles in time of the Calcination; there is only this diffe∣rence between them both, the acid of the stone is mixed with more earth than the salt of Vege∣tables. Add to pag. 152. chap. 13. Of the stone Haematites. The stone Haematites is called the Bloud-stone; either from its stopping bloud, or from its red colour. It is commonly found in iron Mines, and it contains something of that metal, the best is that which is clearest, and has blackish raies. It is prepared by grinding it on a marble with a little Plantain water, it is Desiccative, and astrin∣gent; it is used for spitting of bloud, and other Haemorrhagies, the dose is from fifteen grains to two scruples, it is also used outwardly in Ʋn∣guents. A little acid spirit that partakes of the nature of Iron may be drawn from this stone, by distil∣ling it like Vitriol in a Retort; this spirit is a very good Aperitive for all Obstructions, the dose is to an agreeable acidity.
Sublimation of the stone Haematites. Powder and mix together equal quantities of the stone Haematites and sal Armoniack, put this mixture into an Earthen Cucurbite, or glass one luted at bottom, set a Head upon it, and fitting to it a small Receiver, and Luting well the Jun∣ctures, place it in a Furnace, over a very small fire at first, to warm the vessel, then encrease your fire by little and little, until it is very strong, continue it in this condition for some hours, or until the heat of the head lessens, then let the vessels cool, and unlute them; you'l find in the head, and at top of the Cucurbite, Yellow Flowers drawing towards Red, and in the Re∣ceiver a Volatile, Ʋrinous, Yellowish spirit; keep the spirit, and the Flowers apart in bottles well stopt. They are both of them very good to pro∣cure Sweat, and to open Obstructions: they may be used in Malignant Feavers, Apoplexies, Palsies, and in the Scurvy, in Bolus, or in proper liquors; the dose of the Flowers is from six grains to four and twenty, and of the Vola∣tile spirit, from twelve drops to two scruples. In the bottom of the Cucurbite is found a mass that may be distilled in a Retort with a gra∣dual fire encreased to the highest degree of all, in a Reverberatory Furnace, there will come forth an acid spirit of much the same virtues as the fixt spirit of Sal Armoniack, of which I shall speak hereafter.
Remarks. Sal Armoniack is here mixt that the Volatile parts may carry off the more soluble portion of the stone Haematites; for it would never be able to sublime, if it were not driven by some such like Vehicle. This salt being also incorporated with it serves very much to give it the sudori∣sick quality, by reason of its Volatility. The Cucurbite is set in an open fire, that it may be heated the more, and the Flowers be the more tinctur'd; for the more heat there is, the sal armoniack does the more easily sublime the parts of the stone; the Volatile spirit is only some portion of the Flowers drawn into liquor. The mass that remains in the Cucurbite is a mixture of the more fixt part of the stone, and sal armoniack. All that is drawn from the stone Haematites is accounted of some use, and chiefly so by reason of the Iron it contains. Many other Preparations of this stone have been invented, but these are the best, and choicest. Add to pag. 154. Remarks upon the Oyl of Bricks. The ancient Chymists called this Oyl, the Oyl of Philosophers, and have given the Epithete Phi∣losophical to all Preparations that are made with Bricks. The reason that can be given for it is,
that because they call themselves the only True Philosophers, or Philosophers by way of excel∣lence, they thought they were obliged to confer some influences of this mighty name upon Bricks, because they are the materials where with they build their Furnaces, to work at the High and mighty Operation, or the Philosophers stone; for they pretend it is by this Operation alone that True Philosophy can be obtained. Add to pag. 165. chap. 14. Of Common Salt. Sea salt is made at Rochell in salt marshes, which are places that must be of a lower situati∣on than the sea, and the ground must be Clayie, for otherwise they would not be able to retain the salt-water that has been let into them. Thus all places near the sea are not alike proper to make salt marshes. When the Season of the year begins to grow hot, which commonly happens in May, all the water is emptied that was put into the marshes for better preserving them during the Winter, then the sluces are opened to let in as much salt-water as they think fit, 'tis made to pass through a great many Channels, wherein it purifies and heats, and then is let into places that are made flat, smooth and fit to Crys allize the salt. This salt is made only during the great heats of Summer, the Sun does in the first place evaporate some part of the Water, and because after the great
heat, a small Wind does use to blow (as is usual near the sea) the coolness of this Wind does con∣dense and Crystallize the salt. But if it happens to rain but two hours during the hot weather, there can no salt be made for a fortnight afterwards, because the marshes must be again emptied of all the water, to let in more in its place, so that if it chances to rain but once again in the next fortnight, they can make no salt. Besides the Purification of salt by evaporation, it may be further purified, if instead of Evapora∣tion of the humidity, you set some of it a Cry∣stallizing in a cool place, for very fine pure salt is found at bottom of the vessel, which salt may be separated from the water, and dried, you may then evaporate again some part of the salt liquor, and set it in a Celler a Crystallizing, and so continue your Evaporations and Crystalliza∣tions, but at last you must be fain to evaporate the liquor to the consumption of all the humidi∣ty, because at last it will Crystallize no longer, the reason whereof is, that the remaining salt is full of a fat bituminous matter, which is in a manner inseparable from it, and this 'tis that hinders the Crystallizing at last. 'Tis probable that this fat matter comes from the earth of those marshes that were spoken of. The first Crystallized salt being put into Oyl of Tantar, or some other Alkali salt dissolved, does mix with it without making any Ebullition, because although sea-salt is Acid, yet its points are too gross, and have too little motion, to se∣parate the parts of the Alkali.
The last salt being dried over the fire, and mixed with some Alkali salt rendred liquid, such as Oyl of Tartar, makes a Coagulation and Precipitation of a substance that appears saline and Oyly; this Coagulation does proceed from the mixture and adhesion of Bituminous earth with sea-salt and Tartar; for these salts do easily embrace Oyly substances, and in them lose their activity. Many Acid Bituminous salts which are drawn by the Evaporation of certain Mineral waters, such as those of Baleruc in Languedoc, and Digne in Provence, do perform the same effects, when they are mixed with Oyl of Tartar. This Coagulum does not dissolve in water, as well by reason of the different nature of the salts it is compounded of, as the Oyly earth that holds them together; but it will dissolve in distilled Vinegar, and several other Acid li∣quors, and then an Effervescency rises, because the Acid does penetrate the salt of Tartar, whose parts sea-salt had no power to separate. Add to pag. 169. lin. 30. Remarks upon Spirit of Salt. Since I writ of Monsieur Seignett's particular way of drawing spirit of salt, some have Printed, that if common salt well decrepitated, and kept a good while over the fire, were exposed to the Air for some daies, and distilled without ad∣dition of any thing to it, it would yield a spirit
much like that I have spoken of, and in full as great a quantity. But if we examine the sharp liquor which is drawn this way, we shall find it of so weak a nature, that it may more reasonably be called Phlegm, than spirit, and the salt remains entire in the Retort; whereas M. Seignett's spirit of salt is full as strong as common spirit of salt, & has the very same quali∣ties, nay I conceive it somewhat better, as not hav∣ing so great an Impression from fire as the other. Again some say, it does not deserve the name of spirit of sea-salt, nor ought this Preparation to be look'd upon as any great mystery, because the same incorporation and augmentation hap∣pens to divers other salts exposed to the Air, after drawing off their spirit. I grant this augmentation proceeds from the spirit of the air, and I conceive it is the same spirit which produces all manner of things accor∣ding to the Matrixes or different pores of the earth it uses to meet with, as I have explicated in my Remarks upon the Principles. But because this spirit of the air has met with Pores in our matter, ready disposed to make a salt much like unto common salt, and a spirit is drawn from it much like unto that which is drawn from com∣mon salt, I see no reason to doubt why this spi∣rit should not be a true spirit of salt; all the difference is this, the salt I now speak of is not so throughly united to its earthy part, as com∣mon salt is, and therefore its spirits do separate with more ease; for they are drawn without Addition of any thing else, and with a gentle
fire, whereas those of common salt are so fixt, that they can't be driven out, without mixing a great deal of earth in order to separate all its parts, and without a very great fire. As for the Augmentation which happens to many other bodies exposed to the Air, after their spirits are drawn off, I don't question the matter of fact, nor that these same substances do return into what they were before, by impregnating again with spirits of the Air in considerable time; but it is rarely found that any of them do yield as strong spirits, and as easily as our salt, and herein lies the mystery. Add to pag. 170. lin. 12. in the same Remarks. Some have written, that the Precipitation, which is made by spirit of salt, of any matter held up by Aqua fortis, must not be imputed to the gravity, nor force of spirit of salt, nor to any conflict or jogg that this spirit gives to Aqua fortis, or the matters dissolved; but rather to the conjunction of the Acidity of this spirit with the Volatile and Sulphureous Alkali of Aqua for∣tis, or spirit of Niter, which Acid hereby forces this last to abandon the metal it had dissolved. But this is the same as to explicate an obscure matter by another more obscure; for what like∣lihood is there that the Volatile spirit of Aqua fortis is an alkali? and how comes it to continue in so great a motion with the fixt Acid spirit of
this water without being destroyed? this can't easily be understood. Again, suppose this spi∣rit were an alkali, we must come to explicate mechanically, by what reason this Alkali does leave the body of the metal to betake it self un∣to the spirit of salt; for to say simply that by the conjunction of these two spirits, the Aqua fortis is compelled to abandon the metal it held dissolved, does give no light at all to the que∣stion, unless we had power enough to bestow in∣telligence upon these spirits; wherefore we must needs at last have recourse to joggs and conflicts. Add to pag. 171. lin. 16. Chap. 15. Of Niter or Salt-peter. The great and violent flame which happens as soon as Salt-peter is flung upon the Coals, and the red vapours which it uses to yield when reduced into a spirit, have induced the Chymists generally to believe that this salt is inflammable, and con∣sequently full loaded with Sulphur, because sul∣phur is the only Principle that flames; but if they had suspended their judgments herein, un∣til they had got more experience on this Sub∣ject, they would not only have known that Salt-peter is not at all Inflammable by nature, but they would e'en have doubted whether or no any sul∣phur does enter into the natural composition of this salt; for if Salt-peter were Inflammable of it self like sulphur, it would burn in places where there is no sulphur, for example in a Cruci∣ble
heated red hot in the fire; but it will never flame therein, use what quantity of it you please, and let the fire be never so great. It is true indeed, if you throw Salt-peter upon kindled coals, it makes a great flame, but this is only through the Sulphureous Fuliginosities of the coals, which are violently raised and rarified by the Volatile na∣ture of Niter; as I shall prove in the Opera∣tion upon fixt Niter. As for any sulphur that is thought to be con∣tained in Salt-peter, it can't be demonstrated by any Operation whatever, for the red vapours that come from it are no more Inflammable than the Niter, when they are not mixt with some Sulphureous matter; and it is far more proba∣ble, that this salt contains no Sulphur, if we consider its cleanness, transparency, acidity, and cooling quality, which have no manner of affinity with the effects of Sulphur, which are commonly to make a body opace, to joyn with its acidity, and to heat it. Add to pag. 177. l. 26. Remarks upon Sal Polychrestum. Sal Polychrestum must by no means be used until it is made very white, and very pure; for when there remains any gross portion of Sul∣phur, Vertigoes are to be feared, and stupefacti∣on of the Nerves, and nauseonsness of the sto∣mach.
If you used sixteen ounces of purified Salt-peter, and so much sulphur in this Operation, you'l have at last but three ounces and a half of Sal Polychrestum very fine; but if you use com∣mon Salt-peter instead of purified, you'l have five ounces of Polychrestum as white as the other. This difference of weight proceeds from common Salt-peters containing more fixt salt than purified salt-peter. Sal Polychrestum may be Crystallized like salt-peter and other salts. Its Crystals are very small, and much like those of sea salt, but only they are keener. Add 10 pag. 179. Remarks on Salt of Sulphur. Some have presumed to write, that when spi∣rit of sulphur is poured upon Sal Polychrestum dissolved in Water, there rises an Effervescency as great as when the same Acid spirit is cast upon salt-peter; but doubtless they took but little care in what they maintained, for there happens no manner of Effervescency, neither with Sal polychrestum, nor with salt-peter, for both of them are Acid salts. Nor do I see any reason to believe, that if the mixture of salt-peter and spirit of Sulphur is drawn in a Retort, the spirit of Niter will come forth and leave the spirit of Sulphur in union with the fixt part of salt-peter; for although red vapours are seen to come forth of the Retort, this does not prove
that they are purely Nitrous, those of the spi∣rit of Sulphur are mixt with them, but they are hid in the redness like Water in Wine. Add to pag. 182. after Spirit of Niter. Spirit of Niter Dulcified. Put into a large Boulthead eight ounces of good spirit of Niter, and so much spirit of Wine well dephlegmated; set your Boulthead in the Chimney upon a Round of Straw, the liquor will grow hot without coming near the fire, and half an hour or an hour afterwards, it will boil very much; have a care of the red vapours that come out a-pace at the neck of the Boulthead, and when the Ebullition is over, you'l find your liquor clear at bottom, and to have lost half what it was; pour it into a Viol and keep it, this is the sweet spirit of Niter. It is good for the Wind Cholick and the Ne∣phritick, for Hysterical distempers, and for all Obstractions; its Dose is from four to eight drops in Broth or some other convenient liquor. Remarks. You must leave the Boulthead open; for the Vapours would either carry away the Stopple; if there were one, or else they would break the vessel; the Boulthead is so hot during the Ebulli∣tion, that one can't endure ones hand upon't.
The Heat and Ebullition begin sooner or later; according as the Spirits that are used have been more or less dephlegmated. This Effect is very strange; for spirit of Ni∣ter being a strong Acid, and Spirit of Wine a sulphur, it can't be said that there's here any al∣kali, to cause the Ebullition with Acid, accor∣ding to the common maxime. And this Opera∣tion shews us that every thing can't be explicated by the sole Principles of Acid and alkali, as some do pretend. This Operation has much resemblance with that which happens when Oyl of Turpentine is put into a bottle with Oyl of Vitriol; for the mix∣ture of these liquors does heat and boil much alike. I shall say something of this last mix∣ture hereafter. There is this difference notwith∣standing, that spirit of Niter being more Vola∣tile than Oyl of Vitriol, causes a greater Effer∣vescency. In order therefore to explicate this Ebullition, two things must be considered. First, that spi∣rit of Niter contains a great many fiery parts lock't up in its Acidity, but which still retain some motion, for 'tis they that make spirit of Niter to Fume as it does. The second is, that spirit of Niter is more In∣flammable than salt-peter, when mixed with any sulphureous body, and the reason thereof is, that it is more rarified than salt-peter. Thus when this Acid spirit is mixt with spirit of Wine, which is a sulphur very much exalted, and very susceptible of motion, the Volatile part
of the spirit of Niter joyns its self to this sul∣phur, and the mixture becomes ready to take flame; likewise after this mixture the fiery bo∣dies that were in Spirit of Niter, do by striving to mount upwards put the liquor into so great a motion, that it e'en almost flames, and would without all question quite flame, if there were not some Phlegm always mixed with these spirits, let 'em be drawn never so pure, which serves to allay the activity of the fiery particles; so that there must needs follow a very great Ebullition. This Effervescency therefore proceeds from this, that spirit of wine, and spirit of Niter, which are as it were a salt-peter, and highly exal∣ted sulphur, have been almost kindled into a flame by the fiery bodies that were in spirit of Niter; and that which further proves this con∣ception is, a noise or kind of Detonation, during the Effervescency, which is much like that which happens, when sulphur and salt-peter are burnt together. The great diminution of the liquor proceeds from the Evaporation of the more Volatile parts of the Spirits of wine and Niter, through the neck of the Boulthead during the Ebullition. That which remains is a well sweetned spirit of Niter, for not only its points are soundly blun∣ted in the Ebullition, but the spirit of wine being a sulphur unites and imbodies with those that re∣main, so that they have no longer any Corrosive quality.
Add to pag. 182. Remarks upon Aqua Fortis. The mixture of Vitriol and salt-peter has quick∣ly some smell of Aqua fortis, because Vitriol contains a great deal of sulphur, which easily in∣sinuates into the Volatile part of salt-peter, and exalts some little of it, which causes the smell; it is this sulphur in Vitriol which by volatilizing the Red spirit of Niter, makes it come forth faster, and with a less fire, than when salt-peter is distil∣led with Clay. Add to pag. 184. Remarks upon the Fixation of Salt-peter into an Alkali Salt. The Crucible must be but half full of salt-peter, because the Detonation is so great, that the matter would be driven out of the Crucible, if too much be put in. When the Crucible is not very strong, it breaks in pieces about the middle of the Opera∣tion, and some part of the matter is lost by it. This Detonation is more violent than that which is made with a mixture of salt-peter and common sulphur, because the sulphur of Coals is more Rarified than common sulphur. Niter will never be able to flame, when set over the fire alone in a Crucible, though you make your fire never so strong, and coals though
loaded with fuliginous or Oyly parts, do send forth but only a small blew flame; but when these two bodies come to be mixt together, the Volatile parts of Niter joyning with the Coals, which are Oyly, do rarify and exalt the Coals with such a violence, that they produce a very great flame. Now this Operation confirms my Opinion that salt-peter does only serve here to Rarifie the flame of sulphur, but cannot send forth the least flame of its self; seeing that as soon as ever the coals, you put into the Crucible, are burnt, the flame goes out, and appears no more until you throw in more Coals, with which a convenient proportion of the Volatile parts of salt-peter, that still remained, does joyn, and Rarifie them into a flame. Thus new Coals are successively thrown into the Crucible, until it flames no longer; but toward the end of the Operation, because there remain but few Volatile parts of Niter, the Detonation is much the less, and so is the flame, until at last the Coals finding nothing more in salt-peter for it to raise, do burn only just as they use to do all alone. If you make use of common salt-peter for this Operation, you'l have occasion to use but three ounces and a half of Coals, and you'l get twelve ounces of Purified salt, but if you use fine salt-peter, you must spend seven ounces of Coals, and will get but three ounces of purified salt. This difference of weight proceeds from the fine salt-peters containing more Volatile parts than the other; likewise a great deal more Coals is requir∣ed to raise them, and there remains the less fixt salt for the same reason.
The fixt Niter being prepared as I have shew∣ed, it is a little grey colour'd; now to make it white you must Calcine it in a great fire, stirring it in the Crucible all the while with a spatule; when it shall have continued Red hot for above an hour, it will become exceeding white. You must then dissolve it in water, filter the dissolution, and evaporate the water, and thus you have a very pure and white salt. This salt is an Alkali, being a mixture of the salt of Coals, which is an Alkali, and fixt salt-peter; these two salts are so strictly united and mixed together in the Calcination, that they make a Porous salt, and such as is much like unto the fixt salt of Plants. Not that there is an Alkali salt in salt-peter, as Chymists will have it; for give what Calcina∣tion, or other Preparation you please to this Mineral salt, without adding any thing to it, not the least Alkali can be drawn from it, and all that ever we can see in it is Acid. It is further Observable, that the liquor of fixt Niter, which has been made with common salt-peter, being kept a year, or a year and a half, loses most of its activity as an Alkali, so that it is no longer able to cause any such Ebulli∣tion with Acids, as it could before it was so stale. This accident can have no other cause, than that the Pores of salt contained in the liquor do close up by little and little, and the Acid salt of Ni∣ter does absorbe and destroy the Alkali, which kept the Pores open.
But the same thing does not happen, where the liquor of fixt Niter was made with Purified salt-peter, because whereas a great deal of Coals was used in the fixing it, and but little salt of Niter remained in it, the Alkali must there predomi∣nate so powerfully, that the Acid is not able to regain its strength. This Experiment seems plainly to demonstrate, that fixt Niter is only an Acid salt rendred Po∣rous by the Alkali of Coals. Some Chymists have thought fit to call the li∣quor of fixt Niter, Alkahest, that is, an Ʋniver∣sal dissolvent, thinking it is capable to draw out the sulphureous substance of all mixt bodies. Add to pag. 185. Chap. 16. Of Sal Armoniack. The Artificial sal Armoniack is made at Ve∣nice, and divers other places with five parts of Ʋrine, one part of sea-salt, and half a part of Chimney soot; these three are boiled together, and reduced into a Mass, which being put into sub∣liming Pots, over a gradual fire, it sublimes into a salt in the form we commonly see sal Ar∣moniack. Now in this sublimation the Volatile Alkali salts of Soot and Ʋrine do carry up as much sea-salt as they are able, and do joyn so strictly together with this Acid salt, that the mixture seems to be fixt. The reason of this close union is, that sea-salt being in form of points, does insinuate into the Alkali salts; and
because it has not motion enough to separate the parts of these salts; it gets within 'em, and fills their Pores. Add to pag. 190. the end of the Remarks upon Aqua Regalis. It is Objected, that if there is any heavy matter as it were intercepted between the Pores of Gold, it must needs Precipitate of its self, after the action of Aqua Regalis upon this metal, which is a thing that does not happen. I Answer that if the parts of Gold are heavy, the Dissolvent is a gross body, and very well pro∣portioned to hold up those heavy parts, and hin∣der them from Precipitating. Others have opposed this Explication, and have writ, that if Aqua Regalis dissolves Gold, and can't dissolve Sylver, the reason of it is, that the gross points of spirit of Niter, or Aqua fortis are subtilized by the mixture of sal Armo∣niack, and are rendred fit to enter into the small pores of Gold, whereas the delicate Fabrick of these same points does not leave the necessary force nor motion to divide the parts of Sylver, whose pores are a great deal bigger. But this way of arguing does not agree with Experience; for what likelihood is there that the points of spirit of Niter are so subtilized by the penetration and division of the parts of sal Armoniack? or where shall we find any Exam∣ple, that after a considerable Effervescency of
two salts met together in conflict, the Acidity grows sharper than it was before? this is a thing that can never be proved. On the contrary, every body knows well enough that no Efferves∣cency happens but the acid is partly blunted or broken thereby. Moreover the Argument sup∣poses that spirit of Niter does break its subtilest points in violently contending with the sal Ar∣moniack, whereas in sal armoniack there are Al∣kali salts whose property it is to destroy acids. I could further add here, that the conjunction of salt with spirit of Niter should of necessity ren∣der its points more gross than they were, and that the Crystals which are drawn by the use of aqua Regalis have their shape not so sharp as those that are drawn by aqua Fortis. But that which I have said is so probable in its self, and so easie to be convinced of, if one takes never so little pains to consider it, that I should but amuse the Reader to little purpose, if I should offer to give any more proofs of it. Neither do I find it convenient to make a long discourse in Explicating how Sylver, which has lesser Pores, is more susceptible of the im∣pressions of Air and Fire, than Gold which has larger, seeing I have already supposed that the matter intercepted between the Pores of Gold is more compact, and consequently more hard to separate than that of Sylver.
Add to pag. 194. Remarks upon another Preparation of the Volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack, toge∣ther with its Flowers, and Fixt Salt against Feavers. You see by this Operation that eight ounces of Sal armoniack do contain at least four ounces and a half of Volatile salt. The Volatile Spirit of Sal armoniack is only a dissolution of Volatile salt in water, and if there is not Phlegm sufficient to dissolve all the Vola∣tile salt, there remains some part of it at bottom of the Receiver, and that may likewise be turn'd into Spirit, by only adding enough water to dis∣solve it. Thus the Spirit becomes as strong as it can be made, for the Pores of the water be∣ing filled with as much salt as they can contain, it can receive no more. But if there happens more water than the proportion of Volatile salt requires, then the Spirit proves weak, and must be given in a larger Dose. This Spirit is Sudorifick, but you may per∣ceive more sensibly the effect of Sal armoniack to cause Sweat, by dissolving six or eight grains of this Salt, and the same quantity of Salt of Tar∣tar, each separately in two small Doses of some proper liquor, and giving them to a Patient one presently after the other; for the salt of Tar∣tar working upon the Sal armoniack in the sto∣mach,
after the same manner as it does when they are mixt together in a Mortar, the Spirits do separate from the latter with more force, and act more powerfully, than when they have been separated, before they were given, by a pre∣ceeding mixture; for the small violence that the Volatile Spirits do use in their separation from sea-salt, does leave them the more activity, and disposes them the better to pass through the Pores. Again, it is not incredible, that in the former Effort which these Spirits made in their separation from the fixt part, when Sal armo∣niack was mixt with salt of Tartar in a Mortar, the more subtle part flies away first, and is lost; now 'tis this subtle portion that is most proper to Rarifie the humours, and to drive them out by Transpiration. If you mix in a Viol equal quantities of Volatile spirit of Sal armoniack, and Spirit of Wine, and shake them a little together, they'l cause a Coagulum. This Coagulation proceeds from that the Spirit of Wine, which is a Rarified Oyl, does unite with the Spirit of Sal armoniack which is a salt liquor, and 'tis but the same thing as happens from stirring Oyl and some salt liquor in a Mortar, in order to make an Ʋnguent, called Nutritum. By this incorporation together, the salt is shut up in the ramous parts of the sulphur, and these same sulphureous parts are checkt, or as it were fixed by the salt, so that neither of them have any more freedom of motion; and from this repose of these parts results the Coagulum.
Add to pag. 197. Chap. Of Vitriol. If you dissolve a little white, or green Vitriol in water, and write with the Dissolution, the writing will not be seen, but if you rub the Pa∣per with a little Cotton dipt in the Decoction of Galls, it will appear legible; then if you wet a little more Cotton in Spirit of Vitriol, and pass it gently over the Paper, the Ink will disappear again; and yet at last if you rub the place with a little more Cotton dipt in Oyl of Tartar made per Deliquium, it will again appear legi∣ble, but of a Yellowish colour. The reason that I can give for these Effects is this, the Spirit of Vitriol dissolves a certain Coagulum which is made of Vitriol and Galls, but the Oyl of Tartar breaking the force of this Acid Spirit, the Coagulum resumes it self, and appears again, but because it now contains Oyl of Tartar too, it acquires a new colour. If you should throw the dissolution of Vitriol, or Vitriol only powder'd into a strong Decoction of dried Roses, it will turn as black as common Ink; if you pour some drops of spirit of Vitriol into it, this Ink will turn red; and if you add to it a little Volatile spirit of Sal Armoniack, 'twill turn grey. These changes of colour do proceed from the spirit of Vitriols dissolving the Coagulum which the Vitriol it self had made, and rendring it
invisible; the liquor recovers a fresher Red co∣lour than it had, before the Vitriol was put into it, because the same Spirit does separate the parts of the Rose which were dissolved in the li∣quor, and renders them more Visible. The Volatile spirit of Sal Armoniack, which is an Alkali, does partly break the Acid edges of the spirit of Vitriol, so that the parts of the Rose having nothing more to hold them Rarified, do close together, and consequently the liquor changes colour. By this Experiment may be seen, that the dried Rose may serve to make Ink with, as well as Galls; Indian Wood, and divers other things will do the same. Add to pag. 199. the end of the Remarks upon Galcination of Vitriol. If one should resolve to dry as exactly as one can, sixteen pounds of green Vitriol, there would remain but seven pounds of white Vitriol. But in order to do this exactly, you must powder the white Mass of Calcined Vitriol, after you have broke the Pot, and stir it for a long time in an Earthen Pan, over a little fire, until there rises no more Fume from it, or until there remains in it no more Phlegm. If you should Calcine this white Vitriol to a Redness, you'd have five pounds and a half of Cholcothar.
Some have affirmed in writing that the Red colour which appears after a long Calcination of English Vitriol, was an undoubted proof that that there was Copper in it, after the same man∣ner as the Red colour which happens to Verdi∣grease calcined is a certain proof that it contains in it some particles of Copper. But that which is here said to pass for a thing undeniable, is no proof at all; for first of all those Vitriols which are thought most to par∣take of Copper, do give no greater Redness in their Calcination, that the others which partake least of it. Secondly let Copper be Prepared which way you please, you can never make it Redder than the Cholcothar of. English Vitriol, whose Redness must be thought to proceed from some particles of this Metal contained in it. And thirdly, we see plainly, that Iron, Lead, Mer∣cury, and divers Mineral bodies do acquire a Red colour in their Calcining, without granting they contain any Copper. Add to pag. 201. the bottom of the Page, Remarks upon Spirit of Vitriol. If you Distil eight pounds of white Vitriol, at sixteen ounces to the pound, you'l draw off se∣venteen ounces of Phlegm, and two and twenty ounces and a half, both of the Sulphureous, and the Acid spirit of Vitriol. Of these two and twenty ounces and a half, there will be five ounces of Sulphureous spirit.
You'l find in the Retort five pounds, five oun∣ces of Cholcothar. Use all the care you can possible to preserve all the liquors which come from Vitriol, and yet it will be impossible for you to hinder it from losing some through the Junctures, during the Distillation. If you should use German instead of English Vitriol, you'd draw off a little more spirit than the quantity I named, but it would have some smell of Aqua Fortis, and the matter which remains in the Retort would be of a brown colour drawing towards black. This Colour proceeds from sulphureous Fuliginosities which rise more from this Vitriol than the other, because it par∣takes of Copper; for this Sooty vapour finding no vent to get out at, falls down again upon the matter and blackens it. There's one thing happens about the Oyl of Vi∣triol, when 'tis very strong, which is very strange indeed; it is, that if you mix it with its Acid Spirit, or with water, or else with an Ethereal Oyl, such as the Oyl of Turpentine, this mixture grows hot to that degree, that sometimes it breaks the Viol 'twas put into, and often it pro∣duces a considerable Ebullition. I should quickly give account of this heat and Ebullition, if I would suppose an Alkali in the Oyl of Vitriol, as those do who pretend to ex∣plicate every thing that happens by the notions of Acid and Alkali; but not comprehending how an Alkali should be able to remain so long a time with so strong an Acid as is the Oyl of Vi∣triol
without being destroyed, I had rather give a reason that seems to me abundance more pro∣bable. I conveive therefore that if water, or Spirit of Vitriol, or the Ethereal Oyl of Turpentine do heat the Oyl of Vitriol, it is by setting in motion a great many fiery particles which the Oyl of Vi∣triol had drawn with it in the Distillation; for these little fiery bodies being environ'd with salts that are exceeding heavy, and hard to Rari∣fie, they drive about vehemently whatsoever stands in their way, and when they have caused an Ebullition, and find they can't get out a-top of the Viol, they break it to pieces with the bussle they make at bottom, and on the sides. Perhaps it will-be said, I do here suppose gra∣tis that the Oyl of Vitriol does contain fiery parti∣cles; but if we consider the great violence of fire, and the time that is spent in drawing this Acid, 'twill be no such hard matter to grant me this supposition. Besides it will be hard to ex∣plicate the great and burning Corrosion of Oyl of Vitriol without admitting these fiery parts, for the Vitriol contains nothing in it self of this Cau∣stick nature; 'tis true indeed that it contains Phlegm, Sulphur, and Earth, but it is a thing impossible but this Acid should discover it self more than it does, if it were as Corrosive in the Vitriol, as it is in the Oyl. Once it hapned to me, that putting into my Furnace a Retort whose two thirds were filled with German Vitriol dried, in order to draw off its Spirits, I Distilled first of all the Phlegm,
and sulphureous spirit, which I took out of the Receiver; I then fitted it again to the Retort, and by a great fire continued for three dayes and three nights, I distilled off the Acid Spirit as we are used to do. When the Vessels were grown cold, I admired to find in my Receiver nothing but a Mass of Salt, or Congeal'd Oyl of Vitriol: This Salt was so exceeding Caustick and burn∣ing, that if I offer'd to touch the smallest part of it with my finger, I presently felt an insuffe∣rable scalding, and was fain to put my hand im∣mediately into water, it continued to fume still, and when a little of it was thrown into water, it made the same hissing noise, as a fire-coal put into water would do. Besides it heated the wa∣ter very much, and much more than common Oyl of Vitriol could. If you fill a Glass Viol with the Decoction of Nephritick Wood clarified, and observe it, turn∣ing toward the Light, it will appear Yellow; but if you turn your back to the Light, it will appear Blew; if you mix with it some dregs of Spirit of Vitriol, it will appear Yellow on every side, but if you again and about as much more Oyl of Tartar, it will return unto its first colour. If you take a Blew, or Violet tincture made in water, such as is drawn out of the Sun-Flower, or Violet Flowers, and pour upon it some drops of Spirit of Vitriol, it will presently turn Red; but if you throw into it some Alkali salt, it will recover again its former colour. On the contrary if you pour an Alkali liquor, such as Volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack, upon
the Blew tincture, it will presently turn Green; and if you again pour upon it a little Spirit of Vitriol, it will change this colour into an obscure Red. The Decoction of Indian Wood is very Red: if you drop into it a little Spirit of Vitriol it will turn Yellow; and if you still add some Volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack it will become black. All these changes of colour, which the Spirit of Vitriol, or other Acids, and Alkali's do make, proceed only from the different position of bodies dissolved in the liquor, and from its disposition to modifie the Light different wayes. Add to pag. 208. Remarks upon Distillation of Alom. Some have written that Alom yields but very little Acid, yet if they'l but take the pains to keep up a strong fire under it for three dayes together, they'l find that this Spirit does not give place in strength, or quantity to that of Vitriol. Nor are we at all obliged to distinguish, as they would have us, the Acrimonious, Corrosive salt of Alom from its Acid, seeing that there is no∣thing either Acrimonious or Corrosive in this Mi∣neral salt, which will not turn into an Acid Spirit, when it is driven forcibly by fire.
Add to pag. 211. Remarks upon Flowers of Sulphur. If you mix one part of Sal Polychrestum with two pounds of Sulphur, and sublime them toge∣ther, as those I have described, you'l have white Flowers of Sulphur, which are thought to be better for distempers of the Breast than those others; they are given in the same Dose. This Whiteness proceeds from a very exact Attenuation which Sal Polychrestum gives to the Sulphur; the Sal Polychrestum which remains at bottom of the Cucurbite, may be Calcined, and if you afterwards Purifie it by Dissolution, Evapora∣tion, and Filtration, it will be full as good as before. Add to pag. 216. Chap. Of Amber. Amber is to be found near the Baltick-sea, in the Dutchy of Prussia, and no where else. Some do think Petroleum, or Oyl of Peter, to be nothing but a liquor drawn from Amber by the means of subterranean fires, which make a distilla∣tion of it, and that Jet and Coals are the remain∣ders of this distillation. This Opinion would have some resemblance of truth, if the places where this Oyl is found were not so far distant the one from the other;
for Petroleum is usually found only in Italy, as in Sicily, and in Provence, this Oyl Distills through the clefts of rocks, and it is very probable to be the Oyl of some Bituminous matter, which the subterranean fires had raised. Tincture of Amber. Powder finely five or six ounces of Yellow Am∣ber, and put it into a Boult head, pour upon it spirit of wine four singers height, stop this Boult-head with another to make a Circulatory vessel, and lu∣ting exactly the Juncture with a wet Bladder, set it in Digestion in warm Sand, and leave it so for five or six daies, or until the Spirit of Wine is well impregnated with an Amber colour; pour off this Tincture by inclination, and add more Spirit of Wine to the remaining matter, you must digest it as before, afterwards separating the impregna∣tion, mix it with the other, filter them, and then distil in a Limbeck with a small fire, about half the Spirit of Wine, which may serve for the same use as before: keep the Tincture that you find at bottom of the Limbeck, in a Viol well stopt. It is good for the Apoplexy, Palsie, Epilepsie, and Hysterick distempers; the Dose is from Ten drops to a drachm in some proper liquor. Remarks. You must powder the Amber very finely, that the Menstruum may open it the more easily; this Tincture is only the sulphureous or Oyly part of Amber, with which the Spirit of Wine, which
is a sulphur, is impregnated; some other liquor that is not sulphureous would perhaps be able to dissolve the Amber, but then that which it did dissolve would be but impure. And for this rea∣son you must alwayes use a dissolvent that is of the same nature with the substance you desire to dissolve. The Volatile Salt of Amber. Put two pounds of Amber powdered, into a large glass or earthen Cucurbite, let it be filled but the fourth part full, set this Cucurbite in Sand, and after you have fitted a head to it, and a small Receiver, lute well the Junctures, and light a little fire under it for about an hour; then when the Cucurbite is grown warm, encrease it by little and little to the third degree; and there will distil first of all a Phlegm and Spirit, then the Volatile Salt will rise, and stick to the head in little Crystals; afterwards there distils an Oyl first white and then red, but clear: when you see the Vapours rise no longer, you must put out the fire, and when the Vessels are cold unlute them. Gather the Volatile Salt with a Feather, and because it will be but impure as yet, by rea∣son of a little Oyl that's mixed with it, you must put it into a pretty large Viol big enough that the salt may fill only the fourth part of it, place the Viol in Sand, after you have stopt it with plain Paper, and by means of a little fire, you'l sub∣lime the pure salt in fair Crystals a-top of the Viol. When you perceive the Oyl begin to rise
too, you must then take your Viol off the fire, and letting it cool, break it, to separate the salt, keep it in a Viol well stopt, you'l have half an ounce. This salt has the same virtues as the other I mentioned before, that is, you may give it from Eight grains to Sixteen in some Opening liquor, for the Jaundies, for Ischuries, Ʋlcers in the Bladder, the Scurvy, Fits of the Mother, and upon all occasions where there is any need of re∣moving Obstructions, and opening by way of Ʋrine. The Spirit and Oyl have the same virtues as those I have spoke of. If you would Distil in a Retort the Mass which remain'd in the Cucur∣bite, until there comes away nothing more, you'l have a Black Oyl, which might serve Women to smell to in fits. Remarks. The Cucurbite must be sure to be large enough, for otherwise it will break while the Vapours are a rising. A Clear Oyl may be drawn from Amber in the first Distillation by mixing the Amber with an equal weight of Sea-salt, and distilling it in a Retort the usual way; there will remain likewise some Volatile salt in the neck of the Retort, which may be Rectified by subliming it in a Viol as I have said.
Add to pag. 220. chap. Of Ambergriese. It is thought to be found no where else but in the Oriental seas, though some of it has been known to be sometimes met with upon the English Coast, and in several other places of Europe; the most of it is found upon the Coast of Melin∣da, and especially at the Mouth of the River that's called Rio di Sena. Add to pag. 233. Remarks upon Distillation of Guaiacum. During the Distillation of Spirits, you must not make the fire too strong, for they coming forth with a great deal of violence, would else be apt to break either the Retort or the Re∣ceiver. Though the Guaiacum that is used is a very dry body, yet abundance of liquor is drawn from it; for if you put into the Retort four pounds of this Wood, at sixteen ounces to the Pound, you'l draw at least a Pound of Spirit and Phlegm, and four ounces of Oyl; as for the salt, you'l gain but half an ounce, or six drachms at most.
Add to pag. 238. Remarks upon Oyl of Cloves per Descen∣sum. If you use a pound of Cloves, to Distil them per Descensum, according to the Description I have given, you'l draw an ounce and two drachms of White Oyl, and an ounce of Spirit; there will remain thirteen ounces and two drachms of matter, from whence might still be drawn a little Red Oyl. Add to pag. 249. lin. 6. Chap. Of Wine. 'Tis Objected to this last discourse, that the Tar∣tareous part being in a Natural way separated from the Wine, should in no wise diminish the quantity nor the strength of the Spirituous and Inflammable part. But when I asserted that the Spirits of divers Wines are extreamly much loaded with Tartar, I did not mean that Tartar which Petrifies at the sides of the vessels, for that same is quiet, and does not hinder the Exaltation of Spirits; but I intended a Tartar that still remains mixt in the Wine after the Fermentation, and which accord∣ing as it abounds more or less, does render the Wines more or less thick and gross. It is easy to see this Tartar I speak of, if you evaporate
the aqueous part of Wine, for it will remain at bot∣tom in form of Lees. Nevertheless there is no need of establishing two sorts of Tartar in one kind of Wine, for the former is only the more soluble part of the latter. Divers little Objections have been made me on this subject, for want of duly examining what I have established. Wherefore I have no desire to enlarge my self in the relation of them, for it is my aim, as much as I can, to avoid all Repeti∣tions, as being of no further use but to swell a Book and tire the Readers patience. Add to pag. 256. lin. 32. in the Remarks upon Spirit of Wine. Some persons do endeavour to reject the Me∣thod that I have described for drawing Spirit of Wine, because, say they, a long time is required to draw a little Spirit, and by reason of the diffi∣culty they conceive in procuring such Vessels well made, at Paris, and much more so in the Countrey. But it is likely these Gentlemen do blame this Method, before ever they tried it; for if they had but taken the pains to make the Experiment of it, they would have found that with two or three of these Vessels, they might have drawn as much Spirit of Wine, as they could be able to do with their great Machine; and that this Spirit is not liable to the Impression which might be communicated to it from Copper or Tin vessels.
As for the difficulty that there is pretended of finding these Glass vessels, there is none at all that I know of, but only for such as will not take the pains to visit the Glass-houses, for there they would find enough for their turn; and though I use a great many of them in my Courses of Chymistry, I never was to seek for any yet. But suppose there were none to be found ready made, me∣thinks they might as easily bespeak 'em, and have 'em made at the Glass-houses, as well as bespeak those grand Copper or Tin Machines, that are commonly used. I know those that are better pleased with making a Fair shew, than with the effects of things, and who measure the goodness of an Operation by the trouble it gives one, and by the greatness of Vessels and Furnaces, will find here but little to their satisfaction. But I am very little concerned at such mens exceptions, I never at all endeavoured to follow their Road way. My design is simply to facilitate the means of working in Chymistry, and to despoil it, as much as lies in my power, of those things which render it mysterious and dark. Add to pag. 258. Remarks upon Spirit of Wine Tartarized. A sign, that the Spirit of Wine has carried along with it some of the Salt of Tartar, is this: if you dry gently the Salt of Tartar that remains in the Cucurbite, and weigh it, you'l find it di∣minished an ounce and a half.
You may again put this Spirit of Wine Tarta∣rized to half a pound of more Salt of Tartar, in a Limbeck, and distil it as before, but I have found that it is ne'r a-whit the better for it. This way of Tartarizing Spirit of Wine is the very best and shortest of all that have been in∣vented, whether you desire to make it Pure, or to impregnate it with salt of Tartar; and I may venture to say, that all the many long and tedious descriptions that have been given of this Opera∣tion, have been only invented to cast a dust into the eyes of Novices; for it is easie for any to observe, who give themselves a little to examine things, that after all their long turnings and wind∣ings, and circumstances to no purpose, the Spirit of Wine is not so well Tartarized, as by the plain Method that I have described. Add to pag. 259. Remarks on the Queen of Hungary's Wa∣ter. The Oyl or Essence of Rosemary may be made as the Oyl of Cinnamon, and some drops may be put into Spirit of Wine, and thus we have a Queen of Hungaries Water presently made upon the spot. The Water of the Queen of Hungary sometimes gives ease to the Tooth-ach, being snufft at the Nose, or applied to the Gums with a little Cotton. Some endeavouring to Criticize to little pur∣pose, do say, it is altogether useless to digest
Rosemary Flowers with Spirit of Wine, because their substance being of a very Volatile nature, it easily dissolves without any Digestion. But this Circumstance is very necessary, if we desire to have a Water well impregnated with the Essence of the Flowers, for although there is a Volatile substance in Rosemary, yet good part of the Oyl, in which consists principally the Smell, is involved in the other Principles, and it can∣not be well Rarified, mixed, and Exalted, but only by a Digestion: and thus we find a very good Effect from it. Add to pag. 260. last line, Chap. Of Vinegar. Perhaps it will be Objected that Wine separated from Tartar and Lees grows sowre, when kept a long time in a vessel, without any dissolution of Tartar. But we must consider that Wine, let it be as clear and pure as may be, does always retain the more salt and subtile part of Tartar, which exalts and easily smells, when by the Fer∣mentation it gets the predominancy of the Sulphureous Spirits, which held it as it were in∣volved: and thus clear wine sowrs when alone, but it does not sowr so fast, and the Vinegar is not so strong, as when it is made upon Tartar. Furthermore if we consider the Principles that Wine consists of, we shall find, that neither the Oyl, nor Earth, nor Water, are capable of
yielding any Acidity, and that nothing but the Salt is able to give it. Now it can't be doubted but that the Salt of Wine is in the Tartar. It may be added here, that the Air to which Wines are exposed, by leaving the vessel open, when they would have them turn into Vinegar, does likewise communicate a little of its Acidity to the Wines, in the stirring up, and rarifying the Acid of Tartar. Add to pag. 262. Remarks on Distillation of Vinegar. Some having dried and calcined the sweet ex∣tract that remains at the bottom of the Cucur∣bite, after the Distillation of vinegar, and having by Dissolution, Filtration, and Coagulation, se∣parated an Alkali fixt salt, much like unto that which is drawn from Tartar, they do mix it with Spirit of vinegar, and Distil and Cohobate it divers times, until, say they, the spirit has carried off all the Salt, and then will needs have it called Spirit of vinegar Alkalized, or Radical spi∣rit of vinegar, and they assert that this being much more pure, and entirely united with its proper salt, is much more powerful in dissolving Me∣tals. But far from the Distilled vinegars becom∣ing the stronger through this Preparation, I can demonstrate that it breaks and loses the greatest part of its points in contending with the Alkali salt, with which it is mixt, for 'tis the property of this salt to sween Acids.
Neither is it necessary to believe that by Di∣stillations is drawn the Alkali salt of Vinegar, for it remains fixt at bottom of the Retort with the Acids it is impregnated with; so that this same Spirit of Vinegar to which so many great names and uses have been appropriated, is properly the more Phlegmatick part of distilled vinegar. Add to pag. 264. Remarks on Crystals of Tartar. I see no reason so much to wonder as some do, why Tartar will not dissolve in cold water; for although it does contain a great deal of Salt, this salt is involved in Earth, and Oyl, which must needs hinder this dissolution, and there's no need of having recourse, for an explication of this, to a proportionate Union of Volatile salts and Acids. Add to pag. 264. Soluble Tartar. Powder and mixe together eight ounces of Crystals of Tartar, and four ounces of the fixt salt of Tartar, put this mixture into a glazed earthen Pot, and pouring upon it three pints of common water, boil the matter gently for half an hour, then letting it cool, filter and evaporate the liquor until it is dry, and there will remain at bottom, eleven ounces six drachms of a white
salt; keep it in a Viol, 'tis both a good Aperi∣tive, and Laxative, it is good for Cachexies, Dropsies, and all Diseases that proceed from Ob∣structions: the Dose is from ten grains to two scruples in Broth, or some proper liquor. Remarks. This Operation is nothing but a Dissolution that the Salt of Tartar has made of Cream of Tartar, so that it can dissolve in cold water, which it could not do being alone; the Cream of Tartar also being an Acid insinuates into the Pores of the Alkali salt, and sweetens it. If you Boil Cream of Tartar in water, and put into it some salt of Tartar, there will hap∣pen an Effervescency between 'em, but if you mix these two Ingredients together in cold water, there will be no Effervescency; the reason of which is, that the Acid Spirits of Cream of Tartar being involved in other Principles, can have no active power to penetrate the Alkali, unless they be actuated by fire. I use to filter the Dissolution, in order to se∣parate some terrestrious part of the Cream of Tartar, which could not dissolve: this salt comes near to Tartar vitriolated for virtues, some do call it Vegetable salt. Chalybeated or Martial Crystals of Tartar. Powder and mix a pound of good white Tar∣tar, and three ounces of Rust of Iron, boil this
mixture in an Iron Kettle with five or six quarts of water, for half an hour, or so much time as is requisite to dissolve the Tartar, pass the liquor hot through a warm cloth, then let it alone to settle in an Iron or Earthen Pot ten or twelve hours, it will shoot into brown Cry∣stals, at the sides and bottom of the Pot, pour off the liquor by Inclination, and gather the Cry∣stals; then evaporate over the fire about half the liquor in the same Pot, then let the remain∣der settle, and take out the Crystals as before; continue these Evaporations and Crystallizations, until you have drawn out all your Tartar, dry the Crystals in the Sun, and so keep them. It is a good remedy for Obstructions of the Liver, Mesentery, Spleen; it is given in Ca∣chexies, and for Melancholy, and the Quartan Ague; the Dose is from fifteen grains to two Scruples in Broth or some other liquor proper to the Distemper. Remarks. This Preparation is boil'd but little, that the Tartar may dissolve only the more Saline part of Iron; the liquor is made to pass through a cloth, to free it from the Impurities of the Tar∣tar and Iron that could not dissolve; but you must pass it very hot, for if it were a little cool, the Tartar would Coagulate in the Cloth, and so none of the liquor would pass. Instead of Crystallizing the dissolved Tartar, you may evaporate all the liquor, and so obtain a
brown powder, which has the same virtues as the Crystals. When you would exhibite this Chalybeated Crystal of Tartar, you must make it just boil in the liquor you give it in, for otherwise it will not dissolve, and you must be sure to give it as hot as they can take it, for fear it should Cry∣stallize at the bottom of the Poringer or Cup. Soluble Tartar Chalybeated. Put into an Earthen Pan, or Glass vessel four ounces of soluble Tartar, and sixteen ounces of Tin∣cture of Mars prepared according to the de∣scription that I have given, set the vessel in sand, and with a small fire evaporate the humidity of the liquor, until there remains a black powder, shut it in a viol well stopt, and keep it, you'l have eight ounces of it. This Martial Tartar has the same virtues as the Tincture of Tartar, it is good to remove all Obstructions, wherefore 'tis very properly used in Cachexies, Dropsies, retention of the Men∣strua, in Nephritick Colicks, and difficulties of Ʋrine: the Dose is from ten grains to half a drachm, in some proper liquor, or else made into Lozenges. Remarks. This Preparation of Chalybeate, or Martial Tartar is not only more convenient for use than the former, (in that it dissolves, or mixes in
a cold liquor) but has much more virtue in it, for the Tincture of Mars contains only the more salt part of Tartar. Add to pag. 265. Remarks on Soluble Emetick Tartar. Volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack may be used instead of that of Ʋrine; but then there will ap∣pear no sensible Ebullition, the reason of which is, because the salt of this Spirit is not so open as the Spirit of Ʋrine, by reason of some impressi∣on it has of the Acid sal Armoniack, with which it was mixt; insomuch that the Crystals of Tar∣tar whose Acid is not separated from the Earth, has points too gross and too unactive to insinuate into the Pores of this salt, and divide its parts so easily as those of the salt that's contained in Spirit of Ʋrine, whose Pores are bigger. Another sort of Soluble Emetick Tartar may be made by boiling in Water an ounce of the Glass of Antimony in Powder, with four ounces of Soluble Tartar, for seven or eight hours, then upon Filtring and evaporating the liquor, there will remain a grey Powder of the same virtues as the other, and to be given in the same Dose.
Add to pag. 268. Remarks upon the Fixt Salt of Tartar, and its Oyl. I commonly use to draw this way four ounces of very white, and well Purified salt of Tartar, from each pound of Red Tartar; a little more may be drawn from white Tartar, but it is no better than the other. I have observed that when water is thrown upon the Mass of Tartar newly Calcined, it heats, much like unslack't Lime, when wetted; the reason of which is the same that I have given, to explicate the Ebullition of Quick-lime in wa∣ter: all the difference is this, that Tartar Cal∣cined containing a great deal of Salt, does more easily imbibe water than Quick-lime. Some do Calcine salt of Tartar with a little sulphur, to hinder it from dissolving so easily by the Air, and to whiten it the more; but this is no good practice, because the Acid Spirit of sulphur destroyes some part of the Alkali; and this does come to happen, by reason that the Pores of this Salt by being thus Calcined are not so open as they were, and the Air therefore can∣not so easily melt it. If you would desire to make Salt of Tartar, and other Alkali fixt salts very white indeed, you must Calcine them all alone in a great fire, until they become white, and then Purifie them by Dissolation, Filtration, and Coagulation. As for their proneness to
dissolve, this accident is Natural to Alkali salts, and it cannot be taken from them, but by de∣stroying their nature. Nor can I approve the addition of some quan∣tity of Niter to the Calcination of Tartar, as some will do, because the Volatile parts of Ni∣ter being exalted, the fixt do remain, and by their Acidity do diminish the virtue of Salt of Tartar. Alkali salts are Aperitive, in that they dis∣solve those slimy humors which caused Obstructi∣ons; and it is for the same reason that Salt of Tartar does correct Senna, and hinders it from griping, for the substance of Senna being Vis∣cous, this does Rarifie it, and make it work the quicker; it may also serve to dissolve some vis∣cous Phlegm that sticks to the Intestines, which as it is going off, causes griping pains. Add to pag. 272. the last line in Remarks upon Magistery of Tartar, or Tar∣tar Vitriolated. If you use two ounces of Salt of Tartar in this Operation, you'l draw two ounces and a half of Tartarum Vitriolatum. This Augmen∣tation comes from the more heavy and strong part of the Vitriol, for the humidity that is Eva∣porated is very Phlegmatick. You may here use the Rectified Oyl of Vitriol instead of the Spirit, and then the less is requir'd, because it is a stronger Acid, but the Tartarum
Vitriolatum will not be so white, as when Spirit of Vitriol is used, by reason of some Tincture that always remains with Oyl of Vitriol, Rectifie it as much as you please. Though some have written, that if Tartarum Vitriolatum should be put into a Retort, and actu∣ated by fire, one might draw Spirit of Vitriol as good as it was at first, nevertheless 'tis certain 'twill not be so strong a Spirit; for it has lost the most subtle part of its Acidity, by encountring with the Alkali, which may be easily judged both by the Taste, and the Effects. If by way of Curiosity you would search a little narrowly into this Operation, and observe what happens during the Ebullition of Acid and Alkali, you'l find, that a great many little dashes of water do fly about, especially if the vessel is not placed too low, and you hold a lighted Candle near it, for they will be apt to put it out. This Effect can have no other cause than the violent separation of the parts of Al∣kali by Acid, which makes the watry part of this liquor sprinkle it self upwards, it being on all sides furiously driven. If you use Oyl of Vitriol, the Ebullition is the greater, and the heat the more considerable, be∣cause its Acid being stronger, it separates the parts of the Alkali body with more ease. Now considering the Ebullition which happens between Acid and Alkali, I have the less opinion of a Method that some follow, which is to bathe a little the bodies that are to be Embalmed, with Spirit of salt, and then to put Salt of Tartar
into the Embalming Powder; for it is very like∣ly, that this Spirit of Salt, which is an Acid, by mixing with the Alkali salt of Tartar, pro∣duces a Fermentation which may stir up the re∣maining humidity of the Carkass, and make it enter into the Ingredients of the Powder, and so instead of Preserving the dead body intire, we may have reason to fear lest this Fermentation should rather hasten the dissolution of its parts. Add to pag. 274. lin. 27. in the same Remarks. Leaven does encrease the Fermentation in Dough, as being a Paste it self, whose salts are made free by a long Fermentation; these salts do joyn with those of the other Paste, and assist them both to rarifie and dissolve. The same thing may be said of divers other Acids which do cause a Fermentation. But when the Acids have rarified the matter as much as they can, they there lose their motion, and then there happens a kind of Coagulation, that is to say, the matter returns into its first dimen∣sions. Again there is one effect of Acids, which seems different from those I mentioned before, and it is that they can preserve certain bodies that are put into them, as salt preserves meat. Thus when young Cucumbers, Saxifrage, Capers, &c. are set a steeping in Vinegar, there happens no Fermentation at all, and consequently no Corrupti∣on.
The reason of which is, that the parts of Cu∣cumbers, and other things I mentioned, being of a viscous nature, the Acids do insinuate into them for to dissolve them, but they have not motion there free enough to make their attacks, and se∣parate the parts, so that the Acid of Vinegar does only fix it self in the Pores of these bodies, and there Coagulate. It is this Coagulation that hinders the Cucum∣bers from corrupting, for these Acids do stop up their Pores and serve as so many little Peggs, to keep the parts firm and quiet. Sea-salt which is an Acid does preserve meat, and several other things for the same reason; but I have spoken something of that in the Remarks upon the Prin∣ciples. Add to pag. 276. the end of the same Remarks. Another Objection may be made to what I have said touching Digestion; it is, that whereas I maintained that Acids do Dissolve when they abound, and Coagulate when there are but few in a great deal of matter, it should happen that Spittle should then be apter to Coagulate the Ali∣ments in the stomach, and cause indigestion, than would a greater quantity of Acids, for it seems, according to my Discourse, the more acids are found in a matter, the more liable it must be to dissolve. To resolve this difficulty, which seems to be very considerable, we must observe, that the
natural acids of Aliments taken into the stomach, are sufficient to rarifie and dissolve those bodies which hinder their motion, when they have been stirr'd up by Mastication, or by some salt of the spittle, which serves as a Leaven to them, much after the same manner as the salts of Meal do rarifie the Paste, when they are actuated by means of Trituration and Leaven together; but now if there happens to be too much acid in the Aliments that are taken into the stomach, they will have the same effect as Cucumbers and those other things I mentioned, which preserve in Vinegar. The acids will indeed endeavour to cut in pieces what stands in their way, but having to do with parts too viscous and heavy, they will soon lose all their motion, and fix by their quan∣tity, and by their gravity the natural salt of these aliments, as Vinegar fixes that of Cucumbers; for whereas the acids do shut the Pores of the matter, and keep them firm and quiet, the natu∣ral salt can't be able to exalt so as to cause Fer∣mentation or Digestion. The reason then why a small portion of acids will cause Digestion in the stomach, and a greater quantity will hinder it, is that the small quantity will joyn with the natural salt of aliments, and have its operation without stopping the Pores of the matter, whereas a great store of acids will quite stop up the Pores of this same matter, and hinder the motion of the natural salt; for it is not enough that there are a great many acids, to cause a dissolution, these acids must have room to move in, and make their attacks.
Thus these Effects make nothing against what I asserted concerning acids, for a greater quan∣tity of them will always have more disposition, and tendency to a dissolution; but if this great quantity does Coagulate divers things, it is only by accident, and by reason of the disposition of the matter into which the acid points do use to enter. What I have established concerning acids may serve very much towards the explicating of Fea∣vers, and their principal symptoms. First of all every body must grant, that when there are Obstructions in our Bodies, the obstruct∣ed matter does Ferment and sowr, as Dough, Wine, and several other things grow sowr by being stale. This matter by Fermenting sends salt or acid vapours into the Mass of Bloud, which do cause diverse Alterations in it, according to their quan∣tity, and quality, for these acids are commonly mixt with sulphurs, which are a kind of Vehicle to the acids, and are more or less corrupted, ac∣cording as the matter whence they are derived have sojourned more or less in the Obstructed part. Now if these acid vapours are carried into the Vessels, but only in such a quantity as is fit to make a kind of Leaven in the Bloud, they will then rarifie the Bloud too much, and whereas they by consequence encrease its motion and heat, they do cause that which we call a Fea∣ver; this Feaver must remain as long as the Fer∣ment continues in the Bloud, and according as
there comes a new supply of matter in place of what nature has thrown off. But if a greater quantity of acids rises all of a sudden from out of the Obstructions, then there must needs happen a kind of Coagulation, for these acids thus abounding, and fixing the grosser part of the Bloud, do partly lose their motion, and quiet the Ebullition of the Bloud by fixing its parts. It is this kind of Congelation which causes those Cold Shiverings, which are felt, before the Hot Fit begins; for as the Heat is derived from the motion of the Spirits, the Cold is produ∣ced from the cessation of their motion. The Cold fit continues until the Spirits have by their activity rarified this Congelation; for the Spirits being continually supplied with addi∣tional forces do violently assault the passage 'till they have broke it open, and made their way free. The Coagulum being dissolved, the Bloud should seem to Circulate as it did before, but because the matter of the Coagulum is converted into a Leaven, this Leaven makes the Bloud to Boil, and so causes a Feaver; this Feaver continues until the Bloud is freed from all this Ferment, either by Transpiration, or by way of Ʋrine. Now to conceive how this Coagulum may be converted into a Leaven, we must consider that the Spirits of the Bloud have lost most of their aci∣dity in dissolving this Coagulum, and that there re∣mains but only acidity enough to produce a Fer∣mentation.
Nevertheless you must not think I mean by this Congelation now spoken of, a Coagulum al∣together like unto that in Milk, or to that which happens, when an acid liquor is sying'd into the Veins of an Animal, for these Congelations are too strong, and there would then happen to us the same thing, or very near the same as does to the animal, who soon afterwards falls into Convulsions, and dies, because the course of the Spirits and Bloud would be intirely stopt, and they would never be able to break through so great an obstacle: but I understand here that the Bloud is made thicker than it was, and has not so free a motion as it had before, which is enough to cause such cold Fits. Now there remains for me to explicate how it comes to pass that Feavers have their abate∣ments and returns regularly by Fits. The matter that makes the Obstructions which I have laid down for the Fundamental Cause of Feavers, begins not to send out its vapours, nor disperses its acid salt into the Bloud in order to cause a Feaver, until it has got together a cer∣tain quantity in the obstructed vessels, and then it is probable there is a kind of Eruption of the matter. This Eruption of Feaverish matter must hap∣pen at set times, so long as the Obstruction lasts, because the humors which Circulate to the ob∣structed parts, and there stop, are alwayes in an equal quickness and quantity. Now seeing that in a Tertian Ague, the vessels wherein the obstruction happens, do acquire in two
dayes time a sufficient repletion of matter to pro∣duce the Eruption and Fermentation I have spo∣ken of, the Fits do come to operate every se∣cond day. But because in a Quartan Ague the humors are more tenacious and heavy, and flow with expedition, the Fermentation and Eruption must needs be slower and consequently the Fits more distant the one from the other. The Quotidian Ague is caused by a Salt Pitui∣ta, which is naturally fluid enough to make the matter ferment in less time, wherefore it is that the Fits do return every day. We may reason concerning the other kinds of Feavers upon the same Principle, and explicate all the accidents that happen, but I have no de∣sign to enlarge my self further upon this subject, I should think it would be too great a Digression, and a Book might rather be made on purpose, to express all the circumstances which might be deduced from it. Volatile Salt of Tartar. Dry the Lees of Wine in a gentle fire, and fill with them two thirds of a large earthen or glass Retort, place this Retort in a Reverberatory Fur∣nace, and fitting to it a large Receiver, give a small fire under it to heat the Retort by degrees, and to drive out an insipid Phlegm; when va∣pours begin to rise, you must put out the Phlegm, and luting carefully the Junctures of your vessels, quicken the fire by little and little, until you find
the Receiver filled with white Clouds; continue it in this condition, and when you perceive the Receiver to cool, raise the fire to the utmost ex∣tremity, and continue it so, until there rise no more Vapours. When the Vessels are grown cold, unlute the Receiver, and shaking it about to make the Volatile salt which sticks to it fall to the bottom, pour it all into a Boulthead with a long neck; fit to it a Head with a small Receiver; lute well the junctures, and placing it in sand, give a little fire under it, and the Volatile salt will rise, and stick to the head, and the top of the Boulthead; take off your head, and set on another in its place: gather your salt, and stop it up quickly, for it easily dissolves into a liquor; continue the fire, and take care to gather up the salt according as you see it appear; but when there will rise no more salt, a liquor will distil, of which you must draw about three ounces, then put out the fire. This salt is had in great request to Purify the Bloud, by Sweat or Ʋrine: it may be given in the Palsie, Apoplexy, Epilepsie, Quartan and Tertian Agues, to open Obstructions; the Dose is from six grains to fifteen in some proper li∣quor. The Distilled liquor is a Volatile salt that's risen with Phlegm; it is called the Volatile Spirit of Tartar, and has the same virtues as the salt; its Dose is from eight to four and twenty drops. After this same manner the Volatile salt of Beans, Soot, and divers Fruits and Seeds may be Prepared.
Remarks. The Lees of Wine being incomparably more Fermented than the Tartar which is found in the sides of Vessels, we need not wonder if its salt is more Volatile. This salt is sublimed in a Boulthead with a long neck, to the end the Phlegm, which is too heavy to rise easily so high, may not much mix with it; but it is extraordinary hard to keep this salt dry, it easily humects and dissolves into liquor, where∣fore it were much better to draw it in a Spirit, and less of the Volatile part would be lost, being detained by Phlegm. Nevertheless because there are several persons who are as well pleased with the sight of things, as their Effects, this liquified salt might be mixt with a sufficient quantity of Calcined Bones pow∣dered, to make thereof a Paste, which might be made into little Pellets, to be put into a Boult-head, and fitting to it a Blind head, this salt may be sublimed or Rectified as before, and this pure salt must be kept in Viols well stopt. The difficulty there is in keeping this Volatile salt dry, as well as that of other Vegetables, does proceed from this, that only the more Essential part is Volatilized, for there remains much fixt salt with the earth in the Retort. This Volatile salt becomes Alkali by the means of fire, as the other Volatile salts do, whereof I have already spoken in my Remarks upon the Principles; and there is no manner of probabi∣lity
that it should have been of this nature, either in the Plant or in the Lees, for the reasons that I have shewn in the same Remarks. I shall add here, that if the Alkali salt did ex∣ist in the Lees, but is not able to unfold it self, and get the predominancy of Acids but only by a long Fermentation, as the Chymists will have it, who follow the common way of discoursing of these things, it would then necessarily follow that the more Lees do Ferment, the more they must lose of their Acidity, because the Alkali would destroy it. Nevertheless the contrary to this happens; for Lees do sowr as they grow stale, and those who make your Vinegar, do know well enough how to use Lees, and make them Ferment with their Wine, when they would use a quick dispatch in making Vinegar. It seems to me from the consideration of this effect, that there is little reason to follow the Sentiments of some, who have writ that the Lees of wine abounding in Volatile salt, and a sulphu∣reous spirit do contain but very little Acid; for it is as plain as may be that this Volatile salt is Acid in the Lees, and is the fame that makes the Acid spirit of Vinegar, as being more Volatile than many other Acids, to Volatilize along with its Phlegm in the distillation. It is true that salt of Tartar drawn by the Retort, does rise more easily than the Spirit of Vinegar, but this is from its being Volatilized by the violent heat of fire. Another mark that all the salt of Lees is Acid, is this, that the Tartar does all dissolve in the wine, and turns into Vinegar; for very little or
no Lees, or other Tartar, is to be found in the Barrels wherein Vinegar was made, although there was some before as nature made it, or though some other was added to it. Perhaps it will be Objected, that Lees are sometimes added to Wines grown ropy and muci∣laginous to make them good again, and those Wines are not sowred by the Lees. But this effect happens, when the former Fer∣mentation becoming imperfect, through the too great quantity of Phlegm for the little proporti∣on of Salt that was in the wines, the salt of the Lees does rarifie, exalt, and involve it self in some measure in the Oyly parts of the liquor that the wine is made of, as I have said in the Chapter of Wine. For the Wine does not sowr, so long as the salt finds Oyl to act upon, but it does so, when this salt finds nothing to hinder it from separa∣ting. The Volatile salt of Tartar produces much the same effects, as that of Beans, and other seeds, and though many will needs give it such sublime and extraordinary virtues in comparison with other Volatile salts, I do'nt see any reason for such high fancies, nor that effects do answer their Pretences. Volatile salts have a good use, when they find the Pores and Humors disposed for Transpiration, but they are full as dangerous, when the Humors are not at all Prepared; for by their Volatility they do so stir them up, that oftentimes the Feaver is known to be encreased by them, and translated
to the Brain: wherefore you must be sure to con∣sider well the Temper and present state of your Patient, before you presume to give them. That which remains in the Boulthead, after the Volatile salt, and spirit are drawn off, is a black and stinking Oyl mixt with the more Phleg∣matick part of the liquor; you must separate this Oyl in a Funnel lined with brown paper; it is good for the Palsie, Cold pains, and for Hysterick women to smell to. A Lee or Calcined Tartar is found in the Re∣tort, out of which you may draw a fixt Alkali salt, as out of common Tartar, but in a lesser quantity, for that the greatest part of the Salt of Lees is Volatilized. Add to pag. 278. Extract of Opium called Laudanum. Opium does mitigate all pains which proceed from too great a subtilty of the humours, it is good for the Tooth-ach, being applied to the Tooth, or else made into a Plaisser, and applied to the Artery of the Temples; it is used to stop spitting of bloud, Dysenteries, Fluxes of the Menstrua, and the Hemorrhoids, for Colicks, de∣fluxions of sharp humors upon the eyes, for Rheumatisms, and to ease all sorts of Griping pains. The Dose, &c. as before.
Add to pag. 284. Remarks upon Laudanum. Some have writ in opposition to what I have establish'd on this subject, and say, that if we have regard to the quantity of Narcotick vapours that may arise from a small Dose of Opium, it ought not to be imagined that those Vapours should be able to shut the channels of the Spirits and humours which make a defluxion upon some part; but that we should rather conclude the mitigation of pains, and stopping of defluxions to proceed from a jus proportion of the salt and sulphur of Opium, and from the secret Ferment they contain. But this Objection will give us but little trouble in the answering, when we consider that al∣though the Vapours caused by it are but few, yet the vessels of the Brain, in which the Animal Spirits do move, are exceeding delicate, and easie to be obstructed; and that the too great activity of the Spirits, which often fly into the diseased parts, being thus abated by the viscous nature of Opium, there must needs follow there∣upon some ease and comfort, without any need at all of admitting a stoppage of the Vessels. And again we may conceive, that all the Opium that was taken, being capable of being Rarified into vapours by the heat of the body, there must needs be produced good quantity of them.
As for the proportion of Salt, and Sulphur in Opium, and the secret Ferment they pretend to acquaint us with, in order to Explicate this matter, I know they are high terms indeed, but illustrate very little; for though they say these salts and sulphurs do unite with Homogeneous particles that they meet with, and destroy such as are the cause of the Distemper, we can never by this means receive any clear Idea of that which makes Opium soporiferous. Besides the virtue which Opium has to cause sleep, I have observed that it is often Sudorifick. I conceive this effect must not be attributed only to the Volatile parts of this mixt, which may be thought to operate this way, after they are disingaged from its viscosity, but rather to this, that during sleep, the inward vessels being as it were obstructed, or in some manner Coagu∣lated, and the Spirits finding resistance in their passage, do reflect, or turn their motion to the outward parts, and draw along with 'em some moisture through the Pores. That which con∣firms me in this opinion is the consideration, that divers persons do use always to sweat, when they are a sleep, though they have not taken any Opium at all. Now it may happen that in the operation of Opium, the Spirits finding more resistance within than they are wont, may tend outwards with the more force, and conse∣quently incline to sweat more than in natural sleep. Some prejudiced Chymist may not relish per∣haps this my Explication, because I don't season
it with salt enough, and sulphur, and other Prin∣ciples; but although the five Principles which may be drawn from other Vegetables, may also be drawn from Opium, I never use them but to explicate some Effect; for whensoever I find they are not able to satisfie my reason, no∣thing shall hinder me from pursuing my thoughts and searching otherwhere for some better explication. In fine the Beauty of Chymistry does not consist in suiting our opinions to those of ordinary Chymists, who resolving to expli∣cate all the Events of nature by their received Principles, which they manage according to their own fashion, do reject as ridiculous whatsoever does not agree with their Sentiments; but it rather consists in examining and imitating what is done Naturally, and so searching for reasons that are most probable, and such as may be said to come nearest to truth, though one is fain to forsake the way that others have trod in. Add to pag. 285. Chap. Of Aloes. Aloes is not only used inwardly, as I shall say speaking of its Extract, but it is also used out∣wardly in many Ʋnguents and Plaisters that are Detersive, and Resolutive. Its Tincture is also drawn with Spirit of wine, by the same Method as I shall describe that of Myrrhe; it is resolutive, detersive, good against Gangrenes, and to Incarnate: it is used in Injections to dissolve Gypsous humours, and to cleanse Wounds, and old Ulcers.
Add to pag. 292. lin. 3. in Remarks on Extractum Panchymagogum. Spirit of Wine is commonly used to make this Extract; and it may seem to be so much the purer, being drawn by this dissolvent, rather than by a watry menstruum; for spirit of wine dissolves only the more Balsamick and purer part of mixt bodies: but nevertheless I choose rather to prefer the use of Dew, or else Rain∣water, nay and common water before Spirit of wine for several reasons. First, because in the Evaporation of the humi∣dity of the Extract, drawn by Spirit of wine, a great many of the more subtile parts are lost, which this dissolvent had Volatilized. And in∣deed it cannot be denied, but some parts will eva∣porate, let us use what dissolvent we please; but it is plain there is no such great loss, when watry menstruums are used, as when spirit of wine. Now we should always prefer such menstruums, as are best able to preserve the virtue of the mixt, whose Extract we intend to draw. The second is, because Spirit of wine does al∣wayes leave some impression of heat and acrimony in the Extracts it draws, which the liquors that I use don't do. The third is, because spirit of wine is not so convenient a menstruum to dissolve the salts which the Ingredients we use are full of, and it is in this salt, that their grearest virtue does consist.
Wherefore we ought to choose such dissolvents, as best preserve the virtue of mixt bodies, and such as are familiar to our nature. We must use Spirit of wine to extract Rosines, such as that of Scammony, Jalap, Turbith; but whenever an Extract can be drawn with a watry menstruum, it is better to use that, rather than another, for the reasons I have mentioned. Add to pag. 304. after the chap. Of Gum Ammoniack. CHAP. Of Myrrhe. MYrrhe is a Gummy juice that distils from a Spinous Tree, of a middle height, by Incisions that are made into it; this Tree grows commonly in Ethiopia, and Arabia, and be∣cause the Inhabitants of those countries are thought to feed on Serpents, the Myrrhe that is brought thence is called Troglodytick. The Antients were wont to collect from the same Tree a liquor that fell from it without Incision, which was called Stacten; 'tis only a liquid Gum, but I am apt to think it should have more virtue than common Myrrhe, because it was the more spirituous part, which filtrated through the Pores of the Bark of this Tree.
You must choose such Myrrhe as is friable, light, odoriferous, clear, and such as is in small pieces, of a Yellowish colour, and bitter to the Taste; it is aperitive and resolutive; it is much esteem∣ed for obstructions of the Ʋterus, and to bring the menstrua, and to quicken Womens Labour; it also resists malignity of humors, it is used in Corroborative Remedies, and resolvent Plaisters. Tincture of Myrrhe. Put what quantity you please of good Myrrhe powdered, into a Boulthead, and pour upon it spirit of wine four fingers high; ftir the matter and set it in digestion in warm sand, for two or three dayes, or until the Spirit of Wine is loaded with the Tincture of Myrrhe; then separate the liquors by Inclination, & keep it in a Viol well stopt. It may be used to expedite Womens Labour, to bring down the Menstrua, and in the Palsy, Apo∣plexy, Lethargy, and all diseases that proceed from Corruption of humors; it is Sudorifick and Aperitive: the Dose is from six drops to fifteen in some proper liquor: it is commonly used in outward applications, or mixed with the Tincture of Aloes to discuss cold Tumors, and to dissolve Gypsous humors by way of Injection, and for the Gangrene. Remarks. Though Tinctures of Myrrhe are daily drawn in Wine, or Aqua vitae, notwithstanding the best
that can be Prepared is with Spirit of wine, be∣cause this Menstruum receives the more Oyly, or Balsamick part of Myrrhe; whereas the Phlegm of Wine, and Aqua vitae, do cause these liquors to dissolve, and impregnate with the more terrestrious part of the Gum, as well as with the Oyly. Some do use to evaporate this Tincture to the consistence of an Extract, but because thereby they are fain to lose the more Volatile part of the Myrrhe with the spirit of wine, I do conceive it better to use the Tincture it self as I have de∣scribed it. Oyl of Myrrhe per Deliquium. Boil Eggs until they are grown hard, then cutting them in two, separate the Yelk, and fill the White with Myrrhe powdered, set them on little sticks placed conveniently on purpose, in a plate, or earthen pan, in a Cellar, or some such moist place, and there will distil a liquor to the bottom of the vessel, which you may take out, and keep for use. This is called the Oyl of Myrrhe: it is good to take away Freckles, and Tettars, applied outwardly. Remarks. Though this liquor, improperly called Oyl, is only the more soluble part of Myrrhe humected with the moisture of whites of Eggs, and the Cellar together, yet it is the best of any that have
been invented, whether you draw it in Spirit of wine, or distil this Gum in a Retort: for by spirit of wine the more Volatile part of Myrrhe is lost, either by Distillation, or Evaporation; and it is so Torrified in a Retort, that it loses its best vir∣tues; whereas per Deliquium what Volatile this Gum contains is preserved in its Natural being, for the humidities that mix with it are no ways capable of destroying or altering its nature. Add to pag. 309. l. 11. in the Chap. Of Vipers. I am apt to conceive, that the Venom of Vi∣pers is caused by an affluence of Acid salts, vio∣lently thrown forth, and which by insinuating into the Veins, do by degrees cause a Coagulum in the Bloud, to hinder its Circulation, and the course of the spirits; this opinion is the more probable, in that Coagulated Bloud has been found in the Veins of many Animals, which have been bit by the Viper, and besides the most power∣ful Remedies that cure this Poison, are Volatile Alkali salts, which are proper to dissolve the Coagulum. As for what may be said, that if this discourse were true, the Natural acidity of the Bloud would Coagulate it sometimes, as it happens to Milk which Curdles of it self; and that this Coagulation would produce the same effects as does the Venom of Vipers; this Objection raises no difficulty at all. For the Bloud circulating
in its Natural way, the Acidity that is in it is so well united to it, that it cannot separate to make a Coagulum, no more than the acidity that is in milk can separate from it, whilest the milk remains in the Teats, for we see it never uses to Curdle there, unless occasioned by some Distemper. And again, who can doubt but certain Pesti∣lential Airs, or divers Diseases that come from the corruption of the humours of the body, may be able to Coagulate the Bloud, and have the same effect as the venom of Vipers? Add to pag. 314. the bottom of the page in Remarks on Distillation of Vipers. There is another way of Rectifying the Volatile salt, which is by mixing it with five or six times as much Bones, or Horns burnt white, and putting the mixture into a glass, or earthen Cu∣curbite, then fitting to it a blind head, or such a one whose Nose has not been opened, after that luting well the junctures, then setting the vessel in sand, and with a gentle fire the Volatile salt will rise, and stick to the head, you must con∣tinue the fire until there rises nothing further. This salt is hereby purified from a great deal of its Oyl, which remains in the powder of Bones, wherefore it is whiter than it was, and pleasanter to the Palate. It may again be mixt with other Calcined Bones, and sublimed as before, to render it the purer still, and take away the more of its unsavoury smell, that's caused partly by the Em∣pyreuma∣tical
oyl that it draws along with it in the distillation. Add to pag. 316. the end of the same Remarks. If you distil two and thirty ounces of shavings of Harts-horn, you'l draw thirteen ounces of liquor, and Volatile salt, and there will remain in the Retort nineteen ounces of matter as black as any Coal. You'l draw from the liquor an ounce and a half of Volatile salt, six ounces of spirit, and two ounces of Black Oyl. The black matter being grinded on a Marble is good for Painters to use; if you Calcine it, the fuliginous parts which make it black, will fly away, and leave the Hartshorn very white; you'l have sixteen ounces of it, and this is called burnt Hartshorn. It is accounted Cardiack, but indeed has no other virtue than to destroy Acids, as all other Alkali matters do too. Some do use to stratifie Hartshorn with Bricks, and Calcining it that way, they call it Hartshorn prepared Philosophically, they account it more Cordial than it was before; but they are very strangely mistaken, for the Volatile salt, and Oyl, which were the things that should render it Cardiack, were carried away in the Calcination, and there remains only a Terrestrious matter that might be called Caput mortuum. Notwith∣standing it is an Alkali, that may serve as Crabs-eyes,
Coral, and divers other matters of the like nature, which absorbe Acids; the Bricks bestow no virtue at all on it. Add to pag. 323. Remarks on the Distillation of Wax. If by way of curiosity you desire to know exactly what quantity of liquor, or spirit, can be drawn from Wax, you must dry your Bo∣lus as much as you can, or else use in its place, broken pots, or Bricks powdered, which are not at all wet: out of three and twenty ounces of Wax, you'l draw in the first Distillation just the same weight of liquor; to wit, twelve oun∣ces of Phlegmatick spirit, and the rest is a Butter; in the second and third Distillation you'l draw fourteen ounces of spirit, and six ounces of clear Oyl. Spirit of Wax is only a small quantity of Acid Volatile salt dissolved in Phlegm; but you must not believe what some have written, that having Distilled a considerable quantity of Wax, and put that which was drawn into a Boult head with a long neck, they could sublime the Volatile salt like others of that nature. For this salt, though it is indeed Volatile, yet it is not Volatile enough to rise before the Phlegm; it is an Acid salt much like unto that of Amber, but is not of the nature of Volatile Alkali's, which are known to sublime so easily; it were better therefore to keep this spirit as it is, or else to evaporate about half of
it with a very mild heat, that it may be the stronger. The Volatile salts of many sulphureous matters are drawn Acid, as they were de facto in the mixt, because being cloathed with soft and ra∣mous parts which give way easily to their motion, they do not break their natural keenness in endea∣vouring to separate, when they are forced by fire, and so they do not receive so much terre∣strious and fiery matter, as is requisite to make them Porous, like Volatile Alkali's. Methinks this Operation, and the Distillation of Amber which I have described, do much con∣firm what I said before in my Remarks upon the Principles, that all the salt of mixt bodies is na∣turally Acid, and that Alkali is nothing else but a mutation made by fire. Besides, all sorts of Experiments do seem to me to confirm and esta∣blish this Opinion; but yet I am not so perem∣ptory in the vindication of it, but would gladly give place to another, if I could be shewed that it is better than mine, for I seek after nothing else but real Truth. Neither would I have it thought, I am so full of Vanity, as to vaunt my self for the first Au∣thor of this Opinion, of many other thoughts, and of all the wayes of Operation that are to be found in my Book, as if for certain they were never writ before; for although I can assure my Reader, that they are dictates of my own con∣ception, and that I have not searched into any Author whatsoever to find them out; it may have hapned nevertheless, and I am willing to
think so, that many others besides my self may have thought and written the same things that I have done, and with more order and decorum. All the glory therefore that I am desirous to re∣serve unto my self, upon this occasion, is, that I have had the fortune to fall into the same re∣flexions, as many Ingenious persons have done before me, without consulting any of them. FINIS.
AN INDEX OF THE MORE Material REMARKS IN THIS APPENDIX. A ACid and Alkali, their nature discoursed of at large, Page 14, 15. All Bodies that Fer∣ment with Acids are not compounded of an Al∣kali salt; as Pearle, Coral, &c. but are them∣selves Alkali's, 13. An Alkali after its con∣flict with Acids, remains no longer Alkali, 16, 17. No Alkali salt in Animals, 17. Choler no Alkali, 18. The notions of Acid and alkali cannot explicate the Heat and Ebullition, which proceeds from mixing spirit of Niter with spirit of Wine, 80. The Oyl of Turpentine with Oyl of Vitriol occasions the same difficulty, ib. How these Ebullitions are to be explicated, 81. Why Acids can preserve certain bodies put in them, as Salt preserves meat, 116, 117.
Alchymy, an excellent definition of it, 27. Aloes, its Tincture how drawn, 130. Alom, its spirit as good and strong as spirit of Vi∣triol, 96. Amber, where found, 97. its Tincture how made, 98. its Volatile salt how drawn, 99. Ambergrease, where found, 101. Antimony Emetick, by reason of a saline sulphur it contains, 59, 60. its Regulus Calcined, weighs more than it did before, 60. and this Augmen∣tation from the addition of Fire into its body, ib. whence proceeds the Star, that is seen in its Martial Regulus, 61, 62, 63. Aqua-Fortis, its spirit no wayes alkali, 75. Arcanum Corallinum how Prepared, 54. Astrological Fancies about the correspondence of Metals, and the Planets, divers of them con∣futed, 22, 23. Judicial Astrology censur'd, 62. Aurum Fulminans, why it may be taken inward∣ly, 30. B. Bismuth, why in making its Magistery the Ebulli∣tion is so great, and the Boulthead grows so hot, 31. its Magistery may be made without using Salt in the Water, but the Precipitation is bet∣ter and quicker with Salt, 32. C. Colour, proved to be no real thing; but only to de∣pend on the Modification of parts by divers
Experiments on Red Precipitate, 55, 56: seve∣ral Experiments upon Colours, 95, 96. Copper, why Water or other liquor that's heated or boiled in Copper vessels a whole day together, if not remov'd from off the fire, savours not so much of the Copper, as other Water boil'd in a like vessel, and remov'd from the fire but an hour, 36, 37, 38. what liquors take its Im∣pression sooner than others, 38. Cautions in the use of Copper vessels, ib. why a Kettle newly taken off the fire is not so hot at bottom, as on the sides, 39. Crocus Metallorum, a certain sort, called Mag∣nesia Opalina, 64. in the Preparation of the common sort of it, ordinary Salt-peter being used, yields more Crocus than the Purified Salt-peter; and the reason why, 64. that made with common Salt-peter, is the Redder, and nearer the colour of an Animals Li∣ver, 64. the preparation of it that may be given in a greater Dose, not better than that which is given in a less, 65. D. Digestion, an Objection concerning it answer'd, 117, 118. Dissolvents to be used of the same nature with the substance you desire to dissolve, 98, 99. E. Emails, what they are made of, 40. Extractum Panchymagogum, better drawn with
a watry Menstruum, than Spirit of Wine, 131. In what Extracts Spirit of Wine should be used, 132. F. Feavers, and their principal symptoms explicated by what is spoken concerning acids, 119, 120. How Intermittent Feavers, or Agues, come to return regularly by Fits, 121, 122. G. Goddards Drops, some account of their Process, in the Preface. Gold, thought to be the end that Nature aims at in all her Mines, 23. taken inwardly no real Cordial, 27. nor receives any Influence from the Sun more than other things do, ib. Sto∣ries to prove it a Cordial, refuted, 28, 29, 30. That there are Volatiles which can Sublime it away, 29. Gold purified by Lead, as the White of an Egg Clarifies a Syrop, 33. the intercepted heavy matter between its Pores, does not Pre∣cipitate of its self, 86. an Objection answer'd, 86, 87. Guaiacum though a dry body, yet yields much liquor, 201. H. Hartshorn Burnt no Cardiack, but only an alkali, 137. Philosophically prepared, it is but an ill Medicine, ib.
Haematites, or the Bloud-stone how prepared, 68. an Acid Spirit drawn from it, ib. Sublimation of this stone, 69. I. Ink, how made to appear and disappear several times in Paper, 90. Dried Roses with Vitriol will make as black an Ink, as that made with Galls, 90. and so will divers other things, 91. Iron differs from the Loadstone but only in the fi∣gure of its Pores, 40. Though it is an Acid Vitriolick Salt, yet it remains an Alkali, ib. Divers objections to prefer Steel before Iron for Physical uses, answered at large, 41, to 45. its Aperitive virtue, partly from its salt, and partly from its gravity, 42. L. Lead, though it loses much by its Calcination, yet weighs heavier at last, by addition of fiery par∣ticles into its body, 33, 34. in the distillation of its Burning spirit, called Burning spirit of Sa∣turn, six drachms are taken out of the Retort, more than were put in, besides an ounce and six drachms more of liquor thence distilled, 34, 35. its Calx how revived, 36. M. Metals, how different from Minerals, 21. seven in number, ib. Mercury, the former discourse upon its effects and operations in the Pox, vindicated (modestly) to be the Authors own invention, 45. It is proved to be an Alkali, though it contains no alkali salt, 46. Objections against its being an alkali, and the venom of the Pox an acid, answered, 47, 48. K.
Not half the Spirit of Niter requisite to dissolve it, as is for the same weight of Bismuth, 49. a difficulty about its making a sublimate corrosive in the body, answered, 50, 51. why Mercurius Dulcis, in a Flux, does not fill the Brain with Ʋloers, as it does the mouth, 49. its White Pre∣cipitate by sublimation becomes as sweet as Mer∣curius Dulcis, and may be then given in as great a Dose, 52. its Red Precipitate the less 'tis Cal∣cined, and the less Red it is, the more Corrosive 'twill prove, 53. why spirit of Vitriol upon its Red Precipitate, makes a clear dissolution with∣out any Ebullition, 54. why spirit of Salt upon its Red Precipitate, makes a curious white, 55. why the Colour turns so soon from Red to White, ib. its Red precipitate will sublime if you continue it on the fire too long, 53, 54. other Precipitates of Mercury, 56. and remarkable Observations upon them, 57, 58, 59. why the Volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack does so much help the Precipitation of Mercury, 52. Milk, whence its Coagulation, 18, 19. Minerals, how they grow, 20. Myrrhe, what, 132. its liquid Gum, anciently called Stacten, ib. how chosen, and what it is good for, 133. its Tincture how drawn, ib. why spirit of Wine draws it best, 134. its Tincture better than the Extract, ib. its Oyl per Deli∣quium how made, ib. N. Niter, not at all inflammable, 76. No Sulphur in Saltpeter, 77. Spirit of Niter how dulcified, 79. in the Fixation of Saltpeter into an alkali salt,
why the Crucible must be but half full, 82. The Detonation from Saltpeter and Coals, why greater than from Saltpeter, and common. Sul∣phur, 82. why more Fixt Salt get by the use of common saltpeter than by that which is Purified, 83. How to make Grey fixt Niter become: ex∣ceeding White, 84. Fixt Niter why an Al∣kali, ib. No Alkali salt in saltpeter, ib. why the liquor of Fixt Niter, that is made with com∣mon saltpeter, being kept a year or so, loses its alkali nature; whereas that which is made with purified Saltpeter, never loses being an Alkali, 84, 85. Fixt Niter an Acid salt rendred porous, by the Alkali of Coals, 85. Liquor of Fixt Ni∣ter called by some Alkaest, or Ʋniversal dis∣solvent, 85. Niter excellently well proved not to be inflammable, ib. O. Opium, what it is good for, 127. its Operation proved to proceed from Narcotick Vapours, shutting the channels of the Spirits and Humours, 128. and not from any proportion of salt and sulphur, or secret Ferment, 129. Opium ob∣served to be Sudorifick, ib. Oyl, nothing else properly said to be inflammable, 1. that which caused its Flagration must be a Vo∣latile or Essential salt, ib. this proved from com∣mon sulphur; and a mixture of saltpeter with sulphur, 2. Oyl of Bricks why called by Chymists the Oyl of Philosophers, 70, 71. Oyl of Peter, Jet, and Coals, supposed to be from a distillation in the Earth, but falsly, 97. 98.
P. Petrification, how, 20. Philosophers-stone, the several methods of search∣ing after it related, and pleasantly discoursed of, 24, 25. the misery of those men that seek after it, 26. the possibility of the Philosophers-stone granted, but accounted next to an impossibility, and the reason why, ib. Q. Quicklime, in the making of it, the fire must be kept at an equal height, to the end of the work, 65. its Corrosion caused by Igneous bodies, 66. no Acid in it, to cause its Ebullition in wa∣ter, 67. S. Sal Armoniack, how made Artificially at Venice, 85. eight ounces of it do contain at least four ounces and a half of Volatile salt, 88. its Vola∣tile spirit only a dissolution of Volatile salt in Water, ib. its spirit sensibly proved to be Sudo∣rifick by a proper instance, 89. whence it is that a Coagulation happens from the mixture of spirit of Wine with the Volatile spirit of Sal Armo∣niack ib. Sal Polychrestum, not fit to be used, until it is made very white, 77. why more of it is made with common Saltpeter than that which is Puri∣fied, 78. an Ebullition falsly said to rise, when spirit of Sulphur is cast upon it, or upon Salt∣peter, 78. Salt, that of Vegetables proceeds from a salt juice of the Earth they grow in, 5. too much salt as bad for Lands as too little; an instance of those
near the River Nile, 6. 'tis a Volatile, or at least a saltpetrous salt that fertilizes Lands, ib. yet the Ashes of Vegetables, though full of a fixt salt, do well to this purpose, 7. Three sorts of salt drawn from Vegetables, an Acid or Essen∣tial, a Volatile, and a fixt salt, 9. the acid salt the only true salt in nature, 9, 10, 11. Salt de∣crepitated exposed to the Air to be distilled with∣out addition, yields only a Phlegm, rather than spirit, 74. Monsieur Seignet's Distillation of spirit of Salt without addition of Clay to sepa∣rate its parts, vindicated to be good, and an admirable Operation, 74, 75. how all alkali Fixt salts are made very white, 113. and why they are Aperitive, 114. its spirit not good to bathe bodies with that are to be Embalmed, 116. Salt-water in the Sea, caused by Mines of Salt therein contained, 3, 4. Sea-salt, how made at Rochel, 71. when Crystal∣lized, it makes no Ebullition with Oyl of Tar∣tar, 72. Saltpeter, vide Niter. Sulphur, its white Flowers made with Sal Po∣lychrestum, 97. T. Tartar, why its Crystals will not dissolve in cold water, 108. why its Crystals boiled with its salt do raise an effervescency in hot water, which they cannot do in cold, 109. its soluble Tartar only the Cream of Tartar made soluble in cold water, ib. its Chalybeated or martial Crystals, ib.
soluble Tartar how chalybeated, 111. soluble Emetick Tartar may be made with Volatile Spi∣rit of Sal Armoniack, instead of Spirit of Ʋ∣rine, but then there will be no Ebullition, and why, 112. how this Emetick is prepar'd another way, ib. why water thrown upon its salt newly Calcined, does come to heat like unslack't Lime, 113. Salt of Tartar not to be Calcin'd with Sulphur, ib. nor Niter, 114. its Volatile salt why made of Lees of Wine, rather than Tartar, 124. very hard to keep its Volatile salt dry, and yet how that may be done, ib. its Volatile salt made alkali by the fire, but was not of that na∣ture, either in the Plant, or in the Lees, ib. the Salt of its Lees proved to be Acid, 125, 126. this Volatile salt no better than others, 126. some fixt Alkali salt to be found in the Lees re∣maining in the Retort, 127. Tartarum Vitriolatum, distilled in a Retort yields not so strong a spirit of Vitriol, as it was at first, 115. during the Ebullition of Acid and Alkali in this Operation a great many dashes of water fly about, enough to put out a Candle, ib. Tartarum Vitriolatum made with Recti∣fied Oyl of Vitriol, is not so white as that made with the Spirit, 114. but when Oyl of Vitriol is used, the Ebullition is the greater, 115. V. Vegetation, from a mixture of Volatile salt and Sulphur, 7, 8. the fixt salt that lies in the ashes of Vegetables, does fructifie by being Po∣rous, 7.
Vinegar, its Alkalized, or Radical spirit, proved to be only the more Phlegmatick part of distilled Vinegar, 107. Vipers, their venom caused by Acid salts, 135. the natural acidity of the bloud not capable of causing any such Venemous Coagulation, as Vi∣pers do, 135, 136. their Volatile salt how Recti∣fied, and why, 136. Vitriol, the Redness of it Calcin'd, proved not to proceed from any Copper therein contained, 91, 92. some of its Spirit always flyes away through the Junctures, use what care you can, 93. Ger∣man Vitriol yields more, but not so good spirit as the English, 93. its Oyl being mixed with its Acid Spirit, or with water, or some Ethe∣real Oyl, as Oyl of Turpentine, why it causes so violent a Heat and Ebullition, 93, 94. This not to be explicated by the notions of Acid and Alkali, but by fiery particles contained in the Oyl, 94. an excellent Experiment to prove its Oyl full of fiery parts, 94, 95. Volatile salts when proper to be used, and when not, 126. many of these Volatile salts, drawn Acid, as they were in the mixt, 139. W. Water, Queen of Hungaries water how readily made upon the spot, 105. the Rosemary Flowers in it, though Volatile in their nature, yet re∣quire a Digestion to draw out their virtue, 106. why plain water can Precipitate Bismuth, Lead, and Antimony, but can't precipitate Gold, Syl∣ver, or Mercury, 32.
Wax, its spirit an Acid Volatile salt, like the Salt of Amber, 138. This Distillation, and that of Amber, prove all the Salt of mixt bo∣dies to be naturally Acid, and Alkali's to be nothing but mutations made by fire, 139. Wine, that which is clear, and freed from Lees and Tartar, will sowre, and turn into a (weak) Vinegar, but this by reason of a Tartar con∣tained in its Principles, 106. and the Air thought to communicate some Acidity to Wine, 107. The Authors way of drawing its Spirit vindicated, 103, 104. FINIS.
