L2553 12532106 62783
A LITTLE True Forraine Newes: Better Than a great deale of Domestick spurious false Newes, published daily without feare or wit, to the shame of the Nation, and beyond the liberty of Paris Pasquils. Vnto which is added A LETTER Written by the Lievtenant of the Tower, to the PARLIAMENT, in defence of himselfe, and may give satisfaction to all men. LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Butter, 1641.
An Extract out of divers Letters written in Brazeil, concerning the glorious Vi∣ctory of the taking of the great and populous Citie of Loando de S. Paulo in Angola: By the Fleet of the Generall West-India Company, under the command of the Admirall Houte-beene or Wooden legge, which was done the 26 of August, 1641. Imprinted at Middelburgh, by the widow and Heirs of Simon Mowlers, Ordinarie Printer to the High and Mighty LORDS, STATES of Zealand, dwelling upon the Damme neer the old Exchange 1642. Newes From Brazeil, SIR, I Cannot but communicate unto you the great blessing, which it hath pleased our good God to bestow upon the Companie in the taking of the City of Loando de S. Paulo the 26 of August last past; for after that wee had sent out from hence the 20.30th. of My, under the command of the Admirall Iol
Lievtenant Colonell Hinderson, and as Politick Councel∣lors, Morthamer, and Newlant with 21. Ships and Pinnasses, with about 3000. men, both Souldiers and Mariners; which came the 25. of August, upon the road before the said Citie, and presently landed their Forces, where they found the enimie in order to defend the Citie; yet after a small skirmish, wherein we lost three or foure men, and as many more were wounded, the enimes retired. At the rising of the Moone, our men marched towards the Citie, which they found wholy forsaken, finding in it no more but some few men, that were drunk, without any opposition; inso∣much, that this is a great Victorie, because the King of Castile can get no Negros or Black-Moors to labour in the Mines in the West-Indies, whether-wards they have yeerly sent from that place about 15000. which they buy there for a small price, and are sold here in Brazeil, for 400 or 500. gilders one Negro; and in the West-Indies they are sold yet for a higher price: out of which trade the King of Castile hath yeerly had a great treasure, which he must misse now, because he had for every Negro, ten Crusa custome, besides other great Revenews. This Victory is both here and in Angola counted higher than any other, that the Company obtained here before, in regard of the great traffick, that falls there, and the great profits it will afford, and I doe not doubt, but the Company shall bee furnished from thence with all sorts of Commodities. Upon a good hope of this design, we had sent after the Fleet already in August, two Ships more with two hundred foot with fire-locks, which came thither in very good and due time. Wee are now busie to send thither-wards two lusty Ships with Victuals and Merchandise to begin the trade; it comes us well to passe, that we have taken two
prizes, which were bound for that place with goods, that are much desired there, which gives a double advantage unto us. The Admirall Iol is departed from thence, or was upon his departure, with a good number of Souldiers and Ships, and going out upon another exploit; unto which I pray God to give his blessing. The Vice-Admirall Lichtart towards with Colonell Coin, if God pleaseth, are to goe to Sea within these eight or tenne dayes, with sixteen Saile of Ships and Pinnasses, well manned, upon another exploit, I hope that by Gods assistance, they will have good suc∣cesse; yet the place which they aime at, for divers reasons I must conceale: here underneath I have set to it that same, what wee have obtained, so sarre as is yet known. The Citie of Loando de S. Paulo is of a very great cir∣cumference, situated upon a faire Hill, having obtained thereby six Forts, seven Ravelins, two Batteries, fifty nine brasse Peeces of Ordnance, sixtie nine Iron Peeces, thirteen thousand weight of gunne powder, three hundred weight of matches, two thousand two hundred Bullets: A certaine number of Negros. A certaine quantity of Merchants goods. A certaine quantity of Victuals. A certaine quantity of Wine. Whereof we have as yet no particu∣lar List, what quan∣titie there is of. In the City have been under the command of the Go∣vernour Pedro Sect de Meneses eight hundred white, both souldiers and Townes-men, with about thirty thousand Ne∣gros without wifes and children, but they were all fled, but must needs come to a composition, because they will not be able to get sufficient provision in the field. The profit of the Trade from thence is esteemed to amount yeerly to sixty Tunnes of gold, which is a great matter for the Company, &c.
Laus Deo Adieu, the 30 of October 1641. In the Recyf de Pernambouqe. WOrshipfull and worthy Sir, after my kind saluta∣tion, I hope that you are safely arrived, being the occasion fals out now for Rochel, I cannot passe by this pre∣sent occasion, but advertise you, how that our Admirall Houtebeene with his Fleet hath taken the 25 of August, the Citie of Loando de S. Paulo, together with five Castles, the manner as followeth. Our Forces comming upon the heigth of the said Citie of Loando in sight of the Coun∣try Kassoone, the Inhabitants perceived our Fleet; they gathe∣red together about twenty five thousand Negros or Black-Moores & some thousand white, to resist our Forces; not∣withstanding our Forces would lose no time and occasion, but came up with the whole Fleet, and landed betwixt the Castles and the Citie: those within the Citie seeing the stout and valourous comming on of our men, grew faint-hearted, and betook themselves to flight, excepting three Companies, which seemed to stand to it and to make some opposition, against which was commanded the young Gyselinck with some Troupes with fire-locks, who after some charges given, put them likewise to flight; where∣upon our Forces marched on, and found the Citie and Castles wholy forsaken, and thereupon our men took pre∣sently possession of a great and fair Citie, containing about five thousand great and faire Stone-houses lesse or more, in the bignesse of the City of Olinda, together with five Castles, and seven Batteries; whereupon stood planted about one hundred and thrity Peeces of Ordnance, amongst which are sixty Brasse Peeces. Before the Citie lay about
twenty, both great and small Ships, of which our men took possession in like manner. The Inhabitants have taken along with them all their moneys and best goods, leaving onely behind them some houshold-stuffe, which they could not take along with them; In the taking of the said City, we lost no more but seven men in all. Lievtenant Colonell Hinderson received again some hurt in his broken legge; and commandeth now in the said Citie with twelve Companies. This is truly a great Victory for the Compa∣nie in regard that so little blood was shed, for which we cannot give sufficient thanks unto God Almightie. The Admirall Houtebeen with twelve or fourteen Ships is gone towards N. N. what successe hee will have there, time will shew. Yesterday the Vice-Admirall Lichtart toge∣ther with Colonell Coin, and twelve Saile of Ships is like∣wise gone to Sea upon an exploit, but whether, time will shew: to morrow or next day after are to goe for Holland three Ships, and then I shall write unto you at large, &c. The letter was subscribed and signed by Gilles Crol and Lucas de Keyser. Newes from Brazeil sent over with the Ships called the Burning of Troy, which set out the Recyf de Fernambouck the 6. of Novem. and arrived in the Texell the 2. of Jan. new stile, 1642. THe 2.12. of October, arrived in the Recyf of Fernambouck, the Ships called the Orpheus, comming from Angola with Avisoes, that the 15.25. of August, our Fleet arrived in Angola, and in the afternoone all the souldiers under the command of Lievtenant Colonell Hinderson were brought a shore upon the firme land within a league of the Citie of Loando de S. Paulo, which the 16.26 of August before
break of the day, together with all the Castles, Batteries and Forts, was taken by our men without any resistance almost, because all the Inhabitants, Governour and soul∣diers were fled up into the Countrey: The Embassadors of the said Fugitives, were sent already to our Comman∣ders to come to a composition, that they might returne into the City, and to take possession again of their houses, which are found in number above seventeen thousand. It is to bee admired that they have so slightly delivered up and forsaken so brave a City with invincible Forts, which hath been of great importance to their King, because he brought from thence all the Negros and Black-Mores, which they had need of, and imployed in all quarters; and being we have the said place now in our own hands, Spaine and Portugall it selfe will have great want of Negros▪ It is a place of great Traffick and Negotiation, which hath been of highest importance to the King of Spaine. Our Admirall Iol was departed from thence with some Ships, and gone upon another exploit: Our Vice-Admirall Lichtart with eighteen Saile of Ships, wherein are twelve hundred soul∣diers under the command of Hanscoine, went the 20.30. of October, to Sea upon another exploit.
A Copy of John Coulombels letter sent from Fernambuck, to Philip Bishop, bear∣ing date the 14. of October, 1641. As for news, I must let you know, that our Fleet, which under our Admirall Houtebeen went from hence the 19. of May last past, arrived safely the 15. of Aug. neer the Citie of Loundo de S. Paulo in Angola, where they obtained a glorious victory, taking the said City with 2000. men, and in the City were above 3000. armed men together with 30000. Negros. The City is fortified with five Castles, and divers Batteries; but assoon as they saw our forces ashore, they betook themselves to flight, and are retired about 9-leagues off from the said City upwards into the Country; but now they begin to desire a passe, that they may return into the City, which is granted them with condition, that they should deliver over the half part of their goods. It is an exceeding great victory, which was obtained without any shedding of bloud, and is
of great importance, for the Company; for it is certain, that within the space of 6. yeers, the King of Spain hath had from that Country about 76000. Negros, and every Negro is sold heer for 5. or 600. Gilders, you may now reckon up the profit. There is made ready again another Heer, which is to go to Sea, under the Vice Admirall Liehthart, there designe is not known. An extract of an other Letter sent from N. N. in Brazeil hearing date the 1. of November. 1641. to his friend dwelling in Rochel, in the Ship called the Burning of Troy, which by reason of the great winde was forced to run into the Texel, and arrived there the 2. of Ianuary, 1642. COncerning the affairs of Brazeil, they go on very successefully: the 16. and 26. of August our Admirall Iol with 21. Ships and Pinnaces, and 3000. men hath taken the great and populous Citie of Loundo de S. Paulo in Angola, together with six Forts, seven Ravelins, two Batteries, fifty nine Brasse, and sixty nine Iron peeces of Ord∣nance, 13000. weight of Gun-powder, 300. weight of Match, 2200. Bullets, and obtained a good number of Negros, a good quantity of Merchant goods and victuals, the List whereof is expected, 30. Ships, amongst which are four great
ones, and 20. small vessels, some whereof were laden, from the said place, are yeerly sent away, and sold about 16000. Negros, by Gods assistance it will yeerly bring to the Company 60. or 70 Tuns of Gold, so that the Spaniards will be now wholly destitute of Negros in the West-Indies, &c. Sir, MY words have already been so misreported, that I am forced to return my answer in writing, and think my condition at this time very unfortunate, that according to the warrant of Summons, I received this morning from the honourable House of Commons, I cannot personally attend there without both the breach of His Majesties expresse command, not to stirre out of the Tower without His leave, and likewise of the oath I took at my coming into this place, to observe His Ma∣jesties commands. This I hope well considered, will exempt me frō the censure of contumacy, or disobedience to the commands of that honourable House, whose just Liberties and Priviledges, I shall ever be ready to main∣tain with my life and fortune. And I most humbly de∣sire the honourable House to rest assured, that it is farre from my thought (what false reports soever have been raised to the contrary) to divide my self betwixt the
King and the Parliament, and that my affections are uited equaly to serve both, though in the condition I am in (different from other men) I can perform only a sigle personall obedience here (unlesse His Maiesty plese to asove me from this command.) In the mean time, if b the house, it shall be thought fit to demand any particulars, I am ready with all clearnesse, and in∣genuity to give satisfaction, and with the like candor and fidelity, to behave my self in all other actions, as becomes a person intrusted, and one more willing to de∣posie his life for the true Protestant Religion, the peace and tranquillity of this Citie and Common-wealth, then ambitious to continue Lievtenant of the Tower. In which resolution, I rest▪ Your humble Servant, J. Byron. Tower of London, 12. Ianuary, 1641. For the Speaker of the Honourable House of COMMONS.
FINIS.
