L2971 13659285 101058
THE HISTORY OF THE Donatists. By THOMAS LONG, B. D. and Prebendary of St. Peter's EXON. —Mutato Nomine de te, Anglia, narratur. LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's Church-Yard, 1677.
To the Reverend GEORGE CARY, D. D. AND DEAN of EXETER. Reverend Sir, ALthough I am no Conjurer, yet I su∣spect I have done enough to raise the spirits of the Donatists, which are wont to be very troublesome, and that it may exceed my skill to allay them: And therefore I have thus seasonably (I hope) taken Sanctuary under Your Name; for I have observed that some consecrated Persons, as well as Places, are not haunted with such Spectres. And though such Apparitions have been very affrighting & vexatious to Men of weak judgments & wa∣vering minds, yet some Persons who have arm'd themselves with constant integrity to God, and resolved Loyalty to the King, have been least obnoxious to their power and malice; as good
Souldiers that keep their ranks are not so much exposed to the hazards of War, as they whose fears make them sneak from Place to Place. And this, through God's good providence, was Your security in the late Times of Confusion, wherein notwithstanding the busie Emissaries of the Prince of Darkness, you did not only shine as a bright Example of Christian resolu∣tion, sound Doctrine, and a holy Life, but did really influence a great part of your neighbour∣ing Clergy, the sense whereof hath obliged me to this publick acknowledgment; by which I cannot hope to add to your reputation, but to provide for my own quiet, against such unjust and unsavory reflections, as guilty persons are prone to make, from whom I appeal to your more righteous judgment, whether I have done them wrong, or no. Sure I am I intended them none, for I only present them with a Glass, wherein if they see their own defects, they have no reason to be displeased with the Glass, but with those Vices which cause the reflexion. So∣crates, l. 2. c. 15. of the Tripartite History, tells us, that Constantine to shame the Arians, provided by an Edict, that they should be cal∣led Porphyrians, Ut quorum mores imitati sunt, eorum nomine perfruantur, that they might be known by his Name, whose manners they did imitate: And a greater than Constantine did the
like by the Jews, John 8.44. Ye are of your fa∣ther the Devil, and his lusts ye will do. Every Man's publick profession and practices are the plainest characters to teach us what party he is of. They who through pride and discontent raise and propagate new Opinions, that they may head a Faction, and take pet at the prefer∣ment of better Men, vexing their Governors, despising their Authority, persecuting their in∣nocent Brethren, and fomenting Divisions in a well established Church, are as manifestly act∣ed and animated by the spirit of Donatus, as if there were a transmigration of Souls — Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora gerebat. As old Donatus did, so do his Race, Cast up their Eyes and Hands with down-cast Face. In vain therefore do such pretend, (as with great confidence they do) that they are the off∣spring of those Primitive Christians, who suf∣fered under the Heathen Emperors, for they in the worst times obeyed their lawful Governors in all things wherein they might not disobey God, and constantly adhered to their Bibles, their Bishops, and their Brethren, accounting all such Traditores, (i.e.) Traytrs, as forsook either. Such pretences therefore do make odious repre∣sentations of the Primitive Christians, as if they were in their Generation as factious and sediti∣ous,
as the late Donatists in ours; And as ill re∣flexions do they cast on their Christian Gover∣nors, as if they were very Persecutors. But, by their fruits ye shall know them: for, if it be con∣sidered how exactly every Scene of that horrid Tragedy, which was first acted in the Churches of Africa, hath been acted over, and (if I may so speak) over-acted in the Church of England, it cannot be denyed, that they who destroyed the Church of England, and its Defender, were the most natural off-spring of those Donatists, who so perpetually vexed the good Constantine, and made Havock of the Churches of Africa; or that the present Sectaries, who so tenaciously adhere to the principles, and follow the practices of them that brought such confusion on the Land in the former Age, are their proper Successors. However, it is advisedly done by their Apo∣logists, to make their Pamphlets swell with the frequent mention of the Indulgence of some of the Emperors to peaceable Christians, but pass by the many strict Edicts of the most Christian and pious Emperors, against such as withdrew from the Communion of the Catholick Church, some of which I have transcribed for their bet∣ter information at the end of this History, and shall only acquaint them here with that success which Sozomen, l. 3. c. 11. of the Tripartite History, observed to follow on the due executi∣on
of them. Who speaking of the Laws of Constantine, against such as denyed communion with the Church in his days, The Emperor (saith my Author) strictly commanded that their Meeting-places should be taken from them, and they not permitted to assemble in private Hou∣ses, or Churches; by reason of which Law (I suppose, saith Sozomen) the Memorial of Here∣sie was utterly destroy'd, for after this Law, they could meet neither publickly in the Churches, nor secretly, being observed, and forbidden by the Bishops and Clergy. Doubtless those Bi∣shops and Clergymen were no Persecutors, they did what was their duty, and by a seasonable re∣straint of Men of corrupt principles, preserved the true Christians in peace. And certainly the present Bishops would be defective in a special duty of their Function, which is to preserve the Flock of Christ in Peace and Unity, if they should tolerate such, as seek to scatter and make a Prey of them. St. Hierome, who is thought by some to have been no Friend to that Office, doth yet affirm, that it was ever since the Apo∣stles days the best Remedy against Schisme. I shall entreat your patience, while I mention a passage or two of that Father, which have been tortured to speak against Episcopacy, but do so far commend its usefulness, and assert its anti∣quity, and authority, as may suffice to silence all
its adversaries. In his Comment on 1 Titus he saith, Antequam Diaboli instinctu, &c. Before such time, as by the instigation of the Devil, Factions were made in Religion, and the People began to say, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, the Churches were governed by the common Council of Presbyters: but afterward, when every one accounted those, whom he had baptized, to be his own, and not Christs; it was decreed in the whole (Christian) World, that one, chosen out of the Presbyters, should be set over the rest, unto whom the care of the Church should belong, that the seeds of schisme might be taken away. Would you know when this was done, and by whom, Panormitan will tell you, Li. Decret. de consuetud. c. 4. Immedi∣ately after Christ's death, all the Presbyters ruled in common—but after a while the Apostles cau∣sed, that Bishops should be created for the appea∣sing of Schismes. If any shall not agree that this is St. Hierome's sense, let him compare that pas∣sage in his Epistle to Evagrius, (85) Quod autem posteà, That after this, (i.) in the Apostles age, (as appears both by what goes before, and by what follows concerning St. Mark) one was chosen and set over the rest, was done for a Re∣medy against Schisme, lest every one drawing a part of the Church to himself, should destroy the whole: for in the Church of Alexandria,
from the days of St. Mark the Evangelist, unto Heraclas, and Dionysius, Bishops there, the Presbyters choosing one of their number, and setting him in a Higher degree, called him Bi∣shop: and in his Dialogue, ad Luciferianos, Ec∣clesiae salus in summi sacerdotis dignitate pendet, cui si non exors, & ab omnibus eminens detur pote∣stas, tot in Ecclesiis efficientur schismata, quot sa∣cerdotes. So then St. Hierome's testimony is ex∣press for the Antiquity of Bishops, (for as to the original institution, I shall not now discourse) that they were in the Apostles days, particular∣ly in the Church of Alexandria, in St. Mark's days, and in the Church of Corinth, ever since the People began to say, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, for the ending of which controversie, one was preferred above the rest; and the Scholiast tells us, on Titus 1. that Apollo was the Man, , the first Bishop of Corinth: and the same was decreed in all the Christian World; That the care of the Church was com∣mitted to them, and the welfare of the Church depended on their dignity, to whom if there were not an eminent and peerless power given by all, there would be as many schismes in the Church, as there were Priests; and lastly, that it was a principal duty of theirs, (though it be now accounted their crime) to prevent the growth of schisms in their several Churches.
And this is that which I have (according to my mean capacity) endeavour'd in these Papers, wherein I have only applyed that gentle Reme∣dy, which hath been approved by Ancient and Modern Divines, who agree, that, The means to confute schisme, is to reduce it to its first Ori∣ginal: for howsoever it comes to pass, that facti∣ous persons are in love with their own, they can∣not but abhor the actions of their Progenitors. And now, Reverend Sir, If I have said any thing unworthy of your Name, I know, that as your judgment will discern it, so your candor will pardon it, since nothing hath moved me to this attempt, but my duty to the Church, and my particular esteem of your great Merits, who are a chief Ornament of the same; for though you have been placed in an eminent station, yet that you have rather honour'd that dignity, than been dignified by it, is the judgment of all that know you, and not only the private opinion of Your Humble Servant, THO. LONG. Exon, Febr. 1. 1676/7.
THE PREFACE. IT hath been sometime known, that when divers learn∣ed Physicians, after all their regular methods of Phy∣sick, have given over their Patients as desperate, a mean Empirick, by an easie and gentle application, hath effected the Cure. And (having often considered with my self, how fruitless and ineffectual the many excel∣lent Discourses, and unanswerable Arguments of such as have opposed the Separation from our Church, have been; and that the contumacious humor still spreads it self, to the infection and ruine of many precious Souls) I thought it might be expedient to apply another remedy, (viz.) A true representation of the Opinions and practices of such Schismaticks, as have been condemned in the Primitive times of the Church: whereby, as in a Glass, such as are guilty of the present Separation, may reflect on their own deformities, and the evil consequence of their dividing pra∣ctices. Some Women, who have been too well conceited of their beauty, when they have unawares beheld in a clear Glass, the deforming and destructive effects of a loathsome Disease, have been so surprised with the change, that is vi∣sibly made on their Faces, that they have immediately fallen sick and dyed. And who knows, but when those fanciful per∣sons, who are so highly conceited of their purity, and tender∣ness of their Consciences, shall be convinced, (as by a seri∣ous
reflection on this History of the Donatists they may be) what unclean spots, and visible defects the Souls and Con∣sciences of such as live in Separation from a well establi∣shed Church, have contracted, they may immediately grow sick of their Sins, and apply themselves to the mortification of them, that their Souls may be saved? It is the Opinion of some learned Men, that the Cardinal Baronius hath raised more Prejudices against the Reformed Churches, by his Annals, than Cardinal Bellarmine by all his Argu∣ments: And indeed, upon supposition, that the Relation which he gives of the Primitive Doctrine and Discipline is true, (the contrary whereof hath been sufficiently evin∣ced by Bishop Jewel, and many others) he hath done more to prove our Churches guilty, both of Heresie and Schism, than all the Polemical Divines of the Church of Rome. Accordingly, when it shall appear by the Authentique Re∣cords of the Church of God, that those Persons, who held the same Opinions, and followed the same practices, as some in this present Age do, were frequently condemned by the best Christian Emperors, and Catholick Councils, as schis∣matical and dangerous, and upon what small and inconsider∣able grounds they have run themselves into such great con∣fusions, as have overturned all things Sacred, and well set∣led in Church and State; it may be rationally hoped, that, though the most cogent arguments have not perswaded them, et such horrible Spectres may affright them from their sul∣len and unchristian apartment, and make them choose to live rather with peaceable and humble Christians, in a confor∣mity to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Primitive and present Church, than among such turbulent spirits, as re∣vive the Opinions and practices of the most dangerous and condemned Schismaticks. And it is both a more civil, and facile way of insinuating instructions and reproofs to the
minds and consciences of such, as are averse from plain dealing, to teach them by pertinent instances and examples, by Historical allusions, and wise Apologues; such as the Parable of Trees used by Jotham, and of the Ewe-Lamb, by the Prophet Nathan: and this method was familiarly used by our Saviour, especially when he would convince the Pharisees; as he doth in the Parable of the unthankful Husband-men, Luke 21.33. and divers others, wherein he proves them to be worse than those, who persecuted the Prophets, by their malice against the Son of God, and v. 45. it is said, They perceived that he spake of them. In the days of the late Ʋsurpation, The History of Andro∣nicus, the unfortunate Politician, of Massonello, and the Munster Anabaptists, had their good effect. Most Men are severe censurers of the same sins in others, which they do indulge and allow in themselves. There is scarce a Se∣paratist among us, who, when he shall impartially consider the grievous and continued troubles of the African Chur∣ches, occasioned by the Schisme of the Donatists, who upon false or frivolous pretences, first forsook the Communion of the Catholick Church, and then raised Parties to oppose it, falsly accusing, condemning, persecuting and murthering their Fathers and Brethren, affronting the Magistrates, despising their Laws, raising Tumults and Armies, and pro∣nouncing them Martyrs that dyed in Rebellion; I say, there is not any, but will readily condemn these, though he have been seduced to joyn with such, as have practised the same, or worse things. The Ancients resembled a wise Man to the Image of Janus, which looked both forward and backward; and it would certainly be a point of Pru∣dence in us, to look back, upon the transactions and counsels of former Ages, and to observe what Opinions and practi∣ces have been condemned by wise and good Men, and care∣fully
avoid such. As also to look forward, and to consider, to what dangers and precipices our present Opinions may betray us, what out-rages and cruelties our ambition may lead us to, though for the present we think it impossible, that ever our lusts, or any temptations, or advantages, should be able to transform us into such ravenous beasts, as afterward we may appear to be. Had Cromwel been foretold, as Hazael was, what horrid Massacres and Regi∣cide he should commit, he would have thought it a slander, though from the mouth of a Prophet, 2 Kings 8.12. And if such as have given themselves up to dividing principles, did but consider, how easily they may be taught to act over the same Tragical Scenes of Sacrilege, Rapine and Blood, when their Masters shall get power, and opportunities agree∣able to their malice, which both ancient and modern Secta∣ries have done before them; they may find just cause to grow jealous of themselves, though they have yet the sheeps clo∣thing on them, and to suspect their Teachers, though trans∣formed into Angels of light, for the Ministers of Satan, whose design it is to attempt the ruine of the Church, by the abused zeal of her seduced Children, which he could not effect by the cruelty of her professed Enemies. To unde∣ceive such Persons, and render Schisme and Faction, as odi∣ous and pernicious, as the Scripture doth describe them, and both the History of former Ages, and the sad experience of our own, do demonstrate them to have been, and that all who profess the Name of Christ may agree in the truth of his Holy Word, and live in Ʋnity with their Brethren, and in due Obedience to their lawful Governors, both in Church and State, is the only Design, and hearty Prayer of
Si sapitis, benè, & recte; si non sapitis, vestri curam gessisse non poenitebit, quia, etsi cor ve∣strum ad pacem non convertitur, pax nostra ad cor nostrum convertetur, August. ad Petil. l. 3. IMPRIMATUR, G. Jame R.P.D. Hen. Episc. Lond. à Sacris Dom.
THE HISTORY OF THE DONATISTS. WHen Dioclesian, as a Romish Wolf, had worried and scattered the Flock of Christ, and exhausted Rivers of that precious Blood, he perceived that he could neither diminish their Numbers, nor abate any thing of that primitive Spirit, which, like a Rock, did not only stand firm, but broke in pieces the (Flu∣ctus Decumanos) most impetuous Waves of the greatest persecution.Ann. 300, The Tyrant thought therefore of a more probable way to extin∣guish that Spirit, which was, to withdraw the word of life; and accordingly, in the Nine∣teenth Year of his Empire, like another An∣tiochus
Epiphanes, who did Mosaicis libris bel∣lum indicere, he publisheth his Edict. That the Christian Churches should be levelled with the ground, the Ornaments seized to his use, the Holy Scriptures consumed in the Fire, and all that professed Christianity, be deprived of all Liberties, Offices, and Dignities, unless they would offer Sacrifice to the Heathen Gods. Immediately upon publishing this Edict, his Officers do generally become Inquisitors, and strictly require all the Christians to deliver up the Utensils of their Churches, and the Testa∣ment of their Lord, to be consumed in the Fire, which, if any refused, they themselves were condemned to the Flames. Among other Confessors, Felix Deacon of Autramitum, was summoned by the Inquisi∣tors,Optarus p. 40. to deliver up the Ornaments of his Church, and the Evangelical Books, which were in his custody; whereupon he hid him∣self with Mensurius, Bishop of Carthage▪ whereof the Officers being informed, they re∣quire Mensurius to deliver him up, or to ap∣pear on a set Day at the Emperors Court, to answer the contempt. Where it is observable, that (Episcoporum domus nè in persecutionibus fas erat violare) the Bishops Houses, even in times of Persecution, were accounted as a San∣ctuary by the very Heathen. Mensurius was too much a Christian to betray his Brother, and therefore he chose rather to submit him∣self to the Emperors sentence, and to appear at the appointed time: but in the interim, he
is careful to secure the Goods belonging to his Church: And in those Days, as the Christians had Churches called Basilicas, so those Church∣es had their Ornaments. St. August. contr. Cresconium, says that the Church of Cirta, in the time of Dioclesian had two Chalices of Gold, six Cups of Silver, and a Silver Candle∣stick. Yet the Treasuries of those Chur∣ches were much exhausted in those days, it be∣ing the frequent practice of those Primitive Christians, to sell their Plate and Ornaments, to redeem the lives, or to relieve the necessi∣ties of their persecuted Brethren. Mensurius therefore causeth an Inventory of the Treasu∣ry of the Church of Carthage to be made, and committing the Treasury it self to the custody of the Elders, (as Optatus saith) he leaves the Inventory with an ancient Woman,p. 41. whom he had always found faithful, charging her to pre∣serve it, for his Successors, if it should please God to account him worthy of Martyrdom.Erant in illâ Eccle∣siâ quam∣plurima Ornamenta Auri & Argenti. St. Augustine saith, there were in that Church very many Ornaments of Gold and Silver. Concerning the Death of Mensurius, we have no certain account in Ecclesiastical History, only we find the Bishoprick of Carthage to be void shortly after, and Dioclesian languishing under a surfeit of Christian blood, resigned his Empire to Maxentius, who was over∣thrown sometime after by Constantine, as also Maximinus another Tyrant by Licinius, and thereupon Constantius the Father of Constan∣tine, though he were then in England, was pro∣claimed
Emperor, but he dyed in York, and so the whole Empire was devolved on Con∣stantine, who by his Mother Helena had been from his Childhood instructed in the Princi∣ples of the Christian Religion. Which Baro∣nius observes to be true, notwithstanding the opinion of some ancient Writers to the con∣trary; for this is related by Paulinus a Man of great Learning and holiness,Baronius ad Ann. 315. as well as of a noble Family, and therefore to be believed above Eusebius, [saith the Cardinal] And yet as we shall observe hereafter, when Constan∣tine accepted of an Appeal from the Donatists to the derogation of the power of the Pope, then they plead that he was a Novice, & rudis fide, lately instructed in the Christian Faith, and unacquainted with the Customes of the Church. The flames that were kindled by Heathen Persecutors, were scarcely extingui∣shed, when the new lights and heats raised by contentious and ambitious Persons, begun a∣nother conflagration; for the Bishoprick of Carthage being void, Botrus and Celesius two Presbyters become Competitors for it, against Cecilian, who being a Person of known inte∣grity, was by the general suffrage of that whole Church chosen Bishop, and was ordain∣ed by Felix Bishop of Aptung. And now, the good Woman, according to the trust re∣posed in her, brings the Inventory of the Church-Treasury to Cecilian, whereupon he summoneth those Elders, to whom the Trea∣sury was committed, to make restitution, but
whether they had sold, or shared it among themselves, they refused to deliver it: and Cecilian, as his duty was, proceeds against them to obtain satisfaction. On this occasion, those sacrilegious Elders deny to hold farther communion with Cecilian their Bishop, and joyn themselves to Botrus and Celesius,Optat. p. 41 those two Presbyters that were discontented at the preferment of Cecilian. To these Lucilla, a Woman descended from a Noble Family of Spain, whom St. Augustine calls,S. August. cont. Parm. l. 1. Factiosissi∣mam & pecuniosissimam foeminam quam pro cor∣ripiendo Ecclesiae Disciplinam Cecilianus laese∣rat. A rich and factious Woman, who con∣ceiving that Cecilian being Arch-Deacon had injured her, by a too sharp reproof for some superstitious practice,p. 40. contrary to the Disci∣pline of the Church (which was to kiss the Reliques of some supposed Martyrs, before her communicating at the Lord's Supper) joyns her self, to strengthen the Faction; and by her Mony, incourageth Secundus Pri∣mate of Numidia, and Donatus of Casa nigra, with some others, to oppose Cecilian. Secun∣dus and the rest of his Party, being partly ter∣rified by their own guilt (many of them ha∣ving in the time of Persecution, betrayed their Brethren, or their Bibles to the flames, for which they were called Traditors, and by the Discipline of the Catholick Church, were to be deprived of Communion, until they had satisfied the Church by Penance and Reforma∣tion) and partly, hired by the gifts and pro∣mises
of Lucilla, first meet together at Cirta, a City which was afterward new built by Con∣stantine, and called after his Name Constantina. And that they might carry on their design a∣gainst Cecilian with the less suspicion, like self-denying Persons, they begin first to purge and absolve themselves of that guilt, which by their fear and cowardize they had contra∣cted in the times of Persecution. The num∣ber of the Bishops met at this time (they say) was above Seventy. The Names of the Chief St. Augustine acquaints us with, (viz.) Secun∣dus the Primate, Donatus Masculitanus, Victor, Marinus, Purpurius, and Donatus à Casa Nigra,Opt. p. 39. the Head of the Faction. Secundus acquaints his Brethren that they were met to ordain a Bishop in the place of Cecilian, who was thought unfit for the Chair of Carthage, as being a Traditor; but it behoves us first to clear our selves from that crime, before we condemn another. First therefore, he questioneth Donatus Masculitanus what he could say, to free him∣self from the accusation of being a Traditor, which lay against him? Donatus answered, that it was well known, how violently Florus did prosecute him, to make him offer sacrifice, but God delivered me out of his hands, and God having preserved me, my hope is, that you will continue me in the service of God. Secundus replyed, what shall we say then of he Martyrs, that chose to indure the flames themselves, rather than to offer a grain of In∣cense
to the Heathen Gods? Donatus answer∣ed, I pray you to leave me to God, to whom I shall give an account. Secundus bids him to go on the other side: Then he declares, that Victor was accused to have delivered the Four Evangelists to be consumed in the Fire. Victor answered, that Valentianus being Curator compelled him to cast them into the Fire, and that the Books were so blotted and defa∣ced, that they were almost useless, and if you pardon me for this, I hope God will do the like. Secundus bids him go on the other side. Then was Marinus accused for delivering up his Books, he answered, I gave some Books to Pollus, but the chiefest of them are safe: Secundus bids him go on the other side. The next that was questioned was Purpurius, for destroying his Sisters two Sons, with whom Secundus dealing more severely than with the rest; Do you think, saith Purpurius, to affright me, as you have done others? Consider what you your self did, when you were urged by the Curator to deliver up your Books; how got you your liberty, but by delivering all that was in your power? I confess, I did slay them, and I will slay all such as seek my de∣struction, therefore provoke me not lest I discover more. Upon this discourse Secundus the younger spake thus to his Unkle, Sir, You hear what a charge is brought in against your self, and these whom you have accused are all resolved to leave your Communion, and joyn in a Faction against you; do not inquire too
strictly, what others have done, leave them to give an account to God. Hereupon Secundus consulting with his Brethren, what was fit to be done in this case, they all advised, to leave the Judgment to God's Tribunal; and accord∣ingly, Secundus said, You all know, and God knows what each of you have done, and he will judge you: and so he grants them hono∣rem consessus, bidding them sit down in their places, and they all sate down and said, Thanks be to God.S. Aug. Ep. 162. (This was the Form of Absolu∣tion.) After this they proceed to choose Syl∣vanus, who also was a Traditor, to be Bishop of Cirta, whose Election Cecilian opposing, drew the whole Faction against himself. And during the Session of this Assembly, they held many private Consultations against Cecilian, and sent threatning Messages to him, so that his Friends advised him of the great danger that he was in, his Enemies having strength∣ned their Party by great Numbers, and taken to themselves the Authority of a Council. They resolve therefore to adjourn their Sessi∣on to Carthage, and Summon Cecilian to ap∣pear before them, Botrus and Celesius intend∣ing to accuse him there for a Traditor. Ceci∣lian not owning their Authority, refuseth to appear, and thereupon they proceed to con∣demn him as guilty, with as much facility as they had absolved one another; and pronoun∣cing his See void, they proceed to prefer Majorinus, who was Domestick Chaplain to Lucilla, and had been Deacon to Cecilian, to
be Bishop of Carthage. By this you may per∣ceive, how many sins, and lusts, were in con∣junction, when this Monster of Schisme was first produced; The defeated Ambition of some, the sacrilegious covetousness of others, the restless guilt and feminine malice of others; and therefore it is rightly numbred among the works of the flesh,Gal. 5.20. Jude 19. and the Authors condem∣ned for sensual Persons. It is generally true of all Schisme, what is particularly observed of this, Iracundia peperit, Ambitio nutrivit, Avaritia roboravit: Discontent is the Mother,Opt. p. 41. Ambition the Nurse, and Covetousness a Champion to defend it. To which agrees another ancient Observation. Quicun{que} pa∣cem ecclesiae perturbant, aut Superbiae tumore furiosi, aut invidentiae Livore vesani, aut Se∣culari commoditate corrupti, aut cannali concu∣piscentia perversi. Aug. contr. Parm. l. 3. The Faction being by these Arts propaga∣ted, and become numerous, begins to remon∣strate against Cecilian, not sparing Mensurius his Predecessor, nor Felix who ordained him, but charged them all to have been Traditors, and particularly, that Cecilian, while he was a Deacon under Mensurius, did forbid and hin∣der all relief from those that were imprison∣ed, and ready to suffer Martyrdom in the days of Dioclesian: And (which is usual with such Persons) by how much the more guilty of such practices they themselves were, so much the more vehemently do they accuse others, that their pretended zeal against those sins,
falsly imputed to others, may serve as a cloak to cover the real guilt which defiled them∣selves, Ʋt crimina in silentium mitterent sua, vitam infamant alienam. And now they be∣gin to perswade the People, that Cecilian is no Minister of Christ, nor the People that adhered to him Members of the true Church; that they had no true Sacraments, nor saving Ordinances,Opt. p. 42. but all were corrupted by Idola∣try, and Superstition. And thus they gene∣rally called the Catholicks, Pagans and Idola∣ters, Adhuc Paganus es. They would tell those whom they intended to seduce, that they were very Pagans. Donatus de Casâ nigrâ, is the first that sets up Private Meetings,L. 1. as Optatus observes: Nolebat cum allis sacrificare sed in domibus secretò: He withdraws from the Communion of Cecilian, and the Bishops that adhered to him, (though they had Communicatory Let∣ters from the chiefest Churches of the World) and gathering the People into Coventicles, (for so both Optatus and St. Augustine call those Meetings) they Preach against the Cor∣ruption of Cecilian, and other Catholick Bi∣shops, and the Idolatrous and Superstitious practices that had defiled the whole Church of Carthage, into whose Communion (they say) lapsed Persons, and profane Traditors were promiscuously admitted, to the defiling of all that joyned with them; seeing the Church of Christ is to consist only of such as were holy, and without spot and wrinkle;
and such (said Donatus) were to be found on∣ly in his separated Congregations, where were better Ministers, and purer Ordinances. Having laid this Foundation, no Pharisees were ever so industrious, in gaining Proselytes, as Donatus and his Party, to seduce the People of Carthage, from the Church under Cecilian, to their own Conventicles: for they run from House to House, and from Village to Village, and pick up one of a Family, and two, or three of a Village, by foul and false accusations of others, and fair pretences in behalf of them∣selves, pitying the People, and perswading them, that they lived among Idolaters, and were defiled by their communion with them. Their manner of seducing the People, is re∣corded both by Optatus and St. Augustine. Caius Seius, or Caia Seia, adhuc Paganus es, consule animae tuae, esto Christianus.p. 75. Bonus Homo, si non esses Traditor. (i. e.) Good Man, or good Woman, you are yet a rank Idolater, be advised by me for the Sal∣vation of thy Soul, come out of that Babylon, and be made a Christian, thou hast good af∣fections, if they were sanctified, and placed a∣right, thou may'st become an eminent Saint. Against this Un-christian practice, St. Au∣gustine most passionately declaimes. O im∣probam rabiem cùm Christiano dicitur esto Chri∣stianus, hoc est dicere nega Christum. O ac∣cursed madness to perswade them that were true Christians already, to renounce their Christianity, under a pretence, that they
should be admitted to a higher form! What is this (saith he) but to deny Christ? which to prevent, the Servants of Christ have been al∣way ready to lay down their Lives,Opt. p. 75. and resist even to Blood. Ʋnus consensus & manus tuae porrectio & pauca verba, Christianum faci∣unt de Christiano: As if the being admitted into their Congregations did contribute more to their Christianity than their Baptism. By these insinuations, they skrued themselves into the affections of the younger and weaker sort,Opt. l. 3. p. 73. Aut exivit Ʋxor, & resedit Maritus, &c. Either the Wife separated, and the Husband remained in the Catholick Communion, or the Children and Servants were seduced from their obedience to their earthly, as well as heavenly Parents and Masters, until they had rent the Church of God into pieces, and of one Church made many Synagogues of Satan. Persuasio∣nibus vestris divisa sunt corpora & nomina pie∣tatis. The Church and the City, the Townes and Families, Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children were divided, and were no lon∣ger known by the Name of Christians, but one was a Majorite, another a Donatist, a third a Maximianist, and all of them professed E∣nemies to the Communion of the Catholick Church: And whereas they pretended to greater purity than other Congregations, yet such as joyned with them, were Persons of least honesty and charity; Ille vobis Christia∣nus erit qui quod vultis fecerit, non quem fides adduxerit: He shall be a choice Christian a∣mong
you (saith Optatus) whom a blind obe∣dience to you, and not faith in Christ, hath,p. 75. brought over. Tertullian commended the Christian Religion in his days, because it did so alter the dispositions of Men, as to make those who were fierce and cruel, as Bears, or Tygers, to be meek, and innocent as Lambs, or Doves; but the spirit of Donatisme, did Hominem de homine tollere,Optat. p. 79 rob Men of their Humanity, and made them that were formerly harmless and peaceable, to be unnatural, and implacable; and yet as bad as they were, they promised forgiveness of sins, and a Crown of Martyrdome too, to such, as not only shed the blood of their Brethren, but desperately cast away their own Lives: Of which I shall give too many instances in the insuing Hi∣story. The Faction being increased by such arts, they begin to leave their private Houses, and build Basilicas non necessarias,Optat. p. 61 unnecessary Churches, when those of the Orthodox were sufficient; and having first departed from Ce∣cilian, they departed also from the Catholick Church, affirming, that they only, and the Congregations that joyned with them, were the true Churches of Christ, and all the rest were Apostates. Gaudentius one of their Fa∣ction, undertook to maintain, That the Article of the Catholick Church, was Figmentum hu∣manum, an Invention of Man, and not agree∣able to the Ordinance of Christ. And Dona∣tus, who gave the Name to the Faction, used
all diligence to gain the face and reputation of a Church, to the separated Brethren: to which end, he teacheth it to be necessary, that they who were admitted to their Communion, should make a Publick confession of their Er∣rors, and submitting themselves to the Disci∣pline of their new pastors, should be rebapti∣zed; for by these means, he knew, he should secure as many as came to his communion, without any fear of their return to the Catho∣lick Church. And to the Sacrament of Baptism they added Exorcisme (which is still retained in the Church of Rome,) in this form of words, Maledicte exi foras, Come forth thou wick∣ed Spirit, whereby (as Optatus observes) they did blaspheme the blessed Trinity, in whose Name they had been formerly baptized. The Catholick Bishops are not remiss in the Vin∣dication of Cecilian, but prevailed with Zeno∣philus, a Man of Consular dignity, to take cog∣nizance of the difference between Cecilian, and Majorinus, and in the inquiry to the merits of the cause, it was affirmed by one Nundinarius, a Deacon, who was sometime privy to the transactions of that Party, that most of those who opposed Cecilian, were Traditors, and particularly, that Sylvanus, whom they made Bishop of Cirta, had betray∣ed the Holy Scriptures, and some Ornaments of his Church, and sacrilegiously with-held what was devoted to the use of the Poor. For the truth whereof, he appealed to the Bi∣shops and Presbyters of his own Party, who
knew the certainty of the particulars, and of a great Summe of Mony [Quadringinta folles,Baronius Vol. 3. P. 352. each Follis weighing three Pound and half of Silver] sent by Lucilla, and divided among the chief of that Party, to condemn Cecilian, and to advance Majorinus into his Chair: And that Victor, who had been by Occupation a uller, gave Twenty Folles to be ordained a Priest; and all this Nundinarius affirmed to be true, as in the presence of Christ and his holy Angels. And thus the Schisme is begun, by erecting, Altare contra Altare, a Presbyter or Mock-bishop, against Cecilian, the lawful Bi∣shop of Carthage. But the first Invader of this Holy Office was short-lived, for about the Year 306. Majorinus the Mock-bishop dyed, and none is thought so fit to succeed him, as Donatus, who hence-forth gives the Denomination to the Schisme, which was no longer, Pars Majorini, but Pars Donati: for, as much as in him lay, he did not only re-baptize particular Persons, but the whole Church, which was no longer known by the appellation of Christian, or Catholick, but Do∣natist; and now he takes on him a power to silence and depose the Catholick Bishops and Presbyters, or to impose such Penance on them, as he thought fit, and to prevent any prejudice, that might arise to his Party, by the restimony pf Nundinarius, which was by Zenophilus certified to the Emperor, he is resolved to complain first, and to cast the Odium of the Schisme, and all the sad con∣sequences
thereof upon Cecilian, whom he ac∣cuseth to be a Traditor, and contrary to the custome of the Church, desireth transmarine Bishops to be appointed Judges in the case. The Petition was to this effect: Rogamus te O Constantine, we intreat thee O Constantine, most gracious Emperor, whose Father never exercised Persecution, that your Piety would appoint us Judges from France, because that Country is free from this dissention. This Petition was subscribed by Lucianus, Dignus, Nassutius, Capito, Fidentius, and the other Bi∣shops of the Party of Donatus. The good Emperor was much grieved to hear of these differences, which he had rather might have been determined among themselves, than be brought to his Court, (where were many Heathen, that would rejoyce at them,) or to trouble Foreign Churches with them; How∣ever he grants their desire, and appoints Ma∣rinus, Maternus and Rheticius, three Bishops of France, to whom he adjoyneth the Bishop of Rome, to determine the cause: And send∣eth his Epistle to Meltiades Bishop of Rome, which is recorded by Eusebius, l. 10. c. 5. The Epistle is as followeth, Whereas I have received from Anilinus, Lieutenant of Africa, many Letters, signifying, that Cecilian Bishop of Carthage, is accused by divers of his Col∣leagues; It being grievous to me, that there should be dissention among the Bishops, be∣fore the People, who are so prone to evil; It seemeth good to me, that Cecilian himself
with Ten of his Accusers, and Ten others, whom he shall choose on his behalf, do Sail to Rome, where I have appointed Meltiades Bi∣shop of Rome, together with Rheticius, Ma∣rinus and Maternus Bishops of France, to hear and judge of the differences in question. You cannot be ignorant, that I would have you suffer no Schisme, in any part of the Church. The Great God preserve you. These Bishops met at Rome, in the House of Fausta in the Laterane. Meltiades took to his As∣sistance Fifteen Italian Bishops to assist for the expedition of the cause. These with great de∣liberation, heard all that was objected against Cecilian, Donatus himself being present. The Bishops also agreed to take publick Notaries, for the more orderly and speedy dispatch, that the examinations and proofs in this cause, might be reduced into publick Acts. The first thing that was inquired, was, who were the Accusers, and what Witnesses were present to give Evidence against Cecilian? To which, the Party of Donatus answered, that their Accu∣sation was contained in the Libels, which they had presented to the Emperor, and by him were transmitted to them, which they desired might be read. One of the Libels was super∣scribed thus: Libellus Ecclesiae Catholicae, &c. A Libel of the Catholick Church: (so they called their Faction) containing the Crimes whereof Cecilian is accused. What was con∣tained in the Libel, is not particularly men∣tioned by any Author, nor are Ecclesiastical
Writers agreed, concerning the charge then in question. Those, who in this last Century, have defended the Authority of the Pope, say, that nothing came in question, besides the grounds of the Schisme, on pretence, that Ce∣cilian himself was a Traditor. And hereby they hope to avoid the Appeal, which was made from the sentence of the Pope, to the Emperor, because (say they) the questions discussed afterward in the Council of Arles, were of a divers nature from those at Rome; but of this hereafter. It is very probable that the Donatists had stuffed their Libel with more than a single accusation, some particulars whereof, I shall give an account. The Libel being read, it was demanded, who were Cecilian's Accusers? They answered, the People of Carthage. It was replyed, that the Voice of the People as∣sembled in a tumultuary manner, was not a sufficient ground to condemn any, and there∣fore the Bishops ordered them to produce some competent Witnesses, to attest the accu∣sation. Whereupon Donatus produced some Persons whom he brought with him from Carthage, to depose against Cecilian. The Charge against him was high: (viz.) That while Cecilian was a Deacon under Mensurius, he was set by Mensurius near the Prison Doors, where many Catholicks lay, who were appointed to suffer Martyrdome, and did by force (Loris & flagris & Armatorum multi∣tudine) withstand such Friends, as came to
comfort and relieve them. To this the Wit∣nesses for Donatus, being examined, could say nothing on their Personal knowledge, but on∣ly from the report of the People: This Opta∣tus urged against Parmenian, p. 36. Nullis certis personis aut nominibus Traditores accusa∣stis. The second Article insisted on, was, That Cecilian was condemned by a Synod of 70. Bishops at Cirta, who being all of them Neighbours to Carthage, could not be igno∣rant of the matters of fact whereof they judg∣ed; and that they judged that both Cecilian, and Mensurius his Predecessor, and Felix who ordained Cecilian, were Traditors. To which Cecilian replyed, that he was condem∣ned in that Assembly, being absent and unheard: That he could not without great hazard of his life, appear among them, who being his pro∣fessed Enemies, made themselves his Judges: That many of them were corrupted by the Money of Lucilla to Vote against him, and that generally they were such as had confessed themselves to have been Traditors, but had absolved one another: And also, that he had received many threatning Messages from some of them, especially from Purpurius Bishop of Limatia. Lastly, That they had long before, held private Conferences among themselves, how to destroy him, as well as to depose him, of which things he was advised by several Catholick People, who were ready to attest the same, and by their advice he did forbear to appear. The next Article was, that Felix
who ordained Cecilian was a Traditor, and so his Ordination was null. But this the Bishops thought not fit to inquire into, Felix not be∣ing present, nor having been at any time con∣victed by any Ecclesiastical censure, and so long he had a lawful Power of Ordination. And as in the case of Baptisme, the Catholcks did not rebaptize such as had been baptized by the Donatists: So they resolved in this case,Canon. 13. That Crimen Ordinantis non transiret in Ordinatum. After this, Donatus promised to produce other Witnesses against Cecilian, which he never did, for divers that came with him deserted him, and returned to Carthage. The Bishops therefore acquitted Cecilian, in the Sentence recorded by Optatus, Cum con∣stiterit Cecilianum ab iis qui cum Donato vene∣runt, juxta professionem suam non accusari, nec à Donato convictum esse, suae Ecclesiasticae Com∣munioni, integro statu retinendum, merito esse censeo. Then Cecilian accused Donatus for rebaptizing those that came to his Party from the Catholick Church, and for abusing the Bi∣shops; and it appeared by proof, and by Do∣natus his own confession, that he had not only rebaptized many, whom he seduced from the Catholick Church, but also degraded the Bi∣shops and Priests, which Optatus expresseth by occidere Honores; but also by a certain Ce∣remony of laying his Hands on their Heads, and shaking them, injoyned them to do severe Penance, contrary to the priviledges and cu∣stome of the Church. Hereupon they condem∣ned
Donatus, and acquitting Cecilian received him into their Communion. Of these pro∣ceedings Meltiades certifieth the Emperor: but Donatus instead of acquiescing in the Sen∣tence of these Bishops, works secretly with Fuliminus, a Proconsul, to Mediate with the Emperor, on a pretence of preserving peace, (Bono pacis) that Cecilian might be confined a while at Brixia.p. 44. Which being granted on that pretence, Donatus hastneth to Africa, and there boasteth of a Victory against Ceci∣lian, and gives out that he was imprisoned at Brixia. Which as soon as Cecilian understood, he gets leave to return to Carthage to unde∣ceive the People, and shortly after the Empe∣ror sends two Bishops thither, Eunomius and Olympius, o assist in the establishing of one Bishop, where the People were as yet divi∣ded by two. These having tarried at Car∣thage Fifty Days, and diligently inquired into the causes and grounds of the Schisme, and finding that Donatus did Schismatically defend Altare contra Altare, (i. e.) Bishop against Bishop; they joyn in communion with Ceci∣lian, condemning Donatus and his Party. But that hardy Man being not daunted by all these Sentences against him, his Faction, as well as his Spirit, growing the greater for this oppo∣sition, addresseth himself in another supplica∣tion to the Emperor, complaining that Mel∣tiades and his Colleagues at Rome, being but a few, and very partial, (for he reported that Meltiades himself was a Traditor) did preci∣pitate
the Sentence, not inquiring into the grounds of the difference, and therefore he desired a more full Council might be called for a final determination of that controversie Constantine is pleased of his clemency to ap∣point a more frequent Council at Arles, An 314. Of which before I speak, it may be material to inquire, Whether the Donatists did Appeal from the Sentence of Meltiades and his Colleagues to the Emperor. For, if Meltiades was called to the deter∣mination of this Controversie, by a delega∣ted Power, it will necessarily follow, (saith Albaspinaeus, in the fourth Observation on Optatus) that the Popes in those days were not Universal Pastors, nor had the Supreme Authority of determining Ecclesiastical mat∣ters. And the reason of the consequence is evident, for he that submits to the command of another, doth ipso facto, confess that he is not Supreme, nor will the Supreme Judge suf∣fer his determinations to be rescinded by ano∣ther Power. Now it is not denied, 1. That Meltiades did sit together with the other Bi∣shops at the Emperor's command: 2. And that Silvester his Successor did afterward send his Delegates into France, by the same com∣mand. 3. That the Emperor did appoint o∣ther Bishops to sit with Meltiades: and Mel∣tiades did joyn with them as coordinate, which
he would not have done, if the Supreme Po∣wer had been his own. 4. The Donatists did Appeal (thinking themselves aggrieved) from the Sentence of Meltiades and his Colleagues to the Emperor. Optatus is so plain herein, that Valesius [de Schismate Donatistarum] could find no other evasion, but to say,Optat. p. 44. that Optatus is corrupted in that place; the words are, Donatus appellandum esse ab Episcopis cre∣didit: but he saith less against the second Ap∣peal, from the Council of Arles to the Em∣peror, where the Pope's Delegates being sent, (Silvester the present Pope being himself not able to be present) did acknowledge, that they were Voluntate Imperatoris adducti: and Vale∣sius grants, that the Gallican Bishops did take place of the Delegates, as appears by their Subscriptions. 5. That the Emperor did understand it as an Appeal, and acted accordingly; for he did not only appoint such Judges as were desired, but at last determined the case in his own Per∣son; and tells the World, that he thought it his duty so to do: for writing to Ablavius, he says: If he should neglect to put an end to those Divisions, the Supreme Deity might justly be displeased with Mankind, but especi∣ally with him, to whose care, by the Heaven∣ly command, the moderation of all earthly things was committed. The like he saith in an Epistle to Celsus, his Lieutenant in Africa,Opt. 286. Nil potius à me agi pro instituto meo, ipsius{que} Principis munere oporteat, quam ut discussis er∣roribus,
omnibus{que} temeritatibus amputatis, ve∣ram religionem, universos, concordem{que} simpli∣citatem, at{que} meritam Omnipotenti Deo cultu∣ram, praesentare perficiam. He thought it not only his duty as a Man, but as a Prince, to ba∣nish error, and by cutting off rash judging, (which was the thing they complained of in the Judges at Rome▪) all Men might preserve the true Religion, &c. And in another place, he tells his Bishops, that he was , A Bishop under God, in the external affairs of the Church: So that the Objection made by the Popish Authors, that Constantine was a Novice, and understood not his own Power, nor the Laws of the Church, but invaded the rights of Meltiades, or that he was forced thereunto by the restless importunity of the Donatists, and afterward asked pardon for his offence, will signifie no∣thing; if we consider, that as he was bred a Christian, so he was too tender of the Bishops rights to invade them, which he defended to his utmost power; and he was also more pru∣dent, than to neglect his own duty, or that authority which God had given him, for the welfare of the Church: In which also Saint Augustine, Epistle 162. defendeth the Empe∣ror. Peradventure (saith he) Meltiades with his Colleagues, the Transmarine Bishops, ought not to have usurped the judgment, that had been determined by the 70. African Bishops, Tigisitanus sitting Primate; And what say you, if he did not usurp this Po∣wer?
(saith St. Augustine) for the Em∣peror being desired, sent Bishops to be Judg∣es, who sate with him, and determined what was just, and to his care (whereof he was to give an account to God) that business did belong. Where it is observable, that in the judgment of St. Augustine, Meltiades ought not to have interposed in the difference of the Bishops beyond the Seas, but it had been an Usurpation so to do; and when he did meddle, it was by the Emperors command, who joyn∣ed other Bishops with him. And doubtless had the Africans owned the Pore's Universal Pastorship, they would have gone directly to him, whereas they intreated, not the Pope's Holiness, but the Piety of the Emperor to ap∣point them Judges: Or at least they would have stood to the Pope's determination, which they did not, either at Rome, or at Arles, but appealed from both to the Emperor; And if the Appeal had been unlawful, either Melti∣ades, or his Successor would have found a means to let the Emperor know his Error, who was more likely to gratifie them in their just demands, than the Donatists in what was unjust. The Popes of later Ages would have been as loud as the Donatists were, when they found the Emperor severe against them, Quid est Imperatori cum Ecclesiâ? What hath the Emperor to do with the Church? But we find not any of that Age to contradict what the Emperor had done, but contrarily they ap∣proved and submitted to it. And when the
Donatists objected in the case of Felix, wh was acquitted by Aelian the Proconsul, Th Bishops ought not to be judged by the Secu∣lar Power, St. Augustine defended it, sayin it was not Felix his seeking, but the Emperor appointing, to whom it did belong: Epistle 16 But Constantine is made to pay dearly so his medling with the concerns of the Pope and if the Donation which the Church o Rome boasteth of, had not been forged, th Pope's Universal Pastorship would have bee proved more irrefragably from this Donation than from that of Christ to St. Peter, o which they boast with equal vanity. And because the very mentioning of thi Donation will be confutation enough, I wil give a brief account of it, as I find it in their late Writers, for among the Ancients there is no foot-step of it: Baronius who is wont to improve every thing for the Pope's Power, being ashamed of this, doth only refer to the Writers that have particularly treated of it. This Donation is said to be made to Pope Silvester at Rome, the Third of the Calends of April. Augusto Constantino 4to, & Galli∣cano 4to. Coss. The Original is pretended to have been found, written in the Greek Tongue, in the Vatican at Rome, among other old Re∣cords, by Bartholomaeus Pincernus, who tran∣slated it into Latine, and presented it to Pope Julius the Second. The occasion of it men∣tioned in the Grant it self, is said to be this, That Constantine having revolted from the
Christian Religion, and persecuted many of the Bishops, he was smitten with a loath∣some Leprosie all over his Body, and having tried many physicians in vain, he was at length advised by the Priests of the Capitol, to slay so many Infants as should fill a Cistern with their bloud, and bath himself therein, while it was warm; but being moved at the cries of the Mothers of those Infants, that were appointed to be slain, he resolved ra∣ther to indure his Disease; and the Night af∣ter that he had dismissed the Infants, Peter and Paul appeared to him, and discovered a surer Remedy, which was, that he should send for Silvester Bishop of Rome, who for fear of the Persecution raised by Constantine, had hid himself in the Caves of the Mountain Soracte, and by him his Leprosie should be cured. Hereupon Silvester is brought to him, and the first question, that Constantine is there said to ask him, was, Who those Gods were that were called Peter and Paul, and whether he had any Pictures of them, whereby they might be known? Silvester presently sent his Dea∣con, to bring the Pictures of Peter and Paul: at the sight of which, Constantine knew them to be the same that appeared to him in his Vi∣sion, and had willed him to send for Silvester. To him he therefore confessed his sins, and de∣sired his advice for his health. The Pope in∣joyns him for certain Days to go in Sackcloth, within the Lateran, and afterward to receive the Sacrament of Baptism, and then he should
be whole. Accordingly Constantine submits to the Penance, and prepares for his Baptism; And being in the Holy Font, he saw a Hand stretched from Heaven to support and cleanse him; and being baptized by Silvester, he came forth sound, and clean from his Disease; Then was he clothed in white, and anointed with Chrisme, and had the Pope's benediction, which was, Pax tibi, and all the Clergy an∣swered, Amen. The most of these particulars are mentioned by Baronius, Anno Constan. 19. But nothing of the Donation it self. After this he makes a large confession of his Faith, which he had learned à Catholico Hie∣rarchâ, (i. e.) from the Pope; And the fourth Day after his Baptism, He confirmed the Do∣nation: Wherein he granted that all the Cler∣gy should honour the Bishop of Rome, as their King, whose Throne he exalted above his own, giving him Imperial Dignity and Principality, as well above the four Sees of Alexandria, An∣tioch, Hierusalem and Constantinople, as above all other Churches: He grants him also his Imperial Palace of the Lateran, and taking a Crown of Gold, set with precious Stones, offered to put it on his Head, but the good Pope (as the story says) refused that, and desi∣red only a white Coronet; and to maintain his dignity, he gave him, not only his Palace, but the City of Rome, and all the Cities and Provinces of Italy, (Concedimus & relinqui∣mus, we grant and yield up as the words are) and thereupon the Emperor transfer'd his
Court from Rome to Byzantium, which he builded and called after his own name Constan∣tinople, and bound all his Successors under a Curse (which was habeant Petrum & Paulum sibi contrarios) not to violate any part of this grant. I think it not fit to tire my Readers patience, to give a full Copy of all the Rega∣lia given to the Pope, the Lorum superhume∣rale, quod Imperiale collum assolet circundare, Chlamidem purpureum, Tunicam coccineam & omnia Imperialia Sceptra, Signa & Banna— And how he appointed all Officers to attend the Pope, as he was attended in his own Per∣son; and that the Clergy should be honoured, after the same manner, as the Senators of the Emperor were, &c. Doubtless Pincernus (or some other that imposed on him) wrote a Hi∣story of the Pomp of the Court of Rome, which he saw in the days of Pope Julius the Second, and not of what was intended by Constantine: for if that noble Emperor had given the Pope any of those Dominions, he would not have left them to his Children and Successors, who still had them in possession for many Hundred Years after, all which time we hear nothing of the Pope's claim, in the days of Constantius, Valentinian, Theodosius, Arcadius, Honorius, &c. Some of which were so pious, that they would not have Usurped the Rights of the Church, and by violating the Will of their Renowned Pro∣genitor, incur the Curse of God. I have mentioned many Latine words
in this Donation, because from them (which are of a later Date, than the time of Constan∣tine) the Divines of the Reformed Churches, have raised shrew'd suspicions of forgery: to evade which, the Romanists plead, that these were to be imputed to the Translator, who rendred it from the Greek, but the Original (if there be any) is kept so secret in the Pope Archives, that the greatest Favourites are not admitted to see it; and doubtless, if it had been published, there would have been more objected against the Original, than against the Translation: For it is very unlikely, that the grant should be made in an unknown Tongue; for Eusebius says,l. 3. de vi∣tâ Const. that at the Council of Nice, the Bishop of Rome, who was this very Bishop, spake Latine: And the Decrees and Epistles of Constantine were generally written in the Latine Tongue,l. 10. c. 4. out of which Eusebius says, he translated them into Greek, when he inser∣ted them into his History; and it is strange, that neither Eusebius, who wrote the Life of Constantine, nor any other Historian, within some Centuries of Years, should acquaint the World with this bounty of the Emperor. Nor do they tell us of his Apostasie and Persecution of the Church, nor of his Leprosie Cured at his Baptism, which was not long before his Death, and that, not by Silvester at Rome, but by Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, in the 65. Year of his Age; Silvester being dead about Five Years before. See Eusebius de Vita Con∣stantini, l. 4. St. Hierome in his Chronicle, Ruf∣finu, l. 1. c. 11. Socrates, l. 1. c. 39.
And lastly, it is strange, that none of those Authors, that have written the History of his Empire and Actions, many of which I have consulted in compiling this his History, should say any thing of his revolt to Idolatry; but on the contrary, do all agree in his constant care of the Church, and defending it against Heresie and Schisme. Especially considering his early institution in the Christian Faith, and the many Victories which he obtained in the Name of Christ, whom he was wont solemnly to invo∣cate before his Battles, as he did in the Fight with Maxentius, in answer to whose Prayers, there appeared in the Heavens, to the view of all his Army, the Sign of the Cross, with this Motto, , and accordingly Maxentius was overthrown at the River Ti∣ber, wherein he and a great part of his Army perished. And thereupon the Emperor did bear this Sign afterward in his Standard, and stamped it on several Coins. This shall suf∣fice concerning that fable: I return now to the History. The Emperor, as you have heard, yielding to the Donatists importunity, and to leave them without excuse, appoints a Council to meet at Arles in France, and being at that time, as Baronius saith, on the River Rhine, intended to be present at it; Accordingly he signified his pleasure to Silvester Bishop of Rome, to Marinus Bishop of Arles, and to Chrestus Bishop of Syracusa, and generally to all the chief Bishops in his several Domi∣nions, that each of them taking to them two
other Bishops whom they should choose, should hasten to Arles: The Number of the Bishops (as St. August. contra Parmen.) was Two Hundred, some say 600. so Baronius, from whom Dr. Heylen tells us, that Resti∣tutus Bishop of London, was there present: Marinus Bishop of Arles sate President, though Fr. Baldwine contends, that the Dele∣gates of the Pope were President; but Valesius and others of that Party confess, that Marinus was, and the Order of Subscriptions confirms it. The time of Assembling being come, the Emperor meets the Bishops, and commanding off his Guards, sets Himself in the midst of them, and acquaints them that to satisfie the importunity of Donatus, who complained of partiality in the Sentence at Rome, where (as he pretended) a few Bishops having shut them∣selves up, Causâ non satis cognita sententiam praecipitabant, did precipitate judgment with∣out inquiring into the merits of the cause; He had called them to consult and determine of the differences, that had miserably divided the Churches of Africa: and setting before them the Proceedings in this cause at Rome, he also adds the purgation of Felix, who had ordain∣ed Cecilian, which by the Emperor's care and direction, was dispatched about four Moneths before, by Aelian his Proconsul in Africa; for the Donatists had alledged at Rome, that Felix Bishop of Aptung was a Traditor, and they pretended that this particular was not examined at Rome, and that it was the opinion
of the Church, that the Ordination by Tradi∣tors was null; Constantine therefore sent to Aelian, to enquire into the Life and Actions of Felix, which he did with great care and integrity, taking to his assistance Saturnius, who had been Curator of the City, while Dio∣clesian lived, and so probably was best ac∣quainted with the behaviour of Felix; and Gratianus the present Curator, Alfius Ceci∣lianus a Duum-Vir in the time of Persecuti∣on, and others. And first they question Cali∣dius and Saturnius, what they knew concern∣ing Felix: Both which agreed in a testimony of his Innocence, and Christian courage. Then was produced by the Donatists one Ingentius a Notary, to testifie that he had seen certain Letters in the hands of Alfius Cecilian, which expressed the guilt of Felix, as a Traditor; which being produced (and they are yet on record in Baronius) upon examination, and the testimony of Alfius Cecilianus concerning them, they were found to be forged, and thereupon Ingentius was condemned to the punishment, called Equuleius, unless he would confess who had perswaded him to that for∣gery: The terror of that punishment (which was in the nature of a Rack, for two pieces of Timber being joyned together, the Offender was stretched out at length, and his Hands and Feet tyed fast to the Timber, which being joyned in the middle by a Skrue, the Execu∣tioners extended it to the racking of every Joynt, and if the Offender did not confess,
they added hot Irons and Pincers, to burn and rent his Flesh) did so prevail with Ingentius, that he confessed that he had forged those Let∣ters, at the instigation of some of the Dona∣tists; and thereupon he was committed to the Custody of Petronius Probianus, to be sent to the Emperor, by whom being examined, he acknowledged the Fact, and implored his cle∣mency. But the Emperor was so provoked at this, that he called the Donatists, Officinam Diaboli, the Devil's shop. Together with Ingentius, the Emperor re∣ceives a full account of the innocency of Felix, and relates the whole business to the Council; so that this Objection being answered, there was no considerable Article added de Novo, for the Donatists did, Eandem cantilenam ca∣nere, only revive their old slanders, by add∣ing new impudence and malice in the prose∣cution of them. So that the Council having with great patience heard the clamors and false accusations of the Donatists, they justi∣fied Cecilian, condemning his Accusers, and appointed the 14th. Canon against them. Qui falsò accusant fratres suos, placuit eos us{que} ad exitum non communicare, sed falsum testem juxta Scripturam impunitum non licere esse. These transactions the Emperor immediately confirms: But the Donatists were so provo∣ked, that they condemned the whole Council, and the Emperor also of partiality, and espe∣cially that famous Hosius Bishop of Corduba in Spain, who was in great favour with the
Emperor, saying that he was not only a Judge, but an Advocate for Cecilian; so that, as An∣taeus in the Poet, the oftner they were foiled, the more their fury was increased against their Adversaries. Animos{que} ex vulnere sumunt. These subtile Persons were content to be baffled abroad, while their Party was succes∣ful at home, and to animate them, they alway sent home false reports of the condemnation of Cecilian; and when these were refuted, of the partiality of the Judges, so that their Numbers did still increase, notwithstanding the Anathema of the Council against them; they had the far greater part of the People, and above Two Hundred Bishops to strengthen them. And whereas they pleaded formerly for themselves, that Christ's Flock was a little Flock, and did not act but suffer persecution, their success had furnished them with other Arguments, and with Armes too, for now they begin to boast, that none are so Catholick as themselves, and their Brethren find, that none are so cruel as they; for being much increased, they will not be confined to Africa any longer. The gangrene begins to spread it self into Foreign parts, they planted their Emissaries in France, and at Rome, where Victor was made a titular Bishop, with whom they held corre∣spondence, and had intelligence of all trans∣actions that concerned them; Their Party also grew formidable in Africa, and at Constan∣tina, formerly Cirta, they possessed themselves of the chief Church, and constrained the Ca∣tholicks
to meet in the Fiscal belonging to the Emperor: and the Catholicks not being able to oppose their Potent Adversaries, petition the Emperor that they might have leave to convert that place into a Church. The Empe∣ror commiserating their condition, caused a Church to be built for them at his own cost, being unwilling to provoke the Donatists, whom he saw to affect a false Martyrdome, and not only to glory in, but to gain by their sufferings. And Donatus thinking to have his Faction established by a Law, soliciteth the Emperor for another Meeting, which St. Au∣gustine says,Epist. 162. Epistle 162. was appointed at Millain, where the Emperor once more con∣demned them, as the Authors of Schisme, and Disturbers of the Peace of the African Chur∣ches. In so much that the Emperor being wearied by their importunities, sent word to Valerius his Lieutenant, that the Donatists were Furori suo & Deo Vindici remittendi, as an incorrigible Faction to be left to be pu∣nished by their own fury, and the righteous judgment of God.Ad Annum 316. Which as Baronius ob∣serves, the Emperor was constrained to, be∣cause he could not otherwise tain Africa un∣der his Dominion, but by yielding to so pow∣erful a Faction. He therefore wrote to his Of∣ficers, Ʋt eos libero dimittant arbitrio, to grant them Liberty of Conscience, but in the same Letters, Sic eos detestatur ut nihil eâ indul∣gentiâ possit deformius inveniri, he so expres∣seth his Detestation of them, that nothing may
appear more deformed than that Indulgence: St. Aug. Brevic. Collat. Diei 3. c. 22. Indeed the Emperor, though he was both wise and valiant, had great difficulties to in∣counter. On the one hand the Senate, which was generally made up of Pagans, would not yield to any alteration of their religious Rites, and he was inforced to grant them a Tolerati∣on, Ʋt Senatui morem gereret: On the other hand the Number of Hereticks and Schisma∣ticks, which exceeded that of the Catholicks in divers Countries, gave another check to his Authority—Nos Numerus sumus & mag∣no dominamur Atridi. They were so nume∣rous, that upon their revolt all Africa was in danger of being lost. And here we shall observe, that in all these Councils, nothing was to be determined, but the case of Schisme, as both Optatus and St. Augustine have recor∣ded, that is, whether Cecilian or Donatus were the true Pastor and Governor of the Church, for we hear not of any dissent in point of Doctrine, Pares credimus & uno si∣gillo signati sumus: nec aliter Baptizati,Opt. p. 72. nec aliter ordinati quam vos, Testamentum Divi∣num legimus pariter. We have one Creed, one Baptisme, (for the Catholicks allowed of their Baptisme where it was not repeated on them that were formerly baptized) we read the same Divine Testament, we invocate One God, the Lord's Prayer is the same with us and you (for they used it until they thought themselves so without sin, that they could re∣mit
the sins of others, and then they saw they could use it no longer without a manifest con∣tradiction, Quid vocaris dum peccata confiteris tua, si sanctus es cum dimittis aliena, Opt. l. 2.) but the Schisme that was made, to the dividing of the People of God, and to the destroying of unity, was the great grievance. And it is also remarkable, that, though many Heresies were at this time vented in the Church, as the Novatian, Macedonian, Audaean, Apollina∣rian, and Arian too, yet none did so much afflict the Churches of Africa, as this Schism: against which, as Optatus spent all his labour, so St. Augustine wrote at least one of those great Volumes, which the Church of GOD doth now injoy. The good Emperor, notwithstanding that the Donatists had defeated so many of his en∣deavours for Peace, was resolved to trie one more, which was to call in some of the Eastern Bishops to joyn with those of the West, as he intimates in an Epistle written to Alexander, and the other Bishops of Aegypt, mentioned by Eusebius in the Life of Constantine; who also says, that the Emperor was much blamed for his too great indulgence toward these im∣placable Spirits: But if the necessity of his affairs be considered, it will appear, that he could not do otherwise: for having out of his Christian clemency condescended so far to them, they take advantage of some unhappy Circumstances to force him farther. For about this time Licinius,Anno 315. to whom the
Emperor had given his own Sister in Marriage, and almost half the Empire, revolted, and be∣gun a War against him. The Arian Heresie also was spread over Aegypt, and like a migh∣ty Torrent overflowed the Christian World. Of which Heresie it will not be impertinent to give a brief Account, because many of the Donatists, to strengthen their Faction against the Catholicks, joyned with them; And in∣deed the descent from Schisme to Heresie, is very facile and familiar.—Arius a Presbyter of Alexandria in Egypt, appeared about the Year 315. He was bred up under Meletius a Presbyter, while Peter was Bishop of Alex∣andria, by whom Arius was made Deacon: but being found to have maintained Opinions contrary to the Catholick Faith, both he and Meletius, that had corrupted him, were ex∣communicated. Meletius persisted in his He∣retical Opinions, That Christ was not the Eter∣nal Son of God, but a very Man, Ex utro{que} Parente, and that it was lawful in times of Persecution to deny him, which also he did; pleading for himself, that he had not denyed God, but a Man only, and at last Daemonibus sacrificavit, he sacrificed to Devils. Thus as from Schisme to Heresie, so from Heresie to Infidelity and Atheisme, the passage is obvious. Arius refined this Opinion of his Master, and differed but in one Letter from the Catholicks, teaching that Christ was , of a like substance with his Father, not , (i.e.) of the same nature and substance with the Fa∣ther:
which Opinion for a while he dissem∣bled, until Peter the Bishop was dead, to whom succeeded Achillas, who did not only restore Arius to his Office of Deacon, but afterward ordained him Priest, and being a Man of sub∣tile parts, he was appointed to be a Reader of Divinity in the City of Alexandria, which he performed with some applause, and go such an esteem among the Inhabitant, that the Bishoprick of Alexandria being void by the Death of Achillas, he was Competitor with Alexander: but Alexander being a Person of greater Wisdome and Piety, was preferred by a general suffrage. Whereat Arius being much discontented, openly opposed Alexander; and having nothing to object against his Life, or Learning, he began to contradict his Do∣ctrine: for whereas Alexander had taught that Christ was , of the same substance, and ought to receive the same Worship with the Father; Arius taught that he was indeed the Son of God, and more excellent than the other Creatures, but that he was not from Eternity, but made Ex praeexistentibus, of things pre∣existent, and did not partake of the substance of the Father, nor was of equal dignity and power, but that the Son was inferior to the Father, and the Holy Ghost inferior to the Son, by whom he was made. So that he affir∣med Christ to be the Son of God by Adoption only, not by Eternal Generation, and that he was mortal and passible, not only according to the flesh, but as he was The Word of God.
These Doctrines the good Bishop could not indure, and finding that Arius did diligently propagate and defend them, he first excommu∣nicates him, and then procures his banishment, and sends cautionary Epistles to his Colleagues, throughout Alexandria, to suppress those de∣structive Opinions, and fortifie their People against them, which notwithstanding, a great part, as well of the Clergy, as the Laity, were infected: So that Hosius Bishop of Corduba, a right good Catholick, and a Favourite of the Emperor's, by the intreaty of Alexander, perswaded Constantine to Summon a General Council of Bishops and Presbyters at Nicaea, a City of Bithynia, where Three Hundred and Eighteen Bishops, besides Presbyters, and o∣thers, assembled together, the Emperor him∣self being present, and moderating among them. About this time,Epiph. Heres. 69: (but whether during the Session of this Council, or before, it is not agreed by Ecclesiastical Writers) Arius dyed, (Baronius thinks he dyed not until the Year 336.) But his Death hapned thus: Alexander provoked Arius to a publick disputation, and the time and place being appointed, Alexander sets a-part the precedent day for publick fast∣ing and prayers to God, to put a stop to that pernicious Doctrine, which had so much in∣fected the Catholick Church, as that the very foundations of Christianity were shaken. And the time of Meeting being come, Arius going towards the place, was troubled with a violent pain in his bowels, whereupon going aside to
ease himself, the pains increased, and became so yiolent, that he voided his very Bowels, and so miserably dyed. But his Name and Do∣ctrine survived in another Arius, (Arianus potius homo, quam Arius) who appeared and disputed with the great Athanasius in the Council of Nice, to which Council there was presented a Confession of the Faith of the A∣rians, which was no sooner read but condem∣ned, and presently rent in pieces: and the judgment of the Council in Opposition there∣to, was drawn up in the Nicene Creed. They also ordered the burning of such Tracts, as Arius and his Party had written. Constantine also published an Edict, that none should con∣ceal any of their Books on pain of Death. However Lirinensis observes, 6. that by these Hereticks, not only the Foundations of the Church, but of the Roman Empire were sha∣ken, all things sacred and civil brought to con∣fusion, Non solum affinitates, cognationes, Do∣mus, verum etiam Ʋrbes, Provinciae, Nationes, imo Ʋniversum Romanum Imperium funditus concussum & emotum est. And St. Hierome says, All the Eastern Churches, except Atha∣nasius and Paulinus, were corrupted. Among the Bishops Eusebius Nicomediensis was a chief Defender of the Arian Heresie; and Eusebius of Caesarea was tainted also, for he refused for a while to subscribe the Ana∣thema against them, though the next Day he was better perswaded, and did it. But not∣withstanding all the Learning and care used by
this Council, the Arians increased; for Con∣stantine dying, his Son Constantius succeeded him in part of the Empire, who being of the Arian perswasion, did so countenance those Hereticks, that many of the Catholick Bishops were banished, and wandred up and down in remote Parts, among whom Athanasius, whom they wickedly called Sathanasius, was forced to flee as far as Triers, and there lay obscure several Years, until the Storm was over. Of which the good Leontius a Catholick Bishop did foretel, when putting his hand on his gray Hairs, he said, When this Snow shall be melt∣ed, much filth will be dissolved with it; Mul∣tum Luti sequetur, meaning great Persecution and Impiety would shortly befall the Church. To these Hereticks the Donatists joyned them∣selves, many of whom defended the same O∣pinions, and they that did not, yet agreed in the Persecution of the Catholicks, as their common Enemy. To this Heresie (saith St. Augustine) those who are called Circumcellians in Africa do belong. De Haeres. c. 69. And St. Hierome saith, that Donatus wrote a Book, De Spiritu Sancto, agreeable to the Doctrine of the Arians. For before Arius was well known, Ebion and Cerinthus, and Corpocrates, while St. John lived, troubled the Churches of Asia with the like Opinions, against which, St. John at the desire of those Churches, wrote his Gospel, to assert the Eternal Deity of our Saviour. And Eusebius and others say, that O∣rigen was the Father of Arius, for he taught,
That, As much as the Apostles were inferior to Christ, to much was Christ inferior to God; and that the Son was not to be prayed unto with the Father, seeing he was not the Author of granting our requests, but onely a Suppli∣cator, or Mediator. And among these Here∣ticks, the Gloria Patri was altered, which they used in this form: Gloria Patri, per Fili∣um, in Spiritu Sancto. Glory be to the Fa∣ther, by the Son, in the Holy Ghost. To this Council we find that Cecilian was called, as appears by his Subscription, but none of the Donatists, they being excluded from the Communion of the Catholick Church. The Donatists taking occasion of these trou∣bles abroad, did with the more violence pro∣secute their good old cause at home, and now they take the confidence to petition the Empe∣ror Constantine, to rescind and abrogate the Laws made against them. And whereas some of them had been denied the liberty of exercising their Functions, ei∣ther publickly or privately, and others bani∣shed for transgressing the Laws, and inforced to return to secular imployments, they urge that their banished may be recalled, particu∣larly that Silvanus one of their Bishops, of whom we have spoken before, might return. He was banished upon the accusation of Nun∣dinarius, for selling the Ornaments of his Church: but his Party reported that he was banished, for refusing to communicate with Ʋrsacius and Zenophilus, two Catholick Offi∣cers
under the Emperor, who, as they said, did persecute him. This slander St. Augustine refuteth, l. 3. contra Cresconium, c. 30. where he shews, that the cause of his banishment was not as they pretended, for denying to commu∣nicate with the Catholicks only, but — Quia cum jam traditor fuit, permanere haereticus voluit, ut falsum honorem in parte Donati ha∣beret, qui habere in Catholicâ nullum potuit, tam manifestis traditionis suae gestis publico ju∣dicio reseratis: because being evidently pro∣ved a Traditor, he would continue in the Schisme, hoping to find a false honor among the Donatists, who could have none among the Catholicks. It hapned, that this Ʋrsacius being imployed in the Emperor's Wars, lost his life, at whose Death the Donatists rejoyced, as a token of Divine vengeance against a Capi∣tal Enemy of theirs. I may not omit another clause of their Petition, which was, that they might enjoy—Libertatem Arbitrii, that is, as Valesius, c. 17. interprets it, Liberty of Con∣science, but St. Augustine calls it more fitly, Licentiam agendi, a Licence to do what they pleased, and that they might no more be con∣strained to communicate Antistiti ipsius (i.e. Constantini) Nebuloni, with that Prelatical Knave of his, Cecilian, Colloq. Carth. l. 3. c. 54. & Brevic. August. c. 21. Declaring, that neither by threats nor promises, they would be thereunto induced, bus would rather suffer a Thousand Deaths. These demands of theirs, how insolent soever, were proposed in such a
juncture of time, that the Emperor could no deny them, but grants what they desired, lea∣ving them to the Divine vengeance, which had begun to be revenged on them. The conside∣ration of this restless temper of theirs, pu St. Augustine into so great a passion, that h said, Epistle 167. Puto quod Diabolus ipse I think that if the Devil himself had been so often condemned, by Judges of his own choo∣sing, he would not have been so impudent, as to persist in such a cause. Now that this indulgence was extorted from the Emperor, may appear by his consolatory Epistle, writ∣ten to the Catholick Bishops, which I shal here insert, from the Appendix to Optatus, p. 287. — You well know that I have endea∣voured, by all the Offices of humanity and moderation, which either faith requireth, o prudence and purity would admit, that the most holy peace of that fraternity, where∣with the grace of God hath indued the hearts of his Servants, might in all things be kept inviolate. But for as much as our good en∣deavours have not been effectual to subdue that power of wickedness, which adheres to the judgment of those, who still rejoyce in the mischiefs which they have acted; we must expect, until by the mercy of Almighty God, the malice of these Men, which from a few, hath infected many, be again mitigated; for, from thence we must expect a remedy, from whence every good work proceeds: and un∣til this heavenly Medicine be applyed, our
counsels are to be moderated, that we may give an Honourable testimony of our pati∣ence, and by the virtue of true tranquillity, we may endure whatever their wonted inso∣lence shall do or attempt. For it is a folly to usurp that revenge, which we ought to leave to God, especially when by faith, we ought to be confident, notwithstanding all that the fury of such Men may cause us to suffer, that God will esteem it as Martyrdom: for what else is it, at such a time as this, to overcome in the Name of God, and with a constant heart no endure the insolent affronts of such, as afflict the People of peace? This if your Serenity shall observe, you shall soon see by the grace of God, that the Ring-leaders of contention will be destroyed, when their de∣signs shall be frustrated, and their manners discovered: In the mean time, let all your People know, that they ought not to be led to Eternal Death, by the perswasion of a few desperate Persons; but that by the grace of repentance, and amendment of their errors, they may be reconciled to Eternal Life.— Moreover he was pleased to certifie Eumalius, and other his Officers in Africa, of Cecilian's innocency. (Pervidi inquit Cecilianum, &c.) I have always found Cecilian to be a Man of great integrity, and free from the crimes ob∣jected by his Adversaries. But the Donatists were now by their great Numbers, above the Laws and Power of the Emperor, for now was Constantine imployed to suppress the War rai∣sed
by Licinius, which he did with much more ease, than he could the Tumults of the Dona∣tists. And the Catholick Bishops were bu∣sied in confuting the Arians. Credo nostros in refutandis Arianis totos fuisse, Hist. Collat. Carth. p. 606. which is the reason that we hear but little of the Donatists for five or six Years, the Council at Nice continuing for three Years; but the Council being risen, and the Catholick Bishops returned, the contro∣versie is renewed, and carried on with more fury than ever: For Donatus the first being dead, Donatus Magnus (as his Party called him) succeeds him in the pretended Bishoprick of Carthage: A man of more Learning, and popular reputation than his Predecessor, and of no less zeal, and obstinacy in opposing the Catholicks, and supporting the Faction, a∣mong whom there was none so proud and fanatick as himself. I find this Character of him.— Eò evasit Donatus, ut non modo tanquam alter Hannibal Imperatores contemnebat, sed ut deus aliquis à suis coleretur. He got Troops of Armed Men to prosecute his designs, and called their Captains Duces Sanctorm;Optatus, p. 68. these often affronted the Emperor's Officers. Ba∣ronius observes in the 26th. Year of Constan∣tine, that he did not only load the Prefects with reproaches, calling them Senatus oppro∣brium, & dedecus Praefectorum, but did also cast dirt on the Emperor, as if he had been corrupted by the Catholicks, Corruptum esse Imperatorem. Delib. Hist. p. 246. which he
did on this occasion; The good Emperor commiserating the great sufferings of the Churches of Africa, gives Order for consi∣derable Summs of Mony to be sent to Ce∣cilian, with a gracious Letter, which is recor∣ded by Eusebius, l. 10. c. 6. to this effect: Constantine the Emperor to Cecilian Bishop of Carthage sendeth Greeting. I have sent Letters to Ʋrsus Lieutenant of Africa, that he cause 3000. Folles of Silver to be deli∣vered to thy fidelity, for the relief of the Churches of Africa; and if this suffice not, demand of Heraclus our Treasurer, as much as may be sufficient. And whereas I under∣stand, that some lewd People have much di∣sturbed the peace of the Church, I have gi∣ven Order in the presence of Anilinus and Patricius, to take cognizance thereof, and in no wise to permit such things. If therefore those Men persist in their folly, acquaint the Governors thereof, that they may act as I have appointed them. The Great God pre∣serve thee. This great bounty and grace of the Empe∣ror, which did, as so much Oyl, heal the wounds and refresh the countenances of Ceci∣lian and his People, had a contrary effect on the spirits of Donatus and his Complices, whose malice was hereby inflamed to rage and fury, so that he forbad his People to accept any Portion of the Emperor's Largess, if it should be offered. Whereof Optatus gives the reason, p. 64. Misit ornamenta Domibus Dei,
misit Elecmosynas Ceciliano, nil Donato. He sent Ornaments to the Catholick Churches, and gifts to Cecilian, but nothing to Donatus, And at last, the Emperor saw a necessity o using more severity towards them, and to re∣scue the Catholick Churches by force out o the hands of the Donatists, who in the late times of distraction, had taken possession of them, and triumphed alone, nobis absenti∣bus, says Optatus: The Emperor therefore by a more strict Edict, not only denied them any publick Places of Worship, but forbad them to reside in any of his Cities. St. Augusti mentioneth another Law against them, and any others that should trouble the peace o the Church; by which it was provided, tha all such as called themselves Christians, and refused to communicate with the Catholic Churches, sed in suis conventiculis separati congregantur, and gathered into separate Con∣gregations, should be suppressed. And that such Priests as did ordain, or were ordained, otherwise than the Church did approve of, should be fined in a Mulct of Ten Pounds of Gold, and the Place wherein such impious Meetings were held, should be forfeited to the Emperor, if the owners were consenting thereunto. Moreover they were made unca∣pable of any Ecclesiastical promotion, Ʋt nihil Ecclesiae nomine possiderent, and that the Goods of such as were convicted, should be seized on for the Emperor, Fisco vindicarentur. St. Aug. Epist. 47. & 166. and l. 1o contra Parmen.
and Bzovius Epitome Ba. p. 550. And that which made these Laws more effectual, was the Emperor's charge to his Sons, to put them in Execution after his Death: whereby their hopes of Indulgence were much abated, And by this means the Church had a Prospect of Peace and Unity before it; and Children were restored to their Parents, Wives to their Husbands, Servants to their Masters, and all of them the Unity of the Church. It may here be seasonable to consider, with what Mortar these Persons daubed, to make a Building that consisted of such different Ma∣terials, (Aedificium quod de ruinis constat, as Optat. p. 62.) to subsist and joyn together, notwithstanding the opposition against it, by so Potent and Religious a Prince, and the joynt endeavours of the Catholick Bishops and Peo∣ple, and several Councils, as well Foreign, as of their own Nation. For the Emperor had sent express command to Anilinus, not only to restore to the Catholick Churches, all those possessions and priviledges, which any of their Adversaries had usurped; Sive hortos, sive Aedes, sive aliud quodcun{que} ad jus Ecclesia∣rum aliquando spectaverat, Euseb. l. 10. c. 1o. but more especially, he granted to the Clergy, united in Communion with Cecilian, new Priviledges and Immunities, — As in the 7th. Chap. of Eusebius, l. 10. Ʋt abs{que} ulla molestiâ proprie legi obsequium praestent. But exempted as well Schismaticks as Hereticks from the benefit of those Edicts. And in a∣nother
Epistle to Cecilian, having ordered him to receive what Money he should want, he adds, Quoniam accepi, &c. Whereas I un∣derstand that some Men of unstable and ill composed minds, do seek by corrupt practi∣ces to withdraw the People from the Catho∣lick Church, I have given order to Anilinus my Proconsul, and Patricius my Vicar, of the Prefects, when they were with me, u rem ejusmodi nullo modo negligerent, that they should carefully suppress such, and if you find any to persist in that madness, that you speedily acquaint those Judges therewith, that they may punish them, as I have com∣manded. And in another Epistle, ad Episco∣pos Catholicos, he acquaints them, that he had commanded his Prefects to bring to his Court such Donatists as did disturb them, ut ibi sib mortem pervideant, &c. that they might see the terrors of Death, which were prepared for them. So that we may admire, how such a peevish Faction should not only subsist, but the Leaders of it being Men of pernicious Principles and Practices, should delude such Numbers of the People, and retain them not only in their Communion, but at their Devo∣tion: but the Scripture hath foretold, what Arts and Methods, the Instruments of Satan should use to deceive unstable Souls, most of which were very diligently practised by these Donatists, as St. Augustine observed in his Epistle to Vincentius. As first their tampering with the weaker
Sex, and most ignorant sort of People, such as had weak judgments, but strong affections; and being once seduced, were perverse and violent in their ways, and deaf to all reason and arguments to the contrary. So Rom. 16.18. it is said, they should deceive the hearts of the simple; and 2 Tim. 3.6. Lead captive silly Women: Accordingly Optatus observes, that the weaker Sex, and Younger sort, were generally seduced by them, Exivit Ʋxor, &c. The Wives and Children were seduced from their Husbands and Parents. 2dly, Their transforming themselves (as Satan himself may do) into Angels of Light, pretending to greater Purity, better Ordinan∣ces, and a greater shew of severity, in the Dis∣cipline which they used, for the admission of lapsed Persons; whence they were called the rigid Donatists, Nè Luce veritatis carere o∣stendantur, umbram rigidae severitatis obten∣dunt. They supplied the want of solid piety by the shadow of rigid severity. August. con∣tra Parmen. l. 3. And according to what the Apostle observed of the Gnosticks, They had a form of Godliness, but denyed the power there∣of, 2 Tim. 3.5. 3dly, Their good words and fair speeches, Rom. 16.18. commending such as they would seduce, for some excellent gifts, or good af∣fections, and conversing familiarly with them, promising glorious Priviledges, and liberty to act according to their own Consciences, assu∣ring them of remission of their Sins, and of
special grace and favour with God. 4ly, They pretended also to immediate Re∣velations, and Answers of their Prayers from God; As that an Angel was sent to confirm them in their ways; that there were divers Pro∣digies and Signs declared from Heaven, a tokens to their acceptation with God; for if any strange accident fell out, they interpreted it to the Vulgar, as a special providence, to assert their cause. If the Heathen invaded the Emperor's Dominions, or overthrew his Ar∣mies, or slew any of those Commanders that had been Instruments of their Correction, these were demonstrations of God's displea∣sure against their Adversaries. Periit Ma∣carius, periit Ʋrsacius, cuncti{que} comites vestri, Dei pariter vindictâ perierunt, August. contr Petil. l. 2. c. 92. 5ly, The false reports, and unjust censures raised against such as were not of their Com∣munion, as well Superiors, as Equals: for as St. Peter observes, 2 Pet. 2.10. They are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities: as that Con∣stantine was corrupted by Hosius, a famous Bi∣shop, St. August. l. 1. contra Parmen. 2dly, That Meltiades was a Traditor, Brevic. Colla∣tionis cum Donatistis. 3dly, That the Catho∣licks were. Idolaters and Persecutors, having extorted the Penal Laws from the Emperor against them. They also spake evil of their Worship, that they had no Ministers nor Sa∣craments, nor was there Salvation to be had in their Communion; so that as St. Augustine
says, they carried on their work, Per insanas querelas, & vana mendacia, by furious com∣plaints, and vain lies: Contra Donat. post Col∣lat. And when nothing would stick on their Doctrine, then against their Persons. Cum adversariorum Doctrinam refellere non possunt, eorum mores accusarunt. Istae sunt Haeretico∣rum Machinae, ut convicti de perfidia, ad male∣dicta se conferunt; Hieron. contra Ruffinum. The miscarriage of one Catholick, was enough to cause them to defame not only his whole conversation, but the whole Church, quasi homo ille esset Causa: Aug. ad Crescon. They rejected the Liturgy then used by the Catho∣licks, which both Optatus, and Tertullian before him, called the Legitimate Prayers, as the double salutation, or Pax vobiscum, with which they begun, and ended their Prayers. The Prayer for the Catholick Church, which, as it was framed by the Apostles injunction, 1 Tim. 2.1. so it had been from his days always con∣tinued in the Church, and was called Sacrifi∣cium pro Ecclesiâ; They omitted also the Prayer for the Emperor, in that Collect,Opt. p. 64. men∣tioned by Tertullian to be used in the Church of Africa, even for such Emperors as perse∣cuted it; Oramus pro Imperatore, pro Ministris ejus, & potestatibus seculi, pro rerum quiete, pro mora finis, &c. And no wonder that they rejected the Prayers of the Church, when they also left off the use of the Lord's Prayer. They also pulled down many of their Churches, and such as they thought fit to preserve for their
own use, they washed the Walls and Pave∣ments, as if the Assemblies of the Catholicks had defiled them: They razed their Altars to the ground, and often cast their Bibles into the Fire, which was the very crime that they objected against the Catholicks, and particu∣larly against Cecilian, from whose communion they separated on that account. And all this they did under a pretence of zeal for reforma∣tion, and a purer worship. 6ly, As often as they had power in their hands, they did not only silence the Catholic Bishops, but deprived them of all sustenance, and banished them from their Habitations. Aut tacenda erat veritas, aut eorum immanitas serenda, as St. Augustine complained, Epist. 50. They must either conceal the truth, o yield themselves up to the cruelty of their Ad∣versaries, that laid wait for them, knowing that their errors could not resist the light of the truth;Appendix ad Ope. p. 612. Nec praedicari à Catholicis verita∣tem patiebantur, contra suum errorem. 7ly, When they admitted any to their Com∣munion, they Rebaptized, and imposed new Vows and Covenants on them, obliging them not to approach the Catholick Assemblies, or hear any of their Bishops, which St. Augustine desired of Crispine, Epistle 172. And in the next Epistle, he acquaints us with another Art used by Crispine, to increase and keep firm his Proselytes. Crispine being a wealthy Man, as the Donatists generally were by the Spoils of the Catholicks, he imployed none
to dress his ground, or to manage his affairs, but such as did profess to be of his Party; and to every one that would be rebaptized by him, he gave a certain Summ of Money, and promi∣sed more, by which means he had corrupted great Numbers, whose dependance being wholly on him, they were ready to execute his designs against the Catholicks. St. Au∣gustine asks him, Epistle 173. how he would be able to answer Christ, when he should que∣stion him for such sacrilegious practices, upon those souls, which he had redeemed with his Blood; Crispine, Carum fuit precium tuum, ad emendum timorem Mappaliensium, & vilis mors mea, ad emendum amorem Gentium? Plus va∣luit rebaptizandis colonis tuis quod numeratum est de sacculo tuo, quam baptizandis populis meis, quod manavit de latere meo. O Crispine, Why shouldest thou corrupt with thy Money those poor Souls, to live in fear of thee, whom I redeemed with my Blood to live in the love of me? 8ly, Their Pride and Reputation with the People, kept off many of their Bishops from the Church communion. Vinci possunt, suaderi non possunt, saith St. Augustine; he gives in∣stance in Tichonius, who was one of their most learned Bishops, and defended the Ar∣ticle of the Catholick Church, yet kept him∣self in the Schisme still. And though divers of them knew and hated the pride of Dona∣tus, yet they deserted him not, or with a greater pride, to set up for themselves in a
more Congregational way. Alia schismat facta sunt ex vobis, sicut Rogatense in Maurita∣nia, Ʋrbanense in Numidia, &c. contra Cresc. l. 4. c. 60. Convicta est falsitas, apparuit ve∣ritas, & adhuc contemnitur charitas. Post col∣lat. They were convinced of the falshood of their own Opinions, and the truth of those of the Catholicks, yet would not imbrace peace. So did Tichonius, who continued in the Schism, when he was convinced that it was so; having espoused the Schisme, and gained great repu∣tation, he knew not how to leave that, and his credit too. l. 2. contra Parmen. And i Men do either love the pre-eminence, or to hear themselves prate, as Diotrephes did, 3 John 9. or if they gain a livelihood, and wealth, as Demetrius and his Crafts-men by the Shrines of Diana, Acts 19. their Ears are so stopt, that neither the Arguments of St. Paul, nor the Eloquence of Apollos, nor the Authority of Cephas,2 Tim. 3.8. are sufficient to open them, but they will still resist the truth; Men of corrupt minds, reprobate (or as our Mar∣gent reads it, of no judgment) concerning the Faith. 9ly, St. Peter tells us of some places of Scripture hard to be understood,2 Pet. 3.16. which they that are unlearned and unstable, do wrest; And this was another evil art, whereby they advantaged their Party: They would, Pro∣ferre Evangelium, take a Text of Scripture, as Optatus, p. 78. and usually such as they did not understand, non intellectas Lectiones, from
the Canticles, or Daniel, or the Revelations, and these must be made to speak their Lan∣guage, and promote their designs. So they in∣terpreted that of the Prophet Isay,Isa. 52. calling the People from the Captivity of Babylon, to ju∣stifie their Separation, and from St. Paul, 2 Corinth. 6. they would perswade the Peo∣ple not to have any commerce with, or to sa∣lute others. So in the Conference at Carthage, to prove that the whole World was Aposta∣tized, except the Church of Christ with them; they alledge the revolt of the Ten Tribes, and compare themselves to Judah. St. August. de Verbis Domini in Johan. Serm. 50. names their quoting of Canticles 1.7. as a proof, that they were the Church of Christ: Because it is there said, that he maketh his Flock to rest in Meridie, (i. e.) say they, in the South, where Africa lay; of which see St. August. De unitate Ecclesiae c. 14. (I wonder the less at these, when I find A Lapide, from the same Text, telling us, that Meridies is Romana Ec∣clesia, ad quam Petrus jubente Christo, ex Je∣rusalem & Antiochia, transtulit Pontificatum suum.) Thus to prove themselves without sin, they alledged Eph. 5.27. where it is said, Christ gave himself for his Church, that he might present it a glorious Church, not ha∣ving spot or wrinkle, which they applyed to themselves, as St. Augustine observes. Absit ut quis nostrum ita se justum dicat ut sine pec∣cato in hac vitâ se esse jactaret, as did the Do∣natists in our Conference, saying, that they
were in that Church, which hath no spot, no wrinkle, Epist. 50. They accounted them∣selves to be, Coelestes in Coelo, and other Terrestres in Terrâ. August. Epistle 48. The were the few that were chosen, the rest wer reprobates. They were Israelites, and other Egyptians and Persecutors. They the Flock o Christ, others were Wolves. Whatever th Text was, a great part of the Sermon was to th purpose. Nec mirum si Scripturae pacem n intelligent, qui pacem cum Dei Ecclesiâ non ha∣bebunt. August. de Gestis cum Emerito. It i no strange thing, if they do not understand the truth, who do hate peace. 10ly, Their ready complyance with all other factious Parties, though never so vile and he∣retical, was another advantageous practice. For though there were great fewds between the Donatists, and others that separated from them on the like pretences as they separated from the Catholicks, as Maximinianists and Luciferians, who were professed Anabaptists, the Circumcellians much like our Quakers, the Euchitae and Massalians, who were perfect Enthusiasts, and the Arians, who denyed the Deity of our Saviour, and the Holy Ghost: yet as often as there was an opportunity of vexing and afflicting the Catholicks, they all united as one Man, and forgetting their pri∣vate animosities, armed themselves as against their common Enemy; yea they scrupled not to joyn with the Jews, the most implacable Enemies of Christianity; and when they were
destitute of other Assistants, to make use of the power of the barbarous Goths and Van∣dals. Thus Manasseh vexed Ephraim, and Ephraim, Manasseh; but both joyned to op∣pose Judah, Isay 9.21. Thus it was in the In∣fancy of the Church, and thus it will be until its Consummation: Herod and Pontius Pilate, the Gentiles and the People of Israel, will con∣spire against it, Acts 4.27. 11ly, Their promiscuous receiving of Men of desperate fortunes, and as desperate reso∣lutions, into their Parties. Such as were in debt, or disgrace, through their debauchery and vicious lives, such as were discontented, and thinking themselves injured by their Ma∣gistrates, Parents or Masters, upon whom they could not otherwise be revenged, made Do∣natus or his Successors their Protectors, they were immediately above the Power of the Laws, their debts are all satisfied, and all ob∣ligations of Nature and Religion cancelled, and if they believe their Leaders, their sins are all pardoned. This honour did those new Saints confer upon each other, while they lived, and promised no less than a Crown of Mar∣tyrdome, if they dyed in defence of that Holy League. 12ly, Another Engine which they employed, was, the maintaining of Emissaries in all places, where there was hope of advancing their cause and Party. They had their Confederates in Rome, who scrued themselves into the favour of great Men: nor wanted they their Advo∣cates
in the Emperor's Court; for being many of them inriched by the spoils of others, they were very free in their Bribes and Presents to Men in Power, to purchase liberty to them∣selves; and being Men of smooth Tongues and soft discourse, as well as of crafty and com∣plying conversation, they did insinuate them∣selves to the acquaintance and counsels of some good Men, with a design to betray them, and not unlike our Jesuits could personate all sorts and degrees of Men, that by all means they might increase the Number of their Prose∣lytes, and support their Cause. To which we may add, the familiar and constant correspon∣dence which they held among themselves, ad∣vising not only what was done, but what was most facile and probable to be effected: no did they only meet frequently to consult o such means, but did as unanimously agree and resolve on them, and having resolved, as vi∣gorously act and prosecute their designs with great secresie and constancy; for, as our Sa∣viour observed of the unjust Steward, Th Children of this World are wiser in their gene∣ration than the Children of light:Luk. 16.8. (i. e.) (ac∣cording to the Hebrew phrase) in rebus sui agendis, in prosecuting those worldly affairs wherein they are concerned, (for the He∣brews call the actions of Men , i. e. , as Vatablus sheweth from Gen. 6.9. and 37.2.) And the reason of it is, because when Men are conscious to themselves of un∣just dealing with others, their own just fears
do excite them to advise warily, and act spee∣dily and industriously for their security. Whereas the righteous Man having also an honest cause, supposeth his innocency to be a sufficient guard, and therefore is less studious and solicitous for his own preservation. Lastly, And the great countenance they gave to the Vices of their Proselytes, was no small advantage to the Faction, for they were better than their words to them; they promi∣sed only liberty, but they allowed all manner of licentiousness; they counted it no sin in them to rob, and deceive the Catholicks, nor to defile themselves with fleshly lusts. Ʋnde tantae turbae convivarum ebriosorum, & innup∣tarum, sed non incorruptarum, innumerabilia stupra foeminarum? Aug. l. 3. contra Parmen. They had Principles and Doctrines that incou∣raged them to live more lewdly than others, as that all their sins were already pardoned, and that they could never fall from the grace of God. In so much as their sins, as well as their Opinions had a Toleration. Greges e∣brios sanctimonialium suarum, cum gregibus e∣briis circumcellionum die noctu{que} permixtos va∣gari turpiter sinunt. cont. Parm. l. 2o. Their Teachers permitted the unclean Circumcellians to wander up and down, Day and Night, with young Women, who pretended vows of Cha∣stity, and more holiness than others, as the Gnosticks had done before them, but lived in all Uncleanness. If any Bishop or Priest were cast out of the Catholick Communion,
for scandalous offences, and fled to them, they received and defended him; and he that was in his own account unworthy of the Office of a Deacon in the Catholick Church, is accoun∣ted fit, not only to be a Presbyter, but to create Presbyters too among the Donatists, as Splendonius did. Extant innumerabilia do∣cumenta in iis qui vel Episcopi vel alterius gra∣dus Clerici fuerunt,l. 3. contr. Petil. & tunc degradati, vel pu∣dore in alias terras abierunt, vel ad vos ipsos, vel ad alias haereses, saith St. Augustine. And when any Bishop or private Person deserted them, to joyn in Communion with the Catho∣lick Church, they did not only defame him, but by open violence, and secret conspiracies sought his utter ruine: to which the People were incouraged by their Priests, who taught them, that therein they should do God good service, as they did concerning St. Augustine. It was a difficult matter to find any one among them, that had a good opinion of any that were of another Communion, or that did think soberly of himself, but his proud con∣ceit did generally swell, and poyson their souls, that they were the most excellent Christians, and others reprobates: Qui se à Christs anitate discindunt, se solos Christianos esse ja∣ctant, & damnant caeteros. Aug. contra Crescon▪ l. 4. c. 59. By these and other such arts, they increased their Faction, and made it formidable, not only to the Bishops, but to the Emperor himself, by whose care and good government, though the
limbs of the Faction were cut off, yet the heads and the heart remained still, and with innumerable affronts and vexations, did they grieve that good Emperor, whom (as much as in them lay) they had slain inIn the Language of Op∣tatus, they did occidere Ole∣um, slew him with the sword of their tongues, and hand∣led him, as if he had not been the Lords anointed. his reputation, and tantum non with violent hands brought down his gray Hairs with sor∣row to the Grave, in the 65. Year of his Age, and the 31th. of his Empire: But their malicious spirits survived, to the perpetual trouble of the Church, and of the Emperor's Sons, which succeeded him; whereof Constantine was slain shortly after, by his Brothers Souldiers; Con∣stans, who lived longer, and was Heir to his Father's Vertues, as well as his Dominions, was also made the object of the Donatists ma∣lice; for during these revolutions of the Em∣pire, they recruited their Faction, and had spawned a mad fry of Fanatick Persons, called Circumcellians, to be their Champions, for though they did not always own them to be of their Communion, yet did they on all oc∣casions imploy them to fight against the com∣mon Enemy. These Circumcellians were in∣couraged by Donatus, who pretended that an Angel had appeared to him, and assured him of the confirmation of his Faction, and that he had immediate answer of his Prayers from God, Oravit Donatus & respondit ei Deus è coelo, and that as many as suffered violent Deaths, in defence of the good old cause,
should have a Crown of Martyrdome, and for their encouragement, white Altars or Memo∣rials were erected to their honour, and great commendations of them were celebrated i publick Assemblies.Anno 348. Now Constans the Em∣peror, being mindful of his Father's charge, and in imitation of his Example, sent Paulus, and Macarius with some Gifts and Almes to the Churches of Africa, but with a Commis∣sion also, to endeavour the unity of those Churches. Whereof Donatus having intelli∣gence, although those Legates whom Optatus calls operarios unitatis, did in a friendly man∣ner apply themselves to him, first offer∣ing him to partake of the Emperor's bounty and then perswading him to imbrace peace and unity with the Catholick Bishops, as the Emperor had given them instructions, he not only refused to accept of the Emperor's Lar∣gess, but returned many opprobrious speeches, Quid est imperatori cum Ecclesia? What hath the Emperor to do with the Church? (aut quid est Ecclesiae cum Regibus Seculi quos nun∣quam nisi invidos Christianitas sensit? & multa maledicta effudit) or what hath the Church to do with the Kings of this World? who have been always adversaries to Christianity: and so he rejected the Emperor's propositions for peace, with as much pride and contempt, as the Emperor did with Humility and Charity offer them. There was at this time another Donatus Bishop of Bagaia, who gathered great Troops
of the Circumcellians, to oppose the Empe∣ror's Legates, to intercept the Gifts and Mo∣neys which they were dispersing, for the relief of the several Churches. Of which the Legates being advised, and apprehending themselves in great danger, by reason of the flocking toge∣ther of those desperate persons; They sent to Silvester, who had then the command of the Souldiers, to send them a Guard of Souldiers, not that they intended to be Aggressors, but only (vim vi repellere) to defend themselves against those furious Persons, that were in an extraordinary manner assembled: And the event proved, that they did but what was ne∣cessary; for the People were stirred up to Sedition, by jealousies and prejudices against the Emperor, which the Donatists had scatter∣ed through all Africa, perswading them that Paulus and Macarius had brought with them certain Images, which they intended to set up∣on the Altars, and to command a Superstitious Worship and Sacrifice to them, whereas they came only as Ambassadors of Peace, and In∣struments of Union. And notwithstanding all the affronts which they received from that fu∣rious and desperate Party, who often set upon the Guards of Souldiers, to their own destru∣ction, the Legates at the request of the Ca∣tholicks did forbear any farther acts of Ho∣stility, nor did they act any thing prejudicial to the true Religion. Nulli dictum est Nega Deum, Incende testamentum, &c.Opt. p. 62. None were required to deny God, to burn their Bibles,
or destroy the Churches. Sola fuerunt ad pa∣cem hortamenta, ut Deus & Christus ejus à Populo in unum conveniente pariter rogaretur. They only endeavoured, according to the Em∣peror's instruction, to exhort them to peace, and unity, that they would worship God and Christ with one consent in an uniform manner. But these exhortations to peace, did more of∣fend them, than the tidings of War; they loved the inheritance of Schisme more than the Le∣gacy of Christ; Nunciatâ unitate omnes fu∣gistis; at the very name of peace they all de∣sert the Legates,Opt, p. 64. and become their Enemies, and both by open violence and secret plots, by their slanders and Swords too are always provoking them. And yet these Donatists did not only complain of Persecution by the Legates, but imputed it to the Catholicks, as if they had procured those Bands of Souldiers with a purpose to destroy them,p. 69. to which Op∣tatus answereth, Quod ab aliis vobis provo∣cantibus factum est, nobis non debet imputari; quicquid objecistis, vos fecistis; that if it were true that the Donatists were slain by the Soul∣diers, yet it was false that it was done by the procurement of the Catholicks, who always mediated with the Officers to spare them; And that in truth the Emperor's Officers ne∣ver used violence, but when they were first provoked; Nullus erat primitùs terror, nemo vidit virgam, nemo custodiam; there was no terror against any but evil doers, no punish∣ment or Prison threatned to any peaceable
Christian, the Emperor only preserved peace in the State. And about the end of Constans his Reign, there was a Council held at Car∣thage,Anno 349. Gratus being then Bishop, to restore peace to the Church, in which they decreed divers Canons against rebaptizing, and to pre∣vent that desperate practice of the Circumcel∣lians, to cast themselves from high precipices, and by other violent practices to destroy themselves. And thus for a while the fury of the Donatists was abated, and the hopes of peace and settlement comforted the Church. But this good Emperor is untimely slain by divers Military men, who conspired against him, thinking to divide the Empire among themselves. One Marcellinus invites him to a Supper, and continuing with him late at Night, Magnentius one of the Conspirators begins to affright him, whereupon the Em∣peror fled to Helena, whither they sent a se∣lected Company of Souldiers, and murthered him; But Constantius his Brother succeeded him, who at his entrance on the Government, did seem to favour the Orthodox against the Arians and Donatists, but being setled in the Empire, he declares himself an Arian, and consequently an Enemy to the Orthodox Chri∣stians, whereby the Arians and Donatists rage every where against them; Donatus himself, and many of his Faction joyned themselves with the Arian Hereticks (although they had formerly declared their abhorrence of them) in hope of obtaining the greater power against
the Catholicks by the Emperor's favour. And to this end, Donatus wrote a Book, de Spirit Sancto, as St. Hierome hath observed, agree∣able to the Arian Doctrine. And others of the Faction joyned with the Macedonians, and as St. AmbroseDe Spiri∣tu Sancto. l. 3. c. 11. says, blotted out of their Books those words of St. John, God is a Spirit▪ Maximus Bishop of Neapolis, was deprived of his dignity and function, for not complying with the Arians, who placed one Zosimus in his See, Maximus keeps to his charge and function, until they ejected him by force, and then he denounceth an Anathema against the Intruder, whereof the Intruder taking no no∣tice, applyed himself to the discharge of his new Office, and endeavouring to speak unto the People, his Tongue hung out of his Mouth, so that he could not speak, nor draw it in a∣gain, until he went out of the Church, and then he recovered the use of it; and this befell him a second, and a third time, whereupon he for∣sook his new Dignity. And now lived that famous Ecebolius, a Sophist of Constantinople, who while Constantius was a Catholick, pro∣fessed himself so too, and with him turned Arian; and when Julian was Emperor, was an Idolater; and in the days of Jovianus, would become a Catholick again, and lay at the Church Doors, crying to the Faithful, Me salem infatuatum pedibus conculcate, to trample on him as unsavory Salt, fit for nothing. But it is more worthy our observation, that with∣in a short time that Constantius had declared
against the Deity of the Son of God, the Em∣pire was taken from him, and given to Julian. This Julian the Apostate, who had from his Childhood been instructed in the Christian Re∣ligion,l. 3. c. 1. and (as Socrates says) had been a Rea∣der in the Church at Nicomedia, being of an unstable wit, declares himself an open Enemy to the Christians, forbidding them to bear any Office in the Army, or to serve as common Souldiers: Then he excludes them from the Magistracy, and all publick Offices in the Com∣monwealth, and permits them not to teach Schools, or instruct Youth in any human li∣terature. He did not persecute the Christi∣ans so violently as Dioclesian, and others had done, but he contrived more mischievous ways to destroy Christianity it self, if it had been possible, than others did to destroy the Pro∣fessors of it. For first, having shut up their Churches, and denyed them the nurture of their Children in Humane Learning, He sends for the Bishops of the several Factions, and injoyns them to do nothing prejudicial to the peace of the Empire, and then tells them they might securely follow their own different Modes and Opinions, in the Worship and Faith of God; Eo môdo nomen Christi de ter∣ris perire putavit,St. Aug. Epist. 166. si sacrilegas dissentiones li∣beras esse permifit: And this was that which he designed, in shewing any favour to the A∣rians, and calling back the Donatist Bishops from Banishment; the total destruction of Chri∣stianity. And whereas the Catholicks lookt
on this indulgence of the Emperor's, as a de∣sign that would prove in time to be fatal to Christianity,St. Augu∣stine. for (quae pejor mors animae quam libertas erroris,) there is no Death so evil as the Licence of Error, which is the destruction of so many Souls: Yet the Donatists are loud in their thanks, and acclamations to Julian, for this liberty, as a most just and gracious Prince, when as he did only contrive and allow it, as a more easie and ready way to destroy the name and being of Christianity, which was almost lost already among the new denomina∣tions of Arians, Photinians, Macedonians, and Donatists. And that it might be no more had in remembrance, he imposeth the name of Ga∣lilaeans upon them, as (nomen criminis not re∣ligionis) a name of criminal and wicked per∣sons, not of a religious profession. And a∣gainst the being of Christianity he encouraged the Arians, and others that denyed the Divi∣nity of Christ, and ever favoured the several Sects, more than the Orthodox. Upon this the Donatists grew more proud and impla∣cable towards the Catholicks, and to ingrati∣ate themselves with the Emperor, pull down the Cross which Constantine had set up in pub∣lick Places, to the honour of Christ, and set up the Image of Julian in its place: and by how much he was more severe against the Catho∣licks, by so much the more they applauded him. He silenced all the Men that were fa∣mous for their Learning, as St. Basil and St. Gregory, both of Cappadocia, Èugenius Antio∣chenus,
and Apollinaris the Syrian, who wrote for Christianity against the Heathen, which Book the Christian Bishops presented to the Emperor, desiring him to peruse it, which he did, and returned it to them again, saying, Legi, intellexi, improbavi, to whom they re∣plyed,Epist. 166. Si intellexisses nunquam improbasses. In the Petition of Petilian, Rogatianus, &c. they stiled Julian the only Assertor of Pub∣lick Liberty, from whom alone Justice and Clemency was to be hoped for, when-as St. Augustine says, nil injustius, nil perniciosius. The Catholicks wondred, as well they might, that the Donatists, and the several Hereticks should be so short sighted, as not to perceive that Julian was striking at the very root of Christianity, which the Catholicks often mind∣ed them of, desiring them to consider,Opt. l. 2. p. 54. that by the same Edict by which they were indulged, the Worship of Idols was injoyned, and the Devil and they were let loose together, to compass the Earth, and make Proselytes to their Party. Tunc reddidit basilicas Donati∣stis quando templa Daemoniis. St. August. E∣pistle 166. And when Julian was dead, they often wished their good Protector alive again. But as if Julian were too slow an Executioner of the true Religion, the Donatists make more speed, by destroying their Brethren with as much rage and cruelty, as their most barba∣rous Enemies; for having by Rogatianus, Pon∣tius, and Cassianus, three of their Bishops, ob∣tained some priviledges, which were denied
to the Catholicks, they exercised all manner of cruelty against them.Opt. 55. Felix and Januarius two of their Bishop's, came to the Castle o Lemelle, where the Catholicks had a Church which being shut against them, they command∣ed the Rabble which followed them, to pull i down, who presently got up on the Roof, and uncovered it, and perceiving the Deacons de∣fending the Altar, they threw down the Tile stones, and slew two of the Deacons. In Thi∣pasa a City of Mauritania,Idem, Ʋrbanus Formen∣sis, and Felix Idicrensis, with their bloody Companions, assaulted an Assembly of the Ca∣tholicks, while they were at their Devotions, and driving them out of the Church, slew and wounded a great part of them, without re∣spect of Sex or Age. The Bread of the Con∣secrated Eucharist, they threw to their Dogs, which having eaten it, by the judgment of God grew mad, and fell upon their Masters, renting them in pieces. They sold the conse∣crated Chalices to Women for live uses, or to the Heathen for the Service of their Gods, pulled down the Altars, and burnt the Books of the Holy Scriptures. Felix who was one of their Leaders defloured a Virgin, that had a little before owned him as her Spiritual Fa∣ther; and none of the Heathen committed greater outrages, than some of their Bishops. Julian by their instigation did shut up their Church-Doors, and some of his Officers, with a kind of admiration of the beauty and order,See Baron. as well as the richness of the Ornaments and
Utensils of their Church, took them away,Theodorct l. 3. c. 12. Ecce qui∣bus vasis ministratur Mariae si∣lio. as too good to be imployed in the Service of the Son of Mary: but such profanation as the Donatists committed, those Heathen never learned or practised. This Storm was too violent to continue long; One of the Fathers thus comforted the Church, that Julian was Nubecula cito transi∣tura, and accordingly Julian's ambition insti∣gated him to a War against the Persians, where he dyed in the midst of his own Army by the wound of an Arrow, shot from an un∣known hand, which he conceiving to be sent from Heaven, pulled it out, saying, Vicisti Galilaee, and so dyed. To him succeeded Jo∣vianus, proclaimed Emperor by the Army, that was then in Persia, who desired them to name some other, because he being a Christi∣an, could not lead an Army of such Principles, as Julian had formed. To whom the old Soul∣diers that had served Constantine and Constans, answered, that they were Christians,Ann. 364. and would have no other Emperor; But he dyed unhap∣pily within seven Moneths after, and Valenti∣nian succeeds him, a right good Christian, whom Julian had for that cause banished from his Court. He joyns his Brother Valens to himself in the Empire, who was an Arian. About the Fourth Year of this Emperor dyed the Great Donatus, and Parmenian (against whom Optatus wrote his Seven Books) suc∣ceeded him. It will not be impertinent to set down here a series of the Bishops during
this Schisme, which is as followeth. The Catholick Bishops. Mensurius. Cecilian. Rufus. Gratus. Genetlius. Aurclius. The Donatists. Majorinus. Donatus à Casi Nigris. Donatus magnus Parmenianus. Primianus. Gratus and Parmenian are the two Bishops that were in competition, Anno 368. Of what temper Parmenian was, Optatus his Cotem∣porary, a Person greatly beloved, as well for his Piety as Learning, hath shewn at large. He wanted very little of the Pride of Donatus, and for Calumny and Cruelty nothing at all. In his days Ticonius, one of the most learned and sober of that Party, reading and weighing the Arguments of Optatus for the Catholick Church, was so far convinced, that he wrote in defence of it, confuting the Arguments of the Donatists: and asserting, that (nullius ho∣minis peccatum potest praescribere promissis Dei) the wickedness of Man cannot make void the promises of God, concerning the extent of Christ's Church, for which he was condemned by a Synod of their Bishops, without any o∣ther Answer to his Arguments. Now the great confusion which was at Carthage, drove St. Augustine (who was yet a Heathen) to Rome, where he read Rhetorick, and Philo∣sophy,
until at length by the Prayers of his Mother Monica, and his converse with Pious and Learned Men, especially Saint Ambrose, he was converted, and baptized by St. Am∣brose at Millain, and became Malleus Dona∣tistarum, a happy Instrument to destroy that FactionAt his Baptisme Te Deum was first sung by S. Ambrose and St Au∣gustine Al∣ternatim.. Which Valentinian seeks to do by good Laws and Edicts; divers of which are yet extant in the Codex Justinianus, as that against all Hereticks; Nullus haereticis mini∣steriorum locus, &c. That no Place be allow∣ed to them that were condemned by the Coun∣cils of the Church, to exercise their Ministry, and if any such command or allowance were fraudulently procured, it should be null; That the People should be restrained from such Meetings, and their Teachers banished from Towns and Cities. Another Law was made against Rebaptizing, that the Offender be de∣prived of his Priesthood, l. 2. Ne sanctum Baptisma iteretur. Another against Conven∣ticles: Conventicula illicita etiam extra Ec∣clesiam in privatis aedibus celebrari prohibemus proscriptionis domus periculo imminente, si do∣minus ejus in eâ clericos nova ac tumultuosa conventicula celebrantes susceperit. I shall name but one more made expresly against the Manichees and Donatists, Tit. de Haereticis. Which in English is to this effect: We do ;deservedly prosecute the Manichees and Do∣natists with severity. Commanding that they enjoy not the Priviledges common to others, because they offending against Reli∣gion,
are injurious to all. We therefore pro∣nounce them uncapable of enjoying any pub∣lick bounty, or liberality, of making their Wills, and bestowing their Goods; neither shall their Sons inherit their Estates, unless they depart from their Fathers wickedness and if their Servants forsake such Masters, to have communion with the Catholick Church they shall be indemnified. These Laws are severe indeed, and by Men that had made con∣science of any Law, would have been thought obligatory: but to them that had broken th great Law of Charity, they were as cords o Sand. The Donatists were now become so numerous, and had so wasted the Catholicks that they began to quarrel with each other and in one Tumult, Donatus Bishop of Bagaia is thrown into a Well, in another Marculus is cast from a high Rock. Salvius an Aged Bishop of Membresa hath Dogs hung about his Neck, while the mad People with obscene Songs dance round about him; a cruelty, saith St. Augustine, beyond that of the Hetruria Tyrant, who joyned only Humane Bodies to∣gether. This is true, however strange it may be; St. Augustine tells them, the City is nigh and there they may be fully informed of it. Nor will it seem strange, if it be considered, how the mad Circumcellians cast away their own lives, of whom I shall at present give you only this short account, That they lived in madness, they dyed in desperation, they lay stinking and noysome after Death, and yet
there were a madder sort left behind, that worshipped these abominable Wretches, as if they had been Martyrs. Of these barbarities the poor Catholicks desired their Governors to acquaint the Emperor, and it was in a fit sea∣son, for both Valentinian, and Valens the A∣rian, who gave them some countenance, being dead, Gratianus and Valentinianus they young∣er succeeded, and chose Theodosius Magnus to govern the Empire, who though he used great power and prudence to suppress these Donatists, and hated them perfectly, as by the Laws made while he was Consul, and his acti∣ons during his Government may appear, yet could he not effect it. How much he honou∣red the Church, may appear by submitting himself to the censure of St. Ambrose, having by the instigation of some of his Courtiers given order to destroy some of the Inhabitants of Thessalonica in cold blood: But the wis∣dome of God intended to effect this by other means.Anno 389. St. Augustine having buried his Mo∣ther Monica, resolves to return to Carthage, to assist in making up the breaches of that Church, where the first Book which he wrote against the Donatists, was that which he calls his Psalm, containing an Epitome of their O∣pinions and Practices; and being afterward made Bishop of Hippo in Africa, he bestowed much of his time and labour, as well in pri∣vate and publick disputations, as in many lear∣ned Writings yet extant. But still the Faction thrived, and was delivered of another Sect;
For Parmenian being dead, the Donatists meet at Bagaia to choose a Successor in the Chair of Carthage, and there were two Competi∣tors, Primianus and Maximianus: Primianus was the most zealous, but Maximianus be∣ing of the alliance of Donatus,St. Aug. Epist. 162. and having some good Women to assist him, hoped to succeed; but as St. Augustine observes, for any real worth or ability, other than to head a Faction, Maximianus might have been Minimianus, and Primianus Postremianus. The Assembly is much divided, the greater part vote for Primianus, to the discontent of Maximianus and his Party, who thence-for∣ward deny to hold communion with their Bre∣thren, and gather distinct Congregations; and in a short time, he and his Party had procured Forty Three Bishops to side with him, and these condemned Primianus, and owned Max∣imianus for their Bishop. And St. Augustine, on Psal. 36. tells us of another Meeting at Cubursussita, where were an Hundred Bishops that confirmed Maximianus; But still Primi∣anus hath the greater Number, for shortly after, at another Synod at Bagaia, we read of Three Hundred Bishops that rescinded all that the Maximinianists had decreed, and establish Primianus: of this St. Augustine gives a full account, Contra Cresconium; and there ob∣serves, that without scruple they could urge and execute the Imperial Laws (against such as divided their Church) upon the Maximi∣nianists, but thought it a Persecution, when
the Catholicks proceeded by the same Laws against them; they compared the Maximi∣anists to Core, Dathan, and Abiram, for dividing from them,St. Augustine con∣futed the Donatists by their Arguments a∣gainst the Maximi∣anists. Hoc corum fa∣ctum multum valuit ut corum ora penitus clauderentur. S. Aug. Epist. 50. yet would justifie their Separation from the Catholick Church. Such is usually the judgment of God upon Schis∣maticks, as well as Hereticks, to make themselves condemned, retur∣ning their own actions, arguments, and censures against others upon themselves: Quae tanta Dementia est, pacem in ipsa pace relinquere, & eam in dissentione velle retinere, as St. Augustine most ingeni∣ously applies it;Contra Pe∣til. l. 2. What greater madness can there be, than to forsake the peace of the U∣niversal Church, and seek it in the midst of dissention? For it seldome hapneth that all who separate, are of one mind among them∣selves, but there is a superfetation, some are ready to set up for themselves as soon as there is another opportunity. It was so with the Maximianists, who went off from the Pri∣mianists, pregnant, and were shortly delivered of Twins, the Rogatians and Claudianists, which as Vipers, endeavoured to eat out the bowels of their Parents. And now we are come to a Scene so full of cruelty and blood-shed, that you will suppose it to be the last; But, Nec dum finitus Orestes, this Tragedy is not yet at an end. Arcadius and Honorius succeed their Father Theodosius, and at their entrance on their Em∣pire,
make divers as strict Laws against the Hereticks in general, and particularly against the Donatists, as the wisdome of Man could contrive: but the more they were restrained, the more violently they acted. The Churches generally injoyned a calm, the fury of the A∣rians and other Hereticks was spent, only A∣frica is pestered with new Monsters, of whom the Catholicks send their complaints to the Emperors, That their Bishops could not ap∣pear in publick without affronts, nor travel for fear of such as lay in wait to destroy them; They burned the Bishops Houses, de∣stroyed the Churches, slew their Priests, parti∣cularly Restitutus, and Innocentius, having first digged out one of his Eyes, and cut off his Fingers. St. Augustine hardly escaped them▪ for having been abroad (as his custome was) to visit and comfort his Brethren, they had provided some of their Circumcellians to lay in Ambush, in the way by which he was to return, but by God's providence, his Guide conducted him home another way.St. Hier. to St. Aug. E∣pist. 25. quos gladio nequeunt voto inter∣ficiunt. But he could not escape the Sword of their Tongues, for they rail at him as a Deceiver, and Mur∣therer of Souls, and (dicebant & tractabant) they taught and preached publickly, that it was not only as lawful to kill him, as to kill a Wolf, that did destroy the Flock, but also that whoever slew him, should have all their sins undoubtedly pardoned, and be honoured as Martyrs. In the Year 401. Aurelius Primate of Africa, assembles a Council at Carthage,
for conversion for the Donatists, and supplying the Catholick Churches with Ministers, which were much destroyed. To this they were en∣couraged by Anastasius Bishop of Rome, and by his perswasion they offered, that whoever of the Donatists would return to the Church, should still enjoy their Bishopricks and Digni∣ties. But their courtesie was a little regard∣ed, as their authority; onely they prevailed with the Emperors, to send relief to the poor Catholicks, who suffered no less than if they had lived under Heathen Persecutors. The Decretals of Anastasius made about this time, against the Donatists, are still on Record. At Milevis also was a Council assembled against them, where St. Augustine being present,Epist. 168. de∣scribes their accursed practices, and gives an instance in a young Man, who had been admo∣nished by the Bishop for beating his Mother: The young Man thereupon threatneth his Mo∣ther, that he would become a Donatist, and then would slay her, and so he did. For to them he flies, and is rebaptized, and in white Garments, as a Circumcellian, he goes and sheds his Mother's blood; And from this in∣stance, St. Augustine draws this conclusion. That he who durst not strike his Mother, while he was of the Catholick Church, slew her with∣out punishment, when he became a Donatist. Aurelius the Primate, summons a General Council of all the Bishops of Africa, and sends express Messages to the Donatists, that they would be present at that Council, to treat of
the Union of the Church, where he promised a full and calm disquisition of their arguments, and pressed them to consider the great confu∣sions, which that (Veternus error, as he calls it) old error of theirs had occasioned. Pos∣sidius is imployed to deliver this Message to Crispinus a Donatist Bishop, which having heard, He replieth, (Patriarchali Sermone Definio, Recedant à me impii, vias eorum nosse nolo) in a Patriarchal stile, Depart from me ye wicked, I desire not the knowledge of your ways; and a few days after Possidius was pur∣sued as he was travelling, by a Presbyter, that was also called Crispinus, and fled into a Cottage to hide himself, but Crispine with his Armed Company, broke open the Doors, and having drawn him down from an upper Room,St. Aug. Epist. 166. would certainly have slain him, had not the People that were present intreated for him, or rather had they not threatned to prosecute the Mutherers. St. Augustine having heard a∣mong the People, how their Bishops and Pres∣byters did often wish that they might meet and confer with the Catholicks, for the vindi∣cation of their practices, offers himself to dis∣course privately, or publickly, with any of them. Particularly he invited Procidianus, who pretended a great desire of it,Ep. 147. but refu∣sed when it was offered. In the Year 404. is another Council at Carthage, against the Do∣natists, from which Council they send Thea∣sius and Evodius two Bishops to Honorius the Emperor, to desire his Protection of that part
of the Church, and the due execution of the Laws that were made in that behalf, which if well observed, would redress all their grie∣vances. They name especially the Edicts, where∣by they were disabled to take or receive any publick dignities, or profits belonging to the Church, or to make their Wills and dispose of Estates: and another Law for punishing those that should schismatically or heretically ordain, or be ordained. Honorius was grieved at the complaints of these Bishops, and professed, that the confusion and ruine of the Church did grieve him more than the loss of Rome, which the Goths and Vandals had about that time taken from him; and St. Ambrose ob∣serves of him (fecit quod Pater fecit in Causâ Donati) that he acted for the Church in the case of Donatus, as Theodosius his Father had done, who was solicitous for the welfare of the Church, as of his own Soul. Accordingly he gives order to Adrian, his Vicegerent in Africa, to Vindicate the integrity of the Ca∣tholicks, and punish the perfidiousness of the Donatists, that did rent asunder the Members of the Church, being as he describes them subtle to seduce, cruel to destroy, provoking the Sons of Peace to War. Moreover, he for∣bad all that were Enemies to the Peace of the Church, to come within his Palace.Opt. p. 650. And up∣on the Petition of a young Nobleman, whose Sister being seduced by the Donatists, divided a considerable Estate among them, without any Legacy to her Brother; it was ordered,
that the Estate should wholly descend to him, according to a former Edict. It would offend the Readers patience, to repeat all the Con∣stitutions of the Emperors, and Decrees of Councils, against these lawless Persons, who could break them with less trouble, than the Emperors could make them; Witness their hainous Murther of one Maximianus Bishop of Vaga,St. Aug. Epist. 50. who having by sentence of Law re∣covered his Church, which the Donatists had by force taken from him, came to demand it of them, and to take possession; But the Do∣natists fell on him with so great fury, and wounded him so desperately, that he was left for dead, through loss of blood; and whe the Catholicks came to carry him away, they drave them off, and carrying him into a Tur∣ret, cast him down thence, but it being no great height, and falling on soft Turfs, he was afterward conveyed away, and recovered by his Brethren, and together with other Suf∣ferers, petitioned the Emperor to pity those persecuted Churches, shewing their wounds, and relating the Cruelty of the Donatists; with which the Emperor was so affected, that he made Capital Laws against several exorbi∣tances of the Donatists, and injoyned a strict execution of them; which produced so good effect, that St. Augustine says thus of them: It was my Opinion heretofore,Epist. 48. that none ought to be compelled to the Unity of Christ, but to be perswaded by Reason and Argu∣ment, lest we should have dissembling Ca∣tholicks,
instead of open Hereticks; but this Opinion was overthrown, not by the contra∣diction of words, but by the demonstration of Examples, for this my City (saith he, that is Hippo, whereof he was Bishop) which was wholly seduced by the Donatists, by the Laws of the Emperor, which punished some Offen∣ders among them with Death, is so generally united in the Catholick Unity, as if there had been no Schisme among them; for being first awed by fear, they are afterward convinced by truth, which they could not hear among their false Teachers, and are by degrees made to un∣derstand, and abhor their wicked practices, &c. And to silence their Objections, that they were persecuted and punished beyond their de∣serts; He willeth them to consider, first, what they had done, and then what they did suffer, which was far less than their demerits. Leges puniendo non possunt, quod isti saeviendo potue∣runt:Epist. 170. The Laws never inflicted such punish∣ments on the worst Malefactors, as They did on their innocent Brethren. How great mischiefs did some of your mad Clerks and Circumcel∣lians act among us? our Churches were burnt, our Books cast into the flames, Men were ta∣ken out of their Houses, which they also burnt down, having first plundered them, and then tortured their Masters, by maiming them in their Limbs, and putting out their Eyes, saith St. Augustine, contra Donat. post Collat. These things were not done by the rabble of Circum∣cellians alone, but by their Clergy; Qui duces
eorum semper fuerunt, who were still their Leaders. What Master was there that did not stand in fear of his Servant, if he came to the Donatists,Epist. 166. to make his complaint, and desire their Patronage? They constrain the Ma∣sters to deliver up their Covenants, and let them go free; they force from the Creditors their Bonds and Obligations, and deliver them up to the Debtors, and if this were not done at their command, they assembled Multitudes with Arms, and Fire, threatning present Death, and burning of their Houses, St. August. E∣pistle 50. Praetexatus a Bishop of the Dona∣tists dying, they ordained Rogatus in his place, being a Person of good Learning and Reputa∣tion, who afterward declared himself to be of the Catholick Communion, whereupon they so persecuted him, that at length the Cir∣cumcellians pluckt out his Tongue, and cut off his Hand, as St. August. de Gestis cum Eme∣rito. No good Catholick while he lived a∣mong them, could be secure of any Possession, nor of life it self,Epist. 61. for as St. August. Qui sibi nequam cui bonus? They that by Fire, Water, and Precipices, desperately destroyed their own Lives, had an easie command and power over the Lives of others; and yet these Men, would first cry out of Persecution. Nos ab armatis vestris fustibus & ferro concidimur, & vos dicitis pati persecutionem. St. August. Epist. 166. gives many instances of their cruel usage of such Bishops and Presbyters, as were re∣conciled to the Catholicks. Marcus a Priest,
of his own proper motion declared himself to be a Catholick, and shortly after some of the Donatists met him, and would have de∣stroyed him, had not some that by accident came by, rescued him out of their hands. Restitutus another Convert, was drawn out of his House, beaten, and dragged through the Mud, and long kept a Prisoner, until Proculi∣anus obtained his deliverance. Marcianus had his House beset, and he escaping, they beat his Subdeacon, so as they left him for Dead. They made publick Proclamations, that who∣ever should communicate with Maximianus, his House should be burnt; and when Possi∣dius was sent to Fugilia, to visit and instruct some People there, the Donatists laid ambush∣es for him, which he having escaped, they pur∣sued him to a House, where he hid himself, and set it on Fire three times, intending to have burnt him alive, had not the Countrey Men quenched the Fire: and this was done by some of the Donatist Clergy, who being con∣demned for this out-rage, in a Mulct of Ten Pounds of Gold, the good Bishop Possidius interceded for them, and got the Penalty to be remitted. So desperately were they bent to ruine the Catholicks, that sometimes they joyned with the Arians and Macedonians, and sometimes with the Pagans and with the Jews (whom the Fathers of that Age called Coelicolas) to persecute the Catholicks. Who meet again in another Council at Carthage, and decree to
send Legates to Honorius, to complain of the great slaughters made upon them by the Do∣natists, who had slain many eminent Person namely Severus, Macarius, Evodius, Theasius and Victor, who were Bishops, besides grea Numbers of other Persons. They appoin therefore Restitutus and Florentius, to infor the Emperor of their continued cruelty; and St. Augustine sends Letters to Olympius, a M of great account with the Emperor, desiring that some Assistance might be speedily sent ∣to them, upon which the Emperor sent  Rescript, commanding that such Jews and He∣reticks as molested the Church, should be p∣nished with Banishment, or loss of Life. O device of the Donatists may be here season∣ably mentioned, which is this: Honorius the Emperor, and Arcadius his Brother were Per∣sons of so much piety and clemency, that they could not immediately reproach them, as Per∣secutors, and therefore they laid the blame of all the severe Laws, that were enacted again them,St. August. Epist. 129. upon the evil Counsellers, that we near them; These are not the Laws (say they) of the Sons of Theodosius, but of Stilicho: yet when Stilicho was dead, the same Law were vigorously executed against them. I hapned in the Year 410. that Attal a Tyrant, had invaded the Emperor's Domini∣ons, and promised protection to all such as would submit to him, whereupon many of the Donatists fled to him, insomuch that the Em∣peror was inforced to grant a General Tole∣ration,
that every one should worship God in what manner he pleased, to prevent that ge∣neral revolt to Attalus, which was feared. Upon this the Donatists grew more insolent than ever; so that they permitted not the Ca∣tholick Doctors, to speak against their Errors, nor to Preach the truth: They dragged Resti∣tutus, a Presbyter, through a Chanel of mud,Possidonius in vitâ Aug. & Contra Cresc. l. 2. & Epist. 166. and after twelve days torments slew him: They put out the Eyes of others, and poured in Lime and Vinegar into the holes; and with Fire and Sword terrified all the Churches of Africa. To divert this fury the Catholicks meet again at Carthage, and send four Bishops to the Emperor, to acquaint him of the Cruel∣ties that had been committed, upon his Edict for Toleration, which he recalls by hi Re∣script in these words,Codex de Rel. l. 3. & de Hae∣ret. 51. Ea quae circa Catholicam fidem vel olim ordinavit Antiquitas, vel Pa∣rentum nostrorum authoritas religiosa constituit, vel nostra Serenitas roboravit; novellâ super∣stitione remotâ, integra & inviolata custodire praecipimus: That whatever Laws had been e∣stablished by himself, or his Predecessors, con∣cerning the Catholick Faith, should be held firm and inviolated. By the four Bishops sent from this Council, to the Emperor, at the mo∣tion of St. Augustine, who complained, that in the Regions belonging to Hippo, where the Barbarians had not come, the robberies and violence of the Donatist Clergy, and their Cir∣cumcellians, the Churches were made more de∣solate, than under the power of the Barbari∣ans;
It was earnestly petitioned, that the Do∣natists might be compelled to a publick con∣ference with the Catholicks, all other endea∣vours for Union being frustrated. This Ho∣norius willingly grants,Pridie Id. Octob. 413. and lest the Donatists should refuse this Christian means, or commit any act of violence against the Catholicks, he sent Marcellinus his Principal Notary (or Se∣cretary) to be a Moderator between them, and to take cognizance of the proceedings: and lest he should meet with the like affronts, as Pau∣lus and Macarius did, when they were sent by Constans, upon the like occasion; He comman∣ded a sufficient Army to attend him, which also the Catholicks, fearing the attempts of the Cir∣cumcellians, justly desired. The day appointed for this conference being at hand, the Donatist Bishops being as they reported 279, enter the City with great Pomp and Numbers, so as they drew all the City to be Spectators, and to admire their equipage. And though many of them lived on the benevolence of their Facti∣on, being rendred uncapable by the Imperial Laws of Ecclesiastical Dignities and Possessi∣ons, or upon that which they had wrested from the Catholicks in Licentious times; The Catholicks were far inferior to them, as well in Riches, as in Ostentation. The Catholicks were in Number 286, many of their Party had been slain, and many were afraid to Tra∣vel, because of the Circumcellians, however their Number much exceeded the Donatists, for when St. Augustine viewed the Subscripti∣ons
of that Party, to satisfie himself of their number, he found that the noise of 279. was shrunk into 159. The Meeting was appoin∣ted to be at the Gargilian Baths, in a spacious Room fitted for that purpose.Aug. de Gestis cum Emerito. Before the Ca∣tholicks enter, they agreed mutually by solemn promise, That if the Donatists could evince, that the Marks of the true Church belonged to their Party, they would not desire to retain their Episcopal Dignities, but leave them to the Donatists to be disposed of, (bono pacis) for the peace of the Church: And if it should appear, that they were in the Communion of the Catholick Church, they would notwith∣standing admit of the Donatists as their Bre∣thren and Colleagues, upon their conformity, to enjoy their several Dignities; and where∣ever there was a competition for the present, between a Catholick and a Donatist, for any Ecclesiastical Preferment, there should be a present provision made for the Donatist, and if the Catholick dyed he fore him, he should have an , (as the Civilians called it) a right of succession, wherein they manifested their real charity, who as they ge∣nerally professed, (Parati erant Episcopatum pro Christi unitate deponere & non perdere sed Deo commendare) were prepared to lay down their Bishopricks for the Christian Unity, and not think them lost, but intrusted with God. Delib. p. 220. This charity was not answered with the like from the Donatists, who as soon as they had
been saluted by the Catholicks as Brethren, Marcellinus willeth them all to sit down. Ac∣cordingly the Catholicks took their Seats, but the Donatists refused, and Primianus their Titular Bishop of Carthage replyed,August. post Col∣lat. Carth. Indignu est ut filii Martyrum & progenies Traditor in unum conveniant: It is an indignity to the Sons of the Martyrs, to sit with the off-spring of Traditors; Another said, Odi Ecclesian malignantium, & cum impiis non sedebo. To which the Catholicks answered, that they were met to enquire of the truth, and not of Mens persons, and desired that (nec causa causae, nec persona personae praejudicet) former cause and persons might not create a prejudice to the present. At length they condescend to take their Seats, and then it was proposed by Mar∣cellinus, that for Orders sake, there should be a Select number appointed by both Parties, to discourse pro & con. This after some relu∣ctancy by the Donatists, was yielded to, and the Number on each side were to be Seven, whereof St. Augustine was to be Prolocutor for the Catholicks, and Petilian (who had been a Civilian) for the Donatists: There were also four Notaries appointed by each Party, to write down the several Arguments, and Answers, which being printed at large, and joyned with the Works of Optatus, I shall refer the Reader to them, and onely give a brief account of what is pertinent to the pre∣sent case of the Schisme. Marcellinus having produced the Emperor's Rescript for the Trea∣ty,
promiseth them all candor, freedom, and protection during the Conference, and intreats them to direct their discourse to the causes and grounds of the difference, which was be∣tween them. But the Donatists, who as St. Augustine observes,Contra E∣meritum. (hoc unum agebant ut nil ageretur) make use of all possible cavils, and subterfuges, as if the chief business that they had to do, were to take care that nothing might be done, and to return with as much Pride and Pomp as they came. First there∣fore they object, that the time appointed was elapsed; then, that there was no certain Date to the Imperial Edict, because the Names of the Consuls were not inserted. These being answered, they desire to know who procured the Edict for that Meeting, that the Names of the Legates, and their Petition might be read; tacitely reflecting upon the Catholicks, (saith St. Augustine) for referring the cause of the Church to the Emperor. To this it was an∣swered, that the Catholicks (who confessed that they procured it) had done no other, than they themselves appealing from the Sen∣tence of Meltiades in the case of Cecilian, unto the Emperor Constantine. Then they be∣gin to reflect on the Persons of Felix and Ce∣cilian, and having almost tired Marcellinus, to keep them from impertinencies, repetitions and evasions, he brought them at last to the merits of the cause. But, Quid dignum tanto? I know not any thing that may raise greater admiration, than to consider what trifles, and
apples of contention, like the forbidden fruit, ingaged all Africa in such desperate fewds, as made it an Aceldama, for blood-shed and slaughters, and imployed so many Emperors, Bishops and Councils, for more than an Hun∣dred Years together, without any considerable effect. For when the differences and causes of that confusion came to be considered in this Conference, we do not hear that the Donatists could plead in justification of their Schisme, that their supposed Enemies did deny God, or Christ, or the Resurrection, or did actually persecute them, or that they did with pride, and contempt, deny to admit them to their Communion; nor did the Catholicks charge the Donatists with Apostasie from the Faith, and denying Fundamentals of Christianity: We do not hear them urging, as they might, their rebaptizing and joyning with the Mace∣donians, or Jews, and Pagans, against those whom they knew to be Orthodox Bishops. They all professed an agreement in all such ne∣cessary points of Faith, that it is strange, how they could differ in any thing; And yet the Donatists persecuted the Catholicks so cruelly, as if they had not been agreed in any principle of Christianity. Marcellinus having heard the whole Conference, declared against the Donatists, and charged the inferior Officers speedily to execute the Imperial Laws, in sei∣zing their Churches for the Catholicks, scat∣tering their Conventicles, and confiscating their Meeting places; which Edict the Empe∣rors
confirm, and cause to be entred among the publick Acts. That which was pretended by the Donatists, as the ground of the Schism, was, that Cecilian, who was Bishop of Car∣thage, for almost 100. Years before, was a Traditor; that he, and other Catholick Bi∣shops had admitted lapsed Persons into their Communion, whereby all their Churches were defiled, and ought not to be communicated with: Quia lapsi vel haeretici qui resipiscerent admittebantur. Prosper de promiss. & praedict. So I find the Question expresly stated, by con∣sent of both Parties: Ʋtrum Ecclesia permix∣tos malos us{que} id finem habitura, praedicta sit, an omnion omnes bonos sanctos at{que} immaculatos ab hoc seculo us{que} in finem habitura sit. Whe∣ther the Church of God (according to the predictions concerning it) were to consist of a mixture of good and evil, or only of such as were holy and undefiled. The Catholicks maintained the former from the predictions of the Prophets, concerning the Universal ex∣tent of Christ's Kingdome, from many Pa∣rables of our Saviour concerning his Church, from the Commission he gave to his Apostles, to Disciple all Nations, from the event, which succeeded upon the Apostles preaching, the Conversion of all Nations, from many Argu∣ments used by St. Cyprian against the Novati∣ans; and lastly from their own practice, in readmitting the Maximianists, who had re∣volted from the Donatists, and used another Baptism. And most unreasonable it was to
think that the wickedness of one Man should ruine the whole Church of Christ.St. Aug. Epist 50. Nec peccavit Cecilianus, haereditatem suam perdi Christus. Against this, the Donatists urge that the same Prophets foretold, that the Church of Christ should be Holy, as well  Catholick, that Hierusalem was to be a Hol City, the Spouse of Christ must be withou spot, a chast and undefiled Virgin. To whic St. Augustine replies,Perfectio promissa non data. that these things ough to be endeavoured in the Church in thi World, but would never be effected, unt Christ do come in the end of the World, whe he will thoroughly cleanse his Flowr, & gather the Wheat into his Garner, and burn up the chaff with unquenchable Fire. Then the Donatists begin to recriminate Mensurius and Cecilian, that had been long dead; To which it is presently answered, That they were absolved by the Emperor, and Coun∣cils of the Church then in being, as did appear by most ancient Records, which were ready to be produced, and thereby also Donat stood condemned. But (saith St. Augustine) if those Bishops had been wicked, the Church of God cannot be judged to have perished with them. Whether they were good, or bad, they were our Brethren: if we knew them to be evil, we would joyn with you to condemn them, but not to desert the Church of God, because of them. If Cecilian were good and innocent, he hath the reward of his innocence, and I rejoyce at it; but I never placed my
hope and faith in his innocence: if he had been evil, yet the Church thought fit to continue in his Communion, and so do we. Melius est per patientiam ferre malos quam per calumni∣am relinquere bonos, St. Aug. in Colloq. Carthag. The several Arguments and Answers are too large to be here set down. Upon the whole, Marcellinus adjudged, that the Donatists ar∣guments and pretences were invalid, their Schisme unjust, their practices cruel; and therefore he willed them to return to the Communion of the Church, and live in peace and unity; otherwise he would provide, that the Imperial Laws should be executed upon them. In the mean time, he prevailed with them to subscribe the Records of the Confe∣rence, which had been faithfully taken, by the Notaries on both sides, and so dismissed them. After the Publication of this Conference, and of the Emperor's reinforcing the Laws for pecuniary Mulcts, and Banishment against them; some Thousands of the common Peo∣ple deserted them, and returned to the Ca∣tholick Church, and to their honest and law∣ful callings, which they had long omitted, as generally the Circumcellians did: But the Do∣natist Bishops and Presbyters were for the most part obstinate, and endeavoured to conti∣nue the Schisme. There were many imprison∣ed, and condemned for Murther, and Robbe∣ries, committed in that Tumult, wherein Re∣stitutus and Innocentius were slain; for these St. Augustine mediates, and obtains Pardon.
But the Donatist Bishops return in great dis∣content, and report among the People, that they were not permitted to speak with that liberty and freedome, as they ought: And Petilian, who went off from the Conference, before it was ended, having lost his Voice by raving and passion, pretended afterward, that he was dissatisfied with the partiality of Mar∣cellinus; and therefore he perswaded the rest to Appeal from his Sentence, pretending that they had been kept as Prisoners, and were not suffered to prosecute their Arguments; and that Marcellinus was corrupted, and pro∣nounced the Sentence at Midnight, which was contrary to Law. And St. Augustine going afterward to Mauritania, was challenged by Emeritus, one of the Donatist Bishops, who undertook to defend the Conference, in a Per∣sonal disputation, which St. Augustine agreed to, and hath given us a particular account of it. But as St. Augustine saith, Hoc proprium Donatistis eandem cantilenam canere: It was their custome to inculcate the same Arguments again, which had been often confuted many Years before. There being no reformation among the Lea∣ders of the Faction, who continue several Tu∣mults, Cruelties and Murthers: Thirty of their Bishops were condemned to be banished, who met together, and resolved rather to cast themselves over the Precipices, (as the pra∣ctice of the Circumcellians was) and to dye Martyrs for the cause. And some did destroy
themselves in Wells, and by throwing them∣selves from the Rocks. In so much that Dul∣citius, who was joyned with Marcellinus in the Government of Africa, advised with St. Augustine, what was most fit to be done with those obstinate Persons, that still seduced the People; and what counsel St. Augustine gave him, we read in the 61. Epistle: Furiosus error paucorum non debuit tot populorum salu∣tem impedire. Proculdubiò melius est, ut qui∣dam suis ignibus perirent, quam pariter sem∣piternis ignibus Sacrilegae dissentionis ardeant universi. That the error of a few distracted Persons, should not be permitted to involve all the People in confusion and ruine: and that without doubt, it was better, that such as were Incendiaries, should dye in the flames which they had kindled, than that all the People should still suffer in the fires of sacrilegious Dissention. Thus I have given you a Summary of the History of these dangerous Persons, for full an Hundred Years, and might pursue it yet farther; but considering how troublesome and unsafe it may be to follow them too nigh, I shall desist, and only add some Reflections upon the Faction: And first, Of their several Sects. The Luciferians, as the most moderate, shall have precedency: These were so called from Lucifer Calaritanus, Bishop of Sardinia, who
in the Nicene Council was a zealous Defen∣der of the Catholick Faith against the Arians for which he was banished while they had the power: He is commended for it, by Athana∣sius, Hilarion, and St. Hierome. When the Ari∣ans were suppressed, he was recalled, and re∣stored to his Bishoprick: but perceiving that many of the Arians were on very easie con∣ditions admitted to the Catholick Communi∣on, and made capable of Ecclesiastical Digni∣ties, he was much dissatisfied, and denyed to hold Communion with the Church, for being so charitable to those new Converts. He therefore lays the Foundation of his Schisme in Sardinia, where the Catholicks solicite him, by all gentle and rational means, not to divide that Church whose Faith and unity he had so strenuously asserted; but finding that he was not only resolutely obstinate, but indefatigably industrious to propagate the Schisme, the Ca∣tholicks thought fit to suspend him, and to dis∣sipate his adherents. Whereupon he trans∣ports himself into Africa, whither great num∣bers of his perswasion follow him, and joyn themselves to the Donatists, but kept them∣selves as a distinct Faction, in this respect, that they did not rebaptize, as the Donatists generally did: but their Pride and contempt of the Catholicks, was in a short time equal to that of the Donatists. St. Augustine com∣mends them for not renouncing their Baptism, but condemns them as much for cutting them∣selves off from the Catholick unity, and much
urgeth that known Axiom, Extra Ecclesiam non est salus.Oratio de obitu Sa∣tiri. St. Ambrose writing to his Bro∣ther Siricus, who espoused this Schisme, doth thus acquaint him with the danger of it: Non est fides in Schismate; cum enim propter Eccle∣siam passus est Christus, & Christi corpus sit Ecclesia: non videtur ab his Christo exhiberi fides, à quibus evacuatur ejus passio, & corpus distrahitur. There is no true faith in Schism, for whereas Christ suffered for his Church, and that Church is his Body, it doth not ap∣pear, that true faith in Christ is in them, by whom his Passion is frustrated, and his Body divided: for Christ gave his Natural Body, for the preservation of his Mystical Body, the Church. Saint Hierome therefore comparing these Donatists with the Novatians, calls them both, Non Ecclesiam Christi, sed Antichristi Synagogam. These Luciferians stood as inde∣pendent on the Donatist Congregations, or any of the other Factions, which were generally Anabaptistical: For they did not only Re∣baptize the adult that came over to them, but refused to baptize Children, contrary to the practice of the Church, as appears by several discourses of St. Augustine. The most despe∣rate Sect of all, were the Circumcellians, who were as so many Hectors, to fight for the Do∣natists on all occasions. These were the Zea∣lots, which did abound in every faction, and pretended to higher dispensations, than their Brethren: for they believed, that they were in∣spired by God, to act and suffer extraordinary
things, which they were ready to attempt, as often as their Brethren, or their own lusts did prompt them thereunto. They met sometime in lesser, and sometime in greater Numbers, either as Robbers, to abuse and plunder all that were not of their own Perswasion: Slaves would rob their Masters, and Debtors would force their Creditors to deliver up their Obligations, and had the perfect Principles of Levellers, holding that none had right to any of their Possessions, but by partaking of the same Faith, and Profession with themselves. Dominium fundatur in gratiâ, was their Max∣ime. Or else they would meet in great Num∣bers well armed, and able to affront the chief Armies of the Emperor: And were often the Aggressors, provoking the Roman Souldiers to their own destruction. Thus they set up∣on Paulus and Macarius, who were sent with Presents to the Church of Carthage, from the Emperor Constans, who being assisted by the Proconsul, slew great Numbers of them. These were animated by their Leaders, who were generally Donatist Bishops, and called Sancto∣rum Duces, Captains of the Saints, and were animated by a Perswasion, that as many as suf∣fered a violent Death, in defence of the Reli∣gion, were Martyrs:Optat. p. 146. and accordingly, Altars were built to their Memorial, and Prayers of∣fered up on those Altars. These Circumcelli∣ans had a Solemn initiation; for having devo∣ted themselves to violent Deaths, (which they sometimes voluntarily executed on themselves,
or at the command of their Brethren) their Neighbours and Relations gave them all pos∣sible respect and attendance, so that nothing was denied to them for their encouragement, that like so many fatted Beasts, they might be fit for the slaughter, rather than for a Sacrifice, which yet they were perswaded, that they were offering up to God in an acceptable manner. And as oft as they declared themselves ready for such desperate designs, their Brethren as∣sembled, and prayed, and gave thanks for that supernatural and heroick spirit, wherewith they were inspired. Being thus in a most di∣abolical manner initiated, they would go forth sometime armed, sometimes unarmed, but resolved to provoke whomsoever they met with, railing, beating, and wounding them; sometime slaying others, or suffering them∣selves to be slain; and if this hapned not, they would cast themselves into deep Wells, or o∣ver high Precipices, to their certain destru∣ction. Sometimes these Circumcellians assem∣bled in great Numbers: Sub specie Marty∣rum rapientium latrocinantes; playing the Robbers under pretence of Martyrs, as Phila∣ster observes: or else really attempting such acts of Hostility upon the Catholicks, their Houses, and Churches, or upon the Emperor's Souldiers, as caused the ruine of many Thou∣sands.De fabutis Haereticor. St. August. Epist. 50. ad Bonifac. Theodoret tells us of a Company of these, who went abroad armed, and resolved to run this mad race, and meeting with a young Man unarmed, they were so humane, as not to
destroy him with such unequal Numbers, wherefore they all agreed, that they would deliver their Weapons to him, to wound and kill them, as he pleased; but threatned him also that if he did not execute them, they would miserably destroy him. The young Man seems to accept of the Conditions, only he tells them, it was fit they should suffer themselves to be bound, not only that he might the better ful∣fill their desires, but also because he feared▪ that when he had shed the blood of some of the Brethren, the survivors might, to preserve their own lives, take away his. They therefore do all agree to this, as a reasonable proposal, and forthwith submit themselves to be bound and fettered by the young Man, which ha∣ving done, with as much skill as he could, he first destroyed most of their Weapons, and then beats them soundly with the rest, and so departs, leaving them in their bonds, to be mocked and derided by the Passengers. This phrensie they thought a very high Enthusiasme, but Malus Daemon istam phrenesim immisit; it was the Devil, (that was a Murtherer from the beginning) that inspired it. There were two mad Captains of these Martyrs of the Devil, that, as Theodoret says, were instar Coryban∣tum; furentes & debacchantes, like the Priests of Bacchus, drunk with fury, and led on great Numbers of the Circumcellians, to destroy as far as they went, all sorts of Men, Women, and Children, burning Houses and Churches, razing the Altars, and casting the Bibles into
the Fire. With some such Donatus Bishop of Bagaia assaulted Macarius and Paulus, who having the Roman Souldiers to guard them, slew great Numbers of them, whom being destroyed, he afterward disowned, and denyed them Burial; and at last cast himself headlong, and perished in a Well. You have heard formerly of Salvius, a Bishop of the Donatists, who made another Faction among the Membresitans. He built a Church for his Party, and kept a separate Congregation for a while, but being abandoned by the Dona∣tists, who condemned him in a Synod of theirs, was left to the fury of the mad Circumcellians, who, as you have heard, hung dead Dogs a∣bout his Neck, and danced about him,August. l. 3. cont. Parmen. singing filthy Songs. This Saint Augustine says, they would excuse, because he was condemned by a full Synod of Bishops; to which he replies, That if he suffered justly, being condemned by their Bishops, they ought not to repine and murmur it they also suffered, who were so often condemned by the Bishops of the Ca∣tholick Church; and desireth them to consider, Priùs quid faciunt, deinde quid patiuntur: First what they do against others, and then what they suffer from others. The History of the Maximianists you have had already; I shall now acquaint you with another Faction, which they had established at Rome, for when they perceived that they could not Answer the Arguments of the Catholicks, for the U∣niversality of Christ's Church, and considered
how numerous they were in all Africa, they sent their Emissaries abroad, and especially at Rome they had planted some of their Faction, so that at length they pretended, that no Party were more Catholick than themselves. Victor was setled as the Titular Bishop of Rome, in the days of Constantine: his Successors were, First, Bonifacius Balatensis: 2. Encolpius: 3. Macrobius. 4. Lucianus. 5. Claudianus: who lived in the days of St. Augustine. But as both Optatus and St. Augustine say, they could pretend no higher than Victor, whereas the Churches of Hierusalem and Rome could derive their Succession from the Apostles. But Victor was, Filius sine Patre, Discipulus sine Magistro, and Episcopus sine populo, A Son without a Father, a Disciple without a Master, and a Bishop without a Flock; nor could any of them produce their (literas formatas) com∣municatory, or testimonial Letters, signifying their Communion with the Universal Church. Besides, Sr. Augustine tells them, that they lived at Rome more like Beasts of Prey, than like a Flock of Christ, and never met but in Speluncis, in Dens and Caves without the City, where they kept their Conventicles; and from their wandring from place to place, they were called Montenses, Campitae, and Rupitani, as St. Hierome observes, not unlike our Quakers, Quod inter homines solet esse commune,Optatus p. 78. saluta∣tionis officium auferunt, & ne Ave dicunt cui∣quam nostrum, — Nec monstrare vias eadem nisi sacra colenti. They would not salute any, nor
bid them God speed. I shall name but one mad crew more, which were headed by Op∣tatus Gildoniensis, a Donatist Bishop, who was called Gildoniensis, from one Gildo, a barbarous Person, who invaded Africa with a great Ar∣my, and made havock of the Catholick Chur∣ches. To him this Optatus, with a great Num∣ber of the Circumcellians, joyned himself, and was first Latrociniis infamis, notorious for his Robberies. He snatched away the Wives from their Husbands, and Children from their Pa∣rents, causing many Abortions, and in his Cru∣elties, exceeded the very Barbarians; for they would kill them at once, but he would torment them many days together, that they might dye daily. So that Historians observe, he as much exceeded the Circumcellians, as they did exceed others in Cruelty. Their Opinions. It appears not, that they were accused of any false Doctrine for a long time, until they began to Rebaptize, upon an Opinion, that there were no true Ministers in the Catholick Church, and by consequence no true Sacra∣ments. St. Augustine says, that in his time, they were, Pares Doctrinâ & Ritibus, agreed in the chief points of Doctrine, and in the Ec∣clesiastical Rites. And when Optatus wrote against Parmenian,Optat. p. 72, They had generally One Creed, One Testament, and One Baptism (viz.) in the Name of the Blessed Trinity; they pray∣ed
to One God, and used the Lord's Prayer alike. The Controversie was not, (de Captie, but de Corpore) concerning the Head, but the Body of the Church: But their Schism, which divided that Body, was sufficient to condemn them.Opt. p. 72. St. August. cum Eme∣rito. Extra Ecclesiam omnia possunt habere praeter salutem: possunt habere honorem, possunt habere Sacramentum, possunt cantare Hallelu∣jah, possunt respondere Amen, possunt Evangeli∣um tenere, possunt in nomine patris, & filii, & Spiritus sancti fidem habere, & praedicare; sed nusquam nisi in Ecclesiâ Catholica salutem possunt invenire. He granted, they had the Scriptures, the Sacraments, the Prayers, and Preaching, materially the same as in the Church, but yet Salvation was not to be had but within the Church. All which is true, upon the grounds of St. Paul, as well as St. Augustine, because, without Charity, all these gifts and exercises do profit nothing, 1 Cor. 13. And therefore the Primitive Fathers did so passionately declaim against Schisme, not only, because it was the Occasion of greater confu∣sion in the Church, than Heresies ordinarily were: but because it did equally endanger the Salvation of those that obstinately persist∣ed in it, fitting them for any Error. Dionysius Alexandrinus wrote to Novatian,Quisquis ab Eccle∣sia Catholi∣ca separa∣tus est, quanquam laudabiliter se vivere existimet, hoc solo scelere quod à Chri∣sti unitate disjunctus est, non habebit vitam. Epist. 152. that he might rather do any thing, than rent the Church of God by Schismes, which (saith he) you ought to avoid, as much as Idolatry: for,
when you flye from Idolatry, you consult on∣ly your own safety, but when you avoid Schisme, you consult for the benefit of the U∣niversal Church. I shall therefore only men∣tion that great Error, in the chief Article of Faith, wherein Donatus himself, and many of his Followers, agreed with the Arians; as divers of theAug ad quod vult Deum. Ancients have recorded, (viz.) That the Son was less than the Fa∣ther, and the Holy Ghost than the Son. This being a Consequent of the Schisme; (And it is usual for such as first desert the Unity of the Church, to deny the faith and verity therein professed, within a short time.) It is my intent to speak chiefly of such Opini∣ons, as led them to it, or hardned them in it, that others may see and avoid them. There was a strict Canon in the Catholick Church, forbidding Christians to hold any Communi∣on with such, as had in times of Persecution turned Apostates, or Traditors, until they had undergone the censure of the Church, and ma∣nifested their repentance: but as if this Ca∣non were not strict enough, the Novatians first, and then the Donatists, made themselves wiser than the Laws, and would not on any termes admit such Persons; accounting, that by Communion with them, the whole Congre∣gation was defiled; and such as had been of the Clergy, they accounted of as lay Persons; and the lay People, they esteemed of as Hea∣then: their Baptisme being frustrated, upon this ground they withdrew from the Com∣munion
of Cecilian, and other Catholick Bi∣shops, pretending they had been Traditors and that all the People adhering to them, were polluted; and that the Bishops and Clergy of the Church, could not lawfully rule, or teach the People, nor administer the Sacraments, the efficacy of all these Ordinances depending o the Holiness of the Minister; and that there were no such true Ministers, but among them∣selves. For this Opinion they urge Acti 19.4. where St. Paul gives order, that they who had been baptized by St. John, should be baptized again in the Name of Jesus. Now if John's Baptism (say they) who was a Friend of the Bridegroom, was made void, much more ought the Baptism of those, that are E∣nemies and Apostates, to be so accounted. Against this Opinion, Optatus argueth thus; Non dotes Ministri sed Trinitatem in Sacra∣mento operari, cui concurrit fides, & professie credentium: The efficacy of the Sacrament depends not on the endowments of the Mini∣ster, but the grace of the blessed Trinity, in whom if they that are baptized, do believe, and make profession accordingly, their Bap∣tisme will doubtless have its effect: for the be∣liever is regenerate, not according to the abi∣lities of the Minister, but the power of the Sa∣crament; Nascitur Credens, non ex Ministri sterilitate, sed ex Sacramentorum fertilitate. This is handsomely expressed by Gregory Na∣zianzene in the allusion of an Image, ingraven on two Seals, one of Iron, another of Gold,
where the Image being the same, the Iron Seal makes the same impression, as that of Gold. But St. Augustine observes also, the difference between the Baptisme of St. John, and that of our Saviour Chri, which was in the Name of the Holy Trinity, and therefore both Op∣tatus, and St. Augustine charge the Donatists, with no less sin than Blasphemy, when (as their practice was) they would exorcise those, whom they had rebaptized, with this form of words, (Maledicte exi for as) calling the whole Tri∣nity, in whose Name they had been baptized, accursed. Optatus therefore farther urged,Opt. p. 86, Si datis alterum baptisma, date alteram fidem, date alterum Christum. It is superfluous to renew the Baptisme, where there is no altera∣tion of the Faith. He adds, Etsi hominum litigant mentes, non litigant Sacramenta: The Sacrament is the same, although the judgment of those that administer it may differ. The Bishops of the Catholick Church did there∣fore admit of those that were baptized by the Donatists, although the Donatists would by no means approve of the Catholicks Baptisme. Which plainly argues, as well their excess of Pride, as their defect of Charity, both which St. Augustine observed in a Donatist Bishop that Preached in his City of Hippo, who used this comparison, that the Church of God was like Noah's Ark, it was pitched both within, and without; without, Nè admitteret baptis∣ma alienum; and within, Nè emitteret suum; that it might not admit of those that were
baptized by others, nor baptize any but such as were of their own perswasion. They u¦ged the bare Authority of St. Cyprian for their rebaptizing, which as St. Augustine says, the despised, when he pleaded for the unity of th Church,Cyprianus tolerandos in Ecclesia malos, po∣tius quam propter cos Ecclesiam deserendam & exemplo consirma∣vit & praecepto admo∣nuit. though his arguments we inforced with Scripture and Reaso And for their practices his sole Au∣thority is alledged against the Au∣thority and practice of the Church St. Cyprian in an Epistle to Julian said, Baptizandos esse in Ecclesiâ Ca∣tholicâ qui fuerunt in haeresi & sc mate baptizati; to which St. Augustine a∣swereth, Ego ejus authoritate non teneor, q∣literas Cypriani, non ut canonicas habeo, sed e∣ex canonicis considero, & quod in iis divinar Scripturarum authoritati congruit, cum lau ejus accipio, quod autem non congruit cum pa ejus respuo. (i.e.) Though St. Cyprian ho that they who have been baptized by Here∣ticks or Schismaticks, ought to be rebaptized, yet I am not bound by the authority of St. Cy∣prian, whose Epistles I do not esteem of as Ca∣nonical, but do judge of them by the Cano of Scripture, and what agreeth to the autho∣rity thereof, I receive to his praise, but what is contrary, I refuse with his peace. And whereas they had pleaded, that Conscientis sancte dantis attenditur quae abluat accipientis; that the efficacy of the Sacrament flowed from the holiness of him that administred it: Saint Augustine answered, that as to the visible Mi∣nistry,
both good and bad might baptize; but he to whom both the visible Baptisme, and the invisible Grace doth belong, doth invisibly baptize by both good and bad: Contr. Cresco∣nium, l. 2do. But it as a sad kind of Bap∣tisme, which was practised by Crispine the Do∣natist, who with his Money hired some to be rebaptized by him, and having got a Number of poor People together, that would not be corrupted by his Money, he drove them by force into a River; and, Ʋno terroris impetu, octoginta fermè animas rebaptizando submerfit, Drowning them in the Water, baptized them with their own bloud; St. August. l. 2. contra Petil. The cruelties and mischiefs that have always followed Anabaptistical Principles, may cause all sober persons to abhor them, and therefore I shall not repeat any other argu∣ments against this absurd practice, which as St. Augustine says, if it should be repeated, as of∣ten as it was administred by an unholy person, they need to do nothing else but rebaptize. Another Opinion of the Donatists, was, that the Church of Christ ought to consist only of such as were Holy and Undefiled. Against this those two Fathers pleaded: That the glory of a Prince, consisted much in the extent of his Dominions, and that God had promised to give unto his Son, the Heathen for his inheri∣tance, and the uttermost ends of the Earth for his possession; and therefore they were very sa∣crilegious to confine the Church of Christ to their own Conventicles; especially, seeing God
had according to his promise, planted the Chri∣stian Faith among all Nations; And that Christ had foretold, that as the Seed of the Faithful should be disseminated over the face of the whole Earth so the Devil should sow his tares in the same Field. From this Opinion of be∣ing more pure than others, they proceeded at length to think themselves without sin, as the Novatians, or Cathari had boasted before them, and therefore they refused to joyn in the fame Prayers with others, or to use that Petition of our Lord's Prayer, Forgive us our trespasses; but as the Pharisee of old, stood by himself and prayed, God I thank thee I am not as other men:Opt. p. 57. So would Donatus, Non habeo quod ig∣noscat Deus: I know nothing for which I may ask God forgiveness, (said he.) To this St. Augustine replyeth,Christopho∣rus Justel∣lus in Co∣dice Cano∣num Eccle∣siae Africa∣nae Canone 108. haec habet: Quod in Oratione Dominica Sancti pro se dicunt, Dimitte nobis debita nostra; Placuit ut quicun{que} dixerit in Oratione Dominicâ Sanctos dicere Dimitte nobis debita nostra, non pro scipsis quia nonest iis xecessaria ista petitio, sed pro aliis qui sunt in suo populo peccatores, & ideo non dicere unumquem{que} Sanctorum Dimit∣te debita mea sed debita nostra, us hoc pro aliis potius quam pro so ju∣stus picere intelligatur, Anathema sit. Item placuit ut quicun{que} epsa verba Dominicae Orationis ubi dicimus Dimitte nobis debita nostra  volunt à sanctis dici ut humiliter non veraciter hoc dicatur, Anathe∣ma sit. Quis enim ferat Orantem & non hominibus, sed ipsi Domino mentientem: qui labiis sibi dicit dimitti velle, & corde dicit quae sibi dimitrantur debita non habere? This Council was held at Carthage by Aurelius, and 214. Bishops. Honorio xii. & Theodosio Coss kmalmajas. Quaero utrum ores ora∣tione Dominicâ; si non, unde aliam didicisti pro majoribus meritis tuis, excedentem merita Apo∣stolorum? si sic, quomodo dicis Dimitte nobis debi∣ta nostra, &c. Ista verba orationis aut te non
permittunt esse dei deprecatorem, aut aperiunt esse peccatorem: but when they left the use of that Prayer, he would no longer call them Bre∣thren: Tum desinent dici fratres nostri,In Ps. 32. cum de∣sierint dicere Pater noster. And now it is no wonder, if they despised the usual Prayers of the Church, and particularly that Form which was made in behalf of the Emperor.Bz. p. 550. But they went a point beyond this, affirming, that they were so without sin,Opt. p. 56. as to be the Justifiers of others, who no sooner were admitted to their Congregations, but they presently assured them of the pardon of their sins, and if they suffered in their Society, of a Crown of Mar∣tyrdome. And Donatus himself exceeded all these, he became a perfect Enthissiast, and pre∣tended immediate revelations from God;August. Epist. 165. par∣ticularly, that an Angel had appeared to him, and assured him that his Faction should be e∣stablished. And it was a frequent boast of the Donatists against the Catholicks; Oravit Do∣natus & respondit ei Deus è Coelo: When Do∣natus prays, God answereth him from Heaven; and therefore to him they went, as to an O∣racle, when they would attempt any design, that he might seek God, and then give them direction. To this Optatus replies,Opt. p.84. Ʋt quid pulsetis Coelum cum hic in Evangelio habetis te∣stamentum: In vain do you expect new reve∣lations from Heaven, having the compleat will and testament of Christ here on Earth. Agree∣able to that of Tertullian before him,St. Aug. de unico Bap∣tis. Non opus est revelatione post Evangelium, &c. They
held it to be a pollution not only to commu∣nicate, but to converse with others. There wants nothing now, but a Spirit of Infallibili∣ty, to make him the great Antichrist, instead of which he had infallibly the Spirit of Con∣tradiction to carp at, and reproach every thing that was not agreeable to his own fancy. When we say yea,Opt. p. 84. you say nay, (saith Optatus) Et in∣ter Licet nostrum, & Non licet vestrum, nutant, & remigant animi Christianorum: nemo vobis credit, nemo nobis, omnes contentiosi homines su∣mus: While we plead for the lawfulness, and you object the unlawfulness of Ecclesiastical affairs, the minds of the People are alienated from us, and they condemn us all for contenti∣ous Persons; So that the Heathen of that Age might well say, Cum tot sint inter Christianos sectae, sit anima mea cum philosophis. Their Opinion concerning the Magistrates Power in Ecclesiastical Affairs. It is seldome that a Faction is made in the Church, but the Authors of it do raise Sediti∣on in the State, their Principles do shew what their practices are like to be; Quid est Impe∣ratori cum Ecclesiâ,August. l. 2. ad Petil. 92. & quid nobis cum Regibus Seculi, quos nunquam nisi Invidos sensit Chri∣stianitas? What hath the Emperor to do with the Church, or what have we to do with the Kings of this World, whom Christianity hath always found to be Adversaries? And hence,
they did not only refuse to pray for the Empe∣ror, which the Catholicks perswaded them un∣to, according to St. Paul's exhortation: Oran∣dum pro Imperatore quanquam Gentilis, quanto magis quòd Christianus, quòd Deum timens, quòd religiosus, & misericors? To pray for Kings, although they were Heathen, much more for such as are religious, gracious and merciful; but instead of Prayers, Invenit Do∣natus Bagaiensis unde contra Macarium furio∣sam conduceret turbam:Opt. p. 68. Donatus Bishop of Bagaia, could raise Armed Troops against Marcellinus. But they held also, that they ought not to be restrained by the Emperor's Laws in the Worship of God, and therefore they cried out of Persecution, as often as any Penalty was to be inflicted on them for their disorderly Assemblies: They were (contuma∣ces & legibus hostili modo repugnantes) inso∣lent, and professed Enemies to the Laws. When any of the Emperors sent their chief Officers to make Peace, and establish Unity in the Church, quia uni Deo convenit ut in uni∣tate colatur; as Constans sent Paulus and Ma∣carius, and Honorius sent Marcellinus and Dulcitius, who came not, as Florus did, to shut up the Doors of the Churches,Opt. p. 71. or to pull them down; but, ut pigri in Basilicam coge∣rentur, to regain them to the Church that were refractory, that God and Christ might be invocated with one consent; they cry out of oppression, and invading the Liberty of their Consciences; and like David's Enemies,
When he spake to them of peace, they made them∣selves ready for battel. To this the Fathers plead, that the Church was in the Common-wealth, that is, in Romano Imperio, and not the Common-wealth in the Church; that God had promised, that he would send Kings to be nur∣sing Fathers, and Queens nursing Mothers to the Church; and required our Prayers for them, and our obedience to them, that under their protection, we may lead quiet and peace∣able lives, in all godliness and honesty: And accordingly, the Catholicks being sensible of their duty, were always loyal, and as ready to spend their lives for the Emperor, as the Do∣natists were to adventure them against him: whereby they consummated an evil life with a worse death, as St. Augustine said: And if the Magistrate may be the Sword punish Murther, Oppression, and Robbery, and Witch∣craft, why may he not also, saith St. Augustine, restrain such practices, as give occasion to all these? Whatever evils you suffer from the Ma∣gistrate, you draw them on your own heads: Si occidi malum est, ipsi causa mali estis, and therefore your sufferings are not a Persecuti∣on, but Justice, as the same Father. Again St. Augustine minds them, that they themselves had made use of the Emperor's Laws and Edicts, against the Maximianists, and we blame you not (saith he) for restrain∣ing their fury by the secular Sword, but that you condemn that in others, which you hold lawful for your selves to do. You can by the
Theodosian Laws, exclude and punish them for opposing the Party of Donatus, and yet you are highly offended, if any censure pass against you, Qui adversus Orbem terrarum Sacrilegae dissentionis altare erexistis, Who have sepa∣rated from all other Churches in the World. How as it probable they could live as good Subjects, when they accounted their Emperors Enemies and Persecutors of their Religion; and that such dyed Martyrs, who desperately cast away their own Lives, in opposing their Brethren, and the Officers of the Emperor, that were sent to provide for the common Peace? Si vestros videri Martyres vultis, pro∣bate amâsse pacem in quâ prima sunt Martyrii fundamenta,Opt. p. 72. aut dilexisse Deo placidam unita∣tem, aut habuisse cum fratribus charitatem sine quâ maxima & imperiosa virtus caret effectu: If you would have those, that dye in your per∣swasion, to be accounted Martyrs, you ought to prove that they were lovers of Peace, Unity and Charity, without which all other Vertues are ineffectual to that end: Non in passione certa est justitia, sed in justitiâ passio est glori∣osa. Whatever severity they met with, the Catholicks were far from occasioning it, as the Donatists did charge them. They did some∣time Petition the Magistrate to relieve and protect themselves, but never to destroy the Donatists; but when they had provoked the Secular Power, the Catholicks interceded for them: whereas on the contrary, the Donatists did not only provoke the Magistrate, but the
Heathen also against them, as in the days of Julian, who did indulge them, as well as the Donatists, until by their means, Julian was in∣raged against the Catholicks, and the Donatists were made his Instruments in many Cruelties against them:Optatus. p. 57. Ʋrgentibus & praesentibus Epi∣scopis vestris, persecutionem disponebat; So that they exceeded the Arians in their malice, for they, Armed by the Emperors of their own Perswasion, (Constantius and Valens) did per∣secute the Catholicks, but the Donatists per∣secuted them, non modo non adjuvantibus, se reclamantibus; when the Emperors did strictly forbid it.Si Imperatoribus orunt communionem derestantibus talia ausi sint, quid facerent si iis per Imperatoris communionem aliquid efficere liceret? August. contr. Petil. l. 1. So far were they from indulging that liberty of worshiping God to their Brethren, which they themselves expected from the Emperors, that they would complain of Persecution, if it were not granted them. While Constantine was in the Throne, none petitioned and pleaded for Toleration more than the Donatists, and professed themselves irrecon∣cileable Adversaries to all Persons, and Prin∣ciples, that should tend to disturb, or punish Men for their Conscience sake. But as soon as Julian was setled in the Empire, and called home some of them from Banishment, and re∣stored their Churches to them, the Emperor himself was not so imperious and sanguinary as they. Whatever good Laws Constantine had made for the welfare and unity of the Church of God, were condemned, as acts of
Arbitrary Power. But when Julian granted their Society some Priviledges, to the vexing and grieving of the Catholicks, these were applauded as acts of Grace; nor had Constan∣tine that love and obedience from them, which they manifested to the Apostate. And evident it is, that one reason why the Catholicks were so much envyed and hated by the Donatists, was; because the Emperors did favour them, as being more peaceable and loyal. Eusebius tells us, that Constantine frequently advised with his Bishops, even in Secular Affairs: And then, Quid Episcopis cum Palatio? What have Bishops to do at Court, (say they) or to meddle with the Government? Vos portatis Imperatorum Sacras, (i.e.) literas, nos porta∣mus sola Evangelia: You are busie in promo∣ting the Edicts and Mandats of the Emperors, we study only the Gospels. To this St. Augu∣stine answers, Epist. 166. Because you have no Power with the Emperor, you would raise en∣vy against us that have: but Melius est portare veras jussiones Imperatoris pro unitate quam falsas Indulgentias pro perversitate. What∣ever their study was, their practice was con∣trary, their hands were the hands of Esau, though their voice was like Jacobs. I cannot omit to inlarge a little concerning their Argu∣ments for Liberty of Conscience, that there might be no violence, or restraint laid upon them, to reduce them to Unity, in the Service of God. Gaudentius a Donatist Bishop, ar∣gueth thus, Scriptum est, fecit Deus hominem,Aug. l. 2. contra Gaudent.
& reliquit eum in manu Arbitrii sui; that is God made Man, and left him in the power of his own judgment, that is, to the Liberty of his own Conscience, (as the following Dis∣course expounds it) and why should that be forced from me, which God hath granted to me? Mark (saith he) how great Sacriledge i committed against God, when humane pre∣sumption takes away what he gave, and boasts it self to act for God, and to defend him with force and violence, as if he could not avenge the injury that is done to him. Christi par volentes invitat, non cogit invitos: The peace which Christ teacheth, inviteth them that are willing, and doth not force them that are un∣willing. God sent Prophets to teach the Peo∣ple of Israel, not Kings; and Christ, to pro∣mote the Salvation of Souls, sent not Souldi∣ers, but Fishermen. To which I may add that of Petilian,Contra Pe∣til. l. 2. Absit! absit à nostra conscientia, us ad nostram fidem aliquem compel∣lamus: Far be it from us, that we should compel any to be of our per∣swasionSi voluntas libera unicui{que} tribuenda est, Ceciliano priùs tribu∣atur, August. post Col: lat. cum Donatist.. To which St. Augustine. replies, (1.) By minding them of their Proceedings against the Max∣imianists, against whom they made use of the Theodosian Laws. And (2.) how when under Julian, they had gotten some power, they im∣proved it to the utmost against the Catholicks. So that, as St. Augustine says, the Kite that is frighted from preying upon the Chicken, may as well be thought a Dove, as they be accoun∣ted
mild and gentle, who only want power, and not malice: And then he shews, how ir∣rational and impious their Arguments are, by which all humane lusts and outrages should go unpunished, and no King should restrain his Subject, nor a Father his Children from any wickedness: For if you once blot out that which the Apostle says, for the good govern∣ment of Mankind; Let every Soul be subject to the higher powers, &c. you open a Gap to all Licentiousness. Clamate si audetis punian∣tur homicidia, puniantur adulteria, sola sacrile∣gia volumus à regnantium legibus impunita. How can you say that Murther and Adultery ought to be punished by the Magistrate, but Sacrilegious Schismes ought to be permitted? Or, that it i not the duty of the Magistrate, to contradict or punish you, when you are in∣jurious to his Church and Worship? If a pre∣tence of Conscience may supersede the Penal∣ties of the Law, few Offenders would be re∣trained or punished for any Transgression. And therefore St. Augustine calls it, a most vain and impertinent way of reasoning, which their own practice did contradict and confute, as often as they had power in their hands; and tells them, they did most incuriously condemn the Emperors, as Persecutors, when they only restrained evil doers, and dealt with unruly Persons, as Physicians use to deal with phre∣netick Patients, that bind them up from hurt∣ing themselves, and others. Non persequitur Phreneticum Medicus sed Medicum Phreneti∣cus.
If Men be frantick, and being diseased themselves, shall endeavour to infect and di∣sturb others, he is a Physician, not a Persecu∣tor that binds them to better behaviour▪ St. Augustine wrote an Epistle to Bonifacius, which in the second Book of his Retractations, he calls, Librum de correctione Donatistarum: Wherein he asserts the power of the Magi∣strates, to make coercive Laws in the Case of Religion. 1. Because the Kings that did it not under the Law, were blamed, and those that did it, commended. 2. Because it is their duty, as Kings, Aliter enim servit quia homo, aliter quia Rex: As a Man, the King ought to serve God, by living faithfully, as a King, by executing with convenient rigor such Laws, as command things that are just, and forbidding what is contrary. For what sober Man will say, to Kings, Nolite curare in Regno vestro à quo teneatur vel oppugnetur Ecclesia Domini nostri? It is not your duty to take care who joyn them∣selves to the Church of God, or who oppose it; as if they ought not to regard the piety of Men, as well as the Chastity of Women, or it concerned them, that there should be no Ba∣stards, and not that there should be no Idola∣ters, or Sacrilegious Persons in their Kingdoms. 3. Because Kings may redress what others can∣not, they having the Sword given them to that end; and whereas the Donatists objected, Cui vim Christus intulit? Whom did Christ ever constrain? He propounds the case of Saint Paul, that was stricken to the Earth, in whom
they might perceive, Christ first restraining, and then teaching him— And our Lord ap∣pointed Guests to be first invited, and upon refusal, to be compelled to his great Supper. Wherefore if those that are found by the High∣ways, and Hedges, (i.e.) among Hereticks, or Schismaticks, be constrained to the Lords Vine∣yard, by the Power which the Church hath re∣ceived, ever since Kings received the Christian Faith, let them not find fault, that they are driven by force, but consider whither they are driven, even to those Pastures where they may find true food, and rest to their Souls. 4. Be∣cause the Donatists used unjust violence, to sup∣press the Catholicks, much more might Chri∣stian Princes use their just Power to support them: Cur non cogeret Ecclesia perditos filios ut redirent, si perditi filii coegerunt alios ut pe∣rirent? It is unworthy a Christian Emperor, to deny his Subjects Power to destroy other Mens lives, and to leave them Power to de∣stroy their own, and other Mens Souls. And, when the Emperor makes Laws for falshood against the truth, they that are faithful, are ap∣proved, and they that persevere are crowned; And when he makes Laws for truth against fal∣shood, those that were cruel are restrained, and those that are intelligent are reformed. He therefore, that will not obey the Laws of the Emperor, made against the truth, obtains a great reward, and he that will not obey the Laws made for the truth, deserves a great pu∣nishment: See Epistle 50.
It hapned that Donatus a Presbyter, was summoned to appear at one of the Councils at Carthage; to prevent the censure that he expected there, he threw himself into a Well, and would have certainly perished there, had not others been more charitable to him,Epist. 204. than he was to himself. From this accident, Saint Augustine reasons thus: If they be justly e∣steemed your Friends, that preserved your Natural Life, when you endeavoured despe∣rately to destroy it, how can you think them your Enemies, who in love to your Soul, seek to preserve that unto Eternal Life? An justior est privata violentia, quam regia diligentia? And again,Contra Parm. l. 1. An perperam agitur, cum Reges prohibent divisionem, & non cum Episcopi divi∣dunt unitatem? Doubtless the good Laws which were made and executed by publick Au∣thority, to prevent such barbarous actions, were much more just than those acts of vio∣lence, whereby they destroyed themselves and others. Therefore he proves that none of the Donatists were so severely dealt with, by the lawful power of the Christian Emperors, for the Peace and Unity of the Church, as they dealt with one another, in their private Divi∣sions, nor as they dealt with themselves, in violently procuring their own Deaths: and yet their Survivors justified this practice, from the Example of Razius, 2. Macchab. which St. Augustine confutes at large in the 61. Epistle. And in his second Book against Petilian, he saith, Nemo vobis aufert liberum
Arbitrium, sed attendite, quid potius eligatis, utrum correcti, vivere in pace, an in malitia per∣severantes, falfi Martyrii nomine, vera suppli∣cia sustinere. That good Laws did not de∣prive them of the liberty of their wills, but did require them to consider, what was most eligible, whether by gentle correction, to be kept within the bounds of peace, or by perse∣vering in malice, instead of a pretended Mar∣tyrdome, to suffer deserved punishments. It may here be seasonable to Answer an Ob∣jection, which is made by some Persons, for Liberty of Conscience, and against the enact∣ing of Penal Laws in the Cause of Religion, which I am obliged to take notice of, because it particularly asserts, that none of those Chri∣stian Emperors, through whose Lives I have drawn the Series of this History, did enact any Laws, or use any force for the Suppression of Sectaries, or Hereticks, but granted them all a free Toleration. Dr. Stubs improved this Objection to the utmost, in a Treatise con∣cerning the Power of the Civil Magistrate in things of Spiritual concernment, which Trea∣tise, I hope he hath put among his Retracta∣tions, as St. Augustine did some Opinions of the like nature. And first, I wonder why he should mention, p. 4th. that Law of the Twelve Tables, Sepa∣ratìm nemo habessit Deos, neve novos, sed nec advenas, nifi publice adscitos, privatim colunto; (the breach whereof the Romans often punish∣ed with Death) unless he thought the Christi∣an
Magistrate less obliged to take care of the true Religion, than the Heathen were of a false. It being matter of fact, which I am con∣cerned to Answer, I might confute the Obje∣ction (as the Philosopher did him, that denied motion, by rising up and walking before him) by transcribing the several Imperial Laws, made to restrain both Schismes and Heresies, which I shall add by themselves hereafter, and shall now reflect on those, which he says, were made in favour of them. And first, I say, in ge∣neral, with St. August. contra Parmen: Nec pro pro iis aliquid promulgasse quis invenitur, nisi Julianus Apostata. That Constantine was he first that published many Edicts against them, (which have been particularly mentioned al∣ready) and that none, but Julian the Apostate, may be found to have enacted any thing in their favour. And yet p. 55. the Objector says, Constantine did allow an Universal Toleration, and to that purpose, he quoteth Eusebitus in the 2d. Book of the Life of Constrantine, c. 55. where the Reader may easily observe, that the Liberty there granted, was to the Heathen, whom he distinguisheth from the faithful, and (says he) let them (if they will) erect Groves and Altars to Vanity: for indeed they would do it, whether the Emperor would or no, All the Senators, and the far greatest part of his Dominions, being Heathen; and Constantine could not deny them their Ancient Rites, (Ʋt Senatui morem gereret) lest he should dis∣please the Senate. And the Objector notes that
Eusebius spake largely of this, to no other end, but to confute those, who had given out, that he had abolished the Heathenish Rites and Cu∣stomes. And indeed he did not seek to bring the Heathen to Christianity by force; but that he did by force endeavour to keep Christians in Unity, is beyond all doubt. And those ve∣ry Edicts which seem to grant Liberty to the Heathen, were framed purposely in favour of the Christians, as that made by Constantine and Licinius, mentioned by Eusebius, l. 10. c. 5. For Licinius being a Heathen, violently Persecuted the Christians under his Domini∣ons, to prevent which, this Edict seems to grant a General Toleration, but it especially respected the welfare of Christians, (for the Heathen (as I have said) were not to be sup∣pressed) — as, That Liberty be not denied to any, to imbrace and imitate the Christian Reli∣gion without molestation— And, Nominatim Christianis decernimus, that such Places where∣in the Christians were wont to meet, however alienated, should be restored to them, whether they had been seized by the Emperors, or by them given, or sold to any other. After this, we are told Of several Pagan Philosophers, that were in favour with the Emperors; as Sopater with Constantine, who sate him some∣time at his right hand; Libanius, who under Constantius, had the tuition of Julian, as also Maximus Tyrius had; so Themistius was a Senator in the time of Theodosius; Symmachus was Praefectus Ʋrbis, in the days of Valenti∣nian
and Valens, and Consul in Theodosius his Raign: of all which we may say, as the Obje∣ctor doth, concerning Generidus, who was made General under Honorius; That the Em∣peror did it out of necessity, p. 88. But that Honorius favoured the Donatists, and did only punish them a while, by the instigation of Sti∣licho, the Donatists found to be an untruth, when after the Death of Stilicho, the same Laws were still executed upon them, so severe∣ly, that as the Donatists grieved for the death of Julian, so they rejoyced at the Death of Honorius. It were no difficult matter to tran∣scribe many Laws made by the Christian Em∣perors, against the Pagan Rites; but it is not to my purpose, and therefore I shall only trou∣ble my Reader with that of St. Augustine, E∣pistle 48. Quis nostrum, quis vestrum non laudat leges ab Imperatoribus, adversus sacrificia Pa∣gana? illius quippe impietatis Capitale supplici∣um est. But at last we are told, that though there were very severe Laws made against He∣reticks and Schismaticks, yet the Emperors ne∣ver did, nor intended to execute them. So p. 80. Constantine (saith he) made Laws against He∣reticks, rather for shew and terror, than for execution; and so he tells us of Theodosius, that he made a Law, that the Sectarians should have no Assemblies, nor make any profession of their faith, nor ordain Bishops and Pastors, and that some of them should be banished the City and Country, others made infamous, and have no publick Preferment, and this he en∣acted
with severe Penalties, which yet (saith he) the Emperor did never inflict, for he did not ordain these things with an intention to punish, but to terrifie his Subjects, that they might better agree in Religion. This had been a very politick device to bring their Au∣thority into contempt, when the Imperial Laws, like the Blocks of Wood cast down from Jupiter, among the Frogs, having made a little noise, shall ever after lye still, for every creeping thing to leap and insult over them. If the courage and resolution of those Empe∣rors, or rather the opportunities for the exe∣cution of those Laws had been answerable to their prudence in making them, they might, in all probability, have stopt that deluge of Christian blood, which was poured forth in greater abundance, through all Africa, by the Donatists, than by the Heathen Emperors, And the Execution of those Laws, with such moderation, as the Catholicks did alway de∣sire, expressed in several Epistles of St. Augu∣stine, to Bonifacius, Cecilianus, and other of the Emperor's Officers, had been, as St. Au∣gustine says, Epistle 50. magna in eos miseri∣cordia, as great an act of Charity to the Bodies and Souls of Christians, and of Piety towards God, as the Indulgence granted by Julian was an occasion of Impiety and Cruelty; whereby he had almost destroyed Christianity, by per∣mitting Divisions among its Professors. Nor were the Christian Emperors negligent in the execution of their Laws, as far as the present
necessities, and iniquity of the Times would permit. The Objector instanceth in the banish∣ment of Arius, and four or five more with him, under Constantine, p. 60. And of Euno∣mius, under Theodosius, for keeping Conven∣ticles, and I have given divers other instances. If we may believe the complaints of the Do∣natists, they were not only in terrorem, they felt not only the Rod, but the Sword too, sometime, which as the Scripture saith, The Magistrate beareth not in vain; You may hear them complain, Quod eos Costantinus ad Campum, (i. e.) ad Supplicium duci jussit, l. 1. contra Parmen. that they were in great Numbers exiled, and had divers Punishments, even unto Death inflicted on them. And we read that St. Augustine and the Ca∣tholicks,Epistle ad Bonifaci∣um. did often mediate with the Emperor's Officers, that their Punishment might not be unto Death, and yet they accuse the Catholicks, as if they had been the cause of forming and sharpning the Instruments of Punishment a∣gainst them, such as the following Laws men∣tioned in the conclusion of this History. Of their unjust Censures and Calumnies. The Foundation of this Schisme was laid on the ruine of the reputation of Cecilian, and the Catholicks in Communion with him, whom they reported to be Traditors and Ido∣laters, that they had nor Ministers, nor Sacra∣ments, and their whole Worship was corrup∣ted
by Superstition, and strange Images, which were set upon their Altars. As for St. Augu∣stine, he was a contentious Disputer, and a perverter of Souls, rather to be avoided than refuted, or to be dealt with as a Wolf, or a Beast of prey, and accordingly they did lay many secret Snares to intrap and ruine Him. It is evident, that by the very act of separati∣on, they did condemn their Brethren, as guil∣ty of some heinous sins, for which they refu∣sed to hold Communion with them, and as much as in them lay, excommunicated all the Churches of Africa, as corrupted by Tradi∣tors, and become Apostates. They appealed from Meltiades, not only as partial, but as being himself a Traditor. Nor was the Empe∣ror free from their Calumny, for they report him to have been misguided by Hosius the fa∣mous Bishop, and other evil Counsellors: Imperatorias aures pravis suggestionibus suffla∣tas; whereof he was never more guilty, than in yielding so far as he did, to their importu∣nity, which he did to a good end: Eorum perversitatibus cedens, & omnimodo cupiens tantam impudentiam cohibere; being wearied by them, and hoping by so many sentences a∣gainst them, he might for ever silence their impudent clamors. Of Mensurius, who prece∣ded Cecilian, they said, that he was, Tyranno saevior, Carnifice crudelior, more raging than a Tyrant, and more cruel than a Hangman; and that he had chosen Cecilian,Opt. Ap∣pend. p. 291. as a fit instru∣ment of his cruelty, whereas Mensurius was
well known to yield himself up to the plea∣sure of Dioclesian, rather than to betray his Brother; and of Cecilian's innocency, you have heard sufficiently. Nor did they deal thus only with the Clergy, but with the Ma∣gistrates also. Donatus writing to Gregorius a Prefect, begins directly in the Language of our Quakers, Gregori, macula Senatus! De∣decus Praefectorum! Thou Gregory, blot of the Senate, and disgrace of the Prefects, Opt. p. 64. This was not their common, but their holy Language; Profertis Evangelium & fa∣citis convitium; their Preaching was little else besides Railing. And as if their Preaching was not enough, they did in perpetuam Rei∣memoriam, fill their Libels and Writings with such unsavoury Language. Nullus vestrum est, qui non tractatibus suis convitia nostra mi∣scet: And this they did to maintain prejudice in the hearts of the People, and to lay a scan∣dal, or stumbling-block in the way of such, as might otherwise be brought over to a better Opinion of their lawful Pastors. Auditorum animis infunditis odia, inimicitias docendo, sua∣detis, Haec omnia dicendo contra nos scandala po∣nitis, Optat. p. 78. And though there were many among the People of the Catholick Communion; that lived unblameably among their Adversaries, yet did they condemn them for remaining in the Faith and Communion of their Pastors; as Petilian told St. Augustine to his face; Qui fidem à perfido sumpserit, non fidem sumpsit, sed reatum: August. contra Pe∣til.
l. 1. When Constans sent Paulus and Ma∣carius to promote Unity, and comfort the Ca∣tholicks, that had been much vexed and inju∣red by the Donatists, they report that they were come to advance Idolatry and Superstiti∣on, that they had brought Images, which they intended to set upon the Altars, and would com∣mand the People to Worship them; Whereas those Statues were sent rather as a token of the Emperor's favour, (it being a Custome of those Emperors, to send their Effigies into those Countries under their Dominion, to which they could not come in Person) and the Christian Emperors had provided by their Edicts, that Cultura excedens hominum digni∣tatem, supremo numini reservaretur; Onely a civil respect was to be yielded to them, and Divine Worship to be reserved to God alone. And the event proved them lyars, for when those peace-makers came, and communicated with the Catholicks, Nil tale visum est, nil viderunt Christiani Oculi quod horrerent. There was no change or innovation in the Publick Worship, but the same decency and order was observed as formerly, and those Images proved to be onely imaginations of their own brains. The Second Nicene Coun∣cil calls these Images of the Emperor's, Lau∣rata & Iconas, which being sent to great Ci∣ties, the People went out to meet them, with Acclamations to the Emperor, whom they did honour, and not the painted Image. Thus also they accused Marcellinus, as if he had been
corrupted by Bribes and Presents from the Ca∣tholicks, to incline him to their Cause. And Honorius the Emperor was said to be seduced by Evil Counsellors, though he acted by the known Laws of his Ancestors. And as to false accusations, they gave such proof of their fa∣culty in contriving them, that St. Augustine at the Conference at Carthage, hearing them, contrary to evident truth, to charge Felix and Mensurius for Traditors, and to alledge that Optatus had written, that Cecilian was con∣demned by Miltiades, and that Constantine had imprisoned him at Brixia, tells Cresconi∣us, that he wondred how the Donatists could have any Bloud in their Bodies, and not blush at the mentioning of such things. And as to St. Augustine's particular, they gave him no other Character, but of a contentious Sophi∣ster, that was rather to be avoided than confu∣sed, and to be dealt with as a Wolf; upon no other provocation, but because, as St. Augu∣stine said, they had rather cover a bad cause with wicked slanders and excuses, than to end it by fair disputations and inquiry after truth. And this is the reason, saith he, that Cresconi∣us (Me fecit causam cum defecisset in Causa,) fell so foully on my Person, when I had fairly overthrown his cause. Leave off such subter∣fuges, (saith he) I am but one Man: It is the cause of the Church, not my own, that is now in question; what my conversation is, is known to those among whom I live, we are now to inquire into the cause of the Church. Optatus
complained of the like Calumnies long before. Nullus vestrum est,Opt. p. 69. qui non suis tractatibus convitia nostra miscet, lectiones Dominicas in∣cipitis, & tractatus vestros ad injuriam nostram explicatis. Profertis Evangelium & facitis absenti fratri convitium,idem p. 81. nec voluntatem bonam vis habere nec pacem: They wrested and tor∣tured the Scripture, to make it speak against their Brethren. There is not one of you that doth nor fill up his Sermons with slanders. You begin to read the Scriptures, and expound them to our injury and disgrace. You have neither Peace, nor Good will. Turba gravis paci placidae{que} inimica quieti.— Of their Cruelty. What St. Cyprian (Epistle 49.) observed of Donatus, was true of these, In ipsa persecu∣tione, alia nostris persecutio fuit. St. Augu∣stine, in the Psalm which he wrote against the Donatists, saith more, Quod persecutor non fecit, ipsi fecerunt in pace. They that were prodigal of their own Lives, could not be spa∣ring of other Mens. No sooner did any of the People flie from the Catholicks to the Do∣natists, but they were of another spirit, clean contrary to what the Gospel inspires good Christians withall. This made the Lyon as mild as the Lamb, but among the Donatists, not only Men, but Women, of Sheep became Wolves; of faithful, perfidious of patient, furious; of peaceable, contentious; and of
modest, impudent. Optatus (p. 99.) says, they were pragmatici & crudeles, busie and diligent in exercising Cruelty. (Episcopi vestri multas caedes, propria manu perpetrarunt:) Many of their Bishops did with their own hands, shed that Blood, for the sparing of which Christ shed His. Under Constantine, and other good Emperors, they did not make such havock of the Churches as they would, they were then awed by a greater Power;Epist. 48. But St. Augustine tells them, Nulla bestia mansueta dicitur, quod neminem mordet, cum dentes & ungues non ha∣bet: The Lyon or the Bear do not lose their Natures, when they lose their Liberty, or their Pawes and Teeth; and that their intentions were alway cruel, their actions manifested, as soon as they got liberty, and their power was increased under Julian. Quae caedes à vobis factae postquam Julianus Basilicas tradidit? What Murthers did they not commit, when Julian restored the Churches, and gave them power? They forced the Catholicks from their Habitations, and Churches, into the Mountains, or into Places of strength, and there assaulted them, with as much fury as the most barbarous Enemy. they slew the Bishops at the Altars, and those Churches which Dioclesian had spa∣red, were by the Donatists razed to the ground: they were Interfectores Prophetarum, Murther∣ers of the Prophets, and built Monuments to those that murthered them. And this did ani∣mate them, to slay the Catholicks with a rage that reached up to Heaven, they were taught,
that they did God good service in it. When Men think their Passions to be warranted from Heaven, and that they act by a Commission from God, they think themselves obliged by their greatest hopes and fears, to act them to the highest, as St. Paul did before his Con∣version. But such a furious zeal is without knowledge: For the Wisdome that is from a∣bove, is first Pure, then Peaceable, &c. How far the Donatists were from this temper, the many Massacres made by them do demon∣strate; it was a sport to them to shed Bloud, for as Optatus says, they did Vivum facere Ho∣micidium, make Men dye often, starving some to death, cutting off the Hands and Fingers of others, putting out the Eyes of others with Lime and Vineger, Deturbatos bonis & dig∣nitatibus,Opt. p. 99. vivere in poenam quasi sibi ipsis su∣perstites sinitis: The very mercies of these wicked Men were cruel. Yea, they persecu∣ted them after Death, denying them Burial, and exposing their dead Bodies to the Beasts, and Fowls of the Ayr: Ʋt terreatis vivos, male tractatis mortuos, negantes funeribus lo∣cum cum mortuis litigatis. Clarius a Priest, being ready to perform the solemnity accustomed at the Funerals, in the Village of Subbulia, was forbid by his Bi∣shop, who was a Donatist, and so did insepul∣tam facere Sepulturam. I shall name but that one instance or Novatus, of whom St. Cyprian tells us, Epist. 49. ad Cornelium, that he suf∣fered his Father to dye for want of Bread, in
a neighbouring Village, and would not per∣mit him to be Buried when he was Dead. He kicked his Wife, so as to cause an Abortion. And in a word, among such as Novatus and Donatus were, they are esteemed most Reli∣gious that are most cruel and unnatural, as if they had a command to hate Father and Mo∣ther, &c. Of their Pride. They thought so well of themselves, that they would not sit with the Catholicks, and thought themselves injured if the Catholicks called them Brethren, as St. August. contra Gaudentium,Opt. p. 52. l. 3. So Petilian refused to sit with the Bishops in the Conference at Car∣thage, pretending it was forbidden in Scrip∣ture to sit with the wicked. Donatus the first was a Person that often affronted the Empe∣ror's Chief Officers, and as the Emperor com∣plained, much hindred his service by the Tu∣mults which he raised against them. He kept the Bishops of his own Party at such a distance, as if they all had their depen∣dance on him. When he met any of them, his question was, Quid agitur de parte meâ? What success have my Party? and the Bishops thought it a great honour to write themselves (as they did in publick acts) Episcopos ex parte Donati: and as if the Title of Bishop had been too mean for him, he was called Donatus of Carthage, by way of eminency.
Donatus the Second, whom they called Magnus, (after the Title of him that subdued the whole World) was not content with civil honour; Eum non minori metu omnes Episcopi venerabantur quam Deum: All his Bishops honoured him as if he had been a God. They did not only, jurare in verba, resign themselves to his sole conduct, as if he ruled them by an Infallible Spirit, but sware by him, which is not lawful to do by any, but God, Opt, p. 65. and seeing he did not forbid it, it is plain that he made himself as God: And the People gene∣rally reputed him as their Tutelar Angel, by whom Carthage was preserved, and all Africa blessed. He pretended such familiarity with God, as if he had immediate Answers to all his desires, Oravit Donatus & respondit ei Deus de Coelo. Seldome did he converse with any of his Brethren, but as an Oracle, to give rare and indisputable Answers, which Tichonius ob∣jected against him, who though he continued in Donatus his Party, yet found his Pride to grow intolerable, for he gave no other reason for his practice, but, Quod volumus sanctum est. St. August. Epist. 193. When Marcel∣linus at the Conference of Carthage, had en∣treated the Bishops to sit down, refusing to sit himself (though he then represented the Empe∣ror) until they had taken their Places, the Ca∣tholick Bishops sate down, but the Donatists refused, and began to dispute the lawfulness of it, urging that of the Psalmist, Odi Ecclesiam Malignantium, Psalm 26. I hate the Congre∣gation
of the wicked. To which the Catholicks relplyed, first wittily, that the Psalmist said also, Cum iniquis non ingrediar, that he would not enter into the Assembly of the wicked; and seeing they had condescended so far, as to come into their Company, they might as lawfully sit down with them. And then they desired them more seriously to remember, that David did not so hate the wicked, as for their sakes to forsake the Temple of the Lord; Delib. Hist. p. 218. And so after much intreaty they were perswaded to sit, but desired the Publick No∣tary to enter it among his Acts, that they did it at the pleasure of Marcellinus, & not of their own accord. The like pride was expressed by Parmenian, who being in Conference with some Catholicks, and brought to a non-plus, rose up in a fume, and said (Modicum fermen∣tum, totam Massam corrumpit. Dixit hoc Par∣menianus & abiit. l. 3. contra Parmen.) A little Leaven leaveneth the whole Lump, and so went away. This pride of Spirit appears in that, when they entred upon the Churches of the Catho∣licks,Opt. p. 98. they did wash the very Pavement, and whited the Walls, they broke the consecrated Chalices, and sold them away; and lest any part of the Sacrament which the Catholicks had consecrated, should have touched the Lin∣nen Cloaths, wherewith at the administration of the Sacrament they covered the Altars; Quis fidelium nescit ipsa ligna linteamine co∣operiri? they did not only remove them, but
the Altars themselves, which they razed even to the groundNe ad Deum so∣lito more supplicatio ascenderet, impia ma∣nu scalas subducere laborastis, Opt. p. 94. Optatus (l. 6. p. 95.) bids them dig deeper, seeing they knew not how far the pollution might extend; Altam fa∣cite scrobem, sed observate ne veni∣atis ad inferos, & illic inveniatis Core, Dathan, & Abiron, Schismaticos Magistros vestros; but beware, saith he, that you did not so low as Hell, where you may find your Schis∣matical Masters, Core, Dathan, and Abiron. These Men, saith St. Augustine, thought bet∣ter of themselves than the Apostles did, and worse of their Brethren, than they did of Ju∣das, Com quo Apostoli acceperunt primum Sa∣cramentum Coenae; with whom they received the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper: Psalmo contra Donatistas. So that it will be a hard matter to find out any sort of Men, to whom that Character of the Man of sin, 2 Thess. 2.4. better agreeth, Who opposeth and exalteth him∣self against all that is called God, and is wor∣shipped. And thus having shewn to what height of impiety and mischief this Schisme did grow, from very small and inconsiderable beginnings, so by that, all Men may see the madness of such, as give themselves up to dividing Principles, as manifest as the Scripture said it should be: and though I have not painted the Sin as black as it was,2 Tim. 3.9. yet enough is done to affright all such, as profess the Gospel of Peace, and pretend to the Spirit of Love, from such destructive
practices: For, as Solomon says, they are fools that make a mock of sin, and think light of so great an evil: That cast Fire-brands, Arrows, and Death, and make themselves sport, as if their work and their Religion ingaged them (as the , or Priests of Mars) to scatter Fire in the Church of God; Behold, saith St. James, how great a matter, a little fire kindleth; that fire he means, which is kindled in the Hearts and Tongues of such as profess the Christian Religion from beneath, when they think themselves inspired from above. All Africa was not fuel enough, it put Rome, and France, and Spain into a flame, and that not for the present Age only,in Epistle. but St. Gregory says, it continued both name and thing to his time, and though those flames were for a good while after abated, the heat of those distempers having consumed the vitals of religion, the true knowledge and fear of God, and although the fire was raked up under the ashes of ignorance and impiety, yet at length some rash and un∣wary Persons brought home from beyond the Seas into these Kingdomes, such burning Coals, as meeting with combustible matter, and having glowed a while, and only obscured and sullied the beauty of our Church by their smoke, at length brake put into a devouring flame, and (not to renew our sorrows, by recounting the almost innumerable mischiefs that it did) con∣sumed the very foundations both of Church and State. And though by the wonderful com∣passions of God, (which because they failed
not, therefore we were not consumed) our foundations were not only new layed, but glo∣rious structures, to the envy and admiration of our enemies were raised on them; yet we still feel such unnatural heats, (though God be thanked we do not yet see the flame) that we have no Reason to be secure, or to think our building and establishment to be safe, though the foundations be sure; especially if we shall consider, how like this fire hath been to that of Hell, it having been for so many Hundred Years unquenchable. How much the Holy Waters of the Church of Rome, which have been abundantly sprinkled on us, have contributed to the increasing of our flames, (notwithstanding the boast of their extinguishing Vertue) is more to be deplored than disputed. If any thing may be available, our penitent Tears, and importunate Prayers to the God of Peace, That he would give Peace in these our days, may be most effectual. And of this blessing we need not doubt, if every one would sincerely endeavour to withdraw that fuel of spiritual Pride and Vain-glory, of Envy and Malice, of Carnal Lusts and Secular Interests, and let the Word of God, the Water of Life, dwell richly in him; for those living Plants of the knowledge and fear of God, obe∣dience to our Governors, love and good will to our Brethren, of humility and a mean con∣ceit of our selves, would resist and suppress those flames, whereas our formality and empty profession, a zeal without knowledge, a spirit
of pride, contention and contradiction, and ambitious aspiring, as the bramble in the Pa∣rable of Jotham, makes us like so many dry sticks and sapless Leaves ready to take fire at every blast and motion of the Winds. Let us therefore study to be quiet, and to do our own business, to repent of our own sins, and amend every one his own life, instead of Reforming Churches and Kingdomes. And as Solomon adviseth, Fear God and the King, and not meddle with them that are given to change. POST-SCRIPT. I Have thought fit to Transcribe some few of those Laws, made by the most Christi∣an Emperors, against this rude Faction, the ex∣ecution whereof (when all other means had been used i vain) gave a check to its growth. Constantine, as his Nature, and his Religion more especially inclined him, had long endea∣voured to reduce them by lenity and indul∣gence, but the insolence of the Faction necessi∣tated him to a greater rigour, for he well per∣ceived that his Indulgence to the Donatists, was not only an occasion of their Cruelty to the Catholicks, but of great disturbance in his Empire. St. Augustine also, who had been an Advocate for them, against the rigour of the Emperial Laws, saw it to be expedient to exe∣cute those Laws against them in all their San∣ctions,
except only in the case or Life. And whoever shall impartially consider the History of those Times, may observe with me these two things: First, That as the Emperors, and their Councils, became more zealous for the Christian Religion, they made stricter Laws, and with greater severity caused them to be put in Execution.— 2ly, That by the dili∣gent execution of such Laws, the insolency of the Faction was much restrained, and unity and peace in a good measure established in the Church. And indeed the life of the Laws, as Sir Francis Bacon observes, is in the execution of them, without which they are always a dead (and sometime a killing) Letter, and it were much more convenient not to have them made, than being made, not to have them ex∣ecuted; for, by this neglect, the Offenders are animated, and Authority contemned: As in the Natural body, when physick hath not its due operation, but only stirreth the humors without purging them, it causeth a new fer∣mentation of bloud, and makes way for the noxious humors to seize on the vital parts: Or like the placing of an impotent Dam, to a growing River, which causeth the Waters to swell and roar, and with a greater impetus, than they could have otherwise exerted, to o∣verflow all bounds. What Solomon observed of the Laws of God, is as true of the Laws of Men: Eccles. 8.11. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily; therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them
to do evil. Common experience teacheth us, that if we only threaten our Children or Ser∣vants, and chastise them not as they deserve, they grow the more presumptuous and self-willed. And Solomon says, Prov. 13.24. He that spareth the rod hateth his Son, but he that loveth him, chastneth him betimes. Besides, what prejudice and jealousies doth such a neglect beget between a Prince and his People? The Prince sees a necessity of curb∣ing the insolency of his People, by making wholesome Laws; The People fancy that the Prince hath an inclination to Tyranny, but, not executing those Laws, they suppose him to want power, and to be like a foolish Builder, who having begun to build, is not able to finish. And when they perceive a defect in power, as well as in prudence, to manage the Reins of Government, they endeavour to get the Bit, that was put into their Mouths, between their Teeth, and run away with their Rider. In a word, there is no Fruit more desirable to cor∣rupt Nature, than that which is forbidden, the very prohibition doth endear it, and irritate our desires to an enjoyment. How many have publickly declared, that they could, and would have conformed to our Liturgy and Ceremo∣nies, had they not been imposed by a Law: as if those things which are in their own nature, lawful and good, became evil and unlawful, when inforced by a Law. This was long since practised by some Nonconformists, in the days of Archbishop Laud, who commending to his
Clergy the wearing of short Hair, they that had been zealous for it before that time, did afterwards suffer their Hair to grow to an ex∣cessive length. This is such a spirit of con∣tradiction, as will not be charmed with. Reason and Arguments, though the Charmer be never so wise; Nor will good Laws silence or sup∣press it, without a seasonable and vigorous ex∣ecution of them, which was the course taken by the first Christian Emperors; as appears by the following Instances. Sozomen Hist. Tripartit. l. 3. c. II. De Novatianis, Phrygibus, Valentinianis, &c. Contra hos omnes Imperator (Constantinus) positâ lege sancivit auferri eorum Oratoria & Ecclesiis applicari, & ne{que} in Domibus privato∣rum eos Congregationes ne{que} publice celebrare: melius enim judicabat in Ecclesia Catholica communicandum & in eam cunctis convenire suadebat, propter quam legem (Arbitror) hae∣resium memoriam fuisse destructam— Post hanc enim legem ne{que} publice in Ecclesi∣is poterant convenire, ne{que} latenter, dum Episco∣pi civitatum & Clerici observantes talia prohi∣berent: hinc ergo plurimi metuentes, ad Eccle∣siam se Catholicam contulerunt, Alii vero man∣serunt in sua sententia, non tamen successores ha∣resis reliquerunt.
Anno Constantini 20. lib. 1. Codicis Theodos. De Haereticis. Privilegia quae contemplatione Religionis in∣dulta sunt, Catholicae tantùm legis observatori∣bus prodesse oprtet; Haereticos autem & Schis∣maticos, non tantùm ab hiis privilegiis alienos esse volumus, sed etiam diversis muneribus con∣stringi, & subjici. Euschius in vitâ Constantini, l. 3. c. 61. —Et haec cautio eò vim suam porrigat, ut non mode non in publicis, sed nè in privatis qui∣dem aedificiis, aut in locis ullis separatis, hujus vestrae superstiosae dementiae factiones coeant: & proptereà etiam Jubemus, ut universae aedes ve∣strae, in quibus congressus illos celebrare consue∣vistis, penitus evertantur. Ac quò provisio haec, in curandis erroribus, robur, & firmitatem sibi necessariam assequatur, mandavimus, ut omnia Superstitionis vestrae loca, in quibus convenire solebatis, omnia dico haereticorum templa, (si modo templa appellare convenit) sine recusatione aut controver siâ diruantur, & diruta, abs{que} mo∣râ Catholicae tradantur Ecclesiae, reliqua loca publico Reipub. usui abdicantur, nec ulla in po∣sterum vbis celebrandi conventus relinquatur facultas. Hâc lege promulgatâ istarum sectarum me∣moria, magna ex parte deleta est, plurimis ad Ecclesiam conversis; aliis autem, cum discipulos facere nequirent è vitâ sublatis. Bzovius ad Annum 20. Constantini.
Anno 418. Ʋt pulsis ex urbe primitus capitibus dogmatis execrandi, Caelestio & Pelagio, si qui hujus de cetero sacrilegii Sectatores quibuscun{que} locis po∣tuerint inveniri, aut de pravitate damnatâ ali∣quem rursum proferre sermonem, à quocun{que} corrupti, ad competentem judicem pertrahantur, quos sive Clericus sive Laicus fuerit, deferendi habeat potestatem, & sine praescriptione aliquâ perurgendi, ut probationem convicti criminis sti∣lus publicus insequatur, ipsis inexorati exilii de∣portatione damnatis. Anno 419. Ʋt nefandi dogmatis repertores ab urbe Româ veluti quaedam Catholicae veritatis contagia pel∣lerentur, ne ignorantium mentes scaeva persuasi∣one perverterent, sed quia obstinati criminis per∣tinax malum ut constitutio geminaretur coegit, recenti sanctione decrevimus ut si quis eos in quancun{que} provinciarum parte latitare non nesci∣ens aut propellere aut prodere distulisset, praescri∣ptae poenae velut particeps subjaceret. Praeciquè tamen ad quorundam Episcoporum pertinaciam corrigendam qui pravas eorum disputationes ta∣cito consensu asserunt, vel publica oppugnatione non destruunt— Quicun{que} damnationi suprà memoratorum subscribere, impiâ obstinatione neglexerint, Episcopatus amissione mulctati, in∣terdictâ in perpetuum, expulsi civitatibus com∣munione priventur.
Anno 421. Mandatum Volusiano Ʋrbis Praefecto. Ʋt omnes qui Dei invident pietati diligenter inquirat & eos faciat statim è muris urbis ex∣pelli; it a tamen ut ne intra centesimum lapidem habeant licentiam consistendi. Notat Vossius quod post ista edicta alii Epi∣scopatu dejecti ut Julianus, &c. alii legum se∣veritate territi seu fidei luce convicti ab erroris semita in veritatis viam revenerunt: uti Tur∣bantius, & Leporius, qui de se sic confitetur, sic imperitia & superbia, sic stulta simplicitas cum persuasione noxia, sic fervor cum intemperantia, sic debilis fides, in me viguerunt, ut haec ab ani∣mo potuisse cedere, mihi stupenda Gratulatio. Socrates, l. 2. Cap. 15. Historiae tripartitae. Victor Constantinus Max. August. Episcopis & Populo. Malignos & impios Arius imitatus, dignum est, ut illorum quo{que} suscipiat ultionem: Sicut ergo Porphyrius divinae pietatis inimicus iniqua volumina contra religionem proferens dignam promeruit invenire mercedem, & talem per quam imposterum esset opprobrium & plurimâ comple∣retur infamiâ Et nunc placuit Arium & con∣sectores ejus vocari Porphyrianos, ut puorum mo∣res imitati sunt eorum vocabulo perfruantur. Super haec autem, si qua conscriptio ab Ario facta invenitur igni tradatur, ut non solum pra∣va
enjus doctrina depereat, sed ne{que} ulla ejus pos∣sint remanere Commenta. Hoc etiam praecipio, si quis Arii conscriptiones cellasse comperitur & non repente proferens, igne consumpserit, mortis supplicio subjacebit, mox enim ut in hoc fuerit captus, capitalem suscipiet ultionem. Deus vos custodiat. De Trinitate. Nullus haereticis Ministeriorum locus, nulla ad exercendam animi obstinatioris dementiam pateat occasio. Sciant omnes, etiamsi quid spe∣ciali quolibet rescripto, per fraudem elicito, ab hujusmodi hominum genere impetratum sit, non valere. Arceantur cunctorum haereticorum ab illicitis congregationibus turbae, unius & summi Dei nomen ubi{que} celebretur. —Omnes haereti∣cos illicitas agere intra oppida congregationes ve∣tamus; at si quid eruptio factiosa tentaverit, ab ipsis etiam urbium moenibus, exterminato furore propelli jubemus. Euchario & Siagrio Coss. De Episcopis & Clericis. Si quis Episcopus Sacerdotio pulsus, praesum∣pserit ingredi civitatem ex quâ pulsus est, Ju∣bemus hunc monasterio in aliâ regione constituto tradi, ut quae in Sacerdotio deliquit, in monaste∣rio degens corrigat. Conventicula illicita, etiam extra Ecclesiam
in privatis adibus celebrari prohibemus, proscri∣ptionis domus periculo imminente, si dominus e∣jus in eâ Clericos nova ac tumultuosa conventi∣cula extra Ecclesiam celebrantes, susceperit. Honorio & Aristaeneto Coss. De Haereticis. Omnes haeresses, legibus Divinis & imperiali∣bus vetitae constitutionibus perpetuo quiescant, nemo ulterius conetur profana praecepta, vel do∣cere, vel discere, nec Antistites eorundum aude∣ant sidem insinuare quam non habent, & mini∣stros creare, qui non sunt; nec per conniventiam Judicantium omnium{que} quibus per constitutiones paternas super hoc cura mandata est, ejusmodi audacia negligatur & crescat. Haereticorum au∣tem vocabulo continentur, & latis adversus eos sanctionibus succumbere debent, qui vel levi ar∣gumento, à judicio Catholicae religionis & tra∣mite detecti fuerint deviare. Ausonio & Olybrio Coss. Manichaeos, vel Donatistas meritiffimâ se∣veritate persequimur; huic ita{que} hominum gene∣ri, nihil ex moribus, nihil ex legibus commune sit cum caeteris. Ac primum quidem volumus esse publicum crimen quia quod in Religionem di∣vinam committitur in omnium fertur injuriam; quos bonorum omnium publicatione prosequimur, ipsos quo{que} volumus amoveri ab omni liberalitate, & successione, quolibet titulo veniente. Praete∣reà non donandi, non emendi, non vendendi, non
postremo contrahendi cuiquam convicto relinqui∣mus facultatem; in mortem quo{que} inquisitio ex∣tendatur. Nam si in criminibus Majestatis li∣cet memoriam accusare defuncti non immeritò & hic debet subire tale judicium, ergo & supre∣ma illius scriptura irrita sit, sive testamento, si∣ve Codicillo, sive Epistolâ sive aliquo alio genere reliquerit voluntatem, qui Manichaeus fuisse con∣vincitur. Sed nec filios haeredes eis existere aut adire permittimus, nisi â paternâ pravitate dis∣cesserint: Delicti enim veniam poenitentibus da∣mus. In eos etiam auctoritatis nostrae aculei diri∣gantur, qui eos domibus suis, damnandâ provisie∣ne defendunt. Servos insuper extra noxam esse volumus, si dominorum Sacrilegium evitantes ad Ecclesiam Catholicam servitio fideliore transi∣erint. Honorio & Theodosio Coss. Si vero Diminus temporalis, requisitus & ad∣monitus ab Ecclesia, terram suam purgare neg∣lexerit, ab haereticâ pravitate, post annum à tempore monitionis elapsum, terram ipsius expo∣nimus Catholicis occupandam, qui eam exter∣minatis haereticis abs{que} ullâ contradictione possi∣deant, & in fidei puritate conservent: & quae sequuntur ibidem. Ariani, Macedoniani—Donatistae & qui ad imam us{que} scelerum nequitiam pervenerunt, Ma∣nichaei; nusquam in Romanum locum conveniendi morandi{que} habeant facultatem. Manichaeis etiam de civitatibus pellendis, & ultimo supplicio tra∣dendis, quoniam his nihil relinquendum loci ast
in quo ipsis etiam elementis fit injuria. Cunctis quo{que} legibus, quae contra eos, caeteros{que} qui no∣strae sidei refragantur, olim diverfis{que} tempori∣bus latae sunt, semper viridi observantiâ valitu∣ris. Sive de donationibus in haereticorum conven∣ticula (quae ipsi audacter Ecclesias nuncupare conantur) factis, sive ex ultimâ voluntate rebus qualitercun{que} relictis, sive de privatis aedificiis in quae domino permittente, vel connivente, conve∣nerint venerandae nobis Catholicae Ecclesiae vindi∣candis, sive de procuratore qui hoc nesciente do∣mino fecerit, Decem librarum auri mulcta, vel exilium si sit ingenuus subituro, Metallum ve∣ro post verbera si servilis conditionis sit; it a t nec in publicum convenire locum, nec aedificare sibi quasi Ecclesias, nec ad circumscriptionem le∣gum quicquam meditari valent, omni civili & militari, curiarum etiam & defensorum & ju∣dicum sub viginti librarum Auri interminatione prohibendi auxilio. Illis etiam omnibus in sua manentibus firmitate, quae de militiâ, poenis{que} va∣riis de{que} diversis haereticis sunt promulgata, us nec speciale quidem beneficium adversus leges valeat impetratum. Felice & Tauro Coss. Apollinaristoe, vel Eutychianistae, non Ecclesias sibi construant, parasynaxes & conventicula tam diurna, quam nocturna, non contrahant— Nec eis publicè, vel privati convocandi caetus, vel circulos contrahendi & de errore haeretico dispu∣tandi, tribuatur facultas. Nulli etiam contra venerabilem Chalcedonensem Synodum liceat a∣liquid vel dictare, vel scribere, vel edere, vel e∣mittere,
aut alirum dicta vel sripta super ea∣dem re proferre. Nemo hujusmodi habere libros & sacrilega Scriptorum monumenta audeat ser∣vare: quodsi qui in his criminibus fuerint depre∣hensi, perpetua deportatione damnentur. Constantio & Rufo Coss. De Baptismate. Antistitem, qui Sactitatem baptismatis illici∣ta usurpatione geminaverit, sacerdotio indignum esse censemus, &c. Gratiano & Merobaude Coss. Si quis rebaptizare quempiam de Ministris Catholicae Sectae fuerit detectus, unà cum eo qui piaculare crimen commisit, (si tamen criminis per aetatem capax sit) & hic cui persuasum sit, ultimo judicio percellatur. Lucio & Hadriano Coss. Hi qui sanctam fidem prodiderunt, & Sanctum baptisma haereticâ superstitione profanârunt, à consortio omnium segregati sint, & à testimoniis alieni — Lapsis etenim, & errantibus subve∣nitur, perditis vero, hoc est sanctum baptisma profanantibus, nullo remedio poenitentiae succur∣ritur. Tatiano & Symmacho Coss. Eum qui servum, sive ingenuum, invitum, seu suasione plectendâ, ex cultu Christianae Religi∣onis, in nefandam Sectam, ritumve seduxerit, cum dispendio personarum, capite puniendum esse censemus. Theodosio & Valentiniano Coss. St. August. contra Parmen. l. 3. Si quid pro hujusmodi iniquitatibus patiun∣tur, si nolint corrigi, saltem non audeant gloriari. FINIS.
