M2043 99828049 32476
Mirth for Citizens. Or, A Comedy for the Country: Shewing A young Farmer his unfortunate marriage, His wife is so churlish & currish in carriage He married her for beauty, for's own delight Now he repents it both day and night. By physiognomy adviscth young men that at: Wenches-skip, To be sure to look before that they leap, To leap at a venture, & catch a fall, Raising the forehead breaks horns and all. Tune of, Ragged, torn, and true. HEy boys my Fathers dead, and what used I to fear, VVith gold and silver I am sped, nd have fifty pound a year: Then why should I be single, I will not lead the life; My gold and silver doth gingle, a wooing i'le go for a wife. Sure thrice happy am I if I obtain this Bride, There's none can her come nigh in all the whole world beside. A dainty fine Lass I know as ever England bred: Her skin is as white as Snow and her hair of a Crimson red: She lives but in our Town, she is vertuous, chaste, and wise, If I win her my joys are crown'd besdes a matchless prize. Sure thrice happy &c. Ile get her Fathers good will, and Mothers too beside; Then next i'le-try my skill to win this lovely Bride: I'le hug her and buss her and kiss her; in her lies all my pride: As Conventicle Dick served his sister, and tother thing too beside. Sure thrice happy &c. She hath two hundred pound to her portion and I a great deal of Land: Thus shall I come quick to promotion, for love I take her by the hand: But when I went to be married, I was in the height of my pride; Brave gallants on horseback was carried, to accompany me and my Bride. Sure thrice happy am I that I have obtained this Bride, There's none can to her come nigh in all the whole world beside. O we had a gallant brave wedding indéed, and delicate dishes store, Those were welcome which were of our (biding, but little we minded the poor: O we had both Sack and Canary, and the Musick bravely did play, O then I drank Sack and Sherry, I thought it would never be day: Sure thrice happy &c. When I and my Bride was in bed on my wedding-day at night, My fancies with pleasures she fed, for I had my full delight: She shewed me Venus School and with me she did daddle, But I a young puny fool, did quickly fall out of the saddle. Sure thrice happy &c. But then on the morrow morn, O she laughed me to scorn: O she drank sack and canary in Silver, and made me drink out of a horn, But when our wedding did cease and our brave banquets were done, My joys did quickly decrease, and my sorrows soon after begun, sure thrice happy &c. She told me she would be Master, and all the whole houshold guide, I told her it gave disaster, she said it should quickly be try'd: Then against her I took stick, thinking she durst not come nigh, VVith a cudgel my bones she did lick, that for pardon I quickly did cry: sure thrice happy &c. She's grown so devilish curst, and in it she takes a pride, Makes nothing my head to burst and hang my bones beside: She makes me go to Plough, ditch, hedge, and thrash beside, And Jack come serve the Jow, to this slavery i'm ty'd. sure thrice happy &c. I do get up in a morn, and for her make a fire, i'm a Cuckold and laught to scorn, a holly-Crab pays my hire: Then her clothes she gets on her, Sugar-sops must ready be, And I forsooth wait on her, with bowing on my Knee: Sure thrice happy &c. At dinner she is stout, that by her I must now stand, To wait with a Napkin on my arm, and a Trencher in my hand: Some desire I may them pledge, and she is full of hate, If I kiss not my hand and make a leg, she lays me over the pate: Another thing troubles my head and grieves me worse than this, VVhen her Comrade is with her in bed I must reach her the pot to piss: I must draw her a cup of long tipple if it be a cold Frosty night, Or she beats me as same as a Cripple, O the Bulls pizel doth me fright. Sure thrice happy &c. She kicks me about the house and puts me in bodily fears, I dare not say dun is the Mouse, she pinches me through the ears. She makes horns at me & doth slight me, and makes me a Jackanokes, She kicks me, she pricks me and bites me O I feel her devilish strokes. Sure thrice happy &c. I wish young-men hereafter be not too quick in wooing their wives, And beware of red-hair disaster, or repent it all days of their lives: Chuse a wench of a dark brown hair, and one of a middle size, Cole black will fill thee with care, and ledge others betwixt her thighs. Sure thrice happy am I if I obtain this Bride, There's none can her come nigh in all the whole World beside. By Abraham Miles. The pretty by-names this young woman hath for her Husband. A simple Simon, a Tom Nickols, Jack Adams, a Muddy-brain'd Cuckold, a Hopping Dick, a Nicknindigo the Devils Turnspit. Here follows his potion of Dyet for several days of the week, of a Monday, is he riseth not betimes in the morning, instead of posset she comes up with a Holly Crab, and pays him about in his Shirt; on Tuesdays she bangs his back with a good Cudgel; on Wednesdays she kicks his breech, and lugs his Ears, instead of feeding him with Beef and Souce; on Thursdays, Fridays, and Saturdays, she pays his back with a Bulls pizle, till he cries, O good Wife, I will never do so no more. Printed for P. Brocksby at the Golden Ball in Py-corner
