M2851 13106887 97520
ERRATA. P. 15. l. 9. for Cilents r. Clients: p. 21. l. for Case r. Care: p. 26. l. 22. for Unna r. Connatural; p. 48. l. 20. for Unreasonable r. Unseasonableness.
BRUTES Turn'd CRITICKS, OR Mankind Moraliz'd BY BEASTS. IN Sixty Satyrical LETTERS Upon the Vices and Follies of our AGE. Written in Italian by Signiore Mo∣scheni: And now done into En∣glish with some Improvements. — Quid rides? Mutato nomine de te Fabula Narratur. Hor. Sat. Primâ. London, Printed for Daniel Dring at the Harrow and Crown at the Corner of Cliffords-Inn-Lane in Fleetstreet, 1695.
TO THO. COKE, Esq OF MELBOURN IN Darbyshire. SIR, MEn are now grown so universally jea∣lous of what is of∣fer'd 'em, that not so
much as a Book can have any credit in the World without security. This humour, Sir, has drawn the trouble of this Ad∣dress upon you. Not that I am so vain, as to expect you should An¦swer for my performance▪ but because I know the World will not venture absolutely to condemn, what you are pleas'd to Patronize. It is so custo∣mary for Writers to give great Encomiums of their
Patrons, tho' never so ndeserv'd, that it fre∣uently renders even a ust Character suspected. Tis true, most that have f late appear'd in Print, whether by Imprudence, or Design, have made choice of such Men, that the Author, and his Pa∣tron, look like two Bank∣rupts bound for one ano∣ther. But, Sir, I am so far from apprehending a∣ny such Censure upon this occasion, that I doubt
not, but even those th shall despise my Labo and condemn my Perfo¦mance, twill approve m choice of you, and a¦low of my Judgment.  dare not, for two Re¦sons, attempt you Character; for if I di all that have the Honou to know you, would a¦cuse me of Deficiency and those that have not would suspect me of Flat¦tery: Two faults, in my opinion, no less obvious
than inexcusable. I am not Ignorant that Dedi∣cators, like Lovers, are commonly expected to say fine things, without regard either to Reason, or Merit; but I am consci∣ous, I speak to one, as much above Flattery, as beyond the reach of my Panegyrick. The World may indeed justly won∣der, to find at so few Years, such opposite Qua∣lities reconcil'd; as the spirit, vigour, and warmth
of Youth, with the self Command, Sagacity, and prudent caution of ma∣ny Years Experience. I might very easily enlarge on a Subject so copious, and be Rhetorical with∣out the help of Inventi∣on. But my Task must here be much harder; while I contract my Thoughts, for fear of a contradiction, scarce a∣voidable, which is, by saying at once too much and too little: Too
much; to be credited by Strangers; and too little, to do you Justice. But to be more particular in your Character, were Im∣pertinence, since you, like the Sun at Noon, need no description to be distinguish'd. This Piece is original∣ly Italian. A Country, in all Ages, Celebrated, as much for the Wit of its Inhabitants, and the subtility and delicacy of their Imaginations, whose
spirits seem to be refin'd by the very Air they breath in, as its Ancient Conquests, or the pre¦sent Fertility, Salubrity, and Pleasure of its Soil and Climate. But why do I thus presume to talk to you of Italy or its Peo∣ple? Who, besides your natural Advantages, are so much the better Judge, by having been an Ho∣nour to your own Coun∣try in theirs, and are so well known to, and ad∣mir'd by 'em.
The Design of this Book is very good; and had it been as fortunate∣y Executed, as it was well projected, I see no rea∣on why it should have been Inferiour to any of the Mythologies of An∣iquity, or latter Ages. But to deal ingenuously, in my opinion, the Au∣thor has not been so hap∣py in the Conduct of his Design, as in the Inven∣tion of it. But he has this, for his excuse, that
it was writ above twenty Years since. Neverthe¦less, the judicious Rea¦der, will meet with a grea many prettynesses, to re¦compence his Curiosi¦ty, and here, and there Strong, Sound, and man¦ly Satyr. Nay, he wil every where, find the true Spirit, and delicacy of an Italian; enough to recommend it to our Lan∣guage, and Perusal. I should say something, now for my own perfor∣mance,
but that I'll leave o the Censure of others, who will be sure to judge for themselves, as it is but reasonable they should. I can only add, that I have endeavour'd to correct some Faults in the Original, as much as was consistent with the Expedition design'd; and where there were none, I have done my best to do the Author Justice. As for the Reception it is like to have in the
World, I am little sollic¦tous about it, and valu no Man's Censure, Your only excepted, any far¦ther than it may preju¦dice an honest Book sel¦ler who has endeavour'd in this Translation, to humour the Novelty hunters of the Age For on his profit de∣pends my chiefest satisfa¦on; unless it be in plea∣sing, and being approv'd of by you, the severity of whose Judgment, I
cannot but apprehend and fear, notwithstanding the greatness of your Na∣tive Candour. Yet I hope you'll let my Respect attone for the meanness of my Abilities; and Ex∣cuse, as well the Failures, as the Presumption of him, that will be proud to submit to your Cen∣sure, and no less to Sub∣scribe, SIR, Your Most Humble and Devoted Servant, JO. SAVAGE.
THE Author's Dedication TO THE ACADEMY OF THE CURIOUS. Gentlemen, THat Beasts have spo∣ken is not my Inven∣tion, but appears by the accounts of many Au∣thors,
amongst whom Co¦nelius Gemma in  first Book De Divin Naturae Characteristmi and the 8th. Chapte writes thus, Bruta qu¦dem aliquando huma voce profari, ac futura pra dicere, certum est. I primis exempla Asinae B¦laam. Plinius locutum ga¦lum gallinaceum dixit A urbis conditae DCLXX w Eusebius bovem in subu¦biis Romae paulò ant Tullii mortem frustra s
urgenti, dicentem, quod on frumenta, sed Homi∣es essent propé diem de turi Ao. urbis DCCX. nd in this Age, Father oseph a Carmelite of St. Mary's, and barefooted Apo∣le to the Kingdoms of the Malauri, in his first Expe∣ition to the East-Indies, ives you an account of the Properties of many Terre∣rial, and Volatile Animals, nd amongst the rest affirms, That the Kings-Fishers in hose parts spoke so well that
he himself at first believ 'em to have been Boys. A moreover, that Beasts ha writ, Horo in his fourteen Hieroglyphick and first Bo relates in these words: E apud Aegyptios natio qu¦dam & genus Cynoceph lorum qui literas norù Quapropter ubi primù in sacram Aedem ductu fuerit Cynocephalus ta bellam ei sacerdos Appo¦nit, unà cum scirpeo stile atque attramento, nimi¦rum, ut periculum faciat
sitne ex eo Cynocepha∣orum genere qui litera∣gnari sunt, & an lit∣eras pingat; pingit itaque n eâ tabella litteras &c. But now because to some of the wisest Criticks, it may seem ridiculous for me far∣ther to affirm that Beasts are capable of Titles; I shall give you an example of a Dog, who hearing himself call'd Sir, immediately forgot his natural Fierceness. 'Tis related by Justus Lipsius, (an Author of undoubted Re∣putation)
in the first Ce¦tury of his Epistles A Belgas,Ep. 45. in these word Memini historiolae facet cui Autor Petrus Cieca ait se cum aliquot sodal¦bus egressum ad Indo vestigandos. Canem ce¦mitem habuisse ad ist longo usu doctum: Ecc Femina vetula appare fugit in montes, canis a sequitur, & jam praehen∣debat; illa in genua se ab jicit, canem Dominum appellat, & blande orat
ac paenè adorat. Ille pla∣tus an contemnens crus llit & foeminam illam ermingit atque sic abiit. When therefore Beasts oke, they also made use of e Post reciprocally to com∣unicate their thoughts and terests, and writ a great any Letters, which if they ad been all Printed they ould undoubtedly have ex∣eded the number of those of e like Nature, which now∣days so unreasonably stuff Libraries.
Now I having recove these few from the hands Time, with a great deal pains, and industry, do pres to Dedicate 'em to you G¦tlemen of the Academy of Curious, rather than  single great Man. But would not have you persw your selves that they  those that Ferrante Pa¦vicino promis'd to the le¦ned World so long time si for his ingenious Pen wo disdain to be employ'd ab such mean Compositions.
And now if to any of you, rs, the stile seems low and ean, I must desire you to member they are Letters, d therefore writ to immi∣te common Discourse, and pply the defects of Absence. lso that they were the Works  Beasts, and writ at a time en there was no eve to be found to parate the Flower from the ran.Academia del∣la Crusca. Accept therefore I beseech , of my humble Acknow∣dgments in this poor pre∣sent,
which deserves at le some Mercy, tho' it be w¦thy of no Praise, since it Dedicated to your Mer And I promise your Curi¦tyships, if you can give  any Encouragement, a Tr¦tise of something more pr¦table and pleasant. In  mean time, live healthy a happy, and pardon me, if y can, since I am but lit Charge to you. Your Curiosityships Most Humble and Faithful Serva CARLO MOSCHE
Ad Dom. Advocatum. Carolum Moschenum. cademicum Apatistam Florentiae, Incultum Calii, Argonautam & Anhelantem Anconae, qui in com∣mune hominum bonum Librum scripsit, quo Mutuis Belluarum Coloquiis nostrae Aetatis vitia per∣stringit. QUI poteras Mortale genus dedi∣scere culpam, t gerere ingenti libera colla ju∣go?
Dum sibi saevus Amor ferri dulce & Auri Dira fames, quae cor urit, Amica p¦cet: Nec quicquam retegit Phanacen C¦ronis Alumnus, Cui magis in placito vulnere vulo hiat. Ast aperis, Moschene, novam scele¦ta per artem, Vulnera sic mores posse valere p¦tas. Namque perhorrescant vitiosum monstra nocentem Mortales, fari haec praecipis ipse ris. Militis illa dolet pinguescere sangu campos. Haec auri nimiam damnat Ava¦tiam. Quid juvat ista clamat ad nubes co¦crescere moles Auratisque Sali Puppibus ire V¦dis? Heu nimium nostri temeraria tempo¦aetas!
Cum Themidi nulla est libera in orbe Domus. fert Moschenus vitiorum phar∣macha pesti. que homines valeant Bruta docere jubet. J. Tarquinius Galluccius, J. V. D.
Ad Dominum Car. Moschenum, Egregios Libros edente QUàm tibi facundum finxit The aurea pectus, Carole, quam Pitho dulcior  sedet? Ecce salis multo sinis excudisse  bellos, Moribus & populos expoliisse no Non te felle mades Satyrorum, at¦que veneno, At stringis levibus crimina nost jocis.
tibi flagitium moderato insper∣gere aceto: rpere te Vitium, non lacerare, juvat. àm cupit Argutos Orbis legisse libellos? gibus ô quam se sentiet ire tuis? Decus Anconae foelix I, si unicus Urbis eliciae fueras, nunc eris Orbis Amor. E. B.
Ad Eundem. QUam mirum mutare ¦ros, inflare loquelam. Daemonis est Primum, h dixeris esse Dei. J. D
Alla Memoria Del Signiore Moscheni, Non meno Curioso che Savio Autore di questo Libretto. A Richiesta del Traduttore. OPortenti del Bosco! Alta virtude Da Macchiata Pantera oggi S' ap∣prende: Altri concetti altri ululati intende; Sola disposta al predicar' salute. Hor nelle selve taciturne è Mute, La fera più feroce il ver' comprende; E col Lyceo la Selva oggi contende, Fatte le Belue ne' dettami argute.
Per valor' del Moscheni, i sensi mici Amano i Mostri, e di miglior fe¦tuna Asili son l' Inospiti pendici. Scuola il Bosco; e precetti e no aduna; Fatti saggie le Belue e Oratrici; Il Mastino non più latra alla Lu A. F. Bartoli Fiorenti A Londrà.
Ad Candidum ordaces in Vitia Ho∣minum Pecudes ex Ita∣ico Sermone in Angli∣cum elegantissimè red∣dentem. Rte novâ Pecudes docui ver∣ba conari nglica: Nec Pecus es, ut videare Pecus. rpis enim Mores, meliùs Sapienti∣bus ipsis; meritò Octavus, Candide, tu So∣phus es. A. Boyer.
In Authoris Laudem EXcolit eximiâ Fera mentem  guta Ioquelâ Humanam, ut pudeat vivere  Ferae: Quae Cato, quae nescit Ciceronis  da Movere Corda, loquax moveat, Simia, Tig Equus. Non ensus onerat, Lepus, Ag Cerva, Capella: Sed pascit sanis pectora nostra ci Jo. Hutchinson. M
To his very Ingenious Friend, on the occasi∣on of his Translation, and Improvements of Letters of Beasts from the Italian. WHat Counter-charm, what Ma∣gick's this, That can such wond'rous fears per∣form, Perverting Nature, and their bliss; Can to Man's Image, Brutes de∣form?
Thrice happy Brutes! in native St Ambition, nor no foolish cause, That us enflame, can raise your hat That live and act by Nature's L Content within the Bounds she sets, You only for her wants provide; And scorning Luxury or Treats, With Bellies full are satisfied. The sole Buffoon of all your kind Active, mischievous, foolish, vai The Ape, is likest us design'd, In Nature's migniature a Man. Men have mistaken Circe's charm; By Wisdom she so won the Mind, She cou'd Mens uncouth Lusts disarm, And their unruly Passions bind.
B more surprizing Art you show, Anti-Circean charms entice; native Innocence o'erthrow, And debauch Brutes with human Vice. s from thee, Italy, we bring, The artful mistress of all Vice; s just the Medicine there shou'd spring, From whence the malady had rise. re to thy skilful Pains we owe, Whose learned Pen to form has brought e Wit, which (tho' it there did grow) Came undigested and unwrought. t Men their follies thou dost show, Which they in Beasts reprov'd can hear, nd on their Backs corrected know, What on their own they ought to bear.
Thy Rival Pow'r and Nature's Vi Since thou in Brutes controul'st thus, Once more, Great Vertuoso, try, Transfuse their Innocence to us. J. Dra
TO THE INGENIOUS RANSLATOR. F Brittish Ornaments can add such grace, d make so lovely an Italian face; en we may judge, if we with the compare, at all our English Natives, Boun∣ties are. 'Tis sure,  Country beasts a Ric∣er Soyle, r learnings product, than our fertile Isle; nd tho' some times we borrow, or make use f what the Learn'd in other Clymes produce.
We still repay, what's more than fit, And only loose, by this Commer Wit: Such Forreign Authors, as we  to Paint In English Colours, no Improve want. But in the same Majestick form pear, And full as charming as before were: Witness this peice, in such a  array'd; As courts the Mind, and does the perswade. The first design, was great; seem'd to show It's perfect Glory, was reserv'd now: A Noon-day brightness, does that s adorn, Which was at first, but painted by Morn.
'Tis you (Sir) only, who could with success, nsform this Tract, and make the Fables please, e depth of Language; and of For∣reign Style: y rack the Mind, and still our hopes beguile. t you, who know th' Hetrurian Tongue so wel; n Copy best, and in that Art excel: ere we may find the weighty Oar im∣prov'd; e Bullion purg'd, and all the Dross remov'd. ue, sterling Wit; without the Tinsel grace praevious Periods; or of needless Phrase: ow eloquent each Letter does appear, nd yet the Saytr is not less severe! n even judgment, does the Sense controul; nd flowing sweetness, beautifies the whole:
Ah! that you would proceed to  know, What we, to you, and Italy shall And make a farther progress to ¦plore The wealth of Latium, and detect store: By this one favour, we shall more ¦pect; And wish we might a greater debt ¦tract. Like desp'rate Bankrupts, who in ¦tune Poor; Still run in debt, and still would bor more: Tho' without hopes, to quit their for Score. W. Do
To his Ingenious Friend the Translator. MAny have been, and are th' at∣tempts in vain, nkind from their lov'd vices to re∣strain: n, deadly Satyrs daily come abroad; we still Gallop on in the old Road. m's still a Miser, Jack an am'rous Ass; d I still swallow the last Murth'ring Glass. cian, nor Rabelais, nor Moscheni, et r our ill manners can a conquest get. structive Beasts, here now Divinely teach, hat few Men practice, tho' some seem to Preach.
Disgrace to Reason! shame to all  kind! Who here their faults condemn'd Beasts may find! Happy (my Friend!) were th' ¦lish, happy you! If this Translation might our vice  due: If this might make (which nothing  before Tom Gen'rous, and our Friend  leave his Wh— For my part, I declare, I'll try at lo To go to bed as sober as a Beast. Alex. Ol
To his Ingenious Friend, on his Translation of Moscheni. PErmit, my Muse, in humble lays to tell, What to thy Author, and to thee is due; ow this Translation doth the Work excel, Yet to th' Original, how just, how true. r thou, as Titian and Vandyke hast shown, Such strokes improv'd, and yet so really like, hat none but thee, could have this Work outdone, Had any hand but thine have dar'd to strike.
Yet tho' Meek Virtue values no  plause, But an assurance of her doing well Sure, I should forfeit all true frie¦ships Laws, Should I read this and not t praise reveal. Thus King's are forc'd to hear t boundless fame, Sound from th' admiring Poor well as great, All truly pleas'd, thou hast reviv'd  Name; And plac'd thy own in an Immor Seate. Edw. Ha
THE TABLE. LETTER I. UPon Physick. The Leopard to the Rhinoceros. page 1 LET. II. he Same. he Rhinoceros's Answer. p. 5 LET. III. pon the Law. he Catt to the Ass. p. 7 LET. IV. pon the Same. he Ass's Answer. p. 9
LET. V. Ʋpon Trade. The Ant to the Toad. p. LET. VI. A General Satyr. The Toad's Answer. p. LET. VII. On the Prodigal. The Goat to the Pig. p. LET. VIII. The Same. The Pig's Answer. p. 2 LET. IX. Ʋpon Justice. The Ferret to the Squirrel. p. 2 LET. X. The Same. The Squirrel's Answer. p. 2 LET. XI. Ʋpon Baylies. The Camel to the Spaniel. p. 2 LET. XII. Ʋpon Honour. The Spaniel's Answer. p. 2
LET. XIII. pon Preferment. he Panther to the Tygre. p. 32 LET. XIV. he Same. he Tygre's Answer. p. 36 LET. XV. pon Historians he Dragon to the Badger. p. 38 LET. XVI. he Same. he Badger's Answer. p. 40 LET. XVII. pon Hypocrites. he Wolf to the Porcupine. p. 44 LET. XVIII. pon News. he Porcupine's Answer. p. 47 LET. XIX. pon Poetry. he Sheep to the Lamb. p. 54 LET. XX. pon the Mode. he Lamb's Answer. p. 56
LET. XXI. Ʋpon Musicians. The Buck to the Goat. p. LET. XXII. The Same. The Goat's Answer. p. LET. XXIII. Ʋpon Detraction. The Hiena to the Dog. p. LET. XXIV. The Same. The Dog's Answer. p. LET. XXV. Ʋpon Courtiers. The Camelion to the wild Boar. p. LET. XXVI. The Same. The wild Boar's Answer. p. LET. XXVII. Ʋpon Idleness. The Unicorn to the Elk. p. LET. XXVIII. The Same. The Elk's Answer. p.
LET. XXIX. Ʋpon Favourites. he Ape to the Fox. p. 80 LET. XXX. Ʋpon Ambition. The Fox's Answer. p. 86 LET. XXXI. Ʋpon Ingratitude. The Dog to the Horse. p. 88 LET. XXXII. The Same. he Horse's Answer. p. 91 LET. XXXIII. Ʋpon Imprudence. he Stag to the Wolf. p. 93 LET. XXXIV. The Same. The Wolf's Answer. p. 94 LET. XXXV. A General Satyr. The Viper to the Tortoise. p. 96 LET. XXXVI. Ʋpon Presents. The Tortoise's Answer. p. 99
LET. XXXVII. Ʋpon Fairs. The Lizard to the Scorpion. p. LET. XXXVIII. Ʋpon Eunuchs. The Scorpion's Answer. p. 1 LET. XXXIX. Ʋpon Governours. The Elephant to the Stellion. p. 1 LET. XL. The Same, &c. The Stellion's Answer. p. 1 LET. XLI. Ʋpon Criticks. The Hedge-hog to the Coney. p. 1 LET. XLII. The Same. The Coney's Answer. p. 11 LET. XLIII. Ʋpon Ʋpstarts. The Adder to the Hare. p. 11 LET. XLIV. The Same. The Hare's Answer. p. 11
LET. XLV. pon Travel. e Kid to the Hee-Goat. p. 122 LET. XLVI. he Same. he Hee-Goat's Answer. p. 126 LET. XLVII. pon Impotence. he Bull to the Buffalo. p. 129 LET. XLVIII. pon Marriage. he Buffalo's Answer. p. 130 LET. XLIX. pon Monopolizing. he Wolf to the Otter. p. 133 LET. L. pon Titles. he Otter's Answer. p. 137 LET. LI. on Heraldry. he Bear to the Red-Deer. p. 141 LET. LII. on Orthography. e Red-Deer's Answer. p. 144
LET. LIII. Upon Curtezans. The Ape to the Monkey. p. 1 LET. LIV. Upon Politicks. The Monkey's Answer. p. 1 LET. LV. Upon Dogmatists. The Musk-Cat to the Linx. p. 1 LET. LVI. Upon Licensers. The Linx's Answer. p. 1 LET. LVII. Upon Treachery. The Ermine to the Weesel. p. 1 LET. LVIII. The Same. The Weesel's Answer. p. 16
LETTER LIX. on Servants. e Bear to the Civit-Cat. p. 161 LETTER LX. on the same. e Civit-Cat's Answer. p. 164
LETTER I. Ʋpon Physick. he Leopard to the Rhinoceros. I Address my self to your Honour, not to justifie any Error, because I know I am guilty of none; but prevent the Calumnies of Evil-inded people from wounding my eputation. My Enemies accuse me s I hear from my friends) of taking pon me the Practice of a Physician, d for presuming to get an easie pe∣y of the people of Alessano, Metro∣olis of Lucadia. I call it an easie enny; for if I were to chuse a thou∣sand
times, I could not hit upon advantageous a Calling. For wh as before, being reputed (what I  still under another Title,) I was  and anon accus'd of Murthers c¦mitted in the Forrests, tho' at the  time I were never so innocent; w made me always upon my Gua and careful not to fall into t Snares, so that I were never al free from Fatigue and Vexation.  now by means of this Blessed A am delivered from such Fears.  if any of my Patients thro' my M chance to die (without being a of the Laws) I defend my self  my Ignorance with affirming  transgrest my prescriptions: Someti I blame the weakness of their Co¦tutions, sometimes the use of W and in short every smallest Irregu¦ty which commonly signified  little to the Distemper. Now by t means I am not only free from ¦nishment, but in the greatest li¦hood in the World to get a great
state; for over and above my Com∣on Fee, if my Patient recovers he wards me plentifully; and if he dies s Heir is seldom ungrateful for the nefit he has received. And now cause every one ought to support his ofession with Common Decorum, tho' it were never so easie for me to cover any one, with the meanest erb that grows in the Field; yet, r the honour of Physick, I am forbid  do it; but, on the contrary, am blig'd to stuff my Recipe's with ex∣avagant and unpalatable Names. oreover, for the farther Glory of hysick, at my first Visit I always ighten the Patient and his Friends, ith my Opinion, That he is a dead an; and, to give the greater Credit  what I say, I order Medicines rong enough for an Horse, and con∣ne him to a rigorous Dyet. I beg our Honour to be farther satisfied of y Reasons. When I write a Recipe,  always order abundantly more than  necessary, because by the Apothe∣cary's
Gain my Wealth is encreas for he commonly considers how m I have been his Friend. Now by t Art I rob the Purse of its Soul, a the Body oftentimes of its Breath.  it not therefore seem unlawful to y Honour, because it may appear to rather the effect of Avarice and Vi¦ny, than Charity; for it is an all¦ed Maxim in the Mouths of all M Quod Galenus dat Opes: And if we  deny'd the Means, how can we m the Saying good? I humbly int therefore your often approved Gene¦sity, to represent favourably to  Majesty these my Reasons, that o Mens Envy may not unjustly t place of my Innocence; whilst I s long for all Occasions of acknowle¦ments, and expressing my self Yo &c.
LETTER II. The Rhinoceros his Answer. Ʋpon the same. SIR, HIS Majesty the Lyon, has com∣manded me to signifie to you, hat having had your Reasons in ma∣re Consideration, they have been und very advantageous to your ame and Profession: For the Censors ving examin'd 'em strictly, and be∣g satisfied of their Worth and Vali∣ty, have reported to his Majesty, at a Physician is no less necessary in Commonwealth, than a Soldier; and at the Invention of Money is very equisite for both their encourage∣ments; for as the one with his Igno∣nce, the other might with his Sword eep the Provinces moderately peo∣led, that there might be neither dan∣er of Rebellion, or Subjects starving
for want of Bread. And because  oftentimes Poverty raises Tumults, is permitted the Physician to kill wh and as many as he pleases, and  Soldier to Dragoon and Cut throats often as he can. Proceed theref chearfully in the Profession you h begun; and, for your farther Licen His Majesty has been pleased to gr you his Letters-Patents, with  Power and Authority, command all Magistrates, Chief Physicians,  Super-Intendants of Health, that t do not presume to molest you in  least; but on the contrary, to be ¦ing and assisting you as often as th should be found occasion. But y must remember notwithstanding, t you are not allow'd to exact up your Patients; for tho' his Majesty pleas'd to wink at Murther, yet  will not forgive you any Extorti for that being only reserv'd to  Publick Collectors, it will not be c¦venient to suffer it to be practi by any others. Observe this,
you'll oblige your self and your riend, &c. LETTER III. The Cat to the Ass. Ʋpon the Law. SIR, THE Bearer of this is my Cli∣ent, who has been so suf∣ciently influenc'd by my Inclinations  serve you, that he has offer'd him∣lf to be recommended to you for dvice. He has been in Law a great hile; and his Suit has been unmerci∣lly follow'd by me ever since: ut at length finding that his Case equired the Assistance of some more earned and Able Advocate, I thought  could not do him better Service, than o send him to you; by whom the Me∣its of his Cause being better under∣ood, might be the more judiciously
handled. I have bubbled him as lo as ever I could; yet I don't think  has had any reason to complain:  at the same time that I have set  Night and Day, and worn out  very Nails, to bring his Cause to  Trial, I have not neglected to light his Purse, that he might be the mo nimble in the Hall in its prosecutio After this manner I have hones done my best Endeavours to perso the part of a good Attorney.  pleas'd to accept therefore of this  good Will, since it has no other c than your Riches and Honour. T Gentleman has a good Estate and a ¦lerable Understanding, so that I m safely leave him to the rest of  Apology. I do not mention any fa¦ther Instances, because I am satisfy of your Generosity; but with a du¦ful Acknowledgment of your ma Obligations, subscribe, &c.
LETTER IV. The Ass's Answer. Ʋpon the same. SIR, I Have accepted your good will to∣wards me in sending a rich Client with a great deal of Acknowledg∣ment; and I'll assure you I shall endea∣vour not to seem ungrateful, by ta∣ing the greater care of his Cause. And ho' some People take me for an Ass, ecause I am a meer Lawyer; yet I hall give 'em to understand that they re deceived, tho' they will be still ailing at the Noble Study of the Di∣gests and Codes, as being too laborious nd confus'd, and always preferring heir loose idle Arts of Poetry and Pe∣antry. Be pleas'd therefore to know that in byassing a Judge, I boast a sin∣gular Talent; for I can so confound a Cause with subtil perswasions, that
it shall be impossible for any one  find out the Truth; and then I am  great a Master of the Art of Wranglin that I can split one Action into a tho¦sand, and so oblige my Clients to  manifold Acknowledgments of m Trouble, and consequently to as nu¦merous Fees. In short, my Clie never goes from me unsatisfied: Fo if my Adversary be never so able, an put me often to a seeming Non-plu yet I have always some trick in reserv to baffle his Argument, so that I of¦tentimes make him say what he neve meant or thought of. And moreove if our Cause happen to come before a ignorant Judge, as it may very ofte do, few now a-days giving themselve the trouble to study much; then yo may be assured the Victory will be ours; for my Arguments have alway most Energy upon them. And now before I prepare my self for you Friend's defence, I must acquaint you shall shear his Hide well, and that you must not take it ill if I should make
bold sometimes with a piece of his skin; for if any Profession deserves a Reward, surely that of an Advocate ought to be the most sensible. I am of Opinion therefore, that of all the Tyrannical Laws of Nero, that was the severest, which commands, Ʋt causarum Patroni sine Mercede aut Mu∣neribus causis adessent, related by Ma∣ichio in Tract. de Arbitr. Jud. Lib. 2. Cent. 4. Cons. 369. Nu. 2. For if he had been acquainted with that Saying of Lipsius in his 52 Epistle, and 2 Century, Quod dii bona laboribus ven∣dunt, I believe he never would have promulgated so barbarous a Law; moreover the reason why we are so well paid for our Pleading (and which the Ignorant Vulgar affords no better name to than Robbery and Extortion) s founded upon the highest Equity i∣maginable, for if we scarce have ever a Minutes rest and are always wasting our Brains upon Books for anothers profit; why should not their Purses evaporate heir Substance for our refreshment.
But now I promise you upon the Wo of a Man of Honour and Conscienc that your Client's Cause shall be first di¦spatch'd, and that speedily; for I kno very well that a good Advocate Deb studere brevitati & non disputationib & truffis, which many now a-days do as we are taught by Paris de Puteo i suo tractatu de syndicatu in verbo Ad¦vocati. Therefore being naturally a Enemy to long Discourses and Argu¦ments, I can the easier confess, I thin Contradictions and Disputes fit for no¦thing else but to conceal Truth, an Oppress ones Neighbour: Whereupo I am content to follow the Precepts o our Great Master Justinian, who i Authen. de Referendariis, teaches  Quod virtus in modicis consistit. Whe these prating Fellows do but frighte their Clients, and confound the Judge and so gain little or nothing by th Bargain: If you can therefore follow these my Sentiments, you'll certainly find 'em profitable and weighty  whilst I heartily subscribe my sel
Your Well-wisher and Friend, &c. LETTER V. The Ant to the Toad. Ʋpon Trade. SIR, I Am so far convinc'd of your Friend∣ship, that I dare recommend my elf to your service, for having lately nderstood you have open'd a rich and plendid Shop, where of necessity you ust have occasion for a great many lands, I was Ambitious amongst the est to beg you would make use of ine, humbly presuming my self so r qualifi'd for a Journey-man, as it ay be granted that one who has ade it his business his whole Life, is ble to bring a weak Argument to a ood end. And I will do my self this ustice to say, That with with good
words I can patch up a Broken A as well as any nimble-tongu'd Fel of 'em all, be it never so despe Believe me, Sir, the first Word  e're I spoke in my life, was a Ly And you know a Lye well plac'd a spoke to the purpose never deser blame if it Succeed, and that it is ve often capable of setting a lame M upon his Legs again. And besid that, I Kick and Cuff every body have a Face so brazen as not to be d¦couraged tho' I am convinc'd to be the wrong, for then my Impudent is greatest, when my Argument is w¦kest, for I can so wind 'em, and tu 'em, and baffle 'em, and run 'e down; that with the least Motion my hand I can make 'em of m mind, tho they are never so much e¦clin'd to the contrary. In short if ye please to send me a list of your Good you shall have no reason to doubt  my Managing the Buyers; This I pro¦mise you upon my word, and because by this time I believe you are suffici¦ently
acquainted with my Qualifica∣ons, I shall trouble you with no ore, but kiss Your Hands, and so bscribe, &c. LETTER VI. The Toad's Answer. A General Satyr. SIR, Receiv'd your Letter, and am so far resolv'd to comply with your sires as to send you a list of my oods: In the first place I have a great antity of Quilting for their Use, that  unreasonably stuff Discourses and g Ballads. 2. Fine Pencils for Lawrs that mind nothing else but whee∣ing their simple Cilents with good ords, and bad Deeds, painting to n the Light by Darkness, and Dark∣ss by Light. 3. A great number of asks for those Judges that would
palliate their Injustice, and appear Court double-fac'd to deceive the Igno¦rant and trepan the Cunning. 4. So thousands of hopping Monkeys,  those that having read S—e's Rhim and D—y's Reasons, have had imm¦diately a mind by the help of th counterpoise to dance upon the Ro of Poetry, and take away the La¦rel from deathless Dryden's Bro 5. A great many Bolognia wash-b to scour their hands that have fully 'em, by stealing other Mens Wo and then publickly selling them  their own. 6. Some hundreds  shears for those Blockheads, who sca knowing how to distinguish A from yet impudently undertake to  Cloaths upon an Authors Back whe¦ever any of his Works come into the hands. 7. A few of Galilaeus's Tu which representing things the small and most distant; for great and near, a proper for Courtiers, who believe the¦selves possest of Honours whilst th are only Infamies and dangerous P¦cipices,
which oftentimes turn to their in. 8. Abundance of Horse bits for ose Libertines that licentiously carp  Princes, and industriously endea∣our to expose their Follies, whilst they nnot conceal their own. 9. A great any Fans to cool those angry Men ith, who will be continually reven∣ng themselves upon Flies for sucking heir soure blood. 10. Some guilded orns for Cuckolds, who not only ive way to their Wives debaucheries, ut think themselves the more honou∣ed; and never cease to laugh at com∣mon Courtesans, because they imagine heir shame is less apparent. 11. Some ots of Conserve of Juniper, to com∣rt the Heart and clear the Brain from ull and gloomy Vapours: Also to help the digestion of some certain Go∣ernours and Dry-Heads who never pplaud any but their own Opinions. 2. Some few Barrels of certain little irds of Cyprus, pickled in Vinegar to romote the Appetites of some squea∣nish people, who are not able to relish
any thing but what comes from  and feed only upon Wafers made  Bran, and refuse all other dainties,  they never so delicate. 13. Go quantity of Rhubarb to Purge aw the Yellows from those brazen-fa People that never blush, but mainta their impertinencies with the sa countenances they utter'd 'em.  don't send you any Account of  Cloaths, but I can assure you, that  your self, or any of your Friends ha occasion, they may be fitted with  Degrees at my Shop; make me the¦fore sensible of the reality of your pr¦mises, and you shall find me grateful Yours, &c.
LETTER VII. The Goat to the Pig. On the Prodigal. I Know (Sir,) your Agonies for the death of your Father, cannot e well mitigated with Ink, because hey are too intense, nevertheless my eart that is willing to express your fflictions, communicates these dolo∣ous Drops to my Pen, that I may ac∣uaint you with my concern rather han Administer any Comfort to your Troubles: Let it be notwithstanding ome relief to you to consider that all iving Creatures are subject to Death, nd also that you are left sole Heir o an opulent Patrimony, there being one to divide with you those Acorns which before you could not call your own. I am not a little pleas'd to find you so full of dutiful demonstrations of Love towards him that gave you
your Being? And not like some p¦fligate Sons, that rather rejoyce th mourn at their Fathers Funeral Whilst they propose to themselve loose idle Life and a ridiculous pleas of spending all they have. Dispose yo self therefore to continue in the p¦dent course you have begun, and  pleas'd to make use of me as often  you shall find occasion. So wishing y all prosperity, I subscribe, &c. LETTER VIII. The Pig's Answer. Ʋpon the Same. YOur Generous concern for t loss of my Dear and Loving F¦ther, obliges me but to an humble r¦turn of thanks for it is altogether o of my Power to gratifie your Advi at full, since it has put a stop to m Sorrows, and dry'd up all my Tea
or having made an exact reflection pon your Words, I have been resolv'd r the future to lead a serene and quiet fe, since you have sufficiently satis∣'d me it is not in the Power of tears  recall an expir'd Breath. 'Tis true, y Patrimony is opulent; so great per∣aps, that it makes me rather the ob∣ct of Envy than Love: Neverthe∣ess, I am resolv'd to enjoy my self and end with pleasure what he has heapt ogether with so much Toil and La∣our. I consider he was in years, and  a violent Death had not prevented im, he could never have liv'd much onger. He has far'd well in his time, nd now Fate has shown herself so for∣ard to oblige me; Why should I go bout to Stent my self? I think I have o reason, and to convince you the etter of the Force of your Consolati∣ns, the first thing I shall do will be o pardon his Murtherers. In short, I m resolv'd to mind nothing else but ndulging and Fatning my self, and eave to others the case of Revenges.
For I should be a Fool indeed, if  the sake of the dead I should exp my self to the snares of the living  mean the Lawyers, who in this Kin¦dom are more greedy than any wh Insomuch that there is scarce a p free from the Sacrilege of their gri I am happy in being thus guided  your Advice, and which will alw have an unsurmountable Influe upon Yours, &c. LETTER IX. The Ferret to the Squirrel. Ʋpon Justice. YOU honour me too much,  whilst you oblige me with y Commands; and I am not a little  happy, that my endeavours in favo of the Cat could not prevail upon  slight a Theft, for I try'd all wa with the Chamber-maid to take
er Evidence, that she might not pro∣cute the Stealing a poor piece of heese with so much rigour, but she ntinued still deaf to my Intreaties, d positively insisted upon a total Re∣itution. I have always observed in dges, Attornies, and such like Peo∣e, so great an Avarice, that I never ed for having any thing to do with em; for Justice has no other Ori∣ine, than Covetousness of Gain, and espises all Acts of Mercy as much as  does the Humility of Prayers. For his poor Criminal having no Mony t Command, was instantly condem∣ed to the Pillory. But nevertheless e was pitied by the Mob, rather than olested; for they considered it a reater Crime in the Maid's Negli∣ence, than his Hunger, which has no aw, and therefore could not deserve o severe a Punishment; severe I call  to him, but to Common Thieves it erves as well for a Triumph as an Ig∣ominy. Now he's out of Goal; but evertheless banish'd the Province un∣der
an unmerciful penalty if he  turn, I pity him extreamly as I  his Friend; but, for the future, i has any Wit, he'll give a better Col for his Proceedings, and then he  pass for both honest and honoura If he had robb'd by the Gross,  might have secur'd himself; for  your little Rogues only that su when your great ones know how  avoid and stop the mouth of Justice  the future I beg you to make us your Commands, without any Ap¦gy, and to afford me a larger Fiel  display my Obedience, that I  with Actions more conformable  my Duty express the abundant ¦knowledgments of, &c.
LETTER. X. The Squirrel's Answer. Ʋpon the same. THE extraordinary Goodness that has oblig'd you to so zea∣s a Defence of the poor Cat, is so ch the greater, by your pretermit∣g no opportunity of acquainting me th it; and I am so much the oftner gag'd to beg of you to think of some∣ng wherein I might discharge part  your Obligations, and not always d my self under the burthen of so ny Benefits, without either the Ju∣ce or good Nature to ease my self,  repay you. Truly that Wretch, hose Misfortune it is to be under the ntence of such rash Judges, is ex∣mely to be pitied. And be pleas'd receive this as an irrefragable Truth, hat bad Officers are such, by the tentions of them, that advanc'd 'em;
for they exercise a burthensome T with a tacit License to do wrong,  how should they be able to answer  unreasonable Impositions laid up 'em? He that is rich, easily conquers  seeming Impossibilities; but he tha poor, is subject to every Calami Prisons are only fit to punish poor p¦ple, who have no Money to buy  their Fetters: When rich Men, w a golden Key, discharge all the str¦gest Locks, and avoid the justest P¦nishments, whilst, with the lustre of the dazling Gold, they blind the eyes of the weak Judges, and in spite of the gr¦test Crimes appear innocent. No our Friend had been but able to h greas'd the Fists of this greedy F¦ternity with a tolerable Recompe he had not been expos'd to so i¦mous a Punishment. Oh Villainy  Unnatural to Publick Authority! W a shame is it that the World sho so continually contaminate Nero  the Author of all sorts of Wicked when he could safely say, Quod
penetralibus suis venale aut ambi∣ni pervium! Let us comfort there∣e the Cat, since he suffered only for hat which his Necessities forc'd him o, whilst I heartily wish you the ac∣omplishment of all your Desires and Subscribe, &c. LETTER XI. The Camel to the Spaniel. Ʋpon Baylies. SOme few days since, I had the good fortune to have for my Guest a Gentleman of great account in this Kingdom of Congo; who, amongst o∣her things, related to me that you were enter'd into the King's Service: And without having any respect either o your own Birth, or the unspotted Ho∣nour of your Ancestors, were corru∣pted with a thousand Debaucheries. I must confess, at first, I was very much
startled at this News; but more  specially, when he added that 'tw the common Talk, that your Gen inclin'd you to the infamous Exerc of a Bayly. But I can scarce belie that your Noble Education, togeth with Reflections on the Worth of yo Parents, with the Spurs of Honour, a the Opprobrium of the World, should n prove sufficient Motives to remove yo detestable Resolutions. Return the¦fore, I beseech you, to your self, an do not suffer your Imprudence to lea you to your ruine: For Reputatio once lost, can scarce ever be recove¦red. And the blots of Infamy  water can wash away. If I were a¦quainted with the cause that gives  grea disturbance to your Brain,  would endeavour to remove it with proportionable means. Contain yo¦self then within the bounds of Re¦son, till I can learn it; for otherwi you will have cause to complain only of your self, and not to blame the Ma¦lignity of your Destiny. He that ob¦stinately
meets his own ruine, sure de∣serves but little pity. We ought to be on our guard against those that would offend us. Thus priding my self in having had the honour of tea∣ching you how to avoid a certain Evil, And wishing you all imaginable Prospe∣rity, I Subscribe, &c. LETTER XII. The Spaniel's Answer. Ʋpon Honour. YOur angry Letter would be suffi∣cient to make a considerable breach in my mind, and to make me yield my self wholly conquer'd by your Admonitions, did not the perswa∣sion I have of your Ignorance of the Honours, and particular Prerogatives, that Baylies enjoy in this Kingdom, a∣nimate me to sustain the fiercest As∣saults of your Pen. I would desire you therefore to distinguish between a com∣mon
Bayly, and their Head or Su¦rior; for if I were of this first sort, could certainly have no way to exc my self of the Infamy I had cont¦cted, but in the second rank my P is much more considerable, for  that I reasonably claim the Hono due to a Knight. A Title that in th days has been bought both with Blo and Gold. Be pleas'd to tell me mo over what are the Common Ensig that make a Knight? Are they not  Sword and Cross? Now I want n¦ther of these, for I always wear  broad Sword by my side; and, for  Cross, I bear on my Breast a great M¦dal of Gold. I must convince yo farther: For if it has been th custom amongst all the Europa Nations, to imitate the French in we¦ring a Collar about their Necks as  Mark of particular Honour conferr on 'em, why should I be said to bl¦mish my Reputation, by wearing  rich a one about mine? The Title  Domicellus, which with the Roma
arons was so much in request, had not it its Etymology from the Latin Word Dominus, which signifies Lord he Master. And mine of Baroncellus, who will deny to be derived from the Word Baro, which intimates a Prince with Lordship and Feudatories? Now f mine be more noble, and of better Quality, why should I be despis'd and blam'd when the other was so much respected? My Person, in short, in these parts is as it were sacred, for eve∣ry the least Affront is offer'd me is punish'd unmercifully. Woe be to him that dares, tho' never so manner∣ly, to oppose me in any thing; for  immediately incurrs the severest dis∣pleasure of my Prince, and oftentimes has his Family dispers'd and his Estate confiscated. Be pleas'd therefore, Sir, to weigh these my Justifications, which I must needs own do not seem to me so contemptible. And if the access to the Temple of Honour be so steepy and slippery, let not me be envied for ha∣ving so luckily arriv'd. I don't make
use of any farther Arguments to p¦swade you to a better Opinion of  Conduct, since I am sufficiently ¦tisfied I write to a Person who is b Prudent and Honest. But shall alway be very ambitious of being your Se¦vant whilst I am, &c. LETTER XIII. The Panther to the Tygre. Upon Preferment. I shall always be ready to lay hol of every occasion of doing you Ser∣vice; and therefore shall never cease to preferr the fulfilling of your Desires to any other private Interests: So that, in obedience to your Commands, I ac∣quaint you that I long since arrived in the Court of Phoenicia, in the Quality of his Majesty's Painter with but an ordinary Salary; but since, by the faithful Service of Ten years, there has
een some reasonable appearance of its ncreasing, tho' I must confess 'twas ll built upon random hopes, the com∣mon Food of Courtiers. I trusted up∣on a vain confidence of the first vacan∣cy of some good Office, being perswa∣ded that the King's Generosity would not dispense with as great Obligations. But in a short time I found my self not a little disappointed; for his Majesty's Cup-bearer's Place being vacant, I aw it immediately conferr'd upon one of his Grooms. You may imagine this was no small trouble to me; ne∣vertheless I was resolv'd to conceal it, and to dissemble, tho' it might very well have caus'd no common effects of Anger to see so mean a Fellow advanc'd over ones head. But because in Courts o discover ones thoughts is often at∣tended with no ordinary danger, I de∣termin'd with my self my pencil should express what my tongue dar'd not. And therefore having prepar'd a large Cloth, I cunningly represented the ri∣diculous Action of Sultan Osman, who
made one of his Gardners Begler or Vice-Roy of Cyprus, for having se him one day plant a Carrot with Ad¦dress. You cannot imagine, Sir, h every thing succeeded in this desig for the disposition of Figures, the pro¦portion of Limbs, and brightness  Colours, added to the truth of the Hi∣story, my Pencil being guided by th good Will I had to reprove so unwor∣thy an Action. The Picture being ¦nish'd, I took that time to expose it  when most of the Grandees of the Kingdom were invited to Court to  solemn Banquet. Various were the Opinions of the Guests upon this, a∣mongst the rest of the King's Rarities; but none more judiciously past their Judgments than two old Courtiers, who with Lynce's Eyes searching into the Marrow of the History, immedi∣ately publish'd thro' the Court, It was design'd to accuse his Sacred Majesty of Imprudence, in bestowing Places of Credit and Honour on Persons of mean Condition. This Opinion once spread,
it was not long before it reach'd the King's Ears, who was so grievously nettled, that he immediately order'd the Picture to be burnt, and my Per∣son to be as instantly seized; which undoubtedly would have succeeded ac∣cordingly, had not my Prudence taught me to avoid but the beginnings of so certain Danger, and my Legs as generously supported me in a speedy flight out of the Kingdom. In short, I have learnt at my own costs that eve∣ry particular Passion is pernicious in the Management of any Affair, and that 'tis safer to commend than blame, especially when one has any ambitious end. Thus, Sir, I have given you all the account I am capable of; so beg leave to subscribe, &c.
LETTER XIV. The Tygre's Answer. Ʋpon the same. I Consider in your so candid com¦pliance the abundant Civility  your heart, and which has alway been so charitably bestowed upon ev very occasion upon one who has  little deserv'd it: I return you a thousand Acknowledgments; and desire you  believe I suffer more by your Misfor¦tunes, than 'tis possible for you to  by my Impertinence, tho' I am con¦scious I am troublesome enough. 'T an unalterable Law of this Age, th Honours are oftner the Rewards o Vice than Vertue; and that Knave or Fools are always preferr'd to great Offices by an undistinguishing Destiny. The Money of Merit is not of any va∣lue or consideration in the Bank of the Court; for there, an Enemy's Story shall
always take place of the justest Truth. He that does not grease an Exchequer-Officer's Fist well, shall either receive his Money too soon or too late. We must not think our selves ever establish'd at Court; and we must endure even to be pist upon, if we have any aim to rise. Flattery was heretofore a Vice, but now 'tis valued above the nicest Vertue: For he that knows not how to flatter, must never think to make a good Courtier. The Ears of great Men must never be offended with a relation of any bodies Faults that in the least resemble their own. We ought not, for our own Safety, to stir up a Lion that has our death in his Power. Approve of, and profit your self by this Advice; and you'll oblige one that has both an Heart and a Pen always ready to serve you: So Subscribes, &c.
LETTER XV. The Dragon to the Badger. Ʋpon Historians. I Have received the History compil by your incomparable Pen, a have perus'd it with a great deal  wonder and delight; nevertheles must take liberty to correct a se Particulars in some places, which in my Opinion would render it a little t worthy of blame; for the free Censu of a Friend many times contributio towards the Perfection of a Work,  should be unjust if out of any respect to your Quality I should decline tha Duty. Wherefore treating you with all manner of Freedom, I affirm tha in some Places you have made your self too great a Stranger to the Truth, which ought to be so closely follow'd by every Historian. I observe more over, that some Passages that deserve
o be render'd odious in the highest degree, have been so slightly handled by you, that their Readers have been depriv'd of the Profit of such ill Exam∣ples. Likewise you have fallen into extravagant Excesses in commenda∣tion of some raw Captains, and de∣scrib'd 'em so many Alexanders when they never saw their Enemies Face, nor I'm confident had ever any expe∣rience in storming Towns or attack∣ng Parties. But that which offends e most of all, is the manner with which you extol the trivial Actions of our own Prince; and with an odious artiality and groveling Affection exalt s bare Successes, whilst you conceal the braver Attempts of your Enemy, and which deserve to be consecrated even to Immortality. History ought ot to be alter'd for the sake of Falsi∣ies; and Virtue ought always to take place of Vice, or it will lose its de∣sign'd Effect. Be pleas'd therefore to correct these Errors, or to remove my doubts by some more pregnant Rea∣sons;
for I must always believe  sufficiently qualified to defend  you write, tho' I take this Liberty  your Friend. Pardon this, and belie me yours, &c. LETTER XVI. The Badger's Answer. Ʋpon the same. I Should not have dar'd to have ma any reply to your Reflections  unwilling to seem disenting from yo Authority, and to support my our weakness, did not your generosity in¦vite me to a Defence. I apply my se therefore to remove those scruples that as a rigorous and nice Censurer disturb your Mind. And I shall treat with you after the same Innocent Liberty as you have done with me. You say i the first place I have made my sel too great a stranger to the truth. Now,
at first seems to be a proposition  so great Force that it might be ought rashness in me to presume to contradict it, but who knows but with  few words I may change the face of he matter and make it seem other∣wise? I say then, that Truth is a La∣y of that nice and honest Temper that he will never be seen out of her Cham∣er bare-fac'd, but always covered with a manyfold Veil to avoid the nares that are every where spread for er, insomuch, that the bare token of er Arrival, is enough to put a whole Court into confusion. If then she must needs walk circumspectly, and hinks her self safer in obscurities than ght, why should I be so rigorously am'd if my History so plentifully en∣ch'd with the Actions of great Prin∣es, chuses to make her appear Maskt. elieve me, Sir, all things are lost which re not Registred by History, and those any times boast Eternity; for Tempus stodes sui habent. Next, for the Se∣ond point you blame me because I
handled Vices so slightly. To which Answer; That Princes have such  Absolute sway even over the grea Pens, that they awe bold truths and  have nothing said of 'em, but what grees with their humours: Therefo pray consider if they would be will to lend their ears to the justest Repro of Imprudent, Tyrant, Covetous, D¦solute, or the like. Many that ha made use of these Truths, have th not purchas'd the Contempts and O¦um of their Princes, and by an un¦pected Metamorphosis seen their P changed into Oars, and their Sh to Sails, which with the breath  their Masters displeasure have carry 'em away Slaves and Wande through the World: These are t fruits of telling a Man his own. T ill Characters are given of any one  easier answer'd with a Sword than  Pen; you shall find few Historians  this Age, who do not rather chuse  a foundation, Non quid alii egerint,  quid optimè actum fit. To avoid th
nishments that those meet with who e their Arms longer than their nsciences. Now for the Third Ob∣ction, Of the undeserv'd Encomiums iven to Captains, I hope to clear my , altho' Historia milites propter odem quae mortuos sequitur prompti∣es efficit ad pericula subeunda. Yet hy should not I for the benefit of osterity raise even to the Stars the me of our Warriers? Tell me I be∣eech you if the Chroniclers of Cyrus's Victories were present when he ruin'd he Empire of the Medes, laid the oundation of the Persian Monarchy, du'd the East, and Triumph'd over Asia? If they saw Philip of Macedon stablish his Empire, Enlarge his King∣dom, and Enslave all Greece? It re∣mains only now, That I Answer to the mputations cast upon me, that I am too Partial to my own Prince, and eglect to do others Justice: I Answer, hat there are few Writers, let 'em be ever so good that do not flatter that Person they receive Favours from; and
so permit me to conclude, That  have exactly followed my Predeces Rules I cannot be reasonably said ¦err. These have been all the Reas I have been able at present to coll in my Defence; be pleas'd theref to consider of this my Answer, and you think it necessary oblige me wi a continu'd Reply, and you shall ha no occasion to complain of my Ing¦titude, whilst I acknowledge my  Yours. LETTER XVII. The Wolf to the Porcupine. Ʋpon Hypocrites. BEcause you are an honest Fello and my very good Friend, I w resolv'd not to suffer you to be led  way with an Opinion that I was  the wrong, to open a Shop of Mas in this City, where 'tis said the we¦ring
of 'em is a capital Crime. But  must know that a certain Lord of  Merit and Judgment has lately sish'd this Law, and maintain'd  his Pen, that Metamorphoses  Disguises are highly necessary in  Scene of this World. This is the y means to conceal a cunning Ser∣nt, who perhaps has ambitious houghts in his head. For with his countenance hid under the Mask of a eming Liberty, this Lord Acted his art so extremely well in a certain ragedy, that tho' he was personally own to every body, yet his Designs ere not unridled till he had chang'd s Condition, and appear'd an abso∣te Monarch rather than a Servant,  he pretended. This Action has o∣en'd every bodies eyes, and advanc'd a at esteem and reputation for the Art  Masquerading: For tho' the Vulgar elieve a Mask only becomes a Mini∣er of Justice; yet a wise Man will metimes conceal his own Person, and eep retir'd within the Folds of an ob∣scure
Mantle the better to obtain  desired Ends. Also Nature h sometimes requires a Mask to c her Deformities; and he that can  fit it on, always obtains a suitable ¦ward. My Returns in this Comm¦dity are very considerable and gainf but especially in some particular s of Masks which have thin and though¦ful Faces, for they are very nume¦sly bought up, because they ma people seem wise and honest in  sight of the World, when they  really Villains and lying Hypocri There's nothing more remains,  that I desire you always to comma me, and to oblige me with some A¦count of the different Transactions  the World; for my Curiosity that way  sometimes so very extraordinary, th I often lose a Dinner to hear or read Gazette. So, with hearty Wishes  your Welfare, I Subscribe, &c.
LETTER XVIII. The Porcupine's Answer. Ʋpon News. Shall always rejoice for the Advan∣tage you make of your Commo∣ies; and am glad that you are not ect to that Punishment you men∣ed, since your Miscarriage would  the greatest grief to me imaginable, d your Suffering the greatest trou∣le. I would willingly correspond ith your Commands in some mea∣e; but because distant Affairs are any times corrupted by passing thro' any hands, I must desire you not o take it amiss, if you meet with any alsities or Errors, since other people's Accounts leave always some tincture of the Nature that produces 'em. To begin then, I acquaint you that the Affairs of the World are in such a plight that they are never like to be
reconcil'd, whilst every body make his business to throw Dust in his N¦bour's Eyes. The King of Epyr so desperately in love with a cer City in the middle of the Morea, th to be Master of it He has lately ¦tempted a violent Rape; but be disappointed by the force or vigilan of the Inhabitants, he daily end¦vours to corrupt them with Go whilst his Attempts give so great  jealousie to the Borderers, that he  more Eyes over him than the Bea¦ful Io had heretofore. The Prince  the Morea laughs heartily at his D¦sign; and tho' he seems to stand wi his hands to his Girdle, yet neverth¦less he is always prepar'd to give  Vomit to those that shall contract fl¦matick Humours by the Unreason¦bleness of the Weather, or the Fatig of their Journey: And is resolv'd  warm 'em well with plentiful Salut that they may catch no Cold  Nights.
Captain Saiaverda has spent all the paign to recover his last Winter-ters, and to get under the Walls f Culiacan, where he has been salu∣d with a general Curse for having d a mind to fill their Town with Spaniards, a People of that turbulent d troublesome temper, they thought  impossible to please 'em: Whereup∣n he was oblig'd to promise 'em they ould only have a few Reigments of Sermans. But that frighted 'em worse an the other, for they alledg'd they ad had a bad Vintage, and Wines ere scarce; and therefore could not mply with his Proposals; so that in ort he was forc'd to retire without eing receiv'd, for fear of a farther ha∣d of his Person or Reputation. his Disobedience of theirs, has caus'd m no small Enemies at Court, and ey have lately been in consultation hat punishment to Inflict on such wcy Offenders. But 'tis thought by he most capacious Heads, that their esolutions will rather Pace than Gal∣lop,
and tho' the weather be very ca that they will put but little Fewel  the Fire, because oftentimes from  small spark proceeds a great con¦gration. The King of Babylon, as 'tis sai has Assembled a Diet of his Nobles,  put Cupping Glasses to their Sho¦ders, or Leeches to their Necks,  keep 'em in health and prevent th being Lunatick, but 'tis doubted the will not easily give their consents;  tho' the Wound be only cutane yet it is nevertheless very sensible. A so this Remedy is not approv'd suffici¦ent to divert the Paroxisms of a Fe that may reasonably be caus'd by  bad disposition of Humours which  to be fear'd in that Body, and whi in time may grow malignant and d¦generate into perfect Madness. The Lord D' Cottiniglio, who b Arms under the King of Catai, w lately commanded home by his Mas Prester John, to employ him in  Supream Command of his own Troop
who was receiv'd accordingly with no common Demonstrations of avour and Affection. Pursuant to which he Posted away in great hast to the Borders of the Kingdom, where the Army expected him: All the way  was splendidly Receiv'd and Enter∣ain'd, met in every Province by the ilitia of the County, Saluted by the Cannon of every Fortress, and treated with the Title of His Excellence where∣ever he came. But because the War his Master made was altogether fomented and supported by Ambition, the same breath that sent him Remanded him back again, so that in the middle of his Journey he was depriv'd of his Charge, Title, Reward, and Favour, finding but too late that Fortune sel∣dom continues long constant. This Honourable accident gave opportunity to the King of Trapezonda's Minister, to put him also out of Favour at the Court of Catai, where he had always had the repute of a Prudent and Able Soldier.
There is lately arriv'd from De¦mark a whole Bugget full of New the most considerable of which is That not long ago a Country-ma leading an Asse through the Street richly cloath'd with fine Cloath, hap¦ned to pass by some Officers and Sol∣diers that were near, who being migh∣tily offended that so vile a Creature should arrogate to himself an honou to wear Scarlet, and which they only thought due to themselves, were abo to have sacrific'd both the Asses t their displeasure; so strange a surpriz at first startled the poor Country-man but at length being unwilling to expos his own Life, as well as that of his be∣loved Companion for want of a few words, he rais'd his courage with a Bottle by his side, and began to offer Reasons to encline 'em to mercy, but they would hear none; when with Sword in hand being about to Execute their bloody purpose, the courageous Asse, seeing the extremity he and his Brother were driven to, began di∣stinctly
to articulate these Words. Gentlemen Soldiers, lay aside your Scorn, ridle your Anger, and be not so cruel to one that has been your Benefactor. Remember that you wear Scarlet by Means of my Labour. And if from Beg∣gars and Dunghill-rakers, you are rais'd to this Honour and Power, do not abuse e and my Brother that have been the Cause of it. Remember that when Drums and Trumpets sound no more, our gains will cease, and you may have eed of either of us to save your Lives. Here the Asse ended, which he had no oner done than their forward Blades were return'd to their quiet Scabbards, for they began to be sensible that it would have been a foolish action for them to shed others bloud to empty their own Veins. Of the Affairs of Brazile and China, we have no account as yet, but expect Letters in few Days, and then you hall be sure to have it; so hoping you will be throughly satisfi'd with these my poor endeavours, I submit my
self wholly to your Censure, and  Subscribe, &c. LETTER XIX. The Sheep to the Lamb. Ʋpon Poetry. YOu are ridiculous to ask me wh I have forsaken the pleasing Co¦versation of the Muses, and moreo as if there were no other Poet to d¦sire of me a Copy of Verses to c you of the Head-ake, or to rid yo Brain of those Whimsies that are th for the most part, the Product of Mela¦choly; yet I would not have yo Despair if I don't comply with yo for if you'll give but a little loose t your Purse-strings, you may easi find in the Booksellers Shops Rhim and Poetry enough to last you re¦ding all your Life time. The Co Pegasus who at first had so great
Strangury of Urine, that every quan∣tity was purchas'd with its weight in Gold, to refrigerate their Lips become dry with much Singing, now flows with so great a Stream, that every one lays up a copious provision; and the Concourse of its Followers is even in∣numerable. For now 'tis found that the smell only is enough to make a Poet, tho' before he were never so much a Block-head. Whence it comes to pass that now-a-days Poets do not meet with so many Maecenas's, to fur∣nish 'em wherewithall to purchase so precious a Liquour. Let them that will therefore continue their Addresses to the Muses, for my part I renounce 'em all, gratitude now seldom affording any other recompence to a poor Poet, than a gracious Nod, or an affected empty Complement, and sometimes even these are deny'd by a covetous Pa∣tron: Who, tho' he may be liberal e∣nough to support his Luxuries, yet to a poor learned Thread-bare Versifier will not afford a souse. I wish you
better fortune than you seem to Envy in me, and so Subscribe, &c. LETTER XX. The Lamb's Answer. Ʋpon the Mode. IT Cannot be deny'd but that this Age is so very vicious and so over-run with Avarice, that it would be no common stratagem to keep the Libe∣ral and Mechanical Arts longer upon their Legs, reduc'd almost to anni∣hilation by the greediness of those that for publick benefit are oblig'd to sup∣port 'em. For my part I have reason to Curse him a thousand times, that first learnt me the Trade of a Barber; since I had no sooner obtain'd it, but there started up a certain Lady call'd, Madam The Mode, so very Whimsi∣cal, Fantastical, and Moveable, that she can scarce remain constant one
Minute. Women naturally abhor Old Men, because they have overliv'd their power of enjoying them: But this Lady is so very much enamour'd on Gray Hairs, that she makes the very∣est Youths buy 'em after the price of Diamonds, and in despite of time will have young Men white as Snow, tho' they be but very Boys. If I have not a great deal of patience to polish these per∣fum'd Civet-Cats, you may very well judge, and particularly when I go about to adjust their Beards, because sometimes they will have their Moustaches turn'd round in a curl, at another time like a point of Interrogation. Oftentimes they must have 'em after the Turkish Mode, and sometimes they shave 'em almost quite away, leaving only a little Hair on the upper Lip, to distinguish their Mouths from their Buttocks. Now notwithstanding all this fatigue and vexation, I must confess I should be well enough pleas'd if these Ganymedes would but reward me well; but believe me, Sir, there are some of 'em so very
hide-bound, that they will scarce a¦ford me bare thanks, and others will ¦ly bid me God b'w'you, and promise  come and pay me another time, whi they never mean it; and so leave  poor miserable Cutbeard as famish'd  an Air-fed Poet. I shall trouble you wi no more, Complaints and Compli¦ments being alike tedious, but Sub¦scribe, &c. LETTER XXI. The Buck to the Goat. Ʋpon Musicians. I May well say I am escap'd out o the very jaws of Death, for a lon and painful Infirmity had almo brought me to my last gasp: Where¦fore I hope, Sir, you will not conclud my long silence proceeded from any want of Affection, but rather pity my misfortunes which oftentimes ob¦lige
us to forget our selves as well as our friends. At present, I thank Fate I find my self out of danger, but ne∣vertheless very weak: My Physicians have attributed the Cause of my In∣disposition to Melancholy, and there∣fore have advis'd me to keep up my Spirits, and support Nature with chear∣ful Recreations and pleasant Pastimes for fear of a Relapse, which they say would be worse than the first Disease: I have therefore entertain'd into my service a Musician, who, to give him his due, has very much enliv'ned my mind with Trills, Quavers, Pauses, and o∣ther Graces; insomuch that I must really confess I never enjoy'd so sweet a tast of Life before. For he has made me truly sensible that Mu∣sick, having its first origin from Hea∣ven, there is no Sadness which it can∣not alleviate, nor Affliction which it is not able to disperse. But if his Voice has been so great a relief to me, his Impertinence has been no less grie∣vous, for in a few Days he has not only
offended my Ears, but almost brought me to my Bed again; for changin his Services into slights, his civiliti into bad Words, and the most regula¦ted Harmony into a Concertless con¦fusion, he is become altogether into¦lerable: I can provide no meat that can satisfie him, no drink that ca please him; and, in a word, he is mo scrupulous than a great belly'd Woman, for he nauseates and refuses every thing▪ His belly is his God, and therefore forsooth must be stuft with the Thr∣sties of Lucullus, the Fish of Vedi Pollione, the Dinners of Vitellius, and the Suppers of Caligula. If by chance I de∣sire him to Sing, to divert the disturbance of the Neighbouring Prison, whilst I am not permitted to take the Air, he shall presently excuse it and tell me he is hoarse, or he has got a cold, or his Head akes, or what not. In short, he never cares for Singing if I desire it, but if he sees me never so little intent upon any business, then he shall be sure to Serenade me; and the more I
desire him to forbear, the more he hall insist to rattle in my Ears. I can∣not express to you, Sir, how trouble∣some, humoursome, capricious, and antastical this fellow is, for he is more nconstant than the Sea, and more changeable than the Moon. I think sometimes to rid me of his Tyranny, by discharging him; but then I must o it to his content, tho' to my own oss, that he may have no occasion to lander me with his Tongue; to have a Poet for ones Enemy is a great mis∣fortune, because with his Satyrs he may obscure my fame, but to be ha∣ed by a Musician is far worse, for he can express Invectives more lively with his Voice, than the other with his Pen. With which I shall conclude not to rouble you any farther with unman∣rly complaints, but kiss your Hands, and so Subscribe, &c.
LETTER XXII. The Goat's Answer. Ʋpon the same. WHat enormous Crime have y committed, Sir, that shoul merit so severe a Penance, as to h a Musician for your Table-fellow Meer good Nature obliges me to co¦dole you more for this Misfortune than the Misery you say has torme¦ted you so long. 'Tis true that M¦sick ravishes the heart and elevates  mind; but at this day 'tis practis'd  such mean, proud and petulant Peop that it oftentimes has a quite cont effect. These Coxcombs think  make their Art better received by b¦ing longer desired; and therefore a¦ways take delight to delay their perfo¦mances with affected Complemen and lying Excuses, and a thousand c¦mical Shrugs and awkard Unwilling¦nesses,
which would move even He∣raclitus himself to Laughter. But in my judgment such uncertain Artists should be serv'd as Themistocles was; who being ask'd to sing, and refusing it, was very decently kick'd out of the Company to make room for better humour'd Men. And thence I sup∣pose came the Saying amongst the Greeks,Aristophan. Vesp. Ignosce m Cythara nere nescit. when they would denote a Fool or a Mad∣man, to call him a Man without Musick. But be it how it will, if ever you intend to ve a quiet Life, let that Fellow be re∣mov'd from you immediately. Else you may find your self as much emba∣rass'd as he was, who being almost deaf∣ned with the Contests of Two Musi∣cians about the pre-eminence of their Voices, was forc'd at length (because he would not use 'em as Apollo did Marsia) to rise and run away, leaving them to the confusion of their Obsti∣nacy, and not able to support the de∣fence of an imaginary sound. There∣fore
I hope, Sir, you will not be le dispos'd to bear with the Liberties  this Musician, than readier enclin'd  take oftner occasions of commandi me, whilst I heartily profess my se yours, &c. LETTER XXIII. The Hiena to the Dog. Ʋpon Detraction. YOur Curiosity enclines you to  fantastical search, whilst yo endeavour to know who was that  famous Pasquin, that with an unexpres¦sible Applause of his Railleries was s much reverenc'd by the World. Yo must know then he was an excellent Tailor in Rome (altho' by some he i said to be an Host) who in his prope Calling had no Equal, by name Ma∣ster Pasquin, and who kept a Sales∣man's Shop in the Parione. The fre∣quent
resort of people that made use  him, oblig'd him to keep several urney-men that he might put the edier dispatch to his undertakings; hich fellows, tho' they were not le, yet prated eternally, and spent ost of their time in finding fault ith the great Men of Rome; inso∣uch that I verily believe their words ere oftentimes more numerous than eir stitches. But these reproaches eing vented by mean Fellows, were ken but little notice of; for many mes instead of reprimands, they met ith a reward from those they inten∣d to expose. Afterwards from these oys the custom of Railing got a∣ongst the Citizens, who made so od use of it as to bespatter one ano∣er considerably: At length this asquin dy'd, but the Vein of Satyri∣ng did not end with him; for the ople of Rome bearing some respect  his Memory, erected the Stump of Statue where his House stood, and hich Inherited both his Name and
Actions; for not discontinuing the C¦stom to reflect on Courtiers and ¦lumniate great Men, they did the sa thing by a Paper pasted up, as the old ¦lows Botchers did before with th tongues: Whereupon every one took ¦berty to vent their disgusts by the be of this Person, who always having i his Power to reproach and cond whom he pleas'd; at length render'd hi¦self more famous than the celebrated C¦tick Aretine. The Wit and Railery  this Statue dispenses by anothers he is in great esteem; insomuch that  is sometimes purchas'd at a great r and sometimes also its Authors m with the severest punishments: But t which is most to be wonder'd at,  that having no Feet it runs all over  World, and no Hands nor Arms,  it embraces all. This is what I h been able to gather concerning  Person and Employment of Ma Pasquin, so that I hope it is suffici to Answer your commands, which  always be observ'd to his power, t desires to Subscribe, &c.
LETTER XXIV. The Dog's Answer. Ʋpon the Same. I Have been often made sensible of your good will towards me upon se∣veral occasions, and particularly by this ort History of Master Pasquin, which  heartily thank you for, and do as∣ure you I shall never be able to forget  Person that is so frequently obli∣ing. This Taylor's good fortune as certainly sufficient to have made Alexander envy him more than he id the Glories of Achilles, to re∣commend his name to Eternity, by means of a Statue; and to have such n Homer as you to write his History and Vertues. But Achilles did not at∣ain this Honour without Magnani∣ous labour and heroick Deeds, when our Taylor was at no trouble or ex∣pence. I fancy the design of the Peo∣ple of Rome in building this Statue was o reclaim more by his biting Railleries,
than Cato should by his severe Ce¦sures. But we find it had not  effect, for Raillery is now grown  common with the World, that it  seldom taken in earnest. Satyr an Pasquinates have now a-days the sam influence upon Mankind, as my b king has over the Moon. If sm Sayings, biting Sentences, and poi¦nant Words could have any effect up¦on bad People, it would be necessar for every City to have a School  learn 'em in. It was the Opinion of some Politi∣cians that 'tis almost expedient for th happyness of a civil body to murm sometimes against their Prince, fo Subjects sooner discharge the Veno of their Indignation by speaking freely than acting traiterously. Nevertheles this liberty of talking ought to b moderate, and not malapert and i¦pudent: If Pasquin could but conte himself to be a harmless Universal Phy¦sician, and to cure People of their de¦fects modestly, he might reasonably
deserve every bodies good word, but se unbridled inclinations of his to nd Peoples Reputations, and to make n ridiculous, can deserve no better me than Rashness, Impudence, and lly. And at last he may happen  vent something that may cause his grace and downfall, as it has fre∣ently been experienc'd by other such litious Wits in the like Cases; I be∣ve it would be no small advantage to squin's friends, if he had these words graven in his base, Emenda & hic  ibi vir esto. That is, You that have  mind to show the sharpness of your it and Judgment, consider well first  what you do, and when you come hi∣er, be sure to have your Eyes about , to observe if there be any Spies near t might see you fix your Satyrs; herwise you may incur the danger of h an Attempt. Now to conclude: ose matters that relate to Princes, o' they may be safely observ'd, yet ey cannot be utter'd so; and I should ther approve of that remedy the Se∣nate
made use of to reclaim Calig than Pasquinates and Libels. Th have taken the liberty to enlarge up your Subject, not to instruct but to e¦tertain my self, and discharge my O¦ligations to you which you have o laid upon me to write, tho' I  blush to think I have attempted t copying of your thoughts, so S¦scribe, &c. LETTER XXV. The Camelion to the wild Boar. Ʋpon Courtiers. WIthout doubt, Sir, your goo¦ness pleases it self with  many unmerited Favours you do  yet the oftner I reflect upon your kin¦nesses, the greater is my Sence of th Obligations. I heartily thank you  your Congratulation of the Hono lately done me by his Majesty, an
wish I could return you the like nstrations: In a few days I shall forward to Court, where because I an absolute stranger, and being told  to please his Prince a Courtier  dissemble and flatter, I have ad∣d with some Friends, very skilful in se matters, what course to take to id errors. And one amongst other ngs has sent me a certain Powder de of an herb call'd Fortune, which himself (being an accomplish'd Cour∣r) has many times experienc'd a∣inst the venomous wounds of Envy, d which will prove the like Antidte  any body else; providing it be so∣rly and temperately made use of: r envious people do not employ eir Malice against our Persons, but e excesses of Fortune that we enjoy. Also my Lord Duke Rhinoceros, a ming Courtier, and my very good iend, writes to me to provide my f plentifully of some certain yellow ills, to be procur'd of the Bankers; ithout which he says I should pass
my time but ill at Court, being a¦lutely necessary to purge away Mel¦choly, caus'd by the Avarice and gratitude of great Men. He has  oblig'd me with a copious account  the Art of a Courtier, wherein I f one Chapter with this Title Silenti servato: Now I confess to you, Sir,  incapacity in not being able to fath the depth of this Mystery, for it se to me that a Courtier ought to be ¦ry well provided with words to Am and Baffle those poor wretches, whe indiscretion obliges 'em to attend c¦tinually without ever being able have Access to their Prince, and w is always kept ignorant of the truth every thing: Now if silence be t way to dissolve Friendship, why is prescrib'd to be so exactly practis'd Court? Perhaps because Friendsh and the Court being two incompatib things, it were better for a Court to have no Friends at all, than to ha 'em false. I humbly beg therefore y would be pleas'd to unriddle this Eni
, that I may with the better securi∣ proceed with my Journey, and I ll always acknowledge my self in∣itely oblig'd, and an eternal Admi∣er of your Learning and Truth, &c. LETTER XXVI. The wild Boar's Answer. Ʋpon the Same. THe gentile Pen of my Lord Duke Rhinoceros, has so livelily ex∣ess'd my Sentiments, that I could not ish you better than to speak little at ourt: For so it is, Sir, that a Court∣ ought to be sometimes Mute, as  well as loquacious. Loquacity be∣g a loose superfluity of words vented ithout any thought, so that tho' this cious Quality be never so essential to e Person; yet, (if he will be a Cour∣er and not a Fool) he ought to deavour at least to appear Wise, by
speaking little, which is certainly the property of a wise Man, when talking much is undoubtedly that of a En Tho' silence (I grant you) being  unadvisedly dissolves the links  Friendship, yet handled with discre on always joyns 'em the closer: Fo he that maliciously conceals a prais due to a Friend, is a promoter of Envy and Detraction, whilst he that exalt anothers virtuous Actions knits an i¦dissoluble knot of Gratitude which time it self can scarce dissolve. Silenc was heretofore painted full of Eye and Ears, but without a Mouth,  show us, as I believe, that we ough to speak never, or seldom; or if w must needs talk, that our words b first very well weigh'd and considere of before we transmit 'em to o Tongue, for always a great Talker  the sign of a Fool, when if he had be able to have held his Tongue, he mig have passed for both Learned a Wise. Silence is always requir'd by Prince in his Courtiers, and Secre
i the surest step into his Favour, whilst much talking is an unavoidable Omen of his Ruin. Consider Sir, the Instability of these preferments, and you'll agree with me that my Lord Duke has counsel'd you more like a Friend than a Courtier, receive therefore this first occasion of decla∣ring my Friendship, and believe me very Ambitious of living in your good Opinion, and which will always be the humble desire of, &c. LETTER XXVII. The Unicorn to the Elk. Ʋpon Idleness. THe necessity which now obliges me a fresh to have recourse to our Candour and Goodness, one way  very dear to me, because I know hat those Virtues with which your lind is so plentifully enrich'd, are the
more perfect by being the oftner em∣ploy'd: But on the other hand, I am very unwilling to be so frequently troublesome to a person whose great Affairs, one would think, might privi∣lege him from Addresses of this na∣ture. It will then be the effect of your natural inclinations to bear with me, and the result of an unweary'd good∣ness to forgive and comfort me; I must therefore desire you to understand that my Secretary (who in the Fatigue of business and the exercise of Politick and Civil Functions, has not his fel∣low) is lately to mine and his own Misfortune seiz'd with a stubborn di∣stemper in his hands, which has ren∣der'd him absolutely unfit for writing▪ So that it has put my utmost Inventi∣on upon the Rack, to contrive some remedy that I may not be depriv'd o so learned and useful a Servant, but all in vain; the Physicians after many fruitless Consultations scarce know what to do next, but nevertheless fo the last Remedy have advis'd me to
your Excellencies Nails, supposing it to be the Cramp. In pity therefore to this poor Wretch, but much more to those whose livelyhoods depend up∣on his Cure, I humbly supplicate your Excellency to favour me with a few scrapings, and I dare promise he shall always live sensible of the highest Notions of Gratitude and Obligation: And for my own part I shall always study to Indulge the least Motive of service, and which will be daily due to your Merit and my own Inclinati∣ons, so humbly Subscribe, &c. LETTER XXVIII. The Elk's Answer. Ʋpon the Same. MY good will is always so ready to comply with your desires, that I esteem it no ordinary good For∣tune when you are pleas'd to com∣mand
me, and accordingly have en∣deavour'd to obey you by the enclos'd quantity of scrapings of my Nails, which I could wish might have that fancy'd effect you are pleas'd to ho∣nour 'em with, for that ingenious Gentleman's sake who has so deplora∣ble an occasion; and for whose wel∣fare I am the more concern'd, because it is correspondent to your satisfaction. Permit me nevertheless to signifie my Opinion a little upon this Distemper; 'tis true that Nature has bestow'd upon you an Horn inestimable for the Power it has of o'ercoming Malignities and the mortal Qualities of Poyson, and to me she has been over-prodigal of her favours (if I may believe the Do∣ctors) in impregnating my Nails with a Vertue of driving away the Cramp. But Art, who has always been known to excell Nature, has invented many ill humours, whose pestiferous Quali∣ty my Horn has not been able to Ma∣ster, and that sort of Cramp that con∣tracts great Mens clutches; I be∣lieve
yours would do no good up∣on; our skilful Surgeons are always ent to load their hands well with ron or any other heavy Metal, who re troubled with this Distemper, be∣cause with the continu'd weight the ttracted Nerves might be extended, nd recover their first Motion. I hould therefore mightily commend their Policy, if you could perswade our People to weigh down your Se∣etary's hand well with Gold, whose eight and Vertue is certainly effica∣ous enough to resolve all Attractions f the Nerves, which might hinder  hand to dispatch their business:  pleas'd to accept this Counsel in good part, and believe it altogether uggested to my Pen by the ardent de∣re I have to serve you, whilst I con∣firm my self Yours, &c.
LETTER XXIX. The Ape to the Fox. Ʋpon Favourites. I Should think my self very unworthy of the excellent Character of being your Servant, if I should pretermit any the least occasion of expressing the Obligations of but common Gra∣titude towards your Merit and Fa∣vours: I find my self therefore en∣gag'd to give you an account of my Travels, would you be pleas'd then to know that I have travers'd many Kingdoms and States with very vari∣ous Fortune, for in some Places I was receiv'd and caress'd by every body; and as if they had seen a delightful Prodi∣gy of Nature, they surrounded and courted me on all sides with wonder and joy: In others (Jlt Fortune shew∣ing me her back-side) as if I had been the vilest and most villanious Creature
upon Earth, with publick Hissings, and Hootings, and showers of Stones and Brickbats, I was forc'd to leave the place to avoid being the Pastime of Children, and the Sport and Mockery of the brazen-fac'd Mob. So that at length being resolv'd, or rather forc'd, to put an end to my Pilgrimage, I was enclin'd to settle my self in some place where I might get my Bread, with as little sweat of my Brows as possible, and therefore immediately determin'd to go to the Court of Mo∣rocco, and where I now am. Scarce had I been three days in this Court, but I was made a Gentleman of the Bed-Chamber: Upon which I vow at first I thought I could have touch'd Heaven with my finger; but Fortune that knows not how to degenerate from the rest of her Sex, made me quickly sensible of her Inconstancy, for I found I must Exercise the Trade of a Barber, together with that of a Courtier; The covetousness of the Princes of this Country, having taught
'em to receive none into their Court that is not qualify'd for many Employ∣ments. Now my being defective  this, was the Cause that one day a∣gainst my will being a Shaving  Majesty, I unfortunately cut out a piece of his Chin; upon which you may imagine he was in no small fury, for rising in a rage he darted an Arro at me like lightning, which happily had not its effect; and he seeing it, was going to draw his Scimeter, and un∣doubtedly had done my business had I not nimbly escap'd so certain a dan∣ger. For this error you may be sure I was oblig'd to keep from Court, and had many times thoughts of leaving the Kingdom; but his Majesty's Birth-day approaching, I had a fancy came into my head wherewith I thought it was possible to regain his Favour. The universal Joy that this day oc∣casion'd, was to be seen in every Face, and no Voice was heard that did not favour of Pleasure and Delight. But
that which influenc'd the Applauses ost was a stately Ball kept in the ng's Palace: So great was the Con∣ourse to this Meeting, that without bt there would have been confusi∣n and mischief, had not the vigilan∣y of the Supervisors prevented any: The Ball was free for every body like  Gentleman to dance at, with this distinction only, that Noblemen and nights might he without Masks:  taking courage under this Cloud, crouded through the thickest of 'em, dress'd like a Scaramouch, and presen∣ted my self in the midst of the great Hall; where with four profound Con∣e's, and as many Aery Capers I a∣waken'd the Ladies curiosity of know∣ing who I was; whereupon one of the riskest among 'em rising from her Seat, and making me a low Courtesie; askd me if I would dance a Bergamasea. Upon this you may imagine my senses were not asleep or feet numb'd; For I immediately took her by the hand and fortunately perform'd all the variati∣ons
of Art and Nature, and some o 'em were so very extravagant that they caus'd no ordinary laughter in the Standers by: The Dance being ended, his Majesty with a smiling Counte∣nance ask'd the Lady who I was; who with a blush that almost flam'd in her face, and trembling Accents dis∣cover'd her Ignorance in these words: If your Sacred Majesty does not com∣mand him to unmask himself, he must always be unknown for me, the Mask is a deceit of Art, which as well conceals beauties as blots. But be has given such graceful proofs of his Abilities that 'twere pity they should be lessen'd by these obscurities: His Majesty percei∣ving by this that she had a mind to know me, and being willing to oblige her immediately with a majestick Nod, commanded me to unmask; where∣upon with a Jump that almost reach't the Ceiling, and which ended at his Majesties feet with three profound Re∣verences I fell on my knees, and disco∣vering my Face, humbly beg'd pardon
for my former Crime and present bold∣ness in presuming to my self so great n honour as to Dance in his Pre∣sence. His Majesty laugh'd heartily at the sight of me, and for my punish∣ment made me one of the chiefest Men about him; this is the Series of my present good Fortune, which the Courtiers envying me for, do daily endeavour my disgrace; I have re∣ourse therefore to your singular saga∣ity and prudence, and do beg you would be pleas'd to suggest some inge∣ious and cunning Advice to disable these snares of my Enemies, with whose confusion I am certain to advance my self higher in Dignities and Ho∣nour. Prepare your self therefore with never so many Commands, for they shall all be punctually obey'd by him that knows not how to forget a greater number of Obligations: But always will be glad to Subscribe him∣self Yours, &c.
LETTER XXX. The Fox's Answer. Ʋpon Ambition. I Rejoice with you, Sir, that after  many dangerous Storms rais'd by the winds of Emulation, you have at length regain'd the Port of your Ma∣ster the King of Morocco's favour. He that has wit enough to appease hi angry Prince, may well be counted wise for those Deities for the most part are scarce appeas'd without a Sa∣crifice even of the Innocent: The Anger of a great Man is like Lightning and Thunder that consumes to Ashes be∣fore you hear the noise: But now blessed be Heaven that has deliver'd you from such danger: Let it be your business therefore for the future to take care not to Act the part of a Sove∣raign, whilst you are but a Subject, for 'tis their Trade to flaw, so that
those that are not brought up to it ve∣ry often spoil the skin, as you see you did when you cut off a peice of your Lord's Chin. I have reflected upon your good luck at the Ball, and am amaz'd at it since I have known others of as much skill have endanger'd their cks, by dancing at Court; 'tis ve∣ry difficult I assure you to move with∣out errors to the tune of Ambition and Imulation. The Dance of a Courtier is a Figure that often ends in its own Ruine, for if the beauty of it consists in Leaps; yet they must all come to the ground, so that a Courtier's great∣ness is supported only by a conceiv'd height which has always a certain fll. Leave off I beseech ye this Art of Dancing whilst you are at Court, for 'tis but an Emblem of your future Misfortune, and to know one's Fate before hand sure is not welcome to any body. The use of a Mask for a Courtier I don't approve of, because it very often begets bad effects: But yet I don't say
I would not have you make use of it for that would be rashness in me, an you might have just cause to complai of my friendship if I should pretend to deprive you of the cheifest part o his Composition. For he would no be able to conceal his Malice, Ha∣tred, Envy, and abundant Ill-will without it. Accept of this whils I endeavour to approve my self Yours, &c. LETTER XXXI. The Dog to the Horse. Ʋpon Ingratitude. TIme that wasts and consumes all the Works of Art and Nature, has at length depriv'd me of the use of my Teeth, which were Arms that did not use to fail me; also this my decli∣ning condition that one would think should deserve soft bits and nourishing
Broths to support the small remains f my Life, meets with nothing else  musty crusts and dry bones, so ve∣y bare that they serve rather to fa∣ish than feed me. You know, Sir, ow very faithfully I've serv'd my Ma∣er in the Chase, whilst I were able; nd all my Competitors will confess ow I always out-did 'em in the ca∣eer: But now the Beasts may walk he Forests free from the Injuries of y Teeth. I say nothing of my spi∣its spent, of my meeting at every foot ith Bushes and Briers that made me art, for my so nimbly rushing through m, and of my Limbs cover'd with lood by the sharpness of their Thorns. lso I forget the frequent exposing of y Life in contests with the sturdy oar, and other wild Beasts: And a thou∣nd other hazards I under-went for his leasure and profit; the Memory of hich good services I must own would e a comfort to me in my old Age, id not his Ingratitude add to my ffliction; when I do but reflect upon
his muchings, strokings, kind words▪ and other good turns done t my Youth, I can scarce abstain from tears. Poor Melampo, say I often sigh∣ing, thus are thy Labours rewarded  The money that should be expended for thy recompence, is only coin'd up∣on thy back with a tough Cudg But I must conclude, for my wou bleed a fresh at the bare relation of  much Cruelty, and joyn'd with th Anguish of my Hunger may hast my Death. Have pity then, dear  on this my deplorable condition, a forgive the trouble that these my co¦plaints create you; since I ca think 'em better bestowed than in  Treasury of my Friends bosom. S wishing Heaven may deliver you fro such thoughtless and mercyless M¦sters, I Subscribe, &c.
LETTER. XXXII. The Horse's Answer. Ʋpon the Same. YOu have so often experienc'd the Test of my Friendship, that you  be easily perswaded of my con∣ for your Misfortune, and if a nd be styl'd another self, you may tisfied I am equally tormented;  can receive no comfort but by  of your consolation and con∣ Comfort your self therefore,  with the remembrance that many  old at Court, and yet meet with  eward: Oh how many would be  of a bit of bread, that have worn t their Years in Service of their ng and Country! Consider, Sir, that axim which says, That nothing plea∣ without Fruit. He that proposes  himself present profit, can ne'er e leisure to think of services past,
and do you think he would purcha Inability at the price of his darlin Gold. No, no; if you have in yo Youth been able to serve him, neve let his Ingratitude trouble you no you are old; but suffer Hunger wit patience, and consider his hard usag as the effect of an indiscreet and me Soul, and I shall always be ready wit my poor Ability to support that Li I have esteem'd so dear. Besides Dea you know is not the end of Life if  may believe the Philosophers Transm¦gration: Also 'tis a very remarkab proof of good service when a Serva¦dies in his Master's house, dispose yo self therefore to quiet with these Re¦sons, and believe me when I profess  heartily love and pity you, so Su¦scribe, &c.
LETTER XXXIII. The Stag to the Wolf. Ʋpon Imprudence. WIth no common Sentiments of compunction have I lately d an account of the Favours you ceiv'd from the Asse, and I must eds confess he dealt very much like  Asse by you; yet I cannot forbear ing your Imprudence with a severe proof, for that you being brought up  the Art of a Butcher, must needs  take upon you the Profession of a geon, by plucking the Thorn out of s Foot, which if you had left in, e would never have been able to have one you any harm. You see now if ou had kept to your Profession, you ould not have incurr'd that danger hich your rashness has brought you to: Content your self therefore for e future to be confin'd to the limits
of your own Nature, and since y have show'd your self so good a S¦geon for another, pray try if you  cure your own Nose, and if any s remain let it serve for a warning  you to take care of such ill-bred As who have neither merit nor discreti and of which I'll assure you the Wo at present has not a small numb Accept this Advice from one th wishes you well, and so Subscribes, LETTER XXXIV. The Wolf's Answer. Ʋpon the same. I Thank you heartily for your goo will, and I approve of your Ad¦vice; yet cannot think I deser your so severe Reproofs of Imprudenc when endeavouring to do anothe Good, he like a Brute return'd m Evil. But Experience will defend
for the future against such Accidents, d no body is so wise but that he may m: Nevertheless, there's no doubt t that he that becomes wise by ano∣rs harm is to be commended, but my Misfortunes have been such, that y own must be my Mistress, and that titude is not always the companion  Benefits, how have I been so much  blame? Perhaps in giving too much credit to the feign'd tears of an Asse, that was not sensible of the indness I did him, and not having be∣fore experienc'd that the Memory of a enefit lasts just so long as the time as passing away it was receiv'd . I shall take care for the future to ake the best use of your Advice, hat I may be no more expos'd to this prav'd custom of the Age, and which Resolution to confirm, I Sub∣cribe, &c.
LETTER XXXV. The Viper to the Tortoise. A General Satyr. I Dispatch this present Letter with a expedition to your hands, earnest¦ly to beg the honour of your Advic in a matter of doubt, and which see to me to require no ordinary exac¦ness in its solution. A Cobler has i treated me to recommend to th Clerks of this Circuit a certain S of his, which he has Commenc'd wit a Tanner, for selling him Sole-leath of a Buffalo, for that of an O with a great deal of damage to th Buyer, and discredit to his Shop an Trade; for having made a pair  Slippers of it for a certain Pedagogu they immediately participated of th Nature of the Beast, and enclin'd hi to be led by the Nose by his Scholars with a great contempt of his magiste¦rial
Authority: I desire you therefore o advise me how to prosecute this ause to my Client's advantage, and y own gain; and that speedily, for  were pity the poor Man should suf∣r by delay. The News at Court is, That Don edro de Tendiglia has lately had a at Contest with Don Menrichez di illandro, about the Nobility of their ths; each pretending an Honour d Esteem above the other: Inso∣ch that the Court is at present in a eat Commotion, and no body knows t which way the Balance will en∣e: Nevertheless, there was a fresh ort yesterday that Don Ladron guiga had made 'em friends and ke hands together, endeavouring  perswade 'em that poor Noble Men ght not to go to Court to be ho∣ur'd and respected, but to stay at me with their honest Tenants, who ould prove better Judges of their e Merit and Quality.
The Parliament have now accom∣plish'd an Act that Notaries shall not have so large a liberty of using &c's, under rigorous penalties and depriva∣tion of their Power of acting for the future. But Signiore Cola de Renzo in favour of the many dull and ignorant of that Profession, has obtain'd a mo∣derate construction of that Act, so that now those that know not how to draw up a writing compleat may sup∣ply as they did before their defects with an &c. Some few days ago a wonderful Prodigy was heard in the Air, which cry'd out frightfully three times Ra∣venat, words that gave occasion  doubt whether they related to Hu¦ting wild Beasts in the Woods, or Me Purses in the Hall. If any other ne occurs, you may promise your self faithful and speedy Account from Yours, &c.
LETTER XXXVI. The Tortoise's Answer. Ʋpon Presents. YOur Cause I cannot presume to direct you in, nevertheless I thought it but convenient to write, be∣cause we should never refuse an Answer  one that had taken the pains to ob∣ge us with a Letter out of pure good manners If there were no other Motive, for to great Men we must an∣wer out of duty, to our Equals out of ood manners, and to our Inferiours ut of good Nature, I say out of good Nature; which may be meant to our∣elves, for the Vulgar being always desi∣ous of communication with the Gen∣ry, every the least line they receive from them does not render 'em more oblig'd than liberal: Be pleas'd but to make Experience of this truth, and you'll find that Presents frequently
come from Inferiours; seldom from Equals, but never from Superiours. If one of the meanest, even of the Mobb, do but receive a Letter from a Gentle∣man full of lying expressions of civili∣ties and inclinations to do him service, and such like empty Compliments; he shall immediately make it his dili∣gent study how to be grateful to one whose words proceeded rather from a design upon him than any sincerity of heart. This is my opinion, and if you please you may follow it; but however, receive it in good part from him that wishes you well, and so Sub∣scribes, &c. LETTER XXXVII. The Lizard to the Scorpion. Ʋpon Fairs. THe time of the rich and splendid Fair of Cambalu drawing near,
I have determin'd with my self to make one amongst 'em, and accor∣dingly have prepar'd no ordinary rari∣ties; but amongst the rest I design to build a Booth in the New-street, where with variety of Inventions, and a Com∣pany of Stage-Players that have been us'd to bubble and amuse the people, I do not question but to get a conside∣rable penny. For I am resolv'd to trouble my head no more with draw∣ing rotten Teeth, or introducing new ones where the old were not very grateful: Neither will I concern my self at changing Cards in other peo∣ples hands, nor putting tricks upon any one, because this deceit is grown so very trivial, that he must be a very Blockhead that knows not how to practise it. I must confess this putting tricks upon people has been heretofore very gainful to me, but now who does not understand Legerdemain? Juglers and Merry-Andrews only pretended to it for many Ages past, but now States∣men and Politicians invade their Pro∣rogatives
publishing it for an unaltera∣ble Maxim, that those only are fit to Manage great Affairs, that have cun∣ning and dexterity enough to sell Gloe-worms for Lanthorns. Also I intend to carry along with me a pair of Nine-holes to entertain the Canag∣lia, and which will certainly be ap∣plauded for not only the weakest, but the wisest of those people have been sometimes proud to excell at this Game. Lastly, I shall distribute for the publick good an Electuary made of Tortoise, which I dont doubt will be very welcome to all such as want radical moisture; and who have wa∣sted their Substance, and become He∣ctick, by taking more care of other peoples business than their own. Also because this should be the better re∣ceiv'd, I have determin'd to present the Buyers with a considerable quanti∣ty of perfum'd Pastills to corroborate the Stomach, and to make the breath sweet, after an unmannerly belch of stinking Sentences, which must needs be
very Nauseous to the delicate Nostrils of Mr. Romance-writer, Son of Mr. Spoil-paper; both great Admirers of fresh Btter and Cream-Cheese. These will be the chiefest part of my Vendibles, and which will be so much the more advantageous, if I can have the ho∣nour to sell you any there, where I shall earnestly expect you, whilst I Subscribe, &c. LETTER XXXVIII. The Scorpion's Answer. Ʋpon Eunuchs. YOu invite me to Cambalu, Metro∣polis of Catai, and I will come, but it will be more to correspond with your Commands, than mov'd by the intreaties of some inhumane Fathers; who being extreamly in love with their Sons Voices, have invited me thither to Geld 'em; to the end that
they may the shriller accuse their Cru∣elties, whilst to satisfie the folly of their Inclinations they expose their tender Infants to the greatest dangers, with the depriving of 'em of those Moveables that ought rather to be en∣creas'd, than diminish'd. It would therefore be very commendable in some good Prince to publish an Edict in favour of Generation, and such Boys as were heretofore so unmercifully handled, because they were In deliciis Romanorum, Prohibiting with the se∣verest penalties so great acts of Cruel∣ty, which are nevertheless continu'd for Sport and Pastime. So confir∣ming my self yours to my Power,  Subscribe, &c.
LETTER XXXIX. The Elephant to the Stellion. Ʋpon Governours. I Give you hearty thanks for the ho∣nour done me by the safe delivery of my Letters, and I am extreamly oncern'd for my ill fortune that yours hould go amiss; Nevertheless I hope you will not think it caus'd by y Negligence, but attribute it to tality that attends some affairs. The Administration of publick Em∣loyments serves for a Touchstone to Essay the capacity of the undertaker, so that when that is found sufficient to digest the great diversity of Affairs one meets with in Government, to Com∣mand is no less delightful to Ambition, than gainful and necessary for the Ex∣perience and Knowledge of things. For I may freely confess to my friend, that this Employment has not a little
advantag'd my understanding; for I have box'd the Law about with a great many Ministers, and always triumpht, because I was above 'em in Order. I have also introduc'd publick Audience every day, by which I have ended many stale Suits with a great deal of sa∣tisfaction to the Parties, and for farthe content of the People, I am always ready at hand to dispatch their busi∣ness. And because Bonum ex integr causâ, malum verò ex singulis difficulta¦tibus, over and above my calmness in giving Jugdment, my patience in hea∣ring all is extraordinary; tho' Justice in appearance ought to seem as much rigorous as it ought to be really mild in the distribution: My punishments of Offenders are but few, but those sudden and exemplary, which is a Rul that I have always found successful▪ As to the rest, my City is great, in differently Populous, commodiously Rich, and of a delightful and fertile Soil. And because that a good Go∣vernour ought to shear gently, and
not to flaw, I have contented my self with the profit of an hundred Crowns a Month. My people like all others, have their defects, as there is little flesh to be found without bones; I en∣deavour to shew my self reasonable in word and deed to every body; but still I am resolved to be obey'd and fear'd as Superiour: So, Sir, concludes one that will be always proud of your Commands, whilst he is, &c. LETTER XL. The Stellion's Answer. Ʋpon the same, &c. YOur good Nature always finds In∣clinations to oblige me, and I thank Fate I have a Conscience always ready to acknowledge it. And whilst I am congratulating your safe Arrival in that City, I am rejoicing for your happy ingress into your Government,
and this chiefly because it has so ad∣vantag'd your Understanding, for ma∣ny Ministers now-a-days, of the li Employments, retain much of the Nature of a Turnip, which by its long staying in the Earth grows the grosser; so these exercising themselves in the most difficult Affairs of State, instead of being more subtle and acute in their Intellects, grow insensibly duller and more blockish every day. You have done prudently in defen∣ding the Power of your Jurisdiction; for that being the tender'st part of Government, to keep it from Insults is the surest way to establish it. I would advise you therefore to be vigi∣lant and diligent in the maintaining and encreasing it, and to oppose the least occasion of contending with you for Jus Minuitur gliscente potentia, And not to be like those coxcombs who, out of a desire to be thought accom∣plish'd Courtiers, suffer themselves to be depriv'd of their Authority, which is the only support of their Honour and Interest.
I also admire the Excellence of your t in composing the stalest Dissen∣ns and most aged Controversies. or Law being a Chain that also binds nd engages the Heirs, it is not so asily loosen'd and discharg'd. And  the most part these disorders pro∣cted from the Ignorance of the Jud∣ges; who though they are willing to d a Suit, yet conjure up an hun∣dred more by their Incapacities, and ant of necessary Qualifications. How many daily strut about in Gowns that they may be thought great Lawyers, when for the most part they are igno∣rant of the very Elements? How ma∣ny modern Judges are there, who for want of sufficient Knowledge, act mi∣rably at random? But let us leave these Asses with their gilded Trap∣pings, and come to your shearing and not flawing your People. I must con∣fess I am extremely edified by your Modesty in this case where you are content with little; but I would not have you over-proud of it, For the
Love of Money always encreases. Be∣lieve me, Sir, Diogenes and Stilp, had they but once experienc'd the de∣lights of our Modern Ministers, I mean that Auri sacram famem, the first would never have refus'd the Of∣fers of Alexander, or the last the Treasures of Ptolemy; for by that cur∣sed force of Self-interest they would have found themselves pluck'd and re∣mov'd from such generous Principles. I do not mean that I would have you govern tyrannically; but to imitate the Footsteps of wise Princes, that you may neither be counted a Coward nor a Fool. Be also liberal of your Person, and not like those Rulers that make their Subjects wait whole Years without admitting 'em to their Pre∣sence; and when they do, refusing all that come empty-handed and meanly attired; for that does but beget an Hatred that is many times indomita∣ble. Observe moreover for the future all Instructions given by your Superi∣ours, and from the prodigiousness of
your Natural Gifts Learn to seign and please them, and thereby to esta∣blish to your self an indelible Memory with Posterity, whilst I am sufficiently happy in promoting your good For∣tune; and so subscribe. LETTER XLI. The Hedge-hog to the Coney. Ʋpon Criticks. WE live in an Age, Sir, where every body will be a Critick, and where Moats in others Eyes are more observ'd than the Beams in our own. One can neither speak, nor write, but there's presently one of these commentators by to make his remarks: And altho Nature has been so pro∣vident as to arm me with prickles, yet is it not sufficient Defence against these Mastiffs who will venture to fix upon me in spite of Wounds. I cannot but
wonder every Minute at these Apes; who not being able to distinguish Si∣lepsis from Synecdoche; yet will at∣tempt to seem wiser than others: In∣somuch, that I swear to you my hands have a thousand times Itch'd to be scourging 'em with Invectives, and la∣shing 'em with Satyrs, and I had done it, but I consider'd their trifling Opi∣nions did not deserve so honourable a punishment; and I was rather enclin'd to let 'em alone in their Folly, than to wast the least Ink in their correction, for they turn over Books more to blow the dust off from their own Shoulders, than to learn any good out of 'em. And so because that where a Vice is grown so habitual, all care to remove it may be esteem'd vain and fruitless, I stop my Pen, and wishing you all happiness, conclude my self, &c.
LETTER XLII. The Coney's Answer. Ʋpon the same. YOu have a great deal of reason to complain of those that have of∣fended you, but who can put a stop  the torrent of ill Tongues? Such owd together daily to our Printing-House, where with their shallow heads they pretend to examine the Light of the Sun, and I cannot but laugh hear∣y to see 'em snarle and carp at every ng goes by 'em. For to some, an thors Work seems too wordy, when  others it appears too concise. Some complain that his Subject is obsolete, Others that his Oratory wants Rules; e observes his Stile is not sublime e∣nough, and ten that his Language is not good enough. A great many ab∣hor all that can be said of humane Sci∣ences, and for the most part condemn
every thing that was not first commu∣nicated to their Approbations. Such are not wanting as will damn an Au¦thor for Proud and Arrogant, wher others do believe him humble and tri¦vial. In short the different Censure of these people are oftentimes mor than the Books contain Words or Syl¦lables that they rail against; Innume¦rable is the Gang of such pretenders who shall value themselves more for a little empty Criticism, than the mos celebrated Authors that ever writ, hav deserv'd Fame. Truly their unhappi¦ness that write now a-days, is conside¦rably great, for every Cobler almos will pretend to judge of it: Bu to what purpose is it to be discourag' or vext, since they are not able to giv a true Judgment (which is only to b valu'd) of what they read. Pardo me, Sir, if I write with any passion since I were unwilling to have thes rash Censurers deprive my Press of th honour of your learned Compositi¦ons: Whilst I shall always be ready
acknowledge my self Infinitely ob∣'d, and Yours, &c. LETTER XLIII. The Adder to the Hare. Ʋpon Ʋpstarts. TRuly, Sir, you were very much in the right when you guest hat I should have said to me by the w Secretary of State, for scarce ere I enter'd his doors, but I per∣v'd he had a mind to belye his Birth,  he seem'd more Proud and Arro∣nt than Hanibal after the Victory  Cannoe; and as if he could not con∣escend to speak with any body with∣t an Interpreter. A great folly is is in almost all Creatures, that seeing hemselves rais'd to Dignity and Pow∣, they presently believe they are ansform'd to Deities, and would fain im Adoration; Whilst they do not
consider that Silk which is the greate Composition of their Grandure, is o¦ly wrought by vile and abject Wor from their own Guts. After a gre deal of waiting I was at last introduc and permitted to flatter him in  turn after this manner. That among the universal crowd of his Servan and Admirers, I thought my self oblig to offer a particular Testimony of  gladness and joy to see an Employme so very considerable, so worthily Co¦fer'd upon a Person that might boast hi¦self a faithful Servant to his Prince.  moreover entreated him to accept th mean Devotion, but which altogeth proceeded from a mind and body Infinit¦ly oblig'd to the Greatness of his Fam¦ly and Person. And lastly, I explain my self, better by declaring the pleasu I had in finding his numerous and h¦roick Labours so gratefully rewarde But notwithstanding all this, my Rh¦torical Congratulations being but i receiv'd, I concluded that Ambitio was an Infirmity from which these
ppy Wretches who were rais'd from unghill, can never be freed: For th half a look that scarce demon∣ted his Inclinations to speak to , and a ridiculous Spanish starch'd∣, he answer'd, that he thank'd me  my Congratulations of the Ho∣rs done him by the favour of his ce: But that he was not very well as'd that I did not treat him with  Title of Most Illustrious, that be∣g now a-days bestowed upon Inferi∣ Quality, and therefore might sonably be allow'd to him. His En∣siasm upon this occasion was so at, that it was something of kin  downright Madness, for he protested me with a great deal of earnestness t he was resolv'd to be accosted by  meaner Title, tho' it should cost n a Million of Crowns; and there∣e bid me beware how I behav'd my  towards one of his Quality for the ure. Upon which harsh Commands und my self in a great deal of dis∣er, having to do with so great a
Man, and who I fear'd might hastil offer me some unreasonable outrage▪ so that wisely having recourse to goo words in all humble manner, I apply' my self to appease him: I began t make my excuses in an extraordinary Form, and ended with the like uncom¦mon Submission, so that at last I gain'd so much upon him as to shew me hi backside. The extravagance of thes Merchants of Titles is so very great that I believe they would be willing t translate themselves into the Catalogu of the Deities, and might be easily brought to desire a Statue the better to express their insatiable Pride and Am∣bition. For the future I am resolv'd not to be wanting in windy Titles to blow up these Footballs of Fortune that I may no more expose my self to such dangers; but endeavour to satis∣fie their Pride at full, since it is no common hazard to have a mind to wade through the Streams of Ambiti∣on against the Current of their Will Be pleas'd to accept of my humble
blations in this Narrative, whilst I bscribe, &c. LETTER XLIIII. The Hare's Answer. Ʋpon the same. I Have read your Letter with a great deal of Admiration, and have not een able to abstain from an excess of rth in hearing the ridiculous extra∣agancies of the Ambitious Secretary. or discoursing one day with an inti∣ate friend of mine upon the Actions f these perfum'd civit Cats, and ex∣lling their arrogance, he broke out f a sudden into an immoderate fit of ughter, whereupon being prompted y so great a Miracle as to see an He∣eclitus so merry, he being a melan∣holy Man, I enquir'd the more cu∣ously into the Cause; whereupon he pply'd, that he was always subject to so
strange an alteration whenever he re∣flected upon any of that Stamp tha were us'd to play High and Low. Thi new Proverb awakn'd in me a farthe inclination to dive deeper into th matter; Whereupon he was pleas' to add, these Fellows play High whe they boast themselves descended from the greatest Monarchs of the World or perhaps from those Heroes that ow' their Protection to the wooden Horse Priding themselves in their shining Ha∣bits, or numerous troop of Followers, or sometimes Raving, disdain com∣pany, because they imagine amongst their Equals there is none able to Vie with 'em, or because they hate those they think may Eclipse their borrow'd Virtues with their real Light. But on the other side they sometimes do'nt stand upon playing Low, when they can submit to break a Jest with the veriest Mobb, or Converse with the vilest Buffoons, to whom they shall freely communicate all their thoughts and Interests. And moreover to shew
preposterousness of these Animals  hey have never so rich and new  it, they shall wear only a greasie  hang-ear'd Hat, and trail along r'em a pair of cobbl'd rusty Shooes;  I would have you take that for nted, you'll never see 'em with ei∣r a good Peruke or Stockings: In rt they do every thing in extreams,  are always in the wrong. Be as'd therefore to survey that tool of rs in all his Actions, and you'll a∣e with me there may be such a eature as I describe; for these Cox∣bs like the Cat, tho' they be nsform'd into a beautiful Lady,  still be running after Mice when y might be better employ'd. We not hope for a change of Nature, m that of Habit; good Actions or¦dinations if they are not brought th us into the World or imbib'd in  Cradle, are never sincere, for they  neither be bought with Money, nor chas'd by Honours; for tho' it be arrant Maxim Quod honores mutant
Mores; yet it is always to be under¦stood for the worse, and Dignitie and Honours overcloud the sight, in¦somuch that these dignify'd people fo the most part forget their Friends, Be¦nefactors, Parents, and commonly themselves. Moderation in the enjoy¦ment of any purchas'd Honour, is ra¦ther the effect of an accidental Reason than any Innate real Being. Th proportioning my duty always t your Commands, I Subscribe, &c. LETTER XLV. The Kid to the Hee-Goat. Ʋpon Travel. WIth the same awful Respect th a dutyful Son ought to a¦proach his Reverend Father, do I ta my Pen in hand to pay you the Trib of my humble Acknowledgments; a to acquaint you that with the gene
plause of the whole University, I ve at length attain'd the Degree of octor. I perswade my self there∣e that you will not be less glad of e Honour has been done me, than ll pleas'd that I have not so unprofi∣ly spent my time and squander'd ay my substance, as other Scholars ve done before me; so that now ha∣ing perform'd all that can be requir'd  a dutiful Child, I once more tres∣ass upon your unlimited Bounty for a vour I have hopes you will not please o deny. And that is my Genius in∣lining me naturally to Travel, and ing like to have the good and virtu∣s Company of some of my Fellow-udents, who are to resolv'd to run hrough the greatest part of Europe,  was Ambitious to beg your blessing nd leave to go along with 'em, for the dvantage of their Conversation adds e greater impulse to my desires: ould you be pleas'd therefore to grant  your consent, and convenient Ne∣essaries for so long a Voyage. And
let it not seem hard to you, Sir, to  at this extraordinary Expence, for that is not wholly thrown away that con∣tributes the least Improvement to our Minds. Consider, Sir, that standing Waters soonest corrupt, and that he who has not seen any other Walls but those of his own Country, either rusts in Ease, or rots in Vice. I for my part think them Fools that having it in their Power to see the Magnificencies of Cities, to view the Strength of their Situations, to Survey the vastness of Kingdoms, the populousness of Pro∣vinces, the rapacity of Rivers, th profundity of Seas, the steepiness of th Appennine Mountains, with whatever else the World contains of Pleasure o Wonder; should all the day sit poring on a triffling Map, and finding only a Point for the greatest Cities, and the breadth of a Barly Corn for the largest Empires, pretending moreover with a limited Compass to measure the im∣mensity of this vast World; which to make the least of it is a Globe, and
refore I suppose esteem'd by them  no more consideration than a Cy∣er. How many of these Blockheads aring the Island of Crete nam'd, do sently imagine it a piece of Clay to ke Pots with, because in Italian  is Crêta. And reading at any time  the Canaries, do believe 'em a par∣l of Wenches dancing the Canaries: herefore to prevent my being like ne of these, I once more beg leave to inforce my former Petition to grant e this Innocent satisfaction which in  self contains nothing but an inclina∣on to acquire virtuous Actions, and which are always best learnt from o∣er Men's manners: So humbly Sub∣ribe, &c.
LETTER. XLVI. The Hee-Goat's Answer. Ʋpon the same. YOur Letter gives me a great deal of comfort, whilst you acquaint me that you have made an honourable use of your Studies; which tho' they have been no ordinary charge to me, yet I'm resolv'd not to deprive you of the virtuous Recreation you desire. You will therefore herewithall receive sufficient necessaries for your Voyage; but I must first sorewarn you (being an Italian) of the too frequent use of those three R's, which in one of our Courts is so nicely and rigorously practis'd. The first, which is Ridere, to ridicule, snear or grin at any body, or to use Artifices to deceive, is not prudent to practise amongst Foreign Nations; for they being of a more candid, sincere, and serious Temper, mightily abhor
ch liberties, dissimulation, or deceit.  to the Second Rodere, to detract,  rail against, which is commonly in se with those that see others Advanc'd ver their heads to Dignity and Ho∣our, for few regard anothers great∣ness without Envy or Ill-will; there∣re if we are naturally subject to such  principles, it were best to conceal  as much as we can, for he must metimes be content with bitter En∣tertainment, that has a mind ever to dvance his Fortune. Lastly, Rádere, o oppress, or molest, in an universal Odium; for he that Esteems his Liber∣ty cannot well endure the Yoak of a ordid and cruel Slavery. And you'll and in Travelling that many Nations are now become Free-States by the Tyranny and Oppression of their Go∣vernours, that otherwise would have been contented with an ordinary or tolerable Vassallage. You must neces∣sarily converse with different tempers, therefore would do well to conform yours as variously: But I should be
too prolix to pretend to instruct you in all the Finesses you must practise to avoid disgusts. Therefore shall on∣ly advise you these two; that when∣ever your Baggage is visited by Sear∣chers, be sure to have patience with 'em and bear their Impertinencies as easily as you can, for they knowing no other Equity than common Pilse∣ring and Griping will be sure to have the Court and Law on their side. But above all, take care of the precarious Ceremony of the Court; for there you'll find Ambition and Avarice have the disposal of every thing. The bles∣sing of Heaven smile upon your Un∣dertakings, whilst I am able to do no more than to pray for your prosperity, and so Subscribe, &c.
LETTER XLVII. The Bull to the Buffalo. Ʋpon Impotence. Am very much sollicited by some Friends to Marry, and my Age tells I must not be long about it, if I end to have any comfort or plea∣ in my Wife, for a decrepid old sband is seldom very welcome to a ng buxome Marry'd Woman; erefore I have recourse to your good∣ for Advice in this difficult and gerous Affair, which admits of no eration after the Holy Words are nounc'd. There are a great many ung Creatures offer'd me, and a∣ngst the rest an Heiser considerably ch in Fortune, but more abundantly ovided of Friends, and I am told at the multiplicity of these will be y necessary to defend me against  Calumnies of ill people, which now
seeing me single, never cease to perse∣cute where-ever they are able. But nevertheless I would not willingly go from one extream to another, leaving a free State for a servile, and therefore direct my Sails to you as a safe Pilot to conduct me into an Harbour you have so often experienc'd, and got so advantageously clear of the Rocks and Sands, of Rivals and Ill-humours. I shall impatiently attend this Honour you will do me, and which will be so much the more obliging as it is accom∣pany'd with your Commands: So Sub∣scribe, &c. LETTER XLVIII. The Buffaloe's Answer. Ʋpon Marriage. SO weighty an obligation as your gentle perswasive Letter has laid upon me, I must yield my self altoge∣r
unable to sustain, for how can I thought sufficient to advise another  a thing I have been so much wan∣g in to my self? You say you are cited by some friends to Marry, erefore who ought to contradict it? nd you argue very strongly for it; erefore who dares not be convinc'd;  I should diswade you from Marry∣g, it would be a depriving you of he many benefits, especially Money, hat attend it. And if I should advise you to it, how many Curses and Im∣ecations would you shower on my ead for the accidental misery I might bring you into? In this perplext Di∣lemma I know not which side to chuse. Nevertheless, to show you my Love and Friendship can conquer all other considerations, I'll do my best to com∣ply with your desires. When you can no longer refuse putting your feet into the Fetters, be sure to make use of no Match-maker, but consult only your own Inclinations, for women are not like Cloaths to be put off and on when you
please: Neither would I have you wait too long, least your Hairs grow gray, for the dew of Love is always ren∣der'd insipid by mixing with the Frost of old Age. Your choice of the Hei∣ser does not displease me, and the ra∣ther because you'll run no risque to be pointed at as others are, for She by ancient Heritage wearing the largest Horns, you'll have no reason to fear you shall be enroll'd amongst those Coxcombs who believe the Honour of their Families wholly plac'd between their Wives legs, to be dispos'd of, and manag'd at their discretion. But ne∣vertheless, I do not like her being so Rich, for Men that Marry such Wo∣men many times bring into their Fa∣milies an insupportable Mistriss: Also Parents should not be reckon'd amongst the number of Friends, for they are commonly no longer pleas'd with the Match than they can benefit by it. And believe me, Sir, if the various vi∣cissitudes of Affairs in this World, should require you to ask their As∣tance,
you would find they should  the first that would rather contri∣e towards your Ruin. These are  the Race of those people who pro∣e a great deal but give nothing, d who in time of Calamities and Mis∣tunes never know you. They are e Whores who caress their Cullies so ng as they have any Guineas left, t despise and spit at 'em when they  gone. These are my thoughts up∣ this matter, which I humbly offer  your Consideration, whilst I Sub∣ribe, &c. LETTER XLIX. The Wolf to the Otter. Ʋpon Monopolizing. I Esteem Hunting one of the most Noble and Virtuous Recreations that can be admitted into a civil Soci∣ty, for it is as it were a School where
the Art of War is learnt. Do but ob∣serve, Sir, how Ambushes are every where set to take the Beast at a non-plus, and fresh Dogs always kept in reserve to hinder him taking the Wa∣ter. Now see him Earth'd, and almost as speedily forc'd out again by the bar∣king of Dogs, and crys, and beating of the ground by the Huntsmen; scarce is he out of his Borough, but he finds himself surrounded with a nume∣rous Troop of his Enemies all ready to devour him, which he being as sen∣sible of, immediately puts the wings of swiftness upon his feet, and commits his Life and Liberty to a speedy flight, but at length being overtaken by the swifter Dogs, he is oblig'd to cast him∣self into a round, where on all sides he skirmishes with the close Assaults of his Adversaries. But at length finding a little disorder in their Charges, he takes his opportunity and nimbly rushes through 'em, when in full ca∣reer beating along the Plain he is sud∣denly stopt and forc'd to turn, when
dging to and fro, and making short d irregular fetches, he politickly a∣ids the greedy attempts of his Pur∣ers. Sometimes he squats under a rong Hedge, and there hides himself, nd sometimes he feigns the courage of a Champion, and seems not to be fraid nor cares for quiting his Post, nless he is beat out of it: In truth in this Exercise one does both Battle and Encamp, and the Conquest is always o much the welcomer as it has been won with more toil and labour. This Pastime has been heretofore my dar∣ling practice; but now as we use to say, I have hung up my Arms in the Temple of Peace, not because my Vi∣gour fail'd me, for I am yet as well provided as ever, but because the Go∣vernour of this City has publish'd a ri∣gorous Edict, forbidding with severest threats, all Persons of whatever Quality Estate or Condition, to Hunt or Kill any wild Beast with Dogs, Nets, or otherwise; being resolv'd to reserve those Pleasures and Recreations wholly
to himself. Thus you may see Sir, to what degree the Ambition of governing of∣tentimes extends it self, and how it will subvert even the Laws to humour its own caprices. The wild Beasts that freely walk the Forests, do not natu∣rally wear the Livery of any Owner, but such as can make 'em so; there∣fore why should not any body be at liberty to make themselves Masters of 'em. If Jus gentium be inviolable in the persons of Ambassadours, and which oftentimes causes Wars to main∣tain; why should it not be the like in Hunting, which has the same Autho∣rity for its protection? Those must needs be very Tyrants that pretend to prescribe Laws to the Forests; hereto∣fore there have been Theatres erected, where people might Exercise them∣selves with wild Beasts, but sure not with intent to betray those to punish∣ments that should so eminently expose their lives: I believe by this time I have fully satisfied your curiosity; therefore shall only beg you would be
s'd to comply with mine, in sen∣ some of the freshest News at urt, which has hapned upon ac∣nt of Titles or Precedency; and 'll infinitely oblige, &c. LETTER L. The Otter's Answer. Ʋpon Titles. Know that Fame has been very care∣ful to publish the Dissentions that we hapned lately between two Courti∣, and I cannot believe but that she de use of her swiftest Wings in the osecution. The rumour indeed has en great, nay, so very extraordina∣y, that if the King's Authority had t interpos'd to appease the Tumult, ey would certainly have gone from ords to blows. The story is this, me few days since his Majesty was as'd to Conferr the Title of Mar∣quess
on Signior Rangifero, without giving him either Lands or Jurisdicti∣on, but which he was nevertheless forc'd to purchase with some Gold. This Dignity instead of placing him in an advantagious Post, and augmenting his Fortune, has oblig'd him to a great many superfluous expences far above his ability; and in short, rather con∣tributed towards his Ruin, than Ad∣vancement. Nevertheless he was al∣ways envious of the seeming good Fortune of Signior Conte Elidro, and bore him mortal hatred, but whilst h was his Inferiour he was forc'd to dis¦semble: But afterwards being rais' to this eminent Dignity, he though he might very justly claim Preceden∣cy, and also the Title of most Illustri∣ous: Whereupon meeting the Coun one day in the Anti-Chamber, he se his hands to his side, and taking the Wall proudly strutted by him, which the Count observing, in a great rag was going to strike him, but remem∣bring where he was, he declin'd that
intent, and contented himself only th giving him a fill up, and whispe∣g a Challenge into his Ear, telling n afterwards aloud, That he could  deserve to precede him, or to be ited with the Title of Most Illustri∣, that should boast his Honour not im his own Merit, but the sordid lifications of his pocket; and that ght or hereditary vertues ought  to take place of active and inhe∣nt. This contention caus'd great sturbance in the Court, and the ng was immediately acquainted with eir Proceedings; who as speedily s'd 'em both to be Arrested, con∣ng 'em within the Walls of his Pa∣e, under threats of the severest oofs of his Displeasure if they diso∣y'd; and moreover to the end that ch inconvenient practices might be err'd for the future, he commanded  Attorney General to make a strict quiry into the matter, and to pro∣unce as rigorous Judgment upon the ffender as the Case would bear.
Both Parties weary'd more than  Pen of the Prime Advocates of th Universities to support and maintai their Reasons. This affair was deb¦ted several days, and every body wa in earnest expectation of his Decision when the Attorney General pro¦nounc'd that the Title of Most Illustri¦ous became only such Marquesses  had Estates to maintain it, and there¦fore did not belong to such as ha none: Also that it was a meer foll for them that enjoy'd such Titles a Honorem tantum, to covet to be sa¦luted after that manner, when the scarce deserv'd that of Illustrious; Also such Dignities end with their Live for their Sons soon lose 'em if they Inherit nothing, and that to be abus  with bare Titles, is no more than t be a King at Chess or Cards, who a only dignify'd for other Peoples a¦vantage. Also he would not allow such Marquesses to have any other T¦tle but that most trivial one of S Thus ended this Titular Tryal, but
without satisfying every body, that  that buys Preferment is not to be par'd with him that gets it by his n Merit. Receive this short Narra∣e in part of that mighty debt, that mits the greatest part of my life to  obedience of your Commands, ilst I Subscribe, &c. LETTER LI. The Bear to the Red-Deer. Ʋpon Heraldry. Acknowledge the Genealogical  Carte you were pleas'd to send me,  be the Work of an ingenious Pen; d that the Author of it deserves a eat deal of commendation, whilst from e Stem he makes so many Branches urish. But if I may have leave to ve my opinion against those that st their Descent from Monarchs, d who make a specious pretence to
a Pedigree which they delineate accor¦ding to their own vain fancies, I coul tell you that there is need of othe means to prove their Quality Ab im¦memorabili, than musty Privileges  or old Epitaphs. Therefore because  good Coat of Arms may be found upon an ancient Tomb-stone, must i needs follow that all those that may be buried under it, must of consequence have descended from one of that Race  Also because there may possibly come into the hands of an ordinary fellow an old Worm-eaten Parchment, where∣in mention might be made of the Fa∣bii, Metelli & Africani: Must i hence undeniably follow that he was descended from these Heroes? Also may it be allow'd sufficient to Ennoble a Family what an Historian relates perhaps from the suggestion of one that has a mind to appear in Print  Then because corruptions of Ages have permitted every Commoner to bear his Helmet; must it be granted that they were all Soldiers or Generals, or
descended from any such? Also be∣use now every one has a Mantle to  Coat of Arms; must they needs ve their Origin from Dukes, Mar∣esses, or Counts? And lastly, be∣use sometimes a Titular coxcomb ay bear the Kings Crown; must he eeds be of the Royal Family? No, o, these are but the follies of Ambi∣tion. Believe me, Sir, in matters of Ge∣ealogy, we have no surer Evidence of our Origin than from the Earth, out of which we were form'd; and which being made up of so many A∣omes, it is no wonder if it should produce the like in us. Nature her∣self in the circumvolution of Years, turns all things topsie turvy; there∣fore consider, Sir, if these Professors of Genealogy can be reasonably allow'd to know the true Origin of Families? Oh how many are there now who re poor and beggarly, yet had Ance∣ors that were great Men! And on he other side, how many that now t on Thrones, and Courts of Justice,
who were descended from some of th vilest of Mankind? The clearest a¦mong the Planets is not free from spots; amidst the brightest part of it splendor, there may be observ'd som shades. But that which concerns m most of all is, that Gold should hav the power to purchase Honour, whe Birth and Merit are taken no notic of. So with humble demonstrati¦ons of Love and Friendship, I Sub¦scribe, &c. LETTER LII. The Red-Deer's Answer. Ʋpon Orthography. YOu have discours'd very prudent∣ly upon those that have a mind to Illustrate their Families by Genea∣logies, and I have observ'd that our Author having a mind to imitate the modish way of writing, has all along
adorn'd his discourse with Similitudes, Metaphors, Allegories, Hyperbole's, nd such like Embellishments. And ecause the Italian Tongue has been ery much reform'd, for if Bembo ere now living, who was heretofore he Ornament of our Language; he would be no more esteem'd of than a allad-singer, if he did not alter his hrase, and skill; therefore our Ge∣ealogist has made use of a manner of writing so very bestial and foreign; hat it is enough to put one's whole abrick into disorder. But pretermit∣ing this vocabular extravagance, I hall say something of the correction of the Alphabet. At this day there s more strife amongst our Professors of Orthography for the letter H, than Caesar had heretofore for the Roman mpire. For woe be to him that shall ow dare to write Huomo, Hora, Hono∣e, &c. for he would be presently o∣er-run with laughter, and the Title f Asse would be the best compli∣ment should be bestow'd upon him;
but how deprav'd are our Ears, whils they are not able to distinguish a grace∣ful sound, which H always gives to the word, when without it, it is both lan¦guid and dull. But because one erro brings in another; I shall observe that tis much worse where a T is refus'd for a Z; these Cripplemakers not per∣ceiving that in the Italian Tongue it is much sweeter and stronger to say Oratione, Affectione, than Orazione Affezzione. Where 'tis plain that Z renders the pronounciation harsh and difficult, and changes the Tuscan Tongue into Doctor Gratian. The communication of foreign Languages with the Tuscan, has rather corrupted than enrich'd it, as many believe, in∣troducing a greater Esteem for the Letter Z, which is the Symbol o Death; than for the Letter T which presages Life. But I should have e∣nough to do, if I should go about to call in question the Modern Ortho∣graphy any farther; for I should ne∣ver be able to effect any thing more,
but to procure my self the Universal Odium of the Learned. Therefore I end my Letter, not being willing to be enroll'd amongst those that write Apologies, Subscribing, Yours, &c. LETTER LIII. The Ape to the Monkey. Ʋpon Curtezans. THe Soldier and Curtezan, in my opinion are so very like, that it would be accompany'd with impos∣sibility to venture to decide which Profession ought most to be avoided. The Curtezan vends her Beauty, and Merchandizes, the gifts of Heaven and Nature, with the vilest Usury. For he that is poor, must not think to be ad∣mitted into her Conversation, whose heart is always Mercenary: The Sol∣dier submits his Life and Liberty for a few pence and a little painful Pay. If
this is wanting, he either licenciously Mutinies, or runs a Rebel to those pla∣ces where he thinks Rewards and Sti∣pends are more frequent and just. Hope is the Soul that gives Motion to both these Bodies. One is not better dispos'd to Assaults, Battels, or Slaugh∣ter of Enemies, than through hopes o a Reward, with promises of the Sac∣king some besieg'd City, or Plundering a routed Army. The other, allur'd by rich Presents, and betray'd by golden offers, what hazards will she not un∣dergo, to ruin no less her hated Riva than belov'd Gallant; for she has ever more regard to her own Interest than either the Life or Estate of her dear Narcissus. The Soldier's more cruel than the fiercest wild Beast, and as much a stranger to Pity as Faith; a loose lascivious Woman's perfidy is clear, her Deceit apparent, her Cruel∣ty manifest, and her Reasons plain. She is never at rest till she's reveng'd of a Friend that advises her against Pollutions she gets by; but yet she
seems to differ from the Soldier in this, that her Practice being to promote the delights of the Senses, she cannot well be said to act with force or violence. Nevertheless, considering the World has long since bestow'd on Soldiers the glorious Epithets of Great and Magnanimous, and on the contrary on Whores, those of Vile and Infamous I conclude, that a Soldier ought to be more esteem'd of in a civil Common∣wealth, than a loose and idle Curtezan. Thus much I have been able to write, to obey, not contend, with your sub∣limer Genius; and I would humbly intreat your singular goodness, not to refuse your Answer to the inclos'd Question I have sent you, whereby you may acquire perpetual Fame; whilst I, confessing my self all along an Admirer of your wondrous Abilities, conclude, Yours oblig'd without pow∣er to make any tolerable return, but which will nevertheless be always the earnest endeavour of, &c.
LETTER LIV. The Monkey's Answer. Ʋpon Politicks. I Would willingly comply with your desires, to answer the enclos'd; but being to discourse of Political Af∣fairs, which require so acute a Judg∣ment to conceive the occult reasons of the Statists, I know not whether I shall be able to write any thing to the purpose, it being rather a supernatural than ordinary Undertaking to esta∣blish sound and unalterable Maxims of Government, for their great variety of circumstances incline 'em the more to mutability. But since you have oblig'd me to it, I must obey and tell you that in my opinion the ruin of Republicks arrises either from Wars, or a greater Force; such as Earthquakes, Whirlpools, Fire, Thunder, Inunda∣tions, Plagues, or the like. If there∣fore
a Republick should find it self ex∣pos'd to any one of these sad Accidents, and the miserable Citizens consequent∣ly forc'd to chuse new Members; you require of me whether their number ought barely to be equal to the old; tho' there should not be enough to act in the several Courts of Justice, or o∣ther publick Stations; or whether they have power to augment themselves to a number necessary for the Defence of their Lives, Laws, and Liberties? For answer therefore I say, that Rulers being to have no other end in their Actions, than Justice, and the publick safety of their Subjects, they ought not to take greater care of themselves: For dominion over others was not in∣vented, that he who was possest of it should only have regard to his own Honour or Interest, but the safety and defence of his People. Plutarch gave this definition of a Republick, Respublica est quoddam Cor∣pus compaginatum ex membris, quod
Divini muneris beneficio animatur, sum∣mae Aequitatis nutu agitur & quodam lumine rationis regitur. So that if in a natural Body, there be but one only Soul, that reigns in a Republick: Sup∣pose there be one Supream Authority, which nevertheless may admit many Members; how can this Supream Authority operate for common Bene∣fit, if it be depriv'd of any of its parts? An House forsaken by its Inha∣biters, quickly falls to ruin; a Ship de∣priv'd of its Pilot is soon lost. Now, Lastly, if the number of the new Citizens ought to be greater or lesser than the old; I say, that having regard to the publick necessity of Ad∣ministring Justice, they ought to be suitable to the occasion: But to pre∣vent the many disorders that may happen through Emulation or Con∣tention, which often have pernicious consequences: I should think it more consonant to publick Good, that the numbers of 'em should be equal, whilst
it is not to be doubted, but that will keep an union in their minds, beget mu∣tual Affection, nourish Peace, and is indeed, the very Soul which maintains and preserves a civil Body. Accept of these my hearty Endeavours, and be∣lieve me always proud to acknow∣ledge my self Yours, &c. LETTER LV. The Musk-Cat to the Linx. Ʋpon Dogmatists. FOlly sown and scatter'd through the World, busies most Men li∣ving, and extends its tyrannical Scep∣ter over an infinite number of People, who are continually pecking and a∣busing one another; so that if I had a mind to discourse fully on all the Fol∣lies, that some have said, and others have done, I might grow more Volumnious than Atlas would be able to support
with his Shoulders. Nveretheless, you having desir'd to know which is the greatest Folly in the World, I shall endeavour to comply with your Com∣mands, tho' I am unable to Act my own wishes. I affirm then that the greatest of all Follies is not Boasting a descent from the Trojan Horse; nor desparing of ever being able to accom∣plish one's desires: But in endeavou∣ring to make Coxcombs sensible of their Errors, when they obstinately believe themselves always to be in the right, and this I have found true by Experience when I have thought fit to convince a Person of his Bigottry or a Physician of his Ignorance. It remains only now that I desire to know (as I have several times done) why you, that have so excellent Printers in your Province, should seek to have your Works printed elsewhere? Par∣don and approve of my well meaning, whilst I rest, &c.
LETTER LVI. The Linx's Answer. Ʋpon Licencers. THe daily complaints of those that raise their Reputations by the Press, ought to be a Rule for me to Print my Works under my Eyes, to avoid those errors that the negligence of the Printer often throws upon the Author: But because of two Inconve∣niencies, the worst is most to be look'd after, I shall acquaint you that my principal Motive for a Foreign Im∣pression, was to avoid the churlish Cen∣sure of Supervisors, that have read no∣thing, and are no Judges. There are such in this Province so very unreason∣able, that because they have rais'd their dwarfish wit to a Giant conceit, we must accommodate our humble and modest meaning to their fancy'd Stan∣dard. These Beetles, bred out of the
Excrements of other Peoples Col∣lections, pretend to Judge of the O∣dours of Learned Writings, whose fragrancy destroys their very Being, a∣rising out of Filth and Jakes. He that writes for anothers Instruction ought to be no small Friend to correction: Nor should he take it ill that his Com∣positions are sometimes moderately censur'd by wise and able Criticks. But, on the other hand, if they will be so severe as to endeavour to sup∣press a noble Undertaking for want of a necessary perfection, he may be rea∣sonably allow'd to take it amiss. Hea∣ven prosper all your excellent Wri∣tings, and defend 'em from the false Judgments of busie pretenders, who may either condemn 'em to the Flames or Shades, both alike injurious to in∣genious Men, whilst I Subscribe, &c.
LETTER LVII. The Ermin to the Weesel. Ʋpon Treachery. A Damn'd confounded Mule has play'd me a scurvy trick; for all a-long, dissembling the ill will he bore me, he desir'd to be employ'd in a certain Affair, that very much related to my Interest, and whose good suc∣cess absolutely depended upon his Ma∣nagement; when I, deceiv'd by his courteous Offers, reveal'd to him the greatest Secrets of my breast, and committed my whole dependance to his discretion: And thereupon writing him a loving Letter, that he should be fully satisfy'd with my Gratitude, the perfidious Beast was pleas'd to wrest my honest meaning to an ill sense, and would have fain interpreted me guilty of a Crime I never so much as dream'd of. And laying aside all Truth
and Friendship, thought to sup∣port his Accusation, by denying he ever had any thing to do with me. Thus, Sir, you may see how dan∣gerous it is to confide in any one that has once profest himself one's Enemy; but one would think so wise a Court of Justice, should not give credit to a Beast that had before been Convicted in it of Perjury; yet we see the pra∣ctice of the World, and I must pre∣pare for my Defence, that I may en∣deavour at least to satisfie good People of my Innocence, tho' I am unjustly Sentenc'd to this imminent punish∣ment: Thus deploring my hard Fortune, I recommend Yours to your tutelary Genius: And so Sub∣scribe, &c.
LETTER LVIII. The Weesel's Answer. Ʋpon the Same. YOu ought not to wonder or com∣plain, Sir, of one that acts ac∣cording to his Nature, if he cannot be well suppos'd to behave himself o∣therwise; and if you receive any da∣mage by his means, you should rather consider it as the necessity of his Incli∣nations, than blame his breach of Ar∣ticles. How could you imagine or expect any Friendship from one that by Nature is Barren and Fruitless? Ill in∣terpretations, whence can they pro∣ceed but from a perfidious Mind? All thoughts are originally deriv'd from the heart, and 'tis easie for any body to imagine a Crime in one he desires it in. A resolution of so great a conse∣quence as threatned Life, one would think, should have been better consi∣der'd
of; but where Reason is guided by Passion, the wisest Court of Justice is always blind; where Interest no choice pretends a Freindship Treache∣ry is never far off; where Malice sways the Scepter, Injustice is ever near▪ Comfort your self therefore, Sir, with this certainty, that Heaven does not roul its Spheres for greater Ends than the protection of the Innocent; in the mean time, Accept of my hearty Com∣punction, whilst I Subscribe, &c.
LETTER LIX. The Bear to the Civit-Cat. Ʋpon Servants. I Am satisfied you will have oc∣casion to laugh, as soon as ever you receive this Letter; it being compos'd of nothing else but Com∣plaints, against a subject of the Gallows: I mean a Servant of mine, who by his negligence and rashness, is become very deserving of such a punishment. When this Fellow came first to live with me he promised mighty matters; endeavouring to perswade me he was qualified with all the Sciences; and that he possest many other Arts; which made me the easier condescend to receive him into my House; tho' must confess he was but a shabby Fellow: Yet the consideration of be∣ing Universally obey'd by one Man, made me dispence with all other dif∣ficulties:
He was extraordinary dili∣gent, and peaceable for one Month, that I could not desire better. But because every right side has its wrong, at length, having a mind to give me farther proofs of his Excellencies; he began to play the part of a Physician, and feel the pulse of my Bottles; and because the sweet Liquor might not create choler, he took care to let 'em often Blood. Also he made use of Spring Water to qualifie the superflu∣ous heat: From thence he went into the Granary, where he also behav'd himself like a very skilful Geometri∣cian, dividing and parting the Corn into many Figures. And because that he had often scruples about the Mea∣sure; he was very diligent to make frequent tryals at the Market, and so, in short, soon empty'd my Granary. The Magaziners are very cunning at Venice, in shewing their Chapmen a pair of heels, but they must yield them∣selves out-done by my Arithmetician, who goes far beyond 'em in the Multi∣plication
of shifts; having taken especial are to make 'em by Sea, that he might ot by a long and heavy Pen be obliged o make a convenient substraction to is Roguery. I almost forgot to acquaint ou, How he had a great mind to be thought a Philosopher, for having often times read to the Chambermaid the pleasing subject de Generatione & Corruptione, he at length became so absolute a Master of his Art, that with his frequent application and her assiduous attention, she began to be a little Dropsical; and her Belly after∣wards encreasing, was a means to give her occasion to think of Godfathers. For this and other causes I am at pre∣sent without a Servant, so that if you would oblige me with one of your Ex∣perience, or whose Manners you are sufficiently acquainted with, I should esteem it no small favour conferr'd upon, &c.
LETTER LX. The Civit-Cat's Answer. Ʋpon the same. HE that is moderately Rich, as many believe, is not always the happiest Man; for where other mis∣fortunes have no power over him, that of being plagu'd with bad Ser∣vants will make him miserable enough. To be serv'd by qualified Persons makes no difference. For he that shall thirst after Honour and Riches, to make this Experience, will find that Great Men's Servants, as well as Poor, are Slaves to Interest and Advantage; and that they are to be distinguish'd only by their Habits. For the first
feeding themselves with hopes, and thinking to advance their Fortunes, by the munificence of their Masters, either deceive 'em with Flattery, or Tyranize over 'em with their double Tongues. When the others also knowing they have parted with their Liberty for a few Pence, will be al∣ways ready to make use of shifts to recompence themselves for that which another's Covetousness has taken from them; and because they are less sensible of the wounds of Reputation, they will be always more prepar'd to act any manner of Villany. In short, the greater is our Number of Servants: No lesser is that of our Enemies. 'Tis folly to think that these will serve to Aug∣ment a Man's Fortunes, when the very Name of a Servant carries in it their destruction and depression, as we may find by this significant Anagram, of Servitore, O Res Ʋrit! These are the Generation of Vipers
meant in the Scriptures: Therefore you would do very well to give over thinking of one of any tolerable Honesty or good Manners, amongst 'em, it being impossible that so good qualities should be found in such mean and base Souls. Nevertheless, I shall do my best to gratifie your desires, whilst I subscribe, &c. FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Daniel Dring, at the Harrow and Crown, near Clifford's Inn, in Fleet-street. THE Life of that Incom∣parable Princess, Mary, our late Sovereign Lady, of ever Blessed Memory; who departed this Life, at her Royal Palace at Kensington, the 28th. of December, (1694.) in 12o. Price 1 s. 6d. An Essay on Grief, with the Causes and Remedies of it. 12o. Price bound, 1 s.
Albania, A Poem, humbly offered to the Memory of our late Sovereign Lady, Mary, Queen of England, &c. Ad∣dressed to her Royal Highness, by Mr. Dove. Price 6d. A Satyr upon the Town, ad∣dressed to a Friend in the Coun∣try, disswading him from com∣ing up. Price 6d. A Poem on the Death of our late Sovereign Lady, Queen Mary; by C. Cibber. Price 6d. Plays in 4o. Country Wife's Rehearsal. Gentleman Dancing-Master. Empress of Morocco. As also all other sorts of Plays, Novels, &c.
