N1291 11892580 50457
Northampton in Flames: OR, A POEM on the Dreadful FIRE That Happened there on Monday the 20th. Septemb. 1675. COnfused Cryes fill all the Peoples Ears, And disagreeing Bells bespeak their Fears; Faint glimmering lights on every wall appear, And Fire is all they now can see or hear. Some from their Shops, more from their Tables haste, To meet the Flames, that came themselves too fast: A joynt-concern engaged all the Town, 'Tis Fire alone makes every house our own. Where-ere they go, they new Surprises meet, And Grief alone's the same in every Street. To loud complaints th'amazed people fall, And Ruin'd! Ruin'd! Still did close them all. A thousand hands Strait fight th'inraged soe, Who thus oppos'd do's but the fiercer grow; As when strong Winds th'approaching Seas invade A mighty Billow of a Wave is made; So all the force they us'd to stop the Fire, Did not Repell, but onely raise it Higher. Some from the Walls the heated Rafters tore, With the same Hands that set them Up before; And at the Conquerours feet their houses lay, The haughty Flames scorn the ignoble prey: And Lyon-like the prostrate Spoils, they mist, To conquer faster those that did resist: The infant-Flames each minute stronger grew, Whil'st on the wings of a strong Wind they Flew; Nere did Bistonian Courser swiftlier bear, Pamper'd in Peace the mighty God of War, Whil'st over the Strymonian banks he scuds, And his Strong wind drives on the loytering Floods. But Zephyr could not long sustain the freight, But breathless lies under th'unequal weight; The Flames no more now need the nourishing wind, But seem to leave those slower Blasts behind: And thus to their full strength and vigour-grown, Singly defy all the Remaining Town. The full-fletcht Flames as swift as Joves fires Fly, Which in an instant lighten all the Sky: Houses of Entertainment and of Trade, Are all together in one Ruine laid; Shops, Stables, Barnes, all Buildings fall so fast, You could not say, which was devoured last: Not Polyphemus favour's shewn. The an-Inn.Silver-swan more sweetly sung of late, Too sad presage of her approaching fate; In deepest streams she wish't to hide her head, And curs't the time She left her Watry bed: For now amidst the thickest Flames she fries, And there for want of her own Element dies. The yon-Inn.Lyon next, when nothing else could fright, Prepares himself for the unequal fight; Unknowing how to yield, he scorns the Fires, And in a generous Sullen rage expires. The Hind-Inn.Hind, she heard, and knew her danger near, Which came so fast, she had no time to fear. The albot Inn.Dog was nere afraid of her till now, Nor all so weak an Enemy could do, But now he finds her breath is hotter far, Then all th'inveterate o'th' fiery Star. And here, my Muse, the spacious arket∣Hill survay, Where scarcely now th' Affrighted People stay. Some on their backs their aged Parents bear, And shew their piety's greater than their fear: In the same hast AEnas snatch't his Sire And scarcely sav'd him from th' pursuing fire. With wearied Steps a fearfull Mother strays, She trembles as she goes, looks backs, and Stays; Within her armes her youngest pledge she bore, And fear'd much for her self, for that much more: The Child looks on her with his watry Eyes, And all those frights he could not speak he Cryes, My Child (say'd she) my only child I fear, For none of all thy brethren else appear; Thy Father too — But here she Silent grew, And durst not speak, but fear'd the Worst was true. They Stayd, and saw, the tottering Chimn fall, And heard the Rents of each divided Wall: The great Beames burst and throw the sparks on high, And Fire rains down from the discoloured Sky; It fell so thick, not faster Hailestones pour, Which fall with violent force from an impetious Shower: These Cinders how they scap'd, you could not tell, Unless their tears did quench them, as they fell. The Richest Goods now Flame o're all the Hill, With Aromaticks which dried Channels fill: Th' Arabian Phenix Inn Bird the scattered Spices takes, And of them all a Funeral Pile she makes; May she rise new from this her Flaming Nest, And th' happy Emblem prove of all the rest. What ails my Muse to look so pale, All on a suddain how her spirits faile; With an uncertain step she now does go, And loose Pindariques only flow. See! see the Sacred All Saints Church Fires rise, See how they mount and shew Brighter far than those below. See how they mount an unmixt Sacrifice! The Heavens asunder fall, They open, and receive it all. The Saints from whom it took its Name, Run and catch the Hallowed Flame, Which in safe Treasuries they lay, For they in Heaven's Records did find a day; When it again should fill another Quire, And not consuming prove, but Purifying Fire. My Muse she fainted, and intranc'd she lay, Around her Head the sporting Visions play: When loe a Book a mighty Book she saw, It was the Volume of unerring Fate, The leaves of hardest Minerals were made; So hard, that God alone the Lines could draw, None else could write, and none obliterate: The Book lay open, and all times appear, And things not done, as plain as if they were; In dreadful Characters which fears create, And letters of a vast and fearful Size; She reads Northamptons too unhappy State, And all the Terrours of that Flaming Sacrifice: She reads the Legends of the dismal place, Of Fires, and their violent Rage, When suddain smiles adorn'd her alter'd face, To find such happy Annalls for another Age. She reads, but as she read, excess of Joy, Her wandring Spirits did recall; Her hopes and fears by turns themselves destroy, She hopes all True, yet fears the Truth of all. And is it True said she, The Fates so soon shall raise that happy day, When all these Sister-Streets allied shall be, In stately order Ʋniformly gay. And shall the Sacred Roof so glorious grow, And there those polisht Columns stand, In which each golden Cherub sees his face, Doubly adorning all the Sacred place; And shall all this Treasure flow From Gracious Canterburie's Pious hand! Ingrateful Muse said I, dost thou despair? Thou least of all should'st doubt his Pious care: Did he not make that little that thou art? Yet that far more than thy desert: Did he not take thee from an homely Cell, To place thee where the Muses dwell? First Taught thee how, then gave thee where to Live, 'Tis not His fault but Thine, thy Lawrells do not Thrive, The careful Earl of Northampton:Genius of the place arose, Great in his Courage, great in Grief he shews; His mighty Courage dar'd the Rebel-fire, Though Grief did make him sigh, and blow it higher. Th' unbounded Flames contract a seeming awe, And their unlimited Rage submits to Law; For generous heat did his Warm breast inspire, And his hot Zeal burnt out that colder fire. Obedient flames now creep along the street, An easy Conquest unto all they meet; o Cellars their last refuge now they fly, And there neglected of themselves they dy. But though the Town be Dust, its living Fame hall never Dy in Loyal Comptons Name. London, Printed for William Cadean, at the New-Exchange in the Strande, 1675.
