N7 13106878 97517
FIGURE OF SIX. Containing these Six things; Wit, Mirth, Plea∣sure, pretty Observations, new Conceits, and merry Jests. When dayes are long, this Figure may Help you to passe the time away: And it wil breed you much delight, To passe away the Winters night. LONDON, nted for John Wright at the Kings head in the Old Bay∣ley. 1652.
TO make a larg preface to a small Volume, were as ridiculous, as to set and Alder∣mans Gate before a poor Cot∣tage; for as the one would shew a great diproportion in building, so the other would tire the Reader to no purpose; and therefore I intend not to use many words to intreate thy acceptance of this Figure of Six, because it may be, some delight more in dry Thistles, then in the weetest Flowers that can bee gathered out of the Garden of Invention: but let them injoy their humour,
for I know there are Six kinds of Readers: the paine Rea∣ders; the ignorant Reader, the scoffing Reader, the conceited Reader, the carping Reader, and the kind Reader. Now to the last of these Six, namely to the kinde Reader, I com∣mend this Figure of Six: and if he like it, I care not for the rest, and so I rest. Thy Friend, D. N. This Booke is like a Paire of Dice, That doth run still upon the sice, And two pence of it is the price. The Figure of Six is liked well, For tis six to one but it will sell.
THE FIGURE OF SIX. 1. SIx things are very hard to doe to pray heartily, to forgive willing∣ly, to suffer patiently, to love mo∣deratly, to love wisely, and to spend thriftily. 2. Six things are much abused: Wine, Women, Weapons, Wit, Wealth, and a poore man in want. 3. Six heads are without Braines: an Arrow head, a Horse head, a Nayles head, a Hammers head, a Beds head, and a Maiden head. 4. Six things are best when they are broken: A cunning Scrivener, a Nut a Cake, a Lobster, an Egge, and a good Jest. 5 Six things doe blinde judgement
Affection, Passion, Ignorance, Opinion, Hatred, and Bribery. 6. Six cruell long Bills: A Forrest Bill, a Stewards Bill, a Watchmans Bill, a Chancery Bill, a Woodcocks Bill, and a Taylors Bill. 7. Six great helps belong to a Poet the helpe of Invention, the helpe of na∣ture, the helpe of Art the help of Rea∣ding, the helpe of the Muses, and the helpe of Money. 8 Six chiefe Hearbs in the Garden: Sage, Time, Thrift, Batchelors But∣tons, Rosemary, and the Hearbe of Grace. 9 Six figures of Six: The figure of Six in Arithmetick, the figure six in small Beer, the figure of Six in a horses mouth, the figure of Six upon Cardes, the figure of Six in this Booke, and the figure of Six in silver 10. Six very painefull Letters: The head H, the tooth H, the back H, the belly H, the horn H, and the halter H: 11 Six things are necessary for school, boyes: a Pen-knife, Quils, Paper, Inke-Books, and sometimes Birch.
Feare, Hope Idlenes Jealousie, Sadnesse and Madnesse. 13. Six things doe live in a severall Elements, A Camelion in the ayre, a Salamander in the fire, a Mole in the earth, a Fish in the water, a Foole in the Court, and a Drunkard in his Ale. 14. Six things are good in cold wea∣ther: good Fare, good Fires, good Drinke, good company, good jests, and a she Bed-fellow 15 Six degrees of misery: To be out of Cloathes, to be out of Money, to be out of Friends, to be out of Credit, to be out of house and home, and to be out of one senses. 16. Six goodly fights: to see a Tree full of fruit, a Garden full of Flowers, a field full of Cattell, a Barne full of Corne a woman with childe, and a ship under sayle. 17. Six light things doe make man heavy hearted: Light penny-worths light pots, light purses light gold, light suppers, and light wives. 18. Six things are necessary to Life: Meat, drink, cloathing, lodging, health and some wealth.
19. Six things doe make no shew to the world: Wit in a blunt man, Learn∣ing in a wise man, strength in a valiant man, wealth in a rch man, Religion in a good man, and vertue in a poore man. 20. Six things are much alike: The fawning of a Dogge, the flattering of a Knave, the scratching of an Asse, the greasing of a Sow, the cackling of a Goose, and the kindnesse of an Host. 21. Six blind things: a blind Man, a blind Mold, a blind Buzzard, a blinde Beetle, Homer the blinde Writer, and Cupid the blind Archer. 22 Six things are ncessary in a Chri∣stian life: Faith, Hope, and Charitie, Love, Peace, and Unitie. 23. Six kinds of Prodigals: The fine Prodigall▪ the kind Prdigall, the drunken Prodigall, the dicing Prodi∣gall, the wity Prodigall, and the wen∣ching Podigall 24 Six pleasant Fruits: Cherries, Srawberries, Plumbs, Peaches▪ Peares and the fruit of Love. 25. Six angry things: A sick man, a proud man, a conceited man▪ an upstart Officer, a waspe, and a woman.
26. Six things are too much used: much eating, much drinking, much slee∣ping much swearing, much prating, and much lying. 27. Six things are very dangerous to take up: hot Iron, whole Pots, a seale from a Bond, dice among Cheaters, mo∣ney upon Usury, and a Maids petticoat. 28. Six kinds of Wormes: a Mal∣worme a Muck-worme, a Mud worme, an Earth worme, a fruit-worme, and a Wood-worme. 29. Six things there are which drink of other men: cost: an Host, an Hostis, a Tost, a Tpster, a Fly, and a sharker. 30. Six bad humers: a scoffing hu∣mour, a quarrelling humour, a proud humour, a zealous humour, a mad hu∣mour, and a melancholly humour. 31. Six great menders: Taylors, Coblers, Semsters, Tinkers, Glasse-men∣ders, and Bellowesmenders. 32. Six things doe soone vanish Youth, Beauty, Strength, Mirth, Plea∣sure, and hasty Love. 33. Six things are very sharp fighted: an Eagle a Hawke, a Hearne, a needle, a jealous eye, and a hungry man.
34 Six things are well matcht toge∣ther: A slut and a sloven, a knave and a foole, a scould and a deaf man, a whore and a blinde man, a Bride and a Bride∣groome, an asse and a flatterer. 35 Six Schooles are much frequen∣ted: A Grammer schoole, a Writing schoole, a Drinking Shoole, a Dancing schoole a Fencing, schoole, and a Vaul∣ting schoole 36 Six ill sounds: The scraping of trenchers, the rubbing of iron the how∣ling of a Dog, the creaking of a wheele the crying of Cats, and the scolding of a shrew. 37 Six kinds of tame fowle live in London, prating Dawes, gossiping Mag∣pies, cheating Rookes, young Wood∣cocks, old Dottrels, and wanton Wag∣tayles. 38 Six essentiall parts belong to a Gallant: To weare good clothes, to sweare great oathes, to spend soundly, to drinke profoundly, to complement with a friend, and to court a wench. 39 Six things are soone dry: A ditch in summer, a tap when the drink is out, a complementing Asse, a poore mands
urse, an Apill shower and a widdowes eares. 40 Six things are much desired, but seldome found: A happy Life, a good wife, a carefull servant, an honest Pet∣tifogger, a conscionable man, and a constant friend. 41 Six crackt things are never good: a crackt Glasse, a crackt Bottle, a crackt Fiddle a crackt Groat, a crackt crowne, and a a crackt Maiden-head. 42 Six things are very tedious: To fit by an ill fire, to heare a long tale, to court a coy wench, to ride on a jade, to expect the returne of a slow carryer, and to lye in bead and looke for a sweet∣heart. 43 Six Items are reckoned in Innes: Item for meat, Item for bread, Item for drinke, Item for fruit and cheese, Item for fire, and Item for kissing Hostis 44 Six chiefe faculities belong to the reasonable soul: Speech, Laughter, Rea∣son, Understanding, Will, and Election of good and bad. 45 Six renowned Greeke Poets: Pin∣daries, Euripides, Nonius, Theognis, He flod, and Homr.
46. Six kinds of water: cold wate hot water, strong water, stomack wate Rose water, and Rose the Chamber maids water. 47. Six things belong to a Husband man to manure his ground, to plough his ground, to sow his Corne, to reape his Corne, to thresh his Corne, and to sell his Corne 48. Six steps bring men to Tyburne Idlenesse brings men to ill company, ill company brings wasteful spending, wast∣full spending brings want, want brings stealing▪ and stealing brings them to the Gallowes. 49. Six things doe desire to meet: a foe with his foe in the Field, a friend with his friend, the jet with straw, the Load stone with Iron, the Male with the Female, and the Lover with his sweet heart. 50. Six things are required in a Gen∣tleman: Birth, Education, Learning, Vertue, Courtesie ad Courage. 51. ix comfortable things doe be∣long to a Traveller; a good horse, good company, good boots good waes good store of money, & a good Inne at night.
52. Six in inferiour ignorant Artists: A inker to a Brasier a Cobler to a Shoo∣aker a Clarke to a Lawyer, an Apo∣ecary to a Physian▪ a Botcher to a aylor, and a Rimer to a Poet. 53. Six things are never satisfied. The irstinesse of the Sea the covetousnesse f an Usuer, Iell, Ambition, the Grave, an insatiate woman 54. Six necessary charges belong to oore house keepers: Firing Candle, read▪ Drinke Food▪ and to pay their and-Lords Rent, 55. Six things are that are good in eep: his Wooll for cloths, his skin for archment his dung to fat the ground, is flesh for meat his bones for dice, nd his guts for Fiddle-strings. 56. Six kind of Runners are much sed: A running Footman a running ckey, a running head a running vessel, running horse, a running hound, and running banquet 57 Six things will make a man weep hen he hath no cause of sorrow: To eele Onions and Garlike, to sit by a moaking fire, to drinke Bottle-ale, to at Mustard, and to sup hot broth.
58 Six things there are which th geatest Orator cannot perswade: perswade a foole from his folly, a to heare a scould to be quiet, a ma that has a cold to leave coughing a ma to leave her sweet heart▪ and a man pay the reckoning that has no money. 59 Six things doe make an be well customed: good lodging goo horsemat, good attendance good usag a fine otis and a fine signe. 60 Six great Talkers are seldome bleeved: a fortune-teller, a Traveller a Midwife, an old man, a Lawyer and an Irish man. 61. Six commendations belong to good Horse: to be well metled to hav a good pace, a good colour a  man a faire taile, and to be well markt 62 Six Games are much used: Irish Ticktack, Bowling, Shooting, Ruff and In and In 63 Six things there are which Maid desire: to be prais'd to be woo'd, to b fltter'd, to be kis'd by their swee heart, to bee married, to be refreshed &c. 64 Six kinds of wanton creature
Apes, Munkies, Kitlings, young Whelps Parrots, and wanton wenches. 65. Six things are seldome or never seene: A white Crow▪ a blacke Swn, a faithlesse Turtledove, an Owle in the day time, a Swallow in Winter, and a Friend in adversity. 66 Six kinds of Hooks▪ Fish hooks, Flesh-hooks, Tenter hooks, Doore∣hooks, Pot-hooks, and shouder-hooks, or Serjeants. 67. Six essentiall properties belong to a Lover: to love truly to love honestly, to love discreetly, to love chastely▪ to love faithfully and to love constantly. 68 Six things are unpossible to bee done: to catch a shower of Hayle in a bottle, o empt the Sea with a spoone, to tell the haire of ones head, to finde a needle in a bundle of Hay, to finde a Maidenhead in the court Russes, and to turne a windmill sailes with a paire of Bellowes 69 Six things doe commonly oe to∣gether: lying and swearing, drinking and quarrelling, prid and beggery, love and idlenesse, wit and wilfulnesse, beau∣ty and wantonnesse.
70. Sx kinds of people not to be beleeved: Horse-courers. Broker Travellers, Petty-foggers, Beggers, and Souldiers 71. Six things do make an excellen receit for the recovery of Maiden∣heads: The Brains of a Beetle the heart of an humble Bee. an handfull of with an ounce of Londn deliverance, boyled over the fire of a low worme, with the water of Pumicestone, which at the second taking will restore it, never. 72. Six things belong to a shepheard a Hooke a Scrip, a ottle, a, Tarbox, a Bag-pite, an old cloake, and a young wench wrapt in it 73. Six chiefe businesses belong to a Housewife: Brewing baking, spinning, Carding▪ Washing and Milking. 74. ix very unconstant things: the Wind, for that's alwaies turning, the Moone, for that's alwaies changing, the Sea, for that's alwaies ebbing and flowing, a gliding streame, for that's alwaies running, a Childe, for hee's al∣waies craving▪ and a woman, for shee's alwaies wavering.
57 Six things doe bring men to want: Carelesnesse, Unthriftinesse, Idlenessesse, Wantonnesse, Pride and pro∣digality. 76. Six things can never hold our long: drinking without eating, watch∣ing without sleeping, eating without drinking, clothes without mending gi∣ving without recovering, and spending without getting. 77 Six things are required in a well shap'd Gray hound: to bee backt like a Beame, sided like a Breame, footed like a Cat, tayled like a Rat, breasted like Drage, and headed like a Snake. 78. Six things would make a man laugh: to see a Fox turne Lawyer to see Geese turne Clyents, to heare an Owle sing, to see an Ape play his tricks, to see a Cat play on the Fiddle, and to see a Goose dance to the Musicke. 79 Six hard steps lead to Heaven: Crosses, Afflictions, Troubles, Con∣empt of men, Want and Pover∣tie. 80 Six helps there are to climbe these steps; Prayer, Patience, Humility, Faith, Zale, and hope in God
81 Six morall vertues are of chiefe note: Valour, Prudence, Temporance, Liberaltie, Magnificence and Justice. 82 Six shadowes are often taken for substance: The shadow of Frenchmen, which is Complements, The shadow of Learning, which is plausible Dis∣course; The shadow of love, which are amorous vowes; the shadow of Honour, Which is Wealth, the shadow of Wit, which are Jests: and the shadow of Life, which is meere sha∣dow. 82 Six things belong to a good sire: a pare of Andorns, a paire of Bellows, a paire of Tongs, a Shewell, good com∣pany, and a pot of Ale. 84. Six things are not respected when they are out of date: An old Horse, an old Hound, an old serving∣man, old Bootes, an old Maid, and an old Almanack. 85 Six things deserve hanging: w Cloathes, good Bells, a rope of Onions, a doore on the hookes, a Usurer, and a Theife. 26. Six kinds of humours are much noted, a merry humour, a melancholly
humour, a prodigall humour, a jea∣lous humour, a scong humour, and a sullen humour. 87 Six things can never be recalled, being once mis-pent: a word from Mouth, an Arrow from the Bow, Mo∣ney, Time, Youth once past, and a Mai∣den-head once lost. 88. Six things declare a true Friend: to helpe one in necessity, to speake well of one in absence, to keep ones counsell, to suppresse his anger to give counsell, and be constant to the end. 89. Six sorts of Drunkards, and nere a good one, a sowish Drunkard, a shee∣pish Drunkard, a loving Drunkard, a goat Drunkard an a pish Drunkard, and a Fox Drunkard. 90 Six wayes can never be found out: Via evis the way of a Bird. Via navis the way of a ship, Via vis the way of worme Via sapientis, the way of a wise man Via sagitta the way of an Arrow, and Via juvenis, the way of a young man and maid. 91. Six things are very unseemly: to drinke with a foule mouth, to cut bread with a foule knife, to feed swinishly, to
talke bawdily, to scratch ones breech, and to gnaw meat. 92. Six sweet meats have sowre sawce: Pleasure, Prodigality, Pride, Idlenesse, Scorning, and Whoring. 93. Six notes to be observed in love: to love wisely, love warily, chastly, dis∣creetly, vertuously and constantly. 49 Six things comfort a mans heart: Wine, Company, Good Newes, good Ale, good Clothes, and Money in purse. 95 Six things are well macht toge∣ther: A Lawyer and his Clyent, a Maid and her Love, Money and Wit, a blew Coate and a Cognizance, a Phy∣sitian and his Patient, and a cup of Ale and a Tost. 96. Six things deserve no pity: a lazy Begger, a Drunkards head-ach, a coun∣terfeit Cripple, a Prodigall wanting a Woman weeping, and Goose going barefoot. 97 Six things will take a man by the No before he be aware: Bottle Ale, sneezing Powder. Tobacco, Pepper, and ill smls. things are very sweet and
pleasant Food to a hungry man, drinke o a thirsty: man, sleep to a weary man ealth to a sick man, the shore to a sea, man, and Money to a poore man. 99 Six heads are very good meat: A Pigs head, a Rabbets head, a Lambes head, a sheeps head, a Calves head, and Cods head. 100. Six things are very head-strong: head strong horse, an unruly childe, n unruly, Young-man, a Tempest at ea, a Cuckold and a Bull. 101. Six notes doe shew a vertuous minde: to live temperately, to love ones friend faithfully, to speake courteously, o heale honestly, to beare Adversity patiently, and to follow goodnesse con∣tantly. 102. Six outsides are more faire and beautifull then their infides: A faire Whore apainted Tomb a guilded Cup, rotten Nut, the barke of a Cinamon ree, and a Gallant in a new suit. 103. Six good Dishes in a countrey house are alwaies in readinesse: a piece of Bacon, a piece of hung beefe, White Meats, Cake and Cheese, Pudding and .
104. Six Birds doe hant and frequent Country house a Martin, a Swallow, a Robin-rod brest, an owle a Daw and a Dove. 105 Six things are great wasters of time: Eating, drinking, sleeping. To∣bacco taking, Discoursing, and Idle∣nesse 106. Six things are hard to doe: To row against the streame, to run against a hill to force a woman against her, will, to kick against thornes, and to strive a∣gainst a great man. 107 Six Caps are of great note: the schollers Cap the tradsemans Cap, the seamans Cap the night Cap, the foole Cap and the fudling Cap. 108. Six Touchstones doe try six severall qualities: Money is the Touchstone of Honesty. Temptations of beau∣ty. Adversity of Patience, Prosprity of wisedome Necessity of Friendship, and Time of Truth▪ 109. Six Dishes belong to a married mans table: three of flesh, and three of fish; a Tongue a Dotrell, a Raylt, a Pout▪ a Carb, and a Carpe. 110. Six notes for a wise man▪ To
are injuries to moderate his passion bestow his gifts warily: to deale ho∣stly, to live cheerfully, and dye wil∣gly. 111. Six things are good to the end good Man, a good tale, a good friend, good Booke, a good Play, and a good udding. 112. Six things are very pleasing to e five senses, good cheere and good rinke to the tasting, Money to the ght, musick to the eare flowers to the mell, scratching to the leg to the touch nd to kisse a Maid. 113. Six empty things are never good mpty Braines, empty Barnes▪ empty Pots, empty Platters, empty Pockets, nd empty purses. 114 Six Buts do spoile fix good con∣itions: A faire Maid, but unchast, an onest man but poore; a good Tayler, ut a thiefe; a good workman, but an ill usband; a good huswife but a scould; kind natured man but a Cuckold. 115 ix dayes▪ three good, and three bad belong to a married man: the three good are his wedding day, the Christi∣ing day, and her buriall day▪ the three
bad are washing dayes, scouring dayes, and scolding dayes. 116. Six bad wayes of being be∣tweene; betweene two Serjeant, to sit betweene two doors, to halt be∣tweene two opinions to bee betweene a Whores armes, betweene a paire of foul sheetes, and beteewne Hawke and Buzzard. FINIS.
