O188B 99833694 38172
Oh! how I sigh, when I think on the man, &c. Or, the Amorous Virgin; Who never till this time, did fancy a man, But now she must love; let her do what she can. To a dainty new Tune, much sung in the Duke of York's Play-house. To little or no purpose, I spent many a day, In Manging the Parks The Exchange, and the Play; For ne're in my Rambles till now, did I prove So lucky to meét with the Man I could love, But Oh! how I sigh, when I think on the Man, I find I must love, let me do what I can. How long I shall love him, I can no more tell, Then had I a feaver when I should be well; My Passion shall kill mee before I will slow it, And yet I would give all the World he did know it: But Oh! how I sigh, when I think, should he wooe me, I cannot deny what I know wou'd undoe me, I alwaies did wonder, how Maids could lov Men, How Ladies fell sick, when Men lov'd not agen; I could not tell where the blind Boy then did lurk, Or how the inticing Temptations did work: But now I cry out, I dye for the Man; Let wisdome, and Reason do all that they can. He is the most handsom'st that ever I saw, for Love hath no Reason, and Fancy no Law: Were all Mens perfections contracted in one Accomplished Gallant, 'tis himself alone: For Cupid I see is a vey Trapan; And I mst have Charles, let me do what I can. When fist I espyed him, he daz'd my eyes, And flaes, like Lightning did throw me fly; I blushst, sigh'd, and patend, my Puses did move, I am of pinion there's Witchcraft in Love: But let Love and Reason do all what they can; The Grav will have me, If I hae not the Man. I am so uch perplext, sometimes I could find In my hrt to go to him and tl him my mind: Why, if I did so, what could he say then: Such boldness would make him not love me agen? A Woman is streightned much more than a Man; But yet I must love him do what I can. This amorous Virgin was lying alone, Hid in a close Arbor, and sighing this Song, And lay in a Posture Attired in a Drss, Would tempt a Perin unto wickedness: But all her complaint was, I must have the Man or I shall be Ruin'd do I what I can. The Man whom she fancied was up to the brim, In love with her person as she was with him: And being i' th' next Arbor, where she made her moan, He scal'd a strong wall, that was built all of Stone: And there he presents her the very same Man, That must be her Lover do she what she can. They clung so together. no Power could unloos 'um She did her fond Blushes, in's neck, and his bosum: And there to each other their hearts they reveal; And tell these kind secrets they cannot enal: At last she is like to be blest with the Man, That she must love do all what she can. They vow their Affections, and there plight their Troth They make up a Contract, bound fast by an Oath: They wedded, they bedded, by Parents consent The Maid hath her wishes, the Man is content: When Providence orders a Maid and a Man; They shall have each other, do all what they can. LONDON, Printed by E. C. for F. Colos, T. Veres and J. Wrighs.
