O73B 99833179 37654
coat of arms of the City of London The Oath of every Free-man of the City of London. YOV shall Sweare, that you shall be true and faithfull to the Com∣mon-wealth of England; and in order thereunto, You shall be obedient to the iust and good Government of this Ci∣ty of London: You shall to the best of your power maintain and preserve the Peace, and all the due Franchises thereof; and according to your knowledg and ability, doe and perform all such other acts and s as doe belong to a Free-man of ud City. Printed by James Flesher, Printer to this Honourable City.
coat of arms of the City of London Instructions for every Free-man of the City of LONDON. YE shall be obedient to the Maior and Ministers of this City. The Franchises and Customes thereof ye shall mantain, and this City keep harmlesse in that that in you is. Ye shall be contributary to all manner of charges within this City, as Summons, Watches, Contributions, Tares, Tallages, Lot, and Scot, and to all other charges, bearing your part as a Free-man ought to doe. Ye shall colour no Forreign goods, under, or in your name, whereby his Highnesse the Lord Protector of the Comonwealth of England Scotland and Ireland and the dominions thereof, or this City, might, or may lose their Customes or advantages. Ye shall know no Forreigner to buy or sell any Marchandize, with any other For∣reigner within this City or Franchise thereof, but ye shall warne the Chamberlain thereof, or some Minister of the Chamber. Ye shall implead or sue no Free-man out of this City, whiles ye may have right and law within the same City. Ye shall take none Ap∣prentice, but if he be Free-born, (that is to say) no bondmans son, nor the child of any Alien, and for no lesse tearm then for Seven years without fraud or deceit: and within the first year ye shall cause him to be enrolled, or else pay such fine as shall be reasona∣bly imposed upon you for omitting the same. And after his terms end, within convenient time (being required) ye shall make him Free of this City, if he have well and truly served you. Ye shall also keep the publicke Peace in your own person. Ye shall know no gatherings, nor conspiraciess made against the publicke Peace but ye shall warn the Maior thereof, or let it to your power. All these poynts and articles ye shall well and truly keep, according to the laws and customs of this City, to your power.
