P1236 17161679 106036
THE Penitent Prisoner, HIS CHARACTER, Carriage upon his Commitment, LETANY, Proper Prayers, Serious Meditations, SIGHS, Occasional Ejaculations, Devotion going to Execution, and at the place of Execution. By a Friend to the Souls in Prison. LONDON, Printed for John Williams, at the Crown, in Cross Keys Court in Little Brittain, 1675.
The Penitent Prisoner. HIS Character. HE is one, who although he confess himself to have been seduc't by his Lusts, and intic't by evil Company, yet being under restraint (according to the merit of his Crime) he makes a Pulpit of his Prison to Preach to him Repentance; a Sermon of his shackles to teach him his Service; He turns his Gaole into a Shop to traffick for Heaven; and into an Ex∣change of all Devotions that may gain him Salvation. For being entred into Prison (after he hath sometime look't about him, and sees nothing but thick walls, strong barrs, a dark room, and no way to escape,) he begins thus to word it, For conviction he knows must go before Conversion. Lord  where am I? what have I done: ow hath the iniquity of my hands and heels ham∣per'd me? How have I drunk down iniqui∣ty like water, drawn sin as with a Cart rope! How like a wretch have I night and day tug'd at the Devils oare, grinded at his Mill, dig'd in his Mine, run on his errands,
not only acted sin, but contrived it, sinned with a high hand, and haughty heart! Oh the bitter fruit of those things whereof I am now ashamed! What gravel in my stomach do I find that stollen bread to be now, which once went down so sweet∣ly! Into what a Labyrinth of misery hath the following of the motions of my vile Lusts led me! How have I by my many and grievous sins, dishonour'd my God, sad∣ded the Holy Angels, sham'd my Christi∣an profession, damag'd my neighbour, wounded my own conscience, troubled my spirit, and given large earnest for my everlasting ruine! Methinks I hear it said in my eares, as if spoken from the battlements of Heaven, Let no man op∣press, or defraud his Brother, for the Lord is the avenger of all such, 1 Thes. 4. 6. So Rom. 1. 18. The wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men; where then shall I appear, being in so sad, so miserable a Condition? of whom may I seek for  but of thee, O Lord, who for my sin art justly displeased? yet O God
most Holy, O Lord most mighty, O Holy and merciful Saviour, deliver me not into the bitter pains of eternal death; Thou knowest, Lord, the secrets of my heart, shut not up thy merciful eares to my pray∣ers, but spare me Lord, most Holy, O God most mighty, O Holy and merciful Saviour, thou most worthy judge eternal, suffer me not for any pains of death to fall from thee. Look upon the wounds in thy hands, and have mercy upon me the work of thy hands. O give me a praying, that thou maist afford me a pittying heart. His Letany. O God, the Father of Heaven have mercy upon me, Keep, and defend me from that roaring Lion, that goes about seeking whom he may devour. O God the Son, Redeemer of the World, have mercy upon me, Save, and deliver me from the wrath to come. O God the Holy Ghost, proceing from the Father and the Son, have mercy up∣on
me, strengthen and comfort me in this my present calamitous condition. O Holy, Blessed, and Glorious Trinity, three Persons, and one God, have mercy upon, me. Remember not, Lord, the sins of my youth, nor of my maturer growth, but spare me, Good Lord, spare thy poor creature (not worthy to be called thy Servant) and be not angry with me for ever. From sin, from the crafts and assaults of the Devil, and from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation, Good Lord deliver me. From mispending the few moments I have to live, from hardness of heart, and contempt of good counsel, that shall be gi∣ven me, Good Lord deliver me. In the time of this my present distress and Tribulation, in the hour of my ap∣proaching death, and in the day of Judg∣ment, Good Lord deliver me. I a poor Prisoner, and sorrowful sinner, do beseech thee to hear me, O Lord, That it
may please thee to give me thy Grace to con∣demn my self, that I may not be con∣demn'd, and to judge my self, that I may not be judged. That I may bring forth fruits worthy of Repentance. That I may take a Holy revenge on my self, judging my self not worthy of a mouth∣ful of fresh aire, or a morsel of meat, who have abused thy good creatures as I have done. That I may not give sleep to my eyes, nor slumber to my eye lids, nor suffer the Temples of my head to take any rest, until I have unfeignedly endeavoured to make my peace with thee. That thou wouldst give me true Re∣pentance, which may appear by my mak∣ing restitution (as much as in me lyes) to those whom I have wronged. That thou wouldst forgive all my sins, of what nature and quality soever, and endow me with the grace of thy Holy spirit, to make a sanctified use of this sad Dispensation of thy providence. Son of God I beseech thee to hear me.
O thou Lamb of God that takest away the sins of the World, have mercy upon me. O thou Lamb of God that takest away the sins of the World, Grant me thy peace. Lord have mercy upon me. Christ have mercy upon me. Lord have mercy upon me. Our Father which art in Heaven, &c. O Lord deal not with me after my sins. Neither reward me after my iniquities. O God, merciful Father, who despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart, nor the desire of such as be sorrowful, mercifully assist me in these my Prayers that I make unto thee in this my present trouble and ad∣versity, and grant that I whose consci∣ence by sin is accused, by thy merciful par∣don may be absolv'd, through Jesus Christ my Lord and only Saviour. Amen. O God whose Nature and property is eve to have mercy, and to forgive, receive m humble petitions, and though I be tyed and bound with the chains of my sins (Fet¦ters worse than those of Iron that ar upon me) Yet let the pittifulness of th
great mercy loose me, for the honor of Jesus Christ his sake my Mediator and Advocate. Amen. His Sighs. O that my head were waters, and my eyes a Fountain of tears, that I might lament day and night, the sins that I have committed against so good, and so great a God, so often, and so hainously as I have done! Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death! I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? O that as the Hart pants after the water Brooks, so my soul might pant after thee O God! O that I could be ten thousand times more contrite, and humble in heart than I am! His Serious Meditation. Is any Gaol like the Dungeon of Hell?
Are any Keepers like Fiends? Is there any burning like that fire? Any biting like that Worm? Any shame of face like to the confusion of face before men and An∣gels? Can any loss on Earth equal the loss of Heaven? Or Banishment from Friends, a Banishment from God and his Holy Angels? To dwell in utter darkness where there is no light, amidst infinite torture, where there is no ease, and that to all eternity. Lord, this will be my portion without thy mercy. O Lord, have mercy upon me according to thy loving kindness, according to the multi∣tude of thy tender Compassions blot out all my transgressions. Draw a red streak with the blood of my Redeemer over all the foul Characters of my sins: Especi∣ally, forgive (here he mentions with ut∣most aggravation the sin or sins that most trouble his conscience.) One deep calls up∣on another, the deep of my misery on the deep of thy mercy. O Lord, hear, and consider O Lord, and do it, for my spirit waxeth faint.
His Occasional Ejaculations. When arraign'd at the Barr he thus piously ejaculates; O the time when we shall all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ! Upon the sight of a fire or flame of a Candle he thus words it: O who amongst us can dwell with de∣vouring fire, who amongst us can dwell with everlasting burnings! Upon the Jaylors Locking him in. He thinks on the dismalness of be∣ing shut out of Heaven, and into Hell. Upon hearing his leud Companions to Swear and Curse. Wo is me that I am constrain'd to dwell in this Hell upon Earth, and to have my Habitation among such vile per∣sons.
Upon the sight of that pittance of meat and drink allotted him. Lord, I am not worthy of the leas crumb that falls from the table of thy bounty, being so great a rebel, as I have been to thee. Upon his being bound in the Cart. He thinks upon that evil Servant to whom it was said, Bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness. When he hears the passing Bell go for him. He thinks he hears the sound of the last Trump summoning him to arise and come to Judgment. His Devotion as he is going to Execution. O Saviour of the World save me, who by thy cross and precious blood hast redeemed me▪ help me I beseech thee, O God. O let the sorrowful sighing of me a poor Prisoner come before thee, and by the great∣ness of thy power preserve thou me, who am going to die a shameful temporal death Lord, preserve me from that death which is eternal. O shew some token upon me for good that the Devil, who watcheth for my soul
may see it, and be asham'd, because thou Lord hast holpen and comforted me. O thou that didst save the penitent Thief on the cross, have mercy upon me a misera∣ble malefactor. O deliver me for I am helpless, and poor, and my heart is wounded within me. Though my flesh and my heart fail, yet be thou the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. His Devotion at the Place of Execution. Lord be not far from me, now trouble is near at hand. Now, now Lord Jesus, save from eternal death my poor sinful soul which thou didst purchase with thy blood. O God make speed to save me. O Lord make haste to help me. Save me, dear Jesus, by thy merits, and take my trembling departing soul to thy mercy. Lord Jesus receive my Spirit,
The Prayer of one committed to Prison for destroying her Child. O Almighty God, Father of mercy and God of all Consolation: have mercy upon me a grievous sinner; who having not the fear of thee my God be∣fore my eyes, have made away with my Child; O blessed Saviour, who when thou took'st upon thee to deliver man, did'st not abhor the Virgins womb, compassionate me, who have cruelly destroy'd the fruit of my womb: although for this I am afflicted on every side, yet suffer me not to be distrest, though in want of some of thy comforts, yet not of all; though chastened, yet not forsa∣ken; though cast down, yet suffer me not utterly to perish. Sprinkle me with Hysop▪ dip't in the blood of that immaculate Lamb Christ Jesus, and I shall be clean, wash me, and I shall be whiter than Snow. O let the blood of Jesus be heard above the cry of my crying sin, spare me good Lord spare me a sorrowful sinner and be no angry with me for ever. Amen.
The Prayer of one committed to Prison for Murther, and under the Sentence of Con∣demnation. ALmighty God, the aid of all that need, the helper of all that flee to thee for succour; I the vilest of sinners, and the worst of men, for such have I made my self by my sins, do here passionately beseech thee to have mercy upon me a bloody sinner. O deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, thou God of my Salvation, so shall my Tongue sing aloud of thy Righteousness. The remem∣brance of this my sin is grievous unto me, the burthen of it is intolerable: Have mercy upon me O Lord, have mercy upon me, who repent with as lowly a Spirit, as ever I sinned with a high hand, Lord help my unrepentance. And when Justice shall lay my blood upon my own head, let the blood of Jesus Christ be on it too. Into thy hands I now commend my soul, into thy hands do thou then receive it, O blessed Jesus, be thou then a Jesus to me. Amen. FINIS.
