P3485 12589764 63860
Die Mercurij 29. Junij, 1642. IT is this day Ordered by the Commons now assembled in Parliament, That M. Ash and M. Hampden shall returne thankes to M. Ash for the good paines he took in the Sermon he preach'd the last Fast day but two at the intreaty of the said Commons, and that he be desired to print his Sermon, And that no man presume to print it, but such as hee shall appoint, till the House shall take further Order. H. Elsyng▪ Cler. Parl. D. Com. I appoint Edward Brewster and Iohn Burroughs to print my Sermon. Simeon Ash.
THE PRINCE OF ORANGE HIS ROYALL ENTERTAINMENT TO THE QVEEN OF ENGLAND. WITH, The true Description, how the Nobles inhabi∣ting within the Hague, Rotterdam, Leyden, Amsterdam, Delph, Ʋtricke, Schedam, and divers others congratu∣lated Her Majesty into HOLLAND. Also the Prince of Orange His Royall Speech to Her Majesty at the Hague, and Her Majesties graci∣ous Answer unto the same. Lastly, the manner how Her Majesty with the Lady Elizabeth were Feasted at the Princes Palace in the Hague, March. 1. 1641. First imprinted at the Hague in Holland, and now Reprinted in London for Henrie Barwicke. 1641.
THE Prince of Oranges Royal Entertainment to the Queen of ENGLAND. THe Prince of Orange having credible intel∣ligence concerning the Queen of Englands arriving at the Territories of Holland, wai∣ted in expectation of her comming a long time. But at length having information of her Maje∣sties resolution, and the Parliament of Englands dubious suspition, he began to be ambiguous till afterwards being enformed by an Embassage from her Majesty, he began to be in preparation of some Royal Entertainment, correspondent, and respectively congruent to the merits of so illu∣strious a Queen First then with the concommi∣tant association of many Peers and Nobles atten∣ded her comming  the Gost, where she landed, and after some intercedent expressions of alacri∣ty▪ and tryumph on each side, he consummated his salutations in a brief and succinct Speech, which he alloquated her Majesty▪ to the substance of these words following.
Illustrious Queen of England: THe resplondent irradiation of your inef∣fable vertue, and the obsequious adorati∣on, which I owe as tribute to your sacred Person, have by the delicious compulsion of your attractive splendor respectively induced me to present the engagement of my service, and de∣votion to your gracious Majesty. For maturely finding not only the liberal hand of Nature, boa∣sting her Master-piece in each lineament of you, (which is sufficient to dazle the captive eye of the amaz'd beholder in a repercusive astonish∣ment) but also the singular admiration of Art, ex∣ceeding her self in the facetious eloquence of those Rhetoricall elocutions, which are included in your faecundious brain (which transcends a∣mazement it self) I conceive here from that either my tongue is too barren of expressions to de∣scribe the vertuous accent of your worth, or Our Country too indigent to afford a correspondent entertainment for your Majesty Yet let the discreet reflection of your clemen∣cy be more propitious, and what in perfection we are deficient, in the Embrio of Our desired exoptations shall be consummated. For the obse∣quious respects due unto your Leige, the Royall Monarch of Britain, and the singular obligation of my devotive affection to Elizabeth, our deli∣cious Spouse, had bin sufficient Arguments of instigation to have injoyned Vs to declare Our affectionate humility of ardent devotion unto
you. But hen I perspicuously behold both the Majestick presence of him, inhabited in the can∣ded structure of your Heroick countenance, and the Reall Effigies of Her Angelicall Fabrick, de∣lineated in the perfect Symmetry of each arteri∣all dimension naturally in you, we are in a tripli∣city of engagements induced coactively to re∣commend Our submissive extent of gratitude un∣to you. For when wee apparently consider the various multiformity of vertues compendiously included in the rich Storehouse of your mature perfecti∣on, we thence-from conclude, that you are the ab∣stracted Quintessence of artificiall Nature: your glorious countenance is crowned with Majestie, your brow interwoven with occasionall Lenity, and discreet austerity, your eye (like mounted Phebus in his meridian pride) shoots such refle∣ctive beams of radiant brightnesse, that it capti∣vates the dazled beholder: your Cupidinean cheeks are cloathed with intermixed Lillies, and Roses: your purpureous lips (like a Nectarean current) do redound with expressed Oratory: your Mercurian tongue is guided with such ad∣mirable Rhetorick, that the Muses themselves seem to inhabit there, and make it their Helicon: your Aromatick smelling-breath is so odorife∣rous, that it exceeds the Arabian Odours, and seems rather celestial, then breathed from a mor∣tal creature, your melodious voice is so harmoni∣ous
that Apollo may now lay down his Harpe, and the Sphears themselves become astonished. Yea should I dilate this continued expansion of your meritorious vertues, I might become in∣finite for these particulars already declared, do respectively reade captivity to my admiring thoughts. This Country was lately desolate of all consolation, but being now honoured with your presence, it seems a Paradice. But not to presume to far on your clement patience in a preliminary or tedious discourse; I will consummate our du∣tifull intentions, and gratefull devotion to your Mjesty, in a concise and conclusive period. We are transported with joy having the happi∣nesse of your enjoyed presence; We do likewise present our affectionate gratitude unto you, in regard you would vouchsafe thus to honour us with your illustrious person: and finally (in pre∣sentation of our humble duty) wee commend all our Provinces to your Gracious acceptation, which shall be at your command and pleasure, none interdicting you: yea we do lay Our Royal Scepter at your feet, submissively beseeching you to accept respectively, what Our Country doth afford: while wee offer the Sacrifice of devotive thankfulnesse to your Deity.
The Queen of Englands gracious Answer to the Prince of Oranges Speech. Thrice noble Prince, THe Heroick Dialect of your Rhetoricall expressions have bin so incomparably inge∣nious, that you seem to me the God of eloquence. For my part Our desirous intent would regratu∣late you, but only we are barren of expressions, for you have contracted the Monopoly of famous elocutions to your self, and some Language from your facundious words. You have honourd us too greatly, and more then either Nature or Art have contributed to us in their various dispensa∣tions, have bin by you augmented. But as you have honoured us in this place, so you have ho∣noured your self more, and the place likewise is honoured by your eloquence▪ And now give mee leave to applaud your more meritorious worth: you seem to me Cicero in your fluent words, Vir∣gill in your Seraphick Raptures, Cupid in your face, Venus in your eye, Mercurie in your tongue, Apollo in your voice, Diana in your chastity, He∣ctor in your magnanimous mind, Paris in the statelinesse of your body, and lastly in your elo∣quence a younger Iupiter, out of whose redundant brain the Minerva of eloquence is extracted. Your severall parts are so admirable, that I went Oratory to expresse them. But for your modesty in declaring the indigency of this Country, wee find it otherwise; for rather then deficient (as you
confessed) it seemes superfluous of all fertility. And we do most respectively gratifie you, for your sedulous pains, and will to the largest extent of our power endeavor to remunerate your Roy∣all courtesies. These Speeches being ended, the Nobles n∣habiting within the Hague, Rotterdam, Leyden, Amsterdam, Delph, Vtrick, Schedam, and divers o∣thers congratulated her Majesty with the Lady Elizabeth, and were conducted to the Prince of Oranges Palace at the Hague in a stately try∣umph, every one welcomming her, and shewing submissive salutations to her Majesty. She was likewise Royally feasted at the Princes Palace, shewing her the greatest honour and respects, that can possibly be conceived. And she likewise gratefully thanked him, and the other Nobles as∣sociating him for their liberall munificence. God grant that she may safely return to England a∣gain, to the comfort of His Majesty, and incre∣ments of the Kingdome. FINIS.
