p361 13790689 101836
THE HISTORY OF THIS IRON AGE: VVherein is set dovvn the true state of EUROPE, as it was in the year 1500. ALSO, The Original, and Causes of all the VVarres, and Commotions, that have happened: Together with A Description of the most memorable Battels, Sieges, Actions and Transactions, both in Court and Camp, from that time till this present year 1656. Illustrated vvith the lively Effigies, of the most renowned Persons of this present Time. Written Originally by J. PARIVAL, and now rendred into English, by B. HARRIS, Gent. LONDON, Printed by E. TYLER, and are to be sold by J. Crook, S. Miller, and T. Davies, at the Ship, and at the Starre, in Pauls Church yard, 1656.
TO THE HONOURABLE JOHN RƲSSEL Esquire, &c. Brother to the Right honourable, THOMAS, Earle of Bedford, &c. Honourable Sir, AS the Sun, by the circumfusion of his corruscant beames, doth not onely extrinsically discover the vast extent of the Ʋniverse, but intrinsically foment, and nou∣rish all the particular productions thereof, by the infusion of heat; the same doth Nobility, and Vertue in great Persons, the re∣putation of whose worth, and merit being carried through the World, by the nimble, and happy wings of Fame, makes them not onely known, but engen∣ders an Admiration of their vertues, and a certain kinde of respect also, and reverence to their Persons, even in such as never saw them. This, Noble Sir, is the principal motive, which not onely animates, but instigates me, to consecrate
this Translation to you, with as much assurance of your benigne acceptation, as if Fortune had been as favour∣able to me, in making me knowne to your most worthy Person in England, as Fame hath been liberall, in making me participant, of the report of your high Birth, and Qualities abroad. Wherefore, being upon the matter, a kinde of halfe-stranger to my Country, (not to the Idiom thereof) to whom should I addresse the first fruits of my small labours, after my late return into it, but to so worthy a Branch, of the most illustrious, and Heroick Stock of the Russells? And to whom should I dedicate a Hi∣story, which contains the most renowned Exploits, and the most remarkable, and most imitable Actions, Transactions, and Examples, both in Court and Camp, of the bravest Hero's of Europe, for so long a Series of years, but to him, the reputation of whose in vincible Courage in war, and whose incomparable Courtesie in Peace, together with his singular Generosity, Clemency, and Benignity to all persons, of all conditions, and in all occasions in generall, gives me sufficient ground to hope, that he will not onely vouchsafe to patronize the Worke, but par∣don the presumption of the Workman, whose live∣ly zeals, and respect, is the onely cause of his am∣bition? Be pleased therefore, Most noble Sir, to embrave it as propitiously, as it is presented to you humbly; and excuse the in-elegancie, and rough∣nesse of the stile; in regard that (besides that the Subject is an Historicall Relation) my occasions
suffered me not to attend, nor correct the Presse. If you meet with any Passage in the Booke, upon the reading whereof you may thinke fit to en∣tertaine your noble Thoughts, in some of your va∣cant hours (as doubtlesse you will, there being great variety of all kindes of humane Actions, Pas∣sions, and Accidents) it will not onely be an object of present Contentment, but a subject also of fu∣ture Encouragement to me, to speake my selfe in o∣ther, and better Language, what the height of my Ambition makes me aspire to be, Honourable Sir, Your most humble, and most devoted Servant, B. H.
TO THE READER. Dear Reader, I Have one Request to make thee, which thou wilt have much ado to refuse me; and it is, That thou wilt be pleased to suspend thy judgement, till thou shalt have maturely weighed my Work, that so nothing may fall from thee, which may be too pracipitate, or too passio∣nate. Thou wilt finde some things which will please thee, and will make thee pardon such, as will be more for other rains palats then thine. But above all, I conjure thee by Chri∣an Charity, that I have spoken according to my opinion, without any flattery at all; and if thou findest some things, whereof thou art better informed then I, thou wilt do me the favour to remember, that being in a private Condition, and not having been admitted into the Cabinet, I am not the first, who hath erred through ignorance. I praise not vice, by praising vicious persons; but the vertue which is found in them, as a Diamond upon the Dunghill: and if I speak not all. I know, understand, that there is more dan∣ger to utter all, then profit to silence all. I call this Age, the Iron Age, in regard that all the Evills, and Prodigies, have happened in grosse, which were in praecedent Ages, but in retail. For if disorders were then great, in some corners, they are so, now, every where. If thou laugh at my opinion, Noah was also mocked, for having exhorted the people to Repentance, and began the Ark, about a hundred years before the Deluge. No body knowes, when the Great Judge will come; but the Prodigies advertise us to keep our selves ready, that so we may not be found as in the dayes of Noah, Eating, and drinking, without care. Farewell. A TA.
A TABLE Of the Chapters. PART. I. BOOK. I. CHAP. I. THe State of Europe, towards the end of the precedent Age. Page 1. CHAP. II. Of the war of Hungary. The Mutiny of the French, rigorously punished. The Duke of Mercoeurs death. Whence came the Inhabitants of Transylvania. Page 3. CHAP. III. Of Russia, or Muscovia: the Religion. The History of Demetrius. Page 5. CHAP. IV. Of Poland: the Government: the Religion. Henry Duke of Ainioü elected King, and afterwards Sigismund of Sweden, and Maximilian of Austria, who was taken prisoner in a Battail. Page 6. CHAP. V. Of Sweden. The disorder, which happened between King Sigismund, and his Ʋncle Charles, and why? The successe of their Arms. Page 9. CHAP. VI. Of Denmark; the description thereof. Page 11. CHAP. VII. Of great Britain. The History of the Earl of Gowrey. Page 12. CHAP. VIII. Of Italy, Lorrain, and Savoy. Page 13. CHAP. IX. The jealousies between the two Crownes, and why? The House of Burgundy. Page 15. CHAP. X. A relation of the evils which have happened in France, under the minority of the Kings, and by the diversity of Religions. The jealousie, about the power of the Guisards, or the House of Guise. Page 17. CHAP. XI. Commotions in the Low-Countries, and why? In fine, the Peace of Vervins followes. The Donation of the Low-countries, to the Infanta. Page 18. CHAP. XII. The Arch-Duke goes into Spain, and the Admirall into the Dutchy of Cleve∣land. The death of King Philip. His admirable patience. Page 21. CHAP. XIII. The difference which happened between the counts of Freezland, and the town of Embden. The States put in a Garrison. Page 22. CHAP. XIV. Of the changes which happened about matter of Religion, in the precedent Ages;
and motives for our design, drawn from those revolutions. Luther writes against the Pope. The Rebellion of the Peasants in Germany. Page 24. CHAP. XV. The Anabaptists at Munster. The Reformates in France. A change of Religion in England, by what means? The King repudiates his wife. The Queens Speech. He makes himself Head of the Church. Luther writes to him. His mi∣serable death. Page 10. CHAP. XVI. Queen Elizabeth banishes the Catholick Religion out of England again, by de∣grees. The Protestant Religion goes into Scotland, under the Bastard Murrey, who swayes the Scepter. It is called the Congregation; fortified by Queen Eli∣zabeth; and the Hughenots of France. Page 29. CHAP. XVII. Religion gives divers pretexts; causes jealousies. The Latin, and Greek Re∣ligion. Page 32. THE SECOND BOOK. CHAP. I. THe Queen, and the States refuse peace. The Arch-Duke returns from Spain. Henry polishes his Kingdom, makes war upon the Duke of Savoy. Page 34. CHAP. II. King Henry gives his sister in marriage to the Marquis du Pont. Marries Mary of Medicis; wages war against the Duke of Savoy. The Enterprise of the said Duke, upon Geneva. Page 35. CHAP. III. The Jubily. Biron put to death. The Battail of Flanders. La Burlotte killed. Rhinbergh yeelds. Page 37. CHAP. IV. The Siege of Ostend. Maurice endeavours to surprize Boisleducq, besieges Grave, and takes it. Page 38. CHAP. V. Peace between the Spaniards, and the English. King Henry establishes the Jesuits. Father Cotton hurt. The war is carried on about the Rheyn. Page 41. CHAP. VI. The difference which happened between Pope Paul the fifth, and the Republick of Venice, and why? the peace is made. The Duke of Brunswick endeavours to surprize the town. The King of Denmark goes into England. The continua∣tion of the war in the Low-Countries. Page 42. CHAP. VII. The taking of Ringbergh. The mutiny of the Spaniards. The Siege of Grol raised, by the promptitude of the Marquis. The first overture for a Truce rejected. Page 44.
CHAP. VIII. The defeat of the Spanish Armada. The Enterprize upon Sluce failed. The continuance of the Treaty. Spinola arrives at the Haghe. The Treaty being broaken again, is renewed at Antwerp, where the Truce is made for twelve yeares. Page 46. CHAP. IX. The State of France. The King goes to Sedan. Troubles in Austria, and Bo∣hemia. A Conjuration discovered in Spain and the Mores banished. Page 48. CHAP. X. A brief description of the Kingdomes of Spain, and France. Page 50. CHAP. XI. The King of France arms. The Spaniards do the same. All is full of joy, and fear. He is killed. His education. Page 53. CHAP. XII. The difference which happened, about the Dutchy of Juleers, or Gulick. Iea∣lousie between the Catholicks and Protestants, why? A tumult at Dona∣werdt an Imperiall town, about a Procession. Gulick besieged by Prince Maurice, and the French, yeelds. The Princes will not admit of a Seque∣stration. Page 56. CHAP. XIII. A tumult in Poland, and why? They suddenly arme. The Swedes, and Mus∣covits serve themselves of this occasion, against the Polanders, who loose Smo∣lensko. Treason discovered in England. The troubles at Paris appeased. Ro∣dolph dies. Page 58. CHAP. XIV. The war between the Danes, and Swedes; the reasons why? Colmar ta∣ken. Charles dies. The Queen-Regent purchases a double marriage in Spain. The town of Aix taken, and Newburgh succoured by Spinola, Page 60. CHAP. XV. The differences which happened in the United Provinces. Barneveldt is be∣headed, and the Religion of Arminians condemned. King Lewis humbles the Hughenots, and reduces Bearn. Page 62. THE THIRD BOOK. CHAP. I. THe Prodigies which preceded the wars of Germany. A description of the Kingdom of Bohemia. Ancient differences about Religion. The warres of Zisca compared to this. Page 66. CHAP. II. The Bohemians take Arms, and why? All the Princes interest themselves in this war. Ferdinand elected Emperour. Page 69. CHAP. III. The following of the war of Bohemia. The Battel of Prague. Frederick flies, and forsakes the town, together with his people. Page 71. CHAP. IV. War against the Hughenots, and why? A new difference betwixt the House of Austria, and the Venetians. Page 80.
CHAP. V. The War of Austria, of Lusatia, of Moravia, and of the Palatinat. Page 76. CHAP. VI. The War of Transylvania. The King of Poland treacherously wounded. War between the Poles, and the Turks. Page 78. CHAP. VII. War in the Palatinat. Tilly beaten, takes his revenge, and defeates the Mar∣quis of Baden. The Bishop of Halberstadt makes himselfe known in West∣phalia, is beaten, passes with Mansfeldt through Lorraine, and incamps before Sedan. Page 73. CHAP. VIII. The continuance of the war betwen the Polanders, and the Turks. The Tra∣gical end of young Osman, The Death of some Lords. Page 82. CHAP. IX. Sadnesse in the United Provinces, for the ill success of Fredericks affaires. The war begins again between them, and the Spaniards. Gulick, and Pape-mutz yeeld themselves. Count Henry suspected, and why? Page 83. CHAP. X.Berghen is besieged. Mansfeldt and his Bishop beaten by Cordua; come to succour the Hollanders. The Duke of Boüillous death, and a summary of his life. Spinola quits the siege, Mansfeldt goes into Freezland. The third war in France. Page 85. CHAP. XI. Of the Swissers, and Grizous, and their Government. The fall of a Mountain. Soubize breakes the Peace. The death of the Great Priour, and of the Marshal of Ornano. Page 88. CHAP. XII.Mansfeldt seeks succour every where; puts an Army on foot again. The mar∣riage of the Prince of Wales, with a Danghter of France, after his returne from Spain. Page 91. CHAP. XIII. The siege of Bredà. Enterprises upon Antwerp. Page 93. THE FOURTH BOOK. CHAP. I. The war of Denmark. The Allyances of the Kings of England, France and Denmark, as also of the States of Holland, against the Emperour. Page 96. CHAP. II. The prosecution of the second war against the Hughenots. The Peace is made by the intercession of the King of England, the Venetians, and the Hollanders. War between the English, and the French, and why? The beginning of the third, and last war, against the Hughenots. Cardinal Richelieu makes himselfe known, admired, and feared. The siege, and reduction of Ro∣chell. Page 99. CHAP. III. The following of the war of Denmark, unfortunate to the Danes. Wallen∣stein
besiedges Stralsund in vain. The peace is made. Page 103. CHAP. IV. The war of the Peasants, or Country-people of Austria. Page 105. CHAP. V. The death of Prince Maurice, and of the King of England. The siege of Groll. The state of Lorraine. The Jubily at Rome. Bethleem Gabor makes war against the Emperour; and obtaines peace. Page 106. CHAP. VI.Gustave King of Sweden attacks Broussia, or Prussia. The Imperialists suc∣cour the Poles. Truce is made for six years. Page 108. CHAP. VII. The siege of Boisleducq, or the Bosse. The Imperialists under Montecuculi, joyne with the Count of Bergh, who enters the Velaw. The taking of We∣sel. Page 110. CHAP. VIII. The following of the last war against the Reformates in France. The Duke of Rohan makes his peace. All the Townes stoop, and throw down their Forti∣fications. The end of the Party. Page 112. CHAP. IX. The death of Bethleem Gabor. Ragoski his Successour. The marriage of Ferdinand the third, with the King of Spaines Sister. Page 114. CHAP. X. The War of Italy, for the succession of the Dutchy of Mantua; where in the Emperour, and the two Crowns interessed themselves. Page 115. CHAP. XI. The continuance of the war of Italy. The Venctians beaten. Pignarola taken. Mantua taken, and pilladged. The peace is made with restitution, on both sides. Page 117. CHAP. XII.Cardinal Richelieu makes peace with the English; studies new Allyances, to attack the House of Austria. Page 119. CHAP. XIII. A description of the state of the Empire. The Election of the King of the Ro∣mans. Page 121. CHAP. XIV. A description, of the three States of the Empire. The Hanse-Towns. Page 123. CHAP. XV. The principal motives of the decline of the Empire. Page 125. CHAP. XVI. The Emperour redemands the Ecclesiastical Lands, and Goods, taken after the Composition of Passavia. Alteration amongst the Protestants. Page 126. CHAP. XVII. The Assembly at Ratisbone, where Frithland is exanctorated, or dismissed from his Charge. Page 128. CHAP. XVIII. The King of Swedens entrance into Germany. His reasons why? Those of the Emperour. Allyances with Bogislaus. He blocks up the Sea-towns. Tilly retakes the Generalate, against his will. Page 129.
CHAP. XIX. The Siege of Magdeburgh, The Duke of Lawenburgh beaten, and taken near the Elbe, The King Gustave takes Francsurt upon the Oder, and beates the Imperialists. Page 131. CHAP. XX. The Protestants make Allyance with Gustave. Magdeburgh taken by force. Page 134. CHAP. XXI. The Battel of Leipsick; the flight of the Imperialists. Page 136. CHAP. XXII. The Cardinal pries upon the affaires of Germany; abuses the Duke of Lor∣raine. Papenheim retakes Westphalia; succours Magdeburgh, and beats the Swedes. Page 139. CHAP. XXIII. The taking of the Fleet of Shallops near Berghenup-zoom. Wallenstein resakes the Generallat, with Conditions of too much advantage. An Earth∣quake at Naples. The Mountaine of Soma vomits fire. Page 141. CHAP. XXIV.George I and grave of Darmstadt obtaines Newtrality, and why? Horne beaten by Tilly. The King makes his entry at Nurembergh. Tilly retires. The King takes Donawerdt: passes the Leck: makes Tillies troops retreat with confusion. Tillies death: his Elogies. The Siege of Ingolstadt. The taking of Ratisbone. Divers Instruction of the Embassadours of France. The Eagle in danger, succoured by whom? Page 143. CHAP. XXV. The Count of Bergues, disgusted at the Kings service, goes secretly to the Haghe. The Siege of Mastricht. Papenheim being repulsed, returns into Germany. Limburgh followes Mastricht; and the Deputies, the Prince to the Haghe. Page 146. CHAP. XXVI.Wallenstein drives the Saxons out of Bohemia, drawes towards Nurem∣bergh. The Tragedy which hapned at Rostock. Gallasso, and Holck, in Misnia. The King goes out of Bavaria, and incamps before the said town: sends for all his Forces. Papenheims successe. Page 148. CHAP. XXVII. The Armies are incamped before Nurembergh. The Skermishes. They de∣part from thence. The Battel of Lutzen. The death of Gustave. Papen∣heim, and Feederick. Page 150. CHAP. XXVIII. The Electour of Trevirs takes the protection of France. Monsieur enters the Kingdoms with an Army. The brave Duke of Montmorancyes death. Page 152. CHAP. XXIX. The King of Sweden regretted, and by whom? Wallenstein causes some of his Officers to be executed. John de Werdt makes himselfe known. The Battel of Hamelen. The cruelty of Conquerours. Brisack succoured by the Duke of Feria. War in the Archbishoprick of Colein. Page 153. CHAP. XXX. The Siege of Nancy. Rantzow makes himselfe known, at the encounter of Haguenaux, and at the Siege of Andernack. Page 156.
CHAP. XXXI.Wallenstein defeates the Swedes in Silesia. The Inhabitants of Colein, retract the Agreement made before Nancy. The tragical death of the said Wallenstein. Page 156. CHAP. XXXII. The Siege of Smolensko raised. The King of Poland forces an Army of a hundred and twenty thousand men, to have recourse to his mercy. He makes peace with the Muscovits. Chastises the Turks, The Infanto's death. The taking of Rinbergh. Aitona puts the Milttia in good posture, and takes some Lords prisoners. Page 160. CHAP. XXXIII. The Siege of Ratisbone. The taking of the towne. Aldringers death. The Cardinal Infanto joynes with the King of Hungary. The Protestants recollect all their Forces. The bufinesse of Nortlinghen. The Victory of the Imperalists. The Cardinal Infanto goes into the Low-Countries. Page 162. THE SECOND PART. THE FIRST BOOK. CHAP. I. THe peace made at Prague, after the reduction of many places, and small States. The complaints of the Swedes. Page 165. CHAP. II. The Answer to the complaints of the Swedes. The Cardinal will besiege Colein, The States refuse succour. He seeks to ruine the House of Lorraine. The Princesse Nicoll at Paris. Prince Francis carried to the Cittadell of Nancy. Page 167. CHAP. III. The Imperialists wast in the Dutchy of Wirtembergh. The French come to succour the Swedes. Philipsburgh taken by a prank of war. The Cardinal Infanto enters Brussels, and the Duke of Orleans departs. Page 169. CHAP. IV. The King of France declares war against the Cardinal Infanto, and why? The Spaniards are beaten. The taking of the Fort of Schenck. Page 170. CHAP. V. The Imperialists beat back the French into Lorraine. Oxensterne pas∣ses into France. Bannier begins the war again, and beats the Saxons. Hats∣feldt gives succour. Magdeburgh renders it selfe. The Battel of Witstock. Leipsick succoured. Page 172. CHAP. VI.Coloredo taken. The Spaniards passe into Picardy. John de Werdts Exploits. The Siege of Dole raised. Gallasso enters into Burgundy. The war agianst the Duke of Parma, who makes his peace. The truce prolonged in Prussia. Page 175. CHAP. VII.Ferdinand the second dies, afer the Diet of Ratisbone, where his
Son had been elected King of the Romans. A Recitall of his life, Bannier makes new progresse. Many Princes take Newtralities, and then, the Party of the Swedes. The Arch-Duke Leopold Generalissimo, or chief Generall. Page 178. CHAP. VIII. The Duke of Weymar repasses the Rheyn, and besieges Rhinfeldt, John de Werdt, beaten, and taken. The Duke of Rohans death. Duke Bernards many victories. He takes Brisack, his death. Page 180. CHAP. IX.Breda yeelds it self to the Prince of Orange, Venlo, and Rurem, and to the Cardinal Insanto. Landrecies taken. The French beaten from before Saint Omers, and Fontarrabie. The Queen-Mother goes into England, returns to Colein, and dies, The Defeat before Theonuille. The Defeat of the Hollan∣ders before Callo. The ruine of the Spanish Navie. The revolts of the Nor∣mans. Page 182. CHAP. X. The revolt of Catalunia, and Portugal. The taking of Arras. The Spani∣ards beaten before Carall. The Hollanders beaten before Hulst. Page 186. CHAP. XI. The prudence of the Cardinal-Duke. The Duke of Lorraine goes to Paris, and why? the Count of Soissons, the Dukes of Guise, and Bouillon, retyres them∣selves to Sedan; where they and Lamboy beat the Marshall of Castillon. The taking of Ayre. The Cardinal Infanto retyres to Brussells. His death. Page 189. CHAP. XII. Whether the House of Austria aspire to an universall Monarchy, and whether the reasons be sufficient, which accuse it of aspiring to it. Why France retaines Lorraine. Page 191. CHAP. XIII.Piccolomini raises the Siege from before Wolfenbottel with losse. Torsten∣son arrives from Sweden with a supply. Lamboy beaten, and taken prisoner. The progresse of the Swedes in Silesia. The Imperialists defeated before Leipsick, recollect themselves, after having punished the slacknesse of the souldiers, and raise the Siege of Friburgh. The Battail of Honcourt. The Expleits in Catalunia. The death of Monsieur le Grand. The death of the Great Cardinal. An Epi∣tome of his life. Page 194. CHAP. XIV. The death of Lewis the Iust. The Battail of Rocroy. The Battail of Dudling. The Swedes enter into Holstein. Page 198. CHAP. XV. Of the war of Denmark, with all the circumstances thereof. Page 200. CHAP. XVI.Gallasso retyres out of Holstein, and is ruined by Torstenson at Magdeburgh. The Battail of Lankewitz. The Exploits of the French in Alsatia, under the con∣duct of the Duke of Anguien. The taking of Philipsburgh. 203. CHAP. XVII. The deplorable state of the obedient Low-Countries. The taking of many of the strongest townes in Flanders. Page 206. CHAP. XVIII. The war of England, The Tragical death of the King. Page 208.
CHAP. XIX. A continuation of the Exploits in Flanders. The Batail of Len. Page 212. CHAP. XX. The Peace between the King of Spain, and the Confederated States. The remar∣kable siege of Brin. Torstenson quits the Generalate. Page 213. CHAP. XXI. The difference which happened betwixt the two Families of the Landgraves. The Battels of Mergendal, and Nortlinghen. Generall Mercy's death. Page 216. CHAP. XXII. The Exploits of the Swedes, upon the Franteers of Swisserland, alarme the, Cantons. Gallasso's death. Melander Generall of the Imperiall Ar∣mies. Page 219. CHAP. XXIII. The taking of Swinsfort, and Eger. Lamboy, and Conninxmark incamped before Rene. The taking of Retschin. The siege of Prague. Page 222. CHAP. XXIV. The breach of the Truce with the Duke of Bavaria. A tempest upon the Elbe. Melanders death. The Peace of Germany. The death of the King of Denmark, and of Uladislaus of Poland. Casimir succeeds him. Page 223. CHAP. XXV.Pope Urbans death. The wars of Italy and Catalunia. Page 226. THE SECOND BOOK. CHAP. I. THe tumults at Naples begun by Thomaso Aniello, and why? The history of Conradin Prince of Swaveland; his death; the Sicilian Vespers, or Even∣songs. The history of Catenesa, and of the Tragedies, which happened at Naples. Page 230. CHAP. II. The war of the Turks and the Venetians, and why? The taking of Canea. The Knights of Malta take a great Booty; a great number of Gallies, and the young Sultanesse, with her Sonne. The Venetians obtain succour, but are beaten. Page 234. CHAP. III. The troubles which happened at Paris. The City is besieged. The Arch-Duke comes to succour it. The Siege, and taking of Ypers. Cambray besieged in vain. Hennault ransacked. Page 237. CHAP. IV. Tumults in the Province of Luke, or Liedge. The Election of a Coadjuter. Tumules at Trevirs. The Lorrains in the Kingdom of Aix, and in the Dutchy of Gulick, beat the Peasants. The war is kindled again at Naples. Page 239. CHAP. V. The Jubily at Rome. The Princes imprisoned. The Princesse of Conde, the Duke of Bouillon, and other Lords, retyre themselves so Bourdeaux.
The Dutchess of Longueville, and the Vice-Count of Turenne, to Stenay. The Allyance is made. The Duke of Orleans in Flanders, and a digression upon that subject. Page 244. CHAP. VI. Containing what passed in the Summer of this year of 1654. The Offers of the Portugal Embassadour. The Fleet in the Indies does nothing. The Princes com∣plaints. The Siege of Amsterdam. The Imprisonment of six Lords, carried to Louvestein. The Prince of Oranges death. His praises. Page 247. CHAP. VII. The deplorable death of the valiant Earle of Montrosse. The war of the Polan∣ders, against the Cossacks. Page 250. CHAP. VIII.Blakes Fleet in Portugal. Charles Stuart in Jersey. The Kings Goods sold. Charies Stuart goes into Scotland. The English go thither with an Army. The Scots are beaten. The continuance of the War in Candy. The war made with the Pen. An Embassadour from Spain, at London. The Chineses, or people of China, become Christians. Page 254. CHAP. IX. The Coronation of the Queen of Sweden. The dammage at Paris, by the River. The diliverance of the Princes. Mazarin being banished, departs out of France. The Great Assembly, at the Haghe. The arrival of the English Em∣bassadours at the Haghe. The war against the Cossacks. The King of Scots enters into England with an Army; is beaten at Worcester, and slyes dis∣guised. Page 256. CHAP. X. The Coronation of Charles King of the Scots. His entry into England. He looses the Baetiel near Worcester. The miserable condition of the Scots. Charles's marvellous escape. He arrives in France. The difference between the Electour of Brandenburgh, and the Duke of Newburgh. The peace made. Page 258. CHAP. XI.Cardinal Mazarins retreat into the Province of Liedge. The Princes make their entrance into Paris. The joy for the one, and the other. The Dutchess of Longueville, and the Marshal of Turenne returne into France. The Prince of Oranges Baptism, and the dispute for his tutelage. The Bank broken near Wag∣hening. Uiefeldt accused of having intended to poison the King. Berghen St. Winock, taken by the Spaniards. Page 260. CHAP. XII. The Cardinal returnes into France. The Lords, who had been prisoners, re∣stored to their Charges. The Prince of Conde retires to Paris. The King declared Major. Prodigies seen at sea. The beginning of the troubles between England and Holland, and why? Spirings death. Page 262. CHAP. XIII. The miseries at sea caused by Pirats. The present state of Norway, Den∣mark, Sweden, Poland, Hungary, Germany, Italy, Spain, and France, etc. Page 264. CHAP. XV. The Prince of Conde comes to Paris. The King attacks Estampes. The Duke of Lorraine being to succour the Princes, receives some money of the King, and returnes. The Arch-Duke sends back an Army to Paris: takes Graveling, and Dunkerek. The English beat the French Fleet. The Cardinal of Retz induces the
King to come back to Paris. The Prince of Conde retyres into France. Car∣dinal Mazarins praises. The Cardinal of Retz carried to the Bois de Vin∣cennes. Page 267. CHAP. XVI. The English attack the Convoy of Fishermen. Tromp returns to Sea, findes Blake, a tempest separates them, and he comes back into Holland. De Ruyter attacks Ascue. Van Galens victory before Ligorne. Tromp conducts the Fleet safely into France. Divers Combats. Tromps death. Cromwell, and his Ex∣ploits. The Assembly at Ratisbone. The Election, and Coronation of Ferdi∣nand the fourth King of the Romans. Page 271. The Continuation. Page 275. Reader, The Corrector to the Presse intreats thee to amend with thy Pen these faults, which have escaped his eye. PAge 1. line 28. read sent. p. 2. l. 27. Now. p. 6. l. 16. then. p. 7. l. 1. other, by p. 12. l. 4. glory l. 30. the time. l. 48. and live after. p. 13. l. 35. States. p. 14. l. 42. States. p. 24. l. last, adde, But here we must note another evill, which partly caused that. p. 36. l. 13. apprehension. p. 37. l. 16. gave any. p 50. l. 40. she is p. 51. l. 9. the point. p. 53. l. 35. to the. p. 58. l. 16. as they. p. 77. l. 7. and so. p. 73. l. 16. storm. l. 17. port. p. 83. l. 6. in regard. p. 84. l. 25. of repast. p. 86. l. 18. apprehensions. p. 87. l. 17. receivable. p. 93. l. 4. how. p. 99. l. 38. inconsiderate. p. 100. l. 11. Rebellion. p. 107. l. 21. brought into. p. 112. l. 6. those two. l. 35. glory. 36. dammageable. p. 113. l. 4. Negotiator. l. 18. them. p.  l. 50. adored in Germany then in. l. 53. neighbours with. p. 127. l. 37. such whose party was supplanted. p. 132. l. 48. in such. p. 1. 5. l. 14. ardout. p. 137. l. 26. will hence. p. 138. l. 5. he. p. 141. marg. 1631. p. 144. l. 41. Novelty. p. 153. l. 44. noyse of his Arms. p. 154. l. 4. at his. p. 150. l. 50. out of. p. 172. l. 39. There p. 180. l. 10. winnes the lawrel near the. p. 188. l. 6. good reason; yea. p. 203. l. 5. unwillingly. l. 7. disadvantage. p. 213. l. 25. to escape. p. 239. l. 3. sacked. p. 240. l. 45. at Trevirs. p. 245. l. 54. taken. p. 247. l. 7. praises. p. 255. l. 34. casual. p. 265. l. 1. dele little. p. 268. l. 7. well enough. l. 19. or for. p. 209. l. 13. of others. p. 276. l. 46. excuse. p. 287. l. 18. now held.
Directions for placing of the Figures. THe Emperour of Germany. Page 178 The late King of England. Page 208 The King of France. Page 48 The King of Spain. Page 50 The Protectour of England. Page 254 The King of Poland. Page 251 The Queen of Sweden. Page 256 The King of Sweden. Page 9 Cardinel Mazarine. Page 198 The Prince of Orange. Page 260 The Farl of Strafford. Page 210 The Arch-Duke Leopold Governour of Flanders. Page 237 Pope Alexander the Seventh. Page 287
THE HISTORY OF THIS IRON AGE. THE FIRST BOOK. CHAP. I The state of EƲROPB towards the end of the precedent Age. THE Romane Empyre enjoyed a profound Peace, France, Italy, Spaine, Lorraine, and the Gallicane or French Provinces of the Low-Coun∣tries, began to respire by the Peace of Vervix, All the Partialities of the League grew to be smoothered by the prudence of that Gaulish Hercules. The Romane Catholicks,HENRY Fourth. and they of the Reformed Religion, with an agreeable har∣mony (to one anothers grief) testified their fide∣lity to their magnanimous Prince, and to please him the more, bestowed all their hatred upon his service, and their grudges, upon the glory of their Country. The Ger∣mans, under the government of Maximilian, Nephew to the Emperour Charles, and Rodolph his son (both meek Princes) no more remembred the calamities, which they had suffored through the difference about matter of Religion: Nor knew they now, what belonged to war, but by hear-say and report: for if by accident they saw any souldiers listed, they were appoin∣ted for France, or the Low-Countries. The Forces of the Dubos des deux Ponts, of Prince William of Orange, of Casimir, and of the Duke of Brunsmick,The Battell of Anolt. were soon, the one to be cut in pieces by the Duke of Guise, and the other, after, having committed great extravagances, and made shamefull compositions, to return with confusion. This part whereof only, which came into the Bi∣shopprick
of Colein, to interrupt the marriage of their Electour, proved not despisable,Frances mar∣ried fair Agnes of Mansfeld. and had almost kindled a great fire: but it passed not over the Lisiere, and was quenched in the waters of the Rheyn, by the valour of the Duke of Parma. And so, by a good understanding of the Members with their Head, there returned a Calme: I mean, of the Electours, and Prin∣ces, with their Emperour. Fear was taken away; but distrust, (which casts her roots every where amongst pleasures caused by abundance) was not rooted out. This hath smothered the good Corn (as we shall here∣after shew) and dried up the fat of these rich Provinces; and that Ger∣many, which was so formidable to the whole world would not have since been seen so miserably torne in pieces, if she had known how to keep her self in unity, and concord. Now, this desirable Aurora had chased away the darknesse of the night; this Peace had lulled asleep the better part of Europe, and the War was re∣tired towards the extremities, or uttermost ends thereof; as that at Sea be∣tween the Spaniards and the English;The Low-coun∣tries the Acade∣my of the Wars. the Poles, and the Swedes; the Hungari∣ans, and the Turks. But it was principally in the Low-Countries, where it had fixed its Seate and Schoole. It was (I say) in this little corner near the Sea, amongst great Rivers, and inaccessible Fennes and Marishes, where it set up its Academy, so to render the Discipline thereof immortall. In effect, great spirits not being able to live at home in sloth and idlenesse, and infla∣med with a laudable desire of making themselves famous in Arms, for the acquisition of glory, hastened thither from all parts, there to make their Ap∣prentisage; and some following the humour of their Prince, and others the interest of Religion, ranged themselves on that side, to which their zeal ad∣dicted them. How, because from the knowledge of the Revolutions of the precedent Age, are drawne the truest causes and motives of the bloody and terrible Tiagedies, which are yet a playing in this of ours; we will reprize our Dis∣course from the head, and having reached the source, follow the brooks, and rivers, till we come into that Sea of calamities and miseries, wherein we see poor Christians ingulfed at this day; who cannot truly call themselves any more the Disciples of their Master Jesus Christ, since they have extermina∣ted Peace, and brought confusion, dissentions and disorders upon them∣selves. It is therefore this abominable Age, whereof the Scripture so clearely speaks: This is that Kingdome of Iron, which shivers and subdues all things. The seven Angels have powred down their Vials upon the earth, which is filled with blasphemy, massacres, injustices, disloyalties, and infinite other evills, almost able to draw even the very Elect to murmuration. We have seen, and yet see, Kingdome against Kingdome, Nation against Nation, Plagues, Famines, Earthquakes, horrible Inundations; signes in the Sun, Moon, and Starres: anguishes, afflictions of whole Nations, through the tempests, and noise of the Sea. And whereas the Trees, by thrusting forth their buds, give us assurance of the approach of Summer; in like manner, will I be bold to say, that since those things are come to passe, which have been foretold us, we ought not to make any difficulty to believe, that the End is at hand, and that the Son of man is coming in a Cloud, with Power and Ma∣jesty. O Great God! Inexhaustible source of goodnesse, and mercy! guide thou my pen, to the end that it say nothing but what is modestly true; to the confusion of Atheists, and the consolation of the Elect. Let us therefore be∣gin at that miserable Kingdome, the better part whereof, which makes the extremity and bound (as it were) to Europe, groanes at this time under the tyranny of Turks and Infidels.
CHAP. II Of the Warre of Hungary. The Death of the Duke of Mercoeur. From whence came the Inhabitants of Transylvania. NOw since we must kindle our Torch in the age past, which is to light us in the labyrinth of this of ours, I will take notice by the way of the chief exploits, and will begin from the Kingdom of Hungarie, the Thener, or Stage of the Warre of the Ottomans. This kingdome is most fertile in all the blessings of the earth, as in Corne, in most excellent Wines, in Gold,The fertility of Hungary. Sil∣ver, and all other mettals. In such sori, as that some Authors have presumed to prefer it before all the rest of Europe. At present, the greatest part of it acknowledges the Turk; another is grown desert by the insolencie of the Souldiers; and that which lies next to Germany obeys for their King Ferdi∣nand the fourth, Son to the Emperour Ferdinand the third. This Kingdom being tormented by the Arms of the great Turk, had re∣course to the Emperour Rodolph, and he to the Princes and States of Ger∣many: but they blinded by the prosperity of peace, and plunged in the delights which the fruits thereof produces; slighting the danger which most neerly concerned the house of Austria from abroad, slackly promised relief; which yet was retarded by the jealousie of such, as could not by any meanes brook the glory of that Family, and passionately wished the de∣cline, or rather the utter ruine thereof. Rodolph in the Diet, or Assembly at Ra∣tisbone, made a remonstrance, how Amurat the Sultan had broken the Peace of the year 1991. and taken many Towns, and Places of strength,Peace of the year 1591. broa∣ken by Amurat. but he reaped nothing but winde; for it is in vain to preach to such as will not hear. He dyed in the year 1595 and his Son Mahomer succeeded him; against whom the Christians had neither good luck, nor blessing. For Agria was lost because the succour came too late, as being delayed by the raines; and the Army appeared not till some dayes after it was taken; howsoever there first grew some skermishes, and afterwards a Battail, wherein the Turks were roured, and their Canon taken. But the Conquerors casting themselves too soone and too inconsiderately upon pillage, made them who fled regain their courage; in such sort as that they rallyed, and defeated an Ar∣my of sixty thousand men, however they durst not pursue them. By means of this memorable enterprize, the lot sell upon the impregnable Town of Raab, which issued very happily for the good of Christendome to the ho∣nour of the Count de Swartsbourgh, and Mons. de Vanbecour, (a Lorraine Gen∣tleman) together with the French, Lorrains, Low-burgundians, and Walloons. The Duke of Mercoeur, having taken leave of the most Christian King,Mutiny of the French. and recol∣lected the fragments of the League, went thither, for the service of Christen∣dome: but his Troops not having an equal zeal with that of their General, sell to mutinie in the Fort of Pappeneer Raab, chased away their officers, and indeavoured to sell the said place to the Turks. The Count de Swarts∣bourgh offered them their pay, and conjured them to forbear that trea∣son, but they being obstinate in their wickednesse, delivered to the In∣fidels, (in earnest of their perfidie) of men, women, and children above six hundred Christians: and this by way of recompence for some Pro∣visions. The Place was invested, and the Turks could not succour it; and the brave Earle of Swartsbourgh killed. These detestable Mutiners, after having made many desperate sallyes, and fought long against Famine, (the gate of favour, and pardon being shut to them, who had so wickedly betrayed the Christian
Party,) were at length almost all caught and punished, according to the greatnesse of their treason. Canisia was taken by the Turk, and Stoul-Vessem∣bourg by the Duke of Mercoeur, where he atchieved so much glory, that the great Turk intreated Henry the fourth to call him away. This war was fi∣nished about the end of the year 1606. The Emperours Souldiers muti∣ned for want of pay, and committed a thousand robberies, which caused rebellious and great famine. The Duke of Mercoeur, desirous to go visit his native country, began his journey full of victorious palms, and passed through Vienna, where he was very well received by his Imperial Majesty, and the whole Court.The death of the Dake of Marcoeur. But Parca, envious of his happinesse, cut off the thred of his life at Novemberg. Transylvania is a part of the aforesaid Kingdome of Hungary, and is much peopled, and most fortill: The Inhabitants speak a language much like to that of Low-Saxony; and it is also very credible, that they sprang from thence: but when or how is very uncertain. Some Authors recount that a certain Quack-salver, or Mountebank not being fully satisfied by the Citi∣zens of Hamelen (a Town seated upon the River of Weser) according to their promise made him, (for freeing them from the trouble of an innumerable multitude of Rats, which he drew out of the said Town with the sound of his Pipe) revenged himself after this manner. He gathered together all the children of the Town, or, (to say better) he charmed them so well with the sound of his said instrument, that he going out, and they following to a cer∣tain mountain not farre off, the ground cleft, and swallowed them up, and as soon as they were entred, closed up again: and sometime after it was published and believed, that the said children were transported into Tran∣sylvania: And even to this very day,Wheoe came the thubitants of Transylva∣nia. there are some at Hamelen who write in these terms; such a year, since the departure of our children. The Kingdom of Hungary for the most part, followes the Romane Catholick Religion; though yet both the Reformed party, and the Lutherans (especially in Tran∣sylvania) have likewise their Churches. But the stepping in of these latter created a great deale of distrust; the inseparable companion of contradicto∣ry opinions: The Soveraign authority hath lost part of her vigour; and her power is so much diminished, that the Hungarians could not subsist but by the Majesty of the Eagle. Let us summarily, and without deviating from our path, speak of the glory of the ancient Hungarians; of the vertues, and ill habits which are found now amongst them; and of the troubles which they suffer, or still apprehend amongst themselves by the neerness and vi∣cinity of the sworne enemy of Christendome. Hungary, (anciently called Pannonia) is a Kingdome most abundant in all which Nature covets for her contentment. She is watered with most fair and great Rivers; which would make her most flourishing, if she had not the Turk in her bowels: But she hath an ayer a little too rough for strangers. She hath produced a huge number of great Emperours; most Religious Kings; most holy Persons, and men most learned in all kinds of faculties. Atilas, that scourge of God, came from them with his Huns, for the affliction of Europe; and many other Tyrants, who have often rended Germany, and made the Emperours pay them tribute a long time, to save their Country from the fury of their arms. But vice reigns there now with so absolute an Empire, as it renders the Hungarians very odious, and despicable. Ambition made them loose a King, a saire Army, and Buda, the capitall City of the Kingdome. Avarice hurries them blindfold upon all wickednesse; and makes them sometimes sell the Christians prisoners to the Turks and Tartars; without sparing so much as their own neer kindred, when the insatiable hunger of mony hath vayled the eyes of their understanding.
Their Kings have had frequent experiments of their perfidie; the Turks of their loosenesse; and the Germanes of their cruelty, treachery, and hatred; dangerous both to the one and the other, as having made many Fields un∣fruitful, and brought much profit to their enemies. The Hungarians (saith an old Bishop, writing to the Emperour Frederick the first) have ugly faces, hollow eyes, low of stature, and barbarous both in manners and speech. And yet it must be avowed, that there also dwells vertue amongst them, as well as amongst other Christians; that they defend Christendome; and that their bodies are such Bulwarks, as the Ottomans have not hitherto been able to leap, and which they must first cast to the ground, if they intend to assayle Ger∣many. They are almost alwayes on horse-back, and upon prey with them, and they serve themselves of calamity for an aliment to their vertue. And indeed that of the valiant Count de Serin amongst so many others, shined with so much glory, and constancy at the siege of Sigot, that it purchased him everlasting praise. The Hungarians with their Light Horse do more hurt to the Turks, then to the Germanes; and in this last Warre of Bohemia they offended more by surprises, then by standing Fights. In the Battel of Prague not being able to support the rough onset of the Walloons, and Germanes, they quickly gave ground, and so were partly the cause of that remarkable Defeat. CHAP. III Of Russia, or Muscovia: Their Religion. The History of Demetrius. THis Province, which stretches it self to the Icie Sea, is of a very large extent, governed by an Emperour, or Great Duke, with most absolute au∣thority, (after the manner of the Eastern Countries) however it lye very near the North. The Muscovits follow the Greek Religion,The Greek Re∣ligion. under a Patri∣arch; though yet it be mingled with very many superstitions, which will ne∣ver be corrected, because the Great Duke suffers none of his subjects to tra∣vel, and see other Countries. This people is much tormented by the Turks and Tartars. They have likewise waged great warres with the Polas and Swedes; but with many losses. They were very tyrannically governed by their Prince John Basil, who was succeeded by his son Theodore, a Prince of small sense, for he let both himself and his Country be ruled by his wives brother called Borits Fedorits. He died without children, and his Brother-in-law was Great Duke after him. He had a brother named Demetrius, who (as many Authors worthy of credit have written,The History of Demetrius. with great apparences of truth) was stolne away in his infancy, so to be saved from the evident danger wherewith he seemed to be threatened by the authority of the said Borits; and another very like him put in his place, was exposed dead to the view of the people. Now, this Demetrius being brought up in Poland, with the Palatine Sando∣mir, after he had travelled in Germany and Italy for the space of twenty yeares, gave himself to be known for the son of Basil, Brother to Theodore; and by the assistance of the said Palatime, the Jesnits, and the favour of the King himself, he entered the second time into Muscovy, well accompanied by Germanes, Poles, and Cosacks. Borits raises a most puissant Army to oppose him, but the infidelity of his people, together with some losses, deprived him both of courage, and desire of life: And so he died the 13th of April, in the year 1605, not without suspicion of having voluntarily prevented his misfortune by despaire. His son was received by such as were of his faction:
But the City of Mosco, together with all the Country, having admitted De∣metrius for their Prince, he was forthwith cast in prison. Now Demetrius had no sooner made his entry into the said City, but they began to murmure and say, that he was not the true Demetrius. The Lord Basil Chimouskie, for having said that he had caused the right Demetrius to be buried, brought his head upon a scaffold, which yet, by special favour, he brought back again to weare the Crown, and succeed the unfortunate Demetrius. O strange effect of Fate! The aversion of the people from poor Demetrius appeared yet more, when they understood that he had acknowledged the Pope, and introduced the Jesuits, to work-about a Reformation. He married the daughter of his Foster-Father, who made her entry into the head City the 26 of April, in the year 1606. The persidy of this treacherous people was clearly discovered a moneth after; namely, the 27 of May, and their rage began its first effect upon the Poles and other strangers, (who yet sold their skins dear enough) and others passed on to the Court, there to finish the last Act of the Tragedy. The Prince hearing of the tumult, left the company of his wife (wish whom he then was) got away, and leapt down from the top of a Tower, through a window, at the foot whereof (being found yet alive) he was forthwith dis∣patched. This was done under the pretext of Religion. He was a Prince of a great wit; a lover of hunting and warre, he had read much, was very ambitious, and went much in quest of the allyances of the Kings of Europe; and nominatively of that of the Great Henry of France, Thus unhappily ended Demetrius his dayes, in the very April of his age, and the cruelty of the barbarous multitude continued even upon his dead body, which they tore in pieces: so violent is hatred stirred up by Religion, against such as endeavour to change it, when fury has gotten the upper hand. He was accused by a Declaration, to have been a Monk, an Heretick, and a Witch; and to have endeavoured to change the Religion of Russia; supplant the Nobility of the Country, and introduce that of Poland; to have layen with his wife in the presence of an image of our Lady, and many other things, which are tedious to rehearse. A memorable example of the insta∣bility of Fortune, who when she most smiles is then most ready to shoot her inevitable shots of her irradicable hatred against such as love vertue and constance. It was necessary to recount this for the greater knowledge of what we are to publish concerning Muscovy, which hath selt the tragical ef∣fects of Bellona, as well as the rest of Europe, whereof she is a good part. CHAP. IV Of Poland. The Government; and Religion thereof. Henry Duke of Anioii chosen King, and afterwards Sigismund of Sweden, and Maximilian of Austria, who was taken prisoner in a Battell. THis Kingdome was governed by Sigismund of Sweden, and had no other enemy at that time then the Swedes, for the interest of their Prince. But before we give an account thereof, we will speak of the manners, and Origin of the Country. Poland is of very vast distent, and takes her name from the great Fields which produce a huge quantity of Corn. The great Dukedome of Lithuania, is a part of this Kingdome; which is bounded on the one side by Muscovy;
and on the other, Hungary, Germany, Livonia, and Prussia, or Borussia, to the Baltick Sea, there are many Fennes, Lakes, and huge Forrests;Poland full of Forrests and Fennes. as there likewise are through all the North, where, in the Trunks of Trees, is often found great store of hony, whereof they make a certain Drink (chiefly in Lithuania) which is most delicate, and yeelds not awhit in goodness to Spanish wine. Now here well deserves to be inserted, the story of a certain Peasant or Countriman, who being fallen by accident into one of the Trunks, which was full of hony, ran great hazard to be drowned,The story of is Peasant saved by a strange accident. without an almost miraculous succour, which came to him by chance: And it was, a Bear approaching the said place, to lick the hony (whereof these crea∣tures are very lickorish) the poor man layd hold of his tayle; and the beast violently endeavouring to run away, drew the man out of this sweet, but fa∣tall precipice. The winter is there very long and sharp; against the rigour whereof, the Inhabitants (who have no want of wood) serve themselves of stoves, and good furred gownes, as all the Northern people do. The Nobility is very studious of Warre, and desirous of Travell, and in short, of an humour much like that of the French. They express their gal∣lantry in the beauty of their Cloathes, Weapons, and Horses; in the sump∣tousness of Feasts, Weddings, Funeralls, Christenings; and in numerous Trains of servants too, when they go a woing. They are very stout, and decide their quarrels for the most part by encounters: so that there are more Fights, then Duels. They are very good souldiers, whereof they have given frequent testimonies against the Turks, whom they oppose not with Fortifications and Bulwarks, for the defence of their Kingdome, and all Christendome; but with their Bodies, in the Field. The Tartars do them much hurt by surprizes; who as soon as they have done their feat, and find the Poles advancing, betake themselves to their heels with their pray, and fell their prisoners to the Turks, by whom they are made slaves. The Polanders, (anciently called Sarmass) were very redoubtable to the Romans, and contemned their power, they embraced the doctrine of the Gospel, and since learning and sciences have been in Vogue amongst them, they are extremely civilized; as all other nations like wife are, which have changed the darkness of ignorance into light, and their brutish manners into amiable society. The Latin tongue is so common amongst them, that there are very few Gentlemen who do not speak it. The custome of draw∣ing a sword, when the Priest recited the Gospel in the Mass, is now abolish∣ed, for some misfortunes which happened thereby: however by this zealous action, they signified themselves to be willing to loose their lives for the de∣fence of the Gospel, and for the ingrandizement and propagation whereof they have often tought against the Pagans, and do protect Christendome to this day against the puissance of the Infidels: Though yet, they were mo∣ved by this very zeal, both inconsiderately and perfidiously to break the sworne Peace with the Great Turk; and were consequently all cut off, to∣gether with their King Ʋladislans, near Varne. They are very strong and tall, and have faces able to imprint the figure of feare in the countenance of the most confident. They slight the rigour of the cold, and all other ob∣stacles, which may hinder them from a glorious death. Yet is it also very true on the other side, that vice hath placed its dwelling there, as well as elsewhere; and that the contempt of the Lawes is not lesse amongst them, then in any other part of Europe. They who travell through Poland and Hungary, carry their beds with them yea, and sometimes their victuals too, to shunne the hazard of an ill supper, and a hard lodging. These two Nations have a fashion of cloathing almost alike, which doth differ very little, and they both weare furred Bonnets. The Romane Ca∣tholick Religion is the chief; however there be other also permitted, and
freely exercised amongst them; as namely, the Arrian, and many other old Heresies which are still croaking there: besides, the Greck Church hath also a great number of adherents there. The Kingdome of Poland is Elective; and when the King is dead, the Arch∣bishop of Gssue takes the Government of the State, and assembles the Senate and the Nobility for the election of another. During the Interreign, or va∣cancy, there is committed great store of murthers and insolencies, which moves such as love the publick Quiet, to speed the Election. The Nobility hath most high priviledges, whereby the Kings authority is much bridled and retained within the Lawes of the Kingdom whereof in a word they are so jealous, that they alwayes mistrust their Prince, and imagine every moment, that he will either take their lawes from them, or at least diminish them, to make himself more absolute. Murthers are not so rigorously punished here as in other parts of Chri∣slendome. For a Gentleman shall be quit for killing of another with one years imprisonment, and if the person murthered be of a mean condition, for a small forfeit. The Ecclesiasticks have huge Revenues, for which they are much envied. The most eminent dignities amongst them are to be Senatours, whom they call Waiwodes, Chatellans, and Starosts, which are charges of Captains. In a word, they are all equall, like Brothers, not enduring any superiority at all. The Duke of Anioll elected King. The Kingdome being vacant by the decease of Sigismund, Queen Kathe∣rine de Medicis, sent the Bishop of Valence thither for the Duke of Anioll her son, who was chosen with applause; and the eloquence of the said Bishop, prevailed much therein. The magnificencie of the Dukes Reception, made the French see that the Polanders skorn to fall short of any in gallantry. But his Reign proved not very long: For hearing of the death of King Charles, and preferring the Hereditary Crown of France before the Elective of Poland three moneths after his arrivall, he secretly departed; leaving the Polanders the repentance of having chosen him, and the trouble to choose another;Stephen Bato∣rins succeeds. who sell out to be Stephanus Batorins Prince of Transylvania. He reigned ten yeares, reduced Dantsick to her obedience, kept the bordering places within their duty, and rejoyned Livonia to the Crown. He governed the Kingdome both happily and wisely, died in the resolution he had taken to subdue Muscavy to Poland; left great grief for his so sudden death amongst tho Poles, and a good odour of his vertues to posterity. The Polanders, after the decease of King Stephen, found themselves in a dangerous sicknesse, by a division which threatned utter ruine to the Crown. The great Chancellour Samotskie, the Bishops, and many other of the great. Lords, elected Sigismund of Sweden sonne of King John, and Queen Katherine of Poland, daughter to Sigismund of Jaguellonne. The other party had chosen Maximilian of Anstria, who entring  Poland with an Army made up in haste, besieged Warsaw; from whence be∣ing repulsed,Maximilian forces. and recruting his forces in Silesia, he was the second time de∣feated and, taken prisoner by the Great Chancellour aforesaid. After these two victories was crowned Sigismund in the year 1587, and called by the name of Sigismund the third. He married Anne of Austria, who brought him a sonne named Ʋladislans, who afterwards was King of Poland. And this is that which we thought very sit to recount, and which must serve us for the present History of this Age. Let us now passe into Sweden, and hear what the Swedes alledge against the Polanders, with the reasons and arguments both of the one and the other.
CAROLƲS GƲS'TMƲS' King of S'wethens, Goths; & Vandalls, greate mince of Finland, Duke of Esthonia, & Carelia, Lot of Jria. & Ciou'ned An? Dom: 1654.
CHAP. V of Sweden. The discords happening between King Sigismund, and his Uncle Charles, and why? The successe of their Arms. SIgismund King of Sweden, endeavouring to put two Crowns upon his head, lost the Hereditary one. See how all passed, This young Prince had been brought up in the Roman Catholick Re∣ligion, though yet he were the sonne of King Erick who embraced the Con∣fession of Ausbourgh, and introduced it into his Kingdome. This Erick was sonne to King John, and Nephew to Charles Duke of Sudermanic, whom he left in Sweden to govern that Kingdome in his absence, in the quality of Vice-Roy. Now it often chances, that Princes who have more then one kingdom, grow by little and little to loose the affections of their remote subjects, and their authority comes also by degrees to be eclipsed; in regard that their said subjects are not warmed by the heat of their favour, and prudence; and so others grow insensibly to take place, as well because their pre∣sence winnes the affections of the said subjects; as also for that rea∣sons are never wanting to such as have no will to obey: And besides, every one stands in fear of forraine Rule. But the most powerfull argu∣ment of the coldness of subjects towards their Soveraigne, is diversity of Religions; which causes a change in State, and alters and shakes it so, as that many Princes for the strengthening and fixing of theirs, have believed that they neither could, nor ought to permit any more then one. Sigismund goes into Sweden. King Sigismund hearing many complaints from Sweden, and conceaving some jealousies of his Uncle Charles, resolved, with leave of the States of Po∣land, to transport himself thither with some Polish and German forces. He de∣parted from Dantsick with a fleet of sixty Sayle, and was well received by the Governour of Colmar; from whom he went to see his sister at Ste∣bourgh. Duke Charles hastened towards him from Finland, with an Army to de∣fend the kingdome against the King himself;Sigismund beaten. who (as it was published) came to take the Vice-King prisoner, and change the State by subverting Religion. So there occurred a fierce skirmish, wherein the Vice-King had the better, and Sigismund the King was forced to retite himself towards the Confines of Denmark. In fine, he was beaten again near Lincopin, and his Fleet taken. Upon which, seeing his Uncle thus courted by Fortue, through the mediation of some Lords, he was fain to make peace with him under certain conditions, by vertue whereof his Fleet was restored to him to go by Sea to Stockholm;Makes Peace and Duke Charles (in whose hands were put the prime Lords of Sweden, who had been to fetch the King in Poland) went thither by land. Sigismund instead of going to the Assembly of States at Stockholm, went se∣cretly out of the kingdom, which he thereby lost,He retires our of the kingdom. and regained Dantsick Some Authors have written, that he had been advertised of some ill design of his Uncle Charles against him: and a certain person who was then at Stockholm affirms, that he sighed for his having let slip the bird which he had in his hand. However, those Lords were beheaded, and their heads set upon stakes, which were since taken away upon the request of a great Wanyer. Duke Charles quickly recovered those places of strength, which were in the Kings possession; chastised the Citizens of Lubeck who had favoured him, caused the States to approve of all his actions, and ranged the Finlan∣ders (who held the Kings party) under obedience to himself. Some months
after, the States deposed the King by a publick Decree, declaring him fallen from the Rights he had in the kingdom, and renouncing all fidelity to him; though yet still they were ready to receive his sonne Ʋladislans for King of Sweden, in case he would forthwith send him thither to be bred in the Re∣ligion and customes of the Country. But these conditions not seeming receivable, were not accepted by the King, and the proceedings of the States of Sweden cryed down by the Poles, who resolved to take an account of them with the sword. This is the summe of what is known of that difference, which is yet re∣maining between the Heires of these two Princes, and which is debated by very contrary reasons, according to the predominancy either of Passion or Religion, and according to the knowledge also of the Right of the Parties concerned. The Polanders reproach the Swedes, for that without any available reason, and upon some ill grounded suspicions only; yea, even against all Right both Divine and Humane, they took the kingdom from Sigismund, to give it to Charles. To which the Swede; answer, that the King against his promise had endeavoured under hand to bring in the Jesuits, so to replant the Ro∣man Catholick Religion, and strangers to check and curb them; and many other arguments there are both upon the one side, and the other, which I let passe in silence, and which are found at large elsewhere. Now you have had the words, take also some effects of their arms. Duke Charles, after the reduction of Finlande, went into Livoma, where he gained some advantage upon Samonskie; besieged Riga, but in vain, and re∣turned into Sweden in great danger to be drowned. When he had gotten the Crown upon his head, he gave the reasons thereof to all Christian Kings and Princes; justifying his proceedings the best he could, and seeking the allyance of his Neighbours, and chiefly that of the States Generall, Samonskie the Great Chancellonr aforesaid writ against him, and cried our upon his ambition, which greatly offended him, and gave subject of great grudges between them, which grew at length to implacable hatred. Chules looset the Battel. Fortune frowned upon him at Riga: for his Army being much stronger then that of Poland, was rooted by General Cockevietz, who having senr four hundred of the Livonian horse over a River, to attack the Swedes in the Reer, wonne the Battel by this stratatagem; and so Livonia came to be un∣der the Polanders, till the Reign of the Great Gustavus Adolphus, who redu∣ced it to his obedience. All Livonia hath embraced the Lutheran Religion as well as Sweden, where it is held for one of their Fundamentall Lawes; as it also is almost through all the North. Sweden is the biggest of all the Northern kingdoms, the Head City where∣of is Stockholm, a Town (the Suburbs and Sea-thore, or strand comprised) of great distent. There are many huge Mountains, Rocks, and Forrests, where are sometimes heard great illusions, and phancies, as there likewise are in the water, which are very troublesome and terrible both to men and horses, which passe that way. The country is not much inhabited, and the chief Provinces are West-Gothland, East-gothland, from whence (as also from the rest of Sweden) according to the opinion of some Authours) came the Goths, who so much vexed the Romane Empyre. This kingdom is full of Copper and Iron Mines. The Swedes are good souldiers both by Sea and Land, and have given incredible examples of their valour both in Germany and Denmark, they are of a strong Complexion, and sit to endure hard∣nesse and labour. The Nobility is very mild and frank; loves learning and languages, but especially Latin, and French; travels much abroad, is very dexterous at exercises, and honours and seeks learned company. Yea, and they have this vertue above all other nations, wherewith I have conversed;
that they heartily love one another our of their own country, hide the vices of their Compatriots, and stand much for the honour of their nation. The Peasants, or Country people send their Deputies to the Assemblies of the States, to the end that nothing be coucluded there, to the prejudice of their priviledges. King Gustave, and Queen Christine his Daughter now reigning, created much new Gentry, (which in some sort is disdained by the ancient Families) in regard the Nobility of the kingdom was almost exhausted by the Warres. CHAP. VI Of Denmark. The Description thereof. DEnmark is a kingdom, the best part whereof consists of Islands, as name∣ly, Zeland and Fionia. The Province of Scania reaches up to Sweden, and Jutland to Holstein. It was peacefully gouerned by the prudent conduct of King Christian the fourth, successour to Frederick the second his Father, and Duke of Holstein. During his minority he had four Counsellours, to help him to bear the charge of the Government. He was crowned the 29th of August, in the year 1596. The principal strength of this Kingdom consists of good and stately ships, whereof the King hath a considerable number, as well for the defence of his said Islands, as for that most important passage of the Sownd, which is the streight that separates Scania from Zeland, and which is of huge advan∣tage, by reason of the infinity of ships which must passe over it to go into the Baltick Sea: in the same manner, that those of all the Havens of the said Sea, and bound for the Ocean, are forced to passe that way. The Nobility of Denmark, as also that of Holstein, is much more inclined to warres then learning; zealous for their liberty and Rights, and makes no allyance by marriage with the common people; a maxime much ob∣served through all the North, Poland, and Germany. They rufuse Ecclesia∣stical Honours as below their condition, defend their priviledges, and make no esteem of others, though by their experience and knowledge, they may merit the best Offices and Employments in the Country. The Government is not much unlike that of Poland, in both which Ele∣ctive Kingdomes the Kings undertake nothing of importance, without the consent of the States and Nobility. The Gentlemen are all equall, and as it were of one Family; there being neither Earl nor Baron. The Officers of the Crown, and Counsellours of the kingdome, have the preheminency, and assist the King in the most weighty affaires of the Countrey. Norway (an Hereditary kingdom) opposite to Great Britain, or England, It is very big, but very desert, and hath no considerable Towns, but such as are near the Sea side. It yeelds great store of fish, wood, boards, and good skins. These three kingdomes were heretofore under the government of the King of Denmark: But the Swedes not being able to suffer the tyranny of Christian the second, divided themselves from his obedience. They all follow the Lutheran Religion; and the Capitall City of Denmark is Coppenhaghen; a very fair town, situated upon the streight of the Sownd near the Baltick Sea; a passage of about four leagues, most pleasant and re∣creative, by means of a Forrest which borders upon the Sea from Coppen∣haghen to Elsener: of which passage, because it is so much envyed, we will hereafter speak more at large.
The Peasants of Denmark and Poland are treated almost like slaves; for the greatest part of the Nobility licentiously abusing their liberty, despises all who are not Gentlemen: A fault which hath drawn ruine upon many Families, which boasted of the story of their Ancestours. But it is not enough to be born a Gentleman, unlesse it appear by vertuous, laudable, and generous actions. CHAP. VII Of Great Britain. The History of the Earl of Gore. ENgland is a most fertile, and most potent Island, as well for scituation, as men and ships. There reigned Queen Elizabeth, a Princesse as hap∣py in her allyances, success of arms, and love of her subjects, as ever was. She was Daughter to Henry the 8th, and Sister to Mary and Edward. She changed the Religion, & declared her self Head of the Church. She was alwaies well served: She sent strong succours to the King of Navarre, and her subjects wonne many victories by Sea from the Spaniard, against whom she continu∣ed her hatred, even till her death, in favour of the Ʋnited Provinces of the Low-countries. She was a sworne enemy to the Roman Catholick Religi∣on, and seemed to have made it her task to destroy that, as well as she had the King, who bears the surname of it. Scotland is a kingdom which makes a part (but not the better part) of this Island. There reigned as King, Lames Stewart; a Prince esteemed very wise, who resented not at all the death of his Mother Mary, who was beheaded in England, preferring the hope of succession to the said kingdom before revenge, courting the favour of the Queen, and treading all other considerations un∣der foot. But heaven left nothing unpunished, which often revenges inno∣cence upon the Innocent themselves, to chastise them who have not re∣venged it. He married Anne Sister to Christian King of Denmark, and lived in peace: which yet was disturbed by dreadful conspiracy of a certain Earle called Gore, whose Father was beheaded in the end of the said Kings mino∣rity. Now this Gore returning from travel, sent his brother to the King as he was hunting, whom when he had made believe, that there was a certain man who had found a great pot full of gold, he led him into his said bro∣thers Cabinet, or Closet, where, had he not been succoured by his follow∣ers, he had been unhappily murthered. The Tragedy was afterwards acted upon them, who intended themselves to have been the actors thereof, and the murtherers were justly murthered. In this tragedy, they who were cu∣rious, found such mysteries, as their modesty kept in silence. The Scots are held good souldiers, but they were never very fortunate against the English. Ireland is an Island both big and fruitfull, between Spain and England; where the English have exercised great power and authority, as well in re∣spect of Religion, as for the Rebellion of the Irish against Queen El'zabeth, & calling the Spaniards to help them. But they grew at length to be conque∣red, and have long been governed since by Deputies, or Vice-Kings, under a most austere Disciplipe, which hath constrained some of them to flye to the main Land, and others to retire themselves into the Woods and Forrests, amongst the wild beasts, to seek their liberty, after their own fashion. This Island was heretofore conquered by the Saxons, and a long time af∣ter by the Norman under William the Conquerour. Their lawes have some
resemblance to those of Normandy, and Guienne, which they had some ages in their possession; where the Eldest sonnes take almost all the succession of their Parents, leaving but very little to their Brothers, and Sisters. A very rough Law, and almost quire contrary to that of Poland; where when the Eldest hath divided the said succession, the younger takes the first Portion, and after him the other; so that the last of all is left to the Eldest. The English are good Souldiers both by Sea and Land, not in valour and courage inferiour to any one Nation whatsoever, and are more apt to offend by temerity, and overmuch forwardnesse, then cowardise. Inghilterra, bona terra, & mala gente. The Nobility is generally very courteous, and chiefly such as have travel∣led. England (sayes a famous Italian) is a good Country, but the Inhabitants are very bad. The English are little affected to other Nations, and especially to the French, from whom they have a great aversion; nor can the French or Scots on the other side endure the incompatible humour of the English. After they had lost what they possessed in France, and all the intelligence they had there, they fell for a long time to Civill Warres: But since, under the reign of four Kings, and two Queens, they have seen various persecuti∣ons, not only about Religion, but for matter of State too, where of we will speak in the sequel of this History. The women are incomparably beautifull, and consequently have a great influence upon the men; yea, the Queens have commanded there more absolutely, and have been much better obeyed and respected then the Kings. They treat their servants and horses very roughly; which gave birth to the Proverb, That England is Heaven for Women, Purgatory for servants, and Hell for horses. King James, to smother the hatred and partiality which had alwayes been between the people of these Islands, by laudable advice, entituled him∣self King of great Britain. The Title of King of France, which was possessed by many Kings of Eng∣land, hath alwayes checked the Salick Law, which excludes the Heyres Fe∣mall of France from the Crown: so that though the English possessed almost the whole kingdom of France, it was more by the right of Arms, then by that of the Lawes and Customes. Let us now leave Great Britain, and look upon Italy, where there are many Seates and Republicks, whereof we shall make but little mention, to shun superfluities, and keep our selves within the limits prescribed in this History. CHAP. VIII. Of Italy, Lorraine, and Savoy. POpe Clement the 8th held the Chaire, and by the prudent administration of him, the Venetians, and the Great Duke of Tuskany, there flourished a Peace throughout all Italy. Every one preserved himself within his own in∣terests; nor could any little jealousies take root, to the loss of the publick Quiet: but it was suddenly strangled in the Cradle, by wise conduct, and most subtile policy. The Popes, as well by donation as other practises, have not onely augmented the Patrimony of St. Peter, but drawn also all the Soveraign Au∣thority to themselves, by removing the Emperours from the knowledge of the Affaires of Italy. The Faction of the Guelphes for the Popes, the Gibelms for the Empe∣rours,
reigned there long, and was not consopited or quieted, but by eclip∣sing almost the whole Majesty of Emperours by endeavouring to constrain them to receive the Crown from their hands: A difference not quite ex∣tinguished yet. Besides, that they have ever been unhappy enough in pur∣suing their Right by Arms, the Italians cutting them out work enough amongst themselves, and often hindring their coming out of Germany; so that all the splendour of the Empyre remaines there, and is no otherwise known throughout almost all Italy, then only by name. Under the Reign of Valentinian, the Western Empire was much tottered by the Barbarians, which forced most of the principall Families near the Sea, to retire into the Islands of the Adriatick Streights, and there lay the Founda∣tions of that most puissant City of Venice, and of that most Serene Republick, which hath encreased, maintained, and conserved herself these twelve ages, by an unparallelled blessing; by the most perfect observance of the Lawes, and by a policy worthy of admiration. This gives just cause to judge, that they who began her, were of the most elevated and prime of all Italy; and not slaves, as they were who laid the first stone to the Common-wealth of Rome. In the Peace which was made between the Emperour Charlemayne, and the Emperour of Constantinople, it was concluded, than that Common∣wealth which had already stood more then three ages and a halfe, should serve for a bound and gate to the two Empyres. They had for a long time in their possession the kingdom of Gypres, which the Turks have now taken from them. They have had many enemies, and have often by their great prudence diverted the storms which have been ready to fall upon them, and by the dexterity of their mannagements, regained that which they had lost by the fate of Arms. That mad League of the Pope, the Emperour, and the Kings of France and Spain, would have invaded any other State but theirs: so much amazement did it strike into those Areopages; who yet, by their rare industry were able to untangle this fatal conjuncture, and save their Common-wealth from the shipwrack wherewith she was much threatned. In fine, after that peace which they had made with the Turk, and which followed close upon the glorious Battel (but with small fruit) of Lepante, they finished that Age and began this present, in good intelligence with their Neighbours. The King of Spain enjoyes in Italy the kingdomes of Naples and Sicily, and the Duchy of Milan, upon which States the French have also their pretenti∣ons, which often cause frequent warres between the two Crownes, whereof we shall speak towards the end of this Treatise, in the revolution of those last tumults. The Grand Duke of Tuskany, the Dukes of Mantua, and Parma, keep their Seates in peace, and the Common-wealth of Genoa hers, tyed fast (for her profit) to the interests of Spain. Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy, a Prince as subtle as inconstant (but yet unlucky enough) for having seized upon the Marquisat of Salluces, found himself forced to put on his harnesse, and to leave his rest in the first year of this age, as we shall hereafter shew; neither his journey to Paris, nor all the politick craft he could use, being able to war∣rant him from this check. The Dukes of Savoy are very potent, and often seen to make the skale hang towards that Crown, to which they leane. France seeks their friendship to have the gate open into Italy, in the intrigues whereof she finds her self passionately concerned. Lorraine was governed by Duke Charles, a milde Prince, who still com∣plained of the wrong which the enemies of the League (whereof the Princes of that house were the chief) had made him suffer. This Province (which divides Germany from France) is very fruitfull, and takes her name
from the Emperour Lotarius and her Princes, their Descent from Charle∣magne. They have alwayes been great Warriers, and Godfree of Bouillon, through zeal of piety, went and conquered the Holy Land. The Dukes of Lorraine, for interest of State, keep good correspondence with their Neighbours; and the last misfortune which happened in this Duchy, was caused rather by the decline of the Emperours Affayres, and the ambition of him who thought all lawfull to him, then by the fault of the Prince, who could not shelter himself from that storme, which had already shivered both Masts, Sayles, and Helme. These States aforesaid, in regard they never knew any Religion but that of Rome, suffer not any other so much as to bud, or spring there, and if per∣adventure there be any one found in Lorraine, who hath embraced the Pro∣testant Religion, he retires himself to Metz, or Geneva, and they of the Coun∣try of Luxenbourgh to Sedan. Diversity of Religions parts humours, gives de∣sire of motion to such as are ambitious, and makes a Prince very little loved by them who are not of the same opinion. We have already gone round about Europe, therefore let us now enter in∣to the middle, and speak of those great Monarchies, which by their moti∣ons have shaken all other States, as being governed according to the influ∣ences thereof, and accommodating their interests to the ballance of their greatnesse. For since Warre hath been declared between Spain and France, very few Princes have stood Neutrall; some having joyned their forces to the party most necessary for them, and some others (though but specta∣tors) have not yet forborne to poise more to the one side then the other. But none have been willing to have either of these Crowns suppressed by the other, for the apprehension and fear wherein they all are of a Generall Monarchy. CHAP. IX The jealousies between the two Crownes, and why? The House of Burgundy. NOw to get entire knowledge of the interests of these two Crownes, of the Causes which so often arm them, to the great detriment of Christen∣dom, and the apprehensions which they give of aspiring to a general Mo∣narchy, though by unequall and different wayes, we must goe up to the source, and so come quickly down again, drawing from thence a true ex∣planation for our subject, which we will follow as our guide, to the end of our Course. France being delivered from the warres with England, and wholly resto∣red to her self, as well by the help of forren, as the help of her Neighbours, and even the very Spaniards themselves, with whom she had a close friend∣ship at that time. Having (I say) shaken off the yoke of the English, who were expelled from Guyenne, and Normandy; she became the most puissant Monarchy of Europe. King Charles the 8th went to feaze upon the kingdom of Naples, which was no sooner got then lost by his departure thence, Lewis the twelfth ha∣ving made an Alliance with Ferdinand of Castile, for the recovery of the kingdom enters Italy, surprises Milan, and the unjust usurper Sforce, and so retakes the said kingdome of Naples. But it sometimes happens, that the sharing of stakes makes friends foes; for these Allyes fell to oddes, and Consalve having in many Encounters routed the French, setled the king∣dome
upon the Castilians: and the power and reputation of the Spaniards encreased much, by the valour of the great Captain. The first reason of the hatred between the Spaniards, and the French. Francis the first, having broken the Swissers in a great Battail, easily made himsel Master of the Duke dome of Milan and consequently of the kingdom of Naples. But Fortune smiled upon the French only to betray them: For she suddenly turned to the Spaniards, who took King Francis prisoner, and established themselves in the said kingdome, and in the State of Milan. Now from hence proceeded the hatred between the two Nations, which hath since been augmented according to occurrences of State-jealousies, and other considerable accidents, whereof we will here give a short hint. The second rea∣son. But there is a second and a more pregnant reason, for which not only France, but the neighbouring States also have conceived apprehensions of jealousies, which is that of the Union of Spain by marriage with the houses of Austria and Burgundy, and the latter of these began thus. Philip de Valois, (none to John the sixth King of France, for having well defended his Father in a Battail against the English, was by marriage made Duke of Burgundy, and Prince of the Low-countries, and John his sonne succeeded him not onely in all the Provinces of his Parents, but in the hatred also which he bore to the House of Orleans. Now, this young Prince going with a great force of the Nobility of France, and the Low-countries into Hungary, against the Turk, fell into the hands of Bajazet, who would have caused him to be be∣headed, as well as the rest of the prisoners, had he not been advised to put him to a Ransom, and send him home; and this because it was discovered in his physiognomy, that he should one day become the Author of much disturbance to Christendome: which afterwards proved true. For he caused the Duke of Orleans to be massacred, which raised a huge warre between these two illustrious Houses, to the great advancement of the Eng∣lish affaires in France. But now, for the remedy of all those evills, a Peace was made, and Duke John assassinated in a Conference in the presence of the Dolphin. Now this dismal chance, this unseasonable revenge, and this mad Counsell was the cause why the English assisted by the Burgundians and Flemmings, made themselves masters of almost all the kingdome of France. For Philip surnamed the Good, joyned with the English, to revenge the death of his Father against Charles the seventh. In fine, there happening a civil warre in England between the Houses of Lancaster and York, the White and Red Rose, and Duke Philip drawing his stake out of the play; the English came by degrees to loose all they had gotten in the said kingdome. This good Prince instituted and established the Order of the Golden Fleece in the year 1430, and tyed so by succession all those Provinces into one body, to which Charles the Combatant annexed the Duchy of Guelders sold to him by Duke Arnolt, for the summe of 92 thousand Crowns. The pretensions of the Duke of Juleers, or Gulick, were also gran∣ted by consent of the Emperour Frederick in consideration of the summe of eighty thousand Florens in gold. He left one only Daughter named Mary of Valois, who was a very vertuous Princess, and was married to Maxmilian of Austria; and her death proved fatall to the Low-countries in respect of the war which followed there. Her sonne Philip having renewed his alliance with Henry the seventh, went into Spain and married Iane of Castile, who brought him Charles of Austria. And thus, these Provinces being bound first to the House of Burgundy, and then to that of Austria, came last into the possession of that of Spain; which by the discovery and conquest of the Indies (happen∣ing almost at the same time) is become most puissant and terrible, as well to other States and Princes, as also to the Ottomans themselves; who seeing the Romane Empyre governed by a Prince of this Family loaden with so many Crowns and so many potent States, take no small pleasure in seeing so many Schismes amongst the Christians.
Charles being chosen Emperour, had Francis the first for his Competitor, which kindled great Warres between them. The success whereof was, that Francis being taken prisoner, promised (though he performed not) to re∣store the Duchy of Burgundy and renounce the Rights which the Kings of France had had in some Provinces of the Low-countries, land Italy: so that the Heyres of Charles remained a long time in the quiet and peacefull possession of them; France being enough embroyled at home by the tender youth of three Kings (all sonnes to Henry the second) and by Civill Warre, with∣out looking back into old quarrels.The House of Austria encrea∣sed by Marria∣ges and Navi∣gation. And here we may see how by marria∣ges and Navigations, the House of Austria is both amplified and elevated; which hath maintained her self by arms, given jealousies to the Princes of Europe by her victories, and struck sear and hatred into the soules of the Pro∣testants; who have made Leagues to uphold themselves, and put a flea into the eare of France; which hath abandoned the interests of Religion to make her self great, and check this formidable power. From this Knot or Tye of so many Crowns, and great States together, (wherewith the King of Spaines head is burthened,) sprang that ticklish, and indissoluble diffe∣rence of precedency or preheminency, which the Kings of France by the title of (Eldest sonnes of the Church, and most Christian Kings) have alwayes attri∣buted to themselves. CHAP. X A Relation of the mischiefs happened in France under the minority of the Kings, and by the diversity of Religions. The jealousie about the power of the Guilards. The Evils in France through State-jealousie. FRance by the deplorable death of Henry the second, grew in a very short space to sink into calamities, which dured to the end of the last Age. The evil began in the minority of Francis the second, and under the Regency of Katharin de Medicis; through a jealousie which thrust it self in amongst the Princes of the Blood, the Constable Montmorency, the Counts of Chattillon, and Andelot, Admiral Caspar de Colligny, and other Lords on the one side; and the Dukes of Guise, the Princes of the House of Larraine, and other Noblemen on the other. The Princes complained of the Guisards, or them of the House of Guise (whom in mockery, and to make them odious, they termed strangers) had the mannagement of all the Affaires of France in their hands. They almost all embraced the Reformed Religion, which at that time began to encrease much through the whole kingdome, where∣of they declared themselves Protectors. The chief motive of hatred betwixt these two most illustrious and anci∣ent Families, grew from a jest which the Admiral de Colligny cast upon the Duke of Guise, concerning the taking of Theonnille. A prick of a Lance, which drew such a deluge of blood, as no Chirurgion was able to stench.Hatred be∣tween these two Houses for a jest. The greatest part of the Ecclesiasticks, and the most zealous of the Romane Ca∣tholicks took the Party of the King, and the Guisards. Many Battails were fought, many Siedges of Townes laid, and many Peaces made, and no soo∣ner made then broken. In fine, under Charles the ninth, at the Wedding of the King of Navarre at Paris, upon the Eve of Saint Bartholomew, hapned that abhominable Massacre so much, and so justly exclained against by the Protestants, and blamed even by the Romane Catholicks themselves. In the Reign of Henry the third was made a League, called the Holy League, for the exclusion of Henry de Bourbon from succession to the Crown, as being
an Heretick, whereof the Duke of Guise, (a Prince of courage and high esteem) was the Head, who having routed the Reyters, or Germane Horse, ented Paris in despight of the King, where he was received by the Citizens with excess of honours; and when the showes of joy were ended, they rai∣sed certain Barricadoes, which made the King retire himself to a place of safety. A Fatall Honour to all subjects, how innocent soever they be. For redress of these disorders, there was a Peace endeavoured betwixt. the King and the Duke. The place of Treaty was Blois, where the King (con∣trary to his Royal Word given him) caused both him and the Cardinal his Brother, to be treacherously murthered. His Children were saved by the Queen-Mother; for the King had resolved to extirpate the whole Race, thereby to prevent the danger of revenge. Paris revolted, and in imitation thereof, many other Townes besides: The King applied himself to the Huguenot Party, and sent for the King of Navarre, which rendered him still more odious, and caused him to be pub∣lished for an Heretick. He besieged Paris, but was unhappily stabbed by a Monk, whereof he died, having already declared Henry of Bourbon for his true successour, and Heyr to the Crown; to whom he also left a third Dis∣pute for the kingdome of Navarre. This stab extinguished the Race of the Valois, ended the life of the Prince, and there with also the desire he had to inflict a rigorous chastisement upon the City of Paris, CHAP. XI Disturbances in the Low-Countries, and why? The Peace of Vervin followes. The donation of the Low-Countries, to the Infanta. THe King of Spain was in no lesse trouble about the Low-countries, for the conservation whereof, he spared not his Treasures brought him from the Indies; nor followed lesse the Counsell of Cardinal Granvel, then the Roman Catholicks of France did that of the Cardinal of Lorraine. But the Prince of Orange assisted by the Protestants of Germany, eluded their care, in such sort, as that neither the wise conduct of the Duchesse of Parma, nor the rough proceedings of the Duke of Alva, nor the very presence of King Philips Brother himself, no nor the inimitable valour of that Great Italian Alexander, was able to prevaile so farre, but that seven Provinces untied themselves from obedience to the King, and formed a potent Common∣wealth amongst themselves, by the change of Religion; without which, it is very probable, that neither the situation, nor the Rivers, not all that which could hurt the Spaniards, would have been able to secure or defend them against the potency of Spain. But now from whence came all these disorders? Who laid the first stone, and fixed the foundation of so dismal and fatall a Warre? There are many causes, and divers pretexts thereof to be noted. We will therefore go to the fountain, since the streams are sufficiently known. Under the General Title of Low-countries, are comprised seventeen Provinces; so rich, so well peo∣pled, so full of fair Towns, and big Villages, together with the situation and strength of the Inhabitants, that if they were united together, I know not who would presume to attach them, how powerful so ever he were, either by Sea or Land. But plenty doth not more disunite people then want, and the winde of ambition raises not lesse storm, then ill-taken zeal in Religion.
These Countries have been almost a whole Age the Theater of a most sad, and dreadful Warre, caused by the two aforementioned Passions, which have brought them to this state, wherein they are seen at present. They had every one their Prince or Goernour apart; but by little and little, as well by Marriages, and Successions, as other means, they grew to be devolved un∣der the House of Burgundy, and afterwards under that of Austria, as we have noted already. For, during the Warres of the Emperour Charles the sift, and Francis the first, they were governed by the Queen of Hungary, Sister to the aforesaid Charles. In fine, this good Prince having with an un∣parallelled example of resolution, transferred all his States upon his sonne Philip, and the Empyre upon his Brother Fordinand, so to retire himself into a private condition; the said King Philip his sonne before his departure, gave the government of the aforesaid Provinces in generall to his Sister, and in particular, to some certain Knights of the Golden Fleece, who had faithfully served both his Father and himself in the Warres against France. Now the Order given to pluck up the tender plants of new opinions in Re∣ligion, was by such as hunted after a Change in State, interpreted for the Spanish Inquisition, and the retardment of the forraine Militia for the main∣taining thereof. The introduction of new Bishops made a double operati∣on, by giving an Alarme as well to the Clergy, as to them who had embra∣ced the profession of a Religion, which excluded both Old and New. The Governesse (notwithstanding the coldnesse of some prime Ministers) stopped the disease with agreeable nutriment, and a sleight bleeding; and so rendered a superficial kind of health to this Body, so much stuffed with ill humours. But King Philip irritated by the contemp of his authority, and com∣mandments, had recourse to the arms of Justice; which by violent proceed∣ings, applies both Sword and Fire; amazes the Good, represses the audacity of others; inexorably punishes the bad, and by demanding the tenth pen∣ny reversed or overthrew all that, which was no more then shaken before. Thus have you the seeds of the Evills, which gave birth to those long warres, which have had divers qualifications and various successes under many Governours; who like unskilfull Physitians either performed not their care, or else prescribed all things contrary, because the Disease was incura∣ble. Some make William Prince of Orange Authour of all those troubles; and others impute it to the cruelty of the Duke of Alva. But be it what it will, this People (being very intense upon the conservation of their priviledges, and most prone to jealousie, motion, and surprise) was more agitated by the passion of others, then by their own, so that Ambition urging them to act under the pretence of priviledges and liberty of conscience; and rigour fal∣ling upon them, to make them unseasonably stoop to the commandments of their Master, urged them to fly to the Sword. Insomuch, as sometimes, neither naked Justice, nor Treaties of Reconciliation, were able to soften their exasperated and irritated Hearts: And such of these Provinces as are nearest the Sea, shewed then another kind of countenance both to the Church and Government; and being succoured by their jealous Neigh∣bours, continued this warre with much advantage. The King gives the Low-coun∣tries to the In∣tanta his Daughter. The King therefore being tired with so prolix a warre, made over all the the Provinces to his Daughter Isabell; but it was, after he had sent Alexan∣der twice into France, to relieve the Leaguers, or Confederates, which much advanced their Affaires, and gave them meanes to lay about them, for the settlement of their Common-wealth. And this was the state of things in the Low-countries, towards the end of the Age. Now Cardinal Albert was sent from Spain to govern the aforesaid Pro∣vinces, who brought the Prince of Orange with him, and falling in his Enter∣prise
upon Marseilles, through the vigilancie of the Dake of Guise, he took possession of his aforesaid Government, by the resignation of the Conde de Fuentes, who had not long before seised upon Cambray and Dourlens. Albert hearing that La Fere was streightned by King Henry, resolved to make a di∣version, which might either be able to raise the siege, or at least to recom∣pence the losse of the said place, in case it were taken. Wherefore, he sent Monsieur de Rosne, to besiege Calis, which he quickly took, together with the Town of Ardre, notwithstanding the succour from England and Holland. La Fere rendred it self at the end of seven months siege; and that which hap∣pened afterwards of most importance for the good of the Crown of France, was the Reconciliation of the Duke of Mayenne, and the rest of the League with King Henry. Albert resolved to make the united Provinces also feel the stroake of his Arms: And so he presented himself before Ostend (an Apple not yet ripe) and afterwards before Hulet, which after many Assaults, he at length carri∣ed. But the Marshall de Rosue had his Head taken off by a Canon Bullet, and more then three thousand souldiers were also slaine. The year follow∣ing, Prince Maurice had his revenge near Turnhawt, where he cut off the Troops of the Count de Varax. In the month of March of the same year, Hernantello Governour of Dour∣lens, like a Fox surprised Amiens by a stratagem, to the great astonishment of all France, and the King retook it like a Lion, after six moneths siege. He passed thither with strong forces, and thought to have given a just retaliation to the Spaniards by surprising Arras; but he was repulsed by the young Count of Buquoy, who after wards rendred great and remarkable services to the Em∣perour, as we shall shortly shew. During the time of these changes, the Pope forbore not to represent to the King the misfortunes and mischiefes which this long Warre brought upon Christendome; and beseeched him to hearken to a good and firm Peace with the King of Spain; especially, being invited thereto by the disor∣ders of his own kingdome, and the fear of a new Revolt, more dangerous then the former. There was none but the Queen of England, and the Con∣federated States who endeavoured by advantageous offers to divert him, and keep him on horse-back: Though yet he dissembled their reproaches, and answered, that the Queen was a gainer by this warre; but for his part, that his people was exhausted, and that he received many and great dam∣mages from the Spaniards, who promised by this Peace, to render all they had gotten in France: That he was obliged as a good King, and a good Father, to solace and refresh his poor subjects. So that all their offers, and many more,the Peace of Vervin. 2598. were not able to hinder this holy work, which was concluded and established at Vervin in the moneth of May, 1598. The King of Spain also for his part was urged to make Peace, as seeing himself crazed with age, and having a young Prince, and a Princesse (his children) to marry, and Fortune very often against him: Besides three ene∣mies upon his back; as France, and the Confederated Provinces, which threa∣tened him with the utter losse of the Low-countries; and England, which either destroyed or spoyled his Fleets upon the Ocean, endangered thereof the Indies, and put him to great charges to secure it; and lastly, their taking of Cales, the prime key of the kingdom, and other Places. Now by vertue of this Peace, the places were restored: But the pretenti∣ons, which each of these Kings hath to some certain Demaynes of the other, were not taken away: From whence sprang the seed of new Warres, which were one day to smoother the promises of arming no more, even though there should be occasion for it. The Peace was received by the poor people with such showes of joy, and teares of tendernesse, as cannot be com∣prehended
but by such as have suffered, and almost lost all. The States in the mean while, let not these occasions slip, by the great distance of the Cardinals forces. For Prince Maurice marched into the Field, took Bergh, Grol, Oldenseel, Lingen, and some other places; which progress purchased him the reputation of a very great Captain, and of un∣derstanding the profession of the Militia, as well as any man of his time. After the publication of the Peace, Philip the second by his Letters Patents dated at Madrid the 6th of May, 1598. conferred all the Low-countries, to∣gether with the Duchy of Burgundy upon the Infanta Isabell his Daughter; to which the Prince her Brother consented, and confirmed it both by oath and writing; upon condition, that if the said Princesse came to die without children, the said Provinces should return to the Dominion of Spain; be∣sides many other Clauses, too long to recite. Now, forasmuch as the actions of great persons are examined, and either approved or disapproved, according to every ones passion; this which I here note, was not forgotten by the contrary party. All things are profitable; yea, Lyes themselves (provided they last four and twenty hours) are of utility and ad∣vantage. CHAP. XII The Areh-Duke goes into Spain, and the Admirall into the Duchy of Cleveland. The death of King Philip. His admirable Patience. THe Allyes of both parties were invited to the Peace of Vervin; but the Queen of England not being able to induce the States to it, resolved to joyn with them in warre, under conditions of more advantage to her then before. This gave the Arch-Duke subject to complain of her, for continu∣ing a warre with so great stomack and grudge upon him, by whom she had never been offended. But he having now received the Procuration of the Infanta his Wife, was acknowledged, and received for Prince of the Low-countries, and he wrote a Letter to the Confederated States, but received no Answer.The Arch-Duke goes into Spain. He departed for Spain with the Prince of Orange, and passed through Germany to conduct Queen Margaret of Austria, nominating for Governour during his ab∣sence Cardinal Andrew; and the Admirall of Arragon for Captain Ge∣neral; who led a strong Army into Cleveland, and Westphalia, where he took Rinberg, and many other small places; and made his Winter-Quar∣ter there, notwithstanding the complaints of the Lower-Ceroles. He sent La Bourlette to the Isle of Bommel, took Crevecoeur, laid siege to Bommel, which he was forced to raise; and so after he had built the Fort of St. Andrews, he retreated into Brabant, where his souldiers began to mutiny for want of pay. The Ceroles had raised another Army, which was disbanded for want of order; some of them being for the Spaniards, and the other for the States. It is in vain to lead great forces into the Field, without a good purse to maintain them, and good counsell to encourage them. The death of King Philip. King Philip lived not long after the conclusion of the Peace, which he also wished both with the English and Hollanders, as being desirous to die in Peace. He was long tormented with a feaver, and two impostumes; and in fine, his whole body was so wasted, that it was pittiful to behold, But more admirable was his patience, to suffer all as he did without murmuring. He commanded
like a great Prince, and died like a good Christian. In the beginning of his Reign he was happy, but in the decline of his age, he saw the losse of one part of the Low-countries, and received many other dammages from the English. He was much blamed for not coming himself in person into Bra∣bant, and for proceeding too roughly with that people, which had been so affectionae to the Emperour Charles, and in fine, for constituting two Ge∣nerals over the Fleet, surnamed The Invincible. The Father stripped himself of his States two years before his death, to attend to pious exercises; And the Sonne two years before his: was affli∣cted with grievous pains and torments, which he suffered with superlative patience. Some Writers, who take pleasure in looking back into the Cau∣ses of such accidents, within the secrets of the Almighty, have presumed to publish that it was a punishment from heaven, for the cruelties which his Go∣vernours had practised, as well in the Low-countries, as in the Indies. Others of more moderation have believed, that God had a mind to shew in the per∣son of this porent Prince, that all the Greatness of this world is nothing but dust and vermin. There is nothing constant in this world, but the constant order of Change and Vicissitude. The I'underbolt strikes none but the highest Towers, and loftiest Mountaines. By his endeavouring to succour the League in Franc, he lost the confede∣rated Provinces: And in the design of invading England, he lost a most powerfull Navy, and armed enemies against his States, who gave him much displeasure and trouble. CHAP. XIII The differences which happened between the Earls of Frezland, and the Town of Embden. The States put a Garrison there. THe knowledge of the difference of the Town of Embden, with the Earls thereof, is to be joyned to that of the Low-countries; and so by conse∣quence, it is convenient to mention it here. When Townes grow strong, they ordinarily loose their will to obey; for which they never want either examples or pretexts, whether it be of Religion or Priviledge; yea, and to accuse the weaker party of injustice too, if they get a good issue in it. Now this Town whereof we are speaking being very much encreased and enriched by the great number of people which repaired thither, there to seek (as it were) a sanctuary, from the rigorous execution of the Placarts of the Duke of Alva, against all such as had licentiously, (and perhaps by old priviledges) broaken Images, and thrown down Altars; as also for the con∣veniencie of the Haven, which was held then, and still is, one of the best of the Low-countries, and of the North Seas. In the first place, the Citizens began to murmur against their Count; say∣ing, that he would clip their priviledges and Religion: That he bad already introduced a new one into his own House; That he raised souldiers under∣hand; That he forbad the Consistorial Assemblies, and the like. A bold, and licentious pretext. Tults in the Town. Now, their humours being thus prepared, there wanted nothing but a hot, iry and zealous Preacher to set them a work, who also was quickly found in the person of one Mentzo Alting (a man odious to the Count for some im∣portant
reasons) who got up into the Pulpit, desplayed his Rhetorick, cry∣ed down his Masters actions, foretold the ruine of the Town, endeavored to excuse himself of what was imposed upon him, protested to be gone with the consent of the Townsmen; however he were content to stay with his Flock, and live and die with his sheep, and the like. Words no lesse audacious, then those of the Priests (whom a certain learned person called Baals elsewhere) for the League in France. It concerns not Church-men to blow the Trumper, nor such as thrust their noses into State-matters through passion of Religi∣on, to excuse in some, what they accuse in others. Iliacos intra muros peccatur, & extra. These reasons were as welcome to the people (which loves Novelty in State, provided it be preached) as a draught of water uses to be to a thirsty person. In short, they arm, they choose six Collonels amongst the Citizens; they invoke that Great God, who hears and sees all; and at length, they turn their Ordnance upon the Counts Pallace. O brave proceeding! O true forms of Justice! The Count asks the reason of this novelty, and whe∣ther they disowned their obedience to the Emperour, the Empyre, and himself? They answered, that they had taken arms for Religion, and their own defence, against many falfe accusations: That they made no difficulty to acknowledge the Emperour and him as their Lords, and whatever else should be reasonable. In these Contests they rush upon his House, making themselves Masters thereof by force, and dispatch their Embassadours to the Haghe, as the Count also did his; he to complain of the insolency of his subjects, and they to justify their actions. The effect of these Embasies was, that they put themselves under the protection of the States,A Garrison of the States in the Town. and took a Gar∣rison of a thousand men into the Town, to the disadvantage of the said Count; who at last was fain to suffer his House to be shut up, and some other extremities, which have much weakned and skattered his authority-The Townesmen embraced the Reformed Religion, yea, and they threw the Bowle yet farther: For, by a more ancient priviledge they had a grant of a Religion, conform with that of Ausbourgh. See Emmanuel de Merten. From this disorder sprang much good to the united Provinces, by secu∣ring to themselves this so advantageous Port, which otherwise by these di∣visions might have fallen into the hands of their enemies. But this agreement being made in hast, could not last long, and so there happened some disturbance; which is an ordinary thing, when any one par∣ty gets too much interest. The Count complained to the Emperour of the said Town, by which he was accused to have had some intelligences there, so to make himself absolute Lord of it: But these complaints; as well as that which followed afterwards for the Traffick in Spain, were quickly patched together with a weak thred. In the mean time Count Edzard died, and left five sonnes; Enne, Gustave, John, Christopher, and Charles, the Eldest whereof reconciled himself to the Town. Christopher went to serve the Arch-Duke, and was afterwards Governour of Luxenbourgh. The Count will repaire his authority. In the year 1602. Count Enne propped by some Gentry, (as Cuiphanse, and others) endeavoured to repayre his authority by imposing Taxes, for∣cing the small Townes, and nourishing a faction in Embden. And so he rai∣sed souldiers, under pretext of going against the Turk; gave his Daughter to his Brother John, who married her by a dispensation from the Pope, and embraced the Roman Catholick Religion; and fortified some villages to block up the River. The States of Holland (moved more by their own in∣terest, then by the complaints of the Town) sent to oppose him, drove him out of the Villages (who retyred into Germany) and justified their proceed∣ings by suspicions, and informations, which they said they had received from Brussels, that the said Count acted for the Spaniards, and would bring them into the Town,
Now he had remonstrated before both to the Emperour and Empyre, that it would be expedient to exercise an Admiralty upon the River of Enis, so to prejudice the nearest Inhabitants; with reasons strong enough to move that great and dull Body, (if it could be moved) which so many Dy∣ets have had so much adoe to awaken. In sine, Whatsoever is profitable in matter of State, seems lawfull: But what we do our selves, we ought not to condemn in others. the Peace made 1506. The suspicion daily encreased, and that chiefly because Count John of Ritsbergh was become a Roman Catholick. But at last, by the intercession of the King of England, and the States-Generall, the Peace was made at the Haghe, in the year 1606 as also that of the Christians and Turks, and all jea∣lousies which could come from thence, quite take off. CHAP. XIV Of the Changes which happened in precedent Ages about matter of Religion, and the motives of our Design, drawn from these revolutions. Luther writes against the Pope. The Rebellion of the Peasants of Germany. THe differences which have happened amongst Christians upon the di∣versity of Religions, the distrusts which have sprung from thence, as the fire from the flint; and the reasons of State (precious covers for manifest wickednesse) have proved the cause of the greatest part of all our present mischiefes, and languishments. Therefore let us seek out the true root of it, and leave passion to such as cannot receive any other impressions, then those by which they are utterly blinded. My purpose is not to dyve into questions of Divinity, but only to search in History after the causes of so many altera∣tions, and so much hatred drawn from so holy and innocent a subject. Pope Julius the second. We will therefore begin with Pope Iulius the second, who died in the year 1513. This Pope more carefull of the Temporall then of the Spiritual; and more studious of propagating the Jurisdictions of the Church, then the kingdom of God; made an Allyance with the Emperour, and the Kings of France and Spain, to the utter ruine of the Venetians. But he quickly chan∣ged his Cards, forsook the Allyes, reconciled himself with his enemies, animated Henry the Eighth, King of England against the French; and Ferdinand against the King of Navarre, whom he spoyled of his kingdom, for refusing him passage.He embroiles Europe. He also dissolved the Allyance between the Emperour and the King of France; and called the Swissers into Italy, to drive the French out of the Milan. In fine, having sunk all Europe into inexplicable confusi∣ons, and scandalized his Flock, he made place for Leo the 10th, a man who loved rest, and was lesse a souldier then Iulius, of whom is written this great praise, that he once cast some Keyes into the Tyber, saying, that St. Pauls Sword should have more power, then the Arms of St. Peter. The duty of a good shepherd is to keep his sheep in peace, and feed them; and not scatter them, and send them to the shambles. Whilest these warres lasted, which ruined the Publick and Human Laws, the Divine ones were also very ill kept. The ignorance of the Prelates, cau∣sed superstitions; and their loose and vicious lives, together with their great and vast possessions; the hatred of the people. The learned desired a re∣dresse in the Ecclesiastical Policy, as well as Peace required in the Secular.
Divorce, which continues to this day, with as little apparence of Reuni∣on, as there is of seeing the Rivers run back to their springs. And it is, that the Pope published a Iubily for the collection of monies to resist the Turk, which was most necessary at that time. But the impudence of a certain Monk called Tezel, exceeded so farre, as to presume to sell the Indulgences or Pardons, for the sinnes committed, and to be committed (I have horrour to re∣cite this cheaerie, the companion of superstition, ignorance, and avarice) and forthwith to draw soules out of Purgatory. Martin Luther,Martin Luther opposes Tyrzel. Dector of Di∣vinity at Witembergh, and Monk of the Order of St. Austin, briskly opposed this Impostor; made a Thesis or General Position, which he dedicated to the Pope himself, to testify the will he had to relye upon his definition. But through excess of indignation, he passed the limits of Christian modesty, and Catholick Truth: Insomuch, as that at length he grew to write against the Popes authority, wherein he was impugned by a Divine called Eckins. See Florimoud of Remond. He is excom∣municated. Now Pope Leo, desirous to quench this spark, excommunicates Luther: but that was to cast oyle into that fire, and put poison to the wound. For Martin raises his Batteries against him, and calls him Antichrist; which the Pope too much slighting, applyed all his thoughts to warre. Those enemies, who are most despised, are very often most hurtfull. But the God of Peace drove him out of this world, to make room for another more worthy, and more vtuous, (though lesse politick) then he: However Policie be a very con∣venient Science for such, as govern great States and Empyres. Pope Adrian, the Preceptor or Tutor to Charles the 5. was born at Ʋrick, and promised to bring a wholesom Balsom to the diseases of Christendome, For, he had already elevated the hopes of the Good, by abolishing Simony, punishing sins against nature, and not alienating the possessions of the Church: But his too suddain death declared, that God had otherwise dis∣posed of him; that his two Predecessors had too much embroyled the Flock, that the sicknesse must have its course, and that the Body was filled with too many bad humours, to be cured by one single purge, or one Blood-let∣ting onely. His doctrine in Saxony. Now Luthers doctrine passed from Saxony into Sweden, King Gustave, and Frederick of Denmark being leagued together, against Christian, who de∣serted by his people, was fled; and they also forsook the Pope, as well as their King, and much ranged the authority of the Bishops, of their king∣domes. And as Luthers Doctrine grew to be received, so diffidence and ha∣tred grew equally up with it; together with a desire also to maintaine it, against all who endeavoured to suppress it. There was besides, another ac∣cident, which very much troubled the Church: and it was, that Charles the Emperour, and King Francis the first, had very often entreated the Pope and Cardinals to call a General Councill, for the reformation of abuses, in the Church and Clergy: But this song was little lesse unpleasant, then the op∣position of Luther. And so these two Princes laying aside that care, they being too nearly tyed to their own interests, meditated nothing but warre upon each other. Pope Clement successor to Adrian, seeing the King of France prisoner, made speedily a secret Allyance with his own subjects, and almost all the Princes of Italy, so to put a limit to the power of the Emperour; who in re∣venge thereof, abrogated his Authority in Spain; surprised Rome, and took him prisoner; who was very ill treated by the Germans, as being for the most part Lutherans. Now these two Monarchs, being the chief Pillars of Europe, ought to have favoured a Reformation, and hindred a separation. But what? The impiety of the people whets the sword of the Almighty, who comes slowly to vengeance, though his stroakes be heavie; and the
justice of his wrath will reduce this wretched world into dust. In Germany, they who laboured to revive the Gospel, fell to oddes prin∣cipally about the Sacrament of the last Supper. It is easier to pull down an old Building, then to set up a new one. Erasmus of Rotterdam, (that great Wit) flourished at this time, and contented himself only by scoffing the Monks, without medling with the party of the Reformers: For he well knew, that the abuses came from men, and manners, and not from the  Doctrine, heretofore taught by the Church. The horrible Rebellion which arose about this time, did not a little de∣form Doctor Luthers new-born Doctrine. For the Peasants thinking all things lawfull to them for the liberty (so called they this new Reformation) of the Gospel, took arms, and assayled the Church-men, Cloisters and Gentry. Their number was growne to be a hundred thousand men, and their chief leader a Minister, called Muntzer. The holy Scripture teaches us to obey our Magistrates, and not to exterminate, and cast them out. But am∣bition dwells both in Cabans, in Churches, and even under ragged Cloakes. They are defea∣ted They were routed in three distinct Battails; the first, by the Lord True∣ses; the second, by Philip Landgrave of Hassia; and the last by Anthony Duke of Lorrain, who cut them off when they were endeavouring to enter France, where they hoped to play Rex, by meanes of the Confusion which they ima∣gined they should find there by the Kings captivity, who was carried into Spain. Charles en∣deavours to humble the Protestants. Now the greatness of the Emperour Charles being reconciled to the Pope, and counselled by him to reduce the Protestants (for so were the Princes and States termed, who had received Luthers Doctrine) into the lap of the Church, either by threats, or force; gave no small apprehension to the German Princes: And he being glad of any subject, to establish his power in Germa∣ny, was not willing to lose this fair occasion. So the Armies marched into the Field; and Francis the first, after him his sonne Henry were requested to give relief for the maintaining (as they styled it) of the German liberty, now like to be lost under the Spanish Domination: which was granted by the French fo State-interest, though they were enemies to the Religion. But neither Arms, nor Victories, nor Disputes, nor the Majesty it self of the Em∣perour; was able to deracinate or root out this Doctine; and so in fine, it was permitted by his Authority at the Diet of Ausbourgh. Now, it was not Luther alone, who rose against the Popes authority: For a certain Revolted Monk called Menno, began also to preach a Doctrine different enough from his; and his Adherents were called Anabaptists. Besides, that learned man Iohn Calvin, carried on that Reformation much farther then Luther, as well in France, as elsewhere, and fixed his Chayre at Geneva. They agreed well about combating the Pope, and some other points; but yet since they remained not in perfect unity of Doctrine: In so much, as that this party, and that of Luther, are very little better friends amongst themselves, then either of them is with the Roman Catholicks, as we shall see in the sequel of these Tragedies.
CHAP. XV The Anabaptists at Munster. The Reformers in France. The Change of Religion in England, and by what meanes. The King repudiates his Wife. The Queens Speech. The King makes himself Head of the Church. Luther writes to him. His unhappy death. NOw we have seen the Lutherans established in Germany, let us see what the Anabaptists do at Munster, an Episcopall Town in Westphalia, which was to be the Head of a Chimerical Kingdom, and serve for a preci∣ous testimony of the wrath of that great God, which for a time suffers his Word to be abused, and the wicked to cover their pernicious Designes un∣der the Cloak of Religion, and the mask of Hypocrisie. Oh Lord! Thou dost hourly admonish us by so many prodigies, and monstrous accidents: but our eyes are shut, our eares stopt, and our hearts hardened. John de Lei∣de King of Munster. John of Leiden by trade a Taylor, and his adherents, seized upon the aforesaid Town, and he was made King thereof, and fought long against the Bishop; by whom they were at length subdued, and chastised according to the measure of their crimes. The extremity of their rigour was against the Church men, a clear argument of the indignation of God against them, because they had deviated from their duty, and were lulled asleep in igno∣rance, idlenesse, and pleasures. They likewise desclaimed the Authoriry of the Pope, and brake down the Images, without sparing the very Pictures of the Church-windowes. A zeal too violent to proceed from the Holy Ghost, and of little conformity with that of the Primitive Christians. These insolencies being once repressed at Amsterdam, returned there no more. The Anabaptists which are now in the united Provinces, and the Confines thereof, disown the pro∣ceedings of the former, and count them in the number of Hereticks. The Reformed Religion in France. Now the Doctrine of Martin Luther passed into France, under the reign of Francis the first; though yet it could not take fast root enough there; as well because of the persecutions, and the Kings aversion from it, as also for that it was too far distant from the Author, and Teacher thereof. And so it quick∣ly grew to be transformed into that of John Calvin, and his Disciple Theodore Bez, and so much encreased in few yeares throughout the greatest part of the Country, during the troubles caused by Envies of State, and the League; that the Kings, after many bloody Wars, were constrained by various Edicts or Proclamations, to grant them free exercise of their Religion through all the Kingdom. King Francis was a great persecutor of the said Doctrine;Obtains free exercise. and made open protestation, that he would not spare even his own Arm, if it were infected with Heresie. And yet the lousie which he had con∣ceived against the prosperity of Charles the Empeour, moved him neverthe∣lesse to succour the Protestants. King Henry succeeded in his Fathers hatred to them, but being sent to his grave by the thrust of a Lance, they began to respire; saw the end of their persecutions, lost the smell of the Fagot, and propped by some Princes of the Blood, rendred themselves at length no less considerable in France, then the Protestants are in Germany. The Protestant Church in England. Let us now make a step into England, and see how the Protestant Church hath sowen her first seed, supplanted the ancient Doctrine, and established her self as Mistress there. King Henry the eighth, for writing a Book against Luther in defence of the Roman Church, and her seven Sacraments, was honoured by the Pope with the Title of Defender of the Faith, His prime
Minister, was that great Cardinal Wolsey, who ruled all. So that it is not only from this day that Cardinals have introduced them selves into States, to have the total administration of them. This man being eminently ambitious, hoped to come to be Pope by the recommendation of the Emperour:The story of C ina Wol∣ly. But seeing himselt frustrated of his expectation, he turned his hate upon him; whispered the King in the ear, that his marriage with Katharine of Spain, (Aunt to the said Emperour) was incestuous, because she had formerly been married to his Brother. O! How great is the wickednesse of such as have for saken God to serve their ambition and revenge? This Prelate, who ought to have framed the re∣formation of abuses, and opposed Heresies (since himself held for such all the Doctrines which checked the Pope) was not content with so much ho∣nour and wealth as he enjoyed, without seeing the Emperour thrown down, and buried under the very ruins of that Church, the Religion whereof he professed with so great Majesty, and under the Purple of so great luster. The King intangled in love with a young Lady newly come from the Court of France, and disgusted with the Embracements of that most ve∣ous Princess his Wife; was glad of this scruple, and sollicited the Pope to grant him a Divorcement upon the aforementioned reason. But the Pope temporizes, and sends in sine his Legat to examin the matter. The King and the Legat sir; the Queen being summoned, appears; and in presence of the chief of the Kingdom, makes a Speech in Latin, to the King, which is able to move a very rock to compassion. How is it possible Sir (sayes she) that after having lived almost twenty yeares together in great concord, and having had so many children as we have had, it should now come into your thought to repudiate me? Your Brother Arthur fell sick the ve∣ry first day of our marriage, and some dayes after dyed. I take the great God and your conscience to witness, that you found me a Virgin. And if you are resolved to separate me from your Bed, expect at least so long, as till I may have advertised my Nephew Charles thereof, to the end that I may know how to behave my self in this affliction; since I can hope for no support in the equity of my cause here, where you are Absolute King. If I have offended God since I have been your wife, it has been in being a little too curious to please you, Ah Vertue! This is not the first time that thy adversary endeavours to suppress thee. Thy luster is too bright, not to dle the eyes of the wicked. This poor Princesse in this tribulation had this imperfection, that in re∣gard Nature had been sparing to her of her rich gifts of beauty, she had had recourse to innocent Art, thereby to draw her Husband from the levities to which he was too much inclined, as well by his own naturall Passion, as by the attractive Charms of his fair subjects. Her Speech being ended, (which produced but faint pitty in the soul of the King, and some of the Auditory) she retired her self, together with her Daughter into a private House, where the spake thus to this ambitious Cardinal, who came to her in behalf of the King, to intreat her to yeeld to his will. It is thou (said she) O wicked and dis∣loyal Minister, who returnests this recompence: To my Nephew, for not advancing thee to the Holy Chayre; and to me, for not being able to suffer thy impudicity and naghtesse. The King divorced himself from the Church of Rome, because the Pope would not condescend to his demand; and from his Wife, (by whom he had alwayes been so respectfully loved) to conjoyn in publick marriage with Anne of Bolein.The King leaves his Wife an I the Church of Rome. The Cardinal died in the year 1530, being not long before deprived of all his employments, and fallen from the favour of his Prince, which he had preferred before that of his God, as he restified by these words, full of christian and holy repentance, which issued our of his dying mouth, Ah! I would to God (said he) I had taken so much pains to serve my Creatour, as I have done to serve my Prince!
He put into the Letanies, From the tyranny of the Pope, good Lord deliver us; whose authority was abrogated thorowout the whole kingdome, and the King by Act of Parliament declared, Head of the Church of England. He seized upon the possessions of the Church, by the advice of Cromwell, and some others, who all ended their dayes unhappily.Takes away the possessions of the Clergy. He also bestowed part thereof upon the nobility, for fear of commotion. He hanged such as refused to subscribe, that he was Head of the Church, as aforesaid; and condemned the protestants to the fire. In fine, after having crushed the Church, and lived like a tyrant, he died miserable, and little regretted by his people. Sir Thomas More, that great Heroe, fell under the rigour of his command, and so did an infinite number of other noble persons. Luther seeing him in ill tearms with the Pope, and encouraged by the King of Denmark, very humbly beseeched him,Luther writes to the King, and receives an affront. by a letter which he wrote to him, to embrace the doctrine of the Gospel: but he received such an answer as he little expected, namely, that he should forsake his apostacie, and his wife, and return to his Monastery. Now the Church of Rome seeing her head disclaimed, and his authority banished out of England, felt her self much shaken, as well by Peter Martyr, as orther Protestant ministers: in such sort as that Edward,Edward esta∣blishes the Pro∣testant Reli∣gion. son to the said Henry, having taken the reines of the English Monarchie, had no great trouble to throw her quite our, and fixe the Protestant. But he dying very young, and Queen Mary succeeding him, she had an intention to pluck up this tender plant, and re-establisheth the old doctrin, which yet could not re∣cover its full strength before it was exterminated again, Young trees by being re-planted get vigour, but old ones wither and dye. CHAP. XVI Queen Elizabeth banishes the Romane Catholike Religion again by degrees. That of the Protestants passes into Scotland under the bastard Murrey who swayes the Scepter. It is called the Con∣gregation, and is fortified by the above said Queen, and the Hugenots of France. QUeen Elizabeth (who, during the life of her sister Mary, feigned her self a Roman Catholike, and was like to lose her life, by giving some suspi∣cions of her being a Protestant) being raised to the royall Throne, forthwith unmasqued her self, and began to treat of the meanes how to annull the one, and revoke the other; which was easie to be accomplished. For the igno∣rance of the Priests was great; the desire of their possessions greater; and the curiosity to check a Religion full of ceremonies, which few could solid∣ly defend, greatest of all. It was represented to the People both here and elsewhere, that the doctrine was falsified, and in no wise congruous with that of the four Primitive ages: that Lay men were forbidden to read the holy Scriptures, that so they might remaine in darknesse, and not see the light of evangelicall truth, &c. The Queen assembled a Parliament, which acted to abolish what Queen Mary had done, by the authority of the Pope, and against the Protestants: The Bishops and some secular men also opposed it. A specious conference was offered, in which there was forced upon them a Judge who was an ene∣my to their Cause. They complained of this proceeding, and said, that they were very hardly dealt with, and that they had been advertised of the
Theses, or Argument but two days before, In fine, not being able to agree about the form of the Dispute, the Protestants, before the combat, cried victory; and the other, When shall we be assured of our Faith, if there be always leave to dout, and dispute? Some of them were so much moved, that they would have excom∣municated the Queen: But others being better advised, alledged, that the disposal thereof must be left to the Pope. See Cambden. Reformation in England by degrees. The Queen proceeds to a change by degrees, She prohibits to speak ill of the Sacrament of the Altar, and suffers the Communion to be given under both kindes. A little while after, both Masse and Pictures were banished out of the Churches, and then the Oath of superiority was tendered to the Bi∣shops and other Roman Catholicks, and in case of refusal, they were dis∣missed from their charge. All this passed without any tumult, and hitherto the Reformation was carried on very conform with the Confession of Ausbourgh. And in Scot∣land under the Bastard Murrey who weildes the Scepter. About the end of the year 158 the Protestant Religion began also to spring up in Scotland, and the Authors of it, styled themselves the Brethren of the Congregation. They carped at the Kingly Authority, as much as they did at the lives of the Priests, and the abuses of the Church. They refued to pay their duty to the Queen-Mother-Regent, a most wise and modest wo∣man. The Head and Ringleader, was James Priour of Sr. Andrews (since called Earl of Murrey) natural Brother to the Queen, who gave very great suspicions of his intending, by favouring these changes, to make himself Ma∣ster of the Scepter of Scotland. They wanted no pretext to cloak their Design. For James protested, that he sought nothing but the glory of God, and the liberty of the kingdome, oppressed by the French, and the Queen-Regent, who was daughter to the Duke of Guise. Hammelton, and divers other Gentlemen raised by the Pos∣sessions of the Church, ranged themselves in their Party. Complaints against Religion are ordinarily accompanied by those of the violation of Priviledges. They draw up theirs, (For there will never be wanting such as seek their ad∣vancement in the change of the State) and implore the assistance of the Queen; who alwayes attentive to her profit, and fearing the power of France, under∣takes the defence of the said Congregation; promises to expell them out of Scotland, and by consequence the Roman Faith with them. Whilst this was in agitation, the Queen-Regent died, and her Daughter Mary, Widow to Francis the second, departed from France towards Scotland. Her Brother aforesaid (who was a meer Bastard both in blood and heart) counselled Queen Elizabeth to surprize her at Sea, so to secure both her person and Reli∣gion. But she being arrived at Edebourgh, made no change at all, but ex∣pressed great clemency towards her subjects, thereby to give the lye to those false reports, which those Rebels had dispersed of her, and to convince them also of cruelty and treachery. But the Queen of England stopped not there: For she made a Law, by which all were declared guilty of High Treason, who refused to make Oath that she had full power, and absolute authority in all spiritual things, and over Ecclesiastical persons. O good God! How little comparison is there between those times, and these? Was not this to force mens consciences? The Hugenots of this present Age would be ashamed to accept such a Law as was received with so much alacrity, by these first Reformers. The Scots during these Interludes, cast the Archbishop in prison, for saying Masse, and astronted another Priest for the same subject, even within the Court, and before the very face of the desolate Queen; who neverthelesse with teares in her eyes, took them out of the hands of their enemies: though yet all her clemency mingled with so many sweet charms as accompanied her Ma∣jesty, was never able to soften the hearts of these mutiners; who never left, till
she had her Head cut off from her shoulders, as we shall hereafter shew, together with a part of those misfortunes which have since happened to her posterity. Now Queen Elizabeth, who thought not her authority sure, unless she put her helping hand to the supplantation of the Roman Catholick Religion in Scotland, as well as in England; strengthened so well the party of the Con∣gregation, that the Queen, no longer able to endure so many indignities, nor to disintangle her selt from the snares, which the perfidious Crue had laid for her, was fain at length to betake her self to flight. She also did for the Hugenots in France, that which hath been so much condemned in the King of Spain. For she took them into her protection, assisted them with men and money; and shewed her self every whit as zealous for the exaltation of her Religion, as the Catholick King did for his. So that she rendred her self as odious at Rome, and to the Roman Catholicks, as he did in the Low-coun∣tries, amongst the Calvinists and Lutherans. The Reforma∣tion came into the Low-coun∣tries. The Confession of Ausbourgh entered on the one side into the Low-coun∣tries, and the Reformed Religion from Geneva, from the Palatinate, and from England on the other, the one by the communication of German soul-diers and the other by that of the Nobility which had travelled, the Mini∣sters who came from France, and the Merchants who daily arrived at the Islands opposite to it. It slipped in at first very secretly, found favour in the Houses of some great persons, and affection in the hearts of some people. But being at length discovered, and the Inquisition of Spain intervening, it grew to be much thwarted. But Fire and Sword cannot extinguish a do∣ctrine: nay rather, the patience of such as suffer Racks and Torments, be∣gets compassion to them, and hatred to their persecutors. In fine, both par∣ties arm, and ambition being the one half of the game, the Spaniards regain∣ed ten of the Provinces, by the sword: the others, who vaunted themselves to have had recourse to these extremities, by the violence and cruelty of the Spa∣niards, for their priviledges & liberty of conscience; embraced through all the Towns and Villages the Reformed Religion, as it is taught at Geneva, in some Cantons of Switzerland, in the lower Palatinate, and in the Distinct of Has∣s. The Roman Religion was sent packing, contrary to the first Agrce∣ment: and even they, who either out of compassion, fair promises, or hate of the Inquisition, had born arms for them, were deprived of the free exer∣cise thereof. The generall complaints of all such, as fought against the Church of Rome, were grounded chiefly upon these points. Were grounded upon these points. First, They disclaimed the too great Authority of the Pope, that he mdled too much in Secular Affaires; They blamed the disorders of the Court of Rome; Pray∣ers made in an unknown language; and maintained, that every one was to be per∣mitted to read the Bible: They cried out against Purgatory, Masse, Invocation of Saints, the superstition of good Works, and the like. These were demands strong enough to amaze and astonish them, who were not versed at all in the Scriptures, and understood not even their own Belief, but by rote. The order of the Iesuits begins in the rise of the Reformation. During these emborrasments, sprang up the order of the Jesuits, who have made it their businesse ever since to defend the Pope, and the Rom. Religion; to repaie the loss of Erudition and Sciences, and awaken the sluggish Monks, and encounter in fine these new Champions; But they have met with great repugnance and hatred, as well from the adverse party, as amongst the Ro∣man Catholicks themselves; though not peradventure with so much reason from these latter. They are made pass for murtherers of Kings, for having a Doctrine, discrepant from that of the Catholick Church; and to persecute the Monarchy of the whole Universe, for the House of Spain. Yet they leave not for all this to hold up their heads, and despise the calumnies and re∣proaches
of their Adversaries. And indeed, their Discipline in the Schools is both laudable and profitable: In their Disputes, they are Aristotles, and in their Pulpits Cicero's. In fine, without them (I speak out of the mouth of Reformats) the Roman Church would be quickly beaten down: And so it is to be seen amongst them, painted, under the form of a stooping Tower, propped by the shoulders of the Jesuits, for fear lest it fall. The Authour and Founder of their Order was a Spaniard, and it was very necessary to speak a word of them by the by, because they are made pass for Incendiaries, Plot∣ters of all Sedition, and Treasons, of many perfidies, and wickednesses. Yet God howsoever hath served himself of them, for the conversion of the Indies, and China; for the restauration of learning, and for the illumination and illu∣stration of Sciences, wherein they are looked upon with admiration. CHAP. XVII Religion affoards divers Pretexts; causes jealousies. The Latin, and Greek Religion. IT was expedient for me to make mention in this Treatise of the Religi∣ons, which existed in the precedent Age, and of the Changes they caused; the fatal effects whereof are resented even in this of ours. We have also ad∣ded thereto the ambition of many, who endeavoured to throw all things topsy-turvy, thereby to ascend to the greatnes which they proposed to them∣selves, and which it was most facil to acquire by these Religions Pretexts. O God! How are the hearts of poor mortals overwhelmed in darkness, under the ap∣parence of Religion? And how many are there in the world, who whilest they are plot∣ting mischief, hide themselves under the maske of devotion? Religion indeed was, wont to reign in the soules of many, as Mistresse of the State, and was a just cause of taking arms; but at present, she is little bet∣ter then the servant thereof. True it is, that some years since, she hath done wonders both in Germany and France: But the conclusion hath manifested, that this pretext hath served for the most part,Religion serves for a pretext. but for interest of State, and to cover the martial humour of Princes; who incited by the insatiable hunger of honour, for the ingrandisement of their power, have very craftily made use of the cloak of conscience. This therefore is that, which causes jeaulousie, distrust, aversion, and ha∣tred, and chiesly amongst the people,Causes hatred, and divides humours. who cannot penetrate into the ambi∣tion of Potentates. This I say it is, which causes violent suspicions, and di∣vides humours in the same nation, in the same Parentage; yea, and in the very self-same Family too. For if it have had force enough to arm particular persons a gainst their own Parents, no marvail if it make all that, which de∣pends upon humane strength and science, contribute to the suppression of any Party, of a different opinion; and if Princes have occasion to make use of it, to cover their irregular appetites. But this hatred, which proceeds from the diversity of opinions, is repugnant to the word of God, which com∣mands us to pray for our Brethren, and not to persecute and vex them. We must let the tares grow till the time of Harvest, for fear of plucking up the good corn with them. Now let us briefly turn back, to seek out the motives, which seem to have caused these diversities, which have proved so dam∣mageable and pernicious to christian charity; as fore-runners to the wrath of God, and most undoubted marks of the latter day. In the beginning of the fifteenth Age, there were in the whole uniuers but two christian Churches; namely the Lme, then under the authority of
the Pope, and the Greek, under that of certain Patriarcks. The difference (unworthy of such a division) was, and even yet is, about ambition and pre∣ference, contrary to the advertisements of our common Master; and because the Greek maintained that the Holy Ghost proceeds but only from the Fa∣ther. For all the rest is most easie to be rejoyned, and reconciled. Now the Latine, being received throughout all Europe,The Latine Church under the Pope, and Grek under Patriarchs. there have happened from time to time very many complaints against abuses, superstitions, and the ill discipline of the Priests; yea, and against the Popes themselves, who too much busied with the warres, and intrigues of the world, have forgotten that command, which sayes, Feed my Sheep: Feed my Flock: whereof they are yet apt enough to serve themselves against the checks of their ene∣mies. There was no memory left of the Waldenses and Albingenses;The Waldenses. nor yet of the dangers, into which the Bohemians had brought all Germany, by the doctrine of Witcliffe, and the so prodigiously victorious Arms of Zisca.Witcliffe. For instead of opening our eyes and eares to the admonitions of Iohn Hus, we reduced him into ashes. Charles the 8. King of France declared his dis∣contentment, and so did some other Kings his Predecessors. But it was held for a crime sufficient to convince all men of Heresie, who spake of a Refor∣mation by a General Councell. So that superstition being swolne big, and the world kept in most excessive ignorance, (as a very great and Orthodox person writes) for the space of three hundred yeares by the Franciscans and the Dominicans; as also by the carelesnesse of the Bishops, there started up a German Doctor,Luther and Calvin. (whom we have so often mentioned) and a French one likewise, who first preached against those said superstitions; and then ven∣tured to set up their Standards against the Church her self, with so universal applause, that in a few years even whole kingdomes grew to separate them∣selves from the communion of that Body, which acknowledged the Pope for the Supreme Vicar of Iesus Christ. The Iesuits op∣pose. Now at the same time (as we have formerly shewed) sprang the Iesuits, and armed themselves to quell these valiant souldiers, who skipped out of their holes so openly to attack a power, which all the States of Christendom held in so much veneration. They stopped the course of this Torrent, which neither Fire, Persecuti∣ous, nor strict Prohibitions were able to effect; and they have united to the Body, a good part of those people which had untyed themselves from it. It is not by fire, but by force of Doctrine; and not by words, but by ex∣emplary life, that a remedy must be put to all these disorders, which happens amongst Christians. Now this Society could not but meet with meet with envy enough amongst the Clergy, which felt it self so reprehended and pricked by such new men. For Admonitions and in structions, how necessary and profitable soever they be, leave not to imprint some harshnesse upon the soul of the receivers. An exact Captain is displeasing to lazy souldiers. Violent reme∣dies served for nothing. In fine, recourse was had to such violent remedies, as so sharpened and stung the parts affected, that there will never be meanes to introduce a reconciliation; unless perhaps it fall out to be by ways full of suavity, and charity. For interest took this powerful occasion so fast by his fore-lock, and these Divisions are grown so firmly rooted, that it is probable, they will not finish but with the world. And this is the principall source of the evils, which we have seen, and yet daily see happen; to the grief of all good men in this last Age. And thus we have shewed about what, when, for what reasons, and by whom began these Reformations: Nor must we wonder at the monstrous effects, since they could not be more noble, then their Causes. If we would re∣flect often upon it, we should find Ministers and instruments enough there∣of. The holy Scripture sayes, that there must be scandals, but cursed be they, who shall give them.
THE HISTORY OF THIS IRON AGE THE SECOND BOOK. CHAP. I The Queen of England, and the States of Holland refuse Peace. King Henry of France polishes his Kingdome, and makes War against the Duke of Savoy. THE Peace of Vervin filled with joy, not only the subjects of the Kings, but also all such as acknow∣ledged the See of Rome. The Protestants invited to the said Peace by Henry the Great, shut their eares to the Propositions, and studied only how to make most streight Allyances for their preservation. Where Diffidence gets the mastery, Reason is not under∣stood, unlesse it be ushered in by strong and irrefutable as∣surance. It was impossible for the Arch-Duke Al∣bert, to bring the States to a very advantageous Peace (as the Ministers said) for them, since the arguments of King Henry could obtain nothing from them. For his offers were as stints, out of which they drew sire to kindle the warre, with so much the greater animosity. They sent their Embassadours into England,Elizabeth and the states re∣fuse Peace. where they sound the Queen most disposed to receive theirs; so that it was most facil to draw her to their opinion. In the mean while, the Arch-Duke receives a Procuration from the In∣fanta, his future Spouse, in vertue whereof he was generally and solemnly re∣ceived; and nominatively at Antwerp, where the oath of sidelity was payd him by the Deputies of the obedient Provinces. Albert goes in∣to Spain. 1598. And so he went into Spain; but before his departure, he signified to the confederated States, that he went to marry the Infanta, and that he had the Low-conntries for Portion with her, and was already acknowledged Lord thereof: Therefore he conjured them to associate themselves to the other Provinces, in respect that the King had divided them from his other De∣maines; and that thus all distrusts being taken away, he withed nothing more, then to see that Body entire, and in peace under his Government: But all in vain. For Religion and liberty were too charming subjects to be aban∣doned; and they who are growne to be Masters, abhorre to fall back into for∣vitude.
He began his journey in the moneth of September, in the yeer 1598, lea∣ving Cardinal Andrew his cosin, for his Licutenant, and sent his army to∣wards the Rheyn, which, at his return he found full of confusion and revolt, for want of pay. He was received in all places where he passed (together with the Princess Margaret of Austria, spouse of Philip the third, whom he conducted in his company) with honours due to the greatnes of their quality. He stayed not in Spain; but as soon as he had married the Princesse Clara Eugenia,The King of France repolish∣eth his King∣dome. he brought her into the Low Countries, and they made their entry into Brus∣sels in the moneth of September, 1599. He brings the Infanta, 1599. King Henry of France, having given his subjects a peace, made it all his care to repolish his kingdom, much depraved by the prolixity of the civil warrs, to revive the laws strucken dumb, by the licentiousness of the souldiers, to place good order every where; and in fine, to establish two Religions in very good union, aswel for his own service, as for the repose of his people: Where∣as King Philip, on the other side, in his, would have but one. But some per∣sons of very great experience, have conceived, that if he had embraced the same Maxime, he might have preserved the seventeen Provinces, though others have beleeved, that he would rather have lost them all, as being too far distant from them, and consequently unable to accommodate himself to all occurrences, which required a diversity of temperaments. But this Prince (namely Henry) had been educated in the reformed Religi∣on, and so knew the humours, & the forces of that party not to be contem∣ptible. He was Son to Anthony of Bourbon, who was slain at the siege of Roüen. The Prince of Conde being slain in the battell of Jarnac, and the Admiral remaining Generall of the Hughenot army, he advised them to nominate for their Generall Henry of Bourbon, a young Lord, who had ever defended their party; and so he being turned Catholick, and upon that made King of France, had alwayes a particular care to uphold them, as a people, from which he had received great services. But there was very great danger of taking from them that, which had been promised them by so many Procla∣mations or Edicts, nor did they indeed forbear to cry up their services, and bragg, that it was they onely who put the Crown upon his head. Henry the 3. last King of the race of Valois Now the Royall race of the Ʋalois being extinguished by the death of Henry the third, son to Henry the second, he succeeded to the Crown, though with much dispute, and repugnancie: but his justice was accompanied by his valour, and so by rejecting that, which was most prejudiciall to him (to wit, the reformed Religion) he quieted all his subjects, and reduced them to their duty. CHAP. II King Henry gives his sister in marriage to the Marquis du Pont, espowses Mary of Medicis, and wages warre with the Duke of Savoy. The enterprizt of the said Duke upon Geneva. Henry gives his sister to the Marquis du Pont THe King not content with giving the Hughenots all they had ever desi∣red, intended besides, to obliege the house of Lorraine, by allying the Princes thereof with his own. And so he matched his sister to the Marquis du Pont, who retained the exercise of the reformed Religion; lived in most perfect amity with her husband, and deceased without issue. The Kings marriage being declared null, and Madame Gabriell, by whom he had many children, (the eldest whereof is the Duke of Vandosme) ending
her dayes by suddain death,Marries Mary of Medicis. he married Mary Medicis, sister to the grand Duke of Florence, who arrived in France in the moneth of December, being the last of the precedent age. Upon the delay of the Duke of Savoy, to restore him the Marquisat of Salu∣ces, he prepared himself for warre: And the Duke to divert the storm, came to him at Lyons, with store of presents, and promised to render him the said Marquisat,Makes war up∣on the Duke of Savoy. or else the County of Bresses, within the term of six moneths: But the effect thereof not following, the King quickly made himself master of all Savoy. There is no amusing or retarding a potent creditor, who hath both will and meanes to make himself payd. In fine, by the mediation of the Pope, a peace was made, whereby the Duke remained in possession of the Marqui∣sat, and the King of the aforesaid Country of Bresses. Through this peace Italy was delivered from a great oppression, and so the Troops of the Conde de Fuentes marched out of the Duchy of Milan towards Flanders. During the civil wars, a little before the terrible execution at Blois, the afore∣said Duke easily recovered the said Marquisat, by vertue, (as it was believed) of Pistolls.Gold. He caused money to be coined, with a Centaur, treading under his feet a Gawlish Hercules, with this Motto, Opportunè. But Henry after his Con∣quest, and the accomplishment of his Pretensions, stamped another sort, representing a Gawlish Hercules, treading upon a Centaur, with this, Opportu∣nius. We must never let our hearts be too much puffed up with prosperity, but consi∣der that the conquered, grow often to be Conquerours. We will not leave Savoy, till we shall first have spoken of the enterprize Which the Duke had upon the City of Geneva.The City of Geneva. She is situated upon the Rhine, neer a great Lake, and was before that reformation, the Seat of a Bishop. She changed her Religion in the yeer 1535, since when, no Romane Catho∣lick (as it is published) is tollerated there above three dayes. Now Charles Emanuel, the aforesaid Duke, attempred to make himself Lord of her by surprize. He secretly listed twelve hundred men, under the command of Monsieur d' Aubigny, who by meanes of great store of ladders, and other instruments, got to the number of two hundered into the Town, whilest the Duke was following with some Regiments of recruit. But being discovered, and the Citizens running to their armes, they were strucken with terrour, and returned the same way they came, without having been able to seize upon so much as one of the Gates, to let in the forces, Thus this great designe, so long premeditated, so secretly carried, so well begun, and al∣most compleatly executed, at last failed: But whether through the valour of the townsmen, or the cowardlinesse of the Savoyers, I know not: they were so nettled by this fright, that Father Alexander, a Scottish Jesuite, with all his remonstrances and exhortations, could never infuse any courage into their hearts. But this hot Camisado or assault, made them of Geneva stand upon their guard, for their own preservation; and to this effect, they raised some souldiers, and implored the assistance of the King, who declared them com∣prized within the Peace of Vervin, and gave them a pension: since which time they have kept themselves in peace. The Princes of the aforesaid family affirm, that the said City is seated within the district of Savoy, and consequently belongs to them. But that which cannot be gotten by force, will not be acquired by allegation of right.
CHAP. III. The Jubile. Biron executed. The battell of Flanders. La Bourlotte killed. Rinberg taken. The Iubile. THe first yeer of this age, Pope Clement celebrated a Jubile at Rome, whe∣ther there flocked an infinite number of people from all parts, some out of curiosity, and to see Italy, and others out of devotion, and to gaine the Indulgences. But let us now return towards the Low Countries, in regard that France grew to be even steeped in delights (the fruits of peace) and no body in moti∣on, but Mareschal de Biron,Biron beheaded who attainted and convicted of the crime of high Treason, for having kept correspondency with a forraigne Prince, was beheaded in the Court of the Bastill. Indeed, that infinity of brave actions, which had crowned his head with lawrell, ought (methinks) to have saved him from this stroake. But what? Fortune had elevated him very high, so to tumble him down headlong into this precipice. The Archduke Albert, seing it was but labour lost to solicite the States of Holland to a reconciliation, and that all the exploits of the Admiral did more sharpen the bordering provinces, then fright the confederates, and that the enterprize upon Bommel proved as fruitlesse as that of La Bourlotte, upon some places thereabouts, yea, and that one part of his forces mutinied, and had taken up their quarter apart, under the conduct of one Eelcto,The mutiny of the Spaniards. he began to lay about him, to find money to content them, and reduce his Militia to a good discipline: but he could never be brought to pardon them, who sold the Fort of St. Andrew. The States upon the other side, and Prince Maurice, having shut up their Common wealth, by the taking of such places as gave them enterance to the enemy, and by consequence deprived him of all meanes of drawing con∣tribution out of the said Provinces, resolved to keep one foot in Flanders (the most fertile Province of all) thereby the more to incommodate the Arch∣duke, who hearing that the Prince was entered with a puissant army neer Newport, made his troops march with all speed, cut off seven or eight hun∣dred Scots, who kept the Bridge, and being prowd upon this happy encoun∣ter, advanced to affront his enemies, without granting his souldiers, who were tired with their long march, so much leisure as to breath. But Maurice, having drawn back his fleet into the main, thereby to hinder his souldiers from flight, and obleige them rather to die honourably,The Battell of Flanders. then to seek a shamefull retreat; made a generous resistance, and won a glorious victory. The Mutiners gave a remarkable account of themselves,Gotten by Mau∣rice, and the first of this Age. and almost all lost their lives in the dispute. The Admirall was taken prisoner, and many Of∣ficers of note. And this was the first battell of this age, which proved fa∣vourable to the Hollanders, who conferred all imaginable honours upon their victorious Prince, by shouts of joy, Bonefires, &c. The Archduke, having tasted the bitter fruits of bad counsell, forthwith reinforced his army, and sent troops into all the forts about Ostend, in such sort as that Maurice, finding no gap of advantage, imbarqued his foot, and repassed into Holland. La Bourlotte killed. Collonell La Bourlotte, going to defend Fort Issabell, was killed there by musquet shot, and his death much regretted by the Archduke, he having gi∣ven great characters of himself, in divers actions and occasions of his service, as the taken of many towns, and fighting of many battels.His life. He was a Gentle∣man born in Lorraine, ascended to very high military charges, by his huge
courage, esteemed one of the greatest Captains of his time. Henry the fourth endeavoured to disingage him from the service of the Arch-Duke, in case there happened a good agreement: but he being too passionate for the ser∣vice of the House of Austria, would not hearken to it at all. Now the warre was continued by enterprises, which for the most part issued to the dammage of the undertakers; and almost ever, of the Treaties. The greatest incoveniences were by Sea, where the Dunkerkers, who were snapt, were hanged without mercy; who likewise often repayed the same coyn to the Herring-Fishers, and others. The Zelanders continually complained of the mischiefs they received from Spinola's Gallies at the Sluce, which indeed were neither small nor insen∣sible. But this thorn was quickly taken out of their sides, and the said Town taken by famine, whilest the Spaniards were engaged at the siege of Ostend. Rhinl egh ta∣ken by agreen nent. Rinbergh was besieged by Prince Maurice 1601. and well defended by the Garrison, which was strong: But the relief coming too late, and sind∣ing the Hollanders well intrenched, durst not venter; and so the Governour D'Avila was constrained to yeeld up the place (not without having per∣formed the action of a valiant Captain) upon honourable conditions, about the beginning of August the same year: And Meurs likewise followed the victorious Chariot of Prince Maurice. CHAP. IV The Siege of Ostend. Maurice attempts the surprise of Bois-le-Duc{que} and besieges, and carries the Grave. ALbert, importuned by the States of Flanders, to free them from their ill neighbours, and those Birds of prey at Ostend, in regard that the Forts thereof could not stop their occasions, nor hinder them from fixing their cluches in the flat Country; suffered himself to be induced to that high and most difficult enterprise: partly to draw Maurice from Rinbergh, and ani∣mated also, partly by the vast summe of monies, which the said States under∣took to furnish, at different terms for this work. For their interest urged them to unnestle those enemies; and it belonged only to the Eagle to make so high a flight. But a place, which hath alwayes one Gate open, and where so many neighbours pretend an interest, is not so soon gotten. The said Town was ever very carefully conserved and kept, as well by the Queen of England, as by the confederated States; so to draw great contribu∣tions from it. It was before the troubles, but a very small paltry place, a Retreat for Fishers; but very well known since by the most famous and me∣morable siege that ever was. The siege of Ostend begun thes. of July 1601. It was invested, as much as possibly it could be, in the year 1601 upon the 5. of July; and first revictualled afterwards by an English Knight, called Veer, and above three thousand fresh souldiers of his country, sent by the Queen. In the month of September, Admiral de Varniont, came with a hundred and seventy Sayl of Ships, loaden with all kinds of Munition, both for wat and mouth, for the winter; so that all was better cheap there, then even in Holland it self. This made the Prince resolve about All-hallown-tide, to go and attack Bois∣le-Due: And the Arch-Duke well knowing the importance of the place, sent an Armythither, and put some colours into the Town. But the cold∣ness
of the weather proved the strongest enemy, and forced him to pack up his Baggage, and march another way. In the monoth of September aforesaid, the Queen of Spain was delivered of a Daughter, and the Queen of France of aThe title of the eldest son of the Crown. Dolphin; who by a happy de∣stiny were afterwards joyned together in marriage, as we shall shew in fit place. Prince Maurice, finding his enterprise upon Boisleduc crossed, and that the Spaniards continued their siege, raised more souldiers the year following, and towards the end of Iune, with a terrible train, he marched down into Brabant. The Arch-Duke, informed of his great preparation, enabled by some money from Spain, and the reasons for the continuation of the siege, in which the Honour of the House of Austria was engaged, and all difficulties well ballanced by that most cautelous and advised nation, resolved for his part, to make a great defence. It is in trouble, that vertue shines with most luster. He sent the Admirall into Brabant to stop the progresse of the Princes, who having some Italian Regiments with him, intrenched himself near Tirle∣mont, a Town grown famous since by her deplorable misfortune, and buried in her own ashes. The Hollanders, not being able to draw the Spaniards, (who were yet mindful of their losse received before Newport) to a generall decision, diver∣ted their course, and incamped themselves before Grave; which Town be∣ing well fortified, was two moneths after surrendred upon conditions:Grave yeeld upon agreement. Mutiny. The Spaniards seaze upon Hoochstrade. And the Admirall not able to raise the siege, was constrained to retreat: neither could he hinder the disbanding and mutinies of some of his Souldiers, who seazed upon the Town of Hoochstrade, and began a new policy amongst themselves. The Arch-Duke hastens thither; and the Admiral drawes his stake out of play, and retires himself into Spain, But Albert instead of water, cast oyle into the sire; and, contrary to the advice of the States under his obedience, proscribes them, and declares them Rebels, Traitors, attainted,Mecauban. and con∣victed of High Treason in a superlative degree, &c. But it is in vain to be an∣gry without strength; and the weak Lawes, yeeld to the unjust violence of Armes. The Squadron of Mutiners remained not mute, and the intercession of the Nuncio proved fruitlesse: the Arch-Duke being resolute, and they re-infor∣cing themselves with men and mony, by the near neighbourhood of the consederated Provinces. Now these Revolts gave advantage to the States, and meanes to go in execution through all the Country of Luxembergh; and such as refused con∣tribution, had the grief of seeing their house set on fire. This Cavelcada, or Inroade was finished in lesse then a moneth, and without any resistance at all. During these interludes, the Mutiners governed themselves in form of a Republick, observing a most exact discipline; and amongst other Lawes, forbidding Cards and Dice. They were besieged in Hoochstrade,Are besieged and succoured by Prince Maurice. and suc∣coured by the Prince upon certain conditions: which done, he returned again before Boisleduc: But this Conquest was reserved for his Brother, as we shall hereafter shew. The Arch-Duke, notwithstanding so many inconveniences, mutinies, ve∣xations and losses, stood as firm and immoveable, as a Rock against the greatest stormes before Ostend, though to his no small displeasure, saw it of∣ten relieved. And Prince Maurice not yet satiated with so many victories both by Sea and Land, resolved to vanquish his contumacie by a more sen∣sible diversion. The expences of this siege could not choose but be great; but the people liberally consented without grudging. So pleasant is victory, how dear soever bought. Money. The arrivall of Marquis Ambrose Spinola with the Golden Fleece was a
Spinola came into Flanders with mony. wholesome Balsom to cure the disease of the mutinied Squadron; for it made them return to the Arch-Dukes service, and hastened the rendition of the Town, by the order of continuall mining, which was given by the said Mar∣quis. The Prince in the interim was not asleep, for he departed in the moneth of April, with a huge number of Boats, took many Forts, besides the Towns of Isendike and Ardenbergh; and incamped himself before the renowned Town of Sluce,Sluce taken by famine. which, with some Gallies, was rendred three moneths after, by fa∣mine, though Spinola acted all the parts, which could be invented by the most subtle wit, and used all the force, which the most valiant and resolute souldier could manifest, to relieve the besieged: But his enemies were too well intrenched, and his provident Rivall, kept himself too much upon his guard. Ostend taken 1604. The taking of Ostend 1604, followed close upon the heels of that of Sluce, and the composition made by the besieged, was very honourable. There marched out, of divers nations, about three thousand men, the number of the dead, as well on the one side, as the other, surpassed the beleif of man; and the issue of this siege, kept all the power of Europe in suspense. This Age, which was to be all Iron, fire, blood, and slaughter: This Age (I say) which was to be the totall ruine of Christendome, together with that of Faith and Charity; could not begin better, then by such a siege. This was the most famous Schoole of warre, that ever was before, as where all the Martial Spirits resorted, to learn Discipline, and to put it in practice (as they have done since) in their own Countries. The French, the English, the Ger∣mans, and the Scots,The Siege last∣ed above three years. together with the Hollanders, defended this place about three yeers, through the advantages and commodities afforded them by the Sea. The Spaniards, Italians, Walloons, Burgundians, and other Germans, at∣tacked it with all the force, and industry the greatest courages were able to invent. All such as were not present at this bloody exercise, but remained mute at home, at the noise of so much blood-shed; expected the dubious issue of so hazardous a siege, upon which the Monarchy of the whole world seem∣ed to depend. Yea, even the Great Turk himself, ravished with joy by the ruine of the Christians, was not a little glad, to see such an obstinate resolu∣tion on both sides. Let us here take notice of the Divine Providence, which (like another Ju∣piter) laughs at the folly of Mortalls; who like other Gyants, will needs make themselves masters of all, and endeavour to outbrave the very Elements themselves. The fiercest enemies to mankind are War, Plague, and other Infirmities: The Reward of victory a morsell of earth, and houses buried under their own foundations. And now, if courage and generosity egged on many to this; certainly pitty moved infinitely more, there to be∣wayle their friends, buried under the ruines of this second Troy, and view a little piece of ground, which had cost so much pains, so much sweat, so much time, so much blood, and so much mony. All the industry of man was set on work there on both sides; and the Arch-Duke, and Arch-Dutches, had both the trouble, and the charge of repairing this place, and putting it in∣to that state, wherein we now see it. Necessity caused this siege (at first judged easie) to be begun, Reputation to be continued, and power (in despight of interest) by the industry and valour of Spinola, brought it to an end.
CHAP. V Peace between the Spaniard and the English. King Henry of France re-eshablishes the Jesuits. Father Cotton hurt. Warre about the Rhein, Peace made be∣tween the Kings of Spain and England. 1604. THe Spaniards, having sufficiently tried the great hurt done them by the English, during the life of Queen Elizabeth, as well in Spain it self, as by Sea, and in the Low-countries; yea, and at the Siege of Ostend also; and find∣ing, that all satisfaction endeavored to procure from them, either in Ireland, or England, had not any kind of good successe; began to think, that a peace with these insulary people, would prove necessary for the State. Nor had they much trouble to obtain it; King James being easily inclined to it by some certain jealousie, which had taken root in his soul. The Arch-Duke and his Dutchesse were comprehended in it, and it was concluded the very same day, that the Garrison went out of Ostend. France, through the enjoyment of seven yeares peace, was so well resto∣red, that there seemed not to have been any warre in more then half an age before. King Henry, being a great husband of his Finances, or Exchequer; made a journy to Metz, where two Jesuits cast themselves at his feet, be∣seeching him with a very elegant speech, to vouchsafe to re-establish them through all the kingdome. The Parliament of Paris, and the Sorbon oppo∣sed them; but the King, by special grace admitted them,The Jesuits re∣established in France. and demolished the Pyramide, which had been erected against them, for that one of their Schollars had hurt the King in the mouth; And the Mines, which the Hughenots sprung against their Society, were either discovered or despised: At least, they wrought no effect. But Father Cotton, going once to the King, was at∣tacked in the Loüure by a great number of Lackies,Father Cotton hurt by Lackies at the Lonure. who after many quipps and scoffes, very dangerously wounded him, and would have killed him, if a Count had not hastened to the stirre, and taken him out of their bands. His Majesty seemed much displeased herear; and all issued to the confusion of the one, and the glory of the other. The year following, Prince Maurice had an enterprise upon the Dike of Antwerp, from whence he retyred with remarkable losse, before the Castle of Wowde, which he took by capitulation. The Arch-Duke on the other side, disgusted at the losse of Sluce, and desiring to keep Flanders free from contribution, sent Spinela to the said place, whose credit was already much augmented amongst his enemies, as well as amongst them of the Spanish party. But Maurice, having prevented him, and put all things in good order, he found himself fain to seek the same way, which the Count de Bucquoy had taken, with a flying Camp, towards the Rhein; which he passed, and took Oldenzeel, and Lingen; and if he had prosecuted his business with the same ardor and promptitude, wherewith he began, it was very probable, he might have seased upon Coeverden, Groening; yea, Embden it self, and so have taken footing in Freezland;Warre about the Rhein. in regard that he would have found no great res∣stance, for want of men; especially coming upon an exploit, both unforeseen and unexpected. There was yet another very dangerous encounter towards the Rhem, where Prince Henry had incurred great hazard of being killed, or taken, if he had not been seconded by his Brother; wherein he was more happy, then in the enterprise of Guelders. The Designes upon Grave, and Bergh upon Zoom, were hurtfull to the un∣dertakers, and served for an advertisement to them, upon whom they were practised, to keep themselves upon their guard. The Count de Buequoy quickly
brake the garrisons of Wotchtendone, and Cracaw; and so winter was as a trumpet which sounded a retreat, to both armies. The morning is never so fair, but that there appears some cloud upon the Horizon, before the day be quite spent. France is never so well at rest, but that there is some stir, either in one corner or other, or in the middle. For they are people of a fiery spirit, and enemies to quiet. The conspiracy, which was discovered in Provence at that time, and the author whereof was a gentleman of that Country, (who was appreheded at Paris, together with the Secretary to the Spanish Embassador) caused the the said Embassadour to complaine, and reproach, that the Peace was not well kept: to which the King answered by other objections, which were the seeds of the contrariety since, between these two nations, who yet by different wayes, seem to have both, but one object for their end. The birch of Philip the fourth King of Spaine, the of April. This very yeer 1605, upon the 8th. of April, was born Philip the 4th. who holds the Spanish Monarchie at this day. And the same year, died Pope Cle∣ment the 8th. and Theodore Beza, and the year following, Justus Lipsins, Pro∣fessour of the University of Lovain. CHAP. VI The difference which happened between Pope Paul the fifth, and the Republick of Venice, and why? The peace made. The Duke of Brunswick endeavours to take the Town. The King of Denmark goes into England. The conti∣nuation of the wars in the Low-Countries. VVHiles the war was thus hot in the Low-Countries, there happened a spark of division in Italy, between the Pope, and the Venetians, which if neglected, might have caused an emborasment no lesse perilous then that; the one, (namely the Romane Catholicks) ministring all kindes of means, and reasons to quench it; and the Reformates, all sorts of invention, to kindle it. The knot of the controversie was, that the said Republick had made a Law, prohibiting all the Ecclesiasticall persons, to buy, or receive by Will, or Testament, any immovable goods, or other inheritances. This Or∣der, being ill taken at Rome, caused a Bull, which was published against the said Republick, with the thunderbolt of excommunication, in case it were not revoked within the tearm of four and twenty dayes; interdicting the Priests to say Masse,The difference between the Pope and the Venetians. under paine of the same excommunication. The Se∣nate protests against it, and so from words to blows. Italy was instantly in armes. The King of Spaine ofters assistance to the Pope, and Henry the fourth as much, but under condition, that he being eldest son of the Church, his Holinesse would receive no ayde from any other but himself. This proposi∣tion, together with the information which he had, that the King of England and the Hollanders (enemies to the holy See) had presented all kind of help to the Venetians, and being also moved by his own prudent goodnesse, and the evident danger, to which the Catholick States would be exposed) caused him to hearken to the perswations of the two Kings, and take off the ex∣communication, whereby the businesse was appeased,Taken away by the intercession of the two Kings. and all the Ecclesia∣sticks, who were gone out of the City during this fogg, had leave to return, except onely the Jesuites, who carried the whole burthen, and were banith∣ed
for perpetuity;The Jesuites banished out of the Common∣wealth of Venice. nor have all the intercessions, and addresses which have since been made in favour of them, by the King of France, and many other Potentates, served for any thing, but to renew the said order of banishment against them. The Protestants (their capitall enemies) have not failed to serve them∣selves of this occasion, as also of many other, to cry them down every where by accusing them of some conspiracies against the said Common-wealth, whereof yet there is no clear mention made at all. For they make profession to be forbidden by their rule to meddle with State business. But a good Game, good Gaine. They are not without fellowes, for England furnishes them like∣wise with matter enough. Now these animosities being appeased, there returned a calm to all Italy, which we will now leave to come back into Germany and Holland; For here it is that men are alwayes in action both by Sea and Land, whilest the rust of Christendom are at rest. It is true that the Duke of Brunswick seeing Spi∣nola with a great army neer Lingen, took a pretext to raise one to, but it was in effect to attack the chief town of the Dutchy.An attempt upon Bruns∣wick. His forces seized upon one of the gates, and the wall, without much trouble; but they weakly de∣sended those advantages, which they had gotten, and so were shamefully beaten oft. He besieged the town twice, but the Emperour interposing his authority, all was quickly accommodated. Enterprines never snoceed well but by the courage of the under takers. The King of Denmark goes into England. The King of Denmark went to see his brother inlaw King James, and his sister, where having been regaled the space of a moneth, he returned to∣ward his own Kingdom; not without admiring the pomp, and magnifi∣cence of the English, and giving marks of his royall greatnesse, to that glori∣ous nation. The principall motive of this enterview could never hither to be truly discovered; and whatsoever hath been said thereof, hath been ground∣ed onely upon conjectures, suspicions, and mistrusts. Spinola comes from Spain, and takes, Grol. In the spring of the year 1606 Marquis Spinola returned from Spain, and brought a vast sum of money with him, which is the true sinew of war, and the most excellent oil to anoint the dull armes of the souldiers; and having therewith; put the Militia in good discipline, he sent the Count de Bucquoy to∣wards the Rheine, himself following shortly after: but the continuall rains, and the vigilancy of Prince Maurice, made him lose the hope of re-gaining any access to Groening, and the other places of strength on the way. The Count de Bucquoy staying behind, attempted to passe the Vehal, with Pontons and smal Boats, by the favour of a battery, but he was repulsed. But Spinola took Lothem, and seeing then, that amongst so many enterprizes, none of them all prosper∣ed so, as to get over the Rivers, either neer the Soul, or elsewhere, he turned his armes against Grol, which by furious attacks, he quickly compelled to yeeld, notwithstanding the Garrison were strong enough. And not yet con∣rent with this Town, he caused the Count de Bucquoy to invest Rhinbergh, who could not hinder Count Henry from putting fourteen Colours into the place, and some Cavalrie besides, together with many French Gentlemen Voluntiers. The complaint of the Spaniard against the French Ca∣tholikes. The Spaniards and the most zealous Romane Catholicks of Europe, have very often accused the French of levity, and especially such of them as are Catholicks, in regard that, being of the same Law with the Spaniards, and in peace with them too, they (contrary to the Treaty of Vervin) embraced the other party, not onely to strip their master of his Demaynes, but the towns also themselves of the exercise of the Catholick Religion. If there went none but Spaniards, out of our States (said the obedient Towns) the passion of the French would be in some sort lawfull, but, since our Religion is banished, together with their government, they can alleadge no receivable excuse, to exempt them from
injustice and blame. The Priests maintaining, that it was a matter of consci∣ence, refused to give absolution to the souldiers, as favourers of Heresie, and enemies to the Church. But they, alwayes covered themselves under the cloak of policy, and made the same answer which Henry the fourth their Master did, to the Spanish Embassador, that it was not a war of Religion, but of State. The complaints often enough made by the Archduke and Dutches, upon this subject, had no other satisfaction, then that there might likewise be found enow, in their Armies; and that it was free for every one, to choose what party he pleased. But the French, followed rather the inclination of their Prince, then scruple in Religion, laid more to heart the weakening of the Power of Spaine, then the ruine of Hereticks; and the interest of their Master, then that of the Catholick faith. So that the Protestants made use of them, and have prevailed much, by the jealousie of State, which reigns betwixt these two potent nations. CHAP. VII The taking of Rinbergh. The mutiny of the Spaniards. The siege of Grol, raised by the promptitude of the Marquis. The first overture for a Truce received. VVE left Spinola so well intrenched at Rinbergh, that the Princes cou∣rage was cooled to attack him, who bethought himself a little too late, of sending his brother to Ʋenlo, so to make a powerfull diversion. For the Town being battered, by a rough, and smart assaulter, and defend∣ed by resolute men,Rinbergh ren∣dered. was at last, forced to render; and so the Garrison, to the number of three thousand dislodged, the second of October. Now the taking of so important a place, just at the nose of so strong an Army, produ∣ced such discourses, as blinde passion dictated, to men of blinde judgement; and the Marquis, as victorious as he was, was not yet able to divert some mutinies in his Army for want of pay: and therefore, considering the huge inconveniencies they suffered, by so many marches, sieges, enterprizes, and the harshuesse of the season, he thought fit to refresh them, in the County of Gulick. Now, the Prince, who desired to put nothing to hazard, but be ever pry∣ing upon occasions, met at length with this. He caused Lochom to be be∣sieged, which quickly submitted,Maurico besiges Grol. Spinola rayses him thence, and gives Diet to the inutiners. and then went to attack Grol. But the unexpected arrival of Spinola, made him change the vexations of that siege, (which bred so many diseases in his army) into a most advised retreat, and send his souldiers into their winter quarters. It is the part of a good Pilot, to take his measures well, amongst the rocks; and of a good Generall, to accommodate himself to time; and not to struggle against the harshnesse of the season; but make his retreat, to save his army, the conservation whereof is as landable, as the hazard∣ous gaining of a battell. The Marquis having surmounted many inconveni∣ences, to deterr his enemies from the continuing the siege, and made them at length dislodge; endeavoured besides, to sweeten the mutiners, by grant∣ing Diet, for their winter quarters, where we will leave them, and follow him to Brussels, to contrive the first propositions of the Truce. Never was there so much trouble to decide a businesse of importance, as there was to bring the confederated States, to hear of any overanes of Peaces,
or Truce. It seemed more easie, to make an agreement betwixt fire and water, and all the mettals together, then to reconcile these two parties. But indeed, the distrust was too great, the hatred too much rooted, and fortune too favourable. And whereas other Countries, grow poor by war; this, most rich, most potent, and most flourishing. For on the one side, the enemies army could not enter, in regard of the frequencie of great rivers, and on the other, they are guarded by the sea, in such sort, as that by trafique, they are risen to such a height, that every body courts their friendship. Many assemblies, and mediations for Peace, and accommodation were made, but all vanished into smoak, and served rather for a spur to war, then a balsom, to mollifie the ulcerated wounds, of such as make their profit by Alarms. For this was the common talk; There is no trust to be given to the Spaniards, or the Papists; for they teach, that they are not to keep their faith with Hereticks: The fowler sings sweetly to draw the birds into his Nets: and many other such reasons, which served onely to destroy all propositions of Peace. Nay, even the Embassies of the Emperours, so often reiterated, were able to reap nothing but ceremonies, and those of other Princes, yet lesse. The complaints of the neighbours endammadged and oppressed by the souldi∣ers, were not heard, or at least requited, with excusing the necessity of times, and affaires. For the sea was too much agitated by the windes, and hatred of them, who would have this potent house, in obedience to the feeble commands of thisThe Ʋnited Provinces li∣ving by the windes and waters. Aeolus. In brief, they who spake to the States of peace, were as welcome at the Haghe, as they were at Venice, who spake for the Jesuites, notwithstanding their propositions were just, and equitable, and could not be rejected, but upon meer distrust. But what is impossible to man, is facil to God; and all fruit growes ripe in time. Let us now see the reasons of this resistance. The States could not imagine, that the King of Spaine would ever re∣nounce the Soverainty, of so many, and so illustrious Provinces; and again, they who were become Masters, had lost the will of returning to obedience. They were grown powerfull, by the allyances of France, and England, by the trafique of the Indies, by the picoryes, or spoiles which they had made upon Spain, and the obedient Provinces, with which they offered to make an agreement, and allyance, by excluding the King, and his heirs, but by no means, with his Majesty; whereto the other could not listen, as to a thing impossible and shamefull, and which checked the oath of fidelity, which they had taken. The summons, which the Infanta gave them of her arrivall at Brussels, moved them not at all, either to acknowledge her for Lady, or induce them to peace, or truce. In fine, in the yeer 1607.Great storms at Ester. 1607. (me∣morable for the great storms, which happened throughout all the Low-Countries towards Easter) this resistance began by little and little, to grow warm, and this ice to thaw. For they opened their ears, to the charming perswasions of that worthy Prelate; and their hearts, to the great successes of Spinola, who surpassed, or equaled all his Predecessors, in military science. So that the reverent father Iohn May, Provincial of the order of the Franci∣scan Friers, was a worthy instrument, of this holy work, who, by his infati∣gable care, and most painfull journeys, sometimes from Brussels to the Haghe, and sometimes from thence into Spaine by Brussels, brought the two parties, to a truce of seven moneths, which grew afterwards to be pro∣longed.
CHAP. VIII. The defeat of the Spanish Armada. The Design upon Sluce failed. A continuance of the Treaty. Spinola arrives at the Hague. The Treaty again broken, was renewed at Antwerp, where the Truce was made for twelve years. The Flect bea∣ten at Gibe∣laltar. DUring these goings and comings to and fro, Admiral Heemskerk went to attack the Spanish Fleet designed for the Indies, which he defeated in the Streights of Gibelaltar, to the great amazement of the Spaniards, to see that people which they had so often beaten, and so often despised, come to assault them even in Spain it self: a strange quipp of Fortune. Times have their turns. And so the first fruit which Spain tasted of a Cessation of Arms, was the calling home of the Ships of the said Common-wealth, which much incommodated her Costs, and lay as snares to snap the Gallions coming from the Indies, with some whereof they very often met; slighting the dan∣ger for the advantage of the booty.The enter prise upon Sluce fai∣led for want of courage. But before we sheathe our sword, and hang it upon the naile, let us speak a word of that memorable Enterprise up∣on the Town of Sluce, which was in the year 1606. The Spaniards being advertised by two souldiers of the State of the Gar∣rison, of the Gates, and of the Wall of the aforesaid Town, sent three thou∣sand six hundred men, with that renowned French Gentleman Du Terrail, who was since beheaded at Geneva, for having but so much as thought of an Enterprise upon the City. Now this valiant Cavallier had promised the Arch-Duke either to deliver him the place, or die in the Attempt. And so he marched with his Troops through the Drowned Lands, without being discovered; approached the Town, set threeAn Engine to force Gares. Petards on work about the Gate, the last whereof got it open; but the hearts of the souldiers grew so cold, that they durst not venter in. Never was there an Enterprise of im∣portance more easie to be effected, without either danger or resistance; and never was there any which more loosely fayled for want of courage, and good command: so that it proves most true, that a Coward can never do a good action. Du Terrail not having authority enough to animate these Cow∣ards to enter the Town, was constrained to retyre with them, and ask leave to withdraw himself from them, to a Nation which never failed in any oc∣casion for want of courage, as being more apt to offend in the other extreme. Besides that, danger urged him away in respect of the execution of three Captains, who paid the score dear enough for all the rest. Thus God dis∣poses of all things contrary to the expectation of man. Let us now come back to the begun Treaty. The arrivall of the Arch-Dukes Depaties at the Hague. Spinola, Richardot, Mamicidor, Father Iohn Nay, and the rest of the De∣puties arrived at the Hague, and were received there with many comple∣ments, and tieated according to the dignity both of their employments, and their persons; and chiefly at the Court. The Prince, and the Lords of prime quality, went to meet them at Riswick; where after the ceremonies were performed, the Marquis went into the Princes Coach. A strange Metamorphosis; to see the two chief Captains of the world, most bitter enemies a lit∣le before, court one another now with true respect, and draw the eyes of the people to admire thew. Persons of honour and glory may be hated by the wicked, but vertue never. Now, because it is not my design, nor can this History permit me to particularize all along, upon what passed in this illustrious Assembly; I will
content my self with saying, that the demand of the said Embassadours con∣cerning the forbearance of Traffick to the GreatAmerica. Indies, and the reduction of the exercise of the Roman Catholick Faith, had almost broaken off this Treaty. In effect, some advices from other parts, and the retardment of the Pro∣vinciall aforesaid in Spain, moved the States to sen forth a Protestation, con∣taining their finall intention: And the Embassadours of the Princes who were Mediatours between them, counselled the States, to hearken at least to a Truce, since there was yet no room for Peace. They retire. But they, sticking fast to their resolution, and the Embassadours of Spain likewise persisting within the limits of their Commissions, there was no means at all to make them joyn, or come to a conclusive Definition. And so in fine, they parted from the Haghe, not without Protestations on both sides, of the sincerity of their intentions for the good issue of the said Treaty; each casting the fault upon the other. But after their departure, the States were advised by the Kings of England and France, (with both whom they had made a most streight Allyauce, for the maintaining of the Peace, in case it were concluded) to renew the Treaty of a Truce: And to this effect it was again taken into deliberation by the said Embassadours at Antwerp in the moneth of March,The Treaty re∣newed at Ant∣werp. whether the States likewise sent their Deputies; name∣ly, Count William of Naffaw, and the Lord of Brederode, the 5. of the same moneth, and they concluded a Truce for twelve yeares, upon the ninth of April 1609, which caused great rejoycing every where, as well amongst the Neighbours, as the Parties themselves concerned;Truce made. and the Embassadours were regaled, and honoured with great presents. During this Treaty, many libels were made and dispersed; some with reasons, to countermine this sweet Peace; and others to advance it. Birds of mischief seck the dark and like Owlas, blame the light as hurtfull, and discovering their actions: And so their fluttering was despised. And here we see the end of this war for a while, which sprung up at the beginning of the reign of King Philip the second, and that upon divers pre∣texts; as namely, that of liberty of conscience, and priviledges; and under various Governours, of different humours; fomented by ambition, Religi∣on, and diffidence, under the Princess of Parma, the Duke of Alva, Don Lewis, Don Iohn of Austria, on the one side, and Prince William, and the States-Gene∣rall, on the other, the latter whereof made a strong union amongst them∣selves at Ʋtrick, the Articles of which (namely, for the free exercise of the Roman Catholick Religion) have been much altered. They formed their Common-Wealth under the Arch-Duke Matthias, and the Duke of Alan∣son: under the Prince of Parma, they begged the assistance of the King of France, and the Queen of England: They continued the Warre with much success against Count Mansfeld, and Cardinall Andrew: They repaired what was amiss in their Republick, by the factions which arose under the Earl of Leicester: They valiantly defended themselves against the Arch-Duke Albert, and the Brave Spinola, even till the very publication of the Truce. We will now stay awhile, and repose our selves in the rest of the Low-countries; which we so much desired, as being the part where the War was so long time carried on with so much expense, and no lesse industry, then good discipline; though it were often disturbed, by the frequent mu∣tinies of the Spaniards, for want of pay, from whence the Confederares knew how to draw most considerable advantages.
CHAP. IX The State of France. The King goes to Sedan. Troubles in Austria, and Bohemia. A Conjuration discovered in Spain; and the Mores banished thence. THe hast we had, to see an interruption of the misfortunes, wherewith the BelgickThe Low-countries. Lion had been tormented above fifty years together, and his roaring heard throughout the whole Universe, to the astonishment of all the greatest States of the world; made us slight the reasons of them, who, partly out of hatred to the House of Austria, and partly for the Roman Catholick Faith (the utter abolition whereof they passionately desired) endeavoured to hinder the Truce. We will therefore turn back a little towards France, which flourished now, as if there had never been any warres at all. Courte∣sie, the essential vertue of that Nation, together with the Beauty, Bounty, and Fertility of this kingdome, founded upon most excellent Lawes, fine Sciences, and laudable Exercises, attracted the Nobility of all Europe thi∣ther, as to a School of vertue and glory. In effect, there was no remarka∣ble Commotion, able to give any apprehension or disturbance to the Publick Rest: For the Warre of Savoy, and the conspiracy of the Mar∣shall Biron, were almost as foon smoothered, as known. It was a kind of Terrestrial Paradise, where they who were enemies about the difference of Doctrines, lived in friendship, by the authority of their Master, who main∣tained peace both abroad,The death of Charles Duke of Lorraine. and at home. Charles Duke of Lorraine, a Prince loaden with age, adorned with singular vertue and piety, lest his Sonne Henry his Heyre, to retire himself to the Coelestiall lerusalem, in the yeare 1608. The King of France goes to Sedan with an Army. In brief, the fruits of Peace were most delicious, when the King suddenly raised a great Army, and conducted it to Sedan, For there were some mis∣understandings between him, and the Duke of Boüillon, which were taken away, by the intercession of the forrain Embassadours. However, this Ca∣valcada gave no small jealousie to the Spaniards, who found themselves obli∣ged thereby to put strong Garrisons through all the country of Luxemburgh; and the Confederates reaped great profit from it. For it made men believe, that it was but a fiction, or rather a prelude of that huge preparation, which we shall shortly relate. However, much talke there was of it, and great indagation into the reasons thereof, by men of curiosity. The Duke of Boüillon, feeling the pulse of the Protestant Princes, his neighbours, judged it not necessary to draw blood yet: and that which was differred, shall be found in sit time. Misunderstand∣ings amongst the Princes of house of Austria. We are now revoked into Germany, to see what passed in Austria, amongst the Princes of that Family. Hungary was in disorder, because the Peace was not confirmed with the Turks; which was redressed by the Arch-Duke Mathias, and so a peace was concluded for twenty years, upon condi∣tion, that Achmet should call the Emperour Father, and the Emperour him Son: and that since they were both Emperours, they should renew their amity every three yeers, by reciprocal Presents. He remedied the disasters of the said kingdom, by granting liberty of Religions, and Transylvania, to Borskay; after whom succeeded Stephen Ragotskie, who transferred it upon his Cousin Bethleem Gabor, of whom, as having been a great Instrument of many troubles, we shall make frequent mention hereafter. Now, the Em∣perours brother Mathias, by this so necessary a pacification, gained the hearts of the people, strengthened his Authority, came into Bohemia, in∣camped
LEWIS THE XIIII KING OF FRANCE AND NAVARR
himselfe before Prague; granted the same liberty to the Bohemians, made his entry into Vienna, received the Oath of Fidelity, was Crowned King of Hungary, married his Kinswoman, and at the request of the Duke of Saxony, and some Hungarian Lords, granted the Exercise of the Confes∣sion of Auxbourgh, throughout all Austria: Which licence wonne him the affections of the Protestants, who were ever spying after some meanes, to put division into the said Family; but on the other side, it gave no small offence to the Pope, the Emperour, and the King of Spain, though yet all were appeased in those parts for some yeares. But hereupon there was very great difficulty to reconcile Rodolph with Mathias, for he com∣plained that all this was done out of contempt of his authority. Yet in fine, by the submission of Mathias, and the intercession of the Pope and Princes, it was brought to a temperament, and the Emperour declared him his Successour in the Crowne of Bohemia, in case himself came to die with∣out issue. Now these divisions between Brothers, and Cousin-Germans of the same House, were taken (by such as meddle not a little to pick out the actions thereof) but for artifices, or tricks; and men said, it was the only right way to preserve Hungary, Moravia, Bohemia, and other Provinces depending upon the said kingdome, from falling into the hazard of a new Election: A conjecture, grounded upon probabilities of consideration enough. Spain in the mean while, looked not only upon the troubles of the Low-countries, and means to bring them to an end; but she had likewise a parti∣cular care, to steer her Indian Fleets into a good Port: For, as for the rest, there had in some years passed nothing, which could disturb the tranquility of that kingdom. But in the year 1609. there was discovered a Conjurati∣on, which, had it taken effect, would have involved it in a totall ruin, sup∣planted Christian Religion, and reduced the King to fly for Sanctuary else∣where. But the greatest storms are those, which often do least hurt, and are diverted by slight causes: Yea, a gentle rain often allayes the most furious windes. The Mores implored the assistance of the Grand Signior,The Conjurati∣on of the Mores discovered in Spain. and other Mahometan Princes, the Doctrine of whom they followed in effect, though in apparence Christians: and they had also for a long time been heaping up Arms, and with the slight succour of twenty thousand men, (they being al∣ready at the least a hundred thousand in Spain combatants) they promised themselves to bring all Spain under their subjection. But being detected,They are bani∣shed into Africa. & the King of France having refused them his ayde, they were all embarked in the kingdom of Valencia, and transported into Barbary, by the Kings command. Now this expulsion of them, together with so many Colonies, as the Spani∣ards have in the Indies, and an infinite number of other Islands, hath much dispeopled the Continent of Spain, and greatly retarded the progresse,The cause of dispeopling Spain. which this Warlike Nation might otherwise (peradventure) have made upon her enemies. And this was very well foreseen by a certain Spanish Don, who told King Philip the second, that the transportation of the Natives, would one day be the ruine of Spain. But before we passe any further, let us speak a word of this kingdom, the power whereof is so great, that it gives jealousie to all the States of the Universe.
CHAP. X A brief discription, of the Kingdoms of Spain and France. SPaine is separated from France, by the Pirenaan hills; and from Affrica, by the Levant, or Eastern Sea, which communicates it self, with the Ocean, by that considerable passage, called the streights of Gibelatrar. The Romans made two Provinces of Spaine; and in those two desperate sieges of Segun∣gum, and Numantia, as well they, as the Affricans, tryed the constancy, and courage of the Spaniards; from whom they received great services, in their armies. So that it is not now onely that they are valiant souldiers. The Goths enter into Spaine 168. The Goths, Sweves, and Vandals, after they had ransacked the Empire, made choice of Spaine, for the seat of their domination, as being very pro∣per, to command both Europe, and Affrica. They entered about the yeer 168. and remained in possession thereof, more then four hundred, that is, till Rodrigues, with almost all his nobility, was defeated by the Saracons, who were brought in by a certain Earl, in revenge of the honour of his daughter, whom the King had ravished. Vengeance is against Christian Religion, and yet this young Lady made her own native Country a prey to the Barbarians. They maintained themselves there, above seven hundred yeers, as well against the French, as the Spaniards themselves, who endeavoured to expell them. In precedent ages, there were numbered about twelve Crowns, or King∣doms, which were all reduced to one, by Ferdinand, and Isabell, in the yeer 1474. except that of Portugal which being subjugated by Philip the second, both by armes, and right of succession, hath been peacefully possessed, by him and his heirs, till the yeer 1640. when the Portugezes withdrew them∣selves from obedience to Philip the fourth, and chose for their King, the Duke of Bragasa, under the name of John the jourth. It was in the reign of the aforesaid Ferdinand,The Indies found our under Ferdi∣nand of Castill. that the Indies, and many other Islands were found out, the riches whereof hath much augmented the potency of Spaine, and made her aspire (as her enemies say) to the Monarchie of the whole world. Spaine, in some parts, is very sertil; as for example, in Andaluzia, which Province, as well for plenty of all blessings of the earth, as for the pleasures, and delights of the fields, is a meer terrestriall Paradise. The horses which she produces, are so swift in course, that they seem (according to the pro∣verb) to be engendered by the winde. She feeds an infinite of sheep, almost every where; but chiefly, in Castill, where there is made most excellent cloth; and the wooll, for the superlative finenesse thereof, is transported, into the Low-Countries, and store of cloth wrought in this very town of Leyden, which is much sought for by the French, and other nations. But in some parts also, there is barren enough, through the lazinesse (as it is re∣ported) of the inhabitants, who love much better, to put their hands to the sword (to walk with it by their sides) then to the plough. The wines which grow in Spaine, are much esteemed in England, and the Low-Countries, and through all the North.The Spaniards great Catho∣licks. The Spaniards are much commended, for their fidelity: they are very zealous for the Church of Rome; very devour, and carry so great respect to the virgin Mary, and the reliques of Saints, that it causes them to passe, amongst them of the reformed Religion, for hypo∣crites and idolaters: They are both melancholy and cholerick; very sober, and content with little; they spend more upon the back, then the belly.
Philip the iv King of Spaine.
They are very ambitious, and good Souldiers; for they know as well, how to use victory, as to gaine it, and are much more exactly observant of disci∣pline, then any nation of the world, Above all, they do wonders in places besieged, both by rejecting attacks, and patiently induring the inconveni∣ences of a siege. They are enemies to all such, as follow not the doctrine of the Romane Church, upon whom they have exercised great cruelties, whereby they have made themselves very odious, But, as the Germans are wont, with much importunity, and unseasonablenesse, to require their pay, just upon the paine of a battell; so do the Spaniards, by sedition, after they have fought, which corrupts the fruit of their victory. They faithfully serve their King, but they will have their priviledges kept.Spaine an here∣ditary Kingdom The Kingdome is hereditary; and forwant of an heir male, it falls to the Distaff. Now, besides tho reasons aforementioned, why there are so few inhabi∣tants in a Country of large extent, there is yet another, which is this. Ferdi∣nand and Isabell, having finished the Warr with the Moors, resolved to ex∣pell the Jews also, out of the territories under their obedience; who trans∣ported themselves into Affrion, Italy, the Levant, and Portugal,The Jewes va∣nished out of Spaine, and Portugall., from whence they were likewise chased some yeers after. And besides, the wo∣men are sterill enough; especially towards the south; and again, the warrs, which their Kings have so long had, in Germany, Italy, France, and the Low-Countries, not forgetting the infinity of Garrisons, which they are obliged to keep, to containe their people in their duty) have so much ex∣hausted Spaine, that the King hath given great freedoms, and immunities to such as have five or six male Children: Yea moreover, strangers are invited to come and dwell there, under profitable conditions, provided still, that they be Romane Catholicks; for the Inquisition suffers no other Religion then that. Now, this Inquisition, so much cried down, and reviled by other Nations, was instituted at the first, for the rooting out of the Mahometisme,The Inqui∣sition. and Ju∣dsme, though it now extend it self, upon all such, as give but the least suspi∣cion, of not adhering totally, to the definition of the Church of Rome. If the said Kingdom were as well peopled as France, the King would have made farre greater conquests then he hath, and would not have been forced, to expose his money, and his armies, to the infidelity of some strangers. In fine, the King of Spaine hath so many Kingdoms, so many Provinces, and so many Islands, in all parts of the Universe, that it was with good reason, that a certaine great person, in the yeer 1624, refuted Sleidan, concerning the four Monarchies, in these tearms. Philip the fourth, who now reigns (saith he) upon whose lands the sunne never sets, is more potent, then was any one of those Monarchs for the continuance of neer four score yeers together. This nation walks slowly to conquest, but she keeps well what she hath gotten: She is tardy to resolve, but she stoutly pursues what is resolved; She is not frighted at the encounter of any difficulties, and accomplishes her ends, for the most part, by pertinacy, and obstinacy. She foresees afar off, and never looses, either patience, or hope; howbeit, that length of expecta∣tion, makes her often loose good occasions. She doth marvels, under an Italian Generall; which was observable, in the Prince of Parma, Marquis Spiola, and others. The Spaniards constant and haughty. This proud Nation better understands the art of governing, then all other; and she hath in her, some witts so subtle and acute, that her very enemies themselves, who hate her, are fain to praise her. And now, let us come back againe, over the hills, to take notice, of the complexion, of that brisk Nation her rivall, which hath often stopped her victories, in the heigth of their course, both in the Low-Conntries, Germany, and Italy.
France most populous. France is a most large, most rich, and most populous Kingdome, divided from Italy, by Savoy and the Alps; from High-Germany by Lorraine; from England by the Sea; and from Low-Germany by Luxemburgh, Hennanlt, Ar∣toise, and French-Flanders. The Romans who subjugated the Gawles, and distributed them into Bel∣gick, Cltick, and Aquitanick, were beaten out (by the opinion of some Authors) by Clos, the first Christian King, about the year 500. The Francks passed the Rhein under Pharamond the first King. Clodion went not beyond Cambray, and was forced to return by Stilicon. Aetins cut off his Army, made him repass the Rhein, und hurried him back in Francony-Meroe laying hold of the advantage of the confusions of the Empyre, took Trevers, passed into Campagne, from thence to Paris, and then to Orleans; and so then, and there began to establish the French Monarchy; giving to Gawl which he had conquered,Gawl takes the name of France. the name of France. This kingdom by succession of time, hath been been very much augmen∣ted, and hath soon raised to the Throne Royall, two and twenty Kings, of the first Family,Bre o. and thirteen of the second; the first whereof was Pepin, Father-in-Law to Charlemagne. Hugh Capet, the first King of the third Fa∣mily, by the exclusion of Charlos Duke of Lorraine, through force of Arms, and the favour of some of the Grandies, got the Government of the French Monarchy, about the year of our salvation, 993. Lewis the fourteenth, who reigns at present, is the thirtieth of that Family. This kingdom is composed of four and twenty Provinces, wherein there are fifteen Arch-Bishoppricks, ninty seven Bishoppricks, ten Parliaments, fourteen Ʋniversities, and four Orders of Knighthod; that of the Starre was eclipsed under Charles the fist: that of St. Michael, now little valued; and the third, and that which hath most luster, is of the Holy Ghost, instituted by Henry the third: The fourth is not much pursued. In ancient times, there were but twelve Pers of France; six Ecclesiasticall, and six Secular, and they were, the Arch-Bishop of Rhenns, the Bishops of Lton, Langres, Chalons, Noyon, and Beauais: The Dukes of Burgun∣dy, of Normandy, of Guienne, and the Earles of Flanders, tholose, and Cham∣pagne. But the number of Dukes and Peers, is now very very much encreased, as also that of Marshals and the Rights of both, very much diminished. The French inclined to ams. The French areso naturally inclined to Arms, that the Proverb sayes, they are born Souldiers, nor can they indeed stay long at rest; for if they have no warre with their Neighbours, they quickly make it amongst themselves, by the ambition of some Lords or other, as also by the Martial humour wherewith they are tormented. Points of honour make them runne into the Field, as to a Feast; in such sort, as that the greatest part of the Nobility unhappily falls in Duels. They are very impatient, and enemies to the Spa∣niards, by maxime of State; whom, by all means possible they oppose, to the end that they may not arrive, to the Ʋniversal Monarchy; or else, that, under this pretext, they may atchieve it themselves. They go like Thunderbolts, to Combats, and Conquests, and reverse whatsoever oppugnes them; but, as soon as this heat growes to be a little cooled, they turn their backs, and sud∣denly loose what they had gained with so much reputation. It is no lesse lau∣dable to keep, thou to get, which the Spaniards know very well. Prosperity ea∣sily makes them slight their enemies, and jeer their Allies, to whom they ren∣der themselves suspected, by the vanity of their tongues; in such sort, as this kind of levity does them much harm. The French are more then men (sayes the Proverb) at the beginning of a Fight, and lesse then women, towards the end. But, they have given a contrary account of themselves in many Battails in Italy, and the Low-countries; where, after they been repulsed or routed, they have rallyed, and carried away many glorious victories, as we shall hereafter see.
Besides, it must be confessed, that the French Cavalry is the stoutest, and best of the whole world. There is also a saying, that the French are wise after the businesse, and the Spaniards before it. In effect, they are rash; yea, and they have very often wonne Battails, by this very Passion. Their generosity is re∣markable, in regard they grudge not to give praise to the vertue even of their enemies, when they deserve it: They are of so gentile an humour, that they make themselves admired by strangers: but they agree so ill, out of their Country, by occasion of petty envies, and shamefull detractions, that they are generally blamed every where for it, and make themselves disesteemed by it, The Clergy, the Gentry, and the People, are the three States,Three States. upon which the Monarchy rests; the Priviledges, and Liberties whereof, if well maintained, would make it the most flourishing in the World. But let us now see, what passed there, during the Peace; for it is not our scope, to make a most ample relation of the particulars of every kingdom. CHAP. XI The King of France arms. The Spaniards do the same. All is full of joy, and fear. The King killed. his Educacion. Croupir. KIng Henry having too generous a heart, to be longidle, was meditating Warre, even during the Peace: For which effect, he had alwayes a spe∣cial care, by the admirable oeconomy, or stewardship of the Duke Silly, toPreparation of war in France. to mannage and husband his Finances, or Exehequer, and accumulate great treasures. On the other side, he saw a brisk Nobility, which longed for no∣thing more, then the occasions to express their Martial courage, under the conduct of so great and valorous a Captain. He therefore resolves to raise an Army, for the execution of some huge Designe, which he kept private to himself, to give exercise to his warlike People. The pretext was, the Warre of the Princes, Heyres to the Dukedom of Gulick, Cleveland, and Bergues. But, because the truth, of the principall motives of this arming of his,Ʋnder pretex of the war of Juliers, or Julick. could never yet be known, we will only note such conjectures thereof, as are grounded upon very receivable probabilities. He would not so easily have pardoned the Heads of the Leagus, for the mothereing of the Civill Warres, had it not been, to revenge himself one day, upon the Spaniards, who had so powerfully traversed, or thwarted his lawfull succession the Crown. He saw himself cherished by his subjects, fea∣red by his enemies, loved by all his Allyes, and chiefly by the States Genera of Holland. Moreover, the interest of the Crown seemed to invite him, to reduce under his States, all such Provinces as speak French, and consequent∣ly, the greatest part of all the Low-countries, which had formerly been of the Demaynes of France; as namely, the Counties of Flanders, and Artoise, the Dutchy of Luxemburgh, and many other, which would not have been able to esape his ambition. The flight of the Prince of Conde, caused this speedy Arming; and the honourable, and Christian protection, which he found in the States, as well of the King of Spain, as in those of the Arch-Duke in the Low-countries, seemed likewise, to give some colour of justice, to the most Christian King, irritated against a Prince of his own blood. This Prince, when he was two and twenty years old, married Margaret, Daughter to he Constable Montmorency, a most beautiful, and vertuous Princess, whom he veretly carried to Brussels, so to quench the fire, which her Charms had
kindled in the heart of the King. But Love holding the Empyre, over the Reason of this generous Alexander, commanded him to recover by force, that which vertue so justly denied him. In so much, as that, for this chast Helen of France, all Europe was like to be cast into most dan∣gerous troubles. Now the Princes of Germany weary of seeing the Empyre, so long in the possession of the House of Anstria; as also of the prolix rest they had enjoy∣ed, together with the encrease of their Treasuries; would not have been offended to see the Imperial Crown, upon the Head of King Henry: And he, seeing the disorder which happened in that Family, and strengthened by the friendship of some Catholick Princes,Paxadge de∣manded of them of Colem. as well as most assured, of that of the Protestants; leaned visibly that way. The Magistrates of Colein, being intreated by his Deputies, to grant Provisions for mony, and passage for his Army, were fain to avow, that it would be temerity to opposeso great a King, who had been alwayes victorious; Besides the noises which some scattered up and down, that he would allow and main∣tain three Religions; to wit, the Roman, the Lutheran, and the Refor∣med. In brief, his Designe seemed to be, to extend the bounds of the French Monarchy, at the cost of the House of Austria, and some neigh∣bour-Princes. In the mean time, the King Don Philip stood not with his arms a cross, at the newes of this terrible Preparative,The Arch-Duke puts an Army on foot. which rejoyced all such as were enemies to his States. The Arch-Duke Albert contracts all his old for∣ces, raises new, and sends a strong Army towards the Consines of France, under the command of Spinola, who intrenched himselfe near Gambray. In fine, men talk of nothing but Armes and Horses, in the Countries of both Crownes; and the Pope sends his Nuncio to divert the King from his Designe; but he was dispatched to Monzon. Amazement every where. Now all Europe stood amazed, and the Princes of Italy, seeing the Duke of Savoy in allyance with Henry, by meanes of the marriage of his Sonne, with the Daughter of France; begin to think of their preserva∣tion. The King, in the interim, confirms his Intelligences; gives the Rendezvous of his Troops in Campagne; and after having extraordinari∣ly courted the Embassadours of the United Provinces, conjures them, to to send Prince Maurice with some Troops to attend his coming, at the fronteer of Cleveland. The Protestant Princes could hardly dissemble their joy:The joy of the Protestants and fear of the Ca∣tholks. and the Cartholick strangers their fear, at the approach of so formi∣dable an Army, Infine, both friends and enemies, were ballancing or staggering, in apprehension, joy, and uncertainty; and every one in pain, to know what he was either to hope, or fear. It came so farre, as to be published, that the King was to march with an Army of forty thousand men, and leave as many to guard the king∣dome, whereof he declared the Queen Regent, after her Coronation, But he was treacherously murthered, in his Coach, the fourteenth of May, 1610, and this fatall blow put all France in mourning, his Corps into the Tomb, and his great Designes into Smoak, Above all this misfortune was impatiently taken by them of the Religion, as also by the greatest part of his Allyes, amongst whom his Arms had not as yet moved the least jealousie. The most generall opinion was, that after having establi∣shed the Princes in the possession of the Dutchyes of Galick and Cleveland; he was to go for Germany. And indeed, the House of Austria had reason to keep her selfe upon her guard, as well knowing how much this Prince was affected to her opposers.
His death gave matter enough every where, for men to inform them∣selves, of who might be the Authour; and the Jesuits were not forgotten to be called in question by the Protestants, however Ravillia never confes∣sed any such thing. This King was brought up in labour and toyle, and noursed in the the Civil Warres. His first wife was Margaret of Valois,His Life. whom when he was come to the Crown, he repudiated. He had been Head of the Hugenots, and wonne many Battails, against them of the League. When he was become Catholick, and after the reconciliation of the Dukes of Mayanne, and Mercoenr, all stooped, and layd down their arms. He had a quick wit, brave thoughts and excessive high points of judgement; had in fine such eminent qualities, as would have ranged him in the number of the grearest Kings, that ever wore a Crown, had ho not been too passionately inclined to handsom women; a vicious habit, which is familiar to Princes. He alwayes loved the United Provinces of the Low-Conntres, and assisted them with men, money, and counsell, notwithstanding the complaints of the Arch-Dukes. He was the Resto∣rer of the French Monarchy, which was horribly tottered: and obtained by generall consent (in regard of his heroick actions in arms) the surname of Great. He was beloved, feared, and redoubted; and amongst all his Kingly vertues, none shined more brightly then his Clemencie.VVhy suspected to be a Huge∣not. Many were in doubts of his Religion; for the Ggenots believed him of theirs, and some others also besides, in respect of the favour ge shewed to the Protestant Party: and for that it was imputed to him, to have said, that the Crowne of France was well worth a Masse. It is onely God who can judge of the Conscience of Soveraigns; and therefore men must be silent, and abey. However it were, he much loved Conferences, and Disputes; as it appeared by that of Cardinall Peronn, against Du Plessis Mornay. The Confederated States had good reason to love him, in regard of the care he alwayes took to conserve them; though their seeing him expected by Prince Maurice, with the forces of the Low-countries near Wesel, and a Letter written by him to the Princesse Dowager of Orange, intimating, that he would come and visit her at the Hague, not as a King, but as her kinsman, thrust a flea into their eare. The said Prince of Orange, above all, impatiently took this strange and unexpected ac∣cident. But indeed, his death freed a good part of Europe, from a great terrour; filled the other, with sadnesse, and amazement; gave way to the Prince of Conde, to return into France, with his wife; and so the Armies to retire to rest till another season, and another conjuncture, which after∣wards presented it self in the Warre of Gulick.
CHAP. XII A difference happening, for the Dutchy of Gulick. Jealosic between the Catholicks, and Protestants, and why! A Tumult at Donawert, an Imperiall Towne, about a procession. Gulick besieged, by Prince Maurice, and the French yeelds. The Princes will not admit the Seque∣stration. VVE have already shewed, how the pretext, of the Arms of Hebry the Great, was the succour promised to the Princes of Brandea∣bourgh, and Newbourgh; therefore let us now look upon the justice of the Com∣petitors, since the quarrell is not quite consopited yet. Sone weeks before the the conclusion of the Truce,Death of the Duke of Gulick. deceased John Wolliam, Duke of Cleveland, and Gulick, leaving no Children by the Countesse of Baden, his former wife; no yet by the sister of the Count of Vandemon, his later. Now, this Princesse, passing through Colein, was received by the illustrious Magistraces, and Ci∣tizens of that ancient City, with great magnisicence, acclamations, and wishes of fertility in this match; and all this for their interests, which are visible enough in themselves, without any need at all, to speak thereof. Mary Eleonor, her eldest sister, was married to Albert Frederick, Duke of Prussia, who died without issue male, and left four daughters behinde him. Anne, who was the eldest, was given to John Sigismund Duke of Branden∣bourgh, and Elector of the Empire. The second, to the Old Elector. The third, to the Duke of Courland. The fourth, to Duke John George of Saxonie, brother to the E∣lector. The second sister of the said Duke, called Anne, in the year 1574. married Philip Lewis, Duke of Newbourgh, in which marriage she brought Wolsgang William, who kept his Court at Dusseldorp, and died in the moneth of April, in this year of 1653. The third, who was Magdalen, was made wife to the Duke der Deux-Ponts. And Sibill, the fourth, was bestowed upon Charles Duke of Austria, who had no childe. Difference for scession. Now Duke Iohn William, dying without children, Iohn Sigismund Elector of Brandenbourgh, who married Anne, (as we have already said) eldest daughter to the eldest sister, of the said last Duke, presented himself to be received by the States of the said Dutchy, wherein he was opposed, by the Duke of Newbourgh, son to the second daughter Magdalen, who was then, yet living. The Dukes of Brandenburgh and Newburgh The Elector of Saxonie, and the Duke of Neuers, declared themselves also heirs: so that the Emperour Rodolph, summons the Parties to appear before him: endeavours to sequester the Dutchies, and to that end, dispatches the
Archduke Leopold,Nwburgh re∣fuse the seque∣stration, and demand relief from France. Bishop of Straesbourgh, who makes himself master, of the Town, and Castle of Gulick. Whereupon the two first presumptive Heirs, upon some articles of governing the Country, made an agreement between themselves, and in stead of addressing themselves to Prague, before the Lord of the Fief (who is the Emperour) had recourse to the King of France. O! How great is the strength of distrust, which tyes the hands of justice, and gets authority over ber? They obtained a promise of strong relief. The other Princes, both Protestants and Catholicks, yea, even the Emperour himself, sent their Embassadours likewise to Paris; where the King sound∣ed them all, one after another. In the mean time, they take Arms, make Excursions, awaken the Neighbours: The Germane Protestants receive the Alarm,Germany takes the Alarm. and assemble themselves at Hal: and the Catholicks, on the other side, at Hirtsburg, there to provide for their safety, propose the Election of a new King of the Romanes, and bring the said Protestants, to a more strict ob∣servance of the accord of Passavia. These, are the first seeds, of the divisions; which, being come to maturity, will quickly fill all Germany, with horrible disturbances, as being watered by strangers, (for fear least they perish) with moisture, or humanity drawn out of the essence of Religions, as we shall briefly shew, in fit place. The businesse of Donawerds,Atumult at Donawerdt, which is pro∣scribed and foreed by the Duke of Bavaria. which had already irritated the Protestants, passed thus. Some Religious or Conventuall men dwelling in the towne, and endeavouring to make a Procession, were desired by the Magistrates to desist, for fear of some tumult. But they answered, that they would not quit their Rights, which depended upon the Emperour. In short, they make a Procession; the people falls upon them, and affronts them. The Emperour informed of the insolence, demands an exemplary punishment; wherein being disobeyed, he proscribes the Towne, and gives the execution thereof to the Duke of Bavaria, who by a siege forced it to submit. Now this pro∣ceeding very much displeased the Protestants; and principally such, as were grieved, to see the Empire so long, in a profound Peace. But the enmity was not yet grown so strong, for it shortly after brake out, to the ruine of all this great Body. But let us returne to the Country of Gulick. The Princes excessively afflicted at the death of the King of France,Gulick besie∣ged and taken. sollicit∣ed Prnice Maurice, to besiege Gulick; which he did, and by the assistance of the French Army, under the conduct of Marshall de la Castre, constrained Leopold, to render the said place into the hands of the said Princes, upon an honourable composition. Now it is to be observed, that they would not ad∣mit of a sequestration, nor the decision of the Emperour, to whom it belongs by right, but it looks as if they all endeavoured, to weaken the Principall head of Europ. And so, the Princes were reproached, for having ejected the Garrison of Gulick, with forraine forces, which was immediately to con∣remne the Imperiall authority; and that they had thereby, given cause to the Emperour, to arme against them. The Duke of Saxonie, beares also the title of Duke of Gulick, Cleveland, and Montagues, and draws his pretentions from Sibill, Aunt to John William, and Daughter to William, who was given in marriage, to Iohn Frederick, Elector of Saxonie, who lost the Electorac, for having taken arms, against the Emperour Charles. He was admitted by the two Princes, to govern the Country till the definitive decision of the difference. It seems, that diffidence and suspicion, in affairs of State, authorize the taking up of Arms, without any other forme of Iustice, and that it is no more lawfull, to the Lord of the Fief to dispose of his Right.
CHAP. XIII A tumult in Poland, and why? They arme. The Swedes and Muscovites, serve themselves of this occasion, against the Poles, and loose Smolensko. Treason discovered in England. The troubles appeased at Paris. Rodolph dies. VVE left the King of Poland very busie, about recovering his King∣dome of Sweden, and the expulsion of the Swedes, our of Livonia: and now, we finde him as busie to maintaine himself in the Elective, after having lost the Hereditary. Fortune never ceases to trouble Vertue, and one disaster comes not without another. The begining of the troubles, was by a lit∣tle blast, or slash, which kindled a fire, that carried it self, to the very highest loft, or story of the building. The scholars of the Jesuites, through an impi∣ous zeale,Yunlss in Poland. rushed one day upon the Church, of the Protestants of Posen, and set it on fire. Prince Radzivil, and some other Ranting blades of the Party, took arms, for the defence (as others said) of their liberty, and to revenge this injury, under the vaile of Rakozians. Fortune smiling upon them at first, and they puffed up with a small victory, endeavoured to expell the King, and choose another, unlesse he would subscribe to some certaine insup∣portable articles proposed by them. Ill intentions grow to be discovered, by good successe. In a word, the Warr was kindled in good earnest, and the cloak of Religion not forgotten.The Rakozians being beaten make Peace. The Rebels, or Rakozians being defeated, and vanquished, returned to be friends, and good subjects. But some space after, the wound having been dressed by too milde a Chirurgion, opened and gangroened, and could not be shut up, without strong salves, and fresh bleedings. King Charles of Sweden, having crowned himself, and renewed the War in Livonie, made use of this intestine sedition: Sigismund made a brisk oppo∣sition, as well to him, as to the Swedes, and Muscovites also, whose Empire was then full of factions.The siege of Smolensko. He besieged Smolensko, and after two years siege, carried it. This was a second Ostend, if we consider the length of the siege, and the number of the dead, which, if those authors who gave us the de∣scription thereof, be worthy of credit, amounted to more then twenty thou∣sand men. There was another Polish Army, imployed, to force the head City called Mosco, whilest the rest of the Troops got huge victories, and took the Yown of Novogrode, and the great Duke Suiskie, together with his two Brothers, prisoners. The the great Cham of Tartarie, astonished at so ma∣ny high Victories, offered to submit himself, to the King of Poland. But Sigismond returned, and the confederated Muscovites, to be payd their Ar∣reares, followed him; and being satisfied, they were a further meanes to get yet more Victories,The Muscovites rejell Uladis∣laus. upon the adverse Party. In fine the Muscovites, tyred, and vexed by a forraigne Rule, rejecting Vladeslaus, whom they had former∣ly chosen, elected a new Emperour, and endeavoured to compose their dif∣ference with Sigismund, but in vain; for, they were chased away from before Smolensko, and payed for their perfidie. Now the King of great Britaine, being the spectatour, and very often the Arbitratour, of the Controversies of his Neighbours, lived in peace, and his subjects of the Romane Catholik Profession, were reduced to some di∣scresse, upon the discovery of that abominable conspiracy,The son in England dis∣covered. against him, his children, and the whole Parliament. For it seemed not enough to ex∣tend
the punishment upon the guilty, who received it according to their mrit; but all the whole body of them also, mast be made feel it. It was then, that the doctrine of the Iesuites was carped, and reviled, and their Or∣der brought into horrour, through the whole Island; as it was in France, upon the death of Henry the great, though yet they could not be convinced, of ha∣ving any hand in that, as they evidently were in this. But what shall we say of the English Puritans, whom King Iames himself accused, of having at∣tempted to stifle him, in his Mothers womb? I know, there are also some, who make the Iesuites the cause of the Tragicall death of King Charles; so great an aversion hath the contrary party, from this Society. I neither accuse, nor excuse any, but onely make a plaine, and simple relation, of what is pas∣sed, and blame the rash judgement, of such as are too passionate. Whilest other Kings were in extream jealousie of their interests, King Iames amuses himself with playing the Philosopher, and the Divine, by composing books of controversies against Cardinall Perronn, and Monsieur de Coeffetean, Bishop of Marseilles. And since he had no warr with any body else, he raised one, against the Puritans, and the Iesuites; as making decla∣mations against them both, and their Doctrine; which he said, was most pernicious, to the Potentates of Europe. Take heed, my son, (sayes he, in his Book intitled, the Roy all Present) of these Puritans; meer Plagues both in the Church and state; a race not to be obliged by any benefit, nor tied by any Oath, or promise; breathing nothing, but seditions, and calumnies. And a little lower. You will not finde, amongst any High-way Robbers, more ingrati∣tude, or more lyes, and perjuries, then amongst these Fanatick Spirits, &c. The Duke of Savoy demanded his Daughter Elizabeth, for his eldest Son, and offered him his for the Prince of Wales: but in regard of the difference of Religions, it was honourably refused. Fate had reserved this Princesse for Prince Frederick, Palatine of the Rheyn, who arriving in England,Frederick, Prince Pala∣tine marries Elizabeth Princesse of England. married her, and carried her to the Palatinat, through Holland, where they were recei∣ved, and regaled all along their passage, being accompanied by Prince Maurice, as far as Colein, 1614. The never sufficiently lamented death of Henry the great, one of the bra∣vest Princes that ever wore the Crown of France, was like to put Paris, and all France into great tumults, for the prevention whereof, the Queen-Mother was declared Regent of the Kingdome, and Lewis the thirteenth succeeded him, at the age of nine yeers, being consecrated at Rheims; and all this great preparation for war, was dissipated, either because the Kings design was not known; or else, to say better, because it could not be executed, except the reserve of ten thousand men, who were sent into the Dutchy of Gulick, under the command of Marshal de la Cateres, as we have lately expressed. Now, some time after all these embroiles, and perturbations, both in Bo∣hemia, and Austria, were past; the Emperour Rodolph, either through vexa∣tion and trouble, or otherwise,Death of the Emperour Ro∣dolph the twentieth of January. 1612. (for death hath alwayes a cause) departed out of this fraile life, to the immortall one. He was son to that good Em∣perour Maximilian, whose steps he followed. He was a lover of sciences, and chiefly of the Art of Painting. He passed his time much in distilling, he was fearfull, and by consequence little undertaking, and little feared by his ene∣mies; who knowing his nature, did many things to the diminution of the Imperial Authority. He died at Pragut, in the year 1612. upon the 20th. of Ianuary. The Empire had no need of a distillator, but rather of a good Operatour, to act powerfully, against the ill plants, which cast forth strong roots, both under him, and his successour, and which have given so much pains, and troubles to the Empire.
CHAP. XIV The Warre between the Danes, and Swedes; the reasons why? Colmar taken. Charles dies. The Queen-Regent purchases a double Marriage in Spain. The Town of Aix, or Aquisgrane taken, and Newburgh relieved by Spinola. Chules Duke of Sudermain, and afterwards King of Swe∣den, sends an Embassadour into Holland. CHarles Duke of Sudermaine took the Crown away from Sigismund his Nephew, and possessed his States quietly enough: but there rose a huge warre between him, and the King of Denmark, who very much disturbed his rest, and whereof (in his complaint of King Christian) he takes the Jesu∣its for the Authors. They are the Atlases, who must bear upon their shoulders all kinds of Calummes, and Detractions: They must swallow down the faults of others. He had had many conflicts with the Polanders, and had tried the va∣rious effects of Fortune: But this of Denmark touched him so much to the quick, that they two came from complaints, to brawles and reproaches; and thence to the lye: yea, and at last to desie one another. A strange thing, that men disapprove in others, what they do themselves. Charles a little before, had sent an Embassadour to the States-General, to beseech them to make a close Allyance with him, against his Nephew, the Spaniards, and the Jesuits (for it was upon them, that he chiefly aymed, and whom he so much mistrusted, who yet peradventure, dreamt not at all of him) and demanded a speedy succour, before the Poles had quite subdued Muscovie. He also mentioned the quarrell between him and the King of Denmark, offering to referre it to them, or any other Neutrall Princes, and to acquiesce in their Deci∣sion. The States also sent theirs to him, but he was able to effect nothing with him. The King de∣clares a warre upon him. In the moneth of April, 1611. King Christian declares a Warre, founded upon four points: The first, upon the Fishing of Lapponia, or Lapland, the third part whereof he pretended to appertain to himself. The second, a com∣plaint, formed upon Charles his having fortified Guttemburgh, to the disad∣vantage of the Sound: the third, was the redemanding of the Isle of Oesel, held by the Swedes: And the last, that Christian would not suffer him, to put in his Arms, the three Crownes, nor the Title of Lapland, and North-land. Kings have never any better reason to make Warre, then that which is offered them by occasion. It is a Royal thing (sayes a Disciple of that so much disclaimed Ita∣lian) to attempt the Possessions of others. Colmar taken. The Danes seazed Colmar, the prime key of the kingdom of Sweden, and besieged the Castle, both by Sea and land; which, unlesse it were famished, was held impregnable, by reason of the situation: Neither was it taken now by that way; but yeelded up by the levity of the Governour, who went to fix his habitation in Denmark. That which cannot be digged by Iron, is often done by Gold, The King of Sweden found work enough to do, with two so potent enemies upon his skirts; but that which most troubled him was, that he could not bring the Danes to any Composition,Fonce. so that in sine, having lost Colmar, with above a hundred pieces of Canon, six ships of Warre, the Isle of Bornholm, and some other,The death of Charles. also forced to bow to old age, and afflictions (caused by these losses) he fell sick, and coming to die, made way for that great Captaine Gustavus Adolphus, the very relation of whose victories makes the world tremble.
Charles was a Prince of great courage, and lover of his Law, for the only defence whereof, the Swedes affirm, that he accepted the Crown; and not through any ambition he had to be a King. He inclined a little towards the Reformates, and could not endure to have prayers made in Latin. He was speechlesse some time before his death, and was much more prone to rigour, then moderation; yea, even to Tyranny it self; which is a vice much observed in the successours of Erick, after they are past forry years old. The Danes, sayling with the winde in poupe, took many ships near Els∣burgh, together with the Castle it self. But the Swedes were fully revenged upon them, by taking their measures well, as it will appear in the continua∣tion of this History. With patience all things are effected. In fine,Peace made. a Peace was made, and Colmar, upon agreement, of some barrels of Gold, restored to the Swedes: The Kings were friends, and afterwards an Enterview, and an Al∣lyance both Offensive, and Defensive, concluded against the King of Poland. But let us go back to the South. Italy produced no seed of sedition at all, every one keeping himself within his own jurisdiction; but the Duke of Mantua being taken out of his by death, without sons, his Brother succeeded him; who, assisted by the Spaniards, waged a long warre against the Duke of Savoy, who was suppor∣ted by France. Since the Truce in the Low-countries, and the expulsion of the Mores, there passed nothing in Spain worthy of memory, but some Fights at Sea, against Pirats, who were defeated by the Spaniards, and the Hollanders. The match sought in Spain. Queen Mary of Medicis, willing to keep her subjects in Peace, during her Regencie, and prevent all occasions of disorder, mediated a double match with Spain; that is, of her Son, and Daughter, with Prince Philip, and the Infanta, his Sister; but the marriages were differred, in regard of their too tender age; though yet, this good newes caused great rejoycing through∣out all the Territories of the two Crowns, with Tilts, and Turnaments, worth anmiration; wherein the French Lords expressed as well the agility, and fine disposition of their bodies, as the gentilnesse of their mindes. Let us now draw back to the Low-countries again, which observe the Truce; but let not their souldiers rest, in favour of their Neighbours. For, the Dukes of Brandenburgh, and Newburgh (this being grown a Roman, and that a Reformat) renewed their old unhappy quarrel; either for want of a right and mutual understanding, or else for being the object of the ambitious passion of some other Princes. The Arch-Duke had sent Spinola into the Field, to execute the sentence given upon them of Aquisgrane,Aix or Aquis∣grane yeelds. The Spaniards succour the Duke of New∣burgh, and the Hollanders, the Duke of Bran∣denburgh. who had incurred the disfavour of the Emperour, by expelling the Roman Catholick Magistrates out of the Town; and their sudden submission, gave the Spaniards conve∣niency to hasten to the relief of the Duke of Newburgh, by whom they were expected. They took Wesel, and some other small places; and Prince Mau∣rice on the other side, who was sent by the States to succour the Electour, took and fortified Emmerick, and Rees. It is most dangerous, to have a Neigh∣bour stronger then ones self; for his succour is alwayes dammageable, to him who accepts it. These two Princes know it, as well as any others. But what? Passion very often prevailes over Reason, and the errour of the Hunters, gives the Hare opportunity to escape. But let us reprize this Webbe contrived of many threds of different colours, and woven by divers Weavers. The Emperors Au∣thority proving inefficacious, and his threats, as it wore, our of breath, and saint, (as coming from so great a distance) with these two Princes; who proud of the assistance of two Kings, and shouldered by a strong Common-Wealth, equally shared the Government of the Dutchy, for some time, ma∣king their Residence together at Dusseldorp. But, by means of some small jea∣lousies, were quickly disunited; and the Marriage of the Duke of Newburgh,
with the Duke of Bavaria's Sisters, awakened as great suspicions, in the Duke of Brandenburghs breast (being a Reformate) as the Allyance of the uni∣ted Provinces, in that of the Duke of Newburgh, who was become Cathohok. The Design upon Dusseldorp, had no successe; and that which was so pro∣sperously executed upon Gulick, by the Governours meanes, manifested to the Arch-Duke (a peacefull Prince) that the Reformates in a fair occasion, want no boldnesse, no courage. The Spaniards took the Allarme so much the more powerfully, as the Treaties went on slowly, and as the French seem∣ed to favour the Duke of Brandenburgh, more, to put an obstacle to the Arms of Spain, then for any other consideration. Brief, the Army marches into the Field, under the conduct of Spinola. Aix, or Aquisgrane stooped, and the Romane Catholick Magistrates were re-established. Mullem was batte∣red down, and Otroy taken; besides many othes places, where there was no Garrison of the united Provinces, for fear of a breach. The taking of We∣sel, seemed to countervail that of Gulick; swelled the hearts of the Spaniards, and made those people know, that their Masters should have but a seeming Government, as long as these puissant forces stayed in their States. But if they had relyed upon the judgement of the Emperour, it is likely, that these misfortunes had not happened. At that troublesome and vexatious Treaty of Santen, all the Princes layd open their Interests, the Leaven of partialities about. Religions began to swell, the Deputies went away discontented, lea∣ving the Businesse imperfect, the occupated Townes retained their Ghests, and the two Princes learnt (to their own cost) what many other had tryed before them. CHAP. XV The Differences which happened in the United Provinces, Barnaveldt beheaded, and the Religion of the Arminians, condemned. King Lewis humbles the Hugenots, and reduces Bearne. THE Peace without the united Provinces, had shut up many turbulent and seditious humours within them; which not being able to get out, hatched some very dangerous tumults.Commotions in the united Pro∣vinces. The precious names of Peace and Rest, were both odious, and insupporatable to them. We often flye from that, which is advantageous to us, and follow that, which is hurtfull. The first was at Almar, the second at Liewerden; and the third, and most perilous, at Ʋtrick, where some of the bolder sort of the Mutiners, fortified by a huge crew of their Caball, constrained the Magistrates to abdicate their charges, and chose others in their places; who were most of them, the Heads of their sedition. But this sicknesse requiring a more violent remedy, then the first Lepitives, and the Town threatned with a siege, all grew to be appeased, and the Gar∣rison augmented. Disputes about Predestination. Yet this was nothing, in respect of that mischief which arose, from a con∣troversie in Divinity concerning Predestination, and some other Articles an∣nexed to it; which, like a thick Fogge, so blinded all the Inhabitants, that it left not any use of light at all to any, but to such as served themselves there∣of, to the own profit. The two Champions, who by their Sermons, and Disputes, divided all Holland into two Factions, were Arminins and Goma∣rus. Such as followed this latter, who ardently maintained the said Prede∣stination, were called Contra-Remonstrancers; and the other, Remonstrancers,
of Arminians, who were said to professe a Doctrine, disagreeing from that of John Calvin. This was too high, and difficult a passage to be comprehended by the common people, and so it brought with it nothing but confusion. Yet, the Dispute ended not with the life of Arminins, but was more and more kindled by his Disciples, and chiefly by Verstius; who, upon the Recom∣mendation of the Remonstrancers, was made Professou. From Disputes, came Factions, and Vorstius was deposed, by the threats of the King of Great Britain. In brief, every one takes arms, for his own defence. They of Harlem, Leiden, and Ʋtrick, by the counsell (as was reported) of Advocate Harnaveldt, raise forces, Prince Maurice hastens, surprises Vtrick, disarnis the Citizens, and changes the Magistrates (a remarkably action) as he also did, at Harlem, and Leiden (where they had barricaded the Town-House) and im∣prisons the chief of the Arminian Faction. But the Ministers, notwithstanding all these proceedings, ceased not to dispute, not the Printers to set forth Books, concerning this controversie. Wherefore, there was a Synod convocated at Dort, where the Arminian Doctrine was condemned; the Ministers who per∣sisted in it, imprisoned, and some were banished, and sought their abode in Holstein, and other places. Barnaveldt beheaded. The great States-man Barnaveldt, formerly much cherished by King Henry of France, and greatly renowned for his services done to the Common-Wealth (and chiefly for having drawne out of the clutches of the English, the three places engaged to Queen Elizabeth, as also for having made di∣vers Embassies, and sweated under various burthens of State) finished his life by an infamous punishment. This man, being about seventy two yeares old, was accused of being Head of the Arminian Faction; of disturbing the tranquility of the Townes, and checking the authority of the Prince; whose power he wished indeed, to see lessened, thereby to secure the publick Liber∣ty. In sine, there was a rumour scattered, that he should have had a design to usurp the Government of the Common-wealth. They who were of his party, for proof of his innocence, represented the greatnesse of his services and cares, to maintain the power of the States. And yet howsoever, all his friends, melted (as it were) like snow before the Sun, of the Princes Autho∣rity: and one of the most famous Writers of this Age, sayes, that he was condemned in the name of the States, but by the practices of King James, and Prince Maurice. There is nothing sure in this world, and the greatest for∣tunes, are very often those, which are upon the slippery top of their pracpice. If all they, who are ambitious to go out of their condition, to get up to another more clevated, and high, would but represent to themselves, the disasters and misfortunes, which we see fall upon those great persons; they would have no other desire, then to stay where they are. The Treaty of the Truce, which by his advice, was made for twelve years, against the reasons of Prince Manrice (who being a souldier, and for his own interest, endeavoured to break it) purchased his disfavour; and his very great credit, his hatred be∣sides his disswading the Warre of Bohemia, together with what we have just now said, and many other accusations, abbreviated his life for some dayes. When Jupiter chides, all the rest of the Gods are silens. Hugo Grotius, went to keep company with the other Ministers, who were prisoners at Louwestein, though by the prudent cousel of his Wife, he brake quickly off from it afterwards. Thus, was this mist, which threatened the Common-wealth with a dan∣gerous convulsion, dispelled; the Churches employed by the Contra-Remon∣strancers only; and the Arminians reviled, and disclaimed, as no better then half Traytors, by the very dregs of the People. But really, the blamable treason of the children of Barnaveldt, who breathed nothing but revenge of their Fathers death, was the cause why many retired themselves
from this Party, which, for a time was much discredited. It King Iames, on the one side, ardently prosecuted his destruction: King Lewis sollicited his deliverance as hotly on the other: and would scarce give ear to the multitude of excuses, which was brought by the Embassadours, for so passionate an execution. Howsoever, all these changes, were not able to change the happinesse of these Provinces; the popular Tumults, growing by little and little to slacken, to the great good of the whole Country. But now, the women had also a minde to shew, that they likewise knew how to handle their arms, and gave an experiment thereof at Delpft, about some Imposts, or Taxes, where they so stoutly assailed the Town-House, that it was necssitated to send for both Souldiers, and Counsell from the Hage, to make them retire to the distaffe. Perhaps, there were amongst these, some of them, who had beaten the Franciscan Friers out of their Cloyster: so great a reputation of courage have the good wives of Dlft. And these are all the perturbations, and whatsoever else of note, happened in the confede∣rated Provinces, during the Truce. Before we contrive our Discourse of the Warres of Germany, we will re∣turn a little towards France, which is the kingdom, where Fortune, by her various effects of mutability, seems rather to have established the Empyre, then elsewhere. The nature of the Germans is such, as not to suffer them∣selves so easily to be induced to take arms; for it costs much trouble, to bring them to it, and they walk with leaden heels: but having once taken them up, they lay them not down, till they be able to bear them no longer, and till all be brought to the extremity of desolation. But the French, on the other side, both easily take them up, and more easily lay them down; in such sort, as their Warres are very often finished, and pacified, before it be knowne, that they were in arms. After the consecration, or unction of King Lewis, during the six first years of his reign, there were rather Tu∣mults, then Wars. The Malcontent; the Complaints as well of the Princes, as of the Hgenots; their ill-grounded distrusts, and jealousies, exercised the mind of that great Queen; who dissipated their bad designes, sometimes with money, and augmentation of Pensions, and new Governments; and some∣times also, by making them exactly observe the Edict of Nantes; an interest, which the said Prinoes are accustomed to take, during the minority of their Kings; so to adde to their own power, what they take away, from that of their Master. The Moon, and the Starres, endeavour to weaken the light of the Sun, by borrowing a part thereof of him. But that which is to be la∣mented, is, that all this is done at the charge of the poor people. In effect, the great care of this wise Queen, dispelled many mists, and no lesse preser∣ved the kingdom for her son; then the succeeding Ministers, who have la∣boured to augment it. France, having smothered with the blood of the Mar∣quis d' Ancre, all the grievances, both of the Princes and people, saw like∣wise the end of that,The troubles in France appea∣sed. which the Prince of Conde gave the King, by the obsta∣cles which he was resolved to put, to the confirmation of his marriage. The Duke of Guise conducted the young Princesse of France, to the Con∣fines of Spain, and reconducted the Infanta of Spain; and the Prince of France was lodged in the Battail. The Constable Luynes became the subject of a new Commotion, and his great favour, the object of hatred, to some Gran∣dees, who absented themselves from the Court, under pretext of defending the Queen-Mother; who was extremely exasperated against Luynes, for that he being the Counsellour, of the ruine of the Marshall d' Ancre, had ta∣ken possession of his Place, and gotten his spoyles; and so she retired her self to Angonlesine, to be secured by the Duke d' Espernon. Now this fire, being kindled, by the just disgust of an afflicted Queen, begot an opinion, that it would be scattered through all France. For men began to be active and busie
already, as well at Metz, as within the very middle of the kingdom: and the motion being in a fronteer Town, gave cause to fear, lest, perhaps, stran∣gers might put themselves into the dance. For the Duke d' Espernon depar∣ted from Metz, to go serve the Queen-Mother, to whom he was reconci∣led, by the common necessity of an equall Banishment: The Nobility, and the Armies, began already to march, all was full of fear, and fury; and such as loved novelty,The Prince of Conde. leapt already for joy. But the King, assisted by the Counsell of the first Prince of the Blood, (who was now reconciled to him) instantly seased upon the Castle, and Town of Caen, went and beat the Queenes Troops, before the Malcontents joyned with theirs and reduced them all to a necessity of submitting to his Grace. From thence, he conducted his Army into Bearne,Reduction of Bearne. and by his presence, effected that in few dayes, upon the Ministers, and chief of that Country, which the Edict of the year 1617. had not been able to obtain. He reduced the whole Province under his obedience, re-established the Exercise of the Roman Catholick Religion; rendered the Ecclesiasticall Benefices, put other Garrisons into the places of strength: and four months after, returned to Paris, where he was received with an universal applause, though he left behind him, an immortall disgust, amongst the most zea∣lous of the Hugenot party, by the re-establishment of a Religion (without striking stroake) which in sixty years before, was not so much as knowne there, but by calumnies and reproaches, and matter also for a new warre, with such stomack, and animosity, as wanted nothing but the occasion, to draw the sword. The Marriage of the Lady Christine of France, with the Duke of Savoy. In the mean time, the Cardinal of Savoy, arrives at Court, to thank the King, for the care he had vouchsafed to take, of the preservation of his Fa∣thers Dominions; as also to mediate a Match, of the Lady Christine of France, with his eldest Brother. He was made very welcom, and obtained, in fine, a favourable grant, of all he demanded. We will now give to the Hugenots of France, leasure to study a way, to revenge themselves, of so sen∣sible a displeasure, and stop the King, from getting thenceforth any so great successe, as might encrease their diffidence, and bring a detriment upon their Religion. Let us now pass on to a Warre, of much more horrour, and larger extent; for we can no longer forbear, it being high time to speak of it; we cannot, I say, withdraw our selves, it furnishing us with matter enough to believe, that the Age wherein we live, is the most unhappy of all Ages; yea, the very sink, and last of all.
THE HISTORY OF THIS IRON AGE. THE THIRD BOOK. CHAP. I The Prodigies, which preceded the Warrs of Germany. A di∣scription, of the Kingdome of Bohemia. Old differences about Religion. The wars of Zisca, compared to these. I Abhor, to begin the discourse, of the longest, and most cruell Warr, that ever was in Christendome, and which drew more blood, more altered the Christian Faith, and caused more ruine and deso∣lation, then all that ever were in Europ. Let no man tell me, of the Exploits of Atilas, with his Huns, for he did but passe like lightning. Let there be no comparison made, of the Warts of the Goths, Visigoths, Daces, and Vandals, who came altogether, to dismember the Romane Empire, and the Franks, and Burgundians, who drove the Romanes out of Gawl. For these People, ha∣ving expelled the old Usurpers, by the successe of a battel, or two; leagued themselves forth with, with them whom they had freed from the yoke, and instantly laid the foundations, of a new Kingdome. But this Warr, which we are now going to describe, involved all Europ; and there is not so much as one Province, which doth not resent it; yea, that which is more deploreable, is, that we see not the end of it yet; for, for my part, I am of opinion, in this wicked age, Men will sooner be wanting, then Will, to such as are ambitious, to continue this bloody exercise. The Prodigies, which both went before it, and happened during the con∣tinuance of it, like waves of the sea, have two much informed us, that it would ingulf all the Provinces of Christendome, one after another, and such as thought to be exempted from it, as well for the advantages they had upon their enemies, as for the impossibility of introducing the Babes of Mars amongst them, by reason of their situation; feel, at present, the scourge, with as much sharpnesse, as the former. That facall Torch, which appeared towards the end of the year 1618, with a long, and formidable tayle, seemed to announce to us the wrath of
God; thereby to prepare us to repentance, or else patiently to suffer the evils, which we could not avoid. Those sights, which were seen in the ayre,Prodigies hap∣ned in Europe. in many places, those Tempests, those exundations of Rivers, those disru∣ptions, or shiverings of Barrs, by the mercilesse Ocean; those earthquakes, and inundations, those monstrous Productions, those waters turned into blood, those impetuous windes, which have overthrown so many Towers, and rooted up so many trees; those bloody raines, and so many other super∣naturall accidents, are the messengers of Divine indignation, to such as are obstinate in their wickednesse. Fools, who say in their hearts, there is no God, have despised these advertisements, and lead a life, worse then that, of the people, of the time of Noah. Germany, by a Peace of so many yeers durance, being grown extreamly o∣pulent, the Princes potent, and the Towns much elevated;The State of Germany. began to withdraw herself, by little and little, if not wholy from servitude, yet at least, from duty. The Courts were full of debaucheries, and the excesse of drinking, was recompensed, with a Crown of victorie; the Tables loaden with meat,The debawches were sometimes overturned, with brutall insolence; and that, which could not possibly bring any good, was, that the greatest part of the Grandees there, left the management of their affaires, to their Chancelours, or their Favour∣ites, whilest themselves were plunging in delights, luxurie, ranting, and su∣perfluities, together with the pleasures of the Court, and the Chase. The Emperour Matthias, who was Crowned in the year, 1612, made not his Authority in the Empire, shine a whit brighter then his Predecessours had done; in such sort, as that the State wasfallen (as it were) into a Palsie, and languishment. Not withstanding all these voluptuousnesses, and debauches, distrusts were grown so high, that it was impossible, for the Banks or Damns, to stop these Torrents, without letting some part of them loose. The chil∣dren were then matching in Troops, and Bands, through the streets, with Arms, Drums, and Colours; and the old men sighing and crying out,Prognosticati∣ons of Warrs. We shall quickly feel the effects, of a cruell Warr. That, which arrived at Donawerds, brought some of the imperiall Townes to a league, to which they invited the Electour of Saxonie; but not receiving so good an answer as they hoped, threats remained without effect, and all stayed in apparent enmity (the one party casting the fault upon the other) till the occasions which we are going to recount. But let us enter upon the War of Bohemia. Bohemia, is a little Kingdom, but very fertill, in Corn, Wine, Mines of Gold, Silver, Tinne, and all which is necessary for the life of man. The King is ranged in the number of the Electours; and his Vote, or suffrage, is so necessary, that when the Parties are equall, he who receives it, is elevated to the Imperiall Throne. This said Kingdome, is almost quite invironed by Germany; and it stretches, on the one side, to Moravia. The Inhabitants speak the language of Slavonia, though yet the High-Dutch be as common there, as the French is, in the Low-Countries. The Metropolitan City is Prague, which is watered by the stream of Moldaw. The Country is very great, most populous, and adorned with a most famous, and most an∣cient University, wherein, for a time, were numbered above thirty thousand Scholars. Now, because the first controversies about Religion, which caused the separations, and hatreds amongst Christians, proceeded from thence; it will not be out of our way, and much for the contentment of the Reader, to take notice of the source, and Origin thereof. About the year of Grace 1400. John Huss, having found, and read the Books of Wtcliff,John Huss. betook him∣self publickly, to teach a doctrine much like that of the Waldenses, condemn∣ed by the Church of Rome, as much checking the Points, and Tenets there∣of received: as namely, the authority of the Pope, Purgatory, Worship of Ima∣ges,
and the like; God permitting a diversity of Doctrines, during the Schismes of the Church: for the disputes of the Popes, gave subject, to attack the Points of Faith, exhibited by them, and their own Authority. The Councell of Constance. A Councell was assembled at Constance, whether Jerome of Prague, and John Huss, were invited, under a safe conduct, or passe, from the Emperour Si∣gismond: But for all that they persisted in the Doctrine of Witcliff, and maintain∣ed, that the Churches diffused up and down the world, were deviated from the traditions of the Apostles; they were both contrary to publick Faith, and the Emperours Paste, given them, sentenced to be burned, and their ashes cast into the ayre. And from thence came the Axiome, so often and so justly chanted, and iterated, by the Protestants, and whereof they serve themselves to quicken their distrusts. Faith must not be kept with Hereticks. The Fathers of the said Councell, were moved on by a too inconsiderate, yea, and unjust zeal; which (if we may have leave, to deduce the conse∣quence of the effects thereof which have followed) very much displeased the Father of Truth. The Romane Catholicks disprove of this Maxime, and the Emperour, Charles the 5th. expressed, that he was no friend to it, by keep∣ing his word so truly, wth Doctor Martin Luther, at the Assembly at Wormes. The disciples of John Huss ake arms. Now, the disciples of the aforesaid John Huss, being very impatient at the death of their Masters, and not content with the Churches which were granted them, took arms, under pretext of desiring more. But I find the zeal of all them, who have withdrawn themselves from the Church of Rome, and taken up their Quarters apart, to be very different from that of the Pri∣mitive Christians, amongst the Pagans, and Gentiles, those remaining in the Predicament of Passion onely; and these, adding also that of Action. True it is, that ambition, and desire of novelty both in the one and other State, have been the efficient causes of these great changes. If they, who have cried out with a loud voice, for the reformation of manners, had been heard, as well as they, who have called in doubt many Maximes of Faith; we should really now live in the Golden, and not in the Iron Age. They assault the Images. Zisca tames Bohemia. The first warr they made, was upon the Images, the Prelates, the Cloi∣sters, and the Magistrates, who opposed their unbridled licentiousnesse. A Truce was made, and no sooner made, then broken. Zisca that famous Head of the Faction, made himself Master of Bohemia, and commanded all the Churches dedicated to the Saints, to be battered down; alleadging for his reason, that they must be consecrated onely to God. He defeated all the Armies, that oppugned his Designes; like a Torrent, which carries a∣way, and destroyes all, whiles Fate made him loose that one eye, which was left him. He marched into Austria, and quite blinde as he was, left not ne∣vertheless to crush his Enemies; and arrived time enough to chastize the Citi∣zens of Prague, who were revolted from him, because of the demolition of the Churches, and Imaes. In fine, Fortune by an occult mystery of the great God, averted the Prelates, from their duty, and humbled the Emperour so far, as to bring him upon his knees, before this blind man; yea, and con∣strained him moreover, to offer him the Government of the Kingdom, and the Militia. But that Eternall power, having served himself sufficiently of this scourge, drew him out of the world, by a contagious sicknesse; though even at his death,His death. he signified his martiall humour, and the passion he yee had, to further mischief; for he commanded, that after his decease a Drum should be made of his skin, saying, that his enemies would fly, at the very sound thereof. Let Divines discourse upon these mysterious chances, where they will finde work enough to entertaine themselves. The Hussits continued the warr, under the orders of a certain person cal∣led Procope, at the very report of whom, whole armies were suddainely ter∣rified; yea, fourty thousand men, being entered into Bohemia, and having
taken some towns; through a certain panick, or phantastical fright, threw down their arms, and betook themselves to their heels,Zisca's skin works miracles to save their infamous an I cowardly lives, even before the Bohemians appeared. Perhaps Zisca's skin wrought all these miracles, and would have merited a Temple, if he had not demolished those, which were dedicated to the Saints. It is therefore no won∣der, if in this last Age, there have hapned such strange changes, proceeding from causes so little foreseen, or wholy contemptible; in regard that a hand∣full of men at that time, rendered themselves Masters of a Kingdome, and beat the forces of the Emperour, as often as they durst encounter them: be∣sides that their meer reputation, put their enemies to flight, as much as their arms, Athists, open your eyes, & confess, these changes proceed from an infinite power The Turks, a barbarous, and despicable people, have subdued a great part of Asia, and destroyed the empire of Greece. Tamberlaine, from a shepherd,Tamberlaine. be∣ing become a souldier, was the instrument, whereof God served himself, to abate the pride, of that great Emperour Bajazet. These are revolutions, the reasons whereof are not discovered to man. It is lawfull to seek the causes of them by probable conjectures; but not to pronounce a definitive sentence, or conclusi∣on upon them. I was willing to relate a part of this History, because I find there∣in, a great similitude or resemblance, with that of our Age, as well in order to Causes, and effects (though not successes) for a proof, of this instability, of the things of this world. CHAP. II. The Bohemians arme, and why? All the Princes interest themselves in this Warr. Ferdinand chosen Emperour. NOtwithstanding the licence granted to the Bohemians, by the Fathers of the Councell of Basill, to receive their Communion under two Forms, or Species; there ceased not still, to be Factions amongst them, against the au∣thority of the Pope, and favour to such as oppugned it. Now, because the greatest Rivers draw their Origin, for the most part, from some small, abstruse, and unknown springs; just so, this deplorable war of Bohemia, which being once kindled, and diffused, in that Kingdome, grew to skatter, and sly up and down like wilde fire, throughout all Europ, and is not extinguished even yet, began at first, from so contemptible a spark, as might have been quenched by one single tear, had it but chanced to fall right upon it; But it must needs draw deluges of blood, and general destruction of Chri∣stendom. Where Sins are great, Repentance must be proportionable. And why? In the year 1616, the Hussits layd the foundations of a Church, at Bru∣naw: The Abbor, who was Lord of the Place, opposed them, and complain∣ed to the Emperour Mathias; who commanded the Magistrates to ap∣pear before him, and to suspend the building, till the Cause were decided; but in vain, for the Church went on, and was finished, without answer; as if it had suffised, that it pleased them, who loved novelty, to build it. Whilest this passed, Mathias, finding himself without issue; by the consent of the House of Austria, adopted his Cousin Ferdinand, and Crowned him King of Bohemia, with the general applause of the Bohemians. Which done, it was shewed to the abovesaid Hussits, that the States onely had power, and authority to build Churches; and so they were all condemned; and such as presumed to resist, imprisoned, and their Church demolished. And this was the first motive of this war; and this the leaven, which hidden, for two years together, under the Past of ambition, of the chief of that Kingdom, made it rise, and sharpen so much, as that there was nothing expected, but onely the hour to put it in the oven.
The Lutherans Jubily. The year following, the Lutherans by way of a generall thanks giving to God, for having already preserved their Religion the space of an hundred yeares, made a Iubily; as they also did some Leagues, amongst themselves at Heilbron, against the Roman Catholicks, which proved advantageous to the Bohernians, as seeming (as it were) to give them the Signe, or Watch-word, to which all their humours were disposed and prepared: for in regard that after so many Books composed, and so many Disputes held, there could be no Accord made, in matter of Religion; there seemed a necessity, to try the strength of their Arms,All tends to Warre. and come from words to blowes. The demolition of the aforesaid Church, was of hard digestion to the Hussits, and so it cau∣sed murmurations, Monopolies, or private Conspiracies: and in fine, open seditions. The Emperour being busie, about the Coronation of his Cousin, caused his Embassadours to rebuke the priucipall of them; as namely, the President Slauata, Iarislae Bazite, and Philip Platore; who, without the know∣ledge or consent of his Imperial Majesty, had convocated such an Assembly. But they having (having by-like forgotten the rank and quality they held, or else desiring warre) fell upon these persons, who were sacred by their Commissions, tumbled them down from the top of a Tower through the windowes, expelled the Iesuits, dismissed the Kings Officers from their char∣ges (which was to attack both Church, and State) and took up arms, a∣gainst all such, as should endeavour to impugne this insolent kind of pro∣ceeding. The Emperour labouring, both by Letters, and fair Propositions to remedy these disorders, was already gone very farre in it, and it is likely would have accomplished it, had not the despaire of some, withdrawne the most moderate persons amongst them, from continuing the Work. But in the interim,Deth of the Emperour Ma∣thias. the Emperour died, leaving it to Ferdinand, to untangle this in∣rricate, and troublesome bottome. This Prince had worne the Imperiall Crown about six hundred yeares; he had sometime governed the Low-countries, though with small authority, but as it were only by form, and more in title, then in effect: He was religious and gentle, and beloved by all such, as loved the peace and quiet of the Empyre. Ferdinand elected limpe∣rom. Now the Electours met at Frankefurt, and chose Ferdinand to bear the most illustrious, but most painfull burthen of the whole Universe. And therefore let us see him go, weakly enough accompanied, to finish the War of Bohemia; the cause and pretexts whereof we have already demonstrated. The Bohemians, under the Counts, de la Tour, and Mansfield (Natural sonne to Count Ernest, so well know in the Low-countries) raised very puissant Armies, contemn Ferdinands Remonstrances, deprive him of the Crown, as a Tyrant (For such are all they, whom powerful factions have a mind to suppresse) give out, that he was not lawfully Elected; and fortify themselves with Al∣liances, and succours. On the other side, the Pope, Italy, Spain, and Poland, will not suffer Ferdinand to perish;The beginning of the warre. whereof he seemed to be in imminent dan∣ger by this tempest, without speedy relief; for his ship leakes on every side, and the wind of this Conjuration will infallibly sink both him, and the Catholick Religion with him, if he be abandoned by his Allyes. The Arch-Duke Albert sends him the Count de Bucquoy, attended by the flower of the Walloon, and Luxemburgh Gentry. Of Bohemia. The Bohemians, though amazed to see so many potent States interest them∣selves in the preservation of Ferdinand, lose not their courage, and resolve to adde politick craft,The Wectour Paltime cho∣sen by the States of Bo∣hemia. to open force. They draw to their party the Silesians, and Moravians, keep their Intelligences in Austria, and all Germany; present the Crown to the Duke of Saxony, and then to the Duke of Bavaria, though with visible dissimulation, and refusable conditions; and last of all, to Fre∣derick Prince Palatine, who by the advice of some Lords (who yet basely de∣serted
him afterwards) accepted it. Since he had married the Daughter of a King, he might very take a Crown, which was so freely offered him, and so he was Crowned, with his Sonne, at Prague. CHAP. III. The prosecution of the War of Bohemia. The battail of Prague. Frederick flyes, and forsakes the Towne, together with his People. THus, we see the Match made, and the Game a playing, between Ferdi∣nand, and Frederick, the House of Austria, and the Palatin, and the Christians divided. For, almost all the Roman Catholicks, either in incli∣nation, or effect, espowsed the Party of Ferdinand; and all the Reformates, and the most zealous Lutherans, that of Frederick. These, after their prayers to God for the defence of the Gospel; and those, to the same Authour of all good, and to all the Saints, for that of the Church. The King of France was sollicited by both parties; but he contented himself, with sending thither the Duke of Angoulesme, to mediate a reconciliation. Let us note here, such as declared themselves for King Frederick. The united Provinces of the Low-countries, by the sollicitation of Prince Maurice, who disposed the States to this Alliance, contrary to the opinion of Barnavelds, who wished them was not to meddle at all with it. And it is held, that this opposition of Barnaveldts, so greatly offended the Prince, that he ever afterwards, looked upon him as his enemy; and so at length, it grew to be partly, the cause of his fall. It is alwayes dangerous to cheok the Grandees, and to crack nuts with them. Christian, Duke of Anholt; John Frederick, Duke of Winbergh; Maurice, Landgrave of Hassia; John Ernest, Marquis of Ansbach, and some Im∣perial Towns also; together with the people of England: for the King could never be induced to help his Son in Law, alleadging that he had no right to the Crown. For Ferdinand, besides the aforementioned Allyes, were leagued the Dukes of Saxony, and Bavaria; together with the Ecclesiastical Electours, Souldiers were listed every where, and the Rendezvous, Bohemia; the Theater of this fatall warre. The principall Heads, were the Duke of Bavaria, with Mon∣sieur de Tilly, his Lieutenant Generall; the Count de Bucquoy, and Generall Dampiere: On the other side, the Duke of Anhok, the Counts de la Tour, and Mansfieldt. Now these latter being sooner prepared then the other, and having subjugated almost all Bohemia; marched into Austria, and besieged the Emperour in Vienna. Bucquoy hastens thither, routs Mansfeldt,Vienna besie∣ged. Mansfeldt beaten. and for∣ces La Tour to raise the siege. Dampiere enters the City with the Horse, in∣tending to chastise the insolence of the Citizens towards the Emperour their Master, who yet vouchsafed to pardon them. The Count de la Tour faced about, and marched towards the Capitall City of the kingdom, to divert the storm which threatened it. But, in fine, after some encounters favourable to the Emperour, and the Duke of Bava∣ria, being entered with his Army into Bohemia, and having reduced such as were gone astray into the right path of obedience: the two Armies met, and resolved to finish the disterence by a generall Battail, the price and reward whereof, was the kingdom of Bohemia. Anholt pitched his Camp upon the White Alountain near Prague, in∣trenched himself, and performed the charge of a great Captain. The Impe∣rialists,
inflamed by the Remonstrances, and Exhortations of Father Domi∣nick a Carmelit Fryer, slighted the dangers and difficulties which there were to come to an Onset, in regard of the situation. The Poles and Wallons be∣gan the skirmish, which was followed by the whole Army; and the Hun∣garians, not able to sustain,Prague re∣ceives the Conquerours; as also all the Kingdom. or withstand their attack, basely gave ground, and disturbed the Orders of the Generals, in such sort, as that the Camp be∣ing suddenly staggered, after the resistance of some Regiments, the whole Body fell into confusion, and such as could save themselves, got into Prague. There perished more by water, then by the sword; and the terrour was so universall, that there was no other thought left for the conquered, but to flye towards Silesia. King Frederick, not daring to trust himself in the Places of strength which remained, nor yet to his new Subjects neither; retired speedily towards Breslaw, where, entring into conference with the States of the Countrey, and finding neither forces, nor safety to stay there, he put himself upon the way towards Holland. This Generall Decision fell out upon the eight of November 1620. the very day, upon which was read the Gospel of Give Casar that which is Caesars; and God, that which is Gods. And indeed, it was manifested by the Augures, or Signes from heaven, to whom Godthad determined to give the victory. The number of the slain and drowned, was very great; as being related by some of the most moderate writers, to have amounted to six, or seven thou∣sand. The Conquerours lost but very few of theirs, but Count Godfree of Papenhein was found lying amongst the dead, so extremely wounded, that he could hardly declare his own name. But his hour was not yet come, as being reserved for exploits, which were to fill the whole distent of the world, with his glory. The number of the prisoners was not equall, to that of the dead; the City being near enough, for the retreat of such, as were timely spurred on by fear. Prague, being abandoned by the principall Heads of the Party, remai∣ned the price of the Victory. The nest was there, but the Birds flowne. The Duke of Bavaria, after this Master-blow, retired himself to Mun∣ken, leaving the Command of his Army to Monsieur de Tilly, and the rest of the Businesse, to the Conquerours, who quickly brought all the Places of the kingdome, to the Emperours obedience. One, and the same cause, often produces very different Effects. The Bohemians, being of the race of them, who had defeated so many Armies, not only with the sword, but even with the very noyse of their names; fighting now for the same Cause, and upon the same pretexts, obtained not the same good issue. It is true, that those others, had to do with peo∣ple, who, in respect they had lived long idle in peace, had not any knowledge, or understanding of armes: and these here, with men, who came out of a School, where Mars praesided; where the best Lessons were taught: and where experience, had made them Cap∣taines, Let us now return into France.
CHAP. IV. Warres against the Hugenots, and why? A new difference, between the House of Austria, and the Venetians. THe Hugenots, not being able to digest the reduction of Bearne, which was performed more by the venerable luster of the Kings Majesty, then by that of the sword, which remained unsheathed; and fearing to be one day overwhelmed, by his good successes, through the instigation of their good friends the Jesuits; discovered their distrust,A second warre against the Hugenots. by Assemblies in divers parts of the kingdom; and last of all at Rochell, where all the Churches met, to consult, and provide for their Businesse. The King being informed, that this Generall Convocation of theirs without his knowledge, and per∣mission, too visibly checked his Authority; that that which he had granted them at Londun, proved prejudicial to him, and that it was to his Grace, and not to Arms, that they were to have recourse; gave them to understand his Royall Will; which was, that they should separate themselves within a few dayes, under pain of the crime of High Treason: But in vain; They whose courages are so inflamed, by the clattering of Arms, as to hold it for pleasant musick, are not to be terrified by threats. They send their Deputies to Paris, to make protestation of their fidelity, and excuse the necessity of their affaires. But, the King required nothing but obedience, and so he advanced his Troops towards Saumur, which was delivered him up by Monsieur de Plessis. Saint Iohn d' Angeli, after having suffered some Attacks, implores the Kings par∣don, Benjamin Duke of Soubise comes, and casts himself at his Royall feet, and promises him, to wear his sword no more, against his service, though after∣wards he quickly forget that promise. The Walls were demolished, upon which the choler of Lewis the just was stopped; and his elemencie extended, upon the Inhabitants. This good successe made him resolve, to march into Gascony, nor did a whit disanimate the Gascons, who had determined on the other side, to sell their liberty at as dear a rate as they could. Many Townes were constrained, to humble themselves, to the victorious Arms of their Prince. The women were often seen, most desperately fighting upon the Breach of the Walls; and really, if the chief of the Party had shewed as much stability, as the Common people did zeal; the prize had not been got∣ten so good cheap, nor their Republick (the foundations whereof they were suspected to have already laid) so easily destroyed. The prosperity of this vertuous Prince, together with the promptitude he used to surprise the Hugenots, before they could have meanes to put any con∣siderable forces into the Field, facilitated to him, that which could not be de∣nied to his justice; and since hath declared that his will was, to command his Townes, and not the consciences of his People; for the Hugenots who put all their confidence, and security, in the fortifications of theirs, were at length constrained, to rely only upon his Royall Word. His exploits, against his Subjects of the Reformed Religion, are amply de∣scribed by many Authours, and therefore it suffices me, to take notice only, of the course, or Current of them, insert the misfortunes; briefly follow my way, and return with him to Paris; there to hear his victories sung by the one, and see the displeasure done, to the other. The siege of Montaubanc. The liedge which was laid before Montaubanc (a Town of superlative strength) at the beginning of Autumne, was raised, by the great resistance of the Besieged, seconded by continuall raine, and diseases, which much afflicted, and diminished the Kings Army: not without the losse of many
brave men;The Dake of Mayenne kil∣led. as the Constable de Luynes, and the Duke of Mayenne, who was lamented most of all Now these two Lords, who had most excellently acted their parts upon the Stage, or Theater of France, and danced a Gig & Round most different in cadency to one another; as they were of a very contrary humour, so had they likewise a very distinct death. And in regard that all the most tragical, and most memorable accidents which happened, are found annexed to their lives, we will succinctly passe through them. The Castle of Amboise gave the beginning, and the Birds laid the foundation of the fortune of Monsieur de Luynes.Reletion of the life of the Con∣stalle Luynes. His credit glittered, by the death of the Mar∣quis d' Ancre, and by the return of the Princes leagued against the said Mar∣quis; and his greatness, by that, of the unfortunate wife, that unhappy Favo∣rite, whose Possessions and Goods were liberally bestowed upon him,The death of the Marquis d' Ancre. by the King. He was killed by his Majesties command, and by the counsell of this new Minister, just as he was entring into the Loüure; and his Body torne in pieces, by a people, which thought it self going into a Golden Age, after this Execution.And his VVife. His wife, who had been the companion of his Greatnesse, was likewise to be so, of his disaster and fall. She was cast in prison, and not∣withstanding she baffled, and eluded the vanity of the witnesses, who accu∣sed her of magick, or witchcraft; she was neverthelesse condemned to suf∣fer a shamefull death, upon the Market-place of Greve. Her Exccution cau∣sed pitty, in the soules of some; contentment in others, and amazement to strangers, the eyes of whose understandings were not dazled, by the clowds of passion. For it was a strange thing, to set a Lady, upon a base and infa∣mousscaffold, who had been but a little before, with so much power and greatnesse, at the Court. Ah false, and treacherous Fortune! How much gall dost thou hide, under thy honey? and how many treacheries, under thy favours? No marvel, if thou destroy, what thou hast made, since thou overturnest even Kings, and Kingdomes themselves, which had taken their foundations, from the hands of the Almighty himself. This tragical Begin∣ning being brought to his desired issue, Luynes counselled the King, to banish his Mother from the Court, whom he knew to be in implacable indignation against him. Her Exile (which was taken for a Retreat) the advancement of his two Brothers, companions of his fortune, and the total and entire dis∣posal, of the favour, of the good King; cast him into the hatred of the peo∣ple, which he could not faile to inherit, as well as of the Queen; and into the aversion of the Princes, who took his government for a pretext, of their dis∣contentments, and for a cloak, to disguise their interests. From the quality of an ordinary Gentleman, he rid Post (as it were) to honours, and was cre∣ated Earl, and Viceroy of Picardy, Duke, and Peer of France; and within a very short time after, Constable. In fine, all smiled upon him; every one adored this Golden Calfe; yea, even they, who if they could have gotten him in their power, would have crushed, and shivered him to pieces. To secure himself from the Queen-Mother, he procured the deliverance of the Prince of Conde: but common necessity, obstructed the course of his greatness, though it hardly extinguished the hatred, which all the French bore him, and left him but two friends, who caused his miserable Body to be secretly interred, for fear, lest be should receive the same treatment of him, whose place he had taken. O short felicity! full of troubles, disquiets, cares, and vexatious apprehensions! O vain Glory! so much hunted after, so much envied, and so dearly and painfully bought? how deceitful is thy end? O vain Honours! How are you steeped, and drenched in gall? And how different from those, which are prepared by Eternity for us? On the other side, Prince Henry was beloved, almost throughout all France, as well for his great vertue, as for the open hatred he carried to the Constable; ended his dayes upon the bed of honour, before Montanban, for the Catholick Faith, and for the restauration of the Autho∣rity
of his King, and the whole Kingdom.His life. He was son to the deceased Duke of Mayenne, so well known, in the History of the precedent Age; to whom France had this obligation, that she was not dismembred, and crippled, du∣ring the fury of the cruell Warres. Whilest he courted the Widow of the Count de Soissons, she moved both him, and the Duke of Nevers,1614. to this perni∣cious Warre; to whom the Prince of Conde, and the busie Duke of Boülon joyned themselves also; which kindled by some certain Princess, who respired nothing but vengeance, and terminated, by the prudence of that most wise Queen, at Saint Menehout. He retired from the Court, for the hatred he bore to the Constable, and followed the party of the Queen-Mother,1620. toge∣ther with other Princes: in regard of the ill treatment she received. His choler caused him to commit a great fault, before Moissac in Quercy, whereof the of a frank, and open humour, without dissimulation; such as is fit for a Prince, and not for a Courtier. He was also free to speak, and deliver his opinion, and very courteovs to his inferiours; much more intense, upon the ruine of the Hugenot Party, then upon prolonging the Warre, as many have done, for their own proper interest. In fine, a Bullet sent him to his grave, put the Army in disorder, France into mourning,The mourning of all France for his death. an end to so many brave ex∣ploits, which which will cause him to be eternally hurt, to the siege of Mon∣taubane, and to the fear of the Hugenots, who called him the great Butcher: and the tears interrupted by sobbes, expressed the true love, which all the Orders of France really bore him; and which was besides, most amply de∣cleared, by the elegant Orations made at his Funerall. The newes of his death being divulged at Paris, so much moved the Common-people, that they cast themselves upon the Reformates, and fired the Church of Charenton, yea, and the mischief had yet gone further, had it not been prevented, and stop∣ped, by the Queens, and the Lords of the Parliament. Some dayes after, the Pontan Change (in English, the Exchange Bridge) and the Pont des Orfebures, (in English, Goldsmiths Bridge) were likewise set on fire, with inestimable loss; for which the Reformats were much suspected by their enemies, thereby to revenge themselves of the affronts which had been done them; for venge∣ance is sweet. But much more diligence was used, to finde out the riches, which was fallen into the River, then the cause of two such disasters. How∣ever it be, the Warre grew hot the next year after, and the King made himself Master of the Isles St. Martin, d'Oleron, and Bronage. After some small victories gotten upon the Duke of Rohan, and his Brother,The Peace made at Mont∣peillier. 1622. A Tumult at Paris against them of the Re∣ligion. The Peace made. the Peace was concluded at Montpeillier; by which the said Towne (more by force, then by inclination) returned to her duty; and all the party, which had been attacked by many Armies throughout all the Provin∣ces, after frequent losses, began to respire, and shewed, that it was no more invincible. This Peace separated the Navies, hindered the Duke of Guise, from prevailing upon his advantage; and the Fort Lewis built upon the Haven of Rochelle, gave subject to renew the War, as we shall hereafter shew. The Venetians, to procure reparation of the dammages received from the Croats,1617. in the year 1617. found themselves obliged to arme, against the House of Austria. And they entered by force into the Territories of the Arch-Duke Ferdinand,The Venetians against the House of Au∣stria. from whence they were repulsed. Then, they made an Allyance with the Ʋnited Provinces, and received succour from them, under the conduct of Count Iohn of Nasseaw: But both par∣ties, having had experience of the mutable lot of Armes, they return∣ed into their former good intelligence. At the same time the Warre began again, between the King of Spaine, and the Duke of Savoy. Ver∣celly was taken by the Spaniards; and the Savoyers entred into the Dutchy
of Milan. But this Difference was quickly appeased, by the intercestion of the Pope, and the King of France. When Fortune is equall, and humours capable of reason, Peace is quickly made. Let us go now to Vienna. CHAP. V. The wars of Austria, Lusatia, Moravia, and the Palatinat. WE left Ferdinand, ill enough accompanied on his way to Frankfurt, and the Landgrave, William of Darmstadt came to meet him, and conducted him into the Town, where he was received, and saluted Empe∣rour; though he easily marked a sufficient aversion in that people, from the Princes of his family. What cannot Religion effect, upon weak, and ill-informed mindes? It begets a blind zeal, which being grown big, produces as much mischief as it can possibly effect; and hearkening to nothing but Passion, thinks it does well, whilest it does ill. Whilest the Emperour was detained by the reception of these honours, they of his Party were in daily action with their enemies, and that often with advantage; But this war was terminated the year following, 1620, by the Battel of Pragne. A notable observation, that one onely Battel purchased the Conquerours a whole Kingdom.The War of Austria. Austria was also exercised, by a revolt no lesse dangerous, then that of Bohemia; chiefly, because it chanced at the same time, and for that it de∣prived Ferdinand of all safe retreat. The leagued Mutincers took arms upon this captious pretext; That the Archduke Albert was their Lord, and not the said Ferdinand. How bad soever the Cause be which the Lawyer pleades, he forbeares not yet to speak alond. He on the other side alledged the donation made him by Albert, inviting them to renounce the League, and pay him the Oath of fidelity; which they refu∣sing, he proclaimed them out-laws, and gave the execution of the Proscri∣ption to the Duke of Bavaria, who reduced them to reason, time enough to come to succour the Count of Bucquoy. Lusatia, depending upon the Kingdom of Bohemia, was the allyance, and must needs, for sooth, have her finger in the Pye. This Province was recom∣mended, to the Electour of Saxonie; who choosing rather to proceed by way of accommodation, then presently to fly to extremities, made the States ac∣quainted with his Commission; shewed then the danger of persisting in ob∣stinacy; and would have certainly have perswaded them, had not the Mar∣quis of Lagerendorp broken the negotiation by force of arms, and brought the Negotiatours away prisoners. This impertinent action much displeased the Electour; who finding that they had violated the Law of Nations, resolved to tamper no more with them.Baudissa burneth. The Town of Baudissa, first felt his cholar, and the violence of his arms, which after she was almost wholly reduced to ashes, at length yeelded her self up; and all the rest followed her example. This exploit made the Duke of Saxonie very odious, to the Protestant Party; but, the Emperour, for recompence of his services, and to keep him fast in his friendship, made him a present of both the Lusatia's. It is impossible to please all, and especially two contrary Parties, filled with acrimony, and hatred, through the zenl of Religion.
Austria, Bohemia, and the two Lusatia's, were no sooner under obe∣dience, then there was a necessity to turn the sword another way; as name∣ly, to Moravia;Moravia. which was undertaken and quickly accomplished by Bucquoy. Favour wheels about with Fortune, and Envy lies in wait for it. The town of Iglaw forthwith stooped; Swaim followed, and Generall Spet, being returned to his duty, brought all the other Towns also (partly by force, and partly by inclination) to theirs; and to that warr which seem∣ed by the animosities thereof, as if it would have lasted whole ages, was ended, for some time in all those Provinces. The Silesians,The Silesians make peace. fearing the victo∣rious Duke of Saxonie, who added threats to reasons, and had already lifted up his hand to strike, chose rather to hearken to a friendly Composition, then run the hazard of being forced to it, to the ruine, both of their Country and Priviledges: and consequently, they sent their Embassadours to Dresden, where the Peace was concluded, all forgotten, and all pardoned, upon con∣dition, that they should pay three millions of money, and renounce the afore∣said allyances: whereupon they took the Oath of Fidelity to their Master; and he granted them free exercise of their Religion. Let us step back to wards the Palatinat. The war of the house of Austria The House of Austria, not content with having extinguished the fire at home, carried it into the Territories of the Prince Palatine. Now the Prin∣ces of that great Union; to wit, the Marquis of Anopach, the Landgrave Maurice of Hassia, the Marquis of Dourlarch, the Duke of Wirtembergh, and some Imperiall Townes, had contracted great forces, for the defence of the Palainat. It is most facile, to re-kindle new quenched firebrands, put together by meanes of the heat, which remaines in them some hours after. Spinola went to se∣cond them, and Prince Henry Frederick, who was sent by Prince Manrice, with a Renfort or Supply of some Horse; not finding a perfect harmony amongst them, nor being able to put such an one as was needfull, retyred himself into Holand, leaving the Peace to be treated by those Princes; after they had basely suffered almostrall the Country to be taken by the Spaniards:Ʋpon which the Spaniards seized. And so, this great and needlesse stir, vanished into smoak, and melted, like a great Colosse, or Pillar of snow, before the Sun-beams; for the Principall Heads, having promised not to assist the Palatine, either with men, or mo∣ney, betook themselves to rest, after they had finished so fine a Master∣piece as this, which merits, to be inserted in Commentaries; namely, that Spinola, with an army of eighteen thousand men, went and took a Province which was guarded by thirty thousand, and many Princes besides. Dis-united strength is easily broken. Some Heads of the Hughenot Party, endeavoured to represent to the King the interest he had, to hunder the progresse of the House of Austria, upon his Allyes, their brethren; but in vain; he well enough remembring the succour formerly sent them from thence, which failing them now, disabled them from resisting, against his triumphant Arms. Let us now see, what the Hung arians did, whilest these Tragidies were a playing. They are Neighbours to the Germans, and have the Crosse on the side, and the Half-Moone, on the other.
CHAP. VI. The warre of Transylvama. The King of Poland treacherously wounded. Warre between the Poles, and the Turks. BEthlem Gabor, having made an allyance with Frederick, and seeing Ferdi∣nands forces employed in Bohemia, began to consider, not onely of ma∣king a powerfull diversion, but also of winning a Crown, We have Ambition, and we shall also quickly find Religion. He raised a great Army, under very abstense, and farre-fetch'd pretexts, thereby to puzzle, and baffle such as had power to resist him. This man, for a fine beginning, oppressed Gabriel Batorius his Lord, by the assistance of the Turk; and so being grown Master of Transylvania, and propped by the Ottomans, he possessed it, in the quality of Prince thereof. He made a League with the Archdukes; but seeing them entangled in dangerous Wars, he pricked up his ears, and raised a po∣tent Army, to seize upon the Kingdom of Hungarie. Convenience moves men to break ally ances, as well as necessity; and good successe covers the injustice of the Cause; or at least, urges the doubt, that if Right be to be violated, it ought to be onely to winne a Crown.War of Transylvania. In fine, he secretly armed, took occasion by the fore∣lock, and cloathed the Lyon, with a foxes skin. He got possession of Cassovia, before the people thought themselves in danger. They, whose affections he enjoyed, were discovered by their Religion: The Romane Catholicks, and such others also, as had any resentment of their duty, being frighted, some armed,Gaber takes Posen. and others fled. He took Posen, under the title of Prince of Hungarie; marched to Vienna, and joyned with the Confederates to besiege the Town. But the Polanders, having defeated his Troops, which remained in Hungarie,Is declared King of Hun∣garie. made him return, and mould his businesse after another form; so much did he stand in awe of the King of Poland: though he went back∣wards, onely to leap the better: For he obtained a Truce, which he quick∣ly brake, proclaimed himself King by them of his Caball, entered again in∣to Austria, and if Fortune had not turned her back upon the Confederates in Bohemia, it is very likely, he might fully have accomplished all his preten∣tions, and ruined the said House of Austria it self. There is something wanting, we rise, either too early, or too late. The Emperour was shut up in the Town, and constrained both to hear, and suffer the insolency of some seditions Citizens, which was repressed by the Count of Dampiere, who departed not long after towards Posen, with intention to surprize it; but he was killed by a Musket bullet.Dampiete killed. He was by birth a Lorrain; had done the Emperour many most considerable services, and was much deplored, by the whole Patty. Bethlem finding this thorn out of his foot, and having bought the amity of the Turk with money, brake the Truce, but his Letters, by which he invited the Tartars, and wherein he gave them testimonies of what ser∣vices he would perform to the Grand Signior, at the cost of the Empire, and all Christendome, by allying himself with the Turk, being intercepted; he disobleiged the prime Lords of Hungarie, who cast themselves into the Emperours armes, and fell upon Gabors forces, and handled them almost as ill, as the Polanders had done the year before. The Count de Bucquoy in Hungarie. Hereupon the Count de Bucquoy entered into Hungarie, took many Townes, and amongst others, Posen it self: and the Tartars, coming to relieve Gabor, were cut in pieces, by the Poses, under the command of that great Captain, Cotqueviets.
The Emperour had run great hazard of loosing the Kingdome of Hungarie,Is killed. (had not Fortune saved it) by the death of the brave Count of Bucquoy; who attempting to repulse the Hungarians, when they sallyed out of Newhewsel, was layd upon the ground, with no lesse then sixteen wounds. He could not more generously surrender his soul, nor finde a more illustrious bed of honour, to crown the greatnesse of his actions, had not his souldiers so basely forgotten their duty,His A, my dis∣bands it self. and disbanded themselves so ignominiously. For they might, by carrying the body of this Mars, with as much reason, have expected to winne Victories, as the Spaniards did, by that of their Rodrigues; but after the losse of their Generall, they found themselves without pulse, life, and motion. And so, we may easily think, how sensible a losse this was, to the Emperour, and all his family, to whom he had rendered so potent services. Thus by the death of this one brave Captaine, Fortune changed, and the Conquered became Conquerours. They, who before, were reduced, to a meer feeble, and fearfull defensive Warre, regained courage, and re∣turned to besiege the places which they had lost. But Fortune, lighter then the winde, made Bethlem know, how necessary it was for him, to make Peace; and Ferdinand, desirous to remedy so many evils, as surrounded him on every side, easily suffered himself to be induced to it, by his own naturall inclination: And so, upon the restitution of the Crown, and the relin∣quishment of the Title of King, the Peace was made, and Arms laid down, for a while; though Gabor never cast off the desire of moving, nor the ha∣tred, which he carried to his Lord, the Emperour. The King 'of Poland hurr. Now, since we are gotten so neer Poland, let us deliver that which hap∣ned there, in the year 1620, The King being at Wartsawe, where the Diet was held; and going into the Church upon the fifteenth of November, a Gentleman gave him two blows with a Pole-axe upon the head and ano∣ther on his shoulder, which very much endangered his life: But the Parri∣cide received his reward, and the King was heard by the standers by, with a faint and feeble voice, to pronounce these words: What (said he) do the Polanders learne of the French, to kill their Kings? Let us go hence, till we shall first have related the subject, for which Os∣man the Emperour of Turkie with an Armie of above four hundred thou∣sand men, attempted to swallow up all this puissant Kingdome, which was this. The Waywood of Walachia being revolted from the Grand Signior, and calling in the Poles to relieve him, was attacked by the Tartars, and Turks; who, in the first fight, having the worst, and in the last, the best of the day, the Waywode was killed, and the Polish Nobility defeated: and this Victory so much inflamed the heart of the Great Turk, that he shamefully banished the Poland Embassadour from his Court, and declared a war upon the King. Fortune, is the Mistresse of young Princes, for by good successes,Osmàn at∣tacks Poland. she fills them with temerity, to destroy them.
CHAP. VII The warre in the Palatinate. Tilly beaten, revenges himself, and defeates the Marquis of Baden. The Bishop of Halberstadt, makes himself known in Westphalia, and is beaten; passes with Mansfeldt, through Lorraine, and incamps himself before Sedan. THe prosperous progresse of the Emperours Generals, repaired, and rai∣sed his Authority, to so much splendour, that every body desired to keep himself fast with him, and gaine his favour; there remaining none who durst openly act for Frederick, but such as were droven by despaire. For, the Duke of Anholt, finding the gate open to a reconciliation, stooped to get in; and many Townes also did the same. And the Landgrave William, sonne to Maurice of Hassia, who finding Bellona too hard, and rigorous a Mistresse, betook himself to the society of the Muses, followed the example of the former, and was received with the same benevolence; yea, and ador∣ned with a new Title of Honour besides. We are forced, in a scorn, to make a good Part, which, when the danger is past, we do not value. Mansfeldt recollected fragments of the Armies, found means to repair his losses,Mansfeldt uses deceit in the Palatinate. and grew likely to restore things, to the point from whence they were fallen. In effect, not being able to get into Bohemia, he wheeled about towards the Palatinate: where, by the taking of some places, and fighting some prosperous skirmishes, he raised the courage of his souldiers, and struck astonishment into his enemies. But, the Duke of Bavaria, seased upon the up∣per Palatinate, reduced him to such extremity, that, upon the condition of a summe of mony, and some very high title of Honour, he was content to seek Peace with the Emperour; however it were intended by him, but onely to save his Army, and so to kill two birds with one stone. Foul play, or cheaterie, when it succeeds well, passes for a gallant piece of warlike craft; and wickednesse never seeks long, before it findes an occasion. For as soon as he arri∣ved in the Lower Palatinate, he threw off his Vizard, broke his word, took many Towns (which served for a Fee to his hunger-starved souldiers) sack∣ed Alsatia,Takes Hage∣naw. and surprized Hagenaw. Frederick, upon the noise of these successes, left Holland, passed incognito through France, and not without huge paines, and danger, got to the Army. There happened a surious Encounter near Wisloch,The Bavarians beaten. where the Bavarian; lost abost above two thousand men, a great number of Colours, and four Field-Pieces; which were testimonies, that the victory was not coutemptible. But Tilly was not long, before he found meanes to revenge himself of this affront. It is good to lend to such, as are alwayes read to render. For, having joy∣ned his Troops with Don Cordocia, and being informed, that the Marquis of Baden was separated from Mansfeldt, he followed him so close, that he over∣took him neer Wimpfen; where, after a stubborn fight of some hours, he put the Cavalry to flight. But the Infantry, or Foot, finding themselves aban∣doned with a masculine resolution, mingled with despair, and desire of an honourable death, fought very valiantly, and made Tilly know, that he should not have their lives at so cheap a rate,They have their revenge. as not to wrangle stoutly for them; howbeit, by an unlucky chance, they were deprived of the meanes, though not of the will,Victory of the Imperialists near Wimpson. to continue it. For, by the perpetual playing of the Ordnance, the fire got into the powder, which sprung the Waggons with so unfortunate hurt, that all the Foot fell into disorder, and was cut in pieces:
And eight and thirty Pieces of Canon; a great deal of Baggage, and mo∣ney, with six score Coulors falling into the hands of the Conquerours, made the Conquered confesse, that they received a huge, and most sensible losse. The Field was strewed with dead Bodies, and the perishing of six thousand men upon the place, gave cause to count this, for one of the greatest Bat∣tails of this Age. The Bishop of Halberstadt in the interim was not asleep; but having con∣tracted great forces,The cruelties of the Bishop of Halberstadt in Westphalia. he went ravaging and pillaging all Westphalia; sparing neither Monkes, Nunnes, nor Ornaments of the Church it self, to satiate his cruelty, leachery, and avarice. Indeed, the scandall he gave, was too great; for his proceedings were blamed, even by them of his own Party: and he purchased the name of the Mad Bishop. But the Catholicks were too much tyed to the Emperours service, and therefore he thought fit to chastise them, since there was no other means, to hurt their Victorious head; and besides, the disgust of their so often singing Te Deum, was too sharp and hot to be en∣dured. At Paterborne, he took a Statue of Sains Liborius, of massive Silver, and melted it into Rex Dollars, which he signed, with an Arm stretched out, and a sword, with this motto, A Friend to God: and an Enemy to Priests. The youthfull insolencies, and unreasonable actions, which he committed in a certain Cloyster of Nunnes, must be buried in silence; for the like could not happen, but in a corrupt Age. This Army cast the greatest bulk of the war,Warre again the Ecclesia∣sticks. upon the Ecclesiasticks; nor can there be imagined any kinde of sacriledge, which was not perpetrated by them; neither went they in fine; very farre, before they received the Crown of their works. For being coasted, or over∣taken by the Count of Anholt, who was now joyned to Tilly, they were stre∣nuously assaulted, near the River Maine; and endeavouring to passe in confusion, the Bridge brake, and made fine sport for the Imperialists, who cut off such as were stopped: and the River conspiring to their destruction, thruzled a great many more, so that only they who could swimme escaped, and through their great diligence made a shift at length to reach the Avant∣guard of the Army, where their Bishop marched, and so ranged themselves under the wings of General Mansfeldt, so that the River shared stakes with the Imperialists, in the honour of this victory, as having drowned about three thousand of them. Frederick after this so rough a check, having no means at all left to maintain his forces any longer, disbanded them, and re∣tired himself back to the Hague, there to expect the issue of the Treaty at Brussels, by which Frankendal, with the consent of King Iames of England, was sequestred into the hands of the Infanta. Tilly went afterwards, and took Heidelberg by force, and Manhein, by composition; and that great renowned Library,Heidelbergh taken, and the Library carri∣ed to Rome. was transported to Rome (for the Pope would have also his part of the booty) to the great trouble of all the Electorall Family: but, who can resist against Fate? Mansfeldt, and his Bishop, marched on towards Lorrain, through which they passed, without any repugnance, the Duke being surprized by their unexpected approach, and stayed some weeks at Sedan; and Carda, who was at their heels, in∣camped himself at Ivoy. We will leave them there, to plot new Designes with the Duke of Bollon, and return into Poland, to see what great body of Nobility march so briskly on, to face that potent Emperour Osman.
CHAP. VIII. The continuance of the warre between the Poles, and the Turks. The tragicall end of young Osman. The death of some Lords. THe Polanders, being resolved to revenge the affront done their Embas∣sadour, received besides some kind of check in Moldavia; but Prince Ʋladistans hasting thither with a puissant Army, defeated the Turks in a ranged Battail; which kindled so great fury in the young Emperour Osman, that he swore he would be revenged, and destroy the kingdom of Poland, with that terrible Army, whereof we have spoken already. King Sigismund received the Alarme, and sent his Embassadours to all Christian Kings, im∣ploring their assistance against the Common Enemy. King James aforesaid sent five thousand men, whom the King of Denmark would not suffer to pass, in respect of the Allyance between him, and the King of Sweden. In fine, the Polanders finding nothing, but excuses every where, were fain to get all on horse-back, together with their King, and go to deliver their Prince, who was so ingaged, that he had almost no means left him to escape evident danger. It was a worthy object,They make all the Nobility march, to suc∣cour ladslaus. to see a King march at the Head of two hundred thousand Gentlemen: whereof the Grand Signor being advertised, sent to offer a Peace to the Prince, who embraced it, as an Embassie come from heaven; because the third part of his Troops of sixty thousand men, which were left to defend the Confines against this huge multitude, was quite con∣sumed, partly by continual attacks,The Yeate made and partly by diseases, as having been com∣pelled, for want of victuals, to eat many of their own horses. The Tucks, after having wanted half their Army, made their retreat; which, together with the Peace, was about the moneth of October, 1621. Let us follow them to Constantinople, where we shall see the tragical, and pi∣tifull end of their Prince. Osman, the aforesaid young Prince, by some deportments of his, gave su∣spition to the Innisuries, of his having a mind to transferre both the Trea∣sure, and seate of the Empyre, from Constantinople, under pretext of making a pilgrimage to the Sepulcher of their Prophet Mahomet.Osman strang∣led, and Musta∣pha clled in his place. Whereupon, his ships were stopped, his Favorites massacred in his presence, and himself, after having endured a thousand indignities from the Souldiers, strangled by the command of his Uncle, whom they had drawne out of his Hermitage, to succeed him. But he did not long enjoy those honours, whereof indeed he was unworthy. Happy are they, who live content in the lownesse of their Con∣divion, and are not exposed to the blowes of the Thunderbolt; at those Captaines also are, who for sake the Armies, to return to the Plough, without I stening to the voyce of the charming Syrens of ambition. But it is not only here, that we have seen unheard-of changes. Now these fatall Tragedies were advantageous to the Christians, who were so divided by the two so often mentioned Passions,The Count de la Tour obtaines suco of the Turk. that there was no appearance left to reunite them. The old Count de la Tour, and the Marquis of Lagerendorf, were knocking at the Grand-Signors Gate, and displaying both their Rhetorick, and their Presents, seconded by the Embassadours of the inconstant Gabor; so much were they seazed by desire, to ruine the House of Austria, which almost all Christendome banded together, hath not been able to effect hitherto; no, nor so much as to deprive it, of the Imperial Crown.Sks Mora∣via. However, they obtained some succour, sackaged Moravia, and joyned with Gabor; but the Turks were defeated, and their Mustapha com∣pelled to yeeld up his place to Amurath,Is be . Brother to Osman. And these
Tragedies were the cause of the warre, which chanced between the Turks and Persians, to the great good of Christendom; and gave occasion also to the Gossacks to make a Cavalcada, or Inroade, to the very Gates of Constantinople.The Cossacks at the Gates of Constantino∣ple. For, after they had passed many great Forrests, and vast Deserts, the Alarme grew so hot, that if the said Cossacks had not speedily retreated with their prey, the poor Christians in the Town had had their throats cut, it regard that it was published, that they had intelligence with them. Let us now take leave of the Countries, of the HalfThe Turks. Moon, for many yeares, and return by the Mediterranean, into those of theThe Roman Catholick Countries upon the Mediterra∣nean Sea. Crosse, which being momentarily sprinkled with blood, cannot choose but multiply abundantly. The Venetians were very attentive to the successes of the Bohemian warre, and being more propense to their own interest, then their Religion, occultly favoured the Bohemians. But the rest of the States of Italy, leaned more to the other side; however Peace remained amongst them, just as they did in Spain, where they received the newes of a great victory, upon the King of Maroco, and saw (after the expiration of the Truce) some Holland Vessels brought into their Ports, which came from Venice, and were taken in the Sreights of Gibelaltar. This year 1621. in the moneth of March, deceased Philip the third, King of Spain, and was followed some moneths after,The death of Philip the third King of Spain, and of and Cardinal Bel∣latmine. by the pious Arch-Duke Albert, who left the Country to his Isabel, and the Com∣mand of the Militia, to the Marquis Spinola. That famous Cardinal Robert Bellarmin, so well known by the Books he left written, both against the Re∣formats, and others, paid likewise his tribute to Nature, this very year, being above fourscore years old. England continued in Peace; and therefore we will step into the Low-Countries. CHAP. IX Sadnes in the Low-Countries, for the bad successe of the Affaires of Frederick. The Warre begun again, betwixt them, and the Spaniards. Gulick, and Papemutz surrendred. Count Henry suspected, and why? HOlland was full of loy, upon the termination of the Domestick Disor∣ders, and the condemnation of the Arminians; a great part whereof withdrew themselves out of united Provinces; some others embraced the doctrine of the confession of Auxbourgh, and the rest fought so long against their Crosses, that they surmounted them at length, by obtaining in many Towns free Exercise of their Faith. But this joy was quickly turned into mourning, by the arrivall of the newes of the unhappy successe of King Fre∣dericks Arms; and the losse of his Kingdom, which he had already had, some moneths in his possession. Though yet the Gazets sung alwayes of his victories, and of the decline of the Emperours Affayres: yea, and the Pain∣ters represented him already, sitting in the Imperial Throne; Ferdinand, on his knees before him; and the Eagle all peeled, and debilitated.The Eagle peeled. It was also published, that the Battail before Prague, was wonne by him and the contrary tidings contemned, as suspects, and given out by the Papists; till himself ar∣rived, and brought the naked Truth with him, and shewed in fine, that all was lost. There are many persons so passionate, that they cannot endure to hear truth spoken, if it be contrary to their expectation; and others preferre, before the infamy of lying, the unsteady profit which comes from it. Prince Maurice had often enough bid the Generalls of Bohemia, have a
care of themselves, for that they had to do with a great Captain, full of cou∣rage, and experience. Many have believed, that it was his designe, to make Frederick be raised to the Imperiall Crown; neither were the means there∣of so difficult, had not God disposed otherwise of it. They of Brabant, on the other side, by way of equall return to the Hollanders, pictured the Emperour in his Throne,Loaden with with feathers. elevated on high, with a King fallen at his feet, and the Eagle loaden with feathers, plucking the Crown off his Head. But Painters, and Poets have alwayes been permitted, to set forth their fancies; and the Com∣mon People feed themselves with them, as with solid food. Now, the Contra-Remonstrancers, as well by means of the Synod of Dort, as by the company of the Prince (who declared himselfe of their party) having wonne the Day,Maurice chan∣ges the Magi∣strates. stayed not there. For Maurice, by the advice of some Lords, having changed the Magistrates in many Townes, as I have hinted already; put in their places, such as he liked, and such as approved of the said Synod: In such sort, as the Arminians were fain to leave the Cushion against their wills, and were ill treated too, in some parts, for ma∣king too free use of that, which by vertue of their birthright, and the suc∣cesse of the Armes of the Common-wealth, they conceived, could not be denied them. These changes begat many Libells, and gave ground to the Politicks, to make sine observations, upon those proceedings, which remained secret No definitive sentence can be pronounced, upon what may be done, but upon what is done. Now, as mens humours which were agitated, began by little and little, to relent, or slacken; and partialities, partly for fear, and partly for want of nou∣rishment, to be choaked in the desire repose; just so did the Truce draw to∣wards an end. And it must be noted, that these people, how much soever divided in faction, return forthwith to a coherence, when they apprehend any forraine Enemy: For really, common danger hath so great a power upon their minds, that it makes them speedily reunite, to resist the attempts of strangers: and if that come once to faile, farewell Liberty; for they will never, want private enemies; and their pride is growne too high, not to be envied by many. Their vertue is accompanied by envy, but their Power is too considerable, to be easily, and openly attacked. One of the greatest wits of our times, advised the King of Spain, to make a Truce with them if he had mind to tame them.The nature of the Hollanders. For they are (said he) like over, which joyne together, to repell the Wolves; but as soon as the danger is once past, they fall to oddes amongst themselves. The Arch-Duke sounded them, to see if they would hearken to a Peace, and acknowledge him for Soveraign, under such terms, as seemed to divide the Soveraignty; but they bore a deaf ear, and would not hear of so much, as a prolongation of the Truce: and the Embassadour passing through Delph, was entertained by the dregges of the people, with durt and mud, and most unworthily treated, before it could be remedied. An Embassadour cannot be welcome, where his Master is hated. This affront was dissem∣bled; Spinola being returned out of Germany, went, and incamped himself near the Rhein, whilest Count Henry of Berghen, blocked up Gulick, which surrendered it self for want of food, in the moneth of February, 1622. The same year Papetz (in English, Priests-Cap) was likewise taken, by meanes of the huge quantity of Granadaes, which were cast into it. This was a Fort so called, seated upon an Island, in the middle of the Rhein, built during the Truce, to exact Contributions of the circumjacent Coun∣tries, and to incominodate the Boats, which could not pass without being examined, and visited by it; and it was sacrificed to the vengeance of the Priests, because it carried both the name, and figure of their Quadran∣gular Bonnets.
Count Maurice, by the decease of Philip of Nassaw, his eldest brother (who died like a Catholick at Breda, a little before the expiration of the Truce) being become Prince of Orange, and Heir by will, to all his said brothers goods; sent his other brother with four thousand men, to enter into little Brabant, and force the Contributions.The Hollan∣ders in Brabant This surprize very much amazed Spinola, cast the Country people into despair, to see their houses fired: and moved the soul of the Infanta (who beheld this spoil from the wals of Brus∣sels) to compassion. The Citizens would have marched out with their arms, to revenge this wrong; but Spinola, commanded the Gates to be kept shut, and would not suffer them, to go, and expose themselves to slaughter, and an inevitable defeat. The inhabitants of a Town do enough, when they defend their own walls; for the Field is fatall to them, against old Bands and trained Souldiers. Count Henry of Bergues arriving too late, to hinder the return of the Hollan∣ders, (which he might have effected, either with his forces, or by stopping up the River of Demer) grew to be suspected, of intelligence with his Kins∣men. He was reproached, that he might have come six and twenty houres sooner; and that, if he had used all requisite diligence, the enemies could not have escaped: But he excused himself the best he could; and satisfied most of the Councell, though not all; and after his retreat, it was all more maturely examined, and considered by the most judicious men.The complaint of the Spanish Embassadour, in his behalf. The Em∣bassadour of Spaine complained once to King Henry of France; for his endea∣vouring to disingage the said Count from his Masters service; to which the King answered, that he was by birth a Germane, and no subject of the King of Spains. And thus passed this complaint, together with many more, which the ignorant people imputed, to the hatred, which the Spaniards (according to their saying, and belief) carried towards him. CHAP. X. Berghen besieged. Mansfeldt, and his Bishop being beaten by Cordoua, come to succour the Hollanders. The death of the Duke of Bouillon, and a summary of his life. Spinola quitts the siege. Mansfeldt pas∣ses into Friezland. A third Warre in France. THe burning of many fair villages, in the sight of the Court, caused so much spite in Spinolas soule, that he studied nothing more, then the meanes of revenging himself of it. He kept his designe secret; and assembled a great Army, one part whereof he assigned to Don Lewis de Velasco, and con∣ducted the other (which was far the greatest) himself. He made a shew to draw towards the Rheyn, thereby to amuse the Hollanders, whilest the said Don Lewis had order to march with all speed, to Berghen op Zoom, and to seize upon Emblee, the Haven, and the two Forts, which defended it; but, whether out of jealousie, or otherwise, he want, and took Steenbergh; gi∣ging the Hollanders time, to re-inforce the Garrison, and secure the Isle of Tertollen. The Marquis neverthelesse arrived, and besieged the Place;Berghen be∣sieged. but not being able to gaine the possession of the said Haven, he wasted a good part of his Army about it. We left Mansfeldt, and his Bishop, at Sedan, in consultation with the Duke
of Bouillon;Minsfeldt at Sedan. and let us now call them from thence, since we are sure to learn nothing of their private conferences, but onely by conjecture. The King of France was then before Montauban; and fearing least they might serve themselves of the fair occasion, to make a strong diversion, in fauour of the Hughenots, who were very much weakened; he commanded the Duke of Neuers,The Duke of Neuers. to raise speedily a Body of an Army in Champague, and entertaine the said Mansfeldt with Treaties, till his Troops were in condition, to hin∣der his passage. He also wrote to Don Cordona, who promised him to come, and relieve him, in case the Germans made but the least shew of moving a∣gainst his service. Mansfeldt dares not suc∣cour the Hughe∣nots. Now this proposition of succouring the Hughenots, being found most dif∣ficult, and of too dangerous a consequence, and the meanes of returning the same way they came, taken from them; they resolved to traverse, or passe through Brabaus, and go to succour Berghen, which Spinola attacked both with Mines; and Assaults, as he had done Ostend; and this so much the ra∣ther, because they were invited thither, by the States Generall, and the Prince of Orange. And so they marched, and by their departure, freed Campagne, from the great oppressions, wherewith they had very ill treated the Lasiere. Cordona, and Anholt followed them; and having overtaken them near Floury, compelled them to stop, and face about. The battail be∣gan hotly;Is beaten by Cordona. and Cordona was in danger of losing it, if the enemies horse had stood fast, and better seconded the foot, which was almost all cut off by the Canon. But five hundred Peasants of the Province of Liege, who presumed to set upon them, were cut in pieces, and sacrificed, to their displeasure; which yet, was quite forgotten, as soon as they came to the Hollanders Camp. The Mansfeldians excused their losse, by the necessity they had, to get the passage; which, since they had obtained, by the sword, the Imperialests (said they) ought not so much to boast of their Victorie. The Bishop was hurt in the arme,The Bishop loses his arme. which was forced to be cut off; which gave the Romane Catho∣licks ground to publish, that, that arme which made warre against the Priests, had deserved to be struck off. It is very likely, that if the Protestants had not feared to alienate the King from their Party (of whose favour they hoped one day to feel some effects) they would have made no difficulty at all, to set the Hughenots upon their feet again in such sort, as that the King could not lay hold of a more opportune season to humble them, then during the decline of the affairs, of the Protestants in Germany. The Duke of Bouillon, after the departure of the Germans, being quite cra∣zed with age, payed his tribute to Nature: and it concerns us, to speak brief∣ly of his life, that so we may come both to the knowledge of his experience, and exploits,The death of the Duke of Bouillon. and of his right also to Sedan. Religion, and Nature tied him fast to his Kings service, whose secrets, and savour he enjoyed for a long time. His first wife was the Princesse, who was heiress to Sedan; and not∣withstanding that she died without Childrein, and that there was another heir of the same House,His life. he left not to retaine the said Principat, by the sup∣port of the Kings favour.He marries the heiresse of Se∣dan. He keeps the Principate, and passes to the second marriage. Believed, in Germary, 1609 Surprizes Sy. In his second marriage, he had the daughter, of Prince William of Orange, by whom he had begat two sons, who grew very famous afterwards; and by this Allyance, he acquired a most streight cor∣respondence with the States Gonerall of the united provinces. He much mo∣lested the Dutchies of Lorraine and Luxenburgh by arms, wherein he pur∣chased great reputation. He went and surprised the Cittidell of Sendy, the very day of his wedding, and was alwayes redoubted by his neighbours, and in most high esteem with the Princes of Germany; and it is believed, that it was chiefly he, who counselled the Prince Palatine, to take the Crown of Bohemia. After his designs, and Communications with the Marshal of Bron,
were blown up, he kept himself alwayes close in Sedan, till the King at length, came to awaken him. But his peace was quickly made, in consideration of the good, which he was to perform, and of the high enterprizes, whereof he was both the most worthy, and principall instrument. After the sad death of Henry the Great, the Prince of Conde, being returned into France, he used his utmost endeavour, to tye him to the interests of the Hughenots, by describing his to him, quite otherwise,He embroils France. then they were to be under∣stood; which were in effect, to embroil the Kingdome. But the Prince would not revenge the injurie, which he pretended was done him, to the detriment of Religion, and the destruction of the poor people; which yet not long after he did, against his promise to the Queen: though yet that promise were quickly dissipated, as well as many other, which came out of the shop of his brest, more for his particular advantage, then that of the Pub∣lick, which he alwayes pretended. Now, howbeit, he had been brought up in the civill wars, and factions, he yet refused the generalship,He refuses the Generalship of the Hughenot Party, 1621. Why? of all the Hughe∣not Armies, which was offered him, by the Assembly of Rochell; and that upon very reasonable reasons: as first, his age: then the Gout, wherewith he was much tormented; and lastly, for the difficulty, which he was likely to find, to govern so many Heads, as composed that popular State. Let us return to the siege of Berghen. Spinola finding his enemy recruited with so great a Body of Horse, and his owne, Army much diminished with toyle, assaults, sicknesse, and disband∣ings; speedily raised the siege, for fear least the way should be stopped,Spinola raises the siege. and went, and encamped himself three leagues short of Antwerp; where having put himself in posture, and sent away his sick, and wounded men, he offered the Prince Battell; but he contenting himself with having suc∣coured the Place, made answer, to some French Lords, who advised him to accept the offer; that it was better to make a golden Bridge for his enemies, then engage them in fight, which is often gained by dispaire: And so he retyred to the Hague, where he was well received by the States. Mansfeldt shewed himself likewise there, and the Bishop grew to be known, and hated, and was sometimes in danger of being well rubbed, for his former insolen∣cies. But these two guests, after some consultations, quickly dislodged; for Mansfeldt, having received five thousand men from France,Mansfeldt and the French in East-Freezland The Bishop de∣feated, in the year 1623. neer Statloo. was sent into East-Freezland, for fear least Tilly should come, and take up his quarters there: and the Bishop returned into Westphalia, where living after the old fashion, he was snapt neer Statloo, and most basely defeated. With much more reason, might that have been said of Tilly, which the Emperour of Turkie, said of the French, when he heard the newes, of the huge Victorie gotten by them, upon the Venetians: namely, That they had to do with Calves. Six thousand Imperialists, cut off an Army of eighteen thou∣sand men; and the Bishop, in stead of retyring himself to his Bishoprick, returned speedily into Holland, with the nimblest runners of his broken Ar∣mie, to take new counsell, and recollect his scattered Troops, in the Fron∣teer Towns. There were about six thousand of his men taken prisoners, and the Spanish Garrison of Grol, contributed no small matter to this entyre Victo∣rie, in the year 1623. If the Bishops Souldiers used great cruelties, the Mans∣feldians did not much better in Freezland; in such sort, as that good Country, which was able to maintaine above fifty thousand men, in good order, for fifteen years together, was exhausted in lesse then seven moneths;These two Gene∣rals return into Holland. and the Count of Oldenbergh sound reason to complaine of them besides, as bad neigh∣bours, for making excursions upon his lands. But they got not all off; and of five thousand French, there returned not twelve hundred into France, to revile their Generall, and relate the good treatment, which they had both given, and received, in these parts; all the rest being knocked in the head by
the Peasants, Mansfeldt being rejoyned to the Bishop, with the fragments of both Armies, performed no great exploits; but being beaten againe at Frisoit, they both went back againe into Holland, where they plotted new designes against the House of Austria. But now, let us go visit the Swissers, in their Mountaines, for they will give us matter also, to discourse of them. CHAP. XI Of the Swissers, and Grizons; and their Government. The fall of a Mountaine. Soubise breakes the Peace. The death of the great Priour, and of the Marshall Ornano. Description of the Cantons. BEfore we enter upon the motives of the Wars, which happened in the Grisons, we will first shew, that the Swissers area People of Germany, divided into thirteen Cantons; of whose valour, Julius Caesar, in his Commentaries of the Gawlish War, makes very honourable mention. They are shut up with∣in Mountains, and great Lakes, which make their Countrey inaccessible. The Tyranny of some Governours, caused them to shake off the yoke, both of the House of Austria,The first League and their owne Nobility. Their first League was made between three Country men, or Peasants, who within a short time after, grew much augmented, by the aversion of the People, from the above∣said Government. Let no man trust to his own power, and maintaine it by rigour; for enemies often come, from whence they are least expected. They have, upon the one side, the States, of the Republick of Venice, and the Dutchy of Milan; and Burgundy, Alsatia, and the Dukedome of Wirtemberg, on the other. They were long in peace, and rest, being protected by their Hills, and their pover∣ty; till Charles Duke of Burgundy, at length, stirred them up, to his own con∣fusion. For, having a desire to extend his domination as far as Italy, he (not∣withstanding all their humble supplications, for peace, and liberty, and of∣fers to serve him) brought a war upon them. Irregular ambition prepares her self a fall.Charles of Burgundie beatea. For, their humility being turned into dispair, they fell to the use of arms, which they had almost forgoten; and defeated his Army, with∣out so much as almost any fighting for it, and glutted themselves in fine, with the spoiles, both of the Burgundians, and Flemmings. Since which time, their Allyance hath been sought, by the Popes, Kings, and Princes of Europ; and especially by France,Their allyance. which by keeping her self fast with them, through a yearly pension, hath drawn no small advantages from them. Let us speak a word also, of their beginnings, which are worthy consideration. They were heretofore, wont to receive their Governours, from the Emperours, by whom Justice was administred,Their beginings and their Priviledges maintained: so that they lived in peace with the Ecclesiasticks; upon whom, by donation of the said Emperours, if not all, yet a great part of them at least, de∣pended. In fine, they being a people of a strong nature, and lovers of Liberty (as all such as dwell within the mountains are) found themselves contemned by the Nobility (which, through delights, produced by great riches, was grown insolent) and from contempt, drawn into servitude; and therefore, laying hold of the opportunity, of the confusions of the Empire, they assaulted the said Nobility, and expelled it by force of Arms, and so redeemed themselves from the Yoke. The Emperour Albert, having a great charge of Children, endeavoured
to joyn also that, which immediately depended upon the Empyre, to what he held there already, as well by inheritance, as by donation, and purchase; but in vain: wherereupon he turned his desires into threats; but still in vain: For his Governours had used tyranny,The Governours Tyrants. and brought this people to seek entyre Liberty, by way of revenge, of some crimes committed, and some af∣fronts done to some particular persons; the first whereof was to him, who had alwayes disswaded them, from putting themselves under the yoke, of the House of Austria: The second and principal, was for having attempted the chastity of a woman, a vice, which caused the Kings to be expelled from Rome; the Infidels, to enter into Spain, and whole nations, to go out of Con∣quered Countries: The third was a most absurd, and ridiculous Com∣mand; namely, to do reverence to the Hat of a Governour, which was at the end of a perch, when they passed by it: And it happened once, that a cer∣tain follow being brought before the Governour, for having slighted this or∣der, he commanded him to shoot a Apple from his childes head with an arrow, which he performed, to the great amazement of all such as were present. The first League of three men. Now, in revenge of these, and the like cruell proceedings, a secret League was made, amongst three Husband-men; the number whereof being quickly encreased, they cunningly seazed upon the Castles, of the said Governours, and drove them out of their Country, in the year 1307. Within a short space after the Emperour Albert was assassinated, and his children, being more busie about revenging his death, then punishing the proceedings of the Switzers, left them long enough in peace. In fine, Germany being divided, by the Electi∣on of two Emperours, Lewis of Bavaria, and Frederick of Austria, they (chiefly out of the jealousie they had of the said House, which they had offended) constantly adhered to the Party of Lewis, notwithstanding he were excom∣municated, and made no account at all, of the Ecclesiastical Counsell, which followed Frederick. Leopold bea∣ten. Leopold, sonne to Albert, being puffed up by some Conquests, and by a fair Army, together with the motives of the expelled Lords; led his forces against the Villages, but they were defeated in the Mountaines, near Mor∣garte. And this victory of theirs, produced the perpetual Allyance of the three Villages, which take their names from the woods; to which the rest have likewise adjoyned themselves since, for causes, which would be too long to recite: yea, and very many Imperiall Townes near them, have also leagued themselves with them; in such sort, as that now they have no ene∣my at all to fear. The physick too strong. Now, it must be avowed, that the Physick wrought too much, and ex∣ceeded the bounds of duty and justice. But ordinarily in Civill Warres, when subjects exasperated against their Governours, grow to get the upper hand, they break through all fear, and passe to another manner of Policy, as egged on, by the ambition of some particular men. Hatred furnished Arms, fury gave victory, and fear of chastisement, made them shake off the yoke of their Prince, whom they accused of having violated their Priviledges. Ambition is the moving cause, and soule of tumults, Revolts, and Changes of State; and injuries done to particular persons, are the pretexts. The form of their Common wealth. Their Republick is composed of three Classes, or Orders; the Villages to the number of thirteen; the Associates, or Confederates; and the Towns, which depend upon their direction. Now, these Cantons have divers forms of government: for that of the Villages, is Democratical: and that of the Townes, Aristocratical. In such sort, as that this Whole, being contrived of Parts entire, of variours humours, and conditions, may well be called a mixt Common-wealth, which is kept in unity, by the onely care she hath of her own preservation.
At their Assembly, which is made by a general Convocation, to treat of Warre, Allyance, Peace, and other affaires of importance; the Embassa∣dours of every Town are to meet: A form, much like that of the United Provinces, which took Arms against their Governours, and framed their Common-wealth, by the advantage of their situation, as well as they; the Sea, and the great Rivers being the same to those, which the mountaines are to these. They serve their Allyes, with much fidelity; but if their wages once fail, they take their leave, from whence that Proverb so much quoted in France, No mony, no Switsers. They are accused of being clownish, and simple; but in requitall thereof,Their fidelity, and their ver∣tue in ars. they are not stained with enormous vices (except onely drinking) as some other nations are. Above all, they detest cheatery; and their fidelity hath been much esteemed, in all times; their verue in Armes, very remarkable, as much surpassing that of the rest of the Germans; the one appearing about their Prince, and the other in the Field: however, at pre∣sent (all being subject to change) it doth not much cutstrip that of other na∣tions, and Francis the first, made them know, by a huge rout in the Dutchy of Milan, that they were not invincible, as themselves also manifested at the Battail of Pavia, where they could tell how to leave Play, when the Game did not please them. Their Government (as we have already said) is in some parts Democrati∣cal; and their Alliance, amongst themselves incorruptible, though it proceed rather from a common necessity of their own preservation, then from per∣fect amity:the Religion. Their Religion, in some of the Cantons is only, and purely, Roman Catholick; in other, Reformed: and in some again, mingled. This Age of ours, being the most fatall, and most martiall, that ever was, hath not spared them; bloody Mars having as well skip't over their Mountains, as through the Seas, the Deserts, and vast Forrests. The same year that that fatall scourge-bringing Torch appeared, there happened an accident to the Grisons, which sufficiently testified, that there is no place secure from destruction. The story of the year 1618. For, upon the fourth of September, 1618. towards the evening, one of the highest Mountains, fell down by means of an Earthquake, and overwhelmed a Burgh,Pleura over∣thrown by a Mountain. or little Town called Pleura, and crushed the Inhabitants in such manner, as that neither their cryes, nor groanes could be heard; no not so much as any trace, or signe at all, lest of the place. A tumuh in the Valteline. Two yeares after, the Inhabitants of Valteline, being very ill treated by the Grisons, in the Exercise of their Religion, conspired against them, and by the help of Rodolph Plante, killed a great multitude, and beat the rest out of the Valley; and being succoured by the Spaniards (for the advancement of their own interest) made many Fortresses, for their own defence. The Venetians jealous to see the Spaniards there. But, the Venetians, jealous of their interest, and laying aside that of Reli∣gion, were terrified by seeing the Gate of Italy shut up: and the King of France also, advertised by them, of the common danger; declared his in∣terest, by an Embassadour, whom he sent to Madrid, the fruit of whose negotiation produced a Promise of restitution, provided that the Roman Catholicks were entyrely assured of ther Exercise. For, the Policy of the Spaniards, is, to tye the interest of Religion to that of State, as many other Princes towards the North, also do: and upon these grounds, cold, and disinteressed Catholicks, endeavour to make them pass for Hypocrites, and perswade all the world, that under this Cloak, they will strip all Princes of their States. Who are at∣tacked by the Grisons. The Grisons, loosing their patience, in the long expectation of the depar∣ture of the Spaniards, fell upon them, and were shamefully repulsed. The Arch-Duke Leopold, and the Duke of Feria, hastened thither, who compel∣led
the poor Grisons to a peace, and thereby acknowledge, that themselves alone, were not able to expell such Guests as these, who were so advantage∣ously lodged. Yet, this was not enough; for the Spaniards, though well intrenched, for they could not remain there, without continual fear: and so the quarrel was renewed, and Allyances made, to force them out: Upon which the Marquis de Cocurre entred with some Troops, and rooted them out of their Holds. On the other side, the Savoyers, joyned with the French, under the con∣duct of that famous Constable, de l' Edigniores; brought a warre, into the State of Genoa. took many Towns, and gave an Alarme to all Italy. But this fine appearance, being stopped by a misfortune, made the Troops return, as being destinated for a supply, against the Duke of Soubize, and obliged the King, by the request of the Pope, to give peace to Italy,The Valteline in the hands; of the Pope. and sequester the Val∣teline into his hands; save only that both the Kings, were to have their pas∣sage with their forces that way. About the same time, there was discovered a Conspiracie against the King of France, and the Duke of Vandosme his Brother, the great Priour, the Mar∣shall d' Ornano, and many others put in prison, where the two last ended their dayes, without much noise: and the Count of Chulois, by the hands of a Common Executioner. These accidens raised much hatred upon Cardinal Richelieu, and produced many Pasquils against him. Envy and Harred, are ever companions to the vertue of great Ministers; and their actions are never free from blame. CHAP. XII. Mansfeldt hunts every where for relief, and sets an Army on foot. The Marriage of the Prince of Wales, with a Daughter of France, after his return out of Spain. HAnnibal, was no sooner out of his infancy, then he vowed the ruine of the Romanes, and being revoked from Italy, after he had domineered there the space of seventeen yeares, to save Carthage, he there ran his ship a ground, which had been loaden with so many victories, against the great Scipio. But now, what did he, when all the strings of his Bow were bro∣ken? He made to his wits, for new ones. He remembred his Oath, begged succour, animiated the Kings of the East, against the insatiable ambition of the Romanes, and continued his hatred, even to the very last gasp of his breath. Mansfeldt, and his Bishop seemed to have taken the like Oath, against the House of Austria, and by consequence, for the continuance in action against it, they must have new forces. Holland could furnish them with matter, conveniency, money, and hatred enough; England, with desire enough, to see Frederick again in the Palatmate; and France, with jea∣lousie enough, in regard of the growth of the aforesaid House. There wanted no bellowes to kindle this fire; mens humours being alrea∣dy disposed that way, by diversity of Religions, hatred, envy, self-ends, and Maxime of State; a Cover, which is never, either too long, or too short, and stronger then even Justice it self. But now, as these Captains had not so much trouble to perswade, as that Great Affrican; so had they notwithstanding to do, with people of much bet∣ter understanding, then those Barbarians. They went into France, where
Mensfeldt received some affronts, from some particular persons, for ill treat∣ments given the French in Freezland.Mansfeldt de∣mands succour in France. However, he obtained his demand: namely, some Force; the Minister, who then began to climb the Hori∣zon of favour, being now no more mindfull of the services both asked by, and granted to the Imperialists, before Sedan, in case of necessity, Maximes of State are more forcible then obligations, and Ministers turn their Allyances that way, which their passions carry them. Now, King James, though by the negotiations with Spain, he had disgu∣sted many of the Reformed Religion, shewed himself neverthelesse willing to have as good intelligence with the Catholick States, as the King of France had, with the Protestant, and so he sent Prince Charles his Sonne into Spain, to espouse the Infanta Mary: but, after the losse of much time, he came back into England, and demanded in France (through which he had passed dis∣guised) the Kings Sister, who was more easily granted him. Men have laboured, to penetrate into the Mystery of this Treaty; but all, by conjecture only. The Roman Catholicks of England, who began al∣ready to feel some warmth of the businesse, were extremely afflicted, at the breach of the aforesaid Match; and the misfortune which befell them, was a testimony of the perpetuall Crosse, which was ordained for them, in the Britannick Islands:A misfortune at London. for, being met in a private Assembly at London, to hear masse, the Loft, overburthened by the multitude, sunk down, and bruised near a hundred persons, together with the Priest. When the aforesaid Prince had married the Daughter of Henry the fourth, and sister to Lewis the thirteenth, he, and his Father, undertook the care of re-establishing his Brother-in-Law, in the Palatinate: In such sort, as that Mansfeldt had no great difficulty to transport ten thousand English into Holland, who almost all of them perished at Gerthrudenbergh, and served for bait to the Fish. The French Cavalry, consisting of three thousand, did likewise, no very long service: for, the Generalls marching towards the Rhein, and torment∣ing the Arch-Bishop, after their old fashion, their Army diminished much, by disbandings; and themselves fell into a quarrel, which had almost brought them to a Duell: though at last, they returned into Holland, and went from thence to the North, to warm those people against the Emperour. The Spaniards passe the Isel. Upon the seventeenth of February, 1624. the Spaniards passed upon the Ice, over the River Isel, and caused a terrour, as faire as Holland. Whereup-the Prince was constrained again to lay about him, and pass to Ʋirick: and the States, to command the Country-people to break the Ice of the River of Vecht. But Count Henry expected neither his enemies, nor the thaw, which would have made him to be caught in a Pit-fall; but retyred himself much faster then he came, and many of his souldiers found their graves in the Ri∣ver of Welaw. His designe was, to fright the Peasants, and not to hurt the States.
CHAP. XIII. The Siege of Breda. The Enterprizes upon Antwerp. SPinola was every moment devising, now to wipe off by some no∣table enterprize, the affront he had received before Berghen. He marched into the field, sent Count Henry towards the Rheyn, who made a shew of besieging Grave; and Count John of Nassaw, with the Horse towards Breda; who, at his arrivall, took a great multitude of Boats, loaden with Provisions. Himself followed with the Foot: and in his Councell of War, there was found no more then one Colonell, who thought fit to begin the siege;The siege of Breda. and that upon the same reasons, whereby Spinola himself was moved to it. On the other side, the Prince of Orange, glad to see his Rivall en∣gaged, before a place so well provided of all necessaries, as also of a strong Garrison, did not so soon dispose himself to succour it, but gave the Spaniards leisure to entrench themselves, and they him to repent him∣self of it. But he hoped, by the successe of his designe upon Antwerp, long be∣fore premeditated in his thoughts, and held by him infallible;The enterprize upon the Castle or Cittadell of Antwerp. to un∣nestle them from thence, and cast their state into an irremediable con∣fusion. He was well informed, that there were but very few Souldiers in the Cittadell, and they, for the most part, dismembred, and cripled. Wherefore, he sent some Troops, which made a shew of coming from the Camp before Breda, as carrying the same Motto's and Colours, which Spinola carried; they arrived undiscovered, to the very Mote, applyed their Ladders; and set all their rare Engynes on work, to ren∣der themselves Masters of the Place; whereof they could not have fail∣ed, had not their own hearts failed them first. For one Who goes there of the Sentinell, followed by the discharge of a Musket, made theirs fall our of their hands, and left them no more courage then onely to fly. It was thought, that he had a mind to bestow the honour of this expediti∣upon the Hollanders, whom he onely employed in it; and that if he had mingled any of the other nations with them, the businesse would have issued to his contentment. This newes struck the Marquis almost into a feaver; and sent the Prince loaden with Melancholy, to the Hage, where towards the end of the winter, he died, leaving his Army to his brother Henry Frederick, and Spinola before Breda; who, seeing no meanes to take it by force, resolved to famish it. A former enter∣prize upon the same Cittadell. The aforesaid Prince, had had a former enterprize, upon the said Cittadell, and held himself so sure of it, that he told the Burgoma∣sters of Dort, at his departure, that none but God could hinder it: And indeed, he was no sooner embarked, but there arose so violent, and so
extreamly cold a tempest, that it put both his life and his Fleet in danger; and so he was forced to return. God hath put limits to Victories, which cannot be passed by humane wisdome. Spinola, having sufficiently learnt, how needfull it was to be vigilant, with an enemy who slept not; reinforced the Garrison of the aforesaid Cittadell; kept himself fast in his trenches before Breda, expecting the consumpsion of the Provisions of the Town; and made magazin for the Winter; and being advertised besides, that the Enemy was assembling some forces, and that four Kings had interested themselves in this Siege: He sent for some Regiments, from the Empe∣rour. Uladislaus, Prince of Poland before Breda. Prince Ʋladislaus, since King of Poland, came to see this famous siege, and was received by the whole Army, with such military honours, as were due to the Sonne of a King, and a very great Captaine. The King of Spaine having foreseen this tempest, which was contrived against his Low-Countries, and being unwilling, to hazard the whole, for one piece thereof; wrote to his Aunt, that it was better to leave the siege, then obstinately to persist, in the impossibility of taking the Towne, with the losse of all her States. This savoured well with the Emulators of the said Marquis, as Don Lewis de Velasco, &c. A Magazin burnt. There happened also another misfortune, which was, that the Hollander, fired a Magazin, which would have staggered any other General, but such a one as he; who quickly requited this losse, and by his vigilancie, repulsed the English, who with a most martiall courage, went to attack a Quarter of his Camp. Breda copi∣tulates. In fine, after a Siege of ten moneths, Breda was yeelded; and it happen∣ed the very same day that the Kings Letters arrived, with his absolute com∣mand, to draw off the Army. We left the King of Poland, with his Nobility, marching against the great Turk; and therefore let us now look what the Swedes, in the mean while, are doing. Gustavus laid hold of that occasion; passed an army into Livonia; and after the siege of five weeks, to the great trouble of the Citi∣zens, took Riga. The Swedes take Riga. The Polanders hereupon, made loud complaints of him, for beginning the Warre, just when they were busied, against the Common Enemy: and for breaking the Truce; in the articles whereof it was comprized, that the one of the Kings should not enter into the Lands of the other, without ha∣ving denounced the War, three moneths before. To which, the Swedes made answer, that they had sent their Embassa∣dours;And mk at the complaints of the Foles and that they were not able to dispatch their Commissions any sooner, being hindered by windes, and tempests; which were to be accused, and not they: a trick of War, which must be made passe for good, accord∣ing to the Maximes of this Age. In short, this occasion was favourable to the Swedes, who cared as much for their reasons, as Monsieur de Montmorancy did, for those of the Ma∣gistrates of Metz, when he was gotten into possession of their Towne. This War was finished by a Truce, whereby the Swedes were obleiged to return by Sea, after they had well fortifyed Riga, with intention never to restore it againe. Now, the Electour Palatine, after being spoiled of his States, was deprived also of his Dignities, and his Electorat transferred upon the Duke of Bavaria, his Cosin, 1623. which much augmented hatred, against the Emperour,
Duke Maximilian, and all the Catholicks; and caused, in fine, many new Allyances to be made, which put spurts to the War we are going to discribe, in this next Book. The Electour Palatin spoiled of his States, and banished. This Prince was crowned King of Bohemia, the fourteenth of November. 1619. in the moneth of January following, he made his Allyances; and in the same year also, he lost his Kingdome, and his States, was proscri∣bed by the Emperours Edict, and his Coronation declared Null. He who grasps much, holds little; and it often falls out, that whilest we are in pursute of other mens good, we lose our owne.
THE HISTORY OF THIS IRON AGE. THE FOURTH BOOK. CHAP. I The Warre of Denmark. The Allyances of the Kings of France, England, Denmark, and the States of Holland against the Emperour. GEneral Mansfeldts arguments, had as much ef∣ficacy in the North, as they had towards the South; because the dangers, which seemed to threaten that Country, were grown greater, and besides, a Prince which becomes potent, makes himself both feared, and hated. Tilly wintered in Hassia, in despight of the Landgrave Maurice, nor were the States of Low-Saxony a little trou∣bled, to see the Imperiall Eagles fluttering up and down upon their fronteers; and that not without giving them great incovenience; besides, that they feared, lest they should peradventure come to replant their old authority there. The King of Denmark, together with many other Princes, and States thereabouts, were moved to much impatience, by the ruine of Frederick; as apprehending, lest these Guests should come, and take up their lodging amongst them. Wherefore being advertised by common danger, and by that, which themselves, perhaps, would have done, if they had had the same power, and right which the Emperour had, they made a League for the de∣fence of the Circle of the Lower Saxony, into which entred the Kings of Eng∣land, France, and Sweden; together with the States Generall, and the King of Denmark himself was the Head,A League a∣gainst the Em perour. as being General of the said Circle. The Dukes of Brunswick, Mekelenburgh, and Holstein; the Administratour of Magdeburgh, and the Bishop of Bremen, subscribed also to it. The Emperours forces, in the mean while, grew strong, and Tilly began to smell, that under the mask of amity, there were some new designes a brew∣ing; however they protested, that they were doing nothing against the Em∣perour. But he answered, that the Embassadours of the States of Holland, were not there,Tilly in Hastis. to thred pearles; and that he was sure, that nothing was treated to his Masters advantage, where they had any credit; and conse∣quently, for a greater testimony of his diffidence, he sent for Wallstain, with
an Army, to come and succour him. Causes lye hidden, under pretexts drawn from necessity, and justice, but they are easily discovered, by people of the same profession. Many Prodigies preceded the fatall warres; as Armies fighting in the Ayre, raining of Blood, great Tempests; bearing down Trees, Houses, and Dammes. But that, which was by all interpreted for an ill Augure, or Token, was, that the King going one evening to walk upon the Rampars,The Prodigies. or Walls of the Town of Hamelen, to visit the Sentinels, his horse stumbled at a plank, and threw him into the Mote or Ditch, out of which he was drawne two houres after, and conceived to be dead, for more then three dayes to∣gether. In the mean while, they who laid most to heart, the love of their Coun∣try, and Rest, employed all diligence, to find a means to reconcile this Dif∣ference, thereby to divert the misfortune, wherein all Lower Saxony was likely to be involved. To which effect, a Treaty of Peace was held at Bruns∣wick, and it was already agreed, that the Armies should be licensiated,They treat of peace in vain. by Regiments; to wit, that the King should casheer the first, Tilly the next, and so consecutively by turnes, to the end. But this Treaty was broken off by ambition, and so, such advantages as could not be reaped thereby, were sought by way of Arms. The Gamester is more willing to hazard another mans money, then his own. I will note only the principal actions of the warre, and content my selfe with saying, that it is very probable, that the Emperour had a design, to make his Authority, and Religion flourish afresh, in those Countries, where there was no more left, then a faint, and languishing knowledge thereof; and,The ayne of the League. that mingled with coldness, contempt, and hatred. But as for the contrary Party, they endeavoured, not onely to repell the aforesaid Guest, but also by vertue of the Allyance, to restore the Prince to his States, by force of Arms, since it could not be done by intercessions; and so, in fine, deliver all the Princes, from the jealousie which was given them by this House, puffed up with so many victories. The King retyred with his Army, as farre as the Bishopprick of Werden, and thereby gave the Imperialists opportunity to seaze upon many places: But Fortune varied at Niemburgh, from which Town, after the losse of a ve∣ry great number of their men, they were constrained to retreat, though yet the said losse, were repayred shortly after, by the taking of Calembergh, and the defeating of some companies of Dragoons. Tilly followes the River of Weser, and Wallenstein, that of the Elbe. Wallenstein followed the River of Elbe, and Tilly, that of Weser, who having occupated the Bishopprick of Hall, entred the Dutchy of Anholt, and forti∣fied the Bridge of Dassaw. Mansfeldt attacked this Fort, and being repulsed, joyned with the Administratour of Hall, to besiege that Town. Wallenstein hastened thither; so they fell to work: and the Fight, as well through the valour of the souldiers, as the experience of the Generals, was long time dubious enough, but at last, the Horse giving ground, the Foot found themselves reduced to the necessity of doing the same; and such as could not save themselves by flight, were either killed, or taken, Mansfeldt beaten near the bridge of Das∣saw. In this memorable Battell at the Bridge of Dassaw, all Mansfeldts glory was buried; howsoever he lost not his courage by so furious an overthrow, but having gotten on foot, a fresh Army of sixteen thousand men, (for Germany, and the Septemtrion were yet full of brave Souldiers) he drew towards Sile∣sia, took in some places, passed thence into Transylvania, where he gave up his Army to the Duke of Wimar; and accompanied by some of his principall Officers, put himself in the way towards Venice; but a Dysentery, or Bloody Flux, or rather (according to the opinion of some) a Potion, stopped the
course of his journey,His death. designes, and life, altogether; and delivered the Emperour from a troublesome Enemy: and the Duke of Wimar also a short space after, followed him, not to Venice, but to the other world. Thus end∣ed the life, of this famous General, who had been fortunate enough in raising Armies, but not in fighting Battels. Wallenstine, having stifled the War of Transylvania, marched back into Sile∣sia, dissipated Wimars Troops, and retook the occupated places: And Baudis, and Holck, being sent to joyne with the said Duke, were cut off by Merode, and Beckman: So that Wallenstein, having put an end to all their disorders, returned towards Brunswick. Tilly being intent upon the occasions of hurting his enemies, went, and unexpectedly attacked a Quarter commanded by that Valiant Souldier Obertrawt; who, together with one of the Dukes of Anholt, and some hun∣dreds of Souldiers,Obertrawt killed. was slaine in this encounter; and when Tilly went to visit, and comfort him, he answered him, Monsieur de Tilly, in such waters, are taken such fish. Now the King finding himself in great danger, by the losse of Mansfeldt, and the Bishop of Halberstadt, (who died at the same time, at Wolfenbottel, after he had vomited up a Worm of about four ells long) did not yet lose his courage.The death of the Bishop of Halbersiadt. Nature shews her strength in despair, and Vertue hers, in extremity. He saw two Armies upon his skirts, to be opposed by him, and therefore he resolved to attack the one of them, being more inflamed to vengeance, by the losse of Munden, which he slighted, and the furious blow, which was gi∣ven his Cavalrie, by Count Furstembergh. But, he was a little too tardy, in going to drive Tilly from the siege of Gothing: Besides that he stayed at Luther, against the advice of his Lieutenant Generall Fucks: and Tilly, thereby to make himself as glorious as Wallenstein, desired nothing more earnestly, then to slight. I fine, the Battell was given with so much obstinacie, that the old Bands, which had been accustomed to vanquish,Battell of Lu∣ther the twen∣ty seventh of August, 1626. began almost to stagger towards flight; but their time was not yet come, and the puissant Gemus of their Ge∣nerall, had a great advantage upon that of the King; who perceiving his Horse fly, and not being able, either by his presence, or exhortations, to de∣taine them: was compelled to abandon his Foot, to the mercy of the Ene∣my, and retyre himself as fast as he could gallop, to Wolfenbottel. This was a great and bloody Fight, and the Imperialists remained entirely vi∣ctorious in it. The Victory of the Imperialists and the death of Generall Fucks Brave Generall Fucks, who had disswaded the Battell, lost his life in this occasion, and gave the King sufficient testimony, that it was not through basenesse of heart or cowardize, but upon strong arguments, that he desired him not to precipitate. Many other Officers were also slain, together with above six thousand Souldiers: Thirty Pieces of Canon, three thousand Pri∣soners, fourscore and ten Colours, adorned the Conquerours Chariot; and all the booty was given to the Souldiers, in recompence of their Va∣lour. This was that famous Battell of Luther, which happened upon the 27th. of August, whereby the Emperours authority, and the joy of his Allyes was much augmented, and their Enemies fear redoubled: and after this there followed a continuall thred of Victories, and taking of Towns, even to the very sea-side. Favour flatters Fortune, and when there is no more meanes lest, to make open resistance against the storme, the sailes must be taken in, or the Vessel steered for safety, to the shelter of some Wood, or Rock. The Duke of Brunswick quitts the League. The Duke of Brunswick followed this Maxime, by making his Peace, and renouncing the League with Saxonie. Tilly lost no time, seized upon Rotem∣burgh, and many other places; whilest the King recollected the fragments
of his Army, and put it in Equipage, during the Winter, but to no purpose, For this vessell was too much tottered, to do any more service at all. In conclusion, Tilly having taken Nontheen, drew neer the River of Elbe, which was also to be conquered, after the conquest of so many enemies. But, we leave France too long in Peace, which yet was not all this while quiet. CHAP. II The prosecution of the second Warre against the Hughenots. The Peace made, by the undertaking of the King of England, the Venetians, and the Hollanders. Warre between France, and England, and why? The beginning of the third, and last Warre against the Hughenots. Cardinall Riche∣lieu makes himself known, admired, and feared. The siege, and reducti∣on of Rochell. The Duke of Soubize takes some shipps. WE have already shewed, how the Peace was made in Italy, as well upon the request of the Pope, as to put a remedy, to the inopinated Invasion of the Duke of Soubize; who against all expectation, and in full peace, launched with a Fleet from Rochell, came before the Port of Blavet, and seized upon some ships, which he found there. But, the Duke of Van∣dosme, who was Governour of the Province, transported himself thither, with so much promptitude, that he hindred the aforesaid Duke from making any farther progresse, and forced him to retyre, with two or three great Vessels, and some of a middle burthen. In such sort, as that by this invasion,The peace is broken. the Peace, which was made in the year 1622, before Montpellier, was broken, in that of 1625, and the Duke of Rohan his brother, recommenced the Warre in earnest, both in High, and Low Languedock, under pretext that the Trea∣ty of Peace had been ill observed. The King sends an Embassadour to the Hague. This surprize so much displeased the King, that he forth with sent all those Troops which were destinated for Italy, towards Brittany, and an Embassa∣dour to the Hague, to summon the States, to his assistance, with twenty ships, according to the tenour of the Allyance made betwixt them. But, the Em∣bassadour found some repugnance in the Colledge of the said States, in re∣spect of Religion; though yet, when he had remonstrated to them, that the businesse was onely to humble the Kings subjects to their obedience, and threatened them also with a breach, in case of refusall, they granted his de∣mand. My Master (sayes he) is of the same Faith with the King of Spaine, and yet, he maketh no difficulty to assist you against him. And will you in a Warre of State, expresse an inconsiderable zeale of Religion? He obtaines twenty shipps. Soubize being beaten retyres into England Hereupon, the States dispatched Admirall Hantain, who being joyned with the Kings Navie, carried himself like a Mediatour of a Reconcilliati∣on, and obtained a Truce of three dayes, which yet, was ill enough kept by Soubize, who hoped to draw some advantage from it, but his Fleet was de∣feated, and he forced to retyre into England, with six or seven vessels, and so the French took the Island of St. Martin, and built two Forts there. The King, upon the intercession of the States, pardoned them of Rochell, but the Zelanders did not pardon Admirall Hautain, who had for his recom∣pence
his house demolished, by the people, which were mad at the losse of the said Place. But these were ruled by the passion of Religion; and those, by that of the preservation of the State. The reason why Monsieur de Sou∣bize, brake the Peace, was, because the King had differred the demolish∣ment of Fort Lewis, raised near Rochell, which served for a bridle to the Town, and a Prospective to the Townsmen. But the Governour in∣deed, refused to do it, upon some informations which he had received from the Town of some sinister designes. In fine, the Fort still remained entyre, for all this, and was to prove fatall to the Party, illustrate the Kings Majesty throughout all France, and cut off the root of all Religion: It was believed, that the Duke of Rohan, had begged succour from the King of Spaine, in this discord of the Reformates, and his own, and his brothers disaster; but being pressed by the King of England, the Venetians, the Hollanders, and the Savoyers, he expected not the return of his Embassadour,The Peace is made by an al∣lyance against the Emperour. and so upon the instance of the aforesaid King and States, who could not indure the ingrandishment of the Imperiall Majesty in Germany, the Peace was renewed, the same year thas it was broken, and the League was knit up in Denmark (as we have lately said) in the year 1625. But before that warre, which was fatall to the Danes, was finished, be∣gan the disorders, which thrust themselves in, between the French and English: the reason whereof, as also of the third warre, which consummated the ruine of the Reformed Party, you shall forthwith understand. King James a peaceful Prince King James, jealous of his Royall authority, and more prone to study then fight, could never be induced, to assist the Hughenots in France. But after his decease, King Charles his sonne, by the reasons of Monsieur de Soubize, and his Favourite, the Duke of Buckingham, suffered himself to be perswaded to it; manifesting thereby, in imitation of his Brother in Law, that that Friend∣ship, which grew from the allyance of marriage, was weaker, then that of interest. There wanted no pretexts, as well of Religion, as otherwise; and the English being already pricked against the French, and these against them, for the bad treatment of the Priests, and Officers of the Queen, they were easily brought to break, as well by the arguments of Soubize, as of the whole Body together:The English enter the Isle of Ray 1627. and so the English Fleet, made a descent, or disembarkment in the Isle of Ray, in the moneth of July, of the year 1627, and besieged the Fort of St. Martin, which was not yet quite finished. This Warre, which in outward appearance, had no other scope at all, then that of Religion, with many other petty punctilios, which merited not so much as an ill look from either to the other, proved fatall to the Eng∣lish, and glorious to the French,Are beaten off with shame. by the enterance which they made into the Island, and the chase they gave their Enemies, from thence: but yet more glorious to Monsieur de Toir as, who defended the Fort neer four moneths, both against them and famine; and most glorious, to the Marshal of Scho∣enbergh, who put in the succour, and forced them, after they were lustily beaten, to retyre to their ships. So that, upon the matter, the English went away with the shame, and the Rochelers stayed, with the losse. And this warre, helped to forward the King of Denmarks ruine, in regard that these Kings gave him not the assistance they had promised him, by the Contract, and so he struck a ground. Rochell. The Confederated States, after the reduction of Rochel, were saine to hear, as well the reproaches, and calumnies of the whole Body of the Hughenots of France, as the taunts, and raylings of the English, Where blinde Passion rules, there is no roome for Reason. For it was not their fault, that this difference was not decided by some other meanes, then that of armes. But let us now note the successe of this siege.
Rochell, is a Town situated in the Country of Asins, which is grown to have great traffick, and riches, through the convenienie of the Haven,The growth of the Towne. and by consequence insolent, against the Kings authority. The Inhabitants mutined, under Francis the first, but as soon as they saw him in Arms, and that he would be obeyed, their audacity quickly turned into humility. After they embraced the Reformed Religion, they became by little and little, so powerfull, and so considerable, that the Kings through that the necessity of their affaires, were often obliged, to make a shew, not to see, or connive at that, which was not invisible to any. When we cannot correct Vice, we must seem to be ignorant of it. For, having the principall Key of the Kingdome, they made them∣selves chief of the Party, and all such as for any discontentment, absented themselves from Court, and bent themselves against the King, and his Authority, could never faile to be welcome unto Rochell. It is besieged by Henry the 3. They were once besieged by Monsieur, who was afterwards Henry the Third: but, upon request of the Embassadours of Poland, the siege was drawn off, just at the time when they were in hazard of being tamed. But, since that, their strength, together with their Intelligence, both with∣in, and without the Kingdome is so much augmented; they have relyed up∣on their fortifications, and have subtracted themselves from the yoke, nor more nor lesse, then the Imperiall Towns have done, from that of the Emperour. Cardinall Rechelieu, having gotten full possession of the Kings favour, for having dissipated some tumults, and found out the Mine (whereof the Count of Chalais payd the whole score, as a Complice, for all the rest) had no more left to do, then to acquire also that of the Clergie, and Peo∣ple, by some remarkable service to the State, whereof he could not faile, by the reduction of Rochell. And then by Lewis the 13. in the year, 1627. Now, the King being informed, of the descent of the English in the Isle of Ray, commanded his Troops to march, and as soon as he was recovered of a dangegous sicknesse, which he had at that time, he made them also in∣trench, and advance all the shipps of France, to stop the Haven, even the Spaniards themselves, comming to take possession of the place, which the Hollanders had left, under a specious pretext of mending their Vessels. The Damme being perfected, and the shipps sunk, in the deepest, and hol∣lowest place of the Channell, the besieged were reduced to a famine, which exceeded that of Jerusalem. All their hope was in the English; and Buckingham made all the haste he could to succour them, who had furnished him with victualls for his Army, and now with most instant, and urgent supplications, begged some back a∣gaine from him: but he being assassinated by a certaine Englishman,Buckingham killed by Felton. called Felton, who went expresly out of Holland, to sacrifice him to the hatred of the People, the Fleet was retarded. This murderer committed this fact, by the meer, and onely impulse of zeal, to the Religion, and so, by thinking to forward the businesse, he hin∣dered it. We very often aspire, to that which is against us, and reject that which is for us. This Duke of Buckingham, had entirely disposed of King James, and was no lesse in the favour of the King his Sonne: though neither his good coun∣tenance, nor his gracefull carriage, nor his liberality, nor his courtesie, was
ever able to winne the People, who held him still, for the Authour of all imaginable mischief to the Kingdom. The Reason of State, whereby Princes main∣taine. Now, the King of England being in some misunderstanding with his Brother in Law, the King of France, sent the Lord Montalgue, to the Dukes of Lorraine and Savoy, to animate them to a powerfull diversion, thereby to withdraw him from this siege. What cannot reason of State work upon Princes, who ought to have a care to pre∣serve their interests, by all rationall meanes? By this same reason, have the Kings of France maintained the Hollanders and the Protestants. By this, might it seem lawful to these two Princes, to passe by the consideration of Religion: By this do the Swissers, and the Venetians. uphold themselves. And the two aforesaid, knew well enough, that the French having fastened this pinne, would not, faile to trouble their Neighbours, upon the very first occasion, since there wanted no pretext; be∣sides that perswasion, whereby some flatterers will needs make them be∣lieve, that all Europe belongs to them. The Cardinall, to whom all these plots, and practises were not unknown, as having his Pensioners in England, as well as elsewhere, provided him∣self for them. The Aequinoctiall brought the Fleet, which was to break the Damm, and put some food into the famished Towne.The Damm. The Nobility posted thither, to serve their King, and purchase glory. All was hemmed in with Artillery and Souldiers: and the passage so stopped, as well by the said Damm, and variety of Engines, as also by the Vessels; that the English not seeing any meanes to penetrate, re∣tyred. The Rochelers, of whom there was not above the tenth part left (so much were they wasted with hunger) rendered themselves into the hands of their King,Rochell being starved yields. who took them into his mercy, and granted them the free exercise of their Religion: but he discharged his just choler, upon the Bastions, and Works, which he caused to be thrown down. Never had the Hughenots a more sensible losse then this, nor ever had the Catholicks a more gratefull Victorie. Nor was the Cardinall with∣out his share thereof; the French every where singing his praises, raising him to Heaven; making him their Angel Guardian, and even a God upon earth. But, this love was quickly changed, and this second Tiberius made them feel, that he was a Fox, and governed himself meerly by the Maxims of Machiavell.
CHAP. III. The prosecution of the Warre of Denmark, unfortunate to the Danes. Wallenstein in vain besieges Stralsund. The Peace made. Tilly passes the Elbe. SInce we have left Tilly near the Elbe, let us march on with him, and see what resistance he findes. The terrour was so universal, that every body fled: yea, the souldiers themselves forsook their Canon, Forts, Arms, and Baggage, at the very name of this great General. Only the Marquis of Dourlac presumed to face about; but the Count of Slick quickly made him turn his back, and stick to his heels. The number of the Gunnes, and Colours, much illustrated this victory. There were no more left,Dourlac, Ca∣lembergh, and Nell are bea∣ten. then the Generals Calem∣bergh and Nell, who being found intrenched, were invested by the said Slick, and having no hope at all of succour, yeelded themselves to him. Three thousand horse, and two Regiments of Foot took part with the Conquerors. But, the Generals having gotten possession of Holstein, and Iutland, there re∣mained yet some Townes to be subdued; so that it was necessary to divide the forces, to accomplish the work, Papenheim was before Wolfenbottel, which after it been long blocked up, opened him the Gates. Nerbrot defea∣ted by Anholt. There chanced yer another misfortune in the Countrey of Bremen, which drove the Allyes quite out of the Field: and it was, that General Nerbrot was attacked, and without scarce having fought for it, utterly routed by Anholt; so great power had fear, upon such as were staggered by the pu∣issant Genius of victorious Tilly; and the souldiers being deserted by their General, forgot their duty, and embraced that party, to which Fortune most inclined. What strange felicity had this man? yea, even higher then that of Iulius Caesar himself, since he could more clearly and truly say, I came, I saw, and I overcame. Townes besieged by the Imperia∣lists. The Armies finding now no more Armies to combat, were employed about the taking of Towns; by the resistance whereof, many souldiers, and much time was lost; and leasure given the King, to fortify himself in the Isles of Funds, and Zeland. Stade, after a huge opposition, yeelded to Tilly; and Newburgh to the Duke of Brunswick. The Imperialists attempted severall times to passe to the Islands, but were repulsed with losse. God had put bounds to their victories, and would not suffer this generous Prince to be quite dispoyled of his kingdom. The Conquerors in Meckelen∣burgh. The Dukes of Meckelenburgh took part with the King; for Fate, it seems, would needs involve them in the same disasters: But, at the arrivall of the Imperial Troops, all gave way, all stooped; the Towns opened their Gates, to receive Garrisons, and their purses, to sweeten the insolencies of the victo∣rious souldiers. A hard condition, for that poor people, who had so long en∣joyed the sweet fruits of Peace! But who can resist against the cruel lot of Destiny? Having recovered some ships, they tryed for the last time, to passe, and re-invest the poor King; but were soundly cudgelled, and compelled to make towards Pomerama, which was already conquered, except Stralsund, and Steene: the former whereof being a Maritime Town, was besieged by Arnhem, upon the command of his Generall. And here it was, that For∣tune made the Imperialists confesse, that if they could domineer by land;Wallenstein besieges Stral∣sund in vain. their enemies could do as much, upon the water, For Wallenstein thought to terrify the besieged, by frequent Assaults; but not being able to hinder the
entrance of the ships, he lost an infinity of good souldiers, his own labour, and some part also of his glory. There was a rumour scattered, as if he had van∣ted, that he would take Stralsund,The King ha∣cen again. even though it were hung in the ayer, and tyed with Iron chaines. The King regained courage, and footing in Pomerania, but found still, that Fortune was yet but his Step-mother; as suffering him again to be benten near Wolgast; so that he could do no more, then re-inforce the besieged, who were ready to yeeld, and retyre himself into Denmark. Canipo was forced by famin; and there it was, that the French, who came to succour the King, manifested their valour. Gelucstat, a strong place upon the River below Hamburgh, was long time beleaguered in vain by Tilly, who lost both his time, and his labour, about that; as Wallenstein did his, before Stralsund. In fine, a Peace was treated; and a Warre finished in five moneths, which had lasted five yeares.Peace made. 1629. The King abandoned by almost all his Allyes, (who had work enough at home) with a Royall and indemptable heart, employ∣ed all his abilities, and industry, not only to defend his Islands, but also to expell his enemies out of Holstein. But the peace concluded at Lubec, put a period to all his troubles; dislodged the Imperialists (since they had lost the hope of conquering the whole Kingdom) out of his Territories; and freed all the North, from the danger whereby it was threatned, of a change, both in Church, and State. By this Peace (which a certain French Writer terms shameful for the Conquerours, as being with intention to dispossess a Catholick Prince of his lawfull succession) the King renounced the Provinces of Saxony, and so the amity between the two Princes was renewed. The Emperour writing to the King, told him formally, that their quarrel proceeded from nothing, but the craft and practises of some certain Merchants. The States Generall, being fearfull, left by so many losses heaped together, and the felicity which accompanied this valorous Count, the Imperialists should gain Zeland,The Hollanders will defend the Sound. and make themselves Masters of that famous Streight, which is of so much consequence; offered to defend it with their ships. But the most desired newes of the Peace, and Retreat, stifled all these ap∣prehensions. Whatsoever was past, was sunk into the gulph of oblivion; all setled, is it had been, before the Warre; and the Emperour gave suffici∣ent testimony, that he knew as well how to restore, and pardon, as to van∣quish; and that he had taken armes, to defend the Majesty of the Empyre, and his own Authority; not to strip the King of his kingdoms. This Peace was received by all the Subjects of the King, as a speciall grace sent them from God: but that, which was deplorable in it, was, that he was forced to abandon the cause of his Cousins, the Dukes of Meckelenbergh; who, for having embraced his, and followed his Party (or rather, for having conjoyned their armes with all the members of the Circle) were proclaimed Out-lawes,The Dukes of Meckeln∣bergh excluded from Peace. Their Dutchy given to Wal∣lenstein. and their Dutchy ingaged to Wallenstein, who was afterward put in possession thereof as true Duke, by the Emperour. This proceeding, as be∣ing very rigorous against Princes, of so ancient, and so illustrious a Family, and totally contrary to Ferdinands clemency, made the House of Austria suspected, not only of intending to establish her Authority in the North, but of making also the very Empire it self Hereditary, and to go yet farther too, if occasion were offered. And this, upon the matter, was partly the cause of the Swedish warre, as we shall shortly demonstrate. But let us go into Au∣stria, where we shall find very fine house-keeping.
CHAP. IV The Warre of the Peasants in Austria. VVHilest all the North trembled at the Imperial Eagles, and that nothing but the salt ayer of the Ocean was able to stop, either their flight, or their victories: behold a little spark in Austria, both con∣temptible, and contemned, raised within a few moneths, such an embaras∣ment, as frighted that invincible Monarch, at the same time that all the Princes began (with good reason) to apprehend him, through the constant felicity of his Generalls. These disorders were caused by diversity of Reli∣gion, and the Politicians, together with such as aspired to change, moved them on to that point, which we are now going to describe. The cause of the Revolt of the Peasants. Ferdinand, being a very zealous Prince, thought it his duty to draw, either by fair meanes or foul, all his Subjects to the Roman Catholick Religion; and his Councell alledged, that his Authority would still be wavering, as long as there should be any Hereticks in his States. And so it was facil to perswade him, to a thing which hè conceived to depend upon his consci∣ence. Whereupon he commanded all his Subjects, either forthwith to em∣brace the Catholick Religion, or depart out of Austria, within a certain term prescribed them. A bold resolution, and found strange opposition. He declared in his Letters Pattents, that Heresie, under the pretext of Liberty of Conscience, and Priviledges, hatched nothing in her bosome, but Re∣volts, Sedition, and Devices to shake off the yoke of Soveraigns, and law∣full Magistrates. Princes look upon the interest of State, and the People, that of Religion; which once lost, farewell all respect with it. The Peasants must there∣fore be stirred up, to try if luck would turn, and whether Fortune would be alwayes fixed with a Diamant-Nayle. Complaints were rejected; Count Hebersdorf, the inexorable executor of this importunate and unseasonable Command, was first chased away with stones, and afterwards fury affoar∣ded other weapons. For the said Peasants, to the number of ten thousand, cut off his forces, seazed upon many Castles, and small Places; and being at lenth, re-inforced by forty thousand men, and forty Peeces of Ordnance, pillaged all Austria, sparing neither Priest, Monk, nor Gentleman. The Clergy hath ever served as Fee, or prey to the seditious. The Emperour wrote to them; but they, endeavouring to obtain by force, what was denied to their supplication, disdained to answer him. Up∣on which, he dispatched other Embassadours, to endeavour to reduce them gently, to their duty; but they retained them, and sent some from them∣selves to Vienna, to demand free exercise of their Religion: dismission of the souldiers, and a generall pardon for what was past: All which they had ob∣tained, had not their prosperity, by the defeat of some of the Duke of Ba∣varia's Troops, made them undertake more. If any grow blind by happi∣nesse, it is chiefly the abject sort of the vulgar, which waxes temerarily bold, when it thinks it self feared. But the Town of Lintz, which they besieged, cowed their courage, and speeded the punishment, which they had deserved, by their rash Rebellion. They assaulted it often, but were still repulsed, with huge losse: so that Papenheim, who was appointed to chastise them, effected it not with so great facility, as Trucses, and some other Generals had done, that of the like seditious Rabble, above a hundred years before. For he was fain to combat them at least seven times, before he could vanquish them; so chearfully and stoutly would they rally, and defy their victorious enemies, even in the fight. The Romans found themselves once in great trouble by
the revolt of their slaves, and yet they more easily quenched that fire, though it were even within the Walls of Rome; then the Imperialists were able to do this, because here was more combustible matter. But under what Heads or Leaders,Their Generals, a Schollar, a Shoomaker, and a Smith. did this desperate Crew fight? A Schollar, a Shoomaker, and a Smith. With what weapons? Sticks, Stoones, Whips, Forks, and Muskets. And what more? Potion, and Enchantments. To what end? If we must judge Effects by their Causes, it was for the exercise of Religion, and to beat out their Soveraign Magistrate. Who were those Aeoluses, who letting loose the windes, disturbed the Calm, and raised their storms? It is more easie to conjecture, and believe, then to prove. They are at last defeated in many Encoun∣ters, by Papen∣heim. After the last defeat, the most mutinous of them ran away; and the rest pent up at home, like slocks of sheep. Thus ended this dangerous warre; which teaches us, how perilous a a thing it is, to endeavour to command mens consciences. We must con∣tend with the word of God, and not with the sword; or, to say better, we must pray with charity for one another, and not persecute our selves with arms, unlesse we be commanded by Politick necessity. The holy Scripture sayes; Let the rares grow, fear lest you root out the good corne. Papenheim acqui∣red no lesse glory, nor merited lesse to Triumph, then the two other Gene∣rals. And thus was the Emperour delivered from a most apparent danger, by the remotenesse of his Armies. Let us now make a leap to the Low-Countries, and see what passed there, at the beginning of the year 1625. CHAP. V The death of Prince Maurice, and of the King of England. The Siege of Groll. The State of Lorraine. The Jubily at Rome. Bethleeem makes warre upon the Emperour, and obtains peace. The death of Maurice 1625. PRince Maurice being returned to the Hague, expressed no more then a certain pensiveness, and melancholy, proceeding from age, and (as it was believed) from the errour committed, in that memorable Enterprise upon Antwerp; which grew to augment his feaver, and brought him at length to his grave. His reputation is too much known, to speak much of him; and the United Provinces would have had cause to be infinitely af∣flicted at such a loss, had he not left them that worthy Brother, and that strong Atlas, who forthwith took the burthen of the Government upon his shoulders. This was he who firmly fixed this reeling Common-wealth, by his Arms; took many Townes in Freezland, Overysell, and Guelders, with small charge, few men, and little bloodshed: in such sort, as that he merited to be termed, as he was, the Father of the Souldiers. And of King James, a peace∣full Prince. In the same spring also, died King James; a Prince, who much loved Peace and learning. After he had the Crown of England upon his Head, all the disasters, and misfortunes of his House, begun upon his Praedecessours, were stopped by him, as water is by the opposition of a Dam, or Bank; so to gush out with the greater violence, upon his children, and succesours, as we shall hereafter shew. But, who can penetrate into the secrets of Gods Judgments? He governed his kingdom in peace, and maintained his Subjects in riches, and delights: but there grew up a little Venim, which wrought afterwards, in fit time. The vills which we see often happen, draw their cause sometimes, from afarre off.
Prince Henry, having payed the last duties to his magnanimous Brother, departed from the Hague, to hinder the designe which the Spaniards had,The Spaniards will joyne the Rhein to the Mo, 1626. to joyn the Rhein to the Mose; and by the erection of many Forts, keep the Hol∣landers from passing over; an Enterprise, which unprofitably exhausted their money and made them seem able, to make no more then meerly a Defen∣sive warre. Jupiter laughed at the Gyants who would scale Heaven. Time hath declared the inutility of this work, and to what intention also that advice was given: For the Hollanders are Masters of that liquid Element, and passe it when they will. There chanced nothing worthy of note, in that toylsome March; save only that Count Henry of Bergues, beat up the Horse-Quarter, brought away the Count of Stirum his Cousin prisoner, with some Horse;Count Stirum prisoner. In revenge whereof, the Prince sent Count Ernest, to unnestle the Spaniards from Oldenzeel, and destroy the nest. The Siege of Grol. In the year 1627. he laid siege to Grol, a small, but strong Town, upon the Confines of Westphalia, which he carried in lesse then a moneth, in the sight of a puissant Army. Spinola, in the mean time, was busie about the for∣tifying of Sandflect, a Village between Antwerp, and Berghen op Zoom, which was a design of more advantage, and consideration, then that of uni∣ting the two Rivers. By this exploit of the Prince, it was judged, that his Government would prove happy; and the vessels loaden with mony, which were brought out of Holland by Peter Hein, moved him to undertake the siege of Boisleduc, which was begun the first of May, and ended the seventeenth of September; a fatal day to the House of Austria. Lorraine was peacefully governed by the wise conduct of Duke Henry, son to Duke Charles; but his term was but of sixteen yeers.The death of the Duke of Lorraine. He departed to a better life, the twentieth of Iuly 1624. and shortly after him, the repose, and tranquility of all that Country, by the ambition of her Neighbours. He left but two Daughters; the elder whereof was married to the Count of Vandomonts sonne, her Cousin-German. The Salick Law in Lor∣raine. The year following, the Salick Law having regained vigour, and Francis of Vandomont being next heir by the said Law, which excludes Females; sur∣rendred his right in that Dutchy to his sonne Charles; which was approved by the States of the Country; and so Charles Duke of Lorraine, made his en∣try into the good City of Nancy, and took full possession of the whole Dukedome. Now, some have written against this said Law, as if it were to be obser∣ved no where but in France, as coming thither with them, out of Franconie. But most Writers affirm, that the ancient Franks established their habitation from the bank of the Rhein, to the River of Loire; in such sort, as that Lor∣raine being comprised therein, and having been also a parcell divided from that kingdom, it followes, that the Predecessors had the same intention, to establish it as well in the kingdom of Austrasia, as in that of France, and that it hath been tacitly, and quietly observed, without any dispute. Besides, that it is proved by the Testament of Renè of Ierusalem Duke of Lorraine, and Bar, made in the year 1406. by which the Male are called to Succession, and the Female excluded, as it further appears also by experience it self. A Jubily ar Rome. This year of 1625. Pope Ʋrban celebrated an universall Jubily, at which the Prince of Poland, coming from the Low-Countries, was present; and the same year, the Emperour Ferdinand Crowned his Son King of Hungary; in∣vited thereto, by the States of that kingdom, to be defended by so great and powerfull a Prince, against the perpetual ambushes, and snares, of the incon∣stant Gabor. Nor was it enough, that he had one Crown;The Crowning of the King of Hungary. for that of Bohemia was also resigned him by his Father, with the accustomed Ceremonies. Let us not leave the Danub, which was yet all red with the blood of the
Peasants, till we shall first have seen that of the Transylvanians, and Turks, stream also there, together with the motives of that Warre. Gabor breakes the peace. This Gabor, being swolne with pride, by the Allyance of one of the most illustrious Houses of Germany; honoured at his wedding, by the presence of the two Emperours, besides those of Kings, and other Princes; found him∣self tickled, by a new desire to Reign: and the occasions were so fair, that they stifled the Peace so often sworne, and so often broaken. For the Ar∣mies were drawne towards the Baltick Sea; and the Bavarians, and Pahou∣heim, had work enough, with the revolted Peasants. Whereupon he passed out of Hungary into Moravia, and took many Townes; the fear of so unfore∣seen an evill, making the people have recourse rather to God, then Armes. But Mansfeldt having redressed his Army, after being cudgelled in Saxony, marched out of Silesia, into Hungary; and Wallenstein traced him: affronted them all together, and defeated them. Upon this he called the Tartars, who passed through Poland to his assistance; but they being loaden with pil∣lage, were so hotly charged by the Poles,The Tartars beaten. that they were fain to lay down both their packs, and their lives; in such sort, as that there remained not so so much as one alive, to carry the newes: so that there were only the Turks, upon whom to look now; and them he invited: but it was only to augment the Triumph of Wallenstein,And the Turks by Wallenstein., who beat them, took their Canon, and pillaged their Camp, which was full of riches. The Grand-Signor, desirous to keep the Peace, called back his Troops, and their departure gave Gabor,Gabor repents, and obtaines peace. both disgust, and repentance, for having so often offended the Emperour, who was loaden with victorious lawrel: and therefore he sent his Embassadours, who found Ferdinand as ready to par∣don, as their Master had been light to offend; and so he was content to ac∣cept all the conditions proposed to him by the Conquerors, signe the Peace, and be quiet. The Hungarians rejoyced hereat, because those disturbances held them in continual Alarmes. And this was the end of the warres of Hungary, and Austria, besprinkled with the blood of the Peasants, and Bar∣barians. Let us now suffer them to repose some years, and return again to∣wards the Septemptrion. CHAP. VI. Gustave King of Sweden, attacks Borussia, or Prussia. The Imperialists succour the Polanders. A Truce is made for six years PEace being made being made, between the Emperour, and the King of Denmark, the Imperialists departed out of Holstein, and all the other oc∣cupated places,The Stralsun∣dians under the protection of King Gustave, who enters into Prussia. and dispersed themselves throughout all Meckelenburgh, and Pomerania, The Citizens of Stralsund, grown sturdy, and proud by ha∣ving eluded the Attacks of Wallenstein, put themselves by content of the King of Denmark, under the King of Swedens protection. This action much dis∣pleased Ferdinand; begat the most dreadfull warre of this Age, and opened the passage to the Swedes, to come and usurp a good part of the Empyre, after having troubled it all. Gustavus Adolphus, having made himself Master of Livonia, endeavoured to do as much with Prussia, where he had powerful Correspondents. When there there is not strength enough, recourse must be had to shifts. He entred unresisted, with a puissant Navy, took, and fortified the Pilaw; passed to Elbing, which
yeelded out of affection, as also many other Places. Onely Brunsbergh, a Ca∣tholick Town, durst make defence, and was taken by constraint.Takes many Towns. All trem∣bled, between hope and fear, love and hate, and the desire of novelty seem∣ed to prevail over ancient duty. We desire (saith the Poet) alwayes that, which is denyed us, and labour to ob∣tain that which is forbidden us. I have heard some men of that Country, worthy of credit, affirme, that if the King had drawn neer Dansick, with the same bosdnesse, and resolution that he did before Elbing, it is very probable, that the Citizens would have made their accommodation with him. But opinion, is as much subject to falshood, as truth. The River Wistule, parts it self into branches, the one whereof bathes Elbing, and the other passes through Dansick, and a little below it, shoots it self into the sea. Makes a Fort at the separa∣tion of the River. The King lost no time, but gained the Point, and built a Fort there, like that of Schenck, at the separation of the Rheyn. The River being thus bridled, the Polanders who were wont to bring their corn to Dansick, in certaine long Boats, which they call Canes, chose rather now, to let it moulder, and perish at home, then carry it, at a most vaste charge, through their Enemies Quarters: which caused a dearth in Holland, and incommodated the Traffick so much, that had this Warre lasted any long time, it would have done the Spaniards businesse there. The Polanders, who boasted, that they could easily drive out the Swedes, made no great haste to put their Army into the Field:The Polanders slight their enemies. but were much ama∣zed, to see so many Trenches, and the Townes which were lost, half forti∣fied in a trice. There occurred many ambiguous Fights; but the matter was never brought to a generall decision. The Swedes made Warre, after the Holland fashion, and the Poles, after the French; and these, were beaten before Strasburgh, and those, be∣fore Torn. Generall Arnhem came to succour the Polanders; but he brought them more hurt, then good. A truce made for six moneths In sine, by the intervention of the Count d' Auanx, Embassadour of France, and those of the States Generall, a Truce was made for six years, to the great contentment of the Hollanders, who were full of joy before, by the gaining of Boisleduc; which, how it came to be taken, the strength thereof making it held impregnable, I will forthwith declare. King Gustane, being fortified by the relicks of the Polish Army, marched back into Sweden, to deliberate of the Germane Warre; which was underta∣ken not by any Right, but Usurpation: and more for conveniency and jea∣lousie, then any justice at all. Whatsoever other Princes do, is lawfull, merits praise, and is put into the necessity of their affaires: onely the House of Austria is guilty, and culp∣able: She must endure all, and if the Lot of Warre favour her, against such as presume to shook her, she must not resent it, but make a stop to her Victo∣rie, to avoyd the being accused of Usurpation. The Empyre hath been too long in her possession, it must be torn out of her hands, though it were to be done, by the destruction of the Catholick Religion, and the fundamentall Lawes. But great Preparatives call us back into Holland: there is some huge De∣signe, to which they are invited, by the disorder of the Spaniards.
CHAP. VII. The Siege of Boisleduc. The Imperialists under Mon∣tecuculi, joyne with the Count of Bergh, who enters in Velaw. The taking of Wesel. THe Hollanders, well knowing the Situation, Fortification and Impor∣tance of Boisleduc, were wont to say, as by a common Proverb, to de∣monstrate the small apparance there was of taking it, I will pay you, when Boisleduc isOurs, or of our Part, all which were called Gueuse; Gueuse; that is to say, I will never pay you. But the event hath ma∣nifested the contrary; this Town having closely followed Rochell, which was conceived to be unbesiegable, in regard of the Haven. But in this de∣testable Age, there hath been nothing found impregnable, for wickednesse being every where, the Sword enters every where, all gives way to Injustice, and Impiety. Nothing is able to resist insolence, nothing so sacred, but it is prophaned, nothing so solid, but it is moved, and nothing so firme, but it is broken. The Prince of Orange, seeing the Emperours forces employed in Den∣mark, and Austria, and those of Spaine a ground, by the taking of the Indian Silver Fleet, and carrying it to Amsterdam, egged on from abroad, and inflamed also, with desire of taking this place, by the very difficulties there were in it, resolved, after having maturely picked out all the circum∣stances, to go a Maying there, the last of April 1629. His Intelligences, both within, and without the Town, were not small, and the obstacles, which offered themselves in bulke, very great. But considering, that the greater the difficulties be, the more luster they give to Vertue, he slighted all. For∣tune forwards the stout,The Siege of Boisleduc. and hinders the timid. He invested it with an Army of thirty thousand men, and speedily finished his Trenches, and Lines of Communication, whilest they were disputing at Brussels, who should com∣mand their Army.Henry of Bergh General of the Army. Count Henry was chosen, but he marched so slowly, that he found the Prince too strongly intrenched for his defence, to be pos∣sibly forced out. For, he had dammed up the Rivers, and brought them round about his Fortifications, in such sort, as it was like a broad Sea. And on the other side, the Summer was so faire,A dry Summer. and so dry, that it looked, as if heaven had enter∣ed into contract with the Prince, to give him the fruition of the Victory. For had it chanced to be moist, and rainy (as it is ordinary in that climate) their mills of so rare workmanship, would have proved uselesse, and Nature would have jecred Art out of countenance. The Spaniards in the Velaw. The Spaniards indeavoured to succour it in vaine: which made them passe the Rheyn, at Wesel, to joyne with the Imperialists; and the passage of the Isell being open, and maintained with the sword, gave them a fair prize, together with the defence of some Companies which followed. But, the Prince drew out part of his Army, which so well coasted the Spaniards, that they made no remarkable progresse at all. Never had they Fortune so favourable, and never did they loose so many men, as in that field, not by the sword, but by other inconveniencies: Where∣as had they gon forward at first, they had found no kinde of resistance, all the Country being full of fear, and consternation. The Prince stood so fast before Boisleduc, that he could not be parswaded by the States of Guelders, Overysel, and Ʋtrick, to quit the siege, though it
were to save the Country; bidding them, by way of answer, to have pati∣ence, and put all in good order, &c. that the enemy would give them more fear, then hurt. All which proved true: for, the Hollanders, having ta∣ken breath, and done all which was necessary for the defence of their Country, with some of the licensiated Troops of the King of Denmark, put the Armies to a sudden stand, without either Counsell or courage, upon the dry sands of the Velaw. Yet howsoever,Take Amers∣fort. they were bold enough to attack Amersfort, which not being tenible, was forthwith yeelded, and some other small paltry places near the South-Sea, were attempted, and not ta∣ken, in regard their design was discovered, before it was fit to be executed. Besides, to encrease the misfortune of the Enemies, upon the nineteenth of August, being a very fair morning, Wesel was taken,Wesel being surprised, makes the Spa∣niards draw out. and the booty of the Im∣perialists snapt: which forced them to draw out of the Velaw faster, then they went in, without having so much as seen Amsterdam, which was alwayes in their mouthes. But the grapes were sower, because the Fox could not reach them. Count Henry retyred not to Brussells, but to his Government; and could not so well clear himself, but that there remained some suspicions greatly disadvantageous to his reputation, in the soules of the more clear-sighted men; which were verified, by the open retreat he made, grounded upon slight and frivolous excuses only, concerning the Kings service. Boisleduc yeelds for want of powder, In fine, Boisloduc was rendered; the Imperialists returned into Germany, much lighter then they came; and the Spaniards into Brabant, almost half of them wasted, by hunger, sicknesse, and disbanding, not without loud mur∣muring, and plainly cursing their General. Count Iohn of Nasseaw left the passage of the Isel, and the Prince went into Holland, where he was re∣ceived by all, with marvellous acclamations of joy, and unparallelled applause. This Place, being one of the most important the King had, was taken for want of powder, and a sufficient Garrison; and the Prince, on the other side, having no want of mony, commanded a Bank to be raised from Holland, overthwart the Fennes, or Marishes, which cost the United Provinces much treasure, and much hastened the taking of the Town: besides, that to say truth, the Magistrates of Amsterdam, were not backward to advance money, to de∣clare the zeal they had, to the preservation of the Common-wealth. Never did Fortune smile more upon the Spaniards, with a more unhappy issue; and never frowned more upon the Confoederates, to give them a more glorious victory. The losse of this most important place, frustrated the Spaniards the hope of regaining Holland, and served for an invincible Clausure to the Com∣mon-wealth for the future, if we look upon the outside of it; but it is subject to corruption, in regard of the abundance of ill humours, wherewith it is stuffed within, as rising from the fenny grounds about it, which yet easily are voyded by weak and slight physick, as will shortly appear. But let us now go see the conclusion of the Warre in France, against the Hugenots, and the ruine of that Party, which gave the King means afterwards to shock the House of Austria, and afflict his Neighbours.
CHAP. VIII The prosecution of the last warre, against the Reformats in France. The Duke of Rohan makes his Peace. All the Townes humble themselves, and throw down their Fortifications. The end of the Party. DUring the siege of Rochell, that two Brothers (namely, the Dukes of Rohan, and Soublse) did all they could to succour the Center of their State; moving even Heaven and Earth, with the most zealous of the Party, to save the Place from the shipwrack whereof it was in danger. The one made insurrections every where, saying, that if the Town were taken, all they of the Party would be massacred: but the Prince of Conde, and the Duke of Montmorancy charged him so often, and so closely, that he had almost ever the worst. The other encouraged the English, and urged them to make haste, before the Damme were finished, about which the French wrought with great ar∣dour,o resons retard the suc∣cour. and good successe. Two reasons in my opinion, retarded the succour so long: the one, that they could not imagine, that the said Damme (at which they laughed) would be able to hinder their passage; and that being stronger by Sea then the French, they should easily break all obstacles. The other is, that they would not relieve the Town till it were in extremity; to the end that (the Townesmen being for the most part starved, or debilitated with hunger) they might make themselves masters thereof, and place a Colony of their own nation there; to be ready at all times, to incommodate France, and awaken their old pretensions. They who ask relicfe, have one de∣signe; and he who gives it, another. Besides, that it is also very credible, that the Cardinal (who was not ignorant, of how great his credit would be, after the reduction of this Place, (which was judged impregnable) had corrupted the chief of the Counsell of England, with mony, that so the succour, which was hastened by zeal, might be delayed. Whatever it were, neither the great Arsenal, nor the strength of the Bastions, nor the Purse at Porrette, nor the desperate resolution to die, and to hang him who should first speak of yeelding; served to any other purpose, then to make the constance of the Townsmen admired, augment the story of King Lewis the Inst, and elevate that of the Cardinal, above the Stars. A very great, and most acceptable Vi∣ctory to France, had she remained in the same liberty which she enjoyed, during the potency of this Town. A most damnable victory to the House of Austria, which the French themselves accuse of having then forgotten her interest. A victory, which ruined, and brought to a full stand, or Non-plus, all that Party, which divided the Kings Authority. A Victory, which gave that great Cardinal one half of his honour; and upon which he founded the high∣est, and most constant power, that ever any Minister had; to the ruine of many most illustrious Families, and old Priviledges, the confusion of all Christendom, and even of his own great Benefactresse her self. Now since the English had rather hindred, then furthered the Party, and were accused of being the cause of this irreparable losse; a resolution was ta∣ken to seek to some other support elsewhere: and so an Embassadour was dispatched into Spain, to represent to that King, that interest he had to keep this Party;The Duke of Rohan de∣ands sicour in Spain. and to beseech him to send mony only, and to remember the King of France's Allyance with the Hollander, whom he maintained with as much heat and zeal, as if they were his own subjects, and of his own Reli∣gion,
Whereupon the Spaniards, by the permission of the Counsell Con∣science, resolved upon it; thereby to give as many vexations to the King of France, within his kingdom; as they received from him in the Low-coun∣tries. But the said Embassadour,The death of the Negotiatour. or Necessitator, though a subject of the King of Spaines, was taken and condemned to death, by order of the Parlia∣ment of Tholosa; his innocence, founded upon the action of a publick Minister, serving him for nothing; however this Decree were censured by such as had not their eyes vailed by passion, and who could speak freely of it with∣out danger. Makes his peace with the King, and all obey. King Lewis discovered all their plots, and prevented them, by the pru∣dence of the Cardinal; and having made but a slight peace with the said Duke, he fell with his Army upon the Vivaret, surprised Privas, and took it by open force; chastised insolence, by putting all to sword: treated well the Townes which submitted, and assured them of the free exercise of their Re∣ligion. Upon this, the Duke had recourse to his clemency, and he graciously embraced him, and augmented his Pension. Castras, Niemes, and some other places, which might have given a long trouble, also submitted, with∣out any other punishment inflicted upon, then the demolishment of their new Fortisications: which Commandment was of hard digestion to them of Montauban, who were nevertheless disposed to obedience by the Cardinals presence, and the force of his eloquence, who alledged that the King could not endure any fortified place in his kingdom, And so in fine, they stooped, and with regret enough brake down that, which gave the jealousie; which could not be obtained from them, by violence, and the noise of the Canon. Time ripens all things; and that, which in the precedent Age was judged impossible, hath been found feasible, in this. The end of the Hughenot Party. This was the end of the Hughenot Party in France, which had given so much labour and toyle, to the Kings, and so divided their jurisdiction. It took birth, from the doctrine of Luther, and Calvin; passed infancie, under Henry the second: got vigour, and strength, under Francis the second; grew to strong youth, under Charles the ninth, and Henry the third, through the favour of the Princes of the Blood, enemies to the power, and authority of the Dukes of Guise; and by the valour of the King of Navarre. It obtained free Exercife, and some Townes of safety, under Henry the fourth; and re∣mained quiet, and without commotion, out of respect and reverence, to so great a Prince. But, under Lewis the thirteenth, finding it self abandoned by some of the principall Heads, it began to stagger; and at last vanished quite away; in such sort, as that though the Religion be still there, there is yet no formed party, and the root of the ambition of the Grandies, who under the shadow of Religion, did very often disturb honest people on both sides; is quite cut off. Their distrust (which is called, the companion of safety, which they conceived, they should not be able to find in the Kings word) made them often importune the Queen-Regent, and the marriage with the Infanta of Spain (a Nation which they abhorre above all other) made them joyn to the Prince of Conde, to hinder it; which much hastened their disgrace. The King, being declared Maor, recovered Bearn, more by veneration, then by force; and more by the brightnesse of his Majesty, then by that of his sword. He was the pralude of the first warre, speeded by their As∣sembly at Rechel,Father Arnour. and counselled by Father Arnour, who was preferred by the Duke of Luynes, to the direction of the Conscience, and partly also, of the favour of his Majesty. But as the said Luynes made the Fortune of this able esuit; so did he also soon unmake it, thereby to free himself from the jealousie it gave him Saumur,The taking of Townes. Saint Ieand' Angeli, and a great number of other Towns, Burghs, and Villages fortified, were taken, with incredible successe. There
was no more left then Montauban, which forced the Conquerours to retreat, and in some sort, dimmed their Triumph. The year following produced the Kings constant resolution to be obeyed, and to punish the revolted Towns; the reduction of Moutpeiller, and the Peace which followed, by the counsell of the Constable d' Edignieres.Edigniere. This Lord being of a mean extraction, grew to be elevated to the highest Charge of France, through all the degrees of a souldier,His life. and had heaped up a huge deale of treasure. Not with standing his Belief, which was the same of the Reformates, he alwayes kept his faith invi∣olable with the King, and was by consequence, but little loved by the most zealous of the Party.Makes himself a Catholi. A little before his death, he embraced the Roman Catholick Religion; as having promised it in a frollick to Urban, as soon as he should come to the Pontificat. The second warre made the Hugenots loose the Lordship of the Sea. The third, being begun with the assistance of a stranger, was consummated by the direction of that potent Cardinal, and so the whole conduct of that great Vessel, was restored into the hands of the just, and milde King Lewis. Let us go into Hungary, to see the end of the fickle, and busy Gabor. CHAP. IX The Death of Bethleem Gabor: Ragoski his Suceessour. The Marriage of Ferdinand the third, with the King of Spain's Sister. The death of Gabor. BEthleem Gabor, growne wise by so many losses, inviolably kept the Peace, and maintained himself in amity with the Emperour, till the coming in of the King of Sweden; who being his Brother-in Law, would easily, with his arguments, have perswaded him to take up Arms again, had he not been prevented by a dropsie, which drowned all his smoakie ambitions, to∣gether with his life, and deprived the aforesaid King, of a man, who would yet according to occasions have much tormented the Empyre; and whose life deserved no more admiration, then his last Will and Testament did. For he bequeathed the Emperour forty thousand Ducats,His Testardent. and a brave horse, with a saddle embrodered full of Pearles, and precious stones: to his sonne Ferdinand the third, as much; to the Emperour of Turkie, as much; to his wife, Katherine of Brandenburgh, a hundred thousand Rix-Dollars, and a hundred thousand Florins, besides three Provinces. The Execution of the said Testa∣ment, was recommended by him to the Grand Signor; the widow, and Transylania, to the Emperour. And this was the end of that Gabor, who was so much renowned; who so often re-incouraged them of the Party, when they groaned under the Emperours forces; and who was so soon bea∣ten down by his own inconstance, or rather, by the unhappinesse of the said Party, Ragoskie, having bribed the Embassadour whom the widow sent to Con∣stam inople, was created Duke of Transylvania. She opposed him, and called her Tutour, the Emperour, to her assistance, who sent her the Palatin of Costo∣nia, Ragoskie brough an Army into the Field,His Successour by deceit is of∣ten beaten. which was defeated, and he in great trouble to raise another, which had the same successe of the former, as wel as which followed. Thus finding the Cross too strong for him, he looked to∣wards the Mon. Three Bashaws came to succour him, who were all beaten, one
after another, by the aforesaid Palatine. In fine, since he had no better issue by Arms, then his Predecessour, he was fain to have recourse to the same practises, and follow the same steps. Wherefore, he desired peace with Stephen Gabor, brother to the aforesaid Bethleem, and made him Governour of the Province, restored the widow her Treasures, and served himself of their me∣diation,Make peace. which was not infructuous to him; for he obtained peace, and Tran∣sylania remained under the Emperours protection. Let us now go to the wedding of Ferdinand the third. This Prince being destinated to wear the Crown of the Empyre, as well as that, of the Kingdomes of Bohemia, and Hungary, sent to demand the In∣fanta Mary, Sister to the King of Spain, who was granted him. The King her Brother, accompanied her to Barcelona, where she embaiked for Italy,The marriage of Fordinand the third. passed by Naples, and made her entry at Vienna, with so great pomp, and gallantry, that there could nothing more be added, to augment the splendour thereof. Before her arrivall, her husband was Crowned Empe∣rout at Ratisbone; shortly after, at Posen. Let us leave them with all the joyes of the Court at Vienna, and return into Italy, to see a warre of Catholick against Catholick. CHAP. X Warre in Italy, about the succession of the Dutchy of Mantua, wherein the Emperour, and the two Crownes took part. THe difference,The warre of Italy, for the Dutchy of Mantua. which chanced about the succession of the Dutchies of Maentua, and Monferrat, embarassed all Italy; awakened the ambitious jealousies of those two potent nations, and so much exercised them in warre, that it proved partly the cause of the entyre breach, and desolations which followed. In the year 1627, the twenty sixth of December, Duke Vincent deceasing without Children, the succession fell to the Duke of Nevers, who received it, and praecipitated his inauguration or investure, without the knowledge of the limporour, who is the Lord of Fief, or Supreme-Heredirary thereof. The Spaniards, more through jealousie, then by right, or title, took Arms; as the Duke of Savoy also did, for an old pretension; he seazed upon many places in Monferrat, and they besieged Casal. O interest of State, thou Idol? how powerful art thou, and how many mischiefs dost thou cause? The apprehen∣sion, which the Spaniards had of the Dutchy of Milan, made them undertake this warre, and hasten the Peace in the North. The Duke of Nevers, put good Garrisons into the most tenible places, and joyned with the Venetians, who could not endure, that the House of Austria should make any further progresse in Italy, and shut up the gate to the French. Ferdinand commands them to lay down Arms, but is not obeyed. The Emperour, desiring to extinguish this sire, by a remedy just enough, though a little too suspect; sent his Embassadours, to injoyn both Parties to lay down Arms; and in regard that the Duke of Nevers had not first de∣manded his investure, in due form; to remit the said Dutchies, by way of sequestration, into his hands, that so he might proceed therein, according to Right: But he was obeyed here, just as his Predecessour was, at Gulick. For, the Duke rejected the conditions; endeavoured to succour Casal, and cut in pieces the forces, which opposed his generous designe. The King of France, in the mean while, was busie at the siege of Rochell,
which seemed long to the poor Duke, who found himself oppugned in his lawfull succession by the Spaniards,Succour from France. the Savoyers, and the Imperialists, and that, without hope of any strong relief from France. The King dispatched away Marshall of Crecquy in Autumne, and he went into the Field two moneths after the reduction of the Town, which was in the heart of Winter. The Duke agrees. The Duke, who conceived that the said Marshall marched too slow∣ly and that he would busie himself about the taking of the Marquisat of Salu∣ces, and make a warre in Savoy; changed his maxime, promised the Empe∣rour to obey him, and to receive his Garrisons, into the Townes; and con∣sequently, sent his son, the Duke of Duke of Rhetell to Vienna, to make pro∣testation of his obedience, and innocence. The Spaniards, however much harassed, and tyred, by the frequent sallies of the besieged, the length of the Siege, and inundations of the Po; disapproved this Treaty, and (to their own dammage) continued the said Siege. The Emperour sent other Em∣bassadours, to command observance:The Spaniards continue the siege at Casal. But Dou Carda, who during these intrigues, hoped to carry the place, pressed it hard, lent a deaf ear to the Emperours ouder, and dispatched a Envoy, or Messenger-Express, to Madrid. Nevers, being irritated beyond measure to sind himself thus treated, and that that the equity of his Cause was combatted with so much inju∣stice, and animated, on the other side, by seeing his King slight the rigour of the season, to come and ayd him, turned all his thoughts to warre. The King of France passes by force through Savoy, and makes them rise. The Duke of Savoy refused the King passage, but he got it by force, de∣feated his Troops, assured himself of the Passe, or Streight of the Suze; and compelled the Spaniards to raise the Siege: wherein he was better obey∣ed, then the Emperour himself. But the short durance of the Peace with the Hughenots in France, obliged him to returne, and humiliate theo. It is now time to send part of our forces from the Baltick Sea, to carry the Eagles thither, where they first commanded. Fordinand, to uphold his Authority, dispatched thither an Army of twen∣ty thousand men, under the conduct of the Generals Alring, and Galasso; who, having seazed upon the Passage of the Grisons, effused themselves into Italy, and got into their clutches the whole Dutchy of Mantua, with as much good luck,The Imperialists in Italy lesiege Mantua in with. as the French did that of Savoy, except only the Head City, which they also besieged: but the jealous Venatians, endeavouring to remove all such, as might be able to give their State any cause of apprehension, were not slack in setting their hands stoutly to work, for the Duke: though yet the Imperialists took Goite from them, and carried away all the booty, or pillage thereof to their Camp. But the French coming in the nick, craftily snapt two Sentinels; entred into a Quarter, and put a huge number of them to the Sword. So that the other finding the season improper, and the small apparence there was of carrying the place, retyred themselves much diminished into Garrison.
CHAP. XI The continuation of the warre of Italy. The Venetians beaten. Pignarola taken. Mantua taken, and pillaged, The Peace made, with restitution on both sides. The Venetians beaten by Ga∣lasso. THis retreat gave the Venetians a desire to retake Goite, but they were bro∣ken by Galasso. Whereupon, they re-assembled their forces, and ha∣ving recruited and ingrossed them, put them selves again in a posture of fighting, wherein they were the second time put to flight, and above six thousand killed and taken, together with all their Artillery. This losse much amazed the Republick: But Fortune was more favourable to the French; who (as we have already said) after the taking of Rochel, shewed them∣selves very hot, for the defence of the Duke of Nevers. True it is, that the Kings dangerous sickness at Lyons, had almost been the cause of slackening this generous ardour; and they, who looked asquint upon the Cardinals po∣tencye, seemed to prognosticate, that his ruine was at hand, Envy still fol∣lowes the Charrior of a growing Power. And the Sa∣voyers by the French. The French took Pignarola, and were re-inforced by the Swissers: and this loss, which was most sensible to the Duke, was followed by many other. The Spaniards were beaten by Monsieur de Bassompiere; Cambery taken, and Montmclian besieged. The Duke of Guise landed near Nice, to go joyne with the Army. The King sent the Duke of Montmorancy towards Pied∣mont, and followed himself afterwards. Prince Thomas presuming to dis∣pure his entrance with twelve thousand men, was beaten; the Colours presented to the King, being the honour; and all Piedmont, the re∣ward of the victory. In such sort, as that the poor Duke of Savoy, who had so often ventured to contest, sometimes with one of the Crowns, and sometimes with the other; found himself quite spoyled of his States, For ha∣ving nothing lest but Turin, and not daring to shut himself up there, he resolved to keep the key of the Fields, and let the Mountains oppose the vi∣ctorious Party, by seeking to preserve his liberty in desert, and inaccessi∣ble places. We must, here take notice of the Martial generosity of the French, who, in the beginning of warre are invincible, make all bow to their Armes, break through all oppositions, and as soon take whole Provinces, as other Nati∣ons do Towns: but by the too sudden loss of patience, on the other side,Their impati∣ence. they grew also to loose whole Provinces, almost as soon, as other Nations do Townes. Now Fortune favoured the Imperialists every where, which they made both the Venetians, and the Duke of Nevers feel. For they returned the Siege upon Mantua, and took it at length, by a fine Stratagem.Mantua taken by atrick of warre. For the be∣sieged, by their frequent Sallies, being reduced to a very small number, demanded the succour of five thousand men, from the Venetians, and Letters being intercepted, gave the Besiegers occasion to serve themselves of this trick, to catch besieged. They secretly drew into the field the number of men demanded, who by a fight with powder without shot, got near to one of the Gates, which being forthwith opened by some, who thought them to be Venetians, they made themselves Masters of the Town, to the great asto∣nishment of the Inhabitants, who were sacked by their imaginary Auxilia∣ries; and the Duke yeelding up the Castle by Composition, was conducted, together with his wife and children, to Ferrara.
Spinola before Casal. This victory swelled up the spirits of the Imperialists, and made the Spaniards continue the Siege of Casal, under the command of Marquis Spi∣nola, who had acquired so much glory in the Low-countries: and Toiras, who was all crowned with lawrell, for the honour he atchieved, by the defence of the Fort of Saint Martin against the English, defended the Cittadel. The French, making a shew to go and attack the Dutchy of Mi∣lan, wheeled suddenly about upon the Besiegers, the state whereof was this. The Town and Castle were already yeelded to the Marquis, and the Citta∣del had capitulated, that in case there came not sufficient succour to beat them from thence, within a certain term, which was the fifteenth of Octo∣ber, Monsieur de Toiras was to march out. The French Army appeared in Battaile array neare the Trenches, and the Spaniards put themselves in posture to receive it.The death of Spinola, and of the Duke of Savoy. All seemed to laugh upon the French, by the death of the Marquis, who was taken out of this world by the Plague: and Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy, being being stripped of his States, and overwhelmed with grief and warre, payed also his tribute to Nature. When two great Bulls are ready to rush together, and shock one ano∣ther, the whole Heard stand still, and attend with trembling, the issue of the Combat. In the same manner, was Italy the spectatresse of this furious shock, and had no cause at all to rejoyce. But it pleased God, that by the Popes intercession,The peace was made by the addresse of Cardinal Ma∣zarin. and Cardinall Mazarin's dexterity (who made himself known by this first negotiation) the Peace being concluded at Vienna, was brought to the Armies, just when the Trumpets were going to sound, to draw the sword. A fair escape: happy newes! By vertue of this Peace, the French returned into France, and restored all to the Duke of Savoy, except only Piguarola, which had been privately bought by the said Cardinal. A politick subtilty, to have the Gate into Italy, alwayes open; mixt with Cousenage, as the Spaniards say; who rendred Montferrat, as the Germans likewise did Italy, to go against the King of Sweden. The Duke of Nevers was fain to ask pardon, and Investure; which accordingly was performed, and peace and rest restored to Italy. How many combats, how much blood-shed was here, for a sume of ambition? For Religion had nothing to do in the matter. But it is credible, that the Spaniards would not suffer so potent a French Prince at the entry into Italy, and so near the Dutchy of Milan, which they keep as tenderly, as the ample of their eyes: and that the French, on the other side, would establish him, and uphold him, without acknowledging the Emperour. God makes ju∣stice appear, when men will throw it under foot with Arms. Prodigies in Italy. This warre had been praemonstrated by many Prodigies, and Portents, which praeceded it; as namely, by Earthquakes in Apalia, whereby more then sixteen thousand persons were overwhelmed; by dreadfull floods, streams of blood, and the like. And really, these two Nations, after ha∣ving stoutly wrangled, and by sword, famin, and contagious sicknesses, lost above a million of mortals; came neither of them to the principal, but se∣cret end, which they had proposed to themselves, and reaped no other sala∣rie, then that of vain-glory, drawn out of jealousie of State. The Coun∣tries were destroyed, the Neighbours oppressed, Christian Religion con∣temned, and altered; and in the one of the aforesaid nations, by many per∣sons quite annihilated. The Ministers, who love to fish in troubled waters, and blow the bellowes of their Masters ambition, so to carry them rashly on to warres, which might be diverted by one single conference; will one day have much to answer, before the fountain of all Equity and Justice. The enemies of Cardinal Ri∣chelieu. But let us leave this point to be picked out by the Casuists, and return to France where we shall discover, how the Cardinal falls as deep, into the ha∣tred
of the Grandies, as he is strong in the possession of the Kings favour. The Queen-Mother repented her self of having promoted a Minister, who was to destroy her. Gastion was vexed to see the management of all the af∣faires of France in his hands, without participating therein. That devout Prelate the Chardinall of Berulles, laboured to stop him from forging some designes, as pernicious to the Catholicks abroad, as they had been to the Hughenots in France. But Parca cut off the thred of his life, and deprived Richelieu of a most Religious Enemy, who survived him, to accomplish his end in other; yea, in all such, as gave any jealousie: and the Hughenots themselves were grown to sing his prayses, when many Catholicks had him in horrour and execration. CHAP. XII Cardinal Richelieu makes peace with the English, and devises new Allyances to attack the House of Austria. WHEN the Cardinal, by his great prudence, had broaken that puis∣sant Party, which in some measure, both divided and shocked the Soveraign Power; re-established every where the Catholick Religion, and a fresh springing Amity amongst the people; he perceived himself in danger to be cast out of the Saddle. But, he had acquired so great an influence upon the mind, both of King and People, by the good successe of his Counsels, that he was not a jot moved at the puissant factions, which he saw growing against himself, at the Court; all which he surmoun∣ted afterwards, by a certain felicity, which alwayes accompanied him, and which after the Peace of Italy, shined with more force, and luster. His de∣signes seemed to be carried to a breach, between the two Crownes:The King makes peace with the English. for the more eafie atchievement whereof, and to involve the Church in this perni∣cious warre, from which some Grandies were averse, by the intermission, or mediation of the Venetians, he made peace with the English, whom he could not attack by land; and thought of finding another enemy, whom he might lay aboard, when he would. His Master had deserved, and posses∣sed the name of Just, by humbling with great moderation, the Hughenot Party, and there was no better meanes left to obtain it also amongst the Re∣formates, who were yet very hot, then by poasting to the succour of the Pro∣testant, against the Emperour. The King of England, after the fall of the Hughenots, in whose defence he had lost both many men, and much money, finding the lot of arms unfa∣vourable (which was to be also fatall to him afterwards) chose to sit still in Royall vacancie and repose:The first war of the King against the Spiniards, the second against the French, and the third against his Subjects. He was unfortunate in the first Expedition he made, when he sent that Fleer, with the Admirall of Holland, who joyned with a great number of ships, to surprise Cales. For after having suffered ma∣ny inconveniences, and losses, it was fain at length to return; and the King of Spain remitted many prisoners into England, to be punished like Pyrats, be∣cause their King had not denounced the War. One affront was paid by another. In his second undertaking against France, Fortune favoured him yet lesse; and his third and lasi, was the ruine of his Family, as we will shew, towards the end of this Epitome. Suddenly after the reduction of Rochel, the Cardinal pressed hard for the succour of the Duke of Nevers, against the opinion of such, as could not endure so glittering a Purple, and who apprehended a breach. But he began it, and ended it (as we even now said) in the yeare 1633. The said Duke sold his homage, and duty to the Emperour: which gave contentment to the Duke of Savoy, and the Marquis de Guastala, in re∣gard of their pretensions to the aforementioned Dutchies.
Now, having already dissipated the smallest and weakest enemies of his Greatnesse, he crushed that Party, which had been so formidable to the precedent Kings: and being confirmed by the assurances, which his Master had given him, of covering him with his Crown, against all such as endea∣voured his mine; he resolved upon this great designe, against the house of Austria. A designe I say of huge danger; and which could not be un∣dertaken, and set on worke,The Cardinal disposes the Pro∣testants to War against the Em∣perour. but by means of potent Allyes, for fear of incur∣ring the hazard of destroying the State. Therefore he thought it fir, to a∣waken the Protestants, all the North, and all such as hated the Roman Catholick Religion: nor were the Hollanders the last, though the Spaniards courted them (in vaine) to a Truce. The King of England was easily disposed to it, in regard of his Son in Law, and so great a Family, as wherewith both himself, and the Hollanders were burthened in a strange Country: however the Communion of Reli∣gion, and compassion made this charge seem supportable, and gentle. In briefe, for the common interest of upholding themselves, and for the appre∣hension which every one in particular had of this puissant House; they were all resolved. A powerful Oratour cannot faile to perswade; when he pleads the Common cause. But now, there wanted both a Captain, and Cause sufficient, to cover both this apprehension, and the ambition also of some certaine people; the former whereof they were resolved to finde quickly out, though they were for∣ced to goe seek him in the Ice, and amongst the Deserts of the North; and as for pretexts, as well false as true, they could not be wanting; for since they were about to play their last Game, they would hazard all; and if they lost, the consequence would be an universal Monarchie. In the Treaty of Peace at Vienna, the Embassadours of France promised, that the French should not meddle with the affairs of Germany; and yet there was another Treaty at Stockholne at the same time, about an Allyance, for the quiet of the Empire, and a War against the Emperour. But for the better understanding of what I shall say, of that cruell fatality, which hath made both Germany, and all the Provinces neer it, a kinde of a Church-yard; it will very much import, to make some short mention; First of the quarrells and pretensions of the Emperours against France; and then of the state of the Empire it selfe, the Theater, of the most destructive, and deplorable War that ever was. But there was a necessity in it, to the end that the Prophesies might be accomplished: nor is there any end even yet. Henry the second, seeing Germany in great combustion, by jealousies drawn from the difference of Religion, and being invited into Germany by the Protestants in armes against Charles, and offered the protection of that Party, and invited also on the other side by interest of State; sent thither the Duke of Montmorancy, with a puissant Army, who seized upon those three Bishopricks, by way of correspondence; and would have done the same to Strasburgh, if he had been able to get leave to march with his Troops through the Town, as he had done at Metz. But the conclusion of a Peace between the Emperour, and the Princes, stopped the progresse of the French, and made them return; as Metz did that of the Emperour, and forbide the Eagles any further flight. Ferdinand the second, having triumphed over all his Enemies (whom the French by vertue of their Allyances,The affront of the Bishop of Verdun. had succoured with Councel, Men, and Mony) and being irritated besides, by the affront newly done to the Bishop of Verdun; seemed willing to require satisfaction; so to give exercise to his triumphant Forces, and make War with better conveniencie, and more ad∣vantage, in Lorraine then in Italy. At least, the Cardinal was fearful least, he
should take old quarrels into deliberation again, and send his Troops to re∣place the Eagle at Verdun, which was beaten down to set ut the Flower de luce. Wherefore, for the diversion of this tempest, and to make it burst upon Germany it self; he complotted, and projected with all his Allyances, hop∣ing the luck would turne, and take away that Party,The utility of those Allyances through France. puffed up with so many Victories, redoubted for greatnesse, hated for the contributions, by which it exhausted Germany; and execrated, for the redemanding of the Eeclesiasti∣cal Possessions, which was executed about that time. If this Dam were bro∣ken, but by one single Victory, of what a vast profit would it be to France? The people would fall upon the Imperialists, as they formerly did upon the Lutherans; and so all that Party would be in confusion. Lorraine and Alsa∣tia, would be but a Breakfast; the three Ecclesiastical Electors would in∣fallibly cast themselves into the King of France's armes, thereby to shelter themselves from the fulminating fury of the Protestants; and by conse∣quence, the Imperial Crown could not escape the head of his most Christian Majesty. The Spaniards being shut up, and deprived of succour from Germany, would be easily droven out of the Low-Countries;The secret Al∣lyance. and thus a certain se∣cret Allyance, which was discovered and miscarryed since that time, would one day be a plank, or foundation to the universal Monarchy. This great Cardinal, so admired, and glorious, after having broken the Hughenot Party, succoured the Duke of Nevers in Italy, and trodden upon the belly of the Savoyers; prepared himselfe (I say) for this most dange∣rous designe; disposed the Protestants to it, by Father Ioseph, in the Assem∣bly at Leipsick;Father Joseph at Leipsick. and laboured earnestly for the destruction of the House of Austria; as well knowing, that it was better to prevent, then be prevented, and in what credit he should be, amongst all such as sought the ruine of the Roman Catholick Faith, and that of the aforesaid Victorious House. But let us speak of the State of the Empire, before this horrible tempest began to bruise it. CHAP. XIII. A Discription of the state of the Empire. The election of the King of the Romans. VVE finde in history, that Charlemagne, King of France, Son to Pepin, and Grand-child to Charles Mared, going to Rome to defend Pope Leo, was saluted by him (to crown his merits, and recom∣pence his services) Emperour of the West. I will not here enter into the dis∣pute between the two Nations, of whether he were a German or no: But sure it is, that he was King of France, before he was Emperour; and the Germans themselves affirme, that he transferred the Empire, upon their Na∣tion; yea, and that none can be elevated to that dignity, unlesse he be born a German: And so Maximilian of Austria being dead, Charles was preferred before Francis the first, King of France, for that he was born at Gaunt, a City of Low-Germany: and the arguments of the Elector of Trevirs, in the behalf of Francis, were refuted and rejected. Others alleadge, that to save the West, which was exposed to the excursions of the Barbarians, by that remore∣nesse, or slacknesse of the Emperours of the East; it was transferred by the Pope upon the Gawles, or French; and that the race, or Charlemagne coming
to saile, Pope Gregory the fifth transferred the Right of Election upon the Germans; abolished the Hereditary, and gave hope to Princes of vertue, to be able to ascend to this charge, which is the most glorious in the World. The Emperours have been more absolute, then they are at present; and in the contentions with the Popes, from whom they receive their Crown, or at least their Confirmation, they have been much disadvantaged. Henry the seventh, coming to die in Italy, every several Town assumed to itselfe, a peculiar principal; in such sort, as that the Emperours have had little there since, save onely the bare Title. Besides, the same Popes have caused troubles in Germany, on purpose to leave the domination to them there, and cut off the opportunity of coming to rub up old quarrels in Italy. Our Saviour indeed said, that his Kingdom was not of this world, and that his Apostles should not reign. The Primitive Supreme Bishops declared it, by the Crown of Martyrdom; but some others spurred on by ambition, have wrangled for another, which both made them odious, and their Authority despicable, in many places. And moreover, the peaceful nature of some Emperours, hath made them seeke rest, and neglect the Rights of Maje∣sty. The Empire is not Haereditary, but Elective; and when the Emperour is dead,The King of the Romans is ele∣cted for great affairs. the Archbishop of Mentz writes to the rest of the Electors, to assemble themselves at Francfurt, within three months, either in person, or else to send their Embassadours. During the Interreign, or Vacancy, the Elector Palatin is the Vicar, or Lieutenant; and he who is elected King of the Ro∣mans, is declared Heir. There three Ecclesiastical Electors, and four Secu∣lar. The Arch-Bishops of Mentz, Trevirs, and Colein. The King of Bohe∣mia, the Prince Palatin, the Duke of Saxony, and the Marquis of Branden∣burg; who are not Kings, but may stile themselves the said Kings Compa∣nions. Being assembled at Francfurt, they make Oath to the Elector of Mentz, they will chuse one, who shall be capable of the Charge. They are obliged to finish the Election within thirty dayes; and may not go out of the Town, till all be accomplished. If the voices happen to be equal, he who receives the King of Bohemia's Vote, is infallibly proclaimed Emperour. The King of the Romans is not chosen during the life of the Emperour, but for great Affaires; and he cannot any way faile of succession, as soon as the Emperour is dead. All is observed, according to the Golden Bull of Charles the fourth. The King of the Romans is obliged to take Oath, that he will not seeke to make the Empire Haereditary to his House; but that he will maintain all the Rights, and Splendor thereof, There are two Fundamental Laws, namely the Golden Bull, and the Im∣perial Capitulation; to the maintaining whereof he is bound by Oath. Which makes me finde their opinion very weake who praesume to sustaine, that the Emperour is a Mouarch; in regard that his Authority is so parted, and divided between him, and the Electors, that it looks, as if they were as∣sociated, to help him beare this heavy burthen. Besides, since Germany hath been so distracted by the diversity of Doctrines, the Protestants have in∣haunced so much of the Majesty to themselves, through the too timorous bounty, and moderation of some Emperours, since Charles the fifth, that his hath been but little more acknowledged, and adored, both in Germany, and Italy. And therefore, it is no wonder, if the Eagles Triumphant by so many Victories, have endeavoured to look back, upon some Rights which are now so many years old; and if a general Conspiracy of the Neighbours of the said Protestantes have been made, to hinder old Praetensions, though grounded upon very much equity, and justice. But those forreign Princes,
who have thrust themselves into this quarrel, have stopped their eyes to ju∣stice, opened them to interest of State, and to the means, of either praeserving or ingrandishing themselves. CHAP. XIV A discription of the three States of the Empire. The Hans-Towns. SInce we have spoken as much as is necessary to our purpose, of the Empe∣rour, and the King of the Romanes, his Vicar, or Successour; it concerns us to say also somewhat, of the States of the Empire. The first State. The first, and prime State therefore, is that of the Electours, as being the nearest to the Head, or Chief. They are the Fathers, and Senatours, and the maine, and firme Prop of this Edifice. They assist with their prudence, the Head which they have chosen, and are compared with the Kings of Eu∣rope. The Ecclesiasticks have the precedencie in this ranck; first, the Archbi∣shop of Mentz; next, he of Trevirs; and then, he of Celein. The King of Bohe∣mia, the Duke of Bavaria, who was advanced to the Electoral dignity, by the deposition of the Prince Palatin; and then he of Saxonie, and he of Branden∣burgh. The second State is constituted, first, by foure Archbishops: namely, of Magdeburgh, Salsburgh, Bremen, and Besansow;The second State. after whom follows the great Master of the Tentonick Order. And afterwards, there take place, one and thirty Bishops, who are follow∣ed by ten, or eleven Abbots, with the Title of Princes, as the Abbot of Ful∣da &c. The secular Princes are placed after these Ecclesiasticks, and are in number, eighteen Families; the first whereof, is that of the Archdukes of Au∣stria, divided into two branches, namely of Germany, and Burgundy And this Family hath of much praeheminence above that of the other Princes, as the Archbishops have, above the Bishops. Then, follows that of Bavaria, of Sa∣xonie, of Brandenburgh, &c. After which sit the Abbesses, as there of Quedelem∣burgh, of Esson &c. Some whereof have both the effect, and title, of Princesses, And lastly sit the Counts, and Barons, whereof there is a great number. Reinking to whom I referre the curious, calculates about eight and fifty of them. The third State. The third state is compleated, by the Imperiall and free Towns, which are sixty five in number, or thereabouts: and they are to be considered two wayes; the former, and more noble whereof, is, that they immediately de∣pend upon the Emperour, and have nothing at all to do with any body else, and the other, that these also depend upon the Emperour; but yet they owe some small recognitance, to the Prince, Lord, or Praelat, in whose territories they are seated: however they leave not thereby to be free, and to enjoy the rights of Royalty. So that these Towns possesse the ancient liberty; the privi∣ledges of Princes; have their Session, and Vote in the Diets, and are tearmed the Noble member, and Pillars of the Empire, wherein they are incorporated, nei∣ther more, nor lesse, then the Princes, and Praelats. They are divided into two Benches. The foure first, are Lubeck, Metz, Auxburgh, and Aix, or Aquisgra∣ue. The other being in the quality of Subjects to Empire, are not called. There is yet another companie of Towns, which by vertue of the union
are called Hans-Towns;The Hans-Towns; which are composed, partly of such as are free; and partly Provinciall, and obnoxious. This said company, or Vns hath no other ayme, or end, then that of commerce, and it was approved first, by Charles the fourth. It hath foure Classes, or Metropolitan Cities, to wit, Lu∣beck, Colem, Brunswick, and Dansick; and they have an annuall Assembly at Lubeck, where they have their Charters, or Rolls. But theire last warrs have much altered all the orders, which were formerly kept. The ten Gerclet. The German Empire is distributed into ten Cercles; Franconia, Bavaria, Austria, Swevia, that of the upper Rheyn; and that of the four Electours to∣wards the Ribeyn Wastphalia Saxanie, Low-Saxonie and Burgundy. Now the Emperour, as he is head of the Romane Empire, is bound to swear, that he will defend all the priviledges of the Empire; but that doth not at all derogate from his Majesty, in regard that all Kings, at their consecration do the same and he is also greater, then all the Members of the Empire, and may command them, as having received homage from them: and if when they be cited, or condemned, they esose to appear, he publishes and pro∣scribes them, by commanding some Prince neet hand, to execute his order by arms: from whence it follows, that as he is obliged to defend, and pro∣tect both them, and their priviledges, so are they also bound to obey him, by Oath, and by vertue of the Fief he possesses. A happy Goverment, and a happy Germany, when the Members agree with the Head. CHAP. XV The Principall motives of the Decline of the Empire. The motives of the Declime of the Engire. BEfore we speak of the causes of this last warre, which put Germany into that condition wherein we see her yet, and from which she begins by lit∣tle and little, to be repayred; our Subject requires us to give a brief hint, of those which have so weakened this Empire, which all history, both pro∣phane, and sacred, tell us, is to be the last. The Pojes. The Popes were the first, who weakened it in Italy, and gave matter thereby, to the most ambitious of that Nation, to appropiate some States to themselves, as being either vacant, or desecred, by the troubles, or care lesness, of the Emperours: wherein they served themselves of divers pretexts; as either through zeal of devotion, and respect; or for the punish∣ment of some faults, which they imputed to the said Emperous; or through the immensity of their own ambition; or else, by favouring the factions, of the Ghilphes, against the Gibellins, or Imperialists: in such sort, as the Papal Autho∣ritie obumbrating, or overshaddowing, the Imperiall, hath both now quite away the heat thereof, as I have already said. The Translation of the States. The Barbari∣ans. Secondly, by the translation of the Seate of the Empire to Constantinople, and by the inundation of the Barbarians, which have come at certain times from beyond the Rheynt and from the North. Besides, the Empire is much diminished, by some Provinces, and Towns, yea,The Kingdoms. and whole Kingdoms also, which upon divers praetexts, have loosen∣ed themselves from this great Body, which are mentioned in history, and not for our purpose heer. And moreover, since the Germans have reduced the Empire within the praecincts of their nation, and chosen the Emperours anoughst themselves, by the exclusion of all strangers it is no wonder, if o∣thers
have separated themselves from them, and erected particular Govern∣ments, according to the hunour of theirs. But let us now come to the principall subject of all, drawne from the Ger∣mans themselves: which makes the Empire so weak, that any neighbouring Prince very often dares brave and affront it:The diversity of Doctrines, and ambition. and this is the diversity of Re∣ligions; the over great porencie of the Princes, and States, and distrust, in side, or dissidence, mingled with ambition. For remedie whereof, the Emperoun and Princes have had many conserences and it hath been agreed, & resolved, that there should be but two Religions tolerated in Germany; as namely, the Roman Catholick, & the confession of Auxburgh, which is the Lutheran. But the disease being too great to be cured by so gentle physick; and the house of Austria too powerfull, both in Spain, and the Low-Conntreys, not to give jea∣lousie; distrust, and ambition, (sicknesses of State) have alwayes peeped out their heads, in the Diets, after much time lost in disputing for place, and prae∣cedeucie. So that these being gotten into the interiour of the first, and ma∣king little account of the languishing authoritie of the Emperous, have pro∣duced the hatred, seditions, and warrs, which we have relared already, and those also, which are now going to describe. From this diversity of Religions, sprang the warre, between Charles the fifth: John Frederick, Electour of Saxonie, Philip Landgrave of Hassia, and some other Protestants, which rendred the said Emperours luster, more glonous, and begat such a hatred in all the Protestant States, as is now grown almost irreconciliable. There was a temperament, or kinde of agreement in Religion concluded afterwards, which was called The contract of Passavia,The contract of Passavia. which yet, being taken again into deliberation, hath since made a marveilous ope∣ration, as we are about to shew. In this aforesaid Treaty, it was ordered, and setled, that the Protestants should enjoy all such ecclesiasticall goods, and re∣venues, as they had formerly possessed; and that the rest should remaine in perpetuity, to the Catholicks. For example, the Catholick Bishops coming to embrace the Luheran Religion, should forthwith religne the place, to be occupated by another, who should make open, not feigned profession, of the Catholick; and so consecutively, of all the Cloisters, Abbies, and other digni∣ties: which yet, the Lutherans cannot deny but they have conterveened, and contradicted, and that they retaine all such aforesaid goods, and revenues, against the will of the Testatonrs, and against all Rights, Justice, and E∣quity. Complaints a∣gainst the House of Austria. But we must not also let passe in silence, the complaints which have been made by many of the States of Germany, against the house of Austrin, which hath uphold her self about two hundred years, in the Imperiall dignity, as if it were haereditary: a suspicion, ful of efficacie, which shocks after a manner, the elective right, and strongly opposes the justest maxime of State. To which it hath been answered, that the elections have alwayes been lawfull, and that at present, This house by means of her two Kingdoms, serves for a Bulwark to Germany, against the Turk. Besides that, their is hardly any one to be found in the whole body of the Empire, who is able, with the reveneues of one Fa∣mily, to sustain, or uphold the greatnesse of the Majesty; wherewith Charles the fifth reproached those Princes, which were revolted from him. Were is is not (said hee) for my Low-Countryes, I could not maintain my Table: What profit have I of your Empire, but a great charge, and porpetual troubles? Inferting there∣by, that the glory of this weighty burthen, was deat enough bought, with∣out addition of disobedience. After the decease of this invincible, and most vigilant Emperour, his suc∣cessours, either through too much timidity, durst not make shew of seeing the sults, and errours which were committed, or cast them off, to the following
Diets, which were often extinguished, in the very dispute of precedencie on∣ly, as I have said already. And so the impunity of Vice enccuradging men to sin, not only the Bishops married, and kept their Bishopricks; but the saecu∣lar Princes also seazed upon other ecclesiasticall Lands, and Goods, as it were for decencies sake, and every one in fine, would have his share thereof. The long possession of a thing ill gotten, warrants not the propriety therein, nor ex∣cludes the true Owner from his lawful Right. But they who can defend it with armes, either mock, or defy the strength of the Lawes. CHAP. XVI The Emperour redemands the Ecclesiasticall Goods, taken after the composition of Passavia. The alteration amongst the Protestants. AFter so many Victories gotten, by the Emperours Lieutenants; after ha∣ving humbled the King of Denmark, and all the Protestants of his Par∣ty: after having so often chastized Bethleem Gabor, destroyed the dreadful re∣volt of the Peasants of Austria, and pardoned such, as were too deeply inga∣ged in the Prince Palatines patty, who was deprived of his Stages, and fled for resuge, into Holland; and after the death of Mansfeldt, and his faithful Bishop, the Emperour resolved,She complaints of the Catho∣licks. to satisfy the complaints of the Roman Catholicks, who demanded justice, upon such as by usurpation, detained many Possessi∣ons, and goods, after the contract of Passavia. For being the Head of ju∣stice, he could not deny them; and the Bishops are as well members of this great Body, as the other Princes: but it was to move a stone, which threatned the fall of the whole building. It was represented to him, that the Prorestants had very ill observed the Peace, and that the Catholicks had not dispured with them, what was already granted them, by the said contract; however it were done by force, and for the establishment of firme repose: but that they, not being glutted with those Prebendries, had leapt beyond their bargains, and against the Signed Promise, violently ravaged, and taken many other. But, we must not keep our word with Hereticks. Who must be upbraided with this maxine; he, who sayes it, or he, who does it? The Emperour, upon mature deliberation, finding the equity of the cause, slighting the danger, which yet was most vilable; for he went about to shock the Electours, Princes, States, and Towns of the Empire, who would not suf∣fer such dainty bits to be plucked out of their mouths, with out contesting, and hazarding all; even though they were forced to call in strangers. A command to rander all eccle siesticell goods, taken after the Controll of Pas∣savia. Wherefore, upon the sixth of March 1629, he sent a most expresse com∣mand from his good City of Vienna, to all the Princes, and Towns of the Em∣pire, forthwith to restore all ecclesiasticall Lands, or Goods, seazed, or occu∣pated after the composition of Passavia, upon pain of losse, of all Pviledges, Rights, Immunities, and the Imperiall Eccommunication. The Thunder∣bolt, which falls before the feet of the travayler, doth not so much astonish him, as this sentence did all the Protestants. But before we passe to this dis∣asterous War, let us see the motives, and reasons of both patryes. I have already shewed, upon what Right the Emperours command was grounded;There son why: the execution whereof was assured him to be facil enough, by so many victorious Armies, which it would be no less then evident temerity for them to oppose; since he had already ventered to expel the Heriticks out of his
own Haereditary Countries, & had brought the sedition of the Peasants to a good issue. But, the occult causes were, that he could not better fix his Autho∣rity, then by this way; in regard that, it he would be generally adored, and root the Imperial Crown fast in his Family, he must needs first resorm, and re∣establish the Roman Catholick Religion every where. That he had a foor∣ing in the Bahick Sea; and that since he had so well begun, he ought to pro∣secute, and finish: That he was obliged to God, the Church, and the Holy See; and that at serves for nothing, to undertake, without perseverance, and the Iron must be struck whilest it is hot, &c. Now the Protestants found this Command, of as hard digestion as the Belgicks, or Low-country people did the exaction of the Tenth Penny,A hard Pro∣position. impo∣sed upon them by the Duke of Alva. Men fight sometimes (sayes a learned Writer) with more resolution, for the Harth, then for the Altar. Wherefore,Pro arri & focis. it was held sit to oppose it, by some Protestation: and so, they beseeched his Majesty to suspend the execution thereof, till it were decided, in a Generall Diet. But, in the mean while, there grew murmuration, and grumbling every where, the hatred for Religion was renewed; and a most manifest aversion of the people, discovered. The Emperour granted them a Generall Assembly at Ratisbone,The Assembly at Rathbone. and transported himself thither, at the same time, that the newes was brought him, that the King of Sweden was entred with an Army into the Territories of the Empyre. Whereupon, the Protestant Embassadours, even ravished with joy, required not only a Revocation of the said Edict, or Command, in order to the Ecclesiasticall possessions, but also that all might be restored to the same state wherein it was, before the Revolt. But Ferdinand would not hearken to this; for either he must make himself obeyed, or leave to Com∣mand. Hereupon, the Embassadors sneaked away,And at Lepp∣sick. and assembled them∣selves at Leipsick. The Neighbouring nations seeing this alteration, were not a little glad, to understand that there was a preparation made, to give this Majesty a ge∣neral check in the very foundation, and root thereof. In a word, Leagues and Confoederations were concluded, and strangers, (who, by occult wayes, helped to fabricate this fire) called in, and embraced; the ambition of Spain not forgotten, which aymed at nothing but the Universal Monarchy: the Inquisition canvased, and the Jesuites, as Parricides, Incendiaries, Eno∣mies to peace, and Authours of all sedition, coupled: The Roman Antichrist carried also his pack, by the writings of such, as whose whose party was sup∣by the cruell lot of Armes; and in fine, by all the Protestants: The Imperial Majesty it self was exposed to the rage of the people, which wished for no∣thing but a change. Yea, even the Imperial Townes, which suspected that Majesty, and which, by the licence of the change of Religion, had appro∣priated to themselves all the aforesaid Lands and Goods, thrust on the wheel, augmented the distrust, and offered the profusion of their treasures, thereby to hinder the drawing of the principall source thereof. It was also alledged, that the Princes and States, had had ground and cause to employ the Ecclesiasticall Lands, and Goods, to better uses; and that the Priests; and Monks, lived ill, fatted themselves like hogges, and gave scandal, to the whole world. That they had peacefully enjoyed them above sixty years, and that such of them, as were left them by their Ancestours, might be retaken by them, to provide for their children. In fine, complaints, reasons, and libels were not wanting: And after a great wind, commonly sol∣lowes rain: so, all here being disposed, they came from words to blowes.
CHAP. XVII The Assembly of Ratisbone, where Frithland is dismissed from his Charge. The Allyance of the Duke of Bwaria, with the King of France, 1630. DUring the Assembly at Ratisbone, in the year 1630. Maximilian Duke of Bavaria, and Electour, made a League Defensive, and Offensive, with the King of France; whereby his Majesty promised to maintain the Electorat in the House of Bavaria, and defend it against any, who might be so bold as to attack it, with an Army of fifty thousand men, and he promi∣sed the King to succour him, with four thousand Foot, and fifteen hundred Horse, and he wrought so much by his frequent suites, and instances with the Emperour (induced thereto by Cardinal Richellen) that he procured the Dignity of Generall to be taken away from the Duke of Frithland,Frithland dis missed from his charge. who had alwayes so well served him, though by his behaviour he were growne insup∣portable, chiefly to such as loved not the House of Austria. Those powers which are trayled by so many puissant Aemulators together, run post to destruction. This councell proved dammageable to the Emperour, and yet more to him who gave it; and he who invented it, was very likely to overthrow the whole Empyre. The King of Sweden invi∣ted to come into Germany. The King of Sweden, being advertised of all which passed in Germany, invi∣ted by the Germans themselves; incited by France, England, Venice, the Ʋnited Provinces, and by occasion (which he took up by the Forelock) as al∣so by his own peculiar interests, began to make his preparatives. There wanted nothing for a potent League, but Causes, and Pretexts, whereof there would be found enough, though it were no more, then every ones own advantage apart, which is so strong, that it ordinarily carries the ballance, how full soever it be of reason and justice. Men of this Age adore it: neither is it without ground, that a certain learned person calls it, the Idoll of these times. Towards the beginning of the year 1630. Europe was in a kind of Crisis, war in Italy, Germany full of old souldiers, who struck terrour wheresoever they passed. France, apprehending lest this storm should fall upon her, and that the Eagles should come and nestle again in those three Townes, which were taken from them (as I have noted already) hindied a Treaty of Truce, by hindring the acceptation of the Propositions, and sent to the very bottom of the North, to awaken Gustavus Adolphus to a League. Nor needed there much eloquence to pers wade him, who looked asquint already, upon those puissant Troops, upon the Baltick Sea, which draw near him. But, know∣ing how he had been caught by his Neighbour, he would not be content with promises, but required a surety at Amsterdani, before he would passe any further, England, besides the generall interest, had that of the Prince Palatine, which she conuld not handsomely abandon, in such a conjuncture; and yet was she also fain to give assurance for moneys, before she could enter the League of this great Captain. The States Generall were much concerned therein, since by the growth of the House of Austria, they foresaw their certain ruin, in regard of the succour, which she would be able to give the Spaniards. And moreover, they might well fear, lest all the States of Germany humiliated, or joyned to those of the Emperour, he might come to redemand some Townes amongst them, which are yet noted at the corner of the Eagle or Empyre.
The Venetians, not warmed with the zeal of Religion, as the Protestants were, as being of the same with this House; found for the interest of their State, that it was necessary, to put the said House into such termes, as might not give so much jealousie. And so, the Protestants being inflamed, and incouraged, by the Catholicks, which were interessed, and desirous to see some disorder spring up in this powerful Body; undertook the same de∣signe. And then it was, that the Empire was to be torne in pieces, since the Germans themselves conspired her ruine, with her Enemies, and subtra∣cted themselves from her obedience, because they could not endure her Ma∣jesty. The House cannot faile to be burnt, when the very owners themselves, as well as the enemies, help to set it on fire. This unhappinesse was reserved for the latter times. Let us see the King of Sweden come in; for he will dance bet∣ter then all who came before him. CHAP. XVIII The entry of the King of Sweden into Germany. His reasons why? Those of the Emperour. Allyances with Bogistaus. He blocks up the Sea Towns. Tilly takes the Generalate, against his will. VVHere shall I be able to finde tearmes, and Inke black enough, to expresse, and write tragically enough, the cruel, and dismal ef∣fects, of this sanguinary, and horrible War? Where shall I chuse words of energy, or force enough, to curse the inhuman actions, and unna∣tural Tragedies, which have been acted in wretched Europ, and which are not yet ended; and that, onely by the immense ambition of some few per∣sons? It is lawful openly to blame Vice, but not such as commit it: It is God onely, who must judge, and we poor Subjects must bend our shoulders, and expect our deliverance from above. About Mid-Summer, in the year 1630. the King of Sweden entred Ger∣many with an Army; having first cleansed the Isle of Rugia, and the borders of Stralsund, from the Imperial Garrisons. The reasons which he published, for his coming as an Enemy, were. First, because his Embassadours had not been admitted, to the Treaty of Lubeck. Secondly, in regard the Imperialists came against him in Prussia. And thirdly, for that some Letters of his, which he sent to Bethleem Gabor, had been intercepted, in full peace. But these, were but pretexts: for the true, and moving grounds were these. His reasons. First, because the Emperour had deprived his kinsmen, the Princes of Meckelemburgh, of their Dutchyes. Secondly, for that he had built Forts, in all the Havens; and made Ships, to render himselfe potent upon the Baltick Sea, with designe to passe one day further into Sweden, then he was to expect, that the Eagles would be suffe∣red to coast. And lastly, in respect there was some apperance of extending his domi∣nation in Germany; and in a word, it is alwayes profitable to fish, in troubled waters. The answer to the aforesaid reasons. The Emperour answered, that he himselfe had begun, by putting a Gar∣rison into Stralsund, and that there could be no treating with him, without drawing it from thence. As for his Letters, besides that all the plots, and practices, both of himself,
and his Allyes, were already discovered; it was impossible, but they must tend to his disadvantage, being directed to a man, who had as often revol∣ted, as opportunity was offered him to do it; and who never kept his faith, but when he wanted occasion to break it. In relation to the Baltick Sea, he had at least (being Chief, and Empe∣rour) as much to do with it, as Gustavus had. That the succour which he sent the King of Poland, was sounded upon the same Maxims, upon which himselfe had succoured the King of Denmark, and Stralsund. In order to the Dukes of Meckelemburgh, he objected, that he had nothing to do, to controwl him in Germany; and that himselfe would not take it well, that he should medle with any of his kingdom. That his cares were open to Intercessions, but not to Commands. But, all these arguments served for nothing; there must be blowes. For, the King was sure of his Allyes, and of the inclination of all the Protestants, whose Cause, and Religion, he vanted, that he came to defend. More∣over, this generous Prince, being brought up in arms, was sure, that, could he but once come to beate that old Captain,Tilly. that victorious Rock, against which all his Enemies had made shipwrack; all the Lutherans would lend him their hands, from the one end of the Empire, to the other; and then, what honour, and what glory should he obtain? And if it hapned other∣wise, he might consolate himselfe, with all such other Warriers, as had suf∣fered the like disgrace; though yet still, with this advantage beyond them, that his Enemies could not follow him, into his kingdom. In brief, he wanted but the getting of one General Battel, to put into his hands the two thirds of the Empire: and one more for all; and Italy in, to the bargaine. King Gustave leagues with the Dake of Pomerania. Whilest he was treating the League with Duke Bogislaus (who received him in Stetin) and driving the Imperialists out of Pomerania, and Meckelen∣bargh; being fortunate in many Encounters, and chiefly, in that which was offered for the succour of Colbergh (where the Imperialists were knocked, and Torquaro Conty forced to incamp himselfo at Gartz) the Protestants as∣sembled themselves secretly at Leipsick, from whence they communicated with him, and amongst themselves, about the means of retaining the Eccle∣siastical Lands, and Goods in question; of maintaining their Religion; and reducing, and restraining the Empire, to the same state, wherein it had been before the troubles. All kindes of defence are authorized, when there is fear of the diminution of estate, and State, together with that of Religion. It seems, that in these times, men may dispense with their faith or word gi∣ven, even upon meer doubts; and that it is lawful, upon meer apprehensions onely, though without any ground, to withdraw ones selfe from obedience. But dissidence, and power to hurt upon occasion, have more weight in State∣interest, then in Right; and they, who have not Peace, and Justice, for the scope of their armes, do not make War, but commit robberies; for the end of War, ought to be Peace. He blocks the sea Towns. Now, the King spent all the Summer, in blocking up the maritine Places; raising new Troops; exciting the Inhabitants to expell their Guests, and receive their old Masters; wherein they shewed themselves so good Ser∣vants, that their fear effectively appeared in all parts. Bogistans wrote com∣plaints, and excuses to the Emperour; but they brought nothing back, but reproaches, and condemnations. In the mean time, the Imperial Army and that of the League, were with∣out a Head; because the Duke of Frithland had obeyed the Emperours Or∣der; and General Tilly had a minde to submit to some pious inspirations, which commanded him to leave this Trade, and passe the rest of his dayes in the service of his Heavenly Master: In such sort, as there was much
a doe, yea, and many great Divines were faint to display their eloquence, to make him re-admit this Burthen upon his shoulders. For he considered, that he had alwayes had Fortune as his Handmaid; that he had acquired as much glory, as any one Captain in the World; and that all this might change; that in a great Calme, a great Storme is to be feared; and that it often happens, that the soundest, and best disposed bodies, are those, which most easily fall into grevous sicknesses. No, no, (said he) let another younger then I am, untangle this Web: It is a faire Field to winne the Lawrel; since the dispute is about Religion, and the Authority, of the Prime man of the World; the Cause is just; and the more difficulty it hath in it, the more glory will it also have. Sweat, and Dust mingled with blood, will alwayes revive, and quicken the Palmes, and Bayes, wherewith his head shall be crowned. Mine begin to way old with me; and I will now consecrate them to the foot of a Crucifix. O how happy had he been, had he followed this connsel, and put himself into a Monastery, as he had projected! But his delights were to be ming∣led with bitternesse; his glory was to be obscured; and he was to taste the condition of a Conquered, as well as that of a Conquerour. The Crosse, which he had a minde to embrace in a Cloister,The praise of Tilly who re∣takes the Ge∣neralate. was but exteriour, and vo∣luntary; but this was to be active, and essential. There were published of him, these three things; That be let no day slip, without hearing Masse: That he had never touched a woman; And that he never lost Battel. Let us leave him taking the charge, and care, of ranging the Souldiers again into good order, and discipline; and see what passed at Magdeburgh, since the year 1628. CHAP. XIX The Siege of Magdeburgh. The Duke of Lauemburgh beaten, and taken, neer the Elbe. King Gustave takes Francfurt, upon the Oder, and beats the Imperialists. MAgdeburgh is an Imperial Town, in the Country of Saxonie, situated upon the River of Elbe, grown very rich, and puissant, and by conse∣quence insolent, by the conveniency of Trade; It put Charles the fisth to much vexation, and trouble, and he proclaimed an Outlawrie a∣gainst it, and gave Maurice Duke of Saxonie the execution thereof; who, either through collusion, or otherwise, forbore to take it; and from thence came the German Proverb:Magdeburgh, the first di∣sturbance thereof. Metz and Magd refused to dance with the Empetour. After Luthers Doctrine was planted there, the Arch-Bishops authority began to be much vilifyed, and consequently, that of the Emperour. But let us now come to the state of the controversie. This Town chose Augustus Son to the Elector of Saxonie, for her Ad∣ministratour. Ferdinand consented not to this Election; and the Pope, de∣sirous to restore his credit in that Country, together with that of the Empe∣rour; established the Arch-Duke Leopold, who is at present Governour of the Low-Countries, for the King of Spain. The Imperialists seized upon some places neer it, and extorted a summe of money from it for their Solde, or Pay; and by continuing to demand a greater, provoked the aversions of the Cirtizens, and encouraged them to take arms, and chase them away. They seized also upon some Barkes, which went to the Country of Meckelenburgh; so that Wallenstein at length was faine to come and revenge
that Commotion.Appeased by Wallenstem. Brief, the Town was invested, temerity turned into re∣pentance, and arms into supplications: in conclusion, all was pardoned, they dispensed with for a Garrison, and the Forfeit of a hundred and fifty thou∣sand Riv.-Dollars, which was liberally remitted, out of respect to some cer∣tain Princes: though yet, all this made them not a whit better Servants, to Ferdinand. Thus, was the first bout past; but there followed a second, which brought an utter ruine, and that the most miserable one, that ever fell upon any Town; I will be bold to say, then that of Troy, even though all were true, which hath been written thereof by the Greeks, and then that of Forusalem, Saguntum, and Numantia: yea, of Sancorra, and Tirle∣mour. But we will deliver the motives thereof, and the Prodigies, which praeceded it. The couse of the disturbance. The Arch-Dukes Embassadours were sent to Hall, and Magdeburgh, to press the Inauguration, or Investure, re-demand the Churches, and dis∣mount the Evangelical Canonries. This infinitely displeased the Admini∣stratour Christian of Brandenburgh, who could not brook, that such a dignity, together with so great Revenues (wherewith he could maintain himself ac∣cording to his quality) should be forced from him: Nor was he ignorant, of how the Electour of Saxony took this proceeding, with what eyes these new Catholicks were looked on, and that Fortune did forward the valiant, and hinder the timid: and therefore, he fell to work. On that one side, he perceived the Assembly of Leipsick, and the inten∣tion thereof: on the other, the King of Sweden, who made great progress, and who was expected by all, as a true Liberatour, or Deliverer, and in the middle, all the people extremely affectionate to the Party, and desirous of nothing more, then to be in action for it. We alwayes covet that which is hurtful to us, and ask that, which we ought to shun. The A Imini∣stratour enters into the Town, and gaines the people. He entred into Magdeburgh disguised, with Marshal Falkenbergh, and brought things so to pass by his practises, and shifts, that he gained the Principall of the Town privately; and they, the people publickly. He ask∣ed them, whether they would hold with the King Sweden, and with him? To which they answered with a loud voyce, Yea. Ah! Blind people, what do you? You tumble both your fortunes, and lives into apracipice, by a fatality, which no body can comprehend, and yet lesse, resist. You have forgotten your first sicknesse, but you will perish, in the relaps. You see not any of the Prodigies, which admonish, and threaten you: One part of your Walls, and Bulwarks, tell you by their tottering, that they are to be thrown downe, and that flaming sword, which appeared aver your Town five or six moneths before your ruine, whilst you stept, announced to you, that fire and sword should destroy you. Prepare your selves to suffer Armes, since you demand warre; he who laves danger, shall perish in it. Now this was a Master-piece for the King of Sweden, as being one of the chief Instruments, to smooth the way to his victories. For this Town retarded the Armes of the Imperialists, and opened the passage, to those of the Swedes; who thereby got meanes to hunt them quickly out of all Pomerania, and Meckelenburgh, and terrified them, in fine, like an Earthquake, so that they knew not to what Saint to pray most. They had their enemies within, with∣out, and on every side. If they opposed such as were before, they were bea∣ten behind:The victory of the wedes in Pomerania, and Meckelen∣bergh. so such sort, as that the first year, Gustavus having made an Ally∣ance with: Duke Bogislaus, cleansed Pomerania, and Meckelenbergh, by almost a general Insurrection of the people, and Generall Tilly's absence, The Ma∣ritine Townes, as Colbergh, Rostock, Damitz, and Wismaer, when they had been very long blocked up, yeelded themselves one after another, for want of succour; and the King, having wedged up the Imperialists, asfar as into Silesia, carried on the war, to the very bank of the Elb; but it was after the elestruction of Magdeburgh, as we shal forthwith shew. He found a little repug∣nance
in Pomerania, from them, who knew Perdinands forces; but his violent ar∣guments made them bow, & his complaints moved the Electors also to change their note, who had not qualified him, in their Letters, with the title of : King. He frighted the Ladies at Berling, and got Spawdan for his retreat. In brief, they who invited him, were constrained to se-joyn themselves in apparence from him, and make a shew to apprehend, and fear him; though in their soules, they adored him, as their deliverer: but this dissimulation caused the ruine of Germany, and repentance in them, who so dexterously served themselves of it. The Administratour being glad boyond measure, to see that his design had succeeded so well, hoped to be very shortly in a condition, not only to expell his enemies, but to advance the war also, to some other part.Papenheim ha∣stens, and be∣gius the Siege, 1630. But Papenheim posting thither, succoured the Castle of Hall, retook forth with all all the Towns, stopped up the Fox in his hole, and began the fatal Siege of hisu∣happy Town, the 18. of December 1630. The King, seeing his enemies engaged in a long and tedious Siege, and desirous to serve himself of the advantage, thought of another diversion; and so, he sent Francis Duke of Laenburgh, with some Troops, towards the Elb, to raise a great fire there;Chastises Duks Francis near the Elbe. but Papenheim quenched it with their own blood; took the said Duke prisoner in a small Bark, and sent him to the Emperour, for not having kept his promise, which he gave him, never to bear Armes against him. Having thus furiously dispatched this Com∣mision, he came back to the Siege, and Tilly having mustered his Ar∣my, though he found it not so great as he conceived,Tilly in Mec∣kelenbergh. marched neverthe∣lesse to Meckelenbergh. Gustave, the other side, seeing his onemies melt before Magdeburgh, and having performed very great Exploits, both in Summer, and Autumne, marched in the month of December, up the Oder, to manifest thereby that he was more vigorous in the winter, then the Summer. In effect,Tilly returns to the Siege, and and the King beats the Im∣perialists as Francfut. the Imperialist durst not expect him at Gartz; but, after the loste of many of their men, retyred themselves in confusion, and made a stand again at Francfurt, upon the same River, though yet he returned, and intrenched himself, with∣out hazarding any combat at all, or opposing Tilly, who took Newbranden∣burgh, and put the Garrison to the sword, before his face. But he had his revenge, and made Tilly return towards Magdeburgh, whilest himself took Frankfurt, in the month of April 1631. with incredible felicity, beat the Em∣perours old Bands; flew above three thousand upon the place, and forced the rest to double their pace, towards Silesia. After having plucked out this thorne, he bent all his thoughts, to the succour of Magdeburgh, where we will leave him, to see what passed at that famous Assembly of Leipsick, where there was present that renowned Capu∣cin, Father Joseph, to animate, together with the other Embassadours, the Protestants, to warre against the Catholick League. But interest of State is more considerable then Religion; the Body, then the Soule: this world, then the other, and man, then God: If Right must be wronged, it must be done, only to gain a kingdom; in all other other things, piety must be reveranced. This proceeding had no other justice, then reason of State; and yet, the Reformates will be sure, not to excite the Catholicks to the destruction of any nation, which purely followestheir Doctrine. When you shall see the abomina∣tion of desolation, save your selves upon the Mountains. The Assembly of Leip sick was convocated by the Electour of Saxony, as Head of the Protestants, thereby to hinder the restitution of the Ecclesiasti∣cal Lands, and Goods; to succour a Magdeburgh, and joyn with the Swedes, to resist the Emperour, whose potency was too formidable to them. And this was the ground of their calling King Gustave into Germany, to be Cap∣tain Generall of all the forces; who, being fortified by the Allyances of
France, England, and the Conforderated States of the Low-countries, promised himselfe no lesse then the Empyre it self, if he could winne but one Battail. CHAP. XX The Protestants make an Allyance with King Gustave. Magdeburgh taken by force. They arm every where. VVHilest the Embassadours of the Princes, Imperial Towns, and Prote∣stans States, were treating an Allyance, and the King was grow∣ing formidable; the Drummes were beating, and the Trumpets sounding every where; in such sort, as that the two Electours, in the month of July 1631, seeing themselves with an Army on foot of twenty thousand men, threw off their vizard, wrote to the Emperour, as accusing him of ha∣ving broaken his Oath, overthrown the Peace, and Liberty of Germany; and in fine,Complaints against the Emperour. of having taken away the bonds of Religion: And if he revoked not that Edict for Restitution of Ecclesiastical Lands, and Goods, and that there were not some means found out to remedy these diforders, the whole Empyre would go to rack. But it was now too late to talk of remedies; strangers be∣ing already gotten in, and Ferdinands honour too deeply ingaged. Nor did their distrusts, and jealousies derogate one jot, from the justice of the Edict; no more then their possession of so many yeares made them true, and lawfull Proprietaries: For, That which is differed, is not lost. And for the praescription, it served for nothing; it being as lawful for the Emperour, to take the said Lands, and Goods from them by way of Justice, as it had been for them to dispossesse the Ecclesiasticks thereof by violence, or to re∣tain them, against the agreement made, after they had withdrawne them∣selves from the ancient Church,Refused by other. to marry: and so much the rather, because he was obliged thereto by his Authority, Right, and Interest. Besides, he wanted not arguments to retort. For, he accused them of deceit; for that, under pretext of consulting, they had assembled themselves, to take Armes, and joyn wich Gustave: That it was they, who had long agoe, ruined the supports of Religion, and divided Germany by factions, and distrusts, to the detriment of the publick quiet; and that himself, as being the Head, was bound to restore all to the former splendour, and good intelligence. So eve∣ry one pretended to have right on his side; and the sword was to do the office. Now Tilly, who by the strength ofGold. Ducats, had opened the consci∣ence, had purchased the Pen of a Secretary, knew all that was treated in the said Assembly; and effectively saw, that there was neither Burgh, nor Village under the jurisdiction of the Protestants, where souldiers were not listed. Tilly passes into Hastia. Wherefore he passed into Hassia, where he found the Landgrave William much changed, as being far more mindfull, of what he had concluded at Leipsick, then of what he had promised the Emperour at Vienna: For, he refused both Garrison, and Pension, as also the casheering of his forces; and shewed himself resolute; in fine, by the most manifest signs of aversion he gave, to defend himself, if he were attacked. Upon which, Tilly preparing himself to make him sing another tune,Returns to the Siege. was informed, that the King advan∣ced towards the Elbe, and so his menaces were but Chimera's; for he was forced to return to the Siege.
Count Turstem∣bergh in Swave and Wittem∣berg. The Count of Turstembergh, an old Souldier, stood not with his Arms a∣crosse; for there was work enough cut out already, without expecting any more. Wherefore, he was sent into, Swaveland, and Ʋlme, both which he quickly ranged, and from thence, into the Dutchy of Wirtembergh, where the eleven thousand men newly raysed, were not strong enough, to keep the Duke within the League: in such sort, as that those Provinces were constrai∣ned, to renounce the Protestant allyance, almost as soon as it was known, that they had sworne to it. All these commandments were prosperous enough, in High Germany: but the face of all things was changed, in Low-Saxonie, and the Maritine Towns (the principal subject of the distructs) which had long been blocked up, and put themselves again, into King Gustaves hands. Tilly and Papenheim, being resolved rather to dye, then abandon the Siege, dissembled their losses received, and continued it with so much order, that they quickly made themselves masters,All the Forts taken. of all the Forts and Out-works; so that there remained nothing but the Town, which perished, more out of hatred, and by the industrie of wise Falkembergh, then by her own strength. The Inhabitants were summoned to render; the Mines were ready, and the hand listed up to strike: and yet, through their obstinacie and blindnesse, they would needs expect extremityes, which at length they found. For Papenheim, irritated, as well by their flowts, as by their con∣tumatious resistance, entred first by force, and was repulsed by the Valour of the Marshal, who being killed by a bullet,And the Town by force. which is all burnt. the Inhabitants quickly retreated into their houses; the neerest whereof he commanded to be fired; and almost at the very same instant, the fire was seen very far from thence, neer the Elbe, and so, in lesse then four hours, this fine Town was reduced into ashes, whi∣lest the Souldiers were fighting with the Citizens, for plunder, without ta∣king any care at all, to extinguish the devouring flames. This was the end of that deplorable Town, the ashes whereof produced such animosities amongst the Lutherans, and Reformates, against the Imperia∣lists, that they cannot be highly enough expressed; and principally against Tilly, whose actions they carped, and said, that he had stained all his gallant Victories, with the smoaky ruines of Megdeburgh. What ever were in the matter, true it is, that Tilly, after this ransack, found fortune alwayes against him; and the Protestants reproached him with the indignation, and venge∣ance of God, for the shedding of so much innocent blood. The Catholicks, on the other side, retort the fault upon the insolencie of the Burghers, or Townsmen, who refused honorable conditions, when there was time for them: and whilest the gate was yet open to favour, and pardon: and say besides, that the Swedes, seeing the place lost, lest it on fire, for feare least it should fall entyre, together with the Magazin, into the hands of their enemies; alledging for proof thereof, that the fire was kindled, in many parts of the Town, from which the imperialists were very far off; though yet indeed, when souldiers are once gotten into a place by force, they make no account at all of command. But really, had they been able to enjoy this vi∣ctory, by an honourable composition, they would have been able by the con∣veniencie of the passage, and the Bridge, to keep the warre alwayes in Meck∣clemburgh; succour the places besieged, and have Westphalia behind them: for; a little before the taking of this Town, they had forsaken the Bridge of Das∣saw, upon information, that the King was coming thither, and for fear least he should serve himself of the said passage. But however, these sparkles incompassed all Germany with a fire, which lasted till the year 1649. Change of Religion, Commodityes, Allyances, Situation, and Traffick, had made this Town very insolent, with impunity: but the pot goes so often to the water, that at length, it returns crackt. As long as the Relicks of St. Norbert rested there,
they saved (according to the opinion of many) the Town from the thunder∣bolt; but after they were secretly stolne way, the wrath of heaven fell upon it, and crushed it, Had not Ʋlyffes stolne the Image of Minerva, Troy had not pe∣rished. Magdeburgh, being lost in her ruins, and the poor inhabitants buryed, or burnt in their houses, nothing was left to the conquerours, but a just displea∣sure, to see the desolation thereof. Tilly marched with his army; entred into Saxonie;Tilly goer into Saxonie. took many Towns; wrote to the Duke, and assured him, that if he renounced not the League, he would compell the Emperour to call strangers, into Germany, as well as the Protestants had done, by inviting the Swedes, and all the Princes, by choosing Gustave, for head of the union, and Protectour of the Interests of the said League. The Electour was extremly afflicted, to see his countrey was become the Theater, where all the Armyes were to begin the tragaedie. But he was re∣proached, that it was the recompence of the so many, and so great services, as he had done his Imperiall majesty; and that, as being a Lutheran, he ought to be chased our, as well as the rest. Wherefore, he beseeched the King to make haste; but he temporizing, and demanding Wittembergh for his retreat, he offered him all his Country: by which franknesse, he gave him so much contentment, that he resolved to succour him, without any condition at all. Before this, Gustave worsted Tilly before the Fort of Werben, for he suffered him to draw neer him,Tilly beaten near Werben. under praetext that his Canon was nayled, and Tilly having sent spies to his Camp, for this effect, and understanding that all was quiet, conceaved that his enterprize would not faile to succed; and so was re∣pulsed with much losse; and a little after, he lost yet three Regiments more; whereby he was taught, that he had to do, with a man who was neither Novice, nor. Apprentice, and that he must dispute lustily, to get any advan∣tage upon him. But, he was not aware, that his mifortune followed him to closely, and that his thirteen years Victorie was to be shortly contaminated, by the losse of one only Battail: a Battail, I say, which overthrew the house of Austria; destroy∣ed so much, and so great progresse, and exposed the Catholicks, to great af∣flictions. Lansbergins foretold, There shall come a King from the North, who shall cause troubles in Germany. Oh Bishops! (said he), how much will you have to suf∣fer? &c. CHAP. XXI The Battail of Leipsick. The flight of the Imperialists. The battail of Leipsick the 17 of Septem∣ber, 8631: KING Gustave being joyned to the forces of the Electours, a resolution was taken, to goe, and face General Tylly: who having the wind favou∣rable, and taken the Town of Leipsick, incamped himself hard by, and stood fast, to expect the Armyes of the confederates. This Battail, wherein were hazarded the Capps of two Electours, the liberty of the Princes of Germany; the conquests of so many years, and the whole hope of the Roman Catho∣licks, was very bloudy, and the old bands, which had never been scensly, gave ground here. The Saxons began the Shock, or Onser, whilest the king enlarged his Camp,
to get the winde. But they withstood it not long, before they ran; and their very flight made the King winne the Victorie. We are taught by hurt; and mis∣fortune it selfe is good, for something. There needed nothing to cause disorder, for the Imperialists pursued the Saxons so far, that they gave the Swedes occa∣sion to gain, with little trouble, their Camp, their Canon, and the Winde; and Generall Horne, flanking them in their pursuite, put them into such confusion, that they knew not one another, and hindred them from re∣turning to their own Body, from whence they had more hotly, then wifely unfastened them selves. Tilly, seeing this rowte, gave order for the Canon to be regained; where∣upon, Papenheim with his Horse, gave the Swedes two such furious Charges, as that had it not been for the presence of brave King Gustave, it was likely, that they, who had alwayes been accustomed to vanquish, would also have triumphed now. But he exhorting his men, both by his Majesty, actions, and eloquence; and a terrible execution, being done upon the Imperialists, as well by their own Canon, as by that of their Enemies; their Cavalrie began to fly. Tilly followed, though he were wounded, and thereby gave the lye to such as had impudently published; that he was invulnerable, by vertue of some certain Characters, or Charms. If the Imperiall Horse, had done their duty, as well as the foot theirs, the confederates had runne hazard to loose all. But the Foot being abandoned,The valour of the Imperial Foot. fought so valliantly, that they were faine to turne the ordnance upon five Re∣giments, which were rallyed, and fortifyed a part before they could break them. All the Baggage, Artillery, Munition, and sixscore Coulers fel into the Conquerours hands. Now, who will have forward trust, to his own strength, and power? Who will presume to rely upon the number of his Victories? Who will beleeve that fortune can be stopped, with a Nayle of Diamant? You see, that an Ar∣my of foure and twenty thousand Caprains (that is, all old Souldiers) were broaken, in the plaine, and open Field. Was i for want of courage, or expe∣rience. By no meanes. By whom? By Souldiers, who understood it better then they? Neither shall we finde the cause, in the Justice of the Party! Least of all: for every one thinks, he hath equity on his side; and besides, we must not judge of Right and Valour, by ambiguous, and underraine e∣vents. Moreover, we are taught by practice, that Fortune ranges her self or∣dinarily with usurpers, because they are full of courage, and the Countreys, they hold, of ill humours, factions, and partialities. This bloody battail, which was the seventh of September, 1631, which was called a Day of blood, by the famous Astrologer Horlicins; and which changed the countenance of the Affaires of Germany. And the news of this victorie, (which got strength by going) unspeakably rejoyced, not only all the Protestants, but also all such, as to whom those glorious Fiagles seemed too proud, and so much undertaking. The number of the dead, was very great, by the obstinat resistance of the combattants; nor was that of the prisoners small; which amounted (according to the opinion of some Authors) to thirteen thousand men. The darknesse of the night, sheltered such as fled; however they could not all es∣cape the rage of the Peasants, who cut: the throates of three thousand of them. Tilly retyred, by the way of Hall, towards the Weser; passed through Hassin, conferred with the Bishops of Wurtzburgh,Tilly retyred himself into Bavaria. and Bamburgh; whom he upbraided, with the contempt of his advice, which was, that they should open their purses, to raise a new Army, and not expect, till he were oppressed, by all the forces of Germany together. This done, he departed to∣wards his Master the Duke of Bavaria. And General Aldrwiger, hearing of this defeat, and observing small desire in his Army, to make head against
the Swedes, who were already reported to be invulnerable, by vertue of certain Spolls, or Characters; was forced to return towards Franconie, and from thence, also into Bavaria. The King, having received the Congratulations of his victory, and pro∣testing, that he would pursue the old Corporall (so called her old Tilly) to the end of the world;The King goes goes into Fran∣conie. prosecuted his point towards Franconie, took Coninx∣hoff, and Wurtzburgh, after having reduced Halberstade, and Erfurt; (and this last voluntarily received a Garrison from him, though it had flatly re∣fused any from Tilly) and from thence, he went to salute the River Mayne, where Francfurt threw open her Gates, and Hannaw yeelded her self to him, This done, he divided his Army, sent one part of it towards the Elbe, let the Duke of Saxony recover his lost places,And the Duke of Saxony, in Bohemia. and afterwards march towards Bo∣henia, with General Arnham, who took Prague, and Eguer. A little before this glorious victory, he received newes, that his Queen was arrived at Stetin, with eight thousand men, which were come out of England, under the conduct of Marquis Hamilton. Oh poor Germany? What miseries, and mischiefes are thou about to suffer, all thy Provinces being full of soul∣diers? Fortune, by her inconstancy, courting now the one side, and then the other, will destroy thy Townes, and Villages, and make thy great Empyre, no better the a Church-yard! Thy fine Lands will become vast, and savage, there being no body left to culituate them! Famin will cause the dead to be unburied; Contagion will sweep away such as escape the hand of the soul∣dier, and thy fields will grow white with bones? The first Post, which arrived at Vienna, brought newes, of the defeat of the Saxons; the second, that of Tilly, which disturbed the joy; and the third, filled the whole Court with sadnesse, and made it think of a way how to re∣paire this great losse. If the Affricans, being puffed up with so many victo∣ries, and with the ruine of the Romans, (whereof they held themselves cock∣sure) were much amazed to see them before Carthage; so, to say the truth, the Bishops, and the Roman Catholicks, were not a whit lesse, by the de∣struction of this Army,A terreur a∣mongst the Ca∣tholick. which had alwayes been victorious, and by means whereof, after the gaining of one Battail, they hoped to see the Masse, and the Imperial Authority, restored, throughout all Germany. A flock of sheep is not more scattered, when if sees it self environed by Wolves, and without a shepherd; then were the Ecclesiasticks by this acci∣dent; for terrour having thrust it self in amongst them, they betook them∣selves all to flight;The flight of the Reclesiasticks. some, to the other side of the Dannb: and others by the Rheyn, to Colein. But that, which troubled them most, was, that they were fain to forsake their money, which they might better have employed for the raising of an Army, at that time, when all the Lutherans took Arms. In fine, the confusion of the one, & the joy of the other, was so great, that it could not be expressed, and the money of the Priests served for a bait to attack them. Indeed, their avarice was ever blamed, and the great Revenues they posses∣sed, purchased them hatred: They were too much at ease, it was necessa∣ry to unfatten them a little. The hope of plundering upon them, encouraged an infinite multitude to bear Arms for King Gustave; who never let them be quiet, but kept them continually in action, thereby to disable the Empe∣rour from recollecting himself. Thus luck turned, and Fortune took part with the Swedes, whom we will now leave, in the honours which are done them, and the shouts of joy, which the Lutherans make, for this glorious victory. Now, the King seeing himself thus adored by his own party, and so much redoubted by his enemies, coursed them every where; imagining that from thence forward, he should easily find the way to the Universall Monarchy: But in an allyance, every one hath his design apart, as I shall more amply de∣monstrate,
France calls me now back thither. Ill newes ought to be sooner carried to a Prince then good, that so a more speedy and prompt temedy may be found for disorders. CHAP. XXII The Cardinall watches upon the Affaires of Germany; Abuses the Duke of Lorrain. Papenheim retakes Westphalia; succours Magdeburgh, and beats the Swedes. CArdinal Richelieu, having finished the Civill War of the Hughenots, as al∣so that of Mantua, found himself almost overwhelmed, by the plots and practises of such, as liked not that he alone should have the mannage∣ment of the Affaires in his hands. But he came most gallantly off, by shel∣tering himself under his Kings favour, in such sort, as that the said Kings only Brother, was fain to retyre himself from the Court,The Duke Oc∣leans in Lor∣rain. and pass through Orleans into Burgundy; and then, to the Duke of Lorrain. The Queen-Mother also unable to ruine him, whom she had raised so high, and to undo him, whom she had made so powerfull; being fled from Camplegne (where she was, as it were, guarded) retyred her self to the Infanta at Brussells.And the Queen-Mother at Brusselst. He made use against her, of that authority, which she had procured for him, which she could not now take from him. Ingratitude amongst private per∣sons, is a vice; in businesse of State, but a necessity; and so all is pald with excuses. The said Cardinal was revoked from his banishment, to induce her (upon whose minds he had a very great influence) to a peace, and give her such ad∣vice, as was most usefull to the King, and most dammageable to her self; and which served him for rongs or steps, to climbe to the top of that greatnesse, to which he had ascended. Thus destroyed he her, who laboured to elevate him, and who trusted wholly in him, and made him, in fine her prime, and principall Minster. But, they who relate this proceeding, to save him from the attack of ingratitude, alledge forsooth, that the Kings Cause ought to prevail, and that it is by no means necessary to observe, and keep a Contract, which is made against the Lawes, and Rights of the kingdom. But, there was peradventure, no other way to surmount the Eagle, then to thrust himself into her feathers. Whilest the Queen-Mother, and Monsieur de Luynes, pos∣sessed the Kings favour, the fortune of the whole Court depended upon them two; but he having lost his life, resigned it totally to Cardinal Richelieu on∣ly, who most absolutely tetained it till his death. Kings Gustaves victory wonderfully rejoyced, all the Reformates, and all them of the Cardinals Cabal; however the zealous Catholicks were afflict∣ed, and murmured much at him; blaming him as an impious man, and a fa∣vourer of Hereticks, but he was an immoveable Rock: and so having shaken off his Benefactresse, and her faithfull servants, he bent all his cares to the direction of the Affaires i Germany, and to the meanes which was to be followed, to arrive to a point of so much difficulty, as he had praeme∣ditated. He conducted the King with some Forces, into Lorraine, took Vic, and Moyenvic; procured a Cessation of Armes for fifteen dayes,The King of France in Lor∣rain, with the Cardinal. between his Ma∣ster and the Catholick Electours, and laboured by most secret wayes, to in∣duce them to seek his Majesties protection; wherein he succeeded but little
better, then they had done in the Embassie, which they sent to the King, to beseech him to divert the Arms of Sweden, from their Terriories, and from the Catholick Countries. For, the Electour of Trevrs oaly, sought his San∣ctuary, in the Arms of Lewis, because he could not hope for it, in those of Philip; and yet lesse, in those of Ferdinand. Gustave engry at the protecti∣on given to the Electour of Tievirs. King Gustave, unwilling to let his souldiers coole, could not cadure to hear Monsieur de Carnasse the French Embassadour, who beseeched him to think of a prolongation of the Truce, for a moneth, to whom, (being vexed at the protection given to the Electour of Trevirs, and clearly perceiving the inten∣tion of France) he very cholerickly said, that be can not to dismember the Empyre, but to deliver it from oppression; rather, to retain, and keep it en∣tyre: and that, if his Muster angred him, he would go see Paris, with fifty thousand men. To which Carnasse coldly replyed, that his Master would free him from that trouble, by meeting him more then halfe way, with the like Traine. But these little stings vanished in the common Cause, and by the dexterity of the Cardinal, who judged, that it was not yet time, to come to that; and that it was needfull to dally with the haughty hu∣mour of this Septemtrionall Prince, so to weaken, and attenuate the House of Austria yet more, by his Arms. It was too great an Oak, to be cut down at one blow. They who laboured to exasperate them, did but loose their labour: for, they had to do with Politicians, who had good noses, and who would be sure, not to become enemies, but by sharing the whole Prey. The Duke of Lorraine layes down Arms, and gives three Towns to the King. The Duke of Lorraine had raised an Army of twelve thousand men, to succour the Emperour, and was already advanced as far as the Con∣fines of Hassia: but he was constrained to retyre into his Dutchy, and promise the King of France, who was at Metz, not to meddle with the Affairs of Germany; and for pledge of this promise, to put three Towns into his hands, for the space of three yeares. A hard condition, for a Soveraign Prince, who could not see the Emperours ruine, but with his own. But he was forced to yeeld, to a more potent then himself, for a time; for there grew a change afterwards. If the Protestants had cause to complaine of the insolencie of the souldi∣ers; the Catholicks had also their turn, and were no lesse trodden down, then they; and especially the Priests, Monks, and Bithops; but above all, the sIesuits carried, the pack. The Landgrave of Hassia, at∣tacks the Bishops. The first, who cast himself upon them, was William, Landgrave of Hassia, who pillaged the Country of the Abbot of Fulda, a Prince of the Empyre: from whence, he returned into Westphalia, and to the Diocese of Colcin, up∣pon which he cast irreparable dammages. But Count Papenheins came to Colein,Papenheim re∣taits an Army. to put a remedy to these mischiefes; nor could there be a braver man then he found out to do it, if it were within humane wit, to invent a way for it; which he did, and brought it to so good an issue, that he me∣rited thereby, to be styled the Captain of Captains. He began his march with Lamboy, recollected the seatterings of the old souldiers; and put them in discipline together with the new ones. Being arrived at Hamelen, he joyned with Groensfeldt, retook many places without the losse of a man; and the more he advanced, the bigger was his Army; so great power hath the reputation of a Ge∣nerall, to draw forces together. He resolved to beat Bannier from the Siege of Magdeburgh, to which end, he drew to himself the Gar∣rison which was gone out of Wismar, and with this small Body, and much military science, mingled with cunning, he fell upon the skirts of the Swedes, when they thought him yet farre enough from them; so that they retyred with confusion;Beats Bannier. and hee charging them in
the Reere, put them into great disorder, and entred the Town,Drawes out the Garrison of Magdeburgh. and judging it not tenible, blew up the Rampars, and the Church, and drew out the Garrison, to the number of foure thousand, to do better service elsewhere: He continued his victory, drew contribution from such Towns, as into which he would put no Garrisons, because he would not diminish his Army, ruined the Landgrave of Hasss Leavies, and beat Bannier, who came to succour him. In a word,Beats Bannier again as also the Landgrave, the Duke of Brunswick, and General jot. all gave way, all stooped. He charged the Duke of Brunswick in the Field, with so much fury, that he had much a doe, to save himself, with one only Regiment of Horse. He afflicted the Bishoprick of Bremen, as well as the Dutchy of Brans∣wick; and hearing, that Generall Jot had besieged Staden, he went, and chased him thence, with the losse of above fifteen hundred men;The exploit ef the Westphana. drew out the Garrison, and found himself, in a short time, at the head of a brave Army, and crowned with many victories: He repassed into Westphana, which he re∣stored to the Emperours obedience, and came, in a word, very near King Gustave, by the number of his great exploits. Let us now look back upon the United Provinces, where we shall see Bone-fires: but we must know for what? CHAP. XXIII. The taking of the Fleet of Shallops, near Berghen op Zoom: Wallenstein takes the Generalat, with conditions of to much advantage. An Earth-quake, at Naples: the Mountain of Soma vomited fire. THe Hollanders, amazed at the admirable progresse of the King of Sweden, conceived, that it would be for the interest of all the Allyes, as well as their own, for them to assayle their enemies. They were Masters by Sea, without controversie: And after the taking of the Money-Fleet, they seazed upon the Bay, and Town of Todos los Santos, or All-Saints; where the booty they got, was great enough, to excise their desire, to seek more. But the King of Spain taking it from them again, obliged them to go and attack the Town of Olinda, in Pharnambus, which deligne issued well, and all the Country there about followed quickly after, without much re∣sistance. In such sort, as that the two Branches of the House of Austria, tryed, almost by turns, the cruel effects, of that inconstant Goddesse; however she have not strength enough, to make them loose their courage, they having means sufficient to maintain, and uphold themselves. Now, the Spaniards were afflicted with so many losses both by Sea, and Land; that they resolved to endeavour some revenge. They secretly pre∣pared a Fleet of Shalops, and vanted of great secrets; yea, that there was a certain Priest, who would make souldiers go under the water, and fly in the ayre, &c. The Hollanders were allarmed at this; and Prince Henry in∣camped himself in the Isse of Tertollen, to watch the designes of the Enemy. The Fleet hoysed Sayle, passed through the mouth of Safting,The Fleet of Shallops taken the thirteenth of September 1651. and turned round about the Island: but for want of good Pilots to observe the Tyde, and staying for some Shalops, which were aground in the sands; they lost the time, and gave it to the Hollanders to attack them, and take them, as it were, in a field of corn; and that, without so much as fighting: for they all rendred themselves up to the mercy of their Enemies, and their Cavalry,
which was come to the bank to help them, was fain to return, as it came. There were more then four thousand prisoners, who were all pillaged, and then put to ransom, by a singtilar favour of the Prince of Orange; for they were taken, because they could not fly, not walk under water, and in a place where there was no quarter to be given. The truth of their design was ne∣ver yet known: some thought, it was upon Willeinstadt; others, to make Fortresses, and separate Holland from Zeland. This great victory happened the thirteenth of September 1631, and that of the King of Sweden, four dayes after. An Earth∣quake at Na∣ples. About two moneths after, there chanced a terrible Earthquake at Naples, and the Mountain of Soma, after many horrible bellowings, vomited out burning streams of fire, which tumbled into the Adriatick Sea, and cast out a huge deale of ashes.The Hill of Soma. This was renewed the year following, in the moeth of February, with so great hurt, and losse, to the circumjacent pla∣ces, is well in houses, men, women, children, and cattell, that it cannot be expressed, nor comprehended. Those three aforesaid losses astonished the House of Austria, which, to put a powerfull stop to the impetuous torrent of the victories of King Gu∣stave, her most dangerous Enemy, who was inseparably accompanied both by Fortune, and Favour, cast her eyes upon the Duke of Frithland, a most happy, and most experimented Captain, who, in the affront of having been deprived of his charge, received an incomparable contentment from Count Tilly's misfortunes: And so Embassadours were dispatched to miti∣gate him,Wallensiein retakes the Ge∣neralship. and offer him the Generalship again, and with most ample Commissions, and a huge summe of money. He suffered himself to be much intreated, and courted; covering his ambition, or rather his ven∣geance, with a thousand dissimulations. But at last, under conditions, which divided the Soveraign authority, he was brought to accept it, and forth with gave Pattents, for the raising of sixty thousand men; and so there was an Army of forty thousand on foot, as it were, in the twinkling of an eye, as if with striking his foot against the ground, he had raised soul∣diers; and he Generalissimo, or Chief Genorall, of all the Emperours Ar∣mies, and Arbitratour of Peace and Warre. It often happens, that when we endeavour to shuune one kind of Rocks, or Sand-banks, we hit against another. Necessity seemed to command this extremity, and to remit the course of affaires, to the Divine Providence: He did both good, and evill, and received at length the Crown of his works.
CHAP. XXIIII. George Landgrave of Darmstadt obtains newtrality, and why? Horne beaten by Tilly, The King makes his entry at Nurem∣berge, and Tilly retires. The King takes Donawerdt passes the Leck; makes Tillyes forces retreat with confusion. Tillyes death, his Elogies. The Siedge of Ingolstadt. The taking of Ratisbone. Divers instructions, of the Embassadours of France. The Eagle in danger; succoured by whom? THe rejoycing which was caused by the Kings victory before Leipsick, in the Ʋnited Provinces, to see themselves freed from great apprehension, was very much; whereas, the other, as also all the subjects of the Crown of Spaine, expressed no lesse sadnesse, and cryed aloude, that it was high time to arme, and stop the progresse of these Goths, least both the Empire, and all Europ, should come to be destroyed by them. Between this joy, and fear of the people, King Gustave played not truant,King Guestave posses the Rheyn. but having made his entry into Francfurt, like a great Conquerour, he recea∣ved the Embassadours, and Congratulations of his Friends. His Armes had droven his enemyes over the Rheyn; and therefore, he resolved also to passe it, and the Spaniards, who came to relieve the Electour of Mentz, endeavoured to hinder him; but they were not able to resist his happinesse, and so they gave way to force, though not to industrie. He took Wormes, Spiers, and Oppengeim; only Mentz, and Creutznach, made a shew of defence; but were quickly compelled to follow the other; and the Spaniards, either to repasse the Mosell, or to be shut up in Frankendal. The King, having visited the Seate of the mouth of the Mayne, resolved to build a strong Town,Gustave, burgh. under his own name, opposite to Mentz, below Francfurt; and so he set men on worke about it, and many great Lords built faire houses there, but both this Town, and the Victories of this great Prince, vanished away a few years after, as we shall shortly shew. Amongst all the Princes of the confession of Auxburgh,The Landgrave of Darmstedt obtaines new trality. there was none but George Landgrave of Darstadt, who kept newtrality, and fidelity to the Emperour. He sent to demand it also of the King, by his Embassadours, whom he answered, that he wondered, that he came not himself in Person, since he was so neer. Whereupon, the Prince assembled the principal Ministers of his Countrey, and proposed to them, the Oath, which he had made to his Fa∣ther, never to bear Arms, against the Emperour, unlesse he forced him in his Law, or Religion, and made war upon him, and asked them, whether in this conjuncture, it were lawfull for him to break it, without any wrong done him by the said Emperour, or any dammage at all brought upon him, by his Souldiers? They all held the Negative: and with this sentence, he went to the King at Francfurt, and so handsomly represented his reasons to him, that he obtained what he asked. Whilest Gustave was in doubt, whether he should go down the Rheyn, (where all was full of fear, and trembling) to seaze upon Colein, he receaved newes, that Tilly had beaten Horne in Bambergh, defeated foure thousand of his men, took twenty Pieces of Canon, a multitude of Coulers,Horne beaten by Til'y. and made a shew, to attack Nuremberge. This was the last favour Fortune did this Dar∣ling of hers, whom she abandoned, to court another. Whereupon he instantly
marched wich all diligence; and Tilly, not knowing what to doe, was constrai∣ned to retyre speedily, by a strong accident; which was, that his powder took fire, did a great deal of hurt amonst the Baggage-Waggons, and drew this complaint, out of the mouth of this old Souldier; Let us retyre (said hee) For it is high time, since fortune turns her back to us. Indeed, he had reason: for she was preparing him a bed of honour,Who repasses the Danub. upon which he was quickly to re∣pose. He was followed by the King, who entred Nurembergh in Triumph, and that illustrious Senate presented him with a Goulden Globe, as a Symbol of the Monarchie, which they prognosticated for him. But he foresaw not the misfortune, which he was to suffer that Summer: For, being accompanyed by King Frederick, who came from the Haghe, in the middle of Winter, to see his Countrey, and his Deliverer, and after compelments falling to treat of businesse, the conditions displeased him, and changed the love which the Princes bore him, into diffidence; which was so much the greater; by how much the lesse they durst shew it. Oh! the inconstance, of things in this world? Oh I how subject is all to change? Is refulsed. He took Donawerdt, and passed the River Look, in despight of poor Tillyes resistance; who, though crazed with age, left not yet, to encourage his Souldiers,His death. till he was mortally wounded; and then they retyred a gallop, (though with an orderly retreat enough,) to Ingolstadt, where this famous Captain dyed of his wounds.His elogies. He was by birth, a Walloon, and a Gentleman: He had alwayes been happy, til the last year, when he tryed the effects, of the inconstancie of fortune: He was one of the most Valliant, and Prosperous Warryers, that ever bore Arms. He dyed on a bed of honour, for the de∣fence of the Church, and his Prince. Honours to Gustave, at Auxburgh. Rain, and Newburgh were yeelded to King Gustave; and the Citizens of Auxburgh, opened their gates, singing his praises, and exhibiting all the ho∣nours, and testimonies of amitie, that could be given, to any mortall man; Yea, I know, there were some, who wore his Medall, with as much love, and reverence, as the Roman-Catholicks doe their Relicks, or Agnus Dei. They took the oath of Fidelity to him, as to their lawful Lord, and consented to the destroying down of the faire Gardens about the Town, to begin the fortifica∣tions. This done, he turned towards Swaveland, where the Lutherans, who make the biggest party in that Province,The exploits of the Swedes in Sware. rendered themselves to him, and received Garrisons from him: nor was there scarce any but Lindow, a Town situated upon the Lesk, which remained constant. Italy was allarmed, by the report of so great prosperitie; and Feria, the Go∣vernour of Milan, made an Army, to defend the entry. Some trembled; and others, who desired change of State, and Money, rejoyced. But the mischief went no further; the Italians had but the feare; for their punishment was able enough to fall upon them, without expecting it from the hand of stran∣gers. The Siege of of Ingolstadt. Ratisbone ta∣ken by the Ba∣varians. The King, having brought so many faire Towns in Swaveland under his Laws, whilest the Saxons afflicted Bohemia, and Papenheim domineered in Brunswick; returned to the Siege of Ingolstadt (a fatal Town to the Prote∣stants) full of spight, to hear, that the Elector of Bavaria had craftily seized upon Ratisbone, an Imperial Town, which he fortifyed, as being wholly his own; and upon which depended the ruine of that, which he went to besiege in vaine. The Letters, which had been written by the Inhabitants of the said town being intercepted, gave the Bavarians opportunity to enter, at a Gate which was opened them, as thinking them to be Swedes. The traitours went to pot, the town was saved from pilladge, and the Inhabitants condemned to a forfeit of Money, and to work about the fortifications. They had for∣gotten
gotten their Oath to the Emperour, and the Empire; and novelty, and the triumph of the Swedish Armies, had dazled the eyes of the Protestants, who like Israel, sung their deliverance. Ingolstadt in the mean while saw the principal forces of the Protestants, before her Walls; and if she yeilded, farewel Bavaria: But the King found work here; and this; was the first town, which taught this great Conquerour, that he was to have bounds to his Victories; besides, that he was very like∣ly to loose his life, by a Cannon Bullet. The Elector feeling himselfe so roughly attacked, by an enemy whom he had never offended (unlesse Princes take the occasion to hurt, for an offence) sent the French Resident, Monsieur de Sainct Estienne, to the King, to remon∣strate to him, that in regard he was so deeply ingaged in the Allyance with the King of France, he could not be assailed by him,A notable ob∣servation. without making him∣selfe his enemy. The Resident spake confidently with him, and endeavour∣ed to divert him some other way: but the King interrupted him, and said; I know your Masters intentions, better then you do; and for the rest, I pardon your French liberty; for, you are not sent to me, in the quality of an Embassadour. But the President followed his instructions, and Monsieur de Carnasse his; in such sort, as that these two, being both Officers of the same Master, fell to difference, and were very like also, to come to blowes. This was not the first prank of activity, which the Cardinal played in Germany; though it were well observed by the Elector, and would have been taken for couzen∣age, in another Age; but in this, for politick craft. Howsoever, he made his profit of it; stood fast with the Emperour; and so neately, and dexte∣rously retorted the ball upon the French, that the Cardinal himselfe was faine to avow, that the Duke of Bavaria was the most cautious, and subtile Prince in Germany. When we have to do with Cheaters, we must take heed of all things, and give them like for like, if we can. Indeed, when jealousie, and mistrust hath once taken root, in the hearts of the Germans, there is no means to pluck it out. The designes of the Confede∣rats. The Confoederated Strangers, were almost all resolved to make a Ca∣piratado, or Minct-meat, of the Imperial Eagle; but they could not agree, about the sawee; for King Gustave would have it sower, and intended to eat it himselfe alone, as the Lion did the Stag, which he had taken, in the company of the Wolfe, and the Asse: The King of France would have it sweer, and praetended to both the wings at the least. The King of England would have a share to his Brother in Law. The vnited Provinces desired not her death; but onely to cut off her Tallants, that so she might not scratch. The Venetians were of the same opinion with the Protestants, who would onely make her change her nest, and render her so tame, and gentle,Differences. that she might be no more so fierce, nor able to beck them. Every body endea∣voured to hurt her, and turmoile her; every one laid gins to catch her: But, when the Princes saw, the King Gustave tormented her too much, and handled her after such a-fashion, as they liked not; and that the French be∣gan to pluck off her feathers; they apprehended both her ruine, and their own too. She was not succoured by the Polanders, because thy were most exact observers of the Truce, between themselves and the Swedes. She got but very small aide from Italy; for the Pope himselfe, preferring the odour of the Flower de luce, before all other considerations; seemed not to care for the dangers, to which she was exposed, together with the Church, whereof he possessed the supreme Dignity. And yet for all this, she defended her selfe with great resolution, being succoured by the Spaniards, and the Obedient Provinces; as also by the City of Colein, which was escaped out of a most evident danger. The Eagle de∣fended, and by whom. The Catholick Electors shewed themselves willing to die with her; and
the Duke of Lorraine made no difficulty, to loose his States, and hazard his life, for her safety, and preservation. But, the Elector of Trevers despairing of her health, and endeavouring to save his own States from shipwrack; and charmed besides, by the eloquence of that great Cardinal; cast himself into the armes of France, as we shall hereafter finde; though yet, he could not escape the misfortune, which was prepared, both for his Arch-Bishop∣rick and himselfe. But let us return into Brabant, to the Siege of Mastricht. CHAP. XXV. Count Henry of Bergues disgusted with the Kings service, goes secretly to the Haghe. The Siege of Mastricht. Papenheim repul∣sed, returns into Germany. Limburgh followes Mastricht; and the Deputies the Prince, to the Hague. The death of three Kings, THis year was memorable, for the death of three kings. Sigismund of Poland, who very piously departed the 29th of April. The King of Sweden, who lost his life upon the bed of honour; and King Frederick, who rendred his by sicknesse, at Mentz. The last year, the Hollanders triumphed by water; and they did it this, by land, as we shall see. The Spaniards had sent the best part of their forces, to the Palatinat, and left the Low-Countries, without men, mony, and counsel, and in great ter∣rour, for so many losses. Count Henry of Bergues, disgusted, by some pre∣tended affronts, with the service of his Prince, whose Armies he comman∣ded, and by whom he could not be made greater then he was; seeing the huge progresse of the King of Sweden, and the occasion most opportune, to beate out the Spaniards; went to the Prince of Orange, at the Haghe, with whom, together with Monsieur de la Tilillerie, the French Embassadour there, he had a very secret Conference;Count Henry of Bergues goes to the Haghe. the effects whereof appeared the first Field: and the Prince being at the head of his Army, marched the tenth of June, from Grave, up the Moze, presented himselfe before Venlo (from whence the said Count was already departed the same day) and summon∣ed it to render,Venlo and Ru∣remund, yeild. The end of the War. upon such conditions, as he sent it, in Blanke. There was a report published, that this Feild would produce an end of the War, and of the Spanish Government (which was the onely thing aimed at) with the safety of the Catholick Religion, and the Infanta's authority, and person, The bird cannot chuse but be taken, if she hearken to the fowler. Venlo was forthwith yeilded; none going out of the Town, but the Gar∣rison; for the Priests, and Monks remained: and the Reformats were con∣tent with one Church. Count Ernest of Nasseaw went, with a part of the Army before Ruremund, which defended it selfe; but through despaire of succour, yeilded at last, upon the same conditions that Venlo had done; and a shot of a Harkebuse,Ernest of Nas∣saw killed: or Gun (which was the last that was shot from the Town,) stopped the course of the said Counts life, retarded the designe for some hours; and gave Count John of Nasseaw meanes, to put two and twen∣ty Coulours into Mastricht. This recrute brake the neck, of all great designes, purchased the Count of Bergues,Savosr into Mastricht. and them of his Cabal, much disreputation, and blame: put the Hollanders in danger; and preserved the succession, for Philip the fourth King of Spaine, how bitterly soever it have been disputed since. The Infanta, being fully informed of the said. Count Henry's intentions,
whom she had alwayes loved, and supported, against all such, as envyed him; was at length induced to permit, that an Order might be sent to the Governour of Guelders, to seize upon his person, and bring him with a good Guard to Brussels, since he had refused to come, of his one accord. But he, having smelt the designe, retired himselfe forthwith to Liedge;The Count of Bergues goes to Liedge. where he laboured to draw the Kings Army to him, by promising them an end of the War; but none would follow him; even they who had accompanied him thither, forsooke him: for the Souldiers desire not an end of War; because they have no other Trade to live. The Count of Warfuze,And the Count of Warfuze. who was of the Plot, got also thither; but the Duke of Arschot, who was suspected for it, stirred not at all, but remained firme in his duty. As soone as the Holland Cavalrie appeared before Mastricht, Count John marched out with his; in such sort, as that the Prince, not being able to winne the Town with faire words,Mistricht be∣sieged. as he had done the o∣ther, was constrained to change his note, and keep measure with the Ca∣non: So that he intrenched himselfe before it, and gave the Spaniards lea∣sure, to put an Army into the Feild; who sent for their forces out of the Pa∣latinat, which beat the French, who endeavoured to hinder their passage, and joyned in a Body, under the conduct of the Marquis de Santa Crux;The Spaniards come from the Palatinat. though so late, as that it was impossible for them, to drive away their Ene∣mies. Papenheim being sent for, came with all possible speed; and though he found the Prince so extreamly well intrenched, yet would he not return, be∣fore he had tried,And Papenhe∣im from Wost∣phalia. is re∣pulsed. whether the Hollanders could well withstand the assault of the Germans; wherefore he fell upon them at high-noon, with so desperate a resolution, that he made himselfe feared; and had the Spaniards done their duty, as well as the Germans, it was very likely, that the Hollanders would have runne hazard to be worsted: but he retired with notable losse; left a noble testimony of his bravery; and returned into Germany with a generous displeasure, for having undertaken such a hard task,Returns into Germany, and the Spaniards into Brabant. without be∣ing seconded. The Spaniards marched towards Brabant, not without murmuring against their General, whom they accused, to have played away their money; and one part of the States Army, towards Limburgh, which was surrendred up to them, upon the same conditions that Mastricht was. The Baron of Lede, Commander of this Town, acquired great reputation, and was as highly praised by the brave, and amiable Prince Henry of Orange, as he was ho∣nourably recompenced by the King his Master. Never was the aforesaid Prince in greater danger; and if the people of Liedge had forsaken his friendship, he had been in a poor condition, for want of Victuals. Let us finish this Field. The States General, and the Prince of Orange, invited the Obedient Pro∣vinces, to a Treaty of Peace; and these resolving to heare their Proposi∣tions, by the Infanta's advise, the Duke of Arscot,And the Prince to the Haghe, with the Depu∣ties for the Peace. the Arch-Bishop of Meck∣lin, the Abbot of St. Vast, and some other Syndicks, or Agents, went to the Haghe, where the Prince was received by all, with a multitude of praises, and benedictions; and where we will leave them in a Businesse, whereof they will finde no end, and go see the King of Sweden march out of Bavaria, to save Naremburgh. But let us first look, in what equipage General Wallen∣stein is.
CHAP. XXVI. Wallestein beats the Saxons out of Bohemia; and drawes towards Nuremburgh. The Tragedy, which haphed at Rostock. Gallasso, and Holck, in Misnia. The King goes out of Ba∣varia, and incamps himselfe before the said Town: he sends for all his Forces. The successe of Papenheim. ALl the World admired Wallenstein in his prosperity; many lamented him, in his disgrace; and every body wondered, to see him now, at head of so puislant an Army, with so much glory and Majesty. The first dart he shot, was against the Elector of Saxony (and it was a Proposition of Peace) the point whereof not being yet well sharpned, was quickly unru∣sted, and cleansed afterwards.Waller stein beats the Say∣ons out of Bo∣hemis. The second he shot, had so much vigour, that he dislodged the said Electors Troops out of Prague, and all Bohemia, and made them returne into Misnia, leaving Gallasso behinde them, with some forces. But he was not troubled at all, to see the Duke of Bavaria chastised by the Swedes, nor did he hasten to beat them out of his Country; in respect of the hatred he bore him, for his having disposed the Emperour, by the advice of Cardinal Richelien, to deprive him of the Generalship. In fine, after having been often beseeched to come, he moved at lengh, towards the upper Palatinat,He joynes with the Bavarians. complimented the said Duke, and joyned with him. Gustave Horne was not idle in Alsatia, and by the assistance of the Magi∣strates of Strasburgh (for so many Imperial Towns, so many little Armies for the Swedes) he besieged the Fort of Benefeldt, which by the slacknesse of the Governour,Horne takes Benefeldt. he quickly took; and so, by breaking the Irons, where∣with the Towns seemed to be bound, the Swedes forged other, to stop them. He took many Towns, and would have made greater progresse, had he not been called by his King, to succour him neer Nuremburgh. The Dukes of Meckelemburgh were also still in action, and had so clean∣sed their Dutchy from the Imperial Garrisons,Stirrs at Ro∣stock, and why? who were not expected to be ever seen again in those parts. But there chanced a Tragedy at Rostock, which was like to have destroyed the Town, and the Inhabitants also with it; and it was this. A certaine Burgher, or Townsman, having a minde, ac∣cording to the example of Iudith, to deliver the said Town, from the oppres∣sion (as he said) of the Imperialists; went to the Governour in his Cham∣ber to desire a Pastport; and when he saw him busie in writing it, he struck him so many blowes with a hatchet, that he cut off his head, and carried it away in a bag, and threw it into the Cellar of another Burgher. This mur∣ther being discovered, gave an alarme to the Souldiers, who gave it also so hotly to the poor Citizens, that they thought no lesse, then to be all knocked in the head, and plundered. But inquiry being made, the head was found, and the murtherer shortly after, who was examined, and made suffer the punishment of his Crime, for the discharge of the innocent; and his ill setled head flew off his shoulders, for an example, to such as should undertake, falsly to imitate that aforesaid Lady, who was accompanied by the Holy Ghost. The Duke of Wirtembergh, and all who had renounced the League of Leip∣sick, took arms again, with as much facility, as a Candel newly put out, and yet hot, takes fire: All must be changed; there must be another Golden
Bull, other Electors, and another Emperour; for they scoffed at this, and all his designes: but as soon as the Armies were seen before Nurembergh, all was husht, and every body stood mute, at the expectation of a successe, which was to give the Law. When the King came out of Bavaria, he found but onely Ingolstadt, which resisted him; and in revenge thereof, he dis∣persed all his forces throughout the whole Country; and Minnecken, one of the finest Towns in Germany presented him her keyes; where he seized upon a huge Treasure; and being informed, that there were many pieces of Ord∣nance buried under ground, he caused them to be digged up, and found them full of Ducats. In fine, being loaden with booty, and not able to stay there, he extorted three hundred thousand Rix-Dollars more from the Town, to save it from plunder, as he did some other, after the same rate. Many Villadges were set on fire, for a signe that the Enemy had been there; who retired himselfe with speed, letting the Bavarians take breath by his de∣parture, and leaving Garrisons in three Towns onely, to assure them of his returne, at his pleasure; and so he went, and incamped himselfe before Nu∣rembergh; a place of much renown, for the industry of the Inhabitants, and for being one of the principal Imperial Towns besides. It is seated, almost in the Center of Germany; hath alwayes been extreamely jealous of the Em∣perours happines, opposed his designes, by many direct wayes;Nurembergh contrary to the Emperour. as by Em∣bassyes to the Protestants, and by Leagues which it hath made, with the Enemies of the House of Austria. Wallenstein resolved, to go thanke the Citizens of the Town, for the good reception they had given his Masters Capital Enemy, and by the same means, to recall him to their succour. The Armies drew neer the Town, and invironned it, together with the King; who not being strong enough, to oppose so great, and terrible for∣ces, sent for all his Generals; as Marshal Horne, the Landgrave of Hassia; Duke Bernard of Wimar; Axel Oxensterns, and a multitude of other Officers, with their Troops, who all arrived happily to his camp;All the forces before Nurem∣bergh. save onely Tupa∣del, who had three Regiments cut in pieces, and himselfe taken prisoner. Upon the other side, Gallasso, and Holck gave the Protestants like for like; pilladged Misnia, and took all the Towns, Friburgh, to save the Sepulcher of the Duke of Saxony, paid eighty thousand Rix-Dollers: Leipsick,Galasso in Mis∣nia. took Garrison, the second time, and saw them returne, whom it thought never to see again; and that song was proved false, which said, that the Emperour was escaped like a Theese, and a Highway-man. But respect was lost, and detraction praised. Oh depraved Age! Thou art full of injustice, and per∣fidie. Papenheim in Westphalia. Papenheim being repassed the Rheyn, made all his Enemies forthwith know of his returne; and all the Birds, smelling the approach of the Falcon, hid themselves. He tore some in pieces, and made others fly from their nests; without letting any body take, either rest, or breath. Baudis,His exploits. and the Land∣grave felt the prickings of his tallons: Duke George of Luneburgh, who had besieged Wollfenbottel, found himselfe oppressed, before he knew of his Enemies coming; and he was so well cudgelled, that he could hardly get safe to Brunswick. This successe so much inflamed the courage of this brave Souldier, that he presumed to attack the great Towns; and so he took Hldesheem, and Mulhuse, with three hundred thousand Rix-Dollars for ransom; and Erfurt was already mennased by him, when he heard, that the King was departed out of Franconie, and was coming towards Saxony, there to finde his Tomb: And indeed he said, a little before the Battel of Lut∣zen, that he should not live long, because he was too much loved, honoured,The words of Gustave. and respected by the people: which prediction of his proved true, as we shall forthwith demonstrate.
CHAP. XXVII The Armies encamped before Nurembergh. The Skirmishes. They depart from thence. The Battail of Lutzen. The death of King Gustave, King Frederick, and Papenheim. I Shal not mention all which passed, between the two greatest Armies, that have been seen these hundred yeares, composed of so many Generals, as well as others. Every one laboured to excell his companion; and what∣soever art, and subtilty, can be in Arms, was here set on work. The King, who boasted, that he had to do with a Priest, which was Tilly; with a souldier,Tilly called Priestly the King Papen∣heim, Souldier, and Willenste∣in Foole. meaning Papenheim; and with a Fool, which was Wallen∣stein, (who gave him more exercise then all the rest) not being able to draw him to a generall Battail, offered him the Crown of Hungary; but that not succeeding, and the Impostume, which Wallenstein had in his soul, not being yet ready to burst, and vent the filth which was in it; recourse must be had to force. For the Imperialists were grown Hollanders, and served themselves of the Spade, instead of the Lance. But Gustave, longing to be Master of the Empyre, resolved to unnestle him from thence, and assembled his principall Officers, to dispose his Army that way: But finding them of a contrary opinion, through the impossibility of the Enterprize; he fell to reproach them, and utter such injurious language against them, as had not their interest been tyed to his,Gustave abuses his Officers. and their aversion from the House of Austria, too great; would have made many of them disband. In so much, as that Duke Barnard rising full of generous choler, answered him in these terms. Sir, the Germans are not Cowards. But, the King appeased him, saying, that it was not he whom he taxed, and so disposed him, together with the other Officers, to a Generall Attack. The losse of the Swedes. The Swedes advanced; and the Imperialists, covered with their Trenches, withstood them; and after a stubborn fight of many houres, and the losse of the Flower of their Army, repulsed them; There were aboue five thousand killed upon the place, besides hurt, and taken. Then, was the gold of great Gustaves wisdome ecclipsed, and appeared that it was neer an end. The Im∣perialists lost about fifteen hundred men. And the King fearing, least he should loose the Electour of Saxonie, left a good Garrison in the Town, to se∣cure it, and marched with all his Army, towards Saxonie, to preserve that Countrey for himself. But, whilest the Armyes were incamped neer Nurem∣bergh, and the circumjacent Countries for more then ten leagues compasse, ruined, by the excursions of so many men; General Arnem, domineered over Silesia at his pleasure, and being reinforced by some Troops, constrained Holck, to cast himself into Misnia, with Galasso. The Masters of Politick Science were of opinion, that if Wallenstein had had a mind to destroy the King, he might have done it, without putting him∣self in the danger of hazarding a Combat; had it not been upon very great advantage; but that he let him passe, so to play his part the better. Whatever were the matter, his actions were more neerly, and narrowly pryed into afterwards, which, when the right side of the Meddal was turned up∣wards, were discovered to be all criminal. The King, not having been able to ruin Wallenstein, passed to the Dutchy of Wirtembergh, and sent General Bannier over the Danub. The Duke separa∣ted himself, to go and defend his Countrey; and Wallenstein followed the
King, but suddenly changed his resolution, and marched into the Dutchy of Saxonie, there to take up his Winter quarters. Gustave hastened thither: Wallenstein speedily sent for the Valliant Papenheim. The King, whose genius seemed to apprehend that of the Souldier, laboured to hinder this conjuncti∣on, and desired to destroy him, but could not; for the Souldier had too much craft, and dexterity; and he was very well receaved by his General, who sent him, with ten, or twelve Regiments, to surprise Hall, and keep Galasso, and Holck with himself. The King being incamped before Nurenburgh, had notice from Wallen∣steins Camp neer Lutzen, of the departure of him whose valour he so much esteemed; and being desirous to end the difference by a Battail,The Battail of Lutzen. disposed his Army thereto with a short speech; And Wallenstein, having discovered his intension, sent speedily after Papenheim, and resolved to stand fast, and expect the Enemy. The Shock, or Ouset was furious, and bloody: The Croats did well enough, at the beginning, and the Swedes better; and if Papenheim had stayed a little longer, the Imperialists had fled. But, he came time enough,Papenheim slain. to redresse the Army which already began to stagger, and to repulse the ene∣my: but the shot of a Falkon (a piece of Ordnance so called) put a period to his life, and all his glorious enterprizes. Germany hath produced but few such Souldiers as he was for Valour, Felicitie and Courage;His elogies. and the Emperour hath had few, who have equalled him in fidelity. He first made himself known, in the Valtelme; and at the Battail of Prague, he was found amongst dead. He finished the Tumults of the Peasants in Austria, and above all after the Battail of Leipsick, he redressed his Masters desperate party in Westphalia. He seemed to dye content, when he was told that the King was killed, and it is held, that if he had lived yet some years more, he would have restored the Imperial Majesty, to the first splendour. The Horse basely gave ground, as they had done in the first Battail. It is beleeved, that the King was slaine, about the beginning of the Battail, ha∣ving receaved five wounds, two whereof were mortal, but it could never be learnt, by whose hand he fell, and opinions were so different, that the truth could never be discovered. The Swedes have reported, that he was killed,Gustave slain. by a great Lord of his own Army; others, by Papenheim: but neither the one, nor the other is very likely to be true. He was found amongst the dead, so trodden, and tumbled by the Army, which had passed over his body, that he was hard to be known. What shall we say of the potency of this world, since so much glory, and merit is trodden under foot by horses? This Prince, who, like another Alexander, was grieved, and vexed to stay so long in Germany, and wished nothing more,His praises. then to go seek new Tro∣phies elsewhere; is borne down, and that so venerable Majesty, so much respected, and feared every where, is now reduced to dust: This great Warrier, this invincible Monarch, the delight of the Protestants, the ter∣rour of the Catholicks; the Darling of Fortune: lost his life in the middle of Triumphs, and of Germany. His fall caused so much rage, and despaire, in the soules of his souldiers, that they chose rather to die, then retyre; and obliged the Imperialists, after they had fought till dark night, to make a retreate, but little more modest, then plain flight, towards Leipsick. His life. Duke Bernard, and Cniphanse, gave great testimonies of themselves, in this bloody Fight; and the whole Army melted in teares, to see the King their Generall, without sense and motion. He was Son to Charles Duke of Sudermam, who had taken away the Crown, from his Nephew Sigismund, King of Poland. It is reported, that he had made his Apprentiship in War disguised, and unknown, under Prince Maurice, and that even after he was King, he made a journey into Germany, in the quality of an ordinary Horse∣man. His Governours son hath told me, that he was in the war of Bohemia.
saw the Count of Bucquoy's Army; discovered himselfe to some Princes; and then sowed the first seeds of his intelligence, in the Empire. He made War in Livonia, and Prussia, with a most singular odour of his great felici∣ty. His many Victories changed his sweet, and tractable nature, into a too rough and austere severity; an hereditary Vice in the race of Erick, as soon as they are past forty years old. Thus gloriously ended Gustavus Ad∣phus his dayes; and Parca, by cutting off the thred of his life, made him tri∣umph, to manifest, that if he had lived some years longer, Europ would have been too little, for the number of his Conquests, and his glory. He pre∣sumed, against the content, and opinion of the Chiefe of his Council, to come into Germany, with an Army of eight thousand men, to defend the Lutheran Religion; and to check so vast, and formidable a Power, as that of the House of Austria; but he was sure of his Allyes, and of the affections of all the Protestants, in general: Also that though Fortune should have treated him, as she had done others; he had still the means left, to save him∣selfe in his own Kingdom, and draw up the Bridge after him. But she was too kinde to him, to break company with him so soone; and his designes too high, to please his Allyes. Never was there Prince more regretted, and deplored, then he; and all the North put on mourning, whilest the South, rejoyced at his fall, but it felt the rough Attacks of his Generals, after his death; and the Swedes went not out of Germany, till they got a Peace, the spoiles, and a share of the Em∣pire; a notable recompence,The Battel of Lutzen the sixteenth of November. for having whipped it so well. This Battel hapned the sixteenth of November; some dayes after, deceased King Fre∣derick at Mentz; a milde Prince, and much bewailed by his people. He accompanied Gustave into Bavaria, who was willing to restore him to the Palatinat,The death of Frederick. but under hard, and unreceiuable conditions. Let us see what passes in France. CHAP. XXVIII The Elector of Trevirs takes the protection of France. Mon∣sieur enters into the Kingdom, with an Army. The death of the brave Duke of Montmorancy, THe fidelity of the Ecclesiastical Electors was so great, that they chose rather, to suffer all the rigour, and extremity of Fortune, then untie themselves from the Emperour:The French drivo the Sp∣nids from Trevirs. save onely, that the Elector of Trevirs, sought to shelter his Country, under the protection of France, and received a French Garrison into Harmestein, an inexpugnable place, neer Cobelents, where the Mosell casts her selfe into the lap of the Rheyn. And he would have done as much at Trevirs, if he had not been prevented by the Chapter, which put a Spanish Garrison in before; whereby the King was moved to send the Marshal De'stree, to dislodge it, and put in another. Whilest the said King and Cardinal were looking upon the affairs of Ger∣many, Monsieur his Brother marched out of Brabant with an Army, and published, that he would deliver France from the Tyranny of the Cardinal. The Duke of Montmorancy ranged himselfe with him;Monsieur en∣ters France. and it looked, as if all were disposed to Richelnis ruine. Many of the Grandees inlined also that way; being jealous, to see the King of Sweden destroy the Catholick. League in Germany, shouldered by the Allyance, of the Eldest Sonne of the Church, upon the suscitation of this proud Minister. The Marshal of Schoon∣bergh
followed this said Army, with some ordinary forces. There hapned a Skirmish, wherein the Duke of Montmorancy would needs be nibbling, and so was wounded, and taken, and his Party ruined, by his temerity. It is in a general Definition, and not in a particular fight; that a General ought to shew his dexterity, and valour, A Peace was made in haste; and the strangers who were ingaged with Monsieur, very ill handled; and he hoped to ob∣taine the aforesaid Dukes pardon, but in vaine: for he ended his life,The Duke of Montmorancy beheaded. by the hand of an ordinary Executioner, and his House ended also with his life. This brave Lord, who had performed so many remarkable services, was sacrificed, to the interest which was taken in the Swedish Party, his aversion from which was discovered by himselfe. It is great wisdom, to hide ones pas∣sions, and to lay open those of others; to hear much, and say little. This violent proceeding much amazed all the Lords of France; augmented the Cardi∣nals hatred, and gave Monsieur a good horse, to be gone again, out of the Kingdom. This very year, the Embassadour of Spain arriving at London, brought things so to passe, with his frequent pursuits and instances,Peace between Spain & Eng∣land. that he termina∣ted the difference, between his Master, and the King of England, notwith∣standing all the oppositions which were made, and the thwartings which were brought, by the Embassadours of France, and the confederated States. Pope Ʋrban, to purge himselfe from the hatred, which was born him by all the zealous Catholicks,Pope Urban lit∣tle loved, by the zealous Catho∣licks. for their seing him in secret intelligence with the Cardinal, whom they made Author, of all the misfortunes, and mischiefs suffered by the Church, published a Jubile; but all that, was not able to wash away the ill opinion, which was conceived of him; and in a Synod, which was held in Spain, they treated of abrogating his Authority, in re∣gard they saw him favour them, who endeavoured to destroy a House, which will never fall, but with the ruine of the Catholick Religion; Yea, because he appeared not abroad, at the publick rejoycing, which was made at Rome, for the death of King Gustave, who had been so much feared; many were heard to mutter, and speak such bad, and rash words, as the licentiousnes, and unlimitednes of the miserable Times produced. When the Shepherd takes no care of his Sheep, the Wolves get some of them very cheap: Piety waxes cold; and the weeds grow at length, to stifle the good corne. CHAP. XXIX The King of Sweden regretted, and by whom? Wallenstein causes some Officers to be executed. John de Werdt makes him∣selfe known. The Battel of Hamelen; and the cruelty of the Victorious. Brisac succoured by the Duke of Feria. War in the Archbishoprick of Colein. THe Body of this great Warrier was embalmed, and carryed into Po∣merania, and from thence to Stockholme, to be laid in the Tomb of his Ancestours. He resuscitated the ancient glory of the Goths, and the notice of his Army, struck both Europ, and Asia, into terrour. There was a report given out,It is published, that Gustave is not dead and beleeved by some of them who were most affectionate to him, that he was not dead; but had secretly transported himselfe into Sweden, for some affairs of importance, and to discover the humour of the
Princes: but this fiction, was grounded upon Maxime of Policie, and having gotten some Vogue, was not unprofitable to the Party. He was given, nei∣ther to wine, not women: and he inexorably chastized all such as fayled of their duty. He much changed at last, from what he had been, as his first en∣try into Germany: and no marvail, since his very Subjects themselves, having been as gentle as Lambs, before, were now become arrogant, by so much good success, so many spoyles, and the enjoyment of a Countrey, so much better and happier, then their own. The Princes of the Party lamented him extrinsecally; but were in effect, glad enough, to be rid of such a Con∣querour, who had gotten a far greater possession of the hearts of their Sub∣jects, then they had themselves. But the King of France, and the Cardinal were truly sorry for him, because they had not brought that House lowe∣nough, which they had a minde to strip of some fayre States, as it hath since appeared. And now, in regard they had payd the charge, they prepared to go to the Banquet, by buying the Towns, which the Sweeds had taken, neer the Rheyn. He left one Daughter only. He left behinde him, only one Daughter, Heyress to her Fathers vertues, as well as his Crowne; and he left his Lievtenants, and Allyes, the care, to fi∣nish the worke, not yet perfected. The Hollanders began, more to feare him, then love him; and by con∣sequence, expressed no great resentment of his death; nor did they desire him at all, for their neighbour; wherefore, they were not a little glad, to see him leave Colein, and march up into Bavaria. He will never be forgotten, either by his friends, or his enemyes; and his memory will live, to the end of the world. The Hughenots cal the Lutherans Brothers. The Hughenots of France, for his sake, began already to call the Lutherans their Brethrea; and it is held for certain, that he was endeavouring to awa∣ken the old quarrels in Italy, and else where. He was about two years and a half in Germany, accompanyed by so much happiness (yea too much to last long) that his own very friends were amazed at it. The Swedes make the Offen∣sive every where. To declare to all the world, that he had obtained the Victory when he dyed, his enemies retyred into Bohemia; and the Swedes made every where, the offensive. The Duke of Brunswick, and the Landgrave of Hassia, brought War upon the Bishops in Westphalia, who had lost their Souldier: Gustave Herne, and some others transported it into Alsatia, and Swaveland; and Ge∣neral Bawdas, in the district of Colein: Duke Bernard cleansed Misuia; and Arnem subjugated Silesia. But what did Wallenstein, during all these floods? He cut of the Heads of many of his Officers.Wallenstein executs some Officers, and why? And why? for not having performed their duty? Yea rather, to begin thereby to warp the web of his treason, and put in execution what he had hatched in his Soule: and therefore, he put to death, such as he knew, were most affectionate to the Emperours service. Vertue comes upon the Scaffold, as well as Vice. There was no remedy; for he had full power, without appeal: but the inno∣cent blood spurted in his face, sooner then he thought: for the cry thereof, never findes the ears of the great God, stopped; is must be re∣venged. Baudits designe upon Tuits, a small town upon the bank of the Rheyn, opposite to Colein, issued well; but he was beaten out again, and his proceeding abhorred, for breaking the new trality. So that, he rety∣red to Siburgh, a convenient place, to incommodate the Archbishop∣rick. Aldringers Victor. General Aldringers Victory was greater neer the Leck, where he cut of the Troops of the Marquis of St. Andrew, and retook some places in Sweve∣land: and John de Werdt did as much in Franconie; who grew by little and lit∣tle, to make himself so formidable, that it was beleeved, he was another Pa∣penheim,
sprung up out of his ashes. But, all these were but Skermishes, in comparison of the huge Victory, gotten by the Hassians, and Luneburgians neer Hamelen, in the moneth of July, 1633. They had besiedged the Town, and the others would succour it. Colein, the Mother of Armyes,The seventh of July. quickly pro∣duced one. But, in stead of Papenheim, there was nothing but discord a∣mongst the Generals: Souldiers there were enow; but there wanted a good,The defeate of the Imperalists neer Hamelen 1633; and perfect intelligence amongst their Leaders. However, they advanced; and General Merode thought, that in this occasion, the Commanders would lay aside all partiality, for the Publick good. The Foot fell on; but was de∣serted by the Horse; and the poor Souldiers, who were almost all Wallons, found themselves shut up in a dale, and cryed to them to stand, and make good their ground; but their cries and groanes were carried away by the wind, to follow the base Cowardise of the Horsemen, and the slacknesse of some of the chief Officers. General Merode, and Baron Quad, a Souldier of merit, chose rather to dye with their Swords in their hands, then follow this infamy. The For∣raine Foot threw down their Arms, hoping, for quarter; but they were all massacred without mercie, and so above six thousand of them miserably perished. Hamelen was rendred, and Bonichawse took party with the Swedes. The discord of the Generals appeared. This Army was sacrificed, to the hatred, which Wallenstein already car∣ryed, to such as were able to hurt him; and therefore, being Generalissmo, he s;ent the chief command to Grondstfeldt, against the opinion, and advice of the Electour of Colein. Had there been a good harmonic amongst them, they had not only succoured Hamelen, but easily brought the War also into Meckelenburgh, and Pomerania. But it was to beat the Dog before the Wolfe. This check advanced the Swedish Party: favoured Frithlands designe; aflicted all the Archbishoprick of Colein; and put the French in mind, that it was time to go into Lorraine, to catch some planks, of that ship, which threat∣ned to make ship wrack. The Italians succour Brisat. The Duke of Feria came, with an Army of Italians, to succour Alsatia, where he had the same vexations, though a little better end; for he succou∣red Brisac, crossed Horns Progresse; and made those Catholick Provinces a little respire but the poor Peasants had the worst of it; and the Italians being much ransacked, and wasted by diseases, he was forced to returne the same way he came, Wallenstein would have had him obey his Orders, as Genera∣lissmo; but he made a deaf ears; however the other laid so many ginns in his way, that he had much adoe to escape them; and so all Alsatia, save only Brisac, suffered the Swedish yoke. But since we are upon the Fronteer of Lorraine, let us look what passes there, before we take our flight to any other place.
CHAP. XXX The Siedge Nancy. Rantsaw makes himself known, at the Encounter of Haguenaw, and at the Siedge of An∣dernack. GReat Princes are always obliged, to maintain their Stats, conserve their Subjects, and by the Maxims of prudence, and justice, divert the storme, before it fall, and overwhelme them. The Duke of Lorraine arms. The Duke of Lorraine, seeing almost all Alsatia subdued by the Swedes, and knowing, the danger could not be far from himself, when his neigh∣bours house was on fire, judged it more then time, to look about him. Wherefore, he made levyes; whereat the King of France formalized, and marched into the Field. A sad condition for a Soveraigne Prince, that he may not be permitted to raise men, for his own defence! But, the weakest must to the Wall: For, neither were the reasons which they alledged, suffici∣ent to justify their proceedings; nor his strong enough to secure him from shipwrack. The Cardinal of Lorraine went to meet the King, and endeavoured to divert him, by acquainting him with his brothers intentions, which were all good: but all this was not able to stop him. It was in vain to speak; for words are fruitlesse, to such as are already condemned. All Europe be∣longs to the Crowne of France, and by consequence, Lorraine. See Arroy. The Siedge of Nancy. The King besieged Nancy: The duke protested, that he had desired no∣thing but peace, and good correspondence with his Majesty. Whilest this was a doing, the Princesse Margaret made her escape disguised, and went into the Low-Countries to her husband, who came to meet her at Namurs, and conducted her to Brussels, where she was received by the Infanta, with honour, agreeable to her quality. They of Colein took the prote∣ction of France. The Swedes, and their Allyes, having obtained so great a Victory, as that whereof we have lately spoken, with so little losse, entred into the Archbi∣shoprick of Colein, and tormented it so much, that the Magistrates induced by the arguments of their Syndick, and some others, together with the ne∣cessity of their assayrs; concluded upon the dispatch of their Embassa∣dours to the King of France, to implore his protection. They had recourse to a Catholick Prince, to shelter them from the insolence of Protestants; and that by consent of the Clergy; but the Citizens, being most affectionate to their old Master, would not be satisfyed by these reasons. The said Embassadours were most honourably receaved, at the Camp before Nancy: where the Cardinal spared none of his Compliments (the holy-water of the Court) nor feates of cunning, and skil, to accomplish so huge a Conquest as this; which would be sure to draine all the Emperours resources or fresh springs about the Rheyn; hinder the Communication of the Spaniards with the Empyre; and serve for an infallible meanes to seize up∣on the Low-Countryes. But it chanced, that some inopinated accidents, and the good successe of a Battail, made them of Colein, repent; and this Bar∣gain miscarry, to the said Cardinals great displeasure. Nancy rendred The Duke of Lorraine, found himself obliged, for the obtaining of peace,
to yeeld up Nancy, upon the same conditions that he had done the three other Towns; being counselled not to expect extremities, lest peradventure, he might thereby incur the hazard of losing all his States. Wherefore, he did it with much freedom, and submission: but it had been better for him, to have sustained the siege, and expected the worst; for his Country was not restored to him, nor ever will be, till his Enemies shall not be able to keep it any longer, and shall have enough to do also to keep themselves, in regard of forrain revolutions. They reproached him, that he had given his Sister in marriage, to the Duke of Orleans, against the lawes of the Kingdom; and that he had refu∣sed to do homage to the King, for the Dutchy of Bar. The former of these, was excused by the said Duke of Orleans himself, upon the difference, which was between him and the Cardinal: and for the Homage, he had offered to do it, in his own name; but not his wives, according to the Maxims of the Sa∣lick Lawes, whereof we have spoken already. But these complaints, were but pretexts, to cover the designe they had to seize upon the Dutchy, which is upon the passage into Germany, thereby to get a footing there with more facility, so that they might be hindered by nothing, from conquering the better part thereof: For, if the Eagle could not be taken whole, and alive: they were resolved to have some of her fea∣thers at least, and so leave her without strength, and vigour. After Nancy, quickly followed all tho rest of the Dutchy under certain colours, which offered themselves, without being sought.And all Lor∣raine. And this Country being thus subdued by his Eminences activity, nothing which was on that side of the Rheyn, could escape him. His wisdom was drvine; he disposed, of the influence of the Starrs, and of this lower world, at his pleasure: but there was a power infinitly just, above him, which brought both him, and all he had gotten by unlawfull wayes, into dust. Oh ye Flatterers, Plagues of this corrupt Age; And you, Mercenary Pens, instruments of all mischief, who have employed all your talents, upon the excessive praises, of one of the greater persons that ever wore the Purple? Why have you not been con∣tent, to represent his fine actions to the world, in a more modest, and true style, without mingling therewith, the contempt of the infinite Essence, and of Princes unjustly oppressed? Why doe thou accuse of pride, and ambiti∣on, such as repell force by force; and seek revenge, after they have been at∣tacked? Open your eyes, to what hath happened, and doth yet daily hap∣pen, and look upon the end? It is laid that the good Cause shall triumph at last; and you shall agree with me, that afflictions will one time be Uni∣versall. The King of France having given order for the building of a Cittadell, to a Town, which (in apparence) was but borrowed, put himself upon the way towards Paris; and the Duke of Lorraine, towards Germany, to charge the Swedes neer Hagnenaw:The Encounter neer Hague∣naw. where his Foot ran basely away without fight∣ing at all; as his Enemies Horse also did, after a furious combat; But he, with his, was not able to force their Foot, which defended it self bravely. It was here, & at Andernack, a Town seated upon the Rheyn, that Monsieur de Rant∣saw, a Gentleman of Holstein, gave a high account of himself; and this was the first step, whereby he ascended to the dignity of Marshall of France. But let us go seek Wallenstein, upon the Confines of Poland; and leave the French the care, of disposing of Lorraine, for the expences of their journey into Germany; whereof, because it is a Land of Conquest, every one must have his share.
CHAP. XXXI. Wallenstein defeats the Swedes in Silesia: The Colonians, or they of Colein, retract the Accord made before Nancy. The Tragicall death of the said Wallenstein. VVHilest the Princes, and States, which were enemies to the House of Austria, rejoyced extreamly to see the Eagle lose her strength, under their noses; by the weakening of so many Provinces; by so much blood-shed; by the totall occupation, or seazure of all Lorraine; and by so many rubs, and traverses, as the Hollanders gave the King of Spaine; (who yet like a good Physician defened her with his forces, and fortified her,His money from the Indies. with his Aurum potabile, or liquor of life, from the Indies) it seemed high time to that ambitious General, to hatch his perni∣cious designes, for that by so many brave actions as he had performed, he thought, he deserved to wear a Crown, though it were at the charge of his Masters. Behold here, the most ungratefull of mortalls, and the most dangerous of all the Emperours enemies, who was likely to have effected alone, that which all the rest together, had not been able to do. Desire of revenge, and ambition, made him forget his duty; and cruelty, moved him to undertake this detestable Treason. He sent Generall Holck into Misnia, who reduced many Towns, and even Leipsick it self, for the third time; but a contagious sicknesse stopped the course of his prosperity, and greatnesse. He was a Dane borne, and a Gentleman, that had acquired reputation in Stralsund, whereof he was Go∣vernour; and after the peace was made, he obtained the honour of com∣manding an Army, in the Emperours service. Galasso passed into Silesia, and Wallenstein, not being well satisfied concern∣ing the conditions of Peace,The Swedes de∣feated towards Stenaw the 18. of October, 1633. followed him with the Body of the Army, and employed so much promptitude, and addresse, that he surprized the Enemies near Stenaw; defeated the Horse, (which was much in number) and sur∣rounded the Food, which yeelded, and put into his hands above six score Colours, with all the Baggage and Artillery. Whereupon all Silesia in∣stantly submitted; and it was firmly beleeved, that he endeavoured to bring back the war, to the mouth of the Baltick Sea, to recall the Swedes to defend that passage, by which they entred, and sent home their booty. But he, on the other side, did the direct contrary; and as if he had been vanquished, mar∣ched from Pomerania; and sent Generall Henry Count de la Tour, with Tu∣bal, and his forces, to take up their Winter quarters, in the Emperours He∣reditary Lands. Which proceeding amazed the Court at Vienna, gave the Swedes time, and means to recollect, and discovered to the whole world what he had hatched in his soul. None made any profit of this victory, but they of Colein, who were much encouraged by it; and consequently, they declared, that they could not ra∣tily the Treaty which they had made with the King of France, nor receive any Garrison of his, into their City; but that he might put four hundred men into Andernach,The Colonians will not ratisy the Agreement made with the King of France. and as many at Zonts: founding their excuses, up∣on the insolence of the people. In effect, the Citizens, being singularly affected to the Emperour, memeed both the Magistrate, and the Clergy it self, to beat them of Town, if there were any more speech of changing their Master.
Let us now shew the tragical end of the ungratefull Wallenstein; for since we have already seen the recompence of his services, let us also publish the just punishment of his crimes, and treasons. Biron was advanced to the high dignity of Marshall of France, to crown his vertnes; and his head was strucken off by the publick Executioner, for having plotted against his Master. This said Wallenstein (whom the Emperour had made Duke of Frithland) collected his forces near Eguer in Bohemia, gave them three moneths pay, and made them take an oath to himself, without mentioning the Emperour at all. Thus the Impostume brakes' ambition brought forth Rebellion: all was discovered, and his practice with the Swedes, known. But what reme∣die for so desperate a businesse?Weallenstein's designs disco∣vered. The Vessel could not choose but run aground, when the Pilot himself cast her upon the Sand-bank, and against the Rocks. This Traitor had all in his hands; and the Emperour seeing that his own servants had resolved his ruine, implored the help of heaven. However, it was thought fit; in this disorder, to send money, to the Garrison of Prague, so to be sure of that, as being the Capitall City of the Kingdom, and to retain the King of Hungary, who was ready to march into the Field, with too weak forces. Frithland sent his Brother-in Law Count Terskie to Prague, but it was too late, for they made him understand, that they would acknow∣ledge none but the Emperour. Whereupon our design (said he) is disco∣vered, let us pack away, and Joyn with the Swedes. Now this infamous treason was known to Gordon, Leasly, and Butler; the two former Scotch, and the last an Irish Officer; but all the difficulty was, how to stifle it in the Cradle; to which effect, they invited Terskie, Kinskie, Illaw, and Newman, (all his Creatures) to supper,Supper at E∣guer. where they took their lives to pay the score, and save their Master Ferdinands: And thus the Tra∣gedie being begun upon them as the Members, must be ended upon him, the detestable Head; the Commission whereof was faithfully, and laudably un∣dertaken by Butler, who thrusting open his dore, and finding him up, so staggered and hared him,Wallenstein massacred. that he could not make one word of answer to this fatal salutation. Oh Traytour, to the Emperour, and Empyre, art thou there? And therewith, run him through with his Partizan, so that he fell down dead, and an Irish souldier having crushed his head, with the But-end of his Musket: took him by the heels, and threw him out at the window. This was the end of this ungratefull Minister, who from an ordinary Gen∣tleman, was risen to so much greatnesse, that he could climbe no higher, without being a Traitour, and a Parricide. As he had done great services, on the one side, so had he also received great recompences, on the other; his Master having created him Prince of the Empyre, and made him so potent, that he had trouble enough to unmake him again; yea, and much adoe, to save both himself, and his House, from his cruel perfidie. Never were Traitours seen to make a good end, ambitions persons fall into the praecipice, which they intend for others. He was very much hated, and that chiefly by the Emperours enemies; and yet some, to make the Prince odious, have presumed to excuse him, as if he had been wrongfully killed. Men, who are overballan∣ced by Passion, have no solid judgment. It is said of him; that for having only awaked him out of his sleep, he had caused many to be hanged, with this sentence; Hang that beast: And yet I say, he hath found pennes, which have justified his proceedings, and accused the House of Austria of cruelty, and ingratitude, But, that Polish Bishop, who hath defended him against the sense of the very Swedes, the French,Diseck a Po∣lish Bishop. and other of the Emperours enemies, hath rather discovered his own antipathy against that Family, (which was then combatted by so many Protestants) then reasons, and arguments suffi∣cient to prove his innocence; nor are they indeed valued, but where blinde
passion praedominates: though yet still, this praeoccupated old man hath not failed to finde applause amongst such of his nation, as disapproved the streight Allyance of their King, with the aforesaid House. Whatever be reported of him, he was a good, and judicious souldier, but ambition, becoming the Mistresse of his reason, made him (according to the opinion of almost all Authors) machinate, and contrive the death of his Master, and his Children: by which cruell affect, he stained all his gallant exploits, and rendred his name infamous to posterity. The end crownes the work; and it serves for nothing, to have well begun, unlesse we finish so too. The Polanders are in action; it is time to speak of their vertue, which hath produced miracles. CHAP. XXXII The Siege of Smolensko raised. The King of Poland compells an Army of a hundred and twenty thousand men, to have recourse to his mercy. He makes peace with the Muscovits, and chastises the Turks. The Infanta's death. The taking of Rhinbergh. Aitona ranges the Militia, and takes some Lords prisoners. ULadislans the fourth, King of Poland, was, after the death of his brother Sigismund, by the cosent of the Stares and Nobility, preferred to the Throne; and there suddenly presented it self a fair occasion, to signalize the beginning of his Reign, and let the Polanders see, that he would be the ter∣rour of his enemies. The Muscovits after having done much spoyle in Lituania, besieged the Town of Smolensko, the walls whereof are extremely thick. The King sent his Army thither, and went himself shortly after, to command it. Great skirmishes were made, but small means, to beat up a quarter: whereupon he resolved to storm two Fortresses, or Holds, which were upon the River, and would needs be there himself in person. The more difficult this Enterprise was, the greater was the glory; for, more then six thousand Mus∣covits were put the sword. Upon these advantages he intrenched himself, and not being able to unnestle them totally from thence, he cut off all their Provisions, in such sort, as they quickly found themselves reduced to the ex∣tremity either of starving,An Unheard of victory. or rendring themselves to his mercy. A terrible thing, and not heard of before; that a hundred and twenty thousand men should bring their Arms, and Colours, and cast them at the feet of this vi∣ctorious Prince. This was not a victory, but a monster of a victory. He pardoned them all; and made the strangers, (which were about fourteen thousand men) promise never to bear arms more, against the Crowne of Poland. A while after, peace was made between them upon conditions, that the King should relinquish his Title,Peace made. and praetentions, upon the Great Dutchy, and the Grand Duke his, upon Smolensko and some other places. The Turke, and Tartars, seeing the Polanders busie, entred into Poland, to make a diversion,The Turks eaten. and give the Muscovits breath. But the King had done his work time enough, to come and put sire in their tayles; for he bear them, and forced them to beg peace, which he granted them, upon most honourable terms for himself. At the same time, the third part of the City of
Constantinople was burnt to the ground, with incredible losse. A prodigie, which threatned the Turkes with that misfortune which is now befal∣ling them. Let us now return into Holland, through England, where we shall finde King Charles as much in love with peace, and quiet, as King Iames his Fa∣ther was. He went into Scotland, and was crowned there the twenty fifth of Iune, 1633. We lest the Deputies of the Obedient Provinces very busie: about seeking the end of their evills, in a happy peace; but there was a wind, which hin∣dred the sprowting forth of this good seed. During the time of their negoti∣ation, the Infanta went to enjoy everlasting beatitude with her husband,The death of the Infanta. with whom she had so religiously lived. Her subjects expressed very great grief, for the departure of so good a Mother, by whom they had been so gently governed; and that which most afflicted them, was to foresee, that these Treaties would produce no good effect, as it was easie to judge: for the States stood fast upon impossibilities; and these could not by any means exclude their Master; besides, the Prince going to besiege Rhinbergh, (which he took in three weeks) made them conceive, that they treated with them almost no other wise, then Conquerors use to do, with such as they have vanquished. For, they offered them conditions of advantage enough, to testifie, that their thoughts were very much inclined to peace: but the wind of France, quickly cooled that pious heat. Charnasse made use of the two most potent wayes in the world, to make this Treaty infructuous; that is, of Eloquence; and of that divine Mettall, which Inpiter knew to be the strongest. In fine, he effected so much by his diligent pursuits,The Treaty of Peace vanishes. and sollicita∣tions, that he brake off the whole match, and brought the States to take Arms again, with his Master. The Marquis of Aitona not having force enough to face the Prince before Rhinbergh, was content to fortify the Isle of Saint Stephen upon the Moze, whereby to have the passage free. And the Prince, agitating in his mind a greater exploit, then that of a Siege, went,The siege of Rheynbergh. and incamped himself be∣yond Boisleduc, or the Bosse; and having sent for eighteen or Twenty Troops of Swedish Horse: departed, with a multitude of Waggons of Victualls, and marched directly towards Aitona; who (though he had also received some Horse from the Imperialists for his defence) kept himself upon his advanta∣ges, as judging it beyond the maximes of a souldier, to put the Country into a general joy, by hazarding the Battail offered him. For if the Prince had gained it, he had found no resistance; but if he had lost it, he had left the Conquerours nothing but the glory of having wonne it, without any other profit at all, save only (peradventure) of a Town, or two, as Wenlo, and Ru∣remund. The Prince sent a supply to Mastricht, and retyred himself faster then he came, which caused the disbanding of many of his men. And the Marquis hastened, with three thousand horse, to defend the Isle of Saint Stephen; and thus ended the Field of this year of 1633, upon which the Swedes, who had committed unknown insolencies in this Militia, and some dissolutions, which spoyled the Holland discipline, repassed the Rheyn; as the Imperialists on the other side, also did. But let us see the Field following, before we repasse with them. Some Lords pri∣soners. Aitona, having received money from Spain, and ranged his Militia in a good state of obedience, took some Lords prisoners, who were suspected of having complotted with Count Henry of Bergues. The Prince d'Espinoy was already fled into France, and the Duke of Arscot, gone into Spain; and so this thick fogge being dissipated, and Count Henry's Cause tryed, he marched with his Army towards the Moze, whether he had already sent
the Marquis de Lede, who took the strong House of Argenteau, and retook the Dutchy of Limburgh, and so made a shew of besieging Mastricht, to have the passage open into Germany. The Prince, to divert him from this design, went, and planted himself before Breda; but having received notice, that the Spanish Army drew towards him, to dislodge him from thence, he retyred five dayes after. Thus ended this Field, in the Low-Countries; let us go see other sport in the Empyre, much more bloody then this. CHAP. XXXIII The Siege of Ratisbon; the taking of the Town. The death of Aldringer. The Cardinall Infanto, joynes with the King of Hungary. The Protestants draw all their forces together again. The Businesse of Norlinghen. The victory of the Imperialists. The Cardinal Infanto passes into the Low-Countries. THe chief of the Protestant Party had so great cause to mistrust Generall Wallenstein, whose plots and practises they knew, that it was no wonder if Duke Bernard gave no credit to the promises he made, to hasten a Con∣junction, the retardment whereof was fatall to him, and all his friends. Duke Francis-Albert of Saxony, Lailemburgh, who was the instrument cho∣sen, to tye these two mettals of a different nature together, proved not his Crafts-master; and so was carried prisoner for his apprentisage to Vienna. Ratish me ta∣ken by the Sweden. Duke Bernard having taken Ratisbone by the good will of the Inhabitants, and being assured (too late) of the intentions of the Duke of Fruhland, was advancing already towards Bohemia, when he received the newes of the just disaster, which was befallen him; whereupon he changed course. Inpiter is patient; but when his goodnesse is too much abused, he darts his Thunderbolt, and crushes all. It is alwayes dangerous to meddle with ones Master, and to crack nuts with him. This great Symptome was advantageous to the Swedes, as giving them opportunity to take Towns in Swaveland, and towards the Lake of Bre∣gants; in such sort, as that the terrour which King Gustave had cast in∣to Italy, was now renewed more strongly then ever. The King of Hungary, having cured the Army with a sweet shower of Gold, and taken a new Oath from the souldiers, made them march towards Ratisbone. For, since the servant had betrayed the Father of the Family, it was ne∣cessary, to sond the childe, who was received by all of them, with incredible joy, and alacrity. I will not stay upon the particulars of this famous siege, which cost very much blood; but content my self, with only saying, that newes being come to the Camp, of a notable victory gotten by Arnem, upon the Imperialists in Silesia, and of his moving towards Prague; the King sent so strong a supply,And retaken by the Imperi∣alists. that the said Armens, was constrained to raise the Siege, and retyre himself into Saxony,Aldringer  at the very same time that Ratisbone began to parly, and capitulate, which was near the end of July: and some dayes be∣fore, the famous General Aldringer was slain, near Lanshut. He was born in the Country of Lxenburgh, and his vertue had drawn him out of the obscurity of his birth, to raise him to so eminent a Charge. He had fought happily with John de Werdr, and his death was much regretted, by the principal of his party. Donawerds followed Rarisbone, and the Cardinal Infanto, who had now staid long enough at Milan, passed, with the old Spanish, Italian, and Bur∣gundian
Bands, through Swisserland, into Germany, where they quickly taught the Swedes, what it was, exactly to observe Military Discipline. The Armyes joyned, and marched into the Dutchy of Wirtembergh, after which they sighed and longed, as the Children of Israel did, after the Land of Promise: but they must first passe the Red Sea, and winne a Town whole Garrison was strong, and required a Siege, before they could arrive to the bank. The Swedes sent for all their own forces, and those of their Allyes: Horne joyned with Duke Barnard, and argued against him, that it was better to let go one Town, then hazard the Publick Cause; and that an occasion, for fighting would be found in time, with more advantage. The Duke disputed the contrary; alleadging, that the winning of this Bartail,The Siege of Northinghen. Austria would be open, Bavaria a prey? and their Party, our of all danger: That they must venter it, before the Spaniards came. In fine, it was concluded, that it should be the next day, being the sixth of September; and the proceeding of that Imperiall Colonel, who asked to speak with a Kinsman of his of the same Charge in the Swedish Army, upon the word of a Cavalleer (to whom he pro∣posed an overture of Peace, in his Masters name; which was rejected by the Party) was taken by the Swedes, for a good augure. It would require a vo∣lume, to recount the particulars, of the most bloody fight that ever happen∣ed amongst Christians. The forces of the Duke of Wirtembergh, the Land∣grave of Hassia, and Count Cratz, (who left the Bavarians, when he saw that his Treason was discovered, which was to deliver Ingolstadt to the Enemy) were already arrived; so that there wanted none, but the Rhingrave, who was beyond the Rheyn, with four, or five thousand men. But they would not expect him, for fear lest the Imperialists, who, had gotten to them the Ar∣myes of the Duke of Bavaria, and Cardinal Infanto, might chance to escape them. The Battail of Nordinghen. 1634. the sixth of September. The Fight began in the morning, the most furious shock was given, for the getting, and keeping of a Hillock; and the Swedish Infantry received great losse, about the storming of a mined Fort. The Canon it self being hidden behinde some thick bushes, did terrible execution, by piercing quite through all the squadrons: and the Swedes, upon the other side, amazed to see the grave motion of the Spaniards (who did not recoyle or start back, but gently retreat, and advance with a sure discharge) were constrained to fly, and the Cavalry being pursued by the Duke of Lorrain, & John de Werdt,The absolute victory of the Imperialists. (who gave a brave account of themselves that day) was almost utterly defeated; and the quarter given at Hamelen was exactly observed, till the the King of Hungary ceased the slaughter. All the Canon, to the number of eighty Pieces, and three hundred Colours, were the irreproachable marks of an entyre victory, which crowned the heads of both the Ferdinands. It is held, that there were above twelve thousand men killed upon the place, and near six thousand prisoners, amongst whom was that brave Generall, Gustave Horne, who was received by the King, with such testimonies of benevolence, as were sui∣table to the merit of so courteous, and valorous a Captain. The pillage was for the souldiers, and the fruit of the victory, a peace, which poor Germany enjoyed not long, for she was not yet enough drained,Whereof the first was a peace. and she had still some ill humours left within her, which were not suffered to set∣tle, by her Neighbours. But, if the Protestants, and they who had mixed their interest with them, received much joy, by the first Battail of Leipsick; no lesse, were the hearts of all the Catholicks both in, and out of Germany, ac∣cumulated with alacrity and gladnesse, by this.The joy of the Catholicks. And the Generalls divided this great Army, into many small Bodies, as the Swedes had done theirs, after the Battail of Lutzen, to carry an offensive war, up and down, into many places, whereof we will speak as briefly, as out matter will permit us.
Nortlinghen forthwith surrendred; the Dutchy of Wirtembergh, quicky in her Enemies power; and the Duke, unwilling to be spectator of so pitifulla State, got himself, together with the most prompt of his party, to Strasburgh. The luster of the Eagles Majesty, and of the glory acquired by her, as well in Germany, as Denmark, had been much discoloured, and obscured, by the happinesse of that great Septemtrional Mars; But now she sufficiently recove∣red it,The Swedes will have war in their victo∣ry, and the Im∣perialists peace in theirs. by this memorable victory of Nortlinghen; and to shew, that she durst follow her enemies, she contraried their proceedings. For, they would have war, in the continuation of their Conquests; and she declares her desire of Peace, in hers. They would carry away all, with violence, and extremity; and she would restore all, to the first order, and state, by a moderate accom∣modation. In effect, the King of Hungary offered it to the Duke of Saxony, and the rest of the Princes, by whom it was accepted; but it lasted not long, no more then the deceitfull favours of that variable Goddesse did, by the pu∣issant odour of the Flower de luce, as the drift of this History will shew. The Cardinal Infanto, after having embraced, and taken leave of his Bro∣ther-in-Law, departed towards the Low-Countries, whether we will let him go, and stay yet a while in Germany, to note the carreer of Ferdinands vi∣ctories, in the disorder of the Protestants.
THE HISTORY OF THIS IRON AGE. BOOK I. PART II. CHAP. I The Peace made at Prague, after the reduction of many places, and small States. The complaints of the Swedes ALL the Towns of Swaveland, and the Lake of Bre∣gants, returned to the Emperour, their Lord.The Imperialists divide them∣selves, Aux∣burgh was taken by famine, and pardoned: Rain, and Newburgh followed; Ʋlme, and Neuremburgh were invested: but this Prince, who fought for no∣thing but Peace, and won it, for no other end, then to give it such as would have it, received them into favour.take many pla∣ces. The Castle of Wurtzburgh held out a long time, for fear of not being forgiven. Gonnixhof, after a long Siege, was taken by Hatsfelt. Piccolommi plai∣ed Rex in Turing, and Coloredo in Saxony; in such sort, as that he compelled the Elector to hearken to a Peace, from which indeed, as also from the Empe∣rour, he had no aversion at all, but onely his own interest, and that of Reli∣gion: Which the King of Sweden very well observing, in the midst of his prosperity, and knowing the amity, which was between these two Princes, was fearful least it should come to be renewed. I know, there were some who beleeved, that he was the first, who discovered to his friend, and Ma∣ster the Emperour, the Treason, which the Duke of Frithlund had brewed against him. However it were, the Peace was made at Pragne,The Peace made at Pra∣gue, 1635. in the moneth of May 1635. with advantage enough to the Ghospellers; for their Religion was setled, and all reduced to the same state wherein it was in the year 1627. and all such Ecclesiastical Lands, and Goods, as the Protestants had appropriated to themselves, after the agreement of Pastavia, confirm∣ed upon them, for forty years; and at the expiration of this terme, the dif∣ference to be composed, in an amicable way. Which displea∣ses the most zea∣lous. But now, the most zealous of both Parties, not being pleased with this Peace, the Emperour perceived, that France was cutting some work for him; and that of the Empire being but roughly framed; he wisely con∣sidered, that he who will make war abroad, must make peace at home. Such as would be comprised in this Agreement, were obliged to give their forces to the Emperour their Head, under paine of being declared
Enemies to the Empire; and so they resolved (though many of them with grudging) to enter this holy Temple of Peace: from which yet (since they could not force it) many of them flinched afterwards upon the first occasion, with greater animosities then ever, as we will shortly demonstrate. A Peace constrained, is like a rapid Brook, which may be stopped for a time, by a strong Dam, or Sluce; though at length, it either peirce it, or flow over it. The Dukes of Meckelemburgh were pardoned, and re-invested in their Dutchyes: And all participated of this common Good, save onely the Lands which had been occupated, or seized on by the Swedes; and Duke Bernard,Duke Bernard goes into France. who not having been able to recover what his Ancestours had lost, cast his eyes upon the Flower de Luce; whose favour with that King, had kindled a great jealousie in the Electors Soul, which turned into hatred a∣gainst the Swedes, as it appeared in the continuation of the War. The scatterings of this Army rallyed neer Francfurt; and the Ryngrave, who had had his singer in the pye, and saved himselfe by swimming, was there, with the Great Chanceller Oxenstern, who did all he could, to hinder this Peace, or re-Union of the Members with their Head. For, he pre∣tended, that being the Queens Lieutennant, the direction of the Affairs be∣longed to him: but neither his arguments, nor any such as sounded like them, could be heard. Indeed, if we must seek the justice of a Cause, in good successe, and argument; the complaints of the Swedes seemed, in some sort lawful, and the reproaches which they cast upon the Germans, procee∣ded from a strong resentment. Is this the recompence (said they) of so many labours, and troubles as we have suffered, and so many Battels as we have hazarded for your liberty? Do you make us this ungrateful payment, for the blood which we have shed, and for the life which our King hath lost, to free you from the oppression of the Spaniards, and save your Religion? How will you endure to hear, that they who have been your Deliverers, shall be called your Enemies? These notes rung loude every where, and found both the eares, and the hearts, of a multitude of Protestants open, to produce a seed, the bitternesse whereof was soon tasted; however they had to do with a Nation, which was but too grateful, and acknowledging. The Elector of Saxony, both in his own name, and that of the whole Pro∣testant Body, offered them a hundred thousand Rix-Dollars for a reward, and ordered them to withdraw;A reward offe∣red the Swedes, which they re∣fuse. but they would have more, and stay'd hankering, and hunting after many difficulties; for they saw, that they had yet many good Towns, and Provinces; and that the whole Empire was not able to beat them out of Pomerania. They had the Allyance of France; the affections of the people; yea, and of some Princes alsounder hand, who had signed the Peace, but by constraint, and with regret. And so, in fine, they took a firme resolution to stand it out. There is collusion, and cheate∣ry, as well in Germany, as in other Nations; and Macchiavels lessons are very much practiced there, in this Age. The Chanceller Oxenstern, environed by a great number of Counts, Ba∣rons, and great Lords, kept his Court at Francfurt; but finding the ap∣proach of the Conquerours, he made a stronger Allyance with the King of France; put Philipsburgh, and all that, which the Swedes held thereabouts, into his hands, for a huge summe of money, and retired himselfe, with Rautzaw, through France, and Holland, into Sweden; having sent before his departure, his Traine of a hundred and fifty brave horses for breed, into Pomerania; which fell all into his Enemies hands. A Vessel loaden with Spoiles makes Ship∣wrack. We must here take notice of the shipwrack, of a certain Vessel, which de∣parted with a faire winde, from Wismar, fully loaden with the richest spoiles, and principally, those of the Churches; for besides some silver Organs,
the twelve Apostles of Wurtzburgh, were all shut up in this belly of wood: But being neer her time, she was delivered, without a Midwife, and all was lost, within a league of Sweden, save onely one man, who escaped, to carry the newes, and bid them not expect her. The spoiles of the Church, produce nothing but misfortune. CHAP. II The answer to the complaints of the Swedes. The Cardinal of Richelieu, will besiege Colein. The States refuse succour. He endeavours to ruine the House of Lorraine. The Dutch∣esse Nicoll at Paris, Prince Francis carried pri∣soner, to the Cittadel of Nancy. THe complaints of the Swedes had their answer; which was, that they had had wages, and booty; that the Germans did not send for them; but that they joyned together amongst themselves;The reproaches of the Germans to the Swedes. and that the Princes were not obliged to continue the war, to glutt their ambition, and avarice: That they had obtained that, for which they took arms; That the recom∣pence which was offered them, freed the Princes from ingratitude: That it was not lawful for them, to sell, or alienate the Lands, and Goods of the Empire; and much lesse, to draw the French (their old enemies) into Ger∣many. In briefe, that their pretexts were but illusions, to amuse, and battle the Plaicsends of the Germans. But, let us now bring the French upon the Stage, who will peradventure beat down this tottered Building, since they are invited to it by the Swedes. That great Cardinal, the worthy Instrument of all bloody Playes, and principal mover of that furious Ball, or Revel, which was so long danced amongst Christians; was alwayes, either neer, or in Lorraine, to provide for all occurrences, and remedy the suddain changes of Fortune. He was so extreamly angry, at the inconstance of the Colonians,The Cardinal demands suc∣cour of the Hol∣landers, to be∣siege Colein, but in vaine. or Citi∣zens of Colein, that he could not long dissemble it: And therefore, he sent to intreat the Sates-General of Holland, to assist him, in his designe: and by vertue of the streight Allyance, to succour the French Army (which he had destinated to besiege that City) with Victuals, Munition, and some Shal∣lops. But they answered, that they could not condescend to it, for feare of offending the Emperour, and Empire: nor did they ever render him any other answer at all, to all his replyes; which gave him excessive rancour, and disgust, however he thought fit to make but little shew thereof. For it was not, indeed, the feare of offending Ferdinand, which kept them from it; for they had done that enough already by many oblique wayes; and espe∣cially, by sending Coronel Pinsen, with a strong Brigade, into Westphalia; But it was, because they had rather have for their Neighbour, a weak Bi∣shop of Colein, then a strong King of France. It is Maxime of State which car∣ries it, above all obligations; and Allyances, how strong soever they be, are easily broken in these times, if Interest command it. They sent General Bandits word, that if he did not retire himselfe from thence, they would drive him away by force. So that, these former circumstances, and the utter route of the Swedes, being motives to make the Cardinal differ his designe upon Colein for a sitter season (for vengeance waits occasion) made him he fixed his thoughts upon things of neerer concernment; as thus. He had already almost ruined,
or quite depressed the branches of the House of Lorraine in France, and per∣secuted the Duke of Guise,The House of Lorraine af∣flicted. even till his death; and therefore he resolved to unroot the maine Stock, and destroy the whole Family. The Duke of Lorraine, after being stripped of all his Places of strength, and of Nancy it selfe, to get a peace; found, that France sought nothing but his destruction; and that when he resented any of the astronts which were done him by the Cardinal, the King (who was often ignorant of the cause) was forth with made beleeve, that he had broken his faith; and so his law∣ful excuses had no accesse, where his enemies were stronger then he. We very often judge ill, because we know not the principal Causes. Wherefore, have∣ing no other rolyance, then upon God, and his Sword, and not being able any longer to dissemble his just resentment;The Duke of Lorraines Ma∣nifesto. he published a Manifest; where∣in he declared, that being a Soveraigne Prince borne, and seeing that his Enemies (whom he could not content) sought after his Country, and his life; he transferred all his Rights, upon his brother; absolved his Sub∣jects from their Oath of fidelity to himselfe, and commanded them to o∣bey him. Which done, he returned into Germany, to serve the Emperour, whom the Cardinal studied to ruine with him; from whom he received the quality, of General of the Catholick Army, and passed towards the Danub, with the Cardinal Infanto: And three, or four moneths after, the Princesse Nicoll his wife,The Princesse Nicoll at Pa∣ris. made her entrance into Paris, where she was well received by their Majesties, and entertained according to her condition. Richelieu, being well informed of all; and imagining, that this Trans∣port, or Deed of Gift, was but conditional, and for a time; and knowing also,Prince Francis marrie, his Cousin; is im∣prisoned; retiers to Vienna. that the Cardinal, brother to the said Duke, had sent to Rome, for a Dispensation to marry his Cousin German, and render the Cap into the hands of his Holinesse; judded it expedient, to crosse this match; and so sought to surprize the Post; but in vaine; for he passed through the Guards, and the same evening, the marriage was consummated: But both he, and his Princesse were carried prisoners to the Cittadel; out of which they both secretly escaped, as also out of the Town, disguised in the habit of Country people; and passing through Savoy, Florence, and Venice, arrived at length at the Imperial Court in Vienna. It was indeed, in vaine, for him to attempt the extinction of this most illu∣strious, and most ancient Race, issued from Charlemagne, and so many other Kings, who have performed so considerable services to Christendome; yea, and even to France it selfe, in the Battel of Crecy, and during all the Wars with the English. For God raised a young Maid of this Family, like a se∣cond Judith,The Maid Jane of Orleans. to save the Kingdom from the oppression of Strangers; and the Cardinal after having deprived it of the lawful Prince, called in the Gothick. Nations, to ruine it. This noble House I say, hath afforded Princes, which have defended and maintained the Catholick Religion, throughout the whole Kingdom; and the Cardinal made the Lutherans flock to subdue it. Indeed, there are none but the Hughenot Party, who have any ground to complain of it, since it hath furnished many noble Lords, who have alwayes shewed themselves enemies to that Doctrine. We must confesse, that this Dutchy merited better treatment, since it had never offended France; That it is a poor maxime of State, to oppresse a Prince, who desires nothing but Peace, and upholds himselfe in the justice of his Cause. This proceeding will produce much misfortune; for they who accuse him of having so of∣ten falsyfied his faith, silence the cause thereof, either through malice, or ignorance.
CHAP. III. The Imperialist's wast in the Dutchy of Wirtembergh. The French come to succour the Swedes. Philipsburgh taken by a prank of War. The Cardinal enters Brussels, and the Duke of Orleans departs. FRance, hitherto waged War against the House of Austria, obliquely, and indirectly enough, though yet with advantage; and seized upon Lor∣raine, more like a Fox, then a Lion, as more by craft, then open force. But, it was time, to throw off the Vizard, and lay hold of all Europe, since it ap∣pertaines to it, according to the opinion of that famous Impostour, who is so learnedly refuted, by Jansenius a Professour of Lonain; and a certain Spani∣ard, who argues thus. If the Empire belong to France, because it was governed by Charlemagne; with much more reason doth Languedoc, and some other Pro∣vinces in France, occupated by the Goths, belong to the King of Spain, as he is Successour of the said Goths, who established their Monarchy in Spain, and pre∣ceded the said Charlemagne in time. But let us leave these old trifles, and fond Commentations, and stay in our corrupt Age, where Might, amongst ma∣ny, is more esteemed, then Right, and where, the most crafty Cheats, are held the best Politicians. Duke Bernard being escaped, with many other Officers, had recourse to the favour of France; where, being a German, he was judged capable, and fit to beare the burthen of the War, together with Marshal de la Force.The French in Germany. Such as are least suspected, and most interessed, as well in matter of Religion, as o∣therwise, are alwayes chosen, for the expedition of any great Enterprize. Make a huge Magazine at Philipsburgh There passed nothing worthy of memory between the two Partyes, the Imperialists being grown slack and lazie by the abundance and fertility of the Dutchy of Wirtembergh; and the French making a Magazine at Philips∣burgh, the like whereof was never heard: as being sufficient to pay, and feed whole Armies together, for the entire Conquest of the Empire. The more judicious sort of men conceived, that it was to fall suddainly, and unexpect∣edly upon Colein, the most important Town in Germany; thereby to have communication with the Hollanders; take it away from the Spaniards with the Empire; and so (this gate, together with that of the Sea, being shut, by the States Ships) beat them out of all the Low-Countries. But, an unforeseen blow, an unthought of thunderbolt; a strange accident, brake that, which all the invention of man was not able to divert; and this it was. Gasper Bamberger, being advertised of the slacknesse, and carelesnesse of them, to whom this Golden-Fleece was recommended, and in whose custody this Horne of plenty was; sent some of his most faithful Officers, in the habit of Peasants, and a party of his Regiment,Which is taken by craft. who passed upon the Ice (for it had frozen, and the Winter was one of the sharpest of this Age) killed all the Court of Guard, and with small resistance, grew Masters of the place. And this Enter prize quashed all the faire advantages of the French; made them take other resolutions; freed Colein from a most evident danger, and disposed the rest of the Winter, together with the beginning of the Springs, to a Treaty of Peace. There were found two millions of Gold; above a hundred Brasse-Pides of Orduance; above four hundred thousand Sacks of Corne, Oa Barly, Pease, and Beanes; twelve thousand Sacks of Salt; an incredible Maga∣zine
of Powder, without counting the riches of particular persons, which were brought thither, as it were to Jupiters feet; that is, to be secured. It was easie enough to judge, by this preparation, of the greatnesse of their de∣signes, and confidently to affirme, that it is in the disposal of States, that the great God makes his Divine Providence shine brightest. The losse of Philipsburgh was not sufficient, without the addition of that of Trevirs, together with the Elector; the Town being taken the six and twentieth of March, 1653. and he carried to Brussels, by the Garrison of Luxeburgh. The Cardinal Infanto, having by this great Victory, eluded the ambu∣shes or snares,The Cardinal Infanto at Brussels, and the Duke of Orleans retires himselfe into France. of such as envyed that Government, made his entry in∣to Brussels, in the moneth of December. The Duke of Orleans, for some rea∣sons which were clear enough, would not be present at his reception; but, by the advice, of Puilanrent his Favourite, retired into France, where he was received by the King, with the wonted testimonies of affection; however he caused his marriage with the Princesse Margaret to be declared Null, in Parliament. This Puilanrent for this service, was proclaimed Duke, and Peer of France, and married the Cardinals Niece; but they raised him on high, to make him catch a heavy fall. CHAP. IV The King declares war against the Cardinal Infanro, and why? The Spaniards are beaten. The taking of the Fort of Schenck. THe King, being irritated by the losse of this most important Place, and for that his protection had not been sufficient to cover the Elector of Trevirs; sent to re-demand him from the Cardinal Infanto; who answered him, that he could hot dispose of such a businesse, without the knowledge, and consent, of the Emperour, and the King of Spana: which answer not pleasing him, and finding no hope of any orther; he resolved to declare war against the said Infanto, under this specions pretext. The King of France declares war upon the Spaniards Now, in regard that this War'v as derived, like a contagion, from that of Germany, by which, as by a great fire, all the circumjacent parts were so scotched, that they kindled with the first winde: we will returne again to the Source. The Civil Wars (as we have already shewed) stopped the motion of those old quarrels, and Henry the fourth was diverted from them, by a vio∣lent death. But the Cardinal, having well weighed the strength of the House of Austria, and the furious shocks or foiles she had sustained, conceived that it was now time, to make her fall: for he was fully confirmed, that some Provinces (as that of Flanders, Artoise, and Luxemburgh) had formerly de∣pended upon France: howheit King Francis had renounced his propriety in them for all perpetuity, by way of Ransome from his captivity; which the French themselves do not deny; but they say, that the Kings cannot alienate the Rights of the Crown. If so, how can there be any firme, and sure Treaty made . For, there may as much be said, of the Emperour, the King of Spain, and other Princes; and so it will be a businesse without end. But it might with more equity be alleadged, that in regard they lost those Rights by arms, a hundred years agoe, they may upon a faire occasion, endeavour to recover them by the same means.
Now in these so confused embarassments, there might some pretext be found, which might, perhaps, be rendred just by the lot of Arms: and that of the Elector made all the French murmure nor was there ever a fairer opportunity, to beat out the Spaniards; and therefore it was not fit to neglect it. However the Spaniards rejected it, and affirmed that they were punctu∣ally informed, that the King had signed the League for the Offensive war with the Hollanders, at the Loivire, upon the eighth of March, at seven of the clock in the Evening: Insuch fort, as though they had not taken the Elector, they were neverthelesse sure of a War fifteen dayes after, as by consequence they had. They would not make mention, of many frontier Towns, which the French had attempted to surprize by treachery, as Cambray, and Graveling, to the Governour whereof they offered a hundred thousand Pistols. All which infractions they had prudently dissembled, to keep that part of the Country in quiet. Neither was it the vanity of the Spaniard,A French wri∣ter accuses the Spaniards of vanity. which sought that war, so to make themselves great by the losse, and at the charge of others: but their admirable prudence laboured to divert it, and their power preserved it self still hitherto, in the Low-Countreys. But let us leave dis∣puting, and make the Armyes march into the Field. The French were to scuffle with a Nation, which is not startled at noise. The King contracted formidable forces, neer Sedan, under the conduct of the Marshals of Chastillon, and Brezè, and sent them to enter the King of Spaines territories, at the same time when the Herald arrrived at Brussels,A brave Army neer Sedan. to denounce the war; they having begun their march three dayes before with the bravest Army that could be seen; A trick which couzened the Spyes,The Spanish Spyes couzened. and proved to be of much advantage. Their order was, to joyn with the Prince of Orange, and proceed under his experience, to the conquest of the whole Country, that so it might be shared between them. The Skinn was sold before the Bear was taken; and they who reckon before their Host, must reckon twice. Prince Tho∣mas his Troops defeated. They cutt of Prince Thomas's Troops, which presumed to oppose such an Army, as that; the Vant-guard whereof only, put them to flight; and which was a terrour both to Friends, and Foes: yea, the Prince of Orange himself, and the States when they beheld this so gallant an Army, and above seven thousand Horsemen with scarlet Cassocks were so amazed, that they would have made the signe of the crosse thereat, had they been accustomed to it. But afterwards, distrusts, and jealousies (the obstacles to all brave ex∣ploits) wriggled themselves in amongst them, and continued till the end of the Field. The first prey was Tirlemount, famous for the ruine thereof; for all imagi∣nable cruelties, and unnaturall actions were perpetrated, and executed, in this unhappy Town. The Churches,Tirlemount taken, and burnt. Grat cruel∣ties. and whatsoever the Catholicks held in greatest Veneration, was handled with lesse reverence, then if they had been meer Tartars. All was pillaged, all violated, and burnt, and almost all massacred. A fine beginning, cannot choose but haue a fine end. The Cardinal Infanto, in the mean time, retyred, and incamped himself before Brussels, expecting succour from Germany, and gathering together the forces of the Provinces; all which were not sufficient to stop this impe∣tuous torrent, which carried all before it. The Armies pitched their Camp before Lovaine, the seat of the Muses, which Mars ought to spare; and by consequence he did nothing; for Jupi∣ter saved it. Grotendonck, with six or seven Regiments, commanded in the Town; and the Enemy stayed in this Siege, about twelve dayes;Lovaine be∣sieged. but French at length, being better furnished with Pistolls then Bread, found themselves besieged by hunger, which caused fierce muttering, and then disbanding.
Is succoured, and the Hel∣landers retyre. The Prince of Orange, seeing this disorder, and the relief came out of Ger∣many, under Piccolommi; concluded with the French Marshals, to make a re∣treat; and the Infanto, with his Supply, to pursue them. They went and incamped neer Grave, and the Spaniards, neer to the Fort of St. Stephen, where they stayed not long; for the Prince, being advertised that the fort of Schenck was surprized, hastened thither speedily, with three thousand men; and the Armies followed him. This Fort stood upon a point, which divided the Rheyn into two Arms or Branches; and was so well strengthened, and furnished, that it was not besiegeable. But Captain Een∣holt, a native of those parts, desiring nothing more, then a favourable occa∣sion to revenge the death of his Father, who was beheaded at the Haghe; pryed so well into matters, and layd so fit hold of his time, that he got it with small trouble, and losse, to the great cost of the United Provinces; whose Army camped at Besaw, and the French, at Emmerick, and Rees. And besiege the Fort of Scheck, taken a little be fore. The Spaniards, who vanted that they found the key of Holland, kept this Fort nine mouths, but the Lock was changed; insomuch, as that they were in deliberation of blowing it up. Thus Fortune played the wagge with them, by giving victory sometimes to the one, and sometimes to the other. The French demy much diminished, and afflicted. This French Army, which was the lustiest and gallantest that had been raised since the beginning of this Age; being reduced to five or six thousand men of forty thousand which it was, felt the whole winter, the crosses of ir∣reconcilable Fortune; or rather, the effects of that great God, who was so much irritated by them: for the souldiers were constrained to sell their Hor∣ses, and Cassacks, and go a begging. It was a pittifull thing, to see Gentle∣men of good birth, dye of sicknesse in Hospitals, and the souldiers miserable, by the expectation of the wind, which was almost four months quite con∣trary. Thus passed the first Field, which looked at first, as if it would swal∣low, and devoure all, and so both Parties were equall. But, if Fortune smiled upon the Assailants in the beginning; she did so yet more, upon the Defen∣dants, who prepared themselves, to attack the other the year following: and so the war grew hotter then ever, towards the Rheyn, in the Low-Countries, and in France. CHAP. V The Imperialists beat back the French into Lorraine. Oxenstern passes into France. Bannier renewes the war; and beats the Saxons. Hatsfeldt succours them. Magdeburgh yeelds. The Battail of Witstock. Leipsick succoured. THen offers it self so much to be said, in the carrcer of this deplorable war, which, (as streaming Rivers swell bigge by receiving many other brooks into them) embraces so many other in it, and growes so uni∣versall, that if I made any longer stay, then only to pick out every one in their particular circumstances, I should never come to an end. Wherefore, having sufficiently declared the motives and praetexts, I will speak of them only in bulk, especially since we are now descended to those, which are known to all men; for the wounds thereof are bleeding yet, in the most illu∣strious Families, and the Villages still smoaking; some whereof have so far lost their form, that they are reduced as it were, into a certain First matter, or Chaos, and serve for nothing but a retreat to Wolves and Scritch-Owles,
or Birds of ill augure, which advertise us, that it is time to aspire to some other place, since this land is cursed, and desert; producing nothing but nettles, and thistles. The abomination of desolation is in the holy place; let us hope for no amendment, but fly to the mountains. An inundation in Holstein. This year of 1635. by means of a flood, which happened near Glucstat, there were drowned about six thousand persons, and more then fifty thou∣sand beasts. The like misfortune chanced in Catalunia some years before, and the Plague, which began in the North, passed through Holland, and carried away above twenty thousand mortalls, in the Town of Leyden on∣ly; without counting such as were consumed in Amsterdam,The plague at Leyden. and other Townes: And this contagion seemed to be fomented by the famine, which had been in Germany, where the very dead were disinterred, to be eaten, in the Palatinat, and Alsatia. The French beaten out of Germany. The French had no better luck at fighting in Germany, from whence they were expelled with losse of men, Canon, an Baggage; and Iohn de Werdt went beating them to Monthelgard; and Galasso, having made them quit Mentz, Gust aveburgh, and other places, went pursuing them in the Reer as farre as Metz; in such sort, as that Weimar, and Cardinall de la Valette were compelled to forsake all; and the Imperialists being tyred with following them, and want of food were fain to return, and give them leave to take breath. In other Ages, such revolutions as these, would have produced peace; but in this, these losses, were but as matches to kindle them to a continuation; for he who got a great victory, hoped forthwith to suppress his enemy: and if Fortune changed, desire of revenge suggested no less to the adverse party. Now, since the French are driven almost quite out of Germany, and the Low-Countries, we will go see, in what posture the Swedes were, and how they silently breath nothing but vengeance, by spying out such as were affectio∣nate to them, and attracting by fair promises, them who were wavering, or ballancing between both. The Great Chanceller Oxenstern, one of the best wits of this Age, not be∣ing able, by his protestations, to stoppe the course of the Treaty for peace, and not finding too much safety at Francfurt (as we have already said) went into France, where he was received with such honours, as the King com∣municated to few. He conferred often with the Cardinal; and these two great Starres never made any conjunction, but they cast some ill influence upon the House of Austria, and canvased whatsoever was for their own in∣terest. In such sort, as that they both having taken a firm resolution (the ef∣fects whereof we have already seen) he passed into Holland, where he was generally honoured, and then retyred towards his Mistress, from whence he stirred not afterwards. Bannier re∣newes the war. In fine, Generall Bannier, after having wrangled, and huckled a long time, received his Orders, and a supply from Sweden; began to lay about him, shake off his Extasie, and attack the Saxons: Hitherto, we have seen warres of Ca∣tholicks against Catholicks, and the Lutherans against the Catholicks, but now we shall see Lutherans openly against Lutherans; and then the Refor∣mates, against the Reformates; in such sort, as the Papists will now be reproa∣ched no more, that if their Law were good, they would not tear one ano∣ther in pieces, so like Wolves, as they do. Behold here, the most irregular and extravagant warre that ever was, wherein the most unbridled passions of man had the Helm. Vengeance produced licenciousness, and licentiousness, all the cruelty, and barbarity, which can be imagined. Beats the Sa∣xons. The County of Brunswick felt the first mischiefs thereof, for despaire gave an Army to the Peasants; and military science victory, to the Swedes,
Domts was be sieged by the Saxons; Bannier hastened thither, and charged them so suddainly, and so unexpectedly, that he brake them, before they knew, that the Swedes were in the Field. This check abated the reputa∣tion of Bandits, but not the courage of the Saxons, who presumed to engage themselves again in Battel; but were again defeated by Bannier. In the third shock,Passes into Mi∣snia. he had the worst; but he, (who played his last Game and ventured all) cast himselfe into Misnia, with so much animosity, that he took many Towns, and extorted some hundred thousands of Rix-Dollars: the great∣nesse of which summe made many persons repent themselves of their faint-heartednesse, and stiffled those complaints which rung too loude, and too freely: We cannot with good conscience, make war against the Swedes, in regard that they are of the same Faith we are; and for that they have preserved us, and saved us from the Tyranny of the Papists &c. The Elector of Saxony being sufficiently unsatisfied with his General, and a part of his Subjects, found himselfe not strong enough to dislodge these Guests;The Imperialists in the succour of the Elector of Saxony, take Magdeburgh; are beaten neer Wistock, the fourth of Octo∣ber. 1636. and therefore he had recourse to the Emperour, who dispatched him an Army, under the conduct of General Hatsfeldt. What a change is this? It is not full four years, since the Swedes came to chase the Imperi∣alists out of Misnia; and now these are recalled, to chase out them; which they also did, and besieged Magdeburgh, even a place redoubtable in her ve∣ry ashes. Bannier made a shew, of succouring it; but was met by Hatsfeldt, and forced to retire, with great losse; whereupon the Town yeilded, and Harsfeldt went to seek his Enemy, whom he constrained to forsake Werben, Tangermond, and the Field it selfe, to the Dutchy of Meckelenburgh, where he stayed neer Wistock, and contracted as many forces as he could. The Battel was fought the fourth of October, 1636; wherein the Swedes did more then men; for at the first, they had the worst of it; but towards the end, they so furiously charged the Imperialists, and Saxons, which were upon their retreate, that they made them double their pace, and acknowledge the Swedes for Victours, and themselves for Vanquished; the proof thereof is this. Bannier returned in Misnia, with resolution to do better then before, and to make the poor Subjects feel the hatred which he bore their Master. He took, pilladged, and fired Torgaw. He pardons now no more; for it is the trick of base fellowes onely, to forget offences. This Age is all martiall, and breathes nothing but blood, and slaughter. To be a good Christian (said a Gentleman of Holstein) it to have a faint, and cowardly Soul. Leipsick stopped Banniers impetuous course, and the valliant Adolph Trans∣dorf made him gnaw his thumbs,Leipsick besie∣ged, by answering the Drummer, (who threat∣ned to put all to fire, and sword, if he did not render the Town) that he should do his worst. It is not alwayes the Rampars, or Walls, but the va∣lour of a Governour, which makes a Town strong. William Landgrave of Hassia, seeing Fortune favour that side which he loved,And Lamboy beaten before Haguenaw, by the Landgrave. brake the peace of Prague, and went to surprize Hamboy, who had blocked up Hanaw; defeated him, and freed the Town; for which fine action, he was proclaimed an Outlaw, and a Rebel to the Empire. General Goetz being sent to follow him, took many Places from him, defeated Me∣lander, and shut him up in the Town of Castel. Hatsfeldt, being declared Genetal, of the Imperial, and Saxon forces, made the Victorious Goetz come through Ice, and Snow, to succour Leip∣sick: so ready was the Emperonr,Bannier departs from Leipsick 1637. and in∣trenches him∣selfe near Tor∣gaw. to manifest his benevolence to the said Elector. Bannier being prepared to make them of Leipsick feel his choler, was ad∣vertised of this conjunction, and of his Enemies designe, which made him hasten towards Torgaw, a Town situated upon the Elbe, below Dresden;
where he intrenched himselfe, and shewed, that he would not willingly quit his Country, whom he desired to destroy. Never was Prince so much cry∣ed down, as the Elector was, by the Swedish Party: There was not that vice in nature, whereof they made him not the Slave; and it seemed to them, as if their rage could not be satiated, till this Prince were ruined. Never could the Imperialists draw him to a Battel, he contenting him∣selfe with toiling, and tyring them: but having heard, that Gallasso, and Marazin hastened with new forces to overwhelme him; he made a shew of going towards Erfort, and departed in the night, for Pomerania: They followed him, and cut his Foot in pieces; but he made his Horse foard the the River Oder, and fled into the Isle of Ʋsedom; no lesse proud,Flies into Pe∣merania. of such a retreate, then the Duke of Mercoeur had been before Canisse, in Hungary. Hatsfeldt fell sick, and the Swedes being re-inforced, divided themselves in∣to two Bands, or Bodies; the one, under Bannier, to go towards Silesia; and the other, under Wranghel, towards Marche; but this latter was met, and defeated by General Bredaw; which losse obliged them to stay in Pomera∣nia. During this bloody knocking, where Fortune remained not constant; the Landgrave William, being advertised of the retreate of the Swedes, began also to think of his own; for Cassel was not able to shelter him; and so he retyred into Holland, with his Wife, and Children: himselfe, and his Army,The Landgrave retires into Holland with his Wife. His death. put themselves into East-Freezland, to be shouldered by the States, and the North-Sea; but Parca cut off the thred of his life, by a pestilent Feaver, and left the Game to be played by his wife, who did it with much felicity. Let us leave them forging new designes; and passe to the other side, towards Lorraine. CHAP. VI. Coleredo taken. The Spainards pass into Picardy. John de Werdts exploits. The Siege of Dole raysed. Gallasso enters into Burgundy. War against the Duke of Parma; who makes peace. Truce prolonged in Prussia. DUke Bernard of Weymar, and Cardinal de la Valette, having, with very much adoe, gotten loose from their Enemies, by whom they were both followed, and flanked, retired themselves fighting to Metz; but with the losse of Canon, Baggage, and a great number of men, as well by the Sword, as Famine: And John de Werdt, and Gallasso tracing them, were also so recei∣ved by this scourge, and sicknesse, that after a good part of their Army was consumed, they were forced to retreate; the latter, into Germany, and the former, into the Province of Liedge. The defeate of young Coleredo by young Crecqui in Lorraine, brought the war back again into Alsatia. The Spaniards in Picardy with a potent Army. The House of Austria, to make France feel what she had made her suf∣fer in Germany, and the Low-Countries, resolved to carry the war into her very bowells, and to the very Gates of Paris it selfe. The greatnesse of the Spanish Nation was engaged herein, to make the French know, that they had force enough to revenge themselves effectively, and not by vaine rodo∣mont ados, or ranting. For which end, the Cardinal Infanto was making huge preparations all the Winter long; He entred by the way of Picardy, with an Army of sixteen thousand Horse, and fifteen thousand Foot. The Im∣perialists were conducted by Piccolomini, and John de Werdt; and the Low-Country
Country Forces by Prince Thomas. It was thought, that Army would have devoured all France, there being none but the Count of Soissons, with ten or twelve Regiments, to hinder their passing the River of Some. Take some pla∣ces. Catalet, Capelle, and Corbie, made small resistance; and the other pla∣ces served but for pillage. Count Soissons retyred with some losse; and the ransack which Iohn de Werdt made, together with the dust of his Army, cast terror into the City of Paris. He surprised some, beat others, and went on with so much speed, that he compelled his Enemies, who were very much steeightened, to keep themselves upon their guard. The King raised a puissant Army, and marched directly to his Enemies; who, not being willing to hazard the Country by a generall Battail, rety∣red, and he, having after some weeks siege, retaken Corbie, and finding the the winter near at hand, did the same. But the Hollanders, upon the other side, not enduring to see the Spaniards, in the Fort of Schenck, after a siege of nine moneths, constrained them to change their lodging. Let us pass into Burgundy, and see in what condition the Prince of Conde is there. The Burgund ans say, that he attacked them, contrary to his own word given them,Dole besieged, 1626. is sue∣ured by the Duke of Lor∣raine. Gllasso retyred into Germany. and that a Prince who breaks word, can never have good luck. He laid Siege before Dole, and the Inhabitants were resolved, rather to perish all with their swords in their hands, then yeeld themselves to him. The Duke of Lorrain came from the Low-Countries, and made him raise the siege; and Galasso went out of Germany, with an Army of thirty thousand men, and fell upon France; but stayed not long there, and returned with small glory, and a smaller Train, after he had shewed the French, that the Germans knew how to plunder as well as they: However, he left no mark at all of his valour behinde him; for his Army being diminished by almost the one half, as well through famin, as flight, he returned from whence he came; and Monsieur de Rantzaw, behaved himself so valiantly against him, that he acquired the Marshalls staffe. These Attacks upon the one side and the other, between these two Crowns, not having wrought the effects, which were both feared and expected; it look∣ed, as if the Kings would open their eares, to the holy propositions of Peace, which were made them by Pope Ʋrban. But this Iron Age admits no such Remonstrances, and all the mischiefes must be fulsilled, because they have been foretold: it is an Age of slaughter, and not of peace. Piccolomini returned into Germany, and Iohn de Werdt, to the Diocese of Colein, after having humbled the Country of Liedge, and carried the Eagles into the Kingdom of France; but the Flower de Luce had yet too strong a smell for thern to suffer. Hermestein beked, renders by fain the sixteenth of June, 1638. The Fort of Hermestein had been two yeares blocked up, and the Garrison forced by famine, to consume all their horses: for the Hassians were in Frienland, and in France, too farre off, to give succour to a place which was like to be lost for want of it. Some Waggons there went from Wesel with Victualls and Cloathes, but Iohn de Werdt having notice thereof, marched, and charged the Convoy with so good successe, that he routed the Cavalty, and took all. They of Hannaw, went more cunningly to work, and put three Barks loaden with provisions, into their Town, which passed before Mentz, with a Burgundian Crosse, and two souldiers clad like Monks, thereby to cozen their enemies. It is not the Habit which makes the Monk. This Euterprise issuted well, but the second was not so happy; and so the French were constrained to render this good place, into the hands of the Imperialists.
Ferdinand the Think Emperour of Germany &c:
The Italians were not exempt from the fury of warre; for, after the Cardinall Infanto's departure, the Duke of Parma, upon some dis∣contentments, made a League with the Duke of Savoy, and took the protection of France, which was of much more advantage to him, then it had been to the Electour of Trevirs, and his subjects. The two Confederates besieged Valencia, where they lost their time, mony, and a multitude of men. The Dake of Parma at Paris. The said Duke of Parma was received at Paris, 1636. with great ceremonie, and many complements; from whence, after a while, he repassed into Italy; and the French, and Savoyers, into the Dutchy of Milan, where they were beaten; and the said Duke, being almost spoyled of all his States by the Spaniards, and seeing no succour come from France, nor any effects of the promises made him; chose rather to reconcile himself with them then lose all the rest:Reconciles himself with the House of Aust . wherefore he subtilly dismissed the French out of Parma, and Placentia, and as soon as he had renounced the Kings Protection, all his said States were resto∣red to him, 1636. Yet for all this, the Warre departed not out Italy; for the Spaniards besieged, and took the Fort of Brema,Brema taken. The death of the Marshals of Crecqui, and soiras. and the Marshall of Crecqui coming to spy by what meanes it might to be suc∣coured, was taken out of that trouble by a bullet, and sent to eternal repose from all his labours. The same end had the Marshall of Toiras the yeare before, and in the like occasion, who was regretted by all, for his incomparable dexterity, and valour. Verseil fell also into the hands of the Spaniards, after the defence of about two moneths; and so Cardi∣nal de la Valettes succour proved fruitlesse. And the Dukes of Mantua, and Savoy. In the moneths of September, and October, the Dukes of Mantua, and Sa∣voy, passed to a better life: but let us go into Poland, to see if that King will draw his sword any more. There was a Truce for six yeares, which expired in that of 1635. Ʋla∣dislaus raised a puissant Army, with intention to drive the Swedes (who were much ingaged in the German warre) out of all Prussia, and Livonia, and reconquer the Kingdom of Sweden. The House of Austria animated him in this fair occasion, both for her own interest, and his; France, and Holland, for theirs, counselled a peace; which not being to be found amongst so many difficulties,The Truce pro∣longed for six and twenty yeares, between the Pole, and Swedes, 1635. there was concluded a prolongation of the Truce, for six and twenty yeares; and that, by the perswasion of the Count of Avaux, who had gotten a great influence, upon the Senatours of the Kingdom of Poland. By vertue of which composition, Prussia was restored to the Poles; Livonia remained to the Swedes, and the interest of the two Houses neglected, by the address of these fortunate, and able Mi∣nisters: though it were not indeed without regret, that Ʋladislans, being a great Captain, re-sheathed his sword; and suffered his magnanimous courage to coole, in Royall, and pompous vacancy.
CHAP. VII. Ferdinand two dayes after the Diet of Ratisbone, where his Sonnes had been Elected King of the Ro∣manes, dies. The Relation of his life. Bannier makes new pro∣gresse. Many Princes take newtrality, and after∣wards, the Swedish Party. The Arth∣duke. Leopold Generalissimo, or Chief General. THE Emperour Ferdinand the second, feeling himself debilitated in bo∣dy, by the burthen of so many years, and so many Warrs, as whereby he had been tormented; took nothing more to heart, then the meanes, how to provide for the establishment of that Empire, which Domestick partialities, seconded by the ambition of Strangers, had much shaken. Holy thoughts, and worthy of such a Pilot, as merited to govern such a ship, in a storme, which threatened this great world with destruction. But it had passed the bounds of all Justice; the great Sun-dyal of the Sea, had no more strength; recourse must be made to the Stars, to implore their assistance, and direction for fear of making Shipwrack, by the extraordinary violence of the windes. Where∣in he was gratiously heard, against the expectation of his enemies, whose practises were faine to give way, to the incomprehensible decrees, of the di∣vine providence. He called a Diet at Ratisbone, and sent for the Electour of Trevirs, who was prisoner in the Low-countries.The assembly at Ratisbone 1636. Ferdinand the third, King of the Romanes. In this assembly, the Poland Embassadours speech had more weight for Ferdinand the third; already King of Hungary, then the under-hand dealings of the French, for the Duke of Bavaria, so that the voice fell upon him; and the affection of the Protestants was declared with so great harmony, that the General Showt was, Live Ferdin and the third, King of the Komans. The ce∣remonies being accomplished the 22. of December, 1636. the Emperour, in most Christian manner, rendred up his Soule to God, the 15th, of February, following.The death of Ferdinand the second, the 15th of February. 1637. His life Here we may admire the stupendious, and supernaturall effects of the Di∣vine goodness, in this Prince; who, by the good successe, and prosperity of his Lieutenants, maintained his Scepter, directly, and indirectly, at several times, and all together, against almost all the world. For, he was no sooner Crow∣ned King of Bohemia, then that people revolted, and chose another. When he was Emperour, he had the seditions of the Hungarians, and of his own subjects in Austria, Mansfedt, and the Bishop of Halberstadt, never lelt to hate him, nor ceased to hurt him, till they ceased to live. The Danes provo∣ked his Arms, and felt the effects thereof. The English, Scots, and Hollanders, conspired against him. In fine, the Swedes, with an Army of six thousand English, under the conduct of Marquis Hamilton, and the whole Protestant body; and the French, by the profusion of their Treasures, and the effusion of so much bood, openly manifested the desire they had, to pul the Crown from his head; or at least, to take it away from his House: nor was it enough, to excite the Peasans, but they must also corrupt the faith of that impertinent General. In a word, this poor Prince was no sooner got out of one War, then there sprung up two other; and the weapons whereof he served himselfe in these extremities, were the prayers he daily addressed to God; which King Gustave seemed more to apprehend, then he did all his Armies.
He experimented the Arms of the Tuks, Catholicks, Lutherans, and Refor∣mates; over all which he triumphed, saw his Sonne Crowned King of the Romans, in despight of all his enemies; the Swedes shut up in Pomeranta; and the French beaten out of Germany; yea, and his own Army, together with that of the Spaniards, almost at the Gates of Paris, a year before his death. He was a so mild a Prince, that the Lutherans themselves found nothing to blame in him, but that he hearkened too much to the Jesuits, and that he was too zealous for the Reformation. Strong reasons for them to revolt,Very zealous for the Reformati∣on. and call in the Swedes: but they had cause to repent afterwards. Let us now drive the Swedes out of Pomerania, and hear the complaints of the Imperalists, upon the disorder of their Army, for want of bread. The Swedes had formerly taken the Town of Luneburgh, and put the Ta∣ble, or Altar of Gold to Ransom. Duke George besieged it in August, and carried it, in September following: but General Bannier caused the Gover∣nour to be beheaded, for not having done his duty. Galasso marched out of Pomerania, and passed the Elbe; Glitznigh the General of Brandenburgh, stormed Gariz; and he of Saxonie, the Fort of Varnemont neer Rostock; where he lost his life. Now, who would believe, that the Swedes, being forsaken in apparence, by all the States of Germany; droven back to the Baltick sea; beaten in many Encounters; despoiled of the Isle of Ʋsedon, and many other, with considera∣ble losse; should ever have been able to rise any more? But General Hats∣felds sicknesse made them take courage; though General Bredaw defeated them, and made them start back again into theit Islands. And yet all this was not able to hinder them from afflicting Germany yet more, and that with more confusion, then it had been before. The feaver required yet greater blood-lettings, which made this Body, once so puissant, and formida∣ble, grow faint, and languish. Let us accompany them, to the banck of the Danub, and to the Gates of Ratisbone. Bannier having received from Sweden, a supply of eight thousand men, and ruined Gartz, passed the Elbe, in the Dutchy of Luneburgh; which might have been hindred by the Princes of that House, had they not taken newtra∣lity, and confirmed the good opinion of them at Venice. But he marched into Misnia, where he found great facility every where, and very little aversion a∣ny where; so strong was the zeal of Religion even yet, amongst those people. It was to much purpose, to prohibit the Germans from taking part with the Swedes, under paine of being declared Traytours to their Countrey;The Sweeds a∣gaine in Mis∣nia, in Bohemi∣a, and Silesia. for the hatred they carried to the Catholicks, their inclination to the Swedes, and the desire to plunder, made them slight the ruin of the Empire; but it was chiefly in Saxony 1639, that they declared their sence, concerning the Peace of Prague. Bannier went into Bohemia; Torstenzon, into Lusatia, and Stalhans; into Silesia and God knows, into what condition they put that Country, where they found more friends, then the Imperialists did in Pomerania. He defeated Ge∣neral Marizim neer Chemniz, and incamped before Prague, where he also defeated General Hoskirck. Beats the Im∣pealists. All the world was amazed at this progress, which was against all appa∣rence, and all expectation; and which cost so much blood, so much desolation, and so many inflagrations, throughout all Saxonie, and even to the very Gates of Prague. Fortune had again turned her back, upon the Imperalists, who changed their Commander. For, the Archduke Leopold was declared Generalissimo, or Chief-General, and Piccolomini his Lieutenant. Many encounters hapned, in which the Swedes had almost still the better, and For∣tune accompanied them even to the last, according to the assurance which was given Bannier, by a certain Peasant, who was become his Prophet.
He marched into Thuringe 1640, to joyn with the Weymarians, Hassians, French, and Luneburghians, who returned to his Party. The Imperalists in∣camped themselves neer Salfeldt, and the Swedes over against them; so that there was no other separation between them, then that of the little River Sale, from whence as the French writers affirm, The famous Salick Law, derives its name, and Origen. The businesse passed on both sides, with some small Skermishes, and with looking upon one another. In sine, the Swedes depar∣ted, and took their way towards Brunswick; and the Imperalists theirs, to∣wards Hassia, where they carryed themselves no better, then the others had done in Bohemia. But the Duke of Weymar ruins the Lawrel winns the Rheyn; therefore let as retire that way. CHAP. VIII. The Duke of Weymar repasses the Rheyn, and besieges Rhinfeldt. John de Werdr beaten, and taken priso∣soner. The Duke of Rohans death. Duke Benrards many Victories; he takes Brisack: his death. SInce we have carried on the progresse of the Swedes, to the year 1640. Let us go see what the French, and Weymarians do for their part. Indeed, af∣ter General Gallasso departed, the Burgundians were alwayes much affli∣cted, and their constance wraher brought misfortune upon them,The Burgundi∣ans ill treated. then di∣verted it from them. They refused to admit of Garrisons from him, and the Lorrianers were not able to defend them:The Waymari∣ans, in Alsatia beaten. so that they were beaten neer Besanton, and that Victory opened that way for the Weymarians again into Germany, who, with certain Barks which they sound, passed the Rheyn, made many Forts, and a Bridge, to keep the River at their devotion. John de Werdt, having notice of it, omitted not to come and charge them, and made them turne their backs, so that he quickly got possession of the said Forts, and Bridge; delivered his Masters, this second time, from the fear which was gi∣ven them, by the Duke of Weymar, in those parts; and then, sent his Troops in∣to Winter quarters. However the Duke of Weymar were much astonished at his losse, yet did not he loose his courage. For it is in the crosses of Fortune, that great men shew vertue, and testify that they are never able to despaire of good successe. He repassed the Rheyn,Repasse the Rheyn. 1638. and besiege. took Lanfenburgh, and besieged Rheynfelt, in the moneth of March, 1638. Iohn de Werdt, knowing the importance of this place, marched with all speed; attacked the Enemy; raised the Siege; beat some Foor; and took two Field-pieces. But this Victory, having cast the Imperilites into a kind of dull security; and the said Duke having gotten to himself the Duke of Rohan with five Regiments; he came, and charged them so happily, that he rou∣ted them,Iohn de Wedrt defeated, and taken prisoner, is sent to Paris. and took Iohn de Werdt, and the Duke of Savelly (who afterwards made his escape) prisoners; besides Enkefort, Sperrenter, and many other Offi∣cers, together with sixty Standards, and Coulours. This was a great blow; for it brake open all the bars of the Rheyn, and Iohn de Werdt, with Enkefort, was sent to Paris to witnesse it, and was lodged at Bois de Vincennes; where all the world flocked to see so renowned a Souldier; in such fort, as had he been an Emperour,A daageable loss to the Hause of Austria. there could not have been more crowding. This defeat was the cause of great trouble to the House of Austria; as the
losse of Alsatia, and the taking of Brisack: but upon the other side, it brought no lesse joy to France; especially, to such as were tyed to the interests of that great Cardiual, the main mover of this low world. The Duke of Roham death. the Duke of Rohan, being grown old under the burthen, and toyle of Arms, dyed of his wounds. He was newly come back from the Valieline, where he had archived new Lawrel, which he besprinkled with blood, in this last battail. Rhinfeldt yeelded; Rotued followed, Friburgh made a shew of defence, but the Governour quickly flinched. Duke Barnard marched to Brisack: the Imperialists victualled the Town; but the magazine being spoyled by fire, they were constrained to send other Provisions, which happily arrived; but Fortune smiled upon them, to deceive them: For they were furiously attacked; which they sustained with advan∣tage; and the fight was stubborn, the Generals being both old Souldiers; but the inconstant Goddess forsook them; and so their Army of twelve thousand men was utterly defeated. The besieged had patience,The Imperalists beaten again. Brisack besieged till another was raised: where with Lamboy made such a happy assault, that he got possession of a Fort neer the Bridge; but not being soon enough seconded, he was forced to quit it again. The Duke of Lorrain, who took to heart the praiservation of this place, had no better luck then the Imperialists. General Goetz, being suspected of having too much temporized, was made prisoner: And Reinaker the Governour, after having combated a desperate famin, was compelled to surrender, (with a huge magazine,Renders by fa∣min, in the maneth of De∣cember 1638. And the Wey∣marian, goe into Burgundy and much riches) the said Town of Brisack, the very pillow, upon which the House of Austria reposed, and the best key of the Empire. If this Victory were glorious to France, it was so much the more dammage∣able to her Enemies; and Duke Bernard, to take off all impediments from the French in Germany, fell in upon the Free County of Burgundy, which he so quel∣ted with Sieges, Encounters, Picories, or Robberies, that he reduced in al∣most all, under obedience to them, by whose power he had fubsisted after the Battail of Mortlingen. He did also as much in Lorraine; and it looked as if for∣tune would never abandon him. Duke Berrard refuses to go to Paris. The King, in the mean while, invited him to Paris, under pretext to thank him for so many Victories obtained; but he chose rather to stay at Brisack, which was his heart, the center of all his praetentions, and the inestimable Pearl of all his conquests. His refusal, though coloured with some reason, pleased not the Cardinals palat, who desired to asture himself of that Gate, whatsoever it cost him. In matters of State, interest is only observed; and all other affections pass not beyond civility. This brave Prince wanted no judgment, and knew well of what impor∣tance this place was, and therefore had no mind to give it the French: but he had to do with a man, who was more cunning then himself. In fine, he fel sick, and after having made his Wil, died, in the flower of his age, in the midst of his Victories, and of his Army. Some Germans published,Falls sick and dyes. hat he dyed of poyson wihich was sent from afar off; as if a naturall death were not as well to be found in Armies, as a violent one. His life. This Prince was desended from the Electoral House of Saxony; which, dignity was taken from his Praedecestors by Charlos the fifth, and transferred upon them, who have, and dopossess it ever since; upon which account, he was always, an enemy to the house of Austria, even to the very last gasp of his breath. After the King of Sweden, no Prince was more lamented, by all the Protestants, then he; and indeed, withour lying, he was one of the most valliant, and prosperous Captains of this Age. The King sent forth with, a hundred thousand Dublous, to pay the Army, and keep it in his service; and the Duke of Longueville went out of Burgundy, to command it, who left the Germans the possession of Brisack. Let us leave
them to untwist their jealousies, and make a turne through Germany to see what passes in Westphaha, since it is all in trouble again. Our right way thi∣ther, is by Hannaw, a strong Town neer Francfurt; which, being well seated, and considerable, was in the hands of the Earle of Ramsey a Scotch Coronel, who commanded there like a petty Tyrant, without sparing any; yea not not so much as the Count himselfe, who was Lord of the Place. But this domination of his proved short;Hannaw ta∣ken. for as good a Souldier as he was, he found himselfe attacked upon a faire occasion, and taken in it, though he left not his small Empire, but with his life. The Count of Dillingburgh was chiefe of this Enterprize, and of all the Associates who had interest in it. Pterbone by the Swedes, & Meppen by the Imperialts. The Hassians, upon the other side, took Paterborne by force, and the Ba∣ron of Velleen, the strong Town of Meppen, by an enterprise upon the Prince Palatin. His Army was defeated by Hatsfeldt, neer Lemgow; and Prince Robert, his brother taken prisoner, and carried to Vienna. Which blow made him returne to the Haghe, and confesse, that Fortune was not yet weary of afflicting his Family; and let us go the same way with him; let us be gone I say, out of this poor Empire, all tottered by a Tyrannical war, to see another betr disciplined. Indeed, if Evils grow worse, Prodigies went also multiplying; and Christian vertues being ecclipsed, gave way to all forts of impetis, horrours, blasphemies, and sacriledges. CHAP. IX. Breda renders it selfe to the Prince of Orange. Venlo, and Ruremund, to the Cardinal Infanto. Landrecies taken. The French beaten from before St. Omers, and Fontarriby. The Queen-mother goes into England; returns to Colein, and dyes. The defeate before Theonuille; and that of the Hol∣landers, before Callò. The ruine of the Spa∣nish Armada, or Navy. The revolt of the Normans. ALbeit, that these two unfruitful Fields, and these huge Armies on both sides, made more noise, then effect, as it ordinarily falls out; yet could not the Popes exhortations dispose the Soveragne Heads, ever the sooner to a good peace: but that they would needs begin again the yeare following, 1037. The Prince of Orange, having affronted the Spaniards, with his Fleer, went unforeseen, and unexpectedly, to besiege Breda, which, in eleven weeks space he took;Bredà besieged, and taken. and Charnasse the French Embassadour was killed there, with a Musket bullet. The Spaniards defeated before Leucate. This year was happy for France, by the defeate of the Spaniards before Leu∣cate, a strong place in the County of Rossillion. (which was both beleague∣red, and succoured on Michaelmasse Eve, by the Duke of Alvin;) and by reprize, or retaking, of the Isles St. Margaret, and St. Honorat (which had been held by the Spaniards two years) by the brave Count of Harcourt, with but a handful of men. Landrecies, a most strong Town in the County of Hemnwlt,The French take y Towns in the Low-Countries. was taken by the Marshal of Chastillon, after a Siege of six weeks, and many other small, and untenible places, followed it. Capell was also re∣taken; and Danvilliers, having sustained some assaults, yeilded to the Count of Soissons.
The Cardinal Infanto, not being able to succour Bredà, marched towards the Moze; took with small trouble, Venlo, Ruremund,And the Spa∣niards Venlo, & Ruremund. and a great Maga∣zine appointed for Mastricht, which was of much advantage to him, and in some measure, recompenced so many losses; and had not the Enterprize so excellently begun upon Rhinbergh failed by the cowardise of the Enter∣prizers, all would have remained equal enough: For the Spaniards had cast bridges of bulrushes into the Motes, without being discovered, the selfe same evening that the rejoycing was made for the taking of Breda; upon which having passed, and made themselves Masters of some Bastions, they fell in∣to the Town it selfe; but the Souldiers of the Garrison, tumultuarily, and suddainly taking arms, put them to a retreate; and the Horse, seeing the Gate open, durst not enter; and so the Town got a fine escape. The next year 1638. Fortune returned to the Spaniards. For the French laid Siege before St. Omers, a strong, and well munitioned Place, sited upon a little River, which empties it selfe into the Sea neer Graveling:St. Omers ∣sieged, the birth of the Dolphin. the fifth of Se∣tember, 1638. but, having lost the Fort neer the Bat, and a great Convoy, they were compelled to rise, with great losse; which was mollified by the birth of the Dolphin, the fifth of September; the joy whereof was universal; and the Queen, after a marriage of three and twenty years sterility, manifested an admirable ex∣ception to that Rule, which sayes, that the Spanish Ladies beare no children, after they are four and thirty years old. But it is true, that this blessed fe∣cundity was sent by the Divine Providence, for the good of France. Two dayes after this, the French were beaten from Fontaraby, and their Army defeated;The French beaten before Fontaraby. which misfortune hapned (as it is beleeved) by the Prince of Condes bad correspondence, with the Duke de la Valette; and the losse of this victory obscured the luster of that which they got at Sea; as their taking of Reuty, a place considerable enough, softened a little, the wound received before St. Omers. Cattelet was also retaken, and the Governour, together with all the Captains, beheaded, for not withstanding so much as one assault, and expecting the succour, which was already neer the Town. When Fortune laughs too much, she ordinarily carrye venim in her taile; which the Hollanders experimented this year. For, they craftily got into Plan∣ders, took two little Forts; and besieged that of St. Mary, where they were so well intrenched, that had they kept that Station, they had gone neer to make Antwerp quickly change her Master. But they were so briskly, and frequent∣ly attacked by the Spaniards, that they grew faint-hearted,And the Hol∣landers before Callo. and endeavour∣ed to returne by flight, the same way they came, but were almost all taken prisoners; and all their Artillery, and Shallops fell into the Enemies iands There were of them more smothered in the marshes, then killed in the fight; and Count William had very much adoe to save himselfe, with a few more in his company. The prisoners had the same treatment, which the Spaniards had recei∣ved, who were taken in the Sallops, in the year 1631. Nor was the Prince of Orange himselfe much happier before Guelders, though he retired with lesse losse, and trouble. These alternative victories, and these great Changes of Fortune, (con∣stant in her inconstance) ought to have made the Princes remember, that being Christians, they were bound to lay aside their animosities; but they were so flehed upon one another, that they aspired to nothing lesse then peace, and took nothing more to heart, then the utter ruine of each other. Their thirst was not yet quenched with humane blood,The Queen-Mother arrives in Holland goes into England, comes back to Colein. Her death. nor their heat de∣minished, by reposing all the Winter. The Queen-Mother departed from Bruffels, passed through Holland, where she was received with respect enough in all the Towns (but princi∣pally, at Amsterdam, where that illustrious Magistracy performed the ho∣nours
of the Republick) and then embarked for England, where she was embraced by her Son in Law, and her Daughter, with honour, and sense of tendernesse, and joy. There was a report, that it was she, who counselled the match of the Prince of Orange, with the eldest Daughter of England; and the English im∣puted the first seeds, of the divisions, and wars of their Kingdom, to her; as if this unfortunate Princesse, had every where carried ill luck in her com∣pany, like some contagious sicknesse. But seditious persons are glad, to cast the fault, and guilt of their ill intentions, upon such as are not beloved by the ignorant people; nor is there any more vicious, and corrupt Soul, then that of a detracter. She repassed by Zeland, to Colein; and seeing, that he, whom she had raised so high, slighted her disasters, stood fast in favour, and in the entire administration of the affairs of the Kingdom, she fell sick, and after having pardoned all her enemies, dyed. This great Queen, Mother to so may Kings, being overwhelmed with miseries, and old age, left this mortal habitation, and taught us thereby, that there is no sure, and stedfast felicity, in this pilgrimage. She had most wisely governed the Kingdom of France, during the Kings minority, and elevated to the highest degree of honour, him, who rendered her most mi∣serable afterwards. If the little ones are trodden under foot; the Great ones are also precipitated, and tumbled down headlong, from the highest honours, and dignities, into the abysse of calamities; to the end that every one may resent the disasters of this constantly deplorable Age. The Season being proper, the Armies were led again into the Field, and Fortune shared the Victories.The French beten before Theonuille. The Army of Campagne, under the command of Monsiur de Feuquieres, went to besiege Theonuille, where it was quite defeated by Piccolomini, and Beck, who presented himselfe before Monzon; but the Duke of Chastillon, having recollected the fragments thereof, and joyned them with his Troops (for Fenquieres was dead of his wound) made him change his route, and follow the Infanto's order, to come to the reliefe of Hosdin, which was furiously attacked by Marshal de la Meilleraye, and most excellently defended by the Garrison. Though yet at length, the Go∣vernour having sustained many assaults, and spent all his powder; and see∣ing, on the other side, the Assaultants animated by the Kings presence, was saine to yeild it upon a good composition,Hosdin rendred to the French, 638. 1638. It was beleved, that had he been able to hold it out, two dayes, and two assaults more, the Siege would have been raised; but Pccolomini came too late; and the Ambus∣cado which he had laid for the King in his returne from the Field, was dis∣covered too soone. The Prince of Conde seized upon the strong place of Salces, in the County of Rossillion, which was quickly afterwards retaken by Marquis Spinola; and the King of Spain, who often sent forces into the Low-Countries, found himselfe quickly in a condition, to draw some from thence, into Spain. This very year, Prince Cassimir, now King of Poland, going into Spain to be Vice-Roy of Portugal, was beaten by a tempest, into a Port of Province; where being stayed prisoner, and conducted to Paris, he was detained a ve∣ry long time there, and not enlarged, till after many reiterated Embassyes from the King, and Common-wealth of Poland. Charles Prince Palatin, having in England received the news of Duke Ber∣nards decease and conferred with the King and the Spanish Embassadour there; departed secretly, and passed through France, to winne the favour of that Orphan-Army, and take possession of Brisack: but he was discovered at Molins in the district of Burbon, and carried prisoner to the Bois de Vin∣cennes. The Duke of Lorraine fought very unhappily, against Monsieur du Hallier;
saw himself quickly stripped of the rest of his States, and his poor subjects ve∣ry ill treated. The distressed Burgundians had also their share of the mis∣chiefs of war, and sufficient cause, to repent themselves of having refused the Troops offered them by Galasso. The Spanish Fleet beaten in the Downes, 1639. We will finish this year, with the huge victory, which the Hollanders got of the great Spanish Armada, or Navie, upon the Coast of England, which was almost all burnt, and ruined the twenty one of September, 1639. and a good number of ships carried into Holland. The account of the dead, and woun∣ded men, was very great; and Spain resented this wound a long time, by the dispeopling of her Inhabitants. It hath not yet been known, upon what design this Navie came into the North; and all the discourses, which have been held thereof, have been founded, but upon simple conjectures. A Revolt in Normandy, and in Pou. The Normans fell into Commotions, and seditions, which quite ruined their Province. The people were so oppressed by Gabells, and Taxes, that they had nothing left them, but their miserable lives, and those full of de∣spaire too. To what purpose is it, to take some Townes upon the Fronteers of their enemies, if it be done, with the blood, and ruine of the poor people? I would take Towns enow (saida certain great Warrier) but they would cost my subjects too dear: I desire to winne them, not to buy them. In fine, not being able to support so many exactions, they took Arms, under the conduct of a cer∣tain Jean Vanuds-peds, in English, ohn Goe bare-foot. At first, they were de∣spised, and slighted; but finding favour, credit, and intelligence, it was needfull to send forces, to defeat them, which was done; and Generall Gas∣sion entring into Rouen, disarmed the Inhahitans, and used them, as if it had been a Town taken upon the Spaniards, without carrying respect, so much as to that Illustrions Company, some whereof he ignominiously cashered. Oh Times! Oh manners! If the reverence which we ought to bear to Ju∣stice be taken away, in what esteem, think you, can the Lawes be? The Inhabitants of Caen, had almost the same treatment. The revolt of the Croquans in Boio, had no better issue; and all such as would endeavour to check this Great Cardinals authority, made ship-wrack of both body and goods. It was not lawfull to complain; for that blinde Goddess, had perhaps taken up her lodging in the head of this great Minister, who could not faile. It is said of the French, that they Ride, and not faile. In effect, were their potency so great upon the one of these Elements, as it is upon the other, and they as prudent to preserve, as they are generous to atchieve; they might openly pretend to an universal Monarchy. For they have manife∣sted in these last wars, that they know how to correct their defects, and that they can as well defeat Navies at Sea, as Hosts ashore: and Monsieur de Brezè, (with the Arch-Bishop of Bourdeaux) shewed no less address, and dexterity in the conduct of his Vessels, then he had done, in that of the Ar∣my, which he led into Brabans; so that work was every where cut our, for the King of Spaines Subjects.
CHAP. X The revolt of Catalunia, and Portugal. The taking of Arras. The Spaniards beaten beaten before Cazal. The Hollanders beaten before Hulst. THe House of Austria was not enough afflicted yet, by so many losses, and so many Plots, and Treasons; but she must be yet more tottered by other disasters, and rebellions. Spain, was indeed within her singers breadth of destruction, by the revolts, which are yet in durance, and which, it was believed, would make her loose the Low-Countries, and her States in Italy. But, as a great Oak, agitated by the windes, resists strongly, and raises it self up against them; just so does this House, which men labour in vain, to overthrow. For there are too many Allyes to maintain her. It is in the deepest misfortunes, that she shewes least apprehension; and in the most im∣minent dangers, that she makes her valour known. This year of 1640, was almost fatall to her, by the defection of Catalunia, Portugal, and part of the Indies; the loss of Arras, and the unhappy success of her Arms in Italy, besides the approach of the Swedish war, to the bank of the Danub. Let us take notice in due order, as much as brevity will permit us, of the motives of these stirres. King Philip the fourth, (who now reignes in Spain) being a milde Prince, and a little more addicted to his pleasures, then the state of his affaires requi∣red, left the administration thereof to the Count of Olivares, who (as chan∣ges grow not without a cause) rendred himself odious, to almost all his Ma∣sters Subjects; yea, and complaints came of him, even from the Low-Coun∣tries themselves: besides, that the Grandies, who ordinarily pry upon all occasions to get themselves rid of a potent Minister; so well fomented the grievances of the people, that they brought them to open revolt, upon these pretexts. He had great forces, of Spaniards, and Walloons in Catalunia, ordered to guard that Province, against the invasion of the French. But Rule, and Discipline was not so exactly kept, but that the licentiousness of the souldiers, made the Inhabitants murmur; who suddenly rising up in Arms, slew their Guests, and beat such as came to revenge the sedition: Yea, upon Corpus Christs-day it self,The revolt of the Cataluni∣as, 1640. they cruelly murthered their Governour. With a muti∣nous people, there is nothing sacred, no more then there is reason. The King was not able to stop this torrent by mildness, and clemency; and so since the Sluce was broaken, the water must be let run. For the very Bishops, and Priests themselves, wore plain Incendiaries; and Don Ioseph of Margarita, with some other great persons, made them subtract themselves from the obedi∣ence of their Prince, to embrace the protection of France. A certain great Politician of this Age, discoursing one day upon this mat∣ter, said, that the Catalunian took Armes for their Priviledges, and to be suc∣coured by a Nation, which made profession of observing none at all. The Marshall of Schoonbergh, desirous to advantage himselt by this occasion, offered them his forces, and obliged them to send their Deputies to the King, to conclude a Treaty. Fortune was not lesse adverse to the Spaniards in Italy, where the Marquis of Leganez had besieged Cassal, a fatall place to them, and an unhappy siege, for this third cime. For the brave Count of Harcourt, brother to the Duke d'Elbenf, and of the generous blood of the Guisards, (who had done that Kingdom so many services) hastened thither, with a lesse and weaker Ar∣my;
attacked them, in their Trenches, and after two several repulses,The Spainiards beaten before Caza. fell on again, killed above four thousand men, put in as much relief as he would; and forced this so provident and cautious Nation, to raise the siege. Let no body say now. That the French are not valiant, but in the first fury, in which they are more then men, and in continuance, lesse then women. For, this glo∣rious action being conducted by one of the most strenuous men of his Time, descended from a House which hath alwayes swarmed with brave Captains, and others; declares the contrary. They know how to fight, and when they are broken, to rally, and carry away the victory. After this miracle, he wrought yet another, which could not be done, but by aHyperbole. The Count of Haicourts va∣lour, who takes Turin. Saint full of merits, and it was this. He besieged Turin, where Prince Thomas, Uncle to the Duke, whom he would dispossess, commanded. The Marquis of Leganez attacked him, and pierced through his Lines, but the soul∣diers which were entered, could not get out again; in such sort, as that all their victuals being consumed, they were forced to submit to an enemy, who was weaker then themselves. Which glorious exploits of his, redressed that State, when it was going to ruine; made him admired, and reputed by all men for one of the best Captains in the world, and the French Nation for brave soul∣diers. Wherefore the Cardinal could do no lesse, then cherish such a War∣rier, and so by consequence, he honoured him with his Allyance. Their victory obtained in the the Low-Countries was not of less conse∣quence, nor less famous for the difficulties, which they encountered therein. The Marshalls of Chaunts, Chairislon, and Meillieraye, made a shew of going to besiege Marienburgh, (where two German Canoneers set the powder on fire) but suddenly wheeled about towards Arras,Arras besieged and yeelded, 1540. the Capitall City of that Country; and fort with began to-intrench themselves before it. An Enter∣prise, of no less audacity, then generosity; but Fortune helps such as these, as it disdains them, who are fearfull. The Cardinal Infanto, the Duke of Lorraine, and six Generals more, with an Army of thirty thousand men, went to visit them, with intention to make them sorry for their temerity. Wherefore they pitched their Camp upon Mount Saint Eloy, near the way where the Provisions were to pass: so that the Besiegers were in worse condition, then the Besieged; for all the small Convoyes were beaten, and a pound of bread was worth fortyPence. Solls, and more Upon notice given, that the great Convoy was almost ready, the Duke of Lorraine went, and ruined above a thousand Wagons, at the very Gates of Dourlens, and returned victorious to the Camp. The Spaniards were very busie in consultation, about what good resolution they were to take. The great Convoy advanced, and La Meillieraye went to meet it, with fisteen thousand men. The Infanto being advised by some, to make a firm stand, and fight it (though it were guarded with above twenty thousand men) chose ra∣ther, to attack a quarter; which, had it been done two houres sooner, as it was concluded, the Town had undoubtedly been succoured. However, they suc∣ceeded pretty well, and were already become Masters of a Fort, but the bickering happened in a part, from whence they were repulsed, with great slaughter, and at the same instant, arrived the Convoy, which dulled the heat of the Spaniards, and the desire in the Besieged to make any further defence; and shewed besides, that the most considerate, and advised, are often deceived, and that the greatest wits incurre the foulst errours. Te∣merity surmounted prudence, and the Proverb, which was written upon the Town-Gate, proved false.
Quand les Francois prendront Arras, Les Souris prendroat les Chats. When the French shall Arras take, The Mouse the Cat her prey shall make. Jealousies, and distrusts, made the Spaniards lose so faire an occasion, to whom the losse of this strong place is imputed,The revolt of the Portugue∣ses, 1640. not indeed, without occasion: yea, and many have believed, that this accident animated the Portugueses, to revolt, and shake off the Castillian yoke. They elevated to the Throne Duke Iohn of Braganza, without any blood∣shed at all, which deserves admiration, and whereof we will speak hereaf∣ter. This year of 1640, made the Arms of France triumph, and produced the revolts which we have now described. The Infanto was a little more happy against the Hollanders, for the Prince of Orange, desiring to repaire the affront received at Callò, and ayming at Antwerp, sent Count Henry Casimir, and the Marquis of Hauterive, to attack the Forts, which were upon the approaches of Hulst; one whereof called Nassan, was taken by Hauterive, but Count Henry had no good issue, by the fault of his spyes;Count Henry of Freezland slain. and therefore resolving to die, or gain honour, he went, and assaulted the Fort of Saint Iohnstone, where he was repulsed, with the losse of his own life, and many of his souldiers, and was lamented by all. The Prince went the third time before Guelders, and being able to effect nothing, retyred again to the Haghe. So great a bulk of victories together, accumulated France with joy, and the Cardinals life, with glory, who was not yet free from danger, in regard of the many enemies, his Ministery had acquired him. The birth of the Duke of Anicii, 1640. It was not enough to have a Dolphin; for the Queen to augment the joy, was delivered the twenty one of September, of a second Son, called the Duke of Anion. We left the Imperialists in Hassia, who separated themselves, some one way, and some another, to seek their winter quarters, as the Swedes also did; but because they are redoubtable, in the rigour of the cold, (as being accu∣stomed to it) Bannier made his Troops march, at the beginning of December, in the deep snow, faced about towards the upward Palatinat, and presented himself before Ratisbone, where the Emperour held the Diet. Some bold ad∣venturers passed the Ice, and made great booty in Bavaria; but others payd the score soundly for them. Piccolomini was not asleep, but being advertised by his Spyes, of the po∣sture of the Swedes; he invested Generall Flang, and sent him prisoner, with above three thousand men, to Ratisbone; and pursued Bannier, who retyred with confusion enough,His death, 1641. as farre as Magdeburgh, in the month of April, 1641. who being seized upon by a burning feaver, died the tenth of May, as Halberstadt, and his Body was carried to Stockholm. His Elogies. He was a valiant souldier, and more happy, after the death of his King, then before. Bohemia, and chiefly Saxony, felt the effects of his cruelty, which was covered with the title of vengeance. He redressed the Swedish affaires in Germany, after the Peace; and Forstenton his Successour, made them glorious. The Swedish, and Weymarian Armies being joyned together, and fearing lest the Imperielists should succour Wolfenbottle, which was besieged by the Dukes of Brunswick; they all marched, and incamped themselves before the said Town, where we will leave them wasting and consuming, in expecta∣tion of the success of the Siege.
CHAP. XI The prudence of the Cardinal Duke. The Duke of Lorraine goes to Paris, and why? The Count of Soissons, the Duke of Guise, and Bouillon retire to Sedan. The fight with Lamboy. The Marshal of Chatillon. The taking of Aire. The Cardinal Infanto retires to Brus∣sels: his death. GOod Mariners very often foresee a great Storme, in a great Calme. In high prosperity, we must apprehend some misfortunes, which be∣ing prevised, will be lesse able to hurt, by meanes of the preventive reme∣dies, which may be procured. This potent Minister, during the time of good successe, had his eyes upon the Poupe of that vast Vessel, the government whereof he had in his hands, thereby to observe which way the Tempest might chance to come. He easily discovered by the discontentment of some certaine Princes, a kinde of fog, which by condensing, might cause a furious blast. It is not sufficient, to know what passes, but to foresee also what is to come. Wherefore he secretly cau∣sed the Duke of Lorraines pulse to be felt, and laboured to untie him from the interest of Spain, by rendring him his States. The Duke, who had so often experimented his pranks, and who never had any other then good thoughts for France (and never changed them, till he saw, that they endeavoured to deprive him of his Dutchy) listened to the overtures made him; received the Promises, which were sent him signed to Brussels, for his entire re-esta∣blishment; and thereupon, departed towards Paris, where he was received with much honour (more then a hundred and fifty Coaches going to meet him) and the King expressed great kindnesse,The Duke of Lorraine goes into France. and benevolence to him. They would make him sweare to the Treaty, and yet they would keep Nan∣cy, for a pledge of his promise. So that, the poor Prince, perceiving the Cardinals jugglings, and the aversion of the Courtiers; dissembled some affronts, and endeavoured to withdraw himselfe thence, to returne into Lorraine. For, they would needs ingage him against the Spaniards, which he neither could, nor would do. The Cardinal, conceiving that he would not be able to do any harme, nor finde any credit, in the Council of Spain, suffered him to go. A piece of cunning, whereby he had couzened many. In the mean time, the discontented Princes contracted forces at Sedan; with whom the Duke of Lorraine,The disconten∣ted Princes at Sedan. (having already gotten a small body of an Army on foot) refused to joyne, but kept his word with the King: But seeing, that La Motte, and some other small Places, were not restored him, and that he was but scoffed at by them; at length, full of generous resent∣ment, and zeal of revenge, he cast himselfe again into the interest of Spain, with intention to remaine therein, till a General Peace. Why would they needs retaine Nancy? What assurance could he have, of the restitution? And what hope, or apparence of constraining so great a Monarch to render it to him, if he were untyed from the Spaniards? If, when he was re-established, he should not keep his word (whereof yet there was no doubt at all) the King had but too much means, with the forces in Germany, and France, to make him repent himselfe of any such light Change. No, no; had it not been for the full restitution of his Country, he would not have gone from Brussels; and had they performed what they promised him, he would have lived in pence, and quiet, with his Subjects. But such
as penetrated into this Ministers designes, saw well enough, that they would never render it him, because they intended to adde to France, such other Conquests as they had already made, and hoped to make, in Germany. Those Writers, who flattered the Cardinal, and accused the Duke of levity; either did not, or would not, know the bottome of the businesse, and had a minde, to make men believe, that a Prince ought to want resentment, and interest, when they break their word with him: in order whereunto, I could pro∣duce the example of some others, if it might be done without offence. As soon as the season permitted, the King of France put a strong Army into the Field,Ayre besieged, and taken. under the command of Marshal de la Meillieraye, who took some small places (as the Islers) and laid Siege to Ayre, a strong Town in the Province of Artoise; but the strength thereof, served for nothing, but to kindle the generous courage of the French, who, notwithstanding all the desences both within, and without, took it in leste then two moneths 1641. The Princes disemtented, and why? He sent also another Army, under the conduct of Monsieur de Chatillon, to watch the designes of the Princes; of whose discontentments, and the grounds thereof, it is necessay to speak. The Count of Soissons, a Prince of the Blood, having received au affront at the Siege of Corbie, and many other at the Court, too sensible to be en∣dured; removed himselfe, and retired to Sedan; where the Duke of Guise came to him; and all complaining of the Cardinals unjust Ministery, and of the oppression of the Kingdom; they published a Manifest, containing their complaints, and the subject for which they took Arms, which was for the peace of Europe, and the expulsion of him, who fomented the War. They make Al∣liance with the House of Austria, Beat the Duke of Chatillon, and the Count of Soissons. They made an Allyance, with the Emperour, and the Cardinal Infante, and joyned their forces with those of General Lamboy. In fine, there grew a Battle, wherein the brave Count of Soissons, against the advice of all the Great ones, would needs ingage; and the Duke of Chatillon lost it, and was pursued as farre as Resol. This Victory was bought, by the death of this brave Lord; brought small profit, to the Vanquishers, but much more to him, who was vanquished. For, if he had lived, he would have raised more then halfe France. The King left the Frontier of Flanders, but the Cardi∣nal would not leave him; and so being followed by a gallant Army; which shouldered that which was before Ayre, they marched towards Sedan. The Infanto lost no time; for whilest the King was setting his Minister on work, to make the Duke of Bouillon abandon the Party, by promising him moun∣taines of Gold; he besieged the Besiegers, who not having leasure to raise then Trenches, retired into the Town, which they had gotten but few dayes before. Lamboy arrived with his Troops; and the Infanto, not being well in health,Melo kes Ayre. left the charge of the Army to Don Francisco de Melo, and retired himselfe to Brussels. La. Meillieraye, hoping for no reliefe, saved his small Army, but could not save the Town, nor his Artillery, which were yeilded in the middle of Winter. The discontentment of the Princes, caused this losse, and stopped the course of Victory for that Field. There is alwayes some obstacle in the carrere of affairs; and the water is selfe which beares the Vessel, gives it some retardment. The Duke of Bouillon made his peace, and put his trust in a man, who ne∣ver pardoned; for the more dead, the fewer enemies: but he repented himselfe of it, before much time was past. His Uncle the Prince of Orange, laboured for this reconciliation, and with much more ardour, for his deliverance, as we shall shortly shew. The Cardinal Infusto's death. The Infanto, being arrived at Brussels, gave now and then some likely∣hood of recovery; but God had otherwise disposed of him, into whose
hands he very piously rendred his Soul; and the people being in much con∣fusion were ready to knock the Spanish Physitians in the head, for having let him too much, and too often, blood. He was a most beautiful Prince of body, and yet more, of minde; the delight of the Low-Countries, which he left in extreame regret for his departure. He was suspected, of having intended to reader himselfe absolure Master of those parts, and to make an Allyance of marriage, either with France, or with the Prince of Orange; and yet this suspicion taking root in Spain, was the cause of shortning his dayes. God knows what it was; but the least jealousies of State are irremissible offences. Jupiter will not have the Gyants come up to his Throne. These distrusts, or rather, these chimera's, having no foundation, or ground in reason, dis∣appeared, and vanished, before they were borne. The Count of Soissons being killed (very likely by treachery) the Infanto dead, and the Duke of Boüillon reconciled;Cardinal Ri∣chelieu will o∣verthrow the House of Au∣stria. our great Cardinal was deli∣vered from a huge feare; and therefore he armed potently, to continue his ambitions Enterprises against the House of Austria; but all in vaine; for she will not fall (said a certain great person) but with ru of the Roman Ca∣tholick Church; or at least, it will not be, during his life. True it is, that he persecuted her with all extremity, and without intermission, and did her more hurt alone, then all her enemies together. He undermined her in her foundations, and endeavoured, both by his own writings, and those of his Hirelings, to perswade the World, that she was full of Hypocricy, and not truly Catholick. A lye which lasts four and twenty hours, makes great opera∣tion; and wounds are not cured, without scarrs. He made her be painted, with an immense ambition; the reasons whereof our Subject commands us to pick out, before we passe any further. CHAP. XII Whether the House of Austria aspire to the universal Monarchy; and whether the reasons of such as accuse her thereof, be sufficient, or no. Why France retains Lorraine. AMongst all the Nations, which combat the House of Austria, at this time, none does it with greater animosity then France: indirectly, by favouring her enemies, and succouring them with men, and money; and directly, by open war, which was declared in the year 1635. Nay she hath yet, other Arms, which are not a little dangerous, and which insensibly sur∣prize such; as have no other interest in their quarrels, then that of Religion, and Justice. For she, labours to perswade all Potentates that this House will not relinquish the designe she hath taken, to ascend to an Universal Monarchy; and to make the Catholicks belve, that her zeal which seems to burne so hotly, is but a painted fire. But, let us examine these two last points, which stick so much in the braines of the World, and cause so many evils, and mischiefs, as wherewith this last Age is so erably torne; for the onely finding of the truth whereof, we will answer those arguments of a certaine modrene writer. The arguments of such as say that the House of Auftria as∣pires to the Mo∣narchy. First I find not in Ferdinand of Gastile, any subject at all to believe, that he had a mind to found an universal Monarchy, because he discovered some certain Islands in America, For his life was too full of vexations, disquiet, and jealon∣sies, cast upon him by his Sonne-in-Law, and Don Gansalvo, to give him leave
to think of a designe so ful of chimera's as this. For we must secure what we have, from peril, before we seek more. Charls the fifth, is the principal object of his propositions, and over whom he labours to triumph. But I stay not upon words; I come to effects, which make us judge of unknown causes: The advantage which Fortune gave this said Charles, upon Francis his Competitour for the Empire, made him obtain the Renunciation of the Fiefs, or hereditary Titles, which the said Francis had, upon some Provinces in the Low-Countries; though the restitution of the Duchy of Burgandy, the patrimony of his Grand-Mother Mary of Valois, did not follow his promise. The many victories he got in Italy, Germany, and Barbary, crowned his head, and more glorifyed his memory, then amplifyed his States. He bought the Soveraignty of Ʋtrick, and the Dutchy of Guelders. That of Milan was carryed by Arms, and juridically disputed. Had he aspired to the universal Monarchy, he would not certainly have been diverted, by some small crosses of Fortune; but, on the other side, being some moneths elder then Henry the Great was, when he prepared himself to give his Enemies a furious shake; this great Monarch, (invincible to all but himself) stripped himself of ad, to choose a privat life. His Sonne Philip, found by the Warrs of the Low-Countries, that his life would be too short, to see the termination of them; and as for his meddling with those of France, the effects thereof have declared, that it was more through passion of Religion, then to acquire the possession of that King∣dom unless by losing the hope of getting the whole, we be voluntarily in∣duced to render the parts, we have gained. If the said House, being considered all together, had had this designe, she would have endeavoured to retain the conquests which she made in the North, which upon occasion, would have opened her the passage to other. Besides that, she hath always restored such States as she hath purchased by quarrels, both in Italy, and elsewhere; in such sort, as that I see not by what means, and in how many Ages, she would be able to reach to this pretended Monarchy. But, upon what Branch of this Family, shal this Monarchy be placed? Up∣on that of Germaty? The Emperour Charles, could not endure to see (accor∣ding to the report of that learned writer) the Imperial Crown, upon his bro∣thers head, because he would rather have had it, upon his Sonnes; and the Germans will not see it upon that of a Spaniard. How then, shall these instruments be tuned? I conclude, that she hath been moved to act by Interest only, to uphold her self, and not to hunt aster this chimericall Monarchy. The Emperours which have been since, have manifested no excess of ambition; and Philip the third made no stir at all. So that it must be either Frdinand the second, or Philip the Fourth. Let us examin the grounds which may give these jealousies, and authorize these opinions. The said Ferdinand the second, had War with the Bohemians, and the Prince Palatine, every one knows for what. He would have the three Episco∣pal Townes; had he not right to them? The Victories he got in Low-Saxo∣nie, moved him to restore, and re-established his Authority there; was he out of reason? Here-demanded, as Soveraign Judge, the Ecelesiasticall Lands, and Goods, according to the tenour of the contract at Passavia; was he ill∣grounded? The Lutherans themselves will not say so. Shall we therefore suf∣fer this House to swallow up all? Now it is, that we must have recourse to the interest; which every body ought to have in commendation, and not stray from the path of Justice.
As for Hypocrisiy, whereof he accuses them of this Family, by comparing their piety to the colours of the Rain-bow, which are but deceipts and illusi∣ons; it is acalumnie, which confutes it self, and a malice convinced by the testi∣monies of the Lutherans, who have frequented the Imperiall Court,A calumny con∣vinced. and have wished, that all the Courts of the Protestant Princes were regulated like that. Indeed, the words which he uses, to cure (as he sayes) the mindes of such as are praeoccupated by errour, are not strong enough, to make them passe for good, even in his own opinion. For, a may be cannot form a determinate truth, of future things. Yet it is not my intention, to approve all the actions of this House, and de∣fend her ends; and much lesse, to deliver the Bordering Princes, from the fear which they may have, of her greatnesse; by the refutation of those argu∣ments; but only freely, and plainly to lay open the justice of her Arms, and the strong necessity of her interests, to maintain her self, against so many ene∣mies. I combat no Soveraign Family, but reverence them all, without excep∣tion, and praeoccupation. I only demonstrate the practices, cheateries, and effects of ambition, together with those of self-advantage, which render whole Provinces desert, and breed general calamities. In the Treaty of peace at Manster, we shall discover the intentions of all the Princes, without amusing our selves any more, with the words of interes∣ted Clarks. But we must first consider, why France, which hath always resto∣red to the Dukes of Savoy such of their States,Why France wi! keep Lorrain. as she hath seazed upon by arms; doth now yet so obstinatly retaine Lorrain, as she also did, the three Bi∣shopricks? I answer, that she hath done the former, to avoide giving jealou∣sie to the Princes of Italy, whole good correspondence she holds necessary for her, so to maintain her interests there. But, she will not let Lorrain go, in regard of her conquests made in Germany, and because the Princes of that Country, being divided into Parties, are not sourgent for the restitution of the losses of their Neighbours, as those others are. France calls the Princes of the House of Austria, and all such as are tyed to her interests, her Enemies; and in regard that this irreconcitiable-hatred is not very ancient; we shall quickly finde out the source thereof. During the English Warrs in France, the Spaniards being then great friends, and Allyes with France, always succoured her; and there were some Lords of that Nation, who possested great Charges in the said Warrs. Yea in that me∣morable assembly of Arras, where, to the confusion of the English, the Peace was made between the King, and the Duke of Burgundy; a certain Spanish Knight, in a contention of honour, took the White Cross; without giving any other reason for it, then that it was a sign of Amity. But now,The causes of the hatreds be∣tween France and Spain. the said House being annexed to Spain, the first spark of division sprung up in Italy; the second, and the greatest, was about the Imperial n, and jealousie of State, which lasted til the death of Henry the second; a  as a wakened again under Hen∣ry the third, by the counsell of the Hughenots, and his brother the Duke of A∣lencon, sudddenly made Duke of Brabat. Philip the second of Spain, did the like for him, by favouring the Heads o the League, to the deminution of his Au∣thoritie, and the Hughenot Party. Henry the fourth took his revenge, advan∣ced the hatred, always contraried, opposed, and laboured to weaken this power, which gave him jealousy. And then it was, that not only the Hughenots, but the Catholicks also, began to hate that Nation: Not did the Spaniards remain their debtors therem: In such sort, as the hatred of the people is for∣med by that of State But this kings death stopped the currnet of those partia∣lities; & that double marriage seemed quite to stifle them; out in vain; for these two proud Nations (the most potent of Christendom) have many pretensions upon each other, and cannot endure any praeeminence at all; In so much, as that when the one makes any progresse, the other endeavours to stop it: be∣sides
sides, the same Ministers of State spurred on by ambition, and desire to raise their Families, have from time to time, kindled these suspitions, which have hatched these fatall wars, to the destruction of all Europe. The one of these Houses styles her selfe most Christian; and yet meddles not much with the businesse of Religion; for she ordinarily attracts the Re∣formates to her interests, who are enemies to the Pope, and by conse∣quence to the other House, which suffers not their Doctrine in her Do∣minions. The other is tearmed Catholick, and abandons not the interests of Re∣ligion, no more then she doth her own, unlesse it be by force; proceeding from the necessity of State-affaires, through some new conjuncture, as we shall see in the sequell of this work. Lewis the thirteenth shocked this House, with so much authority, and power, and procured her so many Enemies, that she had very much adoe to keep her self up: in such sort, as that great Cardinal, the Angel-Gardian of France, by his puissant Allyances, begat an opinion in the Soules of many Politicians, that he sought the Universal Monarchy. In effect, by this great Conquerours means, he hoped to overthrow the Emperour, and had alrea∣dy devoured the possession of the Low-Countries, by the help of the Hollan∣ders. But man purposes, and God disposes. But let us withdraw our selves out of this Labyrinth, since we have alrea∣dy gon round about it; and if we enter into it, we have not a sufficient thred of Politick knowledge, to get out, wherefore, let us untangle our selves (I say) from a mater, which is understood, only by them of the Cabinet, and go rowze up the sluggish Protestants neer that Banck, or Damm, by advertizing them of the approach of the Imperalists. CHAP. XIII. Piccolomini rayses the Siege of Wolfenbottel, with losse. Torstenton comes from Sweden, with a supply. Lamboy beaten, and taken. The progresse of the Swedes in Silesia. The Imperialists defeated before Leipsick, who after having punished the stacknesse of the Souldiers, recollect themselves, and raise the Siege of Friburgh. The hattail of Honcourt. The Exploits in Catalunia. Mons. le Grands death. The Cardinals death. An Epe of his life. The Siege of Wolfenbottel. WE lest all the Protestants forces, with the Duke of Brunswick, be∣fore the strong Town of Wolfenbottel, which they laboured to re∣duce to their obedience, by means of a certain Damm, or Banck, wherewith they stopped a brook, which watered the said Town; and the water was already grown so high, that the Inhabitants were fain to forsake the lower parts of their houses. Ficcolomini, knowing the importance of the place, and the affront he should do this great Army, if he constrained it to retyre from thence; advan∣ced with his Troops,And the losse of the Imperialists who constraine the besiegers, entred into the Town, and commanded some Regi∣ments, to attack them who garded the said Dike. The combat was furious; but the Seae, and advantage of the Protestants, put the Catholicks to a re∣treate, with the losse of about two thousand men.
This frighted him not at all; but he took another way, and surprised some Towns from whence they received their provisions,To retire. which made them re∣solve to abandon the Siege, and march oft; though first they peirced the Dike, and the Impetuosity of the water did as much hurt to Brunswick by slow∣ing, as the detention thereof had been little profitable before; for of this wa∣ter, it is, that they brew that good beer called Mum, which is so much esteemed through all Low-Saxony, and chiefly in Holland. The Armies divided themselves, as they had done the year before; the Swedes expected Generall Torstenson, who was come from Sweden with seven thousand men; to whom Coninxmarck, and Stalhans being joyned, they all advanced to wards Silesia, the Imperialists towards Bohemia, and the Wey∣marians, to the Rheyn, whether we will accompany them, to see the Bridge of Boats which they made to passe the River near Wesel. The Confederated States had not yet forgotten the Cavalcade, or Inroad of Papenheims, and the favour he found in the Diocese of Colein. It is most dangerous, to offend such as can revenge themselves, when they please. Lamboy was in the said Country, and his Regiments being distributed amongst the Villages, were defeated one after another,Lamboy bea∣ten and taken; the 7 of Ja∣nuary, 1642. for want of good Guard, upon Saint Authony's day, 1642. and in one of the Villages, which was dedicated to the said Saint, bore his name, and acknowledged him for Patron, or Defender, the Generall himself was taken prisoner, and carried together with many others, to the Bois de Vincennes, to visit Iohn de Werdt, and tell him, that it was time, to go and make head, against the Weymarians. This Army being uttery cut off, the victorious enemy made great booty in those parts. The Count of Guebriant, for having behaved himself so well, merited and received the Marshals staffe; took many small Towns, as Or∣ding, Nuits, Campen, and other, and was supplyed by some Regimens of Bri∣tany, which stayed not long in that Country. The Swedes, under their new Generall performed exploits of no lesse re∣nowne. For, in May they took Glogow by force; and in Iune, Sucht;And the Impe∣rialists in Sile∣sia. Olmz surpri∣sed. af∣ter having beaten the Imperial Troops, commanded by Duke Francis Albert, who died of his wounds; and finally, in Iuly, Olmitz, the Head Town of Moravia. These sensible losses were followed by one of more note. The Arch-Duke Leopold, together with Piccolomini marched into the Field to stop this progresse. Torstonson passed into Misnia, and besieged Leipsick: The Imperialists charged him, and Piccolomini, who comman∣ded the Right Wing, brake through the Left;The defent of the imperialists near Leipsick the 2. of No∣vember, 1642. but his men falling forth∣with to plunder, the said Swedes rallyed, and attacked their enemies so sharp∣ly, that they slighted the Arch-Dukes command, refused to fight, and through cowardize mixed with treachery, began all to run. So that the Swedes had a good bargain of it; for there were found above six thousand men, who never shot Pistoll, nor Musket. The Arch-Duke retyred with ex∣treme displeasure into Bohemia, and Piccolomini was full of confusion, and spight, to see so much perfidy, and the losse of so fair a Game. After this Battail, which was fought the second of November, 1642. the Swedes shewed themselves before Leipsick, which forthwith submitted to them; and in Ianuary following, before Fribergh, which sustained the siege for two months, to the great amazement of all Saxony, and Piccolomini, after having chastised some. Regiments in Bohemia, and redressed his Army, succoured it, and so wiped off the affront, which the base dastardliness of his souldiers had made him receive. Which done, he took his leave of the Em∣perour, and the Electour of Saxony,Fribergh suc∣coured. who feasted him, and did him great ho∣nours, for this advantageous exploit. But he, being loath to hazard his reputation amongst men of Arms, so forgetfull of their duty, came back to Brussels, and put himselfe into the King of Spaines service. The Swedes
returned to Torgow, and the Imperialists to General Gallasso. The Weymarians domineering at their pleasure upon the Rheyn, Hats∣feldt was commanded to face them; who sound himself too weak; but soon after, there happened another change. For Don Francisco de Melo, now Captain General for the King of Spain, having received some millions of mo∣ney, put the souldiery in state of action, and marched from Brussels, the last week of Lent, 1642. forthwith took Lent, and the first day after the Holy∣days, incamped himself before La Bassee, which within seventeen days af∣ter, opened him the Gates, and the Garrison of above three thousand men, marched out.The French beaten by Melo near Harcourt, and he came and surprised the Wymari∣ans. The Count of Harcourt indeavoured to succour it, but found it too perilous an enterprise: And so Melo went to attack the Marshall of of Guiche, whom he utterly defeated, and made it appear, that Fortune was divided in her self. This victory layd France open to him, and his Van-guard, by a fine stra∣tagem, was already entred, when the news came to the Prince of Orange, who was incamped at Littoye, that his Reer and the Battalia, or full Body of his Army, were neer Mastricht. This crafty Spaniard would not leave so potent forces behind him, and would also surprise the Weymarians, be∣fore he fell into France. A great Design, had it not been both prevised, and prevented by the aforesaid Prince, who made his Army march at one of the clock after mid-night, and pitched his Camp near the said Weymari∣ans in such sort, as that Melo coming some hours too late, durst not meddle with them, and avowed that he had to do with one of the cunningest Cap∣tains in the world. But whilest these things passed, Baron John de Werdt re∣turned out of France, and shewed that he had not forgotten his Trade by the discontinuance thereof; for, in less then two months, there were above two thousand horses sold at Colein, which he had taken from the enemy. Let us now pass into Catalunia, and see the condition of the affaires of that Country, commanded by Monsieur de la Motte Houdancour, who so often beat the Castilians, took so many Towns, and succoured so many more, that he deserved, and had the Marshalls staffe. The King and Cardinal went thither,The great pro∣gresse of the Frénch in Ca∣talunia. and the French took Salces, Perpinlan; and all the County of Roussil∣lion; which had been formerly engaged to the Crown of France, but was re∣stored by Charles the eighth. Monsieur le Grand had such an advantagious possession, of the Kings fa∣vour, at that time, that the great Cardinal was alarmed by it, and found him∣self ready to be cast out of the Saddell. For, he let the King know, how ne∣cessary a Peace would be for his kingdom, which was impoverished, and ex∣hausted, by so many Taxes, and Warres, and had already disposed him to li∣sten to an Accommodation, with the King of Spain. But he warped a Web, in∣to which he so involved himself, that he was not afterwards able to put it off. For they who recommended Peace, were held for malefactors, and worthy of death.Monsieur le Grand behea∣ded, and the Duke of Bouil∣lon saved by whom? Wherefore, he was sent to Lyons, with Monsieur de Thoii, where they were both beheaded: and the Duke of Bouillon had run the same For∣tune, had he not been saved by the high, and sharp intercession of the Prince of Orange, and the consideration of the Town of Sedan. For, the said Prince had newly preserved the Weymarian Army, and rendred France a most re∣markable service, whereby he could not merit less, then the safety of an in∣nocent mans life. The execution of the two young Lords aforesaid, augmented the hatred, which all the world bore this ambitious Cardinal, yea, and the King himself expressed some coldnesse to him;The great Car∣dinals death. which, together with so many other in∣conveniences, encreased his sickness, and the fourth of December, 1642, sent him to the other world, since he had troubled this enough already. Never did any man ascend to such an immense greatness, and maintain
himself so well in it. His life was very like that of Seianus, but their deaths were different; this being naturall, and that violent. Don Alvarez de Luna rose very high, but his fall was so heavy, that it brake his neck. Cardinal Wolsey disposed absolutely enough of his Master, but his credit never passed the Sea, but by sits; and yet was he degraded before his death, and in houtly expectation of the Hangman. He was born at Paris, of a noble extraction, was well learned,A brief relati∣on of his life. and took the Orders of Priesthood at Rome. It is said, that Pope Paul the fifth, looking him once in the face, told him, That he would one day be the greatest cheat upon earth. The Queen-Mother finding him a man of great wit, procured him the Bishoprick of Luzon, where he wrote a Book of controversie, upon which she recommended him to the King her Son, and afterwards to the Pope, who sent him the Cardinals Cap; and the taking of Rochel, gave him so great an influence upon his Masters Mind, that he left him almost the totall direction of his Kingdom. He got himself shut of the Queen, and all who favoured her, cut off the Marshall of Marillacs head, and destroyed all such as gave him any jealousie. He never pardoned such as he had offended. He was a most accomplished Politician, beloved by the most zealous Protestants, and ha∣ted by the most zealous Catholicks. He made it his task to ruine the House of Lorrain, by beginning with that of Guise; as also that of Austria, by labouring to conquer the Low-Countries, so that he could not faile to be beloved, by all such as hated the Church of Rome. He is accused of having embroyled England, to the end that for interest of State, it might not hinder his seazing upon Flanders. For an English Embassadour imputes to him the destruction of his King, by most un∣just, and maligne practices; and of setting all Europe by the eares in generall. But he cannot be deprived of the praise, of having done the Kingdom of France superlative services, though it were with the huge oppression of the poor people. A Polish Waywodt of great age, and ex∣perience, desired to outlive the said Cardinall, to see what end he would have. As he had done many people a great deale of hurt, so was he alwayes in perpetuall apprehension, and fear, nor was there eyer Tyrant, who lived in greater disquiet then he. A great Volume might be made, of the observations of his life, which being wholly miserable, was sustained but by a blast of ambition. In fine, whilest he was thinking to triumph over Europe, his infirmities and troubles redoubled upon him, till they made his soule go out of his wretched Body; His death was lamented by few, and such as had either fea∣red him, or fled from his persecution, returned into France, not to put on mourning, but to give God thanks; and repossesse themselves of their Charges, and Estates.
CHAP. XIV The death of Lewis the Just. The 'Battel of Rocroy. The Battel of Dudling. The Swedes enter into Holstein. THe same Play was still acted, under different names. For, they who had so much longed for great Gustaves death, for the establish∣ment of the Emperours Affaires; were all amazed to see his Generalls ac∣companied by the same prosperity, as if they had been destinated to con∣summate the begun-work. Upon the other side, many Princes, and Townes, openly favoured them; in such such sort, as the Emperours af∣faires weakened so fast to mens sight, that they began to despaire of his re∣dresse. And so, it was held for certain, that that Great Cardinals death, would cause a huge alteration in France, and give the Spaniards the prize, but it happened quite otherwise; for the French defeated all their forces be∣fore Rocroy. Let us therefore confesse, that it is the Almighty, who go∣vernes all, changes, destroyes, subverts, and augments States, both when, and how he pleases; and that for the bringing of this Great All to an end, he permits the Destruction to be Universall, and the Confusion Generall. Lewis the Just, being arrived at his good City of Paris, quite altered with the toyle and trouble of his long journey, and extremely sad, and me∣lancholy, began by little and little, to lose his health; and finding himselfe decaying, employed the small strength he had left, upon the care of his foul, and the quiet of his Kingdom.The death of Lewis the Just. He declared the Queen, Regent, or Gover∣nesse of his Sonne the King; recommended Cardinal Mazn to her, and then rendred up his spirit to God. This Prince alwayes loved Justice, and was carried to warre, more by the ambition of his Minister, then any motive of his own; and consequently, would have been glad to see a Peace made (which he much instanced) be∣fore his decease. He destroyed the Huguenot Party, which gave jealousie, and obscured his Majesty, after which, he assisted the Duke of Nevers, in his succession to the Dutchy of Mantua; seazed upon Lorrain, made an Ally-ance with the King of Sweden, and all the Protestants, against the Emperour; and waged warre, both against him, and the King of Spain, under the pretexts which we have already recounted. The Btail of Rocroy glori∣ous to the French. Don Francisco de Melo went to besiege Rocroy, 1643. with a most gallant Army; but having declared the Duke of Alburquerque a young Portuguese Lord, Generall of the Horse, he so much offended the Officers thereof, that when the French came, they would not do their duty, but forthwith began to run; so that all the Foot was defeated by the Duke of Angnien, now Prince of Conde. This victory was very great; (in which Generall Gassion gave a high character of himself) and was the cause of the taking of Theonille. And Melo was so much discredited, that the King was constrained to call him away, and give the government to the Marquis of Castel-rodrigo, who kept it till the Arch-Duke Leopold arrived. The successe of the Armies was various, and if one Party lost a Battail, the Allies got another; so that there could not faile to come a totall mine. The Weyrians, reinforced by the French Troops, conducted by four Marshalls, threatened to go take up their winter quarters in Bavaria. The Duke of Lorrain, who had taken the direction of the Forces of the Catholick League; intended to stop their course, crosse their design, and destroy them
CARDINAL MAZARINE: Rgoywood focit P Stent excudit
by a remarkable defeat. John de Werdt, accompanied by General Mercy, went with the Spanish Cavalrie, to spy them; and so they took a resolution to attack them the next day; which they did with so much felicity, that they rowted one quarter, after another, and took the four Marshals prisoners,The battail of Durling glori∣ous? to the Im∣perialists 1643. with more then four hundred Officers, and about six thousand Souldiers, without counting the pillage, and Baggage. And this victory saved Bavaria from that flood, for that time, and gave the French trouble, to raise another Army, un∣der the same name, though with a new General; for the Marshal of Guebri∣ana was killed the day before the fight. These were two of the most memorable Battails of our Age; the one whereof hapned in the moneth of May, and in the beginning of the raigne of Lewis the fourteenth, given-by-God, by the conduct of the young Duke of Angulen; and the other, towards the end of November, under that of the Duke of Lorrain; and they may be compared to those of Leipsick, and Nort∣linghen. After this glorious Victory, the French treated with him, but without a∣ny fruit at all. For, he had been once at Paris, to be jeered, and he would re∣turne thither no more, but with forces to take his revenge. Wherefore, he marched back to the Low-Countries, took Falkenstein, a strong place, in his way, and left the command of the brave Army to Francis, Baron of Mercy; who, after having taken Rotweil, went and besieged Ʋberling, a place of importance upon the Lack, seazest upon before by Stratagem, for want of good Gard: but it yeelded now upon composition, for want of Victuals, sow∣er moneths after. In the meau time, the Garrison of Brisack mutinied for want of pay; and whilest the disorder lasted, there was found a certain Marchant, who offer∣ed about fower hundred thousand Rixdollers; but General Erlach by his care, brake this bargain, and punished five or six of the Authours of the sedition. General Mercy having fayled to retake Hoheniwiel by treaty, left it block∣ed up by five Forts, and went to attack Friburgh, and Brisgaco; where we will leave him, till the valliant Duke of Anguien came, and disolodged him, and see in what tearms the Swedes are. We said, that Generall Torstonton, having been compelled to raise the Siege from before Friburgh, marched, and planted himself upon the Elbe. General Counixmarck slept not in the interim, but skipped up and down, to and fro, with so much speed, and activity, that he always surprized his Ene∣mies, and never returned without booty. Crackow was sent into Pomeranid, to make a diversion; but he had not the wit to faise the Siege of Domitz, not resist Connixmark, though enough, to runne away, though Poland Torsten∣ton, went into Moravia, where he beat Bucham, and came back into Mis∣nid. At the beginning of December, he entred Holstein with so much prompti∣tude, that he was seen passe before Hamburgh, when he was thought to be up∣on the Fronteer of Bohemia. The Swedes en∣ter into Holl∣stein, 1643. At that same time, came news, that Gustave Horns was entred into Sca∣nia, with an Army of twelve thousand men, whereat all the world was ama∣zed; and men began to beleeve, that the Imperialists would grow to respire, by this new War: but it proved quite contrary; for they made no protis of it at all; and the Swedes marched our, to earry the terrour to the very Gates of Vienna. Let us speak a little, of the pretexts of this expedition, since the Danes themselves were ignorant of the cause, which could not well be found; but in the Generall Maxime. This the French, and Weymariant were beaten; and the Swedes gone out of Germany, to ingago themselves in a frest quarrel; so that the Imperialists had fine sport, and did wonders.
CHAP. XV Of the Warre of Denmark, with all the circumstances thereof. NEver did Fortune more undertake the Swedish Interest, then in this War; and never was good King Christian in more danger of being stripped of his States, then in this perillous conjuncture. It is said, that that great Astrologer Ticho Brahe had foretold him, that he should be droven out of his Kingdome; that he should depart with a staffe in his hand, and that this immutable fate should defal him, in the moneth of Jannary, in the year 1644. I know not, whether this report be true; but sure I am, that the pre∣diction was false; though yet, there were once very great apparence, and pro∣bability, that it would come to pass. For, had the Swedes been able to snap the ships and Barks, which were in a certain haven of that Province, as their de∣signe was to do; they would easily have entred into the Isle of Fune, and crastily rendred themselves masters of the whole Kingdom, at unawares, and without striking stroake.The war of the Swedes, against the Dams. But the most premeditated Enterprizes, are sometimes hindred, and overthrown, by a meer matter of nothing: for the Soule of great designes, is silence; and he who knows not how to keep that, will never bring any thing to good effect. The Swedes fayled not of them∣selves; but God only, made them faile. The King was strucken with as much amazement at the first notice of this invasion, as it a thunderbolt had fallen upon his head; and writing to his Resident at the Haghe, he commanded him to tell the States General, that this irruption seemed so strange to him,And why. that he would father have believed, that the Sky would fall, then that he should see the Swedes enter into his do∣minions. But what could move the Swedes to begin a new War, having so great a one already in Germany; and knowing, that this latter endangered the losse of all their conquests, yea, of their very Kingdom it self? For, the reasons, which they alledged, of the stopping, and visiting some of their ships, are neither valid, nor sufficient; and therefore we will shew ano∣ther. The King of Dnmarke always wished to see an and of that destructive war; and consequently, ceased not to sollicite the Parties to assemble themselves, for the remedy of those mischiefs; yea and he offered himself for Arbitra∣tour of the controuersie. The Swedes consented thereto; and the Emperour, being much troubled, at this too long, and too bloody dance, very freely con∣descended, and accepted him for Judge. Munster was chosen for the dis∣pute, and the Embassadours were invited thither. The King sent his; and wrought so far with the Emperour, that he withdrew his Garrison from Wolfenbottel, and rendred it to the Duke of Lune burgh. This gave the Swedes jealousie, as imagining, that the King was more affected to the Emperour, then to them; and that he would infallibly make them let go their prize. In such sort, as that, in stead of sending their Embassadours to Munster, they sent their Armies into his territories; as also Commission into Holland, to hire ships, and raise Sea-men, whereof that little Province is the Nursery. Torstenton advanced into Holstein; and his Cavalrie being almost all dis∣mounted, by the continuall march he made, was quickly remounted in that good country. He surprised Kiel whilest the Marohants, and Gentry were assembled there; took away the money; passed on further, and seazed, with facility enough,The Swedes oc∣cupats Intland. upon Intland.
The King provided the small Isle of Fune; intrenched the approaches, and made all take arms, who were able to beare them; so that Torstenson was repulsed with losse, as often as he offered to passe. In the interim, the King applyed all his thoughts to the Sea; prepared a little Fleet, and went with it before Gotemburgh; and having given charge to make a greater, he distributed Patents for the raising of men; and dispatched his Embassa∣dours towards the Emperour, to implore his assistance, in a farre greater danger, then that of the year 1628. He complained of this invasion, to all Neighbours, Friends, and Allyes; and informed them, that they made war upon him in full peace, and without having denounced it before. The Swedes in the meane while, got ground in their Enemies Country; and Coninxmarck subjugated the Arch-Bishoprick of Bremen,The Arch-Bishoprick of Bre∣men. which belon∣ged to the King, when he was Prince: so that the good old King had but two Islands left; namely, Zeland, and Fune. They having obtained leave to hire Vessels in Holland, sent for a Fleet thence, under the orders of Admi∣ral Martin Ties: The King attacked him with so much resolution, that he forced him to retire into a Port. All the World wondered, at the report of this Kings Expeditions; who, being about sixty seven years old, was not startled at all,The courage & valour of King Christian. to see many brave Lords fall on every side of him, by Canon, and Musket shot, but breathing all blood, cheered up his Souldiers, and Mariners, to stand stoutly to it. Nor was there need of any other exhortations, then his example; and whoso∣ever could have lost his courage by seeing him act, would have deserved to loose his life. He left the Seas to command the Land Army, after having attacked the Swedish Fleet himselfe in person, with so much magnanimity, that after a long resistance, it was constrained to retreat with full saile, to the Haven of Kiel; where the passage was so stopped up by the Danish Navy that, in humane appearance, it was in danger, to fall into their hands. The war in Holstein was waged by Skermishes; and Torstenson had made himselfe master of the strong place, called Christianprys; so that there were no more then two more of importance, left for the King; to wit, Gluckstat, and Cremp, which much hurt the Swedes by surprizes. Gallasso comes to succour hun. In fine, Gallasso arrived at Oldesto, entered Hamburgh, and Lubeck, and began to treat with the King, about a League Offensive, and Defensive, a∣gainst the common enemy. Monsieur de la Tuillerie, the Embassadour of France, went into Denmark, under pretence of being a Mediatour; but in effect to quash the House of Austria's Negotiation. The Politicks displayed all the subtility they had,Who offered a League. to server their Masters in this conjuncture; however those of Vienna had as bad an issue here, as they had in Poland, when they counselled war, with a very fine shew of well doing, in the year, 1635. The Dunkerekers, being considerable at Sea, offered to maintain at their own charge, a Fleet of a hundred Ships, and Frigots; as well to defend the Sownd, as to offend, in all the Ports of Sweden; and that the King might onely keep the said Streight, with his own, and forty of their Ships against all such as should come from Holland. To which Leagve he much inclined, as finding himselfe strong enough to attack Gustave Horne; and the Imperialists able, with some forces, to stop Torstensons passage; who could neither assault any more places, nor hold those he had taken, if he were compelled to put him∣selfe into a posture of defence. The Embassadours of France and Holland, represented to him, the danger there was for him to involue himselfe in such an Allyance, not forgetting the old argument, that that formidable House, which was in her decline, and had alwayes aspired to the Universal Monarchy; sought no other oc∣casion to set her selfe up again, and make his Kingdom the seate of the war.
They promised him, to mediate an honourable, and advantagious peace for him;Which the other Embassadors hinder. threatened him, if he engaged himselfe so deeply; and said aloud; that they should finde themselves obliged to follow their own interests, and succour their Allyes; yea, and they skared the States of the Kingdom, by using the same language to them; and weakened in fine, the Imperial Party, which had bad luck, both in Camp, and Court. During these Transactions, the Swedish Fleet escaped without any da∣mage, and got into the maine. The King beheaded his Admiral Galde, for not having well kept the passage, and marched into Scania, with a brave Army of sixteen thousand men, almost all Germans, intending to give Horue Battel. But La Tuillerie seeing the Party unequal, run betwixt the two Armies, and with his Rhetorick, stopped the Onset which was ready to be give, promising the King mountaines of Gold; and so both Hosts retired; and the Imperial Forces suffered Torstenson to passe before them, and return into Germany, without stirring at all. But Gallasso follwed him, who, when he might have hindered him from marching out, or compelled him to fight upon disadvantage, in the Dutchy of Holstein; commitred a fault just like that of the Admiral of Denmark;Gallasso suspetiet. whereupon he was held by some, for a traitour, and as if he had been corrupted by the Swedes; and such as de∣fended him, made use of a common argument, to wit, that he had no Order to hazard his Army. But the most probable judgement is, that he was com∣manded, not to advance, unlesse the League were first concluded, upon the the same terms that it was between the French, and the Swedes which it was conceived that the Danes could not refuse, in regard that the Emperour came to extinguish the fire amongst them, whilest he left it burning at home; and for that, being leagued together, they might restore things to the same stare wherein they were, before the warre; especially, since the interest of that kingdom apart, seemed to require it, thereby to dessen, and abase the Swedish potencie. King Christian deceived. These reasons were strong, and inclined the King to the match, but he was not absolute; and so the Dunkerkers came not: the Imperialists returned, and left the business to be mannaged by the Danes themselves, who were sufficiently penitent, when they heard, that their Fleet was beaten by the Swedes; to wit, six as fair, and stately ships, as could be made, taken, and two fired. And then the Treaty of peace went slowly, and feebly on and La Tuillerie was not so hot as before: For much of that which was gran∣ted before, was now taken off, and the King, being of a different sense, from the States, reproached them, with the disorder of the kingdom, and told them, that they were the cause of the ill successe of affaires. The Swedes promised themselves no lesse, then the Conquest, of the whole kingdom, since the principal strength thereof (which consisted in the ships) was very much maimed. But the Kings vertue overpowring all his misfor∣tunes, he reassembled his whole Fleet before Copenbaghen, to preserve the Isle of Zeland; made the Peasants work upon the approaches; and placed a good Guard, to hinder ther the Descent or Disembarkment of the Swedes there, which they were every minut projecting. The Hollanders, who have as much care of their interest, as any Prince, or Common-wealth in Christendome, and who could not suffer the Swedes to be so puissant, without betraying them; and being morcover satisfied, for some affronts, which they pretended to have been done them, as well in the Sound,The Fleet of Holland before Copenhaghen. as elsewhere; and moved to compassion (if there be any in matter of State) by the troubles which this old Prince endured; sent a Fleet, under the conduct of Admiral Witteson, who anchored before Copenhaghen, and landed the Embassadours of the said Common-wealth. The King, concei∣ving this said Fleet to be come to assist his enemies, was ready to defend
self; but the Embassadours moved him to a Peace, and resumed the heat, which La Tuillerie had left. But the Swedes, hoping to grow Masters of the whole kingdom, and thereby continue the War in Germany the better, would not hearken to it; till seeing the said Embassadours so much in ear∣nest, and interest; they suffered themselves willingly to be induced to it. The peace mad In fine, the Peace was concluded to the advantage of the Danes, who re∣nounced some Islands; gave up some good Holds; and King Christian, being restored to rest and quiet, died like a very good Christian, some time after, having reigned above fifty yeares. He manifested by his death, that the Prophecie was false, and that Astrologers, are men, who very often abuse themselves, by abusing others. There was nothing remarkable in this war by land, for the Danes, but the generous resistance of the Garrison of Rensburgh, which constrained the Swedes to quit that long Siege; and the Enterprise of Bromorfund, which issued happily for them. CHAP. XVI. Galasso retires out of Holstein. Is ruined by Torstenson neare Magdeburgh. The Battell of Lankewits. The exploits of the French in Alsatia, under the conduct of the Duke of Anguien. The taking of Philipsburgh. POsterity will not be able to comprehend, how the Swedes could make warre, in so many parts of the world, and from whence they got so ma∣ny men; because though the Kingdom of Sweden be very great, yet it is very desert, and dispeopled; in such sort, as that in all these warres, there never came sixty thousand men, from thence, by the confession of one of the Gran∣dies of that nation it self? I answer, that two Reasons furnished them with so many, and so strong Armies. The former, that almost all the Prote∣stants leagued themselves with them, like the Ivie to the tree; and most of them believed, that in the ruine of the Swedes, was included that of all the Lutherans. And the latter, because Fortune being favourable to them, favour turned also towards them; principally, in regard of plunder. It is most certain, that in Horus Army, there were many women, in the habit of men; who, like so many Amazons, performed the actions of brave souldiers; so much was the courage of this generous Nation inflamed by prosperity. But let us go seek the Armies again. Galasso ruined near Magde∣burgh. Galasso pitched his Camp near Magdeburgh, and Torstenson, a little above him; who so much ruined him by famin rather then by skirmishes, that he returned with very few men into Bohemia, and his Charge (whereof he had very ill acquitted himself) was taken from him. Coninxmarck, one of the most prosperous, and dexterous Captains of this Age,Coninxmarck in the country of Bremen. and another Papen∣heim in the Swedish Party; after having defcated General Enkefurt, returned into the Bishoprick of Bremer, took Staden, Boxtehawdt, and all the Country, whilest Torstenson marched into Bohemia. Who could have believed, but that after so great successe as accompanied the Bavarians, and the departure of Torstenson, with the chief forces; the Im∣perialists would have every where redressed affaires? We must confesse what we cannot deny, which is, that God clearly shewes his power, by the
disposal of several Governments. For it was in vain, that they blocked up Ohnitz in Moravia, took Wolow in Silesia, and made Ragosky some resistance. However they put their Army on foot, under the Orders of the Generals Goetz, Hatzfeldt, and other brave Officers, to whom Iohn de Werdt, joyned with sour thousand men.The Battel of Lankow. Inbtief, a Batrail was given, which was a long time ambiguous, victory inclining sometimes to one side, and sometimes to ano∣ther! General Goetz was slain in the beginning; and Iohn de Werdt made so close an impression, that he forced the Swades, to retyre in confusion. The Imperialists, thinking the Day was theirs, cast themselves, according to their custom, upon the Baggage, where Generall Torstensons wife was, who letting them alone awhile, fell upon them at length with his reserve and put them all to flight. He surprized them loaden with booty, charged them off their horses, easily routed them, and went fighting with them above four Leagues long.Unhappy for the Imperialists the 6. of March, 1645. This was a most sensible defeat to the Imperial Party, for it lest Bohe∣mia as a prey; and opened the passage into Morayin, and the Empetours He∣reditary lands, as far as the Danub. There were about three thousand kil∣led upon the place, four thousand prisoners, together with the Generals Hatsfeldt, Mercy, Broy, Zaradeske, and six or seven Colonels. This Battail fell our, upon the six of March 1645. near Iankow; which caused the Em∣perour to retyre to Prague, and expose his kingdom to the Conquerours; made the siege be raised from before Olmitz, and brought the enemy, even to the Gates of Vienna; in such sort, as there was nothing but the River be∣twixt them. A strange thing, and a prodigious felicity. Fortune constantly continued victories to divers. Generals; and every one thought, that the Emperour was lost, if the Swedes chanced to pass the Danub. This Nation, which was little known in the fourteenth age, was now become so puissant, that she thought, by the help of her Allyes to stumble that formidable house which is composed of so many other. The Roman Emperour was almost destroyed by the Goths, Visigoths, and Vandals, who came from the North; and those Writers wrong the Swedes, who say, that they came not out of their Country, it being too sterill to feed so many people. However, it is not my design to refute that opinion, which refutes it self; but I remain within the limits of that war, and in great amazement, to see the Swedes, at one, and the same time, at the Gates of Vi∣enna, Copenhaghen, and Bremen, every where tredding down their Enemies. Baron Iohn de Werdt, who was wronfully blamed for not well mannaging his advantage through over much rashness; met with some Weymarian Re∣giments, the fifteenth of May, and sacrificed almost fifteen hundred of them, to the soules of such as were slain in the Battel of Iankow, from which he got off with as much temerity, as felicity; but his Party was more affli∣cted, by the losse of two hundred men, then his enemies were by that of six hundred. I should never have done, if I should particularize upon so many takings of Towns; so many furprizes, and encounters; so many Provinces grown desert, and so much poverty, by continuall invasions: but it suffi∣ces me to note the Fields, and Battails. And to the end that we may not go a stray, in the constant victories of the Swedes; we will return to the French Weymarians. The defeat of Durling seemed to have annihilated all that Body, and bu∣ried the memory of that illustrious Prince Bernard of Weymar. His Troops were ill enough handled, after his death, by the Bavarians, towards the Rheyn; but they had their revenge upon the bank of the same River, against Lamboy. This last blood-letting, made them become French, and had no∣thing left of Germans, but the meer name. A politick prank to preserve the amity of the Nation. The Duke of Anguien, a most Martiall
Prince, went to succour the Marshall of Iurenne in Atsatia. The Siege of Friburg. The Baron of Marey besieged Friburgh, 1644. and after the taking there∣of, seemed to threaten Brisack. The French Weymarians passed the Rheyn, and endeavoured to draw the Bavarians to a Combat; but they contented themselves with repulsing their ardour, by a moderate defence. The French lost an infinity of men, at the attack of some certain Forts, and constrained their enemies rather to abandon their advantage, with the losse of foure pieces of Canon, then to ingage in a generall Decision, against the expresse Commandement of their Master, who would not expose his States, to the temerity of a Nation, which wanted neither people, nor intelligence, nor pra∣ctice. This said attack deserved to be published, in regard that the Generals themselves affirmed, that they had never been at a Feast of this kind, where there was greater effusion of blood, with more obstinacy, without defining the difference: And indeed the onsert was made, by the boldest Nation of the world, and which more despises danger, then all other. The furious at∣tacks near Fribgh. The magnanimous Duke of Anguien, being joyned with the Marshall of Turenne, resolved to storm a Fort; but he was fain to retyre with loss. The day following, the Assault was begun again upon the other, with so much fury, that the report thereof cannot be heard without trembling. Yea, the sky it self, being quite absconded with clouds, at such a slaughter, shed so many tears in the afternoon, that it dulled the ardour of the Babes of Mars, and made them retyre into their Quarters, leaving the ground quite covered with dead corps. The last attack was so horrible, and the blood-shed so great, that one would have said, that they had a design to kill all, and perish like Barbarians, not like Christians. A massacre worthy of this present Age. A detestable slaughter, to winne one Fort, and a morcell of ground. The French, who were much superiour to the Bavarians, in Cavalry, ha∣ving refreshed their Infantry, and not being able to draw them into the plain Field, departed from thence, leaving the ground strewed with dead bo∣dies. Never was death seen so much braved by two contrary Patties, with more courage and resolution, and lesse fear, then in these reiterated Encoun∣ters. It was not for Religion, but for Rule. Oh great God, thou comesb with a soft pace, but how hard, and heavy are thy blowes, when thou strikest? The conflict of some Lorrain Regiments near the Rheyn, with Collonel Teste de Corbean (in English Crowes-head) by whom they were surprized, and at first worsted, till they were seconded by one of the Counts of Nasseaw, was glorious to them, but with lesse slaughter. For the victorious Hassians were constrained to fly, and acknowledge, that they who go about to catch, are very often the first caught. Philipsburgh taken by the Duke of An∣guien. The Bavarians marched into the Dutchy of Wirtembergh, and the French being reinforced towards the Rheyn, where they seized by incredible successe, upon Philipsburgh, for want, either of sufficient Garrison, or sufficient resoluti∣on; and afterwards, upon Spiers, and Mentz; made the Flower de luce spring again upon the Rheyn, and carried the terrour of the French Name, into the very heart of Germany. In fine, they returned towards Bavaria, and met the Electours Army, near Nortlinghen; where the brave Baron of Mercy,The second Bat∣tel of Nort∣linghen. (who was born at Longui, and by his valour, and addresse, was ascended to this high degree) cooled their courage a little, and put them to a gentile retreat, but he being slain in the shock, and they seconded by Giese a Hassian Gene∣ral, they defeated some Regiments; and the Bavarians having been all the night in Battail, marched away the next morning, by the Electours Order, with sound of Drummes and Trumpets) sixty three Colours being car∣ried away the day before) and left their enemies nothing, but the pride of seeing them depart, without resuming the Dance; for this retreat of theirs, gave the praise of the victory to them who stayed: and the Duke of
Auguien after having been in danger to be taken in this Combat, re∣turned into France. The Duke of Saxony, being troubled, and tired by so many disasters, de∣manded Newtrality of the Swedes,The Duke of Saxony takes Newtrality. and obtained it by the Emperours con∣sent; who alone, together with the Duke of Bavaria, entertained the Min∣strills of the Revel; but his Companion danced better then he. For, had he abandoned the Party, at the perswasion of the French, he would not have danced much longer; and had he been willing to hazard any more, neither the Swedes, nor the French had danced so well; but he chose rather to dance sure, for feare of tripping. Let us now withdraw our selves from the Labyrinth of Germany, and see in what condition the affairs of Flanders are; for, as for those of the Empe∣rour, they are sufficiently afflicted, and have almost no other support, then that of the justice of their Cause; besides that so many fine actions as are performed in those parts, away from hence. CHAP. XVII The deplorable state of the Low-Countries, under obedience The taking of a great number of strong Towns in Flanders. AFter so remarkable a Victory as that of Rocroy (which hapned after the death of Lewis the thirteenth) and so many losses in Germany, which had so peeled the Eagle, that there was no more apparence, or pos∣sibility left of herflying farre; after the defection of Portugal, and so many Battels lost in Catalonia; it was conceived, that the King of Spain would have neither power, nor will, to succour the Obedient Provinces; as ha∣ving work enough at home; and that the first Field following, the French, and Hollanders would carry all; yea, that the people, being abandoned, would revolt, and to hinder a total ruine, joyne themselves with the Con∣quering Party. In effect, the Ecclesiasticks, and the Nobility cast their eyes already upon France, in regard of the Religion: and the people turned their heads to wards Holland, for love of the Traffick; but the onely depri∣vation of the exercise of their Faith, made them, as it were weeping, follow the Spaniards. Peace was necessary for them, and for that, they held up their hands; but the Treaties walked too slowly on. Nothing but the ri∣gour of the Placarts of these Provinces, and the preaching of their Priests, made them resolve to endure all the extremities of war, rather then submit themselves to the Reformates. For, if we must needs change our Master (said they) let us range our selves under the French, so to have, and retaine our Religion; rather then under the Hereticks, who destroy Souls. The Plenipotentiary Embassadours of France passed by the Haghe; renew∣ed the Offensive Allyance for three years more;The League re∣newed for three yeares. spake in the behalfe of the Catholicks of Holland, but obtained nothing, it being too ticklish a matter. For, where the Reformates are Masters, they give no liberty to them of that Profession, and will not have them amongst them; not being able to suffer Idolatry; and the Papistical Ceremonies shook their over-tender Consei∣ences. Let us leave them going to Munster, to begin a work, which they will not perfect; and let us go see the bloody fruits of this Field. The Duke of Orleans, being declared Lieutennant-General of all the King
his Brothers Armies, sent La Meillieraye, Gassion, and Rantzow towards Flan∣ders; who made a shew of going to Dunkerke, but sate down before the strong Town of Graveling; and seized upon all the Forts about it; and Admiral Tromp came and ranged himselfe before the Haven,The French take many pla∣ces in Flanders, 1645. to shut up the passage. This Town was taken in lesse then two moneths, and thereby made the Spaniards avow, that there is nothing impregnable, when mens lives are not spared. For, the French lost above six thousand before it; and all the indu∣stry of the Spaniards could not save this Bulwark of their State. Don Francisco de Melo, who hindred the Prince from passing the River into Flanders, haste∣ned with all the best of his Forces, gave the Hollanders meanes come over,The Sass of Gaunt taken, 1945. and take the Sass of Gaunt, with many other Forts; and the losse of the said Sass, and Graveling, the two maine defences of the Country, laid it open to an entire Conquest. The Duke of Orleans followed his Carriere, and all stooped to him: he took Bourburgh, the Fort of Linck, Lens, Bethune, St. Venant, Lillers, Armen∣tiers, and Mening; and put all the rest into Contribution: besides that Mar∣dyke was also surrendred after a Siege, and so this Field of 1645. ended. The Victories of the French were little lesse splended in Italy, by the taking of Piombino, and Portolongòno, 1646 to wipe away the affront of Orbitello, where they were beaten, and constrained to discamp; and many other pla∣ces were also taken, besides the defeate of the Spaniards, at the passage of Mora. Count Har∣courts Victory in Catalunia, 1645. The Count of Harcourt, who was not wont to be idle, when any thing was to be done, got a glorious reputation, by winning a Battel, and taking some Towns in Catalunia 1645. Notwithstanding that Flanders was almost quite conquered, the Subjects remained firme in their fidelity, amongst so many troubles;Mardyke sur∣prized by the Spaniards. and the sur∣prizing of the Fort of Mardyke in the Winter, made them take fresh courage. This Place cost but ten, or twelve mens lives, to retake it, and had cost above five thousand to teare it out of the Spaniards clutches. Let us see the begin-of this Field of 1646. The Duke of Orleans being entred into Flanders with a tertible Army, re∣solved to compel the Enemy to a General and final Decision, or to take some Towns of importance in the heart of the Country, which might give the State a mortal blow. And though the Spaniards, were too wise to hazard the former, yet could they not hinder the latter,Courtrack ta∣ken. which was the taking of Courtrack, in the middle of Flanders, seven leagues from Gaunt. But the enemy making a Defensive war onely, forced them for want of victualls, to draw back towards the Sea side; where they took Berghen St. Wynock, and besieged Mardyke, which they hoped to carry by many assaults, before the Holland Fleet arrived; but their temerity was so well chastised by the supply which entred every Tyde, into the said Fort, that Monsieur de la Trisllerie, who was newly come out of Denmarke, was constrained to complain to the States, of the delay of their Fleet. And they, who walked a slow pace, and observed the falling back of the French (with their bravado of saying that this Field would make them Masters of Flanders, and the next after, of all Holland) judged by the rash discourse of the Souldiers, of the intention of their Master, and shewed themselves very cold, in the pursuance of the de∣signe, to come to the concluded Stake sharing; for in this knot it is, that the best friends become foes; and this was the stumbling-block, as it shall shortly appeare. However at length, they sent Admiral Tromp, who was no sooner come, then they lowed their colours, to signifie that they would render themselves up; and so the Garrison of three thousand men, marched out,Mardyke reta∣ken by the French. and were all detained prisoners, contrary to the Agreement made, by a maxime little
usual; for they would not release them, because they would not draine the Source of them, and exhaust the Country of Souldiers. It is to be noted, that this said Fort, before which there perished the Flower of the French Nobility, and which merited not to be attacked, had it not been for the consideration of the Haven, yeelded, to testifie to the French, that the honour thereof was due to the Hollanders: And these small grudges ser∣ved but to sharpen their stomacks, hasten the taking of Dunker, and Fuer∣nes.The eleventh of October, 1646 Thus, almost all Flanders being conquered, they doubted no more of ex∣pelling the Spaniards, since there wanted onely one effort, or last blow for it, whereof France for her part, was resolved. Wherefore, the King sent to intreat the Prince of Orange, to lay siege be∣fore Antwerp, and promised him the succour of six thousand men, demanding onely four Churches for the Roman Catholicks in lieu thereof; to which the Prince consented, but the found some difficulty in the determination of the States: For they of Zeland protested against it; and they of Amster∣dam, would not have the said Town taken, for feare least the Commerce should return thither again. But there was yet another stronger, and more considerable reason; and jealousic had already taken too firme root, to be so easily plucked up. The Marshals Gassions, and Rantzaw, after having put good order at Courtrack, advanced with their Troops towards the Channel betwen Gaunt and Bridges, secured the Princes passage, and drove back Piccolomini, who durst not venture any thing against them. The Prince, after having passed, made a circuit, found plunder for his Souldiers, rendred the Duke of Orleans a visit; then crossed the River Skelde, and entred the Land of Wass. General Back, seeing this storme ready to fall upon him, after having stop∣ped the Hollanders below Gannt, retired himselfe, and pitched his Camp a league beyond Antwerp; for the safety whereof (all being in confusion) he left the fruitful Land of Wass to the Enemy, as also the Town of Hulst, which the Prince forced to yeeld,Hulst besieged, and taken. after a moneths Siege. Fortune, which had alwayes accompained him, made it appeare, that he was yet her Dar∣ling in this occasion; for, though it were in the moneth of October, it was faire and dry weather; and had it been rainy, according to the Season, he had run hazard of loosing the benefit of this Field, and of blemishing in some sort, the splendour of so many gallant exploits, as had been happily ac∣complished by him. CHAP. XVIII The War of England. The Tragical death of the King. FErdinand the third at present Emperour, had good reason to say these words which are reported to have been once uttered by him, by way of deploring the calamity of this Age. The Princes of the Empire (said he) will be rved; and the evils, and disasters which we suffer, will rebound upon the heads of them, who make us suffer them. He is now in repose, and sees all the calamities of Germany, transported into England, and other places. But let us first begin with England, without seeking the speculative Causes or ca∣sting them at all, upon the sins of men. To the end that we may speak with the more ground, of what hath pas∣sed in this Kingdom, we will derive the Source thereof from William the Con∣querours time.
CHARLES PAR LA GRACE DE DIET-ROY D'ANGE ETERRE sould by P. Stent
The curses of Fathers and Mothers upon their Children, are of most dangerous consequence. Behold here a proofe thereof, by which this said Kingdom hath bn afflicted, since many Ages past, and by the late Tra∣gical Act, which turned it into a Common-wealth. Robert, Son to the abovesaid William, being gone to conquer the Holy Land, gave his brother Henry (the first of that name) occasion by his ab∣sence to seize upon his Crown; who having a desire to marry the Princess Mawde, Sister to King Edgare of Scotland, (who had been long before an inclosed Nun in a Monastery) caused her often to be asked with great in∣stancy; but the devour Princesse remained constant to her Vow; but, find∣ing that she would not voluntarily yeeld, her brother Edgare,King Henry of England mar∣ries Mwde Princesse of Scotland. fearing Hen∣ry's fury, was constrained to make her condescend; so that she perceiving it to be a businesse of force, made a prayer to God, that all the issue, and po∣sterity which should spring from them, might live in perpetuall disquiets and quarrels. This malediction of hers hit right, and extended it self, not onely to the third, and fourth generation, but even to our Times also; in such sort, as that there have been few Kings ever since, who to raigne in security, have not been either necessitated, or induced, to kill their Brothers, or near Kinsmen, and who have not also experimented Civill Seditions, whereby the Brothers, Uncles, Children, or Brothers in Law, have seized upon the Crown. In fine, the Division under Edwards Children, between the Houses of Lan∣caster, and Yorke, existed, under the Colours of the Red,The quarrels between the Houses of Lan∣caster, and York. and the White Rose; which quarrell, after having caused many Battels, and the death of above eighty Princes, was composed by the marriage of Henry the seventh, with Elizabeth of the House of Yorke; and so the Roses were re-united, to bu∣ry the two Factions, and terminate the Difference; however the Kingdom were not thereby cured of Mawdes Curse; for in the year 1587. Queen Elizabeth, who then raigned, put to death Mary Stewart her Kinswoman, after detaining her prisoner almost twenty yeares. Thus farre reaches Ste∣phen Basker a Writer of very much esteem: but I must passe further, and call a milde King upon a Scaffold. After Queen Elizabeths decease, it looked as if the course of misfortune were stayed by the raigne of King Iames, and the Union of three Crownes; but this great Calme continuing yet about fifteen yeares after his death, tur∣ned into the blackest, and most furious Tempest that ever was; and those waters had not been stopped, but to overflow this Field with so much the more violence, and desolation. Iames Stewart King of Scotland was murthered by a detestable Trea∣son;The misfortunes upon the House of Stewart. and the Queen his Wife was; beheaded in England, where shee thought to sinde her Sanctuary, from the Faction of her subjects. Her Sonne (afterwards King of England) was likely to be stifled in her wombe: Her Grand-Childe ended his dayes, as she did hers, by the hand of an Executioner, and his distressed Children retyred into France, to their Mother. A strange Catastrophe, and a malediction, more Tra∣gicall in the end, then in the beginning! But let us begin this Tragedy, by this first Act. The English, under a pacificall King, lived in such superlative delight, and riot, produced by an uninterrupted course of many yeares Peace, that they grew almost to forget God: (For it is but in adversity onely, that we are apt to remember him) and such as were not content to live in such delicious idlenesse, betook themselves to the warre, either in Germany, or the Low-Countries.
King Chales will have a Conformity of the Chu ches of Scotland; with that of England. King Charles made Proclamation, for a Conformity, as well in Cere∣mony, as otherwife, of the Churches in Scotland, with these of England. The Puritans opposed i, a tumult was raised against the Bishops, and principall parsons of quality, and a new Allyance, or Covenant amongst the Puritans. The King warned them to renounce it; ut they on the other side, persisted; published scandalous Writings, made a League, abrogated the Episcopall Authority, fortified some places, and constrained him to leave his rest, and take arms. The Scots arms. The Scots having gotten possession of the Castle of Edinburgh, en∣tred in, to England; took Newcstle, and Durham. The King called a Parhament, which (being for the most part, composed of Puritans) he found them inclined to favour the Scots. Whereupon he marched with an Army towards the Botders, where he slighted the advice of one of the chief of his Kingdom, who told him, that if he would be a King, and were not weary of raigning, he must hazard a Battell: But he, preferring a pernicious peace, before a necessary warre, made an accommodation, and at the same time, called a Parliament; which forth with assembled; and the Scots, after having finished a fine Master-piece of businesse, whereof they felt excessive inconve∣niences after wards, returned home. The Deputy of Ireland priso∣ner, his death. The King gave this Parliament all full, and absolure power (provided that in any wife it touched not his Preroative, nor such as were near it, (an individuall point) by verue of a Law made in Henry the seventh's time. But the first thing they did, was to imprison the Lord Deputy of Ire∣land, who could not be saved by the Kings requests, nor his own de∣fence; but that he must needs be sacrificed to the hatred of the ignorant people; who expressed their brutality, by demanding his death, and their folly, by being moved to compassion, at his firm, and immutable constance to the last. The Prince of Orange in England. The Prince of Orange having demanded the eldest Princesse for his Son, and obtained her, he sent him thither to espouse her, where he heard the said Deputies arguments, and saw him brought upon the Scaffold; and af∣ter his departure, the Queen conducted her Daughter to the Haghe, where she was received with very great honours, but found the States more inclined to Neutrality, then to meddle with that intestine warre: For the King finding his Authority sensibly checked, was already retyred to York, where he set up his Standard; sent for the Knights of the Garter; and ha∣ving neither Ships, nor money, sought some, support, in the affections of his subjects: but too late; for the forces, whereof he had dif-invested himselfe, were in the Parliaments hands: however, he was succoured by the grea∣test part of the Nobility,The Malignants, and Round-heads, who? and Gentry, upon whom was imposed the name of Malignants, as that of Round-heads, was upon the Parliament souldiers. The Queen having received some money upon her Jewels, and drawne a good summe from the Prince of Orange, repasted into Eng∣land;War between the King, and Parliament. but was cast back by a most horrible tompest, upon the Coast of Hol∣land; though yet some weeks after, she arrived in safety, with all the Munitions which she had been able to purchase; and afterwards reti∣red into France: leaving her husband in this storm, wherein he was swal∣lowed up. He was prosperous enough at the beginning, by the taking of Bristol, and some other places; however it be true, that his design upon Hull, and Glon∣cester fayled. He defeated the Earl of Essex's Army, and reduced the Parliament to such extremity as mennaced their certain, and visible ruine: but his boumy was so great, and his credulity too prejudiciall to his Affaires,
Sr. Thomas Wentworth &c. Lord Debuty of Ireland. sould by P. Stent.
in so deplorable a time, when distrust was more necessary. In sine, understanding, that the English had called in the Scots, by ver∣tue of the Covenant concluded, and confirmed by Oath on both Parcies, (wherein they swore the destruction of the Bishops) he dispatched Prince Robert against them,The Roylists beaten by the Scots. who joyned his forces (though not his opinion) with the Earl of Newcastle; for he would needs venter a Battail, which he lost, and the said Earl fled into Germany, and all the Kings felicity with him. During these interludes, the Earl of Montroffe did wonders for the King in Scotland, for with a very small Army, he gained a Battail, came off with ad∣vantage in many encounters; and repayred in fine the Kings affaires there,Montrosse for the King in Scotland. whilest they impayred in England; for having lost another victory, to Fair∣fax, he was compelled to retyre to Oxford, where he was besieged. Where∣upon, his Son went into France, and himself fled disguised to the Scotch Army,The King flies to the Scotch Army, and is sold. who received him at first with great honour, and complement; though af∣terwards, they delivered him up to the Parliament Army, for a summe of mony. He was made passe amongst the people for a Papist, and a Tyrant; and that he had a design, to annull all the Priviledges of England, &c. Ah ungratefull People! Ah Scotch Captains! You, who have the renown of being Souldiers; how could you consent to such a basenesse? Had avarice more power over your soules, then respect, vertue, and duty? For though you had an opinion that the King were a Papist, is it lawfull for subjects to act against the Annoin∣ted of the Lord, that which they would not have done to themselves? As soon as the news of the Deputies imprisonment arrived in Ireland,The revolt in Ireland. the Irish took Arms, to free themselves from the Captivity of the English, as they called it; but with so much barbarity, and cruelty, that they rendred them∣selves detestable thereby; especially to such as knew how they had been treated by the English. But what will not people undertake, which from a long time, are grown brutish, and savage, when they crush the head of their Governours, with their own Chaines? The Collections, which were made in Holland for the succour of the Reformates in that Country,The Collections in Holland, for what? begat as well the admiration of the Charity of that Nation towards their Brethren; as doubt also, on the other side, whether such large summes ever arrived there. The King being near London, found himself reduced to the extremity of granting them of the Parliament whatsoever they asked; and not being able to suffer some inconveniences which were cast upon him, he made his escape to the Isle of Wight, where he was treated like a prisoner. But, in fine, being led back again to London, and the Ʋpper House being abolishedThe King is executed the 30. of January, 1649., he was accused by the Army, and brought before a High Court of Justice, where he was tryed, condemned to be beheaded, and executed the thirtieth of Ja∣nuary, 1649. There have happened enormous accidents in this Age; but none which hath so much astonished the world, as this strange proceeding. Such as are curious, have made a shift to pick out some kind of similitude of his death, to that of the Saviour of the world, but for my part, I will be silent. Since that time, the English have fought prosperously against the Irish, and Scots. But let us now end the war, and the difference between the King of Spain, and the States Generall; and see the success of the Armes of France.
CHAP. XIX The continuance of the Exploits in Flanders. The Battail of Lentz. THE Prince of Orange made his last Field in the year 1647. when he passed into Flanders; and received a supply of six thousand French, con∣ducted by Marshall Gramment, who did nothing but plunder, and gave proof of their courage, and irregular Discipline, to the souldiers of this Common∣wealth. He took a Fort before Antwerp, which he presently after lost again. He found so much repugnance in the States, against the Siege of this Town, that he changed his design,Hemy Prince of Orange sick. His death, 1648. and marched towards Venlo; but after the loss of many men there, he retyred to the Haghe, where he fell sick and died, in the moneth of March, 1648. and was interred at Delft, by Prince William his Father. This generous Prince gave so many testimonies of his valour, in so many perilous Sieges, that he made himself admired by all the world. Armentiers and Landre∣cies taken, 1647. The Arch-Duke Leopold being arrived in the quality of Governour of the Low-Countries, besieged Armentiers the thirteenth of May, which the French had fortified, and made a Magazine there, which he gained the twenty sixth of the same monoth. But Gassion being intrenched with eight thousand men near Esterre, hindred him from any further attempt upon Artoise, and chief∣ly Arras, upon which he seemed to have cast his eye. Wherefore, he went and invested Landrecies, and brought it under obedience, in less then three weeks.The French take La Baneè, Diemude, end Tortoza. But Gassion recompenced the first loss, by the taking of La Baneè, which he effected by an Assault only, without a siege, as Rantzow also did Diemude: In such sort, as Piccolomini was forced to lay a formall Siege to it, and tear it our of the hands of Monsieur Palvaw the Governour. Rantzow had an enterprise upon Ostend; which being discovered, was hurtfull to the Enterprisers: Nor had that of Beck upon Courtrack any better success, and La Baneè remained as a Curb to Lile. But the Arms of France had better luck in Catalunia; where the Marshall of Schoonbergh recompenced the loss which the Count of Harcoart made in raising the Siege of Lerida, in doing the like for the Spaniards before Flix, and by easily taking Tortoza,From whence the name of Hibernia to Ireland. a Town situated at the mouth of the River Ebro, called by the Romans Iberus. But Terragona was a stumbling-block for them, as well as Casal had been to the Spaniards. The next years Field, must do miracles, and shew the Hollanders, that without them, they were able to beat the Spaniards out of Flanders. Indeed the Army was very great, and the General had both luck, and courage enough to undertake impossible things.The French take Ypers, and the Spani∣niards Cour∣track, 1648. The fair, and strong Town of Ypers, was attacked, and taken in twelve dayes; and Courtrack retaken by the Spa∣niards, in five. Indeed, the want of Victuals was so great, that if Ypers had held out four days more, the Army had been in danger of suffering much. The forces of both Parties met near Lentz, a Town though small, yet fa∣mous for brave Gassions death,Gassion killed. who was killed by a musket bullet in the Ap∣proaches to the Town. The Sraniards were about seven thousand, and the French much sewer. The Foot did their duty well enough,The Battail of Lentz. and especially the Lorraines; but the Horse (according to their custom) sled, and would not hearken to Gene∣ral Becks exhortations, who was taken, and died rather of vexation, then of his wounds.
In sine, the Spaniards lost the Battail, and had almost lost the Imperiall Prince too, had he not been succoured by the Prince of Ligne,The victory of the French. who remain∣ed in pawn for him. For want of Foot, the French were fain to be content with the Town of Fuernes, which was afterwards retaken by the Spaniards, to guard Dunkerk. It was conceived, that this victory would have been a means to ingran∣dish the French Monarchy; but it was likely on; the other side, to make it stumble; and indeed, it gave it such a shogg, that it hath not been able to recover it self wholly hitherto. For this great Body being strong, and nimble, is fallen into a feaver, which makes it frantick. It is like a Watch, the principall wheels where∣of being broken, keeps no true course, or measure. But let us go, and fi∣nish the war of the United Provinces, since the news thereof is already come; for, if we should stay to note all things, we should never have an end. CHAP. XX The Peace made betwixt the King of Spain, and the Confe∣derated States. The remarkable Siege of Brin. Torstenson quits the Generalate. THe last Field, having produced no remarkable effect at all, was taken by many, as the shooting off of a Musket, without a bullet, rather to content the Allyes, then to advance upon the enemy; rather to drive away the time, then to make use of advantages; and rather to tyre the French, then to come to share stakes with them. Indeed, the Hollanders had a fine game of it; for the enemy, not being able almost to stoop, was fain to avow, that all their defences being taken away in Flanders, they had nothing more left to oppose against them, then the Walls of Amwerp, Gaunt, and Bridges; for Guelders was half conquered, Brabant open, and Flanders almost quite subjugated; so that there remained but one and the last Bowt to come to the sharing of stakes. In the mean while, the Embassadours which last arrived, were the first dispatched; for they found so much inclination in them of Spain, that the Proposition for a Truce, being changed into that of a Peace, all their de∣mands were granted them. In such sort, as more then a twelve moneths time was spent, in attending and uniting the two Parties; howbeit they had brought them so far already, that whatsoever the French had gotten by con∣quest of the Spaniards, and other enemies, was to remain as their own for perpetuity; and they had confirmed it amongst them, by a sure, and fast League; in order to which Monsieur de Seruient had taken great pains at the Haghe; yea, he indevoured, under this pretext, to draw the States to a continuation of the war,The Peate made between the Spaniards and the Hollanders. and the utter expulsion of the Spaniards out of the Low-Countries; and therefore it was no marvaile, if Prince William leaned that way with him. For this young Eagle, being newly received as Gover∣nour, and Captain Generall, desired to accomplish, what his Predecessors had begun. But Seruient found himself repugned by such as had power, and was not able to hinder (however his arguments sufficiently incumbred the Colledge) but the Peace, which was signed at Munster the 8. of January, was ratified at the Haghe, published at Munster, and proclaimed through all the Towns, and Villages of this puissant, and glorious Republick the 5. of
June 1648. And here, by the way, we may take notice, of the admira ble conduct of the Spaniards; who, though at a great distance, and having no o∣ther passage then by sea, have neverthelesse, against all human apparence, defended these Provinces the space of thirteen years, against three most po∣tent Enemies. Such as have more sence of particular, then publick interest have con∣demned this Peace, as having been too much precipitated; alled ging, that the States ought not to have separated themselves from the French, but that they ought to have helped them to drive out the old enemies, and come to share stakes, and many other arguments making for the prolongation of the War. To which it may be answered, that all Wars which have not a neces∣sary defence, and true Peace, for their scope, are unjust. Besides, if the Hollan∣ders obtained by this Peace, whatsoever they desired, and asked, it needs must follow, that they were obliged to ratify it. And as for the interest of France, which was also to accept it for the repose of her Subjects, and for the great advantages offered therein; they clearly perceived, that that great Minister would not have it; and therefore they resolved not to obey his passion; be∣sides, that the Embassadours themselves advised them to embrace it, in case they could bring the King of Spain to an utter renunciation, both for him∣self, and his Successours; which, after the attendance of a whole year toge∣gether, was effected. All the world is also of opinion, that for the good of their State, it is better for them, to be separated from the French. There are likewise some other reasons which remained in the Cabinet, and which some events, not foreseen by many, have made to be judged very preg∣nant. France hath sufficiently declared by the taking of many Holland-March∣ants ships, how displeasing this Peace was to her, but Holland hath dissem∣bled this proceeding with admirable prudence, as attributing it, to the passi∣on of the great Ministers Creatures. Allyes of different nature, bold good in com∣mon necessity; but at the end of the reckning, that frienship growes faint. This War, which had lasted almost ninety years, and which was con∣ceaved to be immortal, expired in the Spring time, 1648. to the great con∣tentment of such as love peace, and tranquillity; and the great discon∣tentment of the French, who had much reason to be angry at it, for two subjects; the one for the division, or Stake-sharing; and the other, because they had not quite chased the Spaniards out of the Low-Coun∣tries. The pence was not pleasing to all. It was observed nevertheless, that this joy was not universal, and that some others beside the French, would have been more glad to carry on the War, to the total expulsion of the Spaniards. Indeed, the Bonefires were kindled with more zeale, and shined with more light, in one Town, then in another, and coldnesse appeared in the countenances of many persons. But above all, they who made their advantage of following the Armies; and such o∣thers also, as with whom passion of Religion prevailed more, then interest of State, expressed their dissatisfactions. The number of such as embraced the Reformed Religion, and the do∣ctrine of Luther, growing, in despight of all Placarts, and Prohibitions, to en∣crease, and multiply, sowed the first seed of the division; to which was added the ambition of some certain Governours, (who according to their own sence,The causes of! the first tumults were ill enough divided) the discontentment of the Nobility, the Clergie, and all in general, for augmentation of the Bishops, and the retard∣ment of the Forrain Militia, in the Low-Countries. Cardinal Granvels authority, and the report which ran of the Inquisition, caused excessive commotions in the Provinces; but ambition, change in Re∣pigion, the exaction of the tenth penny; the bloody proceedings of the in∣exorable
Duke of Alna; the weakening of the Royal Prerogative, and the pretexts of maintaining priviledges, were the windes, which brake the bounds of respect, and concord, and caused the Warrs against the Gover∣nours; and the Duke of Parma's Victories, having made the King burie the confederates, moved them to begin the War against him, which lasted till the valliant Henries death. In the beginning of the tumults, they first indirectly set upon the Catho∣lick Church, by destroying Altars, and Images, under colour of abuse, Ido∣latries, and liberty of conscience; and then upon the King, under that of the Tyranny of his Governours togeather with the avarice, cruelty, and licenti∣ousness of the Souldiers. But in fine by the succour of strangers, the War was carried on directly; and that with so much dexterity, and good successe, that the King hath lost seven Provinces, and the said Church, her exercise; in such sort, as that Philip the fourth now raigning, by the articles of this Peace, hath declared the said Provinces Free States. Let us now see in what coudition the Emperours affayrs are, after a losse so little expected. All his Subjects on this side the Danub were fled for fear; and some also, ou the other side, saved their goods in Stirmark, and in the district of Sals∣burgh; in such sort, as that had the Swedes endeavoured to passe the River, though it were very large, all the hereditary Countries of the House of Au∣stria, would have run hazard of being handled like the rest of Germany. They took Grembs by assault, and laid Siege to Brin. And hear it was, that Fortune made a pause; gave the Imperialists leasure to breath, and look about them,The siege of Brin. as also the Inhabitants beyond the River, to put themselves into better po∣sture. Mons de South governour of Brin. The Governour of this place, was one Mons. de Souch, a native of Rochels, who, upon some very great disgust, had abandoned the Swedes, whom he had served with great zeal of Religion, and affection, and in the quality of a Colonel, which charge he now possessed on the other Party. Torstenson, af∣ter three weekes Siege, summoned the Town, advertizing him, that in case of refusal, there would be no quarter for him. He answered, That he would never ask any; and that he would also give none. When a Gentleman of merit burns with desire of revenge, and acquisition of honour, there is no difficulty which he wil not surmount. The Siege rai∣sed. Torstenson, after having made many assaults, mined, undermined, and cast a multitude of Granada's into the place, was forced to retire. And this Siege lasted four moneths, destroyed about four thousand Swedes, without counting run-awayes, and attcheived the Governour an immortal reputation; besides the Emperours favour, who being desirous to distinguish this rare vertue from the common, made him a Boron, and gave him, some Lands, as also a place in his Privy Counsel. Torstenson quits the Gene∣ralat 1646. Torstenson, as brave a General as ever was, after this cross of Fortune, not be∣ing wl in health, withdrew his Army out of Moravia, resigned the Generalat into the hands of Wranghel, and passed to those new Medicinal Fountaines newly discovered at Hornhawzen, in the Bishoprick of Holberstadt, 1646. where there was then so huge a conflux of people, as if Germany had stil been compleatly inhabited. General Wranghel took up his quarters in Turinghe, in the Dutchy of Wirtembergh, and in Silesia; and Connixmarck, in the Bisho∣prick of Bremen, where it seemed, as if he intended to establish his resi∣dence. He retires into Sweden. The Swedes changed their General, but not their prosperity: for the Im∣perialists were as ill handled by Wranghel, as they had been by Torstenson, who retyred himself into Sweden, and was received by the Queen with honours due to his merits, and the great services he had rendred that Crown.
His death. He dyed in the year 1650, and left a most excellent odour of his vertues every where, yea, even amongst his very Enemies themselves. Before we set down the motions of that fortunare Warrier Charles Gustave Wranghel, we will relate the difference which chanced between the Land∣graves of Hassia, Darmstadt, and Cassel; the rather, because it is mingled with the successe of his first Field. CHAP. XXI The difference which hapned between the two Families of the Landgraves. The Battails of Mergendal, and Nortlinghen. General Mercies death. Why the Land∣grave George remained con∣sant. AMongst all the Protestants of Germany, none remained faithfull to the Emperour, but only George Landgrave of Darmstadt; all the rest be∣ing entred into the Swedish League. And he, finding no subject to take Arms, and so slightly to break his Oath, obtained Newtrality of the King of Sweden; and merited besides to be called by Ferdinand himself, the Faithful Prince. The chief motive of this immovable constance of his, shall be inserted beer, as I have learnt it. The Landgrave William his Father, feeling himself decaying in his strength, and drawing neer his end, sent for this George his Sonne; to whom, after ma∣ny good lessons, and instructions, he declared, as it were by a Prophetick Spirit, that there would happen many Warrs in Germany against the Em∣perour, under the pretext of Religion; wherein Strangers would be also ingaged, being attracted by the desire, and occasion of making themselves great. And therefore, that he should be sure to take heed of casting himself into that precipice; but that he should remain faithful to the said Emperour; without suffering himself by any meanes to be distracted, or carried away, to the ambition of any such people. Promise me (said he) that you will never abandon the Emperours Party, unlesse he endeavour to force you, and your Subjects, in your Conseience. Which he did by Oath, and hath always observed it hi∣therto; so that he could not be loved by the Protestant Party; neither was the Newtrality he obtained, and so religiously observed by him, sufficient to keep him out of the dance; for the Fidlers played about him, and made him dance in despight of his heart. But there must be a pretext, which was not long to seek. Oh cursed, and detestable Age! Apretext to make War up∣on him. Butsback, a place belonging to the said Landgrave, was taken by Gene∣ral Giese, for a punishment (as was said) because it had refused passage to Colonel St. Andrews Forces; or rather, for that indeed the Politick necessity of affaires required it. For, where this Maxime hath the upper hand, Justice is shut out of door. From thence the said Giese went to Marpurgh in Novem. 1644. which Town forthwith yeelded, and lest the dispure to the Castle; which was also, after having briefly defended it self, forced to bow the knee, in regard that the Foot was already taken away. By this unheard-of, and unexpected proceeding, against all Right, against faith, and promise; this agreement, which had bin solemaly made, and sworn between the two Branches of this most illustrious, and most ancient House Hassia, this Agreement, I say confirmed by the Emperour, approved by the of Electoral Colledge, and the whole Empire, was quashed, by this invasi∣on; and that pacisicall Prince George, induced to defend his Countriel by
Arms, since the Lawes, and the Columne, or Piller which supported them, was too weak. In a word, a War was kindled in that district, and the Swedes, who de∣fended the Lutheran Religion, and the Liberty of Germany; ranged them∣selves against this poor Lutheran Prince, in favour of the Calvinsticall Land∣gravinne, or Princesse Landgrave their Alley. Maximes must be changed, accor∣ding to occasions, and the pretext of Religion, is but to amuse the Vulgar. Some Lutherans were not a whit sorry, to see this Prince tormented: but such as yet cherished right, and justice, openly pittyed him. In brief, he ar∣med powerfully, and set forth a Manifest, against which the Landgravinne published another; so that the War was begun, both with the pen, and with the pike. Indeed she could not take a fitter time; For it is alwayes good, to fish in troubled water, 1646. General Wranghel returned towards Hassia, took Hoxter, and Paderborne at discretion, and cleansed all those parts from the Imperialists, whilest they were very busiy about doing the like, in Moravia; where they retook Crambs with much trouble, and Corneuburgh with more. So that when Austria was beginning to respire, by the retreate of the Swedes, and unexpected misfor∣tune put all the Court into Mourning, the Emperesse into her Tomb, and the Religious Prince Ferdinand, into the greatest sadnesse that any invinci∣ble Soule could be able to sustaine. This Princesse,The death of the Emperesse. being great with childe, was stifled by a Catharr or Rheume, and universally regretted by all, for her bounty, and other Imperial Vertucs. The King of Spaines onely Son followed her, which so much afflicted his Father,And of the Prince of Spain. that it caused him a sick∣nesse. Whilest these things passed, General Mortaigne was taken by the Impe∣rialists, and found furnished with certain papers,Mortaigne pri∣soner. which contained so exact, and perfect a List of the Imperial Army, and all other particulars belon∣ging to it, that many of the principal, and highest Officers, had not so com∣pleat a knowledge thereof. Yea, and he affirmed besides, that there was nothing done, nor any Order given, which was not forth with discovered to the Swedes; and therefore no wonder, if Victory marched with them, since Traitours marched with the Imperialists. Whilest the Conquering Army was approaching Hassia, and the Gene∣rals were making good cheare at Cassel, the Count of Holtsappel General of the Elector of Coleins Forces, endeavoured to redresse his Party, and to of∣fend her, whose Troops he had long Commanded. Zonts, a little Town near Nuits, and five leagues from Colein,Zonts. seated upon the Bank of the Rheyn, was very convenient for the Hassians, and very often courted both by enterprise, and open force; but alwayes so valliantly de∣fended, that it never changed Masters. Whilest this small war was mennaged in this Bishoprick, the motion of these great. Armies made all tremble, all fear, and all hope. For, never were all parties seen so hot, as after the Treaty was begun at Munster; in such sort, as that some tooke it for an amusement, and that the Strangers would winne the whole Game, since they had the better of the play. Let us return to the French Weymarians who were grown proud by the ta∣king of Philipsburgh, and Memz. The Duke of Anguien, after these brave exploits, which made the Germans know, how much the valour of that Na∣tion is to be redoubted; returned into France with two Regiments. The Bavarians, being incamped upon the River Necker, retook some places, re∣victualled Friburgh; and having repulsed four thousand men, who attemp∣ted to crosse their designe, took up their winter Quarters; as the Imperial∣ists also did theirs, in Alsatia, Lorrain, and upon the Rheyn; where being re∣inforced with some Regiments, they repassed the River to feck the Bava∣rians,
who assembled their Troops, and to shew that they were willing to strike for it, presented themselves before their Enemies, upon the fifth of May in the morning, 1645. The Conflict was horrible, and the dexterity of that brave General Merey was the maine instrument of the whole Vict∣ory. John de Werdt (who was now a Count) Colonel Colbe,The Battel of Mergendal. and Spork, made themselves famous there. General Rosa, Smithergh, and a great number of Officers, fell into the Enemies hands, without counting the dead, and the Viscount of Turenne was pursued as farre as the Country of Hassia. There were two Regiments, which were not at this Feast, because they came too late; but howsoever, they were charged with the Run-awayes, and paid their share of the Reckoning, as well as the rest. This Battel being gained near Mergendal, raised the drooping hearts, and hopes of the Imperialists, when they were almost quite sunke, by that furious blow two moneths before, near Jankow in Bohemia; caused the con∣junction of the Hassians, and Connixmarck, with the Marshal of Turenne; and was likely to have saved La Mote,The Duke of Anguin re∣turns into Ger∣many. (which was besieged by Magalotti, and defended it selfe bravely) made the Duke of Anguien hasten, who with twelve thousand men (for that kingdom is very populous, and the French are Souldiers from their Cradle) arrived at Mentz; joyned with the other Generals; made a stand near Heidelbergh, and with a lusty, and puissant Army, marched in quest of his victorious Enemies; who wondering from whence such a multitude so suddainly came, re-inforced themselves with four thousand men under General Gleen, and stayed near Nortlinghen, to the great contentment of the said Duke, that young Mars, who sought nothing but Combats to feed his generous ambition: Nor did his enemyes desire it lesse then he, as not being men who were long to be sought. In briefe, they closed with so much resolution, and courage, that it looked as if the Monarchy of the whole Universe had depended upon this Conflict.The last, Battel of Nottlingo hen, 1645. In effect, the number of persons of condition slaine, was very great; and the Germans have written, that the French Army was so much ingaged, that without the succour of the Hassians, after so fierce a Blood-letting, it would have fainted. The Bauel lasted till night, and the death of brave Merey, that Lorrain Baron, gave the Enemies some advantage; for they kept the Field, as I have already said. And really, after this Lords death, the Bavarian Army made no more then a meer Defensive war; rather for want of good Com∣mand, then gallant Troops; but it was too dangerous to vener again, with∣out huge advantage, both Armies being so extreamly weakened. The French took Dunkelspiel, which was quickly retaken; and the Duke of An∣guien, no lesse courteous, then valliant, released his prisoner General Gleen, with a noble present; as Maximilian Duke of Bavaria, (who would not by any means be vanquished, in curtesie) also did to the Marshal of Grammont, whom he sent back with a rich Coach. In the mean time, the supply of four thousand men, formerly conducted by Gallasso, arrived, and advanced with their General Gleen, to relieve Hail∣brun, which the French (though re-inforced with some fresh Troops) were constrained to forsake,The Duke of Anguin re∣turns into France. and the Duke of Anguin, for want of health de∣parted out of Germany. In sine, the Arch-Duke being come, the French made a disorderly retreat, and took up their winter-quarters in Alsatia, and Lorrain, where La Motte was rendred, and dismanteled. General Wranghel upon the other side, attacked Starbergh, which yeelded upon the same conditions with the Towns before taken; but the Burghers, or Townsmen, for having shewed too much zeal for their own defence, were sacked, as a forfeit, for their duty, and constancy. This approach gave an Alarme, not onely throughout Westphalia, but also upon the Kheyn: For the
Swedsh Army marched straight to Marpurgh, and thence to Giesen, which caused the Imperial, and Bavarian Troops to advance to the reliefe of that Prince. Hitherto, we have seen the Armies march apart; but now we will relate what they did after this Conjunction; for the Weymarians, having left the Siege of Frankendal, went also into Hassia;The Armies march together. and then both Armies incam∣ped at Weteraw. The Swedes got the Van, marched towards Hailbrun, and so straight to the LandBavaria. of Promise. The Elector raised his Subjects, who could not hinder their passage, nor their pilladge; so that they took Rain upon the Leck, and besieged Auxburgh; from whence they were re∣pulsed by the Catholick Armies; but they got Landsbergh, and entred into Bavaria. Whilest these things were in agitation, there was a Treaty for a Truce, at Ʋlme; though every where else, the War was carried on by parties; as General Wittembergh in Silesia, against Monte-Cucoli; and Teste de Corbean, against Melander, in the Diocese of Colein. The Conquerors in Bavaria; the Imperialists pur∣sue them. When the Swedes, and French had been some time in Bavaria, the de∣parted thence, and circumfused themselves, throughout all Swaveland, even to the very Frontiers of Tirol, and the Lake of Baden. They attacked the Castle of Bregants, which they took with incredible successe, and made there∣by appeare, that their valour was conforme with the report which flew e∣very where, of their repution, and glory. They also destroyed an Army of Peasants, and chased them out of many Holdes; in such sort, as that this victory alarmed all Swisserland, and made men believe,The Swedes be∣fore Lindaw. that Wranghel would take Lindaw, Constance, and all the Places upon the said Lake. He beset the former of the two, which taught him that God limits Victories; for the Be∣sieged made so generous resistance, that he was compelled to quit the Siege, after he had continued it two moneths. But the Imperialists had better luck,Wysembergh taken. at the Siege of Wysembergh in Nortgaw, of which place, though it were ex∣cessively strong, they grew Masters, after the attack of some weeks. Had they made such a business of it before Wysembergh, as the Swedes did before Lindaw, they had been reduced to the state of a troublesome and weake De∣fensive, for many moneths after. CHAP. XXII The exploits of the Swedes, upon the Confines of Swisserland, alarme the Cantons. Gallasso's death. Melander, General of the Imperial Armies THe prodigious Successes of the Swedes alarmed all that part of Swisser∣land, which lies near the Lake,The Swissers are alarmed. and carried terrour to the very Gates of Italy. Whereupon, the Arch-Duke of Inspruck sollicited the Cantons to an Offensive, and Defensive Allyance, against these Conquerours; but found lesse warmth amongst the Protestants, as being farther from the fire, then amongst the Catholicks. However, some Assemblies were made, wherein a resolution was taken, to raise some thousands of men, to guard the ap∣proaches, and order for more, in case of necessity; and then, Embassadours were dispatched to General Wranghel, who well knowing how dangerous it was to move this strong Body, treated them with more courtesie, then he had formerly done Charles Duke of Burgundy, and promised them to main∣taine
good friendship, and Newtrality with them, The French Embassa∣dours, on the other side,Whom the French cannot lull asleep. endeavoured to lull them asleep, by assuring them of their Kings sincere intentions. But, after the taking of Bregants; of the strong Castle of Argents; of some Islands, the danger wherein Constance was by this new progresse, and the Siege of Ʋberling begun by General Tis∣renne, and that of Lindaw by the Swedes; the said Swissers rowsed themselves out of their drowsinesse, and calling to minde their own interests which were stronger then all the assurances these cunning Conquerours could give them; run to their Arms, and advised their new Neighbours to retire from their Borders;They run to their Arms. for that their Subjects had been ill treated by some Swedish Souldiers; und moreover, because they had taken Constance into their pro∣tection. The Swedes wanting Forradge, blew up the Castle of Bregants, razed some Forts, and marched towards Francony; and the French, towards Witemberg. This retreate manifested that their Myne was discovered, and that it was most dangerous to stay till they were farther detected.The Swedes re∣tire. The Fowler sings sweetly, to catch the Bird. This action hindred not the Treaty at Ʋle for a Cessation of Arms; which was granted the Elector of Bavaria; but the Emperours Deputies could obtaine nothing;They treat of a Truce, which is granted onely to the Duke of Bavari. for they had resolved to pluck off his Crown, and destroy his House, but in vaine; for it will not fall, how sierce assaults so∣ever they give it. It looked, as if the Emperour would not be able to uphold himselfe any more, since both his Arms (namely, the Electors of Bavaria and Saxony had sought their repose, in the promise of the two Crowns, which aimed at no other Peace, then that of entire Victory, or Conquest. Howsoever, he lost not his courage, though he were in the middle of so many Enemies, and abandoned by his Allyes, yea, of almost all his States; which, for their own particular interest, left that of the Empire destitute, and exposed to Strangers; and yet notwithstanding, in the Treaty for redresse, or rectifi∣cation of Afairs, every one of them would enjoy his Right as well as he, though they forsook the Common Cause. On the one side, Ragoski kept him alwayes in action; and on the other, the Conquering Armies, after ha∣ving dulled, or subjugated, almost all Germany, came and fell in upon his Hereditary Lands. And this Field having given them plunder for their labour, and appeased a potent Enemy; what had they more to do, then to seize upon Austria, and share the Double, or Spred-Eagle betwixt them? For behold the Ship split amongst the waves, and raging Seas, abando∣ned by all the Seamen; attacked by three terrible windes at once, and gar∣ded onely by the Master himselfe; so that she must needs make Shipwrack. But if she do, they who have deserted her, will not get ashore; and the Confederates, who think now, to have her good cheap, will snap them one after another, without any difficulty at all. Their procedings sufficiently discover what their intention is. Ferdinand the third, notwithstanding so many troubles; the retreat of so many friends, and the number of so many enemies, lost not his care of the Empyre.Ferdinand bolds ot, he calls the Mo∣ther of God to help him. For, it is after the losse both of Masts, and Anchors, and at the point of splitting, or sinking, and when all counsell is lost; that the good Marriner makes his industry appear. Great spirits never lose hope, nor cou∣rage. To whom doth he addresse himself in this revolution? Not to Turks, or Infidells; but to him, to whom his Father had also recourse, when he was besieged in Vienna. For, he is Heyr to his Christian verutes, and hath nothing short of his devotions. He caused to be erected an Image of the Virgin Mary, Mother of God, directed his Vowes to her; took her for Patronesse, and Advocate; not only of himself, but of all his subjects of Austria, his People, and his Armies, with a fine prayer to God Almighty,
and with so much religious zeal, that all the by-standers could not sufficient∣ly admire this good Prince. They, who know not, that the honour which is given to that Mother, returns to God himself, to glorify his Incarnation, disapproved of this piety; others stood amazed, to see, that in so thick a cloud as was ready to burst upon him, there was no other defence, or oppo∣sition made, then that which would not be able to stop that impetuous tor∣rent. But chear up; for the water riscs much above it, without passing; and the enemies violence will slacken. Melander, cal∣led Holizap∣p General of the Imperial Army. Generall Gallasso having paid his tribute to Nature, the Command was conferred upon Melander, Count of Hozappel, who put the Militia in Disci∣pline again, and made the Rendezvous of his forces, near Budiceis. And Wranghel being retyred out of Swaveland, (as we have already said) unexpe∣pectedly attacked the strong Town of Swinsfort, which by great fortune, he brought under obedience to the Mistresse thereof; and the Governour, for having slighted the notice of the enemies approach, had sufficient time to repent. We left the French-Weymarians in Wirtembergh, and now we will follow them to the Rheyn, and into the Country of the Landgrave of Darmsta, where they made a deplorable shipwrack, upon the Lands of a Prince, who had not displeased, but by his too constant fidelity. Some little while after, the Marshall of Turenne, having received order to joyn with the Marshalls Gassion, and Rantzaw in Flanders, so to stop the course of the Arch-Dukes victories, found himselt surprized by a sud∣dain disunion amongst his Troops; for the Germans divided themselves from him, and sent Complaints to the King. In a word, they would not goe out of Germany, but ranged themselves under General Connin∣inarck, which had almost brought some disorder, betwixt the two con∣quering Crownes. But a small rain makes not the Rivers overflow their banks; and they, who thought, in this alteration, to attract them to their party, advantaged nothing at all; for the Tower which they at∣tacked, was not yet fallen. Upon the other side, Iohn de Werdt, and Sporck were like to have de∣bawched, or corrupted seven, or eight Regiments of the Bavarian Ca∣valry, to conduct them into the Imperiall Army in Bohemia: but they issued not so well as Spar upon Warendorf in the Province of Munster; and so they betook themselves ill accompanied, to the said Army, there to possesse great Offices. But this action stirred up jealousie; and the Electour had much adoe to quench it. They who possesse Goods by force, are all alwayes mistrustfull.
CHAP. XXIII The taking of Swinsfort, and Eger. Lamboy, and Conninx∣marck camped before Rene. The taking of the Retschin. The Siege of Prague. GEnerall Wranghel, having taken Swinsfort at discretion, and refreshed his forces in the Bishopricks of Franconie; marched into Bohemia, and sent for Generall Wittembergh, who was in Silesia; and so, with a very gallant Ar∣my ingrosted or augmented by many Troops,Eger besieged. he besieged Eger, a strong Town in Bohemia. Melander with the Imperial Army, hastened all he could, to succour a place of so great importance; but either the Eagles appeared too late, or else the Governour yeelded too soon; and indeed the Swedes so much exercised the Garrison with continual Aslaults,Yeelds upon dis cretion. notwithstanding the losse of men, that he surrendred at discretion; and that, at the same time when the Van-guard approached, to give notice of the succour; but he paid dearly for it; for he was beheaded. It is true, that Ladron, who had rendred Swinsfort upon the same terms (for Wranghel gave no other) was ac∣quitted for a forfeit of mony; a chastisement little proportionable to the crime committed: For what cannot Gold, and favour do? But this pro∣ceeding of a for rain Generall, in the middle of the Empyre, and in Towns, which enjoyed many Priviledges, was abhorred; for it diminished the Sove∣raign who chastised the Rebels, for having taken Arms against him. Was not this to remove himself from the pretext of the Liberty of Germany. The Army encamped neer Eger, a league beyond that of the Swedes, where there happened many sharp skermishes; and Ferdinand being once surprized in the midst of his Troops,The Swedes beaten. found himself in some danger. But there grews fierce encounter, wherein his enemies were worsted, and Helm Wranghel kil∣led, with more then thirteen hundred of his men; and so the Swedes, after the loss of sorne Standards, retreated into Turingh,Go into Bruns∣wick, and the Imperialists into Hassia. and Brunswick, and Me∣lander being still at their heels, and not able to draw them to a General Bat∣tail, and unsatisfied besides, with the Landgravinne of Hassia; fell upon that Country, where he played Rex, retook the Town (not the Castle) of Mar∣purgh, and so returned into Franconic. But General Wrangh found no less freindship in the Dutchy of Brunswick, then his Predecessors had done; for he recruted his Army, and put it in good order; one part of his Cavalry mounted, and the souldiers in the Field, to drive the Imperialists out of Hassia, who melted like snow before the Sun, whilest the Swed recollected themselves, and grew stronger. Oh strange Metamor∣phosis! Upon the other side, Conninxmarck that brave Captain, was in the Bishoprick of Bremen, where he stood not still, but in a very short space, took the Fortress of Wecht, and many more, with almost as much success, as Pa∣penheim had done;Conninx∣marck in West∣phalia. but by drawing so near Munster, he went so far beyond his duty, and promise made, that he had almost disturbed, and broaken that most illustrious Assembly, in so holy and necessary a work, for all Christen∣dome. Insomuch as Lamboy, reinforced with some of the Duke of Lorraines Troops, was sain to go into Westphalia, and East-Freezland, to make a notable diversion.Lamboy makes head against him. But this Inroad was displeasing to the States, who in favour of their Allies, made him depart, and Conninxmarck hasted thither, to beat him. They were almost the whole Summer incamped near Rene, a little Town of the aforesaid Bishoprick, which was set on fire by the said Conninx∣marks
Bombs, and not taken: for, not being able to draw his Antagonist to a Combat, nor cut off his victualls, he forsook that Country, and left the In∣habitants as little sorry for his departue, as the Saxons had been before. It is said, that his hat falling once from his head, when he was on horse-back, was found, and brought to him full of water; and he being wholly amazed at this mystery, shewed it to his Minister, who not moved at all thereat, pre∣sumed to tell him, that it was the teares of the poor people, whose houses he had caused to be fired. I know not, whether this be a story made on purpose, to render him odious, and the better to paint out his rigorous proceedings, and to deface so many gallant actions as he had performed; but howsoever, it is also true, that he was very cruell. Be it what it will, he did the Crown of Sweden many most remarkable services; the last whereof which was the most admirable, most profitable and most important, was that memorable enterprize upon the great City of Prague, which ha∣stened the Peace; as you shall forth with see in few words. A certain Colonell of the Imperial Army, being disgusted with the service, and having conceived some disdain against his Master, shewed him this trick; whereby Ferdinand found himself necessitated to conclude the Treaty of Munster, and surrender his enemies, many of his Rights. Poor Prince! The wicked rise up against thy vertue, and Traitours endeavour to dispatch that, which thy open enemies cannot destroy or subdue. Connix∣mark being advanced to the Fronteer of the Kingdom, he addressed himself to him, shewed him the facility of surprizing the Retschin, or Small side, as they called it (for by reason of the River, there are many Townes within Prague) offered himself to lead on his Troops, and be the first to scale the wall, in the Assault. Conninxmarck being confirmed by some Horse∣men which he had taken,The enter prize upon the Reis∣chin succeeded. that the condition of the place was just as he told him, marched speedily, entered easily, and surprized many Officers in their beds (amongst whom was old Coloredo) and found so much booty, as was more troublesome to be carried away, then the place had been to be taken. This Cross of Fortune must also needs fall upon this pious Prince, which had been enough to stagger him, had he not fixed the an∣chor of his hopes, upon an immovable foundation. The Prince Palatine Charles-Gustave being created Generalissimo or chief Generall, arrived from Sweden with five or six thousand men; and having encreased his Army by some Regiments drawn out of Pomerania,Prince Charls-Gustave goes to Prague. and the Archbishoprick of Bremen, he advanced towards Prague; where we will let him do a great work, and make a turn back into Bavaria. CHAP. XXIV The breach of the Truce with the Duke of Bavaria. A Tempest upon the Elbe. Melanders death. The Peace of Germany. The death of the King of Denmark, and Uladislaus of Poland. Cassimir succeeds him. THe Truce which was made between the French, the Swedes, and the Bavarians 1648. lasted not long; for it was broaken, about the begin∣ning of this Field, not without great complaints on both sides; the one party being accused of perfidy, and the other of cheatery. Indeed if we would seek in the success of this last action, him, who deserved the blame, through the unhappiness of chance, we should finde it to be the good old Duke of Bavaria, who was little beloved by the Conqueting Patty, because he was too wise, and well advised. But if we will hearken to his reasons, we shall be quickly
of another opinion; though when there is question of Conquest, words are rejected, as weak, and idle; and such as wear the sword, to make them∣selves masters of other mens goods, without any other form of proceeding then that of occasion, very often pass the bounds of newtrality, and tocom∣plain of them, is to offend them. He saw all the conjurated Nations crosse the Danub again, and fall upon Bavaria, and ruine it; except only one part thereof guarded by a River, (which they could not passe) and by his Troops which were mad to see their hands tyed up. They, who have made any observations upon the Tragedies of Germany, have reported, that the greatest losses incurred by the Imperialists, proceed∣ed, either from casting themselves too soon upon pillage, in the advantage of some Battail; or else from jealousies. I will not touch upon the inevitable Rule of Fate, nor Treason, by which the bravest men lare sometimes attrap∣ped, nor many other accidents, from which the most considerate, and vigi∣lant are not able to defend themselves; in such sort, as if we weigh the for∣ces by Politick Prudence, we shall finde, that it would not have been possible, in humane apparence, any way to hurt this most August House. Upon the 24. of November, there rose so surious a tempest in Holstein,A storme at Hamburgh, 1648. and especially at Hamburgh, and upon the Elbe, with such an Earthquake, that it was imagined, that Dooms-day was come; and that both Heaven, and Earth sled, before the face of the Judge, irritated by the effusion, of so much innocent bloud:The death of the Kings in Dn∣mark, and Po∣land. but the end is not yet arrived. Good King Christi∣an, survived not this storme, which seemed to have Prognosticated his de∣parture, he was followed by King Ʋladislans, a Prince of much happi∣nesse; however he met with some repugnance, and much jealousie amongst the Nobility, about the design which he had, to make a new order of Knight∣hood; as also about that great Army, which he had newly raised, with the Duke of Valachia, and some other Allyes, against the Turks (in apparence) and with the money of the Venetians. For the Swedes having smelt the busi∣nesse, and the Polanders yet more, it was remonstrated to him, that these Leavies ought not to be made, without the consent of the Senatours. In fine, being tyred, and almost transported by these importunities, and distrusts, he condescended to the licentiating, or disbanding of the forces, and so that fire was excinguished, without noise. But this dismission was advantagious to the Swedish General Wirtembergh, and to the French also, who got three thousand of the Souldiers to their service. Indeed, all other Kings acquired by their great prosperity, and successe, more authority, and respect from their subjects, and more liberty to under∣take; but this,The Polanders jealous of their Priviledges. by his famous, and remarkable Victories, made the Poles more studious of the preservation of their priviledges which they wilnever loose by flattery, for which they are rather to be praised, then imitated. This warlike Prince was much troubled, after having so well danced in the round against the Turke, and Muscovits, to sit still, whilest the said dance was hottest, almost every where. For his generous Spirit was bound, by the plots of his enemies, who feared the effects thereof, for that they might, pe∣radventure, have redowned to the profit of the House of Anstria.His Brother Casiir suc∣ceeds him. His Bro∣ther succeeded him by election, and by a dispensation, married the Princesse of Nevors, his Widow. Melander the perours Ge∣nerali. Melander, having for many strong reasons, been elevated to the dignity of commanding all the Imperial Armies, promised no lesse, then the redresse, or restauration of the Emperours credit, through all Germany; but that foo∣lish, and dammageable passion had more praevalencie upon the mindes of some certa in persons, then their Masters service. For, they murmured, that this charge was given to a Calvinist; and that a man of mean condition,
was preferred before so many great Lords of merit, and illustrious extraction; whereof he not being ignorant, laboured upon the first occasion, to render so great proofs of his vertue, and zeal, as that every one might be moved by his example to prefer their Princes occasions, before their own particular interests;one whereof you shall forthwith see. The Swedes passed the Danub at Lawing; and he faced them magnani∣mously neer Auxburgh; but not being seconded by Greensfeldt (a fault like that which he committed at the Battail of Hamelen) he chose rather to dye,Is killed, 1648. then flinch, and so sacrificed his life, and that of two thousand men besides, to the passion of his Emulatours. By this Combat, Bavaria was laid open, and the Inhabitants ruined by both Armies; for however the Imperialists, and Bavarians were stronger then the Conquerours, they were faine nevertheless, to content themselves with tormenting them onely by surprises, and Encounters, whilest the old Town of Prague defended it selfe stourly, and so repulsed the Chief Ge∣neral that he could not take it, and lost above four thousand of his men be∣fore it. Now, whereas there be some Seasons so rainy now and then, that though the Sun do shew himself by fits, and thereby give hope of some change; the weather neverthelesse returns to rain, and continues so long, that it makes folks despaire of ever seeing it fair again: Just so, this dismall war, which began in the year 1618, looked, as it would last always: however there were many fair intervalls: For mens hearts were so pufted up with ambition, that it was beleived, that it would never be ended, but with the end of the world. But what seems impossible to man, is not to God. Moreover, the most zealous Protestants fancyed to themselves, that the Catholick Religion being divided by the Arms of France, might be easily annihilated, and then the Conquerours would have all or nothing. The Plempotentiary-Embassadours, had already treated at Munster, and Osuabrugh, the space of four years, when it pleased at length, the Father of light, to dissipate the darkness of ambition, and to send back peace into poor Germany: which was so much tottered, dispeopled, and desert, that it was not any more to be known. The Tragedy both began,The war begun and ended in Prague. and ended in the City of Prague. Great God grant this Peace may last, tul the coming of thy Son our Lord, Amen. It is here to be marked, that after the death of King Gustave, of Lewis the thirteenth, and the Landgrave William, the Daughter of the first, and the widowes of the two others, continued the war against the Emperour, by their Generals, with so great constance, prosperity and glory, that he had very little less trouble, and loss, then he had before. Moreover, the hatred, which the Conquerours shewed towards the Hollanders, for the Compositi∣on which they had made, rendied their design evident enough. The Peace was conlud d, ordered, and signed at Munster, and the Instru∣ments there of sent to the principall persons concerned, to be ratified: which was effected, and a Diet convocated at Nurembergh,The Peace made at M∣st, 1649. there to treat about the restitution of Places, and the disimission of the Armies, as also of the meanes to content the Swedish Militia. Such as had their swords in their hands, were not ill handled; The king∣dom of Bohemia was declared Hereditary to the House of Austria, and put out of dispute with Silesia, and Moravia. The upper Palatinat, and the Ele∣ctorall Dignity to the Huse of Bavaria. The Crown of Sweden retaines Pomerania, except only that part, which is called the Hnder-Pemerama, and the Archbishoprick of Bremen, which is secularized into a Dukedom; Item the Town of Wismar,The gain of the Conquerours. and Meckelem∣burgh. The Marquis of Brandenburgh hath, in recompence, the Bishoprick
of Magdeburgh, which is also secularized, and some other besides. There are most ample Treatises written of this Peace, to which I reser the Reader: but I will first tell him, that there are eight Electors, and that the Prince Palatin is re-established in the lower Palatinat. France hath Bri∣sack, and a good part of Alsatta, with the renunciatton of the Empite, to the pretensions of the Bishopricks of Metz Thoul, and Ʋerdun. The Complaints of the House of Burguady, and the Duke of Lorraines affairs, were remitted to a particular Treaty between the two Crowns. Thus ended the great Revel, or Dance in Germany, which lasted about thirty years, wherein all the Nations of Europe had their pate. Thus was the Emperour Ferdinand the third delivered from so many troubles, and vexations, who sits yet at the Helme of this noble Vessel. Thus every body was contenred, in apparence at least, however there be some, who could have wished to dance longer. Thus was the Maske laid aside, and the design of the French and Swedes discovered, who vanted, that they took Arms, only for the liberty of Ger∣many. Thus, were the Germans in excessive joy; and in some care also, to finde mony, to pay the Charges, content the Minstrills, and the Dancers, and take their leave. Let them go to Nurembergh so weary with having danced so much, that they can hardly stand upon their feer, and let us transport our selves into Italy, to see, whether that prudent Nation, dances with better grace, and more judgement. CHAP. XXV. Pope Ʋrbans death. The wars of Italy, and Catalunia. THe war which was made upon the Emperour by the Swedes, had so di∣vided the people of Europe, that there were very few persons to be found, who shewed not themselves either glad, or sad, upon the issue of any remarkable Battel. The Lutherans, who looked upon it only for the interest of their Doctrine, were afraid least, if the Emperour grew victorious, he should deprive them of the exercise thereof by a Reformation, and retake from them all the Ec∣clesiastical Lands, and Possessions. The Catholicks, guided by zeal, were inwardly afflicted, at the decline, or decay, of that Great House, which alone sustained the hatred of the Pro∣testants; and could not forbeare to murmur, and cry our aloude against Pope Ʋrban,The Complaints of the most zea∣lous Catholicks. whom they conceived to be tyed to the Interests of France. How is it possible (said they) that the Common Father of Christians should, either by se∣cret agitations, plot the ruin, or resist the designes of a House, by which he is so pow∣erfully propped? She hath raised a just quarrel, both for her own interest, and that of the whole Clergy; is grown odious to the contrary Party, and bath hazarded her States. And not with standing all these essential reasons, he depended wholly upon Cardinal Richelieu. What can he expect, after the destruction of the Empire, but another inundation of the Goths in Italy, who will sack Rome, and evert the Holy Chaire? He prefers the advancement of his Nephews, before the care of the Church, whilest the Protestants, and some feigned Catholicks, are labouring to a∣bolish, and overthrow her. The praises which the Protestants gave him, by saying that he was a most learned, and able man, and a good Politician, and that he did very well, to
contribute to the humbling, and abasing of this House; which if she could once come to her end, would make but a simple Chaplaine of him, and take away part of his Authority; augmented, and grounded their complaints yet more. But he, in despight of all these noises,Pope Urban affellionate to France. leaned alwayes towards France. For the interests of States enter as well into the Conclave, as those of the Church. He forbore not for all that, to exhort the Princes to Peace, and to promise Ferdinand some succour, whereof there appeared some effects now and then. This unhappy Age could not produce but miserable fruits, since the Ec∣clesiasticks, as well as the Seculars, forsook Gods Cause, to serve their own irregular Passions, and evil Customes. Some, instead of quenshing this fire, kindled it on every side, and in Italy it selfe, yea, they were the Minstrills themselves of this Universal Revel, or Dance,The Cardinals the Minstrilis of the great Ball. which hath violated the Church, and her Sacraments, destroyed the Theological, and Cardinal Ver∣tues, and utterly extinguished Christian Charity. This good Pope left this mortal habitation the nine and twentieth of July, 1644. after having held the Chaire about two and twenty years;The Popes death, 1644. a very knowing man, and a goot Poet. A little before his decease, he had almost all Italy in arms against him, for the Dutchy of Castro, and some other pre∣tentions of divers partyes; but by the King of Frances intercession all was ac∣commodated; for this war, being dammageable to the Catholick Doctrine, and advantageous to the Protestant, was quickly lulled asleep; and so St. Peters Ship hath not quite made Shipwrack yet, by the tempest of scandals. The Duke of Bouillon goes to Rome. The Duke of Bouillon, being forced to make a change of Sedan, for ano∣ther piece of Land, went secretly, with his wife, out of France, and so to Rome, to Command Pope Ʋrbans Army; but he arrived there after the Peace was signed. In this quarrel of State, the Treasures of the Church were consumed, and scandals took also their place. Cardinal Pamphilio being seventy two years old, was elected to the Holy Chaire, and the Faction of the Barbarins mistically overthrown.Cardinal Pm∣philio chosen Pope. For the suc∣cour demanded of the King of Spain being refused, and a Victory gained upon them near Ptigliano, Te deum was sung at Florence, and other places. The loss of Tortona by the French, a strong place which opened the pas∣sage, from Milan to Genna 1643. was recompenced by the taking of Trino, and Pontestura; and the same year, Piccolomini extorted Mouzon from them also, which much incommodated the Arragonians, notwithstanding the dammage which the Portuguezes put upon the Castillians, by a puissant di∣version. This great General, after having given markes of valour, as well in Spain as in the Empire, repassed with much danger into Flanders, where Affaires required his presence. In this conjuncture, the Mores were desired to fall upon the King of Spain, who, as it seems, had not Enemies enow yet. They did it,The Mores be∣siege Oran, and are beaten. and be∣sieged Oran; but twelve Gallyes made them repent of thrusting themselves into the Dance, and abandon the Siege, together with the desire also of dancing any more. But the Portugnezes had better luck then these Barba∣ans, in a certain Encounter, wherein being routed, and the Conquerours upon pilladge, they raylled, defeated them, and killed above fifteen hundred of them upon the place. Te Deum sung at Madrid, and at Paris. The great Victory gotten upon the French before Terragona, and Lerida, (which were retaken by famine) caused Te deum to be sung at Madrid, at the same time that it was also sung at Paris, for the taking of Graveling. But very shortly after, both Courts put on Mourning, for the death of the Queen of Spam, Sister to Lewis the Just; and the Count of Harcourt went to take the Place of Monsieur de la Morte, who was fallen, by these losses, so farre
into disgrace, that all his former gallant actions were not able to maintain him; as if forsooth, it were possible to be alwayes a Conquerour, and keep Fortune in a chaine. But he who governs all things, disposes also of Vict∣ories as he pleases. For this brave Count before he came thence, experimen∣ted the same disgrace, and the same lot, and had enough to do, to save him∣selfe from the Conspiracy of the Catalunians, and such others as envyed his glory. The French, who had won so many Battels, taken so many Towns; sub∣dued so many Provinces, and refused so advantagious a Peace, had the same luck which their Generals had, and saw their Enemies again, in the heart of their Kingdom. When a worke is done, it is easie to finds out faults. Harcourt, having by his presence, and a strong succour, put thing in se∣curity, besieged, and took Rosa, after such a defence, as made him in doubt of a good issue;Harcourt vict∣orious in Cata∣lunia. passed the River of Segra; beat the Enemy almost as oft as he durst shew himselfe, and made Te Deum be sung as often at Paris, as the other Generals did, who were in Flanders: He took Balagüer, by an admi∣rable chance, repulsed his enemies, who endeavoured to relieve it, and sent the fright even to the very Gates of Madrid. The Spaniards hands were be∣nummed with blowes, and their eyes dazled, by the glory of so great a Cap∣taine, and some Towns, in such confusion as is ordinarily brought by tumult. But let us see how they do in Italy. Prince Thomas, having seized upon Pontestura, made St. Ja, and Vingue∣vano also submit,Prince Tho∣mas in Italy. the Spaniards not being able to exceed the terms of a De∣fensive War. But this prevident Nation defended the blowes by retyring, and craftily gave way to the heat of the French, expecting in the coole there∣of an occasion to hurt, and take revenge. The Barbarins, being hated by the Pope, and necessitated to give account of the Treasures of the Church,The Barbarins disgraced. besought the favour of France, from which they were not fallen, but to return with more splendor, and obtain her pro∣tection. But Cardinal Anthonies flying away with vast Summs of money, so much kindled the choler of his Highnesse, that he stopped his eares, to all such as interceded for their reconciliation; slighted the menaces which came from beyond the Mountaines, and the reports which would needs make him passe for a Spaniard. In effect, he disapproved the Allyance made with the Enemies of the Catholick Church, whose interests he embraced with more zeal then his Predecessour. This mist troubled the serenity of Italy, and made the French arme, and lay a Siege, both by Sea, and Land, before Orbitello. But they were beaten upon both Elements;Cebitello be∣sieged, 1645. Monsieur de Breze's head taken off by a Canon-ball, and Prince Thomas compelled to raise the Siege in confusion. They com∣plained of the Pope, for his having permitted the Neaples Forces to passe through his Countries; to which he answered, that he had done them the same favour. This losse was repaired in the year 1646, by that happy Captain La Meilleraye, who having fitted the Fleet, went, and seized upon Piombino, and Portolongòno, which he fortified. Lerida besie∣ged. The Count of Harcourts eyes being dazled by the charmes of smiling For∣tune, went and laid Siege before the strong Town of Lerida, and assaulted it violently; but the great resistance of the Garrison, and the difficulty he found to mine, made him resolve to take it by Famine. The Governour, to spare his provisions, sent all the women, and children out of the Place, who almost all died with hunger, in the ditches. A great cruelty, though it pas∣sed for a feat of war; for a necessity of State, and for acquisition of honour. But behold the inconstance of this imaginary Goddess; They, who had been so often knock't by this great General, recollected themselves, and
ventured to affront him in his Trenches, out of which they beat him after the third assault, and made him leave Camp, Canon, and Baggage, with a great number of dead men, and prisoners behinde him. This Attack was made the twentieth of October by the Marquis of Leganes,Is suçcoured by Leganes, the French beaten. who had express Command, either to succour the Town, or to die in the attempt. This mischance was followed by another at Sea, where twenty French Gallyes were beaten by seventeen Spanish, and near two thousand French perished in the Combat. In fine, Harcourt obtained leave to return into France, and the Prince of Condè succeeded, to make Shipwrack of so many Victories as well as he, a∣gainst that inchanted Rock, which was as fatal to the French, as Casal had been to the Spaniards; nor was all that great preparation both of men,The Prince of Comde in Ca∣talunia. and money able to save him from it. For, thinking to overcome a Place, which had in vaine been attacked, by two so great Warriers, he besieged it, whilest Harcourt was at Paris in great esteem, where his vertue had already so far triumphed over all such as envyed him, as that nothing was wanting, but the issue of this Siege. The King of Sweden, when he was going to give the brave Count of Tilly battel, was heard to utter these words; If Fortune be against me, it will not have been any grent affront to me, to have lost, against a man; who hath alwayes been victorious; but if she look upon me, with a propitions eye, what glory will be due to me, for having surmounted a Mars who hath been alwayes invincible? Besieges Leri∣da in vaine. This young Alexander, swolne with Victories, continued the Siege; but meeting with the same impossibilities, the same disbandings, and the strong relief which was near at hand; he was faine to with draw himselfe, from a place, which was so disasterous to the French. God hath limited Conquests; and therefore let him come back into France,Leaves the Country. where he was reserved for great affairs. For the horrible Change, which hapned at Neaples; the Comedy mingled with blood; and the Tragedy interlarded with ridicu∣lous accidents; will not suffer us to stay any longer in Catalunia, whether the King sent the Marshal of Schoonbergh, who, by a remarkable felicity repaired these disasters.
THE HISTORY OF THIS IRON AGE. THE SECOND BOOK. CHAP. I The tumu'ts at Naples begun by Thomaso Aniello, and why? The History of Conradine Prince of Swaveland. His death. The Sicilian Vespers, or Even-Songs. The History of Catenesa, and of the Tragedies which happened at Naples. PEace, is an effect of Gods Grace; and War ano∣ther, of his just Choler. For, since Charity is grown cold, Faith almost dead, and the wicked∣nesse of man universall; we must not wonder, if the punishment of this present time, be extended upon the whole Body of Christendom, without exception of Age, Sex, or Condition. But that which is most insupportable, is, the wicked have the winde in poupe, and prosper, and as the exhalations are ordinarily drawne from the vapours, which of∣fuscate, or darken the Sun, just so impunity of offences, causes this disorder. The Kingdom of Naples had been oft enough advertised of a scourge which was prepared for it, by that Mountain near it, which so often vomi∣ted up lumps of fire, and sent it snowes of ashes, but the Preservatives hin∣dred not the disease. The strange ac∣cidents happe∣ned in the king∣dom of Naples in former ages. The strange accidents which happened in this kingdom, in the twelfth, and thirteenth Age, make us confesse that wickednesse, parricides, and perfidies were already known in those times, but not so universally, as in these. For, if there were found great vices amongst some great persons, there were also found more vertues, more piety, and a quick, and lively Faith in generall, through all Christendom. But at present, Justice is trodden under foot, mony does all, vertue is made a laughing-stock, even by them, who boast to have drawn their Ori∣gin from it; and vice, being a la mode, or in fashion, is esteemed: yea, many sin rather by example, then by inclination in this depraved Age; and more to please the vicious, then for that they approve of the vice. By how much the more the Great ones, retyre themselves from the Commons; by so much the more do the Commons endeavour to withdraw themselves from their service. But let us stay at Naples. The infamous death, to which Charles of Ainoü put Frederick Duke of Austria, and his young Cousin Couradine, the last Duke, of the most anci∣ent Imperial House of Swaveland, for having sought his own Right, (which was taken from him by the Pope, and given to the said Charles) teaches us,
that this is not the first time that Soveraignes have ended their lives by the hand of an ordinary Executioner; and that a good cause hath not alwayes a good issue. For the three hundred French Gentlemen who were sacrificed to the spirits of these two Lords, and the Torches of the Sicilian Vespers, or Even-songs, which were extinguished in the blood of the same nation; tell us, that vengeance hath alwayes been sweet, and that it is most dangerous, to put an irritated people into fury. This Gatenesa, from a mean Landress, being grown the Nurse of a Prince, and afterwards, Governess of six Princesses, one after another, with such an absolute power upon their mindes, (and chiefly upon that of the last) that she grew to dispose of the greatest Charges, and Offices of the kingdom, and distributed the best part thereof amongst her own children; saw her self at last, with all her family, dragged to the execution: Yea, a King was hang∣ed at the Grate of a window, by consent of his wife; and she some years after, strangled by a just judgement of the Great Judge. These were the miracles, or rather the prodigies of those Ages, which hapened all in the said king∣dom with so many other, as make us conclude, that usurped possessions sel∣dom pass to the fourth Heyr, or else alwayes cause troubles. Towards the end of the fourteenth Age, this kingdom being revolted from Alfonso of Arragon, the States thereof offered the Crown to Charles the eighth King of France, who easily got it into his possession, and the Neapoli∣tans, with the same facility, shook off that yoke afterwards, for being frustra∣ted of their Charges, and recalled the aforesaid Arragonian. The French returned thither, by the commandment of Lewis the twelfth, who ought to share it with Ferdinand of Castill; but they could not agree about the spoyles; and so Gonsalvo, rather by might, then right, drove them both our. It hath been attacked since, but not subdued, and so remaines to the King of Spain. Now the wars being grown hot, both in Germany, and the Low-Coumtries, and the House of Austria finding her self taken to task by so many enemies; the State of Neaples was oppressed by so many Imposts, or Taxes, that that House being strong and vigorous before, became so lean, and feeble, that he could not longer carry so heavy a burthen. This mischief began first to operate almost throughout all Sicily, where the people constrained the Vice-King to take off the Imposts. From thence, it passed to Neaples, and by that good success, made the Ne politans take the same resolution; and that, by such meanes, as you shall forthwith un∣derstand. The beginning of the troubles at Neaples. The tears of the poor peeople; the advices, and admonitions of some great ones; the libells, and burning of the Custome-Houses, were all able to draw but faint promises of ease, without any effect at all. Whereupon, a certain Fellow of the very dregs of the People, who had dy∣ed in the obscurity of his birth, had not this furious revolt,And why? (whereof he was Head, and Authour) elevated him to the highest top of this Theater, to make him seen by all the world, and to teach as well Noblemen, as Gentlemen, that God serves himself of abject and contemptible means, when it pleases him to chastise them. He first entred this Dance. A Fisherman begins. Now this instrument, being a man of nothing, by trade a poor Fisherman, seeing the dearth of Victualls, together with the said Imposts, which impo∣sed the necessity of despaire upon the people; began to act upon Sunday, and the Tragedy lasted ten dayes, or rather the Raign of this Fisherman, being four and twenty years old, or thereabouts; He armed the children with staves, taught them a prayer against the said Customes, or Taxes, attacked the Gabellors or Collectors thereof; animated the people with a fine speech, and put them into condition to enterprize what he would.
The said custome-Houses being burnt to ashes, they began to run up and down the City, crying out, Live the King, and the Devill destroy the ill Govern∣ment; and went to the Vice-Kings Palace, who, not being able to mitigate them by fair pronuses, (nor the Archbishop, by gentle words, and writings) sled to the Church, and from thence, to the Castle of Saint Elme. The Vice-King being thus retyred, they intreated the Duke of Carafa, to be their Head, and Leader; who not being able to stop their rage, retyred himself also privarely, thanking God that he was escaped out of their hands. Called Mas-Aniello, the just day. Mas-Aniello was chosen Ring-leader of these Mutiners, who comman∣ded the people to take Arms. Thus, was the first day spent; the Officers of Justice disarmed; the people masters, and the Fisherman, their Conductor. 2. The second being Munday, they were all in Arms, and cryed nothing but vengeance; and Mas-Aniello casting off the Visard, made answer to the Vice-Kings Letters, that the Priviledges must be restored, and the Original thereof put into their hands, as well as the Imposts or Customes taken off; and that the people must have as many voices in the Chapter, as the Nobility. By his command, above sixty Pallaces, and Houses, were sacrisiced to Vul∣can, with goods,Many Pallaces hurnt. mony, and Papers; yea, the very Coaches, and Mules them∣selves, and the Procession refused. Oh God! where are thy Thunderbolts? When the multitude growes master by the sword, all respect of things both sacred and pro∣hane is taken away; licentionsnes undermines the foundation of all discipline; and the condition of the great ones is more miser able, then that of meer Brutes. And really, when patience being wounded, turns into fury, it is not to be stopped by any sweetnes. 3. The third day began with the embarassement of other Palaces with∣out sparing any thing at all. Thus treated they all such as had either coun∣selled the said Imposts, or participated of them; yea, the Cloysters were fain to restore the goods of such as were only suspected (which were given in custody) to cast into the fire. The Tower of Saint Lau∣rence taken. The Tower of Saint Laurence falling into their hands, with the Arms, so much pussed up their courage, and contumacy, that the Originall of the Privildges it self being brought, was not able to send them back peace∣fully to their houses. The obstinacy of a people, which gives the Law in fury, pas∣ses from destrust to despair, and admits of no reconciliation. 4. The fourth day they fell upon the Pallace of a certain Duke, without giving quarter either to Moveables, or Books; but the discovery of the conspi∣racy against Mas-Aniello, brewed by some great persons, caused their destru∣ction, together with that of the Treaty of Peace, and the Bandites to be mas∣sacred, even in a Church with unspeakable fury,The Church and Market mined. and without respecting the very throne of the Divine Majesty. It was also discovered, that the Market-place, and the Church of the Virgin del Carmine, were under mined, to blow up perhaps, above a hundred thousand persons all at once. Was there ever any thing seen more dreadfull, then this disorder? And shall there yet be a doubt of the near approach of the end of the world, after so many miseries? can there be greater seen or imagined? The Duke of Carasa be head∣ed. The Duke of Carafe's head being set upon a stake with a hundred and fifty more, much terrified the principal of the City, and made all the people bow to Mas-Aniellos commands, with more speed, and prompitue, then if he had been the greatest Monarch of the universe. Thus the world was turned upside down, and all in confusion. Who will hereafter trust to his own pow∣er, since a young Sot, a man of nothing, attracts to himself the authority of so potent, and rich a City? 5. The fifth day tells us, with what order this fellow governed the City; which was with so exact, and so judicious a policie, that the sharpest wits, yea, even the Spaniards themselves were amazed at it. For he ranged his forces in Battel. Array, and exhorted them to valour, & discipline, as much as if he had
been all his life-time Commander of his Masters Armies. The Nobility disarmed. The first Commandment he made was, that upon pain of death, nei∣ther man, not woman, should weare either Cloak, Coat, or Gown; which was observed without contradiction by the Monks, and Gentlemen; yea, and even by the Cardinal himself. And the second, for all the Nobility and Gen∣try, to bring both their own and their servants Arms, and put them into the peoples hands. The Peace made. In fine, by the Archbishops, addresse, the Peace was made, in the presence of the Vice-King, and Aniello, at which conference he shewed the unheard-of Authority he had over the people; for by putting only his finger to his mouth, he hushed a hundred and fifty thousand men. These things will seem as incredible, as the inchantments of Urgenda the Ʋnknown, and the Rivers of the Amadises. This peace, which was to be pub∣lished the seventh day, was received by all with great contentment, and ac∣quired our Fisherman much glory. 6.Long hayre for∣bidden. The sixth day produced the effects of distrust by the cutting off of so many heads, and bringing them to the great place: Long hayre was forbid∣den, as also to walk the streets, after eleven of the clock. He had seven Sece∣taries, and ten Executioners; and so by his rigorous justice, men went up and down the Town in safety. Doria being arrived with 13. Gallies, asked leave of the Vice-King to come ahore, to buy provisions; but he mitted him to A∣niello, who granted it. But the end of this day discovered the beginning of the vain glory, which was to shorten the dayes of this our Stage-Monarch. 8. The seventh day brought the confirmation of the Peace, discovered his folly, (who protested to have done all for the Kings service, and the peoples liberty) and offered to return to his former condition. 8. The eighth day, all the City rang of his praises, for the Peace made; but his behaviour made him hated, and manifested, that he had a mind to command, and be obeyed like a Tyrant. For, he forced the Cloisters, and rich, Citizens to give mony, and made it appear, that he would not forsake the Government. Aniello insen∣ted. In fine, as wine troubles the brain of such as are not wont to drink any thing but water; in the same state was Aniello troubled by so many honours done him, and by so prompt obedience. For he seemed to be rather a drun∣ken man, then one of right sence; by tunning up and down, doing actions, and uttering words, which prognosticated the end of this Dance, or Maze, and his own too. The Gig followes the Play. The shepheard thinks alwayes of his Pipes; and it is far more easie for a King, to act the part of a Peasant, then for a Peasant, to act that of a King. 9. The ninth day was full of horrour, and cruelty; he hurt one, killed another, and played the pranks of the Furious Rowland. 10. Insomuch, as that the tenth day, being abandoned by the people, and even by himself also, through a certain vaine, and phantastical terrour, he was killed by fowr Gentlemen, and his head separated from his body,He is killed. which was dragged about the Town. This was the end of that famous Thomas Aniello, of whom God Almighty served himself, to punish that proud City, and make it feel the rough stroakes of his wrath; and afterwards, cast the rod into the fire. It is to be observed, that be never spake of his Catholick Majesty, even in his very frantick fit, but with respect. Whosoever would make reflexion, upon all the circumstances of this Tra∣gedy, would embrace a businesse of much prolixity; and therefore, I will say no more, then that it is a lesson for the Great, and a Mirrour for the small; and that all these evills are fore-ruaners of the Lords Day. But it is now time, to frame the war of the Venetians, and Turks.
CHAP. II The war of the Turks, and the Venetians, and why? The taking of Canea. The Knights of Maltha take a huge booty, or prize, as a great number of Gallies, and the young Sultanesse, or Emperesse of Turky, with her Son. The Vene∣tians obtain succour, but are beaten. VVE had so much trouble to sinde an end of this war of Germany, which the Swedes, and the French terminated with regret, and as through spight with the Hollanders, for having too soon left the Dance, which they had no minde at all to finish, till after the Conquest of the whole Empyre; that we signified thereby, the small care we had to set down the other wars in fit place and order; which yet were not despicable, neither in successe, not proceeding; according to the boundlesse irregularities of the Age; however they were not considerable in any other respect, then for being dependent upon that great Body, which makes (according to the sense of some learned persons) the fourth, and last Monarchy. Under the prerext of stopping the prosperity of this laudable House of Au∣stria, there was formed a puissant League to ruine her;yea, and the Eagle was already painted naked every where,The Eagle peeled. panting, and grieving, and even at the last gasp, by the Arms of the said League; and the Duke of Lorrame holding her head, and giving her physick. The Confederates, on the other side, had their hands full of her feather, and stood waiting for her death. But all these riddles served to no other end, then to amuse the people, feed the eyes of the curious, and discover the intention of the said Confederates. In fine, Peace, which it was thought, would never have come down again, but with the Revenger himself of innocent bloud, and oppression;checred up the hearts of such as were timerous; made the Birds of prey withdraw, and the Husbandman live in hope; however let him who stands upright, take heed of falling; for there is nothing sure, in regard, that though the windes be rtyred home to their God Eolus, the waves leave not still to beat against the bank. Indeed, the war, having like a fire, incompassed all Germany, passed on into Denmark, Sweden, England, and France; in such sort, as that there is not so much as any one Province, which can boast of being, or of having been free, and exempt from this universal Disaster. The Germans are hard to be moved; but having once taken Arms, they are very hardly brought to lay them down again. The Turk in the kingdom of Candy. In the interim, the sworn enemy of Christendom, took his time, & measure, kept his cadency, entred into Candy, besieged Canea, and couzened the most clear-sighted of the whole Company; who thought that this storm would burst upon the Isle of Malta. Let us lay open the counterfeit, and mark the pretext, and subject, which kindled the Grand Signor's wrath; who cove∣ring all the Levant, or Eastern Sea with an infinite multitude of Vessels, thought to surprize, and devoure that most serene Common-wealth, which must not perish, but with the dissolution of the world. The Mahometans serve themselves also of dissimulation, and when they make a shew of draw∣ing one way, they go another. The effects of the hatred which they bear the Christians, had not been differred so long in so many fair occasions, had it not been for the war between them, and the Persians.
This war, I say, had taken away the meanes of prevailing against us, by those disorders which had so much weakened us: For neither the brooks of blood which was spilt, not the Towns and Villages which were burnt; not the fields which were made desert, hastened them to come, and dispatch the rest. They seemed to have lost their interests, and rejoyced to see the Name of Christian destroyed, by the Christians themselves. But when it seemed to them a fit time to act, against a Body, which was grown faint by the losse of so much blood, and whilest they were momentarily delibera∣ting amongst themselves, where, and how to begin the Round; the Knights of Malta shewed them the way, and let them see, that there were yet Chri∣stians enow, to give them exercise, and make them pay the expences of the Revel. Ibrahim, the Sultan, being a bloody Prince, and spurred on to war by the Counsells of his Minion, or Favorite (for the Barbarians, as well as our Prin∣ces, have some who make them condescend to their passions) was much more moved by spight, and rage, when he received the vexatious newes, that the Knights of Malta, had taken, near the Isle of Rhodes,The Knights of Malta take the young Sultan∣esse, and her Son, with a huge Ireasure. the great Gal∣lion, and some Gallyes, which conducted the young Sultanesse, her Son, and an Aga, towards Alexandria, with so great riches, as amounted to more then three millions of Gold. The affronts which we receive from such enemies as we despise, are much more tormenting, then those of such as we fear. This Golden Fleece, and this faire Medea, was gained at the point of the Sword, with the losse of many brave Knights, and carried to Malta. And this newes, I say, did so much inflame his choler, that he swore, he would revene him∣selfe upon all the Christians; and to this effect, he contracted the principal Forces, of all the Provinces, and fitted a Fleet of near four hundred saile, and lulled the Venetians asleep in the meane while, by assuring them, that it was not against them, but to draw satisfation from the aforesaid Knights, who put themselves into a posture to undergoe the storme, by sending for all the Knights, demanding the succour of Princes, and fortifying all the ap∣proaches. The said Venetians, and other States of Italy thought also of their defence, but a little too late; and so they tryed, to their cost, and losse, the Great Turks perfidy; who, having made a shew of attacking Malta, returned to∣wards Candy, and took Canea by composition, after he had battered it by a Siege, and many assaults. Some States shewed their zeal for the Common Good; but the reliefe came too late, like physick to the dead; and the cause thereof was jealousie. But this inopinated Invasion much astonnished the Illustrious Republick of Venice, (which asked assistance every where, and in Holland, Ships for their mony) but was not able to restore Christendom to peace. When the Wol∣ves attack a flock of Sheep, the courage of the doggs is cooled, from falling upon the Common Enemy. The ambition of Christians was too great; the opinions in Religion, too different, and various; their charity too much chilled, and the ruin of the House of Austria (which was judged infallible) too much in their hearts. This punishment seemed to have been drawn upon them, by their not ha∣ving well administred justice in the said Island, upon the Governours Son, who had committed a rape; and violated a woman, 1646. which crime made the Mores invade Spain, and hath caused many afflictions in the world besides. One misfortune followes another:Fire got into the Arsenal at Venice. for the fire got into the Ar∣senal at Venice, and indangered the blowing up of that brave City: which so much frighted the noble Senators thereof, that as well for this mishap, as also for many other advertisements, they resolved to provide it well, to the end that the Traitours might have no power to hurt it.
In this conjuncture, the French were in danger to be ill treated, being ac∣cosed of intelligence with the Turks, and of having kindled this fatal war: But that which is without ground, is also without existency; and what is not proved, ought not to be believed. The Turke caused his General to be beheaded, for having lost too many men before Canea, and failed to seize upon the Haven of Suda in the same Island; and not with standing so many prodigies as appeared at Constanti∣nople for many dayes together;Prodigies at Constanti∣nople. he resolved to continue the war with all ex∣tremity, for the space of seven years. For, the year before, one part of the said City was consumed by fire; and this year, the contrary Element threat∣ned to drown it, and made the Inhabitants go up to the tops of their houses, to save their lives. In brief, these supernatural signes make us hope, that heaven, being angry with these Barbarians, will dissipate their Monarchy, together with the impiety of their Alcoran: but the incredulity of Christi∣ans, together with their ill lives, will quickly involue Mortals in the venge∣ance of the Almighty. The Venetians blocked up Canea, and the Turks being ill Neighbours to the Hungarians, laboured to enter into Frioll, and caused the Tartars to march into the Field; but the Cossacks made a powerful diversion, towards the Black-Sea, which divided the said Turks Troops. The Muscovits joyned themselves to the said Cossacks, and the Basshaw of Aleppo revolted; so that the Grand Signor found worke enough to do. The Pope, and Cardinals fur∣nished thirty thousand Crowns a moneth, towards the expenses of the war, with many Gallyes;The Popes suc∣cour. and the Duke of Parma, some Forces. The State of Venice, being mennaced by three Armies, implored the re∣liefe of Christian Princes,The defeat of the Venetions. and beat the Turks in Dalmaria, but received a furious overthrow in the Kingdom of Candy. General Moresini took a good number of vessels appointed to re-victual Canea; but he could not hinder the Fleet; and so the Army was defeated there; six thousand men, with two Generals killed: Retimo taken, and all the Christians massacred. This misfortune so much startled the Common-wealth, that however Grimani had very happily taken a great many Gallyes,Which implores the help of Prin∣ces. she made it highly known at Vienna, Paris, Madrid, and throughout all Italy, that she was not able alone, to sustaine the weight of the Half-Moon; and that having al∣ready consumed about two and thirty millious of Crowns, she should, at last be constrained to enter into such unequal conditions, with this devouring Wolfe, as would be shameful to all Christendom. Though Fortune had been unkinde in the Kingdom of Candy, she yet shewed so gay, and chearful a countenance in Dalmatia, and in many En∣counters at Sea, that she made the Republick break off all Treaty of Peace, and resolve to continue the war. There arrived forty vessels from Holland, and some from Denmark, with∣out counting the succour of Genna, and that of the Pope, who took the said Republicks Cause to heart, as also the repose, and quiet of Christendom. Grinnani got many Victories; and so much tormented the Turks, that famin thrust it selfe amongst them in Canea;The Common-wealths Victo∣ries. where we will leave them scuf∣fling for that fair Island, without entertaining our selves to pick out the cir∣cumstances of Combats, and Cruelties, where with the Barbarians stuste their actions; since Christians, being become Barbarians, do yet worse the they.
LEOPOLD WILLIAM Arch Duke of Austra and Goueruour of ye Low Countries  P. Stuat Excuit
CHAP. III. The troubles at Paris. It is besieged. The Archduke comes to succour it. The besieging, and taking of Ipers. Cambray besieged in vaine, Hennawlt ransacked. THe newes which came to Paris, of the Victory obtained against the Arch-Duke before Lens in Artise, upon the twentieth of August, 1648. would have filled all France with perfect joy, had not an unexpected acci∣dent disturbed the feast, and almost put that great City into confusion, ming∣led with blood, and slaughter. For whilest they were giving God thanks for this said Victory;A tumult at Pa∣ris; and why? the people hearing of the imprisonment of Messiours de Brussels, de Charton, and de Blancmesnil, (President of the Parliament) whom they acknowledged for their Fathers, and Protectors; began to cry Alarme, and run in flocks to the Pallace Royall, to require their liberty. The Shops were shut up; the Chaines made fast; and all the approaches bar∣ricaded: So that Paris was in greater disorder now, or else the danger was greater, then that which chanced in Henry the thirds time, till the Queen being supplicated to release them, was content to grant it. And thus,Appeased. was the first bout (which was but precursory to greater evils) past; and a calme restored to that little world, for three, or four moneths. It is very reasonable (say the Strangers) that the Shop where the Coun∣sells of so many wars had been forged, should feel a part of the Calamities, by which Europe hath been so miserably tottered; but the mischiefe falls upon the heads of the innocent. Strange effects of the Divine Providence; which leaves nothing firme, and stable, in this detestable Age; and nothing unpunnished, though deferred. Let us passe to the second, much more dangerous, then the first. The Queen, together with the King, and Princes, went out of Paris, upon the fifth, or sixth of January at night 1649, which clandestine retreat,The King goes out of Paris, which causes a tumult. gave the Inhabitants such an Alarme; as imagining that she would revenge her selfe of the former Commotion, that they took arms again, with as much heate as they had done before, and raised forces to conserve themselves, un∣der the command of the Duke of Beaufort, Elbouf, and Bouillon, as also the Marshal de la Motte; and their chief General was the Prince of Conty. The King raised some also, and there came many to him from all parts, to reduce this great City to reason; he had already seized upon some ap∣proaches, and some hot Skermishes were made, in one whereof,The pretended Duke of Rohan killed. His e∣ducation. that pre∣tended Duke of Rohan was killed, of whose education the Reader will be pleased to hear a word or two, as I have been able to learne it. Being yet an Infant, he was carried into Holland by a certain Captain, and put to nurse to a Country-woman in North-Holland; where together with his milk, he sucked in the love of the Roman Catholick Religion. When he was grown pretty big, he was sent to the Latin Schooles at Leyden; but with so little care, that he was as it were, quite abandoned; and almost re∣duced to the extremity of betaking himselfe to learne some Trade. During this small state, and low condition, he told his School-fellowes (and name∣ly my sonne) that he remembred well, that he was come of a good House, and that he well knew, that he was the sonne of a French Gentleman. He went publickly to the Sermons, and privatly, when he could, to Masse; which being come to the knowledge of some, to whom he was recommen∣ded, without knowing who he was, they forbid him to go to the secret As∣semblies
of the Papists. But in fine, the vizard was taken off, and the Dut∣chesse of Rohan acknowledged him by Letters, for her sonne; sent him men, and mony, to set up his Traine, and bring him into France, where he soone sound his grave; for a Pistoll bullet decided the sure, and the doubt, of whether he were the true sonne of the deceased Duke of Rohan, or no. Paris was in a more dangerous State, then it had been in a long time be∣fore; for the King held S. Dennis, Mewdon, Corbeil, and Lagny; so that, to get out of one extremity, recourse must be had to another, and that to the utter∣most parts of the Kingdom; I mean, they were faine to implore assistance of their Enemies, which being favourably offered, they received it. The Arch-duke goes to sucour. Paris 1649. The Arch-duke Leopold promised to succour the Parliament, against the Perturbatour of the Peace, and quiet of Christendom; for so they tear∣med Cardinal Mazarin; with whom he refused to joyn in Arms to his own great advantage, and the ruin of the Partsians. Wherefore, he departed in March 1649. with very good order, in all parts where he passed; but with discontentment to his Army, which marched in the Enemies Countrey, with their hands tyed, without receaving mony, or daring to take any thing from the Peasants. Goodnesse is sometimes dammageabe; and to spare ones Ene∣mies, is to give them will to hurt him, and deminish his strength. Cardmal Mazarin, seeing the Arch-dukes approach, and Parliaments care for the remedy of the disorders, which threatned the Kingdome with a great breach; gave way to this sterme, which being once joyned, might come to destroy him. So that the Peace was made, all those insurrections were pardoned, and Leopold found, at the bottom of this businesse, what the Duke of Lorrain had told him before. For he was advised to retyre with all speed, for fear least his passage were stopt. A considerable favour in∣deed, for having saved Paris from ruin, with the losse of almost two thousand Horses, which dyed for want of sorrage. This deceipt was imputed to the necessity of the rime; which, when it hath any ground, passes for craft; for otherwise,The peace made it is but meer malice. Parisians, it will be payd you, and your in∣constance will be chastized; for the busines will not be forgotten. The Arch-duke being amazed at this piece of levity, speedily retreated towards his borders,Ypers besieged. and gave the Marquis of Sfondrato order to invest Ypers, which he did the 11th of April, with incredible diligence, having taken some Forts, which facilitated the succour of the Town from Dunkerk; but he found more to doe, then was imagined; for they of the Garrison being, (in number three thousand) having thrust out some fifteen hundred inhabitants, (such as were most suspected) and shut up the Magistrates, the Clergy, and some of the Nobility, in a Cloister, til the Tragedie were finished; made their Artillery sound lowde, and their blowes fall heavy in many sallies; and especially, in that of the 24. of April, when they went and beat up the quarters of the Spa∣niards; which was a most glorious action; for had the succour been ready, the Town had been infallibly delivered from the Siege. In fine, after ha∣ving well defended the Countersearpe, and a Half-Moon, they yeelded themselves up the eighth of May,Renders it self the eighth of May, 1649. after having consumed their powder; and the Garrison, in respect that it was Sunday, went out the tenth, which was Tuesday. St. Venant submitted at discretion, the sixth of April, and the Gar∣rison were made prisoners of War. The French Army, made Rendezvous between Perone, and Guise being a body of five and twenty thousand effective men, under the orders of that fortunate Warrier, the Count of Harcourt; who knowing that the Spanish Troops were scattered and dispersed, marched with speed, incamped, and intrenched themselves before Cambray. Cambray be∣siged and t∣en This un-thought-of surprize did not a little puzed the Arch-duke, who contracting all his forces, hastened, with the Duke of Lorrain, to succour the
place; and so having put in a supply, he obliged the Besiegers to raise the Siege. This done, he sent his Army into Garrison; and the French, out of revenge for this affront, fell into Hennawlt, took Conde, and asked both that, and all the whole County, in such manner as if they had had no intention e∣ver to returne thither again. Then they entred into the Dutchy of Brabant, and carried themselves not a jot better where they passed, then they had done in Hennawlt; so that the Citizens of Brussels found themselves almost in the same apprehension wherein they were, in the year 1635. And so this Field was passed at the losse of the Country-people, and of the lives of some Soul∣diers, who were killed in the skermishes. Champagne, and Luxem∣burgh rifled. The Duke of Wirtembergh, with fower thousand men pillaged Champagne; and General Rose did as much, in the Dutchy of Luxemburgh, and so they all retyred into their Winter-quarters. Obmiserable condition of this most misera∣ble Age, the Sink of all other, which is turned to corruption, by the infection of so much stanghter! They who had tilled, and sowed the land, were knocked in the head for their paines, or starved with their poor Children, in the rigout of Winter, to leave their Harvest for their murtherers! And such as esca∣ped, sled into Holland, to save their unhappy lives by Day-labour. When shall we see an end of all these misfortunes? Alas! It will not be possible, but with the end of the universe. Now, we have finished the Warrs of Germany, and Holland, let us go into the Bishoprick of Liedge, and see with what fuell that fire is made. CHAP. IIII. The tumults in the Province of Liedge. The choosing of a Co∣adjutour. Tumults at Trevirs. The Lorraines, in the King∣dome of Aix, and the Land of Gulick, or Juleers, beate the Country people. The War kindled again at Neaples. THis fatall War is like the Hydra; the more heads are cut off, the more grow up; out of one smothered in one place, their sprang many, in ano∣ther. If this impetuous torrent be stopped, but with the least apparence of good successe, it forthwith breakes out in many places. It is a great emba∣rassement; the more water is cast into it, the more it kindles. Nor may we hope for any amendment, since those horrible effects, which we have now described, and which we yet see dayly happen, will not permit us to doubt, but that this is the last Age. The people of Liedge are very firme Roman Catholicks, and very much love novelty, as well as the French; they are stank, and single-hearted,A description of the City of Liedge. but a little too cholerick, and jealous of their priviledges. The Town is faire, and great; and the Palace, and S. Lamberts Church, of an admirable structure. It is situated in a Bottom, and surrounded by Mountaines, which take away the sight of it, (unlesse one be very neer it,) and it is bathed by the River Moze, which passes both through it and before it. Sciences so much flourished there heretofore, that Historie affirme, that there were fourteen Princes at one time, all Sonnes of Kings, or Soveraignes. At least, it is no hard matter to judge, that it hath been one of the most flourishing Cities of Europe.
In the time of Ferdinand Duke of Bavaria, Elector of Colein, Prince, and Bishop of Liedge, there were some tumults, and complaints tending to the destruction of his authority. For, they cryed aloud, that their Priviledges were not maintained; that the Prince came not to dwell in the Town, and that he did not say Masse, &c. The power of these factions encreased, which pretended nothing but the conservation of Priviledges, and Liberty, the general pretext of all such as love novelty; and strangers endeavoured to blow this fire of division; especi∣ally, after the taking of Mastricht. La Ruelle mur∣thered by the Count of War∣fuses treachery, who was also cut in pieces. The Burgher. Master, or Maior of the Town called La Ruelle, who favoured of the people, and was cherished by them, was justly suspected by his Prince; for Soveraigns will not have the affection of their Subjects divided. So that it was judged, that this thick cloude would power down a great Shower. The Count of Warfuse, after having betrayed his Master, retyred himself into the said Town; where, thinking to wash away the old treason by a new one, and winne the favour of the Prince, to returne to that of the King; cau∣sed the said. Burghermaster to be unhappily murthered, at a Dinner, to which he was invited both him, and the Abbot of Mouzon Resident of France, his confident, who had great intelligence and authority, in the said town: which murther being discovered, whilest it was hot, made the Citizens take Arms, and cut the murtherers in pieces, and so their grew great tumults. Since which time, the leven of the Sedition hath always remained and faction hath held up her head there.Faclions in the Town, under the names of Chi∣roux, and Grig∣noux. Such as kept their respect towards the Prince, took pride to be called Chiroux; and they, who professed themselves for Li∣berty, Grignoux. In fine, the Prince being no longer able to suffer the deminution of his au∣thority, nor the affront which was done him, when he desired to enter into the Town, armed himself to chastize the said Grignoux. He put some thou∣sands of men into the field, under the conduct of Generall Spar; armed the Peasants, and drew neer the Town, whereof he quickly grew Master, by the intercession of the Chiroux,The Prince en∣ters into the Town. and so the difference was drowned, in the blood of both the Burghermasters, and some others who followed. A Cittadell was built, to defend the one from the oppression of the other; yea, to maintain Justice, and the Princes authority, and to represse the insolence of the com∣mon People. A calme being restored to the Town, every body in quiet, and the cabal of the Grignoux destroyed, who had so much laboured under hand for help from the Hollanders, and the French, a coadjutour was elected, and the votes fell unanimously, by divine providence, not upon the Prince of Conty, (whom his Brother endeavourd to establish by fayre meanes, and foule;) but upon Prince Maximilian,Maximilian of Bavaria adje tour. Henry of Bavaria, a most worthy Prelat, and great or∣nament of the Church, who ought to be imitated by all the other, as being the most noble example that could be proposed. There wanted a holy Pa∣stour, for so iregular and undisciplined a Flock. The difference at Trevirs. Almost the same difference hapned of Trevirs for the same subject, but without blood-shed, and with lesse heat, the temperament, or constitution of these being more moderate, then that of the Liedgers. In fine, by the interces∣sion of some Electors, all was appeased, and the Election fell upon the Lord Charles Gasper of Leyen, at present, Arch-bishop, and Elector. The Lorraines beat the Lied∣geoises. 1549. The people of both these Electors had absolution, but they were fain to do pennance; and the Duke of Lorraines Souldiers have often, and some years together since, disturbed their rest. For, they went to seek their Win∣ter-quarter in the year 1649. in the said Province; beat the Country people who presumed to oppose them, and the Characters, or Charms wherewith most of them were furnished, served them for nothing.
In the last Wars of Germany, these superstitions, and obcecations of the Divel, were much put in practice, and were usefull for sometime, but to the ruin of such as trusted in them. The said Duke of Lorrain, having received some satisfaction, drew his forces out of the said Bishoprick, and sent them towards the Kingdome of Aix: which invasion put such a flea in the ear of all the bordering Princes, and the Governour of Mastricht, that they were already complotting an Alli∣ance to fall upon them, who had pillaged some Carts, coming from Boisle∣duc, and sent some Regiments into the land of Ravestein; but they changed their way, and went to the Dutchy of Gulick. There wanted not Muskets, butGold so talled. Pistols, to drive them into the Bishoprick of Trevirs, where they shore the sheep, which had very little more left, then the bare skin, because they had been shorn so often before. One part of them repassed, at the beginning of Summer, into Flanders, and the rest stayed, to hasten the contributions. This Army is at present the most odious, and most revyled of all Europe, because the last evils are more sensible, then the first, which are half-forgot∣ten. Indeed, they do much harme; but the Swedes did much more in Sazony, through the spight which was caused them by the peace of Prague, and through a resentment which they made ring very loud, nor doth this Prince want any indignation, as not having been comprized in that of Munster; thought yet the tyrannies, which his Souldiers have exercised, as well in Germany, as elsewhere, be not excusable. But all these desolations must be imputed to the corruptnesse of this Age, which being cursed, cannot pro∣duce any thing but abhomination, not to be remedied by humane under∣standing. The end of that destructive War of Germany, made all the world see, that the ay me of the French, and Swedes, was quite contrary to what they pretended. For they said alowd, that they took Arms, and came into Ger∣many, to defend the Lutheran Religion, the Liberty of Germany, which lay gasping under the Tyranny of the House of Austria, and for the re-establish∣ment of such as were oppressed. I intreat the reader, whose judgement is not stolne away by passion, to examine with me, the proceedings of both Partyes. In the year 1635. the Swedes would not accept of an excessive summe of money for a recompence, offered them by the Duke of Saxony; in such sort, as that at the Treaty of Munster, they were faine to leave them in the possessi∣on of Pomerania, Wsmar, and the Arch-bishoprick of Bremen to obtain peace, and they abandoned the cause of the Ghospellers, and Reformates, from whom they had drawn most remarkable services, in Austria, Bohemia, Mora∣via, and Silesia. For the satisfaction of France, which served it self of the same pretexts, they were constrained to yeeld it the Rights in the three Bishopricks; leave it Brisack, and a good part of Alsatia (to the losse of a Prince allyed to it by bloud) and forsake the Duke of Lorrains cause. For though Peace were treated, War was neverthelesse carryed on with extremity, and the said Allyes imagined that they should have brought all the forces of the Empire to an end, before it were concluded. But the Hollanders being pacifyed, ob∣liged them to consider, that Fortune often changes; and to content them∣selves, with what they seemed able to keep in all occurrences, or acci∣dents. Thus were the Protectors of the German Liberty, against the Soveraigne Head. The Emperour being attacked by a Vassal of the Empire, despoil∣ed him of his States; and having many times defeated them who acted for him, imposed nothing more upon him for restitution of all his Lands and
Goods, then a meer single acknowledgement of his fault, and a feigned hu∣mility, by asking pardon. I mean, the King of Denmark who entred Ger∣many in an hostil manner, and was beaten; and Ferdinand for the expences of the war, manifested, by restoring him all, that he would have the world know, that he sought not to give jealousie to any, by retaining such States as he had occupated by a just Cause, and by the lot of Arms. Oh you Clarks, who vant so much of the sincority of the intentions of your Masters, and who desire to make things appeare quite otherwise then they are; confess, now what you cannot deny; namely, that their designe was, to fish in troubled waters; and that in stead of the liberty of the Empire, they effectively sought the ruin thereof. Before you make a Family guilty of Ʋsurpation, look first what they are, whom you defend. Give her leave to maintaine her interest, as well as your Masters do theirs; and ne∣ver blame that in others, whereof you are culpable your selves. In this Treaty, the King of Spaines complaints, and the protestations of his Embassadours, concerning the Circle of Burgundy, obtained not that satisfaction they hoped, and expected; for the French had there, too much authority; and so the aforesaid King expressed his resentment thereof, by retaining his Garrison in Frankendal (as we will shew) and manifested, that he was able to cast yet more prejudice upon his enemies. Let us return to Neaples, where there grew to be a greater Combustion, and that of greater vogue, then it was under the command of Aniello. The nearness, and terrour of the Turkish Arms, had not quenched the de∣sire of the Spaniards from punishing (against the Agreement made) the peo∣ple of Neaples.The Comparison of the troubles of Neaples. For the Prophesie concerning Aniello was to be accomplished, as well upon this miserable City, as in his person; the losse of his authori∣ty was to be lamented. Let us make a brief discourse upon this last mis∣fortune, which both for beginning, progresse, and end, was not much unlike that of the Low-Countries. Margaret Dutchesse of Parma, by the wisdom of her Council, dissipated, and quashed all the disorders which sprang up during her Regency,Together with those of the Low-Coun∣tries. and ap∣peased the complaints both of the one, and the other; as the Duke of Arcos also did, by publishing a General Pardon. But the Duke of Alna, by violent examinations, and inquires, awakened what was consopited before, (since all was forgiven, all ought to be forgotten, the relapse very often causing death) cast the people into despair, and into a resolution of shaking off the yoak, both of his, and their Master. Don John of Austria, instead of receiving the honours which were prepa∣red for him, commanded the people to lay down Arms, and thereby aggra∣vated the wound (by the saying of the Pope himself) which was not yet well skinned. For, upon the refusal of some quarters, or parts of the City, the Spaniards began to batter her from three Cittadels, and from some Gal∣lyes also,The cruelties in the Kingdom of Neaples. with so much fury for the space of three dayes together, that it look∣ed, as if they would have buried her under her own ruines. Nor was this all; for they made an attack upon the Citizens, and exercised such cruelties, as are sutable to the conditions of this cursed Age; as pilladg∣ing houses, ravishing women, and maids; massacring Fathers, and Husbands, and committing certain other prime pranks, and exercises, which were wont to be done there, and which are ordinarily pra∣cticed in one Times; besides cutting the throats of Infants, murther∣ing the sick in the Hospitals, through reciprocal hatred, and demolishing Churches, to serve them for defenses. Albis prophaned: all Society broken! Oh God! O Great Judge! I may say, with the great St. Jerome, that when I consider these slaughters, me thinks, I already heare thy trumpet, which bids us march. Ah! how dangerous a thing it is, to break promise with a people, which have newly laid down Arms? For if you once bring them to despair,
there will be no means to appease them by any promise. The Duke of Guise goes to Neaples. The Neapolitans armed again, breathed nothing but vengeance; desired the protection of France, and the Duke of Guise for their Commander-Ge∣neral. All which being promised them, they stopped their eares to a Re∣conciliation, and strangled their Governour Foralto, after having barba∣rously dismembred, and mangled him, for having advised them to peace; yea, there were no cruelties so enormous and unnatural, but they put them in practice. Gennaro Annese caused the Streets which led towards the Cittadels, to be stopped up; and the Spaniards, seeing the fire too great to be extinguished by their Arms, endeavoured to restore the said Cittadels into the Popes hands, who refused them. The Adiacent Parts succoured the City with victuals; the Bandites took, and sacked other Towns; and the Duke of Metelona, who kept the Field with some forces, gave the Neapolitans no quarter; but they rendred him quid for quo. The Duke of Guise arrived, ordered all things, and besiedged Capisa in vaine. In short, all was full of plunder, blood, and fire. Oh! Austria? where art thou? Faith, Hope, and Charity, where are you? Where are the Commandments of God? Let us go out of this Labyrinth, for these particulars make ones hair rise on ones head; let us see the end (I say) of these abominations here, to go and seek them elsewhere. The Count of Oneate, newly made Vice-King, and a second Prince of Parma in prudence, allayed all these disorders, by an enterprise, the good successe whereof made him renowned, and glorious. For, upon a fair op∣portunity, he rendred himselfe Master of the Gates, and all the people also, with small resistance; some will needs say, by treason. In so much, as all the said people began suddainly to cry Live the King of Spain, which some dayes before had cryed, Live the King of France. All was pardoned, and the Imposts taken off by favour, without constraint. The Duke of Guise was pursued, taken prisoner, and carried into Spain,Is made priso∣ner, and carri∣ed into Spain. together with some o∣ther French Lords. All was re-established as it was before the troubles, Te Deum sung, and the Count of Oneates merits elevated to the Skies. Oh the inconstance of things of this world! For this Sedition was appeased,The Peace made. when it was conceived, that it would have made the Flower de Luces flour∣ish again, throughout the whole Kingdom. Thus was the blood stenched, which by the continual streames thereof, was to stifle the Authority of the House of Austria. These were the effects of the Divine goodness, which by a special grace, would save a City, when human prudence saw it tending towards utter de∣solation, without being able to recover it. Now, after the description of so many calamities suffered, and after the publication of the Peace, amongst all the Towns of this great Body, which was fatigated, and exhausted both of blood, and strength, we will rest a lit∣tle, and take breath with it; and then prepare our selves to go to the Ju∣bily.
CHAP. V A Jubily at Rome. The Princes imprisoned. The Princesse of Condè, the Duke of Boüillon, and other Lords, retire themselves to Bourdeaux; and the Dutches of Longueville, and the Vice-Count of Turenne to Stenay. The Allyance is made. The Duke of Orleans in Flanders; and a digression upon that Subject. I Was thinking to make a full stop in the middle of this Age, as hoping that the Great God, being moved by so much blood-shed, would stop his scourge, and cast his rod into the fire; but alas! It is not yet done; for it seems, that they who contributed to the desolation of the Empire, must now feel the effects of his indignation, in their own States. They danced in Germany, and now the Revel is amongst them at home, to the end that all may be accomplished. If they have made some Con∣quests, they will pay deare enough for them. Whosoever takes a firy coale in his hand, shakes, and stirs it gently, and shuts not his hand for feare of burning it. My designe, in the rem∣nant of this matter, is to do the like, and to handle it so tenderly, as not to burne my selfe, in a season, when the World is so easily toucht, and when truth is hardly able to finde a lodging. The great Ju∣bily. Whilest the City of Rome was full of Strangers, who came thither either out of curiossity, or for devotion, to the great Jubily, and whilest Pope Innocent was addressing his prayers to God for a General Peace, the war marched still on, as before. The Imprisonment of the Princes of Conde, and Conty, and of their Brother in Law the Duke of Longueville,The Imprison∣ment of the Princes, 1550. was likely to bring Paris a∣gaint into trouble, in order to the Duke of Beaufort, who was repor∣ted to be of the number; and gave such as were curiours, desire to finde out the ground of so great a Change. The Princesse of Condè retired her selfe to Bourdeaux, where the Duke of Boüillon, and many other great Lords came to her, who for the hatred they bore Cardinal Mazarin, and the Duke Espernon, were all most welcome to her, and found both safety, and authority there; and the Marshal of Turenne found favour also at Brussels. The Dutch∣esse of Longueville got abord a Vessel, which lay off before the Haven of Deep, and passed into Holland, and thence to the Province of Luxemburgh, to make a streight Allyance with the Arch-Duke Leo∣pold. A Manifest pub∣lished, concer∣ning their de∣tention. The King published a Manifest concerning the detention of the Prin∣ces, the chiefe points whereof were the Prince of Conde's too great power, and insatiable ambition, which too visibly checked the Sover∣aigne Prerogative. This proceeding caused a great alteration in the Court, and bur∣thened the Cardinal with too much hatred, to let him sleep so securely, as to forget the care of his own preservation. The Queen her selfe was not spared, and such Officers of the Court, as were the said Car∣dinals Creatures, wanted not their full measure.
The Allyance with the Arch-Duke. The Viz-Count of Turenne having raised a great summe of money in Ste∣nay, caused the Drummes to be beaten, and confirmed a most straight Allyance with the aforesaid Arch-Duke; the principall conditions whereof, were, that neither Party should lay down Armes, till the Princes were released, the Duke of Lorraine restored to his States, Se∣dan rendered, and a firm Peace concluded between the two Crownes. Which done, they began to raise forces, and the Spaniards disposed themselves to put theirs into the field. The common opinion, that the Spaniard sowes dissention in France, re∣futed. It is the opinion of many persons, that the King of Spain endeavoured to corrupt the greatest part of the Nobleman of France with money, and sowed sedition, and revolt amongst them, with this glittering mettall; as if that Nation were not unquiet, and turbulent enough of it self, without his being necessitated to draine his Treasures to move it. And yet sup∣pose that he did it, it was no more, then what is ordinarily practised every where, when there is an apparence of profit, (being incited thereto by Reason of State) and then what was done by King Lewis the eleventh in England, and elsewhere. But to what purpose should it serve him, save only to spend his mony unprofitably enough, as appeared by their inconstance? Many of them have often retyred themselves into his Dominions, to seek their own security, and his protection: both which they have found, and an honourable maintenance to boot; but how have they taken their leave? Lewis the eleventh being yet in his Dolphin-age, withdrew himself to the Duke of Burgundy; and for recompence, as soon as he was in the Royall Throne, he began, and continued a war upon the Burgundlans. But let us stay in our Age, where we shall finde matter enough. The Duke of Orleans twice at Brussels. The Duke of Orleans fled twice to Brussels, cast himself into the King of Spalnes arms, who succoured him, protected him, and gave him an honou∣rable allowance, together with his Mother the Queen. But being once re∣conciled, (and even after the King his Brothers decease) he employed him∣self with as much heat as the most mortall enemy in the world, to make warre in Flanders; so to destroy his own Sanctuary,And other Lords. and spoyl his Pro∣tectour, when all that people thought, he would fix all his thoughts upon Peace. The Dukes of Guise, and Elbenf, followed the same trace; the former in Italy, and the latter, in Flanders. And what shall we say of the Marshall of Turenne, and the Allyance so solemnly sworne with the Arch-Duke? The issue shewed, that he returned with the same le∣vity, before the work was finished, and so rendred that fair Field intru∣ctuous. This is the profit of the Spanish Cathalicon, and this the founda∣tion, upon which the King built his Conquests; or rather this is the re∣compence of his liberality. I praise the fidelity of the French, but I blame their inconstance; and pre∣sume to say aloud, that the first obligation cannot dispense with the second, made freely, and without constraint. Nor are there many such examples to be found amongst other Nations; yea, and it would be very ill taken in France, if a stranger, after having found his sanctuary there, should, after his reconciliation, labour to make war against it. Maurice Duke of Saxony, Albert of Brandenburgh, and some others, made a League with Henry the second, for the Liberty of Germany; but findings that the French, instead of Liberty, layd hold of some Places, they reconci∣led themselves with the Emperour; and yet were they taxed of perfidy, at the Court of France. The Count of Fustenbergh, having withdrawne him∣self from the service of King Francis the first, and returned into the Empe∣rours favour, was beaten, in seeking a passage upon the River of Marne, and
like to be knocked in the head for his ingratitude. But let us returne to our purpose. The renducli∣on of Belle-garde. 1650. The King having assured himself of Normandy, and many Places held by the Prince of Condes Lieutenants, caused Bellegarde to be besiedged, which quickly submitted for want of succour, and he rendred the Inhabitants their Priviledges. Let us passe the Sea. Charles Stew∣art goes into Scotland. The Scots being Assembled at Edenburgh, resolved to take Charles Stewart for their King; to which effect they sent Commissioners to treat with him at the Haghe, and proclaimed him King of Scotland, and England; which extremely offended the Parliament at London. He departed from Scheveling; and we will let him go in great dan∣ger, to behold the honour which was done Generall Cromwell, for having reconquered almost all Ireland; the Natives whereof being mo∣ved to take Armes by zeal of Religion, and respect to the said Charles, implored the assistance of the Pope, and some other Christian Princes, but not being seconded,The Irish ta∣med, and pu∣ished. and falling into division amongst themselves, they were easily tamed, and chastized, as well for having taken Arms, as for having abused the English. The Diet at Nurembergh. In the same yeare, the Diet was held at Nurembergh; where, af∣ter the agreement was made about the restitution of Places, and the Assessement for moncy to pay the souldiers, the rest of the time was spent in Visits, and sumptuous Banquets, Festivities, and Fire∣works of rate workmanship, and skil. The Duke of Amalsi (former∣ly Piccolomini) was there on the behalfe of the Emperours, and ac∣quired great admiration, and Duke Charles for the Crowne of Sweden? Some Counts were forced to pawne their wives Jewells, and other Ornaments, to be so much the sooner rid of these troublesome Guests. Thus, the Germans were whipt, and payd for the Rodde; for they were faine to give whatsoever they had left, to recover that which was growne savage, and desert. The States of the Empyre sent an Embassadour expresse into Spain, to beseech the King to draw his Garrison out of Frankendal; which was granted at length, that so the Peace might have full vigour, as we will shew hereaster. But since the Embassadours depart from Nurembergh, let us go also out of Germany, and hasten downe the Rheyn into Holland, to see what passes there, concerning the reduction of the Militia, and o∣ther accidents. Who will bee able to hide himselfe from the face of the Lord;
CHAP. VI Containing what passed in the Summer of this yeare of 1650. The Portugal Embassadours offers. The Fleet in the Indies does nothing. The Princ's complaints. The Siedge of Amsterdam. The Imprisonment of six Lords, who were carried to Louvestein The Prince of Oranges death. His Prayer. THe Zelanders, before they would ratifie the Peace, (which they did with an ill will, as well in regard of France, as for the profit of some particu∣lar persons, who were wont to go to the Cape of Grip) would needs be assu∣red of a prompt supply for the Company of the little Indies,The estates of Orphans in Zeland, employ∣ed in the Com∣pany of the In∣dies. which was grown to decay by the revolt of Portugal. Which was granted them, because the Goods, and Estates of many widowes, Fatherless children, and other per∣sons of mean condition, had been employed for the erection of the said Company. The Portugue∣ses make them∣selves Masters of Brazil. The Portugueses, complaining of the cruelty, and avarice of the souldi∣ers, took Arms, and by the help of some certain Traitors, made themselves Masters of the whole Countrey, save only the Rocif, a strong place, built in the Sea. This action stirred up the United Provinces to revenge; and so they speedily accommodated a great Fleer, to go and reconquer the said Country. The Portugal Embassadour at the Haghe, used all possible dili∣gence, to divert this storm, and made offers of high consideration; to wit, either to render the said Country, or to give so many millions for the Rein∣bursement of the Zelanders; but it was in vain, for the Fleet set sayle with a multitude of good souldiers; but the Expedition proving fruitless, and the Ex∣pences unprofitable, the said Company remained almost without pulse, and Vice-Admiral Wit Wittenson, having been constrained to abandon the said Country, for want of releif, was arrested at the Haghe, to answer the obje∣ctions made against him for his so speedy retreat. The States of Holland will dismisse some Troops. Since that time, there hath been other fish to fry, and other knots to un∣tye, which have caused that to be for gotten. For the States of Holland being willing to play the good husbands, thereby to discharge themselves of a part of their debts; considered that it was necessary to licentiate, or dismiss part of their forces on foot, to be eased of so much useless expence.The Prince op∣poses it. The Prince of Orange opposed this design, alleadging against them, how dangerous it was, to disfurnish themselves of the souldiets, during the war between the two Crowns. They urged a Reduction, and a yearly Pension for such Officers as should be deposed; but the difficulty being found greater, by the oppug∣nance of some Provinces, and chiefly the Dutchy of Guelders: it was held fit,And goes amongst the Townes. that the said Prince should go amonst the Towns to dispose the Magistrates to let the Militia remain in the same state wherein it was, and to content themselves with that dismission of the new Troops, which was already made. In effect, the Colonels, having received orders, to keep their souldi∣ers together, the Prince went to Dort the ninth of June, and after he had been at Delfe, Rotterdam, Gorkom, Dergawde, &c. He returned the sixteenth of the same moneth, to the Haghe. The Petition which was made him by two Deputies of Amsterdam, not to come into their Town, seemed not pleasing to him, as appeared by what followed. Upon the twenty seventh of the aforesaid moneth, the Deputies who had
accompanyed him, made report to the Assembly of States, that the Answer of the Towns had been different;Some whereof refuse to give audience. ane that, some of them, as Harlem, Dolst Amsterdam, and Medemblick, had refused him audience, and had remitted the businesse to the Haghe, to be there decided by their Deputies. Complaines. Upon the 30 the prince complained alowd, to the Colledge of the States, of the refusal made him by them of Amsterdam, which was against his dig∣nity, and respect, as also against the greatnesse of the Province of Holland, whereof he was Governour: affirming that this proceeding tended to the deminution of his authority, and contempt of his person; wherefore he de∣sired that reparation, and satisfaction might be made him, by the Ma∣gistrates of the said Town.The answers. To which the Deputies wanted no answer, but alledged their Rights, as may be seen in the Declaration of both parties, to which I refer the Reader. It was generally believed, that these complaints would have gone no fur∣ther, and that they would have been peacefully resolved in the Cabinet; when on a suddain,Six Lords ta∣ken. the news came, that the Prince had caused six Lords to be seazed upon; namely De Witt, Burghermaster, or Mayor of Dort; John Dust of Delft; John de Wael, Burghermaster, and the Syndick Reul, both of them of Harlem; the Syndick Keyser de Horne, and Stellinguerf of Me∣demblick; some of them Deputies, and others Counsellers. Whilest all the world was waiting to know the subject of this so extra∣ordinary Imprisonment, there came other news more strange then this; which struck the ears of every one in particular, filled all Holland with a∣mazement, and the curious with desire to see the Issue. When waters which have been stopped, find passage, they make them∣selves heard with more violence, and at a greater distance; then those which have but their natural course. The Prince not having received satisfactions, his complaints were to be manifested; but in what manner? Every body knows. The night of the twenty ninth, or thirtieth of July (a remarkable night and day) till next morning, being Satterday, and all quiet at Amsterdam, the Post of Hamburgh arrived about eight of the clock, and brought word to the magistrates,Troops straight to Amsterdam. that he had met a Troop of Horse; which was confirmed by the Drossart of Muide, and that there were many more which marched straight to the Town; alongst the Coast of the South Sea. There was but one of the Burghermasters then in Town; who forthwith assembled the said Magistrates, and provided the Town, against these forces which the peo∣ple thought to be the Duke of Lorraines.Thought to be the Duke of Lorrains. The Gates were instantly shut, and resolution taken to put some companies of men in Arms; to which effect, the Drummes were beaten, with so great concourse, that in a very few howers,They run to Arms. the Souldiers, and Canon were seen upon the Walls, and all in a posture of defence, as well on the side of the water, as that of the Land. This City, being the most famous, and most celebrated of the whole uni∣verse, in regard of the Traffick, and infinity of the vessess which arrive there from all the Havens of the world, had not had any Alarme, in eighty years before; and yet she lest not to bestir her self for her own preservation, and the security of the commerce. A very dark night. It is to be noted, that that night was so dark, and rainy, that it deprived the Souldiers of the knowledge of the wayes, and of the strength to march stedfastly: In such sort, as the guydes stayed, and being puzled at a crosse∣way, made the Van march as soon as they found themselves right; but the rest wandered so much up and down, that they found themselves, in the same Village an houre after. The Magistrates, having caused the Bridges to be drawn up, dispatched their Deputies to ask Count William, to what end he came thither with so great
forces? Whereupon he put this little Paper of the Princes into their hands, which said, That he had lately been very Ill received in their Town,The Princes Letter. whether he came for the service of the Common Native Country; and to the end that the like might be done him no more, he had sent Count William of Nassaw; to put all in quiet, that so that which he had yet to propose for the Countries service, might not be hindred by such as were ill affected. Let us returne to the Hague. The Prince having made himself sure of the aforesaid Lords, sent for the Pensioner Gatz, and acquainted him with his having secured them, and told him, that he had sent sixty companies of Horse and Foor, to Amsterdam, un∣der Count Williams conduct, whom he believed to be infallibly already,The States se∣parated them∣selves. in the Town; which being reported by him to the Assembly of the States, they forthwith retired; and the Deputies of Amsterdam, having taken a cow ple of Waggons went by the way of Harlem, and arrived at Amsterdam,The gard invi∣rons the Court, at eight of the clock in the evening; and about eleven, the Princes Gard with five companies more invested the Court. There were so great changes that they made some murmour, and others blame the Peace with the Spaniards; and cast in fine, all the Hollanders into such astonishment, that they knew not how to free themselves from it.The Peasants fly. The Coun∣try people about Amsterdam fled; and no body knew, either what to hope, or feare. The rich were silent, and the dreggs of the People spake. What State can be sure of being free from War, since Holland, being in the middle of the Water, sees her self precipitated into these disquiets, in full peace? God, who governsall, knows why, since nothing is done, without his providence. The reasons why those Lords are detained; they are carried to Louvestein, The Prince gave the six other Provinces to understand, upon what grounds he had seazed upon the aforementioned Lords, whom he sent with a good Gard, to Louvestein the last of July; and having received notice, of what had passed, he transported himself on Sunday, to Amsterveen, a Village neer Amsterdam. In the mean while, Souldiers flocked thither from all parts; and it looked as if they would besiege the Town, in good earnest: which being perceived by the Inhabitants, they opened the Sluces, and made a shew of breaking the Damms,The Slucer open in case they were put to greater extremity; so that by little and little, the Country began to be covered with water, when the Inhabitants of Harlem, observing the Prince was come to lodge, with some companies, neer the banck between their Town and Am∣sterdam, took a fright, and resolved at the same time, to dispatch their De∣puties towards him, who returned with answer, that they should be quiet, and that he had nothing at all to say to their Town. But they of Amsterdam seeing his resolution, forgot nothing which concerned their liberty. In fine, the third of August, the accommodation was made, with articles of advan∣rage enough to the Prince, who withdrew his forces,The peace is made and the forces with∣draw. and thereby rendred Peace to all Holland: and indeed, had this Siege lasted yet some dayes lon∣ger, it would have caused an irreparable dammage; which was grown already, by the interruption of commerce, to be of some millions to the be∣sieged. The Siege knows before. We must not omit to take notice here, of a very remarkable things which is, that some Marchants, some weeks before this Siege, received ad∣vertizements from London, Dantzick and Genna, that Amsterdam was besie∣ged by Prince William. The States, in this conjuncture, determined to draw the difference to the Haghe;The Libels run. and malicious Pens lest not to vomit up their venim against them of Amsterdam; for a certain Libel ran up and down of articles ordered with them of the Parliament of England. In brief, ill tongues were as busy, as ill Penus, and the Prince himself was not spared. Thus passed this first attack, which was but precursory to a pernicious war, whereof weshal make mention in fit place.
Albeit it seemed, that the poison was taken off, and all pacified, distrust increased daily,Distrust. and they of Amsterdam had alway es an eye upon the Coun∣try. The Prince sent the reasons of his proceedings to the Assembly of the States, in writing; but the Paper was sent back, without being opened, and the Prisoner's released, without any other condition, then that of being thenceforth deprived of Publick Employments.The Prince goes to the Assembly of the Stares of Guelders. He went to the Assembly of the Dutchy of Guelders; where having, by his prudence, scattered some disorders between the Nobility and the Towns,Returns is the Haghe. he returned to the Haghe, in some indisposition of health, the twenty nineth of October was let blood, the thirtieth, the day following, the small pocks appeared upon him; and the sixth,His death. against the opinion of all the Physitians (his sicknesse being aug∣mented) he departed out of this world, in the four and twentieth year of his age, leaving behinde him a young widow with childe, who being after∣wards delivered of a young Prince, delivered the House of Nassaw, and such as were well affected to it, from part of the grief which was caused by his death. The vecital of his life. He was a Prince of a great wit, which he testified in the Conference he had with the Deputies of Amsterdam, as also in many other occasions. He was handsome of body, and given to such vices as are ordinary companions to youth: Above all, he was infatigable on horse-back, and sooner tired his horses, then himselfe. He was already his Crafts-master in war, to which he much inclined, and promised to follow the steps of his Ancestours. He knew well how to make himselfe both feared, and obeyed. Let us now see the miserable end of the brave Earle of Montrosse. CHAP. VII The deplorable death of the magnanimous Earle of Montrosse. The War of the Polanders, against the Cossacks. Brave Mon∣trosses praise. VErtue was never so universally oppressed, as in this miserable Age: Witnesse Montrosse, a Souldior of merit, and illustrious extracton; who had rendred his Master so considerable services in the Kingdom of Scotland, that his enemies effectively feared him; and after, he had laid down Anns, by his said Masters commandment, he did him yet such other ser∣vices by Embassyes, as made him admired, for the dexterity of his wit. During the Treaty of the commissioners with Charles Sinart his young Master at Breda, he went into Scotland, contracted some Forces, to such as he carried with him from abroad, and entred the Kingdom upon hope of the good successe of the said Treaty.Is beater. But his Troops were defeated, he e∣scaped by swimming, and lay hid some dayes amongst the Reeds. In fine, after he had been forced by hunger,His mistry. (which drives the Wolfe out of the Wood) to eat his gloves, and the very flesh of his Arm, he was discove∣red by a Peasant; taken prisoner, brought before the Parliament at Eden∣burgh, and accused of entring into the Kingdom, against the order of his bannishment, and other crimes: To all which, he answered with a consi∣dent aspect, that he had done nothing but for his Masters service, and that by his partionlar Command. During the reading of his Sentence, he neither changed colour, nor coun∣tenance; and when he was upon the Cart,His igneminious death. he made a speech, which de∣clared his innocence, and so was hangged upon a gallowes fifty Cubits high,
Gosimirus King of Poland Great Duke of Lithuanice. &c / &c. Ao. 1649
and then quartered. This, was the end of the best, and noblest Servant his Master had in Scotland; and had be lived, it is very likely, that the Scots would not have fallen into so many calamities, nor his said Master have been so easily overthown, in the middle of England. But what do the Polanders do? Are they in peace? Are they exempt from the mischiefs, under which all the rest of Christendom lies growning? Let us step a little that way. After the Truce was made with the Swedes, the Common-wealth of Poland was without enemies, and in repose, which yet was disturbed by the Cossacks; a people which follow the Greek Religion, and depend upon the Govern∣ment of Poland,The Cossacks. which they are obliged to serve on horse back against the Turks, and Tartars, whose passage they stop. But for the rest, they are hard to be ruled, and are wont to receive the Peasants, whom the tyranay of the Gentry drives out of Poland, as also many others, for any wickedness, or oftence committed. The death of victorious King Ʋladislans; some Churches which were taken from them; and a certain Gentleman called Chimenelisky, who was their Head, and Leader, made them take Arms,Take Arms. against the said Common-wealth. For this General, seeing the occasion fair to revenge himself of the affront which had been done him by some certain Lords, put the Cossacks in∣to the Field, beat the Polish Armies twice, and by these Victories, opened the way into the Kingdom, which was exposed to the cruelty,Beat the Po∣landers. barbarity, and infamous avarice of this dreggy people. The Peasants chastised in Li∣tuania. The fire flamed up again towards Litnaria, and the Peasants began also to revolt; but Prince Radzivil repressed them. Pinskow was reduced into ashes, and the Inhabitants, for example to others, put to the Sword. The King goes into the Field, a Battel. Prince Casimir being chosen and crowned King at Warsaw, went himself into the Field, with his Army, to stop the progresse of the said Turks and Tartars, who were joyned together. The Battel was given, and the Enemies,The Peace made. after a stubborn Combat of five hours long, retired with confusion enough, and put themselves in posture again the next day; for the number of them amounted to above three hundred and ninety thousand men. In fine, the Peace was made, the Tartars returned malcontent, the Priviledges of the said Cossacks were confirmed, and Chimenelisky pardoned. This newes came to Prince Radzivil, who was in these termes with his Ar∣my. He had beaten the Rebels; taken many Towns, and was of resolution to go and affront the rest; but he returned, and retired to Vilna. Religion acted her part, in this war, as the jealousie which, the Polanders ordinarily have of their King, did also hers. The Peace had so much rest, and quiet, as distrust, and turbulent spirits are wont to afford; and so by consequence,It dares not long. it lasted not long; for Chimenelisk, having attacked the Prince of Moldavia, would needs compel him to give his Daughter in marriage to his Son, which Prince Radzivil the said Princes Son in Law, endeavoured to hinder. This General seeing the Armies in the Field, and the war resolved (he, who had corresponce in Poland) sent his Embassadours to Constantinople, of whose ex∣pedition we shall speak hereafter. For France, in the bickerment of Civil and Forraigne wars, gives us no more leasure to stay any longer here. The French, being the most affectionate almost of all other Nations to the service of their King, could not endure to see the direction of affaisin a forraign Ministers hands (and indeed other Nations would never have suffered it) so jealous are they of the confirmation of their Rights: and by consequence were extreamly irritated by the imprisonment of the Princes;The Orders of the Parliament of Bourdeaux. and the Parliament of Bourdeaux renewed the Order given against the Mar∣quis d'Ancre, which contained that no Stranger should ever more have the great Ministery, or Intendency of the Kingdom.
Whilest the Arch-Duke, and the Vice-Count of Turenne were busie about sending the Armies into the Field, and that this latter refused all the con∣ditions which were offered him; the French presented the said Arch-Duke a Peace, with the Articles of Munster, which he would not accept of; where∣upon a certain French Writer exclaimes, and sayes, that it is a convincing argument that the Spaniards will not have peace. But this, is but to amuse the poor people. For doth he not know, that the time is changed; and that there was then a necessity of taking whatsoever was offered. Occasion is bald behind. The Spanish Army attacked Guise, and took it by Assault; but the Castle holding out,The Spaniards before Guise. and the news of the defeat of the Convoy being come, made them retyre in hast, with the losse of many men, which hunger caused to runaway. The said Convoy consisted of about fifteen hundred horsemen, who had every one a bag of powder upon his back,Retyred with losse. and carried bread to the Camp; but being attacked by four hundred men only, they threw down their burthens, and fled. Thus were the first fruits of this Field spoyled; and the Cardinal, who knew not which way to turn himself, to quench the fire, went towards Bourdeaux, to force the Allyes, and the said Town, to repentance for their faults, leaving Champagne open to the enemies. It was conceived, that the King, by his presence, would have reduced them all to their duty: but it proved quite otherwise; for Mazarin raised more partialities, hatred, and obstinacy. The Arch-Duke, seeing the occasion faire, sent his Army into the said Province, took Retel, and many other small Places, and gave ter∣rour to the Gates of Paris. The Princes, for better securities sake, were carried to Marcoussy, and from thence, to Haure de grace. Take Retel. And the propesi∣tion of Peace being vain. They goe to Mouzon, and take it. The Arch-Duke wrote from Basoche to the Duke of Orleans, about a Peace, who sent him an answer of the same substance, but without ef∣fect. The Spaniards having unprofitably consumed this Field, went and be∣sieged Mouzon, which they took with much difficulty; as wrestling with the raines, and the overflowing of the River, which caused many sicknesses amongst the souldiers, who were beaten into their winter quarters by the season.Te Deum is  is sung at Brus∣sels, and at Pa∣ris, and why? Te Deum was sung at Brussels, for the happy successe of the Kings Armies, as well in Catalunie, for the reduction of Tortosa; as in Italy, for the taking of Piambino, and Portolongone, as also that of Mouzon in France, which had been so faithfully defended by the waters of the Moze. It was also sung at Paris, with no lesse joy, for the recuperation of Bourdeaux, and Retel, with the defeat of the Vice-Count of Turennes forces. See here, how things passed. The Inhabitants of Bourdeaux, having conceived an irreconcileable ha∣tred against the Duke of Espernon (as we have already said) declared them∣selves for the Princes. The Duke of Boüillon and the Duke de la Rochefancant raised a great Army. But by the intercession of the Duke of Orleans, all such as acted for the Princes,The Accord made at Bour∣deaux. 1650 were pardoned, Arms laid down, every body resto∣stored to favour, and the Dutchess of Boüillon delivered. There was none but the Princess Dowager of Conde, who could not digest this bitterness; for ta∣king the detention of her children too much to heart, and the repulse of her suits,The Princesse Dowagers death, she grew at last to yeeld under the burthen of her afflictions, and left this vale of misery, to go and take possession of the holy Jerusalem. The King made his entrance into Bourdeaux the first day of October, in a most sumptuous, and stately Gally, which was sent him by them of the Town, where he was received with all testimonies of joy, and a Generall Vive le Roy where he passed: And the seventh of the same moneth, he de∣parted for Paris. Cardinal Mazarin seeing the number of his enemies increase, resolved to stop their monthes with a glorious action, which proved usefull to the
State, and served for an evidence to all Europe, that his Ministery was ad∣vantagious both to the King and kingdom of France. He puts the Militia in order, gave the souldiers money, conducted the Army straight to Retel, and after having given it three Assaults,Mazarin re∣takes Retel. made the Spaniards march out. The Vice-Count of Turenne being a brave souldier, (for whose valour some certain Towns in Germany had declared themselves for him) forthwith brought his Troops into the Field, hastened to succour the Place, and gave the besieged an advertisement of the reliefe, but too late. He advanced with six thousand horse, for his foot could not follow; but he was charged by the Marshall of Prastin, and after a resistance which cost much blood, defeated. The Spaniards beaten. The Spaniards recollected themselves in the Province of Luxemburgh, and the Conquerours went to take up their winter quarters in Normandy, and Lorraine, where the Count of Lignevills progresse was soon stopped;And the Lor∣raines. for be∣ing beaten by the Marquis of Seneterre, he was compelled to march away, with the losse of about nine hundred men, and four pieces of Canon. This year, the Deputies of the Cantons of Swisserland arrived in France, to present their complaints, and they were contented. There needed no lesse then a whole Army to force the Leidgers, or people of Leidge, to open their purses; and the Swedes, having obtained the tax of Contributions, repas∣sed the Rhein. The Princes demand the Investure. The evacuation being finished in Germany, and the Embassadours rety∣red, the Princes sent an Embassie to the Emperour, to demand the Inve∣sture of their Fief. The King of Denmark asked it, for the Dutchy of Hol∣stein, by Monsieur de Rantzow, who returned with the honour of the title of Count. After these honours, followed the Reformations almost every where; I would to God, that abuses, andill customes were also reformed, with as much zeal! The Goods of the Swissers arrested since the precedent year, caused many complaints, and menaces, which produced a meer restitution only. Let us take a turn into Spain, with the Emperours daughter newly espowsed to the Catholick King, who was every where received, with magnificent pomps, and honours; but principally, at Madrid; where there was at the same time, an Embassadour from the Grand Signor,The Embassa∣dour from the Turk in Span. who being brought to a most state∣ly Audience, adorned with Diamants, and precious stones, first condoled the Queens death, then congratulated the new marriage, and demanded a private audience for his Commission. The tenour of his letter of credence was, To the most Glorious of all Christian Princes, from Aly Solyman Lord of the House of the Ottomans, &c. First, He offered the Holy Sepulcher. Secondly, True Commerce, without further exercise of Piracy. Thirdly, He proposed a match between Don John of Austria, and the Sul∣tanesse, (of whom we formerly spake, and who was now become Catholick at Maltha) promising him a kingdom under the Turk. And Fourthly, and lastly. That all prisoners might be released on both sides. The Presents were rich, and noble, and the Embassy (in apparence) faire; but the issue thereof declared, that all was but Com∣plement. The Residents of the Parlia∣ment massacred at Madrid, and at the Haghe. Mr. Anthony Ascam being arrived at the same Court, in the quality of Re∣sident for the Parliament of England, found his Tragicall end there, as Do∣ctor Dorislaw had already found his, at the Haghe, Charles Stewarts Embassa∣dour being introduced to his Audience, fell forthwith a weeping, and there∣by moved the King to compassion. The King of Portugal by favouring Prince Robert, caused the English Fleet
to come, and lye before his Havens, which put him to so much dammage, that both he, and his subjects had leasure to repent themselves, of having of∣fended that Parliament. CHAP. VIII. Blakes Fleet in Portugal. Charles Stewart in Jersy. The Kings Lands, and Goods sold. The aforesaid Charles goes into Scotland. The English go thither, with an Army. The Scots are beaten. The continuation of the war in Candie. War by the Pen. The Spanish Embassadour at London. The Chineses turned Catholicks. IT is in the Britannick Islands, that Bellona now exercises her rage; for she hath established her sear there, and looks, as if she would stay some time. Charles was in the Isle of Jersy, where he distributed Commissions, to fall upon the English ships, and spoyle their Trade. But, upon a certain advice which was given him,General Blake before the Ri∣ver of Lisbone. The Kings Goods sold. he departed; and Generall Blake went, and shut up. Prince Robert in the River of Lisbone, whilest the Kings Goods were sold at London; as namely, his three Crownes, his Scepter, the Golden Gar∣ter, all the Jewels, Pictures, Images, Rarities, and whatsoever else of price, and value. Some put the Crownes upon their Heads, the Garter about their Legs, and took the Scepter in their hands, saying, Look, how well these Ornaments become me. Who would have imagined such a change? The mony which was made of these said Goods, was employed upon the States service. They passed yet further, they brake down the Kings Statue, upon the old Exchange, and set up this Inscription; Exiit Tyrannus Re∣gum ultimus. The Parliament searing lest Charles, through some good success, should come, and disturb the Peace of England, by means of some Creatures of his there, laboured to prevent him; and Fairfax having surrendred his Com∣mission, to that most renowned Captain Generall Cromwell, he marched with an Army of sixteen thousand men, to face the Scots, who were above five and twenty thousand; killed above three thousand of them upon the place,Cromwels vi∣ctory over the Scots. and took above ten thousand prisoners; for the rest run away, to pub∣lish the glory of the Nation. Indeed, he had as good success, as Don John of Austria, who lost but nine men in the Battail near Namurs; and he lost but about twenty in this; yea, and he got this as good cheap, as he had that of Marquis Hamilton, whom he utterly defeated the year before in England, with a handful of men. It was conceived, that there were some Traitors amongst that Nation (which yet is faithfull enough) and that they who had sold their King, were yet alive to sell this Army. This great victory rendred Generall Cromwells name most renowned and glorious;Who takes Edenburgh and other places, 1651, opened him the Gates of Edenburgh, Leeth, and many other Townes; and cast the poor King of the Scots into great apprehensions; who entring once into Edenburgh, and seeing the miserable relicks of the unfortu∣nate Montrosse,Charles in Scotland. had much adoe to abstain from tears: but upon the sad news of the death of his Brother-in-Law the Prince of Orange, he obtained leave to take them down. Amongst all other vexations, he had much adoe to sa∣tisfie the importunity of the Ministers, and to discern the faithfull, from the
OLIVER Lord Protector of the Common∣wealth of England Scotland and Irelande &c. Sould by P:Stent.
perfidious, who would have carried him into the very hands of his enemies Let us leave him putting on mourning for his said Brother-in-Law, and for his Sister Elizabeth both together; for which he was full of sorrow. There was no difficulty found in the Empire, but about the Toll, or Cu∣stome, upon the River of Wiser, adjudged to the Count of Oldenbergh,The Tell upon the Wiser. whom they of Bremen earnestly opposed; but being affrighted by the Imperial Thunderbolt, they obeyed. The Emperour sent Embassadours to Mantua, to demand the Princesse for his Wife: and the Duke of Bavaria his, to fetch the Princesse of Savoy. The Grand Signor being tired by a war of so much durance, offered the Venetians a peace, by yeelding them the Kingdom of Candy, whereat they laughed, and resolved to continue the war. The Turks attacked Candy in vaine, and after having lost very many men, returned towards Canea.The Victory of, the Venetians. But the Venetians were yet more happy by Sea, then by Land; for they defeated the Fleet, which carried telles to Canea, retook the strong Castle of S. Theo∣dore, and ruined some Gallyes besides; in such sort, as Te Deum was sung at Venice, with great solemnity. The Chineses Converted. Amongst all the disasters, and afflictions of Christendom, came the news of the Coversion of the Chineses, or People of China, to the Roman Catho∣lick Religion, which much rejoyced all such as took more to heart the pro∣pagation of that Religion, then the interests of fading States. As war was made with the Pike; so was it also with the Pen. For Sal∣masius, wrote a Book in defence of the King of England; and a certain Eng∣lishman called Milton, who was not known before,Milton writes against Salma∣sius. and grew famous by en∣tring the Lists with this triumphant Champion, most acutely, and elegant∣ly answered it. The Schollars, and even the very Women have been seen in Arms in many places; and both Sexes have shewed that they know how to handle the Sword. The Elements, the Servants of this great God, being irritated, rise up to stifle the rest of Mortals; the Mountaines vomis fire; the Earth trombles; the Aire, being infected with pestilence, wasts, and ransacks Poland, as it hath already done other Parts of Europe; the continual raines make the Rivers break over their banks. The Danub, the Rheyn, and the Moze do irreparable hurs;The overflowing of Rivers. and the carnal Embarasments which happen in many places, destroy what was left by the Souldiers. The dammages which were caused by the overflowings of the Sea, and the raines, were also excessively great in Italy, from whence the war began by little and little to retire it selfe, and was not carried on with so much fury as it had formerly been. This world is full of wonders, and unheard of accidents. The Spanish Embassadour at London acknowledged England for a Free Common∣wealth,The Spanish Embassadour in England ac∣knowledges the Parliament. and was treated with were great respect, and honour. This busi∣nesse astonished all the World, to see a great Catholick King, who hath alwayes been an Enemy to Protestants, make friendship, with a people, who had alwayes in times past, beenutter enemiesiro his Family. But the Politicians penetrated to sownd the grounds, which might bring Philip the fourth, and his Council to make amity with them.Why? Considering the assistance which the English had given the Hollanders against the Crown of Spain; the ruin of the Spanish Fleet in the Downes; the Allyance of the French, with the Lutherans in Germany; the wars with France, and many other mo∣tives, made him think it fit to make an Allyance with this Republick. Let us accompany such as are curious, to the Crowning of the Queen of Sweden.
God hath a minde to chastise mankinde, he easily findes means to do it; for no body can hide himself from his face. The Lawrel which Cardinal Mazarin had upon his head, could not secure him from the Thunderbolt; for the Parisians, having already forgotten his services, would needs have him bannished. The Parliament went to the Queen at the Palace Royal, and demanded the liberty of the Princes, for the tranquillity of the Kingdom. She, and her Council being surprized, requi∣red some time, to advise of what should be most expedient for the good of the State, which was granted. But the answer not coming after the expi∣ration of the terme, the Court of Parliament assisted by the authority of the Duke of Orleans, concluded, to give an Order, or Decree, for the justifica∣tion of the Princes. The Queen seeing the hear, wherewith their deliver∣ance was pursued, consented, and dispatched the Marshal of Grammont;The Princes de∣livered. and the Cardinal, giving way to the powerful aversion of such as would not suf∣fer him to be any longer Minister of State; left Paris;The Cardinal retires. went and spake with the Princes, and departed out of the Kingdom. There is no place in this lower world, where Fortune more absoludy raignes, then in the Court of France: For many began now to speak ill of him, who were soon after glad enough, to winne his favour. Mottals, put not your trust in this inconstant Goddess, who often inebriates you, to throw you under her wheel. His departure amended not the businesse. The United Provinces fell into some alterations, which required a speedy remedy. The Belgick Lyon put them in minde of their first Symbole. The Country was without a Governour; the choice of Magistrates, and Officers returned to the Towns; and the deceased Princes Guards, took the Oath of Fidelity, to the States of Holland, from whom they received their pay. The Deputies of all the Provinces were sent for, the great Hall was pre∣pared, and they of Zeland arrived first. The Embassa∣dours of the Parliament in Holland. The Embassadours of the Parliament of England came to the Haghe, and were received with much honour; however the people effectively expressed their aversion from them, by breaking their windowes, and other insolen∣cies; in such sort, as the States, to hinder greater inconveniences,The aversion of the people. and save Persons Sacred by the Law of Nations, placed a great Court of Guard before their house. But let us return into Poland, and we shall hear that the perfidy of the Cos∣sacks, and their General, suffers not the new King to taste a little rest, in the very beginning of his taign. For they brought back the Tartars;The second war of the Cossacks. The Grand Signor sent them a Sable; and the Patriarch of Constantinople brought them a Benediction: and yet they left not to loose four thousand men in a Battel, where the King was present; and were constrained some dayes after,Who are beaten. to retire themselves by night in confusion, leaving part of their Baggage, their Canon, and many thousands of prisoners behinde them. This Victo∣ry sent from above, rejoyced all Poland, and caused Fire-works; and the Embassadours who were at Lubeck, treating the Peace between them and Swedes, imparted the newes to their friends, who expressed great rejoycings, as the ancient Town of Lubeck also did, by their example. Hitherto, we have seen Traffick almost abolished by land, by means of the war, which hath ruined, and devoured all things; and we shall forth∣with see it in almost as miserable a condition by sea, though there be no Mountains, nor Forrests to receive, and shelter Rovers. After the Peace was made, the Great Master of the Knights of Malta, sent his Deputies to the Haghe, to redemand the Lands, or Goods,The Knights of Malta, take the Holland Ships. The French do the same. belon∣to his Order; but having obtained nothing, he got Letters of Reprisal, and his Knights took many Holland Ships in the Levant; as the French also did; so that the complaints and mennaces of the Merchants were heard against
France; yea Monsieur Boreel Embassadour for the Common-wealth at Paris, made them sound loud; but he reaped nothing but promises, with very small effect, which would have caused a great alteration, had it not been modera∣ted by the prudence of this solid, and stayd Nation. Robleries at Sea. Prince Robert also being favoured by the Portugueses, did what he could, to hurt the English, the effects whereof were so much resented by the Mer∣chants of that Common-wealth, that they had no will at all to laugh. And besides, the Pirates having Commission from the King of Scots, did extreme mischief, and had their retreat at Jersy, and Sicilly, two Islands, situated at about fifty degrees, between England, and Ireland; for they took all, without distinction; in such sort, as it was necessary to send Admirall Tromp thither, and the English Fleet which unnestled these Theeves, and a little while after, seazed upon the said Isle of Iersy. The Irish were also bold enough, to seek their advantage, with the same Orders, though with lesse strength; But small Theeves make themselves sometimes feared. These losses, which were praecursory to greater evills, much diminished Trade, by the great Guards, or Convoyes, which it was needfull to send with the Merchants ships, and by the Charges of insuring the Merchandi∣zes. The Dunkerkers did no great hurt. But they aforesaid made themselves feared, by the number, and bigness of their Vessels, and the conveniency of their Havens. Envie, Avarice, and Vengeance produced these misfortunes. We have already spoken of the triumphant Coronation of the Queen of Sweden; therefore let us now go, and see that of the King of Scots, amongst the tumults, and disorders of war; yea, and as one may say, on horse-back, and with his sword in his hand. CHAP. X The Crowning of Charles Stewart. His entrance into England. He lost the Battail near Worcester. The miserable State of the Scots. His admirable flight. He arrived in France. The Difference between the Elector of Brandenburgh. and the Duke of Newburgh. The peace made. CHarles being arrived in Scotland, found many difficulties, as we have al∣ready said,The Crowning of the King of Scotland. which after he had happily vanquished, and taken a solemn Oath, the Earl of Argyle, together with a Baron, and a Citizen, put the Crown upon his head, to the great contentment of the Assembly, which cryed Live King Charles the second. Whereupon Douglasse the Minister went into the Pulpit, and exhorted him to revenge his Fathers death; but he had enough to do to save his own life, within a short space after. For not being able to drive his enemies out of Scotland, he resolved by a very hazardous design, to transport the war into England, there to animate his friends, to take Arms for his service;He enters into Scotland. and so he entered upon a suddain with an Army of about eighteen thousand fighting men, and by often skirmishing came as far as Worcester; but (either for want of Arms, or will) no body stirred for him, but the Earl of Derby, with some three hundred men, which were cut in pieces, very few escaping, but the said Earl himself, who carryed him the newes. General Cromwell, being recovered of his sicknesse, and informed of this inopinated invasion, followed him; and the Parliament raised also new for∣ces
to resist him. The Battail was given near the said Town of Worcester, where the Seots, and Royalists, animated by the presence of their King, car∣ryed themselves well at the beginning; but the Horse being broaken, took flight; and such as were not killed, could not escape,Is defeated by Cromwell. in regard that all the passages were stopt; so that the condition of these, was more miserable, then theirs who died fighting. There were seven thousand taken prisoners, toge∣ther with the whole Train of Artillery; for they were all caught in a pit-fall, except their young King, who made a marvellous escape, as we will forth∣with shew. He was conceived to be slain; but the Parliament ordained, that no body, under pain of death, should either lodge, or relieve him, in any wise; which begat a suspicion, that he was living, and enjoyed some kind of fearfull liber∣ty. For when he saw, that the Battail was lost, he fled with twelve Gentle∣men in his company, whom he was forced to leave, for fear of being disco∣vered, and known, retaining only the Lord Wilmot, with whom he hid him∣self in an hollow Tree, for the space of two dayes,The King of Scots maiai∣lously escaped. and at length retyred to a certain Gentlewomans house, who changed his cloathes, conducted him to Bristoll, and afterwards to London, in the habit of a Gentlewoman, where he stayed above three weeks; and then he passed into France, (though he were known to the Master of the Vessel) and arrived at Roüen, where he was re∣ceived by the Duke of Longueville, and next at Paris, by the King, the Queens, and all the Court. Thus we see how Fortune raises some, and pulls down others: For had Charles gotten the Battail, it is very probable, that England had been the price of the victory. The victory advantageous to the Parlia∣ment. This victory confirmed the Parliaments authority, and destroyed that of the other Party, lost the kingdom of Scotland, cast an infinite number of Widowes, and Fatherless children, into excessive affliction, and the poor prisoners into unexpressible calamities. The first who appeared upon a Scaffold, was the Earl of Derby; and his Wife, after a capitulation, put the Isle of Man into the Parliaments hands. The prisoners of note were put into the Tower of London; and the most famous, and victorious General Cromwell, was received with such applauses, as were wont to be heretofore given to the first Roman Emperors. The Lands of the principal Gentlemen, and such as were most affected to the other Party were confiscated. But let us now leave England, and the Par∣liament; let us leave Scotland in teares; let us leave the different opinions concerning the successe of this war; for those of our Continent call us spee∣dily back, and especially the difference which happened in Cleveland. Wars between the Electour of Brandenburgh, and the Duke of Newburgh. The Electour of Brandenburgh, in full peace sent four thousand men into the Duke of Newburghs Country, who attacked the strong House of Angre∣mont, and performed all acts of hostility, without having denounced the war. This invasion much displeased the Emperour, and much more him, whom it more nearly concerned. Religion, served here for a pretext, and this affront put a flea in the ear of the bordering parts, which yet by the in∣termission of the Emperour, and the States of Holland, was soon taken out; the Lorrainers who went to succour the Duke of Newburgh; sent back the forces casheered; and the Princes returned to their former good intelligence. This war gave Colem much apprehension, and no small distrust to the Uni∣ted Provinces, which feared lest if the fire increased, it might grow to burn their Neighbours houses, according to the Latin Proverb. Tum tures agitur, paries cum proximus ardet. When thou seest the next house burn, Be sure the next will be thy turn. Let us go seek out Cardinal Mazarin in his disgrace.
CHAP. XI Cardinal Mazarins retreat into the Province of Liedge. The Princes make their entry into Paris. The joy for both the Dutchesse of Lon∣guevilles, and the Marshall of Turennes repasse into France. The Baptisone of the young Prince of Orange, and the dispute about his tutelage. The Damme broaken near Waguening. Uleseldt accused of having intended to poyson the King of Denmark. Berghen St. Weynock taken by the Spaniards. THe Queen being very often petitioned by the Members of Parliament, to set the Princes at liberty, for the Kings service, and the kingdoms quiet, and seeing the Resolute run up and down the streets of Paris, requiring their deliverance; condescended to it: but the Kings Counsell, on the other side, was not a little staggered, to hear the importunate voyce of the people, Live the King, Live the Princes, no Mazarin. His eminence finding France disgusted by his Ministery, retyred himself, as we have have already said; and the Princes made their entry into Pa∣ris the 16. of February, where they were received by the Duke of Orleans, and all the great ones, with very strong resentments of joy. The conditions upon which they were released, were that the hostility of Stenay, and Turenne should cease, The Cardinal departs out of France, and takes an order for his banish∣ment. The Cardinal not being able to prevent, or hinder this return of theirs so prejudicial to his Authority, and seeing the Duke of Orleans, who had con∣sented to their detention, so urgent now, under pretext of the kingdoms good, for their releasement; got the King, and Queen, to approve of his retreat. The joy for his departure was incomprehensibly great; for every one gave him a wipe, and acccused him of having exhausted the Finances, or Exchequer, nor is there in fine, that wickednesse in nature; wherewith he was not branded; in such sort as it was believed, that his absence would bring back the golden Age. But his banishment touched him much more to the quick. His enemies had now their time, and he not long after, had his. It is better to laugh at last, then at first. His departure was ignominious, but his return was glorious. The Spaniards offered him all kindness of favour in his disgrace, which he discreetly refused, upon the consideration of a former obligation. The Parliament of Roüen Decreed also against him. All the world, yea, even the Pope himself hated him; And yet for all this, the mischiefs whereof he was held to be the Authour, ended not by his retyrement, The King and Queen made a Manifest, wherein they declared the Prin∣ces innocent,Goes to Dinant, and then to Bruel. and approved all that which was ordered against Mazarin, who passed by Perone, Sedan, and Dinant, where he stayd some days, and then went to Liedge, and in fine, retyred to Bruel to the Electour, who received him according to his qualities. Thus was he exiled, cryed down, and hated by all; his services were forgotten; and even they themselves, who shewed him some courtesie in his retreat, were made guilty thereby. None but great spirits make their magnanimity appear, in misfortunes. The Vice-Count returns into France. The Dutchesse of Longueville, the Marshal of Turenne, and the Count of Grandpre, returned into France with their Troops, where they were welcom; leaving the care of finishing the work to the Spaniards; who could not suffici∣ently wonder at this change; however the Princes sent to Brussels, to thank the Arch-Duke for his care of their deliverance. Small tumults in Holland. The Prince of Oranges Bap∣tisme. The little tumults which happened at Middleburgh in Zeland, at Dort, and at Culemburgh, were appeased before they were known; & therefore we will not speak of them at present, but relate the Baptism of the young Prince of Orange, which was performed with great magnificence at the Haghe. The States Ge∣neral,
Wilhelmus Henrious Prince of Orange nassau sonn of the Princis, Royall. London Printed sould by P Stent.
the States of Holland, and Zeland, and the Deputies of the Town of Delfs, Harlem, and Amsterdam, were his Godfathers. But there chansed a great controversie concerning his tuteladge (which was adjudged to the Princesse Royall his mother) which caused some coldnesse between the two Ladyes, and much adoe there was to end it. The great as∣sembly at the Haghe. In the mean while, the great assembly persevered in the care of making the union stronger then ever and repayting some disorders; in relation to which it was judged necessary to grant an Act of oblivion; to put the Mili∣tia into good method; to maintaine the Reformed Religion to keep the bitt in the Roman Catholicks mouthes, and exclude such as followed that Do∣ctrine, from all Publick employments. Separates. All being concluded, the Assembly sent for a Minister to give God thanks, and parted with most perfect intelligence. A day of prayer was held, and alms was distributed, and the Firewords, and Ordnance made a concert, for the Simbole of the union. The Bank bro∣ken. The yeare of 1651 towards the end of Winter, the Snowes melting by a thaw, the Waters of the Rheyn swol up in such sort, that the Bank between Rhene, and Waguening brake, and put the inhabitants about Amerssort into great perplexities. Indeed,Many Inunda∣tions. this year deserved to be called the yeare of de∣luge; for there were very few Rivers in Europe, which did not, by the conti∣nuall raines exceed their bounds, and bear down their banks. The Scourge of God, as water, fire, and sword, are every where felt. Let us go to the septemptrion, where we shall finde one of the greatest Lords, yea the high Steward of the House of the King of Denmark himself, suspected, and accused, of having intended to poyson the King. A wickedness unknown heretofore, in the colds of the North. Ulefeldt the high Steward of the Kings houshold accu∣sed of having intended to poy∣son him. It was Mons. Ʋlefeldt, a man of great experience, and much renowned for the Embassayes, wherein he had rendred the King, and Common-Wealth great services, who was accused of this treason, by a lewd woman, who not being able to prove the said accusation, was beheaded. One Colovel Walter was also suspected, who having defended his innocence, summoned the said Ʋlefeldt; but he, in stead of appearing before the King, departed secretly with his wife, into Holland, & afterwards into Sweden; His flight was extreamly ill taken, and Hannibal Zeestadt, for having contemned the Kings Authority, was degraded, from his charge, and deprived of almost all his Estate. These two Lords had marryed each of them one of the dead Kings naturall Daughters, and were Brothers-in-Law to Count Wolmaor,The Count Wol∣maer goes into Muscovie. who during his Fathers life, went into Muscovie, to marry the Grand Dukes Daughter, where he tryed the perfidie of those Barbarians, who, in consideration of an advice come from another place, would not give him the Princesse, but upon unre∣ceivable conditions. In fine, having unpesterest himself from their hands, and received his liberty, he repassed through Poland, put himself into the Imperiall Armies, whore he acquired great reputation, and high employ∣ments, and the Emperours favour to boot. Thus all was appeased in that Kingdom, and let us now returne post back through Germany, where we shall find nothing but a reformation, and some complaints which rang every where, of the Garrison of Frankendal. The French forces marched towards the Low-Countryes, and committed some robberies, and violences upon the Fronteers of Flanders: the Spaniards opposed them; and towards the end of the Summer, drew out some regi∣ments, and made them march under the conduct of that great Captain the Marquis of Sfondrato, who took Fuernes with small resistance;Sfondrato, takes Fuernes and Berghen St. Wynock 1651. but Berghen St. Wynock, a strong place, and ayded by the waters of the Sea, (which the Sluces being drawn let passe) and which gave the Souldiers great vexations, open∣ed her gates the eleventh day, to let the Spanish Garrison in, and the French
out. The Fort Linck was also soon reduced; and Burburgh being abandoned, was put again into condition to defend it self. It was conceived, that the Spa∣niards would make an attempt upon Dunkerk; but the continual rains, the late∣ness of the season, and sicknesses amongst the souldiers, sent the Army back to rest. CHAP. XII. The Cardinal returns into France. The Lords who had been imprisoned, are restored to their employments. The Prince of Condè retyres from Paris. The King declared May or. Prodigies seen upon the Sea. The beginning of the troubles between England and Holland, and why? The death of Spiing. The Cardinals forces passe through Hol∣land. HOwever Cardinal Mazarin was unhappy in a Crosse of fortune, yet he omitted not either his care, or any occasion to serve the King of France. For he contracted some of the forces which were disinissed in Cleveland; and sent them secretly down the Rheyn to Rotterdaim; where being discovered, and their leader summoned to the Haghe, the Souldiers con∣strained the Boatmen, to put them a shore, and so every one went whether he pleased. In the moneth of August, there arrived neer two thousand Neapolitans before the Rammekens, in foure ships, who tryed the courtesie of the Zelan∣ders, heard their grumblings, and were forced to returne to Sea, since the pas∣sage to Antwerp was not allowed them. The Printe of Condè retyres himself from cort. After the Princes departure, the Lords who were released, were restored to their former charges. But a sudden gust, or blast, which surprizes the Mari∣ners at Sea, in a great Calme, doth not more hare them, then the Prince of Condes sudden retreat did the French, upon an advertizement which had been given him, that the Queen would secure his person again. She sent a protestation to him, that she had no such design, and that it was nothing but false reports scattered by the Enemies of France: and so upon conditions that the Cardinals Creatures (as Servient Tellier, &c.) should retyre from the Court, he came back to Paris: but these conditions were ill enough observed. The King de∣clared Mayor the seventh of September 1651. The seventh of September, the King being at the Parliament, the Chan∣celler declared him Mayor, as being entred into the fourteenth year of his Age, and the Queen discharged her self of her Regencie. The Prince of Condè upon another information given him, that they would murther him, retyred himself again to St. Maur, and from thence to Bourdeaux, where he drew the inhabitants to his party, and the Spaniards came to succour him with seventeen Ships. Mezarin re∣turns into France. The King and Queen went to Poictiers, where they sent for the Cardinal, who forthwith obeyed, and came to them with some thousands of men, and was received by them both, with superlative testimonies of benevolence. Thus was the fire grown greater then ever, and more certain apparence of a general combustion throughout the whole Kingdom. An order of Parli∣ament was proclamed against Cardinal Mazarine, declaring him guilty of High Treason, as a Perturbatour of the Kingdom; all his Lands, and Goods confiscated; his fine Library sold; a hundred and fifty thousand Livers, or Florins adjudged to any body who would bring him alive or dead,The Spaniards come again into France. and the Spaniards called again into France by the Prince of Condè under the conduct of the Duke of Nemours. The Kings complaints were answered by other, and the conclusion was, that if his Majesty would expell the Cardinal, the forrain forces should re∣tyre out of France.
Let us leave the French thus divided, some leaning to the Princes side, and some to Mazarins; and these latter were styled Mazarinists: for we must take notice of the motion of the English, towards a War with the Ʋnited Pre∣vinces, which were of the same Religion, their Friends, and Neighbours. For the English put out an Act forbidding the importing any commodities from any place, but those of their own growth, and in their own ships, to the intention of increasing the shipping, and Mariners of that Nation; which act how highly it disgusted the Hollanders, the effects of a most fierce War will demonstrate. Some Prodigies preceded this War, which I will set down briefly, without staying upon the circumstances thereof. Oh unhappy Age! No sooner are we delivered from one misfortune, then we fall into a greater. For these united Provinces had no sooner given thanks to the Almighty for Peace, then they found themselves ill looked upon, by many Potentates; envied by some, and incommodated by others, in their trade. In fine, the mischief came from that part, which they least suspected. Take heer the Prodigies which were seen by men of credit, and report thereof made to the States, in this substance. Prodigees seen neer the mouth of the Sea. That upon Fry day the twenty second of December 1651; about nine of the clock, ten or twelve leagues from the mouth of the Moze; they saw a plaine Field, of the hight of a man, about the Horizon, and therein many Souldiers, both foot, and Horse, which forthwith disappeared. Next, they saw, neer about the same place, a great Fleet coming from the North, some of the Vessels whereof had their Sayles but half up. By and by, there appeared another from the South-east, which came straight to attack the Former; and then it seemed as if all the Ships were sunk to the bottom; which yet shewed themselves again so distinctly, that they were able to discerne the Ropes, and Cables. Last of all, they saw the great Vessels again, which they had discovered first. These visions lasted about three houres. A Lyon, on the North side of the Ships, per∣formed the last Act, under which there appeared animals of different shapes, which turned into Ships. The Parliament of England being grown formidable, by Charles Stewarts expulsion, whom they quite expelled the Island; and by the conquest of the Kingdom of Scotland, was much intense upon War, and desirous to diminish the traffique which hath inriched these united Provinces; as by taking the Ships which they met either at Sea, or came into their havens, and then, by giving Letters of Mart.The begining by Letters of Mart. Whereupon, the complainrs of the Holland Marchants obliged the States to send their Embassadours, to acknowledge them for a Free Com∣mon Wealth: to renew friendship; and to redemand their Vessels ta∣ken. The first point pleased them; and the second was payed with silence; and the third differred, as never to be granted. The Propositions which they made the said Embassadours, were so high, and beyond their expecta∣tion, that the High and Might Lords resolved upon War. Whilest these things were in agitation, there hapned an encounter betwixt General Blake, and Admiral Tromp, about striking,The first attak. wherein Tromp was so briskly received, that he had much adoe to get handsomly off, lea∣ving two ships behind him, in the possession of the English. This action hastened the returne of the Embassadours; and set the States on work, for the fitting of a second Fleet, which was retarded by the wary Hollanders, out of hope of composing the difference, by representing the ne∣cessity of a good harmony betwixt the two Nations. They wanted neither strength, courage, nor convenience to hurt but other considerations made them seek an accommodation, which these new Republicans rejected.
Mousieur Spiring, the Embassadour of Sweden used all diligence, to prevent the States Embassadours departure,Every one goes into England to acknowledge the Parliament. and encouraged them to acknowledge England for a Free State. The Title in his Letter of Credence not being well adjusted, he met with some little difficulty, yet nevertheless obtained Au∣dience; but death taking him soon away; deprived that State of a great friend. After the Spanish Embassadour had acknowledged them, every body hastened to the Offering, as fearing to be the last. Only France seemed not much to care; but after having suffered a very rough check, she at last came, as we shall shortly demonstrate. But we must yet make another great cir∣cuit, before we conclude our Work. CHAP. XIII. The miseries at Sea caused by Pirats. The present state of Nor∣way, Denmark, Sweden, Poland, Hungary, Germany, Italy, Spain, and France. &c. HItherto, we have seen the wars begun, and caried on, first for the au∣thority, and occupation, or seazure of Countries, under the princt∣pal pretext of Religion; and then there hapned so great a Hotchpot, and such a confused variety, by the shuffling together of so many different Ally∣ances, and deceiptful practices; that this precicus Cloak being grown quite thred-bare, could be no longer worne; and therefore the hatred of Nati∣ons, and old quarrels, must now be brought upon the Stage. Indeed, if (according to the saying of Tertullian) by forging so many Religions, there grow at length to be none at all left; with the like founda∣tion, may I also say, that by making so many various Allyances, which are so easily broken, and so dexterously patched together again, there is no Al∣lyance at all. I have to do (said a certain Monarch) with a bordering people, which never keep their Faith, but when they perceive no occasion to hurt me. By this it is, that there is so much trouble to make a peace; and they who labour to joyne the two Parties, finde so much difficulty, and repugnance, in regard of the indelible distrusts, and jealousies between them, that they cannot accomplish it.Sea-Rovers. Besides, that there have alwayes been Sea-Rovers, who, as The The eves, hidden in the Woods and Forrests, have surprized passengers, and laid wait for the Merchants Ships; and at present, we see whole Fleets, the Sea loaden with Vessels, to attacke, not by stealth, but open force, the said Merchants Ships, and the men of War also, which ac∣company them. Some years agoe the Sea was free, and safe enough; but now, there are more, and greater dangers there, then there ever were by Land. Let us passe through the North, and end our Carrer in England. The Kingdom of Norway, being secured by its poverty feared not, the year before, nor this present year neither, the war, wherein the King of Denmark seemed ready to involve himself.Thirty Eng∣lish Ships stopt in Denmark. For he redemanded the Por∣tion of his Aunt Anne, Queen of England; which being refused, he stopped, and confiscated some thirty English Merchant Ships, and made a streight Allyance thereupon, with the States of Holland, for their Common In∣terests. That Libell which was made in Sweden, being washed, and wiped off with the blood of the Authours thereof, all was there in good order, and
diligence was used for the setting out of a little considerable Fleet; which gave the bordering parts so much jealousie, that King Frederick sent his Em∣bassadours thither, who returned with a good answer. A Spanish Re∣sident at Stock∣holme. There was then a Spanish Resident at the Court of Sweden, who treated secretly; and the affairs of the last Assembly were conducted there so oc∣cultly, that there was no light at all to be found thereof: But true it is, that Silence is the Soul of great Expedtions. Livonia was well guarded against the invasion of the Polanders; and the Treaties at Lubeck between them and the Swedes produced no good ope∣ration at all; so that the Embassadours retired, to the great displeasure of such as meddled in them. The Muscovits did nothing in a long time, which deserves to be noted here. But the Polanders felt, as well as the rest of the Nations of Europe, the Rod of the Almighty, by pestilence, inundations, and wars, which continue even yet, against the Rebellious Cossacks, under the direction, and authori∣ty of King Casimir. The accidental fire, which was like to burne the young Princesse, was taken as an ill augure, by such as were curious; but the King∣dom is yet in vigour, and the Armies in condition to ruin their enemies. The Turks, and Tartars made some irruptions into Hungary, which gave both dammage, and fear by the marching of some Troops, but at present, the Peace is exactly kept. The Empire enjoyes the Peace made at Munster; and every Prince la∣bous, by the offer of fair Priviledges, to revive both his Country, and the Religion he professes. The Emperour, who shewes that he took the re∣dresse of the Empire more to heart, then the preservation of his own life, assembled all the Electors the last year at Prague,The Electors at Prague, 1692. and courted them with so free, and open a breast, that they were all most satisfied, and promised to meet at the Diet of Ratishone. Germany seeing her Head and Members in so perfect a harmony, hopes that this Union will prove a wholesome Balme, to cure the wounds of the Empire. Italy is restored to a better state; there being only the Venetians, who a∣lone sustaine the weight of the Ottoman Arms. They sent their Embassadour to Constantinople,The Venetian Embassadour arested at Con∣stantinople. being advertised of the Grand Signors desire to compose the Difference; who, against the Law of Nations, arrested him, and would not listen to any overture of Peace at all, unlesse the Republick would yeeld him up the whole Kingdom of Candy. The Pope was disgusted at the disobedience of the Christians, who stopped their cares to his remonstrances. The heat of the war in Piemont cooled by little and little, for want of nutriment. The King of Spain, after the Conjuration made against his person, and sti∣fled in the blood of the Authours; after the peace restored to the States of Neaples, Sicily, and Perin; had no other care left, then to protect his Sub∣jects; maintain the peace with the United Provinces; keep up his Armada, or Navy; send monies into Flanders to continue the war; and succour the Princes of France, thereby to divide, in effect, or weaken that Kings Autho∣rity; as he hath also, on the other side, endeavoured by all means possible, to deminish that of the House of Austria. The Civil wars of France had taken away the vigour of that of Cataluni and Barcelona, having been blocked up, about fifteen moneths,Barcelons renders her self, 1652. rendred hr selfe in Autumne in the year 1652. La Motte Hodincour not having been able to succour it, though he entred the Town by force; no more then the Duke of Mercoeur was Tortoza; and so they both returned into France, with Don Joseph de Marguerita.
Cazal, and Dunkek ta∣ken. Cazall, and Dunkerck being taken from the King of France, with very lit∣tle trouble, and charge; gave full joy to the one Party, and grief to the o∣ther, to see that their Conquests made with the mony, sweat, and blood of the poor people, were torne from them, as it were playing, and without losse of men, as we shall demonstrate. They imputed all these misfortunes, to the Civil wars; but others, to the injustice of their taking arms, upon meer di∣strust, and occasion, in so favourable a conjuncture. During this deplorable Civil War, wherein this poor Kingdom findes it self miserably involved, after having waged, and kindled so many other wars throughout all Europe;The Second State assembles it selfe at Paris. the Second State began to hold their Assembly at Paris, according to the example of the first; but being broken by fair promises, the true jealousie which proceeded from it, vanished. The poor Subjects were not yet enough oppressed by the Taxes, but that they must be so more,Bat it is bro∣ken. by the dissolute, and undisciplined Souldiers, whose insolency was insupportable; but their chastisemens was proportionable to their bar∣barity: besides, despair made both the Nobility, and people of Campague take arms against them, and dispatch a very great number of them; and they of Senlis Meanx,The Souldiers killed by the Country people. Anergue, and other places followed their example, and massacred a great part of those Robbers; in such fort, as it was horrible to see all these disorders. Moreover there hath been a perpetual Traffick, or buying, and selling of Charges,The Venality, or selling of Offices dammgable. and Offices, since the Ministery of these two Cardinals, which hath caused almost mortal Commotions, to the State. The troubles in Provence, Guyenne, Anergne, and other parts, proceeded from this turmoyle. For a summe of mony hath often been given to some, for such a Government, and to others for such another, whilest the Subjects have been averse from it: And we must here adde, that the venality, or selling of Offices hath corrupted Integrity, and Justice; in such sort, as that this Goddess, having lost her strength, all sorts of impieties, extortions, and blasphemies are now in vogue: for the fear of God, and equity being taken away, men run post into vices, and welter in wickednesse; yea, and Prin∣ces very often make their Subjects sin, by their example. Regis ad exemplum, totus componitur orbis, What ere the King is, that we ever finde, The people apt to be, in their own kinde. The Prince of Conde, having received a supply from Spain, and Paris ano∣ther from Brussels by land,Suttour from Spain. as I have noted already, the War was made in Xaintongue in the year, 1652, and in the district of Aunts, against the Count of Angnon, Governour of the Isles of Broiiage, and Oleron, by the Count of Harcourt, who retook some places, and the Tower of Rochel. But having received notice, that the Cardinal would accommodate himself with Brisack, posted thither,Harcourt at Brisack. and left his Army an Orphant. This retreat, of one of the most illustrious, and most fortunate Warriers in the World, who was so necessary, and useful to the State, was a Pill of hard disgestion, which yet must needs be swallowed down, without shew∣ing the bitternesse thereof. Let us here mark the inconstance of the French Nation, which they them∣selves confesse to be as it were essential to them. For, they, who had quite abandoned, yea, contemned the just choler of their Soveraign, and incur∣red the Crime of High Majesty; by pursuing with the naked Sword, the deliverance of the Princes,Renlarkal le Vihanges. and calling in Strangers into the Kingdom; both were astewards, and yet are, the onely men who fight against the Prince of Coinle.
The Duke of Boüillon was raised very high, and cherished by the King, and all the Court, part of the year 1652. but he quickly lest those vain, and inconstant honours, to goe and receive incorruptible ones;The Duke of Boüillons death. for he died at Pontoise. He was a great Captain, and had learnt the discipline of War in Holland, where he had the honour to Command the Cavalry, and govern the Town of Mastricht. He lost the affection of all the Hughenots, by having embra∣ced the Roman Catholick Religion; and that of the King, by having put himself into the League of the Princes of the Peace; in such fort, as being suspected of I know not what kinde of intelligence with Monsieur le Grand, and imprisoned, the Town of Sedan, and the high intercession of the Prince of Orange, saved his life. The Marshal of Turenne after having refused many courtships, and a pre∣sent of great value from the Prince of Conde, was chosen to command the Kings Army. CHAP. XV The Prince of Conde comes to Paris. The King of France attacks Estampes. The Duke of Lorraine, being come to succour the Princes, receives some money of the King, and returnes. The Arch-Duke sends an Army to Paris; Takes Graveling, and Dun∣kerck. The English beat the French Fleet. The Cardinal of Retz induces the King to come back to Paris. The Prince of Conde retires into France. Cardinal Mazarins praises. The Cardinal of Retz carried to the Bois de Vincennes. THis young Mars, this invincible Courage, judging his person to be more necessary at Paris, then at Bourdeans; left his Lieutenants the direction of his own Forces, shewed himself quickly amongst those of the Duke of Orleans, and the Strangers, and made the Marshal D'hoquincour feel, that he was no more in Guyenne; for after having lost his Troops,Marshal D'ho∣quincour bea∣ten. he was constrain∣ed to sly. The King made his Army march, under Turenns orders, who went to attack Estampes; but finding the Duke of Lorraine to draw near, he retired, and confessed that the Strangers who were in the Town, defended themselves bravely. It looked, as if the Princes would have a good bargaine of all such as made head against them; when upon a suddain, the Duke of Lorraine, by the in∣terposition of the King of Englands Eldest Son, made a contract apart, re∣ceived mony, and retired himself out of the Kingdom; but he sent back his Army shortly after, with the Spaniards, because the restitution of the three places promised, was not performed. The Prince being irritated, and the Parisians extreamly amazed, began to revile the said Duke, and all in fine, discoursed of him, according to their passion. Some accused him of inconstance, and others of avarice: but such as had a straine above the vulgar, judged that there was some vengeance hidden under this action; and that the levity both of the one and the other so often manifested, to them whose assistance they had both implored, and felt; ought to be recompensed by a just retaliation. Be it what it will, the Princes Troops being tired by frequent Skermishes, and by that furious, and bloody shock given in the Faubourgs, or Suburbs of St. Anthony, (wherein
the Mazarinists, or Royalists had the worst) being very much diminished, the Arch-dukes succour was sent for again, which being conducted by the Baron of Clinchant, advanced quite to Paris. But let us come back into Flanders. Graveling be∣sieged, Mardyke abandoned, yeelds, and Dunkek af∣terwards. The Arch-Duke finding that the fire was too great in France to be so soon extinguished, made a shew of besieging Dunkerk; but his design was upon Graveling, one of the most important places of the Low-Countries, which defended it self enough; but for want of sufficient Garrison, was yeelded upon the same Conditions, that it had been formerly taken. Mardyke was abandoned: and Dunkerk expecting the relief by Sea, which was dofeated by the English, was retaken without either; losse, or blood∣shed. Thus, were three places reduced to obedience with a hand-full of men, which had cost the French mountains of Gold, and Seas of blood. Who would have said so much six years before, when there seemed to be no doubt at all made, of the utter expulsion of the Spaniards? Times change, men change, victories are alternative, and nothing is constant, but the immutable Order of the Decree of the Everlasting. This reduction deservedly rejoyced all Flanders, which saw her Traffick, and Inhabitants slourish again. The Town of Dunkerk had been offered to the States of Holland, for Mastricht; for a summe of money, but the bargain was not made. The City of Paris seeing it self in violent, and murtherous factions; the Parliament in confusion; the Country People frighted away strangers in the Kingdome; the Princes in a very difficult passage to be cleared, and the Clergy afflicted by these unhappy disorders; resolved to dispatch the Cardinal de Retx to the King, (who was with a new Parliament at Pon∣toise) to beseech him,The King re∣turns to Paris. to return to Paris. This Embassie was well received by his Majesty, who, having published an Act of Oblivion, was so much better at Paris. The Prince of Conde retyred himself with the forrain Troops, took Retel, and St. Menhout, and his winter quarters, at the begin∣ning of the spring, 1653. And the Duke of Odeans de∣parts. The Duke of Orleans having received order, either to come to the King or to retyre himself; rather chose the latter, then to suffer Cardinal Maza∣rins presence, who quickly caused the order to be annulled, that was made against him: because there was no body found, who had a mind to earn a hundred and fifty thousand Crowns by killing him. Thus, we see the figure turned up-side down; the Cardinal above the wheel, and the Princes under it; so that Conde chose rather, to cast himself in∣to the King of Spaines arms, then to trust his own Masters Act of Oblivion; and Conty was received at Bourdeaux, together with the Dutchesse of Longue∣ville his Sister, whilest her husband stayed amongst the waves of this raging Sea, in his Government. Reader, be not amazed at these Metamorphoses, or changes, for the causes thereof are not so hard to be comprehended, as that of the Tyde of the Sea was to the Prince of the Philosophers. What do you hope to see, but mon∣sters, prodiges, and miracles? The Province of Gasconie being fertill in subtill wits, and brave souldiers, was no sooner got out of one danger, then she fell into a precipice yet more perilous, through blind temerity, and as well to serve the passion of others, as for not receiving the satisfaction promised them, or rather for seeing their Complaints despised, and that which had been promised them, very ill performed. The puissant Armies, which were to ruine Mazarin, returned without having done any memorable action at all. The Parliament being in division, knew not where to sinde it self; the Citizens changed like the wind, and wedded sometimes the one Party, and sometimes the other. Yea, the Prin∣ces
themselves were in discord; for the Duke of Neos was killed in a Duel, by his Brother-in. Law the Duke of Beaufort, and the Count of Ri carrid prisoner to the Bastill, by the Duke of Orla's order, for having resisted Gode. In such sort, as all issued to the Kings advantage, by the Great Cardnals wise Counsell, who, like an experienced Pilot, saved the vessel from ship-wrack, and brought her over so many Rocks, amongst so many Quick∣sands, in the darknesse of a cloudy night, and amongst o many contrary winds, to the Port. For, he knew how to sow the tares of distention amongst them who would take the Helm from him, and threw them out of that ship, which he never abandoned, in the very height of the storm. Indeed to say the truth, the King had need of such a man; though he be more usefull to him, then to the poor subjects; and some have reviled him, by following the passion others, or for resentment, rather then by the know∣ledge of affaires; and therefore are as incapable to judge of him,Cardinal Ma∣zuins praise. as a blind man is of Colours. The rash judgements of the ignorant people, cause tumults, and seditions, and kindle a fire, which invirons a whole State; for which there there must be a speedy remedy. True it is, that he is blamed, and that upon very probable arguments, for not having made peace at Munster, for the necessary rest, and tranquility of the French, and for the superlative advantage of France. But,Wherefore he did not make Peace. he hoped to come to share stakes, and conceived, that the United Provinces would for∣sake their interests, to follow his passion, and his designes. But God had otherwise disposed of it. Why the Prince retyred himself. The Prince of Conde, being priviledged by his birth, after having per∣formed the Crown such services as surpasse the belief of man, after having spilt his blood, and exposed his life to so many hazards; after having gained so many Battails, and forced so many Towns, was not able to digest an Im∣prisoment, grounded upon conjectures, which the brightnesse of his glory had ingendred in some distrustfull soules. It is a great heart-sore to a gene∣rous spirit, to have any other Guard imposed upon him, then that of his us honour. The information which was given him of that designe, and then of the attempt projected upon his person, (as was reported) moved him to endea∣vour to destroy his eneme; which not being able to atchieve by almost a generall Insurrection, he chose rather to withdraw, then to see a man at Court, who overshadowed him, and made his heart swell with ven∣geance. His Father re∣tyred himself to Brussels. The Father, to save his honour, had retyred himself also to Brussells, and depositated his wife in the hands of that most vertuous Princesse, the Cardi∣nal Infanta. And the Sonne, to revenge the affront which he precen∣ded to have been done him, and for which he could get no satisfaction in France, took the same course, sound the same protection, and the honour to command the Armies. The issue will shew us how to judge of the intentions, and of the cause, by the effects. In fine, every one would have the superiority, and no body would stoop, to make place for another. For, the Citizens of Paris,The Cardinal of Rtz at the Bois de Vin∣cennes. who thought to finde their own interests in those of the Princes, seeing the Game in danger to be lost, easily disingaged themselves from the affections which they had vowel to them. And the Cardinal of Rtz,And Beaufort, with the Duke of Orleans to Blois. who had mediated the Kings return to Paris, and rendred him superlative service, was soon after, carried prisoner to the Bois de Vincennes. The Duke of Beaufort, who had swumme in the affe∣ctions of the Parisians, not finding his safety any more amongst them, rety∣red himself with the Duke of Orleans,The reduction of Retel, and Bourdeaux, 1653. to Blois. This last Field began with the taking of Retl, saw the Prince of Cae, with the whole Army, in Picardy, and the reduction of Bourdeaux. God
grant, that the end therof may produce a peace, for which so many people long, and earnestly expect. It must be looked for from his band; for it is only he, who can give it in our dayes; it is he only, who fights for us, and who will graciously hear the prayers of his affected people.The Duke of Guise returns into France. Upon the intercession of this Prince, the King of Spain set the Duke of Guise at liberty, who was taken in the tumults of Neaples, as hath been already said. He retured into France, but took not his intercessours part, because he had not the same interests, nor had recei∣ved the same affronts. Before we conclude our work, we must passe once more into England, to see how that Common-wealth is governed, which as soon as it was out of the Cradle, sell into a difference with that of Holland, which had fought fourscore years for her liberty, and in whose preservation the bordering Countries have their interest, as we shall forthwith demonstrate. The situation of Holland. Holland is so situated, and her number of shipping is so great, that there arrive merchandizes from all the Havens of the world, which are transpor∣ted by the Hollanders, to other parts, as well by Sea, as by the Navigable Rivers which surround it. The People are very open, and plain, and go∣vern their Trade with so much industry, craft, and cunning, (I speak in ge∣nerall) that they surpasse all other Nations of the Universe therein. Now, as the Liver in mans body makes the Chylus, or Concocoction, and diffuses the blood through all the vaines; just so Holland receives the Merchandizes into her bowels, and sends them through all the vaines of this world. But the Liver being corrupted, the body cannot long subsist: so the Traffick being spoyled; not only this Country, but the other also would have too much to suffer. Their knowledge in order to the Sea, is so perfect, and their proevidence so laudable, that they seldom make shipwrack. The English slight the friendship of the Hollanders. All things being well considered, it may be asked why that new Common-wealh, being yet in her infancy, full of danger, and in the middle of so ma∣ny enemies both at home and abroad, sought not the friendship of this, be∣ing almost conform in doctrine with her, as also Aristocratical Government? To which I answer, that two Common-wealths, so near one another, which have but one, and the same scope, or ayme, i.e. the Traffick, are lesse able to agree, then Rivals, who court one Mistresse, or two Neighbour-Kings. Religion may do much to animate a people; but profit, mility, and gain carries it quite away. There is yet somewhat more; for ambition makes face of the Piramide, which doth not shew it self, and is stolne from the eyes of the most clear-sighted persons. Rome and Carihage were in perpetual controversies. One of these two Republicks must needs perish, to open the passage to the other, for the Conquest of the Universe. Whe prepare themselves for the war. I leave the other reasons to be picked out by acuter wits, and say that the States not being able to make any profit of theirs, were constrained to lay about them for their own defence, and to provide all approaches, or In∣lets. They reinforced the Garrison of the Brill, and of Zeland; gave order to sit a good number of ships, and to raise mony upon the people, to furnish the expences, whilest the English continued their hostilty. But a certain faction flipt in amongst the people, by such authours as were enemies to the publick quiet; and we will first recount some particular misfortunes. The tumult at Middleburgh 1653. was soon appeased. That at Dort, was yet of lesse consequence. The fire which happened to the Town-house at Amserdam,The Town house at Amstedam burnt. 1652. brought some dammage, and caused the hastening of that, which was already begun to be built. The audacity of the Seamen, who brought back the vessels which remained in Hitland; was repressed by the punishment of some amongst them.A small nult appeased. But a rash Commandment, more un∣fortunately executed, and which cost the life of some Citizens, who were
killed by Musket-shot, was like to have put that illustrious City into a deplo∣rable confusion. The English, not content with taking their ships, attacked, and took also many other vessels, which go every yeare to catch Herrings, and other fish; so that they hurt, and do yet hurt this Republick, by all the means, and ways, they could, or can devise. The Propositi∣ons of the Eng∣lish not recei∣vable. The Propositions which they made our Embassadours, were so high and unequall, that they sufficiently evidenced their design against this Com∣mon-wealth; the principall whereof was this: That we should enter into a League Offensive and Defensive with them, and that we should make all their enemies, ours, &c. Points of most dangerous consequences. But let us go further. CHAP. XVI The English attack the Convoy of the Fishers. Tromp returns to Sea, and findes Blake. The Tempest separates them; and he comes back into Holland. De Ruyter attacks Ascue. Van Galens Victory before Ligorne. The English take all without distin∣ction. Tromp safely conducted the Fleet into France. Divers combats. Tromps death. Cromwell, and his Exploits. The Diet at Ratisbone. The Election, and Coronation of Fet∣dinand the Fourth, King of the Romans. VVhen Nations, cannot be reconciled by all kinds of reason, and justice, war must be endured. The Astrologors foretold this, in the observation of that Comet of the year of 1618. and that of the year before, and advertised us, that the wrath of God was not appeased. The States having received the troublesome news of the taking of those ships of war which accompanied the fishermen, gave order to attack the English, by way of retorsion. The Fleets at Sea. Tromp departed in July, with resolution to make the English repent their having neglected, and slighted the Hollanders friendship; and espying Sir George Asene in the Downes, with a Squadron of Ships, was not able to bear up with him, by reason of the Calme; and so going to seek Blaks in the North, where some Vessels which came from the Great Indies, were to pass, he discovered him. The prayers were said, and the Onset begun;A storm dam∣mageable to the Hodanders, 1952. but a great wind separated the two Fleets, made the English retyre into their Havens, and some of our Ships perish upon the Rocks; and the rest were saved in Hitland, and about forty came home, with the Admirall. Thus the Calme, and the Tempest parted them two several times; but de Ruyter, going to convoy the Marchant-Fleet with forty Ships, met Ason with his Squadron, and faced him so stoutly, that he was constrained o ∣treat into England, and give him passage. General Badiley bravely defended himself against twice his number of Ships in the Streights; but being over-powred, lost the Phanix, which was after wards recovered by Captain Cox.
The Victory obtained afterwards before Ligorne by Admiral Van Galen, was successful;Van Galens Victory before Lavorno. for three Vessels were taken, and some other burnt: yet was in some manner otherwise, the said Admiral receiving his deaths wound in the engagement. It very often chances, that they who gaine the Battel, have not the great∣est booty; for there are some who go out in Party, and sometimes make their Fortune. The Capes of Grip are certain particular persons, who go to Sea with small Vessels, set out at their one charge, and they make huge pro∣fit: and they lie at present, about the Coast of England, and cause much danger. The conjunction of Vice-Admiral Witt Wittenson was rendred infructu∣ous by the Cowardise of some Holland Captains, who forgot their duty, whilest the English performed theirs, with great advantage, by taking the Spanish mony, which was destinated to pay the Armies in the Low-Coun∣tries, and carrying it to London where it was stop't,The English de∣taine the mony which comes from Spain. and rever restored, be∣cause there were some Holland Marchants Goods, or Wares in the Vessels; and albeit the instances made by the Arch-Duke Leopold, and the Spanish Embassadours were heard, they yet took no effect; whereupon some have believed, that they were but faigned; but however it were, they kept the mony, and have served themselves of it. The Rendeznous of the Ships, near Rochl, 1653. The States considering the greatness of the danger, gave all the Marchant Ships order to assemble themselves, in a General Rendeznuous before the Isle of St. Martin, near Rochel, and there expect the Navy, consisting of seventy six Men of War, and eight Fire-Ships, which departed the first of Decem∣ber, under Admiral Tromps orders, to convoy home the abovesaid Merchant Ships, which were above three hundred, all loaden with Commodities. The English approached; but came off with losse, and returned into the Thames; and so the Fleet arrived in France, without any dammage. But during these great Attacks, the little War was carried on, with much par∣tiality and prejudice to the Marchants. For the mitigation of Gods wrath, and the diversion of his scourge from the United Provinces, the States ordered prayers to be made every Weducsday at four of the clock in the afternoone, all Shops to be kept shut, and all negotiations forborne during the time of the Sermon. Thus was the War indirectly mennadged upon this blew Element, be∣tween the two most potent Nations that are at present, or ever have been in all the North, for the Dominion of the Ocean, and for the retention of Trade. None but the Sea-Monsters, are able to render an account of all the brave Actions which are done there, as being Spectatours of them. The said States, being advertised of the great preparation which their Enemies were making to attack Tromp in his return with the Marchant-Fleet, gave order for the speedy equipaging of some other Ships, to go to meet him; but they were hindred by contrary windes. The Navall Battel which lasted three dayes, 1653. Tromp being arrived near Bolein discovered the English Fleet, and a little after began a Battel, which continued three dayes, the most furiously that could be: Nothing was feen but fire, and flame; and one would have said, that the Ocean was become combustible, and had taken the nature of the contrary Element. The Land had been already sufficiently steeped in blood; and now the Sea must be also coloured, with it. The indignation of that just God extends it selfe upon all the Elements; malediction is upon the Land, and upon the Water, The end of the Combas was, that Tromp retreated into Calais Road, and brought back the most part of the Fleet into Holland, all which the English thought to eatch, though they were faine to becontent, with the taking of some Marchant Ships, and some Men of War; and with letting the Hol∣landers
see, that they had to do with most generous, and redoubtable Eno∣mies. But our Admiral had two difficulties to overcome; the one to charge the Enemies in their retreat, and the other, to guard the Marchandise. When a Shepherd sees many Wolves coming to attack his flock, he keeps it behinde him, and cannot serve himself of the advantage be hath upon any one alone, by pursung him, for fear of giving the rest the occa∣sion of seizing upon his sheep. This brave man did wonders;Tromps praise. but he had the displeasure of seeing seeing above twenty of his men of War fly, without fighting at all. The States ceased not, during these fatal actions, to employ all possible inventions to disingage themselves from these troubles, which obstructed the Commerce, either by force, or friendship. For the advantages which the Enemies had by the conveniency of their Havens, before which they are necessitated to passe, as at the mercy of the Canon, oblidged such Fleets as were not furnished with sufficient Convoyes,The Ships passe behinde Scot∣land. to passe behinde Ireland and Scotland, and before Norway: a long, paineful, and perilous Voyage, and which very often caused the merchandises to be corrupted, and spoiled. The great Fleet, which departed this Spring from Rochel, made this huge circuit, and by an admirable felicity artiyed safely, without having me the Enemy, who expected it at the passage; that which was appointed towards the Baltick Sea, was all the Summer at the Flie, without daring to come out; and that of the great Indies is not yet arrived. In the Battel against General Deane, Tromp, was forced to retreat with considerable losse, because he had a contrary winde,General Deane beat the Hol∣landers. and stayed before Flu∣shing to repaire his Ships. But the English kept the Sea, and shewed them∣elves before the Brill, and then before the Taxell, where we will leave them, to see what passes in the Province. Seditions in Holland, and chiefly at En∣chuien. During these Tragedies at sea, murmurations, and mutterings were heard a shore, and certain Libells intitled the Lords of Louvenstein. It was said, that there was a design to ruin the House of Nassaw, and that the Prince of O∣range ought to be Governour of the Country; and many other Calumnies which deserve to be suppressed. When the Drum was beaten for the raysing of Souldiers, the common people would needs have it done under the con∣duct of the Prince of Orange; in such sort as that at Enchuysen, there hapned a Tumult of very ill example. The States considering the potency of their Enemies, and many other affairs which might be thought of for security, sent for a great Body of Horse, into the very center of Holland, and placed it near the Sea-coast.The Horse comes into Holland. But they chiefly expressed their infatigable care, in the fitting, and setting forth of a Fleet, to chastise a Nation which neglected their friendship, where∣of the were deceived, as the sequel will demonstrate. Tromp having put his Fleet into a fighting posture again, and the souldiers being payed, and assured of maintenande in case they were may med, set sayle towards the end of Iuly, and went generously to face his Enemies; and Witt Wittenson departed from the Texel to second him: The fight began, and the Hollanders charged twice through the English Fleet, and in the third time it was,A furious Bat∣tel wherein the Hollanders are worsted. that this warlike Nation of the English shewed their magnani∣mity and courage, by forcing the Hollanders to a retreat into their Havens; three Dutch Fire-ships fastened on three of their Flag-ships. But the English, contemning all danger, flung themselves into the flame, and disingaged their Ships. Tromps deaths The valliant Tromp dyed in this bed of Honour. He was beloved, and regretted by all in general, for the mildnesse of his nature, and for the servi∣ces which he had done his Native Country. He was ennobled by Lewis the thirteenth King of France, in recompence
of those services which he had done him, and very much esteemed by Car∣dinal Richelieu;Enobled by the King of France. but Rarea took him a way, before he had finished this War, which drew the attention of the whole World upon it, General Cromwel, a most prudent Politician, and most magnanintous Captain, having surmounted the Royal Party, subjugated the Irish, defea∣ted in many Battels,Victorious Cromwel dis∣solves the Par∣liament. and humbled the Scots, as well in their own Country, as in England, and dissipated Charle's Forces, had now no more to do, then to dissolve the Parliament, which he performed with as much glory to him∣self, as shame to them: So that he is now more absolute in Authority, then any of the Kings ever were, by vertue of his Army, whereby he keeps the people in awe, and order; who governs the State not only like a Brutus, but like a Caesar also. He constituted a new Parilament, which changed not their resolutions to hurt the Hollanders, who had also the power to de∣fend themselves. This we see the State of England, not onely under a Brutus, but a Caesar afso,Confusion in the Church of Eng∣land. the Church governed by Independents, and full of confusions; yea, the women have preached, against St. Pauls expresse Commandment, and the Clthes turned into Stables: But a regulation of all these exorbitances, is expected from the government of so sage a Ruler. But in what condition have we lest Holland? In the care of choosing a new Admiral, and maintaining the Union of the Consoederated Provinces. For conclusion, we will go back to see that most famous Assembly of Ra∣tisbone, where there is nothing treated but what is of high,The Assembly at Rausbone. and noble con∣sequence. The saines are past, the stormes scattered, and the Mariners re∣pair the Vessels; the Sun of Justice shewes himself; and such as have esca∣ped shipwrack, dry their Cloathes, and rake together the fragments of what is left them. However Ferdinand the third, that most Religious, and most August Em∣perour, were arrived at Ratisbone together with the Electours, and had suf∣ficiently declared, that for the good of the Empire, is was necessary to pro∣vide a worthy Successor; they endeavoured not yet, to elect a King of the Romans, till after the hews was come, that the Swedes had restored into the hands of the Marquis of Brandenburgh,The Hinder Pomerania re∣scorred. Heir to the last Duke of Pomerania, that Portion, or Parcell which is called the Hinder-Pomerania; the time be∣ing passed in visits, divertisements, and honest recreations. But then, the said Emperour, transporting himself, together with the Electoral Colledge, and an infinite multitude of other Princes to Auxburgh; his Son Ferdinand the fourth, King of Bohemia, and Hungary, was with a common voice, pro∣claimed King of the Romans.Ferdinand the fourth proclaim∣ed King of the Romans. By the happy Conjunction of these Stars, no∣thing could be expected, but a previous influence of long repose, through the whole Empire of Germany; a reparation of disorders, and an establish∣ment of a good Peace, by there-union of minds. Great God! How infinite are thy wonders, and how immovable is thy Provi∣dence! The choose the Sen of him, out of whose hand they laboured to pull the Helme, to whom they give, both with him, and after him, the government of this Vessel. But the windes are either appeased, or gone into other Countries, to make them also feel their violence, and rage. Great Prince! Worthy Fruit of that most August Plant! Rose pick't out of the thorns of confusion, to Command! Star of good Augure, who rejoycest the Mari∣ners, and annowucest them the end of the Storme! Receive, amongst the Publick Acclamations of the whole Empire, my vowes, conceived upon the Coast of the Ocean, and in the uttermost parts of Low-Germany, for the prosperity of thy youthful age. Long mayest thow live, and revive the anthority of the Lawes borne downe by these monstrous Wars. Let Christian Faith, Hope, and Charity, reflourish, under thy glorious, and pacifical Empire. Let the hatreds of Religion be taken away; and
let distrusts, jeadousies, and partialities be stifled, to the end, that by the ter∣mination of so many, and so great calamities, we may all render due thank to our Creatour, Amen. The continuation of the Iron Age. I Have spoken briefly, of the misfortunes of this abhominable Age; and have represented as in a picture Sacriledges, Massacres, Revos, Wickednesses, and all other mischiefs in gross, together with their causes, and deceiptfull pretexts, to prove that it is the last. Such as doubt hereof, do infallibly expect more dreadful prodigies, more universall,The evils of the latter dayes. and more destructive Warts, more enormous changes, more frequent Earth∣quakes, more ample Embarassements, more ordinary Inundations, more common Scandals, more absurd Ingratitudes, more pernicious Penns, more coldness of Charity, more hatred amongst Christians; more diversity in Re∣ligion, and more generall contempt of the Laws, both Divine, and Human, For, such crimes as in former Ages, were abhorred, and not committed, but in privat places, and by the favour of darkness, are now perpetrated in pub∣lick, and with freedome and boldness. Wherefore, we must not wonder, if disasters continue, since the wickedness of man goes alwayes increasing. We endeavour to cure the wounds, but it is but superficially, for they are in∣wardly festered. No no; there will be no end of our exorbitant Wars, but with the end of that great day, since the point which feeds them, is too pow∣erfull, and the Almighty too much inflamed with indignation, to differ his Vengeance, and stop his Angels, who are ready to descend, and consum∣mate all. There are no more Williams of Hennawlt, to do the oppressed speedy ju∣stice; nor more St. Lewises, inexorable to punish blasphemers, and to make a Temple of devotion, of a Court. The Emperour Ferdinand at Rathone. We left the Emperour Ferdinand, the third, with the King of the Romans his Son, at Ratisbone, in a very painfull cate of putting the Empire into solid rest, and quiet, if it could possibly be found, after so long a tempest, and in an Iron Age; the Princes in paine, to contract new Subjects, by fayre promises, and the Germans in alacrity, to repayre their battered Houses; which they will not have so soon done, but that we may have leasure to run through the other Provinces, before they be in condition to call us back thither. Wherefore, let us hasten into France, by the way of Brisack, where we must give brave Count Harcourt a visit. Count Harcourt at Bisack. This most happy Warrier, advantaged by his birth, and the good suc∣cess of his Arms, kept himself close shut up in his Government like another Narces, since he saw some Belisars in his House. For, neither affronts recei∣ved, nor the high promises of Strangers, not advantagious Allyances were able to shake his fidelity, or obscure the splendour of his enterprizes, but that he made it appear, in the Issue of the negotiation, that he ought to be con∣sidered, as a great Servant to the King, and that he belyed not the bloud of the Guses so often shed, for the glory of the Crown: however the Hughenots cry him down, in regard that he was head of the League, directly contrary to their intention. But let us turne a little to the left hand, to see how dexte∣rously the Swissers come off with their civil War. There is no Province in Europe, though invironed by Waters Fenus, or inaccessible Mountaines, but hath had a share of the evils, and mischiefs, of this deplorable Age; as the Swissers can witnesse, who covered by their
Mountaines, feared nothing lesse then this following Rebellion, which was likely to overthrow the State. A revolt in the Cantons of Swisserland. This fire began about Lucerne, in the moneth of March 1653. and run in a short space, through all the Cantons. The Pesants, and Subjects of the said Town, took Arms, to punish (as they said) ill Goverments: but nei∣ther that, nor the pretext of some Coms cried down, where able to conceale the malice of some, who would needs imitate Catiline, as well in his end, as in his beginning. The delicateness in the Ayer of Italy, and the gentilenesse, and gluttony of the kitchin of France, had corrupted the old manners of some, emptyed the purse, and filled the brain with smoak, which sought its center above, and the destruction of such as endeavoured to hinder it, and keep it below. As the number of the Seditious went augmenting; so did not the apprehensi∣on goe deminishings in such sort as that an Assembly of the thirteen Cantons was judged most necessary, for the good of the Common-Wealth, and an Army to quell thern; whose resistance not being answerable to their arro∣gance, they were cowed by some Skermishes, frighted to their habitati∣ons, and reduced to their duty, by the proceeding of a gentle kinde of ju∣stice upon them. A happy people, and a Province endowed with wise coun∣sel, from whence God so soon drew off his Rod. Fare you well, wise Swis∣sors, a thousand times wiser then they, who contemne you; for we must now return into our way again, to reach the Low-Country Army in Picardi, and view the posture thereof, as also the successe of this Field. The Prince of Coud finding himself surrounded by a puissant Army, longed for nothing more then a good occasion, to come to action with the Marshall of Turenne, who being no novice in the trade, nor in the poli∣tick Maxime, (which forbids him to hazard any Battail in his own Coun∣try, unlesse he were forced thereto) satisfyed himself, with hindring both the Sieges of Towns, and the generous desire of this young Alexander, whose true Element is more in Battails,The Spanish Army in Pica∣dy. then the Salamanders is in the fire. The poor Peasants were drawn from their harvest, and the Province quickly freed from this invasion; though yet however, autumne must needs give fruits, in regard that the Spring had made a shew of so many flowers. The Prince re∣tyres, and will besiege Guise. The said Prince, in his retreat, was advised by the counsell of War, to attack Guise, which was unprovided of a sufficient Garrison. The Knight, who beares the name thereof gave him to understand, either by his own motive, or by that of his master, whose forces he commanded, that this Siege was unseasonable, how much apparence soever there were, of repay∣ing the affront received before it the precedent year. The time passed in contest; the Garrison of the Town reinforced, and the Knight after two dayes sickness,The knight of Guises death. dead; which death, for the Violence thereof, was suspected of some malignity as well to the Soule, as to the body. The suddain deaths of great persons give occasion of talke; but those of mean ones, are put into common necessity. However it be, one of his Masters drew profit from it, and the other disavowed it. Commandments are dangerous, to such as execute them, for not having their Commission in writing. This unforeseen accident amazed such as were cleer sighted, filled his most illustrious House with mourning; cansed great alterations, and designes which made more noyse then effect. During these irresolutions, the Arch-duke departed from Brussels, and arri∣ved at the Army neer Cambray, to advice how, and with what advantage the Field should be finished.The siege of Ro∣croy. Rocroy (glorious by the defeat of the Spaniards) was a subject, which deserved to be brought under obedience; wherefore the resolution was taken to besiege it; and the French, who had coasted their ene∣mies to the Frontiers, without hazarding any thing, went and incamped
themselves before Mouzon.And of Mou∣zon, I will say nothing in particular of these two Sieges, (though I were present at one of them,) but that Heaven, being angry to see the two most generous Nations that ever bore the Christian Name, cea∣sed not to outrage or vex one another to their mutuall disadvantage; powred down so many teares, and the windes raysed so many stormes,Ill weather. that both men, and horses felt excessived stresses. It parted the victorres, to open their eyes; for Rocroy, which was the first attacked,These two Towns renders them∣selves. yeelded two dayes after Mou∣zon; i. e. the thirtieth of September; and the Armies being fatigated by the over much wetness of the season, went to seeke shelter, almost naked. The French, being very impatient, and desirous to be lodged more at large, unnestied the Garrison of St. Menehout; and the Lorrains,And St. Menc∣hout. conducted by their own Master the Duke, went to affict the Bishoprick of Liedge. The Lorraines in the Bishop∣rick of Liedge. The small success of the three last Fields, in respect of the great advanta∣ges, (which were promised by the disorder, caused by the discontentments of the Princes of the blood,) at least a: second Peace of Vervins; made fools talke, who open their mouthes, when the wise, or at least, the wary (a most usual maxime in these present times) keep them shut. There was a misfortune foreseen and it fel upon the Abbot of Mercy, and the Count of Bassigny, who were cast in prison;The Count of Bassigay, and the Abbot of Mercy, priso∣ners. and their imprisonment gave such as were curious ground to scrue into the cause thereof, and made others believe, that it would discover some great mistery, for which the lovers of novelty longed much. This first Thunderclap struck but one only steple; but before it was dis∣sipated, it crushed a Rock, which so many Mariners, in this Sea of miseries, both doubted, and feared, and against which so many Vessels made Ship∣wrack. For, the Liedgers took an Alarme, as also a resolution to make an Allyance with the French, against the House of Spain. Which blow must needs be fatall to his Catholick Majesty, if not prevented; and Cardinal Mazarin ful of joy, to see himself at the Helme of the Ship, began to hope, that the webs which he had woven in that Country, would be more difficult to untangle, then it was to unty the Gordions knot. The Duke of Lorraine was sent for to Brussels, taken prisoner, and carried to the cittadel of Antwerp. And the Duke of Lorrain. Neither the exploits of Mas-Aniello; nor the death of the King Charles brought more astonishment to all Europe, then this detention, which gave things another countenance, brake the neck of many designes, sent back the great Faber with his forces, to Sedan, and retained the Liedgers in their liberty, which they were about to loose, together with their Peace. The Imprisonment of this Soveraign Prince, smothered all his Counfels, which seemed to be great; and was taken for one of the strangest acci∣dents of the time, and discovered, that he was beloved by almost no body. He is suspected, to have imitated the constable of St. Paul,Suspected to imitate the constable of St. Paul. and to have sought his profit, in this pernicious War, where he danced better, then he did in the great Ball, or Revel, which was made at Paris 1642. France blamed this proceeding, more for her own interest, then for that of the Prisoner; his Troops expressed so great discontentments; and fell into such disorder,Prince Fran∣cs arrives a Brussels. that it was needful to send for Prince Francis to put them into the state of obedience, who having taken leave of the Emperour, and all the Court, departed from Vienna, being well received, and cherished every where, and principally at Brussels, where he arrived with his two Soanes. Whilest the Count of Fuensaldania in busy about securing the Lorrains to his Masters service, and assigning them good Winter-quarters, to the great displeasure of the Inhabitants of Lile, we will go down a little lower. Promps last battail. The last Battail in the moneth of August, wherein the valliant Admirall
Tromp, lost his life, proceeded partly from disgust, by seeing the Enemies brave, or domineer so long, upon the Coast, before the havens of Texel, and the Moze, hindring the going out of the ships, & obstructing the commerce. The Hollanders, who had made so many bravadoes, throughout all the whole Ocean, and imagined that the Lordship of the Sea belonged with∣out controversie to them; were even almost dead with spight, and displea∣sure, to see themselves so highly, and grossely affronted, even at their own doors. This batail, Isay, (whereof I have hitherto made very little mention) decla∣red in the beginning, the addres of both Parties, by striving for the advantage of the winde: and at the end, their generous, and obstinate resolution to overcome. The losse which the Hollanders sustained, was of about fifteen or sixteen Vessels; and that of the English, little (as to Vessels) but many were extreemly indammaged on both sides. In this surious fight, as also in all the former, the English Vessels, by reason of their hight, and their number of bigg Brass Gunns, had almost the same advantage, upon the Hollanders, which Curasseers,In which as in many former, many Captaines did not their duty. or Corsler-Horsmen have, upon the Light Horse. Besides, that many Dutch Captains, did not their duty; in such sort, as that the Hollanders reaped no other profit of their valour, then that of removing their Enemies from their Coast, and were forced themselves into the Texel. The English considering in what equipage their fleet was, and fearing the violent storms, that usually happen about that season of the year, withdrew themselves likewise, into Harwich, and Yarmouth Roades. Let us leave them both, labouring to repayre their ships, without exami∣ning the number of the dead, and wounded, or lending eare to the cries, and groanes of Widows, and Orphanes, (which ring even to heaven it selfe, in all parts of Europe) to see what passed at that time, in Guyenne; and we shall meet by the way some Vessels richly loaden,The French bes some ships of the Spani∣ands. which Mons. de la Milheraye carried in triumph from Spain to Nantes. We have told you already, that Bourdeaux had recourse to the Kings clemencie,The reasons why Bourdeaux yealds. the cause of which change was this: The length of the siege; the Plague, Famin, and more then all, secret Intelligence, and the Act of Obli∣vion prevayled for the King:The pnish Fleet rives too late. In such sort, as the Spanish Fleet, which arri∣ved two dayes after the accommodation, returned into Spain to see the Ad∣miral thereof beheaded; and the Princesse of Condè retyred into the Low-Countries, to her husband, who, after this reduction, had no body lest in those parts, who sides with him. Indeed, the tardity of the Spaniards, and the proceeding of the Prince of Conty, gave France glory, and such as knew the affayres of the world, matter, to examine the reasons thereof. All these successes were attributed to the Cardinals prudence, who, by de∣stroying the Princes Party, fortifyed his own, and prepared himself to have the King annointed;The tumult in Languedock passes like a flash. for that tumult of Languedock, between the Count of Rieux, and them of the Religion, which looked as if it would have caused an embarassement, proved but a flash, and forthwith disappeared; so that the troubles were allayed, in those two great Provinces, and they in con∣dition to see thenceforth, no other forces there, then they that are usually raysed for Catalunia. The heat of the English recalls us speedily towards the North; besides there passed nothing worthy of memory, in the County of Rossillion. After that bloody Navall Battail, which makes the haire stand on the heads of such as hear it related, and which looked, as if it must needs have cooled the courage of these Champions for entring the lists any more, (which all Christendome beheld with terrour) the English were the first, who endeavoured to resume the Dance;A tempest in∣dages the English Fleet. but a horrible tempest arising made them repent their temerity, and sent them back to their ports, many of their ships being much incommodated.
In fine, these most valorous Sea-souldiers gave the Belgick Lyon so many jerks, and hogs, that almost all the States of Europe, foreseeing, and appre∣hending this terrible Power, desired to gain their amity; amongst which, the Swedes were not the last,The Swedes make Amity with England. to evidence that interest of State was not less near their hearts now, then the pretext of Religion was formerly, from which they drew so great advantage. The Hollanders, fearing lest the prosperity of their enemies should make them enterprize somewhat upon them by land, as well as by water, made the Country people take Arms, and keep good Guard every where, with∣out neglecting what belonged to the Sea, and the furnishing of Ships,The Country people take Arms in Hol∣land. about which they laboured incessantly. But this was not sufficient, for they must chuse an Admirall, who fell out to be Opdam, of the most ancient House of Wassenaer, who forthwith transported himself to Amsterdam,Opdim Admi∣rall. and thence to Texel, at the mouth of the North Sea, to put all things in good order. Eukhayse drawn out of the hands of the Rabble. At the same time the Town of Enksen, seated upon the South-Sea seven Leagues from Amsterdam, was drawn out of the hands of the Rabble, by means of some souldiers, who entred very craftily, whilest they were all run∣ning to the Town-house, to heat a Proclamation. This tumult was of so dangerous a consequence, that it had dismounted the Magistrates; but that of the Haghe, about the young Prince,A tumult at the Haghe and was begun by Children, and augmented by some malicious persons, who brake the glass-windowes of many houses, made the Burghers, or Townsmen run to their Arms, and the Nobility get on horse-back, to stop these petulances, which deserved somewhat more then the rod.at Alckmaer. That of Alckmaer had the same issue, and was refrenated by the prudence of the Magistrates. All which seditions, had but one, and the same Cause; and their Pretexts were also ve∣ry little different. Indeed the Red-Lyon had very much to do, both at home, and abroad, by the strength of his enemies,Murmur against the States. and by disunion of wills amongst his friends; and such as were bound to the Helme, were not a little exposed to the venimous traducements of evill tongues. A tumult in England. England felt also some Commotion for want of pay; but that was smothe∣red; and no body stirred, but some certain Seamen, some whereof payd the score for all. In the moueth of November, the Holland Fleet having conducted another towards the Sownd, and being fallen too near the Coasts, was surprised by a suddain storme, which cast many of the Ships so a ground,A tempest af∣flicts the Hol∣land Fleet. that they could not ger off into the Main; and many poor Seamen miserably perished, about a Musket-shot from the Mountains of Sand; so that Fortune treated both par∣ties alike in sight of the Coast, laughed at their Enterprises; but the more ju∣dicious sort of men foreseeing, that at long running, the Traffick would be utterly annihilated, and the ruine of Holland advanced, (which was so much envied for her riches) considered that a Peace, though little glorious, was better then a thousand triumphs.The Embassa∣dours of Ho∣land return into England, to begin the treaty of peace again. Wherefore the States sent their Em∣bassadours again to London, to begin the Treaty, for the last time; and in case of refusal, to tell the English, that they would enter into a Confedera∣tion against them, with some other Princes, thereby to bring them to reason. The confusion which was made by the plurality of voyces, and the roar∣ing of the Red Lyon, rung so loud, that the most considerate Lord Protector, and his Parliament, who regorged with booty, taken from the Hollanders, opened their ears to the Propositions of Peace. But whilest these things were in agitation, who would have believed, but that many should needs be well disposed for the Kings eldest Son? For the High-landers in Scotland had taken Arms, and had received some from Holland; the French spighted at
the taking of their Fleet, without a denunciation of war, arrested all the English Merchants goods in Normandy; the Hollanders made a shew of prepa∣ring themselves in good earnest for the war, which yet notwithstanding they endeavored to shun, as most pernicious to them. Some beleeved, and would needs make others also believe, that the States of Holland, chose rather a way of Accommodation, then to enter into a war, which if it had proved successefull to them, would have redressed Charles Stewarts affairs, and his Nephews, to the detriment of their Authority. Others maintained, that this Peace being utterly broaken, the Country would quickly be lost. Be it what it will, mens passions have been so much the more discovered, upon this matter, as the liberty of speaking is greater in Holland then elsewhere. A tumult at London raised by the Portu∣gucles. The tumult which was so temerarily excited at London, by the Portugal Embassadours brother, made him carry his head upon a Scaffold some moneths after; and all issued so well for the great, and most prudent Crom∣well, that he acquired, together with the Title of Protectour of the Com∣mon-wealth of England, the renown of the most acute Politician of this Age. For good successe made the Enterprizers admired, gave the Prote∣ctor full power, and authority, and left desolate Charles nothing but com∣plements of compassion. France the san∣ctuary of the afflicted. France, which hath alwayes vanted her self to be the Sanctuary of such as are poor and afflicted, labours at present to strip her self of that glorious quality, through a maxime of State. She hath already felt the strength of the English,Will have no war with the English. by the loss of her ships, and so knowes how dangerous this ene∣my is, and the trouble she had in former Ages, to pluck him out of her bow∣els. Wherefore, it is better to appease him by politick craft, and comply with the Times,The reasons. then to fall into another war. The motions are great enough yet, in the Kingdom; and it suffices to have the Spaniards for her enemies, without drawing the English upon her back too. We must sometimes kisse the hands of such as we would have farre enough from us, for fear of irritating them. And therefore it is, that the King sent his Embassadour to London, to acknowledge the Republick, and treat of a good peace, and settle Traffick. The Lord Pre∣tour a great Politician. General Cromwel hath expressed his incomparable dexterity, in the man∣nagement of Arms, in the direction of Affaires, in his Allyances with stran∣gers, in dissipating the ambushes, and treacheries, which have from time to time been land against his designes, and his authority; and principally, in the wars against the Hollanders. And you shall now sce how he came to rise higher. He assembled another Parliament, some of the members whereof being inclined to him, proposed one day in full Assembly, that the burthen of the Common-wealth was too heavy for them, and that it was necessary to impose it upon the shoulders of General Cromwell. Some of them not ap∣proving of this change, retyred secretly to shelter themselves from the con∣trary winds, and the rest were dismissed by him; and so the rest went forth∣with to conferre that honour upon him, congratulate with him; and gave him the Title of Protectour,England hat's changed her Gevernment three several times. (which is not new in that Island) and occultly, the Soveraignty of England: so that in a few years, this said Island hath changed her government three severall times; and yet leaves not to flou∣rish, and to be most formidable to all the powers on earth. Some moneths before the dissolution of the Parliament, the Kings youngest Son, commonly called the Duke of Glocester, was sent to Dunkerck, in the condition of a private Gentleman, with a summe of mony to defray his expences. Whilest the Peace is treated at London, with many dissiculties, by the in∣tervention
of the Reformed Cantons of Swisserland, and the recommenda∣tion of the Queen of Sweden, we will take a turn through the North. The King of Denmark being fortified by the Allyance of the States-Gene∣ral, and the jealousies which the King of Swedens Leavies gave him,The King of Denmark for∣tifies himselfe. being taken away; had no other care, then to keep his Subjects in arms, to hin∣der all surprises, and to intrench the Approaches, at the same time, when the scourge of God went ransacking all the Inhabitants of the North. At Stockholme, Fortune manifested her Empire, by casting for a time, Count Magnus de la Gardia under her wheel,Count Magnus de la Gardia disgraced. and depriving him of his Mi∣stresses favour; but she was not so rigorous to him, as she was to the brave Earle of Essex, in Queen Elizabeths time, in England. Whilest this August Queen is disposing her self to do, in the greatest vi∣gour of her youth, what the Emperour Charles the fifth did in his decline, we will make an in-road into Poland. Searce had King Casimir unlaced his Armour, yet all stained with the blood of the Rebellious Cossacks,The King of Po∣land attacked by the Musco∣vites. when he saw himself oblidged to put his foot in the stirrop again, to resist the Moscovits. This Kingdom, which had been so much afflicted by the excursions of the said Cossacks, by Inundations, contagious Diseases, Partialities, and Di∣strusts, which are ordinary in Free Countries; findes her self now in the necessity of making a Defensive War; and the Natives, to make resistance, against a barbarous Nation, which they have so often beaten, and chased as far as the very heart of Russia, and the very Gates of the Capital City Mosco. But Changes are as well universal, as Chastisements. The death of that great Mi∣nister, Mons, de Brum In the beginning of the year 1554. religiously deceased at the Haghe, that great man, and most faithful Minister Monsicur Anthony de Brun, Baron of Apremont, and Ordinary Embassadour for the King of Spain, to the States. He was born at Dole in Burgundy, had served his Master from his youth, in very great affairs, and nominatively, in the General Peace at Munster. Towards the Spring, the Peace was concluded at London, against the opi∣nion of many, and the news thereof was most agreeable to the Hollanders; but when the Articles came to be published,The Peace made between the English & the Hollanders. whereby the young Prince was excluded from all Charges, or Offices, it much troubled the Provinces, and was like to cause divorces, and great partialities; in so much as the other Provinces set forth complaints, and Protestations, which were amply enough answered in a Manifest published by the States of Holland, and which the Reader may see at good leasure. But there were nothing but murmura∣tions; they taxed the said States with ingratitude, and reproaches, and slanders were scattred at random. Is this the recompence (said they every where) of so many services rendred? The Princes, his Predecessours,The cause of the murmurations, in behalfe of the Prince of Orange. spared not their blood, nor their lives, nor their meanes, to purchase our liberty; and in lien thereof, we make Agreements, so prejudicial to his Authority, and so contrary to our duty! Ah! what will not the Allyes of this Illustrious Family say? Will they not accuse us, and our posterity of the blackest ingratitude in the World? Then were the obligations of the Common-wealth, to the said House, tepeated, the services laid open, and the merits so highly exalted, and found so infi∣nite that there was no means to recompence them. A Manifest published by the States. These noises (I say) and this liberty of censuring the procedings of their Masters, with impunity; produced that Manifest, which by little and little, swallowed up the tattle of such as were most hot amongst them; refuted the Objections of the other Provinces; and put Holland into firme tranquility again. For my part I content my self with having hinted a word thereof, for proof of the general malignity of this corrupt Age. This war, having been prudently counselled by the most accomplished Politician of these Times, against a Nation, which was able to give the Law
upon the whole Ocean,The war began in regard of the jealousie which was amongst the Provinces. had it not been unfortunatly divided by an unfore∣seen Siege, and an unexpected Death; was continued by him with very much dexterity, utility, and glory; and terminated with so great advan∣tage abd reputation, that he hath rendred himself far more formidable, then any great Conquerour ever was. Hath much ex∣creised the Eng∣lish. This war restored the English to the perfect knowledge of the maritime Militia; and oblidged the Hollanders, who opened their eyes too late, to seek this Peace, for the redresse of their Traffick half ruined. Whilst the sea was agitated by so many different humours, there arrived news of the utter losse of Brezill,The utter losse of Brezill. together with the Recif, which was believed, when it could be no more doubted of, and caused some to cry louder, and especially them of Zeland, who could not digest some Articles; But Gene∣ral Schup, who brought the confirmation of the said news, was forthwith imprisoned, together with some others. Let us briefly dispatch what we have to say, because it is quite fresh. Cardinal Mazarin finding no more contradiction in the Council, and per∣ceiving that the heat of the French against him began by little and little to cool;The Consecra∣tion of the King of France. had now no other care, then to get the King Annointed; which ac∣cordingly was done at Rheims with the accustomed Ceremonies, for the illustration whereof it was held necessary to adde a Triumph to it. Stenay, a small place, but of great consideration; between Verdun, and Se∣dan, was the Lawrel-branch worthy to guild the Head of this great Kings;The Siege of Stenay. and so it was invested, and the Trenches opened in his Majesties presence. The Prince of Conde; who was not asleep, led his Troops into the Field, and made a shew of going another way, whilest some other Forces seized upon the approaches of Arras,And of Arras. with so much felicity and speed, that such as en∣deavoured to enter the Town, were repulsed, and beaten. The Arch-Duke hastned thither, the Peasants were commanded to come, and work about the lines of Circumvallation; and the Horse, to hin∣der the French from entering into the Town, the Garrison whereof was ve∣ry weak. A bold Enterprise; and which could not be accomplished with so few men, without making some diversion. But let us make another turn through the North, for the last time. The Queen of Sweden quits the Crown. Queen Christine, performed a most extraordinary action, and which is more easie to relate then to imitate; for having worne the Crown of Sweden, which was so much illustrated, and augmented by the brave exploits of the Great Gustave her Father, for some years together; put it in the presence of all the States of the Kingdom, upon the head of her Cousin King Charles in the month of June; and after this Ceremony, departed from Stockholms to Hamburgh. Our Age produces nothing but Prodigies, and Miracles: Some loose their Diadems by force; and others, of their own accord. The Polanders being extreamly disgusted, to see the Muscovits keep Smol∣ensko blocked up,The Muscovits ravage Litua∣nia and make havock at their pleasure in Lituania (who had been formerly so often defeated by them, though they were six times stron∣ger) and receiving no relief from Christian Princes; knew so well, how to represent to the Great Turk by their Embassadour, their firmness, and sta∣bility in the exact observance of their former Treaties with him; and how they had constrained their King Ʋladislans to casheere his Forces, which he intended to employ,The Turk pro∣mises the Po∣anders sucear. to the disadvantage of the said Treaties; that he pro∣mised them, in fine, to assist them. It is already confirmed, that the Tartars are joyned with them, and that the rest most make an Invasion upon Mus∣covy, but it is after the losse of Smolensko,Smolensko, ta∣ken. which was most sensible to the said Common-wealth. The cruelties which those Barbarians exercise in those parts, would be incredible in an Age which were lesse cursed then this; and we are made hope, that the Poles will quickly have their revenge; how∣ever,
such as are of opinion with me, by the consideration of the giddy course, of the affairs of Christendom; suspect the relief of these Infidels,The succour of the Insidels sus∣pelled. and fear, least in the general Commotion of the Levant, or Easterne people, they may chance to seize upon this Kingdom, instead of succouring it, and effuse themselves, according to the old prediction, into Germany. Time will shew us strange revolutions, and it is best, not to apprehend such evils as must needs happen. The Greeks are groaning even yet, for having desired, and tasted the like succour. This war of the Muscovits, and Cossacks, wherein Religion, Rebellion, and some other Causes make a concert, is very dammageable to this strong Bulwark of all Christendome, and teaches us, that such as have alwayes been beaten heretofore, have now the advantage. Luck is turned every where; Governments are changed; Policy is reversed; and men follow ano∣ther, and a very different habit. Reformations in Germany. The Germans, by their dissentions, and distrusts, have very much weak∣ned the Empyre; and there is no discontentment heard now, but about the Reformations, which are made in the Emperours Hereditary Countries; But such as councel them would do well to begin upon themselves, or pro∣ceed at least more civilly therein. For I know not, whether Persecutions for diversity of opinions have ever been useful to the Church. St. Martin disapproved them; and indeed, they ingender more hurt, then they bring good, in these latter times. This Emperour continuing his care, for the Roman Catholick Church, the redresse of the Empire, and the restauration of his most serene House to her first splendour, by the Election, and Coronation of his Son; sees now his joy turned into mourning, and the hope of almost all his people, over∣thrown, by the inopinate death of this young King. The paines which were taken to remove him from infected places, and where the fimall pocks domincered, was uselesse. No no, most devoute Monarch; it is in vaine, to endeavour to conserve this dear Plant; the Infinite Essence is too much provoked to wrath, by the sins of Christians, to grant them this precious Pledge of Justice. There is no more fidelity to be found amongst them; and when the Pillars shog, the Building cannot stand. The Archbishop∣rick of Bremen secularized. The Arch-bishoprick of Bremen being secularized by the Peace of Mun∣ster, fell to be shared by the Swedes, for having tormented the Eagle, and saved the Protestant Party from shiprack; or rather for having crossed the House of Austria's designes. They would not be content without the Capital Town it self, which is situated upon the Weser, a large River, which discharges her self into the North Sea; for the gaining whereof, and to hin∣der the communication of the Sea;The Swedes wil have the Town. Count Conninxmark caused a Fort to be built below the said Town, which was to bring it to the last gasp. This strange proceeding, which offended both the Emperour, and Em∣pire, opened the eyes of the bordering people, and discovered the ambition of the Swedes. Montecuculi went into Sweden; but was put off with delayes; for the North understands dissimulation as well as the South. Ferdinand threatned this haughty General,, with the Imperial Thunder∣bolt, but it moved him not at all. The impunity of offences provokes men to continue them. The Inhabitants of the Town took Arms,The Townesmen take Arms. with resoluti∣on to defend themselves, and sent to implore the Succour of the Head, toge∣ther with that of their Allyes. And gaint the Forts. About the Summer solstice, or Sun-stead, in Conninkmarks absence, they put their men into the field, took those places, which lighted them to neer; and made the whole Dutchy contribute to this Wat. Connixmarck retakes them, and shut up the Sweden, Town. These affronts were so sensible to this great Warrier, that he quickly af∣ter revenged himself of them; for being seconded by some new forces from
Sweden, he did not only reconquer the said places, but also so streightly shut up the Bremeners, that loosing all the confidence they had in their own for∣ces, they had recourse to those of their Allyes, and especially the Hollan∣ders. The States Ge∣nerall send their Embassa∣dours thither. Interest of Religion, which is more potent amongst the Reformates, as being more popular, and lesse tyed, then the Catholicks, together with that of state, and some other considerations, made the States Generall resolver to send their Embassadours, to mediate an accord, and temper the hot demands of the Assailants, which were so much preludiciall to the Em∣pire. They forthwith declared their Commissions, and by mixing the strength of their interests, with that of their arguments, brought the Swedes to con∣descend to a more gentle Treaty, for fear of obliging the mediatours to be∣come Parties, in favour of such as had the same law, and whose assistance themselves had received, according to their ability, in other necessities, and whom they could not abandon, without being accused of ingratitude; yea, and there were forty ships equipaged for their relief, in case the Swedes would needs try extremities. The peace made. Thus, was this War of the Lutherans against the Reformates, soone fini∣shed. This is the state of the North, and that of Germany, which is not very safe, by the death of the King of the Romanes, the Emperours indisposition, and the Arming of some Princes in Low-Saxonie; for as for that of the Mar∣quis of Brandenbrgh, and the Duke of Newburgh, time will shew us what scope it hath.The King of Swedens mar∣riage with a Priacesse of Holstein. But let us now run to the mysterious Siege of Arras, and we shal finde Queen Christine at Antwerp, who receives the newes of her Cousins mar∣riage, with a Princesse of Holstein. Arras, which was taken by the French, in the year 1640, before the face of thirty thousand men, and had struggled against famin, and some other difficulties, which made the most judicious despaire of good successe; was likely to be lost playing. Wherefore they were thinking to quit the Siege, which the youg King had begun, presently after his consecration; but yet they found meanes to continue it, for his Majesties honour, and to send the Marshal of Turenne,The Marshal of Turenne at the succour of Ar∣ras. with ten thousand men, to succour this place. Our young Alexander, that accomplished Captain, who in his first essay had shewed his mastership, thought fit, to go ruin those Troops whilest they were feeble,The Prince of Conde proposes to goe and at∣tack him, but be is not heard. and tyred by their long march, (according to the example of that German Mars, that Tamer of Brisack) and before they were re-inforced by the Nobility; but this too judicious, and prudent Nation, which chooses rather to fall into the other extremity, could not be brought to resolve it; choosing rather to cover themselves in their trenches, to hinder the reinforcement of the Garrison; and to expect the Enemy, with a firme foot. The French Nobility comes to the succour. Stenay yeeldeds. The French Nobility, which doth more for the love of Vertue, and for the favour of their King, then many other Nations doe, for wages, hasten∣ed thither. Stenay was yeelded, the Troops increased, and the King him∣self, thereby to animate his subjects to behave themselves well, drew neer the place appoinred to get honour. All the world expected the Issue of this Siege; and some wondered, how the Spaniards were able to hold out against such terrible forces,The Spaniards o weake to ard so many works. which so small ones, and the attacks went so slowly on, against so weak a Garrison. For, there were not men enough to defend the lines of so great a circuit, to gard the Convoyes, and force the Town. It was believed that there was yet some Arrow hidden, and more then one string, to the flow. Every body turned their eyes towards the sea, and the Embassadours set that Divine Metral, together with all their Rheto∣rick,
on work, either to rayse or stop the tempest. In fine, the twenty fifth of August, being the day of S. Lewis, was design∣ed to attack the Lines, which were bordered by the Spaniards much demi∣nished, and fatigated. The French advanced, gave the Alarme,The Siege∣raysed. in all the quarters; entred by a turn-pike which was ill enough garded, and beat down part of the Lines, to make way for the Cavaltie. There began a confusion in the Camp, which made some fly,Confusion in the Camp. The Prince of Condes va∣lour, and ad∣dresse, tosavt the Army. and others resolve to defend them∣selves. The Arch-duke seeing the cowardise of some, tesolved to fly; and the Prince of Conde, vigorously to charge the enemies, who contenting them∣selves with having gained the Artillery, succoured the Town, and made some hor Skermithes; let this rock retite, being too hard to be scaled, and most dissicult to be surmounted. The Princes valout cannot be highly enough extolled, nor the order which he kept, to save the Army, and make a dexterous retreate, sufficiently admired. Sadnesse in the Low-Countries, for this defeat. The news of this so little expected disaster, gaining force upon the nim∣ble wings of Fame, and growing much greater then it was; was likely to cast the Flemmings into despaire; but the following Posts manifested, that the hurt was not yet past remedy; that the Prince of Conde had done more thena man, and had merited the Lawrel, by this retreat. The number of the dead, was but little; that of the prisoners, greater; and that, of the victo∣rious Bnemy, most grear. As this blow filled the King of Spains subjects, in the Low-Countries, with sbrrow; so did it make all France skip for joy, and accumulate prayses upon the Cardinal, as well as upon the Generals; who,Joy in France. They King at Arras, and the Army in Hen∣nawlt. after having accompanicd their Victorious King to Artat, took leave of him, and fell in with their for∣ces upon Hennawlt. During the joy of the one, the forrow of the other, and the amazement of all, I will make reflection with such, as to whom this war is infinitely displeasing, for Heavens sake, upon some Sieges, on both sides, since the war was first declared, in which the indignation of the Almighty most clearly appears. A calculation of the unhappy Sieges on both sides, which denotes, that this war is dis∣pleasing to God. The King of Spains Armies found Fortune against them, before Cazal, Leucatu, Rocroy, Guise, Rosa, Balaguier Arras.—The King of Frances, were unhappy, before Theonnille, Dole, St. Omers, Fontarrabie, Lerida and Cambray; so that by these alternative losses, and by the obstinate continu∣ance of the war, there can be nothing expected, but an excessive weakening of both Crownes, and an insufficiency to resist, one day, other Enemies. These are the misfortunes of this depraved Age; which it not remedyed, we shall soon see yet greater changes. The bowle being cast, goes very often fur∣ther, then the bowler desires. Quenoy for∣tifyed and Clairmont ta∣ken. The French having ransacked the County of Hennawlt both sart, and wide, and fortifyed Quenoy, whilest the other forces feazed upon Clairmont; left a good Garrison there, and retreated into Winter-quarters. The Veneiuns resist the Turk. The Venetians, by their generous resolution, shew, that they will recon∣quer the kingdome of Candie; and hinder the Half-Moon, from perfecting her Circuit. The Gennezes have sent their Embassadours into Spains, to end their difference, and into France, for some negotiation, the effect where∣of depends upon Time. The Pope qui∣et, and the Duke of Sa∣voy constant in the Dance. The Pope, not having been able to perswade the two Kings to a peace, keeps himself in peace, and with him, the rest of Italy; save only the Duke of Savoy, who stands fast in the Dance with the French. The Duke of Guise, having better retained in memory, the courtships of the Neapolitans, then his own misfortunes, and his promises made as Madrid; set men at work the whose summer long, for the atring of a great
Fleet, to go to the Conquest of that Kingdome, which hath been sooften taken, and retaken, with so great facility. He departed at the beginning of Autumne:The French ex∣pedition under the conduct of the Duke of Guise, unhappy. but having been resisted by storms at Sea, and by the Spaniards ashore; he lost the hope of seizing upon it, and returned towards France, with notable losse. In such sort, as that the French have found Fortune against them in Italy, and the Spaniards, in the Low-Countries. There are misfortunes every where, if not by Arms, at least by sicknesses, and other accidents. For whilest the Hollanders (who were not resolved, to take any Governour yet) had trouble enough to get their proceedings ap∣proved by the rest of the Procinces,Misfortunes happaning at Delft. and the Inhabitants thereof; that horri∣ble blow happened at Delft the 12 of October, between ten and eleven of the clock, where the fire got into the Magazine of powder, and so destroyed one part of the Town, that few houses remained whole, and untoucht, ei∣ther in walls, or windowes. And at Grave∣ling by powder. The like misfortune happened at Graveling, towards the spring, which killed many people, as well as that of Delft. These prodigious accidents made many, who were astonished at them, believe, that the Great Day of Judgement was come, and others, that they prognosticated nothing but miserie. The English Fleet. The English keep two Fleets ready; and have already sent one under General Blake to the Levant, to succour the Spaniards against the French But the said General falling short of the Duke of Guises Navy, which was returned from the Kingdom of Naples,Generall Blake burns the Tu∣kish ships near Tunnis. almost a fortnight before he came, he plied in∣to the Port of Ligorn, where he was most honourably received, and from whence, after almost three weeks stay there, he set sayl for Tunnis, where he sired a Castle, and nine Turkish ships in Port ferino, upon the disdainfull refusal of the Dye of that place, to give satisfaction for some wrongs, and dammages formerly put upon the English Nation. The Count of Broglio forces the Suburbs of Lile. The Count of Broglio, Governour of La Basseè, for the French, after the ta∣king of the Fort, and Abby of Breclean, being informed that there was a Re∣giment of Horse quartered in one of the Suburbs of Lile, commanded part of the Regiment of Piedmont, together with part of a Foot-Regiment, to go and beat up their quarters; but having notice upon the way, that they were removed, and entred into the City, he neverthelesse advanced, and having given a very strong onset, fired the Suburbs, and burnt about sixty houses to the ground. This done, hearing that some Lorraine Forces were march∣ing from Lents towards Doway to joyn with a body of Horse of about four thousand, commanded by Don Carlo del Campo Governour of Lile; he resol∣ved to set upon some Foot left behind about the Town, in the absence of the Horse, and so stormed their Works, about midnight, in three distinct pla∣ces, and forced them out of their Out-works;Retreats from before Lents. yea, and would have gone over the Mote, had he not been advertised of the enemies speedy return, and thereupon thought sit to retyre with his men, (himself being dangerously wounded) to La Bassèe. The Parliament of England, called by the Lord Protectour, calculated the charge of the Nation,Account of the yearly expence, of England. which in the whole amounts to thirteen hundred thou∣sand pounds Sterling, per annum; whereof two hundred thousand pounds yearly for the said Lord Protectours support; four hundred thousand pounds for the maintenance of the Navie, and Ports, and seven hundred thousand pounds, for the Armies. A monster found in Catalunia. There was found in Catalunia, in the mountains of Cerdania, a certain Monster described thus. He hath humane shape as far as the waste, and downwards is like a Satyre, or Wild-man; he hath many heads, arms, and eyes, and a mouth of extraordinary bignesse, wherewith he makes a noyse like a Bull. His picture hath been sent by Don Iohn de Austria to the King at
Pope Alexander the Seaventh
Madrid, and afterwards many Copies thereof drawn, and sent abroad by Embassadours, and other persons, to severall Princes, and States in Europe. The Popes death. Pope Innocent the tenth, after a tedious, and dolorous sicknesse, died the the seventh of this moneth of Iannary, and the Cardinals, after a long deli∣beration in the Conclave, and the colluctation of the French and Spanish Fa∣ctions, elected Cardinal Ghisi to the See,Cardinal Ghisi elected Pope. who took upon him the name of Alexander the Seventh. The States of Austria, upon the twenty sixth of February, did homage to the young Arch-Duke Leopoldus Ignatius, Son to the present Emperour, which was performed with great State. The Treaty being ratified between the King of Sweden, and the City of Bremen, the said City disbanded many Companies, and gave Generall Con∣ninxmark passage over the Bridge. The Duke of Newburghs forces so much much streightned the Lorrainers in their quarters, that they had much adoe to subsist there, and the difference lately hapened betwixt the Electour Palatine, and the Electour of Mentz not being yet ended, but referred to the Assembly now here at Frankfurt, the orther two Ecclesiastical Electours, kept a small Army on foot, to be able to stand in readinesse, upon all occasions. The Governour of Theonville, who had boasted upon a certain time, that he would be in Arlon at dinner the next day, having notice that the Prince of Simay (who is governour of Luxemburgh) was marching with a conside∣rable strength to meet him, changed his design, returned to Theonville, and sent his men into winter quarters. The Factions in Hungary about the chusing of a Palatinate, being grown very high, the Emperour resolved to go thither, as well to allay the said trou∣bles, as also to have his Son Leopoldus Ignatins crowned King of that Coun∣try at Presburgh;The Emperours Sonne Crowned King of Hun∣gary. which, after many difficulties, and some satisfaction given by him to the States, and people of the Kingdom, was performed with the accustomed Ceremonies. An Insurrection in England. There was a great Insurrection of the Cavalier-party, in various parts of England, against the Lord Protectour, and present government, which had it not been seasonably discovered, and dissipated, might peradventure, have involved the whole Nation, in a most fierce, and bloody war. One Party of them was under the conduct of Sir Joseph Wagstaffe, and was routed neer Salsbury, in Wilishire, many principall persons taken prisoners, amongst whom was Mr. Penruddock, who with some others, was alterwards tryed, and executed at Exeter, but Wagstaffe himself, as also many others, made their escape beyond-sea. There were many of the said Plot, taken in divers others parts of the Nation. About the same time, a Gentleman of great quality of the Country of Provence in France, was arrested, and imprisoned, upon suspicion that he kept correspondence with General Blake then at Ligorn, and that he inten∣ded to have betrayed the Port of Tonlon, together with the ships therein, to the English: but after the said Generall was gone with his Fleet towards the Coast of Barbary, he cleared himself so well of that charge, that he was set at liberty, and his said accusation found to be but a meer suggestion of some enemies of his. The Polanders beat the Mus∣covits, and Cossacks. The Polanders obtained a great victory over the Muscovits, and Cossacks near Vsman, where, after a shrewd fight of three dayes, they put them to a totall rout, and killed about fourteen thousand upon the place, themselves losing not above two thousand, save only some persons of condition. The booty, and spoyle they got was very great, besides seven hundred Waggons, and near a hundred Colour of Horse and Foot.
Whilest the Cardinals were busie in the Conclave, about the Election of a new Pope,An Anti-Pope chosen at Asco∣li. there met seaventy two Archbishops, and Bishops, with some Abbots, at a certain place called Ascoli upon the borders of Neaples; where after some dayes conference, they chose one of their Members to be Pope rendring him all the usual honours, even to the very worshipping him. This Anti-Pope called himself Eugenius. But the news thereof coming to the Conclave at Rome, it so much startled them, that they sent to the General of the Church-Militia, to march speedily thither with some Forces, to secure the Chief Authors of this great Schisme; but they, having notice thereof, to prevent being apprehended, brake up, and parted, and the new Anti-Pope fled. The Tinkish Emperour Crowned. There was such a concurse of people at Constantinople, to see the Coro∣nation of the young Emperour, that lodging was hard to be found there; and provisions were also at an excessive rate, the Cossacks, according to their old custom, having so wasted, and spoiled the Country on that side near the Black-Sea, that it made them very scarce. The Dogi, or Duke of Venice being dead, the Forty one shut themselves up according to custom, and after some debate, unanimously elected the Lord Contarini, heretofore Embassadour Plenipotentiary at Munster, and one of the most ancient Senators, who was Crowned with the Dukes Crown, with the wouted Solemnity the five and twentieth of March. The Queen of Sweden, widow to the great, victorious King Gustave, ha∣ving lain long sick of a Quartan Ague (followed by a strong Rheume which fell upon her breast) died the last of March, in the Town of Nicco∣ping. The Duke of Savoy cast a cruel persecution upon the Protestants in the Vallyes of Angrogna,The persecution of the Prote∣stants in Pied∣mont. Lucerna, and St. Martins, by sending the Marquis of Pianella, together with the Count of Quince, one of the French Licutenant Generals, who set upon them, beat them our of the said Vallyes, and forced them tofly to the Mountains, where they suffered much hunger, and cold. The news hereof coming into England, the Lord Protectour being moved with compassion,The Lord Pro∣tectours charity to them. and charity, dispatched one Master Moreland, one of his own Gentlemen, by the way of Paris, to the foresaid Duke, to mediate with him in the quality of Agent, in behalf of the said distressed Protestants, sending them also some relief of monyes out of his own Treasury, and ani∣mating the people besides, to contribute, and collect publickly in the Chur∣ches, considerable summs for them; which accordingly was performed with remarkable zeal, and remitted them; as they have at large acknowledged by a most humble, and ample Letter of thanks, which they wrote to his Highness, the transcript whereof would be too long to set down here: and so would that of the King of France, to his said Highness, in answer to his to his Majesty, wherein the King clears himself of having had any hand in the persecution of the said Protestants; and friendly assures his said High∣ness, to intercede with the Duke of Savoy, in favour of them: So that, in fine, after many debates, the difference between the aforesaid Duke, and his said Subjects is accommodated, and Master Moreland returned. Upon the two and twentieth of June there hapned such an extraordinary Thunder,A Tempest at Gulick. and Lightning at Gulick, or Juleers, that it pat all the people in ex∣cessive fear; and there fell a Thunderbolt upon one of the Magazins, where∣by not only the House, and all the Ammunitions were blown up, but many other houses also thereto adjoyning were fired, and rent in pieces; how∣ever, through the mercy of God, there were but few persons killed, but great store of goods spoiled,The Garrison of La Bassee five some Villadges. and lost. The Licutenant Governour of La Basses having notice that the Spaniards had quitted the Fort of Lilers, which they kept all the last Winter; sent out
a Party of that Garrison consisting of about three hundred and fifty, to which a Party of Bethane being joyned, they marched under the command of the Count of St. Front, and plundered, and fired the Town of Altembergh, and four Villadges beyond Ypers, which refused to pay their Contribution; which put such a terrour into the adjacent Country, that most part of the people sled with their best goods, to secure themselves, in the strong Towns. The Spaniards began to discover their apprehensions of the English Fleet; viz, that of General Pen in the West-Indies, and that of General Blake, which after the businesse of Tunnis, was fallen back upon the Coast of Spain; in order to which take here the Clause of a Letter from the Count of Linares General of the Spanish Gallyes, written to a friend of his at the Court of Ma∣drid, upon the tenth of June, from St. Lucar. A Clause of a Letter from the Count de Li∣nares. We are now in sight of thirty of the English Men of War, who lie at sea, three leagues from the Bay; and this is the very same Squadron with which I spake at Alicant in November, 1654. The Commander then told me, that they were going to chase the French: but now, though they know where to meet with the French in Catalunia, they come hither. When this said squadron went by this way at first, they shewed more friendship to us, and more confidence in us; for they came in hither; but now their sliness; and strangness makes us presume (and I do presume) that they have some unhappy designes against the Gallions of silvèr, which are ex∣pected. It is also feared, that another squadron much greater then this, which went to the Indies, may do us much greater mischief there, that we shall hardly know what belongs to a Piece of Eight in Spain. Wherefore, it will concern men of pru∣dence, to hoard up what they can; for if that designe prosper, all manner of Rents in Spain will come to nothing. The Town of Landrecies, after a long, and sharp siedge, was rendred to the French the twelfeh of July, upon these following condition. 1. That Monsieur de Maugre the Governour, and Don John Morphy Colonel of an Irish Regiment, together with all Officers, and Souldiers, Horse and Foot, should march out the next day at eight of the clock in the morning, with their Arms, Baggage, Goods, Horses, Cattel, and other things belonging to them, Colours flying, Bullet in mouth, and Marches lighed at both ends, and should be safely convoyed to Valenciennes the nearest way. 2. That for that end, a hundred Waggons, and Carts should be affoarded them, for the security whereof they should leave two Captains behinde, who should be sent to Valenciennes presently after the said Waggons were returned. 3. That all Prisouers, and also the Horses taken on both sides, should be resto∣red; and the Souldiers, who were run away, delivered. 4. That such soul∣diers as were either sick, or wounded, and not able to march out presently, should remaine safe there, and be maintained, and attended till their re∣covery, and then have Passes to be gone. 5. That all Magazines, both of Provisions, and Ammunitions, and all the Artillery not embezeled, should be the same day surrendred to such as should be appointed to receave them, with restitution of whatsoever might be found to have been diverted by sale, or otherwise, to the benefit of any private person. 6. That the Inhabi∣tants should be free to remain there, enjoy their Goods, and accustomed Im∣munities, and Priviledges; and if any would be gone, he should have three moneths time granted him, to sell his Goods both reall, and personal. 7. That the Officers of the Magistrate of Judicature should be maintained in their Places, they taking an Oath of Allegiance to the King. 8. That such Church-men as were fled into the said Town, should have power to go out with their moveables, and Church-Ornaments; yea, and even with those belonging to other Church-men, Cloisters, and Monasteries, which were absent. 9. That he Country-people, who were there for refuge, should
have liberty, either to returne home, or go any whither else with their goods, within the terme of three moneths. 10. That the said Governour, and Colonel should, upon the subscribing of these Articles, deliver the whole Bastion of the Attack, for security of the performance of the said Ar∣ticles. The successe of the French. Neer about the same time the Prince of Conti took Castillon, and Solsona in Cataluma; and the Spaniards having made many attempts, upon the la∣ter for the recovery thereof, were alwayes repulsed with losse: so that, in fine, Te deum was sung at Paris, for the prosperity of their Arms in both Countries. The King of Swedens great successe in Po∣land. The King of Sweden finding no likelihood of bringing the difference be∣tween himself and the King of Poland to a desired accommodation, sent Generall Wittembergh with a great Army into the said Kings Territories, who making a very great, and fortunate progress there, the King himself followed shortly after in person; whereupon fifteen thousand of the King of Polands Souldiers, and three great Provinces revolted to him, besides divers other remarkable successes, the particulars whereof will appear by these fol∣lowing, Instructions for a solemn day of Prayer, and Thanks-giving, which I heer insert for the Readers satisfaction. Whereas his Majesty, our most gratious Lord, and Soveraigne hath been moved by just, and most necessary causes, to make war against the King, and Crown of Poland, and for that purpose, ordered Generall Wittembergh to enter that part of the Enemies Country neer Kron, which lies next to Germany; It hath pleased the most high God, so to blesse, and prosper his Majesties Armies, and undertakings, as that the said Generall hath not only taken divers Castles, and Gar∣risons in the said Country, but making progresse also as farr as Wsee, in the province of Posen, the two Palatinates of Posen, and Calissen, together with the Cities of Posen, Calissen, Lesno, and Micdzirez, as also an Army of fifteen thousand men, immediatly renounced all Allegiance to the King of Poland, and came under the tuition, and protection of his Majesty, our Soveraigne; which was done before the fifteenth of July 1655. Now, seeing that it can be no other then the wonderfull worke of God, that so great a part of our Enemies Dominions should, without so much as one blow, be reduced under his Majesties obedience, we are bound to render thanks to Almighty God from the bottom of our hearts for so great mer∣cy. &c. Besides these aforesaid advantages, the Earle of Oppalinski, nothing con∣tent to have forsaken the King of Polands Party himself, drew also many of his friends, and neighbouring Lords, into the same engagement, and they joyntly made an agreement with the King of Sweden, containing these heads. 1. That they should no longer own the King of Poland, or acknowledge him for their Soverargne. 2. That all such as should refuse to doe the same, should be pursued with fire, and sword. 3. That the King of Sweden should have the same Authority over them, which the Kings of Poland had; and that for securi∣ty of the performence of this Article, they should deliver, all their strong Holds, to General Wittembergh. And lastly, That the King of Sweden should dispose of all the forces already raysed in great Poland. The French, after the surrender of Landrecies, besieged, and took Conde, St. Ghistain, and some other small places, and made excursions, even to the very walls of Brussels. The Spaniards Embargo. The Spaniards after having set out a Fleet to watch Generall Blake, upon their Coast, upon the news of the miscarriage of the designe of the Generals Pen, and Venables at St. Domingo in Hispamola, put a General Embargo upon the English Marchants Goods (and imprisoned many of their persons also) in all the Ports of Spain, and the King published a Manifest, which was quick∣ly,
and roundly answered by the Lord Protectour, whereupon there in∣stantly followed actions of hostility at sea. The Siedge of Pavia raysed. The City of Pavia in Italy, which had endured a long, and fierce Siege by the Duke of Modena, and Prince Thomaso, was at length delivered by the valour of the Townsmen, and the succour brought them by the Marquis of Caracena Governour of the Dutchy of Milan; and the two aforesaid Princes forced to a disorderly retreat, with the losse of many of their men, some Canon, and Baggage, and the said Duke dangerously shot in the Arme. The Provaditore Morofini, General for the State of Venice against the Turks, got possession of the Island of Egina in the Archipelago, and of the strong Hold of Vola, which was surrendred the twenty second of March, and which is the more advantagious, in regard that the Turks had made their chief Magazine there for this summer expedition so that the Venetians gained, besides their Ammunion, a very great quantity of Bisquet, and sea∣ven and twenty pieces of great Ordnance, most of them Brasse. As much of the Provisions as could be carried away, was put on ship-board, and the rest syred, that so the Enemy might not be benefited thereby, and the best of the works demolished. Ʋictories of the Venetians a gainst the Turks About a moneth after they gave a totall defeat to the Turkish Fleet, which endeavouring to come out of the Dardanelles upon the fourteenth of July at night, after a very hot fight of eight houres, was utterly routed, and dis∣persed, and forced to get shelter under the Castles of the said Dardanelles, having lost in the battail, sixteen ships, six Gallyes, two Mahones, and many other Vessels, foure thousand men taken prisoners (who were all made slaves) and a greater number killed. This victory was so much the more remarkable, for that the whole Venetian Fleet was not there, a party thereof having been sent towards Canca a few dayes before, to prevent the Turks relieving that place. The Turkish Navy consisted of about a hundred ships, and Gallyes; and the Venetians, but eight and thirty, with eight Gallyes, and two Galleasses. The King of Sweden, puts forth a mani∣fest. The King of Sweden, upon his entry into Poland, published a Manifest, and sent a Letter also to the Emperour, comprehending the reasons of his taking Arms against that King, wherein he accuses him of eluding the Treatyes held between them; of usurping the Title of the Crown of Sweden; of endeavouring to debauch the people of Livonia, or Leefland, and to draw them to a defection; of sending a Fleet into the Baltick Sea; of attemp∣ting to intice the States of the Isle of Oesely to a revolt; and many other charges he imputes to him, in order to his having broaken the Articles of Truce concluded between the two Crownes. From the very time that he entred Poland, he went on with a conquering, and irresistible hand, all submitting, partly by force, and partly by composi∣tion, and voluntary inclination, to his obedience. After he had taken, and stayed some time at Warsovia, he endeavoured by all means possible, to joyne with Field-Marshal Wittembergh so to meet, or seek the enemy with the more security; whereof the Poles being advertized, laboured to crosse that de∣signe, and hinder their conjunction; to which effect they placed themselves in the woods, so to sally out at unawares upon the said Field-Marshal, as he marched by, as not imagining that the King could possibly be yet arrived to him. So that his Maesty being sufficiently informed of their purpose, fell in very good order upon them, and advanced with such successe, by en∣tertaining them, with his Ordnance and Forlorne,The Polanders beaten. that however they sometimes endeavoured to rally, and draw to a head again, they were con∣strained to quit the Field in great confusion, with the losse of all their Bag∣gage, consisting of three thousand Carts, and the Swedes pursued them in
the Reer, almost as farre as Cracovia, putting most part of them to the Sword. Nor was their prosperity a whit lesse in Lithuania, the Nobility of that Country having abandoned their obedience to the King of Poland, and sworne fidelity to the King of Sweden, (howbeit some of them shortly after began to repine at that yoke) and the Muscovits, desirous of amity with the conquerours, departed. Hereupon the Count of Steinbock, Master of the Ordinance, passed the River Vistula with his Troops, and advanced against the Marsovians, being there between nine, and ten thousand strong, where both he, and his, behaved themselves so valliantly, that they rowted the said Mar∣sovians, killed, and rook many of them, and put the rest to flight. The King and Queen of Poland fly. The King of Poland finding the progresse of his Enemies so prosperous against him, and himself deserted as well by his own Subjects, as by Fortune; and seeing at present small hopes of making any advantagious opposition, to so impetuous a torrent, fled, together with his Queen, into Si∣lesia. In the interim Christina, lately Queen of Sweden, being departed from Brussels,Queen Chri∣stine declares her self a Ro∣man Catho∣lick. betook her self towards Rome, through Germany, and made a so∣lemne, and publick Renunation of her former Belief, embrancig the pro∣fession of the Roman Religion, at Inspruck in Tiroll; after which, proceeding to her journies end, she was received by the Pope with great magnisicence, and splendom. The Lottain Army goes to the French to∣gether with Prince Francis. Whilest tus things passed, a Brigade of the Lorrain Army, consisting of five Regiments, eserted Spanish service, and went to the French, and shortly after, Prince Francis of Lorran himself did the same, with the maine body of the Army, upon conditions that he should enjoy the Dutchy of Bar, and the County of Vaudement, as also a penssion from the King of France, sufficient to maintain himself, and his Family; and the Lords, who had been Commanders in his Brothers Army under him, and were come with him, restored to their Estates. The faid Forces were all dispersed, and ranged under Marshal Turnns orders, in Picardy. The disgust of some Fronteer Governours. The lansenists in France. There hapned a great disgust between the King of France, and the Go∣vernours of Dourlans, Arras, Peronne, and Corby, about some contributions, and other Advantages belonging to their Goverments; in so much, as it looked a great while, as if they intended no less then to revolt, and under∣take the Prince of Condes party; but seasonable satisfaction being given them, they returned to their obedience, to the great elusion, and frustration of the expectation of the Spaniards; and the Dutchesse of Chatillon, who was im∣prisoned for having endeavoured to incite the Marshall D'hocquincourt Go∣vernour of Peronne, towards a defection, was also set at liberty. About this time, Complaint was made to the Court of France, of the great increase of the Iansenists, or such as adhered to the doctrine of Iansenius Bishop of Ypers in Flanders, which notwithstanding it had been consopited by Pope Innocent the Tenth, some years before by a speciall Bull authorized, and sent by him to that effect, began now to be again resuscitated by Doctor Arnault, and some others of the Sorbon, as also some of Lovain, in such sort, as had there not been very mature prevention used, it might have grown by degrees, to be a businesse of difficulty enough to allay; the principles of the said doctrine having much affinity with what was held by Saint Augustin, and is now in conformity with that of the Reformed Churches, (touching Pre∣destination, Free-Will, Merit of Works, &c.) besides, that it is no way displea∣sing to many learned, and considerable persons amongst the Roman Catho∣licks themselves, on this side of the Alps, and therefore the more caution was used for the timely silencing thereof.
The King of Sweden, after his former great victory, the King of Polands flight, and the generall successe of the Swedish Arms in Poland, and the Do∣minious thereupon depending; besieged Cracovia, and took it by Compo∣sition; called a Diet, or Assembly of the States of Poland at Warsovia, drew an Oath of Fidelity from them,The Polish Quartians submit. and setled the affaires of the Kingdom un∣der obedience to himself, at which time the Polish Cavalry called Quartians together with their General Podolskie, Great Standard-bearer of Poland, sub∣mitted themselves to him; five thousand whereof he took with himself: sent two thousand of them with Licutenant Generall Muller into Great Poland, and employed the rest upon other occasions. This done, and an agreement being made with Chimlinskie Generall of the Cossacks, who came to offer himself to the King of Sweden, with about sixty thousand men, he sent his Armies into Prussia, which took Thoren and Strasburgh by Composition, and marched to Marienburgh. An Embassa∣dour from Por∣tugal at Rome. Upon the twentieth of November, Francisco de Sowza arrived at Rome, in the quality of Extraordinary Embassadour to his Holinesse, in the behalf of the Churches of Portugal, in despight of all the powerfull opposition made by the Spaniards, and their Faction in that Court. The Swedish Fleet consisting of fifty ships, commanded by Generall Wrang∣hel, after having layn long near Wismar, launched into the Road of Dant∣zick, and attempted to seize upon the little Town of Hoste, but was repul∣sed by the stout resistance of the Inhabitants, and forced by ill weather back into Pomerania. The Protestants of the Valleys of Piedmont, finding the Agreement made between the Duke and them, to be very disadvantageous to them, as well in regard of the rigour of some of the Articles thereof, as also for that the de∣molishment of the Fort Saint Martin; and some other promises made them by their said Duke, goe slowly on towards performance; feel them∣selves in as much calamity, and insecurity, as before; and consequently cease not to send their complaints, and implore the assistance of their Brethren abroad, as much as ever. There happened also not long agoe a great controversie between the Protestant, and Catholick Cantons of Swisserland, about the falling off of about thirty families from the Romish Religion, and embracing the other, which if not quickly pacified, may peradventure produce much mis∣fortune. It is said, that the Pope having offered the King of Poland some assistance of mony, the said King made answer, That the summe was too inconsider ble to advance him to the recovery of his States; and that for his own subsistance as a King, he thanked God, he had treasure enough; and finally, that however he had lost his Crownes, yet could he not lose his Kingly Title. But it is fully conceived, that the Emperour, and some of the Catholick and Ecclesiasticall Princes of Germany, will at length resolve to affoard him such relief, both of men, mo∣ney, and other necessaries for war, as may enable him to appear in the Field against his Enemies, and make the Game fairer for him, then hither to it hath been, not withstanding the Emperour aforesaid have made a kinde of Declaration to the contrary, and sent his Extraordinary Embassadour to the King of Sweden, to complement him, and intercede for a friendly Ac∣commodation; for he hath already sent divers Regiments into Silesia, and still goes on with his Leavies, which he distributes, and ranges near the fron∣teers both of Sweden, and Poland: and indeed this prodigious prosperity of the Swedish Arms in Poland, gives an Alarme not only to all Germany, but even to Italy also, and makes them stand upon their guard, not knowing whose turn may be next. During the distractions of Christendome, the Pope hath not been much
asleep since his coming to the Chayre, but hath uncessantly laboured by Let∣ters to the Kings of Spain, and France, to draw them to a firm peace; yea, and he hath sent two of the most eminent, and most potent Cardinals of all the Colledge (namely Cardinall Barberini, and Cardinal Grimaldi) who have shewed themselves upon all occasions, great servants to the French Interest, to the Court of France, to negotiate the matter; and it is thought, that the Spa∣niard, being on the loosing hand, and almost desperate, will give France what∣soever she askes, rather then misse a peace: however some be also of opi∣nion, that they will be able to effect little therein, in regard that France hath made her Peace with England, which was published at Paris and London, with extraordinary joy, and splendour, the ninth of December, 1655. with very much advantage to the English Nation. FINIS.
