P3954 12399398 61231
The first and Second Part of A SEASONABLE, LEGAL, AND HISTORICALL VINDICATION, AND Chronological COLLECTION of the Good, Old, Fundamen∣tall Liberties, Franchises, Rights, Laws of all English Free∣men their best Inheritance, Birthright, Security, against all Arbitrary Tyranny, and Aegyptian Burdens) and of their strenuous Defence in all former Ages; of late years most dangerously un∣dermined, and almost totally subverted, under the specious Disguise of their Defence and future Establishment, upon a sure Basis, by their pretended, Greatest Propugners. WHEREIN IS, Irrefragably evinced by Parliamentary Records, Proofs, Presidents, That we have such Fundamentall Liberties, Franchises, Rights, Laws. That to attempt or effect the Subversion of all or any of them, (or of our Fundamentall Government) by Fraud or Force, is High Treason. The principal of them sum∣med up in X. Propositions; The chief printed Treatises asserting them, speci∣fied: A Chronological History of our Ancestors, zeal, vigilancy, courage, pru∣dence, in gaining, regaining, enlarging, defending, oft confirming and perpetua∣ting them to Posterity, by Great Charters, Statutes, New Confirmations, Excom∣munications, Speciall Conservators, Consultations, Petitions, Declarations, Re∣monstrances, Oaths, Protestations, Vows, Leagues, Covenants, and likewise by their Arms, when necessitated, during all the Britons, Romans, Saxons, Danes, Normans and English Kings Reigns, till this present; collected for present and future publique benefit: with a Brief Touch of their late unparalelled Infring∣ments and subversions in every particular: The Triall of all Malesactors by their Peers and Juries, justified, as the onely legall, best, most indifferent, and all other late arbitrary Judicatories, erected for their Triall, exploded, as de∣structive both to our Fundamentall Laws and Liberties. Collected, recommended to the whole English Nation, as the best Legacy he can leave them, By William Prynne of Swainswick, Esquire. The Second Edition Corrected and much Enlarged. Psal. 11. 3. If the Fundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do? Psal. 82. 5. They know not, neither will they understand, they walk on in darknesse: all the Foundations of the earth are out of course. London, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Edward Thomas in Green Arbour, 1655.
Errata. IN the Epistle, letter C. page 8. l. 6. read effect, D. p. 2. l. 9. Tesmond, H. p. 5. l. 19. Censurers, I. p. 5. l. 13 of r. our K. p. 7. l. 28. r. Heirs, L. p. 4. l. 20. r. exercerunt. In the Margin H. p. 3. l. 42. aliquem, I. p. 6. l. 27. pacti L. p. 8. 13. r. 23. In the Book p. 4. l. 25. r. as of, p. 13. l. 36. r. were resol∣ved. p. 19. l. 14. r. Vote of p. 24. l. 16. of p. 26. l. 15. of and p. 29. l. 33. Statutes. p. 32. l. 26. r. E. 6. c. 5. p. 35. l. 6. to sedi∣tion p. 38. l. 19. r. parts. Margin, p. 27. l. 13. ther r. other, p. 64. l. 3, 4, 5. r. 10. R. 2. cap. 1. 1 H. 5. c. 1. 28 H. 6. n. 51. l. 11. r. 4. E. 4.
To all truely Christian Free men of England,This Epistle should have been printed be∣fore the first part; but was omitted through hast. Patrons of Religion, Free∣dom, Lawes, Parliaments, who shall peruse this Treatise. Christian READER, IT hath been one of the most detestable Crimes, and highest Impeachments against the AntichristianSee the se∣veral Epistles of Frederick the Emperor against Pope Gegory the 9, and In∣nocent the 4 re∣corded by Mat. Paris, p. 332. to 693. sparsim. Popes of Rome, that under a Saint-like Religious pretext of advancing the Church, Cause, Kingdom of Jesus Christ, they have for some hundred yeers by-past, usurped to themselves (as fole Mo∣narchs of the World in the Right of Christ, whose Vicars they pretend themselves to be) both by Doctrinal Positions and Treasonable Practises,See Extra de Majoritate & Obedientia: Augustinus Tri∣umphus: Bellar∣minus, Becanu, and others, De Monarchia Re∣mani Pontificis. Hospinia Hist. Jesui. l. 3, & 4. an absolute Soveraign, Tyrannical Power over all Christian Emperours, Kings, Princes of the World (who must derive and hold their Crowns from them a∣lone, upon their good behaviours at their pleasures) not onely to Excommunicate, Censure, Judge, Depose, Murder, Destroy their sacred Persons; but likewise to dispose of their Crowns, Scepters, Kingdoms, and translate them to whom they please. In pursuance whereof, they have most traiterously, wick∣edly, seditiously, atheistically, presumed to absolve their Subjects from all their sacred Oaths, Homages, natural Allegiance, and due Obedience to them, instigated, encouraged, yea expresly,
enjoyned (under pain of interdiction, excommunication, and o∣ther censures) their own Subjects, (yea own sons sometimes) both by their Bulls and Agents, to revolt from, rebel, war against, depose, dethrone, murder, stab, poyson, destroy them by open force, or secret conspiracies: and stirred up one Christian King, Realm, State, to invade, infest, destroy, usurp upon another; onely to advance their own Antichristian Soveraignties, Usur∣pations, Ambition, Rapines, worldly Pompe and Ends: as you may read at leisure in the Statutes of 25 H. 8. c. 22. 28 H. 8. c. 10. 37 H. 8. c. 17. 13 Eliz. c. 2. 23 Eliz. c. 1. 35 Eliz. c. 2. 3 Jacob. c. 1, 2, 4, 5. 7 Jacob. c. 6. The Emperour Frederick his Epistles against Pope Gregory the 9. and Innocent the 4. recorded in Matthew Paris, and Henricus de Knighton, de E∣ventibus Angli ae, l. 2. c. 14, 15. others, Aventinus Annalium Boiorum, Mr. William Tyn∣dal's Practice of Popish Prelates; the second Homily upon Witsunday; the Homilies against disobedience, and wilful Rebellion; Bishop Jewels view of a seditious Bull; Iohn Bale in his lives of the Roman Pontifs; Doctor Thomas Bilson in his True difference between Christian subjection, and unchristian Rebellion; Doctor John White his Sermon at Paul,s Cross, March 24. 1625. and Defence of the Way, c. 6, 10. Doctor Crakenthorpe of the Popes tempo∣ral Monarchy; Bishop Morton's Protestant Apology; Doctor Beard's Theater of God's Judgements, l. 1. c, 27, 28. Doctor Squire of Antichrist; John Bodin his Com∣monwealth, l. 1. c. 9. The learned Morney Lord du Plessy, his Mystery of Iniquity, and History of the Papacy. The General History of France. Grimston's Imperial History. Matthew Paris, Speed, Holinshed, Cambden, and others, in the lives of King John, Henry the 3. Queen Elizabeth, and other of our Kings, with hundreds of printed Sermons on the 5 of November. The principal Instruments the Popes imployed of late yeers, in these their unchristian Treasonable Designes, have been pragmatical, furious, active Jesuites, whose Society was first erected by Ignatius Loyola (a Spaniard by Birth, but ASee Massae∣us Vegius & Petrus Ribade∣niera in vita Ignatii Loyolae. Heylins Micra∣cosme, p. 179. SOULDIER by Profession) and confirmed by Pope Paul the 3. Anno 1540 which Order consisting one∣ly
of ten persons at first, and confined onely to sixty by this Pope, hath so monstrously increased by the Popes and Spaniards favours and assistance (whose chief Janizaries, Factors, Intelligencers they are) that in the yeer 1626.See Lewis Owen his Jesu∣ites Looking∣glass, printed London 1629. the Epistle to the Reader, and p. 48 to 58. Ju∣bilaeum, sive speculum Jesu∣itium, printed 1644. p. 307 to 213. Hospinian Hist. Jesuitica, l. 2. they caused the picture of Igntius their Founder to be cut in Brass, with a goodly Olive Tree growing (like Jessees root) out of his side, spreading its branches into all kingdoms and Pro∣vinces of the World, where the Jesuites have any Colledges and Seminaries, with the name of the Province at the foot of the branch, which hath as many leaves as they have Colledges and Residencies in that Province; in which leaves, are the names of the Towns and Villages where these Colledges are situated: Round about the Tree are the Pictures of all the illustrious Persons of their Order; and in Ignvtius his right hand, there is a Paper, wherein these words are engraven, Ego sicut Oliva fructifera in domo Dei; taken out of Ps. 52. 8. which pourtraictures they then print∣ed and published to the world: wherein they set forth the number of their Colledges and Seminaries to be no less then 777. (increased to 155 more, by the yeer 1640.) in all 932. as they published in like Pictures & Pageants printed at Antwerp, 1640. Besides sundry New Colledges and Seminaries erected since. In these Colledges and Seminaries of theirs, they had then (as they print) 15591 Fellews of their Society of Je∣sus, besides the Novices, Scholars, and Lay-brethren of their Order, amounting to neer ten times that number. So in∣finitely did this evil weed grow and spread it self, within one hundred yeers after its first planting. And which is most observable, of these Colledges and Seminaries they reckon∣ed then no less then 15 (secret ones)Speculum Je∣suiticum. p. 210. See Romes Ma∣ster-peice & Conterburies Doom, p. 435, &c. Hidde works of Dark∣ness. 88, 144. IN PROVINCIA ANGLICANA, in the Province of ENGLAND, where were 267 SOCII or Fellows of that Society: besides 4 COL∣LEDGES OF ENGLISH JESUITES ELSEWHERE. In IRELAND and elsewhere 8 Colledges of IRISH JESUITES: and in SCOTLAND and otherwhere 2 Residencies of SCOT∣TISH JESUITES. What the chief imployments of Ignatius and his nume∣rous
swarms of Disciples are in the World, his own Society at the time of his Canonization for a Romish Saint, suffici∣ently discovered in their painted Pageants, then shewed to the people,Mercure Ie∣sule, tom. 1. p. 67. Speculum Jesuitieum p. 1. 56. wherein they pourtraied this new Saint holding the whole world in his hand, and fire streaming out forth of his heart (rather to set the whole world on fire by Combusti∣ons, Wars, Treasons, Powder-plots, Schismes new State, and old Church-Heresies, then to enlighten it) with this Motto; VENI IGNEM MITTFRE: I came to send fire into the World; which the University of Cracow in Poland objected (amongst other Articles) against them, Anno 1622. and Alphonsus de Vargas more largly insisteth on in his Relatio, de Stratagematis & Sophismatis Politicis Jesuita∣rum, &c. An. 1641. c. 7, 8, 24. Their number being so infinite, and theSee Lewis Owen his run∣ning Register, & his Jesuited Looking glass. The Anatomy of the English Nunnery at Lisbone. Pope and Spaniard too, having long since (byDe Monar∣chia Hispanica, p. 146, 147, 148, 149, 204, 234, 235, 236, 185, 186. Campanella's ad∣vice) erected many Colledges in Rome, Italy, Spain, the Ne∣therlands, and elsewhere, for English, Scottish, Irish Jesuites (as well as for such secular Priests, Friers, Nuns) of purpose to promote their designs against the Protestant Princes, Realms, Churches, Parliaments of England, Scotland, Ireland, & to reduce them under their long prosecutedSee Thomas Campanella de Monarchia His∣paniae. Watsons quodhbets, Co∣loni Posthuma, p. 91. 10 107. Cardinal de Os∣sets Letters. Ar∣cana Imperii Hispanici Delh. 1628. Advice a tous les Estat's de Europe, touches les maximas Fundamentales de Government & dissiennes Espaginols, Pa∣is, 1625. UNIVERSAL MONARCHY over them, by Fraud, Policy, Treason, in∣testine Divisions, and Wars, being unable to effect it by their own Power; no doubt of late yeers many hundreds, if not thousands, of this Society, have crept into England, Scotland and Ireland, lurking under several disguises; yea, an whole Colledge of them sate weekly in counsel, in or neer Westminster, some few yeers since, under Conne the Popes Nuntio, on purpose to embroyle England and Scot∣land in bloody civil wars, therby to endanger, shake, sub∣vert these Realms, and destroy the late King (as you may read at large in my Romes Master-piece, published by the Commons special Order, An. 1643.) who occasioned, excited, fo∣mnted, the first and second intended (but happily prevented) wars between England and Scotland, and after that, the unhappy Differences, Wars, between the King, Parliament, and our three Protestant Kingdoms, to bring them to utter de∣solation,
and extirpate our reformed Religion. The Kings Forces (in which many of them were Soul∣diers) after some yeers wars being defeated, thereupon their Father Ignatius being a SOULDIER, and they his Military sons, not a few of themSet my Speccb in Parli∣ament, p. 107. o 119. and the History of In∣dependency. secretly insinuated themselves as Souldiers, into the Parliaments Army and Forces, (as they had formerly done intoExact Col∣lction, p. 651, 652, 662, 666, 813, 814, 86, 826, 827, 832, 902, 904, to 920. A Col∣lction of Ordi∣nances, p. 267, 313, 354, 424. the Kings) where they so cunningly acted their parts, as extraordina∣ry illuminates, gifted brethren, and grand States-men, that they soon leavened many of the Officers, Troopers and common Souldiers, with their dangerous Jesuitical State-politicks, andSee Puty Projects, the History of Inde∣pendncy, and Armies Decla∣rations, Papers, Proposals. printed toge∣ther, London, 1647. Practises, put them upon sundry strange designs, to new-mould the old Monarchical Government, Par∣liaments, Church, Ministers, Laws of England; erecting a New General Councel of Army-Officers and Agitators for that purpose; acting more like a Parliament and Supream Dictators, then Souldiers. And at last instigated the Army by open force▪ (against their Commissions, Duties, Oaths, Protestations and Solemn League & Covenant) to Impeach, imprison, seclude, first elevē Commoners; then some six or seven Lords; after that to secure, seclude the Majority of the Commons House, suppress the whole House of Lords, destroy the King, Par∣liament, Government, Priviledges, Liberties of the Kingdom & Nation, for whose defence they were first raised, which by no o∣ther adverse power they could effect. This produced new bloody divisions, animosities, wars, in and between our three Protestant Realms and Nations; & after with our Protestant Allies of the Netherlands, (De Monarchia Hisp. c. 25, 27. Campanella's express old pro∣jected Plots to subject us both to the Popes and Spaniards Monarchies, effected by the Spaniards Gold and Agents) with sundry heavy Monthly Taxes, Excises, Oppressions, Sales of the Churches, Crowns, and of many Nobles and Gentlemens Lands and Estates, to their undoing, our whole Nations impoverishing, and discontent, an infinite pro∣fuse expence of Treasure, of Protestant blood both by Land and Sea, decay of Trade, with other sad effects in all our three Kingdoms; yea, sundry successive New changes of our publick Government, made by the Army-Officers, (who
are still ringing the changes) according to Campanela's and Parsons Platforms. So that if Fire may be certainly dis∣cerned by the smoke; or the Tree commonly known by its Fruits, as the Truth it self resolves, Matth. 12. 33. we may truly cry out to all our Rulers, as the Jews did once to the Rulers of Thessalonica, in another case, Act. 17. 6. THOSE (Jesuites) WHO HAVE TURNED THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN, ARE COME HITHER ALSO; and have turned our Kingdoms, Kings, Peers, Monarchy, Parliaments, Government, Laws, Liberties, (yea, our very Church and Religion too, in a great measure) UPSIDE DOWNE, even by those very Persons, who were purposely raised, commissiond, waged, engaged by Protestations, Covenanes, Vows, Oathes, Laws, Alle∣giance and Duty, to protect them from these Jesuitical In∣novations and subversions. And those Jesuites, Spanish Romish Agents, who have so far seduced, so deeply engaged them, contrary to all these Obligations, and to their own former printed En∣gagements, Remonstrances, Representations, Proposals, Desires, and RESOLUTIONS, for setling this Nation in its just Rights, the Parliament in their just Priviledges, and the Subjects in their Liberties and Freedoms; published to all the World, in the name of Sir Thomas Fairfax, THE AR∣MY, AND THE GENERAL COUNCEL OF THE ARMY, none Volume. London, 1647. (which they may do well to peruse) yea, against the Votes, Intreaties, Desires, Advices, of both Houses of Parliament, the Genera∣lity of the good Ministers, people of the three whole King∣doms, and their wisest, best affected Protestant Friends, who commissioned, raised, paid, assisted them for far other ends O whether may they, will they not (in all humane probability) rashly, blindly, suriously hence∣forth lead, drive, precipitate them, to our whole three Kingdoms, Churches, Parliaments, Laws, Liberties total, final desolation, and the Armyes too in conclusion, beyond all hopes of prevention, unless God himself shall miraculously change their Hearts, Councels, and reclaim them from
their late destructive, heady violent courses: or put an hook into their Noses, to turn them back by the way by which they came: or, set a timely period to their usurped Armed power and extravagant late proceedings, of such a desperate un∣parallel'd, unprotestant strange Nature, as none but the very worst of Ignatius his Disciples and Engineers durst set on foot, or still drive on amongst us Protestants. Which I earnestly beseech, adjure, and conjure them now most seriously to lay o heart, before it be over∣late. Those who will take the pains to peruse all or any of these several printed Books (most of them very well worth their reading) written against the Iesuites and their Pra∣ctises, as well by Papists as Protestants, as namely, Fides Iesu & Iesuitarum, printed 1573. Doctrinae Iesuiticae prae∣cipua capita, Delph. 1589. Aphorismi Doctrinae Iesuticae. 1608. Cambitonius, De Studiis Jesuitarum abstrusioribus. Anno 1608. Iacobus Thuanus, Passages of the Jesuites. Hist. l. 69, 79, 83, 94, 95, 96, 108, 110, 114, 116, 119, 121, 124, 126, 129, 131, 132, 134, 136, 137. 138. Emanu∣el Meteranus his Passages of them. Belgicae Hist. l. 9, 12, 17, 18, 19, 21, 23, 26, to 34. Willielmus Baudartius, Continu∣atio Meterani, l. 37, 38, 39, 40. Donatus Wesagus, Fides Ie∣sus & Iesuitarum, 1610. Characteres Iesuiticae, in several Tomes. Elias Husenmullerus, Historia Iesuitici Ordin, Anno 1605. Speculum sive Theoria Doctrinae Iesuiticae, necnon Praxis Jesuitarum, 1608. Pasquier his Jesuite displayed. Petrus de Wangen, Physiogmonia Jesuitica, 1610. Christopherus Pelargus, his Novus Jesuitismus. Franciscus. de Verone, his Jesuitismus Sicarius, 1611. Narratio de proditi∣one Jesuitarum in Magnae Brit. Regem, 1607. Consilium de le∣suitis Regno Polonia ejiciendis. The Acts of the States of Rhetia, Anno 1561, & 1612. for banishing the Jesuites wholly out of their Territories, NE STATUS POLI∣TICUS TURBARETUR, &c. mentioned by Fortunatus Sprecherus, Palladis Rheticae, l. 6. p. 251, 273. Melchior Val∣cius, his Furiae Gretzero, &c. remissae, 1611. Censura Jesui∣tarum, Articuli Jesuitarum, cum commonefactione illis oppo∣sitae
Anti-Jesuites, au Roy par. 1611. Variae Doctorum The∣ologorum Theses adversus quaedam Jesuitica Dogmata. The Remonstrance of the Parliament of Paris to Henry the Great against the re-establishment of the Jesuites; And their Cen∣sure of Mariana his book, to be publickly burnt, printed in French, 1610. recited in the General History of France, in Lewis 13. his life, & Peter Matthew, l. 6. par. 3. Historia Franciae. Variae Facultatis Thologiae & Curiae Pa∣risiensis, quam aliorum Opuscula, Decreta & Censurae contra Jesuitas, Paris 1612. Conradus Deckerus, De proprietati∣bus Iesuitarum, 1611. Quaerelarum inclyti Regni Hunga∣riae adversus corruptelas Iesuiticas defensio. Lucas Osiander, his writing about the Jesuites bloody Plot, Han. 1614. Iesuitarum per unitas Belgii Provincias Negotiatio, Anno 1616. RadulphusAn Excellent covey of  stable, asonakle  and . Hospinianus, Historia Iesuitica, 1619. Bogermannus his Catechismus Iesuiticus. Lodovicus Luci∣us, Historia Iesuitica, Basil. 1627. Arcana Imperii Hispa∣nici, 1628. Mercure Iesuite, in several Tomes, Geneve 1626, De Conscientia Iesuitarum, tractat. Censura sacrae Theologiae. Parisiensis, in librum qui inscribitur, Antonii Sanctarelli societatis Iesu, de Haeresi, Schismate & Aposta∣sia, &c. Paris, 1626. Anti-Cotton; Ioannes Henricius, De∣liberatio de compescendo perpetuo crudeli Conatu Iesui∣tarum, Fran. 1633. A Proclamation of the States of the united Provinces, Anno 1612. And another Proclamation of theirs: with two other Proclamations of the Protestant States of the Marquesate of Mravia, for the banishing of the Iesuites, London 1629. Alfonsi de Vargas Toletani, Relatio ad Reges & Principes Christianos, De Stratagema∣tis & Sophismatis Politicis Societatis Jesu, ad Monarchiam Or∣bis terrarum sibi conficiendam: in qua Jesuitarum erga Reges & Populos optimè de se meritos infidelitas, ergaq́ ipsum Pouti∣ficem perfidia, contumacia, & IN FIDEI REBUS NO∣VANDI LIBIDO, illustribus documentis comprobatur, Anno 1641. Jubilaeum, sive Speculum Jesuiticum, exhibens PRAECIPUA JESUITARUM SCELERA, MOLITIO∣NES, INNOVATIONES, FRAUDES, IMPOSTU∣RAS, ET MENDACIA, CONTRA STATUM EC∣CLESIASTICUM
POLITICUMQUE, in & extra EUROPEUM ORBEM; primo hoc centenario, confirmati illius Ordinis INSTITUTA ET PERPETRATA: ex va∣riis Historiis, inprimis vero Pontificiis collecta, Anno 1644. (a piece worth perusing) Or else will but cast their eyes upon our own forecited Statutes, and theNo  date. Proclamations of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charls against Je∣suites, and Seminary Priests. A brief Discovery of Doctor Allens Seditious Drifts, London 1588. Charles Paget (a Seminary Priest) his Answer to Dolman, concerning the succession of the English Crown, 1601. William Watson (a secular Priest) his Dedachordon or Quodlibets, printed 1602. now very well worthy all Protestants reading. A Letter of A. C. to his Dis-Jesuited Kinsman, concerning the Jesuites, London 1602. Romish Positions and Practises for Rebellion, London 1605. The Arraignment of Tray∣tors, London 1605. John King Bishop of London, his Sermons on November 5. 1607, 1608. King James his Conjuratio Sulphurea, Apologia pro Juramento fidelitatis: &, Responsio ad Epistolam Cardinalis Peronii. An Exact Discovery of the chief Mysteryes of the Jesuitical iniquity: and, The Jesuites secret Consultations; both printed Lon∣don 1619. William Crashaw his Iesuites Gospel, London 1621. William Feak of the Doctrine and Practice of the Society of Jesus, London 1630. The many printed Sermons of Doctor Iohn White, Bishop Lake, Bishop Andrews, Doctor Donne, Doctor Featly, Doctor Clerk, and others, preached on the fifth of November. Lewis Owen, his Running Register, London, 1620. His Un∣masking of all Popish Monkes and Jesuites, 1628. And his Jesuites Looking-Glass, London, 1629. John Gee, his Foot out of the Snare, &c. London, 1624. with the Jesuitical Plots discovered in my Romes Master-piece; and, Hidden works of darkness brought to publick Light, London 1645. shall see the Jesuites and their Se∣minaries charged with, convinced of, and condemned for these ensuing Seditious, Treasonable, Antimonar∣chical, Anarchical Positions and Practises; for which,
their Society hath by publick Acts and Proclamations been several times banished out of Hungaria, Bohemia, Moravia, Poland, the Low Countries, Rhetia, France, Transilvania, Sweden, Denmark, the Palatinate, Venice, Aethiopia, Japan and Turkey, as well as out of England, Scotland and Ireland, as most insufferable Pests and Traytors; in many of which they have yet gotten footing again. 1. That at least ifty several prime Authors of that in∣fernal Society of Jesus▪ in several printed books (which you shall finde specified in Doctor John Whites Defence of the Way, c. 6, 10. Aphorismi-Jesuitarum: Iubilaeum, or, Speculum Iesuiticum, p. 187, 188. and the Appendix to my Fourth part of the Soveraign power of Parliaments, p. 187, 188.) have dogmatically maintained;Hospinian. Hist. Jesuit. l. 4. That the Pope hath absolute power, not onely to excommunicate, but judicially to suspend, mulct with temporal penalties, depose, dethrone, PVT TO DEATH, and destroy any Christian Empe∣rours, Kings, Princes, Potentates, by open Sentence, War, Force, secret Conspiracies, or private assasinations, and to give away their Crowns and Dominions to whoever will invade them, by Treason or Rebellion, at the Popes command; and that in cases of Heresie, Schisme, Disobedience to, Rebellion against the Pope or See of Rome, Male-administration, re∣fusal to defend the Pope or Church against her adversaries, In∣sufficency to Govern, Negligence, Tyranny, Excesses, Abuses in Govenment, Incorrigibility, Vitiousness of Life, andQuando eorum malitia hoc exigit & Reipub. vel Ec∣clesiae NECES∣SITAS sic re∣quirit. Specu∣lum Jesuiticum, p. 168, 169, 170. Mercure Jesu∣ite, Part. 1. p. 884, 885. Alfonsi de Var∣gas Relatio. &c. . 55. NECESSITY OF THE PUBLICK GOOD, OR SAFETY OF THE CHURCH, STATE, OR CAVSE OF GOD; as Antonius Sanctarellus the Jesuite particularly defines, in his Book De Haeresibus, Schismatibus, &c. printed in Rome it self, Anno 1625. who affirms it to be, Multum aequum & Reipublicae expediens, ut sit aliquis supremus Monarcha, qui Regum hujusmodi excessus possit corrigere, & DE IPSIS IVSTITIAM MINISTRARE; sicut PETRD concessa fuit facultas PVNIENDI PAE∣NA TEMPORALI, imo etiam, PAENA MOR∣TIS,
DICTAS PERSONAS AD AL∣VM COKKEECMIONEM ET EXEMPLVM. (Whether the Erection, Title of, or Proceedings against our beheaded King, in the late mis-named High Court of Justice, had not their original from hence; and whe∣ther the Army-Officers derived not their very phrase,See thei Remonstrance from Sl. Albans, 16 Nov. 1648, and Decem. 7. with other Pa∣pers. of bringing the King TO IVSTIEE, with their pre∣tended NECESSITY OF PVBLICK GOOD AND SAFETY, for it, from these very Jesuites, or their Agents in the Army; let themselves, the whole Kingdom, and all Wisemen now consider.) Moreover, some of the fifty Authors, (as Creswel, or Parsons the English Jesuite, in his Philopater, Sect. 2. andAttributed to ne Jesuite Tresham. De Officio Principis Christiani, chap. 5. affirm, That the whole School both of (their) Divines and Lawyers, make it a Position certain and undoubtedly to be believed, That if any Christian Prince what∣sover, shall manifestly turn from the Roman Catholick Reli∣gion, or desire, or seek to reclaim others from the same; or but favour, or shew countenance to an Heretick (as they deem all Protestants, and Dissenters from the See of Rome in any punctilio, such) HE PRESENTLY FALLETH FROM, & LOSETH AL PRINCELY POWER & Dignity; & that By Vertus & Power OF THE LAW IT SELF, BOTH DIVINE AND HVMANE, EVEN BEFORE ANY SENTENCE PRO∣NOVNCED AGAINST HIM BY THE SV∣PREAM PASOR AND IVDGE. That thereby his Subjects are absolved from ALL OATHES AND BONDS OF ALLEGIANCE TO HIM AS TO THEIR LAWFUL PRINCE. Nay, THAT THEY MAY AND OVGHT (See Watsons Qlibets, P. 295. &c. PROVIDED THEY HAVE COMPE∣TENT POWER AND FORCE) TO CAST OVT SVCH A PRINCE FROM BEAKING RVLE AMONGST CHRISTI∣ANS, as an Apostate, an Heretick, a Back-slider, a Re∣volter from our Lord Jesus Christ, AND AN ENEMY TO HIS OWN ESTATE AND COM∣MONWEALTH;
lest perhaps he might infect others, or by his example or command, turn them from the faith. And that the Kingdom of such an Heretick or Prince, is to be be∣stowed at the pleasure of the Pope, with whom the people upon pain of Damnation, are to take part, and Fight against their SOVERAIGN. Out of which detestible and Treasonable Conclusions, most Treasons and Rebellions of late time have risen in the Christian World; and the first smoke of the Gunpowder-treason too, as John Speed observes in his History of Great Britain, p. 1250. Whereupon the wholeAlphonsi de Vargas Relatio, &c. c. 55. Spe∣ulum Jesuiti∣cum, p. 162, 163. University of Paris censured them, An. 1625, and 1626. not onely as most pernioious, detestable, damnable, erroneous, and perturbing the publick Peace; but likewise, as Subversive of Kingdoms, States, and Republicks, se∣ducing Subjects from their Obedience and subjection, and stirring them up to Wars, Factions, Seditions, & Prin∣cipum parricidia, and the Murthers of their KINGS. 2. That the Jesuites haveHospinian. Hist. Jesuitica, l. 3. frequently put these Trea∣sonable, Seditious, Antimonarchical, Jesuitical, damnable Doctrines into practice, as well against some Popish, as against Protestant Kings, Queens, Princes, States: which they manifest, 1. ByHist. Galli∣ca, & elgica, l. . p. 126. Specu∣lum Jesuiticum p. 46. Hospinian. Hist. Jesuitica, l. 3. . 159. their poysoning Jone Albreta Queen of Navarre, with a pair of deadly perfumed Gloves, onely for favouring and protecting the Protestants in France against their violence, Anno. 1572. 2. By their suborning and animatingSee Specu∣lum Jesuiticum and the General History of France in H. 3. Hospinian. Hist. Jesuitica, l. 3. f. 151, 152. James Clement a Dominican Frier, to stab King Henry the third of France in the belly with a poysoned Knife, whereof he presently di∣ed, Anno. 1589. for which they promised this Traytor, a Saintship in heaven. Pope Sixtus the fifth himself commend∣ing this foul Fact in a long Oration to his Cardinals, as Insigne & memorabile sacinus, non sine Dei Opt. Max. particulari providentia, & dispositione, ET SPIRITUS SANCTI SUGGESTIONE DESIGNATUM: facinus{que} longe majus quam illud S. Judith, quae Holofer∣num è medio sustulit. 3. BySpeculum Jesuiticum, p. 75. Cammolet the Jesuites publick justification of
this Clement in a Sermon at Paris Anno 1593. wherein he not only extolled him above all the Saints, for his Treason a∣gainst, and murder of Henry the 3. but broke out likewise into this further Exclamation to the people: We ought to have some Ehud, whether it be a A Monke, or A Souldier, or a Varlet, or at least a Cow-herd. For it is necessary, that at least we should have some Ehud. This one thing onely yet remains behinde: for then we shall compose all our Affairs very well, and at last bring them to a destred end. Where∣upon, by the Jesuites instigation, the same yeer 1593. one Peter Bariere, undertook the assasination of KingSee the Ge∣neral History of France in the life of Henry 4. and Lewis 13. Speculum Jesu∣iticum, p. 77, 80, 126, 235. Hospinian. Hist. Jesuitica, l. 3. p. 153, to 158. Henry the 4 of France: which being prevented, and he executed, thereupon they suborned and enjoyned one of their own Jesuitical Disciples, John Castle, a youth of 19 yeers old, to destroy the King: who on the 27 of December 1594. in∣tending to stab him to the heart, missing his aim, wounded him onely in the cheek, and stroke out one of his teeth; for which Treasonable act he was justified, applauded, as a renowned Saint and Martyr, by the Jesuites, in a printed Book or two, published in commendation of this his undertaking. As namely, by Bonarscius the Jesuite, in his Amphitheatrum, Franciscus Verona Constantinus, (a Jesuite) in his Apologiapro Iohanne Castello, contra Edictum Parliamenti, & supplicium de eo ob Parricidium sumptum, An. 1595. Where he thus writes of the attempt upon Hen. 4. Whosoever diligently ponders, that Henry was excommunicated, an Heretick, relaps∣ed, a profner of holy things, a declared publick enemy, an op∣pressor of Religion; and (thereupon) a person secluded from all right to the Kingdom; and therefore a Tyrant, not a King; an Vsurper, not a lawful Lord; he verily, unless he be mad, and destitute of humane sence, and love towards God, the Church, and his Country, cannot otherwise think or speak; but that the fact of Castle was generous, conjoyned with Vertue; and Heroical, to be compared with the greatest and most praise-worthy facts which the ancient Monuments of Sacred and Prophane Histories have recorded. One thing onely may be disliked, namely, That Castle hath not utterly slain and taken him from the midst of us.
In sum, He denies this Henry to be any King of France, by right or inheritance, because, (in his and the Jesuites Opi∣nion onely, not in Truth) he was both an Heretick, and A TYRANT. Asserting, That it was lawful for Castle, or any other private man, TO DESTROY AN HERETICK OR TYRANT, much more then, him that was both. AndSpeculum Je∣suiticum, p. 80, 81. Hospinian. Hist. Jesuitica, l. 3. f. 156, 157. John Guignardus a Jesuite, (Fellow of the Jesu∣ites Colledge of Claremount) in his Papers then seised by, and reported to the Parliament of Paris, Anno 1595. not onely compared Henry the third and fourth to Nero and Herod, and justified Clements murder of the one, and Castles attempt upon the other, as most Heroical and praise-worthy Actions: but likewise added, That if we in the year 1572. on Saint Bartholmews day, (in the General Massacre of the French Protestants) had CVT OFF THE BASILICON VEINE, (Henry King of Navarre) we had not fallen out of a Feavour, into that Plague, which now we finde. Sed quicquid delirant Reges plectunctur Achivi, SANGVINI PARCEN∣DO. That King Henry should be but over-mildly dealt with, if he were thrust from the Crown of France, into a Monastery, and there had his crown shaven. That if he could not be deposed without a war, then a war was to be raised against him: but if a war could not be levied against him, the cause being dead, CLAM E MEDIO TOL∣LATVR: he should then be privily murdered and taken out of the way. For which the Parliament of Paris adjudged and executed him for a Traytor. Yea, so desperately were the Jesuites after this, bent to destroy this King, thatHospinian. Hist. Jsu. l. 3 . 157, 158. Alex∣ander Hay (a Scottish Jesuite of Claremont,) privy to Castles villany, used to say, That if King Henry the fourth should pass by their Colledge (the first there built for them) he would willingly cast himself out of his window headlong upon him, so as he might break the Kings neck, though thereby he brake his own. Yet was he punished but with perpetual Banishment. After which Jesuitical conspiracies detected and prevented, notwithstanding this King Henry (before
these two attempts to murder him) had by their sollicitations, renounced the Protestant Religion, professed himself a zealous Romanist, recalled the Jesuites formerly banished for the mur∣ther of Henry the third, against his Parliaments and Counsels advice, reversed all the decrees of Parliament against them, razed the publick Pillar set up in Paris, as a lasting Monu∣ment of their Treasons and Conspiracies; built them a mag∣nificent Colledge in Paris, indowed them with a very large Revenue; entertained Pere Cotten (one of their Society) for his Confessor (who revealed all his Secrets to the King of Spain;) bequeathed a large Legacy of Plate and Lands to their Society by his will, and was extraordinary bountiful and favourable towards them; yet these bloody ingrateful Villains, animated that desperate wretch,See the Gene∣ral History of France in Hen. 4. and Lewis 13. Dr. John Whites De∣fence of the y, c. 10. p. 46. Ravilliac, to stab him to death in the open street in Paris, Anno 1610. Albigni the Jesuite being privy to this murder, before it was perpetrated. Yea, Francis de Verona in his Apology for John Castle, p. 258. thus predicted his second mortal stab, in these words, Though this Prince of Orange scaped the first blow, given him in his cheek, yet the next hit, where∣of this was a presage; as the blow given by Castle SHALL BE THE FORE-RVNNER OF ANO∣THER BLOW. Such implacable Regicides are the Jesuites. 4. By their suborning, instigating sundry bloody instru∣ments one after another, to murderSee Grim∣stons History of the Netherlonds p. 764. Thuanus l. 79. p. 186. Spe∣culum Jesuiti∣cum. p. 60, 61. William Prince of Orange, prevented in their attempts by God's provi∣dence, till at last they procured one Balthasar Gerard to shoot him to death with a Pistol, charged with three Bul∣lets, An. 1584. the Jesuites promising him no less then HEA∣VEN it self, AND A CANONIZATION AMONG THE SAINTS AND MARTYRS, for this bloody Treason, as they did to James Clement before, for murdering the French King. And it is very remarkable, That after this murder of his,De Monarch. Hisp. . 27. p. 258. Thomas Campanella (a Jesuited Italian Frier) prescribed this as a principal means to the King of Spain of reducing the Ne∣therlands under his Monarchy again, to sow emulation
and discords amongst their Nobles, States, and to murder Prince Maurice his son and successor, which he expresseth in these direct termes. Maxime opus est, ut Serpens seditionis, Comes Scilicet Mauritius Interimatur; non vero per bellum diu∣turnum, copia illi danda est, magis magis{que} succrescendi: which theyChron. Belgiae Tom. 1. p. 719. Tom. 2. p. 97. Meteranus l. 17. p. 575. Hospinian. Hist. Jesuitica, l. 3. f. 205. twice likwise attempted to affect; An. 1594, and 1598. No wonder that they so much endeavour by all means & instruments to suppress that noble family now, to whom the Netherlands principally owe their infranchise∣ment from the Spanish yoak of bondage. 5. BySpeculum Jesuiticum, p. 127. their poysoning Stephen Botzkay Prince of Tran∣sylvania, for opposing their bloody persecution. 6. By their manifold bloody Plots and Attempts from time to time,See Speed and Cambden in her life. Bi∣shop Carletons Thankful Re∣membrance of Gods Mercy, London 1624. to murder, depose, stab, poyson, destroy our famous Protestant Queen Elizabeth, by open Insurrections, Rebellions, Invasions, Wars, raised against her both in England and Ire∣land; and by intestine clandestine Conjurations; from which Gods ever-waking providence did preserve her. Amongst other Conspiracies, that of Patrick Cullen, an Irish Frier, (hired by the Jesuites and their Agents to kill the Queen) is observable.Hospinian. Hist. Jesuitica, Speeds History, p. 1181. Camb∣den, Stow, Ho∣linshed in the Life of Queen Elizabeth. Spe∣culum Jesuiti∣cum, p. 73. Holt the Jesuite, (who perswaded him to undertake the murdering of her) told him, that it was not onely lawful by the Laws, but that he should merit Gods Favour, and Heaven by it; and thereupon gave him remission of all his sins, & the Eucharist, to encourage him in this Treason; the chief ground whereof (and of all their other Treasons against this Queen) was thus openly expressed by Iaquis Francis, for Cullens further encourage∣ment; That the Realm of England, then was and would be so well setled, that unless Mistras Elizabeth (so he termed his Dread Soveraign, though but a base Landressson;) were suddenly taken away, All the Devils in Hell would not be able to prevail, to shake and overturn it. Which then it seems theySee Watsons Quodlibets. principally endeavoured, and oft-times since attempted, and have now at last effected, by those who conceit they demerit the Title of Saints (though not in a Romish Kalender) and no less then Heaven, for shaking, overturning, and making it No Kingdom.
7. By theirSee Speeds Hist. p. 1240, 1242, 1243. John Sow, and How; 1 Jac. Conspiracy against King James, to de∣pive him of his Right to the Crown of England, imprison, or destroy his person: raise Rebellion, alter Religion, and Sub∣vert the Stat and Government; by vertue of Pope Clement the eighth his Bull directed to Henry Garnet, Superiour of the Iesuites in England: whereby he com∣manded all the Archpriests, Priests, Popish Clergy, Peers, No∣bles and Catholicks of England, That after the death of Queen Elizabeth by the course of Nature, or otherwise, who∣soever shall lay claim or title to the Crown of England, (though never so directly or neerly interessed by descent) should not be admitted unto the Throne, unless he would first tolerate the Ro∣msh Religion, and by his best endeavours promote the Catho∣lick cause; unto which by his Solemn and Sacred Oath he should religiously subscribe, after the death of that miserable woman; (as he stilled Queen Elizabeth.) By vertue of which Bull, the Jesuites, after her decease, disswaded the Romish∣minded Subjects, from yielding in any wise obedience to King James, as their Soveraign; and entrd into a Treasonable Conspiracy with the Lord Cobham, Lord Gray, and others, a∣gainst him, to imprison him for the ends aforesaid; or destroy him: pretending that King Iames was no King at all before his Coronation; and that therefore they might by force of Arms, lawfully surprise his person, and Prince Henry his Son, and imprison them in the Tower of London, or Dover-Castle, till they inforced them by duress, to grant a free tolera∣tion of their Catholick Religion, to remove some evil Counsel∣lors from about them, and to grant them a free Pardon for this violence; or else they would put some further project in exe∣cution against them, to their destruction. But this Conspi∣ricy being discovered, The Traytors were apprehended, ar∣raighned, condemned, and Watson and Clerk (two Jesuited Priests who had drawn them into this Conspiracy, upon the aforesaid Pretext) with some others, executed as Traytors; Cook 3 Ini∣tutes, p. 7. and Calvins Case 7 Report, f. 10, 11. 1 Jac. c. 1. all the Iudges of England resolving, that King Iames be∣ing right Heir to the Crown by descent, was immediately upon the death of Queen Elizabeth, actually possessed of the Crown, and lawful King of England, before any Proclamaton or Co∣ronation
of him, which are but Ceremonies, (as was formerly adjudged in the case ofSee Fox, Ho∣linshed, Speed, 1 Mariae, Queen Mary, and Queed Iane, 1 Mariae) there being no Interregnum by the Law of ENGLAND, as is adjudged, de∣clared by Act of Parliament, 1 Iac. c. 1. worthy serious perusal. 8. theirSee 3 Jac. c. 1, 2, 4, 6. Speeds History, p. 1250, to 1256. The Arraign∣ment of Tray∣tors, with others. Prayers for the 5 of November. Hospinian. Hist. Jesuitica l. 3. f. 163, to 170. horrid Gun-powder Treason Plot; con∣trived, fomented, by Garnet (Superiour of the English Je∣suites) Gerard, Tensmod and other Jesuites; who by their A∣postolical power, did not onely commend, but absolve from all sin the other Jesuited Popish Conspirators, and Faux The Sculdier, who were their instruments to effect it. Yea, the Jesuitical Priests were so Atheistical, as that they usually concluded their Masses with Prayers, for the good success of this hellish Plot, which was, suddenly, with no less then 36 Barrels of Gunpowder, placed in a secret Vault under the House of Lords, to have blown up and destroyed at once, King James himself, the Queen, Prince, Lords Spirituall and Temporal, with the Commons assembled together in the Upper-House of Parliament, upon the 5 of November, Anno Dom. 1605. and then forcibly to have seised with armed men pre∣pared for that purpose, the persons of our late beheaded King, then Dake of York, and of the Lady Elizabeth his Sister (if absent from the Parliament, and not there destroyed with the rest) that so there might be none of the Royal Line left to inhe∣rit the Crown of England, Scotland and Ireland; to the utter overthrow and subversion of the whole Royal Family, Parlia∣ment, State and Government of this Realm. Which unpa∣rallel'd, inhumane, bloody Plot, being miraculously dis∣covered, prevented, the very day before its execution, in perpetual detestation of it, and of the Jesuites and their traiterous Romish Religion, (which both contrived and approved it) the 5 day of November, by the Statute of 3 Jacobi, ch. 1. was enacted to be had in perpetual Re∣membrance, that all Ages to come, might thereon meet together publickly throughout the whole Nation, to render publick praises unto God, for preventing this infernal Jesuitical Design, and keep in memory this joyful Day of Delive∣rance;
for which end, special forms of publick Prayers and Thankesgivings were then appointed, and that Day ever since more or less annually observed, till this present. And it is worthy special observation, that had this Plot taken effect,Speeds Hist. p. 1242. The Arraignment of Traytors, and M. John Vicars History of the Gunpowder Treason. It was agreed by the Jesuites and Popish Conspira∣tors before-hand, That the Imputation of this Treason should be cast upon the Puritans, to make them more O∣dious: as now they father all the Powder-Plots of this kinde, which they have not onely laid, but fully ac∣complished of late yeers against the King, Prince, Royal Posterity, the Lords and Commons House, our old English Parliaments and Government, upon those Indepen∣dents, and Anabaptistical Sword-men, (whom they now repute and stile,See Militiere his victory of Truth, 1654. dedicated to the King of Great Brittain. the most reformed PURITANS,) who were in truth, but their meer under-Instruments to effect them; When as theySee my E∣pistles to Jus Patronatus, and Speech in Parliament. originally laid the Plots; as is clear by Campanella's Book, De Monarchia Hisp. ch. 25. and Cardinal Richelieu his Instructions at his death, to the King of France. And it is very observable, that as Courtney the Jesuite, Rector of the English Jesuites Colledge at Rome did in the year 1641. (when the name of Inde∣pendents, was scarce heard of in England) openly affirm to some English Gentlemen, and a Reverend Minister (of late in Cornwal) from whom I had this Relation, then and there feasted by the English Jesuites in their Colledge, That now at last,Nota. after all their former Plots had miscarried, they had found out a sure way to subvert and ruine the Church of England (which was most formidable to them of all others) by the Independents; who immediately after (by the Jesuites clandestine assistance) infinitely encreased, sup∣planted the Presbyterians by degrees, got the whole power of the Army, (and by it, of the Kingdom) into their hands, & then subverted both the Presbyterian Govern∣ment and Church of England in a great measure, with the Parliament, King and his Posterity; asIn his Victory of Truth, 1654. p. 15, 18, 24, 25, 26, 27. Monsieur Mi∣litiere a Jesuited French-Papist observes. So some Indepen∣dent Ministers, Sectaries and Anabaptists, ever since 1648. have neglected the observation of the fifth of November,
(as I am credibly informed) and refused to render pub∣lick thanks to God for the deliverance thereon, contrary to the Act, for this very reason, which some of them have rendered; That they would not mock God in publick by praising him for delivering the late King, Royal Posterity, and House of Lords from destruction then, by Jesuites and Pa∣pists, when as themselves have since destroyed and subverted them through Gods providence; and repute it a special mercy and deliverance to the Nation from Tyranny and Bondage, for Ʋpon which ground, many of them have since solemnized the 30 of January, instead of No∣vember 5. which they have cause to bless the Lord: Performing that for the Jesuites and Powder-Traytors, which themselves could not effect. The Lord give them grace and hearts to consider, how much they acted the Jesuites, and promoted their very worst Designes against us there∣in; whatSee Militiere his Victory of Truth, p. 4, to 50 infamy and scandal they have thereby drawn upon all zealous Professors of our Prote∣stant Religion, andJer. 5. 31. what will they do in the end there∣of? 9. (To omit all other Forraign instances cited in Spe∣culum Jesuiticum, p. 124, to 130. where you may peruse them at leisure) ByRomes Master-piece, p. 8, 18, 19. their poysoning King Iames himself in conclusion, as some of them have boasted. 10. By the Popes Nuntio's, and a Conclave of Jesuites Con∣spiracy at London, Anno 1640.Romes Master∣piece, p. 8, to 22. to poyson our late King Charles himself, (as they had poysoned his Father) with a poy∣soned Indian Nut, kept by the Jesuites, and shewed often by Conne the Popes Nuntio to the Discoverer of that Plot; or else, to destroy him by the Scotish wars and troubles, (raised for that very end by the Jesuites,) in case he refused to grant them a universal liberty of exercising their Popish Religion throughout his Realms and Dominions: and then to train up his Son under them, in the Popish Religion; To which not onely heretofore, but now likewise they strenuously en∣deavour by all possible means to seduce him; as appears more especially by Monsieur Militiere hisThe Victory of Truth, Anno 1653. late book dedicated to Him for that purpose, to invite him to the Roman Catholick Faith. Surely all these premised instances compared together, and with that memo∣rable
passage of the English JesuiteHospinion. Hist. Jesuitica, l. 3. f. 214. l. 4. f. 264. Campian, in his Con∣certatio Ecclesiae Catholicae: (or Epistle to Queen Eliza∣beths Councel.) Treviris 1583. p. 22. Velim sciatis, quod ad Societatem nostram attinet, omnes nos, qui per totum Orbeni longe lateque diffusi sunt, quarum est continua suc∣cessio, & magnus numerus, Sanctum foedus infisse, nec quam∣diu unus nostrum supererit, studium, & consilia nostra in∣termissuros, ad Reges Hereticos quovis modo tollendos (as Hospinian relates, and expounds his words and mean∣ing) & Religionem vestram extingere. Iampridem jacta est ratio, & inchoatum certamen nulla vis, nullus Anglorum impetus superabit; so as to hinder this their holy League and Covenant long since entred into, To destroy, take out of the way, ruine all Protestant Kings throughout the World, under the Notion of Hereticks by any means whatsoever, (and the Protestant Religion togetherwith them.) With aPrinted by it self, and at the end of my Speech in Parliament. Copy of a Letter sent by an Independent Agent from Paris, some few weeks before the Kings removal from the Isle of Weight, by the Army-Officers, declaring the Jesuites implacable En∣mity to the King, and to hereditary Monarchy throughout the World. And an Express sent from Paris to the King him∣self, some three dayes before his seisure and translation from Weight, to this effect, (as I have heard from per∣sons of Honour) That the Jesuites at a general meeting in France, had resolved, by the power of their friends in England, to seise on his Majesty, bring him to justice, and cut off his head, because he had, contrary to their expectation, closed with the Parliament, consented to the abolishing of Episcopacy, and) to five new Bills against Jesuites, Popish Priests, Mass, Po∣pery, and all Popish Ceremonies, in the last Treaty; and ad∣vising Him, to prepare for this new storm, which within few days after fell upon him: will sufficiently inform the world, that the late unparallel'd capital proceedings against our Protestant King, (contrary to the Votes of both Houses of Parliament) the Parliament Members, Peers House, and forced, dissolved late Parliament too,See An Apo∣logetical Decla∣ration of the Province of London, &c. Jan. 24. 1649. proceeded not from the Principles of our reformed Protestant Religion, as thisPage 5, 7. 8, 18, 33, 39. &c. Monsieur in his printed Pamphlet, would make
his Reader, the youg King; to whom he dedicates it, and all the World believe; but from the Popes and Jesuites forecited Treasonable Opinions, seconded with their clan∣destine Sollicitations and Practises: and that they, with some French Cardinals, Jesuites, as well as Spanish and En∣glish, (then present in England to promote their Designes) were the chief original Contrivers, Promoters of them, whoever were the immediate visible Instruments, as I haveSee my Speech in Parli∣ament, and Me∣mento. The E∣pistle to my Jus Patronatus, & Tho. Campanel∣la De Monar∣chia Hisp. 6. 25. elsewhere more fully demonstrated, for the wiping off this Scandal from our reformed Religion, & the sincere Professors of it, who both abominated andSee the Decla∣ration of the se∣cluded Mem∣bers, The Lon∣don - Ministers and others, Re∣presentation to the General, and the second part of the History of Inde∣pendency. pro∣tested against it in print.  Radolphus Hospinian in his excel∣lent Historia Jesuitica, l. 4. f. 244, 245. reckons up these three prime causes of the Jesuites Regicides, & other Noto∣rious Treasons. The first is, that blinde Obedience, which they vow to their Superiours, to execute with great celerity, spiritual joy, and perseverance, whatever their Superiours shall enjoyne them, by being perswaded, That all their Cem∣mands are Iust to them; by renouncing their own Opinion and Iudgement with a certain Blinde Obedience: and by be∣lieving, that those who live under Obedience, are carried and governed by Divine Providence, (a word now most in use with our Army-Saints, and Souldiers, wholly infected with this Jesuitical Doctrine ofTo their Gene∣ral & Officers, even in unlaw∣ful acts against the Parliament, King, Kingdom. Obedience) by their Supe∣riors, whithersoever they shall suffer themselves to be carried, or in what sort soever they shall be dealt with by them, (like a staffe in the hand of a man, which readily obeys him that holds it, wheresoever and in what thing soever he will please to use it,) especially when backed with a pretext of Necessity, Re∣ligions Safety, Publick Good, Exemplary Justice, and promoting the common Cause for which their Society was first instituted. 2. That they hold themselves obliged to no Kings, Princes, or Civil Magistrates by any Oath of Allegi∣ance, but onely to the Pope and their Generals; and therefore think themselves free and unable to commit any Treason at all against them, although at the Popes and heir Superiours com∣mands they still rise up against, murder, stroy them. 3. That they deem those Kings, Princes, which the Pope and Jesuites, or
other learned men of their Religion, or the common people shall deem Hereticks, to be thereby wholly made uncapable of any Empires, Kingdoms, or Principalities, or any other civil Dig∣uity; yea, to be accursed Tyrants, unworthy of the name of Kings; that thereby their Subjects are totally absolved from the bond of Allegiance to them; and that thereupon it is lawful to kill and destroy them, and the murders of such are meri∣torious. Now that these three Jesuitical Grounds and Principles, (infused into our Army-Officers and Souldiers by the Jesuites and their Instruments of late yeers, against their Primitive Orthodox Positions, Protestations, De∣clarations, Oaths, Covenants, Engagements) backed with secret Avarice, Ambition, and Self-ends, were the principal impulsive Causes of all the extravagant violent Pro∣ceedings both against the late King, and Parliament (not the loyal Principles of the Protestant Religion) is apparent unto all the World, by the Armies own Declarations of Nov. 16. and Decemb. 7. 1648. Their True State of the Commonwealth of England, &c. 1654. and other Pam∣phlets for their justification, which all true Protestants blush at. 3. That the Jesuites ever since the Establishment of their Military Order, under Ignatius their Martial General, have been theHospinian. Hist. Jesuitica, l. 3. Romes Master-piece. principal Firebrands, Bellows, Instruments of kindling, somenting, raising, continuing all the publick commo∣tions, wars, seditions and bloody fewds that have happened in or between any Kings, Kingdoms, States, Princes, So∣veraigns or Subjects throughout the Christians world; and more particularly, of all the Civil commotions, wars in France, Germany, Transylvania, Bohemia, Hungary, Russia, Poland, England, Scotland and Ireland, to the effusion of whole Oceans of Christian blood: which one poetically thus expresseth, Jubilaeum, five Speculum Jesuiticum Epi∣gramma. Quicquid in Orbe mali passim Peccante Gradido est, Quicquid turbarum tempora nostra vident, Cuncta Sodalitio mentito Nomine Jesu Accepta Historiâ teste, referre licet.
It modò & vestrae celebrate Encaenia Sectae, Militis inventum, Loiolana cohors. Yea, it is well worthy observation, what Jacobus Cru∣cius,Hasen mullerus Hest. Jesuit. c. 1. Speculum Jesu∣iticum, p. 61. a Jesuite (Rector of the Jesuites Novices at Landsberge) presumed to publish, in his Explication of the Rules of the Jesuites, Anno 1584. in these words: The Father of our Society ought to be a Souldier; because, as it is the part of a Sculdier, to rush upon the Enemy with all his Forces, and not to desist, till he become a Conquerour; so it is our duty to run violently upon all, who resist the Pope of Rome; and to Destroy and Abolish them, not onely with Counsels, Writings, and Words; Sed invocato etiam brachio se∣culari, Igne & Ferro tollere & abolere, sicut Pontifer & nostra Vota (contra Lutheranos suscepta) Volunt & Mandant. But likewise by calling in to our assistance the secular Arm (of an Army) to take away, and destroy them with Fire and Sword, as the Pope and our Oathes (taken against the Protestants) Will and Command. And may we not then safely conclude, they have been the Original Contrivers, Fomenters, Continuers of all our late intestine and forraign wars, by Land and Sea, with our Christian Protestant Brethren and Allyes, (asExact Col∣lection, p. 12. 10 20 97, 98, 106, 108, 207, 461, to 465. 491, 492, 498, 508, 574, 616, 631, to 670. 812, to 828, 832, 834, 849, 890, to 918, 651, 652, 653. sundry Parliament Declarations of both Houses aver and attest?) And that many of them have secretly crept into, and listed themselves Souldi∣ers in our Armies, on purpose to put on foot their designs against our King, Kingdoms, Churches, Religion, and perpetuate our Civil Wars? And so much the rather, because,Relatio de Sratogematis & Sophismatis Jsuitarum, c. 4, 6, 7. Alphonsus de Vargas (a Spanish Popish Priest) informs us: That the Jesuites, being a Generation of Incen∣diaries, are so welpleased with the name of their Founder Ignatius, derived from Fire, and signifying a Caster about of wild-Fire, or an Incendiary; that though his christned name at first was Innicus, or Inighistas; Yet Iohannes Euse∣bius Nirenberger, a Jesuite, in his Book, De Vita Ignatii, printed at Madrid, 1630. most falsly records, That his Parents at his Baptism, being in doubt what name to give him, thereupon the Infant himself, with a loud voice, said,
He would be named Ignatius, to signifie what office he should obtain in the Church and world, even to cast abroad fire in them, and set them all in a flame. Hereupon his Disciples the Jesuites, considering that this their founder was by his name A firebrand, and a Souldier by his profession, professed publikely to the King of Spain, his councel and the world, that it was no less consonant to the mind, institution and statutes, then to the name of their warlike Father Ignatius, that they should not onely exercise, but Publikely profess and teach to o∣thers, Artem Pyrotechnisam, &c. the art how to make and cast abroad fire-balls, fire-works and wild-fire, to fire and burn houses and Cities: and likewise the art of warre, of setting Armies in battel array, of Assaulting cities, the maner of making Gun-powder, bullets, fire-bals; of casting Guns, and the maner and wayes of making all other Military works, Engines, together with rules and precepts belonging to Navigation, & omnia maritini belli munia: and all duties and incidents belonging to Sea-fights. Upon which they perswaded the King of Spain (notwithstanding the op∣position of all the Universites of Spain against it) to erect a publike University for their fiery martial order at Madrid, and to endow it with an annual Revenue of ten thousand Crownes; wherein they set up a publike Lecture concerning war and all incidents appertaining thereunto; with this Printed title: Acroasis, De re Militari; in qua pracipietur Doctrina & forma Militiae veteris & Hodiernae, & Species Mathema∣tum arti isti subordinatarum: quae sunt Tactica, five De Acie instruenda, Topographica, Machinaria Militaris, Or∣gano Poetica, Pyrotechnica, &c. Hanc acrosia faciet, P. Hermannus Hago (a Jesuit) quarta pomeridiana usque ad quintam. This is the first publike Military Lecture I ever read of erected in any University amongst Christians, and Professors of theRom. 10. 15 Gospel of peace; who are expresly en∣joyned by theRom. 15. 33 Heb. 13 29. God of peace, and PrinceIsai. 9. 6. of peaceMat. 26. 52. To put up their swords into their scabberds, because all those that that the sword, shall perish with the sword.Isai. 2. 4. Mica. 4. 3. To beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning-hookes: not to lift up the sword against one another, neither To
learne war any more. Yet such bloody incendiaries and delighters in war are the Jesuites, that they thus pub∣likely teach others the art of war and fire-workes, to set the whole Christian world in combustions and open warres against each other; which they have everywhere accomplished, and that upon this accompt: that the Gos∣pel of Jesus is principally to be taught and propagated by arm∣ed power, exercitu & armorum usu; by An army and the use of armes (whereby they now propagate it in our Kingdomes the quite contrary way, to the ruine of our Church and religion:) whereuponCap. 7. p. 47 and c. 23. p. 132. Vargas passeth this just censure on them: Hos velut Ignigenos illis Comici verbis recte quis a se amoliri, & in malam rem abire jusserit. Apage illum a me; nan ille quidem Vulcani irati est filius. Quaqua tangit, Omne amburit; si prope abstes, calefacit. And a German Frier in his Astrum inextinctum, gives this true Character of them: Discordias inter suprema Reipublicae Christianae capita seminare credimus esse veritati patrocinari; quam salvam esse negant, quamdiu Principes isti inter se non colliduntur Hoc est flammas in Europa suscitare, sicut gloriantur Patrem societatis Ignatium, esse illum, de quo Christus dexerit, Veni ignem mittere in terram, hoc est, clas∣sicum in aulis Principum canere, & illos inter so committere. 4. That theSee Hospi∣nian. Historia Jesuitica. l 4. f. 212, 213, 214. and l. 3. throughout. Thu∣anus Hist. l. 4. Jesuites from the first erection of their Military order, have conspired, attempted to subvert and ut∣terly extirpate (under the name of Schismatickes, Hereticks, Gospellers, Heresie, and the Gospel) all professors whatsoever of the Protestant Religion and their Doctrines throughout the world, not onely by Machivilian plots and treasons, but by war, fire, sword, holy leagues, Armies & armed power, as is evident both by their bookes and Practices. To instance in a few parti∣culars both abroad and at home. Franciscus Veronas Con∣stantiensis, a Jesuite, in his Apology for John Castle, Anno 1595. part 5. c. 13. resolves, That all wars to extirpate here∣tickes (Protestants) Ar lawfull, yea more lawfull then
against all other Infidels, because Heresie according to Gods word, is worse then all Infidelity. And if war be Just against Heretickes, how much more just is it against the head of the Heretickes? And if it be just to Extirpats hereti∣call Kings out of all Christian Kingdomes (which the Jesuites entred into an holy League to effect, as you heard before out of Campian) How much more just is it in the most Christian Kingdom (France) to root out King Henry the 4? (whom they not onely warred against, but stabbed and murdered as aforesaid.)Genevae, 1620. Thuanus Historiae, l. 65. p 238. and lib. 67. 299. records; That it is the opinion and Sentence of the Jesuites, that it is a Pious and wholsome thing, that all Christians should lay violent hands upon Sectaries and Protestants, ought to be armed against them, and to make no peace, keep no faith nor truce with them; yea, that it would be more profitable for the Church, and more conducing to Gods glory, for all Christians to give over their warrs they wage against the Turkes by common consent, and to let the Turks alone, and to turn all their arms and forces against the Evangelical Sectaries (or Protestants) which live amongst them, who are worser, and ought to be more odious to true Christians then Turkes; andYet these plead for a To∣leration among us, and enjoy it. utterly to destroy and persecute them to death, rather then to delete the unbelieving Mahometans, who are not so dangerous as they. Hoc quàm pie, et juxta mansuetudinem Christianam dicatur, ipsi qui conscientias alioram moderantur, conscientiam suam rogant; Subjoynes Thuanus, though a Papist. And Joannis Paulus Windeck, in his Book De extirpandis Haeres. antid. 10. p. 404. 412. antid. 11. p. 480. and p. 244. positively determines, That the Lutheranes and Calvinists are to be persecuted with warrs, and not onely to be terrified, but like∣wise deleted, cut off, taken out of the way, and utterly extir∣pated with arms and flames. That all Catholike Princes ought to enter into Holy leagues, associations & confederacies, to de∣stroy and root them out, as they did in France, Anno 1587. That the oportunity is not to be neglected, namely,Nota. Quando Protestantes Pecuniis exhausti sunt; when the Protestants Purses and money are exhausted (as they are now amongst
us by excessive endless Taxes, Excises, Civil wars, and a perpetual army too much swayed by Jesuitical counsels, to eat us out, and ruine us with our Religion in conclusion, ere disbanded.) And that the Catholickes may more easily oppress and destroy these Sectaries, they are to be severed one from, and divided against each other, by sundry various arts and means, and all occasions laid hold on for this purpose. (And are we not so now in all our Realmes and Dominions more then ever, by the Jesuites and Romish Emissaries?) Which the Emperor Charles the 5 observed (in his proceed∣ings against the Protestants in Germany) to his great ad∣vantage. In pursuance of these JesuiticalRichardi Dinothi Histo∣ria de pello Civili Gallico, l 6. p. 151. &c. The General History of France. p. 778. 779 Hospinian. Historia Jesu∣itica f. 149. 150 Thuanus Histo∣ria. l. 63. Positions, Anno 1576. and 1577. the King of Spain, Duke of Guise, with sundry others, Jesuited Popish Princes, Nobles and Papists of all degrees, by the Jesuites instigation, and Popes speciall approbation, entred into a bloody Conspiracy, or holy League, as they term it: To restore and retain the most holy worship of God, according to the form and maner of the holy catholike Apostolike Church of Rome: to abjure all errors or corruptions contrary thereunto, &c. To spend not onely all their Estates, but lives, to repeal all publique Edicts in favor of the Protestants and their associates; to extirpate all Heresies, heretickes, and pursue all such as publike enemies, with fire and sword to death, who should any way oppose or withstand this League, or refuse to joyne with them in it, or fall off from it upon any pretext, after this Oath to observe it. Which League they several times renewed: and in theDinothus, Peter Mathew, Thuanus Ge∣neral History of France, Me∣teranus, and others. renovation there∣of Anno 1598. the Jesuits openly boasted, That they would use their utmost endeavours, that before the year 1600. be∣gan, Evangelium (So they termed the Protestant Reli∣gion) Radicitus ex orbs toto extirpetur; Should be clean extirpated out of the whole world. The Massacres, Slaughters of how many thousand Protestants by open intestine wars and bloody Conspiracies, this League occasioned in France, Germany and the Netherlands, together with the murders of two French Roman Catholike Kings, theSpeculum Jesuiticum, p. 92. French and Belgick Histories of those times, will sufficiently inform the Reader.Meteranus Historia. l. 23. Speculum Je∣suit. p. 100. In the year 1602. the Jesuites erected a new
Colledge and Society at Thonon in Savoy, to convert or utter∣ly extirpate the Protestants, under the Notion of Heretickes. 1. by Preachings. 2. by pious frauds. 3. by Vi armata: by force of armes: to which new Society, many Popish Kings, Nobles and others, gave their names; and in June that yeare listed above 25000 expert Soldiers, all Roman Catholickes, to put this their Designe against the Protestants in execution upon the next oportunity: there being above 50 Jesuites disguised in Lay-mens habits imployed in England, to stir up the Papists and people there to joyn with them in this new Association, to root out the Protestants in all places by the Sword, the Prin∣cipal Engine used by these Ignatians to effect it. To pass bySee Hs∣pinian. Historia Jesuitica l. 3. f. 160. 161. 162 all the conspiracies and attempts of the Jesuites in Queen Elizabeths reigne, to extirpate our Religion and the Professors of it by open wars, Rebellions, Spanish and forraign invasions both in England, Ireland and Scot∣land, recorded by Mr. Cambden, Speed and others in her life, and William Watson in his Quodlibets; with their attempts of like Nature in the beginning of King James his raign, recited in the Statutes of 3. Jacobi, c. 2. where all may peruse them: I shall onely acquaint you; That a little be∣fore the beginning of our late bloody wars, Divisions, (contrived, fomented by the Jesuites and Papists, as IHidden Workes of dark∣ness brought to publique light. Romes Master∣peece, Conter∣buries Doome. have elsewhere at large, discovered, andExact Collect. p. 651, 652. 662. 668. 813. to 832. 902. to 920. many Parliament-De∣clarations attest) one Francis Smith an English Jesuite, open∣ly affirmed to Mr. Waddesworth and Mr. Yaxly, That it was not now a time to bring their Religion by disputing or Books of controversie, but It must be done by an Army, and By the Sword. And it is very considerable, That when the Jesuites Spanish and Romish Agents had engaged the King and English Protestants against their Protestant Brethren of Scotland, 1639. to cut one anothers throats; the King of Spain had provided a great new Spanish Armado by the Jesuites sollicitation, and a great Land-Army of old Spanish Soldiers to invade the Western and Southern parts of England, then destitute of all forces, Arms & Ammunition to defend it, all drawn to the Northern parts against the Scots; and to joyn with the Popish confederates here, to extirpate the English he retickes
and Protestants: which designe of theirs, through the Hol∣landers unexpected encounter, which scattered their fleet upon the English Coasts, and the Pacification with the Scots, before any engagement of both Armies, was happily prevented. That this Spanish Fleet was then especial∣ly designed for England, appeares (besides other Eviden∣ces, which I haveThe Royal Popish favou∣rite p. 58, 59. Hidden workes of darkness brought to light p. 198. elsewhere touched) by the confession of an English Pilot in that Navy upon his death-bed, mortally wounded in the first fight, to an English Minister and others, to whom he revealed it out of conscience; by some Letters I have met with; and by a Pamphlet made and printed by the Jesuites, Anno 1640. intituledThe Royall Popish favou∣rite. p. 58. 59. Hidden workes of darkness p. 198. The Jubilee of the Je∣suites, taken from a Papist at Redriffe, and presented by Sheriffe Warner to the whole Commons House, November 14. 1640. Wherein among other Passages then read in the House, (entred in the Journal of that day, out of which I transcribed them:) there was a Particular prayer, For the holy martyrs that Suffered in the Fleet sent against the Hereticks of England,Nota 1639. with this advice; That the Papists must fish in troubled waters, (to wit, whiles that The King was Ingaged in the wars against the Scots:) withExact Collect. p. 12, 13. certain prayers added, For their good success in that Designe against the Scots. For the more effectuall carry∣ing on whereof, the Popes Nuncio, with theHidden workes of dark∣ness brought to publique light p. 189. to 199. and Romes Master-Peece. Colledge of Jesuites then in Queen-street, secretly summoned a kind of Parliament of Roman Catholicks and Jesuites in London, out of every County of England and Wales, in which Conne the Popes Nuncio sate President, by the Queens commission and direction, in April, 1639. Who granted and collected an extraordinary large Contribution, by way of Subsidy, from the Papists, to carry on this war against our Protestant Brethren of Scotland, and raise forces to joyne with the Spainards, whom they then expected, to cut the English Protestants throats. The Jesuitical and Prelatical Popish party much displeased with the defeat of this their Plot, by the unexpected Pacification with the Scots, 1639. induced the King soon after to break and revoke it,See the Kings declara∣tion concerning that Treaty, Hidden workes of darkness. Anno 1640. (the very year of theSpeculum sive Jubilaeum Je∣suiticum. Jesuites Jubilee, which they solemnized in all places,
being the 100. yeer from the first Erection of their Order by Ignatius, Anno 1540.) they caused a new Army to be raised and sent into the North against the Protestants of Scotland, to subdue & destroy them. At the same time they secretlyHidden workes of darkness p. 225. 226. Canterburies Doom. p. 459. listed an Army of no less then 7000. Romish Catho∣lickes, kept in private pay, of purpose To cut the Protestants throats who should resist them, and to Conquer the Pro∣testants in England first, and then in Ireland; which Designe they were to put in execution, when the Pope or his Legat, with the Spanish, French and Venetian Ambassadours should appoint; who designed them to begin to execute it, When the King went into Scotland against the Scots; as O Conner (the Queen-Mothers Priest) confessed to Anne Hussey,Nota. who justified it to the Lords of the Councel then, and afterwards, before the Lords in Parliament upon her Oath. The Jesuites were so confident of the good success of their designes amongst us, and compleat Victory over all the Protestants throughout the world this yeare of their Jubilee (makingSee Bellar∣min. de Nois Eccl. Nota. 15. Triumph over their Enemies, one of their Notes of the true Church) thatSpeculum five Jubilaeum Jesuiticum. p. 220. to 224. they appoint∣ed a solemne Enterlude to be acted by their Society in the pub∣lique Hall at Aquisgran in Germany, in honour of their Ju∣bilee: wherein they signified to the people, by printed Tickets and Pageants, that the Popish Church of Rome should be brought in upon the Stage, happily fighting against, triumph∣ing and reigning over all her enemies every where throughout the world, in all ages till that present day, and especially of later times, by their meanes. The beginning of this Enterlude being happily acted, and succeeding according to their mindes; at last there were two Armies of soldiers brought by them upon the Stage, ready to encounter each other: the one of Jesuites and Papists, fighting for the Church of Rome; the other, re∣presenting the Protestants warring against her. Before their fight, a Jesuitical actor, clad in black, personating a Popish Masse-Priest, divineth good success to the Popish Army, pray∣ing for it with an affected devotion and solemne invocation (or rather profanation) of Gods name: after which, the Popish Army of actors, as being certain of the instant victory,
uttered these words to their Captain (as their parts directed them) with a loud reiterated voyce and shout; Pereat, Pereat, Quisquis est hostis Ecclesiae: Let him perish, let him perish, whoever is an enemy of the Church: whereupon a great part of the Stage on which they acted, together with the whole Popish Army (not one Souldier or Captain excepted) at the repeating of these words and wishes, fell to the ground immediately, with so great celerity, that many of them felt they were fallen down, before they discerned themselves to fall; their feigned enemies of the Church (representing the Protestants) standing all fast, at least in place, if not in mind, on the other part of the Stage, which fell not at all. With this sudden fall, many of the Popish Army were bruised in peeces with the beames of the Stage falling upon them; who through pain and horror, needed Monitors to silence their outcries; others having their bones broken and Limbes put out of joynt, were carried to the Chi∣rugions to be dressed; and all the rest confounded with shame, crept away secretly under the Veile to their Lodging. And so this Jesuitical Enterlude, by divine justice, ended in a real unexpected bloody Tragedy and real rout of the whole pre∣tended victorious Popish Army of Jesuites; and the Scotish Wars that yeer (which they so much depended on) through Gods mercy, concluded in a blessed Peace and Union be∣tween both Nations. Whereupon, theSee Hidden works of dark∣ness brought to publike light, p. 219. to 250. The Rise and Progress of the Irish R. bellion, and others. Irish Popish Re∣bels, by the Jesuites Plots and instigations, seconded with secret encouragements, and promises of assistance with Arms and Moneys from Cardinal Richliou, the King of Spain, Pope, and other forraign Popish Princes, undertook the late horrid bloody Massacre of all the Protestants in Ire∣land, and surprisal of all the Forts, Castles, Arms and Am∣munition therein, on the 23 of October, 1641.Hidden works of dark∣ness, p. 243. be∣ing Ignatius day, the Founder and New Canonized Saint of the Jesuited Society, for the greater Honour of their Patron, Order; they being the chief Plotters of this hor∣rid bloody Treason. Which horrid Conspiracie, though hap∣pily discovered the night before its execution, at Dublin, and some few places else; yet it took effect in most other parts of Ireland, to the slaughter of neer two hundred thousand
Protestants there, in few months space; seconded with a bloody Warre, for sundry years; to the losse of many thousands more lives. To this PlotHidden work of darknes, p. 226. all the Papists in England were privy, who intended the like Massacre in England; and soon after by the Popes andExact Coll. p. 662, 666, 813 to 832. A Collection of Ordinances, p. 267, 318, 354, 424, and the History of In∣dependency. Jesuits instigations, by the assistance of sorragin Popish Princes, they eugaged the King and Parliament in a long∣lasting bloody uncivill, unchristian war against each other, con∣cluding in the Kings and Parliaments joynt ruines by an Army raised for their mutual defence, seduced thereunto through the Jesuits instigations and policies. After which, they engaged the Protestants of England and Scotland (formerly united by the strictest Bnds and Covenants against them) to war upon, invade and destroy each other by land; and soon after that (by the SpanishSee Tho. Cam∣panella de Mo∣narchi Hisp. c. 25, 27. Agents Assistance) raised a most dangerous bloody Warre between our Protestant old Allies of the Neitherlands and the English by Sea; to the infinite dam∣mage, prejudice of both, and the effusions of whole O∣ceans of the Gallantest Christian Protestant blood, that e∣ver yet was shed, the expence of more treasure and men in these inteste Wars, than would have conquered all Spain, Italy, and the Indies, had they been imployed up∣on such a designe; and to the entailing of aSee the 27 Article of the Instrument of Government. perpetuall Ar∣my on us and our Posterities; more ready (as we have of late years found by sad experiments) to hearken to the Je∣suits clandestine suggestions, eductions, and execute their fore∣plotted Designes to ruine our Kingdomes, Parliaments, Laws, Liberties, Monarchy, Church, Religion, then to follow the Advice, Votes Councels, Directions, Commands of our Parlia∣ments, Kingdomes, and the best affected Protestants of all ranks who first raised, and have so long maintained them, for quite other ends (hereafter touched) then what they (of late times) have most pursued, to the Popes and Jesuits great content. 5. That the Jesuits have endeavoured, attempted the convulsion, concussion, subversion not onely of the Empires, Realms, and ancient setled Governments and States of Germa∣ny, Russia, Bohemia, Hungaria, France, Poland, but likewise of England, Scotland and Ireland, and to new model them
intoExact Coll. p. 3, 4. 461, 462 491 497, 498, 917, 631. other Forms of Government. What mould of Government they intended to cast England into, is thus long since described by William Watson (a secular Priest) in his Quodlibets, Anno 1602. page 309, 310, 330, 331. England is the main chance of Christendome at this present, by seditions, factions, tampering and aspiring Heads: the onely But, Mark, White, the Jesuits aym at, as well in intention as execution of their pretended expedition, exploit and action. I am of opinion, that no man on earth can tell what Govern∣ment it is they intend to establish, ratifie and confirm, when they come to their preconceited Monarchy; no not any of their Plot casters. No question it is, but their Government shall be as uncertain as their New conceited Monarchy; their Monar∣chy as mutable as their Reign, and their Reign as variable as the Winde, or Proteus in his Complements. But no que∣stion is to be made of it, but that the Government they do di∣rectly intend at this present is, A MOST ABSOLUTE SOVERAIGNTY, DOMINION AND STATE, CLEARLY EXEMPTED from any subordination, TO ANY LAW or Legifer divine or humane; and there∣fore it is rightly called DESPOTICON in the highest de∣gree of exemplary immunile,Is not ours so ow? IMPERIALITY AND ABSOLUTE REIGN, RULE AND AUTHO∣RITY, as containing in it three sorts of Government; Sil. Monarchical, Aristocraticall, Democraticall, in mat∣ters of Counsell and mannaging of Common wealths causes; not in point OF REGALITY, HONOUR AND IN∣HERITANCE; For there shall be neither Title, nor Name, nor Honour given, taken or done to any Prince, Duke, Mar∣quesse, Earl, Viscount, Lord, Baron, or the like, (all the Jesui∣tical Governours being Puritan like, Seniours, Elders, Pro∣vincials, &c.) neither shall there be any successions by Birth or blood, TO ANY HONOUR, OFFICE OR MA∣GISTRACY from the Monarch, Pater General, to the Minor, Pter Minister, but ALL SHALL GO BY See the New Government of the Common∣wealth of Eng∣land, Artic. 25, 26, 32. 33, 34. 41. ELECTION OR CHOICE. Whether our late and present variable floating New moulded Governments have not been cast by this long since predicted Jesuiticall
Mould, let wise men, with all our late, yea present Go∣vernours, now sadly consider and determine. 6. That theAlphonsi de Vagas Rela∣tio cap. 5. Jesuits in a publique Disputation held at Madrid, published by them under this Title; Con∣clusiones Politicae sub Regis Domini nostri praesidio, instruct∣ed the King of Spain (their Chief Protector,Speculum Je∣suiticum p. 217 218, 219. whom they most extoll above all other Kings, to promote both his universall Monarchy and their own thereby.) That in relation to his Empire, Power was necessary, which power they defined to be; A faculty, not onely of re∣taining the Kingdomes he already possessed, but like∣wise of acquiring other mens. Perswading him by this Doctrine to believe: That he was therefore consecra∣ted a Catholike King by God, that he might enjoy a faculty, not onely of keeping his own, but also OF IN∣VADING AND SEISING UPON OTHER MENS DOMINIONS. For to retain ones own, was the praise onely of a private family: DE ALIENIS CERTARE REGIA LAUS EST: but it was a Royall praise to fight for that which is other mens: NEC REGNAN∣DI CAUSA JUS VIOLARE CRIMEN EST, DUM CAETERIS REBUS PIETAS COLATUR: Neither is it a Crime to violate Law or Right, to reign or gain a Crown, whiles that Piety in other things shall be ob∣served. Which Jesuitical Machivilian unrighteous Do∣ctrine, though (as Alphonsus Vargas, a Spanish Popish Priest resolves) it be diametrically contrary to the do∣ctrine of our Lord Jesus himself, instructing men, that See Joh. 10. 1. Ezech. 18. 5. to 14. Levit. 6. 1. 4. Job. 20. 19, 20 c. 24. 2. to 15 Obad. 5. Jer. 49. 9, 10. aliena obtinere non Potentis Principis, SED IMPOTEN∣TIS AC VIOLENTI PRAEDONIS EST: Yet the Je∣suites and their Instruments of late years have sufficiently propagated it amongst our English Grandees and Army-Saints; for a most sacred Oracle, as their violent invasions of other mens Realms, Powers, Offices, Pallaces, Lands, Estates, and Possessions of all kindes, by meer armed power and might, demonstrate beyond contradiction. 7. That theAlphonsi de Vargas relati &c. c. 5. 7. see c. 2, 3, 16, 18, 19 56, 57. & Ho∣spinian Historia Jesuitical. 206 207. Jesuites in their Book, De Zelo S. Igna∣tii in Religione sua instituenda, printed at Madrid, p. 13,
do glory; Hoc Societatis proprium esse, ut quotidie nov promat inventiones quibus homines ad Deum perducantur: That this is the property of their Society, that it DAI∣LY BRINGS FORTH NEW INVENTIONS, where∣by men may be brought home to God (that is, to their Religion and Society) the principle whereof they, and Vargas record, to be these. Their perswading of men to embrace the Gospel, by AN ARMY; the use of ARMES, Power, Terrour, Fire: Their Exercise of Merchandize (which many of them in most places & inHidden works of dark∣nesse brought to publique light, p. 203, 204. England too, now use, they being very great Merchants, Factors, and Returners of Moneys by Bils of Exchange) and of all other Secular Imployments, Callings, in Lay-mens ha∣bits, the more easily to insinuate themselves into all Countries, Places, Companies and Societies of men to infect, seduce, and discover their secrets, according to this their received Maxime; JESUITA EST OMNIS HOMO: a Jesuit is every man: that is, a man of all Professions, Callings, Sects, Religions to effect his ends: Their questioning, traducing, oppugning, censuring of all the Articles of the Apostles Creed, and received Principles, Doctrines of Christian Religion; corrup∣ting, slighting, falsifying the Scriptures themselves, to∣gether with Councils, Fathers, Schoolmen, and all other Divines; but those onely of their own Order, which they incomparably extoll above and prefer be∣fore all other: Their venting of new Opinions, No∣tions, Revelations, Exposions, Crochets, Herefies, Problems, both in Divinity itself, and all other Arts and Sciences in the Presse, Pulpit, Universities, Schools. And if these (as Vargas assures us) be their properties and new inventions to propagate the Gospel, and draw men unto God (which our Lord Jesus himself and his true Disciples were wholy ignorant of) may we not certain∣ly conclude, that they have of late years been extraor∣dinary busie at this their harvest work amongst us, and more especially in spreading their Gospel by AN AR∣MY, and taking upon them the use of Arms, in
of their Military Father Ignatius, with all other secular Imployments, and New Sects to draw Proselites and new separate Congregations to them, throughout our Realms, to destroy both our Church Discipline and Re∣ligion, as well as our Civill Government and Laws? 8. That as the whole House of Commons in theirExact Coll. p. 3, 4 &c. Re∣monstrance of 15. December 1641. charge the Jesuites, and late Jesuited Court-Counsellors, with a Malignant and pernicious designe, of SUBVERTING THE FUNDA∣MENTAL LAWS and Principles of Government upon which the Religion and Justice of the Kingdome are firmly e∣stablished. So William Watson a Secular Priest, chargeth Father Parsons, the English Jesuite, and his Jesuited com∣panions, in their Memorial for Reformation of England, when it should be reduced under the power of the Jesuites (as Parsons was confident it would be, though he should not live to see it) written at Sevil in Spain, Anno Dom. 1590. that they intended to have Magna Charta, with our Common Fundamental Laws and Liberties, abrogated and suppressed: thus expressed by William Watson in his Quodlibets, pag. 92, 94, 95. Father Parsons and the Jesuites in their deep Jesuitical Court of Parliament, begun at Styx in Phlegeton, have compiled their Acts in a compleat Volume, intituled: THEQuere, whe∣ther the High Court of Justice had not its title from hence HIGH COƲRT OF REFORMA∣TION FOR ENGLAND. And to give you a taste of their intent by that base Court of A TRIBE of TRAI∣TORS sawcily (like to Gade, Jack Straw, and Tom Tiler) ƲSƲRPING the AƲTHORITY of both STATES, EC∣CLESIASTICAL and TEMPORALL in all their RE∣BELLIOƲS ENTERPRICES: these were principall points discussed, set down, and so decreed by them, &c. He first mentions three of them relating toStew Watsons Dialogue be∣tween a secular Priest and Lay Gentleman▪ printed at Rhemes, 160. p. 95. Church∣men, Scholars, and Church and Colledge-Lands: which were to be put in Fee offs hands, and they all to be re∣duced unto Arbitrary Pensions, &c. And then proceeds thus to the Fourth. The fourth Statute was there made concerning the COMMON LAWS of this LAND; and that consisted of this one principal point, That, ALL
THE GREAT CHARTERS of ENGLAND MUST BE BURNT; the manner of holding Lands in Fee simple, Fee tail; Kings service, Soccage or Villanage, brought into villany, scoggy and popularity; and in few, the Common Law must be wholy annihillated, abolished, and troden down under foot, and Caesars civill Imperials brought amongst us, and sway for a time in their pla∣ces. All whatsoever England yeelds, being but base, bar∣barous, and void of all sence, knowledge, or discretion shewed in the first Founders, and Legifers; and on the other side, all whatsoever is or shal be brought in by these out∣casts of Moses, stain of Solon, and refuse of Lycurgus, must be reputed for metaphysical, seme-divine, and of more excel∣lency than the other were. Which he thus seconds, Quod∣libet 9. Article 2. p. 286. First, it is plain, that Father Par∣sons and his Company (divide it amongst them how they list) have laid a plot, as being most consonant and fitting for their other Designments, That the Common Laws of the Realm of England must be (forsooth) either abolished utterly: or else, bear no greater sway in the Realm than the Civil Law doth. And theAnd is not this the cheif Reason of their late endeavou∣red alterations chief reason is, for that the State of the Crown and Kingdome by the Common Laws is so strongly settled, as whilest they continue, the Jesuites see not how they can work their wills. And on the other side, in the Civil laws, they think they have some shreds, whereby they may patch a cloak together to cover a bloody shew of their Treasons for the present, from the eys of the Vulgar people. Secondly, the said good Fa∣ther hath set down a course how every man may shake off all authority at their pleasures, as if he would become a new Anabaptist, or King John of Leydon, to draw all the world into Mutiny, ebellion and Combustion. And the Stratagem is, how theAnd was not this the very principal engin lately used to alter our old Fundamental Government, cut off the King, and divest his Posterity of their three Kingdoms? witnesse the Armies printed Declarations, and the Junctoes Votes in pursuance of them, Jan. 3. 1648. See Mene Tkel Percz by John Rogers. Common people may be inveig∣led & seduced to conceit to themselves such a liberty or prero∣gative,
as that it may be lawfull for them, when they think meet, to place and displace Kings and Princes, as men do their Tenants at will, hirelings or ordinary Servants. Which Anabaptistical and abominable Doctrine, proceeding from a turbulnt tribe of Traiterous Puritans, and other He∣reticks, this treacherous Jesuite would now foist into the Catholick Church, as a ground of his corrupt Divinity. And p. 330, 332. He intends to alter and change all Laws, Customs, and Orders of this Noble Isle. He hath prejudi∣ced the law of Property, in instituting Government, Governours, and Hereditary Princes to be, BENEPLA∣CITƲM POPƲLI, and all other private possessions, ad bene-pla∣citum sui &c Whether any such new deep Jesuitical Court of Parliament, and high Court of Reformation for England, to carry on this old Design of the Jesuites against our Laws, hath been of late years sitting amongst us in or neer West∣minster, or elswhere, in secret Counsel every week, as di∣vers intelligent Protestants have informed me, andA great stick∣ler against our Laws and a promoter of this Jesuitical de∣signe. Hugh Peters reported to divers on his own knowledge (being well acquainted with their Persons and practises of late years) it concerns others neerer to them, and more able then I to examine. Sure I am, a greater man by far then Hugh Peters, in an Assembly of Divines and others, for re∣conciling all dissenting parties, not long sinceThis he hath since this Epistle penned, affirm∣ed in a printed speech in the Painted Cham∣ber before a greater Assem∣bly, Sep. 4. 1654 p. 16, 17. averred to them on his own knowledge: That during our late innovations, distractions, subversions in Church, State, and overturning of Laws and Government, the common adversary hath taken many advantages, to effect his de∣signes thereby in civill and spiritual respects. That he knew very well, that Emissaries of the JesuitesThe more shame for those who suffer it? never came over in those swarms, as they have done, since these things were on foot. That DIVERS GENTLEMNE CAN BEAR WITNES WITH HIM, that they had a CONSISTORY AND COUNCEL ABROAD, THATTherefore of the army and others Rulers by this clear publike confes∣sion in print. RULES ALL THE AFFAIRS OF THE THINGS IN ENGLAND. That they had fixed in England, in the limits of most Cathe∣drals (of which he was able to produce the PARTI∣CULAR INSTRUMENT) an Episcopal power, with
Archdeacons and other persons, to pervert, seduce, and deceive the people: And all this, whiles we were in this sad and deplorable distracted condition. Yea, most certain it is, that many hundreds (if not some thousands) of them, within these few years, have been sent over from Forraign Seminaries into England under the disguises ofA amongst o∣ther, Eleazar and Joseph Bar Isaiah, 2 chea∣ting Impostors and Villains, who bavechea∣ted good people of some thou∣sands of pounds The 1 of them would have for tibly ravished a maid in March last, & fled away in the night to a∣void apprehen∣sion, from Durs∣ly in Glocester∣shire. He confes∣sed in his drink he was a soul∣dier in Prince Ruperts army. converted Jews, Physitians, Chyrurgions, Mechanicks of all sorts, Merchants, Factors, Travellers, Soul∣diers, and some of them particularly into the Army; as appears by the late printed Examination of Ramsey the Anabaptized, New-dipped Jesuite, under the mask of a Jewish Convert, taken at New Castle in June 1653. and by sundry severall late instances I could name. To pretermit all instances of diverse particular Jesuites come over into England, not only within these few years but moneths, discovered by persons of credit; with Sir Kenelm Digby; who though the son of one of the executed old popish Gunpowder Traitors; a dangerous active seducing Jesuited papist, if not a professed Jesuit;3 Jac. c. 1, 2. The arraign∣ment of trai∣tors, Speed, Stow. 3. Jac. who in the years 1638 and 1639. conspired with the Popes Nuncio and a Conclave of Jesuites sitting in Council at London, to subvert our Religion, introduce a universall tolleration of the popish Religion in our kingomes, new modle and shake our former established govern∣ment, and to poyson, destroy the late King himself, in case he con∣sented not to them therein: and for this very purpose, both plot∣ted, raised, promoted the first Wars between the Protestants of England and Scotland,Romes Master piece p. 8. &c. 13, 24. Hidden works of dark∣nesse brought to publike light p. 189. 190. 196. 202. 211. 253, 254. Ex∣act Collection p. 12. 13. Canterburies Doom p. 453. which he abetted all he could, by his letters and secret Collections of moneys from all the Papists throughout England and elswhere, who largly contributed to this war and designe: for which he, Sir John Winter, Master Mountague and others (who had a hand in this conspira∣cy) were convented and brought upon their knees at the Com∣mons House-bar, Jan. 28. 1640. upon which he retyring into France was about May 1645. sent as a speciall Embas∣sadour from the Queen to the Pope of Rome himself, to soli∣cit him for ayds of monies, men, arms, against the Parliament;
is first audience, he had the best reception; and fairest Promi∣ses of Aid in general that could be wished; writing hopefully of supplies of Moneys from Rome to the Queen and others, as both Houses of Parliament in theirA Colle∣ction of Or∣dinances, &c. p. 831, 832, 833 851, 852, 858, 869. Declaration and Let∣ters, (published 26 March 1646.) proclaim to all the world) and likewise good Hopes ofHidden Works of Darkness, &c. p. 252, 253, 254. a Cardinals Cap for himself, or the Lord Aubeny, or Mr. Mountagne, for which he and the Queen sollicited. After that, upon his return from Rome, he was sent over into England about Decemb. 1648. asSee the Letter in the Appendix to my Speech in Parliament, & Relation of the Armies Proceedings against the Members: The II. Part of the History of In∣dependency. a fit instrument to New-moddle us into a Commonwealth, and promote the violent Proceedings of the Army Officers and their Confederates (set on work by the Jesuits and their A∣gents,) against the late King, Parliament, Members: where, upon his arrival, he was, instead of being apprehended and brought to justice for the premises, hugged by some Grandees whom he courted, permitted to ride and walk about at large, while the Members were under strict guards and restraints; frequently repaired to Whitehall, where he was well received; his Sequestration totally taken off, without any Fees or gratifi∣cation, by special order; and himself now at last permitted to lodge not only in Wildemans House, (where the Queens Ca∣puchins formerly resided) but sometimes in Whitehall it self; to the admiration of many understanding Protestants, who justly suspect, he hath there more disguised Iesuits to consult with, and promote both their old and new designs against our Church, State, Religion, Laws, Liberties, till they have brought them and us to utter ruine. I shall for brevity sake acquaint you with one memorable general instance, discovering what swarms of Jesuites are now amongst us, under other visors. An English Protestant Nobleman (a person of honor) whose Ancestors were Papists, being courteously entertained within these two years at Rome by some eminent Iesuits, in their chief Colledge there, was brought by them into a Gallery having Chambers round about it, with Titles over every door for se∣veral Kingdoms, and amongst the rest, one for ENGLAND. Upon which, he enquiring of the Iesuits, what these titles sig∣nified; was answered by them, That they were the Chambers of the Provincial Iesuits, of each Kingdom and Province (written ever the respective doors) wherein they had any members of their
society now residing, who received all Letters of intelligence from their Agents in those places every week, and gave account of the to the General of their Order. That the Provincial for England, lodged in the Chamber over which the title ENGLAND was written, who could shew him the last news from England: which he desiring to see, they thereupon knocked at the door, which was presently opened: the Provincial being informed who & what the Lord was, read the last news from England to them. Here∣upon the Nobleman demanded of them. Whether any of their society were now in England? & how they could stay with safety, or support themselves there, seeing most of the English Nobility, Gentry, and Families that were Papists, were ruined in their e∣states, or sequestred by the late wars & troubles, so as they could neither harbour, conceal nor maintain them, as they had done heretofore? They answered, It was true; but the greater the dangers and difficulties of those of their society now in England were, the greater was their merit. And that they had then above fiftéen hundred of their Society in England,Nota, able to work in several Professions & Trades, which they had there taken upon them, the better to support & secure themselves from being discovered; (who, together with some Popish Priests and Friers no doubt, upon diligent inquiry will appear to be theSee the Quakers un∣masked. chiefest Speakers, Quakers, Disputers, Seducers, Rulers in most separate Congregations, and the principle bro∣chers of all New Opinions, Blasphemies, now abounding a∣mongst us.) This Relation I have heard from the mouth of a Reverend Divine more than once; to whom this Noble Lord, upo his return into England not many Months since, seriously related the Premises, averring the truth of them upon his Ho∣nour. Yet for all this, since the stupendious pretended repeals and annihilations of the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, & that of Abjuration of Popery (consented to by the late King in the Isle of Wight) purposely made for the better detection and prevention of Iesuites, and their treasonable forementio∣ned practises against our Church, Kingdoms, Princes, Religion, Parliaments,1 Eliz. c. 1. Eliz. c. 1. Jac. c. 1, 2, 3, 7 Jac. c. 6. and Government, by the wisdom and zeal of our best affected vigilant * Protestant Parliaments; I can neither hear nor read of any effectual means, endeavoured or prescri∣bed by any in power, for the discovery of these Romish Ia∣nizaries,
or banishing, feretting, and keeping them out of England, where they have wrought so much mischief of late years, and whose utter ruine they attempt: nor any incou∣ragement at all given to the Discoverers of their Plots and Persons; but many affronts and discouragements put upon them, and particularly on my self, lately mewed up close Prisoner, under strictest Guards in remotest Castles, near three years space (withoutMy Impri∣soners have lately profes∣sed to me, that they knew▪ not the cause why I was thus close im∣prisoned. any Accusation, hearing or particular cause yet assigned or disclosed to me, though oft then and since demanded by me from my Imprisoners) whiles they all walked abroad at large, of purpose to hinder me from any discoveries of their practises by my Pen, where as they printed, vended publickly here in England above 30000 Popish Books of several kinds during my imprisonment, without the least restraint, to oppugne our Protestant established Religi∣on (asSee Causia, the Jesuites Holy Court printed in Folio. many of them do in terminis as most damnable Here∣sie) propagate the Jesuites Plots, and antichristian Romish Church and Religion amongst us, as you may read at large in the Stationers Beacon fired; which seasonable book, and Discovery of these Romish Emissaries books and plots, some T. P. the new Faux is first. Officers of the Army, in their Beacon quenched, publickly tra∣duced in print, as a New-Powder-Treason of the Presbyteri∣an Party, to blow up the Army, and that pretended Parlia∣ment (of their own erection) which themselves soon after blew up and dissolved in good earnest, pleading for a free Toleration of such Popish Books, and all Religions, as agreeable to the Armies Engagements and Principles, to carry on their designs against our Religion and Laws. But most certain it is; there hath been of late years not only a General Councel of Officers of the Army sitting many moneths together in Councel, toSee their Declarations, Proposals, and printed Pa∣pers, 1647. 1648, 1649, 1652. & since for that pur¦pose. alter and new model all our ancient Laws and Statutes, in pursuance of Father Parson's design; but like∣wise two Conventicles of their own selection and election, sit∣ting of late in the Parliament House at Westminster, assuming to themselves the Name, and far more than the Power, of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England; together with the transcendent ambitious Title of The Supream Authority of the Nation, (in derogation of the Army Officers Suprema∣cy, who sufficiently chastised them for this strange Usurpation)
who have made it their chief businesse, not only to New∣model our ancient Fundamental Government, Parliaments, Ministry, Ministers maintenance, by Glebes, Tithes, and our Universities, much according to Parsons and his Fellow Jesu∣ites forementioned Plat-formes, and Thomas Campanella his Instructions to the King of Spain, De Monarchia Hisp. c. 25. but likewise to New-mould, subvert, eradicate the whole Body of ourQui tam fa∣cile receptas & patrias leges cum novis aliis commutant, certe legum ip∣sarum authori∣talem debili∣tant atque e∣nervant. Necenim tantum legis abrogatio proderit, quan∣tum Magistrati∣bus non obedi∣endi mos obe∣rit. Aristotle Polit. l. 2. c. 6. municipal Laws, and with them the great Charter of our Liberties it self. And in their last casiered, unelected Convention, (as some of their Companions, now in greatest Power assure us, in theirAnd since this in a Printed Speech, Sept. 4 1654. True State of the Case of the Commonwealth of England, &c. London, 1654. p. 5, 16, 17, 18.) there was a strong prevailing party whom nothing would satisfie, but A Total Eradication of the whole body of the good old Laws of England (the Guardians of our Lives and Fortunes) to the utter subversion of civil Right and Propriety; who likewise took upon them (by vertue of a supposed right of Saintship in themselves) to lay the foundation of a new Platform, which was to go under the Name of A Fift Monar∣chy▪ never to have an end, but ToHath not the Army done this in our three Na∣tions? See their own Chaplain Sedgewick, his Justice on the Armies Re∣monstrance 1648. war withall other powers and break them to pieces, baptizing all their prose∣lites into this Principle and perswasion; that the Powers former∣ly in being, were branches of theThe Mo∣narchy of England hath been, 1. In the Britons, 2. in the Saxons, 3. in the Danes, 4. in the Nor∣mans Royal Line', & now the 5. must be elective in others. Fourth Monarchy (of England, Scotland; and Ireland) which must be rooted up and destroyed. And what other Fifth Monarchy this could be, but that projected universal Monarchy of the Iesuites, which would bring the whole Monarchy of Great Britain and Ireland, together with France, Spain, and all other Princes, States in Christendome under the esuites subjection, and break all other powers in pieces; (mentioned by Watson, in his Quodlibets p. 306, to 333. and Alphonsus de Vargas, Relatio de Stratage∣matis & Sophismatis Politicis societatis Iesu, Ad Monarchi∣am orbis terrarum sibi conficiendam c. 8. &c.) or else, that Elective New Monarchy of Great Britain and Ireland, pro∣jected byDe Monarchia Hisp. c. 25. See the Epistle to my Jus Patrona∣tus. Campanella and Cardinal Richelieu, which some Grandees now endeavour by their Instrument to erect and perpetuate for everArt. 1, 2, 12, 25, 32, 33, 41, 42. without alteration in themselves
and their Successors, (though they thus expresly brand it in others;) let themselves, and wise men resolve? it being apparent, by the practises and proceedings of all the Propug∣ners of this new Project, that this Fifth Monarchy they intend to erect, is neither the spiritualLuke 17. 21. Rom. 14. 17. 2 Pet. 1. 11. Col. 1, 13. Heb. 12. 28. Rev. 12. 10. Kingdom of Iesus Christ in their own hearts, mortifying their ambitiō, covetousness, pride, self-seeking, unrighteousness, violence, rapines, & other world∣ly lusts; nor the personal reign of Christ himself alone, in and over our 3 Kingdoms, and all other Nations for ever,Non abripit mortalia, qui Regna dat coe∣lestia. Sedu∣lius in hym∣no acrast: de vita Christi. Rex iste quina∣tus est non ve∣nit Reges pug∣nando superare, sed moriendo mirabiliter sub∣jugare. Venit enim non ut regnet vivus, sed ut trium∣phet occisus; nec ut de aliis gentibus auro exercitum quae∣rat, sed pro salvandis Gen∣tibus pretisum sanguinem fun∣dat. Hujus pueri regnum non est de hoc mundo; sed per ipsum regnatar in hoc mundo. Ipse est enim Sapientia Dei, quae dicit in Proverbiis, Per me Reges reg∣nant. Tu enim regnum nulla∣tenus habuisses, nisi ab isto puero qui nunc natus est accepisses. Claudius l. 1. in Matth. depri∣ving all Temporal Kings and Princes of their Crowns, Rights, and Government over their Subjects; which they falsly en∣deavour to evince from Dan. 2. 44, 45, c. 7. 14, 27. Micah 4. 1, 2, 7. Luke 1. 32, 33. Rev. 20. 1. to 8. 1 Cor. 15. 24, 25. Heb. 12. 26, 27, 28. but a meer supream, arbitrary, temporal Autho∣rity without Bounds or Limits, encroached by and erected in themselves and their confederates, without any colour of Right or Title by the Laws of God or the Realm, and no ways intended, but refuted by all these sacred Scriptures & others, which explain them. This design of the Jesuites, to alter and subvert the whole body of our Laws, was so far promoted by the Iesuitical and Anabaptistical party in this last Assembly, (ele∣cted only by theA True State, &c. p. 13. Army-Officers,) that on Aug. 20. 1653. (as our News-books print,) they Ordered, there should be a Committee selected, to consider of a A new Body of the Law, for the Government of this Commonwealth, who were to new-mould The whole Body of the Law: according to Parsons his mould. And hereupon our cheating Astrologers (especially Lilly & Culpeper, theSee Th:  Iesuites grand Factors to cry down our Laws, Tithes, Ministers) from the meer visible earthly Conjunctions, Votes, Motions, Influences of these New wan∣dring excentrick Planets at Westminster only, (not of any Coe∣lestial Stars, as they would make Country-Clowns believe, al∣wayes moving and acting themselves by an unalterable Law from the very Creation until now, Gen. 1. 14. to 19. c. 8. 22. Psal. 104. 19. Psal. 136. 8. 9. Ier. 31. 35, 36. c. 33. 20, 21. Iob 38. 32, 33. therefore no ways exciting men to alter Fun∣damental Laws and Governments here on earth) took upon them in theirSee hir Almnk in Janurary▪ February▪  Monthly Prognostications for this year 1654.
versity & College Lands by Monthly endless Taxes, Excises, & a perpetual Law, Tith-oppugning, Parliament-dissolving Army, in whose Councels, we have cause to fear, the Iesuites have been most predominant of late years, and will still make use of them to our final ruine, if not effectually purged out, and the Army new moulded, new principled, if any longer con∣tinued under pretext of publick safety, and not wholy disban∣ded for the peoples ease and Liberty. It is worthy observation, that Tho. CampanellaDe Monar∣chia Hispanica c. 25. p. 204, &c. prescri∣bed the sowing, and continual nourishing of Divisions, Dis∣sentions, Discords, Sects and Schisms among us, both in State and Church (by the Machivilian Plots and Policies he sug∣gests, punctually prosecuted among us of late years) as the principal means to weaken, ruine both our Nation and Reli∣gion, and bring us under the Spanish and Popish yokes at last: witness his, IAMVERO AD ENERVANDOS AN∣GLOS NIHIL TAM CONDUCIT QUAM DISSEN∣TIO ET DISCORDIA INTER ILLOS EXCIT AT A PERPETUOQUE NUTRITA, Quod cit melires occasi∣ones suppeditabi: and that principally, by instigating the No∣bles and chief Men of the Parliament of England: UT AN∣GLIAMIN FORMAM REIPUBLICAE REDUCANT AD IMITATIONEM HOLLANDORVM: which our Republicans lately did by the power of the Army-Officers; or, by sowing the seeds of an inexplicable war, between England and Scotland; By making it an Elective Kingdom, (as some now endeavour under another Notion) or by setting up Other Kings of another Race, without Legal Right, or just Title, against that ancient, unquestioned, undoubted Right and Title setled, established in King Iames and his Royal Po∣sterity by Inherent Birthright, and lawfull right of De∣scent bySee 25 H. 8. c. 22. 31 H. 8. c. 4. 37 H. 8. c. 17. 1. Eliz. c. 3. God himself and his Laws, confirmned & strength∣ned by all possible Titles and Rights of compact, Laws, Statutes, Oaths, perpetual uncontradicted custome, Protestations, Co∣venants, the solemn Publick Faith and Engagement of our English Parliaments & Nation, for themselves, Their Heirs & Posterities for ever, as the Statutes of 1 Iacobi c. 1. 2, 3, Iac. c. 1. 4, 7. Iac. c. 6. which both houses of Parliament in their De∣claration of Nov. 2. 1642. Exact Collect. p. 705 resolve. And that upon this suggestion to the People; Crudelem fore SCO∣TUM ubi semel Imperium in illos obtinuerit▪ ∣mente,
repostum, quanta injuria Angli Scotos superioribus illis annis afficerint. Praeterea suspicionem cis incuiat, fore ut Jaco∣bus CAEDEM MATERNAM VINDICATURUS SIT, &c. Exasperandi sunt etiam animi Episcoporū (Presbyterorū) An∣glicorum proponendo illis REGEM SCOTIAE Calvinismum amplexum esse SPE & CUPIDITATE REGNI, ADAC∣TUMQVE VI, A BARONIBUS HAERETICIS; quod si vero Regnu Angliae etiam btineat, TVM ILLVM CITO PRIO∣REM RELIGIONEM REVOCATURUM ESSE: qùando∣quidem non solum MARIA EJVS MATER moriens, virum etiā REX IPSE GALLIARVM SVMMOPORE EI RELI∣GIONEM CATHOLICAM COMMENDARINT, &c. yet now transcribed almost verbatim out ofDe Monarchia Hisp. c. 25. Thomas Campanella, (who suggested it against King James to alienate the English from him, & keep him from the Crown) & very freshly by the Authors of, The True state of the Case of the Commonwealth, &c. p. 48, 49. objected against the present King of Scots and roy∣al Issue, to deprive him and them from the Crowne of Eng∣land, and engage the whole English Nation against their Title, to vest it in some other Family in greatest power.) Or if these projects should fail, then by dividing us into many Kingdoms or Republicks, dislinct one from another; and by sowing the seeds of Schisms, and making alterations and innovations in all Arts, Sciences, and our Religion. The old Plots ofDe Monar∣chia Hispan. c. 25. Campanella, Seewatsons Quodlibets, p. 286. to 332. A Dialogue be∣tween a secular Priest and Lay Gentleman, printed at Rhemes, 1601. p. 93, 94, 95. Parsons, and late designs ofConte de Galeazzo Gual∣do Priorato, Hist. part. 3. Venetiis 1648. p. 175, 176. Cardinal Richelieu, of the Pope, Spaniard, Jesuites, to undo, subvert our Protestant Church∣es, Kings, Kingdoms and Religion, as the marginal Authors irre∣fragably evidence: yet all visibly set on foot, yea, openly pursu∣ed, and in a great measure accomplished by some late, nay pre∣sent Grandees and Army-Officers, who cry up themselves for our greatest Patrons, Preservers, Deliverers, and Anti-Jesuits, when they have rather been but theEt quidem quid refert an Mulieres (& Iesuitae) praesint an hi qui prae∣sunt mulieribus obedient? Arist. Polit. l. 2. c. 7. Jesuites, Popes, Spani∣ards and other Forraign enemies instruments and factors, in all the late changes, new-models of our Government, Parliaments, & pretended reformations of our laws and Religion, through inad∣vertency, circumvention, or self-ended respects, as many wise and godly men justly fear. For prevention whereof, I shall recommend to the whole Kingdoms serious consideration, the memorable Preamble of the Statute of 25 H. 8. c. 22. disco∣vering the like Plots of the Pope and our Forraign Enemies to
to prevent them for the future, in these ensuing words. In their most humble wise shewen unto your Majesty, Your most humble and obedient Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Tempo∣ral, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled: that since it is the natural inclination of every man, gladly and willingly to provide for the surety, both of his Title and Successi∣on, although it touch his only private cause: We therefore, most rightful and dreadful Soveraign Lord, reckn our selves much more bounden, to beseech and instant your Highness, although we doubt not of your Princely heart and wisdom, mixed with a na∣tural affection to the same, to foresee and provide for the perfect surety of both you and of your most lawful Succession and heirs, upon which dependeth all our joy & wealth;Nota. in whom also is united and knit, the only meer true inheritance and title of this Realm, without any contradiction: Wherefore, We your said most humble and obedient Subjects in this present Parliament assem∣bled, calling to our mind the great divisions, which in times past have been in this Realm, by reason of several Titles pretended to the Imperial Crown of the same; which sometimes, and for the most prt, ensued by occasion of ambiguity and doubts, then not so perfectly declared, but that men might upon froward in∣tents expound them to every mans sinister appetite and affe∣ction, after their sence, contrary to the right Legality of the Succession and Posterity of the lawfull Kings & Emperors of this Realm, whereof hath ensued great effusion & destruction of Mans blood, as well of a great number of the Nobles, as of other Subjects, and specially Inheritors in the same. And the greatest occasion hath been, because no perfect & substantial pro∣vision by law hath binmade within this realm it self, when doubts and questions have been moved, & proponed of the certainty & legality of the Succession & posterity of the Crown. By reason whereof,Nota. The Bishop of Rome, & See Apostolick, contrary to the great and inviolable grants of Jurisdictions By God immediatly to Emperours, Kings & Princes in succession to their heirs, hath presumed in time past, to invest who should please them to inherit in other mens Kingdoms & Domini∣ons; which thing, we your most humble Subjects, both Spiri∣tual and Temporal, do most abhor & detest: And sometimes other forraign Princes and Potentates of sundry degrees,ota. minding rather dissention & discord to continue in the realm, to th'utter desolatiō therof, then charity, equity, or unity, have
many times supported wrong titles, wher by they might easily & facilly aspire to the Superiority of the same, the continuance & sufferance whereof deeply considered & pondered, were too dangerous and perillous to be suffered any longer within this Realm, & too much contrary to the unity, peace and tranqui∣lity of the same, being greatly reproachful and dishonourable to the whole Realm. In consideration wherof, your said most hum∣ble and obedient Subjects, the Nobles and Commons of this Realm, calling further to their remembrance, that the good, unity, peace, and wealth of this Realm, and the succession of the Subjects of the same,Nota. Most specially & principally above all wordly things, consisteth and resteth in the certainty and surety of the pro∣creation, & posterity of your Highness, in whose most royal per∣son at this present time, is no manner of doubt or question, Do therefore most humbly beseech your Highnes, &c. to declare the establishment of the successiō of your royal posterity in the Imperial Crowns of this realm: as he and they did by this & other succeeding acts of Parl. & in 1 Eliz c. 3. & 1 Jac. c. 1. to prevent the like civil wars and mischiefs for succee∣ding ages, now revived, promoted by the Pope, Jesuits, & Foraign Popish Princes to work our ruine. Certainly, whosoever shall seriously ponder the premises, with these pas∣sages in William Watsons Quodlibets concerning the Jesuits,Quodlib. 3. ar. 4. p. 65. 41. 1. That some of the Jesuits society have insinuated themselves into all the Princes Courts of Christendom, where some of their Intelligencers reside, and set up a secret coun∣sel, of purpose to receive and give intelligence to their General at Rome, of the secrets of their Soveraigns, and of all occurrents in those parts of the world, which they dispatch to and fro by such cyphers, which are to themselves best, but comm̄only only to themselves known, so that nothing is done in Eng∣land, but it is known at Rome within a month after at least,Nota. & reply made back as occasion is offered, to the consequent over∣throw of their own natural Country of England, and their native Princes and Realms, by their unnatural Treasons against them; that so the Jesuits might be those long gowns, which should reign and govern the Island of Great Britain. To which I shall add that of Rob: Turner an English Jesuit, in his Epistles printed at Ingolstad, An. 1584. Ep. 19. Volui irrepere, volui irrumpere in in∣timas Aulas Principum; volui videre omnia, ut ad Justitiae norman praeclare exigerem. Vix coeperam obie Principū Aulas, cum viderim Hoereticorū illum Mundum ADMINISTRARI A STULTIS, &c. with that of Hospinian, Historia Jesuitica l. 3. p. 148. That the Jesuits are so subtil, vigilant, bold, la∣borious, and indued with such a facilty of flattery, insinuation, acting and hur∣ting in Princes Courts, that they exactly discover, know, and fish out all their secrets, (which they evel to their Superiors, the Pope and Spaniard) and alone rule all things in them: so that the Courts of Europe are more grievously infested & afflicted by the Iesuites, than the Court of Pharoah was of old by the Aegyptian rogs. And may we not then justly fear our new Court hath been as much pestered and infest∣ed by them of late years, as our old Court heretofore? Quodlibets p. 39. 209, 233, 234, 305, 306, 307, 30. That the Jesuites hope and endeavour to have England, Scotland
and Ireland under them, to make these Northern Islands a Iaponian I∣sland of Iesuites, and one Iesuitical Monarchy,; and to infeoffe themselves by hook or by crook In the whole imperial Domini∣ons of great Britain with the remainder over To their Corpo∣ration, or puni-Fathers succeeding them, as heirs specially in their society, by a state of perpetuity: Putting all the whole Blood Royal of England to the Formidon, As but Heirs general in one Predicament together, as now they have done. 3.Quodlibets p. 11, 12, 14, 16, 17, 42, 45, 50, 283, 285, &c, 332, 333. A Dialogue between a se∣cular Priest & a Lay Gentle∣man, An. 1601. That the Jesuites have Magistracy, Kings, Magistrates, Ministers, Priesthood, and Priests in high contempt; publishing many slanderous, seditious; trayterous, and infamous speeches, libels, and books against them, to render them odious and contemptible to the People, full of Plots, exasperations a∣gainst the Church and Commonwealth, like rebellious Traytors, to bring all in∣to an uproar, that they may have all Countries, Kingdoms, Governments, Suc∣cessions, States, Inhabitants, and all at their pleasure. 4. That theQuodlibets p. 295 to 313 61, 286, 287, See the Right & Jurisdiction of the Prelate and Prince, by J. E. 1617 Jesuites have taught the people (in order to get England un∣der their power, and in order to God or Religion, as they stile it,) That Sub∣jects are bound no longer to obey wicked or heretical Princes and Kings de∣flecting from the Catholick Religion, and drawing others with them, but till they be able by force of arms to resist and depose them. That the popular multi∣tude may upon these grounds, when they think meet, place and displace their Princes and chief Officers at their pleasure, as men may do their Tenants at will, hirelings, or ordinary Servants, putting no difference in their choice Vpon any Right or Title to Crowns or Kingdome, by Birth or Blood or otherwise, then as these Fathers (forsooth) shall approve it, By this all things must be wrought and framed, conformable to opportunities of times and occasions; as for example: The people must have a right and interest in them, and to doe what they list in choice of their Kings and Supream Governours, til they have set such a person or Usurper in the Crown,See I. E. his Treatise of the Right and Ju∣risdiction of the Prelat & Prince, prin∣ted 1616. & re-printed 1621, by the Jesuits. as they for their ends have designed; and then the times and occasions changing, when such a one is setled in the Throne, the former doctrine and practises must be holden FOR A MISTAKING; yet such, as seeing it can∣not be holpen, the people must beware herafter of attempting the like again. By this a check must be given to the publishers of such paradoxes, (when they have accomplished their designed ends,) after that a dispensation procured for the Offenders, and then all shall be well ever after; till a new oppor∣tunity for their further advantage. 5. That theQuodlibets p. 26. Jesuits by absrd equivocations, counterfeited perjuries, Sacri∣ledges, and cousenage, become all things to all men, that they may gain all; as to be Seminary Priests amongst Seminaries; Secular Priests, among Seculars; Religious men, among Religious; Seditious men among Seditious; Factions Spaniards amongst Spaniards; ENGLISH TRAYTORS AMONG TRAYTORS; SCOTISH VILAINS, AMONG SCOTS, &c. and amongst all these, to deny and affirm, to object and answer, to swear and for∣swear, whatsoever may be a gain to them, for their pragmatical Commonwealth and society. No wonder then, if they transform themselves into all shapes, and take upon them all professions now amongst us. 6. That theQuodlibets p. 62, 69, and elsewhere. Jesuits by their devices and practises, have brought all to Machiavels rule, DIVIDE ET IMPERA, in sowing division, breeding of jealousies, and making of hoslile strife, by opposition of King against King, State against State, Priest against Priest, Peer against Peer, Parents against
children, children against parents, sisters against brothers, ser∣vants against masters, wives against husbands, husbands a∣gainst wives, and one friend against another, raising up rebel∣lions, MVRDRING OF PRINCES, making uproars eve∣ry where, until they make those they cannot otherwise winne unto them, either yield to be their vassals to live quiet by them, or force them to flight, or drive them out of their wits, or other∣wise plague them to death. 7. That theQuodlibets p. 43. 61, 62, 64. 16. Jesuits by their cursed positions, and machia∣villian practises, have made religion it self a meer political and atheal device; a pragmatical science of Figboys, and but an art of such as live by their wits, and the principles of Machi∣avel taught by their Rabbes; yea, a very hotch potch of omnium gatherum, religious, secular, clergical, laical, ecclesiastical, spiritual, temporal, MARTIAL, civil, Aecomenical, poli∣tical, liberal, mechannical, municipal, irregular, and ALL WITHOVT ORDER; so that they are not worthy to be cal∣led religious, ecclesiasticks, catholicks, nor temporal mechan∣nical Christians; but rather Machiavillians, Atheists, Apostates; their course of life shewing what their study is; and that howsoever they boast of their perfections, holiness, medi∣tations and exercises, (as if they were all Superlatives, all Metaphysicians, all entia transcendentia) yet their platform is heathenish, tyrannical, sathannical, able to set Aretine, Lu∣cian, Machiavel, yea, and Don Lucifer, in a sort to school. Those, I say, who shall sadly ponder all these premises, and compare them with the late practises, policies and pro∣ceedings of some swaying politicians of our age (infected likewise with this Atheistical State-Maxime, amongst others derived from the Jesuits, and Machiavillian Spanish State-Counsellers:) In Reipublicae administratione, quaedam LICI∣TA ESSE RATIONE STATVS, alia respectu Consci∣entiae: whichDe Monar∣chia Hisp. c. 32. p. 297, 298. Thomas Campanella (as bad as he is) not only severely censures, but thus declaims against with high∣est detestation, Qua opinione profecto NIHIL MAGIS AB∣SVRDVM AV IMPIVM ne excogitari quidem potest: Nam qui conscientiae universalem suam jurisdictionem in om∣nes res humanas TAM PVBLICAS QVAM PRIVATAS,
subtrahit, ostendit, SE NEC CONSCIENTIAM, NEC DE∣VM HABERE, &c. Siquidem omnia scandala Ecclesiae Dei, & PERTVRBATIONES ORBIS TERRARVM, INDE ORTA SVNT: that men may do against all Laws of God and Man, their own Consciences, Trusts, Oaths, out of a pretext of the benefit, safety of the State, & publick good, as most now do; Or, compare thē with the constitution of our Church, State, Religion, publike affairs, must needs acknow∣ledg, that these pragmatical Iesuits have bin very active, pre∣valent, powerful, successful, and not only militant but tri∣umphant, of late years amongst us, under some disguise or other: that they have dangerously poysoned us with these their Machiavillian and Atheal policies, practises positions, and have more real Disciples, Factors, if not Tutors, now a∣mongst us, then in any former ages: And is it not high time then to endeavour to detect their persons, and prevent their dangerous designs upon us, with greatest care and diligence? Truly though most others be negligent and fearfull here∣in, yet that text of Ezek. 2. 6, 7. And thou son of man, be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of their words, though bryars and thorns be with thee, and thou dost dwell among scorpions, be not afraid of their words, nor be dismayed at their looks, though they be a rebellions house. And thou shalt speak my words unto them, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, for they are most REBELLIOVS; hath anima∣ted me to exonerate my conscience herein, and to say with the prophet, Isai. 62. 1. For Zions (Englands) sake I will not hold my peace, and for Ierusalems sake I will not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof as a Lamp that burneth. Wherefore, Upon serious consideration of all these Premises, and of all those Sacred Solemn Oaths, that Protestation, Vow, League, and National Covenant, which I have formerly taken (lying still as so many)Josh. 9. 19, 20. & Psal. 89. 34. Psal. 15. 4. Heb. 6. 17, 18. indissoluble Obligations on my Soul, notwithstanding the ingrate, malicious, unchristian Requi∣tals of all my former unmercinary services, Sufferings for Re∣ligion, Laws, Liberties, and the publique, in times of greatest Danger, recompenced only with long causeless, close impri∣sonments,
injuries, affronts, losses of all kinds, by pretended friends and Patrons of our Liberties, as well as by professed causeless Enemies. And notwithstanding all other Dis∣couragements from the general baseness, cowardise, Sottish∣ness, slavishness, degenerated Spirits of the whole Nation, and their strange fearfulness even publiquely to own, much less cordially, to assist, defend, (according to the sixth Ar∣ticle of the Covenant) those few couragious Patrons who have hazarded their Lives, Liberties, Limbs, Estates, and all earthly comforts for the publique defence of our Religion, the Laws, Liberties, Priviledges of our Kingdom, Church, Parliament, against the old and late avowed sub∣verters of them, whose veryWhen our Saviour him∣self was appre∣hended, car∣ried away prisoner, and like to be cru∣cified, all his Disciples for∣sook him, and fled, and Peter denyed him with an oath, Mat. 26. 56. 70. 10 75. And at Pauls first ap∣pearance be∣fore Nero, no mā stood with him, but all men forsook him, I pray God it be not laid to their charge, 2 Tim. 4. 9. 16. And so it is now with most publike sufferers. Company, visits the gene∣rality of their former friends and acquaintance have decli∣ned, (as if they had some plague sores on them;) not on∣ly during their late restraints, but likewise since their en∣largements out of them, (enough to perswade them never to write, speak, act, or suffer any thing more, for such ingrate, unworthy Creatures, but rather to put their helping hands, to make them and their Posterities slaves for ever.) I have yet once more, out of pure zeal, love, conscience towards my native Country, adventured my life, liberty, and decayed estate, (considering the lawless∣ness and Danger of the times, not the justice and good∣ness of the Common Cause, I plead) for the necessary de∣fence of the Fundamental Liberties, Franchises, Lawes, Rights, Parliaments, Priviledges, and Government of our enslaved Nation, (though every wayZeph: 2. 1. unworthy to be beloved by God, or men of noble spirits) in this Seasona∣ble, Legal, Historical Vindication and Collection; wherein I have with all boldness, faithfulness, without the least fear or flattery of any Mortals or created powers whatsoever, argued, evinced, maintained my own particular, with the whole Nations publique right and inheritance in them, (of which few or none take any care, but only of their own private gains, case, safely, though with theUnusquisque majorem tem∣poris sui partē in rebus priva∣tis curandis ponit, & Rem∣publicam nihil detrimenti ex hac sua negli∣gentia capre posse putat; sed & aliquam ali∣um esse existi∣mat qui Rem∣publicam curet, ei pro setpso perspiciat. Ita cadem omnium privatorum opinionè Universam Rempublicam perdi, non a∣nimadvèrtit. Thucidides Hst. l. 1. pag. 110. Publike ru∣ine) and endeavoured (as much as in me lies) to preserve
them and our Religion from the several Jesuitical plots, counsels, specified in the whole Commons House Remon∣strance of 15 December 1641. Exact Collection, p. 3. to 14. of late years revived, and more vigorously pursued than ever, and to rescue them out of the Claws of Tyranny, and all usurping arbitrary powers, which have avowedly encroa∣ched on, yea trampled them under feet of late, more than ever the worst of all our Monarchs, or beheaded King did, though declaimed against, as the greatest of Tyrants by some who have transcended him in his worst Regal Exorbitances; and particularly in this, which the Lords and Commons in Par∣liament, in theirExact Coll. p. 492. 497. 494. Declaration of Aug. 4. 1642. thus grie∣vously complained of, and objected against the Kings ill Counsellers, That the LAWS, were no protection or defence of any mans right, all was subject to will and power, which imposed WHAT PAYMENTS THEY THOVGHT FIT, to drain the Subjects purses, and supply THOSE NECESSITIES, which their ill counsel had brought upon the King, and gratify such as were in∣strumental in promoting most ILLEGAL and OPRES∣SIVE COVRSES. Those who yielded and complied were countenanced and advanced, all others disgraced and kept under, (and are they not so now, as much as then?) that o their minds made poor and base, (as they were never so poor and base as now) and THEIR LIBERTIES lost and gone (as they were never so much as now) they might be ready toAre they not now more ready to let it go, then e∣ver? & have not thousands done it? LET GO THEIR RELIGION whensoever it should be resolved to alter it, which was, and still is, the GREAT DESIGN, and all the rest made use of as in∣strumental and subservient to it. Upon which considera∣tion they thus concluded that Declaration, Therefore we the Lords and Commons are resolved, to expose our lives and fortunes for the defence and maintenance of the true Religion, the Kings person, honor and estate, the power and priviledge of Parliament, the just rights and liberty of the Subject, And we do hereby require all those who have any sence of piety, honor or compassion, TO HELP A DISTRESSED STATE, especially SVCH WHO
HAVE TAKEN THE PROTESTATION, and are bound in the same duty with us unto their God, their King and Country, to come into their aid and assistance. That which hath not a little encouraged me hereunto, is not only this their publick call, but likewise this memora∣ble passage, vow, protestation of the Lords and Commons as∣sembled in Parliament, in their printedExact col. p. 650. 659. 660. Declaration in answer to his Majesties of October 23. 1642. Which I fear most of them since in power have quite forgotten; and therefore I beseech them now seriously to remember it. Though we know very well, there are too many of the Gentry of this Kingdom, who to satisfy the LVSTS OF THEIR OWN AMBITION, are content, like Esau, TO SELL THEIR BIRTH-RIGHT, AND CARE NOT TO SVB∣MIT THEMSELVES TO ANY ARBITRARY AND UNLIMITED GOVERNMENT,Nota. so they may FOR THEIR OWN TIME PARTAKE OF THAT POW∣ER, to trample and insult over others: (And have not, are not some of these declarers and censures such them∣selves?) yet we are assured, that there are of the Gen∣try many worthy and true hearted Patriots, (but where are those many now?) who are ready to lay down their lives and fortunes, and of late have given ample testi∣mony thereof, for maintenance of their Lawes, Liberties, and Religion; and with them and others of their resolu∣tion we shall be ready to live and die. (But how many of these Declarers have made good this publike engage∣ment? yea, have not some of them been, and still are more ready to secure, seclude, disoffice, imprison, kill, slay any such true-hearted Patrons, as I have felt by sad ex∣perience, than to live and die with them?) And we must own it as our duty, to use our best endeavors, that the meanest of the Commonalty may enjoy their own Birth-rights, Freedom and Liberty of the Laws of the Land, being Nota. equally entituled thereto with the greatest Subject. I trust therefore the greatest Grandees in late or present power, neither will nor can be offended with me, and that all the Nobility, Gentry, Commons, and true-hearted. Pa∣trons
in the Nation, who bear any love to the Laws, Li-Liberties, Freedom of the people, for which their Ancestors and they have so long, so stoutly contended heretofore, and lately with our Kings; will live and die with me in this their Vidication and Defence, against any of their fellow-Subjects, who shall endeavor to subvert or deprive them of the full and free enjoyment of all or any of them, ac∣cording to this Engagement and Declaration: Wherein there are these further observable passages, relating to the Parliaments priviledges and its Members, which I desire our Army-Grandees, who impeached, secured, secluded my self with other Members of the last true Parliament, levi∣ed war against and forcibly dissolved it; with the Contri∣vers of our late New-Modelled Governments, would seri∣ously ponder; who in common justice must be content to be as freely told of and reprehended for theirFraudes pro∣pemodū omnes at{que} Injuriae ab Ambitione & Avaitia pofi∣ciseuntur. Arist. Polit. l. 2. c. 7. frauds, faults in print (where the publike and every mans private interest, Right, Liberty, Security, is concerned) as they have cen∣sured others, as well their Superiors, as Equalls, oft in print, though perchance lsse peccant than themselvesSee the Armies old & new Declara∣tions against the Parliam. & Members. Their True state of the Commonwealth &c. which, mutato nomin, is but a direct Arraignment of themselves under the name of o∣thers. in that they object against them.Exact col. P. 652. 654. 655, &c. For the matter of his Ma∣jesties raising an Army against the Parliament (wherein many Papists, Priests, Jesuites were imployed) and taking away the priviledge thereof, we shall refer it to the judgement of every ordinary capacity, whether it be void of sense to say, that this War is raised against the Parliament; But the truth is, that it is not a few persons, but the Parliament it self, is the thorn that lies in these mens sides, which, heretofore when it was wont to rick them, was with much ease (by a sudden dis∣solution) pulled out: But now that is more deeply fastned by the Act of Continuance, they would force it out by the power of an Army. (Hath not this been the very practise of some Army-Grandees of late, here objected against the King Jesuitical and Popish ill Counsellors?) And whosoe∣ver will peruse the several Speeches and Declarations, made upon the breaking up of former Parliaments, since the begin∣nning of his Majesties Reign, will find, the pretences of those unjust and illegal Dissolutions, to be grounded upon the
exceptions against some particular Members, under the name of A few factious and seditious persons: so that the aspersing and wounding of the Parliament through the sides of a few Members, is no new invention: (And hath not this been the very Army-Officers practise, since the first year of their reign till now, to wound the last real Parliament; yea, their own late dissolved Mock Parliaments since, through the sides of a few corrupt Members, or a corrupt Majority in the House, as all their PrintedSee their declarations in May, June, Iuly, Aug. 1647 in ovemb. Decemb. Jan. 1648. An. 1652, & 1653. & their True state of the case of the Commonwealth of England, &c. p. 4. to 35. Ann. 1654. with some o∣ther Papers & Speeches since. Declarations upon their dssolutions attest. And is this then no crime? or no Jesuitical practise in them, though such in the lateExact collect. p. 3, 4. to 16. King and his ill Counsellors?) And for the satisfaction of all indiffe∣rent men, that this War is raised against the Parliament, we shall refer them to former Declarations, issued out in His Majesties name, being so many invectives and ground lesse accusations, not against particular Members only, but against the Vote and proceedings of both Houses. (And are not many of the Armies Declarations in 1647. and 1648. yea, the late Pamphlet of some present Grandees, intituled, A True State of the Case of the Commonwealth of England, Printed 1654, Such? let them now then see whence they took their pattern, even from the beheaded Kings Exact col. p. 3, 4, to 16. 651, 652, 653. Nota. Jesuited evil Counsellors, whose steps they exactly trace in this:) But if the truth were, as that Declaration seems to imply, That this Army is raised to force someIf one Member suf∣fer, all the Members suf∣fer with it, 1 Cor. 12. 26. particular Members of this Parliament to be delivered up, yet upon that ground would it follow, that the same is levied against the Parliament. For it cannot be denied by any inge∣nious man, but that the Parliament by theirSee Cooks 4 Instit. c. 1. p. 15, 16, 17. 23. 24, 25, and my Plea for the Lords. inherent rights and priviledges hath the power to judge and punish their own Members: [yet the Army Officers took upon them to secure, seclude them without Charge, and their future New-minted▪ Parliament Members, though only elected by the People, must be tryed, judged by the new Whitehall Members, ere they can be admitted to sit, Ar∣ticle 21 of the New Government.] And we have often declared to His Majestie and the World, That we are alwayes ready to receive any evidence or accusations
against any of them, and to judge and punish them accor∣ding to their demerits; yet hithertoNor yet against my self, and o∣ther secured secluded and long impriso∣ned Members. no evidence pro∣duced, no Accuser appearing: And yet notwistanding, to raise an Army to compel the Parliament to expose those Members to the fury of those wicked Counsellors, that thirst for nothing more than the ruine of them and the Commonwealth: What can be more evident, than that the same is levied against the Parliament? For did they prevail in this, then by the same reason (pray observe it) They might demand 20 more, and never rest satisfied until their malice and Tyrany did devour all those Mem∣bers they found crosse and opposite to their lewd and wicked designs [And was not this the practice of the Army-Officers, who levied a real actual War against the Parliament? They first impeached, secluded XI. Members of the Commons-House; and some Lords soon after. An. 1647.  then they secluded other Members, by their high Declaration of Aug. 18. 1647. after that they secured, im∣prisoned my self, with 44 Members more, and secluded the greatest part of the Commons House, leaving not above 50 or 60 at first sitting, who confederated with them, in December 1648. within two moneths after this, they be∣headed the King; then suppressed the whole Lords House, to carry on their designs since acted: At last they dissolved their own Mock Parliaments, when they crossed their am∣bitious aspires: What they did in September last since this was first penned to those now sitting, is fresh in memory.] Touching the Privileges of Parliament, which the contri∣vers of that Declaration in his Majesties name, (and the Contrivers of sundrySee that of Iune 14. of Aug. 2 & 18. 1647, and the Letters of Iuly 29. 1647. The Decla∣rations of Nov. 16. Dec. 6. 1648. Declarations since in the Armies name, who imitated them herein.) seem to be so tender of, and to professe all conformity unto, and deny this Army to be raised in any degree to violate: we shall appeal to the judgement of any indifferent man, how little truth is contained in this their assertion, (or in the Army Offi∣cers printed Papers to the same effect.) The Parliament is to be considered in three severall respects: First, As a Councell to advise. Secondly, As a
Court to judge. 3. As it is the body representative of the whole Kingdom, to make, repeal, or alter Laws: and whe∣ther the Parliament hath enjoyed its priviledges in any of these respects (under the Army-Officers and powers, as well as late King) let any that hath eyes open judge. For the first, We dare appeal even to the Conscien∣ces of the Contrivers themselves, (and to the conscien∣ces of the Army-Officers, Souldiers, and Whitehall men themselves) whether matters of the highest importance, (witness all the publick proceedings against the late Parliament, King, Peers, Government; the Warrs with Scotland, Holland: their new Magna Chrta, repealing the old, Entituled, The Government of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, wherein they take upon them such an Omnipotent Soveraign power, as, To pass a decree upon the wavering humors of the people, and to say to this Nation, (yea to Scotland and Ireland too,) As the Almighty himself said once to the unruly Sea,Job 38. 11. Here shall be thy bounds, hitherto shalt thou come and no further; as some of them most arrogantly, if not blasphemously publish in print to all the world in their True State of the Case of the Commonwealth, p. 34. Their making of new binding Laws and Ordinances, repealing old Laws and Statutes in and by pretext of this Instrument, out of Parliament, as their ma∣nifold Whitehall Folio new Edicts, amounting to near 700 pages, attest) have not been agitated and determined (in and by the Army-Officers, General Councel, and other unpar∣liamentary Juncto's,) not only without, but contrary to their Advice, (and Votes too;) and whether private unknown Councels (in the Army, Whitehall, and elswhere, yea the private Councels, Plots, conspiracies of Iesuits, of For∣raign Popish and Spanish Agents) have not been hearkned unto, approved and followed, when the Faithful and wholsom advice of the great Counsel hath been scorned & neglected (by the Army Officers and their Confederates.) And yet none can deny, but it is one of the Principle ends why a Parliament is called, To Consult the great Affairs of the Church and State. And what miserable effects and sad events, this neg∣lect
of the great Councel, and preferring of unknown and private Councels before it, hath produced; let the present Distractions of this Kingdom bear witnesse, (with all the bloody, unchristian Wars, Taxes, Oppressions, Distractions, since the Armies force upon the King, Members, Houses, An∣no 1647. and 1648. to this present time.) Concerning the Second, it sufficiently appears by the ma∣king the Kings Court, by the Force and Power of the Kings Army; the Sanctuary and refuge of All sorts of Delinquents against the Parliament and Kingdom, and protecting and de∣fending them from the Justice thereof: and by admitting such to bear places of great trust in the Army, and to stand in de∣fiance of the Parliament and the Authority thereof; (and is it not a far greater crime to make the Parliaments Ar∣my it self, a Delinquent against the Parliament and King∣dom; the sanctuary of such Delinquents against both, and to continue such Officers in places of greatest trust in the Army, who have levied actual war against the Parliament, secluded, secured members of Parliament, kept divers years under their armed guards in defiance of the Parliament, without any particular Charge or Impeachment, refusing to release them, even when the Serjeant was sent at first from the House it self, to demand the Members seised?) By all which it is apparent, how our Privledges have been torn from us by piece-meals, from time to time. And we might mention many passages, whereby they were endea∣voured to beAnd are they not so now, almost past hopes of any future re-planting? pulled up by the root, and totally subverted. As the attempt to bring up the late Army from the North to force Conditions upon the Parliament: His Majesties Letters and Commands to the Members of both Houses (which found obedience in a great many) to attend him at York; and so, By depriving the Parliament of their Mem∣bers, destroy the whole Body: (And was not the actual twice bringing up of the Parliaments own Army, by the Army Officers, against the Parliament it self, to impeach, secure some principal Members of both Houses; seclude the Majority of the Commons House, suppress the whole House of Lords; break off the Treaty, behead the King,
(theModus tenen∣di Parliamen∣tum. Cook 4. Instit. c. 1. Head of the Parliament) against the Parliaments Votes, alter the Government, force conditions on the Par∣liament it self, to omit the 12, 21, 24, 32, 37, 38, 39 Ar∣ticles of their New Government, with the secluding of all the Members lately admitted by Armed Souldiers, till they took a New Engagement, and keeping out all others) a taking of the Privileges of the Parliament from them all by Whole-sale, and a more desperate pulling up by the Roots, and total subversion of all the Priviledges and whole Body of the Parliament, than this objected against the Northern Army, or the Kings Jesuitical ill Councel?) Which is enough to prove the vanity of the Contrivers of that Declaration (and of the Army Officers too) to feed themselves with hope of belief, That the Priviledges of Parliament are not Violated, but intended to be preserved, with all due observance. Concerning the Allegation, That the Army raised by the Parliament, is to murder the KING, (oft alledged by the Exact Coll. p. 550. 595. 321, 322, 364. 618. 894, 895. 919, 920. A Collection of Ordinances, p. 28 39. 116. 117. King and his Party, in many printed PROCLAMATI∣ONS, Declarations before and after this here mentioned) We hoped the Contrivers of that Declaration, or any that pro∣fessed but the name of a Christian, could not have so little cha∣rity as to raise such a SCANDAL, especially when they must needs know, theLet those who took it, remember their violati∣ons of it, & repent, See Exact Collect. p. 497, 498. Protestation taken by every Member of both Houses (and Army Officers too) whereby they promise in the presence of Almighty God, TO DEFEND HIS MA∣JESTIES PERSON. The Promise and Protestation made by the Members of both Houses upon the nomination of the Earl of Essex to be General, and to live and die with him; wherein is expressed, THAT THIS ARMY WAS RAISED FOR DEFENCE OF THE KINGS PERSON, Our oft, earnest, and most humble Address to his Majesty to leave that desperate and dangerous Army, &c. A request inconsistent with any purpose to offer the least violence to His Person, which hath, andWas this ve∣rified by ma∣ny of these Remon∣strants? e∣ver shall be dear unto us. And concerning the imputation laid to our Charge, of Rai∣sing this Army, to Alter the whole Frame of Govern∣ment and Established Laws of the Land, (which the King
and his partyExact Coll. P. 262. 282. 284. to 289. 297, 298. 490. 424. 500, 502, 404, 514, 517, 521, 522, 526. 528, 530, 531, 534. 550, 551, 554, 558, 561, 564, 574. A Collection, p. 117. 452, 453. frequently objected in print) we shall need give no other Answer but this: That the Army Raised by the Parliament is to no other end, but for the Preservation of his Majesties Person, to Defend themselves, the Laws of the Land, and the true Protestant Religion. After which, they there and elswhere conclude. And by this time (we doubt not) but every man doth plainly discern through the Mask and Visard of their Hypocrifie, what their (the Kings ill Counsels) design is, To Subject both King and Parliament and Kingdom to their nee∣dy, Ambitious, and Avaritious Spirits, and to the violent Laws, Martial law, of Governing the People by guards and by the Souldiers. But alas for grief, how superlatively have many of the Army Officers, and their confederate members (though parties to these Declarations and Protestations) violated them, and both Houses Faiths, Trusts, intentions, ends in raising the Army, in every of these particulars? How have they verified, justified the Kings Declarations, Jealousies, concerning the Parliaments Army, in every point, here (andExact Coll. p. 688, 689. 696, 697. elswhere) disclaimed by both Houses? How have they exceeded, out-acted the Kings Jesuitical Counsellers, and most desperate Popish Army, in violating, subverting both the Parliaments Priviledges, Members and Parlia∣ments themselves, together with ourSo stiled, Exact Col. p. 4. 12. 34. 61. 243. 262. 321. 500, 502. in the Decl. of the Lords & Commons concerning His Majesties Proclamatiō. Iune 6. 1642. p. 4. besides the authorities in the 1. chap. Fundamental Laws, Liberties, Government; for whose preservation they were only raised, paid? How have they pursued the Kings and his worst Jesuited Counsellers footsteps in all the charges here objected against them by both Houses, in relation to the Parliaments priviledges, Members, Constitution, Rights, Laws, to their utter subversion, dissolution, and waged war against them? And doth not every man plainly discern through the Mask and Visard of their Hypocrifie, (to use both Hou∣ses expressions) that their design is just the same with that here objected by the Parliament to the Kings ill Jesuited Counsellers, and Popish army; even to subject both King, Parliament and Kingdom, to their needy, ambitious, avaritions spirits, and to the violent Laws, marshal Law, of Governing
the People, (yea Parliaments themselves) by Guards, and by the Souldiers? and By Conquest to establish an absolute and unlimited power over the Parliament and good Sub∣jects of this Kingdom; as the HousesExact Coll. p. 617. 631, 730. elswhere thrice ob∣jected against the late King, his Army and party: being the very design (as many wisemen fear) of the 27 Article of their New Government; to settle a constant Annual re∣venue for the maintenance of 20000 Foot, & 10000 Horse and Dragoones, (to be alwayes constantly, kept up Win∣ter and Summer, without disbanding or diminution) for the Defence and Security of England, Scotland, and Ire∣land? Which must henceforth be kept under by Mercinary Foces, to guard of Protectors, when as theHorace. Heathen Poet assures us, nteger vitae scelris{que} purus, non eget Mauri jacu∣lis nec arcu; much less our English Nation, ever formerly se∣cured by their own unmercinary Militia of the Trained Bands, and those Lords and Gentlemen who hold their Lands by Knight-service. O that they would now in the name and fear of God (as they tender the eternal salvati∣on of their Souls, the honour and priviledges of all future Parliaments, the ease, welfare, settlement of our Nation) Lay all this most seriously to their Hearts, and make it a matter of their greatest lamentation, and repentance! Be∣sides this, have they not falsified that memorableExact Col. p. 686, to 730. late Declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parlia∣ment, Novemb. 2. 1642. in Answer to his Majesties (well worthy perusal now) and made good (both for the time past, and all succeeding Parliaments, whiles there shall be any standing Army in England able to over-power them) all the odious, scandalous positions, in relation to the English Parliament, its Members and priviledges (de∣duced from the Kings Declaration, only by inference, but disclaimed by the King) summed up by them, in the close of that Remonstrance; and published in these ensuing terms, as will evidently appear, if applied to the Army, and their Generall Councel of Officers, by adding or exchanging their names, only for the Kings in a paren∣thesis?
1.Exact coll. p. 729. See their De∣clarations & Papers of Aug. 7. 1647. D. c. 7. & Jan. 3. 1648 where they thus Declare and brand them. That the King (the * Army, General, and their Gene∣ral Councel of Officers) when he pleaseth, may declare the Major part of both Houses, (which in all sorts of Re∣publicks doth, yea ought of right to over sway the Minority, & their Votes to be firm and binding to all men, asQuod pluri∣bus visum pro∣batumque fue∣rit, id in OM∣NIBUS RE∣BUS-PUB∣LICIS VA¦LET. In O∣ligarchia enim & Aristocratia, & Democratia, quod eorum qui Rempubli∣cam gerunt, MAJORI PARTIS PLACUE∣RIT, i. e. RA∣TUM AC FIRMUM. Politicorum l. 4. c. 8. See 33 H. 8. c. 27. Aristotle himself resolves;) a faction of Malignant, Schismatical, and ambitious Persons: so that all Parliaments that have been heretofore and SHALL BE HEREAFTER, AND ALL LAWS MADE IN THEM▪ may by this means be called in question at pleasure; (yea nulled and repealed for ever, as some former Parliaments have been, when held and over-awed by armed power, or unduly elected, packed, sum∣moned without Lawfull Authority, or some of the Mem∣bers forcibly secluded, as you may read at large in the Sta∣tutes of 21 R. 2. c. 11, 12, 16, 17, 18. 1 H. 4. c. 3. 1 H. 4. Rot. Parl. n. 22, 23, 36, 48, 66, 70. 113. 39 H. 6. c. 1. & 17 E. 4. c. 7. worthy the serious perusal of our present Grandees, and all illegitimate Parliaments, where they may read the fatal end of all new unparliamentary projects, laws, devices, wherein many now so much glory, as if they would continue form for ever: when as in a few years space, they will all probably prove nullities, be for e∣ver reversed; yea, branded to posterity, as most pernicious presidents. 2. That his Majesty (the Army and their General Coun∣cel) may declare what is the known Law of the Land, a∣gainst the judgement of the Highest Court, and conse∣quently of all his Courts: So that the safety and right of King and people, and THE LAW IT SELF must depend upon his Majesties (the Army, General, and their Coun∣cels) pleasure. 4. That as the King hath a property in his Townes, Forts, and Kingdoms; so he (the Army and their General Councel) mayWhich now they do. dispose of them as he pleaseth; and the Re∣presentative body of the whole Kingdom may not inter∣medle in discharge of his Majesties (the Armies, Generals, Councels) trust, though by the advice of evil Councellers they see it diverted to the hazard of the publique peace & safety of the Kingdom.
5. That his Majesty (the Army, General, and their Coun∣cel) or any other person, may upon suggestions and pre∣tences of Treason, Felony, or breach of peace (or of their Trusts, a fourthSee their im∣peachment of the xi. Mem∣bers, & the humble An∣swer of the Gen. Councel & Officers of the Army, &c. Jan. 3. 1648. Army new-minted cause) Take the Members of Parliament, without giving satisfaction to the House, whereof they are Members, of the grounds of such suggestion or accusation, and without and against their consent (as in the case of the late secured, secluded Members, and their two Junct's since) so they mayHave they not lately done so since this was pen∣ned, as well as hereto∣fore? Dis∣member a Parliament, when they please, and make it what they will, when they will. 6. That whosoever shall follow the King (Army, Ge∣neral and their Councel,) in the wars (against the Par∣liament) though it were to destroy Laws, Liberty, Re∣ligion, the Parliament it self, and the whole Kingdom; yet he shall be free from all crime or punishment. And that on the other side, to oppose by force any such force, though in the most Legal way, and by authority of the Representative body of the whole Kingdom, is to leavy war against the King (Army, General) and TREASON (within the Letter of 25 E. 3. or of their new Knacks since:) So our Lands, Liberties, Lives, Religion, and Laws themselves, Whereby all the Rights both of King and People are due to them, and preserved for them, shall be at the sole will and pleasre of the Prince (Army, General, and Ge∣neral Councel of Officers, in their new High Courts of In∣justice, or other Martial Judicatories, as now they are.) O consider, consider seriously by these particulars, to what a sad, low, despicable condition all English Parlia∣ments are now for ever reduced, and their pristine antient Priviledges, Honor, Freedom, Power, violently ravished from them by the late Army practises, violences, and re∣bellious insolencies against them, never to be parallel'd in any age; which hath really verified this clause in the De∣claration of both Houses,Exact coll. P. 496. August 4. 1642. objected a∣gainst the King and his popish Army, in relation to the Parliaments Army, purposely raised, commissioned, & enga∣ged for their defence. That if the King (by his Army)
may force this Parliament (as the Parliaments Army both forced and dissolved it) they may bid farewell to all Par∣liaments, for ever receiving good by them; And if Par∣liaments beAnd are they not so lost now? lost, they (the People) are lost, their Laws are lost, as well those lately made, as in former times, ALL WHICH WILL BE CVT IN SVNDER WITH THE SAME SWORD, NOW DRAWN FOR THE DESTRVCTION OF THIS PARLIAMENT: (as we now find true by sad experience.) Epistola ad solitariam Vi∣tam agentes. Sir Christopher Sybthorpe his Reply to an Answer made by a Popish Adversary, Dublin 1625. p. 27, 28, 29. Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria (about the year of our Lord 340.) objected this as a great crime, barba∣rism, cruelty, and violation of the priviledges of Councels, to the Arrian Emperour Constantius. That whensoever he called a Councel or Assembly of Bishops, it was but for a shew: For he would not permit them to be guided by the Ecclesiastical Canons, but his Will alone must be their only Canon. And when they advised him, not to subvert the Ecclesiastical order, nor bring the Arrian Heresie into the Church of God, he would neither hear, nor permit them to speak freely; but grievously bending his brows (if they had spoken cross to his designs) and SHAKING HIS SWORD AT THEM, COMMAN∣DED THEM TO BE TAKEN AWAY. Where∣upon he thus infers, What Liberty for perswasion, or place for advice is there left, when he that contradicteth, shall for his labour lose either his Life, or his Country? Why hath the Emperour gathered so great a number of Bishops, partly terrified with threats, partly inticed with promises, to condescend, that they will not communicate wih A∣thanasius? And Hilary Bishop of Poictou Ann. 360. in his first Book against this Tyrannical Arrian Emperour Constantius, thus censures his violent proceedings of this kind, to the subversion of the freedom and priviledge of Councils and their members. Thou gatherest COUNCILS, and when they be shut up together in one City, thou TERRI∣FIEST THEM WITH THREATS; THOU PI∣NEST THEM WITH HVNGER, THOU LAMEST THEM WITH COLD, (as the Army Officers did the
secluded Members 6 and 7 Decemb. 1648. when they shut them up all night in Hell, on the bare boards without beds in the cold, and kept them fasting all the next day at Whitehall, til 7 a clock at night) Thou depravest them with Dissembling; O THOU WICKED ONE, what a mocke∣ry dost thou make of the Church and Councels? Only Dogs return to their Vomit; and thou compellest the Priests of Christ, to sup up those things which they have disgorged, and commandest them in their confessions, to allow that WHICH BEFORE THEY CONDEMNED. What Bishops hand hast thou left innocent? What tongue hast thou not forced to falshood? Whose heart hast thou not brought to the con∣demning of his former opinion? Thou hast subjected all to thy will, yea, to thy violence. And have not some swaying Ar∣my Officers, by their frowns, menaces, frauds, Swords, open force upon the Parliament and its Members, beyond all the presidents in any ages, done the like, and exceeded this Arri∣an Tyrant herein? And is it not then high time for all friends to Parliaments, to protest and provide against such detesta∣ble, treasonable violences for the future, destructive to all Parliaments, if permitted, or silently pretermitted without question, exemplary censure, righting of the imprisoned Members, or any provision to redresse them for the future? Our prudent Ancesters were so carefull to prevent all violence, force, arms, and armed men, in or near any places where Parliaments were held, to terrifie, over∣awe, or disturb their proceedings or Members;See the De∣claration of the Lords and Commons, June 6. 1642. concerning this Statute. That in the Parliament of 7 E. 1. (as you may read in Rastals Abridgement, Armour, 1. Provision was made by the King, by common consent of the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, by a ge∣neral act, That in all Parliaments, Treaties, and other Assemblies, which should be made in the Realm of England FOR EVER, every man shall come without Force, and without Armour, well and peaceably to the honour of the King, and of the peace of him, and of his Realm, and they together with the Commonal∣ty of the Realm upon solemn advise, declared; That it belonged to the King, and his part it is by his Royal
Signiory strictly to defend Wearing of Armour, and all other Force, against his peace at all times, when it shall please him (especially at such times, and in places where such Parliaments, Treaties, and Assemblies are held) and to punish them which shall doe contrary according to the Laws and usage of the Realm▪ And hereunto they are bound to aid the Kind, as their Soveraign Lord, at all seasons when need shall be. Hereupon our Kings ever since this statute, by virtue thereof, and by the Law and Custom of the PARLIAMENT, (as Sir Edward Cook in his 4 Institutes c. 1. p. 14. informs us) did at the beginning of every Parliament, make a speci∣all Proclamation, Prohibiting the bearing of Arms or weapons, in or near the places, where the Parlia∣ment sate, under pain of forfeiting all they had; Of which there are sundry presidents cited by Sir Edward Cook in his Margin; whereof I shall transcribe but one (which he omits) and that is 6 E. 3. Rot. Parliament n. 2. 3. Because that before these days, at the Parliaments and Counsels of our Lord the King, Debates, Riots and commotions have risen and been moved, for that People have come to theIs not the quartering of Horse and Foot in or near such pla∣ces, to affright and overawe Parliaments and their Members, a Violation of this Law, Pro∣clamation, Law and Cu∣stom of all English Par∣liaments, fit to be redres∣sed? places where Parliaments have been summoned and assembled, armed with privy coats of plate, spears, swords, long, knives, (or daggers) and other sort of arms, by which the businesses of our Lord the King and his Realm have been impeached, and the great men which have come thither by his command, have been affrigh∣ted: Our Lord the King, willing to provide remedy against such mischiefs, defendeth, that no man of what estate or condition soever he be, upon pain of forfeiting all that he may forfeit, to the King, shall be seen armed with a Coat of Male, nor yet of plate, nor with an Halberd, nor with a spear, nor sword, nor long knife, nor any other suspitious arms, within the City of LONDON, nor within the Suburbs thereof; nor any place near the said City, nor yet within the Palace of WEST MINSTER, or any place near the said Palace, by Land or Water, un∣der the foresaid pain: except only such of the Kings
men as he shall depute, or by his command shall be deputed to keep the peace within the said places: and also except the Kings servants, according to the Statute of Northampton. And it is not the intention of our Lord the King, that any Earl, or Baron may not have his Lance brought to him in any place, but onely in the Kings presence, and in the place of Councell. The like Proclamations were made in the beginning of the Parliaments of 9. 1, 17, 18. 20, 25 dw. 3. and sundry others: more necessary to be revived in all succeeding English Parliaments now than ever heretofore, since the unpresidented forces upon the late Members of both Houses, and the Parliament it self, by the Army-Officers and Souldiers, raised to defend them from Violence: The Treasonablenesse and Transcendency whereof be∣ing at large related in my Epistle to the Reader, before my Speech in Parliament 4 December 1648, I shall not here criminally presse, nor insist on, but referred them thereunto: However for the future security and free∣dome of our Parliaments from violence, I must crave liberty to inform these Army Parliament drivers, forcers, dissolvers, (habituated to this trade) That if theExact coll. p. 34. 56. 66, 67, 68, 76, 77, 198, 200, 201, 202, 246, 695, 723. 729. late Kings march to the House of Commons, accompanied only with some of his Pensioners and others, armed with Pistols and Swords, meerly to demand but five Members thereof to be delivered up to Justice, particularly impeached by him of High Treason some dayes before: to wit,Let those ob∣serve this Im∣peachment, who are now really guilty of it in the highest de∣gree. That they had traiterously endeavoured to subvert the Fundamental Laws and Government of this Kingdome: To deprive the King of his Royal power: To place over the Subjects an Arbitrary and Tyrannical power, To subvert the very Rights and be∣ing of Parliaments: and by force and terrour to compell the Parliament to joyn with them in their designs; for which end they had actually raised and countenanced Tu∣mults against the King and Parliament. Or if theExact Coll. p. 118, 195, 207. to 237. 248, 273, 293. 523, 524, 525, 617, 631, 660, 695. Kings bare tampering with some Officers of his own Northern Army, to draw a Petition from them to the Houses, or march towards London from
their quarters; (not to seise upon, force or dissolve the Parliament or its Members, but only to over-aw them, and impeach the freedom of their debates, Votes tou∣ching Episcopacy, Church-Government, and the Kings Revenues) were such high transcendent violati∣ons of the Priviledges and Freedome of Parliament, and unsufferable injuries, as both Houses of Parliament separately, and joyntly proclaimed them to all the world, inExact Coll. in the pages quoted before. severall Declarations, during his life; Or such capitall crimes, as those who condemned and executed him for a Traytor and Tyrant, have published in their Declaration of 17 March 1648. (touching the grounds of their proceedings against him, and setling the Government in the way of a Free State, without King or House of Lords) since his beheading, in these very words. But ABOVE ALL, the English army was laboured by the King to be engaged against the English Parliament; a thing of that strange in piety and unnaturalness for the King of England, that nothing can answer it, but his being a Forraigner; nei∣ther could it have easily purchased belief, but by his suc∣ceeding visible actions in full pursuance of the same; as the Kings comming in Person to the House of Commons, to seise the five Members, whither he was followed with some hundreds of unworthy debauched persons, armed with swords, and pistols, and other arms; and they attending him at the door of the House, ready to execute what the Leader should command them. Which they charged against the King, as the highest of his unpar∣ralleld Offences; for which they appeal to all the world of in∣different men to judge, whether they had not sufficient cause to bring him to Justice? Though neither he nor his follow∣ers then seized, secured, secluded, injured any one Member, when they thus went to the Commons House; YeaExact Coll. p. 51, 52, 54. 66, 67. and elswhere. present∣ly retracted his Impeachment, and offered all satisfaction that should be desired by the House for this breach of Privilege: and though neither the Northern Army, nor their Officers ever advanced towards, or offered the least violence to the Hou∣ses, or their priviledges, by Petition or otherwise.
Then certainly the Parliaments own Armies Officers, Counsels, manifold high printed Declarations, of June 14. 23. July 7. Aug. 18. 1647. Nov. 16. & Decemb 7. 1648. and others before and since, their professed open Op∣positions, Impeachments, against the very Proceedings, Votes, Orders, Ordinances, Members of both Houses of Parliament, which first raised them principally for their defence; [Printed by their order in their Book of Decla∣rations, The History of Independency, and my Speech in Parliament,] their Impeachment of eleven Members of the House of Commons, and sundry Lords at once; their securing of above 40, and secluding of above five parts of six of the whole House of Commons at once; their See their Declaration of June 23. 1647. & Aug. 18. Dec. 6. 1648 avowed marches with the whole Body of the Army, in Batalia, severall times to force the Houses, seise their Members, over-aw, affright, dis-member, dissolve the Parliament it self, and their own new erected Jun∣ctoes since, and justification of it to all the world in print [in their humble Answer touching the secured and secluded Members, Jan. 3. 1648. The true state of the case of the Commonwealth of England, 1654. and their Declarations concerning their dissolution of their two Junctoes] after these Misdemeanours of the King, without the least re∣pentance for them, must needs be farre more execrable, unwarrantable and criminal, than the Kings, and deserve a severer censure than his Peccadilioes in respect of their crimes. And if by theAnd their Generals Let∣ter from Bed∣ford, 29 July 1647. whole Armies printed Remon∣strances, August 2. and 18. 1647. the tumult of some unarmed London Apprentices, who offered some small force to the Houses, to the violation of their Priviledges, (without securing or secluding any one Member) deser∣ved a speedy and exemplary capital proceeding against the principal contrivers and Actors in it,See a Decla∣ration of the Gen. Councel & Armies En∣gagements, &c. p. 49. as they then decla∣red, and vehemently urged again and again in those Re∣monstrances) Or if by their own Charge in the Name of the whole Army, June 14. 1647. against the XI. Members, it was so high an offence in them, That they joyntly or seve∣rally invited, encouraged, abetted or countenanced several
Reformadoes, and OTHER OFFICERS AND SOUL∣DIERS TVMVLTVOVSLY AND VIOLENTLY TO GATHER TOGETHER AT WESTMINSTER, TO AFFRIGHT & ASSAULT THE MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT IN PASSAGES TO & FROM THE HOSE, TO OFFER VIOLENCE TO THE HOUSE IT SELF, & BY SVCH VNRVLY OVT∣RAGES & THREATS TO AWE AND INFORCE THE PARLIAMENT; And that upon their bare sug∣gestion thereof (without any proof at all, or colour of truth) they presently demanded, That the persons impea∣ched MIGHT BE FORTHWITH SECLVDED FROM SITTING IN THE HOVSE, and removed thence, before any hearing or trial, which the Officers and Army eagerly pressed in their Paper of June 15. 1647. Nay, if by their own late printed Instrument of the Government of the Commonwealth of England, &c. Articles 14. 16. All and every person and persons, who have aided, advised, assisted, or abetted in any war against the Parliament since the first day of January, 1641. (un∣lesse they have since been in the Service of the Parlia∣ment, and given signal testimony of their good affections thereunto) shall be disabled, and be uncapable to be e∣lected, or to give any Vote in the Election of any Mem∣ber to serve in the next, or in the three succeeding trien∣nial Parliaments: and all Votes and Elections given to the contrary, shall be null and void. And if any person so made uncapable, shall forfeit one full years value of his real estate, and one full third part of his personal estate, in case he shall give his Vote for election of Members to serve in Parliament: as they there adjudge; though such persons as they intend thus to disable, never waged any actual war against the Parliament it self, or its Mem∣bers, immediatly, but only against the Forces raised by the Parliament, and so mediatly and indirectly only against the Parliament, (the case of all the late Kings adherents and assistants, not within the letter, but meaning of these Articles:) then doubtless those Army-Officers, Souldiers,
and their Confederats, who advised, sided, assisted abetted in one or more wars against the Parliament Houses, and Par∣liament Members themselves, whom they immediately as∣saulted, forced, secured, secluded, dissipated, dissolved, de∣stroyed, and have justified it several times in print, without giving any signal testimony of their good affections to the Parliament; and in this their Instrument have laidArticle 10, 12, 21, 22, 24, 27, 30, 32, 36, 37, 38, 39. ma∣ny Chains, clogs, restraints, on all new future Parliaments, of their own framing, inconsistent with the Honour, Freedom, Priviledges, being of real English Parliaments; deserve a farre higher and severer censure than these Apprentices, or impeached Members did in their repute; or those Mem∣bers they most insolently accuse and impeach, in their De∣clarations of June 2. and August 18. 1647. (not to be presidented in any age since the Creation, till then:) and they all are by their own Verdict, Instrument, totally dis∣abled (as much as the archest Malignants and Cavaliers) by the very letter of these Articles, to be elected, or give any vote for the election of Members in the four next succeeding Parliaments; and those who have given their Votes in the late Elections, have thereby forfeited at least one full years value of their real, and one full third part of their personal estates; and deserve as high, (if not an higher) censure, as any sequestred, or other Delinquents condem∣ned formerly by them, for bearing arms, levying or abet∣ting any war, but only mediately against the Parliament; and as high an uncapacity to be put not only on themselves, but their Heir males to serve in Parliament, as the Statute of 21 R. 2. c. 6. imposed heretofore on others, for a farre lesse offence; to secure the Members and Priviledges of all succeeding Parliaments, from such unpresidented for∣cible violences, ruptures, dismembrings, dissolutions, as the last Parliament sustained, by the Armies outrage and confederacy against them, (of most dangerous president to Posterity;) of which I desire to make them truly sensi∣ble. The last real andSee Exact Collect. p. 320 321, 322. 561, the true and excellent con∣stitution of our Parliament. duly constituted English Parliament we had, were so deeply sensible, of the dangerous destru∣ctive
Consequences of securing or secluding their Members, and keeping them from the Houses, upon any Impeachments or Surmises, without the Notice and consent of the House; that in their forementioned Remonstrance of Nov. 2. 1642. they claimed and asserted this. TO BE SO CLEAR AND ESSENTIAL A PRIVILEDGE OF PARLIAMENT,Exact Col! p. 723, 724. 726, 727 THAT THE WHOLE FREEDOM THEREOF DE∣PENDETH UPON IT. That NO MEMBER OF EI∣THER HOVSE OF PARLIAMENT was to be proceeded against, or judged, NOR TAKEN AWAY, OR DETAI∣NED FROM THE SERVICE OF THE HOUSE, WHEREOF HE IS A MEMBER; (no, not in case of Treason, Felony, or Breach of Peace, much lesse in any other) until such time as that House hath satisfaction concerning the cause: though in such cases they confessed, he might be arrest∣ed by the Officers of Parliament, or any other Ministers of Iustice, to the intent only, That he might be brought to the Parliament Corpus cum causa, and deteined in safe custody till he may be brought to the Parliament; but not to be pro∣ceeded against in any inferior Court, before such time as the cause be heard in Parliament, and dismissed from it. For (else) who ses not,Nota. that by this means, UNDER FALSE PRETENCES OF CRIMES AND ACCUSATIONS, SVCH AND SO MANY MEMBERS OF BOTH OR EITHER HOVSE OF PARLIAMENT MAY BE TA∣KEN OVT OF IT AT ANY TIME, BY ANY PER∣SONS TO SERVE A TVRN, AND TO MAKE A MAJOR PART OF WHOM THEY WILL AT PLEA∣SVRE. And as the grand Inquest of the whole Kingdom should be (by this means) subject to the grand Inquest of one particular County; So the whole Representative Body of the Kingdom should be at the Devotion of a Middlesex Iury, (as since of their own Army, raised to protect them from these mischiefs.) And therefore, as THE FREEDOM OF PAR∣LIAMENTS DEPENDETH IN A GREAT PART VP∣ON THEIR PRIVILEGES, AND THE FREEDOM OF THIS NATION UPON THE FREEDOM OF PARLIAMENTS,Nota. WE HAVE GOOD REASON TO
BELEIVE, that the People of England knowing their Lives and Fortunes are bound up in this bundle, will venture their Lives and Fortunes in this Quarrel: Which I in∣treat all those who have so highly infringed this principle Privilege of Parliament of late years, with all the people of England now seriously to consider, to vindicate, pre∣serve it in all succeeding ages from the like violations, if e∣ver they expect to be Freemen, or to enjoy free English Parliaments again;Exact Coli. p. 561. which are such an ESSENTIAL PART OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE KINGDOM, that we can attain TO NO HAPPINESSE WITHOUT THEM, and like Hipocrates twins, We must laugh and cry, LIVE AND DIE TOGETHER WITH THEM. Now farther to convince the Army-Officers, Souldiers, of their late great injustice to, and affronts, contempts a∣gainst the Parliament which raised them, in relation to our ancient fundamental Government and chief Member of the Parliament; I shall desire them and all their con∣federates in cold blood, seriously to consider, whether they have not, by their undutifull, violent procee∣dings against them, contrary to the Votes, Declarations, Remonstrances of the PARLIAMENT, endeavoured (as much as in them is) to falsifie this clause in both Houses Declaration Nov. 2. 1642Exact Coll. p. 696. Although they would perswade his Majesty, That there is little confidence to be placed in our Modesty and Duty; yet, AS GOD IS WITNESSE OF OUR THOVGHTS, SO SHALL OUR ACTIONS WITNESSE TO ALL THE WORLD; that TO THEHow much it and they have been dis∣honoured by the contrary, let the Army Officers read at leasure in Militiere his Victory of Truth. HONOR OF OUR RELIGION, and OF THOSE WHO ARE MOST ZEALOUS IN IT (so much struck∣en at by the contrivers of that Declaration, under odious names) we shall suffer more for and from our Soveraign, than we hope God will ever permit the malice of evil Counsellors to put us to: And although the happi∣nesse of this and all Kingdomes dependeth chiefly upon God; Yet WE ACKNOWLEDGE THAT IT DOTH SO MAINLY DEPEND UPON HIS MA∣JESTY,Nota. and THE ROYALL BRANCHES OF THAT
ROOT, that as WE HAVE HERETOFORE, SO WE SHALL HEREAFTER, esteem no hazard too great, no reproach too vile; but that we shall willingly goe through the one, and undergoe the other, That we, and the WHOLE KINGDOME MAY ENJOY THAT HAPPINESSE, which we cannot in an ordinary way of providence expect FROM ANY OTHER FOUNTAIN OR STREAM,Nota. than those from whence (were the poi∣son of evil Councels once removed from about them) no doubt, but we and THE WHOLE KINGDOME SHOULD BE SATISFIED MOST ABUNDANTLY. And on the contrary, have they not fully and actually ve∣rified, in respect of themselves and their Confederates in the Houses, this Odious aspersion, then (only in predi∣ction) cast by the KING on the PARLIAMENT, but by them at that time renounced with greatest detestation; and drawn those sad consequences on the whole Kingdom, wherewith both HOUSES conclude that Declaration in these words? 7.Exact Coll. p. 730. That the Representative Body of the whole King∣dom (since dissolved by the Army) is a Faction of Malignant, Schismatical, ambitious Persons, whose DE∣SION IS AND ALWAYES HATH BEEN TO AL∣TER THE WHOLE FRAME OF GOVERNMENT, BOTH OF CHURCH AND STATE, AND TO SUB∣JECT BOTH KING AND PEOPLE TO THEIR OWN LAWLESSE ARBITRARY POWER AND GOVERN∣MENT, and that they DESIGN THE RUINE OF HIS MAJESTIES PERSON and OF MONARCHY IT SELF: and consequently that they are TRAITORS and all the King∣dome with them, (for their act is the act of the whole King∣dome) And whether their punishment and ruine may not also INVOLVE THE WHOLE KINGDOM IN CONCLU∣SION, AND REDUCE IT INTO THE CONDITION OF A CONQUERED NATION (as some ARMY OFFI∣CERS, & SOULDIERS openly averre we are now redu∣ced to by and under them) NO MAN CAN TELL: BUT EXPERIENCE SHEWETH US (and now we find it
most true in theWho in their Letters of July 18. 1647. Pro∣positions of Aug. 2. and o∣ther of their Declarations, professed to all the world, That it was fully agreeable to all their Principles, & should be their desires and endeavours to maintain Monarchy, the Priviledges and Freedom of the Parliament; and the Rights of his Majesty and Royal Family, that so a lasting Peace and Agreement might be setled in this Nation, &c. Which otherwise, they confessed then in good earnest, could not be hoped for, nor expected. Whence they intituled their Printed Book, A Declaration of the Engagements, Remonstrances, Representations, Pro∣posals, Desires, and Resolution from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairax, and THE GENERAL COUNCEL OF THE ARMY, FOR SETLING OF HIS MAJESTY IN HIS JUST RIGHTS, THE PARLIAMENT IN THEIR JUST PRIVILEDGES, and THE SUBJECTS IN THEIR LIBERTIES AND FREEDOMES: Printed by their and the Lords House special Order London 1647. Let them now seriously consider and perform it in good earnest. ARMY-OFFICERS, COVNCELL, SOVLDIERS) THAT SVCCESSE OFTEN DRAWS MEN NOT ONELY BEYOND THEIR PROFES∣SION; but also many times beyond their first intenti∣ons. Surely as the Armies and their Confederates late pro∣ceedings in relation to themselves, (though not unto the forced, dismembred, dissolved Parliament, and secured Mem∣bers) have fully verified this charge in every particular, then reputed most false and scandalous; which I thus press upon their consciences at this time, and so largely insist on, not to defame or asperse them to the world, as many others do, who apply that black Character of Ier. 9. 2. to 6. c. 12. 6. Rev. 3. 10. to 19. (They are all an ASSEMBLY OF TREACHEROVS MEN: Thine habitation is in the MIDST OF DECEIT, &c. Destruction and Misery are in their wayes, and the way of Peace they have not known; there is no fear of God before their eyes) unto them in a more emi∣nent manner, as being really verified by their unparalleld exorbitances formentioned; but to vindicate the Innocency, Integrity of the Majority and secluded Members of both Houses, against the scandalous printed aspersions of Mili∣tiere and other Papists, to preserve and justifie the Ho∣nour of our Reformed Religion, and of the most zealous Professors thereof; to restore, re-establish if possible, the Priviledges, the Freedom of all Future Parliaments, much impaired, endangered by their heady violent Procee∣dings, and most pernicious Presidents to Posterity (if not
publikely abominated, exploded by them, or exemplarily punished (to deterr all others from their future imitation) to convince them by what Jesuitical, Popish, old Court-Prin∣ciples, Counsels, Practises, they have hitherto been misgui∣ded; and to reclaim them, as much as in me lieth, for the future, from the like destructive. Practises, for the publick Safety, Peace, Settlement of our distracted Kingdoms; and do most earnestly beseech them, as they are English-men, Souldiers, Christians, seriously to repent of and lay to heart, lest they perish eternally for them at last; as likewise to take heed, lest by teaching and instigating the Common Souldiers of the Army, to suppresse, oppresse, betray the Parliament, Kingdom, People, who raised, payed, and en∣trusted them only for their safeguard and defence, they do not thereby instruct and encourage them at last to betray and destroy themselves; it being a true observation ofDe Clement. l. 1. c. 26. Se∣neca the Philosopher, Aliquando Tyrannorum praefidia in ipsos consurrexerunt. PERFIDIAMQVE ET IMPIETA∣TEM ET FERITAREM, ET QVICQVID AB ILLIS DIDICERANT, IN IPSOS EXECRERVNT: Quid enim potest ab eo quisquam sperare, QVEM MALVM ESSE DOCVIT? Non diu paret, nequitia, nec quantum jubetur, peccat; as we have seen by many late presidents: So the Army-Officers, Souldiers Great Successes in all their Wars, Designs, and forcible ill Proceedings against the King, Parliament, Kingdom, Government, Laws and Li∣berties; as it hath caused them not only beyond their Pro∣fessions, but also beyond their first Intentions, Commissions, Protestations, to forget that Gospel-precept given to Souldiers, Luke 3. 14. to advance themselves to a more absolute Soveraign arbitrary Power over them, than ever any Kings of England claimed or pretended to, (as their late Proceedings, Remonstrances, and transcendent Instru∣ment of the Government of the three Kingdoms, manifest;) so it hath been thePsal. 37▪ 7 Psal. 73. 3, &c. Eccles. 8. 11, 12. principal Ground, whereby they have justified all their unpresidented forementioned Exorbitan∣ces, as lawfull, commendable, Christian: and that which hath struck such a stupifying pannick fear, such a stupendious
cowardize, baseness, sottshness, into the Generality of the Nobility, Gentry, Ministery, and Commons of our late most heroick English Naton, that there is scarceEzk. 22. 30. a man to be found throughout the Realm of any Eminency (though we should seek after him like Diogenes, with a Candle) that dares freely open his mouth against their most irregu∣lar, illegal, violent, destructive arbitrary Proceedings, Usur∣pations, Innovations, Oppressions, Taxes, Projects, to the shaking and utter subverting of our ancient Fundamental Laws, Liberties, Rights, Properties, Parliaments, Parliamen∣tary priviledges, Government, and taking away of the very Lives of some (and thereby endangering the Lives of all o∣ther) English Freemen of all Degrees, in mischristened High Courts of Justice. Such a strange Charm is there in Success alone, to metamorphise Men into meerSee 2 King. 10. 1, to 12. Esth. 8. 17. tempo∣rising, slavish, sordid sotts and beasts; yea, to cause not only persons truly honourable, but the veryDeut. 32. 17. 1 Cor. 10. 20. Rev. 9. 20. Ephes. 2. 2. Devil himself, and the worst of beasts, to be wondred after, applauded, a∣dored, not only as Saints, but Gods. We read Rev. 13. of a Monstrous deformed BEAST, to whom the Dragon (the Devil) gave his Power, Seat and Great Authority; where∣upon, all the world wondred after the Beast, and worshipped not onely the Dragon, that gave him power, but the Beast like∣wise; saying, Who is like unto the Beast? WHO IS ABLE TO MAKE WAR WITH HIM? And there was given unto him a Mouth speaking Great things, and blasphemies, and power was given him to continue and make war forty and two months. And power was given unto him to make war with the SAINTS, AND TO OVERCOME THEM; and power was given him over all Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations. And (HEREVPON IT FOLLOWS) all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the Lambs Book of Life. And another Beast (un∣der him) caused the earth and all that dwell therein to set up the Image of this Beast, and to worship it; and he caused all both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive the mak of the Beast in their right hand, and in their fore∣heads; and none might buy or sell, but he that had this mark;
and as many as would not worship this Beasts Image, were or∣dered to be killed. Yet this Blasphemous Beasts reign and power continued but forty two Months, Rev. 13. 5. This Beast, (in the height of his Power and Victories) was by God himself, threatned to go into captivity, and be killed with the Sword, as he had led others into captivity, and killed them with the Sword, ver. 10. All his followers and worshippers shall (soon after) drink of the wine of Gods wrath, and be tormented with fire and brimstone, &c. Rev. 14. 9, 10, 11. The Saints at last shall get the victory over this Beast, Rev. 15. 2. And the Beast himself (notwithstanding all his for∣mer Victories, Friends, and great Armies) was at last taken, and his false Prophet with him; and were both cast alive in∣to a lake burning with fire and brimstone, and all his Forces were slain with the Sword, and the fowls were filled with their flesh, Rev. 19. 18 19, 20, 21. From which Texts I have fre∣quently silenced, confounded some of our conquering Ar∣my-Officers and Souldiers, whiles prisoner under them, when they were vapouring of their Great Victories, Suc∣cesses, and concluding from thence, both their Saintship, and the Goodness of their Actions; saying oft-times like the Beasts followers here, Who is able to make war with us? And that with these genuine deductions from these Texts, which they could not reply against; worthy all Souldiers and others saddest meditations. 1. That God may, nay oft-times doth give great power to the very worst and most blasphemous of all Men and Beasts; & that not only over one or two, but many Tongues, Nations, as in this Text, and Dan. 7. 3, to 29. c. 8. 4. to 27. 2. That such Beasts many times may, and do not onely make war with, but even overcome the very Saints themselves in battel, as the Babylonians, Assyrians, and other ungodly Beasts did the Israelites, Gods own Saints and People, Psa. 79. 1, 2, &c. Dan. 7. 21, 23, 24, 25. Isa. 10. 5, &c. c. 14. 16, 17. Jer. 26. 6, 7, 8. c. 25. 9. &c. yet they were but blasphemous Beasts, and wretches still, not Saints. 3. That if such Beasts have but Great Power and Success in their Wars, Enterpries against their Enemies, or the Saints
themselves; though their mouths utter blasphemy against the God of Heaven, his Name, Tabernacle, Saints; though their Actions, Designs be never so impious, atheistical, treasonable, detestable: their power but short and fading, yet whiles they are in Power and Prosperity, the whole world will wonder, run after, worship, flatter, Saint, Deifie and Adore them for Gods, (asPlutarch Arrianus, Quintus Curti∣us, Suetonius, Grimston, in the life of A∣lexander, and Julius Caesar, Balaeus, his Lives of the Popes. Mor∣nyes Mystery of Iniquity. Alexander the Great, and Julius Caesars friends, flatterers did them; and some wicked Popes Favourites them too;) yea, set up, and worship their very Images, receive their marks in their hands, fore∣heads, and extol them to the skies, saying, Who is like un∣to the Beast? who is able to make war with him? 4. That such adulatious Speeches, Vaunts, Practises as these, and such Arguments of Saintship, of the Goodnesse of mens causes, undertakings, actions, only from their present Power, Victories and Successes, are the arguments, practises, of worldly, earthly, beastly men; of worshippers of the Beast and Dragon of2 King. 18. 33, 34, 35. c. 19. 17, 18, 19. Isa. 10. 7. to 16. Assyrians, Turks, Popes, not of the E∣lect real Saints of God, Whose names are written in the Lambes Book of life; who will neither flatter, worship, nor adore such Beasts, nor receive their marks in their hands or fireheads, though they be prohibited to buy or sell, or slain for refusing it by their Instruments, Rev. 13. 8, 15, 17. Dan. 3. 12. to 29. 5. That such Beasts in power, will never want under-Beasts and Instruments, nor yetRev. 13. 1. to 18. c. 16. 13. 14. c. 19, 20. 1 King. 22. 6. to 24. false Prophets to per∣swade or enforce Obedience and Subjection to them, even by dis-franchisements, death, lying wonders, flattering Prophecies, Speeches, Sermons, and Hypocritical Mock∣fasts. 6. That the Power and Dominion of such Beasts, is given and derived to them immediatly by the Dragon (theEphes. 2. 2. Prince of the power of the Air) only by Gods permission, not his approbation; Rev. 13. 2. Hos. 8. 4. 2 Thess. 2. 4, 8 9. And that in wrath, for the punishment of the Peoples sins, and de∣struction, greater condemnation of the beasts themselves at last. Hos. 13. 11. Rev. 13. and 14, and 19. Psal. 94, 23. Ier. 51. 24, &c. c. 5 . throughout. Hab. 2. 6, 7, 8.
7. That this their Dominion, Raign and Triumph, is commonly very short, like this Beasts here for forty two Months, Rev. 13. 5. which is but three years and an halfPaterculus, Plutah, Su∣tomus, Anton∣ni Chronica, Grimston, and others, in hi Life. Jacobus Usserius Ann∣lium pars p∣sterior, p. 366, 367. Julius Caesar that great first Conqueror of this I∣sland and a great part of the World; usurping the supream Power over the Roman Senate, and changing the Government, lived only FIVE MONTHS A SOVERAIGN LORD IN PEACE (though some compute his whole dominion 3 years and 7 months) and then was suddenly stabbed to death in the Senate-House, by those friends in whom he reposed greatest trust; for his Tyrannical Usurpations, and alteration of their former Government; for endeavouring (as was suspected) to make himself KING OF THE ROMANS, (though he re∣jected the Title of King when offered unto him by M. An∣tonius, saying, That Jove was only King of the Romans, that so he might seem to be compelled to receive it by the peo∣ple, (being their King before in deed, though not in name:) and for saying, That theDo not some now by words and deeds, re∣pute it and the People so? Commonwealth was but a Voice or Name, without a Body or Substance. Nullum violentum est diuturnum, See Isa. 10, and 14. Iob. 20. 4, 5, &c. Psal. 37 and 73. Psal. 92. 6, 7. Isa. 17, 13, 14. 2 Chron. 23. and Sir Walter Rawlies Preface to his History of the World, worthy serious perusal by the Grandees of these times. 8. That in conclusion such Conquering, Usurping Beasts, not∣withstanding all their Power, Friends, Followers, Confe∣derates, Armies, Policies, are usually conquered, taken, slain on Earth, and cast into the Lake burning with fire and brimstone for ever, for their Tyrannies, Blasphemies, Bloodsheds Oppressions of the People and Gods Saints, and their Confede∣rates, Armies, false Prophets, followers, adorersSee Mat. West. an. 655. 1 Kings 16. 2 Kings 15. 2. Chron. 13. 17, 18, 19, 20. and our King Ri∣chard the third. destroyed with them even on earth; and then made to drink the Cup of Gods wrath, fury and torments for ever in hell, Isa. 10, and 14. Jer. 50. and 51. Rev. 19. 19. 20, 21. c. 6. 15, 16, 17. 9. That though they continue Conquerors and victo∣rious for many years; and conquer not only, one, two or three, but many Kings and Kingdoms; cut off not on∣ly the thumbs of their Kings, that they might not lift up a Sword against them, and their great toes, that they may not
run from them, but their Heads too; Yet God at last (in his retaliating Justice) doth usually pay them home in their own coyne, as is evident, not onely bySee the Turkish History in his life. Bajazet the Turkish Emperour, ourSee Hunting∣don, Mat. west. An. 655. Graf∣ton, Speed, Ho∣linshed, Fabian Brompton, in the life of Penda. King Penda, (who slew no lesse than 5. Christian Kings in several battles, took sundry other Kings prisoners, and at last was slain himself, with all his old victorious Captains and Souldiers, by King Oswi, and a small despicable Army of raw Souldiers, not half so many as they, Ann. 655. who thereupon seized on his Kingdom) and o∣thers in prophane Stories; but by that memorable History ofJudg. 1. 2. to 8. Adonibezeck; who after his Conquest of no less than seventy Kings, (who ever in this latter age, conquered one quarter so many?) and tyrannizing over their persons, was, by a small party of Judah and Simeon, fought with on his own dung-hil, his victorious old Army totally routed, ten thousand of them slain, himself forced to fly, pursued, and taken prisoner by these contemptible Enemies, who cut off his thumbs and his great toes. Whereupon Adoni-bezek (though an idolatrous Canaanite) used these memorable words, worthy all Conquerours and Tyrants memorial; recorded by God himself to all Posterity, Iudges 1. 7. Threescore and ten Kings having their thumbs, and their great toes cut off, have gathered their meat under my table (like so many Dogs rather than Kings) AS I HAVE DONE, SO GOD HATH REWARDED ME: and they brought him (Prisoner) to Ierusalem, and there he di∣ed. See the like retaliation threatned, inflicted. Hab. 2. 6, 7, 8. Isa. 33. 1. Dan. 7. 23. to 27. Obad. 15. Ezech. 35. 5, 6, 15. Rev. 16. 5. 6. Ier. 51, and 52. Nah. 3. 1. &c. Rev. 13. 10. Ioel 3. 6, 7, 8. Deut. 32. 43. Isa. 10. & 14. 2 Chron. 22. 10. compared with c. 23. 12. to the end. 10. That the Elect Saints of God, do by faith in the Word of God, and upon consideration of the usual Provi∣dence and Justice of God towards such Beasts and bloody Conquerors, most assuredly see their downfall, and with pa∣tience expect it, Rev. 13. 9, 10. If any man have an ear let him hear.See Joel 3. 6, 7, 8. Mat. 26. 52. Sir Wal∣ter Rawleighs Preface to his History of the World, & Dr. Beards Theatre of Gods Judge∣ments, on the 6 and 8 Com∣mandements. HE THAT LEADETH INTO CAP∣TIVITY, SHALL GO INTO CAPTIVITY; HE
THAT KILLETH WITH THE SWORD, MVST BE KILLED WITH THE SWORD: Here is THE PATI∣ENCE AND THE FAITH OF THE SAINTS. O that we had this Patience and Faith within us now! 11. That upon this Faith and Assurance, the true E∣lect Saints of God, neither will, nor do, nor dare to admire after, follow, worship or adore such Basts, or their Image, nor receive their marks in their hands, or foreheads, though all the world else readily do it without opposition; enduring pati∣ently rather to be warred upon, killed, secluded from buying or selling any thing, then unchristianly to adore, subject, or enslave themselves unto them, Rev. 13. 2, 15, 17. Esther 3 1, to 7. 2 Kings 3. 13, 14. Iohn 10. 4, 5. Dan. 3. 4. to 30. 1 King. 19. 18. 2 Chron. 11. 13. to 18. Which serious seasonable considerations, as they should daunt the hearts and allay the high Presumptious Spirits of the most Successfull Conquerors, Powerfull Usurpers o∣ver and violent Invaders of the Liberties, Lives, Estates, Rights, Properties of their Lawfull Superios or Christian Brethren, and all Subverters of the Laws, Priviledges, Par∣liaments, Government of their Native Country, especially a∣gainst their Oathes and Trusts: So the Meditation on them, together with the contemplation of the infinite Power, Wisdom, Faithfulness, Iustice, Holiness, Presence, and gracious Promises of God, have at all times and seasons hitherto, invincibly animated, steeled, fortified my Soul in the midst of all my sufferings, both under the domineer∣ing Prelates, Parliament-assaulting Army-Officers, the late Tyrannical cashiered Republicans, and all other self-created oppressing Powers, which (if not already dead and buried in the dust, with all their thoughts and high aspiring Projects,) yet shall certainlyIsa. 51. 6. 12. c. 26. 13, 14. Psal. 82. 7. Psal. 146. 354. die ere long like men, and become us dung; yea, they have enabled me by Faith and Patience to beRom. 8. 36. 37. Psal. 3. 6. more than a conquering triumpher over them: and to sing aloud with magnanimous David (a man after Gods own heart) long before their down-fall, Psal. 27. 1, 2, 3. The Lord is my Light and my Salvation, whm shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall
I be afraid? When the wicked even mine enemies and my foes came upon me to eat up my flesh, they stumbled and fell. Though an Host should encamp against me (as they did at Westminster, at my House, and in sundry Garrisons, where I was a Pri∣soner under Souldiers) my heart shall not fear: though war should rise against me, in this I will be confident. I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people that have set themselves against me round about. And to cry out in Pauls words of defi∣ance against all Enemies and Perils in the cause of my God and Country (uttered in his own and all true Elected Saints names) Rom. 8. 35, &c. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? (or our Native Country, as well actively as passively considered;) Shall tribulation? or distress? or per∣secution? or famine? or peril? or SWORD? (of an whole Army, or other Powers) Nay, in all these things we are more than Conquerors through him that loved us. For I am per∣swaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor PRIN∣CIPALITIES, NOR POWERS, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Iesus our Lord. And to say with him in all threatned Dangers for my sincere conscientious publick Services, Act. 20. 22. 24. And now I go bound to Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall there befall me, save, that the Ho∣ly Ghost witnesseth in every City, saying; That Bonds and Af∣flictions wait for me. But none of these things move me, nei∣ther count I my life dear unto me, so s I may finish my course with joy, and the Ministery which I have received of the Lord Iesus, &c. And verily me thinks the serious contemplation thereof, and of all the premises, with that of 2 Sam. 10. 12. Isa: 51. 12. 13. Ier. 1. 8. Ezech. 2▪ 2, to 6. Matth. 10. 26. 28 coupled with Psal. 11. 2. If the foundatins be de∣stroyed, what can the righteous do? Prov. 24. 22, 23. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, AND MEDDLE NOT WITH THOSE WHO ARE GIVEN TO CHANGE; For their calamity shall rise suddenly (which we have seen verified in many late Changers, Mock Par∣liaments, and self created new Powers,) and wh knoweth
the ruine of them both? should now at last banish all base carnal fears out of all timerous hearts, rouse up the lan∣guishing, fearfull, dead, stupid Spirits of our degenerated English Nation, and engage them all unanimously, un∣dauntedly to claim, vindicate, regain, re-establish those an∣cient undoubted Hereditary Fundamental Rights, iberties, Priviledges, Franchises, Laws, Government, (purchased with their Ancestors & their own dearest Blood, sweat, Treasures) which belong to the whole Kingdom; to all true English Parliaments, Freemen in general, and to every of them in particular; whereof they have of late years been forcibly disseised, or ypocritically cheated by pretended Patrons, Pre∣servers, and Propuguers of them; the substance whereof I have here set before their eyes in ten brief Propositions, and by Records, Statutes, Presidents, Histories, Contests, Re∣solutions in all ages, undauntedly, (as their Common Advo∣cate) asserted, fortified to my power, for their Encourage∣ment and president in this publick work. And if they will now but couragiously second me herein, with their joyn, bold, rightfull Claims, Votes, Declarations, and Re∣solut Demands of all and every of their enjoyments, and fu∣ture inviolable Establishments; with strenuous Oppositions of all illegal perpetual Imposts, Excises, Contributions, Pay∣ments (the chief nerves and cords to keep them still in bon∣dage by Mercinary Forces, supported only by them to keep them still in slavery) according to their Oaths, Vows, Pro∣testations, Duties, manifold late Declarations, Remonstran∣ces, Solemn League, Covenant, and the encouraging memo∣rable Presidents of their Ancestors in former ages here, re∣corded; I dare assure them (by Gods blessing) a desired good-Success, whereof theirSee Part. 1. p, 14, 15, 16. Ancestors never failed: no mortal Powers nor Armies whatsoever, having either Im∣pudency or Ability enough to deny, detain them from them, if they will butSee 1 Sam. 8. 4, to 22. ch. 12. 2. 2 Sam. 18. 2, 3, 4. Jer. 38. 5. generally, unanimously, couragiously, im∣portunately claim and demand them as their Birth-rights. But if they will still basely disown, betray, and cowardly desert both them and their Assertors, and leave them to a single combate with their combined Jesuitical enemies
(whom none take care to discover, suppress or banish out of our Realms, where they now swarm more than ever) and Armed Invaders; the Fate of our old English Britons, when they improvidently neglected to unite their Coun∣sels, Forces against, and fought only singly with the inva∣ding united Armies of the Romans, is like to be Englands condition now;Tacus in vita Agricole. Dum pugnant singuli, vincunntur uni∣versi: the single Champions of our Liberties, Laws, Rights, will be easily over-powered, destroyed, for the present; and all others (by their unworthy Treachery and Baseness, in not adhering to, but abandoning their present Patrons) discou∣raged, disabled to propugne, regain them for the future: and the whole Kingdom vanquished, yea enslaved for e∣ternity in all humane probability, to those who have bro∣ken yourJer. 28. 13, 14. former yokes of wood, but instead thereof have made for, and put upon you yokes of Iron: and by the Jesuites Machiavilian Plots and Policies, will reduce you by degrees under a meer Papal yoke at last, having deeply leavened many in power and arms, with their forementioned most desperate Jesuitical Positions, Practises and Politicks, which will soon usher in the whole body of Popery, and all dam∣nable Heresies whatsoever, by degrees, to the ruine of our Religion, as well as Laws and Liberties. Wherefore, seeing it neither is, nor can be reputed Treason, Felony, Sedition, Faction, nor any Crime at all, but a commendable bounden Duty, to which our Protestations, Oaths, Leagues, Covenants, Reason, Law, Conscience, our own private and the publick Interest, Safety of the Nation engage us, for all and every Freeborn Englishman, joyntly and severally to claim, maintain, preserve, by all just, ho∣nourable, publick and private wayes they may, their un∣questionable Hereditary Birth-rights, Laws, Liberties, Par∣liamentary Priviledges, &c. here asserted and presented to them, after so much Blood, Treasure, Labour spent to rescue them out of the hands of old and late oppressing Tyrants; nor any Offence at all, but a praise-worthy service now in me, or any other, publickly to encourage them to this du∣ty, (and the strenuous defence of our endangered under∣mined
Protestant Religion, subverted with our Laws & Li∣berties, and living or dying together with them) at this present season, as I have done heretofore upon all occasions; And seeing none can justly censure them or me, for discharging our Oathes, Consciences, Covenants, Protestations, Duties in this kinde, but such as shall thereby declare themselves Pub∣lick Enemies and Trayters to the whole Nation, Laws, Go∣vernment, Parliaments of England, as the Resolutions, Presidents,Part. 1. ch. 1. herein cited, yea their own best friends, (and ourSee the Ho∣milies against Disobedience, & wilfull Re∣bellion. Reformed Religion too) have already adjudged them: And seeingA Declarati∣on of the E∣gagements, Remonstran∣ces, & Reso∣lutions of Sir Tho. Fanfax, & the Gene∣ral Councel of the Armie, London, 1647. p. 150. Sir Thomas Fairfax and the General Councel of his Army, held at Putney Sept. 9. 1647. in their Declara∣ration, concerning THE FVNDAMENTAL AVTHORI∣TY & GOVERNMENT OF THE KINGDON; prin∣ted by their appointment, in these words: Whereas a Mem∣ber of the General Councel of this ARMY, hath publikely de∣clared and expressed himself, THAT THERE IS NO VI∣SIBLE AUTHORITY IN THE KINGDOM, BVT THE POWER & FORCE OF THE SWORD, (as others of them say since, and now both by words and deeds, without controll.) We therefore the said GENERAL COUNCEL (to testifie. How FARRE OUR HEARTS & MINDS ARE FROM ANY DESIGN OF SETTING UP THE POWER OF THE SWORD ABOVE OR AGAINST THE FUNDAMENTAL AUTHORITY & GOVERN∣MENT OF THE KINGDOM & OUR READINESSE TO MAINTAIN AND UPHOLD THE SAID AU∣THORITY:) have by a Free Voe (in the said Councel, no man contradicting) judged the said Member, TO BE EX∣PELLED THE SAID COUNCEL. Which we hereby thought fit to publish, as A CLEAR MANIFESTATION OF OUR DISLIKE & DISAVOWING SVCH PRIN∣CIPLES OR PRACTISES, (which notwithstanding they have since avowed pursued in the highest degree; and I desire them now to repent of▪ reform, and really make good) have engaged to maintain and propugne with their Swords, what I here endeavour to defend, support, with my Pen. And seeing they intituled their Printed Papers,
A Declaration of the Engagements, Remonstrances, Reprè∣sentations, Proposals, Desires, and Resolutions, from his Ex∣cellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, and THE GENERAL COVN∣CEL OF THE ARMY, for setling OF HIS MAJESTY IN HIS JVST RIGHTS, The PARLIAMENT in their JVST PRIVILEGES, and the SVBJECTS in their LI∣BERTIES & FREEDOMS. Also Representations of THE GRIEVANCES OF THE KINGDOM, & REMEDIES PROPOVNDED, for REMOVING THE PRESENT PRESSVRES WHEREBY THE SVBJECTS ARE BVRDENED (and EXCISES, TAXES amongst the rest) And the Resolutions of the Army, For the estab∣lishment of a firm & lasting peace IN CHVRCH & KING∣DOM, printed by their own, and the Lords House special Orer, London 1647: the self-same things I here contend, plead for, (which I wish they would now really make good by their future consultations and actions to avoid the just censures of meer Hypocrites and Impostors, as the whole World will else repute them.) I shall therefore exhort not only the whole Army, Army-Officers, and their General Councel; but likewise the whole English Nation, and all real Lovers of their own or their Countries Liberties, Peace, Laws, Ease, Safety, Religion, and future establishment in this common Cause, in the words of the Philistines one to another in a time of need, when they were greatly affraid, 1 Sam. 4. 9. Be strong and1 Cor. 16. 13. quit your selves like men, O ye Philistines, that ye be not servante to the Hebrews, as they have been to you quit your selves like men, fight, &c. That so (as the Apostle writes in the like case, Phil. 1. 27, 28.) Whether I come and see you, or be absent from you▪ I may hear of your affairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving together for the faith of the Gospel; (and the anci∣ent Fundamental Laws, Liberties, Rights, Priviledges, Par∣liaments, Government and Religion of our Realm, which the Jesuites and their Instruments make their Master-piece totally to undermine and subvert) And in nothing terrified by your Adversaries, which is to them an evident token of Perdition, but to you of Salvation, and that of God. If the Pre∣sidents
of your renowned Ancesters here recorded; the Pa∣terns ofRecorded in Livy, Tully, Plutarch, Vale∣rius Maximus, and others. Recta honesta digna Imperio, digna populo Romano, omnia pericula pro Re∣publica subire, mori pro patria. Cicero de Fini∣bus bonorum, &c. p. 365. and Tusc. Qaest. p. 445. many gallant Pagan Romans, Graecians, who have spent their Lives, for their Countries, Laws, Liberties; Or if my example and these my Lucubrations shall provoke you hereunto; I shall think my labour well bestowed; and you and your Posterities worthy to live like English-Freemen. But if you wil now neither manfully demand, speak, nor con∣tend for them any more, out of a slavish fear of a prevailing Army raised only for their just defence, or any other hu∣mane Powers whatsoever; nor once adventure with uni∣ted Spirits now at last, so much as confidently, boldly to ask these your unquestionable Birthrights at the Thrones of any mortal Grandees, your Fellow-Subjects, when God Almigh∣ty himself commands you, to come with boldnesse to his coelesti∣al Throne of Grace, that you may obtain (not meer right as here, but) Mercy it self, and Grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4. 16. Qui timide rogat, docet negare; you can neither hope for, nor ever obtain them for the future, but deserve eternally to forfeit them, and you and yours to be made slaves for ever: However I (though these Collections prove successless) shal carry this as a comfortable Cordial with me to my grave, That I have faithfully discharged my Conscience and bounden Duty to my degenerous Native Country, by en∣devouring all I could both to make and preserve it free indeed; to detect and prevent all Jesuitical Plots and Practises, to undermine, imbroyl, divide, subvert, ruine it; and used my utmost sincerest constant endeavours in my place and calling herein. But if through the Malice, Tyranny or In∣justice of any prevailing Enemies of publick Freedom, or Jesuitical Agents, I shall chance to suffer for it in any kind, (as I have formerly done for most of my publick services of this nature) be it close-imprisonments, Fines, Pillories, Stig∣matizings or Death it self; I shall onely say beforehand, as Gregory the Great did heretofore: Indict. 2. Epist. 78. In causa qua Deo placee cupio, homines non formido: and as noble Heroick Esther did, in a like publick case for her en∣dangered captivated Nation,Esth. 4. 16. If I perish, I perish: and this my unrighteous suffering, shall be a new Glorious
permissive, ordering, over-ruling Providence, doth no wayes justify nor extenuate the guilt of any Traytors, Rebels, Mur∣derers, Conspirators sinnes▪ Treasons, Rebellions, Murders, Regicides, Conspiracies, Rapines, Oppressions, or Wicked Devices, which he permits them to plot, act, accomplish; so it doth in no wise exempt them in Gods or Mens esteem from being the true Original Plotters, Contrivers, and imme∣diate instrumental Actors of them; nor from the divine or humane Punishments which they in justice demerit; as is most evident by Gen. 50. 15. to 21. Psal. 37. 7. 9. Prov. 24. 10, 21, 22. Iob 20. 5, 6, &c. 1 Kings 12. 12. to 25. c. 15. 23. to 30. c. 16. 1. to 30. specially ver. 7, 8. 2 Kings 11. 1. to 17. c. 14. 5, 6. c. 15. 8. to 32. c. 17. 21, 22. 1 Sam. 8. 2 Sam. 1. 2. to 17. c. 4. throughout. Hos. 1. 4. c. 8. 4, 5. Isay 29. 15, 16 c. 10. 5, 6, 7, &c. Acts 1. 16. to 21. c. 2. 23. 1 Thess. 2. 14, 15, 16. Mat. 27▪ 3, 4, 5. compared to∣gether. And if we should look upon all our late Changes, Revolutions in our Kingdoms, Government, Church, Parlia∣ments, Religion, Laws, (wrought by the Iesuites and their Instruments) as the meer wonderfull immediate Productions and Glorious Operations of God himself in the world, and upon the instruments imployed in them, only as Gods own precious chosen Saints and Servants, accomplishing nothing but his own determinate Will, Providence, Councel, (though to satisfie their own ambition, covetousnesse, malice, rapine, blood-thir∣stinesse, lusts) as many now proclaim them, and not as Conspirators, Treacherous, Perfidious, Pernicious Malefact∣ors in the highest degree, as well as Iack Cade, Wat Tyler, Strafford, Canterbury, or the murderers of our Saviour, Jo∣ash, Ishbosheth, with other Kings heretofore, and of Henry the 3. and 4. of France, of late; there should then be no Traytors, Conspirators, Murderers, Sinners, Treasons, Con∣spiracies, Murders, Sinnes, in the world (being all perpetra∣ted by Gods permissive Providence) no Law, nor Hell to pu∣nish them: and it would be no less than a direct resisting, fighting against God and his Providence, for any Christians, Kingdoms, Kings, or Loyal Subjects, to pray against, resist, oppose the Treasons, Murders, Conspiracies, Vsurpations,
Rebellions, Innovations, Plots, of any Iesuites or Romish Emissaries, or their under-Agents, against our Kings, King∣doms, Governors, Parliaments, Laws, Liberties, Govern∣ment and Religion; which would be professed Blasphemy, or Frenzy at least, for any man to affirm. 2. That this Iesuite Parsons▪ in his oks of the Reforma∣tion of all the States of England, as he prescribed Reforma∣tions to the Prince, Court, Counsellors, Noblemen, Bishops, Prelates, Pastors, Universities, Lawyers, Laws, in which he will have STRANGE METAMORPHOSES; so likewise, THE COVRT OF PARLIAMENT HE WILL HAVE BROVGHT TO BETTER FORM, as W. W. (a secular Priest) in A Dialogue between a Secular Priest and a Lay-Gentleman, printed at Rhemes, An. 1601. p. 95. Watson in his Quadlibets, p. 92. to 96. 320. to 334. William Clark (a scular Priest in his Answer to Father Parsons Lbel, p. 75. &c.) in direct terms attest. And may we not then justly suspect, that the late New-models and Reformations of our Kingdoms, Parliaments, Government, Laws, &c. (ori∣ginally promoted by ourSee their printed Decla∣rations of Iune 14. 23. Aug. 1. 2. 1647. Their Agree∣ment of the People, Jan. 1648. & Go∣vernment of the Common∣wealth of England, 1654. moulded by them. Army Counsels, and Officers) proceeded primarily from the Iesuites Projections & Plots against them, if the Statutes of 23 Eliz. c. 1. 27 Eliz. c. 2. 35 Eliz. c. 2, 3. Iac. c. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7. 7 Iac. c. 6. and the ma∣nifold Declarations of both Houses of Parliament, Exact Collection, p. 491, 492, 497, 498, 616. 631, 666, 698, 813, to 828. may be judges? 3. That the Iesuites drift directly is (immediatly by means ofDo not many now boast, talk, write of such a Con∣quest by the Army over England? CONQUEST intended for England) to bring it and all Christendom into an uproar, FOR COMMON SOVLDI∣ERS TO EXAMINE THEIR SOVERAIGNS, WHAT TITLE THEY HOLD BY; that thereupon themselves by craft, money and multitudes gathered together through their Policy, may bring England, (and then) Spain, and all the rest under their subjection and Monarchy: And that princi∣pally by this Iesuitical Position; That every Precopie or Tar∣tarian multitude, getting once the stile and title of a PUB∣LICK STATE, or HELVETIAN COMMON∣WEALTH, may alter, change and innovate the course of in∣heritances
and succession TO CROWNS AND KING∣DOMS, and also to every private Persons heritage holden in Fee-smple: asQuodlibets, p. 322, 323, 333, 334. William Watson assures us in these very terms. And whether the Jesuites have not instructed our Army Officers and Common Souldiers upon this pretext, and for this very end, to examine their Soveraigns, yea, our Par∣liaments Titles, Priviledges, and Powers too of late, and dis∣pose of, reject, suppress them at their pleasure; let themselves, the whole Nation, with all in present power, in the fear of God, most seriously consider, without passion or affection, before it be over-late. 4. That the Oathes of Supremacy and Allegiance (which all Members of Parliament ought by Law to take, before they can sit, or vote as Members) specially made and pre∣scribed by our most wise, zealous1 Eliz. c. 1. 5 Eu. c. 1. 1. Jac. c. 4. 3. Jac. c. 4, 5. 7 Jac. c. 6. 16 Caroli. The Act for Trien∣nial Parlia∣ments. Protestant Parliaments, to prevent the Treasonable plots and designs of Popes, Iesuites, and Papists, against our Protestant Princes, Realms, Parlia∣ments, Religion, though confirmed by many Statutes, and con∣taining in them, only the Declaration of such a Duty, as every true and well-affected Subject, not only by the bond of Allegi∣ance, but also by the COMMANDMENT OF GOD, ought to bear to the King, his Heirs and Successors; and none but See J. E. his Right & Juris∣diction of the Prelate and the Prince; cap. 15. Beca∣nus, Bellarmine, Lessius, Eudoe∣mon Johannis, & others a∣gainst this Oath. persons infected with Popish Superstition formerly oppugned, (as the Prologue of the Statute of 7 Iacobi c. 6. positively resolves) have by late State innovators, not only been dis∣continued, suspended, but declaimed against and repealed (as much as in them lay) asSee the printed Edicts repealing thē, & enforcing the Engage∣ment, An. 1649. VNLAWFUL OATHS; the old Lawes against Iesuits and Popish Seminaries, discontinu∣ed, abrogated, or coldly executed.See the Propositions for the Trea∣ty. The New Oath for abjuration of Popery, with all Bills against Iesuites and Pa∣pists, presented to the late King by both Houses the last Parlia∣ment, and by him consented to in the Isle of Wight, wholly laid aside, and quite buried in oblivion. The Solemn Pro∣testation, League and Covenant, prescribed by the last Par∣liaments taken by all the well-affected in all the 3 Kingdoms (toSee the Preface to the Covenant. prevent the dangerous plots of Papists, Iesuites, and our common enemies to destroy our Religion, Churches, Realms, Government, Parliaments, Laws, Liberties) quite
antiquated, decied, detested, and aSee the E∣dicts for the Engagement, An. 1649. New Engagement forcibly imposed under highest penalties and disabilities upon all men, diametrically contrary to these Oaths, Protestations and Covenants, which have been (by a new kind of Papal power) publickly dispenced with, and the people absolved from them, to become sworn Homages to other new self-created Lords and Masters. And are not all these, with the late Proclaimed Universal Toleration and Protection of all Religi∣ons, to considerate zealous Protestants, strong Arguments of the Jesuites Predominancy in our late counsels, transactions, and changes of publike Government? 5. That the Notion of THE PRESENT GOVERN∣MENT, (in my weak apprehension) derived its original from the Iesuites late-inventedBellarmin de Pontf. Ro∣mano. Sir Hum: Linde his Via devia. PRESENT CHURCH, the onely Supream Power and Judge of Controversies, which all men must submit unto, by a meer absolute blind Obedience, and implicit faith, without dispute by their determination: as they must do, by a like Iesuitical blind obedience (newly taught and obtruded on us) to that present Republican Go∣vernment, and new Optimacity, and Popularity, lately set up instead of our Monarchy. Which two forms of Govern∣ment, and want of a King and Monarchy, as they are the punishment of a peoples Sins, and the Transgressions of a Land by Gods own resolution, not a Mercy. Hosea 10. 3. c. 1. 4. Ier. 18. 7. Prov. 28. 2. Ez. 19. 14. Lam. 4. 20. c. 5, 7, 8, 12. so they were the inventions of Factious Grecians at first, wch Thucidides Hist. l. 1. 3. Plutarch, Ly∣sander, Aristot. Polit. l. 4, & 5. put all their Cities into Combustions, fury, frenzy, and civil wars against each other, to their utter overthrow in conclusi∣on: witness these verses ofSee Grotius de jure Belli & Pacis, l. 3. c. 15. P. 537. Heniochus, a Greek Comedian: Tum geminae ad illas accesserunt Mulieres (TITAS QUAE CUNCTA CONTURBARUNT: OPTIMA∣Est nomen alteri: alteri POPULARITAS; (RUNT. Quarum incitatis PRIDEM EXTERNATAE FU∣ So the Iesuits,Watsons Qudlibets, p. 320, 321, 312, 332, 333. Parsons,De Monar. Hisp. c. 25. Campanella,Conte de Galiazzo, Gualdo Priorato Hist. part 3. p. 175, 176. Car. Richelieu, designed to introduce & set them up among so us in Engl. Scotl. and Ireland, of purpose to divide destroy us by civil wars and combustions, and bring us under their Jesuitical power at last,
as the marginal Authorities declare to all the world. And if this be undeniable to all having any sence of Religion, Peace or publick Safety left within their brests, is it not more than high time for us to awake out of our former lethargy, & for∣did, selfish stupidity, to prevent our ruine, by these and other forementioned Jesuitical practises? Of can any Englishman, or real Parl. be justly offended with me for this impartial discovery of them? Or for my endeavours to put all the dis∣located Members and broken bones of our old inverted fun∣damental body Politick, into theirOptandū qui∣dem est, st modo Respublica sal∣va et incolumis futura sit, ut Civitatis parts omnes quidem sibi constent, in suoq́ statu per∣maneant. At ut praesenti statu gaudeant, Reges Regiae dignita∣tis splendore commoventur; Optimates Se∣natoriae, haec enim illis pro virtutis suae praemio est: po∣pulus Ephoriae. Aristot. Polit. l. 2. c. 7. due places, joints and po∣stures again, without which there is no moreSee 1 Cor. 12. 12. to 31. 25 H. 8. c. 22. 26 H. 8. c. 3. 1 Jac. c. 1, 2. 3 Jac. c. 1, 2. possibility of reducing it to its, prstine health, ease, settlement, tranquility, prosperity, or of preserving it from perpetual pain, inquieta∣tion, consumption and approaching death, than of a natural body whose principal members continue dis-joynted, and bones broken all in pieces, as all prudent State-Physicians must acknowledge. These five Considerations, together with the Premises; will I presume sufficiently wipe off all the malicious scanda∣lous Imputations, which Militiere and other Papists, have injuriously cast upon the Principles and chief Professors of our Reformed Religion, in relation to the late exorbitant Procee∣dings against the King, Parliament, the publike Revolutions, Confusions, Ataxies both in our Church & Kingdoms; and retort them on the Iesuitical, Papal, seditious, Treasonable, Antimonarchical Principles and Professors of their Religion, especially the Iesuits and French Cardinals (Militiere his late Lords and Masters) the original Contrivers, and chief clande∣stine Promoters of them, as every day more and more disco∣vers to the world. And withall abundantly justifie this my undertaking & impartial discovery of Jesuitical plots to ruin our Church, Religion, Kingdoms, Parliaments, Laws, Liberties, Government, against all malicious Enemies, Accusers Malig∣ners whatsoever, before all the Tribunals of God or Men, where I shal be ready to justifie them upon all occasions. In perpetual testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my Hand, and by Gods Grace shall ever be ready to seal them and the truth of God with my blood, if called out to do it. Swainswick, Aug. 12. 1654. William Prynne.
A Seasonable Legal and Histo∣ricall VINDICATION and Chronologicall Col∣lection of the good Old Fundamental Liberties, Franchise, Rights, Laws of all English Freemn; (their best Inheritance, Birth-right, Security, a∣gainst all Arbitrary Tyranny, Aegyptian Slavery and Burdens) of late years most dangerously under∣mined, oppugned, and almost totally subverted, under the specious feigned Disguise of their De∣fence, Enlargement, and future Establishment up∣on a sure Basis. IT is an universall received Principle, and experimentall truth, beyond all contradi∣ction, That no naturall structure, no artificial building, no Civil or Ecclesiastical Corporati∣on, Realm, Republike, Government, or Society of men; no Art or Science whatsoever, can possibly be erected, supported, established, preserved or continued in their being or well-being, without FOVNDATIONS; Whereon, as they were at first erected, so they must neces∣sarily still depend, or else they will presently fall to utter ruine.
Hence it is (to wave all Humane Authorities in so clear a verity) that in Gods own sacred unerringJohn 17. 17. 2 Cor. 6. 7. Ephes. 1. 12. Jam. 1. 18. word of Truth, we finde frequent mention of the naturall2 Sa. 22. 8. 16. Job 38. 4 6. Ps 18. 15. & 102 5. Pro. 8. 29. Is. 24. 18. & 40. 21 & 48. 13. & 51 13. 16. Zech. 12 1. Mic. 1. 6. Joh. 17. 24 Eph 4. 4 Heb. 1. 10. & 4 3. & 9. 26 1 Pet. 1. 20 Foun∣dations of the the vast natural Fabrick of the Earth, Heavens and world it self; of the Artificial, Material1 Kin. 5. 17 & 6. 37. & 7. 9, 10 Ezr. 4. 13. & 6. 3. Ps. 137. 7. Ezech. 41. 8. Hag. 2. 8. Zech. 4 9. & 8 9. Mat. 7. 26, 27 Luke. 6. 48, 49. Foundations of the Material Temple, Wals, City of Gods own most famous Jerusalem; and of private Houses: of the spi∣rituall Isa. 28. 16. & 54. 11. Ps. 87. 1 1 Cor. 3. 10, 11, 12. Heb. 11. 10. 1 Pet. 2. 6 Rev. 21. 14. 19. Foundations of the Spiritual Temple, City, Jerusa∣lem, and whole Church of God; even Jesus Christ him∣self: of Doctrinal2 Tim. 1. 19. Heb. 6. 1. 2. Foundations, and first Principles of Re∣ligion; Christianity, Salvation: yea, of the Politicall Foun∣dations of Kingdomes, Republicks, Churches, Governments, States: Which being once shaken, undermined, subver∣ted, razed, or dstroyed, bring unavoidable ruine and desolation upon them, (Psal. 11. 3. Psal. 82. 5. Jer. 50. 15. & 51. 25, 26. Micah 1. 6, 7, 9.) Even as we daily see Castles, Walls, Houses to fall instantly to the ground, and be∣come an heap of Confusion, when theirJer. 50. 15 Mic, 1. 6, 7 Luke 6. 48, 49 Matt. 7. 26, 27 Foundations are blown up, decayed, or demolished. Upon which consideration, those publike Laws, which establish, fence, fortifie, support the Fundamental Con∣stitutions, Rights, Liberties, Priviledges of any Nation, Kingdome, Republike, (essentiall to their being and sub∣sistence, as a free or happy people, against the Invasions, un∣derminings, enchroachments of any Tyrants, Ʋsurpers, Oppres∣sors, or publike enemies, are usually stiled Fundamental Laws; and have ever been reputed so sacred, inviolable, im∣mutable, in all ages, upon any pretences of necessity, or publike safety, that most Nations, and our own English An∣cestors above others, have freely chosen to hazard, yea, lose their estates, lives, in their just defence, against such ex∣orbitant tyrannical Kings, and other Powers, who by force or policy have endeavoured to violate, alter, or subvert them; rather than out of a Cowardice, Sottishnesse, Carelesnesse, or want of cordial love to the Publike, to suffer the least in∣fringment, repeal, or alteration of them to the inthrawl∣ing of themselves or their posterities to the arbitrary wils of such domineering Tyrants and Ʋsurping Powers.
Now because, after all our Old and New (many years) bloody, costly, dangerous Contests and Wars, for the main∣tenance of our good Old Fundamental Liberties, Laws, ights, Priviledges, against all secret or open underminers of them, I clearly behold with grief of heart, that there is a strang monstrous generation of new Tyrannical State-Hereticks, sprung up amongst us; who are grown so desperately impudent, as not only to write, but publikely to assert in print, inLilburn tried and cast p. 39, 142. to 148, 154. Caes Voice from the Temple, which perswade the subversion and abolishing of al former Laws, especially for Tithes and Mi∣nisters support. Books printed by AUTHORITY, (even in Capitals, in every Title page) That the Freemen and People of England have no such unalterable Fundamental Laws and Li∣berties left them by their forefathers (as our Ancestours here∣tofore contested for, both in the Field and Parliament-House, with William the Conqueror, Henry the first, King John, Henry the third, Edward 1. 2. 3. Richard 2. with other Kings and Princes; and our late Parliament and Armies too, with King James and King Charls.) That neither Ma∣gna Charta, nor the Petition of Right, nor the Laws for try∣ing Malefactors by Juries of their Pears, are Fundamental or unalterable; but that the State Physitians (or rather Mountebanks) of our time (who are not tied up to them, but left free unto themselves) may lay them quite aside, either in part or whol, as they see cause. Yea, have now attained to such a super-transcendent Authority, that they may (as they as∣sert) lay aside all Parliaments & Parliamentary wayes, & appoint something else, as more seasonable and proper to us, and as Pro∣vidence makes way for it, if they see it more conducing to the safety and good of the Commonwealth (that is, to their own privat Interests, Honors; Profits, Securities, Designes, Op∣pressions, Rapines, gilded over with this specious pre∣text) And then peremptorily conclude, That to plead for these and other fundamental laws and liberties, as unalterable, (though the only Bulwarks & Badges of our Freedome) is nothing else, but to enslave the Nation: for by such a Principle, people do not only lose their Liberty, but are brought under such a kinde of Tyranny, out of which (AS BEING WORSE THAN THE AEGYP∣TIAN BONDAGE) there is no hope of deliverance.
An absurd Tyrannical Paradox, transcending any I ever yet met with in any Author; stripping us naked of all our long enjoyed Laws, Liberties, Franchises, great Char∣ters at once; tending onely to reduce, and perpetually inthrall us under such an absolute AEGYPTIAN BONDAGE and Tyranny, without any hope of future deliverance from it, which some now endeavourSe the Go∣vernment of the Cōmon-wealth of England, &c. Artie. 3. 12. 21. 22, 24, 7, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 38, 39, 41. to entaile on us and our posterities for ever, by an Iron law, and Yoke of Steel, in stead of restoring to us that glorious Freedome, which we have so long expected from them in vain. And because I finde the generality of the Nobility, Gen∣try, Clergy, Commonalty of our Nation, after all their late years expensive bloody wars, and Parliamentary Disputes, for the defence and preservation of these our ancient Here∣ditary Fundamentall Charters, Laws, Liberties, Privi∣ledges, so strangely degenerated both from themselves, and their Heroick prudent Ancestors, as that they are more readily inclined, upon every occasion, out of a base, unchristian, unmanly, un-english fear, or sottish cowardise and stupidity, wittingly to desert, betray, surrender them al up into the hands of any invading Ʋsrpers, without the least Publike Claim, Dissertation, Defence, Dspute; then diligently or couragiously to cōtend or suffer for them, of late they did: So as that which Paul once taxed in the lavish besotted Corinthians, 2 Epist. 11. 20. may be most truly averred of our degenerated, infatuated English Na∣tion: Ye suffer if a man bring you into bondage, if a man de∣ur you, if a man take of you, if a man exlt himself (above your Laws, Liberties, Franchises, Parliaments, Kings, Nobles, Properties, Lives, Consciences, and all2 The. 2. 4. that is cal∣led God, or warshipped) if a man smite you on the face; not∣withstanding all their manifold lateSee Exact Collect. and a General colle∣ction of all Or∣dinances, &c. Protestations, Vows, Covenants, Remonstrances, Declaration and Publike Engage∣ments to the contrary. And withall, after diligent enqui∣ry, discovering scarce one man of Eminency or Power in the Nation, nor so much as one of my degenerated temporizing
Profession of the Law, (even when theSe Culpepers and illy's Mrlins and Almanacks, John Cannes Voice. Lilb. tried and cast, with many Pe∣titions and Pamphlets a∣gainst the Law and Lawyers. The Order of Aug. 19. 1653. That there should be a Committee sele∣cted to consider of a New body of the Law for the government of this Common∣wealth. whole body of our laws, and all its Professors, are violently assaultd, and devoted unto suddain ruine, by many lawlesse spirits) who hath so much courage, magnanimity, honesty, zeal, or cordial love to his Native Country, remaining in his brest, as manfully to appear in publike, for the strenuous necessary defence of these our Hereditary, fundamentall laws, liberties, rights, franchises, (though their own, and every other English Freemans best inheritance and security) for fear of being persecuted, imprisoned, close imprisoned, exiled, condemned, destroyed, as a Traytor, Rebell, Sedi∣tious person, enemy to the Publike, or disturber of the Kingdomes peace, by those who are truly such: I there∣upon conceived, I could not undertake or performe a more necessary, seasonable, beneficiall service for my Country and ingrate unworthy Nation (who are now a∣shamed, afraid, for the most part, to own, visit, or be seen in the company of those Gallant men, much lesse to assist, defend, and stick close unto them in their dangers, ac∣cording to the sixth Article of their late Solemn League and Covenant, who have suffered, acted, and stood up most for their Common Liberties, Rights, Freedoms, Religion, a∣gainst all invading Tyrant, to their great discourage∣ment and betraying:) not pitch upon any Subject more proper for me, either as a common Lawyer, or as a constant Advocate and Sufferer for the publike Cause, and Liberties of the Nation, as well under our late extravagant Free State, as former Regal and Episcopal arbitrary Tyranny, than in this juncture of our publike affairs, to present our whole distracted unsetled Kingdome, with A Legal and Historical Vindication, and Chronological Collection, in all ages, of these Ancient, Hereditary liberties, Franchises, Rights, and all those National, Parliamentall, legal and Martial Contests, Laws, Charters, Records, Monuments of former and late times, for their Confirmation and inviolable observation, which our Ancestors and our selves have alwaies hitherto reputed Fundamental, unalterable and in∣violable, upon any pretext, and have most eagerly contended
for, with the Prodigal expence of many millions of trea∣sure, and whole Oceans of gallant Christian English blood. And if upon the serious perusall of them, the univer∣sality of our degenerated Nation, after their many so∣lemn Protestations, Vows, Leagues, Covenants, Remonstrances, inviolably to defend and maintain them, shall still so un∣dervalue them now at last, (as most actually have done) as not to esteem them worth the owning, maintaining, vindicating, or perpetuating any longer; & thereby draw upon their heads, the reall guilt of all those bloody Wars, Murders, Tumults, Violences, Rapines, Oppressi∣ons, Sins, Mischiefs, illegal Taxes, Excises, Exorbitan∣cies, which their many late years pretended necessary de∣fence and preservation have brought upon our three whol Nations; let them henceforth, like so many dastardly conquered bondslaves,Exod. 21. 6. bored through the ears, publikely dis∣avow, disclaim, renounce, abjure them, for themselves and their posterities for ever, as meer worthlesse toyes, or pernicious inventions, fit onely to kindle perpetual wars and discords between King and People, head and mem∣bers, superiours and inferiours; or, as poor slender Cob∣webs, (as now they prove) able to hold none within compasse, but the very weakest Flies, broken thorow with ease and impunity, by every greater Fly, or armed Waspe, creeping up into any Power or Supream Authority, by right or wrong; and swept down to the very ground, by e∣very new Broom in the hand of vpstart Innovators. But if upon saddest deliberation, they shall really e∣stimate them to be such incompatable, rich, precious Jewels, and ancient Inheritances, as are every way worth the in∣finite Treasures, Wars, Blood, Cares, Consultations, Troubles, heretofore and of late years expended, both to gain, retain, confirm, and perpetuate them, to them and their Posterities for ever, as their principal earthly securi∣ty, and beatitude; I hope they will all then unanimously conclude with the Poet, Non minor est virtus quàm quaerere, PARTA TVERI: And both by their Votes and Actions, return the self-same
peremptory magnanimous answer to any Caesar, Conque∣ror, Potentate, power, or Combination of men, whatsoever, (who shall endeavour by force, fraud, or flattery to com∣pell or perswade them, to sell, resign, betray, or give up these their Ancestrall Priviledges, Inheritances, Birth∣rights to them) as Naboth once did to King Ahab, 1 Kings 21. 3. The Lord forbid it us, that we should give (sell or be∣tray) the INHERITANCE OF OƲR FATHERS (and our Posterities likewise) unto thee, or you; though they should suffer for this Answer and Refusall, as much as Naboth did from bloody Ahab and Jezebel. But whatever low price or estimate this spurious, stupid, sordid, slavish age may set upon these richest Pearls; yet for my own particular, upon serious consideration of these Chronological Collections, and the Solemn Oaths, Pro∣testations, Vows, League and Covenant, obliging me to de∣fend them to the uttermost; I value the whole Nations publike, and my own (with my cordial friends) private in∣terest in them, at so high a rate, that I would rather chear∣fully part with ten thousand lives, and all the treasures of the Nation, Indies, were I owner of them, then wit∣tingly, negligently, or unworthily sell, betray, or resign them up to any mortals or powers whatsoever, upon any pretences or Conditions, after all my former Publicati∣ons, Contests, Sufferings, Losses, &c. for their just defence. And to the end al others might now take special notice of the inestimable value our Ancestors in all ages have set upon them, and what successive wars, conflicts, they have chearfully undertaken for their preservation; I have at vacant hours compiled this ensuing Vindication and Collecti∣on of the old Fundamental liberties, franchises, laws of all Eng∣lish freemen, which I shall bequeath to my most beloved Na∣tive Country, in general, and every reall Heroick Patron of them in particular, as the best Legacy I can leave behinde me, both for their present and future Enfranchisment, Im∣munity, security, from all Arbitrary Tyranny, Slavery and yokes of Bondage, under which they have a long time lan∣guished, and lamented in the bitterness of their spirits.
The Method I resolve herein to pursue, is this: 1. I shall produce some punctuall Authorities of mo∣ment, to evidence, That the Kingdome and Freemen of Eng∣land, have some ancient Hereditary just Rights, Liberties, Pri∣viledges, Franchises, Laws and Customs, properly called FVN∣DAMENTAL; and likewise a Fundamental Government, no wayes to be altered, undermined, subverted directly or indirectly, to the publique prejudice, under pain of highest Treason in those, who shall attempt it, especially by fraud, force, or armed power. 2. I shall, in brief Propositions, present you with the chiefest and most considerable of them, which our Ance∣stors in former ages, and our latest real Parliaments have resolved to be, and eargerly contended for, as FUNDA∣MENTAL, essentiall to their being and well-being, as a Free People, Kingdome, Republique, unwilling to be enslaved under any Yokes of Tyranny, any arbitrary,  po∣sitions or Powers whatsoever, Then give you a briefe touch of their severall late unparalelld violations, both by the Edicts and Actions of usurping Powers. 3. I shall in a Chronological way, tender you a large Hi∣storical Catalogue of National Parliamental, civill and military▪ Contests, Votes, Declarations, emonstrances, Oathes, Vows, Protestations, Covenants, Engagements, Excom∣munications, Confirmations, Evidences, Statutes, Char∣ters, Writs, Records, Judgments and Authorities in all ages, undeniably evidencing, declaring, vindicating, establishing, perpetuating these Fundamental Hereditary Rights, Liberties, Priviledges, Franchises, Customs, Laws, and abundantly manifesting the extraordinary care, indu∣stry, zeal, courage, wisdome, vigilancy of our Ancestours, to de∣fend, preserve, and perpetuate them to posterity, with∣out the least violation or diminution. 4. I shall vindicate the excellency, indifferency, and leg∣lity of trying all Malefactors whatsoever, by Juries of their eers, upon legal Processe and Indictments; and manifest the illegallity, injustice, partiality, dangerous consequences, of admitting or introducing any other form of Trials, by New. Arbitrary Martiall Commissions, or Courts of High Ju∣stice,
(or ratherSummumjus, est summa in∣juria, Cic. de Officiis p. 611. injustice) inconsistent with, and destru∣ctive to the Fundamental Rights, Liberties, Priviledges, Laws, Franchises of the English Nation, and of most dangerous President to Posterity; being set up by the greatest preten∣ders to publike Liberty, Law, and the heifest inveighers against Arbitrary Regal Tyranny and Power, which ne∣ver publikely established such arbitrary illegal Tryals and new Butcheries of Christian English Freemen, by any law, and may fall to imitate them in future Ages, by their ex∣ample. Each of these I intend to prosecute in distinct Chapters in their order. CHAP. 1. 1. For the first of these: That the Kingdome and Freemen of England, have some ancient Hereditary Rights, Liber∣ties, Priviledges, Franchises, Laws and Customs, properly cal∣led FƲNDAMENTAL; and likewise a FƲNDAMEN∣TALL GOVERNMENT, no wayes to be altered, under∣mined, subverted, directly or indirectly, under pain of High Treason in those who shall attempt it; especially by fraud, force, or armed power. I Shall confirm the first part of it, by these ensuing pun∣ctual Authorities of moment, against thoseLilbourn tried and cast p. 39, 40, 142, to 148 and elsewhere. John Cannes  Voice from the Temple. John Rogers Mene Tekel, Perez. p. 6. Lilly and Cul∣peper in their Prognosticati∣ons An. 1653, & 1654. See the Armies Pro∣posals. traiterous late published Pamphlets, which professedly deny it, and endeavour, a totall abrogation of all former Lawes, to set up a New modell and Body of the law, to rule us for the future, according to their pleasures. The first is, the expresse words of the great Charters of the Liberties of England, granted by King John, Anno 1215. in the 16 year of his Reign; Regranted and confirmed by King Henry the third, in the 9 year of his Reign, and sundry times afterwards and by King Edward the first, in the 25 and 28 years of his reign: Wherein these three Kings successively, by their several grand Charters, under their great Seals, did grant, give, and confirm, to all the Nobi∣lity,
is, and ever shall be, far from the thoughts and intents of all good Kings, Governours and Parliament, who bear a sincere care and affection to the Subjects of England, to alter or innovate them. 3. That by these ancient good Laws, Priviledges and customs, not only the Kings Regall Authority, but the peoples Security of lands, livings, and priviledges, (both in general and particular) are preserved and maintained. 4. That by the abolishing or altering of them, it is impossible, but that present confusion will fall upon the whol state and frame of this Kingdom: Which I wish all Inno∣vators and New Modellers of our Lawes and Government would now at last lay seriously to heart, and the whole Kingdome and English Nation sadly consider, who have found it an experimental truth of late years, and no imagi∣nary seigned speculation. 3. The third is, The Remontrance of the whole House of Commons in Parliament, delivered in Writing to King James, in the Parliament of 7. Jacobi, Anno 1610. which begins thus: To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. Most Gracious Soveraign, Whereas we your Majesties most humble Subjects, the Com∣mons assembled in Parliament,See the 1 and 6 Proposition in cap. 2. having received first by Message, and since by speech from your Majesty, a Command of restraint, from debating in Parliament your Majesties Right of imposing upon your Subjects Goods exported out of, or imported into this Realm, yet allowing us to examine the grievance of these Impositions, in re∣gard of quantity, time, and other circumstances of dis∣proportion thereto incident: We your humble Sub∣jects nothing doubting, but that your Majesty had no intent by that command, to infring the ancient and fun∣damentall Rights of the Liberty of PARLIAMENT, in point of exact discussing of all matters concerning them and their Possessions, Goods, and Rights whatsoever: Which yet we cannot but conceive to be done in effect by this Command; Do with all humble Duty make this Remonstrnce to your Majesty.
First, we hold it an Ancient, general and undoubted Right of Parliament, to debate freely all matters, which do properly concern the Subject and his Right or Estate: which freedome of debate being once fore-closed, the essence of the Liberty of Parliament is withall dissolved, &c. Here the whole House of Commons, in a speciall Remon∣strance to King James, (printed and published by Order of a Committee of the House of Commons for licensing of Books, dated 20 Maii 17. Caroli 1641.) Declare, resolve, vindi∣cate and maintain, one principal, ancient, fundamentall, general, undoubed right of the Liberty of Parliament, a∣gainst the Kings intrenchment on it: Of which should they be but once fore closed, the Essence of the Liberty of Parliament is withall dissolved. And peradventure it may not be unworthy the most serious disquisition of the next ensuing nominal or real Parliament, to examine, whether some clauses and restri∣ctions in the 9. 12. 14. 16, 17. 21. 22. 24, 25. 27. 30. 32, 33. 36, 37, 38, 39, 40. Articles (or strings) of the New Instrument intituled, The Government of the Common-wealth of Eng∣land, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto be∣longing; as it was publikely declared at Westminster the 16. day of December 1653, &c. do not as much, nay far more intrench upon the ancient Fundamental, General undoubted Rights and Liberty of Parliament, and parliamentary free debates, to the dissolution of the Essential liberty of all future Parliaments, as this Command of King James did, or as the Bishops late Canons, imposed on the Clergy in and by the Convocation, Anno 1640. ever did; and this clause in their, &c. Oath then made, (nowSee the Go∣vernment of the Common∣wealth of Eng∣land, &c. Arti 12. the writs and printed returns for new lections; and enforced new Test and En∣gagement impo∣sed on the three Kingdoms and new Members, seluding m, of them. imitated by others, who condemned it) I. A. B. do swear, that I will never give my consent to alter the Government of this Church, by Arch-bishops, Bishops, Deans and Arch-Dea∣cons, &c. as it stands now established, and as by right it ought to stand. Which clause and Oath imposed one∣ly on the Clergy-men. Resolved by the whole House of Commons and Peers too, in Parliament, without one dissenting voice, December 16. 1640. to be a most dangerous & illegal Oath, contrary
to the Rights and Priviledges of Parliament, and to the Fun∣damental Laws and Statutes of the Realu, &c. and of dan∣gerous consequence: the contriving whereof was objected to the late Archbishop of Caterbury, in his original Ar∣ticles of High Treason, for which amongst other things he lost his head. The fourth is the notable Petition of Grievances of the whole House of Commons in Parliament, presented to King James in the seventh year of his Reign, after their Vote against his Right, to levy Impositions on goods imported, or exported, without assent and grant of Parliament, in these ensuing words. The Policy of this your Majesties Kingdomes, appropriates un∣to the Kings of this Realm,See Proposition 1. in ch. 2. with assent of Parliament, as well the Soveraign power of making Laws, as that of taxing or im∣posing upon the Subjects Goods or Merchandises,Nota. wherein they have justly such a property, as may not without their consent be altered or changed: this is the cause, that the people of this Kingdome, as they haveO how are they now dege∣nerated! ever shewed themselves faithfull and loving to their Kings, and ready to aid them in all just occasions, with voluntary contributions: so have they beenAnd should they not be so now then? ever care∣ful to preserve their own Liberties and Rights,And should we now at last fail herein? when any thing hath been done to prejudice or impeach the same. And therefore when their Princes, either occasioned by war, or by their own bounty, or by any other necessity, have without consent of Parliament set on Impositions, either within the Land, or upon commodities exported or imported by the mer∣chants, they have in open Parliament complained of it, in that it was done without their consents, and thereuponHow dare then any self created powers who are nei∣ther Kings nor Parliaments now arrogate to themselves, or exercise such a super-Reg al arbitrary power and Prerogative, against all our Laws and the own in∣strument and oaths. never failed to obtain a speedy and full redresse, without any claim made by the Kings, of any Power or Prerogative in that point. And though the Law of property be original, and carefully preserved by the Common Laws of this Real, WHiCH ARE AS ANCIENT AS THE KINGDOME IT SELF, yet those famous Kings, for the better contentment and assurance of their loving Subjects, agreed, THAT THIS OLD FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT (observe the words) should be further declared, and established by Acts of Parlia∣ment, wherein it is provided, That no such Charge shall ever be
laid upon the People, without their common Consents, as may appear, by sundry Records of former times. We therefore your Majesties most humble Commons assem∣bled in ParliamentNota.And oh that we would fol∣low it now again, both in and out of Par∣liament? following the example of this wor∣thy care of our Ancestors, and out of our Duty to those for whom we serve, finding that your Majesty, with∣out advice of your Lords and Commons, hath lately (in times of Peace) Set both greater Impositions, and farre more in number, than any your Noble Ancestors did ever in time of Warre, do with all humility present this most just and necessary Petition unto your Majesty, THAT ALL IM∣POSITIONS SET WITHOƲT ASSENT IN PAR∣LIAMENT, MAY BE QƲITE ABOLISHED AND TAKEN AWAY. And that your Majesty likewise, in imita∣tion of your Royal Progenitors, will be pleased, that a Law in your time, and during this Session of Parliament, may be also made,Nota. to declare, That all Imposition of any kinde, set, or to be set upon your people, their Goods or Merchan∣dises, save onely by common Consent in Parliament, are and shall b Void; wherein your Majesty shall not onely Give your Subjects great Satisfaction in point of their Right; but also bring exceeding joy and comfort to them, who now suffer partly through the abating of the price of Native Com∣modities, and partly through the raising of all Forraign, to the overthrow of Merchants, and shipping, the causing of general dearth, and decay of all wealth among your people; who will be thereby no lesse discouraged, than disabled to supply your Majesty when occasion shall require. In which memorable Petition, the whole House of Commons resolve in direct terms: 1. That the Subjects of England have old original Fundamental Rights (and more particularly) in the Property of their Goods, ex∣empted from all Impositions whatsoever, in times of peace or war, without their common consent in Parliament; declared and esta∣blished both by the ancient and common law of England and sun∣dry Acts of Parliament, and records, of former times. 2. They de∣clare, the constant vigilant care, zeal of our ancestors and former Parliaments in all ages, inviolably to maintain, defend, preserve the same, against all enchroachments, to∣gether
with their own care, duty and vigilancy in this kind in that very Parliament. 3. They relate the readinesse of our Kings to ratifie these their Fundamental Rights by new Acts of Parliament, when they have been violated in any kinde. 4. They declare the benefit accruing both to Prince and People, by the inviolable preservation and establishment of this old Fundamental right, and the mis∣chiefs accruing to both by the infringment thereof, by arbitrary illegall impositions, without full consent in Parliament. 5. They earnestly (in point of Conscience, prudence, and duty to those for whom they served) Pe∣tition his Majesty, for a new Law and Declaration, against all new Impositions and Taxes on inland Goods, or Merchandises imported or exported, without the peoples free consent in Parliament, as null, void, utterly to be abolished and taken away: Whether it will not be ab∣solutely necessary for the whole English Nation, and the next ensuing National, or reall Parliament, to prose∣cute, enact, establish such a Declaration and Law against all such former and future arbitrary, illegal, oppressive Taxes, Impositions, Excises, that have been imposed and continued for many years together on the whole king∣dome, bySee the white∣hall Ordinan∣ces for the six months contri∣bution, Excise, till 1656. tun∣nage & Poun∣dage till 1658. beyond all Pre∣sidents in any age, and the ve∣ry words and letter of the 30 Article of their government. new extravagant, self-created, usurping ARMY-OFFICERS, and other Powers, without free and full consent of the people in Lawfull English Parlia∣ments, against all former Laws, Declarations and Reso∣lutions in Parliaments, to their great oppression, en∣slaving, undoing, in far greater proportions, multiplicity, and variety, than ever in former Ages, without the least inter∣mission; and likewise against their late declared designe, to perpetuate them on our exhausted Nation, without alteration or diminution, (beyond and against all presidents of former Ages) both in times of Peace and War, for the future, by the 27, 28, 29, 30, 39. Articles of the Instrument entituled, The Government of the Common-wealth of Eng∣land, &c. I remit to their most serious considerations to determine, if ever they resolve to be English Free∣men again, or to imitate the wisdome, prudence, zeal,
courage and laudable examples of their worthy Ancestors, from which they cannot now degenerate without the greatest Infamy, and enslaving of themselves with their Posteri∣ties for ever, to the arbitrary wils of present or future Ʋsur∣pers on their Fundamental Rights and Liberties, in an higher degree then ever in any precedent Ages, under the great∣est Conquerours or Kings, after all their late, costly, bloody Wars, for their Defence against the beheaded King. 5 The fifth is, A learned and necessary Argument made in the Commons House of Parliament, Anno 7. Jacobi, to prove, That each Subject hath a Property in his Goods; shew∣ing also, the extent of the Kings Prerogative in Imposi∣tions upon the Goods of Merchants, exported or im∣ported, &c. by a late learned Judge of this Kingdome, prin∣ted at London by Richard Bishop, 1641. and Ordered to be Published in Print, at a Committee appointed by the Hono∣rable House of Commons, for examination and Licensing of Books, 20. Maii 1641. In which Parliamentary Argu∣ment, p. 8. 11. 16. I finde these direct Passages: That the New Impositions contained in the Book of Rates, imposed on Merchandizes, imported and exported by the Kings Prerogative, and Letters Patents, without consent in Parliament, is against the natural Frame and Constitution of the Policy of this Kingdome, which is, JƲS PƲBLICƲM REGNI, AND SO SVBVERTETH THE FUNDAMENTAL LAW OF THE REALM,Nota. and introduceth a new Form of State and Government: Can any man give me a reason, why the King can only in Parliament make Laws? No man ever read any Law, whereby it was so ordained; and yet no man ever read, thatYet those who have pulled down our Kings as Tyrants, now presume to do it: Witness their New White-hall Laws and Ordinances, amounting to near 700. pages in folio in a few moneths space. any King practised the contrary; therefore IT IS THE ORIGINAL RIGHT OF THE KINGDOME, AND THE VERY NATURAL CONSTITUTION OF OUR STATE AND POLICY, being one of the highest Rights of Soveraign Power. If the King alone out of Parliament may impose,And do not those do so, who now ay Monethly Taxes, Excises, Customs and New Imposts on us daily, out of Parliament, and that for many moneths and years yet to come, against the Letter of their own Instrument and Oath too? HE ALTERETH THE LAW
OF ENGLAND IN ONE OF THESE TWO MAIN FUNDAMENTAL POiNTS; he must either take the Subjects Goods from them, without assent of the Party, which is against the law, or else he must give his own Letters Patents the force of a law, to alter the property of the Subjects goods, which is also against the Law. In this and sundry other Arguments (touching the Right of Impositions) in the Commons House of Parliament by the Members of it, arguing against them, it was fre∣quently averred, and at last Voted and Resolved by the House, 7. Jacobi. That such Impositions without consent in Parliament, wereAnd are they not so now? AGAINST THE ORIGINAL FƲN∣DAMENTAL LAWS AND PROPERTY OF THE SƲBJECT, and Original Right, Frame and Constitution of the Kingdome; as the Notes and Journals of that Parliament evidence: An expresse parliamentary Resolution in point, for what I here assert. 6. The sixth is, A Conference desired by the Lords, and had by a Committee of both Houses, concerning the Rights and Privi∣ledges of the Subject. 3. Aprilis 4. Caroli 1628. entered in the Parliament Journal of 4. Caroli, and since printed at London 1642. In the Introduction to which Conference, Sir Dudley Digs by the Commons House Order, used these expressions: My good Lords, whilest we the Commons, out of our good affections, were seeking for money, we found, I cannot say a ook of the Law, but many A FƲNDAMENTAL POINT THEREOF NEGLECTED AND BROKEN, which hath occasioned our desire of this Conference: wherein I am first commanded to shew unto your Lordships in general: That the Laws of England are grounded on Reason more ancient than Books, consisting much in unwritten Customs; yet so full of Ju∣stice and true Equity, that your most honorable Predecessors and Ancestors propugned them with, a20. H. 3. c. 9. See Cooks 2 In∣it. p. 97, 8. NOLƲMƲS MƲ∣TARI; and so ancient, that from the Saxons dayes, notwith∣standing the injuries and ruines of time, they have continued in most parts the same, &c. Be pleased then to know, THAT IT IS AN UNDOUBTED AND FUNDAMENTALL POINT OF THIS SO ANCIENT COMMON LAW
OF ENGLAND,Proposition 1, 4 THAT THE SUBJECT HATH A TRUE PROPERTY IN HIS GOODS AND POS∣SESSIONS, which doth preserve as sacred, that MEƲM and TƲƲM, that is the Nurse of Industry, and the Mother of Cou∣rage, and without which, there can be no Justice, of which ME∣ƲM and TƲƲM is the proper object: But the ƲNDOƲB∣TED BIRTH-RIGHT OF FREE SƲBJECTS, hath lately not a little been invaded and prejudiced by pressures, the more grievous, because they have been pursued by IMPRI∣SONMENT, contrary to the Franchises of this Land,Proposition 2. &c. Which the Commons House proved by many Statutes and Records in all ages, in that Conference, to the full satisfaction of the Lords House; since published in print. 7. The Seventh is, The Vote theSee Canter∣buries Doom, p. 19. Exact Coll. p. 12. whole House of Commons, 16. December 1640. Nullo contradicente, ente∣red in their Journall, and printed in Diurnall Occur∣rences, page 13. That the Canons made in the Convocation (Anno 1640.) ARE AGAINST THE FUNDA∣MENTAL LAWS OF THE REALM, the Property and Liberty of the Subject, the Right of Parliament, and containe diverse things tending to Faction and Sediti∣on. Seconded in their Remonstrances of 15. December 1641. 8. The eight Authority is,Exact Collect. p. 112, 113. The Votes of both Houses of Parliament, concerning the security of the King∣dome of ENGLAND and Dominion of Wales, 15. Mar∣tii 1641. Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament to be forthwith printed and published (as they were then by themselves, and afterwards with other Votes and Or∣ders) Resolved upon the Question, nemine▪ contradicen∣te; That in case of extream danger, and his Majesties refusall, the Ordinance agreed on by both Houses for the MILITIA (to secure the Houses, Members and Priviledges of Parliament and Kingdome against ARMED-VIOLENCE, since brought upon them by the MILITIA of the Army) doth obliege
the people, and ought to be obeyed, by the FUNDA∣MENTAL LAWS OF THIS KINGDOME. A very vain and delusory Vote, if there be no such Law, as some now affirm. 9. The nineth punctuall Authority is,Exact Coll. p 850, 584, 87, 888. a Second De∣claration of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, concerning the Commission of Array; Printed by their spe∣ciall Order of 12. January 1642. Wherein are these ob∣servable passages, The main drift of all the answer is to main∣tain, That the King by the Common Law may grant such a Commission of Array, as this is, upon this ground, be∣cause its for the Defence of the Kingdome: And, that the power, which he hath to grant it by the Common law, is not taken away by the Petition of Right, or any former Statute, but the King notwithstanding any of them, may charge the Subject for Defence of the Kingdome; so as the charge imposed come not to himself, nor to his particular advantage. These grounds thus laid, extend not to the Commission of Ar∣ray alone, but to all other charges that his Maesty shall impose upon his Subjects,See Chap. 2. Proposit. 1, 2. 3. upon pretence of Defence of the Kingdome; for there is the same reason of Law for any other charge that is pretended for Defence, as for this. If his Majesty by the Common Law may charge his Subjects to finde Arms, and other things in the Commission enjoyned, because they are for Defence of the Kingdom; by the same reason of Law, he may command his Peo∣ple to build Castles, Forts and Bulwarks, and after to maintain them with Garrisons, Arms, and Victuals, at their own charges: And by the same reason he may compel his subjects to finde Ships, and furnish them with Men, Ammunition and Victuals, and to finde Souldiers pay,Do not the Army Officers now enforce them to all this without a Par∣liament, to sup∣port their usur∣ped new Pow∣ers and Posses∣sions, and esta∣blish them∣selves in a most absolute Sove∣raignty over our three king∣doms? Coat and Conduct money; provide victuals for Souldiers, and all other things NECESSARY FOR AN ARMY; these things being as necessary for Defence, as any thing that can be done in execution of this Commission. And for that exposition of the Petition of Right and other Statutes therein noted (if it should hold) doth it not overthrow, as well the Petition it self, at all other Laws that have been made for the subjects benefit against Taxes and other charges, either or any other Parliaments?
These Positions thus laid down and maintained,Nota. Do shake the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdome (the ancient Birth right of every Subject) both for the Property of his Goods, and Liberty of his Person: Nay, they strike at the root of Parliaments: What need hisThese expostu∣lations reach to them at White∣hall now, who presume to im∣pose Taxes, Cu∣stoms, Excises and make bind∣ing laws and Instruments for our whole 3 kingdomes, Nations, Par∣liaments, which no King there ever did in like nature, nor their C∣cels in any age. Majesty call Parlia∣ments, to provide for Defence of the Realm, when himself may compell his subjects to defend it without Parliaments? If these grounds should hold, what need the subjects grant subsidies in Parliament for Defence of the Kingdome in time of reall danger, if the King for Defence at any times, when he shall onely conceive or pretend danger, may impose Charges upon his Subjects with∣out their Consent in Parliament? Upon that which hath been said in this and our for∣mer Declaration, we doubt not but all indifferent men will be satisfied, that this Commission of Array, is full of danger, and inconvenience to the Subjects of England, AND AGAINST THE FUNDAMENTAL LAWES OF THE LAND, both for PROPERTY OF GOODS, AND LIBERTY OF PERSON, &c. As it is against THE FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF THE REALM, so no statute makes it good, &c. And the Lords and Com∣mons do upon the whole matter here conclude, That they are very much aggrieved, that after so many Decla∣rations and solemn Protestations made by his Majesty to rule by the known Laws of this Land, his Majesty by advice of his ill Councellors should be perswaded to set such a Commis∣sion on foot, which is so clearly contrary TO THE FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF THIS LAND, the Rights of Property, and Liberty of the Subject, contrary to former resolutions of Parliament, and to the Petition of Right. I am certain, the generality of the Nation are now as much and more agrieved, that some, who were Parties to this Declaration, and others, who have made as many or more Declarations & Protestations as his Majesty ever did, to rule by the known laws of the Land; should since this, far ex∣ceed his Majesty in the like, nay greater, more exorbitan∣ces in the Militia, Excises, Taxes, Impositions, Imprison∣ments
arbitrary extravagant proceedings, capital exe∣cutions in new erected Courts of Injustice, and whole vo∣lumes of new binding Ordinances, as they term them, and their ill-sounding Instrument, obliging all our three Nations, both for the present & all future ages, inSee the true state of the case of the Common∣wealth of Eng∣land, &c. p. 33, 34. their intention; as diametrically contrary as the Kings Commissions of Array, to the Fundamentall Laws of the Land (four times together so stiled and insisted on, as such, in this one De∣claration of both Houses) the Right of Property of the Subject, contrary to former Resolutions, and the Petition of Right; yea (which is most abominable) to their own Declara∣tions, Remonstrances, Votes, Protestations, Vows, Solemne Leagues and Covenants in Parliament, to their own eter∣nall Infamy, as well as the peoples intolerable oppression and slavery; who thereupon may justly conclude and protest against them, as both Houses did in the close of this Declaration against the Array, viz.Exact Collect: p. 888. And the Lords and Commons do and shall adhere to their former Votes & Resolutions, That all those that are Actors in putting of this Commission of Array (these Instruments, Ordinan∣ces new Taxes, Imposts, Excises) in execution, shall be e∣steemed disturbers of the Peace of the Kingdome, and of the Properties and Liberties of the Subject. 10. The tenth Evidence is,A Collection of all publike Or∣ders, Ordinan∣ces, and Decla∣rations of Par∣liament, p. 451, 452, 457, 458. the Vote and Letter of both Houses of Parliament sent to his Majesty at Oxford, 9. March 1643. in Answer to his Majesties, of the third of March▪ and wherein there is this passage: We the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of England, &c. Have resolved, with the concurrent advice and consent of the Commissioners of Scotland, to represent to your Majesty in all humility and plainnesse as followeth; That this present Parliament convened, according to the known andHow have others of late (which they stile Parli∣ments) been convened? FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF THE KINGDOME (the continuance whereof is esta∣blished by a law consented to by your Majesty) is in effect denied to be a Parliament, &c. And hereupon
we think our selves bound to let your Majesty know; That since theYet forcibly dissolved by the Army, and some now in Power, against their Commissions, Oaths, Trusts, Protestations Covenant, and an Act of Par∣liament for their continu∣ance; who may do well to peruse this clause. See c. 2. Proposition 6, 7. continuance of this Parliament is settled by a Law, (which as all other laws of your Kingdome, your Ma∣jesty is sworn to maintain, as we are sworn to our Allegiance to your Majesty; those Obligations being reciprocall) we must in duty, and accordingly are resolved, with our Lives and For∣tunes, to Defend and preserve the ust Rights and full Power of this Parliament: To which the Earle of Essex (then Ge∣neral) by both Houses order, in his Letter to the Earle of Forth January 30. 1643. adds this Corolary. My Lord, the mainenance of the Parliament of England, and the Pri∣viledges thereof, is that for which we are resolved to spend our bloud, as being THE FOƲNDATION WHEREON ALL OƲR LAWS AND LIBERTIES ARE BƲILT: Which both the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, in their Declaration 23. March 1643. touching their proceedings upon his Majesties Letter, concerning a Treaty of Peace; (wherein this Earls former letter is re∣cited) thus second: The Parliament of England is the one∣ly Basis, the chief Support and Pillar of our Laws and Liberties, &c. And if notwithstanding all these Obligations, the King shall at his pleasure dissolve this Parliament, the Kingdome is not onely deprived of the present, but made uncapable of enjoying the benefit of any future Parlia∣ment, or Laws, any longer than shall stand with the will and pleasure of the King: and consequently THE FUN∣DAMENTALS OF ALL OUR LAWS AND GO∣VERNMENT ARE SUBVERTED. Let the Parlia∣ment-purging, securing, sequestring, dissolving Officers Army, and their Confederates, seriously ponder this, yea let all the whole English Nation and their Trustees who shall hereafter sit in Parliament, consider and reform it in the first place, if ever they expect any Freedome, free Parlia∣ments, Peace, settlement, enjoyment of their Fundamen∣tal Laws, Rights, or Liberties for the future, depending on our Parliaments Freedome, and exemption from all force and violence on its Members.
The eleventh is, theA Collection &c. p. 504. Ordinance of both Houses of Par∣liament, 13. Junii 1644. For the Forces raised in the County of Salop, which begins thus: The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, taking into their serious considerations, the great Oppressions under which the Inhabitants of the County of Salop lie, by reason the insupportable Taxes, &c. and the present condition of the County, by reason of the great num∣ber of Irish Rebels that have invaded it, and joyned with Papists and other ill affected Persons, now in those parts, which threaten the extirpation of the Protestant Religion, and the subversion of the FUNDAMENTAL LAWS and GOVERNMENT OF THE KINGDOM. For prevention whereof, &c. A direct Ordinance in point. The twelfth is,A Collection &c. p. 877, 878, 879. a Declaration of the Commons of Eng∣land, assembled in Parliament, 17. Aprilis 1646. Of their true intentions concerning the ANCIENT and FUN∣DAMENTAL GOVERNMENT OF THE KING∣DOME, securing the people against ALL ARBITRARY GOVERNMENT, &c. wherein they complain, That the Enemy being in dispair to accomplish his Designes by War, do mis-represent our intentions in the use we intend to make of the great successes God hath given us, and the happy opportunity to settle Peace and Truth in the three Kingdomes; to beget a belief that we now desire to exced, or swerve from our first Aym's and Principles in the undertaking of this War, and to re∣cede from the Solemn League and Covenant, and Trea∣ties between the two Kingdomes; and that we would prolong these uncomfortable troubles, and bleeding distractions, INAnd is not all this now pro∣ved a reall ex∣perimental truth, in some of these Remon∣strants, to their shame? ORDER TO ALTER THE FUN∣DAMENTAL CONSTITUTION AND FRAME OF THIS KINGDOME, to leave all Government in the Church loose and unsettled, and ourselves to ex∣ercise THE SAME ARBITRARY POWER OVER THE PERSONS and ESTATES OF THE SƲB∣JECTS, which this present Parliament hath thought fit to abolish, by taking away the Star-Chamber, High-Commission,
and other arbitrary Courts, and the exorbitant Power of the Council Table, (all which we have seen expe∣rimentally verified in every particular, in the highest de∣gree, notwithstanding this Declaration, by some in late and present power, and new White-hall Council Tables, ex∣ceeding the old in illegal Taxes, Law-making, and other extravagances:) All which being seriously considered by us, &c. We do declare, THAT OUR TRUE and REAL IN∣TENTIONS ARE, and OUR ENDEAVOUR SHALL BE, to settle Religion in the purity thereof,And can most of these Remon∣strants in late or present Po∣wer, now say this in truth or realty? and must not they be utterly asha∣med, confound∣ed, before God and man, when they consider how they have dissembled, pre∣varicated with God and men herein, in each particular? TO MAINTAIN THE ANCIENT and FUNDAMEN∣TALL GOVERNMENT OF THIS KINGDOME, TO PRESERVE THE RIGHTS and LIBERTIES OF THE SUBJECT; to lay hold on the first opportunity of procuring a safe and well grounded peace in the three Kingdoms, and to keep a good understanding between the two Kingdomes of England and Scotland, according to the grounds expressed in the Solemn League and Covenant: And lest these generals should not give a sufficient satisfaction, we have thought fit, to the end men might no longer be abused in a misbelief of our in∣tentions, or a misunderstanding of our actions, to make a further enlargement upon the particulars. And first, Concerning Church-Government, &c. because we cannot consent to the granting of an Arbitrary and unlicensed Power and Jurisdiction, to neer ten thousand Judicatories to be erected within this Kingdome, and this demanded in such a way, as is not consistent with the FƲNDAMENTAL LAWS and GOVERNMENT OF THE SAME, &c. Our full resolu∣tions still are, sincerely, really and constantly to endeavour the Reformation of Religion in the Kingdome of England and Ire∣land, in Doctrine, Worship, and Government, according to the word of God, and the example of the best Reformed Churches, and according to the Covenant. WE AREAnd can the new Modellers of our Govern∣ment over and over, who were parties to this Declaration, & then Members of the Commons House, say so now? or read this without blushing and self-abhorrence? SO FARRE FROM ALTERING THE FUNDAMENTAL GO∣VERNMENT OF THIS KINGDOME BY KING, LORDS and COMMONS, that we have onely desired, that with the consent of the King, such Power may be settled in the TWO HOƲSES, without which we can have no assurance,
but that the like, or greater mischiefs than those which God hath hither to dilivered us from, may break out again, and engage us in a second and more destructive war; whereby it plainly appears, Our intentions are not to change the Antient Frame of Government within this Kingdome, but to obtain the end of the Primitive Institution of all Government, The safety and weal of the People; not judging it wise or safe, after so bitter experience of the bloody consequence of aIs not a super∣intendent pow∣er in the Army over, above & against the Par∣liament or Peo∣ple, far more dangerous & likely to intro∣duce such an arbitrary Go∣vernment in the Nation, if lest in the Ge∣neral, Officers or their Coun∣cels power? pretended Power of the Militia in the King, to leave any colourable autho∣rity in the same, for the future attempts of introducing AN ARBITRARY GOVERNMENT OVER THIS NA∣TION. We do declare, That we will not, nor any by colour of any Authority derived from us, shall inter∣rupt theDid not the imposing a strange New Engagement, and sundry ar∣bitrary Com∣mittes of In∣demnity, &c. intrupt it in the highest de∣gree; and the misnamed high Courts of Ju∣stice, falsifie this whole clause? ordinary course of Justice, in the severall Courts of Judicatories of this Kingdome, nor inter∣meddle in the cases of private interest other where de∣terminable, unlesse it be in case of male-Administration of Justice; wherein we shall see and provide, that Right be done, and punishment inflicted, as there shall be oc∣casion, ACCORDING TO THE LAWS OF THE KINGDOME. Lastly, Whereas both Nations have entred into a Solemn▪ League and Covenant; we have, and EVER SHALL BE VERY CAREFULL DULY TO OBSERVE THE SAME: that as nothing hath been done, SO NOTHING SHALL BE DONE BY US REPUGNANT TO THE TRUE MEANING AND INTENTION THEREOF, &c. WHO WILL NOT DEPART FROM THOSE GROUNDS AND PRINCIPLES, upon which it was framed and founded. Though the generality of the (afterwards,) secured and secluded Majority of the House of Commons, endeavoured constantly to make good this Declaration in all parti∣culars; yet how desperatly the garbled Minority thereof, continuing in power after their Seclusion, prevaricated, apostatized, and falsified their Faith herein in every par∣ticle, in the highest degree, we cannot but with greatest grief of heart, and detestation remember, to the subversi∣on,
ruine of our King, Lords, Commons, Kingdome, Parliaments, Fundamentall Laws, Government, and the peoples Liberties, &c. almost beyond all hopes of restitution or reparation in humane probability, without a miracle from heaven. The Lord give them grace most seriously to consider re∣pent of, and really, sincerely reform it now at last, and to make it the principle subject of their prescribed publike Humiliations, Fasts and Lamentations, as God himself pre∣scribes; Isa. 58. 5, 6, 7, 8. Jer. 34. 8. to 22. Ezech. 19. 1. 14. Hos. 10. 3, 4. and not still to adde drunkennesse to thirst, lest they bring them to temporall and eternal condem∣nation for it in Gods own due time, and engender end∣lesse Wars, Troubles, Taxes, Changes, Confusions in our Kingdomes, as they have hitherto done and will do till all be restored to their just Rights, Powers, Places, Posses∣sions and Liberties. By this full Jury of Parliamentary Authorities, to omit many others, ofExact Collect. p. 4. 12. 34. 61. 243. 260. 321. 500. 502. like, orSee the hum∣ble Remon∣strance against the illegall Tax of Ship-money briefly discus∣sed, p. 2. &c. Englands Birth righ & their Treatises. The Declaration of Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Army under his Command, tendered to the Parliament, June 14. 1647. concerning the Just and Fun∣damental Rights and Li∣berties of the Kingdome. inferiour nature, and lesse moment, it is undeniable: That the people of England, have both an∣cient Fundamentall Rights, Liberties, Franchises, Laws, and a Fundamental Government, which like the Laws of the Medes and Persians, neither may nor ought to be altered, or innovated upon any pretence, but perpetually maintained, defended, with greatest care, vigilancy, resolution; and he who shall deny or oppugn it, desers no refulation by further arguments, since it is a received Maxime in all Arts, Contra Principia negantem non est disputandum; but rather demerits a sen∣tence of Condemnation and publike execution at Tyburn, as a Common Enemy, Traitor to our Laws, Liberties, Nation; it be∣ing no lesse than a transcendent crime, and High Treason by our Laws, for any person or persons, secretly or openly, to attempt the undermining or subversion of our fundamental laws, rights, Liberties, Government, especially by fraud, treachery, force or ar∣med power and violence (the later part of my first proposal) which I shall now confirm by these twelve following Presidents and Evidences, corroborating likewise the former part, That we have such Fundamental laws, liberties, rights, franchises, and a fundamental Government too.
In theWalsingham, Stow, Holinshed Speed Grasion, Trussel, Baker in 5 R. 2. John Stows Survey of Lon∣don p. 89. to 103 Mr. St. Johns Argument at Law, at Straf∣fords Attainller p. 14. fifth year of King Richard the second, the vulgar rabble of people and villains, in Kent, Essex, Sussex, Norfolk, Cambridge-shire and other Counties, under the Conduct of Wat Tyler, Jack Straw and other Rebels, assembling toge∣ther in great multitudes (occasioned at first by the new invented Tax of Poll-money, granted by Parliament, and the over-rigorous levying thereof, on the people, by the Kings Officers (though nothing so grievous as our Exci∣ses, Contributions, & new Imposts now, so long exacted without any legal Grant in true, free and full English Parliaments) resolved by force and violence, to abrogate the law of Villenage, with all other laws they disliked, formerly set∣led; to burn all the Records, kill and behead all the Judges, Ju∣stices, and men of law of all sorts, which they could get into their hands; to burn and destroy the Inns of Court, (as they did then the new Temple, where the Apprentices of the law lodged, burn∣ing their Monuments and Records of Law there found) to alter the tenures of lands, to devise new laws of their own, by which the Subjects should be governed: to change the ancient Heredi∣tary Monarchicall Government of the Realm, and to erect petty elective Tyrannies and Kingdomes to themselves in every shire: (A project eagerly prosecuted by some Anarchicall Ana∣baptists, Jesuits, Levellers, very lately) and though withall they intended to destroy the King at last, and all the Nobles too, when they had gotten sufficient power; yet at first to cloak their intentions from the people, they took an Oath of all they met; Quod Regi & Communibus fidelitatem serva∣rent; that they should keep Allegiance and Faith to the King & Commons: Yea, Wat Tyler demanded a Commis∣sion from the King, to behead all Lawyers, Escheaters, and others whatsoever that were learned in the laws, or communi∣cated with the law by reason of their Office, conceiving in his minde, that this being brought to passe, all things after∣wards would be ordered according to his own and the common peoples fancy. And he made his vaunt, putting his hand to his own lips; That before scure dayes came to an end, ALL THE LAWS OF ENGLAND SHOULD PROCEED FROM HIS MOUTH. (Which some of late times
seem to speak not only in words, but deeds, by their ma∣nifold new laws and Edicts, repealing or contradicting our old) This their resolution and attempt thus to al∣ter and subvert the Laws and Government, upon full debate in the Parliament of 5. R. 2. n. 30. 31. was declared to be High-Treason against the King and the Law, for which divers of the chief Actors in this Treasonable Designe, were condem∣ned and executed, as Traitors, in severall places; and the rest enforced to a publike submission, & then pardoned. Let these imitators now remember this old President. 2. In theThe Statutes at large, Stow, Holins∣hed, Speed, Grafton, Baker Trussel, in 10 & 21 R. 2. & 1 H. 4. M. St. Johns Speech concern∣ing the Ship∣mony Judges p. 28. to 37. and argument at Law, at Straf∣fords Attainder. Parliament of 11. R. 2. (as appears by the Parliament Rols and printed Statutes at large) three Privy Councellours, the Archbishop of York, the Duke of Ire∣land, and the Earl of Suffolk, the Bishop of Exeter, the Kings Confessor, five Knights, six Judges (whereof Sir Robert Tresylian Chief Justice was one) Blake, of the Kings Coun∣cel at Law, Ʋsk, and others, were impeached and condemned of High Treason, some of them executed as Traitors, the rest banished, their lands and goods forfeited, and none to en∣deavour to procure their pardon, under pain of Felony; for their endeavouring to overthrow a Commission for the good of the Kingdome, contrary to an Act of Parlia∣ment, by force of Arms, and opinions in Law delivered by these temporizing Judges and Lawyers, to the King, (through threats and terrour at Nottingham Castle) tend∣ing to subvert the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, overthrow the Power, Priviledges and proceedings of Parliament, and be∣tray (notAs some of late years have done. all the House of Lords, but only) some of the Lords of Parliament. Which Judgement being afterwards re∣versed in the forced and packed Parliament of 21. R. 2. was reconfirmed in the Parliament of 1 H. 4. c. 3, 4, 5. and the Parliament of 21. R. 2. totally repealed, and adnulled for ever, and hath so continued. Read Statut. at large. 3. In theM. St. Johns argument at Law, at Straf∣fords Attain∣der p. 13, 14, 17. Parliament of 17 R. 2. n. 20. and Pas. 17 R. 2. B. Regis Rot. 16. Sir Thomas Talbot was accused and found guilty of High Treason, for conspiring the death of the Dukes of Glocester, Lancaster, and other Peers, who main∣tained the Commission confirmed by Act of Parliament, 10. R. 2
and assembling people in a warlike manner in the County of Che∣ster, for effecting of it, in destruction of the estates of the Realm; and the Laws of the Kingdome. 4. In theHall, Fabian Holinshed, Speed, Grafto, Stow, Martin, Baker. 29. year of King Henry the sixth, Jack Cade, under a pretence to REFORM, alter and abrogate some laws, Purveyances and Extortions importable to the Commons where∣upon he was called JOHN AMEND ALL) drew a great multitude of Kentish people to Black-heath, in a war∣like manner, to effect it: In the Parliament of 29 H. 6. c. 1 this was adjudged High Treason in him and his Complices, by Act of Parliament: and the Parliament of 31. H. 6. c. 1. made this memorable Act against him, and his Imi∣tators in succeding ages; worthy serious perusal and consideration by all, who tread in his footsteps, and over∣act him in his Treasons. Whereas the most abominable Tyrant, horrible, odious, and errant FALSE TRAYTOR, John Cade, calling himself sometimes Mortimer, sometime Captain of Kent, (which Name, Fame, Acts and Feats, be to be removed out of the speech and minde of every faithfull Christian man perpetually) falsly and traiterously purposing and imagining the perpetuall destru∣ction of the KINGS PERSON and FINAL SƲBVER∣SION OF THIS REALM, taking upon himAnd have not others of late assumed to themselves more Royal po∣wer than he? resolved to be Treason by 21. . 3. Rot. Parl. & Cooks 3. Institut p 9. ROYALL POWER, and gathering to him the Kings People in great num∣ber, BY FALSE SƲBTIL, IMAGINED LANGƲAGE: and seditiously made a stirring Rebellion, and insurrection, ƲN∣DER COLOƲR OF JƲSTICE, FOR REFORMA∣TION OF THE LAWS OF THE SAID KING, robbing, slaying, spoiling a great part of his faithfull people: Our said Soveraign Lord the King, considering the pre∣mises, with many other, which were more odious to remember, by advice and assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and at THE REQUEST OF THE COMMONS, and by Authority aforesaid, Hath ordain∣ed and established, that the said John Cade shall be had, named and declared, A FALSE TRAYTOR, to our said Soveraign Lord the King; and that all his Tyranny, Acts, Feats, & false Opinions, shall be voided, abated, adnulled, destroyed, and put out
of remembrance for ever. And that all Indictments, and things depending thereof, had and made under the power of Tyranny, shall likewise be void, adnulled, abated, repealed, and holden for none: and that the blood of none of them be defiled, nor corrup∣ted, but by the Authority of the said Parliament clearly decla∣red for ever. And that all Indictments in time coming, in like case, under power of Tyranny, Rebellion and stirring had, shall be of no regard or effect, but void in Law: And all the PetitionsTo wit by Cade and his Confederates for the altera∣tion of the laws delivered to the said King in his last Parlia∣ment holden at Westminster, the sixth day of November the 29. of his Reign, against his minde, by him not a∣greed, shall be taken and put in Oblivion, out of Re∣membrance, undone, voided, adnulled and destroyed for ever, as a thing purposed against God and his Con∣science, and against his Royal estate and preheminence, and also DISHONORABLE and UNREASONABLE. 5. In theSee Mr. St. Johns argu∣ment against Strafford, p. 17. Halls Chronicle and Holinshed. 8 year of King Henry the 8. William Bell, and Thomas Lacy, in the County of Kent, conspired with Thomas Cheney (the Hermite of the Queen of Fairies) TO OVER THROW THE LAWS AND CUSTOMS OF THE REALM: for effecting whereof, they with 200 more met together, and concluded upon a course of rai∣sing greater forces in Kent, and the adjacent Shires; This was judged High Treason, and some of them executed as Trai∣tors. Moreover, itCooks 3. Insti∣tutes p. 9, 10. was resolved by all the Judges of England, in the reign of Henry. 8. that an Insurrection against the Statute of Laborers, or for the inhansing of Salaries and wages, or against any Statute, or to remove Councellors, or to any other end pretend∣ing Reformation of their own heads, was TREASON, and a levying war against the King, BECAƲSE IT WAS GE∣NERALLY AGAINST THE KINGS LAW, and the Offenders took upon them THE REFORMATION THEREOF, which Subjects by gathering of power ought not to do. 6. OnCooks 4. Insti∣tutes c. 8. p. 89. to 96. December 1. in the 21. year of King Henry the 8. Sr. Thomas Moore, Lord Chancellour of England, with fourteen more Lords of the Privy Councel, John Fitz-James, Chief Justice of England, and Sir Anthony Fitz-Herbert,
Herbert, one of the Judges of the Common Pleas, exhibited sundry Articles of Impeachment to King Henry the 8. a∣gainst Cardinal Wolsey: That he had by divers and many sundry wayes and fashions, committed High Treason, and NOTA∣BLE GRIEVOUS OFFENCES, by misusing altering and subverting of his Graces Laws, and otherwise, contrary to his high Honour, Prerogative, Crown, Estate, and Dignity Royal; to the inestimable great hinderance, diminution and de∣cay of the universal wealth of this his Graces Realm. The Articles are 43. in number, the 20, 21, 26, 30, 35, 37: 42, 43. contain, his illegal arbitrary practises and proceedings to the subversion of the due course and order of his Graces Laws, to the undoing of a great number of his loving people. Whereupon they pray. Please therefore your mostexcellent Majesty of your ex∣cellent goodnesse towards the Weal of this your Realm, and sub∣jects of the same, to set such order and direction upon the said Lord Cardinal, as may be to terrible example of other, to beware to offend your Grace, and your Laws hereafter: and that he be so provided for, that he never have any Power, Ju∣risdiction or authority hereafter, to trouble, vex or impoverish the common-wealth of this your Realm, as he hath done here∣tofore, to the great hurt and dammage of every man almost, high and low. HisSee Speed, Hollinshed, Grafton, Stow, Antiquitates Ecclesiae Brit. p. 378. & 379. and Godwin in his life. poysoning himself prevented his legal judgement for these his Practises. 7. The Statute of 3. and 4. Ed. c. 5, 6. enacts, That if a∣ny persons, to the number of twelve or more, being as∣sembled together, shall intend, go about, practise or put in use with force and arms, unlawfully of their own authority, TO CHANGE ANY LAWS made for Religion, by authority of Parliament, OR ANY OTHER LAWS OR STA∣TUTES OF THIS REALM, STANDING IN FORCE, OR ANY OF THEM; and shall continue to∣gether by the space of an houre, being commanded by a Justice of Peace, Mayor, Sheriffe, or other Officer to return: or shall by ringing of any Bell, sounding of any Trumpet, Drumme, Horn, &c. raise such a number of persons, to the intent to put any the things aforesaid in ure, IT SHALL BE HIGH TREASON, and the parties executed as Traytors: After
this the Statute of 1 Mariaec.Mr. St. Johns Argument a∣gainst Strafford p. 14, 15. 12. Enacted, That if twelve or more in manner aforesaid, shall endeavour by force to alter any of the Laws or Statutes of the Kingdome; the offenders shall from the time therein limited, be adudged ONELY AS FELONS, whereas it was Treason before: but this Act continuing but till the next Parliament, and then expi∣ring, the offence remains Treason, as formerly. 8. In theCooks 3 Instit. c. 1. p. 9, 10. Mr. St. Johns Argument at law against Strafford, p, 15, 16. 39. year of Queen Elizabeth, divers in the County of Oxford consulted together to go from house to house in that County, and from thence to London and other parts, to excite them to take arms for the throwing down of in∣closures throughout the Realm; nothing more was prose∣cuted, nor assemblies made; yet in Easter Term 39. Eli∣zabeth, it was resolved by all the Judges of England (who met about the Case) that this was High Treason, and a levy∣ing war against the Queen, because it was to throw down all inclosures throughout the Kingdom, to which they could pretend no right: and that the end of it was, TO OVER THROW THE LAWS AND STATUTES for inclosures. Where∣upon BRADSHAW and BURTON (two of the prin∣cipal Offenders) were condemned and executed at Ainstow Hill in Oxfordshire, where they intended their first meet∣ing. 9. To come nearer to our present times and case: In the last Parliament of King Charls, Anno 1640.See the Jour∣nals of both Houses, & Act for his Attain∣der. Mr. Pyms Declaration upon the whole matter of the Charge of High Treason, a∣gainst him, A∣prill 12. 1641. Mr. St. Johns argument at law, at his At∣tainder, and Diurnal Occur∣rences. The whole House of Commons impeached Thomas Earl of Straf∣ford, Lord Deputy of Ireland, of High Treason; amongst o∣ther Articles, for this crime especially (wherein all the other centred) That he hath TREASONABLY ENDEA∣VOURED by his Words, Actions and Counsels, TO SUB∣VERT THE FUNDAMENTALL LAWS and GO∣VERNMENT OF ENGLAND and IRELAND, and introduce an arbitrary and Tyrannical Government. This the whole Parliament declared and adjudged to be High Treason, in and by their Votes, and a special Act of Parliament for his Attainder; for which he was condemned, and soon after executed on Tower-Hill, as a Traytor to the King and Kingdome, May 22. 1641.
10. The whole House of Commons the same Parliament, impeachedSee the Com∣mons and Lords Journals, his printed Im∣peachment, Mr. Pyms Speech thereat, Canter∣buries Doom p. 25, 26, 27, 38, 40. William Laud Arch-bishop of Canterbury, of HIGH TREASON; in these very terms, February 6, 1640. First, That he hath traiterously endeavoured to sub∣vert the Fundamental Laws and Government of this Kingdome of England, and instead thereof, to introduce an arbitrary and tyrannical Government against Law: And he to that end hath wickedly and TRAYTEROƲS∣LY advised his Majesty,See Chap. 2. Proposition 1. that heDo not others now do it, who impeached and condemnedhim, in an higher de∣gree then he? might at his own will and pleasure, levy and take mony of his Subjects without THEIR CONSENT IN PARLIAMENT; and this he affirmed was warrantable by the law of God. Secondly, He hath for the better accomplishment of that his Traiterous Designe, advised and procured Sermons and other Discourses, to be preached, printed and published; in which theIs it not so in the New Instru∣ment Article 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 12, 13, 16, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30▪ 31, 32, 33, 34, 37, 38, 39, 40. 42. of our New Government, and those that compiled and prescribed it to the 3 kingdoms. Authority of Parliaments, and the force of the Laws of this Kingdome have been denyed, and absolute and unlimitted Power over the Persons and Estates of his Majesties Subjects maintained and defended, not onely in the King, but in himself and other Bishops, against the Law. Thirdly, He hath by Letters, Messages, Threats and Pro∣mises, and by divers other wayes to Judges, and other Mini∣sters of Justice, interrupted, perverted, and at other times by means aforesaid hath endeavoured to interrupt and pervert the course of Justice in his Majesties Courts at Westminster and other Courts, TO THE SUBVERSION OF THE LAWS OF THIS KINGDOME, whereby sundry of his Majesties Subjects have been stopt in their just suits, deprived of their lawfull Rights, and subjected to his Tyrannicall will, to their ruine and destruction. Fourthly, That he hath traiterously endeavoured to cor∣rupt the other Courts of Justice, by advising and procu∣ring his Majesty to sell places of Judicature and other Offices, CONTRARY TO THE LAWS and CUS∣TOMES in that behalf. Fifthly, That he hath TRAITEROUSLY caused a a Book of Canons to be compiled and published, with∣out
any lawfull warrant and Authority in that behalf; in which pretended CanonsAre there not more such mat∣ters contained in the new Instrument of Government than in these? many matters are contained, contrary to the Kings Prerogative, to the Fundamentall Laws and Statutes of this Realm, to the Rights of Parliament, to the Property and Liberty of the Subject, and matters tending Sedition, and of dangerous consequence, and to the establish∣ing of a vast, unlawfull presumptuous power in himself and his successors, &c. Seventhly, That he hath traiterously endeavoured to alter and subvert Gods true Religion BY LAW ESTA∣BLISHED; and instead thereof to set up Popish Reli∣gion and Idolatry: And to that end hath declared, and maintained in Speeches and printed Books, diverse Po∣pish Doctrines and Opinions, contrary to the Articles of Religion ESTABLISHED BY LAW. He hath urged and enjoyned divers Popish and Superstitious Ceremo∣nies WITHOUT ANY WARRANT OF LAW; and hath cruelly persecuted those who have opposed the same, by corporal punishment, and imprisonments; and most unjustly vexed others, who refused to con∣form thereunto by Ecclesiasticall Censures, Excommu∣nication, Suspension,Have not ar∣bitrary Commit∣tees in most places done the like, or worse, in many cases? Deprivation, and Degradation, CONTRARY TO THE LAWS of this kingdome. Thirteenth, He did by his own authority and power contraryHave not o∣thers done the like in an high∣er degree? to Law, procure sundry of his Majesties Sub∣jects, and enforced the Clergy of this Kingdome to con∣tribute towards the maintenance of the War against the Scots. That to preserve himself from being questioned, for these & other his Traiterous courses, he hath laboured to subvert the Rights of Parliament, and the ancient course of Parliamentary proceedings, (and have not the Army Offi∣cers and others actually done it since upon the same accompt?) and by false and malicious slanders to in∣cense his Majesty against Parliaments. All which being proved against him at his Triall, were after solemn Argument by Mr. Samuel Brown, in behalf of the Commons House, proved; and soon
after adjudged, to be High Treason at the Common Law, by both Houses of Parliament; and so declared in the Ordinance for his Attainder: for which he was condemned and behead∣ed as a Traitor, against the King, Law and Kingdom, on Tower Hill, January 10. 1644. 11. In theSee the Com∣mons and Lords Journals, Di∣urnal Occur∣rences, p. 15, 16 19, 37, 191 to 264. and Mr. St Johns Speech at a Conference of both Houses of Parliament concerning ship money & these Judges. Toge∣gether with the Speeches of Mr Hide, Mr. Wal∣ler, M. Per∣point, M Den∣zill Hollis at their Impeach∣ments, July 6. 1641. aggra¦vating their offences, in Di∣urnal Occur∣rences and Speeches, p. 237 to 264. same Parliament, December 21. Jan. 14. Febr. 11. 1640. and July 6. 1641. Sir John Finch, then Lord Keeper, Chief Justice Bramston, Judge Berkley, Judge Crawly, Chief Baron Davenport, Baron Weston, and Baron Trevour, were accused and impeached by the House of Commons, by several Articles transmitted to the Lords, OF HIGH TREASON, for that they had Traiterously and wickedly endeavoured, to subvert the Fundamental Laws and established Government of the Realm of ENGLAND, and instead thereof to introdce an Arbitrary and Tyranni∣cal Government against Law; which they had declared, by traiterous and wicked words, opinions, judgements; and more especially in this their extrajudiciall opinion, subscribed by them in the case of Ship money, viz. We are of opinion, that when the good and safety of the Kingdome in generall is concerned, and the whole Kingdome in danger; your Majesty may by Writ, under the Great Seal of England (without consent in Parlia∣ment) command all your Subjects of this your Kingdome, at their charge to provide and furnish such a number of Ships, with Men, Victuall and Ammunition, and for such time as your Majesty shall think fit for the Defence and safeguard of the Kingdome, from such danger and perill. And we are of Opi∣nion, that in such case, your Majesty is theNow others presume to do it without writ of consulting with the judges who condemned it in them. See c. 2 Propo∣sition 1. sole Judge both of the danger, and when, and how, the sume is to be prevented, and avoided And likewise for arguing and giving judgment accordingly, in Mr. John Hampdens case, in the Exchequer Chamber, in the point of Ship money, in April 1638: which said opinions, are Destructive to the Fundamental Laws of the Realm,Have not others been sole Judges of it, and other pretended dangers since? the Subjects Right of Property, and contrary to former Resolutions in Parliament, and the Petition of Right; as the words of their severall Impeachments run. Sir John Finh fled the Realm, to preserve his head on his shoulders; some others of them died through fear, to prevent the danger, soon after their Impeachments, and
the rest who were lesse peccant, were put to Fines. 12. Mr. John Pym, in his Declaration upon the whole matter of the charge of High Treason against Thomas Earl of Strafford, Aprill 12. 1641. before a Committee of both Hou∣ses of Parliament in Westminster Hall; printed and published by Order of the House of Commons; proves his endeavour to subvert the Fundamental Laws of England, and to intro∣duce an Arbitrary Power; to be High Treason, and an offence very hainous in the nature, and mischievous in the effects thereof; which (saith he) will best appear, if it be examined by that universall and supream Law, Salu Populi: the element of all Laws, out of which they are derived: the end of all Laws, to which they are designed, and in which they are perfected. 1. It is an offence comprehending all other Offences. Here you shall finde several Treasons, Murthers, Ra∣pines, Oppressions, Perjuries. There is in this Crime, a Seminary of all evils, hurtfull to a State; and if you consider the Reasons of it, it must needs be so. The Law, is that which puts a difference betwixt good and evill; betwixt just and unjust. If you take away the law, all things will fall into confusion; every man will become a law to himself,Nota. which in the depraved con∣dition of humane nature, must needs produce many great enormities;And are they not so now? Lust will become a Law; and En∣vy will become a law; Covetousnesse and Ambition will become laws; and what Dictates, what decisions such laws will produce, may easily be discerned in the late Government of Ireland (and England too since this.) The law hath a power to prevent, to restrain, to repair evils: without this all kindes of mischiefs and distem∣pers will break in upon a State. It is the Law that in∣titles the King to the Allegiance and Service of his peo∣ple: it intitles the People to the Protection and Ju∣stice of the King, &c. The Law is the Boundary, the measure betwixt the Kings Prerogative, and the Peoples Liberties; whiles these move in their Orbe, they are a support and security to one another; but if these Bounds be so removed, that they
enter into contestation and conflict, one of these great mischiefs must needs ensue: if the Prerogative of the King o∣verwhelm the Liberty of the people, it will be turned into Ty∣ranny; If Liberty undermine the Prerogative, it will turn in∣to Anarchy. The Law is the safegard, the custody of all private interests: your Honours, your Lives, your Liberties, and your estates, are all in the keeping of the Law: without this, every man hath a like Right to any thing: and this is the condition into which the Irish were brought by the Earl of Strafford; (and the English by others who condemned him) And the reason which he gave for it, hath more mischief than the thing it self: THEY ARE A CON∣QUERED NATION, (let those who now say the same of England, as well as Scotland and Ireland, consi∣der and observe what followes) There cannot be a word more pregnant and fruitfull IN TREASON, than that word is. There are few Nations in the world, that have not been con∣quered, and no doubt but the conquerour may giveAnd did not some at White-Hall do so of late, and now too witnesse their volumes of new Declarati∣ons, Edicts, Or∣dinances there made. what Laws he please to those that are conquered. But if the succeeding Parts and Agreements do not limit and restrain that right, what people can be secure? England hath been conquered, and Wales hath been conquered, and by this reason will be in little better case than Ireland. If the King by the Right of a Conquerour give Lawes to his people, shall not the people by the same reason be restored to the Right of the conquered, to recover their Li∣berty if they can? What can be more hurtful, more per∣nicious, than such Propositions as these? 2. It is dangerous to the Kings Person: and dangerous to his Crown: it is apt to cherish ambition, usurpation, and oppression in great men: and to beget sedition, dis∣content in the people, and both these have been, and in reason must ever be great causes of trouble and altera∣tions to Prince and State. If the Histories of those Ea∣stern Countries be perused, where Princes order their affairs, according to theHave not o∣thers taken up such Principles in their practi∣ses, proceedings even against Kings Kingdomes, Parliament, Peers, as well as private per∣sons? mischievous Principles of the Earl of Strafford, Loose and absolved from all Rules of Government, they will be found to be frequent in com∣bustions, full of Massacres, and the tragical end of Prin∣ces.
If any man shall look into our own Stories, in the times when the Laws were most neglected, he shall finde them full of Commotions, of Civill distempers, whereby the Kings,Nota. that then raigned, were alwaies kept in want and disresse, the people consumed with CIVIL WARS: and by such wicked Counsels as these, some of our Princes have been brought to such miserable ends, AsNote this, all the whole Com∣mons-House o∣pinion then. no honest heart can remember without horrour and earnest Prayer, that it may never be so again. 3. As it is dangerous to the Kings Person and Crown, so it is in other respects very prejudiciall to his Majesty, in honour, profit and greatnesse (which he there proves at large, as you may there read at leisure) and yet these are the Guildings and Paintings, that are put up∣on such Counsels: These are for your Honour, for your Service. 4. It is inconsistent with the Peace, the Wealth, the Prosperity of a Nation. It is destructive to Justice, the mother of Peace: to Industry, the spring of Wealth; to Valour, which is the active vertue whereby the Pro∣sperity of a Nation can onely be procured, confirmed, and enlarged. It is not onely apt to take away Peace, and so intangle the Nation with Wars, but doth cor∣rupt Peace, and pours such a Malignity into it, as pro∣duceth the effects of Warre: both to theIs not this an experimental truth now? NOBILITY and others, having as little security of THEIR PER∣SONS OR ESTATES, in this peaceable time, as if the Kingdome had been under the fury and rage of Warre. And as for industry and valour, who will take pains for that, which when he hath gotten is not his own? or who fights for that wherein he hath no other inte∣rest, but such as is subject to the will of another? &c. Shall it be Treason to embase the Kings Coyne; though but a piece of twelve pence or six pence, and must it not needs be the effect of greater Treason toAnd were they ever so base, cowardly, sla∣vish as now? embase the spi∣rits of his Subjects, and to set a stamp and character of Servitude upon them, whereby they shall be disabled to do any thing for the service of the King or Common∣wealth?
5. In times of sudden danger, by the Invasion of an Enemy, it will disable his Majesty to preserve himself, and his Subjects from that danger: When war threatens a Kingdome, by the coming of a Forraign Enemy, it is no time then to discontent the people, to make them weary of the PRESENT GOVERNMENT, and more inclinable to a change. The supplies which are o come in this way, will be unready, uncertain; there can be no assurance of them, no dependance upon them, either for time or proportion. And if some money be gotten in such a way, the distractions, the divisions distemper, which this course is apt to produce, will be more pre∣judicial to the publike safety, than the supply can be advantagious to it. 6. This crime is contrary to the Pact and Covenant between the King and his People; by mutuall agreement and stipulation, confirmed by OATH on both sides. 7. It is an Offence that is contrary to the ends of Govern∣ment. 1. To prevent Oppressions; toWas ever their power, vi∣olence so unli∣mited, unboun∣ded in all kinds as now, against Kings, king∣doms, Parlia∣ments, Peers, People? limit and restrain the ex∣cessive power and violence of great men; to open passages of Justice with indifferency towards all. 2. To preserve men in their Estates, to secure them in their Lives and Liberties. 3. That Vertue should be cherished, and Vice suppressed; but where Laws are subverted, and Arbitrary, and unlimited pow∣er set up; a way is open not onely for the security, (as now of all heresies) but for the advancement and incouragement of evil, Such men as areIs it not most true of late and still? ptest for the execution and maintenance of this power, are onely capable of preferment; and others, who will not be Instruments of any unjust Commands, who make Conscience to do any thing against the law of the Kingdome, and liberties of the Subject, are not onely not passable for imploy∣ment; but SƲBJECT TO MƲCH JEALOVSIE and DANGER. (Is not this their condition of late and present times, even in Parliament Members themselves, as well as others, secured, secluded, kept close prisoners per∣force, for making Conscience of doing nothing against
the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, and their Oaths and Covenants too? and refusing to comply with usur∣ping Innovators in all their self-seeking extravagancies and Treasons? expertus loquor.) 4. That all accidents and events, all Counsels and Designes should be improved for the publique good. But this arbitrary po∣wer is apt to dispose all to the maintenance of it self. (And is it not so now?) 8. The Treasons of subversion of the laws, violation of Li∣berties can never be good or justifiable by any circumstance or occasion, being in their own nature, how specious or good so∣ever they be pretended. He alledgeth it was a time of GREAT NECESSITY and DANGER,Note when such Counsels were ne∣cessary, FOR THE PRESERVATION OF THE STATE; (the Plea since, and now used by others, who condemned him;) If there were any NECESSITY IT WAS OF HIS OWN MAKING. He by his evill Coun∣sell had brought the King (as others the Kingdome since) into a Necessity; and by no rules of Justice can be allowed to gain this advantage to his Justification; which is A GREAT PART OF HIS OFFENCE. 9. As this is Treason in the nature of it, so it doth exceed all other Treasons in this; that in the Designe and endeavour of the Authour, it was to be A CON∣STANT and PERMANENT TREASON; a standing perpetual Treason; which would have been in conti∣nual Act, not determined within one time or age, but transmitted to Posterity, even from Generation to Ge∣neration. And are notSee Article 2, 2, 3, , 5, 10, 11, 12, 13, 16, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 39 & p. 45, 46. of the Government of the Common∣wealth of Eng∣land, &c. others Treasons of late times such, proclaimed such, in and by their own Printed pa∣pers; and therein exceeding Straffords? 10. As it is odious in the nature of it, so it is odious in the Judgement and estimation of the Law. TODoth not the Declaration of 17 March 1648 and the Instru∣ment of the new Govern∣ment do it, in the highest de∣gree▪ AL∣TER THE SETLED FRAME and CONSTITU∣TION OF GOVERNMENT, IS TREASON IN ANY ESTATE. (Let those consider it who are guilty of it in the highest degree, beyond Strafford, Canterbury, or the Ship mony-Judges in our own State.) The Laws
whereby all parts of a Kingdome are preserved, should be very vain and defective, if they had not a power to se∣cure and preserve themselves. The Forfeitures inflicted for Treason by our Law, are of Life, Honour, and Estate, even all that can be forfei∣ted: and this Prisoner, although he shouldAnd others as well as he, of far inferiour place & estate. pay all these Forfeitures, will still be a Debtor to the Common-wealth. Nothing can be more equal, than that he should perish by the Justice of the Law, which he would have subverted: nei∣ther will this be a New way of blood. There are marks enough to trace this Law to the very Original of this Kingdome. And if it hath not been put in execution, as he alledgeth, this two hundred and fourty years; it was not for want of LAW, but that all that time had not bred a manBut have not our times bred men much bol∣der than he, since this speech was made, and he executed? bold enough to commit such Crimes as these: which is a circumstance much aggravating his Offence, and making him no lesse liable to punishment: he is THESince, he hath many followers. ONELY MAN, that in so long a time hath ventured UPON SUCH A TREA∣SON AS THIS. Thus far Mr. John Pym; in the Name and by the Or∣der and Authority of the whole Commons House in Parlia∣ment: which I wish all those, who by their Words, Acti∣ons Counsels (and printed Publications too) have traite∣rously endeavoured to subvert the Fundamentall Laws, Liberties, Government, Parliaments of England and Ireland, and to introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government against law, as much as ever Strafford did, yea, far out stripped him therein (even since his execution) in all particulars, for which he was beheaded; would now seriously lay to heart, and speedily reform, lest they equal or exceed him in conclusion in capital punishments for the same, or end∣lesse Hellish Torments. 13. The next Authority I shall produce in point, is, The Speech and Declaration of Master Oliver St. John, at a Conference of both Houses of Parliament, concern∣ing SHIPMONEY, upon Judge Finches Impeachment of High Treason, January 14. 1640. printed by the Com∣mons
Order, London, 1641. wherein he thus declares the sense of the Commons, p. 12. &c. That by the Judges opinions (p. 36. forecited) concerning Ship∣mony, THE FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF THE REALM CONCERNING OUR PROPERTIES and OUR PERSONS ARE SHAKEN: whose Trea∣sonable Offence herein, he thus aggravates, page 20. &c. The Judges, as is declared in the Parliament of 11 R. 2. are the Executors of the Statutes, and of the Judgments and Ordinances of Parliament. They have made themselves the Have none done so since them▪ EXECUTIONERS OF THEM; they have in∣deavoured the DESTRUCTION OF THE FUNDA∣MENTALS OF OUR LAWS and LIBERTIES. Holland in the Low Countries, lies under the Sea: the superfices of the Land, is lower than the superficies of the Sea.See Chap. 2. Proposition. 1. It is Capitall therefore for any man to cut the Banks, because they defend the Coun∣try: Besides our own, even Forraign Authours, as Comines, observes, That the Statute DE TALLAGIO, and the other Old Laws, are the Sea Wals and Banks, which keep the Commons from the inundation of the Prerogative. TheseHave not o∣ther Pioneers and Judasses done the like▪ Pioners have not onely undermined these banks, but have levelled them even with the ground. If one that was known to be Hostis Patriae, had done this, though the Dammage be the same, yet the Guilt is lesse; but the Conservatores Riparum, the Overseers intrusted with the Defence of these Banks, for them to destroy them; the breach of Trust aggravates, nay, alters the nature of the offence: Breach of Trust, though in a pri∣vate Person, and in the least things, is odious amongst all men: much more in a publike Person, in things of great and publike concernment, becauseThis is grown a meer Paradon of late years, in Judges, soul∣diers & others. GREAT TRUST BINDES THE PARTY TRUSTED TO GREATEST CARE AND FIDELI∣TY.
It is TREASON in the Constable of Dover Castle to deliver the Keys to the known enemies of the King∣dome: Whereas if the House-keeper of a private per∣son, deliver possession to his Adversary, it is a crime scarce punishable by Law. TheWhat are they now of late times of pub∣like Changes? Judges under his Ma∣jesty, are the Persons trusted with the Laws, and in them with the Lives, Liberties and Estates of the whole Kingdome. This Trust of all we have, is primarily from his Majesty, andSee 27 H. 8. c. 24. 26. Ma∣gna Charta c. 12. 29. 52. H. 3. c. 1, 3, 5, 9, 20. 3 E. 1. c. 44, 45, 46. 13 E. 1. c. 10, 12, 30, 31, 35, 39, 44, 45. 25 E. 1. c. 1, 2. 27 E. 1. c. 2, 3. 34 E. 1. c. 6. 12 E 2. c. 6. 2 E. 3. c. 3. 14 E 3. c. 10. 16. Rastal Ju∣stices. from him delegated to the Judges. His Majesty at his Coronation, is bound by his Oath TO EXECUTE JUSTICE TO HIS PEOPLE ACCOR∣DING TO THE LAWES; thereby to assure the People of the faithfull performance of his GREAT TRUST: His Majesty again, as he trusts the Judges with the performance of this part of his Oath; so doth he likewise exact another Oath of them, for their due execution of Justice to the people, according to the Laws: hereby the Judges stand intrusted with this part of his Majesties Oath. If therefore the Judges shall doe wittingly against the Law, they doe not onely break their own Oaths, and therein the Common Faith and Trust of the whole Kingdome; but do as much as in them lies, asperse & blemish the sacred Person of his Majesty, with the odious and hatefull sin ofWas it ever so frequent a sin as now in all sorts of late Judges, Offi∣cers, Subjects▪ Perjury. My Lords, the hainousnesse of this offence is most legible in theDo none de∣serve as severe now? severe punishment, which former Ages have inflicted upon those Judges, who have broken any part of their Oaths wittingly, though in things not so dangerous to the Subject, as in the case in que∣stion. See Cookes 3. Institutes p. 146, 147, and page 133. Ho∣linshed, page 284, 285. Speeds History page 651. Stow, Walsingham, Daniel in 18 E. 1. Sir Thomas Wayland, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas 17. E. 1. was attainted of Felony for taking Bribes,
and his Lands and Goods forfeited, as appears in the Pleas of Parliament, 18 E. 1. and he was banished the Kingdome, as unworthy to live in the State, against which he had so much offended. SirSee Cooks 3. Instit. p. 145. William Thorpe Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, in Edward the thirds time, having of five persons re∣ceived five severall Bribes, which in all amounted to one hundred pounds, was for this alone, adjudged to be hanged, and all his Goods and Lands forfeited: The rea∣son of the Judgment is entered in the Roll, in these words. Quia praedictus WillielmusHave none of this name, or of this Function since done as bad or worse in an high∣er degree? Thorp qui Sacramen∣tum Domini Regis erga populum suum habuit ad custodiendum, fregit malitiose, falsò & rebelliter, quantum in ipso fuit. There is a notable Declaration in that Judgement, that this judgement was not to be drawn into example, a∣gainst any other Officers, who should break their Oaths, but onely against those, qui praedictum Sacra∣mentum fecerunt, & fregerunt, &Let Custodes Legum & Li∣bertatum An∣gliae and those now called Judges, re∣member it▪ habent Leges Angliae ad custodiendum: That is, onely to the Judges Oaths, who have the Laws intrusted unto them. This Judgment was given 24 E. 3. The next year in Parliament 25 E. 3. Numb. 10. it was debated in Parliament, whether this Judgement was legall? Et nullo contradicente, it was declared, TO BE JUST AND ACCORDING TO THE LAW: and theLet the Repor∣ter and others now consider it same Judgement may be gi∣ven in time to come upon the like occasion. This case is in point, That it is death for any JƲDGE wittingly to break his OATH in any part of it. This OATH of THORP is entred in the Roll, and the same Verbatim with the Judges OATH in 18 Edw. 3. and is the same which the Judges now take. (And let those who have taken the same Oath, with the1 Eliz. c. 1▪ 3 Jac. c. 4. 7 Jac. c. 6. OATHES OF SUPRE∣MACY and ALLEGIANCE too, remember and apply this PRESIDENT, lest others do it for them.) Your Lordships will give me leave to observe the dif∣ferences between that and the case in question.
1. That of Thorp, was onely a selling of the Law by Retaile, to these five persons; for he had five severall Bribes, of these five persons; the Passage of the Law to the rest of the Subjects, for ought appears, was free and open. But these Opinions are a conveyance of the Law by whole sale, and that not to, but from the Sub∣ject. 2. In that of Thorp, as to those five persons, it was not an absolute deniall of Justice, it was not a damming up, but a straitning onely of the Chanel. For whereas, the Judges ought Judicium reddere, that is, the Lawes being THE BIRTH-RIGHT and INHERITANCE OF THE SUBJECT, the Judge when the parties in suit demand Judgment, should re-dare, freely restore the Right unto them; now he doth not dare, but ven∣dere, with hazard onely of perverting Justice; for the party that buyes the Judgment, may have a good and honest cause. But these Opinions, besides that, they have cost the Subjects very dear, dearer than any; nay, I think, I may truly say, than all the unjust Judgments that ever have been given in this Realm, witnesse the many hundred thousand pounds, which under colour of them, have been levied upon the Subjects, amoun∣ting toThis is no∣thing incompa∣rison to the late Taxes, Ship mo∣ny, Excises im∣posed on the subjects, with∣out a Parlia∣ment, amount∣ing to above 20 times as much as the Kings Ship mony, and more frequent, uncessant, and endlesse then it. seven hundred thousand pounds and upwards, that have been paid unto the Treasurers of the Navy (in sundry years) besides what the Subjects have been for∣ced to pay Sheriffs, Sheriffs Bailiff (and now an hun∣dred times more to Troopers, and Souldiers, who for∣cibly levy their unlawfull Contributions and Excises, though adjudged HIGH TREASON in Straffords case, and proved such by Master St. John) and otherwise; which altogether as is conceived, amounts not to lesse than a Million (in five years space, whereas we pay above two Millions in Taxes, Imposts, Excises, every year) besides the infinite vexations of the Subject, by suits in Law, binding them over, and attendance at the Coun∣cel Table, taking them from their necessary imploy∣ments, in making Sesses and Collections, and impri∣sonment
of their persons (all now trebled to what then.) I say, Besides what is past, to make our mise∣ries compleat, they have as much as in them is, MADE THEM ENDLESSE (as others since have done, by un∣cessant endlesse Taxes and Excises:) for by these opi∣nions, they have put upon themselves and their suc∣cessors, An impossibility of ever doing us right again, and an incapacity upon us of demanding it so long as they continue. (As the Compilers of the late Instrument, with 42 Strings, intitled, The Government of the Common Wealth of Eng∣land, &c. Article 1, 2, 3, 9, 10, 12, 22, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 36, 37, 38, 39. have done, as far as they, and much be∣yond them.) In that sore famine in the land of Egypt, when the inhabitants were reduced to the next door to death; (for there they say, why should we die?) for bread, first they give their money, next their Flocks and Cat∣tle; last of all, their Persons and Lands for Bread, all became Pharoahs; but by this, Lex Regia, there is a transaction made, not onely of our Persons, but of our bread likewise, wherewith our persons should be sustained; that was for bread, this of our bread. For since these Opinions, if we have any thing at all, we areAre we now beholding to it for any thing a∣gainst the onely new Law of the longest sword? Which takes, imposeth what when, and how much it plea∣seth, without accompt, or di∣spute, from all sorts and de∣grees of Persons; and that by those who were com∣missioned, trust∣ed, engaged by Oaths, Prote∣stations, Vows, League and Covenant to preserve our laws and pro∣perties. not at all beholding TO THE LAW FOR IT, but are wholy cast UPON THE MERCY and GOODNESSE OF THE KING. Again, there the Egyptians themselves, sold them∣selves, and all they had to the King: if ours had been so done; if it had been so done by our own free consent in PARLIAMENT, we had the lesse cause to com∣plain. But it was done against our Wils, and by those who were intrusted, and that ƲPON OATH, with the preser∣vation of these things for us. The Laws are our Forts and Bulwarks of defence: If the Captain of a Castle, only out of fear and cowardice, and not for any compliance with the enemy, surrender it, this is Treason, as was adjudged in Parliament, 1 R. 2. in the two Cases of Gomines and We∣ston, and in the Case of the Lord Gray, for surrendring
Barwick Castle to the Scots, in Edward the thirds time, though good Defence had been made by him, and that he had lost his eldest Son in maintenance of the Seige: and yet the losse of a CASTLE loseth not the Kingdom, onely the place and adjacent parts, with trouble to the whole. But by these Opinions, there is a Surrender made of all our Legall Defence of Property: that which hath been Preacht, is now judged; that there is no Meum and Tuum,Is there any between the late & present powers and them, further or longer than they please▪ between the KING AND PEOPLE; besides that which concerns our Per∣sons. The LAW is the TEMPLE, the Sanctuary, whe∣ther Subjects ought to run for SHELTER and RE∣FƲGE: Hereby it is become Templum sine Numine, as as was the Temple built by the Roman Emperour, who after he had built it, put no Gods into it: We have the Letter of the Law still, but not the sense: We have the Fabrick of the TEMPLE still, but theAre they not so now? Dii Tutela∣res are gone. But this is not all the case, that is, That the law now ceaseth to aid and defend us in our RIGHTS, for then possession alone were a good Title, if there were no Law to take it away: Occupanti concederetur, & melior esset Possidentis conditio: But this, though too bad, is not the worst: for besides that which is Priva∣tive in these Opinions, there is somewhat Positive. For now the Law doth not onely not defend us, but the Law, it self, (by temporizing Judges and Lawyers) is made the Instrument of taking all away. For whensoeverIt is not so now, when o∣thers who con∣demned and be∣headed him for a Tyrant, say, pretendad act it over and o∣ver. his Ma∣jesty or his Successors, shall be pleased to say, that the good and safety of the Kingdome is concerned, and that the whole king∣dome is in danger, the when, and how the same is to be preven∣ted, makes our persons and all we have liable to bare Will and Pleasure. By this meanes, the Sanctuary is turned into a Shambles; the Forts are not slighted, that so they might neither do us good or hurt;Nota. But they are held against us by those who ought to have held them for us, and the mouth of our own Canon is turned upon our own selves: (And that by
our own Military Officers, Souldiers and others since, as well as the Ship money Judges then.) Thus far Master Oliver St. John (by the Commons Order) whose words I thought fit thus to transcribe at large, because not on∣ly most pertinent, but seasonable for the present times; wherein as in a Looking Glasse, some pretended Judges and Grandees, of these present and late pst times, may behold their own faces and deformities; and the whole Nation their sad condition under them. In the residue of that Printed Speech, he compares the Treason of the Ship-money Judges, and of Sir Robert Tresylium and his Complices in the 11 of R. 2. (condemned, executed for Traitors by Judgment in Parliament, for endeavouring to subvert the Laws and Statutes of the Realm by their illegall Opinions, then delivered to King Richard at Nottingham Castle, not out of conspiracy, but for fear of death, and corporall Torments, wherewith they were menaced:) whose offence he makes transcendent to theirs inWorth consi∣deration of those of the long robe. six particulars, as those who please may there read at lea∣sure, being over large to transcribe. I could here inform you, that the Fundamentall Laws of our Nation, are the same in the Body Politique of the Realm, as the Arteries, Nerves, Veines, are in, and to the natural Body, the Bark to the Tree; the Foun∣dation to the House: and therefore the cutting of them a sunder, or their Subversion, must of necessity, kill, destroy, disjoyn and ruine the whole Realm at once: Wherefore it must be Treason in the highest degree. But I shall onely subjoyn here some materiall Passages, in Master St. Johns Argument at Law, concerning the At∣tainder of High Treason of Thomas Earle of Strafford, before a Committee of both Houses of Parliament in Westmin∣ster Hall, Aprill 29. 1641. soon after Printed and published by Order of the Commons House: Wherein p. 8. he lays down this Position; recited again, p. 64. That (Straffords) endeavouring, To subvert the Fundamentall Lawes and Government of England and Ireland, and instead therefore to introduce a Tyranni∣call
Government against Law, is Treason by the Com∣mon Law. That Treasons at the Common Law are not taken away by the statutes of 25. E. 3. 1 H. 4. c. 10. 1 Mar. c. 1. nor any of them. The Authorities, Judgements, in and out of Parlia∣ment, which he cites to prove it, have been already men∣tioned, some others he omitted; I shall therefore but transcribe his Reasons to evince it to be Treason, su∣peradded to those alledged by him against the Ship mony Judges. Page 12. It is a War against the King (Let our Military Officers and Souldiers consider it) when intended. For alteration of the Laws or Government in any part of them. This is a levying War against the King (and so Treason with∣in the Statute of 25. E. 3.) 1. Because the King doth maintain and protect the Laws in every part of them. 2. Because they are the Kings Laws: He is the Fountain from whence in their severall Channels, they are derived to the Subject. Whence all our indictments run thus: Trespasses laid to be done, Contra pacem Domini Regis, &c. against the Kings peace for exorbitant offences; though not intended against the Kings Person; against the King, his Crown and Dignity. Page 64. In this I shall not labour at all to prove, That the endeavouring by words, Counsels and actions, To subvert the Fundamental Laws and Government of the King∣dome, is Treason at the Common Law. If there be any Com∣mon Law Treasons at all leftAnd how mamy are guilty of this Treason See Hos. 3 4, 5. cap. 10. 3, 4. cap. 1. 4. cap. 1. 4. Zech. 9. v. 5. Hab. 1. 10, 14, 15. Mic. 4. 9, 10. Amos 1. 13, 14, 15. Lam. 5. 16. Ezech. 19. 1. 14. Isay 17. 3. c. 7. 16. Jer. 17. 25. 27. cap. 18. 7, 8. cap. 22. 3. to 13. cap. 25. 8 to 38. cap. 51. 20. Proverb 28. 2. Ezech. 17. 14. cap. 29. 14, 25 Isa. 47 verse 5. Daniel 4. verse 17. NOTHING TREA∣SON IF THIS IS NOT, TO MAKE A KING∣DOME NO KINGDOME. Take the Policy and Go∣vernment away, Englands but a piece of earth, wherein so many men have their commerce and abode, without rank or distinction of men, without property in any thing further than in possession; no Law to punish the murdering or robbing one another.
Page 70, 71, 72. The horridnesse of the offence in endea∣vouring to overthrow the Laws and present Government, hath been fully opened before. The Parliament is the repre∣sentation of the whole Kingdome, wherein the King as Head, your Lordships as the more Noble, and the Commons, the other Members areAre they so now? and who have dis∣solved the Li∣gaments that formerly united and held them together? knit together in one body Politique. This dissolves the Arteries and Ligaments that hold the bo∣dy together, THE LAWS. He that takes away the Laws, takes not away the Allegiance of one Subject on∣ly, but of the whole Kingdome. It was made Treason by the Statute of 13 Eliz. for her time to affirm, That the Law of the Realm do not binde the descent of the Crown. No Law, no descent at all, NO LAWS NO PEER∣AGE, no ranks nor degrees of men, the same con∣dition to all. Its Treason to kill a Judge upon the Bench; this kills not Judicem, sed Judicium. There be twelve men, but no Law; never a Judge amongst them. Its Felony to embezell any one of the Judiciall Records of the Kingdome: THIS AT ONCE SWEEPS THEM ALL AWAY and FROM ALL. Its Teason to coun∣terfeit a Twenty shilling peice; Here's aHave we not many counter∣feit laws and Acts of Parlia∣ment of law? and yet some counterfeit Judges that execute and give them in charge as true ones? counterfeit∣ing of the Law: we can call neither the counterfeit nor the true Coyn our own. Its Treason to counter∣feit the great Seal for an Acre of Land: No property is left hereby to any Land at all: NOTHING TREA∣SON NOW, AGAINST KING OR KING∣DOME; NO LAW TO PƲNISH IT. My Lords, If the question were asked in Westminster Hall, whether this were a Crime punishable in the Star Chamber, or in THE KINGS BENCH, by Fine or Imprisonment? They would say, It were higher. If whether Felony? They would say, That is an Offence onely against the Life or Goods of some one, or few persons. It would I believe be answered by the JƲDGES, as it was by the Chief Justice Thirning, in the 21 R. 2. That though he could not judge the Case TREASON there before him, yet if he
were a Peer in Parliament; HE WOULD SO AD∣JUDGE IT. (And so the Peers did here in Straffords, and not long after in Canterburies case, who both lost their Heads on Tower-Hill.) I have transcribed these Passges of Mr. Oliver S. John at large for five Reasons. 1. Because they were the Voice and Sence of the whole House of Commons by his mouth; who afterwards ow∣ned and ratified them by their special Order, for their publication in Print, for information and satisfaction of the whole Nation, and terrour of all others, who should after that, either secretly or openly, by fraud or force, directly or indirectly, attempt the subversion of all, or any of our Fundamental Laws or Liberties, or the alteration of our Fundamental Government, or setting up any Arbitrary or Tyrannical Power, Taxes, Impositions, or new kinds of arbitrary Judicatories, and imprison∣ments against these our Laws and Liberties. 2. To minde and inform all such who have not onely equalled, but transcended Strafford and Canterbury in these their HIGH TREASONS, even since these PUBLICA∣TIONS, SPEECHES, and their EXEMPLARY EXE∣CUTIONS, of the hainousnesse, in excusablenesse, wilfulnesse, maliciousnesse, Capitalnesse of their Crimes; which not onely the whole Parliament in generality, but many of themselves, in particular, so severely pro∣secuted, condemned, and inexorably punished of late years in them: that so they may sadly consider, bewail, repent, reform them with all speed and diligence, as much as in them lies. And with all, I shall exhort them seriously to consider that Gospel terrifying passage, (if they have not quite sinned away all Conscience, Shame, Christianity, Religion and Fear of the last Judge, and Judgement to come) Rom. 2. 1, 2, 3. Therefore thou art inexcusable O man, whosoever thou art that judgest; for wherein thou judgest another, thou CONDEMNEST THY SELF, FOR THOƲ THAT JUDGEST DOEST THOƲ THE SAME THING. But we
are sure that the Judgment of God is according to truth, against them who commit such things. And thinkest thou this, O man, that judgest them which do such things; and doest the same, that thou shalt escape the Judgment of God? 3. To excite all Lawyers (especially such, who of late times have taken upon them the stile & power of Judges) to examine their Consciences, Actions, how far, all or any of them have been guilty, in the highest degree of these Crimes and Treasons, so highly aggravated, so exemplarily punished of former and later times, in cor∣rupt, cowardly time-serving, degenerate Lawyers, and Judasses, rather than Judges; to the disgrace of their Profession, (now generally spoken against) their own dis∣honour, infamy, reproach, the scandall of Religion, which some of them have eminently professed: the pre∣judice and subversion of the Fundamentall Laws, Liberties, Rights, Priviledges of our Nation, Peers, Parliaments, and of the ancient Fundamental Government of this famous King∣dome, whereof they are Members: and that contrary to some of their own late Judgments, sciences, Consciences, Votes, Printed Arguments, Speeches, Declarations, against others, even in and out of Parliament? and their own first Charges in their Circuits, repugnant to their la∣ter. 4. To instruct those Jesuited Anabaptists, Levellers, and their Factors, (especially John Canne, and the rest of the Compilers, Publishers, Abetters of the Pamphlet inti∣tuled, Leiutenant Colonel John Lilburn, tried and east; and other forementioned publications:) who professedly set themselves by Words, Writings, Counsels and overt Acts to subvert both our old Fundamentall (with all o∣ther) Laws, Liberties, Customs, Parliaments, and Govern∣ment, what transcendent Malefactors, Traitors, and Enemies they are to the publique, and what Capital punishments they may incurre, as well as dmerit, should they be legally prosecuted for the same; and thereupon to advise them timely to repent of, and dsist from such high Treasonable attempts.
5. To clear both my self and this my seasonable De∣fence of our Fundamental Laws, Liberties, Government, from the least suspition or shadow of Faction, Sedition, Treason and Emnity to the publique peace, weal, settlement of the Nation, which those, (and those onely) who are most fa∣ctious, and seditious, and the greatest Enemies, Traitors to the publique tranquility, Weal, Laws, Liberties, Go∣vernment, and establishment of our Kingdome (as the premises evidence) will be ready maliciously to asperse both me and it with, as they have done heretofore some other of my Writings of this Nature, with all which, they must first brand Mr. St. John, Mr. Pym, the whole House of Commons, the two last, with all other Parliaments fore∣cited, and themselves too (from which they are so much changed and degenerated of late years) ere they can ac∣cuse, traduce, or censure me; who do but barely relate, apply their words and judgments in their purest times, without malice or partiality, for the whole Kingdomes benefit; security, and resettlement. To these punctual full Juries of Records and Parlia∣ment Authorities in point, I could accumulate Sr. Edward Cook his 3. Institutes, p. 9. printed and authorised by the House of Commons speciall Order, the last Parliament. The severall Speeches of M. Hide, M. Waller, M. Pierpoint, and M. Hollis, July 6. 1641. at the Lords Bar in Parlia∣ment, by Order of the Commons House, at the Impeach∣ment of the Shipmony Judges of High Treason, printed in Diurnal Occurrences, and Speeches in Parliament, London, 1641. p. 237, to 264. M. Samuel Browns Argument at law before the Lords and Commons at Canterburies Attainder, all manifesting, their endeavouring to subvert the Fundamen∣tall Laws and Government of the Realm, to be High Treason; with sundry other printed Authorities to prove; That we have,See Exact. Collection, p. 4. 12 243, 262. 321. Fundamental Laws, Liberties, Rights; and a Funda∣mental Government likewise; which ought not to be innovated, violated, or subverted upon any pretences whatsoever, by any po∣wer or prevailing Faction. Which Fundamental Rights, Liber∣ties, Laws, Sr. Thomas Fairfax, and the Army under his
Command, by their Declaration of June 14. 1647. parti∣cularly promise and engage, to assert & vindicate against all arbitray power, violence, oppression, and against all particular parties or Interests whatsoever, which they may doe well to remember and make good. But to avoid prolixity (the double Jury of irrefragable and punctuall authorities already produced being sufficient to satisfie the most obstinate opposites formerly contradicting it) I shall onely adde three swaying authorities more, where∣with I shall conclude this point. The first, is a very late one, in a Treatise, intituled, A Surely there are sundry fals∣hoods in it, as well as some truths. true State of the Common Wealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, in Reference to the late established Government by a Lord Protector and a PARLIAMENT. It being the Judgement of DIVERSE PERSONS, who through∣out these late troubles, have approved themselvesIf we believe themselves in their own cases faithfull to the Cause and interest of God, and their COUNTRY: presented to the publike, for the satis∣faction of others. Printed at London, 1654. who re∣lating the miscarriages of the last ASSEMBLY at West∣minster (elected, nominated by the Censurers of them, the Army Officers onely, not the people) use these ex∣pressions of them, page 13, 14, 16, 17, 21, 22. But on the contrary, it so fell out in a short time, that there appeared many in this Assembly of very contrary principles to the interest aforesaid, which led them violently on to attempt and promote many things, the consequence whereof would have been, A subverting of the Fundamentall Laws of the Land, the Destruction of Property, and an utter extinguishment of the Gospel. In truth their Principles led them TO A PULLING DOWN ALL AND ESTABLISING NOTHING. So that instead of the expected settlement, they were running into FURTHER ANARCHY AND CON∣FUSION. As to the Laws and Civil Rights of the Na∣tion, nothing would serve them, but a TOTALL ERADICATION OF THE OLD, AND INTRODUCTION OF A NEW:
and so the good Old Laws of England (the Guardians of our Laws and Fortunes) established with prudence, and con∣firmed by the experience of many Ages and Genera∣tions: (The Preservation whereof, was aSome mens act ons since, declare they had some other ground and ayms than this. principall ground of our late quarrell with the King) having been once abo∣lished, what could we have expected afterwards, but an inthroning of Arbitrary power in the Seat of Judicature, and an exposing of our Lives, our Estates, our Liber∣ties, and all that is dear unto us, as a Sacrifice to the boundlesse appetite of meer Will and Power, &c. Things being at this passe, and the House (through these proceedings)Those who se∣vere and dis∣joynt one house from the other; and by force & armed power seclude, exclude and disjoyn the members of the same House, one from another, so many times one after ano∣ther, & justi∣fie it too, are the greatest dis∣joyners of the House and Par∣liament, and very unlikely to make any firm or reall settle∣ment of this Nation. perfectly disjointed, it was in vain to look for a settlement of this Nation from them, thus constituted: but on the contrary, nothing else could be expected; But that the Common-wealth should sink under their hands, and the great cause hitherto so happily upheld and maintained, to be for ever lost, through their preposterous management of these affairs, wherewith they had been intrusted. Whereupon they justifie their dissolution, and turning them forcibly out of doores by the Souldiers, with shame and infamy; to prevent that destruction, which there∣by was coming on THE WHOLE LAND, by this New Powder Treason plot, set on foot by the Jesuites and Anabaptists, to destroy our Laws, Liberties, Properties, Ministers, and Religion it self, at one blow, and that in the very Parliament House, (where some de∣stroyed and blowed up Kings, Peers and Parliaments themselves, as well as Lawes and Parliament Privi∣ledges of late years) where they had been constantly defended, vindicated, preserved, established in all for∣mer Ages, by ALL TRƲE ENGLISH PARLIA∣MENTS. The second is,See my Speech in Parliament, p. 100. to 108. The Votes of the House of Commons, concerning a Paper presented to them, entituled, An Agreement of the people for a firm & present peace, upon grounds of Common Right, 9. November 1647, viz.
Resolved upon the Question, That the matters contained in these Papers, are destructive to the being of Parliaments, and to the fundamental Government of this Kingdom. Resolved; &c. That a Letter be sent to the General, and those Papers inclosed, together with the Vote of this House upon them; And that he be desired to examine the proceedings of this business in the Army (where it was first coyned) and return an Accompt hereof to this House. These Votes were seconded soon after with these ensuing Votes, entred in the Commons Journal, and printed by their special Order, 23 Novemb. 1647. A Petition directed to the Supream Authority of England, The Commons in Parliament assembled, The humble Petition of many Free-born people of England, &c. was read the first and second time. Resolved upon the Question, That this Petition is, A sedi∣tious and contemptuous avowing, and prosecution of a former Petition, and Paper annexed, stiled, An agreement of the Peo∣ple, formerly adjudged by this House, to be destructive to the being of Parliaments, and Fundamental Government of the Kingdom. Resolved, &c. That Thomas Prince Cheese-monger, and Samuel Chidley, bee forthwith committed Prisoners to the Prison of the Gate-house, there to remain Prisoners during the pleasure of this House, for a Seditious avowing, and prosecu∣tion of a former Petition and Paper annexed, stiled, An Agree∣ment of the people; formerly adjudged by this House, to be de∣structive to the being of Parliaments, and fundamental Go∣vernment of the Kingdom. Resolved, &c. That Jeremy Ives, Thomas Taylor, and William Larnar, bee forth-with committed to the Prison of Newgate, there to remain Prisoners during the pleasure of this House, for a seditious and contemptuous avowing, and prosecution of a former Petition and Paper annexed, stiled, An Agreement of the People; formerly adjudged by this House, to be destructive to the being of Parliaments, and fundamental Government of the Kingdom. Resolved, &c. That a Letter be prepared and sent to the
General; taking notice of his proceeding in the execution (ac∣cording to the Rules of Warre) of a Mutinous person (avow∣ing, and prosecuting this Agreement in the Army contrary to these Votes) at the Rendezvous near Ware, and to give him thanks for it; and to desire him to prosecute that Business to the bottome, and to bring such guilty persons as he shall think fit, to condign and exemplary punishment. Resolved, &c. That the Votes upon the Petition and A∣greement annexed, and likewise the Votes upon this Petition, be forth-with printed and published. After which, by a special Ordinance of both Houses of Par∣liament, 17 Decemb. 1647. no person whatsoever, who had contrived, plotted, prosecuted, or entred into that Engagement, intituled, The Agreement of the people, declared To bee de∣structive to the being of Parliaments, and Fundamental Go∣vernment of the Kingdom; for one whole year was to be elected, chosen, or put into the Office, or place of Lord Mayor, or Al∣derman, Sheriff, Deputy of a Ward, or Common Counsel∣man of the City of London, or to have a voyce in the Election of any such Officers. All these particulars, with the Capital proceedings against White, and others who fomented this Agreement in the Army, abundantly evidence the verity of my foresaid Proposition, and the extraordinary guilt of those Members and Souldiers, who contrary to their own Votes, Ordinances, Proceedings, and Cen∣sures of others, have since prosecuted this, the like, or far worse Agreement, to the destruction of our ancient Parliaments, and their Priviledges, and of the fundamental Government, Laws, and Liberty of our Nation: which I wish they would now sadly lay to heart, with that saying of Augustine, approved by all sorts of Divines, andSee Gra∣tian, Caus. 2. Qu. 1. 2. Summa Angeli∣ca, Rosella, & Hostiensis. Tit. Restituito. Casuists; Non remittitur peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatu, & sciendum est, Quod Restitutio est IN PRISTINUM STATUM POSITIO. The third, is the memorable Statutes of 3 Jacobi, c. 1, 2, 4. & 5. which relating the old Gunpowder Treason of the Jesuits and Papists, and their infernal, inhuman, barbarous, detesta∣ble plot, to blow up the King, Queen, Prince, Lords, Com∣mons, and the whole House of Peers with Gunpowder, when
they should have been assembled in Parliament, in the upper House of Parliament, upon the fifth of November, in the year of our Lord, 1605. do aggravate the hainousness and transcendency thereof, by this circumstance, That it was (as some of the principal Conspirators confessed) purposely devised and concluded to be done in the said House, That where sun∣dry necessary and religious Laws, for preservation of the Church and State, were made, (which they falsly and slanderously termed, Cruel Laws enacted against them, and their Religion) both Place and Persons should be all destroyed and blown up at once; and by these dangerous Consequences, if it had not been miraculously prevented, but taken effect; That it would have turned to the utter ruine, overthrow, and subversion of the whole State and Common-wealth of this flourishing and renowned Kingdom, of Gods true Religion therein established by Law, and of our Laws and Government. For which horrid Treason, they were all attainted,See Speeds Hist. p. 1250. &c. Mr. Vicars History of the Gunpowder-Treason, The Arraignment of Traytors. and then executed as Traytors, and some of their Heads, Quarters, set upon the Parliament House for terrour of others. Even so let all other Traytors, Conspirators against, all Blowers up, and subverters of our fun∣damental Laws, Liberties, Government, Kings, Parliaments, and Religion, treading presumptuously in their Jesuitical footsteps, perish, O Lord,Judg. 5. 21. but let all them who cordially love, and strenu∣ously maintain them against all Conspirators, Traytors, Under∣miners, Invaders whatsoever, be as the Sun when hee goeth forth in his might; That the Land may have rest, peace, settlement again, for as many years at least, as it had before our late Innovations, Warres, Confusions, by their restitution and re∣establishment. CHAP. 2. HAving thus sufficiently proved, That the Kingdom, and Freemen of England, have some antient Hereditary Rights, Liberties, Franchises, Privileges, Customs, properly called FUNDAMENTAL, as likewise a Fundamental Go∣vernment, no ways to bee altered, undermined, subverted, di∣rectly or indirectly, under the guilt and pain of High Treason in
those who attempt it, especially by fraud, force, or armed Power. I shall in the second place present you in brief Propositions, a Summary of the chiefest and most considerable of them, which our prudent Ancestors in former Ages, and our latest real Parlia∣ments, have both declared to be, and eagerly contested for, as fundamental, and essential to their very being, and well being, as a Free People, Kingdom, Republick, unwilling to be enslaved under any Yorkes of Tyranny, or Arbitrary Power: that so the whole Nation may the more perspicuously know and discern them, the more strenuously contend for them, the more vigi∣lantly watch against their violations, underminings in any kinde, by any Powers or pretences whatsoever, and transmit, perpetuate them intirely to their Posterities, as their best and chiefest in∣heritance. I shall comprise the sum and substance of them all in these Ten Propositions, beginning with the Subjects Property, which hath been most frequently, universally invaded, assaulted, un∣dermined by our Kings, and their evil Instruments heretofore, and others since, and thereupon more strenuously, frequently, vi∣gilantly maintained, fenced, regained, retained by our Nobles, Par∣liaments, and the people in all Ages (till of late years) than any or all of the rest put together, though every of them hath been constantly defended, maintained, when impugned, or incroa∣ched upon, by our Ancestors, and our selves. 1 ThatSee the Laws of King Ed∣ward the Con∣fessor, con∣firmed by Wil∣liam the Con∣querour, Lex. 55, 56, 57. The great Charters of King John, and Henry 3. c. 29, 30. 25 E. 1. c. 5, 6. 34 E. 1. De Tallagio. c. 1, 14 E. 3. Stat. 1. c. 21. Stat. 2. c. 1. 35 E. 3. Stat. 2. c. 1. 15 E. 3. Stat. 3. c. 5. 21 E. 3. Rot. Parl. N. 16. 25 E 3. Rot. Parl. N. 16, 27 E. 3. Stat. 2. c. 2. 36 E. 3. Rot. Parl. N. 26. 38 . 3. c. 2. 45 E. 3. Rot. Parl N. 42. 11 H. 4. Rot. Parl. N. 50. 1 R. 3. c. 2. The Petition of Right, 3 Caroli, the Acts against Ship-money, Knighthood, Tonnage, and Poundage, 16. & 17. Caroli. no Tax, Tallage, Aid, Subsidy, Custom, Contribu∣tion, Loan, Imposition, Excise, or other Assesment whatso∣ever, for defence of the Realm by Land or Sea, or any other publick, ordinary, or extraordinary occasion, may or ought bee imposed, or leavied upon all or any of the Freemen of England, by reason of any pretended or real Danger, Necessity, or other pretext, by the Kings of England, or any other Powers, but only with and by their common consent and grant, in a free and
lawful English Parliament duly summoned and elected; except only such antient, legal Ayds, as they are specially obliged to render by their Tenures, Charters, Contracts, and the common Law of England. 2 ThatSee Magna Charta, c. 29. & Cooks Insti∣tutes on it. 5 E. 3. c. 9 15 E. 3. c. 1, 2 25 E. 3. c. 4 28 E. 3. c. 3 37▪ E. 3. c. 18 42 E. 3. c. 3 2 R. 2. c. 2 4 5 H. 4. c. 10 19 H. 7. c. 10 23 H. 8. c. 8 The Petition of Right, 3 Caroli, and other Acts in ch. 3. 2 H 4. Rot. Parl. N. 60. & 69. no Free-man of England ought to bee arrested, confined, imprisoned, or in any private Castles, or remote unusual Prisons, under Souldiers, or other Guardians, but only in usual or Common Gaols, under sworn responsible Goalers, in the County where he lives, or is apprehended, and where his friends may freely visit and releeve him with necessaries; And that only for some just and legal Cause expressed in the Writ, Warrant, or Process, by which he is arrested or imprisoned; which ought to be legally executed, by known, legal, responsible sworn Officers of Justice, not unknown Military Officers, Troopers, or other il∣legal Catchpolls; That no such Free-man ought to bee denied Bail, Mainprise, or the benefit of an Habe as Corpus, or any o∣ther Legal Writ for his enlargement, when Bailable or Mainpri∣zable by Law; nor to be detained Prisoner for any real or preten∣ded Crime, not bailable by Law longer than until the4 E. 3. c.  17 R. . c. 10 next gene∣ral or special Gaol-delivery, held in the County where he is im∣prisoned; when and where he ought to be legally tried and pro∣ceeded against, or else enlarged by the Justices, without denial or delay of Right and Justice. And that no such Free-man may, or ought to be out-lawed, exiled, condemned to any kinde of Corporal punishment, loss of Life or Member, or otherwise de∣stroyed or passed upon, but only by due and lawful Process, In∣dictment, and the lawful Trial, Verdict, and Judgement of his Peers, according to the good old Law of the Land, in some u∣sual Court of publick Justice; not by and in new illegal Milita∣ry, or other Arbitrary Judicatories, Committees, or Courts of High Justice, unknown to our Ancestors. 3 That the ordinarySee the Laws of Edward the Confessor, and William, the Conqueror, Lex. 35. 55, 56, 58. Rasals A∣bridgement. Tit. Armour. 35 E. 3. c. 8. Rot. Parl. N. 23▪ The Sta∣tures for im∣pressing Soul∣diers, 16 & 1 Caroli. standing Militia, Force, and Arms of the Kingdom, ought to reside in the Nobility, Gentry, Free∣holders, and Trained Bands of the Kingdom, not in Mercena∣ry Officers and Souldiers, receiving pay, and Contributions from the people; more apt to oppress, inslave, betray, than pro∣tect their Laws, Liberties, and to protract than end their Warres and Taxes. That no Free-men of England, unless it bee by
special Grant and Act of Parliament, E. 3. Stat. 2. c 5. 4 H. 4. c. 13. Exact collection, p. 878, 879. may or ought to be com∣pelled, enforced, pressed, or arrayed to go forth of his own Coun∣ty (much less out of the Realm into forreign parts) against his will, in times of Warre or Peace; or except he be specially ob∣liged thereto by antient Tenures and Charters, save only upon the sudden coming of strange enemies into the Realm; and then he is to array himself only in such sort, as he is bonnd to do by the ancient Laws and Customs of the Kingdom still in force. 4 That noSee Magna Char. c. 29. 5 E. 3. c. 9. 15 E. 3. c. 1, 2 21 E. 3. Rot. Parl. N. 28. 1 E. 3. N 35, 36, 37. 5 E. 3. c. 4 Rot. Parl. N. 16. 28 E. 3. c. 3. 37 E. 3. c. 8. 42. E. 3. c. 1. 3. 2 R. 2. Parl. 2. c. 2. 7 R. 3. c. 4. 2 H 4. Rot. Parl. N. 60. 69. 15 H. 6. c. 4. The Petition of Right, 3 Car. and the Statutes against Ship-money, Knighthood, Tonnage and Poundage, 16, & 17 Caroli. Free-man of England may, or ought to be dis∣inherited, disseised, dispossessed, or deprived of any Inheritance, Free-hold, Office, Liberty, Custom, Franchise, Chattles, Goods, whatsoever, without his own Gift, Grant, or free Consent, unless it be by lawful Processe, Trial, and Judgement of his Peers, or special Grant by Act of Parliament; nor to be denied or delay∣ed common Right or Justice in any case. 5 That the old received Government, Laws, Statutes, Cu∣stoms, Priviledges, Courts of Justice, legal Processe of the Kingdom, and Crown, ought not to be altered, repealed, sup∣pressed in any sort; nor any new form of Government, Law, Sta∣tute, Ordinance, Court of Judicatury, Writ, or legal procee∣dings, instituted, or imposed on all, or any of the Free-men of England, by any person or persons, but only in and by the See 1 Sam. 7. 4, to the end. c. 11. 14, 15. c. 12. 1. 2 Sam. 5. 1, 2, 3. c. 16. 18. 1 King. 12. 3. to 21. c. 16. 1. c. 20. 7, 8. 2. King. 11. 1. to 21. c. 21. 24. c. 23. 30. Kingdoms, peoples free and full precedent consent in a lawful Parliament, wherein the Legislative power solely re∣sides. 6 That Parliaments ought to be duly summoned, and held, for the good and safety of the Kingdom, every year, or every three years at least, or so soon as there is just occasion. That the Election of all Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, to sit and serve in Parliament (and so of all other Elective Officers) ought to be free. ThatKing Johns Magna Chata, Matth. Paris, p. 247. 5 R. 2. c. 4. cook 4. Instit c. 1. My Plea for the Lords, My Ardua Regui, The Levellers levelled▪ and Epistle before my Speech in Parliament. 4 E. 3. c. 14. 36 E. 3. c. 10. 50 E. 3. N. 151. 1 R. 2. N. 95. 2 R. 2. N. 4, 5. all Members of Parliament Hereditary or Ele∣ctive, ought to be present, and there freely to speak and vote
according to their Judgements and Consciences, without any over-awing Guards to terrifie them; and none to be forced, se∣questered, or secluded thence by force or fraud. That all Parlia∣ments not thus duly and freely summoned, elected, freely held, but unduly packed, without due Elections, or by forcible seclu∣ding, securing any of the Members, or not summoning all of them to the Parliament, and all Acts of Parliament fraudulently, or forcibly procured by indirect meansSee 39 H. 6. c. 1. 17. E. 4. c. 7.  H. 4. N. 21, 22. 48. 1 H. 4. c 3., ought to be nulled, repealed, reputed voyd, and of dangerous president. 7 That neither theSee Rastals Abridgement of Statutes, Title, Provision Premunire, & Rome. Kings, nor any Subjects of the Kingdom of England, may or ought to be summoned before any Forreign Powers or Jurisdictions whatsoever out of the Realm, or within the same, for any manner of Right, Inheritance, Thing belong∣ing to them, or Offence done by them within the Realm, nor tried, nor judged by them. 8 That all Subjects of the Realm areLeges Ed∣wardi Regis, c. 35, Lam∣bards Arch. F. 135, 136. Cooks 7. Re∣port, Calvins Case, f. 6, 7. Leges Willielm Regis Lex. 58, 59. Seldens Notae ad Ead∣merum, p. 191. 11 H. 7. c. 1. 18, 19, H. 7. c. 1. 25 H. 8. c. 22. 26 H. 8. c. 3. 28 H. 8. c. 7. 1 Eliz. c. 1. 3. 5. 5 Eliz. 2. c. 1. 1 Jac. c. 1, 2. 3. Jac. c. 1, 2, 4, 5. 7 Jac. c. 6. The Protestation, League and Covenant, and the ancient Oathes of Fealty, Ho∣mage, Mayers, Sheriffs, Free-men. obliged by Allegi∣ance, Oaths, and duty to defend their lawful Kings Persons, Crowns, the Laws, Rights, and Priviledges of the Realm, and of Parliament, against all Usurpers, Traytors, Violence, and Conspiracies. And that no Subject of this Realm, who accor∣ding to his Duty, and Allegiance, shall serve his King in his Warres, for the just defence of him and the Land, against For∣reign Enemies or Rebels, shall lose or forfeit any thing for doing his true duty, service, and allegiance to him therein; but utterly be discharged of all vexation, trouble, or losse. 9 That no publick Warre by Land or Sea ought to be made or leavied, with, or against any Forreign Nation: nor any publick Truce or League entred into with Forreign Realms or States, to binde the Nation, without their common advice and consent in Parliament. 10 That the Kings of England, or others, cannot grant away, alien, or subject the Crown, Kingdom, or antient Crown Lands of Eng∣land to any other, without their Nobles and Kingdoms full and
free consent in Parliament. That the antient Honours, Manors, Lands, Rents, Revenues, Inheritances, Rights, and Perqui∣sits of the Crown of England, originally setled thereon for the ase and exemption of the people from all kind of Taxes, pay∣ments whatsoever (unlesse in case of extraordinary necessity) and for defraying all the constant, ordinary expences of the King∣dome (as the expences of the Kings houshold, Court, Officers, Judges, Ambassadors, Guard, Garrisons, Navy and the like) ought not to be sold, alienated, given away or granted from it, to the prejudice of the Crown, and burdenning of the people. And that all Sales, Alienations, Gifts, or Grants thereof, to the empairing of the publique Revenue, or prejudice of the Crown and people, are void in Law, and ought to be resumed, and repealed by our Parliaments and Kings, as they haveDaniels Hi∣story p. 78 79. 80. 123. 10. 12 n. 2. r. 8. H 5. r. 9 1. 1. 6. n. 53. 31. H. 6. r. 7. 1. R. 2. n. 14. 1. H. 4. n. 100. 6 H 4. n. 4. 15. 8. H. 4. n. 12. 33. H. 6. n. 47. 4. G. n. 3. 12 E. 4, n. 6. fre∣qeuntly been in all former ages. For the Readers fuller satisfaction in each of these propositi∣ons (some of which I must in the ensuing Chapter but briefly touch for brevity sake, having elsewhere fully debated them in print,) I shall especially recommend unto him the perusall of such Tractates, and Arguments formerly published, wherein each of them hath been fully discussed, which hee may peruse at his best leasure. The First of these Fundamentalls, (which I intend principally to insist on) is fully asserted, debated, confirmed by 13. H. 4. f. 14. By Fortescue Lord Chief Justice, and Chancellor of England, de Laudibus Legum Angliae, dedicated by him to King Henry the 6. f. 25. c. 36. By a Learned and necessary Ar∣gument against Impositions in the Parliament of 7. Jacobi: by a late reverend Judge, Printed at London 1641. By Mr. William Hakewell, in his Liberty of the Subject against Impositions, maintained in an Argument in the Parliament of 7 Jacobi, Prin∣ted at London 1641. By Judge Crooks and Judge Huttons. Arguments concerning Ship-mony, both Printed at London 1641. By the Case of Ship-mony briefly discussed. London 1640. By M. St. Johns Argument and Speech against Ship-mony, Printed at London 1641. By Sir Edward Cook in his 2 Insti∣tutes p. 46. and 57. to 64. and 528 to 537. By the first and second Remonstrance of the Lords & Commons in Parliament.
against the Commission of Array. Exact Collection p. 386. to 398. and 850. to 890. and by my own Humble Remonstrance against Ship-mony, London 1643. The Fourth part of the Sovereign Power of Parliaments and Kingdomes, p. 14. to 26. my Legall Vindication of the Liberties of England, against Illegall Taxes &c. London 1649. and by the Records and Sta∣tutes cited in the ensuing Chapter, referring for the most part to the first Proposition. The second, third, and fourth of them, are largely deba∣ted and confirmed by a Conference desired by the Lords, and had by a Committee of both Houses, concerning the Rights and Priviledges of the Subject, 3 Aprilis 4 Caroli, Printed at London 1642. By Sir Edward Cook in his Institutes on Mag∣na charta, c. 29. p. 45. to 57. By the first & second Remonstrance of the Lords and Commons against the Commission of Array, Exact Collection p. 386. and 850. to 890. By Judge Crooks, and Judge Huttons Arguments against Ship-mony. By Sir Robert Cotton his Posthuma p. 222. to 269. By my Breviate of the Prelates Encroachments on the Kings Prerogative, and the Subjects Liberties, p. 138. my New Discovery of the Prelates Tyranny, p. 137. to 183. and some of the ensuing Statutes, and records, ch. 3. See 1 H. 4. rot Parl. n. 22, 23, 24, 26, 28, 43, 44▪ 47. The Fift and Sixt of them, are fully cleared, vindicated in and by the Prologues of all our Councills, Statutes, Laws, before and since the Conquest. By 1. H. 4. Rot. Parl. n. 33, 34, 36. (an excellent full president.) Sir Edward Cooks 4 Institutes, ch. 1. Mr. Cromptons Iurisdiction of Courts, Title High Court of Parliament. Mr. St. Johns speech against the Ship∣mony Judges, p. 32, 33. my Plea for the Lords; my Levellers levelled; my Ardua Regni; my Epistle before my Speech in Parliament; my Memento, my Sovereign Power of Parlia∣ments and Kingdomes, part. 1, 2, 3, 4. my Legal Vindication against illegal Taxes, and pretended Acts of Parliament, London 1649. Prynnethe Member, reconciled to Prynne the Barester, Printed the same year. My Historical Collecti∣on of the Ancient great Councils and Parliaments of England, London 1649. My Truth triumphing over Falshood, Antiquity
over Novely, London 1645. 3 E. 1. c. 5, 4 E. 3. c. 14. 36 E. 3. c. 10. 1 H. 4. c. 3, 4. 5 R. 2. Stat. 2. c. 4. Rastal tit. Parliament. 1 H. 4. Rot. Parl. n. 21. 22. 48. 70. 31 H. 6. c. 1. 39 H. 6. c. 1. Rot. Parl. n. 8. 17 E. 4. c. 7. expresse in point, and some of the Re∣cords hereafter transcribed. In this I shall be more sparing, be∣cause so fully confirmed in these and other Treatises. The Seventh, is ratified by Sir Edward Cooks 1. Institutes p. 97▪ 98. 4 Institutes p. 89. and 5. report Cawdries case, of the Kings Ecclesiasticall Laws, Rastals Abridgement of Statutes, Tit, Provisors, Praemunire, Rome, and other Records and Statutes in the ensuing Chapter. The Eight, is verified by the Statutes quoted in the Margin to it, and by other Records in the third Chapter. The Ninth and Tenth, are fully debated in my Soveraign Power of Parliaments and Kingdomes, par. 2. p. 3. to 34. part. 4. p. 1. to 13. and 162. to 170. touched in Sir Robert Cot∣tons Posthuma, p. 174. 179. confirmed by sundry Presidents in the next Chapter. & by 1 H. 4. Rot. Parl. n 32. How all and every of these Fundamentall Liberties, Rights, Franchises, Laws, have been unparalledly violated, subverted, in all and every particular, of late years, beyond all Presidents in the worst of former ages, even by their greatest pretended Pro∣pugners, their own Printed Edicts, Instruments, Ordinances, Papers, together with their illegall Oppressions, Taxes, Ex∣cises, Imposts, Sequestrations, Rapines, Violences, unjust Pro∣ceedings of all kinds, will sufficiently evidence, if compared with the premised Propositions. Not to insist on any fore-past illegall Imposts, Taxes, Excises, under which the nation late∣ly groaned, imposed on us by unparliamentary Junctoes, or the Army Officers alone from Anno 1648 to 1653. without any real Parliament by their own armed Iurisdiction. I shall here instance onyl in 3. or 4 particulars, relating wholly to the First Propositi∣on, being of most generall, greatest present and future concernment of all other to the whole English Nation, at this very instant most intollerably oppressed, grieved by them; directly sweeping away all their Fundamentall Right of Property, and consequentially all their Liberty of person, Laws, Charters, at once, and that in perpetuity, beyond all hopes of Future redemption, if not
timely prevented by the Ʋniversality, Body of the Realm, or their Trustees. The first of them is, the present imposition, and continuance of the strange, oppressive, monstrous, general high Tax of EX∣CISE, imposed on most native and forreign Commodities throughout England, and its Dominions; which as it was a meer Stranger to all our Ancestors, and those now living, till within these few years; so it was no sooner projected by some e∣vil Malignant Jesuited Counsellers about the late King, but it wasSee my Declaration and Protesta∣tion against the illegal, dete∣stable, oft-condemned new Tax, and Extortion of Excise, 1654. Exact collecti∣on, p. 885. Mr. St. Johns Speech con∣cerning Ship-money. p. 15, 16. presently condemned, and crushed in the very shell, when first intended to be set on foot in England by King Charls, (with the advise and consent of his privie Council at White-Hall) by a Commission under the Great Seal of England, dated the last of February, 3 Caroli, issued to thirty three Lords of his Majesties Privie Council and others: which authorized, commanded them to raise monies BY IMPOSITIONS OR OTHERWISE, as they in their wisdoms should finde most convenient; and that only for these publike uses, THE DE∣FENCE OF THE KING, KINGDOM, PEOPLE, and of the Kings Friends and Allies beyond the Seas, then in such imminent danger, that WITHOUT EXTREAMEST HA∣ZARD OF THE KING, KINGDOM, PEOPLE, KINGS Friends and Allies, it could admit of no longer de∣lay. In which INEVITABLE NECESSITY, form and circumstance must rather be dispenced with than the sub∣stance lost. The Commissioners being thereupon specially in∣joyned, to be diligent in the Service, and not fail therein, as they tender his Majesties Honour, and THE SAFETY OF THE KING and PEOPLE. This Commission was no soo∣ner discovered, but it was presently complained of by the whole Commons House, in the Parliament, of 3 Caroli, and upon Conference with the Lords it was immediately Voted, adjudg∣ed by both Houses, without one dissenting voyce, TO BEE (EX DIAMETHRO) AGAINST LAW, and CON∣TRARY TO THE PETITION OF RIGHT; after which, it was cancelled as such in the Kings own presence, by his consent, order, and then sent cancelled to both Houses, for their satisfaction, before ever it was put in execution, and all
Warrants for, and memorials of it cancelled, damned, de∣stroyed; the Commons further urging, That the Projector thereof might be found out by strict inquiry, and EXEM∣PLARILY PƲNISHED (as the Parliament Journal attests) notwithstanding all the specious pretences, of inevitable neces∣sity, imminent danger, and the defence, safety of the whole Kingdom, People, King, and his forreign Protestant Friends and Allies (then in greater real danger, than any now appear∣ing) This Original Parliamentary Doom, Judgement against that New Monster of Excise, was ratified, approved, pressed by both Houses of Parliament, in the Cases of Ship-money, and the Commission of Array, as you may read at large in Mr. Oliver St. Johns Speech and Declaration, delivered at a Conference of both Houses concerning Ship-money, 14 January, 1640. (printed by the Commons Order) p. 13. to 20. and, The Lords and Commons second Declaration against the Commis∣sion of Array. Exact collection, p. 884, 885. from which they then drew this positive conclusion (fit to be now considered by our New Governours, and the whole Nation)Exact Col∣lection, p. 886. Nota. THAT TO DEFEND THE KINGDOM IN TIME OF IM∣MINENT DANGER, IS NO SUFFICIENT CAVSE (for the King and his Council, much less then for those who condemned, suppressed them for Tyrants, and Oppressors of the People) TO LAY ANY TAX OR CHARGE UPON THE SUBJECTS WITHOUT THEIR CONSENT IN PARLIAMENT. Yea the whole House of Commons was so zealous against this Dutch Devil of Excise, that in their Re∣monstrance of the state of the Kingdom, 15 Decemb, 1641. Exact Collection, p. 3 4, 6. they expresly brand, censure, the first Attempts to introduce it, for A MALIGNANT and PERNIIOUS DESIGN, TO SUBVERT THE FUN∣DAMENTAL LAWS and PRINCIPLES OF GO∣VERNMENT, upon which the JUSTICE OF THIS KINGDOM WAS FORMERLY ESTABLISHED; as pro∣ceeding from JESUITED COVNSELS,Nota. BEING MOST ACTIVE and PREVAILING; yea, for AN UNJUST and PERNICIOVS ATTEMPT, TO EXTORT GREAT PAYMENTS FROM THE SUBJECTS. Which was to be
accompanied (as now it is) with Billited Souldiers in all parts of the Kingdom, and the concomitant of German (as now of English) HORSE, That theAnd is not this its present sad slavish con∣dition? LAND MIGHT EI∣THER SUBJECT WITH FEAR, or BE ENFORCED WITH RIGOVR TO SUCH ARBITRARY CON¦TRIBUTIONS AS SHOVLD BE REQVIRED OF THEM. And when some rumours were first spread abroad, that the COMMONS HOVSE INTENDED TO LAY EX∣CISE UPON PEWER AND OTHER COMMO∣DITIES; they were so sensible of the injustice and odiousness thereof, that they thereupon published a special Declaration, printed 8 Octob. 1642. Exact Collection, p. 638. wherein they not only disclaim, renounce any such intention, but branded those Reports and Rumours, for FALSE and SCANDA∣LOVS ASPERSIONS, raised and cast upon the House BY MALIGNANT and ILL-AFFECTED PERSONS, TENDING MUCH TO THE DISSERVICE OF THE PARLIAMENT: and Ordered, That the AVTHORS OF THEM should be inquired aftèr, apprehended, and brought to the House TO RECEIVE CONDIGNE PUNISH∣MENT. After which this Excise being notwithstanding this Disclaimer, and much publick, private opposition against it, set on foot by some swaying Members (upon a pretence of necessity for support of the Army) to the great Oppression, and Discon∣tent of the People; The Generall and general Council of Offi∣cers and Souldiers of THE ARMY themselves, were so sensible of this illegal oft-condemned New grievance, that in the Heads of their Proposals, and particulars of their De∣sires, in order to the clearing and securing of the Rights and Liberties of the Kingdom, tendred to the Commissioners of Parliament residing with the Army, the first of August, 1647. (printed in their Book of Declarations, p. 118, &. pub∣lished by their own, and the Lords House special Order) they ade this one principall Desire to the Parliament; That the EX∣CISE may be taken off from such Commodities, whereof the poor of the Land do ordinarilyDo they not so on Beer, Salt, and other Manufactures, for which they▪ now pay Ex∣cise? live, and A CERTAIN TIME TO BE LIMITED FOR TAKING OFF THE WHOLE. Yet notwithstanding all these Judgements and Out∣cryes
against it; some of those very persons who thus publickly branded it, both in the Parliament House and Army; by irre∣gular paper Ordinances (as they intitle them) dated 24 De∣cember, 1653. March 17. 1653. and May 4. 1654. have by their own Self-derived supertranscendent Authority, with∣out, yea against the Peoples consents, or any Authority from Parliament, imposed, continued Excise upon our own Inland, and Forreign Commodities, in very high proportions, from the twenty fourth of March 1654. till the twenty fourth of March 1655. And (which is most observable) prescribed it to bee levied, by putting the Parties to an (EX OFFICIO) OATH against themselves; by Fines, Forfeitures, SEQVES∣TRATIONS, and SALES OF THE REFUSERS, OPPOSERS, PERSONAL and REAL E∣STATES, DISSTRESSES, BREAKING UP OF THE PARTIES HOVSES, SEISVRES OF THEIR GOODS, IMPRISONMENT OF THE PERSONS OF ALL SUCH WHO SHALL HINDER OR OPPOSE THE MINISTERS, OR OFFICERS IMPLOYED IN LEVYING, or distraining for the same, BY LOCKING UP THE DOORS, or OTHERWISE. And by these their unparalleld Edicts they further order, That the Officers of Excise, BOTH DAY AND NIGHT, shall be permit∣ted free entrance into ALL ROOMES and PLACES WHATSOEVER THEY SHALL DEMAND, in Brew∣ers, Sope-boylers, and others Houses, under pain of forfei∣ture of fifty pounds for every refusal (by colour whereof all mens Houses may be robbed, plundered, and their throats cut by Theeves and Robbers, pretending themselves Excise-men, Souldiers, authorised to make such Searches, as many of late have been.) And they with all their assistants shall bee kept indenspnified in ALL CAUSES RELATING TO THE EXCISE, from time to time, against all Sutes or Actions brought, or other molestations, against them by the Parties grieved; who areWitness Mr. ony amongst others. usually Fined, Imprisoned, enfor∣ced to pay Costs of Sute, only for suing for relief) yea (which I cannot think of without horrour and amazement) ALL
COVRTS OF JUSTICE OF THIS COMMON-WEALTH, and ALL JUDGES and JUSTICES OF THE SAME,Nota. SHERIFS, COVNSELLORS, ATTURNIES, SOLICITORS, and ALL OTHER PERSONS, are there∣by expresly required, to conform themselves accordingly, (in all things) WITHOVT ANY OPPOSITION OR DISPVTE WHATSOEVER; as the precise words of their Ordinance of 17 March, 1653. proclaim to all the Nation. Which declares further, That IT IS NECESSARY to provide A CONTINVAL SVPPLY for the carrying on the weighty Affairs of this Common-wealth OVT OF THIS REVENVE OF EXCISE. And do not these Clauses, (com∣pared with the 27. & 29. Articles of their Instrument,) clearly discover, a fixed Resolution in these new Legislators, to continue, and perpetuate upon the whole Nation, this importable Grie∣vance of Excise, from year to year, without intermission or end, to be leavied by the means aforesaid? to hinder all and e∣very the Freemen of England, from endeavouring to free or exempt themselves, or their Posterities from it hereafter, by any Sute, Action, Habeas Corpus, or other legal remedy in any Court of Justice whatsoever? yea peremptorily, positively to prohibit, enjoyn all Courts of Justice, Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, Counsellours, Atturnies, Solicitors, with all other persons of this Common-wealth, both for the present and future Ages, to give them the least legal assistance, advice, or relief against the same, or against any Officers, or Assistants which shall forcibly laie it by distress, Fines, Imprisonnents, Confisca∣tion of Goods, Sequestrations, Sales of their personal or real Estates, or otherwise? I appeal then (in the behalf of all the Freeborn People of Eng∣land) the Souls and Consciences of these new Ordinance-mak∣ers, with all the Executioners of them in any kinde, before all the Tribunals of Heaven and Earth, whether they have not by these their Dismal Ordinances, more desperately, irrecove∣rably, totally, finally (as much as in them lies) undermined, subverted; and quite blown up at once, all the Foundations of our hereditary Fundamentall Properties, Liberties, Laws for eternity, and levelled them to the dust, then the worst of all
our Kings or former Councill-tables ever did? Deprived the whole Nation, and every particular Free-man in it, of all fu∣ture benefit of our Laws, Statutes and Courts of Justice, for their just relief against this intolerable Oppression; and there∣by reduced us to the condition of the most slavish, captivated, fettered Bond-slaves and conquered Vassals under heaven, without any visible means or hopes of future enfranchisement, under a pretext of fighting for, maintaining, protecting, en∣largeing our former properties and freedomes & to a more mise∣rable, sordid, servile condition, than either we or our Ancestors sustained under the worst of al our Kings and their most pernicious Counsellors; who never in any age attempted, tither to make or impose such Extravagant enslaving Ordinances or Excises, with such strange penalties, Forfeitures, Imprisonments, Se∣questrations, sales, & most unrighteous Monstrous Inhibitions of all legal suites, & means for cheirrelief in Courts of Justice, as they have done: King Charles himself (though condemned, be∣headed by them for the worst of Tyrants and Oppressors) permit∣ting his Subjects free Liberty, to dispute the Legality of Fines for Knight-hood,See the Argu∣ments concer∣ning them in Mr. Hambdins and others cases. Ship mony, Tonnage, Poundage, Loanes, Excise and other Impositions not—only in his Parliaments, (where they were fully debated without restraint, and Laws passed against them afterwards by his own Royall assent thereto) but likewise in all his other Courts, where they were first brought in question. Yet now in our Nw Free State, under these greatest pretended Patrons of our Laws and Liberties, all Courts, Judges, Justices, and other Officers must conform to these illegall Im∣positions, and their tyrannicall waies of inforcement, without any opposition or dispute whatsoever; and all Counsellors, Attornies, Solicitors and others, must neither argue, nor advise, nor act. in any kinde against them. And is this the glorious old antient English Liberty, Freedome, Property, Law, and free course of Justice, wee have spent so many millions of Treasure, so ma∣ny years of publique Consultations, warres, Prayers, Fasts, Tears, and such Oceans of precious christian Protestant Eng∣lish blood, inviolably to maintain and perpetuate to posterity? If any Free-born English men whatsoever dare publikely averre it, let them do it at the perill of their infamy, execration in all
future ages, yea of their own heads and Souls. If they can∣not but now absolutely disavow it, let them with shame and in∣dignation disclaim, renounce such illegall Ordinances, Exci∣ses, as most detestable both to God and all true-born English free men.2. The 2 is, The present continuing Impositions of Customes Tonnage and Poundage upon Goods, Merchandizes imported and exported, without any grant thereof by Parliament, by a new Printed Paper, entituled, an Ordinance of March, 23 1653. thus peremptorily imposing them without any Prologue or Inducement to satisfy the people either in Equity or Justice, much lesse in their Legality in respect of those who thus impose them for sundry years yet to come. Be it ordained by his highness, the Lord Protector, with the advise and consent of the Councell, that one Act of Parliament (though noSee Cook; 4. Justi. c. 1. Brooks Parlia∣ment 4. 76 42. 107. and my Plea for the Lords. Act at all by any known Laws, Statutes, Law-books, Records, Customes or Constitutions of the Realm, bu a meer Nullity) entituled, an Act for the Continuation of the Customes, until the 26 of March, 1653, and all clauses and powers therein contained are, and ARE HEREBY CONTINUED, and SHALL and DO STAND IN FULL FORCE UNTILL THE 26 DAY OF MARCH in the year of our Lord 1658. &c. By which these New Legislators, by their own inherent Superlative Pow∣er, presume to impose this Tax upon the whole Nation, (with∣out any grant in Parliament) for full 5 years space, not only contrary to theSee Cooks 4. Justit. c. 1. and Rastal. Taxes. Presidents in all former Kings raigns, who never claimed nor received it, but by speciall grant in Parlia∣ment; but likewise contrary to this memorable Remonstrance, made by the whole House of Commons in the Parliament of 3 Caroli, (never yet Printed to my knowledge.) Most gracious Soveraign, your Majesties most loyall and dutifull Subjects, (the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled,) being in nothing more carefull than of the Honour and Prosperity, of your Majesty and the Kingdome,) which they know doth much depend upon that union and relation betwixt your Majesty and your people) do with much sorrow apprehend, that by reason of the incertainty of their continuance together, the unexpected interruptions which have been cast
upon them, and the shortness of time in which your Majesty hath determined to end this Session; they cannot bring to ma∣turity and perfection divers businesses of weight, which they have taken into their consideration and resolution, as most im∣portant for the common good. Amongst other things, they have taken into especiall care the preparing of a Bill for the granting to your Majesty such a Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage, as might uphold your Profit and Revenue, in as ample manner as their just care and respect of Trade (wherein not only the prosperity, but even the life of the Kingdom doth consist) would permit. But being a work which will require much time and prepara∣tion, by Conference with your Majesties Officers, and with the Merchants, not only of London, but of other remote parts; they finde it not possible to bee accomplished at this time; wherefore considering it will be much more prejudicial to the Right of the Subject,Nota. if your Majesty should continue to re∣ceive the same without Authority of Law, after the determi∣nation of a Session, then if there had been a recess by Ad∣journment only (in which case that intended Grant would have related to the first day of the Parliament) and assuring them∣selves, That your Majesty is resolved to observe that your royal Answer, which you have made to the Petition of Right of both Houses of Parliament; yet doubting lest your Ma∣jesty may be mis-informed concerning this particular case, as if you might continue to take those Subsidies of Tonnage and Poundage, and other Impositions of Merchants without breaking that Answer; they are forced, by that duty which they owe to your Majesty, and to those whom they represent, to declare, THAT THERE OVGHT NOT ANY IMPOSITION TO BE LAID ƲPON THE GOODS OF MERCHANTS EXPORTED OR IMPORTED WITHOVT COMMON CONSENT BY ACT OF PARLIAMENT,Nota. WHICH IS THE RIGHT AND INHERITANCE OF YOVR SVBJECTS, FOVN∣DED NOT ONLY ƲPON THE MOST ANTI∣ENT AND ORIGINAL CONSTITVTION OF THIS KINGDOM, BUT OFTEN CONFIRMED
AND DECLARED IN DIVERS STAVTE LAWS? And for the better manifestation thereof, may it please your Majesty to understand, That although your royal Predecessors, the Kings of this Realm have often had such Subsidies, and Impositions granted unto them upon divers occasions, especially for the guarding of the Seas, and safe∣guard of Merchants,Nota. yet the Subjects have been ever care∣ful to use such Cautions and limitations in those Grants, as might prevent any Claim to be made, that such Subsidies do proceed from duty, and not from the free gift of the Sub∣ject, and that they have heretofore limited a time in such Grants, and for the most part but short, as for a year, or two; and if it were continued longer, they have sometimes directed a certain space of resensation or intermission, that so the Right of the Subject might be more evident. At other times it hath been granted upon occasion of Warre for certain numbers of years, with Proviso, that if the Warre were ended in the mean time, then the grant should cease. And of course it hath been sequestred into the hands of some Subjects to bee imployed for guarding of the Coasts; and it is acknowledged by the ordi∣nary Answers of your Majesties Predecessors, in their assents to the Bills of Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage, that it is of the nature of other Subsidies, proceeding from the good will of the Subject. Very few of your Predecessors had it for life, until the reign of Henry 7.Though he came in by the Sword, as a kind of Con∣querour. who was so farre from conceiving he had any right thereunto, that although he granted Commis∣sions for collecting certain Duties and Customs due by Law, yet he made no Commission for receiving the Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage, until the same was granted to him in Par∣liament. Since his time, all the Kings and Queens of this Realm have had the like Grants for life, by the free love and good will of the Subject; and whensoever the people have been grieved by laying any Impositions or other Charges upon their Goods and Merchandizes without authority of Law, (which hath been very seldome) yet upon complaint in Parliament they have been forthwith releeved,Nota. saving in the time of your roy∣all Father, who having through ill counsel raised the Rates
of Merchandizes to that height at which they now are, yet he was pleased so farre to yeed to the complaint of his people,Nota. as to offer, that if the value of these Impositions which he had set, might be made good unto him, he would bind himself, and his Heirs by Act of Parliament, never to lay any other; which offer the Commons at that time, in regard of the great burthen, did not think fit to yeeld unto. Nevertheless your loyal Commons in this Parliament, out of their especial zeal to your Service, and special regard of your pressing occasions, have taken into their considerations; so to frame a Grant of Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage to your Majesty, that both you might have been better enabled for the defence of your Realm, and your Subjects by being secure from all undue Charges, be the more encouraged cheerfully to proceed in their course of Trade; by the encrease whereof your Majesties profit, and likewise the strength of the Kingdom would be very much augmented. But not being now able to ac∣complish this their desire, there is noAnd are not all the Com∣mons Mer∣chants, Free∣men of Eng∣land bound to use the same course, and make the sme Declaration now? course left unto them without manifest breach of their Duty, both to your Majesty and their Country, save only to make this humble Declara∣tion, THAT THE RECEIVING OF TONNAGE and POVNDAGE, and OTHER IMPOSITIONS NOT GRANTED BY PARLIAMENT,Nota. IS A BREACH OF THE FVNDAMENTAL LIBERTIES OF THIS KINGDOM, and CONTRARY TO YOVR MA∣JESTIES ROYAL ANSWER TO THE SAID PE∣TITION OF RIGHT; And therefore they do most hum∣bly beseech your Majesty to forbear any further receiving of the same,And can our pesent Gran∣dees take it in ill part if we refuse to pay them now, be∣ing demandd without War∣rant of a Law, and the re∣ceivers of them in a Premu∣nire by ex∣press Act of Parliamen of 16 Caroli, made since this Re∣monstrance. and not to take it in ill part from those of your Majesties loving Subjects, WHO SHALL REFVSE TO MAKE PAIMENT OF ANY SVCH CHARGES WITHOVT WARRANT OF LAW DEMANDED. And as by this forbearance, your most excellent Majesty shall manifest unto the World your ROYAL JUSTICE IN THE OBSERVATION OF YOVR LAWS; so they doubt not hereafter, at the time appointed for their coming a∣gain, they shall have occasion to express their great desire to ad∣vance your Majesties HONOVR and PROFIT,
The King dissolving this Parliament on a sudden, and conti∣nuing to take Tonnage and Poundage by his Royal Preroga∣tive without any Act of Parliament, sundryAlderman Chambers, Mr. Rolls, and o∣thers. Merchants upon the Commons Remonstrance, refused to pay the same; where∣upon their Goods were seised: of which they complaining in Parliament, 16 Caroli, were Voted full Reparations against the Customers, with Dammages for the same. And to prevent the Kings Claim thereunto by right; with all future Demands and Collections thereof from the Subject without grant in Par∣liament, they Declared and Enacted by three special Acts of Parliament 16, & 17, Caroli, That IT IS and HATH BEEN THE ANTIENT RIGHT OF THE SVBJECTS OF THIS REALM;Nota. That NO SUBSIDY, CVSTOME, IM∣POST, OR OTHER CHARGES WHATSOEVER OVGHT OR MAY BE LAID OR IMPOSED UPON ANY MERCHANDISE EXPORTED OR IMPOR∣TED BY SUBJECTS, DENIZENS OR ALI∣ENS, WITHOVT COMMON CONSENT IN PAR∣LIAMENT, and that if any Customer, Controller, or any o∣ther Officer, or Person, should take or receive, or cause to bee taken or received the said Subsidy, or any other Impost upon any Merchandize whatsoever, exported or imported, except the same be due, by Grant IN PARLIAMENT, shall incur the penalties and forfeitures OF A PREMVNIRE, to the which the King gave his Royal Assent. And to prevent any fu∣ture prescription thereunto by the King, they discontinued it for some time, and then granted it specially from Month to Month, or some short space with sundry limitations, and the penalty of A PREMVNIRE if otherwise received, by se∣veral New Acts of Parliament, to which the King gave his assent. These Acts the King himself in his Proclamation of the sixteenth of December, in the eighteenth year of his reign, stiles, THE FENCES OF THE SVBJECTS PROPERTY, re∣ceived from Ʋs, and understood by Ʋs, as one of THE GREATEST GRACES THE CROWN EVER CON∣FERRED ON THE SVBJECT; And by that Proclamati∣on, he prohibited all his Subjects, both the paiment and receipt of any Monies for Customs, or other Maritine Duties, contrary
to this Act, by any Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament; under pain of a PREMUNIRE, and of being likewise pro∣ceeded against as ill-affected persons to the Peace of the King∣dome. Whereupon the Lords and Commons in their answer to this Proclamation; though they declared; that the intent and meaning of that penall Clause of a PRAEMVNIRE and other Forfeitures (in these new statutes, which likewise disable every person, Customer, Officers who should take or receive, or cause to be taken or received any such subsidy or imposition upon any Merchandize, during his life, to sue or implead any per∣sons, in any action reall, mixt or personal in any Court whatsoever,) was only to restrain the Crown, from imposing any duty or payment on the Subjects, without their consent in Parliament: and that it was not intended to extend to any case whereunto the LORDS and COMMONS GIVE THEIR ASSENT IN PARLIAMENT (which they never did to this New White-hall Ordinance, nor the pretended Act reci∣ted in it, therefore the imposers and receivers of it by vertue there∣of, without such assent in Parliament, are within the penalties of the aforesaid Statutes:) Yet to avoid the danger of a Praemuni∣re in their Officers, by exacting it only by an Ordinance of both Houses, without a speciall Act of Parliament; they did by their firstExact Collec∣tion p. 790. to 797. Ordinances, impose and demand Customes, Ton∣nage Poundage and new Imposts, not as a Legal Duty, but only BY WAY OF LOANE, til the Act of Parliament for their future continuance should be assented to by the King: as their Declaration of 31 December 1642. and their Ordinance of the same date, concerning the subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage attest. By what coulor of Law, Iustice, Right, this antient birth-right of all English Subjects, so lately declared by three Acts of Parliament, to which most of our late and pre∣sent White-hall Grandees were parties, comes to bee lost and forfeited by our contests to preserve it; or how the Customes, Imposts of Tonnage, and Poundage, can bee now imposed, continued on, or exacted from the Subjects by any Powers, Officers, or persons Whatsoever, and levied by severest penal∣ties, Forfeitures, Imprisonments, Seisures, by pretext of this
White-hal Ordinance, (though no waies granted by common consent and Act of Parliament,) without incurring a Praemunire; and forementioned penalties, disabilities; or without subverting the Fundamental Liberty, Property, Franchises, Laws, Statutes of the whole English Nation, in a farre higher degree then ever in former ages, I cannot yet discern; and all our New Governours, Merchants, Customers, Officers and other persons, who have any Cordial affection, Love, Zeal to their own or the peoples hereditary Rights and Priviledges, may do well to demurre in Law upon it, till they can satisfy their own and other mens consciences therein, to prevent the dangerous consequences of such an ill president to posterity. In the Parliament of 1 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 32, 33, 34, 36. These were the principall Arti∣cles of impreachment exhibited against King Richard the Se∣cond; for which hee was forced to depose himself, as unfit to Govern, and resign up his Crown to King Henry the Fourth. See Historiae Anglicanae Londini. 1652. Col. 2750, 2751. Halls Chronicle f. 7, 8. John Trussel in. 23. R. 2. p 46. Grafton p. 401. That whereas the King of England out of the profits of the Realm, and the Patrimony belonging to his Crown, might live honestly without oppression of his people, so as the Kingdome were not burdened with the extraordinary expences of warre, that this King during the Truces between the Realm and the Adversaries thereof; gave and squandered away a great part of the Crown-Lands to unworthy persons, and thereup∣on exacted almost every year, so many Taxes and Grants of Ayde from his Subjects of the Realm, that hee thereby GREATLY and TOO EXCESSIVELY OPPRESSED HIS PEOPLE, TO THE IMPOVERISHING OF HIS REALM. That the same King being unwilling to keep and defend the just Laws and Customes of his Realm, and to do according to his pleasure, whatsoever should suite with his desires, frequently when the Laws of his Realm were ex∣pounded and declared to him by the Justices and others of his Council, who requested him to administer Justice accor∣ding to those Laws, said expresly with an austere and frown∣ning Countenance, THAT THE LAWS WERE HIS more suo, AFTER his own MANER; and sometimes, THAT THEY WERE IN HIS OWN BREAST, and THAT HEE ALONE COULD ALTER and MAKE THE
LAWS OF HIS REALM, And being seduced with this opinion, he permitted not Justice to be done to very many of his Leige people, but compelled very many to cease from the prose∣cution of common Justice. That when as afterwards in his Par∣liament certain Statutes were made, which might always bind, till they were specially repealed by another Parliament, the same King desiring to enjoy so great Liberty, that none of these Statutes might so binde him, but that he might execute and do according to the pleasure of his own Will, which hee could not do of right; subtilly procured such a Petition to be presen∣ted to him in his Parliament, in the behalf of the Commons of his Realm, and to be granted to him in the general; THAT HE MIGHT BE SO FREE AS ANY OF HIS PRO∣GENITORS WERE BEFORE HIM. By colour of which Petition and Grant, he frequently did, and commanded to bee done, MANY THINGS CONTRARY TO THE SAID STATVTES NOT REPEALED, GOING AGAINST THEM EXPRESLY, and WITTINGLY, AGAINST HIS OATH AT HIS CORONATION. That although by the Statutes and Customs of his Realm, in the summoning of every Parliament, his people in every County of the Realm ought to be free, to elect and depute Knights for the said Coun∣ties to sit  Parliament, both TO RECEIVE their GRIE∣VANCES, and TO PROSECVTE REMEDIES THERE∣UPON, AS IT SHALL SEEM EXPEDIENT TO THEM; yet the said King, that he might in his Parliament be able to obtain the effect of his rash Will, frequently directed his Man∣dates to his Sheriffs, that they should cause to come to his Par∣liament CERTAIN PERSONS NAMED BY THE KING HIMSELF, AS KNIGHTS OF THE SHIRE; Which Knights verily favouring the said King, he might easily enduce, as he frequently did, sometimes by divers threats and terrors, and sometimes by gifts, TO CON∣SENT TO THOSE THINGS WHICH WERE VERY PREJVDICIAL TO THE REALM, and VERY BVR∣DENSOME TO THE PEOPLE;Nota. and specially, TO GRANT TO THE SAID KING A SUBSIDY FOR CERTAIN YEARS, TO THE OPPRESSING OF
His People overmuch. That although the Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels of every Freeman, by the Laws of the Realm used in all former ages past, ought not to be seized, unless they had forfeited; Yet notwithstan∣ding, the said King purposing & endeavouring to enervate these Laws, in the presence of very many of the Lords and Commons of this Realm frequently said and affirmed, That the Life, Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattles of every one of his Subjects, are at his will and pleasure, without any Forfeiture (by the known Laws) which is altogether contrary to the Laws & customs of the Realm aforesaid. Whether all these high Misdemeanors char∣ged against King Richard, have not been revived, and acted over and over both by words and deeds in a farre higher degree than ever he was guilty of them, by some late, present Whitehall Grandees, Army-Officers, New Instrument-makers, Legitors, and Imposers of Excises, Customs, Imposts, Tonnage, Poundage, Contributions for many years yet to come; and of that constant Annu∣al Revenue projected, intended by them in their 27 Ar∣ticle: I remit to their own judgements, consciences, and our whole Kingdom to resolve, and what they demerit for such extravagant high offences, for which he lost Crown and Regal power, let others determine. The 3. particular, is their late incumbent Imposition of 6. Moneths new Contribution, by a meer Self-enacted Whitchall Jurisdiction, without any consent, grant, in or by the People in Parliament, by that they intitle, An Ordinance of the 8. of une 1654. beginning thus (in a most imperial Stile, transcending all former Acts of Par∣liament, granting or imposing any Subsidies) without any Prologue to sweeten it, or court the people to its rea∣dy payment. Be it Ordained and Enacted by his Highness the Lord Protector▪ with the consent of his Council, and it is hereby Ordained, That towards the maintenance of the Armies and Navies of this Commonwealth An Assesse∣ment of one Hundred and Twenty Thousand Pounds
per Mensem for Three Monethe, commencing the 24 of Iune, 1654 and ending the 29 of Sept. following, shall be Taxed, Levied, Collected and Paid in England and Wales in such sort as is hereafter expressed. The full sum of the said Three Months Assessment of One hundred and twenty thousand pounds by the Month, to be at once whol∣ly collected and paid in to the Receivers Generall at or before the tenth day of October next, &c. The Levying thereof upon the refusers hath been by distress of Goods by Souldiers, Troopers, and quartering them on the refusers till payment, and double the value many times paid to, and exacted by the Souldiers for their pains; adjudged (even by some of our New Grandees Votes who prescribe such Taxes and wayes of levying them) to be No less then High Treason, and levying Warre inSee Mr. St. Johns Argu∣ment at his Attainder. p. 36. to 52. Straffords case, for which principally he was condemned, and lost his head on Tower Hill, as a Traytor. In this New Whitehall Tax without a Parliament (in∣tended as a leading President to bind the whole Nation in perpetuity, if now submitted to, as the 27 Article in∣timates) there is a double violation, subversion of the Fundamental Laws and Properties of the Nation in the Highest degree. The first, is by the reviving, imposing ofSee Judge Crooks, & Judg Huttons prin∣ted Argu∣ments, & my Humble Re∣monstrance against the Illegal Tax of Shipmony. Ship-mony on the whole Realm, and all Inland Counties, as well as Maritine, for the Maintenance of the Navies by Sea, (which should be maintained only by the Customs) and that in a farre higher proportion than the Shipmony imposed by Writs by our late be∣headed King; amounting to no less than Forty thou∣sand pounds per Mensem at last, by way of Contribu∣tion alone, besides the Customs, Tonnage, Poundage and Excise paid towards it. This Imposition of Shipmony, by the late King, (though ratified with the advise and consent of his Council, many colourable Presidents, Records in all for∣mer ages, and the precedent Resolution of all his Iudges, under their hands, as just, and legally imposed in case of Necessity and Publike danger only, without consent in
Parliament) together with the Iudgement and Procee∣dings of the Iudges in the Eschequer Chamber in justifica∣tion thereof, were in the last Parliament, after solemne debate, by thePrinted at the end of Judge Huttoes Agument, & amongst the stautes of 16 Caroli. Votes and Iudgements of both Houses, on the 20. Ian. and 26 February, resolved (Nemine con∣tradicent) To be contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, contrary to the Rights and Proper∣ties of the Subjects of this Realm, contrary to for∣mer Iudgements in Parliament, contrary to the great Charter and to the Petition of Right: and voted to be so declared by the Iudges at the Assizes in the severall Counties; the same to be entred and inrolled in the severall Counties by the Clerks of the Assises. After which, it was for ever damned by a special Act of Parliament, to which the King himself gave his Royal assent, (afterwards cited and enforced by both Houses. Exact Collection p. 886. 887. in the case of the Array.) And those Iud∣ges who argued, That the King might lawfully impose Shipmony on the Subjects, without a Parliament in cases of Danger and Necessity, of which they affirmed him to be the sole Iudge; were by all impeached by the House of Commons of High Treason, for these Opinions of theirs; whereby they trayterously and wickedly endeavoured to subvert The Fundamental Laws and established Government of the Realm of England, and instead thereof to set up an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government against Law; of which at largeChap 1. p. Diurnal Oc∣curences & Speeches, p. 191. to 265. before. How any present Powers or Persons then, can either impose, justi∣fy, levy, enforce it upon any Pretext of Necessity, or publique Danger, on the whole Nation, after all these late Resolutions, Iudgements, Votes, Impeachments, and a special Act of Parliament so fresh in memory (especi∣ally such who were parties to them) without incurring the self-same Impeachments and guilt, as these Ship∣mony Iudges did, or a severer Censure then they sustai∣ned, let their own Conscsences, and those who may on day prove their Iudges, resolve them at leasure, being past my skill to doe it?
The 2. is, By the imposing of a direct heavy Tax, Tallage, and Monthly contrbution, and that only (for the Maintenance of such a Land Army, which hath of∣fered force unto the Members of both Houses, subverted, destroyed that Parliament, Government, Laws, Liber∣tie, for whose preservation they were specially raised, Commissioned, engaged) without, yea against the Peoples assent in Parliament: which no King of England, with the advice and consent of his Council, had ever any Right or Power to doe, or audacity enough to attempt, no not William the Conqueror, Cnute, Henry the 4th. Edward the 4th. or Henry the 7th, who came principal∣ly by power of the Sword, to their Soveraign Regall Authorities. By what Justice, Power, Legal Right, a∣ny other person or persons whatsoever, who are nei∣ther rightfull Kings, nor Parliaments of England in their own or others repute, can either impose, levy, exact such extravagant Heavy Taxes, Contributions, from the exhausted Free-born People of England, (especially be∣ing now pretended new Free State,) against all our Fundamental Lawes, Statutes, Franchises, Charters, Properties, Liberties, Records, Parliamentary Iudge∣ments, their own late Remonstrances, Declarations, Votes, the Presidents of all former ages, yea of all our Kings coming in by the Sword to their Thrones, let the Imposers of them seriously advise, as they will an∣swer it at their utmost peril to God, Men, and the whole English Nation; who expected better things from them, even a total final exemption from all such illegal Bur∣thens, after all their late Wars, Agonies, Expences, to redeem and preserve their Lawes, Liberties, Estates, Properties, Posterities, from such exorbitant Oppres∣sions, diametrically contrary to all the forecited Iudgements. Resolutions, Remonstrances, Statutes, Votes, Presidents, and sundry others, which I shall hereafter in∣sist on in the third Chapter of this Treatise to which I must refer you: And shall we not then adventure a di∣stresse,
a Prison, quartering upon, or any other Duresse, yea Death it self, rather than volutarily submit our selves and Posterities backs thereto, when as we spend our Bloods, Lives, Treasures, against lesser, easier, Roy∣al Impositions? How shall we answer it to God, Men, or our enslaved Posterities, if we now most safely, un∣worthily submit thereto in perpeuity, without the least legal, strenuous, publick oppression or debate of its legality. If any here allege (as some men do) in Iustification of these three,Objection. (or rather four) forecited kinds of illegal universal Taxes, imposed, levied, on the whole Nation, without consent of Parliament; That they are all war∣ranted by the Instrument of the new Gevernment, Arti∣cle 27, 28, 29. That a constant yearly revenue shall be raised, setled and established, for maintaining Ten Thou∣sand Horse and Dragoons, and Twenty Thousand Foot in England, Scotland, and Ireland for the Defence and secu∣rity thereof, and also for a convenient number of Ships for guarding the Seas, besides two hundred thousand pounds per annum, for defraying other necessary charges, for Administration of Iustice, and other expences of the Government, which Revenue shall be raised by the Cu∣stomes, and such other ways and means which shall be agre∣ed uo. By the Lord Protector and Council; and shall not be taken away, or diminished, nor the way a∣greed upon for the raising of the same altered, but by consent of the Lord Protector and the Parliament. That the said yearly Revenue shall be paid into the pub∣lick Treasury, and issued out for the uses aforesaid. That in case there shall not because hereafter to keep up so great a Defence at Land or Sea, but that there be an abatement made thereof; The Mony which shall be saved thereby, shall remain in banke for the Publick service, &c. All which they, in the True state of the Case of the Common∣wealth, p. 43, 44, commend, for a most excellent Pro∣vision, A costant Revenue, A Publike Bank or Treasury upon all occasions, &c. which they intend
to perpetuate on the whole Kingdom, without end or abatement, as well in times of peace, safety, as of war and danger. Therefore the Protector and his Counsell at Whitehall in pursuance hereof, may lawfully impose (by vertue of these Articles) both Excise, Customs, Tonnage, Poundage, Ship-money and contributions, for these ends upon our three whole Kingdoms and all the Freeborn English by printed Ordinances of their own, in what Proportions, and for what time they please (yea and for perpetuity) without consent or grant in Parlia∣ments, and restrain all future Parliaments, both from ta∣king away, or diminishing them, or altering the way agreed on for their raising, without their Protectors consent thereto; (as the expresse words run, and their practise yet expound¦s them:) notwithstanding all former Laws, Statutes, Charters, Resolutions, Iudgements, Remonstrances, Oathes, Vowes, Declarations, Presidents) either in or out of Parliament) to the contrary. To this I answer,Answer. first, that I cannot but stand ama∣zed to hear any Army-Officers, Souldiers, Lawyers, or persons in present trust or power, who bear the name or hearts of English Freemen, Saints, Christians, Lovers, Patriots or Protectors of their Native Country of England, its Parliaments, Laws, and Liberties, to make such a stupendious irrational objection, as this, which justi∣fies all the exorbitant Opinions, Proceedings, Taxes, Oppressions, Impositions, of our late beheaded King, Strafford, Canterbury, the Ship-money Iudges, old White∣hall Council Table, yea all our other former Kings, and their evil Counsellors most irregular Exaction of mony in all ages from Brute till now; and will render the very worst of all our Kings, if compared with our late and present Tax-masters, and pretended Assertors of our Liberties, rather good, gracious, just, righteous, Princes, Benefactors, than Tyrants or Oppressors, for the future, seeing they never out of Parliament imposed, enforced on their subjects any such heavy, various, perpetual Tax∣es, Imposts, Excises, Ordinances, or new Articles of the
Government, as these forecited. 2ly. This Objection (if admitted just or solid) gives a private Cabinet uncto, of obscure persons (yet un∣known by name unto our Nation) a Superlative, Super-Parliamentall Authority, to contrive and set on foot, a new devised Instrument, to undermine and blow up all our former fundamental Laws, Customs, great Char∣ters, Liberties, Franchises, Properties, Parliaments, former frame of Government at one crake, after all our late bloody, costly contestations for their preservation, both in the Supream Courts of Publick Iustice, and fields of War, without our privities or consents thereto, ei∣ther in or out of Parliament, contrary to all their and our Protestations, Oathes, Covenants, Commissions, Trusts, Pro∣mises, Pretences; And instead of English Freemen (as we were before these contests and wars) to strip us quite na∣ked of all our former Freedoms, Liberties, Properties, Cu∣stoms, Rights, derived to us from our Noble Ancestors, as the purchas of their dearest blood & render us & our Po∣sterities for the future, the most absolute Issachars, Vassals, slaves under Heaven, inthralled to all sorts of intollera∣ble, illegal, unpresidented, incessant, endlesse Taxes of all kinds, without hopes of alteration or mitigation by a∣ny future Parliaments, (without their Protectors or his Successors voluntary consents, which they cannot ex∣pect) and to a constant standing Mercenary Army of Horse and Foot, by Land, and Navies of Hirelings by Sea, to keep us and ours in perpetual Bondage under such New irregular Successive Tax-Masters; who must e∣lect their successors like themselves. 3ly. All our former antient Laws, Statutes, Parlia∣ments till now, in all changes, Revolutions of State or Government, ever constantly asserted, maintained, pro∣vided, See p. 12 to 20 before the 1 Proposition, and Statutes, Arguments thereunto: specially 23 E. 1. c. 5. 6. 34. E. 1. c. 1, 2, 3. 14 E. 3. c. 21, and Stat. 2. c. 1. 3 Caroli The Petition of Right. That no Tax, Tallage, Custom, Contribution, Impost, Subsidy, Charge, Excise, Loan or Payment what∣soever, should be imposed on the Freemen of England, without their common consent and grant, in full, free, law∣full English Parliaments; and if any were imposed other∣wise
by any Power or Pretext whatsoever out of Parlia¦ment, that it was Null, and void to all intents, to bind the people. But these Monstrous Articles quite turn the scales; impowring a few private persons (neither elect∣ed nor intruted by the people for such ends) by colour of this ill tuned Instrument (contrived privatly by them∣selves alone, as most conjecture, for their own self-inte∣rests) to impose perpetuall Imposts, Excises, Customes, Contributions of all kinds, on our whole three Kingdoms and Nations, which neither they, nor their Parliaments (though never so grievous, extravagant, unreasonable or oppressive) shall have power to take away, diminish, alter, or regulate in the forecited illegall, oppressing, vio∣lent wayes of levying them, unless their Grand Soveraign Lord Protector, shall first give his consent thereto; (which they cannot expect, nor enforce,) and in cale of his re∣fusall, they are utterly left remediless; he having Thirty thousand armed Mercenary Horse and Foot in severall Quarters by Land, and a strong numerous. Navy by Sea at his command, to keep them under endless Tributes to him and his Successors for ever. O England, England, (to omit Scotland and Ireland) consider seriously, and timely, to what a blessed Liberty, and long-expected free∣dome, this New invented Instrument and the Irish Harp, lately quartered with the English bloody Cross, as our Free-State Arms, hath now at last reduced thee, if these objected Articles must remain inviolable, maugre all our Laws, Statutes, &c. to the contrary; as our New Tax-masters and their Instruments, both literally and practically conclude, unlesse you use your utter∣most, lawfull, present, diligent, joynt Endeavours to prevent it 4ly, The whole House of Commons, yea some who were parties to this Instrument, lately impeached and with the Lords ouse, by judgement of Parliament con∣demned, beheaded theSee their Im∣peachments & printed tri∣als, & Mr. St. Johns Argu∣ment at Law against Straf∣ford, p. 34, 35. Earl of Strafford, and Archbi∣shop of Canterbury, as guilty of High Treason; in subver∣ting our Fundamental Lawes, Liberties, and setting up an
arbitrary Tyrannical Government; for resolving at the Councel Table, before-hand, To assist the King to raise Monies on the Subjects to carry on the Warres against the Scots, by extraordinary wayes, in case the Parlia∣ment should prove peevish, and refuse to grant such Subsi∣dies as they demanded of them. And for Straffords affir∣ming, That Ireland was a Conquered Nation, and that the King might do with them what he pleased: That they were a Conquered Nation, and were to expect Lawes as from a Conqueror. And that he would make an Act of Councel board in that Kingdom of Ireland, as bin∣ding as an Act of Parliament. And do not the Ob∣jectors, Contrivers of this New Instrument Articles, and those who now vigorously put it in execution in any kind (as too many do;) speak out, and do as much, as bad, as they in each of these particulars; nay farre more and worse? Do not they (after the late violent breach∣es of our former Parliaments, and their own Junctoes by the Army) raise monies in more vast proportions, by more irregular, violent, extraordinary wayes, by longer continued Taxes, Excises, Impositions, and constant yearly Revenues, then they ever did or designed, quite out of Parliament, by their own arrogated Legislative Tax-imposing Power? Do not they by this very In∣strument, proclaim to all the world, that not only Ire∣land and Scotland, but England it self, is now a meer Conquered Nation? that thereupon they may do with us what thy please; and we must not only expect, but receive Lawes from them as Conquerors; having already pub∣lished whole Volumes of New-Laws and Ordinances of all sorts at their New-erected Councel board (which the Old never did) and made them as binding, not only to Ireland, but England and Scotland too, as an Act of Par∣liament? yea farre more binding than any Parliament Acts, by binding the hands, power of future Parliaments themselves, and our three whole Nations (as aforesaid) and that in Perpetuity (which noCook 4 Inst. p. 42. 11 R. 2. c. 4. 1 H. 4. rot, Parl. n. 143. 2 H. 4. c. 22. 21 R. 2. c. 4, 5, 6. 1 H. 4. c 7. rot. Parl. n 48. 60. 68. Parliaments, nor Acts of Parliament can do) and by repealing, nulling all our
former Fundamental Laws, Charters, Liberties, Free Government made by Parliaments, with our very Par∣liaments themselves? And if so, let the Objectors now seriously consider both the Treasonableness, unparlia∣mentalness, sad Consequences of this Objection, and what ill effects it may produce in present or future ages. 5ly, The Statutes of 25 E. 1. c. 2. & 42 E. 3. c: 2. yet in force, declare All judgements given or to be given by the Justices, or any other, contrary to the points of the Great Charter, toSee Sir Edw. Cooks Preface to his 2. Insti∣tutes. be void and holden for Nought: and if any Statute be made to the contrary, it shall be holden for none. Therefore these Instrument Articles, and Pa∣per Ordinances made by colour of them, in direct oppo∣sition to, and subversion of the points of the Great Char∣ter, and all other Acts for their confirmation, must needs be holden for nought and void to all intents, to bind this whole Free-born Nation, or any one Freeman of Eng∣land in particular. 6. If these Articles and Instrument (for the premised reasons, and defect of Legal power in the yet unknown Instrument-makers) be not void in Law, to all intents and purposes, as all wise men repute them; yet other clauses, and Articles of this very Instrument, (admit it valid and obligatory to our Nations) give a fatal blow to all the forementioned Excises, Impositions, Contributions by colour thereof, and to the Objected Articles. First the Prologue to the Oath, at the close thereof, proclaims the Government setled by it, to be such, as by the blessing of God might be lasting, secure Property, and answer The Great Ends of Religion and Libertie, so long Contended for: But these Articles (as the Objecti∣on and premises evidence) do no wayes secure, but utter∣ly subvert all Property, in the highest degree; and an∣swer not, but eternally frustrate, abolish, the Great ends of our Religion (condemning all illegal, unrighteous Tax∣es andJer. 21. 12. c. 22. 3, 4, 5. Ps. 12. 5 Ezech. 18. 5. to 14. c. 22. 12, 13, 27, 29, 30. c. 45. 7. to 10. c. 46. 18. Mich. 3. 1. to 5. c. 2. 1, 2, 3. c. 7. 2. Isa 58. 6. Tyrannical, Usurping, Oppressing arbitrary Pow∣ers) but especially of our Liberties, so long contended
for; and are rather likely to raise new troubles and unset∣tlements, than make the Government lasting (as many late Presidents, with those ancient ones in Dr. Beard his Theatre of Gods Judgements, l. 2. c. 36. to 42. may perswade us:) Therefore it must be exploded, as repug∣nant to the whole scope of the Instrument. 2. The 6. Article of it is fatall and destructive to the objected Articles; viz: That the Laws shall not be alte∣red, suspended, abrogated, or repealed, nor any New Law made, Nor any Tax, Charge, or Imposition laid upon the People, but by common consent in Parliament. Save Only, as is expressed in the 30th Article (not 27.) Now these objected 27, 28, 29 Articles, being diame∣trically contrary to every word, clause of this 6 Article, and agreeable to our Fundamental Laws (which the last clause of the Oath obligeth their Protector and his Suc∣cessors to maintain, and to govern the People by) which Laws must be allSee True, &c. p. 17, 18. altered, suspended, abrogated, repea∣led by these Articles alone, if reputed valid; in giving Power to them, to impose any Tax, Charge, Imposition upon the People, without common consent in Parliament; and being not within the saving of this, or the 30th Arti∣cle, must needs be void and repealed by this very sixt Article, and the Oath it self. 3. The 30th Article following them, diametrically contradicts, repeals them in these words. That the rai∣sing of Money for defraying the charges of present extra∣ordinary Forces both by Land and Sea, in respect of the present warrs, shall be by consent of Parliament: Save only, that the Lord Protector, with the consent of the Major part of the Councel, for preventing the disor∣ders and dangers which may otherwise fall out both at Sea and Land, shall have power until the Meeting of the first Parliament (on the 3. September 1654.) to raise Monies for the purposes aforesaid. The former part of this Article is consonant to, and expounded by the 6. forecited, which is more generall: and the plain sense thereof is this. That all monies raised for defraying the
Extraordinary Forces both by Land and Sea (exceeding the antient standing Garrisons, Guards maintained by the old constant Revenues of the Crown, without any Tax upon the People) shall be by consent of parliament. Therefore a fortiori; all perpetual standing Taxes, Ex∣cises, Contributions to maintain the ordinary and ex∣traordinary Forces by Land or Sea, and ordinary ex∣pences of the Government (which, in respect of their constancy, permanency, are far more grievous, dange∣rous to the Subject than rare extraordinary ones upon emergent occasions) must and ought not to be imposed by their new created Power out of Parliament, after the 3 of September. It any here object;Objection. That the latter clause of the 30 Article Save only, &c. Authorized those at Whitehall, without a Parliament, to impose Excises, Taxes, Cu∣stoms, (Impositions, Contributions forementioned, and any other constant annual Revenue they shall settle, ac∣cording to the 27 Article; so as it be done before Sep∣tember 3. 1654. Therefore they are all lawfull, because imposed before that time by their printed Ordinances forecited. I Answer,Answer. 1. That this saving, is utterly void in law, to all intents, 1. Because it is not only contrary to all our Fundamental Laws, Great Charters, Statutes, but re∣pugnant to the body of the 6 Article, and first part of the 30▪ to which it is annexed. 2. Because it assigns the Legislative Tax-imposing Power (the inseparable incom∣municable Iurisdiction of our Parliaments alone) to a new Whitehall Councel, by a void instrument made out of Parliament for a certain time, which biggest Sove∣raign power, the Parliament it self neither legally may, nor can, nor ought to transfer by any Ordinance or. Act of Parliament to any Committee of their own Members, no not for a moment, as is both resolved and declared by Act of Parliament. 1 H. 4. c. 3. and Rot. Parl. 1 H. 4. n. 26, 48, 6 6, 70. 31 H. 8. c. 8. 34 H. 8. c. 23. and 1. E. 6. c. 12. it being derogatory and destru∣ctive
to the free State power, Rights of Parliaments, tending to the great incommodity of the whole Realm, and of pernicious example to Posterity, as the whole Parliament of 1. H. 4 long since resolved in positive termes. 2ly. This saving is just like the Popes oldMath. Paris Hist. Angliae London. 1640. p. 810. 818, 854 875. Detestable Non Obstante, at the close of their Bulls; quae omnem subvertit praehabitam Justitiam, which subverted all the Justice and Privileges granted before to any in the Body of those Bulls; and as pernicious as thatSee M. Sr. Johns Speech against the ship-money Judges, p. 16, 17▪ 18, 19. Exact. Col∣lect. p. 885. Proviso, which the House of Lords desired at first, to have inser∣ted into the Petition of Right, which would have made it Felo de se, because it insinuated that the King by his So∣veraign power where with the Law had intrusted him, for the protection, safety, and happinesse of his People might impose any Aid, Tax, Tallage, or charge upon his People without a Parliament, though by his ordinary power he could not do it. which had left the Subjects in worse case than it found them, and wholly destructive to it self in all the parts thereof: whereupon after a conference had concerning it by the Commons, it was totally rejected by both Houses; as this Salvo must be for the self same reason. 3ly. Admit it valid; yet it gives power to them to raise moneys for the maintenance by Land and Sea, only until September 3. 1654. and no longer; as is evident by the very words themselves; and the Confession, Exposi∣tion, (of those who made the Instrument, as most sup∣pose) in their, True State of the Case of the Commonwealth of England, &c. 1654. p. 39. 40. in these words This power is to continue only til the sitting of the next Parliament. Yea George Smith in his new Treatise, intituled, Gods unchangeablenesse, &c. (in justification of the pre∣sent Governour and Government) p. 54. writes thus; And for his seeking to have power to make Laws, and raise monys, it is meer calumniation. He seeks it not, He claimes it not, but leaves it to the wisdom of Parliament, as appears in Artiole 6. (as is thus ex∣cepted)
for and in Cases of safety and necessity, till the time that this present Parliament was assembled, and yet to be done by him with the advice of his Council, so then he seeks not the strength nor treasure of the Nation, nor to have it in his own power. Therefore they can im∣pose no Taxes, Excises, nor Contributions by their printed Ordinances to continue after its beginning; nor by any future Ordinances (as they term them) after that time. Now the first Tax of Excise, forementioned, is imposed till the 26 of March 1655 which is 7 months after the 3 of September 1654. The 2 of Customs, Ton∣nage and Poundage, is continued til the 26 of March 1658, which is 3 years and 7 months after this 3 of September. And the 3 for the 6 Months Contribution reacheth till the 29 of December 1654, which is near full 4 Months after the first sitting of that their next Par∣liament: And any constant yearly Revenue setled by them, will far exceed this limited time, and all former Taxes: Therefore all these premised, and all other fu∣ture Excises, Customs, Impost, Contributions by pre∣tended Ordinances for their levying after the 3 of Sep∣tember, exceeding the power and time limited by this Saving, must be void, and no ways warranted by the very Saving it self, and to be opposed as such. 4ly. To say, That although these several impositions continue after the 3 of September 1654, yet they were imposed by their Printed Ordinances before it; there∣fore within this Saving is a most absurd excuse and shift, repugnant to the words, yea wholly destructive to the 6 Article, and first part of the 30, For by this reason had their forecited Ordinances (or any other dormant or fu∣ture Antedated ones yet unpublished) imposed Excises, Customs, Tonnage, Poundage, Contributions on us for twenty, fifty, an hundred, or a thousand years yet to come, before the 3. of September, they must have been binding to us and our Posterities, during all that space, and unavoidable by the people, or future Parliaments, by this Saving and exposition of it. But the words of
this Saving, giving only Power to raise Monies until the Méeting of the first Parliament; not to make New Edicts any time before it to impose and continue Taxes for any time or years after it, (which would have fore∣stalled, affronted the next and all future Parliaments in their proper work, of granting, regulating all future Tax∣es (according to the 6. and 30. Articles) and made them meer Cyphers:) clearly takes away this evasion; with all their former and future Whitehall Impositions after the 3 of September; as contrary both to their Instru∣ment and Oath. 5ly, The words of the 30th Article whereto this Sa∣ving refers, are observable, That they shall have power un∣til the meeting of the first Parliament, to raise Monies for defraying the Charges of the Extraordinary Forces both at Land and Sea, In respect of the present Wars: To which, for the purposes aforesaid, in the Saving re∣lates. But the present Warres being many Moneths since ended, both by Land and Sea, by the Peace con∣cluded with Forreign Nations: and so no need, nor use of Extraordinary Forces to be still continued by Land or Sea; the ancient Trayned Bands and Militia of the Realm, being now well able to defend, secure us at their owne cost, without any Mercenary Forces, Excises or Contributions, only to pay them; the power of raising Monies in this Saving, with the grounds thereof, are now at an end, as well as our Warrs; and the whole 27 Ar∣ticle too: Since the old standing Militia, and Trayned Bands of the 3. Nations, will be a sufficient Safeguard to them, without our Mercenary Army or Forces; which See Heylyns Microcosme. p. 756, 757, 758, 395, 412. 507. 577. 578. 642. 672. 704. usually prove Treacherous Supplanters, Usurpers; Op∣pressors to all who rely  them; whereupon our pru∣dent Ancesters, since gernes usurpation,Exact Coll. p. 7. 575. 639, 640, 641. 807. 836. 850. to 890. intrust∣ed their Militia and Defence of the Realm, only in the hands of the Nobility, Gentry, Freeholders, and persons of best ability and estates, not in Mercenary Armies (which supplanted the Britons:) And our Warres now ceasing, the antient Revenues, Lands, Customes of the Crowne,
and Perquisits of the Courts of Justice, will be sufficient to defray all the Ordinary expences of the Government, Navy, old standing Garrisons, (if continued, though useless) Officers of State and Justice, as they did inSee the Act of Resumpti∣on, 28 . 6. 11. 53. all former ages, and still ought to do, for the peoples ease and benefit. 6ly, It hath been the special policy, care of our pru∣dent Fore-fathers and wiseSee Cooks 4 Instt. c. 1. p. 33. Regal Taxes, & here ch. 3. sect. 4, 5, 6. Parliaments, never to grant any annual Tax or Charge (except Tonnage and Poundage in some cases for a limited time) for Publike Defence, unto their Kings and Governours; nor usually to give them above Subsidy, or one or two Fifteens, or a single Escuage, and sometimes not so much, in any one Parliament, upon any extraordinary occasion or necessity, and that upon these Grounds. 1. BecauseSee 14 E. 3. c. 21. & stat. 2. c. 1. 5. R. 2. stat. 2. c. 2, 3, & all Acts for . extraordina∣ry Aydes, ought to be granted only for, and proportioned to extraordinary, present, emergent Necessities, visibly ap∣pearing; which being not lasting, but momentany and various one from another, no standing certain Contribu∣tion can or ought to be allotted for them, but only a tem∣porary and mutable; the ordinary setled Crown Reve∣nues being sufficient to defray all ordinary expences, without other Aydes. 2ly, To keep a perpetual tye upon their Kings and Governours, to summon frequent Par∣liaments, and redres all their Grievances in them, before they should receive any Grant of new Ayds or Subsidies from them, to supply their publique Necessities; to pre∣serve a Power and Right in Parliaments to examine the grounds and present necessity of all Taxes demanded: and toSee Henry de Knyghton, de Eventibus Angliae, l. 5. col. 2681. to 2690. 2 R. 2. rot. Parl. n. 20, 21, 24. take an Accompt how former Taxes, & the Kings Revenues had been disbursed, before they granted new ones: All which the granting of standing annual Aydes for publique Defence would fruste. 3ly, To prevent the encroaching of a constant Charge and Revenue on the People, which if granted but for years, life; or but twice or thrice in the same kind and proportion, without alte∣ration, though but as a free gift in Parliament, would thereupon be claimed, exacted from them afterwards, as
a meer just annual Right and Revenue, without their fu∣ture grants, as Danegeld, was by some of our Kings of old; Imposts once granted, by Edward the 3. and other Kings heretofore; and the Customes of Tonnage & Poun∣dage by King Charles of late. 4ly, To avoid all unjust Oppressions of the people by imposing on them more Taxes at once than the present urgent necessities requi∣red. 5ly, To prevent the inhaunsing, doubling of Taxes by any new dangerous Presidents; Sir Edward Cok ob∣serves in his 4 Institutes, p. 33. That the Commons never used to give above one Temporary Subsidie, and two Fif∣teens, in any one Parliament, and sometimes less; till the Parliament of 31 Eliz. which gave 2. Subsidies, and 4 Fif∣teens; upon which first breach of this old circle and usage, their Taxes still increased afterwards by degrees; for in 35, & 39 Eliz. they rose to 3. Subsidies, and 6 Fifteens: in 43 Eliz. to 4 Subsidies and 8 Fifteens: in 21 Jacobi to 3 Subsidies, and 6 Fifteens, in shorter time then had been before: in 3 Caroli, to 5 Subsidies in shortest time of all: and now of late, to constant annual Imposts, Excises, & endless Monethly Contributions, amounting to at least 3 Subsidies every Moneth. 6ly, Because a standing extra∣ordinary Tax (especially for years or life) when once claimed or received as part of the publique Revenue, would be hardly relinquished, or discontinued, without much contest, and danger; as appears by Danegeld of old, and Tonnage, Poundage, Excise, Monthly Contribu∣tions of late imposed as of right upon us, by every new upstart Power; and when once customarily claimed, col∣lected as a Duty, will no ways ease nor exempt the peo∣ple from new Extraordinary Aydes and Taxes. This is evident by that memorable President concerning Abby-Lands, in King Henry the 8 his reign, setled on him as a large annuall standing Revenue, of purpose to defend the Realm, and ease the People from all future Aydes, by the Parliaments of 27 H. 8. c. 28. 31 H. 8. c. 13. 32 H. 8. c. 14. Yet were these Lands no sooner setled on the Crown for these ends, but in the same Parliament of 32 H. 8. the
King demanded and ad of his Subjects, one extraordinary Subsidy both of the Clergy and Laity; and 34 H 8. c. 16, 17. & 37 H. 8. c. 24. he demanded and had the like Sub∣sidy of them again: and his Successors the like and greater Subsidies every Parliament since. The like we see in the Case of Tonnage and Poundage, granted only for the De∣fence of the Seas and Realm against Forraign Enemies & Pirates: Which no sooner taken by the late King, as a standing Revenue of the Crown, but he exacted and levi∣ed against Law, a New annual Tax of Shipmony, to guard the Seas, for which very use he received Tonnage, Poun∣dage, and the ancient Customes; as our late Governors did, and present do; together with new Imposts and Excises; and yet impose Land rates of Forty thousand pounds a Month besides, to Maintain the Navy. To in∣stance in one particular more: Our late new Governours made sale of all Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Chapters, Delinquents, Kings, Queens, Princes, and Sequestred Lands and Goods, both in England, Scotland, and Ireland, one after another; under pretext, to ease the People in, and of their heavy Taxes: But what was the issue? all their Taxes, Excises, and other Impositions were still continu∣ep on them, without any intermission or diminution, nay advanced higher than ever, to 120 thousand pounds Contribution by the Month for England, besides Scotland and Ireland, even whiles all these Lands and Goods were selling; the Lands and Goods sold, consumed, without any publique Accompt yet given of the Monies, or their disposall; or any present ease to the oppressed people: and the ordinary standing Revenues of the Realm being now by this meanes decayed, dissipated, and almost brought to nothing; these New Projectors and Dissipators of this vast publique Revenue; instead of easing, by co∣lour of this Instrument, resolve to impose upon the un∣done, long-oppressed Peoples gauled, broken backs and Estates, such perpetual constant, annual Taxes, Exci∣ses, Imposts, Revenues as you have heard, for the Main∣tenance both of the Army, Navy, Administration of Ju∣stice,
and other ordinary expences of the Government; which no Kings of England ever yet received, or preten∣ded to. Which if any future Parliaments shall be so mad, or improvident once to settle, or the Kingdom not una∣nimously to oppugne; if setled by them without a Par∣liament, instead of easing of the People of their long insupportable Taxes, now their wars are ended; in all succeeding Parliaments, they shall still be burthened with new extraordinary Taxes, upon new preten∣ded extraordinary occasions, and Forces raised (as the words of the 30 Article, compared with the 27 and 29, declare) as if this new constant revenue had never been setled; and if our Parliaments refuse to grant them, these New Projecting Tax-Masters (who must dispose of all the moneys in the intervals of Parliaments) will im∣pose and levy them at their pleasure, by their Supertran∣scendent usurped Tyrannical Power and Sword men, and dispose of them as they please without a Parliament, as they have already done, without rendring any other publick Accompt to the people thereof, than hath hi∣therto been given to them of all the many millions of Treasure already extorted from them of late years, to no other end (as appears by these Articles of our New Government) but now at last, to bring and keep them under perpetual endlesse Taxes of all sorts, and the intol∣lerable, worse than Turkish Slavery of a perpetual domi∣neering Mercenary Army, Navy, instead of long pro∣mised Liberty, ease and exemption from them, till they are all brought to a morsel of bread, and till their pri∣vate estates be utterly consumed, as well as the publick Crown and Church Revenues, yet remaining. The lad and serious consideration of all which Premi∣ses, I humbly submit to the Impartial Iudgements, Con∣sciences of our present Governours, Army Officers, Soul∣diers themselves, how discrepant they are from all their former printed Deolarations; Protestations, Promises, Vowes, Engagements to the People, and what they ex∣pected from them; It was the Speech of the Scythian
Embassadours, to Alexander the Grand Conquerour of the world,Q. Curtius, Hist. l. 7. p. 831. Nec Servire ulli possumus, nec regnare de∣sideramus. Si Deus es, tribuere mortalibus bnificia de∣bes, non sua eripere, sic Homoes, id qud es semper esse te cogita, Stultum est eorum memintsse propter quae tui oblivisceris: Let it be all Heroick English Freemens to our pretended Conquerors; who may do well to re∣member that Hermolaus and other Officers, and Soul∣diers of Alexanders own Guard, conspired his destructi∣on, after all his Persian Conquests, for this very reason, which they justified to his face,Qu. Curtius, Hist. l. 8. Quia non ut ingenuis imperare caepisti, Sed quati in mancipia dominaris; because he had begun not to raign over them as Freemen, but to domineer over them like Slaves; and because Revelaetions in this age, may be more prevalent with some Men than Gods own Oracles, or our Lawes; I shall inform our Tax-imposing Governours; that St. Bridget of Sweden in the 8 Book of herPrinted at Numbergh, 1521. Revelations of the Heavenly Emperour unto Kings, cap. 6 records; That she had this Revelation from the Son of God, That Kings and Governours ought to love the People and Com∣monalty of their Realms: That they then shew they truly love them, when they permit them to enjoy their approved Laws and Liberties; when cruel Exactors and Collectors domineer not over them; if they burthen them not with new Inventions of Impost, Taxes, and Tributes, nor with grievous and unaccustomed Hospitality, Permanen∣cies or Freequarter; For although for the resisting of In∣fidels they may humiliter petere auxilium a Populo; humbly request an aid from the People and Commons of their Realms (not imperiously impose it) when there is a necessity; yet let them beware quod necessitas illa non veniat in consuetudinem & legem, that the necessity comes not into a custom and law:See Revela∣tionum l. 4. c. 104, 105. l. 7. c. 16. l. 8. c. 48. & Rev∣lationes extra∣vagantes. c. 73, 80. For that King (or Ru∣ler) who layes not aside his unjust Exactions, and Frau∣dulent Inventions to raise monies, and oppresse his People, making his reigns and Kingdoms meer robberies and ra∣pines, as most then did, and nw too) let him know for
certain he shall not prosper in his doings, but shall lead and end his life in grief, dismisse his Kingdoms in tribula∣tions; his Son and Posterity shall be in such hatred, re∣proach and confusion, that all men shall wonder thereat; & his Soul shall be tormented by the Devils in Hell: which she manifests by theRevelationum l. 8. c. 48. example of an unjust Tax-imposing King, damned to Hell, and there tormented by the Devils: For that to retain the Kingdom to himself, and defend it from Invasions, he petended the antient Revenues of his Eschequer would not defray the Expences of the Govern∣ment, and Realms defence; whereupon he devised certain new Inventions, and fraudulent Exactions of Imposts, Tri∣butes, Taxes, and imposed them on his Kingdome, to the dammage of the Natives, and oppression of innocent Mer∣chants and Strangers; although his conscience dictated to him, Quod ista erant contra Deum, et omnem Iusti∣tiam, et Publicam Honestatem: that these things were against God, and all Iustice, and Common Honesty; as our forementioned Excises, Imposts, Taxes are now. Let those who are now guilty of this sinne in the highest de∣gree, beware they incurre not the self-same temporal and infernal punishments, thus threatned to and inflicted up∣on others. And let our whole English Nation and their Trustees, upon serious consideration of all the premises, beware how they in any kind, through fear or cowardise, submit their necks or backs to the forementioned illegal Yokes and Burdens, of perpetual standing Excises, Im∣posts, Contributions, and Taxes, to enslave themselves and their Posterities for ever to an oppressing Military New Government, and perpetual Army: For which end I shall only recommend unto their meditation and pra∣ctise, this observation and policy of our prudent Ance∣sters, Math: Paris Hist. Angl. p. 517. Binus actus inducit Consuetudinem; that a dou∣ble generall submission to, and payment of such exorbitant illegal Taxes, will introduce a customary, future exaction and payment of them; which made them always (as we have greatest reason now to do) peremptorily to withstand the firs, to prevent a second customary, future exaction
and payment in like kind; pursuing the Poet Ovids old sage Counsel, wherewith I shall conclude this point. De Remedio Amos, l. 2. Principiis obsta: serò medicina paratur Cum mala per longas invaluere moras, How transcendently all the other Fundamental Laws, Liberties, Rights of our English Freeborn Nation have by late and present Governours and their Instruments been infringed, subverted in an higher avowed degree than ever in former ages, by forcible tyrannical Procee∣dings of all kindes, in breaking open mens Houses, by ar∣med Souldiers, and other unsworn illegal Officers, Excise∣men, Sequestrators, both by day and night; seising their Persons, Horses, Armes, Papers, Writings; ransacking their Studies, Truncks, Cabinets, upon false surmises, sus∣picions; close imprisoning their persons (by multitudes) without, before any examination, particular accusation, hea∣ring, trial, in unusual places; and some of them in reme∣test Isles, Garrisons under Souldiers: Their pressing of men for Land and Sea service, and carrying them away perforce by Soldiers, Troopers, Officers, Mariners, (like so many Prisoners) out of their own Counties and the Realm, to unnatural, unchristian Warrs, against their Wills and Consciences: Their disinheriting many Thousands of Eng∣lish Freemen of all sorts, of their Freeholds, Lands, Offices, Frachises, Honors, Authorities; spoyling them and theirs of theirs Goods, Chattles, Estates, Lives, in and by Arbi∣trary Committees, Martial, & other extravagant Courts of highest Injustice: Subverting, Changing our ancient Funda∣mental Lawes, Statutes, and enacting New without the Peoples free consents in Lawfull, English Parliaments: altering the whole Frame and Constitution of our Monar∣chy, Government, and Parliaments themselves: Depri∣ving the people of the Free election of their Parliament Members, and other Elective Officers, contrary to our Lawes, Charters, Usages; securing, secluding the Mem∣bers of Parliament themselves, by armed Force; dissolving Parliaments by the Sword alone, without Writ or legall
power, contrary to Acts and Privileges of Parliament; by erecting New Legislative, Tax-imposing, Self-created Powers, (not elected by the People) at Whitehall and elsewhere, not to be paralleld in any age. By creating New-Treasons contrary to the old ones, and the Statute of 25 E. 3. and condemning, sequestring, imprisoning, executing English Peers and Freemen, only for their loyalty, Duty to their lawfull Soveraigns, and defence of the Rights, Pri∣vileges, Liberties, Laws of the Kingdom, Parliament, Nation, according to their Oathes, Protestations, League, Covenant, and Gods own Precepts, against the publique E∣nemies, Oppugners, Vnderminers, Subvertors of, and Con∣spirators against them. By making publick wars at Land and Sea with our Christian Protestant Brethren, and other Nations; and concluding Leagues, Truces without common consent or advice in Parliament. By alienating, selling, giving, squandring away the ancient Demesnes, Lands, Honours, Rents, Revenues, Rights, Inheritances of the Crown of England, (yea of Scotland and Ireland likewise) to Officers, Souldiers of the Army, and o∣thers, for pretended Arrears, Services, or inconsidera∣ble values; which should defray all the constant ordinary Expences of the Government, publique, State Of∣ficers, Embassadours, Garrisons, Navy, Courts of the Kingdom, and ease the People from all kind of Tax∣es, Payments, Contributions whatsoever towards them (except in extraordinary emergent cases and necessities in times of war, requiring extraordinary expences for their publique safety supplied by Aydes and Subsidies granted only by common consent in Parliament only, and not other∣wise) which now must be wholly, or for the greatest part defrayed by the People alone, out of their own exhausted private estates, by endlesse Taxes, Excises, Contributions (as appears by the 27, 28, 29, 30. Articles of their New ill sounding Instrument foreinsisted on) whiles others, with∣out right or legal Title, enjoy the old standing Demesnes, Lands, Rents, Revenues and Perquisites of the Crown for their private advantage without any Acts of Resumption
(See Mat. Pas p. 306. 308. Grafton, p. 90. 149. Daniel, p. 78, 79, 83, 123. 1 R. 2. Rot. Parl. to 148. 1 H. 4. n. 100. 6 H. 4. n. 14, 15. 8 H. 4. n. 52. 1 H. 5. c. 6. 28 H. 6. rot Parl. n. 53. 31 H. 6. c. 7. 33. H. 6. n. 47. 4 E. 4. n. 39. 12. E. 4. n. 6. usual in all former ages) to keep the Kingdom, Nation from becoming Bankrupts, and people from oppression) which should ease the people of those intollerable constant burthens lately laid upon them, against all Justice, Law, Conscience, and make insufferable wasts, and spoyles of the stately Houses, Timber, Wood, Mines, Forrests, Parkes of the Crown, without restraint, to the Kingdoms ex∣traordinary prejudice; for which they ought to give an Account and make full reparations, if the Earl of Devon∣shires case, Cook 11 Reports f. 89▪ 90, 91 be Law. And by sundry other particulars (requiring whole Baronian volumes, to recite and specifie to the full;) is so well known by dayly experience, and multitude of Presidents fresh in memory, to our whole three Nations, that I shall here no further insist upon them. all which experi∣mentally confirm the truth of our Saviours own words. Iohn 10, 1, 10. Verily, verily I say unto you, He that entreth not by the Dor into the Sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a Theef and a Robber; The Theef cometh not but steal and to kill, and to destroy, Whatever his pretences be to the contrary. And this rule of Johannes Angelius Wenderhagen: Politiae Synopticae, lib. 3. c. 9. sect. 11. p. 3. 10. Hinc Regulae loco notandum. Quod omne Regnum vi Armata acquisitum in effectis Sub∣ditos Semper in durior is Servatutis conditiones arripiat, li∣cet a principio Dulcedinem prurientibus spirare videatur; (which we now find most true, by sad, sensible experi∣ence) Ide cunctis hoc cavendum, Ne temere se seduci pa∣tiantur. FINIS.
