R704 R29261 11058126 46186
REFLECTIONS ON THE City-Charter, AND WRIT OF Quo Warranto. Together with a VINDICATION Of the late SHERIFFS and JURIES. Imperia Legum potentiora quam Hominum. LONDON, Printed for E. Smith at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhill, MDCLXXXII.
REFLECTIONS ON THE City-Charter, ❧c. IT is very obvious to any indifferent Observer, that the weekly Pamphlets of our Popish, or Popishly affected Scriblers, and the spiteful Herangues of many in∣considerate or designing Clergy-men, with the assi∣stance of some Degenerate Citizens have possessed divers well-meaning Persons with great prejudices, and fur∣nished them with variety of Objections against the pre∣sent Constitutions and Government of this CITY, parti∣cularly quarrelling at the Conduct of our late Sheriffs and Jurors, who are according to the Information and Advices, we daily receive from these Impudent Libel∣lers entred into a Confederacy to affront the King, sub∣vert the Laws, obstruct the equal Administration of Ju∣stice between our Sovereign and his Liege Subjects, de∣pressing those, who are well affected to his Person and Government, countenancing and acquitting the disaffe∣cted and turbulent. That any whose Habitation is remote from this Ci∣ty, who are unacquainted with its Fundamental Laws comprehended in a Famous Charter (Superior to all ex∣cepting the great National One so dearly purchased, so highly valued by all Englishmen, who have not extream∣ly degenerated from the Honesty and Courage of their re∣nowned Progenitors) That such Strangers, I say, to us and our Affairs should through Ignorance or Misinformation censure and condemn our late Transactions is no Subject
of Admiration; as neither that the Hireling half famish∣ed Patrons of the so often bafled Popish Cause should give such odious Characters of us: But we cannot resist being affected with grief and indignation, that an Unnatural Brood hatch'd in this our CITY, who have thence derived all the Advantages of a quiet easie life, many the Comfort and Conveniences of a plentiful Estate, and some of them loaded with Honour, should yet most ingratefully expose the Mother, who did both bear and educate them unto undeserved Contumely for the present, and, I may add, to manifest ruin for the future, should Events (which God forbid) depend upon their unhallowed Wishes and un∣wearied Endeavours. I have not set Pen to Paper in order to the Instructing or in hopes of Converting those re∣solved desperate Persons, who design and have vow∣ed the Subversion of our Antient, Laudable, Constitutions; Nor do I write principally for the sake of those weak, ductile persons, who are influenced and actuated by an implicite Faith, suffer themselves to be managed by cunning Gamesters, and by them wheedled into a persua∣sion, that by parting with their fair, present Possessions, they shall obtain far better in reversion, yet offering no Security in the interim to make good their Undertaking, besides a bare Parole, which hath been already many times violated or forfeited. The Errors of such Persons are next step to incureable, they usually not consider∣ing what is said, but by whom; and if contrary to the Sentiments and Lectures of their Leaders, or contradi∣ctory to their mistaken corrupt Interests, with great clamour they decry the most visible Truths, the most co∣gent Arguments for Falshood and Impertinency: But I write for the Information of divers Persons, who tho under mistakes, are yet honest and sincere, indiffrent what is Truth, dilligent Inquirers after it; and being enlight∣ned thereby, do accommodate their words and actions unto its Dictates. Such Gentlemen and Citizens, I design
chiefly to serve, and for their sakes have employed some leisure hours in making a true and faithful Representa∣tion of the Present State of our City, and of the behavi∣our of those Magistrates in whom of recent memory, the Citizens have reposed the greatest Trust, I mean She∣riffs, and Juries by them appointed; upon whose dis∣cretion and Integrity, all that is dear unto us depends, our Lives, Liberties, Estates, would to God there were no need to add, and in some respects our Religion also. I do not in the least doubt, before I put a Period to this Dis∣course fully to convince all, who are unprejudiced and considerate, that those very persons, who have long been, and still are, the Song of the Drunkard, the Subject of a Thousand Railleries and Reproaches in all Companies and Entertainments of True Papists, and false, or mis∣guided, seduced Protestants, do yet really deserve the warm Affections and high Esteem of all Honest English∣men, Good Protestants, and Discreetely Loyal Subjests. But before I proceed to their Vindication, it will not be amiss to premise by whom so many scandalous, fi∣ctitious Reports have been raised, by whom so many un∣just groundless aspersions have been contrived, foment∣ed, propogated. After diligent enquiry, long obser∣vation and frequent converse with Persons of divers perswasions and qualities; I have arrived unto a cer∣tainty in my own mind, that manifest declared Papists and others, not professedly such, but in reality friends unto and Correspondents with that Party, are the Persons who observe, aggravate, and spread all these Stories and opinions that are likely to weaken the Pro∣testant Interest, create misunderstandings between Pro∣testants of different apprehensions, thereby to embroil and if possible breed irreconcilable divisions and feuds amongst them; having thus sowed the seeds of Distra∣ction, and consequently of Destruction amongst us, how sedulously did they cultivate the weed, which
had they patience, in time might have effected their purpose, but the sprightly enterprizing Emissaries of the Roman Communion finding their designes not ripen according to their expectation, have recourse to their own peculiar tried Acts of Lying Perjury and Suborna∣tion, hopeing by these means to Extricate themselves out of the Labyrinth of their so often proved, so clear∣ly demonstrated, and fully detected Conspiracy, and to cast the Odium of their detestable principles and pra∣ctices on such of the Innocent Protestants as were most zealous for their own Religion, or active against theirs, whose courage, Quality, Estates, or interest made ap∣pear formidable Adversaries, and likely to obstruct a hopeful design, which had been long hatching, was once neer the Birth, but by a train of Providences, miraculously discovered, and for them unhappily dis∣appointed. It were a difficult task to trace them through all their crooked Paths: no small labour to bring to light all their misterious hidden works of Darkness. Let us be content with our Ignorance of some few of their hellish Machinations, enough appearing to all whoare not voluntarily blind: and sufficient to render the Contrivers and Actors abominable, and as a∣gainst whom they were designed; thankful that we have been hitherto delivered from the effects of their Malice and Cruelty: It is high time to be jealous of them, we cannot be too watchful and Circumspect af∣ter so many narrow escapes, which to recall unto your Memories would be a great piece of Impertinency, did not daily Experience manifest a sort of pretended Protestants who make it almost their sole Imployment to palliate, ex∣tenuate, and if possibly, to obliterate out of our minds the remembrance of so formidable a Conspiracy, a Plot owned and stigmatized by His Majesty in divers Procla∣mations and by Four Successive Parliaments: The First of which was so far from being composed of Dissenters, that
they alone forged the Fetters with which the Protestant Dissenters are now manacled. How many of the Conspi∣rators were upon fair Tryals and full Evidence convictd and executed: Colemans own Letters, being Witnesses, a∣gainst which no Rational Objection was ever yet raised. Let us not forget how providentially Dangerfield's Plot was defeated, whereby the Packet of Letters to have been Concealed, and after by the hider discovered, was to have Accused many Worthy Nobles and Gentlemen: soon after others were to have been conveyed to divers Pro∣testant Gentlemen and Citizens of the best Account throughout the Nation; but being Intercepted in Celiers Meal Tub, the hopeful Project proved Abortive. But so many Disappointments did not excite Desperation in the magnanimous Romanists, who, tho so often routed, rallied their Forces, had recours to new Strategems, but still stri∣king on the old String, to entangle the Innocent Prote∣stants, and render them obnoxious to the utmost severity of the Law; destroy their Bodies, confiscate their Estates, murder their Reputation, and reproach their Religion. All these would have certainly ensued had any of the fore∣mentioned Sham-Plots succeeded, or what immediately followed, the Contrivance of Fitz-Harris, who undertook to frame a Venemous Libel, full fraught with Sedition and Treason; this was by apt Instruments to have bin convey∣ed into the Houses and Pockets of divers Eminent Persons devoted to Destruction, and they thereupon proceeded a∣gainst as the worst of Traitors. But all these mischie∣vous Contrivances falling on their own Pates, a new Scene appears: They having imployed in England and Ire∣land many Persons of mean Fortunes, bad Principles, and worse Lives to carry on their Conspiracy; some of their Agents, having upon the publick Faith Assurance of Im∣punity, and Promise of Reward greater than they could reasonably expect from their Principals came in for Wit∣nesses against them, but having slender Countenance, very
mean Allowance and no Prospect of Reward, the Protestants fearful to maintain them, least they should seem there∣by to dishonour the King, and influence the Evidence to accommodate their Testimonies unto the desires of those Gentlemen and Citizens, by whom they should be suppor∣ted and relieved. The Romanists quickly espy this Ad∣vantage, and immediately by large Promises and some considerable Performances gain them to Retract their E∣vidence against Themselves, and accuse those Protestants, with whom they had frequent, intimate Converse; and some others into whose Presence they had scarcely ever been admitted. Hereby they did infallibly assure them∣selves of these Advantages, if they were Believed, to take off their Enemies; if Credit was not given unto them, the Former Testimony they gave against the Conspirators would be rendred invalid. And besides they gained this further Improvement of their Evidence being reje∣cted (upon grounds we shall hereafter mention) that hereby they raised a great Outcry of the Partiallity of JURIES, who would believe the same Witnesses a∣gainst Papists, and reject when they Accused Protestants of the same Crimes; and having cunningly hounded their Proselyted Witnesses on PERSONS not accep∣table to a great body of PROTESTANTS a∣mongst us, upon whose acquittal, with the help of their spightful Insinuations, a great clamour was made, the King could have no Justice, this Affair Misrepresented by our Enemies, is the Original, and Sourse of all our Calamities, our City, Sheriffs and Juries being thereup∣on rendred suspected, a Quo Warranto issued out against the Charter; The Sheriffs threatned, afrighted, and upon every slender occasion hampered: New and un∣heard of Acts to obtain a Sheriff; probably designed for some extraordinary service. The Common Citizens affrighted and perplexed, lest they should be deprived of their ancient Customs and Priviledges upon the exer∣cise
whereof their Wealth and Welfare depends: and who can doubt but all these Disorders and Misprisions are the result of the Papists concerning the King, Exaspe∣rating both his Majesty and the Judges against the She∣riffs and Juries, who were they, to judg by number and not by weight, would appear utterly unexcusable, but hereof anon at large: Howsoever from this indisputa∣ble matter of Fact which we have related, it appears that the Papists incessantly Plot to destroy the Prote∣stants, which not being able to effect by force, they have narrowly escaped, effecting it more then once by Subornation and Perjury. Therefore it behooves all Protestants to be extreamly circumspect, prepare for and provide against all those mischiefs they have rea∣son to expect from a subtle Potent Enemy: And there can no more appropriate and effectual Antitode be pre∣scribed or even desired against this Itallian poyson of Perjury, than judicious honest Juries: Which of all Societies, Cities, Persons, that of London and its In∣habitants ought to secure, they being more exposed to the danger of Popish malice and cruelty, then any o∣ther part of the English Nation. For though the hatred of the Romanists extends it self to the whole body of Protestants, yet their animosity manifests it self, and their Attempts are chiefly levelled against this City, they accounting it as really it is the great Bulwark of our Religion, which being battered down by open force, or secretly undermined, a breach would be opened through, which Popery would flow like a torrent with its inseperable attendants Ignorance, Cruelty, and Sla∣very, whether they have any ways contributed to the debating and impoverishing this City, will readily ap∣pear to those who believe that the burning of the City was contrived, begun and carryed on by them, none can doubt who have heard of Huberts Confession, or read the Depositions made before the darling long Par∣liament,
the Evidence then given being so clear, both from the number and quality of the Witnesses, and no∣toriety of the Fact, as constrained that numerous Com∣mittee to conclude Papists were the principle, if not its only incendiaries: And latter Evidence hath discover∣ed they did not only destroy our Habitations, but rob and make spoil of our goods, as if we had been Ene∣mies of War, and they had taken our City by Storm. And we are abundantly confirmed in this belief, by the Authority of that great Integruous Minister the pre∣sent Lord Chancellor, who in the most August, Illustrious Assembly this Age hath known, himself in the highest place of Honour hath been since his Majesty's Raign con∣ferred on any Subject; upon the Tryal of a great Popish Peer, did most solemnly and positively charge Papists with that detestable Hellish Fact, which gave occasion of that Inscription in our Mother-Tongue on that stupendious Pillar, erected to be a Lasting Monument of Gods Justice and Mercy to us wards, and of perpetual Ignominy, to∣wards that Restless Faction, who to consummate their Ma∣lice, would certainly, were it in their power, mix our Bloud with our Sacrifices, and our CITY with Salt. Such have been their Actions, now to manifest what Senti∣ments they entertain either of Fear or Revenge, with re∣ference to this Abhorred City, I shall out of many Ac∣counts, I have received from Credible Witnesses select only Two, which I received immediately from Persons pre∣sent during the ensuing Discourses; The First of a noto∣rious Papist eminent both for Zeal and Quality, who fa∣miliarly and frankly communicating to divers Gentlemen, whom he apprehended to be All of his own Religion, rendring an Account of the hopeful Posture of their Af∣fairs, after much boasting, he assured them, They were ap∣prehensive of no danger from any Quarter, except that damn'd Rebellious, Fanatical CITY of LONDON, which might chance in Three Days to turn the Tide, disappoint and con∣found
their most hopeful Projections: The Other was a re∣markable Herangue made by a Mascarade Protestant, a Militia man, and pretendedly zealous Defender of our Faith in the Company of at least Five Auditors, after se∣veral Souldier-like Rants and bitter Invectives against the CITY, he at length thus Pathetically concluded, The CITY of London never hitherto yielded me a pleasant Pro∣spect, saving once, when in flames, and I hope shortly to enjoy the Satisfaction of Seeing it in the same Condition, which a∣lone can render this Nation Happy. Do not question, but these are the Sentiments of most Papists and their Adhe∣rents, but they generally express themselves more wari∣ly, yet no less maliciously, the former base Dialect would be too gross, might chance to awaken an Alarmn some not over dangerous Protestants, who are immerst in a profound Lethargick sleep, and will, I fear, never awake, to see their danger, till they feel it. Amongst such as these, they are continually sugge∣sting the Temper and Proceedings of the City, during the last unnatural Civil War, as if the present Citizens were to reckon for all the Bloodshed and Confusion during the late Troubles. And that if the Wisdom of the Supream Magistrate do not prevent, the same Cause will Revive, the old Quarrel will be fought over again, the same Spirit inspiring, the same Principles acting, and ferment∣ing the Generality of Citizens which prevailed in 41. that 'tis necessary such ill disaffected Persons should have no share in the Government, which would afford them opportunity of perpetrating all imaginable Mis∣chiefs. Let us now examine what Foundation there is for such Insinuations: I do not question but the CITY of London, as at this present time, is well-affected to his Majesties Person, as it hath ever been to any preceding Prince, I am no less certain, that very Party upon whom our Objectors squint do more stedily and sincerely desire
his Majesties Life and Welfare than they who oppose and expose them, and I find that our Citizens have gene∣rally (especially those we now vindicate) a most huge value for the Laws and Established Government of this Nation, and in this respect so far from being Men given to Change, that there is nothing in the World whereof they are more Apprehensive; Most of those, with whom I am conversant, (assured me) would joyfully part with a great Portion of their Estates to be secured of that Legal Administration, which we have (blessed be God) enjoyed ever since his Majesties Glorious Restauration. But, besides, the Calamities and Miseries of the late Ci∣vil Wars are so lively imprinted in all considerate minds and have rendred them so averse to imitate the Prede∣cessors herein, that I find them generally inclined to suf∣fer to a very High Degree, before they would so much as consult, how they might preserve what all Laws of God and Men allow to be maintained, and defend if unjustly invaded. Who then are these Factious, Sediti∣ous, Rebellious, Traiterous, dangerous, Citizens, whom we ought to hate, expose, avoid, disarm, outlaw and punish when you desire a Description of them, a Catalogue that you might know them, and avoid the Malignity and Con∣tagion of their Company and Converse, get out from a∣mongst, that you escape being destroyed with them? You shall have for Answer, They are Phanaticks, Men of Commonwealth Principles, Parliamentarians, but if you press them to a more particular Definition of these Furies in their less Reserved Mode, or if you happen to hear them Rant it among their Comarades, unconceivable, 1. They are such as do not desire, pray, or address for a Blessing of a Popish Successor. 2. All who do not Abhor the Proceedings of the Three last Parliaments. 3. All who do not Abhor all Associations for preserv∣ing our Liberties and the Protestant Religion, and particu∣larly
that pretended to be found in the E. of S. Closet. 4. All who talk of Parliaments for the future, and es∣pecially if any think it adviseable, with all duty and profoundest humility, to bring to His Majesty's Remem∣brance the Constitution of our Government, which re∣quires Frequent Parliaments, and His Majesties Gracious Promise, That He would frequently oblige his People there∣in. 5. Such as in the Judgment of Charity, hope and be∣lieve there are any Honest, Loyal, Protestant Dissenters, and especially, if they have any Regard to those Votes of Parliament, which declared such Dissenters, Fit Ob∣jects of his Majesties Clemency, who desire the Relaxa∣tion of some, and Abolishing other Statutes made against them, and dehort all Persons from Subjecting them meer∣ly upon a Religious Account to the Severity of Penal Laws. 6. All who will rake the Popish Plot out of its Ashes, who will not allow the Papists to be a part of His Ma∣jesties best Subjects, from whom in those Mens Opinion there is little or no danger, but certainly abundantly less than from the Fanaticks and Commonwealths men, and Favour is at this Time especially to be shewed, whereby we may Moderate the Persecution against the Poor Protestants in France; that there is no Sort or Rank of Men, who have more Candour and Goodness in their Nature, Civility in their Demeanour, none more for Mo∣narchy, or more against Parliamentarian Democrasy and Tyranny: Their Principles with some small Allowance and favourable Construction, easily Reconcileable to the Doctrine, their Officers, Garments, Ceremonies to the Discipline of the English Hierarchy: That the Fanaticks is a Common Enemy to both, therefore having an Uni∣on of Interest; there should be one of Hearts, a Combi∣nation to suppress the Schismaticks, and then after at leisure in a calm, friendly way to compose and accom∣modate their small differences.
7. Another sort of Pestilent fellows are those who hinder the Disturbers of the Nation from being brought to condign punishment, such have been all our Modern SHERIFFS, and most part of our JU∣RIES. 8. They who are unwilling their CHARTER should be taken away, and who do Defend the Legal Privi∣ledges and Antient Customs of this Renowned CITY of LONDON. Now Five Parts in Six of this great CITY coming under some, and the Majority under all those Reproofs you may readily imagine, that with those Censors, our CITY is very whiggish, malignant, Anti-monarchical. We are mostly a Tiptoe, need only a pretence, a Head, and the blowing of a Trumpet to put us in uproar. The First will be to massacre the Papists, the poor In∣nocent Papists, and his Loyal, Magnanimous younger Bro∣ther Tory Tom, the two great Pillars of the Government in Church and State. Next comes in the Old Prank of Rifling Princes, ma∣king Tinder of Lawn Sleeves, then break upon us Swarms of Sects, innumerable as Insects, and that Hohgob∣ling Leviathan in Civil Government stalks over Crowned Heads, Princes and Nobles, trampling under foot all Laws and Equity. What I have repeated is not the Thousand Part of what is commonly Herangued by our Abhorrers of a Protestant Successor, and a Monarchy confined within the Narrow Limits, which Law and Reason have pre∣scribed, we shall examine the Maximes of these, at the same time, querelous and insolent Gentlemen, confute
their frivolous Pretentions to Truth and Reason; and lastly, vindicate our Loyal, Integruous, coura∣gious Magistrates, our Intelligent, upright, unby∣assed, JURORS; our Honest and peaceable Fellow-Citizens, from the Calumnies of Men, whose Design and Business is to create pub∣lick Disturbances. We shall expose and unravel those perverse Reasonings, and Sophisticate Arguments, where∣with they endeavour to obscure and perplex Truth, the Light whereof will shine through the Mist and Dust they have raised to Ecclipse her. Most of the forementioned objections have been so frequently and strenuously refuted that it is amazing any should have forehead enough to repeat them. Their zeal for a Popish Succes∣sour, is for reasons best known to themselves at present Dorment. And a late Tryal, together with some expressions which the notoriety of the Fact, and irresistible power of Truth, extorted from our great Justiciary, hath somwhat dampt and checkt their hopes of stiffling the Popish Plot, that which they urge at present with most vigour is the abandoning of our Charter, a resigna∣tion whereof is necessary by reason of our unpar∣donable
abuse, of so gracious concessions, by choosing Sheriffs who return Juries, that con∣found all humane and divine Laws, condemn∣ing the Innocent, and acquitting the Guilty, both alike abominable before God and Man. It will be necessary in order to the more clear and distinct resolution of these Objections to give a summary account of the Nature and most re∣markable Contents of our City Charter, toge∣ther with some obvious suitable Reflections there∣on, then we appeal to all endued with Reason, who have any observation upon the vastly dif∣ferent effect of good and bad or no Govern∣ment; whether this City hath cause voluntarily to resign that which above all other means hath most contributed to its Grandieur and security: and herein we may safely imitate Diogenes, whose generous freedom was commended by the great Alexander himself, which mighty Monarch inter∣posing between him and the Sun: Stand aside said he, and deprive me not of that which thou canst not impart unto me, meaning the benign influen∣ces of its Light and Heat. But to make good our promise of representing under one view, the sub∣stance of our invaluable Charter, which is of so great Antiquity, that I know not from what time to reckon its date, for this City being by its
Situation rarely qualified to become the Scale of Trade, and Seat of Empire, hath enjoyed the former without Interrupti∣on, above 1600 Years, as appears from Tacitus, an Au∣thor of unquestioned Authority: and the latter, almost e∣ver since the Heptarchy was reduced under one Monarch; The Saxon and afterwards, the Norman Race having always given it the Preference, honouring it with their Residence, fixing here their Courts of Judicature, and endowing it successively with greater Priviledges than were ever enjoyed by any City in the Universe, old Rome it self not being except∣ed. Our Records are silent what their Priviledges were, during the Dominion of the Saxons; but since they were certainly very considerable, they so valiantly in Fight maintaining them, and, after the Loss of their Prince, made Terms with the Norman, their Weapons in their Hands, and recei∣ved him to be their King, upon Condition, he would con∣firm unto them the Laws of good King Edward, which was graunted in these Terms: I give you to understand, I will that you enjoy all the Laws, you enjoyed in the Days of King Ad∣ward, and I will not suffer that any Man to do you wrong. Di∣vers of these Laws are specified with Additions in the Char∣ter, granted by Henry Son to Willam the Norman, which is published with his Laws a large by Wheelock, p. 176. which begins thus: Sciatis me concessisse Civibus meis London. tenend. Middlesex ad firmam pro CCC libr' ad Compotum ipsius & haere∣dibus suis de me & haeredibus meis; ita ut ipsi Cives ponent Vice∣com. qualem voluerint de seipsis, & Iusar. qualem voluerint de seipsis, &c. He granted the Citizens to chuse out of them selves a Sheriff for the County of Middlesex, and a Justice for Pleas of the Crown. King John confirmed unto them in his second Charter the Sheriffwick of London and Middle∣sex, with all Customes and Emoluments thereto appertain∣ing: And further graunted, that the Citizens among them∣selves might make Sheriffs whom they would, and remove them whensoever they pleased: and the said Sheriffs, du∣ring
their Office, not to be condemned to any Amerciament or Mulct of Money, exceeding 20 li. These were all con∣firmed with Additions by his Son Henry the Third; who in another Charter concedes unto his Barons of the City of Lon∣don that they may annually chuse out of themselves a Mayor for the Government of the City, and at the end of the Year to confirm or remove him, and substitute another at their Pleasure. It is by many controverted, who those Barons were, who are in this and other Charters mentioned, out of whom the Mayor was to be chosen; Whether all Freemen, or Persons of the greatest Quality and Authority in the Ci∣ty: Matthew Paris pag. 893. Cives Londinenses quos propter Ci∣vitatis dignitatem & Civium antiquam Libertatem Barones con∣suevimus appellare. And pag. 974. Convocaverunt in Aula Guild∣hall appellata totius Civitatis Cives, quos Barones vocant. This was during the Reign of Henry the third. But long before I find in Malmesbury, pag. 189. concerning the Imprison∣ment of King Stephen: Barones Londinenses, qui sunt quasi Optimates, pro magnitudine Civitatis in Anglia. To the said Barons in the same Charter was graunted and confirmed, that they might have in Peace, freely, quietly, entirely all their Liberty ever before used in London or without, by Land or Water, and all other Places, acording to the Charter of King John, which is the famous Magna Charta, or an A∣greement between the King and his Subjects, after many te∣dious and bloody Contests, wherein the City of London al∣one is comprized by me, cap. 9. Civitas London habeat om∣nes Libertates suas antiquas & consuetudines suas. The said King Henry the third having obtained, as his Father King John before him, a Dispensation from the Pope, accounted himself free from his Coronation-Oath, and absolv'd from his frequent solemn Obligations of observing Magna Charta, governed tyrannically, having little regard to other Law than his own pleasure and humour, did create such Dissatisfa∣ction
in the People, as at length caused a general Defecti∣on. But Henry having concluded a firm League with the King of France, pawned or mortgaged Normandy and An∣jou for 300000 li. bought off many of the Malecontents, and with the Assistance of the French and the Popes Thunder, with great difficulty and extream Hazard of his Person (be∣ing once both prisoner and sorely wounded) he overcame his Adversaries, and amongst them the Londoners, who had vigorously oppos'd his Arbitrary Proceedings. Those of note, who escaped the Carnage of the great Battle of Evesh∣am were outlawed, they, who remtined at home, impri∣soned, their Estates confiscated, and says Mat. Paris, Civi∣tatem Londinensem privavit suis Privilegiis & Libertatibus: but Westmonsteriensis Primores Civitatis poena pecuniaria ad summam non modicam multabantur. Howsoever, soon after, upon their Submission, he granted unto them divers new Priviledges and Immunities. Succeeding Princes were very tender of their Priviledges, as appears by Letter-patents of Edward the second, declaring, That whereas the Mayor and good Men of the City, tho not obliged to war out of the City, yet had upon an Emer∣gency assisted the King with aid of armed Men, this should not be to the Prejudice of th City, nor drawn into Exam∣ple. But most eminently in the Charter granted by Edward the third in Parliament, wherein was granted and confirm∣ed, That, whereas in the Great Charter of the Liberties of England, the City of London is allowed all their ancient Li∣berties and Customs, and the said Citizens had from the Time of Edward the Confessor, William the Conqueror and others our Progenitors, divers Liberties and Customs, as well by the Charter of these our Progenitors, as without Char∣ter by ancient Custom, many of which have been in Cir∣cuits, and by Judgments or Statutes invaded, We will and grant for Us and our Heirs, that they enjoy their Liberties,
according to the foresaid Great Charter, and all Impedi∣ments unto, and Usurpations upon them be revoken and disannull'd. And afterwards in the same same Charter men∣tions a particular incroachment by our Exchequer Court on the Sheriffs, which he thereby frees them from; as also from unusual Amerciaments in case of Escapes, &c. It is also very remarkable, that their being so particularly comprehended in Magna Charta did supersede other Statute-Laws, made contradictory to the Liberty and Priviledges of the aforesaid City, as appears at large by the third Char∣ter of Edward the third. The said Prince in his fifth Grant declares how sensible he is that his Navy was weakned by the Impoverishing of the City, and Decay of Trade therein; and thereupon grants them further Franchises for the Cities Welfare. And because so much depended upon Customs not con∣tained in written Records, but only derived by a long Se∣ries of Tradition from Times immemorial; and if the City were put upon the Proof, it might create them much Trou∣ble and Expence. Edward the fourth granted unto them, that in all Pleas of or upon Customs of the City of London; tho the City or Government thereof be a party; The Ma∣or and the Aldermen declaring and testifying by their Re∣corder, whether there be suc a Custom or not, shall be al∣lowed, and Process made accordingly. And in the same Charter it is granted to the Major, Commonalty and Citi∣zens, that tho they, their Predecessors, or Successors have not used, or shall not use, have abused, or shall abuse any of the Priviledges or Customs contained in former Grants, of us or our Progenitors, that yet they shall not incur the Forfeiture of the Premises. This same Prince afterwards, in consideration of many Kindnesses done to him by the Ma∣yor and Commonalty of London, did grant unto the City divers Offices, specified in his fourth Charter. And after∣wards
there seemed to be an Emulation or Contention a∣mongst succeeding Princes, who should most contribute unto its Honour, Wealth and Security. But we shall, to avoid te∣diousness, pass over all to the Confirmation of former Char∣ters by King Iames, in which the Preface is remarkable, assigning the Reason of former Gnts; Whereas many of our Progenitors for free, laudable, multiplyed, and conti∣nued Service done by the Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens of London, and their Predecessors, and for divers other ur∣gent Causes and Considerations, &c. We grant a Confir∣mation of all former Charters to the City, and Restauration or Restitution unto all Liberties as fully as ever their Ance∣sters enjoyed. And tho they have not used, or have abused a∣ny Authorities, Liberties, Priviledges, Customs, &c. not∣withstanding they may hereafter fully enjoy and use them. So King Charles the first: Such is our Love to our City of London, our Royal Chamber, that whatsoever we shall see necessary or profitable to the Major, Commonalty and Citi∣zens, we have been and are ready to give unto them; and it pleases Us, that all former Grants be not only confir∣med but enlarged. His Majesty now reigning, being sensible how much this City contributed to his Restauration, and how much its good Government, Wealth and Glory would establish his own Power and Dignity, confirmed all preceding Char∣ters in Words as kind and comprehensive, as can be employ∣ed on so solemn an Occasion, which being large and already published, I do thereunto refer the Reader. And from this Epitome of the various Charters and Concessions, together with the Circumstances of Time and Persons, we derive the ensuing Corollaries or Observations, which seem naturally to flow there from. 1. You may hence learn the great Antiquity of this Char∣ter, upon which account with some People it should be∣come more venerable.
2. Observe the unanimous Consent of all Princes, to con∣firm and enlarge this Charter, apprehending, as is expresly in divers of their Concessions, that they did thereby not only benefit the City, but derive Honour and Advantage upon themselves. 3. That very few of our Kings have attempted to destroy or suspend the Exercise of this Charter, and those who did, laid thereby the Foundation of great Troubles, which al∣ways thereupon ensued. 4. Divers wise Princes, tho highly provok'd, and just Pretences afforded them, for ever to have abolished it, if they had regard only to the Persons, more immediately con∣cern'd therein, yet providently discerning the Benefit accru∣ing to themselves, and the Nation thereby, did not only confirm but adorn it with new Priviledges. 5. It is hard to conceive how this Charter can be forfeited since it hath not only the Concession of Kings, but the San∣ction of Parliaments, That no Part thereof shall be forfeited by Abuse or Disuse: probably for seeing that some powerful Mi∣nister or ill-advised Prince might from a Principle of Re∣venge or Avarice pretend a Breach of the Charter, and thereupon Forfeiture, and then the Lease must be renewed, or the Tenure voided; whereas nothing is more rational, than that, if any Misdemeanour be committed by any parti∣culars of a Society, the Criminals only should suffer, and not the rest of the innocent Community; therefore in many of our Charters the Sheriffs, Mayor and other Officers are declared accomptable and punishable for great Offences as other Subjects. 6. It is most apparent that this City was never more peaceable and obsequious, or more contented under the Government of any Prince, from the Time it was erected, than now under that of his present Majesty, whose Clemen∣cy and Justice, as it affords us an entire Satisfaction, so no∣thing
in our present Circumstances renders us so uneasy, as the continual Fears, we shall not long enjoy a King so unexceptionably good, who hath reconciled the two seem∣ing Extreams of Majesty and Love; exercising with the Wisdom and Authority of a Mighty Prince, the Care and Indulgence of an Affectionate Parent, not only of his Coun∣try, but more especially of this City, which he hath honou∣red, enriched, and secured, by chusing it for the Place of his almost constant Residence. 7. The Dissolution of this Charter will be succeeded with such a train of Mischiefs and Calamities, as the very re∣flection thereon, will possess an honest considerate Man with terror and amazement, one might write a large Volume of the evil Effects and Consequences which would probably ensue, to foresee and enumerate all which, were next to an Impossibility; but so much as is obvious, makes it an Epi∣tome of Confusion, and an Emblem of the last Catastrophe of the Universe, or of the first Chaos: And therefore our most Gracious Prince, is certainly either ignorant of those Proceedings against us, or there is somewhat Mysteri∣ous which we cannot comprehend; but having had such long experience of his Majesty's benign Humour, and certain knowledg of his Propensity to gratify this City in all their reasonable Requests, let us never fear that he will in a moment pluck up by the Root, what was planted and che∣rished by so many of his wise magnanimous Predecessors, and to those, towards whose Prosperity his Majesty himself hath not meanly contributed. Let us therefore trust God and his Vicegerent, and discharging our Duties to both, ex∣clude all Carking sollicitous Thoughts. But like Innocent Persons, chearfully expect a good Event of this, as of all our other Affairs. Howsoever, I apprehend, it will not be amiss, before I close my Discourse on this Subject, to re∣hearse a few of those manifold Inconveniences which will
necessarily ensue upon the Forfeiture or Abrogation of our Charter, for the instruction of those silly Gulls, who would perswade us voluntarily to abandon all these Franchises, Pri∣vileges, and Emoluments; which by a long Series and Suc∣cession of Services, a great stock of Merit hath been gained. It is some excuse to alleg, in order to extenuate our Follies, that we are drunk, therefore in Charity we will suppose these Men drunk with Loyalty; but withal I question not, but before I leave them, to make it evident, that none are or can be good Subjects, till they do own and maintain his Majesty's legal Prerogative as their own Property; and al∣so their Fellow Subjects just Liberties and Privileges, as their own Estates and Lives. But there is amongst us a worse sort of Men, who for base sinister Ends would dissolve the present Constitution of Government, for that none, who know them, will give their Votes towards their obtaining any share in this; they hope, in the new Model, to become con∣siderable, and thereupon censure and declaim against the Present; like the mad Philosopher, who would be buried with his Face downwards, fancying the World would be turned topsy turvy, then all the rest would lie wrong, and he alone right. To inform the former Rank of Ignora∣muses, and bring that confusion upon the latter unto which they would reduce us, I shall endeavour to represent the Result of this so much desired and expected Reformation. It is supposed, which yet I can scarcely perswade my self to believe, that some, even among the Governors of our Cor∣poration, are no strangers to, and will not be much dis∣pleased with this designed Alteration; let them consider, that the Aldermen, who in the present established Govern∣ment are very considerable (those above the Chair Justices of course, and of the highest Rank) will be levelled with the meanest Commoner, liable to be Collectors, Pettit-Con∣stables, and other Offices of the lowest Degree; those who
expect to be Mayors, deprived of so honourable and profi∣table an Employ; those who have been degraded, as I may say, and on even ground with other Plebeans. A great part of the Revenues of the City forfeit by Statutes of Mortmain, or revert to the Original Donors, their Heirs or Executors. The Commonalty, besides all the Miseries which attend Anarchy, liable to Pressing, to go abroad on War∣fare, from which, by their Charters, they are exempted; not capable, with that ease and advantages of recovering their Debts, exposed to Vexatious Suits, Pleas of the Crown, now being decided in their own Courts, by their own Of∣ficers. Aliens will dwell in their City, learn the Mystery of all their Trades, and have equal Advantages with them∣selves. No provision for Widows, who abandoned Dower or Jointures, and left to the Custom and Courtesy of the City: Orphans Mony hazardous, if not lost, with not only injury to Citizens, but to many worthy Gentlemen, whose Daughters will be left to great Uncertainties. To say nothing of Freemens Widows and Children, who thereby enjoy great Privileges, to be rescinded. And not to expatiate on their Estates in the Stocks and Treasuries of private Companies, and the Revenues of the said Companies; Revenues and Government of Hospitals. What Confusion and Loss will ensue the intermission of the Offices of Conservators of the River, and Water-balywick; of Packing, Scavage, Por∣tage, Garbling, Gauging, measuring Coal, Corn, Salt, &c. To pass over Prizage of Wine, Markets, Escheats, Profits, and Emoluments from Leaden-Hall, and other publick Pla∣ces, from weighing, approving, laying, housing divers Commodities; forestalling, ingrossing. But these are pri∣vate Damages, and are all nothing to what the whole City is at once liable to: We may become a Garison, or rather a Camp; and if we lose the benefit of chusing our Sheriffs, our Lives, Liberties, Estates, lie at the Mercy of such as shall be imposed on us.
These, and innumerable other Mischiefs we are liable un∣to, if the Charter be rendred invalid; which though we have little cause to fear, during the Administration of our present Sovereign, who hath never hitherto manifested his Power, by embracing Opportunities of oppressing or de∣pressing his Subjects: Yet having no possibility of ensuring his Life, who knows what conditioned Princes may succeed him; and we ought, if we can prevent it, to leave nothing to Chance. Let us therefore highly prize our Priviledges, and by all legal Means, maintain that precious Patrimony left us by our Forefathers; behave our selves with all duti∣ful respect to our King, that he may not be induced, by the Importunity of our Enemies, to take every Advantage a∣gainst us. And let us cherish mutual Love among our selves; A Society, no more than a Kingdom, divided, can long subsist. Let every one mind his own Business, and that of the Publick, when legally called thereunto; but let all be transacted without clamour, railing, reviling, with mo∣desty, meekness, regularly. As I would have none to betray their just Privileges, so neither to claim more than is their Due; for to arrogate more to our selves than is right, is the ready way to lose what we might otherwise justly chal∣lenge. I am unwilling, and almost afraid of recapitulating the Inconveniences will by this Resumption redound unto the Supream Magistrate: The old and too too often expe∣rienced Sentence is, Necesse est ut multos metuat quem multi timent; when People are put out of the protection of those Laws they value and like, they are not free or for∣ward to give due subjection to those, whereof they do not in their secret thoughts approve, though outward Respects restrain them from declaring it. The next favou∣rable Opportunity, or Invitation, whereby they may re∣venge their Losses, or recover their Liberties, is usually em∣braced; of which Richard the second is an eminent and de∣plorable
Instance. When I consider all this, and much more, fit rather for private Thoughts, or communication to pub∣lick Ministers, than for common Discourse, I am great∣ly surprized to find what progress is already made in this Affair, and from what Miscarriage, or pretended Mis∣carriage of the City, it derived its Original. I cannot find any specious colour for this new sort of Inquisition, besides that common Complaint of our Adversaries, That so long as the City chuses Sheriffs, and they assign Juries, the King's most Excellent Majesty, and his most Loyal faithful Subjects, must despair of Justice. Upon which Theme, (good God!) how copious and elegant are they! How clearly and fully do they prove their Charge by induction of Particulars! How many Ignoramus Juries! How many honest useful Per∣sons brought into trouble, only for their exposing Persons Disaffected, and Actions displeasing to the Government! This, if it be true, all must account a very hainous Crime, and not to be expiated by a less Punishment, than that which they have allotted for it. But if to be accused, would ren∣der any Criminal, how few would be Innocent! We shall therefore impartially examine all their Allegations, and if I do not demonstrate the falseness and futility of them, or at least if I do not, without reserve or disguise, really believe what I declare to others hereof, may I suffer greater Indig∣nities, and worse Punishments, than those I would depre∣cate for, and avert from this Renowned City, in which I first drew my Breath: wherein I have led the most comfor∣table part of my Life, and which I hope, dying, to leave to my Posterity, more advanced in Reputation and Prosperity, than when I first entred therein. May it be and continue the deserved Metropolis of so great an Empire, the Dar∣ling of so good a King; the impregnable Bulwark of the best Religion; the Glory of the most truly generous and easily governable Nation; the worst indeed of Slaves, but
the best of Subjects; which Character may they deserve and maintain, whilst they are a People, as they have for a∣bove 1600 Years already elapsed. Britanni di∣lectus,Corn. Taci∣tus de Vita Agricolae. Tributa & caetera Imperii munera impigrè obeunt modo injuriae absint, has aegre tolerant; jam domiti ut pareant, nondum ut serviant. Having finished what I proposed to represent concerning our Charter, I proceed, according to my promise, more par∣ticularly, to vindicate our Modern Sheriffs and Jurors, whom our Adversaries load with Reproaches, and brand with no less Crimes than Disloyalty and Perjury: From which Vil∣lanous Accusations, since we cannot clear our selves with∣out recriminating, let indifferent Persons judg who have the better Cause and Plea. There is nothing certainly more obvious to all considering People, than that we are beset by a company of Men, who since they dare not attempt the destroying us by Force, do therefore endeavour to compass and effect it by Tricks and Fraud. And it were endless to recount the Ways and Methods which they have been pur∣suing, for the subversion of our Religion, Laws, and Liber∣ties, and to make us fall a Sacrifice to their Rage, under the charge and imputation of Crimes, whereof their Consci∣ences tell them we are altogether Innocent. It were too bold an effort directly to trample upon the English Laws, and therefore they are thinking how to make them as insig∣nificant to the protection of the Guiltless, as if we never had enjoyed any Laws, or were deprived of them by a Right of Conquest. Nor doth any thing occur to their Thoughts, that would be more inservient hereunto, than the obtaining Sheriffs, that they are assured would return such Juries, who would reckon i enough to condemn us of Treason, because we desire to be preserved from coming un∣der a Popish Prince; or because we believe there hath been a Design carried on by those of the Romish Faction, for the
Destruction of the King, the Subversion of the established Government. And after all the Clamour that hath been raised against the late Sheriffs, and those Juries which they have returned to serve either in Capital or Civil Causes; We defie the utmost of the Malice of our Enemies, to ad∣vance one just Exception against the Righteousness and Im∣partiality of their several and respective Verdicts. Alas what kind of Juries are those returned in the Neighbouring Counties, at which nevertheless no Offence is taken, in com∣parison of those, that have been from time to time upon the Pannels in London and Middlesex! Let us but ballance the Acquitment of Gascoign and Wake∣man, with the Ignoramus's returned either at the Best a∣gainst Colledg, or that against the Earl of Shaftsbury, and e∣very sober Man must acknowledg, that if it be lawful to ar∣raign a Jury, there is more to be objected to the disparage∣ment of those, than there is to asperse these. Nor can there be a greater Evidence of the Integrity and Justice of the late Juries, than that they have carried it equally towards all sorts of Persons: for did not the Jury in March 1681 bring in an Ignoramus upon a Bill exhibited against diverse Persons, under a pretence of Recusancy; and this, not because they favoured them or the Popish Re∣ligion, but because the Evidence was not full, or the Wit∣nesses such, as a wise and honest Man ought to believe? And is it not strange, that the Jury which rejected the Bill against the Earl of Shaftsbury, should be so severely blamed, when it is so well known, that the principal Per∣sons then in Commission on the Bench have often said, that they must have done as the Jury did, had it been their Lot to have been in their Place? Can any Thing tend more to the Vindication of the late Juries, than that they have never failed to give Verdicts a∣gainst these of their own Principles, and their best Friends,
if the Evidence before them appeared any ways clear and full, and that the Witnesses were such, as that credit could be given to them; Witness the Case some time ago against Francis Smith, and that of late against Mr. Best. Are any so unreasonable as to expect, that a Jury should find Bills upon the Depositions of such as themselves know to be perjured and infamous Rascals? and of this complexion and stamp were most of those that swore against the Earl of Shaftsbury: Or would they have a Jury convict a Person, upon the Testimony of a Woman, that would not declare and express her self in the very Court, but as she was prom∣pted, nor without asking her Suborner what she should say next, as in the case of Sam. Harris. Finally, What Jurors did ever better merit the Character of good and legal Men, than those, whereof our Grand Juries have been mostly composed? Men of good Fame, free from all reasonable Suspicion of any Design for themselves or o∣thers, upon the Estates or Lives of any suspected Criminals, or had any Quarrel or Controversy with any of them; in∣different, impartial, of sufficient Understanding and Estate. Let us compare their Verdicts with those, of any which pre∣ceded them in London in our Memory, and I perswade my∣self, they will not be disgraced by the parallel. Nor shall we decline to challenge the adjacent Counties, whether they can produce Verdicts founded on more Reason, or where the Jurors acted with more deliberation and indifferency: I am ashamed to nominate them in the same breath with our sprightly inspired Association-abhorring Jurors; who con∣demn Persons on Reputation of I know not whom; whereas it is customary with ours to refuse Bills from other Grand Ju∣ries, unless they reexamin the Evidence; These, tho absent, with a breath condemn, whom the most judicious Jury ever sate in London, upon fair and strict Inquiry, acquitted; to the full Satisfaction of hundreds of honourable Persons there present.
I intended to have enumerated all the remarkable Verdicts given within these two Years last past, whereof I have a most particular Account, with the Reasons and Motives inducing them; but I being prolix, and what I have already specified, being, in my Opinion, their sufficient Apology, I shall su∣persede that Task, and conclude, after I have remembred you how great a Trust and Power is lodged in Juries; so that as a Modern Judicious Author, wisely observes, That 'tis the greatest in the Nation, next to the Legislative; the Concernments of all Commoners; the Honour, Reputation, Estates, and Lives of the Nobility is submitted to their Censure: Their Duty is to Indict Offend rs, and protect the Innocent in their Reputations, Lives, and Interests, from false Accusers, and malicious Conspirators. Of how great Consequence is it then unto us all, to have good Juries? How carefully ought we to provide for the Security of our Lives, &c. against such as would destroy us by false Accusation and Perjury? And except our Sheriffs be wise, careful, and integruous, we may prognosticate great Hazards to divers Persons, whom we cannot but believe in our Consciences to be innocent of those Crimes whereof their Adversaries would soon charge them, could they obtain Juries like to prove so severe, as those were lately to Wilmore and Sheriff Pilkington. And now, my dear fellow-Citizens, what remains, but that I should exhort you strenuously to assert and maintain your undoubted right of chusing She∣riffs. Be not afrighted by Menaces, or wheedled by Promises of an Equiva∣lent, to part with so essential and necessary a Branch of your Charter; which should you neglect or resign, (pardon the harshness of the Expression) you will thereby become Traitors to the Community, and Violaters of that pub∣lick Trust which you are obliged by your Interest, and engaged by your Oaths, faithfully & fearlesly to discharge. Nay, tho Persons of the greatest Au∣thority amongst you should interpose, let not that influence you to abandon your Unvaluable Privileges, and complement you selves into Misery; for cer∣tainly they who, by misrepresentation, have raised such jealousy and distrust of you, will, when they have obtained, by this Incroachment, an almost De∣spotick Power, exercise it in a manner will not be very agreeable, and afford you sufficient cause bitterly to lament your unaccountable, your unexcusable Credulity and Folly, and will render you mean in the Eyes of them you have gratified, hateful and abhorred to those you betray. As for what re∣gards your Duty and Love to your Prince, these will be more signalized by your putting a value upon his Gifts, than by your slighting and rejecting them. And indeed we cannot reasonably believe or imagine his Majesty will require our subjecting our selves; and all we have, unto his Absolute Will and Pleasure, he having ever hitherto preferred an upright equal Administra∣tion, before an unlimited Domination; and that humane benign temper, wherein he excels all Men, will certainly dispose him to pardon us if we cannot, dare not repose that confidence in his Ministers we could in himself. The best and wisest of Princes, see most Transactions with other Mens Eyes,
hear with their Ears, and Act by their Hands; the concealing Addition, alte∣ration of a Word in Speech, or Circumstance in Actions, we may daily ob∣serve, renders Cases very different from what they were really: Therefore having so many, and such powerful Enemies, as I have before demonstrated, our only Security is, the established Law, by which we are governed; and we have his Majesty's Royal Word, that shall be the Rule of all his Actions, and equally distributed to all his Subjects. Whilst the Laws have free course, and are uncontrouled by Justiciaries, duly interpreted, faithfully represen∣ted, and that Sheriffs take care to return equal Juries, no Innocent need fear. Our Adversaries may accuse us, brand us with odious Names and Characters, or at worst, imprison us; but the Law, which is impartial, cannot be brib'd or biass'd, and our honest Neighbours will soon relieve us. Nay, let the whole Fraternity of tutor'd Witnesses appear against the meanest Com∣moner, whose Cause is just, I question not, but our discerning Juries will ea∣sily detect the Fraud, and acquit the Oppressed. Birds that have once escaped the Snare, are not easily entangled again. The same Cheat, in the same Age, must not be brought often upon the Stage; or if it be again represented, what Impunity its Actors promise themselves, or what Encouragement and Assurances they may receive from others, I know not; but unless we are pro∣digiously blind and infatuated, they cannot, methinks, reasonably hope for success. Let us then cheerfully unite in this laudable Resolution, to chuse such Magistrates for the Year ensuing, as are endued with Wisdom and Courage, who have obtained a good Report for their Dutifulness to their Sovereign, and Love to their Fellow-Citizens; who are uncapable of being by either Side biassed and corrupted; Men actively prudent, honestly zealous, of brave, firm, manly Resolutions; who will not be afraid to discharge their Duty in in the fullest and utmost extent. If Almighty God hath designed our Hap∣piness, he will provide Persons thus qualified, and inspire and animate us to elect them. And such Ministers will be not only a great Security to the City, in this time of great Fear and extremest Exigence, but doutbless very acceptable to his Majesty, whose most admirable Humanity, and tender Af∣fection to his People, will certainly dispose him to pity a distracted City, upon the brink of Ruine, by reason of Jealousies and Divisions; and to re∣joyce at our Choice of vertuous, peaceable, discreet Sheriffs, who may greatly contribute to the accommodating our Differences, removing our mutual Pre∣judices and Mistakes; whereby this City will be rendred more capable of serving his Majesty, and relishing the Blessings of his mild benign Govern∣ment; a commendable Emulation will be excited, who shall manifest most dutiful Respect unto his Royal Person, and most liberally contribute to the Support of his Government: And being delivered from the fear of our Enemies, we shall join in celebrating his Praises, continually supplicating him b whom Kings rule, to grant him uninterrupted Health, long Lfe, a peace∣able and prosperous Reign; and that whosoever suceeds him may imitate and express all his Princely Vertues, whereto let every Loyal Subject say, Amen.
