S1864 13704253 101469
CR HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms A PROCLAMATION For discovering and apprehending some Rebels lately in Arms in the West and their Resetters. CHARLES by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, De∣fender of the Faith; To Our Lyon King at Arms, His Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy Council Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch as by the nature of the Monarchy devolved upon Us by God Almighty alone, and by the inhe∣rent Priviledge and Prerogative of the Imperial Crown of this Our Ancient King∣dom, We are sufficiently Impowered to take such Courses and Methods, as according to the Circumstances of the Times wherein We are Stated, may best secure Our Royal Government, and Our Innocent and Peaceable subjects: As also by the Laws and Acts of Parliament of this Our Kingdom, All She∣riffs, Stewarts, Lords, and Baillies of Regalities, and Baillieries, and their De∣puts are obliged when any Rebellious, and Disorderly People appear openly in any of their Jurisdictions, to Convocat Our Lieges, and to raise the Huy and Cry against: them, and never leave the following and pursuing of them, till they be chasd out of the said jurisdictions, and to take and apprehend them, and g them in, and present them to Justice; And that the Heretors, Commons, and generally all Our Lieges are  to concur with them. In which, if they fail, as in that which is their duty, We must take such other  as may most effectually secure Our Royal Government, and good Subjects. Yet it is undenyable, that  many years, great numbers of Armed Rebels, have most insolently, and rebelliously gathered themselves together, and have not only Marched up and down Our Western Shires of Cliadisdale, and other Shires besouth the River of Forth, But have assaulted and Murdered severals belonging to Our Forces, burnt Our Laws, and Ex∣communicatted Our Sacred Person. And of late, in the Month of June last, about two hundreth Arme Rebels have presumed, to the great contempt of Our Authority, to March openly through several of the said Shires for ma∣ny days together, threating the Orthodox Clergy, and Murdering Our Souldiers, and have at last, (when they found it convenient) disappeared, being certainly and undenyably Harboured, and Reset by the Inhabtants of these Shires, without sufficient diligence done by the Sheriffs, and Inhabitants of the said Shires, either for dissipating them, or for discovering their Resetters, and bringing them to Justice; By which preparative (i allowed) all Rebels may safely Rise in Arms, and yet be secure. We therefore, with Advice of Our Privy Council, Do hereby Command and Charge Our Sheriffs, Stewarts, and others in the several Shires forsaid, as they will be an∣swerable upon their duty, and higheset peril (with whom We Command the Heretors and Common to concur) To apprehend, and bring into Justice the Persons of the saids Rebels, who appeared openly in the saids Shires, and to discover to Us, and Our Privy Council, betwixt and the fifteenth day of August next, all such as did Re∣set and Intercommon with them, With Certification, that if they fail, We will for preserving the publick Peace, and Our good Subjcts, take such other effectual Courses, as in Our Royal Prudence We shall find most t for prevent∣ing Rebellions, and secureing the publck Peace in the Shires above mentioned. And to the effect Or Pleasure in the Premisses may be known to all Our Lieges. Our Will is Herefore, and We Charge you strictly, and Com∣mand, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye passe to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and whole remanent Mercat Crosses of the head Burghs of the Shires of this Kingdom, on this side of the Water of Frth, and there in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make publication of Our Pleasure in the Premisses, that all Persons concerned may have notice thereof, and give punctual obedience thereto. And We ordain the sheriffs of the saids Shires to cause forth with publish this Our Proclamation, at the several Mercat Crosses within their re∣spective Shires and Paroch Kirks, and the Ministers of the respective Parochs, to read the same from their Pulpits up∣on a Sabbath day, after Dvine Service. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the twenty and second day of July, 1684. and of Our Reign the thirtieh and six Year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. WILL PATERSON, Cls. Secreti Concilii. GOD Save the KING. Edinburg, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, Anno DOM, 1684.
