S2294A R10369 11907165 50740
THE Second Part OF Dr. Sherlock's TWO KINGS OF BRAINFORD, AT THE IMPORTUNITY OF HIS VINDICATOR. LONDON, Printed for W. Rayner, 1690.
The SECOND PART OF Dr. SHERLOCK's Two Kings OF BRAINFORD. WHere a Man is charged with Ill Intention, or such Consequences as no Pretence of Good In∣tention can Justifie; a Vindication is most proper for himself: for if any part of the Charge is too true to be answered, it may be lessen'd by a Protestation, or par∣don'd for the Ingenuity of a Confession. Dr. Sherlock has indeed protested, that he intended not to reflect upon this Government as an Usurpation, but I think this has been shewn to be contrary to the plain Fact. Himself says in his Preface,Pref. p. last. In managing this Argument upon the Principles he has laid down, it is necessary to reason upon Supposition of unjust Ʋsurpations, and Illegal Revolutions of State. And indeed this way of arguing was necessary to justifie his Swearing Allegiance; for if his Principles are true, our Government was an un∣just Usurpation, and the Revolution Illegal; tho he drops
some Expressions contrary to his avowed Principles; he by no means applies them to the Justifying the Revolu∣tion, but only to warrant our Submission to it: if he says any thing which may in consequence prove this Govern∣ment to be no Usurpation; it is plainly contrary to the confess'd Intention of his Book; and did he believe our Revolution justifiable, he ought first to have proved it so, before he admitted the dangerous Supposition that it is not so. This the Law of Argument had required, if he had been of an Opinion consisting with the Honour and Safety of this Government: Not having done it, but on the other side, shewing that the Ground of his Scruple was, that he thought Usurpers were not to be obeyed; and that it was removed, by being taught, that Usurpers are to be obeyed: What does he less than loudly proclaim their Majesties Usurpers? He may, if he please, slight and contemn the Objection; for my part I cannot so far undervalue the Wit of his Vindicator, as not publickly to clear my self from his Charge,page 34. page 35. of being a Malicious Slanderer of the Doctor, guilty of wickedly wresting his Sense, falsi∣fying his Words,page 37. and most Religiously, that is, most irreligiously, bringing Objections against the very Scriptures: because I do not take them in the Doctor's Sense. Were it not for these Groundless Imputations, I should have slighted the Peevish Quarrel at my Stile, and the Title which I chose, as expressive of the Doctor's Characters of Two Kings; one who is supposed to have Legal Right to the Government, and yet none to the Allegiance of the Subject; they not owing any to him, till he regains it by Disturbing the Present Peace and Settlement made by God himself. Another admitted to have Right to the Alle∣giance of the Subject, and yet that this is without Legal Right to the Government; tho he is fully submitted to by the People, and in Conjunction with them, or with their
consent, has Power of making Laws which may change all Legal Rights. Whether another Title might in fewer words have re∣presented this to the mind, is not worth a Contest: and had there been no more than Mirth in his Charges, I might have suffered him to indulge his Spleen at the supposed Laskity or Mercinariness of a Pen,page 38. which perhaps I may say, without Vanity, has been given up to the Cause of my Country; and tho I have no reason to boast of my Gains in its Service, I hope no Misfortunes shall make me repent of those Endeavours which I have dedicated to it: nor durst I betray it, so much, as by my silence, how much soever Interest, or Importunity might have pleaded in Excuse. If others of greater Abilities, and less interrupted Studies, had as often thought themselves under the like Obligation, it might have set aside mine. I must needs say, I am very sorry to have any Contro∣versie with a Gentleman who expresses a Zeal for this Government: but I should be much sorryer, if his writing against me should prove a piece of Service to it. But he who pays Service to that, while he has a Veneration for the Doctor;page 28. Which I have undertaken as a piece of Service to the Govern∣ment, as well as out of Venerati∣on to the Doctor. may think he serves it, when he makes its Honour and Establishment subservient to the Reputation of the Man whom he Venerates. Some would think that he unluckily transposes the Romish use of πατρεία and δουλεία, paying the highest Honour to the inferior Nature. I may well say it is not unusual for Bigottry, or a forbidden Admiration of Persons, to enervate Mens Faculties, corrupt their Judgments, and divert that Noble Ardour, with which they should prosecute the common Enemies, to their Country, and to Mankind. It is certainly very unhappy, for any to be so blinded with Passion or Affection, as not to be able to discern Friends from Foes; to engage against their own Party
and Interest; and to support those who would destroy them, but could not, without their being Accessary to their own Ruine: the Excess of Truth in this Matter, forbids the Satyr of the Application. But surely this Gentleman's Quarrel is very unreasonable against me, who am his Friend, as I am, or would be, to every Body who comes in to this Government upon such Principles, as may make Allegiance more certain than the Chance of War; and less precarious than the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, even as now maintained, would ren∣der it. If that just Indignation, which I have conceived, against those false Colours, with which some would bedawb and spoil the natural Beauties of this Revolution, may at any time have warm'd my thoughts; I hope it has no where transported me to any indecent Expressions: and if my words are Froth for want of weight;page 28. I know not that I have given occasion, for the Compa∣rison to a Wild-Boar Whetting his Tusks,ibid. or a Wild Reflecter upon the established National Church.page 40. Yet this Gentleman shall see that I can be Temperate in every thing concerning my self, and how ill soever he treats me, I am resolved to use him well; because I believe him to be a Friend to our Constitution and Settlement; and that he differs from me only where he misunderstands me. I shall calmly shew, 1. That he for the most part agrees with me, and where he materially differs, he differs from himself as much as from me. 2. That the Doctor materially differs from him and me and that I had reason to except anainst the Doctor's Prin∣ciples, as, by manifest Consequence, 1. Charging the In∣struments in the late Revolution, with Rebellion against that Power which he had taught to be irresistible in all
Cases. And 2. Their Majesties with Ʋsurpation. 3. That by like Consequence, he too plainly invites the late King once more to try his Fortune. And 4. Does not free himself from, at least, bordering upon Blasphemy. 3. That those Expressions, wherein the Doctor agrees with me, are Departures from his Principles; and that the Propositions with which I concluded, and which this Gen∣tleman receives for true Principles, are every one of them contrary to the Doctor's. 4. And tho it may seem needless, after proof of the other Heads, I shall remove all the seemingly material Objections against my Expressions, or that Sense in which I have taken Scripture, or the Doctor's Words. I. This Gentleman confesses,page 19. that the Notions of Passive Obedience and Non-resistance, have been much abused, and strain'd, perhaps, much farther than the Law of God or Man intended 'em. But, says he, take them in a right Sense, and I believe few Christians will oppose 'em; all owning that private Persons are not to resist Authority, or disturb the State they live in: and that when no notable Inconvenience follows, any Mischief, is much better than War. But more fully, both Law and Gospel, says he,page 23. condemn Resistance of our Lawful Superiors, but neither, that I know, give any direction how to behave them∣selves, supposing all overturn'd, the Laws vacated, the Govern∣ment changed, and in respect of what it was before, entirely dissolved, not being willing to suppose any such things should happen, which if they do, by their not taking particular care of those cases, they seem to leave a Man to the direction of common Prudence, and Self-preservation. Herein he effectually justifies the Revolution upon the late King's vacating the Laws, &c. and I make no other Ex∣ception to his Notion, than that it too much Favours a Common-wealth Principle: whereas I think I have suffici∣ently
shewn how the Law preserves the Monarchy, notwithstanding the Dissolution of the Contract,Vid. Fun∣damental Constituti∣on of the English Government. or other Obligation between the Prince and People. But yet he will have it, that the Law does not deny such Prince his Right to the Crown,page. 34. even after the Law, which he owns to have given it him, was vacated. Nay, he will have it to remain, notwith∣standing what he calls the Acquists and Conse∣quences of a just War:page 31. but having admonish'd the Doctor of the want of Policy in such Insi∣nuations,Two Kings, p. 38. I shall leave this Gentleman to think better of it. And I believe the World will think, that he had no reason to except against my Notions, when he not only receives my Scheme of Government, as sup∣posing it almost in every Line to be the Doctor's; but,page 40. page 35. with me, owns that a Prince may Usurp upon his Subjects, and that the late King was such an Usurper:Tyranny or Ʋsur∣pation upon Sub∣jects. Two Kings. p. 20. Speaking of times, When the Law has its due course, and the Government not as good as totally overturned, He says, If things be once in that condition, and the Prince is [an Ʋsurper on that part of Power which is distinct from him,] and wherewith the Law, which the Doctor tells us, is the measure of our Obedience, never intrusted him; In this case [which was plainly ours] as not concerning him, he does not meddle. And then he effectually sets aside all the Doctor's pains to bring the 13th to the Romans to require Submission to Usurpation; for grafting upon my Argument, If, says he,page 36. Natural Power be Force, and Moral Power Law, the King de Facto is possessed of both, and there is no need of the Distinction; but surely there is to shew, that the Doctor mistakes the Text.
He as effectually sets aside the use the Doctor has of the Text, to make Tyrants irresistible; for upon the Do∣ctor's asserting that Sovereign Princes are not to be resisted, which he all along applies to England, where he owns that the Law has set Bounds to the Sovereign Power of the Prince; Indeed, says our Author,page 35. where a Prince has the absolute Sovereignty, and entire Authority, few, I suppose, will deny him to be in the right; since where such Authority is, the Authoritative Acts thereof are Law. But this Gentleman himself holds this not to be the case of an English King; for he owns he may be said to usurp upon part of the Power with which the Law never trusted him. And will have it,page 34. that the Doctor has shewn beyond Contradiction, that he was ever far from intending to give away the Liberty of an English-man, parti∣cularly by the passage, That the Prince cannot make or re∣peal a Law, without the consent of the People. It seems, to our comfort, the Doctor was all this while laboring the case of a French, not of an English King; but it may appear, That he is far from receiving this Gentleman's Sense of Sovereignty, and of Usurpa∣tion upon part of it: nor will he with his Vindi∣cator, say, that the Supream Power of this Na∣tion, is the King and Parliament,pag. 24, 25. or as he soon explains it, King, Lords and Commons: according to this, if Gods Authority, tho in a lower Degree, is in Lords and Commons; and if, as the Doctor has it,pag. 20. Every one who exerciseth Supream Power, is from God, and his Person is Irresistible, then the Persons of Lords and Commons are Irresistible. II. That the Doctor does materially differ from him and me, and that I had reason to charge him as I did, is very evident, even from this Book which this Gentleman under∣takes to defend; but had it not appear'd plainly here, I think it
were very allowable for me to prove it out of his Case of Resistance,page 28. Taking to task not only the Do∣ctor's present book but those already past. where he purposely treats of the Case of Tyranny; as he here does of a supposed Usurpation: And this, surely, I am very well warranted to do, after the Doctor had said, Pref. p. ante pen.I must add one thing more, That I have re∣nounced no Principle that ever I taught, ex∣cepting one in the Case of Resistance, which is the only mate∣rial Passage I have any reason to retract in that Book. 1. But even in the last Book he holds, contrary to his Vindi∣cator,page 48. Vid. page 45. A great Preju∣dice rather than an Objection. page 48. and that in express terms, That the Obli∣gations of Duty and Conscience, are not only Prejudices, but Objections against our late Re∣volution: His words are these, King James, more, I hope, by following ill Counsels, than by his own Inclination, had effectually removed all Prejudices and Objections against such a Revolution, [excepting the Obligation of Duty and Con∣science.] Vid. p. 30.These Obligations being excepted, I appeal to this Gentleman, whether he can, agreeably to the Doctor, say, That King James did either Forego or Forfeit his Right. Nay, whereas the Gentleman owns the Law, requiring Allegeance to the late King, vacated before the Settle∣ment; let him see whether the Doctor does not charge the Instruments in the Revolution with Perjury: We must not,page 22. says he, contrary to our Sworn Duty and Allegiance, promote such Revolutions. page 30.And elsewhere says, by Swearing to the Heirs, and Legal or Lawful Successors, we do not Swear to own or submit to any Prince, who is not the Legal Heir; but we Swear, not to make it our act; not to set up any Prince, who is not the right Heir.
Let this Gentleman, if he pleases, say I am a Malicious Slanderer of the Doctor, in saying, that herein he con∣demns all those as guilty of willful Perjury, who had been Subjects to the late King, and were Instruments in setting up This. That they did not adhere to the Strictest Prin∣ciples of Loyalty and Obedience,page 16. is a Censure not worth the mentioning after this: But according to those Principles, the Doctor says, Men are to have no hand in such Revolutions, or to oppose them as far as they can; and not to be hasty and forward in their Compliances. This Genleman admits, that the Scripture provides not for the Irresistibility of any Prince, who has not the abso∣lute Sovereignty, and such entire Authority as makes Laws, which he denies to belong to the King of England.True Vin. pag. 24, 25 page 30. page 43. But the Doctor says, of such a Sovereign Prince, as he supposes ours to be, that he is not to be re∣sisted by Force, and that his Subjects must reverence God's Authority in him, and submit to him with∣out Resistance, though they are ill used. 2. This Gentleman agrees our present Settlement to be no Ʋsurpation; that the late King was the Ʋsurper upon his Subjects;page 35. and that they justly chose a Delive∣rance; but the Doctor, as I shall shew more parti∣cularly than I have already observed, says, that, by the unforc'd Consequence of which, their Majesties must be Ʋsurpers. And therefore, whereas I have maintained by Law, that their Majesties are Rightful King and Queen, and came by their Power by due means; I here take up the Vin∣dicator's Challenge, and shall shew where the Doctor affirms what is contrary to this: and then I hope,p. 29. tho this Gentleman will have it, that he does not say in terms or Consequence, that their Majesties are Ʋsurpers; all un∣byassed Men, to whom only I appeal, will say, that I de∣serve not the name of a Malicious Slanderer.
Tho this Gentleman seems disposed to dispute every thing which I shall affirm of the Doctor, he will not, I dare say, deny that the Doctor admits the late King once to have been our Lawful and Rightful Governour; and must allow that he was so declared in the Oath of Alle∣giance taken to him. Wherefore, 1. If neither the Subjects, nor any Foreign Prince, could upon the account of any Injuries he did the Subjects, contribute towards the Revolution, according to the Doctor, without Sin; but the Revolution was Gods Pre∣rogative and Act; and yet Gods Interposition did not take away the Right. 2. If the late King could not Lose or Forfeit it. 3. Or if he could, yet did not. If any one of these Cases are received by the Doctor, upon the Subject of our Debate, much more if all of them are, I think it will not be denied, but that in plain Con∣sequence, of what the Doctor says, their Majesties cannot but be Ʋsurpers. That the Doctor allows the Subjects in no case to con∣tribute to such a Revolution, has appeared already: and if he makes Revolutions so much Gods Prerogative, that no Man whatever can, without Sin, act before God has de∣clared himself by the Event; then he condemns the Foreign Prince, who Delivers a People, as well as them who Sue for the Deliverance.page 43. But he says, that the Revo∣lutions of Government are Gods Prerogative, the changing of Government he keeps in his own hand: And tho he speaks it there, in reference to the Subjects Duty, he before had in all cases confin'd the Right of bringing them about to Gods Providence; which he makes the sole Foundation of Government.page 24. I cannot, says he, see where to fix the Foundation of Government, but in the Providence of God. And tho he speaks of several ways, whereby God uses to change or fix Governments, he excepts against the effect of Choice, Conquest, Sub∣mission,
Ʋsurpation, Continuance of it,page 13. and even Hereditary Right it self; and imputes the Change solely to the Authority of God, made known by the Events of Providence; and yet makes that Authority not to give a Right: for that Providence, which, with him, is the sole Foundation of Government, he says,page 56. alters no legal Right; but whoever is set up by Providence, while a Right remains unaltered in another Prince, must, one would think, needs be an Ʋsurper.page 33. And he will not allow, that any Ambitious Prince can grasp at a Crown, or invade his Neighbour, without a Dose of Enthusiasm. For, says he, if the Kingdoms of the World be disposed by God, and no Art or Power can place any Prince on the Throne, but by Gods appointment; unless they can flatter themselves, that God has ordained them to be Kings, it will check their Ambitious Attempts, which God can so easily defeat. To which we may add what he says in the next Page; Tho Kingdoms are disposed by God,page 34. yet Princes may be advanced, to Gods Authority by his Gift, by no Honester Means than Thieves take a Purse, or break open my House, and take my Money or Goods. What Prince would thank the Doctor, for allowing him God's Autho∣rity upon these Terms? But if God alone, without any consent of the People, disposes of the Kingdom, and such disposition cannot alter the Right, without their consent, nor indeed with, as the Doctor argues, making no such Submission, in concurrence with Providence, to alter the Right; then it seems the Invading Prince does, and must, continue an Usurper, till he gains a Submission from the Dispossessed Prince: Which he says,p. 9. Indeed may be thought necessary to trans∣fer a Legal Right. But he who wants any thing necessary to have a Legal Right to a Crown transferred to him, is certainly an Usurper. Nay, the Doctor will have that Prince, who has not obtained his necessary Translation
of Legal Right, to continue an Usurper, even after the Death of the Dispossessed Prince; for his words are these: page 24.An Ʋsurper by long Continuance, may outlive those who formerly wore the Crown; but does it give Right to him who has none, that he Outlives those who had the Right? For tho no body else has any Right to the Crown, how does this make him a Rightful King, who has no Right? 2. The late King could not upon the Doctor's Principles, Lose or Forfeit that Right which he once had. This appears not only from his urging the Necessity of the Prince his Submission, to transfer that Right which he once had; but from the Nature of that Authority which he is by him supposed to have had, and the way by which he came to it: For if it be Gods Authority, and of his immediate Gift, then indeed he cannot Forfeit, or Lose it to Men: And since God himself, by taking it away, does not alter his Right;page 26. the Right is, and ever must be the same, till God, by a Miracle, declares his Will,page 200. that it should be altered: And if this be a Doubt upon his late Case of Allegiance, the Case of Resistance says, the Sovereign Power is inseparable from his Person. 3. If the late King might have Lost or Forfeited his Authority; yet it is evident, that according to the Doctor, he did not. I will own to the Vindicator, that the Doctor no where says, that a Prince may not Forfeit or Forego his Right; but I think the plain Consequence of what he holds, is, that the Prince cannot Forfeit it: Indeed he admits he may Forego it, but that is, by a Sub∣mission not yet made. As I before observed, in shewing, that he condemned the Revolution; he makes Conscience and Duty Exceptions to it, and that King James did not remove those Exceptions: according to which, and the whole drift of his Book, Conscience obliges Men still to
pay him all that Duty which they can in Consistency with Self-preservation. King James being named by himself, in reference to the Revolution, I think it is no Force, upon his meaning, to say, he is the dispossessed Prince, whose Legal Right he will have not to be alter'd; and that what∣ever he makes to be due to a dispossessed Prince, who has Legal Right, he makes due to King James: Let the World judge of the Consequences of the following Parti∣culars. 1. He makes it our Duty to take care, that we pray for him who is in Possession, under the Name and Title of King; in such Terms,page 17. as not to Pray against the Dispossessed Prince. 2. He says, we must not deny the Disposs'd Prince his Just Right: but the Possession, it seems,page 26. is not in ur Hands: and, one would think, that since he so boldly Insinuates the other's Right, he would have their Majesties Resign. 3. That he may Fight to Regain the Possession. 4. That it is Doubtful, whether in such case he may not Commissionate his Old Subjects to Fight for him; For, says the Doctor,page 31. I am not Lawyer enough to decide, whether a Commission granted by a King out of Possession, be a Legal Commission. But as I before shewed, if it were not Legal in Form, it would, accor∣ding to him, have the Authority of Sovereign Power; and all the Support and Comfort which he leaves the deserted Prince in Possession, in such case, is, that no Law, that the Doctor knows, requires all Subjects to receive Commissions, either from the other, or from him.page 31. 5. As he no where says, what implies in the least, that the Subject may assist the King in Possession, when the other Fights against him; He rather shews it to be his Opinion, that the Subjects may not Fight on the side of the Possession,page 17. while the Dispessessed Prince has also such a Formidable Power, as makes the Event very
Doubtful. For in such cases he will have the Degree of Submission to This to be abated: And his Answer to the Objection,page 26. That it is unjust for Subjects to pay Allegiance, while another has legal right and claim to the Throne, Shews, that he allows them to pay Allegiance, only while the other don't and can't Govern, for want of Power. 6. That they who are under no Obligation to the Prince in Possession, are not forbid to assist the Dispossessed Prince to recover his legal right. Nay, by direct Consequence, if his be the Cause of Right and Justice, they are oblig'd to assist him, as they have Opportunity; and no doubt this was Publish'd to strengthen the Confederacy against France. What will Foreign Princes think, if a Divine of our Church, who takes the Oaths to their Majesties, shall be known to have Written thus? No doubt but the French King will take care to have his Book Translated into their Language. I hope henceforward this Vindicator will not be so free in his Censures,page 34. and will own the Disloyal Con∣sequences in the Doctors Book are the Doctor's own, not of my making: However, I think, this may shew, That I was far from being a Malicious Slanderer, when out of Service to the Government, I exposed those Conse∣quences. 3. And, perhaps, the Gentleman will not be altoge∣ther so sure,page 30. That there is little Ground for af∣firming, that the Doctor too plainly invites the late King once more to try his Fortune. 4. The Vindicator says of me, Let him prove the Absurdity, and Blasphemy, of those Principles, on which the Doctor proceeds in his Book, and he shall quickly have either a Confession, or an Answer. He that can∣not discern the Proofs of the Absurdity, of Notions which himself Rejects, shall never engage me upon that
Head. As for Blasphemy, I had no where expressly charged it,page 4. but qualified it with a perhaps; and the full exposal of that, I had referred to the Divine. But when I came to touch upon what looks that way,page 24. I thought I was very gentle; when I said, I do not well know by what Term to call it, but shall fairly represent it. But this Gentleman makes me a very Civil return for my Moderation herein: tho I forbear to charge the Doctor with Blasphemy, he charges me with denying the Authority of the Scriptures, which I am sure I never did. His words are, He blames the Doctor for affirming the Scripture never speaks of the bare Permission of Events,pag. 36, 37. but represents God, as the Author of all the Good and Evil which happens to Societies and Persons. Which, says he, I ex∣pected he'd have answered, by instancing where it did: But instead of that, he wisely Reasons against Matter of Fact, and most Religiously brings Objections against the very Scri∣ptures, the Authority of which, at least, being, I hope, from God, we may take the Truth of it for granted, and wave any farther answer; especially when the Robber's Case has been already considered. I know not that I have any where spoken so doubtfully of the Authority of Scriptures, as this Gentleman, in but hoping, that they are from God: For I believe that they are: and surely Faith has an higher Degree of Assurance than Hope. But, as in many other Particulars, all the Force which lyes in this Gentleman's Objection against me, is by changing a Word for the Doctor and me, and putting in represents, in∣stead of makes. If the Scriptures, as the Doctor says, makes God the Author of all Evil which happens in a City; tho it might seem difficult to the Understanding, Faith must yield to the Authority; but if it only represents God as the Author; then it does not follow, that we must believe him to be the Author: But Reason would carry us from
the Literal Sense, to some other, fully suitable to that Idea which we have of a Being Infinite in all Perfections. But unless this Gentleman believes Transubstantion, I hope he will not say, that I disbelieve the Scripture, be∣cause I receive not the Literal Meaning in some places; as where it represents God with Passions, nay, Body Humane. If I argue against Matter of Fact in this, I am sure he must against Common Sense; if he will in no case allow the Scri∣ptures to be taken in any other than a strict literal Meaning: And the Doctor himself argued against Fact, as much as I do, when he said of Usurping Rebels,Case of Ref. page 128. such Men get Power into their Hands by Gods Permission, not by Gods Ordinance. p. 34.He waves, he says, any farther Answer; when the Robber's Case has been already considered. My Objections upon the Supposition of Gods giving the Crown authori∣tatively to an Usurper, supposed to be an Usurper, not∣withstanding such Gift; would not be answered, if he could shew, upon the Doctor's Principles, that God may be said to Authorize Usurpations, but not Robberies. But what says this Gentleman to the Objection from the Parallel?True Vind. page 25. the most he says is, you may turn to the Doctor's Book, and see it answered before it was made;Two Kings page 25. but he does not take notice of the meer Evasion shewn to lye in the pretended Answer? This Gentleman thinks the Substance of the Answer to lye in this; There is pure Force for the Destruction of Civil Order, without any Agreement. By his mentioning Civil Order, one would think, that instead of speaking of Robberies, he speaks of Usurpations, without any Agreement: Is not the want of Agreement of the Party usurp'd upon, equally supposed? How then does this difference the case? Till this Gentleman shews a more material difference, it will not be said, that the Doctor has taught what obviates my Objection. He would have it, that I, in saying that Publick Good may require the Establishment of one who had Usurp'd, yield a material difference between his case and a Robber's: But,
1. If Publick Good required this at the beginning, and the proper Judges of the Publick Good declared so; he whom the Doctor supposes to be an Usurper, never was one. 2. From the time of such Declaration, he would cease to be an Usurper, if he were one before. 3. If he assumed the Government without this, ac∣cording to the Doctor, he might have done it by as ill means as a Robber robs my House: wherefore what I said there, does not in the least weaken the Parallel. And he who says,page 34. as the Doctor does expresly, That a Prince may be advanced to a Throne, by no Honester Means, than Thieves take my Purse, or break open my House, and take my Money and Goods; and yet will allow of no distinction, in reference to a Man's mounting the Throne,page 12. between what God permits, and what he does; as I conceive, charges God as foolishly, as if he should say, God is Accessary to Robberies. And let the Doctor, if he pleases, clear himself. It may already, pretty well appear,Vid. True Vind. p 37. that I did not Transcribe out of the Doctor, when I was arguing against him; and justifying God Almighty, by shewing, that a Literal Sense was no more to be put upon those Texts, which would make God the Author of Usurpations; than a like Text, which, if taken Literally, as I am perswaded it ought not, would make him to have appointed those very Bounds which are gotten by Violence and Injustice. III. But this Gentleman has a Passage, which would bring the Doctor and me together more than I am aware of. He comes, says he, at last,page 40. after he Fancies he has thrown down the Doctor's Scheme of Government, and his own too, for he has prov'd 'em the same, to erect another Scheme, almost every Line whereof, is the same with
the Doctor's,True Vind. page 40. who, I suppose, would not refuse to Sub∣scribe to more than one, in all those other Particulars. page 17.This Gentleman might have observed, that I had asserted, and endeavoured to prove, that if the Doctor would, in all cases, yield, as entire Obedience to the King of Providence, as he did to the Legal King; he had learn'd this from Principles directly contrary to the Do∣ctrine of Passive Obedience and Non-resistance. page 28.I had shewn farther, that if the Doctor had pursued, as he ought, those true Principles which he sometimes falls upon unawares; he would have given the World more Satisfaction of his Sincerity. The Vindicator being resolved to write against me, as it should seem before he had read all my Book, un∣dertakes to maintain against me from the Doctor's Book,page 29. and what is there asserted either in express terms or fair consequences, That their present Majesties, William and Mary, are rightful King and Queen of these Realms, and came by their power by due means;page 4. which I say is im∣possible to be proved upon the Doctor's Grounds. But when I came to shew where the Doctor, departing from his Grounds, lets fall Expressions, which, if the Con∣sequences of them were duely pursued, would fully justifie Their Majesties and the Revolution; This Gen∣tleman falls into a Passion, and says, I surreptitiously prevented him:page 38. that is, I prevented his Answer, when he wanted but three Pages to finish; and that surely was great pity. But if the Doctor's Grounds or the Principles which he lays down, are contrary to Their Majesties Right; if the Expressions which he uses, contrary to his Prin∣ciples, are never applied to justifie their Right, but barely for the Justification of himself and other Subjects, in Swearing and paying Allegiance; if, farther, the de∣sign of his whole Book appears to be contrary to those Expressions; then I think, till this Gentleman can prevail
upon the Doctor to renounce those Principles which so long kept him from swearing Allegiance, and still with∣hold him from justifying the Government; he cannot say that he has justified his Swearing, upon such Principles as prove the Right, as well as Possession of the Crown, to be in Their Majesties. Wherefore I must still call upon him, as he values the interest of the Protestant Religion, to which Their Majesties are the greatest support; as he values the Obligation for that great indulgence and benignity which has been shewn him; as he values the Liberties of the English Nation, which suffer none to halt between two Opinions in this matter, (especially since he yields, that many things have been said to justifie the legality of the late Revolution,page 2. which may make Men more modest in the point) to read those Books, which treat of it, with that judgment which he applies to other things; and then I doubt not but he will pub∣lish such a Recantation, as shall make full amends for the mischief which his Book may do, with unwary and un∣stable Minds. When the Doctor has considered better, then I hope, he may receive and illustrate the Propositions which I had rais'd, with the Approbation of the Vindicator: but at present, if I may judge by the Doctor's Books, he differs widely from them. Two Kings. The Doctor. 1. That Allegiance is a le∣gal Bond or Tye, importing Active as well as Passive Obe∣dience, to legal Authority. 1. Allegiance is due, not for the sake of Legal Right, not to bare Legal Right; Case of Alleg. p. 2. Subjection, as appears from St. Paul, signi∣fies Non resistance. Case of Resist. p. 147. Non-resistance is as perfect Subjection, as
can or ought to be paid to So∣vereign Princes, ib. p. 44.
2. He to whom Allegiance is not due, is not legal King, nor has right so to be; or ever can be, without a new sub∣mission of the People either of free Choice or by Constraint: unless it be by the visible de∣signation and appointment of God Almighty. 2. He who has a Legal Right to the Crown, but has it not, ought by the Laws of the Land to be King, but is not: But he who is actually Setled in the Administration of the regal Power is King, and has Gods Authority tho he have not a Legal Right: p. 14. when such case happens we must pay Allegiance to him who has not the Legal Right, p. 15. 3. No Divine Law, or just inference from thence, sets aside Humane Constitutions, suitable to Christianity, and beneficial to Civil Societies. 3. Our Constitution sets aside the right of the late King; and since the Doctor allows that God has turned him out; he must provide a Divine Law for his Right, or none remains. But if it be gone, then Gods Providence with the Submission of the People have transferred the Legal right, without the Sub∣mission of the Prince, which the Doctor denies, vid. sup. 4. No Divine Interposition or Act of God, which is not so visible, as may satisfie all Men, before the success, what is the Will of God; can be said Authoritatively to alter,
or diminish Rights to Crowns, or the Liberties, or Properties of Subjects. 4. God, when he sees fit, sets up Kings without regard to Legal Right, or Humane Laws; and Kings, thus set up, are invested with Gods Au∣thority, p. 2, 3. This alters
not legal right, p. 26. and yet it is Gods Act. It makes no dif∣ference in this case, to distin∣guish between what God per∣mits, and what he does, p. 12. Whereby, tho he leave the dispossessed Prince a Right, notwithstanding that the Law had altered it; he takes away the Interest of the Sub∣ject, not only in relation to the declaring, upon a Va∣cancy, what Governour they will submit to; but gives the Prince, that thus comes in, a Power over that Law which settles their Properties: espe∣spially if we take the Expla∣nation from his Case of Re∣sistance; he being invested with a Power Independent on Laws.Vid. inf. of the Right of Election within a Family. Vid. Case of Resist. p. 197. 5. Humane Constitutions may be vertually repealed or suspended, when they cease to answer the main end or Law, the good of the respective So∣cieties. 5. If Princes abuse their Power, God will punish them for it, and deliver their oppressed Subjects, p. 38. But they must submit without resistance, tho they are ill used, p. 43. I cite this upon Supposition, that the Constitution allows of re∣sistance in no case. And to this may be applied, what the Doctor says of the Legal
Right still remaining with the Dispossessed Prince.
6. They who contributed to∣wards our present Settlement, did what had been justifiable, tho they had fail'd of Success. 6. I have at large shewn, how contrary this is to the Doctor. p. 10, 12. 7. Their Majesties are our sole, lawful and rightful King and Queen, according not only to the Supream Law, the pu∣blick Good, but to the positive Laws and Constitutions of this Government, known and de∣clared, as there has been occa∣sion, in all Ages, from the first Foundation of this limited Monarchy. 7. When the Doctor comes to subscribe to this, I dare say, he will burn his Case of Allegiance. 8. They no more consult the Honour and Interest of their Majesties, than the Common Safety; who now advance the old decanted Doctrine of Non-resistance and Passive Obedi∣ence, to a Power exercised without regard to legal right, or Humane Laws. 8. When the Doctor is brought to subscribe to this, perhaps he will burn his Case of Resistance: which some Body has done him the kindness to Abridge, and pu∣blish as his Defence, Vid. The Case of Allegiance Defended, with a more particular respect to the Doctrine of Non-re∣sistance and Passive Obedience. IV. Now we enter into a large Field, where either Weeds, or weighty Ears of Corn, are very plentiful; and it is likely to be thought, that either this Gentleman's Understanding, or mine, is Fruitful of Mistakes; mine in using so many Expressions justly exceptionable; or his, in excepting without just Ground.
But perhaps, that way among the Wits, call'd Banter, with which some of Luxuriant Fancies are very enter∣taining, may be advanced to the press; and then one may be thought, not to understand the New Laws, among the Beaux Esprits, who will take to himself, what has no determinate meaning. And indeed in many places, where he seems to play upon me, he really falls soul upon the Doctor. I had observed,Vid. True Vind. page 31. Vid. Right unal∣tered. Vid. Two Kings, page 7, 8, 9. that the Doctor makes no∣thing of Gods Authority, because he will have it, that tho a Prince is placed and settled in the Throne by God himself; yet he who had the Right before that Settlement, may still Fight for it: Upon which I had raised these Que∣stions. 1. Does not the Dispossess'd Prince, by so doing, deny God's Authority? 2. Does not God Warrant him that is in Possession to defend his right? Shall it be said, agree∣ably to the Doctor himself, that God designed to take it away again, till by restoring the Power to the other, he has given him the Stamp, or Sign of his Authority. Observe his general Answer. All these Objections, says he,page. 31. bear as full against a King de Facto, and so against our Laws, as the Doctors Argument, who, as has been proved, must have either God's Authority, or none at all. He might have taken Notice that the Objection is, that, tho the King de Facto has God's Authority, he al∣lows him, with whom he supposes the Right to be, to fight against that Authority. But is it against our Law, or against the King de Facto, that he should be Warranted to defend his Posses∣sion; And that it shall not be thought, that God per∣mits the other to fight for the Possession? Whereby it appears, that the Doctor's asserion to use his Vindicators
Words, Bears full against a King de Facto, and so against our Laws. The same will appear from the particular Answers to the Questions. 1. To the First, he says, The Authority may relate to the Subjects not to him: Himself takes in the Consideration of the Law, which he agrees to be on the side of the King in Possession;page 14. Vid. sup. p. 7. p. 8. 32. whereas the Doctor says, the King out of Possession ought by the Laws of the Land to be King: But if the Law, and God s Authority, be on the side of the Possessor, has not he the right, and no other? I am sure this Gentleman, if he keep to his Foundation, holds that he has: He admits that the other is, become a private Person; yet indeed he will have it, that he may be called King on the account of right. If he says of right,page. 35. remaining with him; then I am sure the Two Kings of Branford are not re∣duced to One. Vid. sup. p. 15, 16.But the Doctor, as I have already shewn, not only affirms a right to continue, but some Consequences of that right which are contrary to our Law. page 31.2. To my Second Question, this Gentleman says, The regnant Prince's Defence of what by God's Permission, and Providence, he enjoys, and lawfulness of the same, may depend very much on the justness of the War in the begining. To come to particulars, all the World grants the then Prince, his present Majestie's Cause was Just, and 'tis as clear, that the Acquists and Consequences of a lawful War may be lawfully defended. Here he Fights not only against his admired Friend, the Doctor, but against himself, and against the Sense of Two Parliaments,page 52. who as the Doctor himself owns, have the Cognizance of this matter. But,
1. He might have met with an Objection to this in the Author of Vindicioe Juris Regii, or Elementa Poli∣tica; for want of the Declaration of War. 2. The Doctor either thought not of this Acquist, or Conquest, or else did not agree the right of it; contending for a right in another, though his Vindicator says, all the World agree His present Majestie's Cause was Just. 3. Himself justifies the Revolution and Setle∣ment upon a truer Principle,page 7, 8. as has appeared above. 4. The Act of Parliament setling the Crown,Vid. the Act 1 W. M. for re∣viving of Acti∣ons and Process. and more especially that which pro∣vided that Indictments, during the Vacancy, should run Contra pacem Regni (both which Laws, among others, were by this Parlia∣ment declared to have had full Parliamentary Authori∣ty) shew that the Crown was not acquired by Con∣quest, but by the voluntary Submission of a free People. 3. To my Third, he says, There is no question but God designs to take away his Gift when he actually does it. Which Answer would justifie all prosperous Rebellions. What I say further, upon the Doctors allowing, that the Dispossess'd Prince may fight against one to whom God has given his Crown, I think may be left to shift for its self, being answered at the same rate. But it concerns me to free my self from the charge of so foul an Abuse put upon the Doctor, as never was Fowler, where he represents me saying,True Vind. page 33. that the Doctor Interprets that part of the Canon, If any Man affirm, that Jaddus, having Sworn Allegiance to Darius, might have borne Arms against him, he doth greatly Err; in this manner, the meaning is no more than this, that he having Sworn Allegiance to Darius, could not have made a voluntary Dedition of himself to Darius.
But the best of it is, there is no one Observation of his, which may seem to deserve an answer, wherein he takes my words as they lye: And it would be strange, if I, having tax'd the Doctor with leaving out those words, and compared it to the Omission of a part of Bracton, which explained Bracton's meaning, contrary to what the Doctor render'd it; should say, that the Doctor puts an Interpre∣tation upon words, of which I say he gives no account at all. But the Doctor had affirmed, that the Canon takes no notice,Case of Alleg. page 8. that Jaddus, having Sworn to Darius, could not submit or Swear to any other Prince while Darius lived. And instead of explaining the whole Canon, he undertook to explain what Jaddus meant, when he said he could not Swear to Alexander, while Darius lived, because of his Oath to Darius. Upon this he had put a strein'd Sense, that he could not Swear till he should be forced to it; but since he had been bound to take notice of that part of the Canon, which I observ'd; it was not improper to represent that way, in which he would explain Jadus his meaning, as an Art to turn off the Observation of that part of the Canon: for every Body must confess what he says of a voluntary Dedition, would be very Foreign to that part of the Canon which says, If any Man affirm,Canon 30. that Jaddus, having Sworn Allegiance to Darius, might have lawfully borne Arms against Darius, he doth greatly err. page 35.In another place this Gentleman accuses me of a Wicked, disingenuous, and silly Wresting the Do∣ctor's Sense, and Falsifying his Words, and turning them quite backwards, and this he says, one shall often meet with. The Instance which he gives, is, that I Charge the Doctor with saying, that Scripture and Reason require our n t resisting a King, when he Subverts the Laws and Liberties, and legal established Religion of the Kingdom, by illegal Methods. Whereas, says the Vindicator, he says almost quite contrary, that we are not bound to defend him. It seems he
admits, that where Assistance is not a Duty, Resistance may be Lawful: But I am sure the Doctor says no such thing, but the contrary. This Gentleman confesses he says, That a Sovereign Prince must not be resisted; but he will have that not meant of an English King, but such a Prince as has the Absolute Sovereignty, and entire Authority,page 35. the authoritative Acts whereof are Law. It seems, when Dr. Sherlock was Preaching up Non-resistance, as the Duty of his Hearers, he thought himself in France or Turky, not in England; where this Gentle∣man, besides what I before observed, says, The Prince is only invested with the Executive Power,True Vind. p. 8. & 35 and part of the Legislative. In relation to the Church, I, who never thought Church∣men the Church, must expect an heavy Charge; yet let him take my own words, and make the most of them. He will have it, that I make the Members of the Church of England the fewest of them,pag. 29, 30. who contri∣buted towards this Revolution: But this he does, by applying to all the Church-men, and their Disciples, who invited our Deliverer, and closed with the Deliverance, what I say of some of our Church-men, and many of their most Zealous Disciples:Two Kings page 4. and this after I had done right to the Body of the English Clergy. And with the like Justice he had involved the whole Church of England in what I spoke,True Vind. page 29. of the Behaviour of the Warm Men of our Clergy, who, when time served, had taught that the Kings most illegal Acts had the Authority of Sovereign Power: and whether they who had taught this, and yet denied to read the Late Kings Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, did not as effectually deny that Power, which once they taught, to be Gods Ordinance, as the Primitive Christians did that of Julian, let others judge.
All my 37th. Page, he says, is spent in wild Re∣flections upon the established national Church,page 40. as if they pretended Infallibility, and that I declare, I am for tugging with them, till they are subdued upon a Struggle; the same way, He supposes, that some of my Temper struggled with the Bishops in the last Age, when they not only pulled their Gowns from their Ears, but their Heads from their Bodies: In which I am much beholden to him for his Charity; and his seeming Inclination to do the like by me. But it is to be considered, 1. That I spoke not of the Church of England, but only of Clergy-men. 2. Such of them as might think themselves to be ex∣empted from such Settlements as bound the Laity: And that while such keep up an Empire within an Empire,page 37. the Changes of Civil Government will not bind them, till they are subdued upon the Struggle, and by Providence con∣demned to Affairs truly Spiritual; which I think would do the World and them no hurt. 3. I no where said, that even these Men pretend to In∣fallibility, but to Gods Authority, if not to that; and with this no doubt but they would carry on their work as well. page 31.He makes pleasant work about Right and Fact; he says, the Doctor makes Fact, Fact, and all along distinguishes Possession from Legal Right, as all People,page 34. he says, acknowledges it may be distinguished. That he sets aside the Consideration of Law, as to Right, not Fact; but he will have it, that I am very un∣civil,page 34. in blaming the Doctor for confounding what he had made a plain case, by saying, The Law does not deny the others Right to the Crown: And, says he, I am strangely mistaken if it does,page 35. when it supposes it, nay grants it, and is the very Foundation of the Law: And that it lay upon me to answer the Doctor's Instance in the three Henries. To all which I say, 1. That a Man of less Subtilty than the Doctor, might make Fact, Fact, and distinguish it from Right.
2. It is very strange, that the Law should be set aside, in relation to Right, and that by the Doctor, who says, to what particular Prince we must pay our Allegiance,page 54. we must learn frrom the Law of the Land: and tho this is not suitable to the Scheme he lays down; yet in the nature of the thing, it seems a great Impropriety to say, the Law is a Proof of the Fact, not of Right. 3. Tho Law and Fact may well be distinguished, and should the Statute 11 H. 7. suppose that there may be such a Distinction, and that Allegiance may be due by that, where there is Fact without Right; that warrants not the Doctor's going only upon Fact where there is a Right. 4. The Instances of the three Henries,H 6. Is in the Register of Writs called King de Facto & non de Jure, in Acts of Parliament an Ʋsurper. 1 E. 4. c. 1. 17. E. 4. c. 6. if they were to the Purpose, are on my Side; since though they were not next in the Line, and were call'd Kings only in Fact, that is, Usurpers, when the contrary Party prevail'd; yet they were all their Times lookt upon as legal and rightful Kings, and that ac∣cording to the Constitution of the Government: and never certainly was there any Age, before this, in which the Sub∣jects had the Insolence and Folly, to call in question the Right of those to whom they swear Allegiance. 5. But if either the Doctor, or the Vindicator had read and considered what has been said in this Controversie, they might have found, that the Fact in relation to the three Henries, is nothing to the Purpose; for they want∣ed not, even that which the Doctor makes essential to transferring the Right; having had the Submission of the next in the Line. Henry the Fourth came in upon the Parlia∣mentary Deposal of R. II. and his actual Submission to it.Fund. Const. cap. 8. f. 81. Ib. cap. 9. f. 92. Rot. Parl. 8 H. 4. n. 60. Henry the Fifth and Sixth came in under a Settlement in Parliament, af∣ter that Submission. Richard Duke of York, of the elder Line, Father to Fdward IV. submitted to this
in the time of H. VI. and E. IV. claim'd not the Crown, as having a Right Prior to Henry VI. but as forfeited to him for the others not observing the Act of Settlement,Fund. Const. cap. 7. f. 58. or as he call d it, the Covenant established in Parliament. Two Kings.The Vindicator excepts against my Saying that the Constitution of this Monarchy is hereditary as to a Family, elective as to Persons; and says, it has been always hereditary to Persons, where some notable Defect has not intervened, or Power conquered Right. All that he brings to back his Assertion, is, that Competitors to the Crown have pleaded the next Proximity of Blood. But if Proximity has been pleaded, and over-ruled by Conventions or Parliaments, which the Doctor admits to have Cognizance of the Plea; then the Case is stronger against him, by reason of the Plea, than if it had never been made. Vid. Case of Res. p. 2.But that both he and the Doctor may be mo∣dest in this Matter; I shall mention a few Heads which he may see prov'd at large. Fund. Const. of the English Go∣vernment. cap. 8. f. 73.1. The Form of Prayer, used at the Coro∣nation of Saxon Kings, and the Council at Calcuth, Anno. 789. shew the Peoples Right of Electing, at least within a Family. Ib. cap. 4. f. 37.38, 39.2. The Confessors Law, ancient Lawyers, and Historians, plainly prove Elections. Sup. cap. 8.3. To this very day the People at Coronations are askt, whether they will have such an one King. 4. The Opinions of King Alfred and W. I. and frequent Settlements of the Crown, prove the same. Sup. f. 74.5. Oaths of Allegiance, till such Settlements, were only personal to the King in possession. 6. Even where there has been a Settlement, it has not been lookt on as absolutely conclusive to the People, till they actually received a King.
8. The Parliament 12 R. 2. mention an old Law,Knighton, f. 2683. the Record of which it is likely he imbezled, which shews,Propinquiorem aliquem de san∣guine. that upon a Vacancy of the Throne, they might chuse any Body of the Royal Blood. 9. The Practice of the Kingdom, since the reputed Conquest,Vid. Abstract of the Succession. Fund. Const. sup. in the frequent interrupti∣ons of the Line, if nor good of its self, yet con∣firm'd by the former Heads, is a good Proof. 10. The Statute 11 H. 7. shews Allegiance by all Laws due to a King in Possession,Fund, Const. f. 74. Ib. f. 84. by a full Submission of the People. 11. Such a Right of Election here is not sin∣gular;Ib. f. 83. but agreeable to the ancient Constitu∣tions of other Kingdoms, descended from the same common Stock. It is not fit to leave this Matter, without notice of the Charge of my having notoriously misrepresented the Doctor, in relation to the three Henries,True Vind. page 33. and that I bring him in affirming, that an Ʋsurper may leave his Crown to his Heirs, without any express or implied Consent of the People; but the good Luck is, that I never said the Doctor affirm'd this, but would have it so; as the manifest Conse∣quence of what he says: but if I did affirm so, and the Doctor had own'd, as this Gentleman does, that such a King, with the express Consent of his Subjects, may make a Law to bind the Right of the Crown, and did so; then the Contradiction would be palpable, which I do not charge; for then it would be thus, the three Henries were rightful Kings, excluding all others, and yet others had still a Right unaltered: but I say it is an Inconsistency in him, to hold that the Possessor has an hereditary Crown, and leaves it to his Heirs, which implies a Legal Descent, and that without any Express or implyed consent of the Subject, that it should descend; and yet that a dispossessed Prince has Right to what is thus left to the Heirs; but I
am sure, how much soever the Vindicator takes in the Con∣sent of the People, the Doctor does not allow their Consent to diminish the Right of the dispossessed Prince. I would not willingly forego any part of my Answer to the Doctors Comment upon the 13th. to the Romans: though this Gentleman receives my Sense of it in the main,Two Kings. he nibbles at two Heads of five, whereby I think it is evident that the Doctor went upon a wrong Ground. Where, I say, when our Saviour and his Apostles gave Rules about Subjection, there was no Competition [between Princes or Powers] about Rights or Titles to Government. This in truth he admits, but leaves out [Princes or Pow∣ers] and fights with his own Proposition; but surely, take it even as himself makes it, he had no reason to ask, where was my History, or Memory upon this? for Despisers of Domi∣nion, and the ungovernable Gnosticks or Jews could not be called Competitors or Rivals for Power with the Romans. 2. I observe that the Doctor, to no purpose here, if it were true, argues that the Romans were Usurpers over the Jews. This Gentleman says, the Emperors were Usurpers upon the Senate and People: but for that, not to menti∣on Historians, which shew the contrary, I shall refer him to the Roman Law, which says, that the People had con∣ferred the Power upon the Emperor, ei & in eum jus tuum contulit.Vid. Fund. Const. f. 6. But himself admits that the Romans were not Usurpers over the Jews; for having taken notice of the Will of their King Herod, submitting his and his Chil∣drens Rights to the Pleasure of Augustus; he says, if Herod had any Right, he must derive it from Possession and Consent: which I am sure I am far from denying, though the Doctor does, that this can transfer a Right to a Crown, without the Submission or Consent of the dispossess'd Prince.
I shall only free my self from a Contradiction, which he thinks he has found in my Words; and then take my leave of him, not doubting but we shall be better Friends when we meet next. I having said, I do not find, that the Doctor thinks the Subjects bound to defend the Possession, against the supposed Legal King: He will have it, that I contradict my self in the next Line, in saying, Tho they have Sworn Allegiance, which implies a Legal Defence, according to their Abilities. This, indeed, is the Legal Implication, but far from being yielded by the Doctor. who, I believe, is satisfied, that this Gentleman defends his Principles no more, than the Witty and Judicious Author of that Admirable Poem the Anti-Weesils; who says of the Passive Ass; Grave Soul-less thing, to Slavery inur'd,Anti-Weesils, first part, p. 15. He fears his Back should be from Loads secur'd; Brays at the Court, because no Burden's there, And thinks the Sweetest thing on Earth's to bear. Handsomly exposes the Passive-Obedience-Men, in the Fable of the Spaniel, commanded to fetch his own Tail: and truly justifies Providence, concurring with the National Revolt, upon the late Breach of the Fundamental Contract; And Contracts fastned with a mutual Oath,Ib part 2. p. 15. Have mutual Bands, who e're breaks one breaks both. The Doctor and I should not differ, did he, with that Discerning Author, yield; 1.Ibid. The Consequence of the Breach of a mutual Contract: 2. That the asking the Peoples Consent, is not a vain Ceremony at Corona∣tions: 3. That the most invidious Condition, is implied in a Political or State Contract, as well as in the Matrimonial. 4. That there was such a Contract between the late King
and his Subjects. 5. That there was a Breach on his side. In short, his business is not to justifie the Doctor, but the Revolution; the Doctor is for himself, not for the Revolution. Obj. But say some, they are no Friends to the Government, who write against the Doctor; who shews that Men may submit to this Government, notwithstanding the Prejudice against it, from that share which the People had in setling it. Answ. In Answer to which, I desire these Particulars may be well considered. 1. It is enough to remove the Prejudice, not only against Submission, but even the Revolution it self; that the Doctor, with all his strength of Invention, cannot shut out the People; but by condemning God's Instruments in all cases, in bringing about the greatest Blessings to Mankind. 2. Without Blemishing the Divine Perfection. 3. If this be a Prejudice with any against the Govern∣ment; to have it thought an Usurpation would be a Pre∣judice with more. 4. A Government settled by a National Consent, need never fear them who are prejudiced against that Cosnent; if they who were for it, may be admitted to defend it. 5. If they who have this Prejudice, seemingly come in to this Government, they are but the better enabled to be∣tray it; and as the Belief of Right in Governours restrains the Multitude, who have the most strength, from taking the Power into their own Hands; whenever the strength of the Nation is in the Hands of them, who believe King James to have the Right; according to their own Principles they will be bound to recall him. FINIS.
