W1506 R23963 7933783 40528
OF THE GIFT OF PRAYER. 1 Cor. XIV. . Theodoret apud Oecumenium. . S. Chrysostom in 1 Cor. Homil. 35. . Quidam soâ Novitate gaudent, atque ut statim Novi∣tas esse desiit, nauseant. Quo genere hominum, cùm in rebus caeteris nihil est molestiùs, tum in rebus sacris sunt molestissimi & intolerabiles: quamquam ut rumpar irâ, ferre illos cogor, nisi velim & Evan∣gelium ipsum è medio tollere. Luther in Praefat Form. Miss. & Commun. pro Eccles. Wittenberg. DVBLIN, Printed Anno Dom. M.DC.LXXVIII.
To the Learned and truly Venerable, Dr. RICHARD BUSBY, My ever Honoured Master. SIR, I Have oftentimes in secret reproached myself of ingratitude, in that I never yet in any of those things, which I exposed to the World, have made publick acknowledg∣ment how much I owe to You: Sincerly therefore now repenting, I reform; and own my self to have received from You not onely excellent Rudi∣ments of good Literature, but the first Rational Impressi∣ons of Religion. I rather prefix this Recognition to the ensuing Discourse, than to either of the other in its company, because, Sir, it was truly the sense I had of Your piety, which first ope∣rated towards the reconciling me to Church-Musick. I came to You with prejudices (very unreasonable, such as commonly all prejudices are) against it: The first Organ I ever saw or heard, was in Your House, which was in those dayes a more regular Church than most we had pub∣lickly. I then thus judged, if a man of such real Devotion, as I knew You to be of, would keep an Organ for sacred Ʋse, even when it was interdicted and of dangerous conse∣quence,
there was certainly more of reason for it, and ser∣viceableness in it, than I apprehended. When afterwards God was pleased to bring again the Captivity of our Mo∣ther the English Church, my own experience soon con∣vinced, that those my favourable thoughts were most just: and now I have thought my self concern'd to tell the preju∣dicate World so much. I have, Sir, no other recompence to make, which You will accept, for all Your antient care and real kindnesses to∣wards me, than this poor acknowledgment, together with my serious prayers for a full Retribution to You from Him, who sees in secret, but will reward openly. In confidence that You acquiesce herein as a plenary satis∣action, I will dare to stile my self, SIR, Your very thankful Scholar, And ever humble Servant, Edward Wetenhall.
The REVIEW. EVery man (especially if of the Function I am of) is bound to do, what in conscience he thinks he can, for the publick good; This is all the Plea I have for writing on these Subjects: And if men are not either disorderly troublesome, or abominably self-flatterers, their Endeavours of this kind amongst all good men are usually well accepted, or easily pardoned; This has made me hope, with the better sort, a candid Reception. For even as to those particular wherein I may seem most to have exceeded what became my condi∣tion and place, and especially in the presumption of the Dedication, I can safely avow, next to the pay∣ing the Duty I owe to their Eminencies, I had no more solemn end therein, than by putting my Book into so great hands, to secure its doing all the service 'tis capable of. If my Zeal for Reall and Regular Devo∣tion may conciliate to this my Ambition, and to the o∣ther Freedom I have used, a favourable censure, I shall rejoice: if it do not, such is the uprightness of my intention, that whatever shall be the success, I have nothing to repent of in my Undertaking (as far as I know) but my insufficient Performances. Of these possibly there is no man more intimately sensible than my self. —Plurima cerno▪ Me quoque, qui scripsi, judice, dign lni.
It is much easier to satisfie an Auditory with a Ser∣mon, than the World with a Book: and were I to write this over again, there are not a few things which I would change, others which I would strike out, and more that I would supply. But the Alterations I could desire, I would not have understood touching any Doctrinals I maintain, or the Expedients I offer to publick benefit: my meaning is onely touching particular expressions, diverse superfluous repetitions, allegations, proofs, and some punctilio's, which yet, it may be, all men will not take notice of. What of this nature I judge most obnoxious to mistake, I will here set down, and together observe to my Reader som E∣scapes, which are not my own. And first, every mans eye will inform him, that the Character which the Printer had to use, being somewhat old and worn, there are several letters and syllables very blind, or scarce appearing, some not at all, which, from the sense, the judicious Reader may easily be able to supply. The Passage I have oberved, at which any can be most at a loss, is, page 86. lin▪ penlt. of wning. To the same Original many ill Punctations are to be referred: for having not sufficient variety of points of e sam size with the letter, the Printer has used sometimes those he had belonging to another letter. As an instance I give page 5. line 19. where to an Italian letter is put a Text-letter-period, and the peri∣od too destructive of the sense: for redress, I desire it be read thus—also, it is plain by the Process of his discourse, that— Next, which is a fault of my own, writing with
a great deal of freedom, I have sometimes used, as some may reasonably judge, too much liberty even with words, and taken them otherwise than in their most proper and artificial sense. Of this nature my use of the word Faculty, pag. 39. lin. 22. has been by some thought, where I call the Gift of Prayer a Fa∣culty. Nothing was less n my thoughts▪ than to intimate thereby that it is a Faculty, as by that name we mean Potentia naturalis: for I afterwards call it an Hbi, an Ability. In all such cases, let one term be taken as explicatory of the other, and let none make me an offender for a word. It is hard to be always so accurate in our expressions, as not sometimes loqui cum vulgo. Thus too page 720, I affirm some mens Ordination Null, and in the next line speaking more complyingly, call it imperfect: I understand thereby such imperfection as in our present case makes it Null. Again, as to our Greek Character, it is very small, blind and old, and therefore many times bad accents, acute for graves, aspirates for lenes, some false, some abounding letters have slipt in. Had the Press here more incouragement, it would be better furnished. Also in what Hebrew words occur, there are some mistakes, and especially▪ put for▪ more than once. page 220. l. 9. and pag: 649. l: 22. Further, our Paper being somewhat of the least, and the Margin very small, the Citations which are in the Margin are often imperfect, and sometimes by the Printer totally omitted. But I can safely affirm my self to have used great faithfulness in citing Au∣thours, and to have alledged very few passages out
of any which I have not seen. The chief, and all that come to my knowledge. I will ingenuously confess. Pag. 94. I cite St. Austin upon the credit of Dr. Heylin, producing those words out of him, Hist. of Liturg▪ ch. 5. sect. 9. But though I have not found those very words in St. Austin, yet I have ob∣served the passage of Sursum Corda in St. Austin sven  eight times mentioned, as usuall in the Li∣turgies of his dayes. Particularly in his first Tome, in his Book De ver, Relig. Quotidie per universum or∣bem genus humanum unâ paee voce respondet sursum cor∣d hahere ad Dominum. Again, Tm. 2. Epist. 156. Ad Probam. And very often otherwise, both in hi Sermons and Expositions. Again, several of the Rabies I have cited▪ upon the credit of men much versed in the Rabbinical learning: but then I have generally named those men, whose authority I rely on, in the Margin or Text; otherwse I have read those Passages my self▪ But I must acknowledge want of leisure, and indeed, of those kind of Books, makes me too much a Rbby at second hand. In my translating Authours, I have not alwayes render'd word for word, for neither do I like it; but, I have not wittingly falsified any one Passage of any Authour whatsoever, but have still been faithful, as I conceived, to the sense. Thus in that Text of Origen's, pag. 97. Eorum quae geruntur in Baptism, ver brum gstorumque, & ordinum aque in∣terrogationum, &c. I have rendred Gstorum, Gestures, not mistaking it for Gestum. but because, qu g∣runtur just preceding, I could not, without Tauto∣logy, render it literally, and can conceive the Fa∣ther meant nothing thereby, but some exteriour rites
and bodily acts then used in Baptism, which I knew not how more fitly to express than by gestures. The like liberty it may be observed, I have taken upon like occasions in other places. Scimus & hanc veniam, petimusque damusque— Indeed my caution in avowing or disavowing any point to have been such or such an Authour's judg∣ment has been such, that I cannot vindicate it some∣times from a poor and mean diffidence to my own sense. I will give one instance. I have taken no∣tice page 316 of Luthers authority against Instrumen∣tall Musick alledged out of H. Eckard his Fasi: Controv. Theolog. by the Pseudonymous Authour of the Apology for the Ejected English Ministers. Obser∣ving the manner of both those Writers citing Luther to this purpose, I was confident that the one never read in Luther, what he saies as from him, and that the other had onely a confused memory of somewhat he had read in him, which at randome he thought might be interpreted against Church-musick (as it was objected by on Anbaldinus) but either knew not where to find it, or did not, when he wrote, consult it. All this while I had the very Text in Luther, which I was, and am confidet, they blind∣ly aimed at, in my hand and eye. Yet because two Writers affirm, and give me no more particular ad∣vantage to try their sincerity, than to read over se∣ven large Folio's, I would not answer, as in my conscience I think I might, Non est scriptum, Luther never said so; but if any be of the same mind with me, and think my distrust of my own search to be either too modest or too cautious, they may be pleased to add page 318. after line 14. as follows.
Though this answer may suffice, yet till Writers, who avouch great names at such randome, will be pleased to satisfie the World by more particular Cita∣tions, that they neither abuse themselves nor others, as I have shewn in part, and can abundantly detect, Irenaeus Philalethes does, I will deal a little more boldly, and say, I do not believe, but both of them father upon Luther what he never either writ, or said. And, for my own justification, I will produce the Text of Luther, which I am well con∣vinced the one of them, who does not use to conceal his reading, never lookt on, and both of them found their assertion on, if on any in his Works commonly extant. The passage is in his Formul. Miss. & Commun. pro Eccles. Wittemberg. Which Book, after its Preface, begins with a Profession, that he never designed to abolish the whole Order of Worship then in use in the Roman Church, but pessi∣mis additamentis vitiatum repurgare, & pium usum monstrare; To purge it from the vile additions, with which it was corrupted, and to shew its godly use. He then shews how simple the pra∣ctice of our Lord, and of his Apostles, was in the administration of the Holy Supper. He then tells us, how far from blame the Prayers and Hymns, which the Primitive and Antient Fathers added, were. But, in the degenerating age of the Church, he mi∣serably complains [Ʋbi jam licentia fiebat augendi & mutandi prout uivis libebat, accedente tum & quaestus & ambitionis sacerdotalis tyrannide, tum caeperunt Al∣taria illa & Iusignia Baal, & omnium deorum poni i Templum Domini] When once the trick was brought in of adding and changing as men pleased in the
Office of the Communion, through the Tyranny of the Priests ambition, and their desire of filthy lucre, then begun those Altars, and the Images or Ensigns of Baal, and all the Gods, to be put into the Temple of the Lord. In the business of Church-musick, what have we to do with the Fur∣niture of Popish Altars? Who ever heard of Organs upon Altars? I profess, I can no more endure a Rood-loft, nor yet the abominations which adorn the Romists Altars than Luther. But still what's this to Organs? God grant some men either Brains or Foreheads, and they▪  never cite thus. But to go on: After a long Catalogue of abuses brought in to the Communion, after complaints De Canone lacero & abominabili—Collectis mercenariis—making the Communion Monopolium Sacerdotum—saying Msss pro defunctis, pro itineribus, pro opi∣bus, &c. he challenges it as a difficult point, Titu∣los solos numerare uorum Missa factum est sacrificium: After taxing these, I say, and diverse other corru∣ptions, and Essentiall depravations of that Holy in∣stitution, he has these words, which I conceive to be the passage meant. Nam Additamenta externa va∣sium, cereorum, pallarum, deinde Organorum & to∣tius Musicae—quid dicam? Nihil erat, &c. To what purpose should I speak of those outward Additions of Vessels, Tapers, Palls, and then of Organs, and all the Musick in use in the Mass? There was nothing of Artifice almost in all the World, which could draw either ornament or gain, which was not used to set off the Mass with. It is most plai hereby, if Luther intended to condemn Organs and Church-musick at all, it was as abused by the Pa∣pists
in the transforming the Communion: but such use thereof as we have described, that he never designed to condemn, is evident by a multitude of Passages following in that very Book, of which I will set down some. Kyrie eleeson, ut hactenus cele∣bratum est, variis meldiis, diversis temporibus, ample∣ctimur.—He is also for the Quires singing the Gra∣dual with the Hallelujah, for their singing the Ni∣cene Creed, the Sanctus, the Agnus Dei, the Bene∣dicamus Domino,—adjecto Halleujah in suis melodiis: but he would have all these in the Mother-tongue. Who ever heard of neer so much Musick in our Communion-Service, as this comes to, which yet Luther allows. And to omit other Passages, he la∣ments towards the end, Poetae & Musici nobis de∣sunt, we yet want Poets and Musicians which might compose for us, and publickly sing godly Hymns: In a word, these are all sincerely Luthers words and sense: But to be plain, Luther was not yet clear, what in such outward Decencies he would have set∣tled; and therefore though it is most evident our Ad∣versaries abuse him, when they alldge him absolute∣ly against Church-musick, and our usual Cathedral practice, yet, as already insinuated, in these his Books, we lay not such weight on every expression, as to doom any Practice received by us, or the Lu∣theran, as well as other Reformed, Churches, by vir∣tue of it, or for its sake. Thus as to that Addition, which I refer to the Readers choice, to make or omit. There is but one point of any general nature yet re∣maining, which I would suggest, and that is, that though these Discourses were all of them, as to their
substance, framed and pen'd long before the design of Printing them, and perhaps somewhat in another Form, yet my troublesome Emploiments not per∣mitting me the leisure of timely and mature Trans∣scription, I have been forced to send all (I can scarce say) sheet by sheet to the Press: and many Addi∣tions and Alterations offering themselves, while a man Trans-scribes, it so came to pass, that I could never view all together till I saw all in Print. (Such is the disadvantage at which I have writ!) And therefore I must beg pardon, if now and then some connexive or limitative particles be wanting, which if expresly appearing, would make all more plain and consistent. I am very clear to my self in my own notions, and I could wish I had made, or could make, them so to all: I do believe I could have done it, had I the happiness (which some have too much of) call'd Leisure. But seeing it is as it is, I de∣sire the Reader will not censure me as inconsistent with my self for any passages of this nature which he may observe, whether I have set them down in the ensuing amendments, or not. If any man shall duely convince me of an errour, there shall be no one who will more willingly acknowledge and tract than my self: Onely I desire I may be dealt with in as much temper I have shew. Be pleased therefore to aend as folows. Pag: 15. lin: 9.  Acts: II. v. 16. p: 55. l. 4. read parxsm▪ . 6▪ . .  rmis . Prmise. p. 58. l. 23. fo   Rey. p.  aganst l. 3. in te , adde Sect. 7. p. 62. .  . A  tugh pssssd—▪ p. 69. Over against ▪ . i e Margin Sect: 9. p 71. l. 4. Marg: adde Mr. Th.
Long of Exon. p. 73. for every read ever. p. 84. l. 26. read possibly▪ p. 115. l. last read, as much. p. 119. 22, r. ordinarily in use. p. 174. r. best. p. 179. l. 3. Adde, To. p. 212. over against l. 2. adde in the Margin, Sect. 2. p. 218. l. 23. adde af∣ter as, I am apt to think—p. 225. l. 18. r. 1. Cor. XIV. p. 198. l. 2. r. Ar, and in Humane—p 230. l. 21. After Endlesse Authorities adde, Both Antient and Modern; of which because the Mo∣dern ones will sway most with some men, I will therefore set down a few of them onely. p. 249. l. 2. and again p. 251. l. 2. and in severall other places in this discourse, which the intelligent rea∣der will easily perceive by the sense, for Consn r. Concent. p. 270. l. 11. r. Leguntur. What I had granted to the judgment of diverse learned men pag: 229. lin. 25. and in the next whole page, I may seem to have censured a little slightingly, pag: 336, if the particular design of my discourse in each place be not distinctly attended. I allow in the former place, that the word Psalmes, when used in the new Testament, is conceived, and that with great reason, to have commonly a particular reference to the book of Psalms: and in particular, that the Hymn sng by our Lord and his disciples at the last Passeover he kept was, in all probability, the Great Hallelujah; adding, that I see no incon∣veniency to interpret the Psalms spoken of by St Paul▪ Ephs: V. 19. and Coloss. III. 16. or by St. James cap. V. 13. (all which places, by the by, proceed onely of private and occasionall Psalmody,) touching Davids Psalms chiefly or especially: Yet in the latter place, where I discourse of the Original,
or first commencement, of singing the whole book of Psalms in orderly course as we do at present in our Church, (and again too, pag: 352.) I seem to slight some mens interpreting thse places meerly of Davids Psalms, and call other opinions, that bear proportion therewith (as namely, that our Lord used the whole two and twentieth Psalm, when he hung upon the crosse, or even the Great Hallelujah, at his last supper) onely conjectures, Probables of the lowest rank, and so bad Arguments to prove the thing in hand. I affirm further, It is certain the Publick Hymns in the Primitive Christian Church were fit∣ted to the then present estate by the Holy Ghost. In all these things, I am very constant to my own no∣tions if I be aright apprehended▪ That the term Psalms, when the Apostle bids the faithfull to Teach, speak to and admonish one another in Psalms, to the end The word of God may dwell plentifully in them, may be interpreted of, or chiefly applied to, the book of Psalms, I see no reason to oppose: but that both that term, and the other two, Hymns and Spirituall songs, are to be understood solely thereof I do not see any Logick or Grammar enders so much as highly Probable; and therefore if this intrepreta∣tion be probable, it must be onely in the lowest rank. Again, I am as fully perswaded, that our Lord on the crosse used the Initiall word of the two and twentieth Psalm, as that he was crucified; but that he then used the whole, or the greatest part of that Psalm, I can sarce look upon as probable: I could therefore give these conjectures no more favourable name, than that of Probables of the lowest rank, that is, onely not impossible. Lastly as to the Great
Hallelujah, it is most likely indeed our Lord might use it: for celebrateing a Jewish feast after the Jew∣ish fashion, and amongst the Jewish people, who can think but he used the usall Jewish Hymn? which (at least, as yet) was no wise improper. But to argue thus, Because one term may with good reason be applied chiefly to Davids Psalms, there∣fore both it and two more were expressly designed touching them; or to derive the Orderly singing the whole book of Psalms in course, either from our Lords, or his and his Disciples, occasionall use∣ing some small passages or parcels out of it; or from thence, that the Apostles probably did prescribe to the Primitive Christians that they should speak to, teach and admonish one another in the words of those Psalms, as occasion privately offered, is as Bad Logick as a man need to be guilty of. A thing may be true, and yet not a fit argument to prove all, for which it shall be pleaded. And this was truly my sense As to the number of Psalms, which make up the great Hallelujah, I have indeed expressly varied, allotting thereto six Psalms pag: 230. and but five pag: 336. but for this variation I have great au∣thours to produce; and which party are in the right, I acknowledg my selfe not able to determin; have∣ing, s before complained, neither leisure to search the Originall books, from whenc these authours preend to derive this tradition, nor indeed the bookes themselves. All I can say is, that diligent∣ly peruseing those Psalms I judged most probable, that it consisted onely of five, viz. Psalm 114, 115, 116, 117, 118: but herein I durst not be con∣fident,
and therefore made use of both opinions; one∣ly that which I thought most likely I put last, as my Second thoughts; makeing my judgment herein from the subject matter of the Psalms. If on the other side we will judge from the name  or the Great Hallelujah, it is most probable this Hymn begun with Ps: 113. whose first word is  whereas the 114th begins otherwise. But what shall we say to a third opinion, produced out of the fa∣mous Rambam? The great Hallelujah saies he begins with the Psalm Celebrate dominum, viz. 118▪ and ends at the first Psalm of degrees, or Psalm 120. Learn∣ed Drusius would not undertake to determin the case, but left it to the more learned (Ʋid. Drus: in Matthew: XXVI. 30.) and so do . Pag: 356. l. 4. r. I desire. Pag: 371. l. 20▪ Af∣ter fall, adde, This was long ago the sense of Gre∣gory the Great in this particular: Psalmista non optan∣tis animo sed prophetantis ministerio dnunciat. Pastoral: Cur. cap 1. Pag: 436. l. 19. r▪ , Chron: VI. Pag: 451. l▪ 23. r. to be considered. p. 467. l. penult. r. Quaest. & Respons. ad Orthodox. p. 480. l. 8. dele nay. pag: 489. in the Margin over against l. 20. Adde Constitut: Apostolic. lib: 2 cap. 57. p: 502. l. lt. r. came a long time after. pag. 521. over against. l. 14. in the Margin. add▪ Rabb. Dav. R. Menahem. &c. vid Pagnin. ad vocem. p. 528. l. ult. r▪ quos. Pag 563 l. 8. Add in the Margin Sect. 8. p▪ 569. in the Marg: r. Sect: 9. p. 596. l. 22. r. sifting. p. 642. l. 10. r. most happily p. 653. l. penult. r▪ determining those mentioned, or any such like, little difficulties, that he reproved their superstitious and hypocriticall sollicitude touching them,
and professedly. p. 670. l. ult: r. parts. p. 675. l. 15. r. Father. Pag 696▪ l: 11. In the Margin add. Sect. 4. Since my committing to the presse this last part, there has been put into my hands, what  learned man of our Church some few yeares ago has writ∣ten, a little contrary to what I have maintined. Had I read it before, my book should have answer∣ed the main considerables therein; here I must not take such scope as it requires. Wherefore in a word I professe, I am glad, a man of his reading could find no more to say in the case, and declare my selfe rather confirmed, than shaken, by what ever he pro∣duces, which was new to me; and am ready to satisfy the world, whensoever any occasion shall be given me, as to the particular authorites alledg∣ed by him; which are few, some of them blind and slighty, the rest boldly used, to say no worse▪ Could some men (whose ashes were together made such, and hallowed, in the flames of martyr∣dome) now speak, they would give him no thankes for wounding that Church, which they nursed by their own bloud, through their sides; and that by the publication of some immature and opineing Essaies of theirs, for their full advised sentiments. I pray God all his papers and mine may escape such dealing, Pag. 732. l. 11. . not at all. pag: 776. l: 10. r. a thing. There are diverse other literall faults which I thought not worth troubling the judicious reader with; and perhaps some more materiall ones, which have escaped either my observation, or my memory: As to these, though I have divers more
just Apologies, than I could wish I had, yet I shall onely desire all my readers will be pleased to re∣member, whose words those are, Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so unto them, and neither censure, nor interpret otherwise.
AN ACCOUNT of the CONTENTS. In the First PART CHAP. I. Sect. 1. THE Introduction touching the design of the whole. Sect. 2. That pray∣ing by a spiritual Gift is expresly mentioned in Scripture, and particularly in the I Cor. XIV Sect. 3. It is questionable whether the other pla∣ces of Scripture, usually alledged for this pur∣pose, belong thereto, and most probably they do not. Sect. 4. The six Heads of nquiry in this Discourse. Sect. 5. The firt, What that spiri∣tual Gift of prayer mentioned in I Cor. XIV. was. Sect. 6. The second, What the Apostles Rule for the publick management of it, in rela∣tion to Mtter, Form, intelligible Language, and intention or Devotion. Sect. 7. Of pray∣ing in the Holy Ghost, and like Scripture▪ phrases. Sect. 8. The Result of the Whole. CHAP. II. Sect. 1. THe Third: Concluded, That which hath been of late named the Gift of pray∣er, is not the same with the spiritual Gift spo∣ken
of by the Apostle, and the Reasons hereof. Sect. 2. The fourth Enquiry, touching an Or∣dinary Gift of prayer, supposed to succeed the Extraordinary one, and to be of Perpetuity in the Church. Sect. 3. What sober Notion can be framed thereof. Sect. 4. A Judgment of it in such Notion. Sect. 5. That this Gift, in this Notion, as to the Essence of it, was no more ap∣propriate to Prayer, than to other like Christi∣an Offices. Sect. 6. How far its Use reasona∣ble or tolerable at present. CHAP. III. Sect. 1. THE Fifth point of Enquiry, touching a∣ny Advantage of Prayer by Gift a∣bove prayer by Form. 2. dification the great measure by which we are to estimate all advan∣iage in this concer. 3. What Edification truly means, 4. A frequent Mistake amongst persons of honest intention about it. 5. That may con∣duce to private Edification, which does not to publick. 6. The Advantages of Conceived prayer impartially set down. 7. The inconve∣nieneies of it. 8. The Advantages of prayer by Form. 9. The inconveniencies of it. 10. A Judgment and Resolution upon the whole. 11.
A Removal of some pretences and prejudices against the Efficacy of Forms. Of spiritual sense. CHAP. IV. Sect. 1. THE sixth Enquiry. An Account of the practice of the Catholick Church, in Four propositions. (1.) Some passages in our present Liturgy (not found expresly in Scripture) used in the Apostles age. (2.) Liturgies compi∣led, if not as to some offices and parts, by the Apostles, yet soon upon the Apostles decease, and injoined. (3.) Since the beginning of the Fourth Century till the Reformation, no prayers publickly used by allowance, but approved Forms. (4.) None other since the Reformation by express allowance in our Church. Sect. 2. The Original and progress of Conceived pray∣er in publick, since the Reformation. It first appeared publickly at Geneva. Calvin's mo∣desty in this practice. It came into England by occasion of Mr. T. C's praying in the pulpit before Sermon in Queen Elizabeth's dayes: ne∣ver generally prevailed there till the Troubles broke out. Its private occasional use observi∣ble
in all ages in an ejaculatory way. Its larger private use since the inspired age, if any where, to be found amongst some of the Religious Orders of the Romanists. Of their Mental prayer. Of Luther's and the Lutheran practice. Sect. 3. Some respect to be had to the present Genius of our Age and Countrey, by a prudential compliance, where the Law (favou∣rably taken) seems to have left some liberty. 4. An account of the Tempers of our people, or those who pretend to be sons of the Church of England 5. What the Laws of our Church may seem to allow, or permit, as to Conceived prayer in any case. 6. What in prudence may be done without disobedience to the Church. 7. The Conclusion of this Discourse. In the Second Part. CHAP. I. Sect. 1. WHat is out of Controversie on this sub∣ject of singing to God. 2. The points to be resolved in this Discourse. 3. How the inspired Church was qualified for this duty. 4. What the spiritual Gift of singing, mentio∣ned: Cor. XIV, 15, was. 5. What spiritual Songs, psalms, and Hymns. 6. What Rules
laid down by the then inspired Authours for performance in this kind. 7. What the Melody of the heart. 8. A Monition to be serious in this matter. CHAP. II. Of the Primitive practice in singing, and the progress of Church-musick. Sect. 1. SInging, a constant part of the publick Primitive Worship, and the first Office amongst the Christians, which the Heathens took notice of. 2. What the Primitive Christians sung. 3. The way of singing in the Primitive and succeeding Church, for a considerable time, very plain. 4. Christians of all conditions used to sing both privately, and in the publick Con∣gregations. 5. Of the introducing more Artifi∣ciall Musick into Church use. 6. Of the introducing Instrumentall Musick. 7. of the Churches which have receiued it, or declared their approbation, and desire of it. 8. Are∣collection and summe of the whole. CHAP. III. Of the English Practice and the justifia∣bleness thereof.
Sect. 1. THe fourth head of this discourse. Dif∣ferent useage in singing observable in the practice of the English Church. 2. What regularly is sung or to be sung in our Church. 3. Prayers may be sung, though of our prayers onely some responsory petitions are artificialiy sung. 4. of the Antiquity of Singing the book of Psalmes in the Alternate way. 5. What Reasons might induce the Church to this practice. 6. Whether and how the Psalms are proper to be sung in the Evan∣gelical state. 7. of Anthems, and what sub∣ject and form sittest for them. 8. Of Volun∣taries. 9. of putting the Psalms into metre, and the practice of Other reformed Church∣es herein. 10. Singing the English metricall Version stands in our Church, neither by Law nor allowance, but by bare permission and conniveance. 11. The Gross indecencies and miscarriages Common herein. Whether instru∣mental musick in the worship of God be lawfull under the Evangelical state? 13. Whether it be expedient? 14. Answers to Objections. 15 A Transition to what remains.
CHAP. IV. How the present waies of singing in our Church may be managed to the most Spiritual advantage of all sorts. Sect. 1. A More express process to the last Head of this Discourse. No Alteration of Lawes necessary to redress what may be pre∣sumed amiss in the Chorall use. 2. A brief view of the old Jewish Quire, their number of Members, their Office, Kinds of Musick, and Sorts of Song. 3. Of the Consti∣tution and present State of our Quires. 4. An account of the particulars most obnoxions to censure in our Choral use. 5. The grand O∣riginal hereof, want of learning and due in∣stitution in our Quire-men or Church Musi∣cians. 6. The Necessity and Facility of re∣dressing such want. 7. Of further Remedies necessary. An humble supplication to the Su∣periour Clergy, who shall Condescend to read this discourse, that they will please to resume respectively, and exercise their rightfull powers in appointing the Daily services and Anthems. 8. What may, without alteration or breach of laws, be done in reforming the parochial sing∣ing.
9. An humble address to the Parochial Clergy, to endeavour, as far as may he, such Reformation. 10. The Conclusion by way of Submission of all to the judgment of the Church, and earnest exhortation to all Quires, to be of Gods mind, in preferring Devotion to Art. In the Third Part. CHAPTER. I. Of the Nature of our present Preaching and its Difference from that spoken of in Scripture. Sect. 1. DIfferent judgments as to the Nature and necessity of the present Preaching. 2. The Heads of this Discourse attemperated thereto. 3. Au Entrance upon the First head, by considering what Preaching the Gospell, signifies in the New Testament. 4. The Differ∣ence between preaching the Gospel, Teaching & prophesying. 5. What was most peculiar to that First preaching. 6. There neither is, nor rea∣sonably can be imagined will be, in the present or future ages, any such preaching of the Gospel, as
that in seripture. 7 The nature and frame of our present Sermons. 8. The name of preaching taken in a new notion, when applied thereto 9. The main particulars of the Difference ∣tween our preaching, and that spoken of in Scripture. 10. What pretences there may be at present to the Gist. 11. The summe of the whole. CHAP. II. Of the Authority of our present Preaching, and how this difference came in. Sect. 1. THe Second head proceeded to, And First of the authority of our Office. 2. Dif∣ferent orders of the Ministry in the inspired Church. 3. Of such Orders as were to be of perpetuity. 4. Of the authority, that is certainty or truth, of what we teach. 5. A proceeding to the third head: and first of the Occasion which introduced this difference? Tis such as Iustifies it. 6. Of different Modes and me∣thods of preaching. There have been, and ought to be such. 7. Of what preaching there was in the old Jewish Church. 8. Of what nature
the Apostles Sermons. 9. Of the Sermons or Homilies of the Fathers. 10. The original and continuance of Postills. 11. Of the breaking off of that course, and the introducing the pre∣sent way, both in the Protestant and Romish Churches. 12. An apology for the freedome aboue used. 13. Corollary touching the rea∣ding our Sermons. 14. Of modest names to be givee to our Sermons. CHAP. III. Sect. 1. Of the Fourth head, the unreasonableness of some mens present alledging St. Pauls plea of necessity of preaching for theirs. 2. A two fold call necessary to autho∣rise a present preacher; and first of the Inward cail. 3. Of the Outward, and its necessity. 4. Who may confer it. 5. Of necessitated want of Episcopal Ordination. 6. None a∣mongst us can now pretend a call to the ministry, much less a necessity of preaching, who have not received episcopal ordination. 7. The pretence of meere conscience frivolous, and fitt all hereticks and sectaries. 8. Of ima∣giry cas extraordinary. 9. Of the felicity of the Church of England in regard of regular
ordinations, above other reformed Churches 10. What necessity of Preaching lies on preachers lawfully constituted. Two points premised 11. First, divine precept obliges us. 12. Secondly necessary compliance with the temper and expectation of the people. 13. The summe of all said for necessity of constant & frequent preaching, and a Transition towhat remains. CHAP. IV. Sect. 1. THe last head. Supposed, that preaching is more frequent amoungst us than in our immediate fore-fathers days. 2. The Rea∣son and benefits thereof. 3. How far it may be suspected preaching may grow more scarce, or in diverse places very much fail. 4 A pro∣posal of two general heads of woes consequent. 5. Strict observation of the Lords day keeps up the face and aw of Religion amongst our people, and two Sermons on the Lords day, keep up that strict observation. 6. Afternoon Sermons on that day no Novelty or piece of Puritanism. 7. It were requisite that in all great towns or largeparishes there were er∣mon
each Holy day: how it may easily be done. 8. The particular mischiefs consequent upon more scareity of preaching: the first. 9. The second and third. 10. The fourth. 11. The misery of the Clergy in such case. 12. The conclusion reflecting on the whole, addrest both to Preachers and People. ADVERTISEMENT. IN stead of further Preface or Epistle to the Reader, the Reader is desired to peruse the Review in the end of the Third Dis∣course.
REVERENDISSIMIS IN CHRISTO PATRIBUS, Dominis Praesulibusque Amplissimis, D. GUILHELMO Archiepiscopo Cantua∣riensi, Totius AN∣GLIAE Primai & METROPOLITA∣NO, &c. D. MICHAELI Archiepiscopo Dublini∣ensi, HIBERNIAE Primati, & summo ibidem D. Cancella∣rio, &c. Ecclesiarum Situ (heul nimiò) Diversarum, Fide Ipsissimarum, Fulgentissimis STELLIS, Praesidibus Oculatissimis, Cordatissimis, Meritissimis, Auspicibus ANGELIS ter maximis;
Tripartitam hanc (qualem qualem) De Charismatis Officiis{que} Liturgiis Commentationem, Non quòd par sit His vel Patronis vel Lectoribus, Sed ut insigniori, nec opinando Ambitionis Nisu, E Tenebris, ipsam alioqui Male Pressis, Feliciter Asserta, A Tantis Nominibus Lumen hauriat & Splendorem, Summo in Matrem Ecclesiam Studio & Pietate, Summâ in Optimos Patres Observantiâ & Cult, Eâ{que} demum, qua scripserat Parhthesiâ, Ingenuâ, quantumvis Audenti, V. D. M. Q. C. Edvardus Wetenhall.
OF THE GIFT OF PRAYER. CHAP. I. Sect. 1. The Introduction, touching the Design of the whole. Sect. 2. That Praying by a Spiri∣tual Gift is expresly mentioned in Scripture, and particularly in the▪ I Cor. XIV. Sect. 3. It is questionable whether the other places of Scri∣pture, usually alledged for this purpose, belong thereto, and most probably they do not. Sect. 4. The Heads of Enquiry in this Discourse. Sect. 5. The first, What that spiritual Gift of Prayer, mentioned in the 1 Cor. XIV, was. Sect. 6. The second, What the Apostles Rule for the pub∣lick management of it, in relation to Matter, Words, and Intention or Devotion. Sect. 7. Of praying in the Holy Ghost, and like Scri∣pture Phrases. Sect. 8. The result of the whole. IT is the peculiar (and we hopeSect. 1. the just) praise of the English Protestant Church, given to her by the most competent
Judges as well Strangers as Natives, e∣ver since her first regular Establishment, that throughout the whole Reformati∣on, there is nothing so glorious and ac∣complisht as is her publick worship; especially, as managed in Cathedrals and such Places of the better note. There are notwithstanding amongst us, of late years, not a few serious and con∣siderative men (persons of real Piety and worth) whom, the constant use of another way of serving God, ever since they knew what Religion meant, has pre∣judiced against this; and the confidence of their way being best, has never suffer∣ed to look deep enough into the advan∣tages of another. This their confidence has commonly two very plausible, but insufficient, that I say not treacherous supports: a superficial or seeming sense of some passages of Scripture which they at first hstily ran away with, and never since doubted; and the experience and memory of that Devotion or good affe∣ction, which that way of worship has ex∣cited, and usually renews in them. These men, being (as above supposed) of upright and honest hearts, truly con∣scientious
and fearing God, are not to be inveighed against, because they are in some regard adverse; nor to be laught at, because they have not judg∣ed more maturely: (As things went twenty or thirty years ago, considering how many were then in the very Crisis of their Education, it is not to be won∣d that the Age abounds with men  such sentiments in Religion) Rather it is to be endeavoured, and it ought not to be despaired, that by such fair understanding, which calm and serious reason is apt to beget, they may be won to admire the excellency of what they now unhappily disapprove. That in our Publick Worship, which such persons bear most uneasily, is the neglect of what they call the Gift of Prayer, and the use of what we call Church Musick. Exceptions possibly there are against our preaching, but those less, and perhaps by persons less consi∣derable: however, the charges against that, are of a different nature from what is objected against these, and shall be considered also by themselves. Our Sermons usually take with them much
better, than either the Liturgy, or the Choral use of it: In both these they think and say, we have laid aside the Primitive pattern. In the one, they complain, we retain nothing of the Apostolical spirit; in the other, we ob∣serve not the Apostolical simplicity. Now we will enter into a free and distinct consultation of each. We will search what is certainly Apostolical, and what the Scripture directs touch∣ing each, their management, their im∣mediate ends and design. We will con∣sider the expediency and congruity of all to the present state, the measures which the Church has taken in the se∣veral Ages, her perpetual use and pra∣ctice all along. We will perform the whole with all openness, candour and sincerity, without fear, or favour of our own part, leaving what we do to approve it self to every Readers reason and conscience in the sight of God, and desiring onely to be received with the same unprejudicate mind, with which we have written. That the Scripture speaks of prayingSect. 2. by a certain spiritual Gift may not be de∣nied.
When in any Discourse the argu∣ment or subject of it is plainly exprest or propounded in the beginning, if it shall so come to pass, that in process any ambiguous or equivocal terms drop, they may be surely determined or inter∣preted by the Analogy they have to the common subject treated of. Whereas therefore the Apostle St. Paul in the XII Chapt. of his first to the Corinthians, ver. 1. propounds to treat touching spi∣ritual Gifts. (Now concerning spiritual gifts, Brethren, I would not have you ignorant) and carries on that Discourse for three Chapters together, as is most evident, when in the XIV. Chapter ver. 15. we read, I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding al∣so. It is plain that by spirit we are to understand a spiritua! Gift (the Meto∣nymy is easie) for of spiritual Gifts the whole Discourse principally proceeds; and forasmuch as he applieth this Gift to Prayer, [I will pray with (or by) the spirit] it is certain he affirms a spiri∣tual gift there was, then in the Church, facilitating in the Office of Prayer. There are sundry other places whichSect. 3.
are conceived by some to belong here∣to: as, Zech. XII 10. I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabi∣tants of Jerusalem the spirit of Grace and supplication. And in the Epistle of St. Jude, ver. 20. But ye beloved building up your selves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, keep your selves in the love of God. And in St. Pauls Epistle to the Ephesians, ch. VI. ver. 18. Praying allwayes with all pray∣er and supplication in the spirit. And especially that of St. Paul to the Romans cha. VIII. ver. 26 Likewise the spirit help∣eth our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for, as we ought, But the spirit maketh intercession for us with groan∣ings which cannot be uttered. But in all these places the context is so arr from enforceing any exposition, which will concern utterance in praier, that the scope of them seemes to restrain them clearly to another thing, as shall be shewn in an other part of this discourse more pertinent to the sense o those Texts. There is yet another passage which some have laid great weight on, as being a promise from our Lords own
mouth Math: X. 19, 20. When they deli∣ver you up, take no thought, how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak, For it is not ye that speak, but the spirit of your Father that speaketh in you. Hence they would frame an argument, à fortiori, thus: Would God assist them to plead at an heathen Tribunal, and not at the throne of Grace? But the answer is plain. He did undoubtedly as∣sist those, to whom this promise was gi∣ven at both, and that by the infallible conduct of his spirit: But yet neither is as∣sistance at both here promised, nor doth the promise belong to us, our case, o imes, but to those primary and ex∣traordinary Martyrs or Witnesses of Christianity. And being it is designed by our Lord to that particular case of answering for themselves, when arraign∣ed for their Christianity, there is no rea∣son we should extend it to what we list. In those cases it was not them who spoke, but the Holy Ghost in them. Those their apologies or defences being (as Scripture) given by inspiration of God, were of the same authority, with
Scripture, and are many of them at this day Scripture. As is St. Peters, Acts IV, ver: 8 &c. and chap. V, ver. 29. And St. Stephens, Act. VII: And divers of St. Pauls. Acts XXII. and again chap. XXIII, and XXIV, ver. 10 &c. and XXVI, ver. 2. &c. Behold in all these (and more instances that might be alleged) the pro∣mise verified; and the effect, Defences of infallible verity, as proceeding im∣mediately from the Holy Ghost speaking in the Apologists. But will any man in his wits admit or urge this consequence? Our Lord promised by miraculous inspi∣ration to assist His Apostles, when ar∣raigned before heathen judges for pub∣lishing his Gospel, so that they should be able without thought to make de∣fences of themselves and Doctrine, of divine and infallible authority: There∣fore in every ordinary case of prayer he will assist all the faithfull by the same inspiration. Or will these very persons arrogate thus much to themselves and their own prayers, that they proceed from the same, that is infallible, inspi∣ration? It must, in all charity, be affirm∣ed of them, that they will not.
In the mean time, though these pla∣cesSect: 4. infer no such thing, yet we have said, that the Apostle to the Corinthians ex∣presly speaks of praying by a certain spiritual Gift, and that the same canot reasonably be gainsayed, by any who consider his discourse in the Chapters cited. Now touching this Gift of Prayer (as it is termed) and the grounds there∣of (a case, which hath made more noise and trouble in the English Church, than in the whole Christian world) we will inquire, (1.) What is the strict import of the Gift, which the Apostle speaks of in that passage to the Corinthians, the onely place which can be proved to be∣long to this matter. 2. What Rules the Apostle in that discourse laies down for the use or management of that gift? 3. Whether what has been by the late age, or is by this, called the Gift of praier, be the same gift, which is there mentioned by the Apostle. 4. If there should be found reason to conclude the spiritual Gift there spoken of to be extra∣ordinary, miraculous, and proper to those times, whether then any Ordinary Gift of prayer, nswerable to that Extra∣ordinary
one, be of perpetuity in the Church, and a common consequent of a Gracious heart, as some have affirmed. 5. Whether conceived prayer, or pray∣er by such an ordinary pretended gift, have in publick, any advantages of pre∣scribed Forms? And lastly, what has been the certain Practice of the Church all along in this case? In all which weighty Enquiries (for such they are now become) I cannot con∣tein my selfe from a second passionate beseeching, and in the name of God con∣juring, all who shall give themselves the pains to peruse this discourse, that they read with the same equanimity and un∣prejudiced sense with which I write, who, I thank God, ly under no tempta∣tion to plead for one kind of prayer more than the other, any further than the meer merit of the cause shall turn the ballance. As to the first matter of enquiry. It hath been already said and proved, thatSect. 5. Praying with the Spirit (1 Cor. 14.) signifies praying by a spiritual gift faci∣litating in that Office: Now the great question will be what is the strict impor∣tance
of the Spiritual gift there design∣ed? In answer thereunto, we will readily allow in the general, that it was an Abi∣lity to make and utter, anew and upon the sudden, a Prayer suiting to the then present state of Christianity. And for proof hereof we will desire no other evidence (as indeed none that is to be had can be more proper) than what the Apostles own words, taken in their true dependances, and with reference to the design of his discourse, carry in them. And the consideration hereof, besides the proving what we alledge it for, will lead us to a more particular, and indeed the strictest sense of that spiritual Gift there said to be serviceable in Prayer. It is to be known then, that in those extraordinary dayes, God was pleased to inspire many of the Faithful peculiarly with the gift of divers Tongues. And this variety of Tongues, in men that had not learnt them, was not onely a meanes to propagate the Gospell in Countries remote and of a different lan∣guage from that of the Jewes, but a signal proof and confirmation of that
Gospell's being from Heaven, Heaven by such a miracle giving witness there∣to. This is what we read in the Cha∣pter alledged, ver: 22. Tongues are for a sign not to them that believe, but to them that believe not. And the History of the effusion of this miraculous Gift, in several instances, we have in the Acts of the Apostles. Cap: II. and X, ver. 46. and elsewhere. Now of those persons who were inspired with differentSo Ba∣sil, Hi∣erom, Chry∣sostom, Tho∣phylact of the Anci∣ents; ¦rasmu, Cme∣ron, Estius, &c. of the Mo∣derus. Tongues, some could interpret, others not; but themselves understood not Di∣stinctly the mysteries which they utter∣ed, or the Prayers and Praises which they conceived. Thus we read in the forementioned chapter, ver: 14. If I pary in an unknown Tougue, my spirit pray∣eth, That is my spiritual gift is exerci∣sed in prayer, but my understanding is unfruitful: not onely am I not under∣stood by others (which some would have to be the whole, and is part of the Apostles meaning) but neither do I di∣stinctly understand my own words thus uttered; for if I did, I could inter∣pret (speak those things in my own Mother Tongue) which yet it is plain
many of them then could not, ver. 13. Having thus asserted the unprofitable∣ness of praying by the Spirit when they understood not, he proceeds, in the Fifteenth verse, as to consultation. What is it then? I will pray with the Spi∣rit, and I will pray with the understand∣ing also: that is, By this inspired gift of Tongues would I be able to utter Pray∣ers, but so, that I understood distinct∣ly what I uttered, and were not as things without life, giving sound, as pipes, or harps, or trumpets, and like instruments, ver. 7, 8. Praying in (or by) the spirit then, in the Apostles sense (or the spiritual gift there spoken of) signifies an inspi∣red faculty of uttering a new Prayer, and that sometimes even in strange and different Tongues. This is acknow∣ledged by several modern Interpreters of good note; Spiritu, i. e. Linguâ per∣grinâ quam mihi dictat spiritus. Bza in Cor. Spiritus, Voce singulare linguta∣rum donum significans, Cal. Instit. lib. 3. c. 20. sect. 3. So Diodate an others, whose judgements they, that most admire what they cal the gift of Prayer, will not contemn. The summe
then of the case there handled, and the Apostles resolution thereupon, is this. The Corinthians were many of them zealous Affecters of those miraculous gifts then frequent amongst them: but particularly and above the rest of this prodigious gift of Tongues. Our A∣postle doth not go about directly to re∣press or check this their Zeal, but to guide and conduct it into a right chan∣nel; shewing them chap. XIII, that Charity is much a worthier object of the most passionate Zeal, than any spiritual Gift: and in this XIV Chapter, that if yet they will affect spiritual Gifts, they ought to be most zealous of those which conduce most to edification. To this purpose he compares the gift of Tongues whereof they were so eager and fond, with other spiritual gifts of a more edi∣fying nature; namely, with prophesying (or expounding the Scriptures of the Old Testament, the new one not being then extant) and with interpreting of tongues, and yet by no meanes under∣valuing even that their admired Gift of Tongues: whereof therefore he sets down the usefullness in two points.
First in regard of private edification, ver. 4. He that speaketh in an unknown tongue edifieth himself. And, Secondly, in order to the conversion of infidels. ver: 22. Tongues are a sign: a verifica∣tion of old prophesies (such as Isai: XXVIII, 11. cited by our Apostle ver: 21. and that of Joel II, 28. cited by St. Pe∣ter, Acts II, ver▪ 16.) to convert the Jewes, who received those prophesies, but yet believed not the Gospel; and a supernatural effect or miracle for the perswading the Heathen world of the Divinity of Christian Doctrine. But together that the justice of his compa∣rison might appear, he sets down also the comparative uselessnesse of this gift in two other points, the former of more private concerment: The mans own understanding many times was unfruitful. ver. 14: the latter of a larger extent, others (already convert∣ed) understood not those tongues, were not commonly edified ver. 5, 6. &c. and could not to such praises say Amen▪ ver. 16. Wherefore this Gift of tongues was not so excellent, that is so usefull to the Church as prophesying, or interpre∣ting
of tongues, no not if applied to this special office of prayer, wherein all ought to beare a part, at least by their Amen or consent, which how could they give to what they did not under∣stand? Upon the whole consultation the text is the result, as is evident by the very manner of speaking, or the initial Formulary. What is it then? In other words, what shall we determine in this case? To which it is returned by way of resolve. I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding al∣so, and with the understanding both of my selfe and of them who hear me. ver: 2, 9, 16, 19. In other terms: I account the faculty or gift of uttering an inspired prayer for the service of the Church in the publique worship of God, to be de∣sireable and of excellent use in the Church; yea even those prayers, which. are inspired in or under unknown tongues, to be a miraculous proof of the Gospell. But all these prayers, when used in publick, ought to be so uttered, and in such a language, as that they may be publickly understood: Else, so farr
forth as they are not understood, so farr forth are they uselesse to the Church, any otherwise than as miracles. By his account it is plain both what this spiri∣tual Gift was, and that it was such as we have above determined. To proceed therefore now to theSect. 6. consideration of the Rule given by the Apostle for the publick management of this gift. . The searching the distinct and full import of these words [I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also] will make out the summe and particulars of the Apostles Rule. The summe is: Gifts indeed are not to be despised or neglected? But above all gifts, above all dexterity, neatness, co∣piousness, nay above all miracles of Lan∣guage (for of such gifts there spoke he) we ought to be sollicitous, even in our publick prayers, that our minds and hearts be all along discinctly intent and employed. Words, though inspired ones, are of little virtue or worth with∣out the concurrence and ingagement of the mind. Indeed the designe of words
in prayer, as to God-wards (who un∣derstands our thoughts without any ex∣teriour indications of them) is but to fix the Soul, to give distincter form and maturity to its acts, and to keep it staid to the particulars of its devotions. They are but the Vehicles of the souls breath∣ings and Transports. By them our minds do elabi sursum ac evolare, glide forth and soar aloft to that God, whom the infinite tendencies of soules, rather than pittiful limited sounds, which dy with our breath, can reach and move. Wherefore, though they are to be used (both upon account of the reasons mentioned, and Divine command) yet all speech, all gifts or faculty thereof, are so far onely valuable & useful, as they serve to engage the mind in affection and duty to God. To reduce this into distincter mem∣bers. First, it is considerable that the Apostle no wise undervalues or teach∣eth to neglect the spiritual gift, which was then so miraculously frequent a∣mongst them: which because it was onely ( and not ) a ift and not a Grace, cannot be supposed to have been otherwise serviceable to them in
prayer, than as it suggested the matter and words of the prayer. These we will conclude them to have had by pre∣sent inspiration; which in that he di∣rects them, who were thus extraordina∣rily inspired to imploy, resolving and de∣termining, I will pray with the Spirit, this part of his rule can be no further of concernment to us, who have not this extraordinary inspiration, than as it is applicable to what in our ordinary state  succeeded such inspiration. And  can impose on us is this, that e use thse ordinary abilities we  (analogus to their extraor∣ ones) in provision of prayers b∣ our state, that is, made up of meet tter and meet words, which was all which their inspired faculty did sup∣ply. We must conceive, God has ne∣ver been wanting in his provisions for his Church. When under the law he required sacrifices, and the great pomp of a ceremonial worship, he inspired Moses and David and Asaph and other holy men to furnish his Church with suitable devotionalls, prayers and hymnes pertinent to that state. When
under the Gospell the state of things was changed, and he now without those shadowes required the sacrifice of faith∣full and pure hearts, he haveing first accepted the immaculate sacrifice of his onely Son upon the Crosse, by the sweet savour whereof all our sacrifices both of hearts and devotions must be∣come acceptable, he I say, forasmuch a i was necessary there should be pub∣lick prayers proper also for this state, in∣spire the primitive Christian Saints with such abilies, by which they con∣ceived prayers meet to their worship. And the same spirit rests still in the Church; onely te manner of its com∣munication is diverse. What they had by extraordinary inspiration, we have by more ordinary meanes and methods, of which we shall speak hereafter▪ When therefore he wills, that those in∣spired persons Pray with the spirit, that is, make use of their inspiration in pray∣er, by parity of reason, I say, he requi∣res, we, in our state, imploy our Chri∣stian prudence, care and skill, that our prayers be meet and pertinent to the present condition of the Church & of
our selves. And that, as above intimated, First, as to the matter of them. We are not presently to vent, what first offers it selfe to our ranging phansy. Things ought to be examined, and choice made, and care taken, that in our confessions we charge not on our selves sins, which we do not think our selves guilty of: that again in our peti∣tions we neither ask things unlawful, nor indecent, nor for ill ends to spend on our lust: that finally in our doxolo∣gies, and all addresses of invocation, admiration, praise, or vow to God, we ascribe not or promise to him things unbecomeing his pure nature and glo∣rious Majesty. The very law of nature as well as Holy writt▪ requires thus much. Eccle. V. 2. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God (which he presseth by naturall reason) For God is in heaven and thou on earth. And secondarily, even as to wrds and expressions, none can conceive, but Christian prudence and care is to be used; for as much as it is certain, the mind closely follows the words and
conceives and understands thinges by them. It must needs therefore be, that irreverent, absurd or uncomely ex∣pressions lead aside or disturb true devotion. The Holy Ghost, in setting down an order for Israels repentance, condescends to a strange particularity in this regard. Hose. XIV. 1, 2. O Isra return unto the Lord; for thou hast  by thine iniquities. Take with you words, and turne to the Lord: say  him, Take away our iniquity, and r∣ceive us graciously. &c. And  Great and wise Saint, Job, (rnked  God himselfe amongst the three Ezek: XIV 14, 20▪ in prayer) speakes of it, even in  case, as a matter of dreadfull  (which sure then in us ought to engag some care & thought) to choose out words to plead with God. Job: IX. 14. I will therefore onely adde, that what ever interest or Familiarity any man can conceive himself to have with God, loose and carelesse language in Prayer, must needs bespeak a certain want of the fear of God in him, who uses it; and most especially in Publick, where every expression may be presumed to have an
influence on many hearts, either to quicken or infect them. Thus then stands the first member of the Apostles rule; that, whereas the Corinthians had an immediate inspira∣tion then assisting many of them in prayer, they should not neglect it: which can concern our times, and state no o∣therwise than thus; that, whereas we have onely Christian prudence and usual utterance, which are the gift (though but common gift) of Gods spirit, we ne∣glect not the use of these, in providing, according to our ability, that our prayers be meet and fit, both in matter and form. I doe not see how any thing more can reasonably be infered hence: The other branch of his rule is this, that all gifts, which are exercised in publick prayers, ought to be so regu∣lated or managed, as that the prayers, made thereby, be understood, both by the person that presents them, and the congregation of Auditors, who are to joyne therein. This is clearly his sense, I will pray with the spirit, (as before said) but I will pray with the understanding also, the point we now urge. He allowes
that even the very gift of strange tongues, (for of that gift particularly as we have seen he speaks) might be used in prayer; but first, by such who vnder∣stood it themselves, that so while their spirit prayed, their understanding might not be unfruitfull V: 14. And, secondly, if amongst the unlearned, then with interpretation, that so, they who occu∣pied the room of the unlearned might say Amen. V. 16. They were to use the gift of tongues, that the benefit of a new miracle might redound to the pro∣pagating or confirming the beliefe of Christianity; but they were to interpret, that the prayers, which they conceived, might not be of their private spirit, but being understood by all, ingage distinct∣ly the devotion of the whole Church. And the necessity of this later is most evident. For, how is it possible the mind can go along with, consent to, and be distinctly affected with, what it does not understand? Can any man, that re∣solves to speak reason or sense, call the muttering over of words, which he does not understand, a reason∣able service? This is a strange wor∣shipping
God in spirit and in truth, to pay him such a service, which cannot possibly have any truth in it, that is any conformity of my mind with my words, because I understand them not; nay, concerning which I do not know whe∣ther it be an act of Worship or of Bla∣sphemy, whether I bless or curse. The consideration of this, I confess, creates in me not a little wonder at those of the Romish Church; that a∣gainst all Scripture, reason, truth of Hi∣story, nay even against common sense, they should magnifie, maintain and pra∣ctice (even after these miraculous gis have long ceased) Prayer in an unknown Tongue: and this in a manner constant∣ly and in their most solemn and serious Offices. That their common Priests amongst us should affirm, that no Chri∣stian Nation before the Reformation u∣sed to have the publick Service in any but the Latine Tongue, I do not at all admire, because I am satisfied by suffi∣cient experience, that many of them do not understand what is Latine and what not▪ (Hebrew or Greek words, when writ in a Latine Character, are
sufficiently Latine with them: and this, as to many passages in their Offices they will face us down in, before their cre∣dulous people, and call us ignorant, be∣cause we know better) But that any of them who pretend to Learning and E∣ducation should say so, I cannot but stand amazed; when even their own Breviaries, their Ritual, nay the very Canon of the Mass it self have all along not onely several Hebrew and Greek words, but some passages intirely with∣out variation taken out of the old Greek Liturgies (and therefore must needs suppose them in being before them∣selves) and besides several Greek Litur∣gies, which certainly were once in use, have we not to this day extant the Li∣turgy of the Church of Alexandria, of the Aethiopick & Armenian Churches, & many others which perhaps I never heard of? But to let these Gentlemen pass: while we reprehend Adversaries, it is necessary we be just and constant to our selves. I must needs confess, amongst those who call themselves Protestants and Reformed, and who would be thought to be of us, since there have
been so many pretenders to the Gift of prayer, they have made this sacred Of∣fice of prayer, as they perform it, very unintelligible: if they do pray with the spirit, so; I am sure they do not pray with the understanding, at least of those who hear them. I must avow, I cannot un∣derstand Non-sense, nor distinctly com∣prehend mens meaning in broken sense, or their blundering confused aiming at sense: and I could wish, that most of the prayers of the gifted men were not too often fraught herewith. I am well as∣sured also, that most of the common people do not understand terms of art, nor new and affected words and phrases, and so that they cannot to one half of such mens prayers say Amen. I might also say, that by their frequent exple∣tives, by their often being at a loss, by their undigested and inconsistent expres∣sions, their uttering at a peradventure what comes next; it is evident, that they themselves many times do not distinctly understand, what they would have. If therefore we will keep to this member of the Apostles Rule, it is plain we can no more justifie such prayers as these,
than the former practice which we have reprehended, & which even these men themselves do reprehend, in our Elder Adversaries of Rome. There may be yet conceived a third branch in this the Apostles rule, though indeed it may rather seem a consectary from what he saies, than matter of his plain design. For the discovery where∣of it is to be considered that though the Greek word , which is in this place rendred understanding, princi∣pally denote the intellectual part of the , yet it is commonly used, both in  and prophane authors, for the purpose, sentence, resolution or desire of the mind, yea in a word for the whole rational part, or any act and intention, thereof. Thus in Homer,  signifies the inclination and maine bent of his mind. And any thing is said , when it is as we would have it. Besides there is no rea∣son assignable, why the Apostle should require, that men pray with the under∣standing, but because that being the leading part of the soul, draws the will & unites all the powers of the Soul upon
God. To pray then with the mind (as the word imports or may infer) will be to pray with real inten∣tion and all good affection, in the lan∣guage of Scripture, to pray with all our heart, with all our Soul, and with all our Strength. And when the Apostle re∣solves, we ought so to pray with the spi∣rit that we pray also with the mind, he would that all spiritual gifts, servicea∣ble in prayer, be so managed, as that the prayers made thereby be not onely comprehended by the understanding, but also may make impression upon the will and affections, and draw and im∣ploy the whole Soul God-wards, by the exercise of all those Christian graces which are proper to the respective parts of prayer. I do not say this was di∣rectly intended here by St. Paul; but it is fairly enough deducible from what he did directly intend, and from his expresse terms. And this is truly what the ScriptureSect. 7 Jude▪ v 20. Eph. 6 18. meanes, by praying in the Holy host, or prayer and supplication in the spirit, and like phrases: when the whole soul being attent to every part of the duty
and seriously intending and being bent on the matters exprest, is affected sui∣tably to the nature of each; confessing sins with sorrow & contrition for them, with hatred of them, with resolution against them; and with the same temper most passionatly begging pardon and grace, and together being resolved to endeavour by all meet means to obrain & await the graces petitioned for; again, interceding for others with servent charity and good will. That this is the genuin sense thereof cannot more fitly be proved, than by considering, in the first place, what the Spirit of prayer, which was promised, was. The pro∣mise we have most largely and perspi∣cuously in Zech: XII, 10. I will pour upon the House of David, and upon the inhabi∣tants of Jerusalem, the spirit of Grace of supplications; & they shall look upon me whom they have peirced & they shall mourne for him as one mourneth for an onely Son; & shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for an onely Son. Nothing can be more plain by the very letter of a Text, than that the Blessing here pro∣mised was a complication of the graces
of Gods spirit, contrition, faith divine love, and whatever else makes up the ardent devotion of a penitent heart; rather than any gifts of utterance, none of which haply would suffice for the ex∣pressing such passionate effusion of affe∣ction, as is in the context repraesented It is in direct terms first styled the spirit of grace, a penitent, affectionate, broken heart▪ and by being such, a spirit of sup∣plications, plurally, that temper being lowder in the eares of God, than all vocall ayers; of which we have a fa∣mo instance (I. Sam. I. 10, 13) in the case of Hannah. And if that passage of St. Paul, Rom. VIII 26, be to be un∣derstood (as some would have it) touch∣ing such an inward assistance of the Ho∣ly Ghost, as all the faithfull may expect in prayer, it must certainly be interpre∣ted in proportion to this prophesy. He had said (ver: 24, 25) That under all their pressures and groanes it was Hope that supported them; and that by wor∣king them to patience: upon which immediately he proceeds (ver: 26) Likewise the spirit also helpeth our in∣firmities; when our very hopes are
weake and languishing, we receive a secret supply of comfort from the Holy Ghost wonderfully affecting our hearts, and by that meanes supporting us. For we know not what to pray for as we ought. In these deliquia, or fainting fits, we are many times at a losse, whether we ought to ask the removall of our cala∣mities, or no. But the Spirit it self ma∣keth intercession for us with groanes, which cannot be uttered. The same Ho∣ly Ghost, in these straits, works our minds to such ineffable heights of Devo∣tion, and casting our selves upon God, as do undoubtedly prevail with God to give us what is best, though we nei∣ther positively aske the one nor the o∣ther, but refer the whole to the gra∣cious pleasure of our heavenly Father. This is I profess as naturally as I can represent it (to make the verse any way consistent whith the Apostles dis∣course) the sense of that verse, takeing it even of the spirit inwardly assisting the faithfull in prayer: though it seemes ra∣ther to be meant of the spirit dwelling in Christ, who sits at the right hand of God making intercession for us, for
which I could alledge severall reasons, were it to the present designe. Upon the whole then, takeing this verse, even in favour of our adversaries, the Apostle expressly affirmes, that the great assi∣stance, which we receive from the Holy Ghost in prayer, is, its makeing inter∣cession for us withgroanes which cannot be uttred; referring the assistance to in∣ward devotion wrought by the Holy Ghost, and too great for the utterance of words, and not to any gifts of utter∣ance or expressions. Having thus considered what the spi∣rit of prayer is, in the sense of Scripture, and what the great assistance which the Faithful may expect in prayer from the spirit, for further proof that the notion above given is the fittest, which can be put on those phrases of praying in the Ho∣ly Ghost, and prayer in the spirit, let the places where they are found be lookt o∣ver with regard to the connexion and design of each. In Ephes. VI. from ver. 10, to the 17. (inclusively) the Apostle conjures his Ephesians, considering the variety of dangers and difficulties in their Christian warfare (set down er;
12) that they should endeavour all courage and constancy; and to that purpose Arme, or endeavour to con∣firm, themselves by the Truth, and a righteous or holy life (ver: 14) by Charity, Faith, and Hope (ver: 15, 16, 17.) Praying alwaies with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance: in other & shorter terms, praying with all fervour and constancy; or with the exercise of all those Christian graces, and as men inspirited with supernatural devotion. And if that passage of St. Jude has any thing in it peculiar and distinct from this sense, it is onely with relation to the publick assemblies, and prayer therein. He had warned the faithfull (ver: 19) of those who separated them∣selves, sensual men, haveing not the spi∣rit [brutish persons, void of grace or any principle of a new life] But (ver: 2.) ye beloved, building up your selves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, keep your selves in the love of God. [In stead of separating, fre∣quent the publick assemblies, for your daily growth in grace, and joyn there
in prayer with all zeal and ardour of mind, thus keeping your selves in the favour and under the blessing of God in communion with his Church.] What any inspired gifts of utterance, supposed in the community of the faithful, have here to do (the publick and promiscuous ex∣ercise of which possibly might rather tend to schism and separation) it is not easy to conceive. The result then, or the whole thatSect. 8. can be reasonably concluded, from all the places, which we have yet consider∣ed, is, That there were, in the miraculous state of the Christian Church, certain ex∣traordinary gifts of utterance, particu∣larly that of divers Tongues; that this was then used, and under some cautions use∣ful, even in the Office of Prayer: that both then and ever the Holy Spirit of God, in a peculiar sort under the Gospel, sweetly moves, softens and quickens the hearts of the Faithful, as in other cases, so especially in prayer: that herein it raises in them greater fervour of love and good affection than naturally could be had or expected: that in all kind of Prayer the Faithful ought to endeavour
the exercise of the graces of Gods Spirit; And that finally, all publick Prayers are to be fitted, in the best manner that may be, to the general capacity and devotion of the Christian community. CHAP. II. Sect. 1. The third point of Enquiry. That, which hath been of late named the Gift of Prayer, is not the same with the Spi∣ritual Gift spoken of by the Apostle. Sect. 2. The fourth Enquiry, touching an Ordinary Gift of Prayer, supposed to succeed the Extraordinary one, and to be of perpetuity in the Church. Sect. 3. What sober notion can be framed there∣of. Sect. 4. A judgment of it in such notion. Sect. 5. That this Gift in this notion, as to the Essence of it, was no more appropriate to Prayer than to other like Christian Offices. Sect. 6. How far its use reasonable or tolerable at present. THE third point of Enquiry willSect. 1. take up less time for satisfaction: namely, Whether what has been by the
late Age named, and is now called usu∣ally, the Gift of prayer, be the same with that spiritual Gift spoken of in the place aforementioned? For answer whereto, though it might seem requisite some definition or descri∣ption should first be given of this pre∣tended Gift, yet I presume it for the pre∣sent purpose sufficiently known by its name, and proceeding directly to the Question answer it in the Negative, that the Faculty called the Gift of pray∣er, and pretended to by those, who quarrel'd and withdrew from the Litur∣gy of the Church of England, was not at all the gift designed by S. Paul in 1 Cor. XIV, 15. the only place which yet I can find to speak of praying by a spiritual gift. For, First, it is plain by the account already given of that place, that the Gift there spoken of was the gift of Tongues. In the first Chapter, we read the Corinthian Church to have been enriched in all utterance and know∣ledge.1 Cor. 1. 5. This gift of Tongues was a per∣ticular species or kind of the Gift of ut∣terance: but yet as particular as it was, it was no more appropriate to the Office
of prayer, than to that of singing: for it follows in that very place, I will pray with the spirit, &c. I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the un∣derstonding also. And no more to ei∣ther of these, than to the Office of preaching or speaking mysteries. For, ver. 2. He that speaketh in an unknown tongue, in the spirit speaketh mysteries; or, ver. 6. He speaketh either by revelation, or by knowledge, or by prophesying, or by do∣ctrine: And again, ver. 26, He hath a psalm, hath a doctrine, &c. Now it is certain, or will be confest, that this gift of Tongues was not the thing pretend∣ed to in the Gift of prayer. Again, it is acknowledged by all, that the Gift there spoken of was extraordi∣nary and miraculous: and this destroyes the very pretense of those touching whom we speak. For though haply they would be content to be admired for their gift of prayer (and it may be some do really admire many of them af∣ter a fashion) yet was not this Gift pre∣tended any miracle, but an usual conse∣quent (at least in some measure) of grace, though sometimes incident even
unto reprobates also, and so more or∣dinary than a gracious heart it self. But it will be demanded then, isSect. 2. there not some Ordinary Gift of prayer, answerable to to that Extraordinary one there spoken of, which was to be of perpetuity in the Church, and may be expected from the Holy Ghost by all the Faithfull, as being a common fruit of Conversion? This is the fourth point of the pro∣pounded inquiry. And in answere hereunto, that terms may not involve us in obscurity, I must forbear no lon∣ger to set down as inoffensively as I can, what can be the sober meaning of the Gift of prayer. Now as to those who meant any thingSect. 3. sober and intelligble thereby, I conceive their meaning in ordinary language may be thus exprest. This gift they suppo∣sed to be a faculty, infused by the Holy Ghost, consisting of quickness of thought and readiness of speech, both particularly applied to the business of prayer. And this they would have reckoned amongst what they call the Common gifts of the spirit; because, though all are by then
supposed to have it in some measure who are truly converted and in whom the spirit dwells, yet many may receive from the spirit of God this and such like gifts (and in a greater measure too than some of their converts) who yet are void of the sincere and choice grace of Gods spirit: as Jadas may be conceived to have been indowed with spirituall Gifts qualifying him for his Apostleship and ministry, and yet still a reprobate, and farr from haveing an holy heart. This is, as distinctly as I can apprehend it, and as impartially as I can set it down, the sense of this pretended Gift. I call it a pretended gift, not but that I acknowledge such abilities, wherever they are, to come from the spirit of God in a common way; but I cannot admitt either that every faithfull man must ex∣pect such gifts so to be infused into him by the spirit, or that he must not be accounted faithfull, if he want them, or finally that such Gifts are more pe∣culiar to the present and Christian state of the Church, than to any other former estate thereof whatsoever. Now I humbly beseech all who shall
take the pains to read this, not to be of∣fended with what I have said, or am now about to say for the bringing people to a clear understanding & a sober judgment in this matter. Let us be content to con∣sider the case like men of reason, and in words of truth and plainenesse. Suppose then I should tell the worldSect. 4. that there is an Heathen art called Rhe∣torick, and that there have been many naturall men of excellent abilities this way, as Aristotle, Cicero, Quintilian, Hermogenes, and many other masters, who bave long since written bookes of this art, teaching men to speake readily on any subject upon a sudden, & that this has been known commonly amongst the heathen to have been effected in a most copious and eminent sort, exceeding farr what most (if not all) our preten¦ders to Gifts have attained to; Must not this be allowed to be truth? Suppose these men, long since dead, who never heard of Christ, or his spirit, or the gift thereof, could now heare us talke of Qickness of thought, and Rea∣diness of speech, as parts of a suppo∣sed Gift of prayer, might not they
presently stand up and lay claim to this gift? Nay and not onely so, but that they taught it, and have lest admirable pre∣cepts for it; and that these two are nei∣ther better nor worse, than the result of two parts of Rhetorick (according to their doctrine) the names whereof are Notorious, Inventio & Elocutio. Suppose I say further, that as the Philosopher hath observed that there is a Natural kind of Logick, which even unlearned men have, by which they reason and draw notable shrewd conse∣quences (which our Neighbours very fitly call Mother wit) so there is a natu∣ral kind of Rhetorick (some men na∣turally are more quick both in thought and speech than others) must not this also be confessed as a truth? I will onely add one thing more, that there is a kind of unartificial education and institution. When men converse much with persons, who are expert in art, and hear them frequently discourse of, and practise in▪ that art, if they have any natural parts themselves, they learn something from them, and setting them∣selves to imitate them, and practice by
the rules, they have had given them, they are presently able to do some little feats in that art themselves. Now, is there any thing strange in all this? Is not this what was known and taught in the Heathen World, long before the gift of prayer was thought of in the Christi∣an, that all Arts and Sciences are attain∣ed Naturâ, praeceptis & usu, by mens na∣tural parts upon institution and practice? I would fain hear of any, who attained the gift of prayer any otherwise than thus. Those who have been the sudden∣est Proficients, that I have heard of (I forbear any instances which look like odous) have, to my knowledge, had persons, of great eminency in this way, labouring with them many dayes toge∣ther, giving them methods (such as they were) and instructions for the use of them, putting words into their mouth, practising before them, setting them to practise themselves. And these things being notoriously known, what man, that has not sold himself to whimsies, and given up his reason to extravagant ima∣ginations, can conceive or suppose in this case any infusion of a spiritual gift, or
must not rather acknowledge a common habit naturally acquired (I mean by usu∣al and proper means) the like to which in any other case (caeteris paribus) may be had at any time; and in which there is no reason to conceive any other than a general influence and concourse of the Holy Ghost, such as in other matters ac∣companies mens exercise and industry. Now upon the whole I demand, is it reasonable to take a piece of an ordinary art, famous even amongst Heathens, and applying it to a particular Christian Of∣fice, to wit that of prayer, to disguise it by a new Christian name; and calling it the Gift of prayer, to make it presently a Fruit and sign of grace? If it had been onely said, that even Ordinary Oratory is a gift of the Spirit, it must have been acknowledged a truth; for so are all arts and sciences, not onely Liberal but even Mechanical (so was Embroidery Engravoure in Aholiah & Bezaleel, Exod: XXXV, 31, 35; spinstry in the Women ver: 25, 26; Architecture in David 1. Chron: XXVIII, 11 12) But if men will pretend to have received this as a gift, by a sudden and more than usual
inspiration, and not to have come there∣by, upon their natural parts, by heare∣ing or reading discourses thereof, by heareing it practiced, by practiceing therein themselves, they abuse the world and themselves. And if they will make such things as these signes or fruits of grace, they are signes truly what the grace in them is, but somewhat un∣luckily: they shew indeed, that though they may be good meaning men in this, and in other regards upright and sound, yet they are in spiritual matters marveil∣ously whimsicall, unreasonable and halfsighted; they distinguish not be∣twixt Grace, Nature and Art.Sect: 5. I may presume what has been said is sufficient to take off the pretence of any supernatural infused Gift, in this case ordinarily received, or to be ex∣pected by the faithfull. Now to shew, for a more full satisfaction to the en∣quiry in hand, that this Gift, as they call it, was, as to its Essentiall parts, no more appropriate to prayer than to other Christian offices of like nature, I shall onely urge the Experience of that age, by giveing in short the General
history of the Processs of this Gift. Af∣ter the great setters up hereof had im∣parted this their gift of prayer to the people, that is, taught them to pray by the spirit or in the conceived way, did not those very people presently, by virtue of this their gift, that is, this readiness of thought and speech, begin to expound Scripture and to speak in their assemblies, as they call'd it? Was not this the way of proceeding? First they learnt to pray by gift: then haveing exercised this gift in private fa∣milies, they begun to repeat their lead∣ers sermons, and by little & little imitate them, as they had done their prayers. Then they took upon them to exhort and instruct private families, that is, they practiced in private, and thence proceded to speak in publick, trying first how they could come offin their way of prayer publickly; in which haveing succeded they stuck at nothing. Can it be pretended that the Gift was differ∣ent in one and the other exercise? Was it not the same faculty that qualified them for both? And has not this, or worse been, the education and in a
manner sole erudition of many of them, who practice the ministry amongst those congregations, that withdraw from our Church. I have not written these thinges to viliy or cast a blemish upon masters of Families instructing, Ca∣techiseing, examining their children and servants on Lords daies and due times, nor upon their daily worshipping God by sober prayers in their Families, which I look upon as every such Christian mans duty, according to his ability and within his proper sphere; but onely to lay o∣pen, fairly and candidly, those artifices by which many pragmaticall men, not with∣out the instigation of the Spirit of Pride, have deluded themselves and others in∣to a conceipt of I knownot what gifts of the spirit, when God knows all was com∣mon and ordinary enough. And this, I say, is most evident demonstration that this Gift, as to its essence, is no more appropriate to Prayer than Preaching, be∣cause it capacitated those, who could pretend to nothing but gift, for both: and is, if we  it by its true name, no more than Habit of speech, a natu∣rall and somewhat unartificial kind of Oratory.
But it will be said, allowing what weSect. 6. call the Gift of prayer to be nothing else but an Habit of speech, at tainable by such means as has been said, yet may not we use this Habit of speech in pray∣er so, as to conceive our prayers our selves in our own words? I answer hereunto, Who doubts but we may? Provided, we acknowledge this Habit to be what it is, and use it accor∣ding to the Laws of God, with reve∣rence to the Majesty of God, and care we speak not unadvisedly of him or to him; according to the Lawes of the Church, with sobriety, modesty, peacea∣bleness and order, so, as to edifie our selves thereby in private, and not to di∣sturb or divide the Church by bringing thereby the publick and stated order in∣to disesteem: and finally with justice to our selves and the Common Christiani∣ty, so, as not to make this the sole way of praying in a due or Christian sort, & by a disuse of any other to incapacitate our own or our Admirers devotions for the other, & make both our selves & them uncharitably censorious of all Forms of Prayer, and those who use them, that is
of the whole Catholick Church, except our selves and our new (comparative∣ly) inconsiderable party. CHAP. III. Sect. 1. The fifth point of enquiry, touch∣ing any advantage of prayer by Gift above prayer by Form. Sect. 2. Edifi∣cation the great measure by which we are to estimate all advantage in this concern. Sect. 3. What edification truly means▪ Sect. 4. A frequent mistake a∣mongst persons of honest intention about it. Sect. 5. That may conduce to pri∣vate edification, which does not to pub∣lick Sect. 6. The advantages of Con∣ceived prayer impartially set down. Sect 7. The inconveniencies of it. Sect. 8. The advantages of prayer by Form. Sect. 9. The inconveniencies of it: Sect. 10. A judgment upon the whole. Sect. 11. A removal of some pretences against the efficacy of Forms. HAving allowed, under the cautiorsSect. 1. before set down, some arbitrary
use of such supposed Habit of speech in prayer as spoken of, it will be but rea∣sonable, and consonant to that Free∣dome, candour and openness, which I in the beginning promised in this Di∣scourse, to enquire further, Whether it were not more expedient, that the use of Conceived prayer in publick, were in∣joyned, or at least allowed and practi∣sed, than that of prescribed Forms, by reason of the great advantage concei∣ved prayer may be found or imagined to have, above any Formes whatsoe∣ver. And for satisfaction hereto, I shall impartially consider the advantages of both kinds, and having compared both, I do not doubt but we shall find our Church, like her in the Gospel, to have chosen the better part, and which I hope shall never again be taken from her. Now to make the way more plain to a full and distinct satisfaction, I think it fit to premise three things, First, That conducency to Edificati∣onSect. 2. is the onely measure, by which all advantages, conveniencies or profit are to be estimated in this case. If this need
any proof, greater cannot be required, than that it is made by the Apostle, in the same chapter which has hitherto been so serviceable to us, the great stan∣dard, according to which the Excellen∣cy of all Gifts and Offices in the publick Worship are to be examined. Letall things be done unto edification. The mat∣ter, there mainly taxt amongst them, was the use of spiritual Gifts, more to pomp and ostentation than a general good. How is it then brethren? When ye1 Cor. XIV. 26. come together, every one of you hath a Psalm, hath a Doctrine, hath a Tongue, hath a revelation, hath an interpretation. Each glories in adventures of his own Gifts, and through affectation, or under pretence of improving each himself, in stead of consulting publick edification, you introduce publick confusion. Upon which immediately follows the passage now mentioned, Let all things be done unto edification. No exercise of Gifts in the Christian Assemblies is to be allow∣ed, which conduces not to the common edification. So much then as either of these sorts of prayer edifies more than the other, so much of advantage
hath it of the other▪ Secondly, it is necessary we take someSect. 3. account what is the real and true im∣port of this term Edification: for it is to be acknowledged, Edifying is a term which the people much use, and little understand. It properly signifies Build∣ing, as we know; and is onely Metapho∣rically spoken of the soul, to signifie any advance, improvement or betterment of it in matters spiritual: and there being but two Faculties of the reasonable soul, capable of perfective habits or dispositi∣ons, namely, the understanding and the will, we may soon take an account par∣ticularly, what can be the utmost notion or extent of Edification, when applied to spirituals. The Understanding is edi∣fied, when it is further inform'd or in∣structed in the knowledge of some mat∣ter of worth or concernment. Thus Edi∣fication signifies improvement in know∣ledge or (whlch is resolvible into the same) recovery of what was forgotten. The Will is edified, when it is drawn either to the love and practice of some Duty before neglected, or to the dete∣station and abandoning some sin before
adhered to. Thus Edification signifies improvement in holiness or good reso∣lution. In summe and most plainly; a man is then edified when he is made any whit the wiser or the better. and beyond this Edification is onely a Chimera, or well meaning mistake. I do acknowledge the warmth ofSect. 4. affection under holy Offices, the motion of Transient remorse and sorrow, fears, hopes, and joys, have been, and to this day are, mistaken by many honest (though weaker) persons for the great∣est if not the onely Edification. When they have found their affections a little moved, perhaps to such pitch as that a tear has dropt, they have esteemed themselves singularly edified. Now though it must be allowed commenda∣ble and happy, in general, to pray and hear with such tenderness of heart, yet it is a great and may be a very fatal er∣rour, to take such passions for the graces of Gods spirit, or the motion thereof for solid and serious Edification. Felix we read trembled at St. Pauls preaching, yet had not therefore a jot more of the feare of God in him. They who are
resembled to the stony ground heard the word and anon with joy received it, but were notwithstanding as fruitless in ef∣fect, as they on the high way, who admit∣ted or regarded it not at all. And we know, how shallow some mens passions ly, howsoon they are come at, how easily stirred, and to how little purpose. St. Austins confession of his concernment even to teares for Dido in the Poeme, which he knew to be onely a Fable, is notorious: and every daies experience of effects of the like nature, upon occasions which I will not name, shewes, that to be moved with pathetick subjects and harangues is as common and natural, as it is usually fruitless. The utermost that is to be determined in the behalfe of these sensible commotions I conceive is, First, That if while a mans mind is really intent and seriously engaged in devo∣tion, the more sensitive soule shall at that time conspire therewith in suitable affections, such devotions are a great deal more confortable to the performer, and he may be sure acceptable to God; it is an argument we serve God in such case with our whole man, according to
that of David, my heart and my fleshPsal lxx. 2. rejoyceth in the liveing God. And, secondly, that these little parox∣ysms of pious affections, even when comeing upon us more unawares, by their frequent returns or more lasting impressions, which some times they may make on the soul, may serve, as previous dispositions, to prepare the Soul to the hatred of sin, to the love of God, to a serious tem∣per, and steddy resolutuion of duty. But where they uncertainly come and go, where they neither proceed from a mind so imployed and engaged, as be∣fore said, nor prevail to imprint any thing on the mind for a change to the better (which God knowes is two com∣monly the case) they are triviall, and little or not at all to be valued, if not fallacious. Reall edification still may not be concluded more, than what be∣fore resolved: so that the issue, in our present case to be tried, is no other than this, Which kind of prayer most conduces to the makeing men wiser or Holyer. And, lastly, it is to be considered bySect. 5.
way of promise, that there may be a private edification of a mans self, as well as a publick edification of the Church; and that what may conduce to the one, may not equally contribute to the o∣ther. This is plain out of the foremen∣tioned chapter to the Corinthians, ver: 3 and 4. He that prophesieth speaketh unto men to edification and Exhortation and Comfort. He that speaketh in an un∣known tongue edifieth himself; but he that prophesieth edifieth the Church. The gift of tongues might edify the parti∣cular owner, but it did not so much edi∣fy the community of the Church, as other more intelligible gifts. These things thus premised, I shall faithfully and impartially, upon long thought, and possibly some experience, endeavour to determin the case above putt, not at all detracting from the merits of what they call the gift of prayer To begin with what may be said forSect. 6. it: Conceived prayer hath these advan∣tages, First, it is ever New, and so more apt to gratify curiosity: and therefore those
who come not to the publick Worship out of sober Devotion, but Vanity or Custome, will more greedily come to it, and be less weary of it than prescribed Forms; its novelty both invitin  it, and allaying somewhat the Taedium or wearisomness of its length. In a word, it serves to bring many such people to Church. And the same is the true rea∣son, why we have many Hearers of our Sermons, who will not at all come into the Congregation at the Service: The Sermon is always new; the Service is not. Now though such persons look up∣on it as a great part of Religion in them to affect Sermons so zealously, yet it may be feared that this is one point which may be added to the Inventary of their mistakes, that they distinguish not herein, betwixt Curiosity and De∣votion. Secondly, Conceived Prayer may be sometimes more suited and apposit to the particular seasons and occasions, than the general prescribed Forms: But this according to the abilities of the Perfor∣mer, and as he is Master of phansie and speech, of consideration, invention and
Elocution. And Thirdly, For these rea∣sons (namely, its Novelty allwayes, and Particularity sometimes,) it is more apt to affect common and more slighty minds. Their love, grief, compassion, joy, hopes, are more easily hereby stir∣red. Now these, though they are, as be∣fore said, very commendable and com∣fortable withall, and well pleasing to God, when they proceed from sober de∣votion and judgment, yet let any man of reason judge how useless, and of what deceitful and dangerous consequence, they may prove, when they have such an irrational rise, as from Novelty, Phansie and Humour. Lastly, upon the former accounts it is easily admissible, that Conceived prayer may keep many persons more at∣tentive to it, than they would be to com∣mon Forms. Yet so, that this attention cannot alwayes be accounted, nor is really at first, true Devotion, or an act of direct Worship. It may proceed pos∣sibly from the Fear of God, and sense of his present Majesty, that I am so atten∣tive. But yet every act of Worship im∣porting a consent of the mind, and this
attention being in order to judgment, and that praevious to my consent, it is plain, the attention it self is not a direct act of Worship. For having attentively heard, inasmuch as all is new to me, I must first judge, whether what is in the name of the Congregation (and so in my name) presented to God, be generally approveable and suitable to my conditi∣on, before I can say Amen thereto that is, before I can either offer it up my self, or consent that it shall be offered up for me. Now I say, this act of consent and intention being in this case the first pro∣per act of Devotion or Worship, it is plain, that neither of the precedent acts, of Attention or Judgment, are strictly to be accounted such. These I profess are the onely advan∣tages, which either my poor experience, consideration or reading suggest alledg∣able for Conceived prayer in preference to Prescribed Forms: It is more inviting and less tedious to some spirits, it i sometimes more close and particularly apposit, it is more apt to affect com∣mon minds, and to retain some kind of attention; and how farr all, or any of
these, are advantages, has been under each head stated or intimated. Now on the other side, to deal in∣genuously,Sect. 7 it hath many inconveniencies, and such which concern both the Praier it selfe thus uttered, the Performer, and the congregation. As to the prayer it selfe, that cannot be so complete and absolute as other∣wise it might be, both in regard of matter, form, and the consent, which it should have from the whole assembly to make it their joint supplication, or common act of worship. In regard of the matter, it must needs be much de∣ficient. The generall concernments of a Christian assembly are numerous and yet weighty; and therefore need to be represented or sett forth, as neer as can be, it not in express terms (as is done excellently in our Church Litany) yet under such heads as naturally enough comprise them and suggest them to the peoples thoughts. Let any man be of never so happy consideration or ready memory, it is not likely, if possible, that upon the sudden or some little thought, he should make so just an enu∣meration,
or even summulary of them, as is necessary; especially supposeing that commonly he is to vary expressions, if not method. He must needs omit many things necessary to be confest, asked, or given thankes for, through unavoidable lapse of memory, and being (possibly) more affected and carried away with other points. And in this case, I appeal to any, who have been but in a tolerable measure seriously conversant in this kind of pray∣er in private, where they have sewer di∣versions than a vast congregation affords, Have they not many times, after have∣ing forecast the particulars of their state in their mind, kneeled down with an in∣tention to make such or such confessions, petitions, thankesgiveings, or intercessi∣ons, which, being more affected withsome other particulars, they have cleare omit∣ted. If it be said, notwithstanding these omissions, God was privy to those inten∣tions, & will accept themfor express pray∣ers: I return, so he was to the inten∣tions of the mind, in all which was ex∣prest, and if expression was necessary in one, it was in the other; especially,
being a way is obvious which might comprehend (more neerly) all. And, which is more considerable, secondly, though God be privy to our intentions, man is not; and so they who should have joyned with the speaker in prayer, that is all ingaged in the prayer, but himself, are at a losse. Further as in this kind such omissions are inevitable, so is there great danger of more positive michief. A man though pos∣sessed actually with the fear of God, may deliver on a sudden a proposition, which he could oftentimes wish recalled, as not fully foreseeing its consequence, when yet in the uprightness of his heart he spoke it. What miscarriages there have been of this nature frequent, I will not mention, though at hand: but sure, suffi∣cient to justifie that Twelfth Canon of the Council of Milevis, forbidding a more cautious practice than this, Ne fortè aliquod contra fidem, vel per ignorantiam, vel per minus studium sit compositum. This as to the matter of such prayer, and in the next place as to words: though some men are more happy in ex∣temporary language than other, yet ge∣neraly
the first expressions which offer themselves (and which in this case most∣ly a man must take) are not the fittest, properest and most pregnant. Things spoken on the sudden are commonly more rawly, imperfectly and confused∣ly exprest, which consequently must needs be as indistinctly apprehended by the auditory. Now certainely care ought to be taken that our sacrifices should be, as neer as can be, without ble∣mish even in these outer parts. Lastly, as to the Consent of the con∣gregation, which any prayer, offered in publick, ought to have to make it their common act, I have already said, that it is most necessary men judge before they consent (and truly, too commonly, where conceived prayer is used in pub∣lick, most people are more employed in judging than in praying) now suppose after judgment past in the breasts of the hearers, many of them shall not think fit to consent to such a confessory, peti∣tionary or Eucharisticall passage, what then is become of the Common or Pub∣lick prayer? Where is the agreement and conspireing votes of the faithfull,
necessary to render it more effectuall? And yet this seems to be required by our Lord, Math: XVIII, 19. Here then are three or four considerable, yet undeniable, inconveniencies attending the prayer thus uttered. 2. As to the Performer or him who is the mouth of the rest: Though we admit him to be a person of happy gifts, of a vast comprehension, ready thought and memory, and as ready speech, yet no man being the same at all times, and he being to represent to God not onely his own state and wants (which his own heart possibly would more facilly sug∣gest) but the peoples too; First, his con∣sideration, memory and invention must needs oftentimes be more on the rack, than they would be in the use of a ma∣ture, well-accomplisht, and known Form, to which in every point his whole soul might attend and consent without such distraction, or disease. And, Se∣condly, When he shall apprehend any thing to be by him too unadvisedly, in. sufficiently, or blunderingly exprest, if he have any grain of Modesty in him, he cannot but be concern'd and disturbed:
and the uneasiness of this may be much greater than that of the former case, and so more considerably withdraw his heart from due attention, if not sometimes al∣most confound him in some part or pas∣sage of his Prayer. Here then is a dou∣ble Distraction attending the publick Performer in this kind of Prayer. Lastly, in regard of the Auditory it has certainly these inconveniencies. First, The Devotion of the whole Congregation is tyed not onely to the measure of the Ministers gifts and abili∣ties, which in many are but mean or in∣different, but also to all the infelicities of his present temper, and the disorders of his heart. There is certainly much more reason to complain of stinting the spirit, if we respect the hearts of the peo∣ple, in this case than under well compo∣sed Forms. Admit a man to be but a mean Master of speech, memory and in∣vention, the Congregation, whose pray∣ers can be no better than he can on the sudden pour out, is in a miserable con∣dition. Admit him to be never so great an Oratour, yet no man hath at all times the same presence of mind and readiness
of utterance. Now it would be a deplo∣rable case, that five or six hundred mens devotions should depend onely on ones, and be subject to be dampt or confound∣ed by his distempers; of which even good men are subject to various. 1. To dulness or grosser indisposition of body, and so of mind. 2. To incogitancy and wandrings. No man so intirely devout, as that he can alwayes set bounds to his thoughts, nor therefore to his expressi∣ons. 3. To incumbrances and distracti∣ons from without. The Holiest men are many times more affected with worldly concernments and events than becomes them: and no man of reason can think it a tolerable evil, that the devotions of a multitude should be disordered by the distractions of a single person. Lastly, I have already insinuated the mischief, which mustredound to the Congregation in publick conceived prayers, by reason of unavoidable omissions, or the defici∣encies of memory & consideration, if of no other faculty. Let the incommodities arising from these and other like so fre∣quently emergent cases be put together, & the summe will be very considerable.
Secondly, conceived prayers are much more difficult to all mixt Auditories, than are known and common Forms. It is a very hard thing to speak so plainly, as to make half the common people un∣derstand, especially when there is no opportunity of interlocutory helps, and a man must take the words, which first offer. The language of Universities and Cities, and of men of liberal education, amongst whom men, that may be suppo∣sed qualified for this performance, have or should have been bred, is much diffe∣rent from that of the Vulgar. A multi∣tude of neater words insensibly insinu∣ate themselves, and by use become fami∣liar and natural to us, which though they are plain to men of education, are not so to the illiterate. Again, what un∣couth singularity of words do men gi∣ven to this conceived way, affect? I list not to expose any. Upon these and per∣haps many other accounts (already touched) it is evident such prayers are very difficult, and as they who occupy the room of the unlearned, can seldome, for want of having understood what was said, say Amen to half, so by reason of
obscurity or confusion more learnd persons are sometimes in no better a plight. Thirdly the devotion of the Hearers, yea even of the most judicious is put to frequent losses, by reason of the mee novelty of many ex∣pressions and things. As before said, after I have heard I must iudge be fore I can consent: and if by reason of novelty, affectation of expression, ambiguity, indigestedness, or any such rub in my way, I cannot readily judge, but hesitate and deliberate touching this or that passage, in the meane time he who prayes is gone on, and now upon a new subject, and I evidently left behind and at lsse, and miserably perhaps confounded before my devo∣tion can close in again: and no sooner it may be well fixt, but again lead into the same inconveniency and Maze. I professe I have not plaid the sophi∣ster in any of these charges: I judge in my conscience all men who understand things, and are sober and unprejudicate, must needs acknowledge the truth of what I have said; and it is not impos∣sible
but that I might have added much more on this Subject. But it is time now to pass to the con∣siderationSect. 8 of common, known, and pre∣scribed Forms. And first as to their Conveniencies. 1. They are more mature and com∣prehensive, than are, or can be, any extemporaneous effusions: and that both as to matter and words. They are made upon consideration and study, and not withut invokeing the assistance of the Holy Ghost. They are afterwards scannd and examind by their authours. They then pass many other learned mens judgments, and perhaps corrections; by all which they are fitted not onely to the publick neties and condition of the people, as to the matter contained in them, but to such facility and naturall∣ness of speech as may comply with all mens understanding, and withall, to such gravity and reverence, as is due to the divine worship. 2 Though it should be supposed, that by reason of that temper, in our people generally, which the Holy Ghost objects to the Hebrews (Chap: V ver. 11, 12)
that even forms themselves, when new, are not so well understood by them as they should be, yet Common formes by being common become generally un∣derstood. And this is a matter of very great moment: For it is all one in effect whether I pray in an unknowne tongue, or in words of a tongue which I know, but do not understand these particular words of it; still my understanding is unfruitfull, and my devotion confused, and the benefit of such prayer little or none at all. Now this our daily experience teacheth as, that there are very few that desire to be serious in their prayers, who are not easily brought to pray with understan∣ding by forms, and so with distinct edi∣fication. We may note therefore that our Lord Jesus thus taught his disciples to pray: for he saith, not only, After this manner pray ye () Thus pray ye, each of which words bears an Emphasis with advantage to this cause, though some have so wrested them as to inferre thence the Lords prayer to be onely a pattern for our imitation) but, when ye pray, say our Fa∣ther
&c. which words as expressly injoin the use of this form as any words can command any thing, as hath been shewn by a learned man in an Exercitati∣on to that purpose. And indeed had not our Lord taught to pray by a form, he had not taught a way of prayer, of which all his followers had been capable. Forthough some, who have nimble natu∣ral parts may, by a little instruction and practice, be brought to conceive a pray∣er, as they speak (but many times ra∣ther in affected (that I say not canting) language than intelligible) such an unar∣tificial education, as before described, sufficing to excite and help a pregnant fancy, yet those, who have slower con∣ceptions and mean memories, are very difficultly, and not but in a long time, if at all, brought hereto. Yea I have known some men singularly pious, learned and judicious, from whom I have seen many excellent Prayers written, as being com∣posed by them upon meditation and stu∣dy, who yet were never able to pray with any tolerable readiness in the con∣ceived way. And I have heard as much of the famous T. C. of whom more anon;
but perhaps that way was scarce known in his dayes. Wherefore I may reckon it as a Third advantage of Prayer by Form, that it helps all mens infirmities. God forbid the world should ever be brought to that pass (as some would have had it) that none must ever offer up a prayer of their own to God, but such who are able to do it by the pre∣tended gift. Now there is no person of whatsoever condition, sex, or almost age, if we suppose them to have any exercise of reason, but may be able to pray in this way, and that allowing them sin∣cerity and understanding of what they say, as acceptably to God, as the ablest and most exercised Christian. By this means doth God in a manner, out of the mouths of babes and sucklings receive glory, and a sweet savour. A fourth advantage of prayer by form is, that it governs and restraines some mens extravagant phansies and de∣signes as well as expressions. This was noted by Mr. Calvin, as his third rea∣sonIn E∣pist. ad. Prot: Angl. why he would have (Formulam pre cum & rituum Ecclesiasticorum) a form of prayers and of Church rites, from
whence Ministers might not swerve in their publick ministration (ut obvim eatur desultoriae quorundam levitaii) that by this meanes a stop might be prepa∣red to the variablnesse and unconstancy of some: And after him by Dr. Ames, though a man more adverse to ourCas. con. lib. 4. cap. 17. Church and Liturgy than every Calvin was. Non desunt ctiam, quibus utile est, ut ujusmodi medio, in suis meditationibus ac defiderijs quasi regantur. Having deter∣mined Forms of prayer, though read out of a book to be lawfull and pro∣fitable, his third reason for the profi∣tabenlesse thereof is There are some, saith he, to whom it is an advantage, that by this mean they be after a sort governd in their meditations & desires. It keeps men from many rambling imagi∣nations and fond requests in private, and both from those, and Novelties too, in Publick. Lastly, it cannot but be a secret con∣sort to a Christian mans Soul who useth the approved and prescribed Forms, that in the use of them he strictly maintains, & perhaps injoyes & tasts, the swee communion of Saints, some thousand cn∣gregations
of the faithfull joining with him, and it may be at that very instant, in the same prayers. And it must needs be some satisfaction to any meek and modest person, that his prayers are such, which have past the approbation of a Church truly Catholick and Apostoli∣cal. I would indeed that all men should see with their own eyes; but some have not the best sight, and by whom can such be better guided, and in whose sentence more satisfactorily acquiesce, than by such a Church, and in her reso∣lution? Besides, such a concurrent judg∣ment doth no wise preclude or infringe my own, but rather addes to me fuller persuasion and content. And certainly, if there be any truth in that promise of our saviour, that where two of you shall agree on earth touching any thing that they sall ask, it shall be done for them in heaven, so vast a consent of the faith∣full in prayer must needs adde much more to the effectualness thereof, than if all these congregations varied from the other & each of these the next time from it self, as lesse or more it would be in the conceived way. These are
many, but I dare not say all the advan∣tages of prayer by approved and pre∣scribed forms. Now to speak as impartially touchingSect. 9. its inconveniencies: and I promise not to spare one, that I have either heard of, or can imagin. First, it may seem justly said, that sta∣ted Forms, which are allwayes the same, cannot be so close and pertinent to our particular wants and conditions, both spiritual and outward, as those which are in a manner dictated by an heart viewing those concerns. And our wants or estates varying, so ought our prayers. Now too much generality cannot but be a fault, inasmuch as things generally considered and attended unto more slightily affect. Besides that, secondly, Even use and frequency, as some say (and pretend their experience for their saying so) breeds dullness and incogitance. The lips and tongue can go without the heart, and so the heart often overruns them, scarce many times giveing them the meeting at the Amen. Thirdly it is ordinarily alledged, or
has been at least (though retorted even by Dr. Freston against the very concei∣ved way in publick) that Forms of pray∣er do stint the spirit, too narrowly bound ens affections, and as it were cramp their devotions; which have more liber∣ty to take their free course and utmost fligt when they do not follow, but di∣cta words. Lastly, Forms seem more servile and mean: they savour more of the Jewish Paedagogy than of the Evangelical spi∣rit: they are as milk fit for the weaker and ruder sort. They became the Church in its Childhood, and may become par∣ticular persons while they are yet babes in Christ; but neither are particular per∣sons alwayes to be children, nor the Church ever in Non-age: They become not therefore the present Age of Chri∣stianity, much less of the Reformation. This is the summe of the incommodities of Forms, which I am able to pro∣duce. If any deem me to have been too spa∣ring in this behalf, I profess it is, be∣cause upon serious and long thought, more materials did not occur: and if any
person will be pleased to add to them, I hereby bind my self, when such inti∣mations come to my knowledge, to make a due answer to such new inconvenien∣cies, or else ingenuously to acknow∣ledge, that I am not able to see, but that such inconveniencies are irremedia∣able and intolerable. And thus now both kinds of prayerSect. 10. lye before us with their respective ad∣vantages and inconveniencies. Now to make a true judgment upon the consi∣deration of the whole, comparing both, we will say, That which soever kind be∣sides its own conveniencies, is capable of most of the conveniencies of the other, and hath least inconveniencies either of its own, or from the addition of so much of the other as it partakes of, is certain∣ly to be preferr'd. This rule is so reaso∣nable, that I may presume it will not be excepted against. But such I say is Pray∣er by allowed or prescribed Forms, espe∣cially in publick, and perhaps by arbi∣trary Forms (though variable) most com∣monly in private: and this will be evi∣dent by view of the particulars already laid down.
First, its own conveniencies are un∣doubted. 1. Maturity, comprehensive∣ness and more exactness. 2. Intelligible∣ness, or being more accommodate to the peoples or all mens understanding. 3. Ea∣siness and succouring the infirmities of the weakest. 4. Bounding extravagant designs and phansies, restraining idle suits. 5. The comfort which redounds from the sense of the communion of Saints maintained herein, the satisfacti∣on from our prayers being approved by so competent a Judge as the Church: together with the greater effectualness thereof, in all likelyhood, as being offe∣red with so general consent. Secondly, Prayer by Forms, and par∣ticularly by allowed and prescribed Forms, is capable of all the real advanta∣ges of conceived prayer in publick. I said of all its real advantages: for it is no prevarication to say, all its reputed advantages are not real▪ As namely. 1. The newness of a Prayer in general is no advantage of it at all, nor is it any pre∣judice on the other side to a Prayer, that it is known or old. Can any man say, he is less able to pray with due af∣fection,
because he knows what petiti∣ons or parts of prayer the Minister will come to next, or understands all he will say: Rather in all likelyhood, knowledge in this case should prepare the heart to a meet temper. Those persons whom no∣velty onely, or chiefly, brings to their prayers, are certainly men of very aiery and fantastical devotion (let the Reader pardon the seeiming contradiction in the terms) The onely case, as far as I can see, wherein it is a commendation to a prayer that it is new, is, when there is something new in the condition of the Supplicant, to which it is accommo∣date. Now it is well known, upon new occasions our Church frames new Pray∣ers suitable thereto: and Christ himself, who had the spirit without measure, doubted not in the same case to use three times the same words. But thus taken, the newness of prayer resolves it self into the particularity of it, which was reckoned as a second advantage of conceived prayer. And touching this I say, forasmuch as publick prayers must be supposed to be offered up by every particular person in the Congregation,
whose conditions in particulars differ, but agree for the main onely in their generall nature, therefore all publick prayers ought to be conceived in gene∣rall terms; otherwise they will not fitt all the particular persons who are to joyne therein. It is therefore no fault of the Confession in the begining of our Liturgy, that it is general: Every man were thereby in some degree a liar, if he should accuse himselfe of those sins, whereof yet another man ought to ac∣cuse himselfe. In publick prayers, it must be a mans particular reflexions on his own condition, while he offers up the general forms, that must make them particular. Thus he that reflects on the peculiar errours of his wayes, on his omissions and commissions, when he re∣peats the generall confession, makes the confession as particular to himself, as any publick confession of sin ought to be. And beyond this, particularity in publick prayers, as is evident, would be no virtue at all. Nay, any conceived prayers what∣ever, can no otherwise than thus become particular to a mixt auditory. And as to the 3▪ advantage of conceived prayer, that
it is more apt to affect, I say, that, be∣sides that this is not true as to all and it may be as to very few besides the per∣former, such devout and particular use and application of publick forms, as just now spoken of, will make them as apt to affect as any publick conceived pay∣ers: for that conceived prayers are forms to all but him, who makes them, The same is to be said as to the 4th and last advantage of conceived prayer, that it is more apt to keep men attentive Let such attention be understood, as is an act of devotion, and not of curiosity or in order to judging, and it is plain who uses publick forms thus, is atten∣tive: and the habituating a mans self thus to use them, wil keep him atten∣tive. There is nothing in conceived prayer more than in forms apt to retain attention, but novelty; and that we have found more to grafy curiosity than devotion. And I need not tell those, who ever were seriously verst in conceived prayer, as to themselves in private, that they full well may remem∣ber even herein they can be guilty of incogitancies, distractions, dullnesse,
and such ciders. Nimble as their tongues are, their hearts are much too nimble for them. It is thus evident then, that prayer by form may partake of al he reall benefits of conceived prayer, especially if so prudently con∣trived a our publick prayers are, with allowances of meet places & transitions for the interserting such new occurrences, as the particular occasions of the faith∣full may require to be interserted. Now thirdly, that prayer by form, by parttaking of these the advantages of conceived prayer, doth partake of none of its inconveniencies, such as are materiall omissns, Errours in point of faith, insufficient expression, and the rest, is plain by the meer consideration of them: all these are provided against by well composed forms. And lastly the inconvenienes imputed to Forms of prayer are easily removea∣ble or remediable. Some of them in∣deed have in them more of shew than truth; As, that frequent use should breed dullnesse: this can onely be true in such, who pray meerly with their lips and not with their hearts. Let men
honestly imploy their soules in the prayers they offer up, and they will find forms not at all to damp, but duly conduct Good affection. If we may deale sincerely & candidly herein, that dullnesse, which is apt to attend in prayer, arises indeed, ei∣ther from Non-attentiveness, or from the antecedent causes thereof, indisposi∣tion of body, want of preparation of the mind, too much habituateing our selves to worldly or sensuall affaires and converse, the guilt of some sins un∣repented of, o the like: or if not from these, then from prejudice and vain humour: let al these be duely provi∣ded against, and no feare of this com∣plaint. For I need not tell the greatest freinds of the conceived way, how usuall it has been (and I believe is) for them to complain of lukewarmness or being quite cold in Holy things, of hard hearts, of wandrings & distractins of formality & having fal from the love of their espou∣sals, by all which I presume they chiefly mean the want of that more ardent affection, which they have formerly had in holy duties. And I am not so uncharitable to them as to thinke these
complaints to be dissimulatory preten∣ces, or trifling expletives: they undoub∣tedly are sensible of, and desire to mourn over, what they thus complain of. But they would take it ill, should I impute this want of temper to Con∣ceived prayer, as occasioned thereby: Let them then cease to do the like to us, and doing both themselves & us justice, acknowledge with us the true cause of this malady. How the want of particularity in pub∣lick or private rms may be remedied we have already suggested: namely by each mans pecu eflion within his ownbrest or otherwise by such private interertions as his condition requires. We have intimated also the vanity of that pretence touching stinting the sp∣rit in prayer by form. If by spirit, we mean the spirit of the auditours, it being tied to words still, and those ex∣temporary too, is as much or more stinted than in the other way. If we mean the spirit of the speaker, that possibly is under some distraction; whe∣ther that may be called restraint, we leave to consideration. However this
plea can onely be made for such prayer in secret, between God and our Souls, which comes not within our present compasse, and which no man can inhi∣bit us: or if he do, 'tis frivolously done, in as much as we can still injoy our li∣berty herein, both without his leave and knowledge. There Remains onely the last impu∣tation against prayer by form to be weighed, that it is servile and mean, below the dignity and more liberall attainments of the Gospell state: Now this is a pretence grounded chiefly upon point of honour, and importing not so much any incommodity, as something inglorious. But be it what it will, we wil consider it in its utmost force. Will then any man pretend that the Glorious liberty of the Sons of God,▪ amongst o∣therRom: VIII. 15. things, imports a free habit of speech? We have indeed, through the bloud of Jesus, received the spirit of ad∣option, whereby we cry Abba Father: thatHebr: X 19. is, we have, through the same bloud, boldnesse to enter into the holiest. In o∣ther terms, we have free accesse unto God as a father, according to our needs.
But does this inferr any internall gift or personal ability of utterance, so much as an exteriour priviledg, by Gods great vouchsafement conferred on us? And is it not very certain too this liberty may be abused? Besides, can we, by force of this dignation, pretend to any such plerophory of the spirit, that all the petitions we shall make, shall, by vertue thereof, be acceptable, fit, and such as become us? Have we no need of thought, and forming our requests? And if we have, where is the dishonour in acknowledging and practiceing it? Or can it, all being considered that has been said, be pleaded by any, that prayer in the conceived way is generally most accomplisht and excellent? And if it must be acknowledged, both as to mat∣ter and form, more imperfect, is it then any honor to pray in a more imper∣fect sort? Will it credit the Gospell, that men upon presumption of priviledges under it, present God with more raw & inconsiderate addresses? Upon the whole then, haveing shewn how all the reall inconve∣niencies of prayer by form may be re∣medied,
and haveing removed such im∣putations, which are by prejudice and mistake affixt to it, its own advantages being besides so great, and it selfe ca∣pable of all the true advantages so much magnified in conceived prayer, I must needs give it, especially in pub∣lick, every way the preference. Haveing thus made good the assertion touchng prayer by known and prescri∣bed forms, to give good measure, pressed down, and even running over, I might here more particularly insist, that con∣ceived prayer neither has, nor in a com∣mon way can possibly have the conve∣niences of due forms and that indeed, neither in publick nor private. I will not deny but supposeing a liberal utter∣ance, it may in private more comply with a large heart: and it may be good, in some case, in private to allow great affections their ee ent, yet all waies with sobriety and humility. But this I do avow, that such prayer can never be so mature and comprehensive; so easy to all men, whether to practice themselves, or understand in others; and that in stead of governing it must needs give way to ex∣travagant
thoughts, phansies, and ex∣pressions. Notwithstanding all this, some haply may urge their own experience, andSect: 11 plead, that feeling inwardly its efficacy and excellency, they ought not to suffer themselves to be beaten out of it. And to make this argument as plausible as I can, to give it all the strength which upon full consideration I am able to see it is capable of, We will say, there is such a thing as a kind of spirituall sense or tast. And the royall prophet hath warranted he expression, when he saith (Ps. XXXIV. 8.) O tast and see that the Lord is good: now of this it may be said, as of common taste (non est dispu∣tandum) a man is not to be disputed out of it. And supposeing that any per∣son hereby have perceived a remarkable advantage of conceived prayer, above prayer by form, he ought to suffer no discourses whatsoever to perswade him out of this his spiritual sense. I answer hereto, according to what I have above allowed, who goes about it? But this advantage still is private, and though we should admitt this plea
of such spiritual sensation to be a sober one, yet it can be in reason prest no far∣ther, than for mens private use of such sort of prayer, which they feel most effi∣cacious to move them, and every way  them most excellent. For this can ne∣ver be proved the publick sense, inas∣much as there are so many thusands who reclaim and protest otherwise, that they are not onely sensible, but as they think able to demonstrate to others, as I conceive it hath been in this Discourse already done, that there is much more advantage in knowne and stated Forms. But let us a little more intimately consider this pretence. It resolves into nothing else but this, that the soul is conscious to its self of its own acts, & the impressions made upon itself▪ Such & such offices or performances may move more ardent affections, and the mind moved therewith cannot but feel them, and perceive that it doth feel them: and then all the reason or discourse in the world cannot, nor ought to perswade us, that we do not feel, what we do feel and are conscious of. Now I say, still of this spi∣ritual
sense, if it be not Enthusiastical or Fantastick, a rational account is to be given. For as in the outward senses, there is no real sensation, except there be an object to move them; so in this spiri∣tual sense, there can be no real percepti∣on of such excellency, except there re∣ally be such excellency: and that excel∣lency if we are not able to make out ra∣tionally to our selves and others, it is imagination or humour, which we mi∣staking call spiritual sense. Upon as par∣ticular examination of the case as we could make, we have found prayer by Form to have all the real advantages in publick above conceived prayer. And the truth is (seeing it must be spoken out) if conceived prayer in publick be any more efficacious, or apt to move any Hearers than prayer by due Forms, it is onely by reason of Novelty; prejudice or Custome. How far those affections are to be valued that meer Novelty rai∣ses, we have already spoken. And as to the other points, it must be confessed, that many honest minds lye under a great prejudice against Forms by reason of their Education in Factious Times,
and perhaps (in part) under Factious per∣sons, who have instilled into them their own Opinions, and inured them to a kind of Enthusiastick Worship of God. These persons have never been used to pray affectionately in any but new and conceived prayers, and therefore they think (as before intimated) there is no praying affectionately otherwise. But would these good men honestly lay aside their prejudice, would they fairly & with understanding read and consider our Church-Liturgy, would they come there∣to with prepared, and devout souls, would they thus make tryal of it a lit∣tle, lifting up their pure minds to God in the use of it, they would soon find, even under it, that tenderness of heart and warmth of affection, which they have experienced in the other way, and which, without vanity or dissimulation, we profess to all the World, for the glo∣ry of God, we do find under it as often generally, as with due attention and se∣riousness of mind we are conversant in the use of it. They would find also, by its comprehending more universally all their wants, and the wants of the whole
Israel of God, the great advantage to be on this side; and that there is no such spiritual sense against us in this case, as is pretended. And thus I have endeavou∣red in all calmness, candour and sinceri∣ty, and with the greatest reason and evi∣dence that I could use, to satisfie this question, as to the real intrinsick merit of the Cause. CHAP. IV. Sect. 1. The sixth Enquiry. An account of the practice of the Catholick Church in this case. Sect. 2. The Original and progress of conceived prayer in pub∣lick since the cessation of miraculous gifts. Sect. 3. Some respect is to be had to the Genius of each age. Sect. 4. An account of the temper of our people, or those who pretend to be sons of the Church of England. Sect. . What the Laws of our Church may seem to allow as to conceived prayer in any case. Sect. 6. What in prudence may be done with∣out disobedience to the Church.
Sect. 7. The Conclusion of this Dis∣course. THE last point of Enquiry propoun∣ded was, what has been all along from  imitive dayes the practice of the  Church? For certainly,  gion not being new, nor chang , Universal and constant pra∣ctice ought to sway much with us in all points thereof. And in answer to this Enquiry, I say summarily, it cannot reasonably be de∣nied, (1.) That some passages in our pre∣sent Liturgy were Forms used in the ve∣ry Times of the Apostles, if not by the Apostles themselves. (2) That if some of the Apostles themselves did not com∣pile Liturgies, yet soon after the Apo∣stles dayes there were Liturgies compi∣led, used, and generally injoyned by the Bishops of the more Eminent Churches. (3) That it is certain that ever since the beginning of the Fourth Century till the Reformation, there have been general∣ly no other prayers but known and ap∣proved Forms, publickly used by allow∣ance in the Catholick Church. And Last∣ly, none other publickly, since the Re∣formation,
by allowance in our Church. For making good the first Assertion, I will produce Three or Four instances. That passage Sursum corda, Lift up your hearts, St. Austin saith to be Ver∣ba ab ipsorum Apostolorum temporibus pe∣tita, words derived from the time of the very Apostles, as well as used in the Li∣turgy of the Church in his dayes. And we find them expresly, with the answer to them, We lift them up unto the Lord, Habemus ad Dominum in the Li∣turgy ascribed to St. Peter, and with ve∣ry little addition in that ascribed to St. Peter, and with ve∣ry little addition in that ascribed to St. James, of both which more anon. But the authority of St. Cyprian is elder than St. Austin's, who in his Book De O∣rat. Dominicâ, has these words, Sacerdo ante Orationem, praefatione praemissa, parat fratrum mentes, dicendo sursum corda, ut dum respondet plebs, Habemus ad Do∣minum, admoneatur, &c. The Priest, saith he, in the preface before the prayer (at the Eucharist we will sup∣pose) prepares the minds of the Bre∣thren by saying Lift up your hearts, that while the people answer We lift them up unto the Lord, they may be
admonished, they ought to think of nothing but the Lord. The words which follow, Let us giveThe words Let us give thankes unto the Lord are o∣mitted in St. James's copy but: they are in St. Cyrills of Hru∣salem, as well as in St. Peters. thanks unto the Lord, and the answer, It is meet and right so to do; And then, It is very meet & right, and our bound duty, &c. , &c.) are also found in the Liturgy ascribed to St. James, the Bishop of Jerusalem, and brother of our Lord, as also in that ascribed to St. Peter. They are also transcribed by S. Cyril, S. James's successour in the See of Hierusalem Ca∣tech. Mystagog. 5. So is also that Sera∣phick Hymn, Therefore with Angels and Archangels, &c. with some variation. I might alledge more out of this Office of the Holy communion, especially as to the Trisagium or the Holy, Holy, Holy, which follows in that Hymn, but design∣ing brevity, I pass to the Office of Ba∣ptism. The solemn renunciation of the Devil and all his works, &c. the profession of Faith made by the person to be bapti∣sed, and some interrogatories to these purposes are certainly derived from the Apostles age, if not which is most like∣ly,
for the substance, a Constitution of theirs. , &c. I renounce Satan and his works and pomps, Clem. Constit. l. 7. And if that Authour be of suspicious credit, or an uncertain age, Tertullian is not, who began to write about the end of the se∣cond Century. In Ecclesia, sub Antistitis manu contestamur nos renunciare Diabolo, & Pompae, & Angelis ejus, &c. Lib. de coron▪ mil. Before Baptism (saith he) in the Church under the hand of the Priest, we protest to renounce the Devil, his pomps, and works. He adds, that being baptised they did, amplius aliquid respondere quam Dominus in Evangelio determinavit, an∣swer something more than our Lord had determined in the Gospel; that is, undoubtedly they made a longer pro∣fession of Faith, than is set down in the Gospel at the institution of baptism. And his saying they did respondere, make res∣ponsals, must needs inferr some interro∣gatories put to them by the person bap∣tiseing them. But Origen is express in this matter, who speaking of Rites and Customes so long in use in the Church, that the
ground or Original of them could not easily be given, amongst other points demands, Eorum quae geruntur in Bapti∣smo, verborum gestorumque, & ordinum atque interrogationum ac responsionum, quis facile explicet rationem? Who, saith he, can easily unfold the reason of some things which are done in Ba∣ptism, of the words, gestures and or∣ders, of the Interrogatories and Re∣sponses—which yet we observe and fulfil, according as we first took up, being delivered to us by Tradition from our Great High Priest (Jesus Christ) or his Disciples. Orig. in Num. Homil. 5. Now this form and prac∣tice being so early received in the Church, and ever since reteined, cannot, as Tertullian expresses him∣self on a more general case, be (Erratum sed traditum) any novelty or corrupt practice, then of late crept into the Church, but delivered to them from the former, that is, the Apostolical age. Lastly, that in the Apostles dayes not onely the people used to answer their Amen, (as is sufficiently conclusible from
1 Cor. XIV, 16.) but that their prayers used to conclude with some Doxology or blessing of God, which ended in these words () To ages of ages or world without end, is clear out of St. Chrysostom on the Corinthians, whoHomil. 35. in 1 ad Cor. reports this as the close of that blessing with the spirit, spoken of there by the A∣poste, which also Peter Martyr on the place hs acknowledged. Ex quo loco ha∣bemus, etiam primis illis temporibus preces publicas consuevisse per haec verba in secu∣la seculorum absolvi. Now in those Li∣turgies before mentioned, and even in our own, we know how frequently our prayers thus end. These instances I con∣ceive sufficient proof of the first Asser∣tion. And as to the second, whosoever will without prejudice consider the rea∣sons there are to believe, that some of the Apostles left some beginnings or grounds of a Liturgy, or of a Form and Order for publick administration in the worship of God, and that even in words known to have been used by them in their administration, wil it may be with me judge it highly credible, that the
constitution of a Liturgy in general did derive from the Apostles themselves. We have in the Bibliotheca Patrum,Bibl. atr. Gr. Lat. Tom. 2. Three old Liturgies, amongst others, Two ascribed to Apostles, and one to an Evangelist. The first to St. James the brother of our Lord, whom Eusebi∣  to have been by the Apostles chosen first Bishop of Jerusalem, and who seems to have acted as such, being Pre∣sident in the first Council held at Hieru∣salem (Acts XV, 13.) and delivering the definitive sentence. The second to Saint Mark the Evangelist, whom Ecclesiasti∣cal Authours generally agree to have been the first Bishop of that Famous Church of Alexandria. And the third to St. Peter. Now touching these, I will first set down the Opinion of two per∣snsRelig. Assem. chap. 7. Hist. of Liturg: Ch: 5. very much verst in Antiquity, and then my own thoughts with their rea∣sons. The truly learned Mr. Thorndike & Dr. Heylm, having allowed it sub judi∣ce, how far these Liturgies, as to the ground of them, were theirs, whose names they bear, acquaint us, that upon com∣paring each of them with the Liturgies of the respective Churches, where those
Holy men longest presided, or which at least pretend them to have presided there, it will appear, that the Liturgy ascribed to St. Peter is, for the main and substance, the foundation and ground of the Roman; that to St. Mark, of the A∣lexandrian, extant in the forementioned collection; that to St. James, of the Hie∣rosolymitan: whence they conclude them to have been the Ancient Liturgies of those several Churches, and afterwards for the gaining of authority to them, to have had those great Names affixt to them. But they affirm them according to the judgment of the Learned (and I do not doubt but there is sufficient proof of it) as ancient doubtless as the third Century. Now for my part, with submission to the more judicious, I con∣ceive we may be more positive, & justifie what we say, if as I have done, we affirm more. I do therefore ingenuously and in plain terms profess, that as I am not so fond and credulous to think that any of these Liturgies intirely as we now find them modelled, were of these in∣spired Authours composure, so on the other side I am not so infidel as to think,
that nothing in any of them was theirs. There are many passages which singular∣ly savour of the simplicity and ardent de∣votion of those dayes, though this gol∣den part be almost buried in the hay and stubble which later ages have heaped thereto. That it is probable there might be some ground-work aid by these Ho∣ly men, seemes conclusible from what has been said on the former Head: other∣wise, how should those passages come so earlily and universally into the Church, if none of the Apostles had used some more constant Order, than what is of extemporary suggestion, in publick Offi∣ces, and the very Forms of words which they used, had not been long known, observed and recorded? Nor doth it at all hinder, that though these Litur∣gies are assigned to different Authours, yet in many substantial parts they so a∣gree, as if one hand had been in them all: for it is no wonder that there should be much concord, even in words as well as things, amongst those who had all been bred Disciples under the same Ma∣ster. And we are to remember, what we have from as ancient a Father as most
extant, Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 7. . As the Do∣ctrine of all the Apostles was oe and the same, so was their Tradition as to out∣ward Order. And in the other coup∣ter parts, which came not from the A∣postles, these Offices might have, if not the same interpoators, yet of the same judgment. But that which swaies me most to this mid, is what  confess  not able to answer if it be, as it is, plead∣ed for them: especially as to that sri∣bed to St. James, the evidences are ma∣ny and strong. First, we find this Litur∣gy in the Church of Jerusalem in St. Cy∣ril's dayes, who comments thereon, as to divers passages, in his Mystag▪  Catechises. Now this Cyril flourished about the Year of Christ 350. Secondly, I find in Sixtus Senensis, to whom I amBibli∣oth. Sant. lib 2. referr'd by the Publishers of this Litur∣gy touching its authority, that Proclus Archbishop of Constantinople (according to usual calculation about the yea 418) who was a stout oppugner of Nestorius in the third General Council at Ephesus, owned a Liturgy beginning as this doth, ut veram & germanam Jacobi Scriptu∣ram,
as being St. James's genuine Work, and that it was used as such in the Greek Church. And Lastly, what prevaileth most is the suffrage of the Father sin the sixth General Council, begun at Constantino∣ple, but denominated from Trullo where it was finished, who avow in defence of their Thirty second Canon, or the rite which they thereby enact, that S. James the brother of our Lord, according to the flesh—in an holy Office or ritual delivered to them () in writing published that so it ought to be done. And we find it accordingly in that Liturgy, which bears his name. Now whether that rie of mixing water with the wine were really a Tradition of St. James's or no, it mattereth not to my purpose: It is not easily supposeable, that Two hun∣dred twenty seven Fathers (for so many there were in that Council) should urge an authority of dubious repute, or al∣ledge a Book to be then received, which was not received. And this is evidence sufficient to prove, that in the Ancient Church, which was nearer the Apostles times, and had more advantage to search the truth, it was no wise doubted but
some of the Apostles were Authours to the Church of a publick stated Form of Worship (which is all I contend for) however those Forms are not come sin∣cere to us. This as to the Liturgy ascri∣bed to St. James. There are some autho∣rities which I could produce for that of St. Marks, and the other of St. Peters, indefinitely, that those Holy men were reputed to have left Liturgies to their Churches, I do not say these intirely but in part, for I avow these abominably cor∣rupt: but what I have said is enough to my design in the assertion I have laid down. Now if any one should judge the first part thereof, that some of the Apostles did deliver the Grounds of a Liturgy to the Church, scarce evident, yet thus much is beyond controversie, that Litur∣gies under these names (particularly that attributed to St. James) were extant in the times alledged, and that is the first proof which I produce for the later part of that my second Assertion, That soon after the Apostles dayes, there were Li∣turgies compiled, used, and generally in∣joined by the Bishops of the more emi∣nent
Churches. As to the compiling and use of Liturgies, it is plain that one of these, as to the ground of it, could not be of later date than the Third cen∣tury, if of so late. And as to the injuncti∣on of Liturgies, there cannot be clearer evidence demanded, than express Ca∣nons of Councils or Synds. Now it is beyond question, that in early dayes it was provided in the Christian Church, that the Prayers approved by Councils should be publickly used: and if any other were requisite, yet none should be of publick use, till such time they had passed the Councils or the Bishops ap∣probation. And particularly to this pur∣pose, the Council of Laodiea held ac∣cording to Baronius about the year 314,V. Be∣ro. i appe ad  . or 315, which first and best settled the Canon of Scripture (the Old Testament, if I mistake not, fully as we receive it as to the number of Books, and the New one so too, within one) that Venerable Council I say, has this Canon, , Can. 18. That there should be alwayes the  Order ( or Liturgy) of Prayers, both at Nie a
clock (in the Morning) and in the Even∣ing. Here is an injunction by a Council; which because some would so construe, as to reconcile it with a liberty of every Ministers framing his own Forms, provi∣ded he use constantly the same, we will add to the Canon the Gloss, which its old Commentator put upon it, which in∣terprets it directly against this sense, that those who had a mind might not , compose their own prayers, &Zona. in Con∣cil. La∣odic. say these in the Assemblies, but that , the same pray∣ers, that is, those which were already re∣ceived by tradition, should be made in each Assembly. For confirmation of which sense, he cites the Twenty third Canon of the Council of Carthage, as being to the same effect with this, by which itIn Cod. Can. Affic. Can. 13. was ordained, , That the prayers appointed and authorised by the Synod should be used, and not other new ones. By which report of this twen∣ty third Canon of Carthage by Zonaras, it is evident, that either the Latin copies, extant in the Magdeburgenses, Carranza, &c. are faulty as to that 23. Canon, if not
others, as some seem to have proved, or that we are to understand those words in it [cum Fratribus instructioribus contule∣rint] of some Bishops conferring about the new prayers spoken of, with superiour Bi∣shops or the Fathers in a Council, & pro∣curing their approbation and authority thereto. And the above celebrated Doctour Heylin, proves by the three preceding Canons, the 15, 16, and 17,Hst. of Litg. Ch 6. (much to this purpose) & by the subse∣quent, Can. 19, that the sense of the Council is for stated Liturgies, and the other cannot possibly be admitted, with∣out destroying the design of the Council in them all: which will be evident to any one who will peruse the Canons thereof. The next evidence I shall produce shall be in the following Age, the Ca∣non of the Council of Milevis, held, as is evident by the very preamble of the Acts, under the Empire of Arcadius and Honorius; and therefore about the year 403, or 404, Placuit & illud ut preces vel. 12 orationes quae probatae fuerint in concle, &c. It also hath seemed good unto us, that those prayers and supplicati∣ons which have been approved in the
Council, and such prefaces (I suppose brating the Eucharist) and mmemorations be used by all. Nec ae omnino diantur in Ecclesia nisi quae  pruntioribus tractatae, vel comprobatae in Synodo fuerint▪ And that none o∣ther at all be used in the Church, but such which have been examined by the more prudent (and such certainly were the Bishops of the Churches re∣puted) or approved in the Synod. The reason (above touched) of this their constitution is most wholesome, namely, for the prevention of errours and inno∣vations in Faith, which may be very suc∣cesfully insinuated into mens affections by new and arbitrary prayers. From henceforward, it were easie to be copious in producing the Canons of subsequent Ages: for scarce a Council past without some reference to, or rein∣forcement of, such former constitutions. I will mention some in the succeeding Ages, that it may be evident, what was the constant practice of the Church. The Council held at Agatha (now Agde) in France, about the Year 506, has its 21. Canon to our purpose. Quia convenit
ordinem Ecclesiae ab omnibus aequaliter custodiri, statuendum est, sicut ubi∣que fit, &c. To the same effect effect the Council of Pau (Epannese) in Burgundy about 2 or 3 yeares after; the Council at Girona (Gerundense) in Spain, in the year 518. Primùm Sta∣tuitur ut unaquaeque provincia in oicio Ecclesiae unum ordinem teneat. Their first Canon is that Every province ob∣serve the same order in the service of the Church. To omit others, in the next age, the fourth council at Toledo, held about the year 632, has its second Canon thus: Placuit t unus ordo orandi atque psallendi a nobis per omnem His∣paniam & Galliciam conservetur: nnus modus in, &c. quia in unâ fide continemur & regno We think fit there be observed one order of praying and singing throughtout all Spain and Galicia, one form in celebrateing the solemnities of the Eucharist, one form in the Evensong &c. because we are all of one faith and Kingdome. Should I proceed beyond these years in alleging authorities of this nature, it would besaid against all that follow, corru∣ptions
& Popish superstitions now came in apace on the Church, & it is not much to be heeded what the councils in such dayes enacted. Now though all men know the pretended universal Bishop had not yet so easily gotten the univer∣sal power, as to overaw all Councils and synods, yet on this suggestion, I will give my reader no more exercise for patience on this subject; these things ha∣ving, I presume, both abundantly pro∣ved my second assertion, and made a fair way for the third. Which being negative, the proof indeed would rather lye on the other side (possession being, as they say, a good title, till a better is made out) The Church were to be produced which in some time, betwixt the daies from whence we have dated Liturgies & the reformation at Geneva, did allow arbitrary or conceived prayers. But this indeed being not to be done, we will give it as good a proof as the case will admitt, and such, the foundation of which we have already laid. We will then suppose (& the supposition will be deemed violent by none, who have read
any thing, and observed the severity of those ages in points of Ecclesiastical or∣der and discipline) that in former daies men did not, as they do now in our country, make lawes and never keep them. If Ecclesiastical order was once enacted, it was strictly observed: excom∣munications then were dreadfull, and pennances heavy. So that haveing found the observation of Liturgies so ex∣presly decreed, and these decrees so fre∣quently all over the Church iterated and enforced, in every particular pro∣vince whither the Church had spread it selfe, we cannot think the allowed practice of the Catholick Church was contrary to its direct and so often repe∣ted lawes. On the otherside we may conclude the censures of the Church to have been brisk & severe against all who affected innovation in this case, and in any the least regard made attempts thereto. I remember not at present, in my small reading to have met with any, who varied from the publick received or ap∣pointed Forms of Worship, but such who being themselves infected with
some Haeresie or other, had a mind to spread their contagion, and used this as the least suspicious, and most effectual course of instilling its poison into the people. Thus Paulus Samosatenus Bishop of Antioch about the year 262 (accor∣ding to Eusebius) took away (Psalmos & Cantus, qui ad Domini nostri Jesu Christi honore dcantari solebt, tanquam re∣centiores & à viris recentioris memoriae edtos &c) The Psalms & Hymns, which had been used to be sung in the Church to the praise of God and Christ, pre∣tending them to be new and compo∣sed by men of later date (though it seems they had been used before his time) and introduced new ones of his own: but this in order to the magnify∣ing of himself, and spreading his own Haeresie against the Divinity of Christ. Now how this was taken, though in a Bishop of so eminent a Church, the same Eusebius reports. A Council was called at Antioch, whither resorted al∣mostccles. Hist. li 7▪ cap. 22, 23, 24. infinite Bishops, Priests and Deacons, by whose unanimous consent he was censured, and particularly for this pra∣ctice, as appears by the very Conciliar
Epistle; He was, ab omibus sub Coelo Ec∣clesiisCa. 2. excommunicatus, Excommunicated by all the Churches under Heaven, de∣posed from his Bishoprick, and resing to submit, extruded by the secular arm of Aurelian the Emperour, with the great∣est disgrace. Afterwards the Arrians attempted much a less change in the Doxology, used at the end of the Psalms, about the middle of the Fourth Century, some of them singing one while in steadSozom. lib. 3. cap. 19. &c. of Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, onely thus, Glory be to the Fathr, and the Son, in the Holy Ghost; and after a while, Glory be to the Father, by the Son, in the Holy Ghost, both which though admissible in a good sense, escaped not sudden notice and censure. The Shibboleth was soon percei∣ved and check, being universally dis∣approved, rejected and overruled by the Orthodox Church. What kind of Prayers the Adians, s Epiphanius, or Adaeans as, Theodoret calls them, used, I do not sind recorded. These were a sort of Anthropomorphtes, generaly of a very strict life, but refu∣sed
to hold communion in Prayers with any, though never so blameless and up∣right Christians, except such who were of their own Sect▪ which practice of theirs Epiphanius calls, as it was indeed,Epi. contr. Hae. lib. 3. Tm. 1. most grievous and horrible. For this cause amongst others, Audius himself was cen∣sured by the Church, and afterwards banished into Scythia, where, and amongst the Goths, he ended his days; and his Fol∣lowers being adjudged Haereticks and Shismaticks, the▪ Sect in some time, of it self fell. By these instances it is plain enough what was the sense and practice of the Church, in reference to those who innovated the least, in point of the Pub∣lick Prayers or Worship. For though it may be said, these several persons or parties were censured rather for the Haeresies couched in their new formd de∣votins, than for the making to them∣selves new Forms, yet it must be toge∣the acknowledged, that their very ma∣king o New Forms, or attempting up∣on the Od, being adjudged one parti∣cular, which amongst others is record∣ed, or taken notice of, to have made up the sue total of their respective Hae∣resies
and Schisms, such practice cannot according to the judgment of the Church in those dayes be looked upon as inno∣cent, much less allowed and well estee∣med. And withall it appears how just reason the Church has had, both for due composing and prescribing Litur∣gies, as finding ever no more succesful expedient for the preventing the subtle spreading of Haeresie, and preserving the Unity o Fait and Doctrine, than Uni∣formity in the publick Worship. In which care of preveting the one, and preser∣ving the other, if we will allow the Church to have persisted, we must ad∣mit what is contended for, to have been her constant practice ever since that first constitution of Litugies. And if it be but just and reasonable that the Church still persist in such endeavours (as cer∣tainly the experience of this Age has suf∣ficiently convinced it is) then is it sit such order be still maintained. For a conclusion in this particular,  must not omit, that long since there has been an express challenge made and published, by a most learned nd sincere▪  person (one who had read  uch it
may be as any man in the Age, and whoThern∣dike, Just weights & mea∣sures, cha. 16. A. D. 1662. as well understood the controversies of our dayes as any other whosoever) to produce any one prayer made by Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, by his own private gift, in the Pulpit before Sermon, for fifteen hundred years after Christ. The publick Liturgies were indeed used be∣fore Sermon; but no prayer at all of the Ministers own making, in which the people were to join. The Minister might himself kneel down before he be∣gun to preach, and in private betwixt God and himself, implore the assistance of Gods Spirit in that so great Work: but that he made a solemn Prayer of his own in the behalf of the people, is ut∣terly denied, and any one instance in an∣tiquity challenged to be produced; nor has the challenge, that I ever could hear of, been yet answered, though it have been notorious enough. There is indeed an authority produced out of St. Chry∣sostome, by that worthy and learned Gentleman Hammon L' strange esq; (though it cannot be said in answer to Mr. Thorndike, because Mr. Thorndike's Book was publisht Three years after)
yet as may to some men seem, for the contrary opinion, in these words. ▪ Where is the profit of preaching if prayer be not joined with it? First goes prayer, then comes the Sermon. But that this prayer is to be understood of the publick stated prayers, then in use in St. Chrysostome's own Church, is evident by another passage out of Saint Chrysostome, where he mentioneth the Deacon (not the Bishop who was to preach) bidding Prayer in this Form, .De pro∣phet. obseur. Tom. 2. Let us pray for the Bishop (who was then to preach, and possibly going up into the Pulpit) that he may rightly divide the word of Truth This then here designed, was no prayer of the Preachers, but of the People, viz. their Common∣prayer: and whatsoever prayer was u∣sed by the Preacher, was his own in pri∣vate, as appears by the very prayer, which if any could be, is to be produced against what I say; that I mean of Saint Ambrose, the very matter, Form and style of which shews, that he both de∣signed and used it betwixt God and him∣self,
and that the people had nothing to do therein. I find it thus in Ferrarius; whence he had it I can onely conjecture, I have not yet found. Obsecro te Domi∣ne,De ritu concio. lib. 1. cap. 8. & suppliciter rogo, Da mihi semper hu∣milem scientiam quae aedificet, da mitissi∣mam & sapientem elquentiam, quae nesci∣at inflari, & de suis bonis supra fratres extolli. Pone quaeso in ore meo verhum consolationis, & aedificationis, & exhor∣tationis per spiritum sanctum tuum, ut bo∣nos ad meliora valeam exhortari, & eos qui perversè gradiuntur ad tuae rectitudi∣nis lineam revocare verbo & exemplo. Sint verba quae dederis servo tuo, tanquam acu∣tissima jacula & ardentes sagittae, quae pe∣netrent & incendant mentes audientium ad timorem & amorem tuum. I forbear translating, because I would not be te∣dious: and those Readers, whom this Form concerns, are presumed to under∣stand it. I onely say further of it, that had this Prayer been designed for the people to bear any part therein, even but to an Amen, it would have had a more formal close, as many other pray∣ers, which according to the manner of those dayes being presented ()
secretly by the Priest or Bishop, ever ended, when the people were to express their consent, with per secula seculorum () in an audible voice; or per Do∣minum nostrum Jesum Christum, or some like passage: whereas this plainly con∣cludes in an abrupt sort, and is rather a Summary of such ejaculatory petitions, as that Holy Bishop used seriously to send up to God before his preaching, than any publick or compleat Form. Which being sufficiently evident to any considerative person, hereby may ample satisfaction be given to those two autho∣rities out of St. Austin, that look some∣what athwart on what I affirm: name∣ly, that produced by Ferrarius in the Chapter above mentioned (though with no design undoubtedly to justifie any such practice as this of conceived Prayer before Sermon, which is no where in use in their Churches, that I, or I believe any man ever heard of) The hour now coming (saith the Father) that the Preacher is to speak) Prinsquam exeAug. de Dctr. Christ. lib. 4. c. 15 rat proferentem linguam, ad Deum levet si∣tientem animam) Before he employ his tongue in speaking, (viz. to the peo∣ple)
let him lift up to God his panting soul, that he may be able to utter what he has taken in, and deliver what he has prepared. Who sees not that the Father intended the private eja∣culatory prayer of the Preacher, to the intent before expressed? And the other authority alledged out of the same Fa∣ther by the before commended Gentle∣man, is to the same effect. Pastor orando prose, ac pro illis quos est allocuturus, sit Orator antequam dictor; Let the Bishop (or Preacher) by praying for himself and those whom he is to speak to, be∣come a Supplicant before a Dictatour: namely, as St. Ambrose (St. Austin's Fa∣ther, who begot him in Christ) had by his forementioned example taught him, in a private and most devout address. Still we see, the Preachers own private devotion, not any publick prayer, in the name of the people, is prescribed or re∣corded. All that that can be said to the con∣trary, as far as by my utmost search I can find, from any use of the ancient Church, amounts onely to the Double sa∣lutation, as it was called. The Bishop co∣ming
up into the Pulpit, said,  Peace be unto you, which after, when it became part of some Priests work to preach, was changed into, The Lord be with you, to be used upon the same oc∣casion by the preaching Priest; whereto the people answered, And with thy spirit. But this will no whit avail for the assert∣ing the antiquity of such prayers before Sermon, as are in use amongst us. The Romists (whether having laid aside ge∣nerally, or superadded to this antient usage, I cannot say) commonly use be∣fore their Sermons the Angelical saluta∣tion of the blessed Virgin, Ave Maria, gratiâ plena, &c. which though now used as a prayer in that Church, yet in its own nature is nothing less. However even this use is Novel; and he, that wouldFerrar. ui supra. have fetched it as high as possible, is not able to plead its rise from any elder au∣thour than Beatus Vincentius Fereri, who flourished about the Year of our Lord 1410. and first makes mention of it. And the reasons, which they give for the use of it, shew it cannot be of much elder date; it was brought in, say they, Propter Haereses in Beatam Virginem, by
reason of Heresies sprung up in the Church against the blessed Virgin, as In principio was added to the Gloria Patri in opposition to the Arrians, &c. But neither will this do the adverse opinion any service: so that I must needs profess, I see not but the learned Mr. Thorn∣dike's demand or challenge (to have it shewn, that the publick prayers of the Church, or indeed any prayer of the Preachers own making, presented in the name of the people jointly with himself, was used in the Pulpit, is utterly unan∣swerable, as above said) The Liturgy, a great part of it, did go before the Ser∣mon, but no other prayer did publickly intervene betwixt it and the Sermon. And the rise of such intervening pray∣ers shall presently be shewn. In the mean time, it remains to be made good what was the last point a∣bove asserted as to the practice of the Catholick Church, that our own Church (a most sincere part of the true Catho∣lick Church) never allowed any pub∣lick prayers, besides those in our Litur∣gy, since the Reformation. And we will begin our researches as high as we can.
That there were some attempts, not without intermissions and interruptions, towards a Reformation in the dayes of King Henry the VIII (though the Church of England, as now it stands, cannot be in∣titled to all his Acts) is not to be denied. What concerns the present case, is the alteration of the prayers of the (then) Church: and the summe thereof (as far as I cn find) was, that by his injuncti∣ons issued out by his Vicar General, ac∣cordingDr, Hylius Hist: of the R∣frm. to his direction, Anno 1536, The Curates in every Parish should teach the people to say the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and the Ten Com∣mandments in the English Tongue. Afterwards (to wave what was done, as to the publication and allowance of the Bible in English, and of a certain (then at least) excellent Book, intituled, the Institution of a Christian man in the Year 1545, he appointed, to the end the people might be better acquainted with the prayers of the Church, that the Li∣tany, being put into the Form almost wherein now it stands, should thence∣forth be said in the English Tongue. Be∣sides this, I find by King Edwards injun∣ctions,
that he caused the Primer (but in what Year I dare not affirm) to be set forth in English by his authority, to the intent that they who understood not Latine might pray thereupon. Some∣thing also was done by him (I suppose in the aforementioned injunctions) as to a Form of bidding prayer, of which more anon. Otherwise, the prayers of the Church (such as they were) stood in his dayes as they did before, and prest with the same severity: Witness the six Ar∣ticles, and the proceedings thereupon. So that no varying from stated Forms could be as yet allowed. In the dayes of King Edward, things came on towards more maturity. Imme∣diately after his coronation came forth his Injunctions (many of them the same with his Fathers, and others little varied) by diverse of which strict care is taken for the use of such Forms, as then were extant by authority, and of none other. By the 19th. it is provided, That no person shall henceforth alter or change the order and manner—of Common-pray∣er or Divine service, otherwise than is spe∣cified in these injunctions, until such time
as the same shall e otherwise ordered by the Kings authority. The injunctions spe∣cifying such order of Common-prayer are the 21. Touching Reading the Epi∣pistle and Gospel in English, and not in Latine—And every Sunday or Holy day one chapter of the New Testament in Eng∣lish at Matis immediately after the Les∣sons; and at Even song, after the Magnifi∣cat, one chapter of the Old Testament. And the  That the Priests with other of the Quire, shall kneel in the midst of the Church, and sing or say plainly and di∣stinctly the Ltny, which is set forth in English, with all the suffraes following, and none other procession or Litay to be had or used, but the sad Litany in Eng∣lish, adding nothing thereto, but as the Kings grace shall hereafter appoint. Thus as to the publick prayer of the Church: as to mens more private prayer, the Lawes of our Church at present pre∣scribe nothing, but  mistake not the sense of the 33. ( may otherwise be reckoned the 4.) in unction, there was then a prescription even as to this: That all manner of persons not understanding La∣tine, should pray on no other Primer, but
what was lately set forth in English by King Henry the VIII: and such as have knowledge of Latine use no other also. And that all Graces to be said at Dinner and Supper, shall be alwayes said in the English Tongue. The Form of bidding of prayer was likewise reduced much for the bet∣ter, and made five times shorter; but still, by the same injunctions, prescribed to all Preachers in the Realm: And all this, Ʋn∣der pain of deprivation, sequestration of Fruits of Benefices, suspension, excommuni∣cation, and such other coercion, as to the Ordinary, or other Ecclesiastical Judge, ap∣pointed by His Majesty, should seem conve∣nient. Thus stood things by this blessed Josias's injunctions, in the very concepti∣on and forming of the Reformation, be∣fore any more mature order could be brought forth. I will be a little more particular as to King Edward's Acts, because it is by some pretended, that things were better for them, and more liberty allowed in this case under his Reign, than has been since. Which although it were true, as I find no reason to pretend it is, yet it must be acknowledged, many things
might be born with in Ecclesiâ constituen∣dâ, while the Church was modelling, which are intolerable when a regular or∣der is established. To proceed then; While the Kings commissioners in all parts took care for the Execution of these injuncti∣ons, towards the end of this his first year was framed by the holy men (most∣ly) who afterwards compiled our Li∣turgy, at the Kings command, An Order of administration of the Communion in English, and before Easter sent abroad, with the Kings Proclamation in the Front both, in pursuance of the statute of 1. dw: 6. c: 1 for ministring the Holy Sacrament to the People under both kinds, with consideration of which, the Proclamation is prefaced, and then pro∣ceeds after this manner. Least any man phansying and deviseing a sun∣dry way by himself in the use of this most blessed Sacrament of unity, there might arise any unseemly and ungodly diversity, Our pleasure is by the ad∣vice of our most deare uncle the Duke of Somerset, Governor of our person and Protector of all our Realms, Do∣minions and Subjects, and other of our
Privy council, that the said blessed Sacrament be ministred unto our People onely after such Form and manner as hereafter, by our authori∣ty, with the advice before mention∣ed, is set forth and declared. After∣wards, the Kings intentions of carrying on the Reformation, and providing a more compleat Order of publick pray∣ers, being declared, it follows; Wil∣ling all our loving subjects, in the mean time, to stay and quiet them∣selves with this our direction, as men content to follow authority. (accor∣ding to the bounden duty of subjects) and not enterprising to run afore, and so by their rashness, become the great∣est hinderers of such things▪ as they, more arrogantly than godly, would seem by their own private authority most hotly to set forward. No thoughts yet of every Ministers forming the pub∣lick prayer according to his own gifts; at least no allowance, or even permission of such practice in any the smallest par∣ticulars. For whereas, there being no∣thing yet of Common prayer extant in English, but the Litany before mentio∣ned,
and this Order of the Communion, there were several publick occasions which required to be particularly re∣presented in the publick prayers, for these there were particular collects fra∣med, and used in the end of the Litany. Thus I find by Archbishop Cranmer's Articles of Visitation in the 2. of King Edw. 6. Whether the Curates in their Common-prayers, use not the Col∣lects made for the King, and make not special mention of His Majesties name therein, Art. 4. Whether they doe not on every Sunday and Holy day, with the Collects of the English pro∣cession (so, as appears by the 23d. of King Edward's injunctions, they then called the Litany) say the prayer set forth by the Kings Majesty, for peace between England and Scotland. Art. 5. But soon after came forth a riper and more perfect birth: for on Sept. 1. the King commended to those godly Bi∣shops, and other learned Divines, whom he had before employed in the Order of the Communion, the framing of a publick Liturgy, or Order of Morning and Evening prayer, and of ministring the Sacraments
and Sacramentals, and celebrating all other publick Offices: who readily and chear∣fully going to work, in a short time fi∣nished the design, which they were so well prepared for, and which indeed, as to some considerable parts, was even then in a good readiness. This so finish∣ed, they presented in all humble sort to the King; who having received it to his great comfort and quietness of mind (to use the words of the Statute) commend∣ed it to his Lords and Commons assem∣bled in Parliament, by whom being per∣used, it was declared to be done by the aid of the Holy Ghost, and a statute re∣gularly past, that all and singular Mini∣sters in any Cathedral or Parish Church within the Kings Dominions, should from and after the Feast of Pentecost then next coming▪ be bound to sa and use the Mat∣tins, Even song, celebration of the Sacra∣ments, and all their Common and open Prayer in such order and form as is mentioned in the same Book, and no o∣therwise. See the statute more at large (2. Edw: 6. c: 1) as touching the penaltie▪ of useing other Forms. Afterwards in the year 1551, upon oc∣casion
of some doubts which had been rai∣sed in the use and exercise thereof, pro∣ceeding (as the second statute expresseth it) rather from the Curiosity of the Mini∣ster and Mistakers, than any worthy cause, this Liturgy was reviewed, explained and made more fully perfect in such places, in which it was necessary to b made more earnest, and fit for the stirring up of all Christian people to the true Honouring Al∣mighty God. There was also added to it a Form for the makeing and consecra∣ting Bishops, Priests and Deacons; and all injoined as before. (5 and 6. Edward 6. chap: 1) And thus stood the Publick Prayers under the Reformation in King Edwards reign. Queen Elizabeths injunctions, as to thisAnno 1559. point, are much to the same purpose with King Edwards; witness the 5th, the 18th &c. But what is most worthy of parti∣cular remark, in them is The form of bid∣ing of Prayers, which more exactly agrees with our present Canon (anon to be considered) being altered much to the better, and especially in that, for praying for those, who are departed in the Faith of Christ, the people are onely invited to
praise God for them, and to pray for themselves, that they may have grace to direct their lives after their good examples, and be partakers with them of the glorious resurrection in the life everlasting. And this, amongst the other points, is injoin∣ed (as before in King Edwards injuncti∣ons) to be obseved and kept upon pain of deprivation, sequestration of Fruits and Benefices, suspension, ex∣communication, or otherwise as the Ecclesiastical Judge should think conve∣nient. The Justice of Peace to assist the Ordinary for due execution. As to the publick Liturgy, some alterati∣ons were made in it in the first Year of this Glorious Queen, considerably con∣ducing to make it more satisfactory. The injunction of it was the same as for∣merly, onely the penalties somewhat more particular and severe, 1 Eliz. cap. 2. & 23. Eliz. cap. 1. These things were onely reinforced (some Explanations of the Liturgy being made by his Majesties Commission) un∣der King James, by his Proclamation of Mar. 5. in the first Year of his Reign of England, and by the Canons of 1603. As
to the state of things under our late martyred and blessed Soveraign King Charles the first, and the continuance of such order not onely in our own Church, but promoting it in the Church of Scotland, to whom our Liturgy, with such due alterations as accommodated it more to the approbation of that peo∣ple, was sent and prescribed, things are so fresh in most mens memories, or so common in all our little Historians, that nothing need to be said. All that can be pretended by way of objection against what I have spoken, touching the allow∣ance of our Church, must be grounded upon the 55. Canon, which will come under consideration in the following Section. In the mean while, I hope I have spoken particularly, and demon∣stratively enough (as the case will ad∣mit) touching the practice of the Catho∣lick Church in this behalf. Now as to the Original and Progress of conceived prayer in publick, I have pro∣ved,Sect.  that in the Miraculous age of the Church, there were inspired prayers, and that this is the true Scripture notion of prayer by Gift. I have also cited, in
the Front of this Discourse, a passage out of St. Chrysostome, undeniably to the same effect. But as to that notion where∣in conceived prayer has been of late years practised, and is still contended for, I do say, the Thing is in a manner as new as the Name, and neither of them much above one 100 years old. By con∣ceived prayer, I here mean, a course of fra∣ming publick vocal prayer ever anew, & as it is spoken, according to a mans present & arbitrary conceptions, in which he is pre∣sumed to be assisted by the spirit of God. And thus taken, as far as upon search made I can find, both the Name and Thing appeared first in the World at Ge∣neva, and that some time after Calvin's return thither, as near as I can conje∣cture, about the Year 1550; Mr. Calvin himself being the first man, whom I can discover to have used publickly, either any new form of prayer of his own ma∣king, varied arbitrarily by himself, or any such course of praying as now de∣scribed: but to give that worthy (how∣ever in some things unhappy) man his due, very modestly and soberly. Thus we have it reported of him, by Johannes
Budus one of his Amanuenses, at least one who, cum duobus strenuis fratribus, with two able brethren, took many of his Lectures in writing from his mouth, and is owned for this by Mr. Calvin with a singular character of kindness. Sicuti Lectionum initio eâdem semper uti∣turIn praef. ad prae∣lct. Calv. in mn. proph. hic noster precandi formula, quam nos quoque hic addi voluimus, ut tota jus do∣cendi ratio nota esset: ita etiam singulas Le∣ctiones novis subinde precationibus claude∣re solet, prout illi ex Spiritu Domini datur eas EX TEMPORE formare, & ad Lecti∣onis cujusque subjectam materiam accom∣modare. As in the beginning of his Le∣ctures, this our Doctour alwayes uses a Form of prayer, which we also have caused here to be set down, that the whole way of his teaching might be known; so is he wont to close each Le∣cture commonly with a new prayer, according as by the spirit of the Lord it is given to him ex tempore to frame the same, and accommodate it to the subject matter of the Lecture. This preface bears date in the Year 1557, and Calvin's prelections on the Minor pro∣phets, being the first of all his prelecti∣ons
now extant (at least amongst his La∣tine Works, others are uncertain) and this his practice beginning with his prelecti∣ons, it is plain I have reckoned favoura∣bly, when I cast it into the Year 1550, or thereabouts. Behold then here the first instance of this kind of publick prayer in the Christian Church, since the cessation of Miracles. And it would seem hereby, that the name Extemporary prayer was more ancient than conceived. But how far distant this practice of Calvins was from▪ that of late and present dayes amongst us, shall appear by the view of Calvins own Forms. That before his Lectures was no more than this, Dot nobis Dominus in caelestis suae sapientiae mysteriis cum vero pietatis profectu versari, in gloriam sum, & aedificationem nostram, Amen. The Lord grant to us, that we may be so employed in the Mysteries of his Hea∣venly wisedome, as truly to grow in godliness, to his glory and our own edification, Amen. This in our dayes would be looked upon as a strangely short prayer before Sermon: but such was the modesty of this man, when he brought in first into the Church a Form
of his own. His Extemporary prayers (as those commonly use to be longer than Forms) did something exceed this, and were for the most part of five or six lines, seldome or never exceeding nine or ten; as any may see who list to consult his praelections on Jeremy, Ezekiel, Dani∣el, and the minor prophets. If any should object this to have been his practice on∣ly in his Lectures, but that surely at his Sermons he used more liberally to exer∣cise this his gift, though I find little dif∣ference betwixt his Lectures and his Sermons, but onely that perhaps they were delivered most of them in a diffe∣rent Tongue and he has pleased to give them a diverse nae, yet we will view his practice therein: and though we may still find some footsteps of an Exempo∣rary prayer after Sermon (none before) yet possibly more regularly and confor∣mably to the practice of the Ancient Church, than that at his Lectures: for his practice was rather an Exhortation to,Bz in  in Jb. or bidding of prayer, ending with the Lords prayer, than any proper for'd prayer of his own. His Brother Beza shall speak his way of prayer before and
after Sermon, who in the Year 1593, thus records it in Latine (However pos∣sibly Calvin at his Sermons rather spoke in French) Precatio quam solitus fuit D. Johannes Calvinus initio concionum sua∣rum concipere: The prayer, which Mr. John Calvin was wont to coneive in the beginning of his Sermons. Here by the by is the first mention, that ever I met with, of conceiving prayer, and whether the Name conceived prayer doe not owe its Original to this Beza's ele∣gancy in the Latine speech, Orationem concipere, I leave to the consideration of some men, whom it concerns to justifie their own terms: yet I believe they will not be able to produce an ancienter or better authority for it. But to return: the Form before Sermon which Calvin never varied, as far as I can find, was this. Invocabimus Deum nostrum Opti∣mum, &c. Let us call (or w will call) upon our most gracious God and Fa∣ther, beseeching him that he will please to turn away his Eyes from those ma∣ny and grievous sins and offences, by which we constantly provoke his wrath against us: and because we are
very unworthy to appear before his Majesty, that he will vouchsafe to look upon us in his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, and accept the merit of his death in satisfaction for all our sins, so that by that means we may be accepted be∣fore him: that he will also be pleased to inlighten us by his Holy spirit in the true understanding of his Word, and to give us grace to receive him by true fear and humility in our soules, and that through him we may be taught altogether to place our whole confidence in him, to worship and ho∣nour him, and to glorifie his Holy Name in all our life: so that, since he has pleased to take us into the number of his servants and sons, we may ren∣der the honour and obedience which faithful servants owe to their Lords, and sons to their Fathers. Now let us pray to him precabimur autem as our good Master has taught us to pray, saying, Our Father, &c. This is, word for word, what Beza calls Mr. Calvin's prayer before Sermon; which whether not more conform to the practice of bid∣ding prayer in the ancient Church, but
especially to that in our Church, than any new, formed prayer of his own, let all the World judge. That which the same Auho cl The prayer, whichBeza Ibid. Mr. Cavn was used to conceive in the end of every Smo, beg  his con∣stant Form. Proemur autem coram Optimi De nor Majstte [hic solitu ft adjicere &c.] Let us fall down before the Majesty of our most gra∣cious God. [Here was he wont to in∣tersert whatsoever the subject matter of his Sermon gave him occasion to ask, which being different every Ser∣mon, such petitions or acknowledge∣ments cannot here be set down.] They usually took up eight or ten small lines, and then he proceeded again in constant Form thus. And that he would not onely bestow this grace upon us, but upon all people and Nations of the Earth, calling all the poor ignorant, out of the blind captivity of Errours and ig∣norance, into the right way of salvati∣on, &c. And after several other peti∣tions for all sorts and conditions of men (in constant form) making up twenty lines or more, he concuded ever thus.
Haec autem omnia ab ipso petemus, sicut, &c. All these things let us ask of him, as our supreme Master and Lord Jesus Christ has taught us to pray unto him in these words, Our Father. It is plain, that this is also rather a summary Exhor∣tation directing what to pray for, and moving the people to ask all these things in the words of our Lords prayer, than any true formal prayer, such as the usu∣al conceived ones of our dayes: so that though by the forementioned interserti∣ons, alwayes varied, and those short Ex∣temporary prayers before spoken of, he gave the first instance of what we call conceived prayer, yet this was, according to the character already given, with great modesty and sobriety, not ventu∣ring at the rate that our people do, who would seem by the length of their pray∣ers to have received the spirit without measure, but that generally the lamen∣table stuff they vent, shews they mistake the abortions of their own fancies for di∣vine suggestions. I do not say, but that there are some persons who use this kind of prayer with good decorum and great grace, and possibly to good pri∣vate
advantage: but we see how small the beginnings hereof, at least in pub∣lick were; of how late age, and with what tenderness a famous Doctour, a man of as eminent parts, industry, pre∣sence of mind, as many ages have shewn, and withal the Father and Founder of that party who cry up this way, adven∣tured at an Ejaculation or two at a time therein, when our common people, nay some even children in a manner, dayly challenge an arbitrary & unlimited right thereto, and pretend themselves in the constant exercise hereof to be moved and enabled by the Holy Ghost. As to Calvin's part I shall onely add, that he was so far from admitting this unlimited gift of prayer, that in extra∣ordinary cases of the calamities of the Genevan Church, he composed, used and prescribed particular Forms (quibus reli∣qui ministri in urbe & agro uterentur) for the Ministers to use both in City and Countrey, which are extant to this day. Now that I have not impleaded this way of more novelty, than it is really chargeable with, I shall produce the con∣fession
of a very pious and learned man, and him sufficiently a friend thereto, Dr. Preston by name, whom, since mySaints daily Exerc. Ser▪ 3. fixing this practice where I have done, I find to acknowledge all in a manner which I have contended for, touching the primitive and constant use of Litur∣gies. In the Church, saith he, at all times, both in the primitive times, and all along to the beginning of the Reformed times, to Luther and Calvin▪s time, still in all times the Church had set forms they used, and I know no objection against it of weight. Touching Luther I shall say more anon. As to Calvin, I have already made it evident, he was far from laying aside all Forms, and out of the very Forms, which to this day they have in that very Church, which most follows his Rules, it is notorious, I might speak much more. Onely this I note here, that the use of set Forms in the Church, is not acknow∣ledged to have received any disturbance, till since the Reformation by these two eminent persons: and yet that such use, as such, could not be any Popish corru∣ption (as the clamours of some pretend) which needed Reformation, seeing it is
owned to have been continued all along, and even in the primitive times. To bring conceived prayer nearer home; I need not speak how apt man∣kind is to follow Great and New Exam∣ples, especially in points which give men advantages to display their own admi∣red excellencies. Such was the vanity or infirmity of many of our Countreymen, that even in other novelties as well as this, Happiest was he that was likest Calin (and it had been well had they not far gone beyond him). But besides this unhappy propensity, there were se∣veral occurrences, which at first drew many of our Countrey men into love with and afterwards made the way fair for, the publick introducing of this practice. It is not to be denied, but there were some few too much enclined to Zwingli∣anism, who quarrelled the Liturgie in the dayes of Edw. 6. The dreadful storm under Queen Mary drove these, amongst many better and more sober persons of our Nation into a voluntary Exile, part∣ly in Germany, partly amongst the Swit∣zers &c. The place which gave them most encouraging reception was Frankford;
and hither therefore the greatest num∣ber flocked. In the head of these ap∣peared Whittingham, Goodman, Williams, &c. persons of the character before in∣timated, and ill affected to our Liturgy, though contented enough to have one of their own. Here, whether by their own procuring underhand, or by the Magi∣strates imposing on them, I cannot say, they could not have the use of the French Church, but upon promise to con∣form to the French in Doctrine and Ce∣remonies. This these malecontents rea∣dily accepted, strangely mangled the English Liturgy, left nothing but a con∣fession new modelled, the Psalms, Cha∣pters and Creed, and, instead of the Hymns, had certain English Meeters, which being sung, the Preacher went up into the Pulpit, and improving much the pattern given at Geneva, made there a more solemn prayer before Sermon, than that of Mr. Calvins (which seemed but needful, inasmuch as our Litany nd the whole body of the prayers were now di∣scarded) and after Sermon proceeded to a formal larger prayer for the whole state of the Church, especially the En∣lish
Exiles, concluding wlth the Lords prayer, after the example of Mr. Cal∣vin. To mend the matter, to this thus disfigured English Church comes Knox from Geneva, where he had some time taken sanctuary, having, by a seditious Pamphlet against the Government of Women, made both his own Countrey Scotland, and the Kingdome of England, in each of which a Mary then reigned, unsafe for him. He would have set up amongst these Exiles some other new Rules of his own; but finding his design unpracticable, he struck in for the pro∣moting the Genevan Order: which was carried a while, though not without great reluctancy of many, and some mix∣ture of our English service. These things happened in the Summer 1554. In the Spring following came Dr Cox (for∣merly King Edwad's Tutour, and Dean of Westminster, one of the principal com∣piles of our Common-prayer book, and so a man of great authority amongst the Exies) with several other English to Frankfort. He presently retrieves these disorders▪ removes Knox, settles Master Whit head as principal Pastour amongst
them, and Mr. Hor (afterwards Bishop of Winchester) with other able English Divines, in other Offices, and by this means, the Litany came into the Pulpit instead of the Preachers Prayers, and soon after most of the Service orderly, so that the face of the English Reforma∣tion again appeared, though in Exile. But this lasted not long, for in Spring the Year ensuing, upon occasion of words past between Mr. Horn (then White∣heads successour) and one Mr. Ashley a popular Lay-man amongst them, the people take the power into their own hands, weary out their old Ministers, choose some new ones, manage all things by Officers appointed by themselves: in a word, Independency seems now to have entred into the world, and the Mi∣nisters they had, seemed rather to take unto themselves the liberty to accom∣modate the publick Worship to the Hu∣mour of the people, than any regular pattern. By which advantage, arbitrary Prayers amognst them might easily, and ndoubtedly did grow apace, though I cannot instance in any particulars. It is not to be wondred, if in the days
of Queen Elizabeth these men returning, brought much of this unsettled humour with them, and inveigled others with the love of a Forreign (and therefore forsooth more admirable) Reformation, which pretended to be farther off from odious Rome, but in truth was onely more dissonant from the Rules of the Primitive Catholick Church, and allow∣ed both Ministry and People more li∣berty to pray and say whatever pleased them, than the sober English Form. But notwithstanding, the Order settled in King Edwards dayes, had not so uncer∣tain Foundations, and the interval (how∣ever dismal) betwixt his and Queen Elizabeths Reign was not so long, but that the Liturgy and Lawes returned soon into their current: and though the Number of abused people, who were for some other Worship (but what, they did not well know) was by the foremen∣tioned means encreased; yet totally to wave the Liturgy, and bring instead thereof prayers of private composure, or conception (which was yet more rare) was not so feasibe. The advantage there∣fore laid hold on was this. All Offices of
Worship, before the Reformation, being performed in Latine, which the common people understood not, and it being not fit that whole Congregations, so much interessed in the publick Worship of God, should be excluded from any other share therein, than that of being idle spe∣ctators, or answering sometimes a blin∣fold Amen to what they understood not, for remedy thereof, in the days of King Henry the VIII, when he had not yet faln out with the Pope, there had been de∣vised an English Exhortation to the peo∣ple, conteining the Heads of the (then) prayer for all Estates, which the Preach∣er was to use before or in the beginning of his Sermon, as well to let them know whom they were to pray for, as to move them thereto. The Form is of some length, and may be seen at large in the fore cited Book of Mr. Ham: L'Estrange. The summe for some reasons I will set down. After a laudable custome of our Holy Mother the Church, ye shall kneel down and pray for the Three Estates, the souls in Purgatory, our Holy Father the Pope, all Cardinals, Archbishops and Bishops▪ especially
my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, my Lord Bishop of this Diocese, all the rest of the Clergy, the peace of Christendome, the Realm of England, the King, the Lords of the Council, the rest of the Nobility, Benefactours to the Church, Tillers of the Earth, Fruits of the Land, good Weather, all persons under any deadly sin, all the sick, all Pilgrims and Palmers, for share in their prayers, for the recove∣ry of the Holy Cross into the hands of Christians, for all women in our La∣dies bonds, for the Child that it may receive Baptism, and the Mother Pu∣rification, for the good man and wo∣man that this day giveth bread to make the Holy loaf, for them who first began and longest continue it. for those and all true Christian peo∣ple, every man and woman, say a Pa∣ter noster and an Ave, &c. This had been by King Henry the VIII. afterwards corrected, the Pope and Gardinals ex∣punged, himself stiled supream Head of the Church, &c. & after that very much reduced by K. Edwards injunctions. Some small Alteration it received again in
Queen Elizabeths dayes, being reinjoin∣ed, and was become now so innocent and conform to Saint Pauls injunction (1 Tim. II. 1, 2.) that those who liked not the Liturgy, did both like and use this before Sermon. The Chieftain of the Dissenters in those dayes was the fa∣mous Mr. Thomas Cartwright who though he dreaded the Desk, yet stole oft into the Pulpit, first in some obscure Villages near Cambridge; afterwards he set up and read a Divinity Lecture (in the lan∣guage of later dayes, preached the Le∣cture) at Coventry. Most of his hearers having no more kindness for the pray∣ers of the Church than himself, would not usually come into the Church before his Sermon began; and by this meanes being guilty of so great an irregularity, as both preacher to handle, and people to hear the Word, without any other solemn prayer, but that brief though most comprehensive one of our Lords, he was desired by some of the Princi∣pals of his Followers, for their sakes who could not join in the Common∣prayer, to frame a prayer of his own before his Sermon: which he did, turn∣ing
the Exhortatory Form of bidding of prayer, with some addition of other Heads into a Form of prayer, which (I mean a Form of prayer of his own com∣posure) he used both privately and pub∣lickly to his dying day. And I remem∣ber my self, soon after my first coming to the University, to have been inform∣ed by a very ancient Minister of that perswasion, that Mr. T. C. however a man of great Learning & parts, and an excel∣lent Preacher, to his knowledg never did nor could pray by gift. We have thus seen in this great man, the first instance of a Prayer before Sermon (of the Preachers private composure) in England, though I believe none but that age, with which the World determines, will see the last. For this practice of Mr. Cartwrights no sooner appeared in the Nation, but it flew like lightning, from East to West, and he was imitated herein by Ministers of all sorts, as much as Calvin; & though the Queen by her injunctions and Visi∣tours, and by an express Proclamation (as I have heard) forbad it, (for after so comprehensive prayers as those of our Liturgy, if men would be serious
therein, & were of sober mind, there can be no great need of such practice, not to speak of the mischiefes consequent) yet could no considerable check be given hereto. And▪ what T. C. either never could, or never did, that presently many did to admiration, pray in the present conceived way, & many more affected it: insomuch that it presently became a Doctrine, publickly & generally preach∣ed up by such, who pretended the great∣est purity of Reformation, that Forms ofD: Preston St. Dai∣ly Ex∣ercise  82, 83. prayer were not sufficient; That they were onely helps that one might use that is ex∣ceeding weak, as a child that cannot goe may use a prop to help it; but we must not alwayes be children, we must not alwayes use this help; That there is no man that has any work of Grace in his heart, but is inabled in some measure to pray without a set Form, he is able to express his desires to God one way or other: And though the more sober part understood all these doctrines onely of private prayer, as is evident by the Authour now cited (Forms are an help for the private, for the publick it is another case, are his express words) yet these being the Sermons
which were most resorted to, and books, containing such doctrines as these, being most read by such, who pretended the greatest zeal for Religion, and such per∣sons withall practising according to these doctrines or precepts, it soon came to pass, that even the common people in private first, and then in their Families, adventured at, & as they thought much prfited in and by conceived prayer. And though I say those sober men who first taught this practice, intended it onely for private, yet this being thought the best and most edifying course of prayer in one case, was adjudged such absolutely and in all cases, no other pray∣ers much heeded by the Zealous; so that he being no body within a while, who did not before, and perhaps too after his Sermon, use a cnceived prayer, ua∣n good men who knew both the novel∣ty and  of the practice, were  it in ,  otherwise to be  in the discharge of their . The  of a multitude  prepared for this new  of , some randees, who affected
changes, and upon that and other ac∣counts (possibly of revenge and parti∣cular grudge) had a mind to disturb af∣fairs, full well knowing that there is no more effectual expedient to draw well∣meaning people, and especially those who are zealous ous in Religion (which were the fittest for their turn, because the fiercest) to any cause, than pretence of religion, conscience, and greater puri∣ty, made the settled Order of Worship, one particular of their grievances, cryed out for a Reformation of it, and anima∣ted all persons to write and practise against it. Designes being ripe, out broke our unhappy was, which gave men liberty to pray or not to pray, and to do each as seemed good in his own eyes. And in proces, it pleasing God in punishment of the National sins, that vi∣ctory inclined to the worse cause, out comes an Ordinance of Parliament, Jn. 23. 1644, For the taking away of the Book of Common prayer, and for the esta∣blishing and putting in execution of the Directory for the publick worship of God. This Directory administred matter or Furniture (to use their own term) for
prayer, to those would please to take it, but left each Minister to his own discre∣tion, choice, method, expressions and gifts; declaring and averring, that OurPref: to the Dire∣ctory. Lord Jesus Christ pleaseth to furnish with the gift of prayer, all his servants whom he calls to the Office of the Ministry. A bold assertion, and in which the Au∣thours of it did not consider, that they were obliged, upon this their principle, to confess that their Patriarch T. C. and many others, whom they cryed up for precious Ministers of Christ Jesus, were not called to the Ministry. But notwith∣standing this orderly provision of mate∣rials, some not being able to manage them, and most thinking themselves above even thus much of a Form, very extravagant, immethodical, or else very lame and imperfect were most of the publick prayers: insomuch that some of the more sober men, of those very dayes, were really ashamed thereof; and amongst others, a learned and ingenu∣ous person, drew together rules, fra∣med a systeme of precepts, which al∣though in complaisance to the language of the age, and to render somewhat of
sobriety more palatable to a fantastical world, he intituled, the Gift of prayer yet in that he teacheth therein this kind of prayer, as we use to do the more Li∣beral Arts and Sciences, in that he ap∣plies to this office the principles of Rhe∣torick, delivering heads for invention, and helps for language or elocution, this is in effect a fair confession, that what he called the Gift of prayer, was in his sense no better or no other, than what we have above resolved. Hitherto the rise and progresse of con∣ceived prayer has been insisted on, in the notion wherein it was opposed to the Liturgy, as an Ordinance or office of the publick worship, and as the Exer∣cise of it was made a part of the Mini∣sterial function. As to the private pra∣ctice of some what of this nature betwixt God and a mans own soul, in an ejacu∣latory or occasional way, I do not be∣lieve some such thing to have been ever out of use amongst the faithfull, in any age of the Church, before or under the law, or since the Gospell. To breath out a petition, or so, under any pressing want, or upon any compassionable occasion is
naturall: and had this been it, which some men meant in saying, that all men who have any work of grace upon their hearts are inabled to pray without a set form, and can expresse their wants one way or other, no man of sense would e∣ver deny it, but rather adde thereto. I will say, whether a man have a work of grace upon his heart, or whether he have not, let him ly under any calamity or want, or otherwise be considerably affected, and by the common faculties, which are naturall to all men, that have the use of reason and speech, he is able to expresse his wants or desires, one way or other, to God. The very hea∣then mariners in Jonah, when they were likely to be cast away, prayed to God to save themselves and Jonah too. They were in their petitions very compassio∣nate to him, and discreet as to them∣selves: yet I neither believe them to have been in that instant inspired with any gift of prayer, nor before that to have had any work of grace upon their hearts. Grace at the utmost, according as appeares by the story, was but then; if then, makeing its first attempt upon
them: nor can any man deny, but that common naturall abilities, admitting onely an ordinary concourse of God sup∣porting us in the exercise of them, suf∣fice for makeing such occasionall ad∣dresses▪ I do not say, but that in some such occasionall suits there may be, and often is, more than nature. In those secret elapses, which the souls of the faithfull make daily and hourely to God, upon all varieties of occasions, there is undoubtedly much of the pre∣ventions and assistances of grace. The warmth of heart and good affection, nay it may be the very thought and in∣tention of praying at that instant, and on that occasion, proceed from the spi∣rit of God. But here the case is widely different: no such urging or passionate circumstances are supposed. Insuch cases, I say, there is the same naturall ability and (haply) prompt ue to pray for help, as there is to perceive, desire and speak. And this being asserted by us there can be no controversy, remaining as to this point, were this the meaning of the gift of prayer: for what many times a man is able to do by strength of
naturall faculties, he is certainly much more able to perform by them advanc∣ed by grace. But this is not the sense of conceived prayer, even in that notion, wherein it has been asserted to be the right of every private Christian. It is notorious, that e∣ven by such a private Gift of prayer, they mean a being able to make a solemn, formall, continued speech to God, re∣presenting a mans whole state, for the main, as to his spirituall and temporall concernments, and also interceding for others as occasion shall require; for the expressing of all which, they suppose the infused promptitude to supply the faithfull, with freeer and better terms, more naturall to their purpose, and more agreeable to the sentiments of their own hearts, than any they can otherwise be furnished with. Now this pretence I say is new: or if any, who are fond of the practice, will contend for the anti∣quity of it, I believe they will not e∣steem it any great credit to their cause, to have the eldest authrs and practiti∣oners of it produced. And I beseech them not to be ffended, if being en∣gaged
to speak the utmost of my know∣ledge on this subject, I am enforced, by the process of my discourse, to publish the eldest tracks, that I can find, which may ground any plea for its tole∣rable antiquity; still prescinding from the inspired dayes. Amongst the more exalted proficients in the Religious Orders of the Romish Church, I meet with a kind of prayer called Mental prayer, much magnified amongst them, and no without reason▪ if they practice it, as their more sober Authours teach and direct. But their newer Mystical Divines have made it a wild & unintelligible Rodomontade. The name indeed I do not find to be elder, than some of their later School Doctors, Bonavent: Waldens: Gabr. &c. And possibly they have accommodated thisSarz. de v∣tu. Rl. Tom: 2. l: 2. c: 2▪ 3. &c. name, to more than in its natural import it will bear. It is used with them to sig∣nifie in a manner all private devotion, as namely Reading, Meditation, Prayer, and Conemplation (by which last, they understand an act of the understanding, imployed on God and spiritual things, ravishing the will with heavenly joy and
delight) and all these conjoin'd. This do∣ctrine they pretend to take out of a piece imputed to St. Bernard, and ex∣tantBer∣nard. Tom: 2. in his Works, which is intituled De scala Claustralium, or, De modo orandi. But it is plain to any one, who peruses that piece, that St. Bernard, or whoever was the Authour of it, as he has not the term Mental prayer, so rather designed to shew what exercise of Devotion be∣comes a cloisterd Religious person (spi∣ritualis hominis exercitium he calls it, and compares it to a ladder, of which he names the foresaid four acts as the four steps) than to midwife into the world any new sort of prayer. That kind of  which St. Bernard makes his  step, and which, if any thing that speaks of, is to be called mental pray∣, is nothing but occasional addresses, or soliloquies, of the devout soul to God, suitable to the matter meditated upon, mixed with the Meditations in an eja∣culatory way: Orationes rapti quodam∣odo jaculatas is St. Asts language in the same case. The name therefore being too strait for so large an exercise, some later Authours have been content to re∣duce
mental prayer to two parts,Rosi∣gnol. de. di∣scipl▪ Christ▪ Perf. l. 4, c: 4▪  Meditation, and Prayer properly so called, that is Petition: for which al∣so, to gain some colour of antiquity to so magnified a thing, they produce a passage out of the same St. Bernard, where he calls Meditation and Prayer the two feet by which we ascend to Heaven, and explains their effects thus. Meditatio docet quid desit; oratio, ne desit, obtinet. The design of Meditation isSrm. de Sto. Andr. in fin. to find out what is wanting, of pray∣er to obtain it may not be wanting. But neither there has the Father any one word, as if these two distinct acts of devotion were to be reduced into one exercise or office, to make up a new kind of prayer. However the aforesaid Masters have done it, and so publish it to the world, extolling it above all other kind of prayer infinitely, and teaching of it (what some of our men do of Concei∣ved prayer) that it is far more effectual than any other kind of prayer whatsoe∣ver, that it is Angelical rather than hu∣mane, the fountain and seminary of all virtue, the greatest participation of Heaven and I know not what not.
Now in this later confined sense, as Mental prayer is supposed to be a kind of prayer opposite to Set Forms, and made up of Meditation and Petition, it would seem very neerly to agree with their practice, who exercise conceived prayer in private, not without previous thought and consideration. And though the name, Mental prayer, seem to import it to be onely an exercise of the mind (with∣in which kind their loftier authours pre∣tend chiefly to confine its practice) and not of the voice, yet there are not want∣ing some amongst them, and those too Seraphical enough, who engage also the voice somtimes herein. I shall represent all as plain as I can, for I must acknowledge the best talk a ittle enthusiastically. They suppose three sorts or degrees of Con∣templation. The first consists in the know∣ledgeWa. Hion. Scle o Perfec∣tion. P: 1. Ch: 4▪ 5 &c. of God, gotten by reason, discourse, and study: this especially belongs to lear∣ned men and Scholars. The second lyeth principally in affection, without spiritual light in the understanding, or sight of spi∣ritual things, and this is of plain unlearn∣ed persons, who give themselves wholely to devotion. By this they mean nothing, but
some heat, or transport of affection, be∣gotten by attent and continued thought on some sacred subject, which is apt to move the mind. The third comprehends both the former, and consists both in clearer knowledge and more elevate affe∣ction, which they therefore account the most perfect contemplation that can be had in this life. Now to the second sort of contemplation doth belong, say they, a kind of peculiar vocal prayer, which, if I mistake them not, is very neer a kin to Extemporary prayer. It is by none that I have seen more plainly described, than by Walter Hilton a Carthusian, who was Famous in the Reign of King Henry the VI, about the Year 1433, in a Bok which he wrote for the use of Margaret Mother to Henry the VII, when she was now enred into a Religious life. ThereScal. Prfect. Part. 2▪ ch: 1. Sect. 1▪ is, saith he, another sort of Vocal pray∣er, which is not by any set orm of prayer; but is, when a man or woman, by the gift of God, feeling the grace of Devotion, speaketh to God as it were bodily in his pesence, with such word as suit most to his inward stir∣rings for the time, or as cometh to hs
mind, answerable to the Feelings or motions of his heart, either by way of rehearsal of his sins and wretchedness, or of the malice and sleights of his E∣nemy, or of the mercy and goodness of God. And hereby he cryeth with desire of heart, and speech of mouth, to our Lord for succour, as a man that were in peril amongst his enemies; or in sickness, shewing his sores to God as to a Physician, saying with David, Deliver me from mine enemies, O Lord: or else thus, Heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee; or other such like words as they come to his mind. Thus this Holy and great man, especial∣ly considering those dayes. Now this practice looks much like conceived pray∣er: onely there must be acknowledged these differences. 1. That this kind pre∣supposes much meditation, and rais'd affections; whereas in conceived pray∣er men set themselves commonly to it, with little or no thought precedent, and use it as a mean to raise affection. 2. This is not supposed to exclude other ordi∣nary prayers b Fom▪ (as their Mattins, Even song,  as in their Brevia∣ries),
to which all Religious persons a∣mongst them are by custome, and their rule, bound: Whereas, amongst the people we speak of, conceived prayer is judged the onely sort of prayer to be used by such, who have attained the Fa∣culty thereof▪ 3. The more liberal exercise hereof i lookt upon as more rare, even in those very persons who have arrived at it, a more than ordinary gift and favour conferred upon them by God, of short duration, and of no constant or frequent returns; as beingIdem Ibid wondr painful to the spirit, and wast∣ing o e body, who useth it. For, say they, it maketh the body for to stir and move here and there, as if the man were mad, or drunk, and could have no rest. In a word, this character of prayer very neerly agrees with such prayers, as I have heard some Qakers pretend to, who owe more of their Religion to men full well verst in these Books and pra∣ctices, than the world thinks of. But our conceived prayer is ordinary, at arbitra∣ry seasons, & much more ame and dull. Ours seems rather to be somwhat of their Mental prayer, (or that Meditation, which
is supposed to have preceded this kind of Vocal prayer) worded, but broken off, before it hath raised either mind or body to such passions, as they talk of. Upon the whole, I really judge, that, excluding from the notion of our pre∣sent private conceived prayer, such brief occasional ejaculatory prayer, as I before allowed ever to have been in use, and which no serious man will dare in general to reprehend, there is nothing since the inspired times, which looks like the private practice of our conceived prayer, elder than this practice, which I have thus given account of, amongst some of their more exalted Votaries, and which it is plain was not their usual dai∣ly prayer, at fixed times, or on common occasions, but some more extraordinary eruption and rapture of devotion. At least I sincerely profess, if there be any such thing, it has escaped my notice, not∣withstanding that I have diligently exa∣mined what I could meet with writ on this subject, and have been otherwise inquisitive enough. It is plain, the Fa∣thers, both in publick and in private used Forms, (though, I say it again, we
ptend not to tye any man in private to Forms onely) and when, in private, they would pay more solemn devoons on particular reasons and occaso, they penned o themselves new Forms pro∣portionably. Witness the private pray∣e extnt of St. Basil, of Ephrem Syrus on several occasi, of St. Ambrose pre∣paratory to the Communion, together with the great variety of St. Augustine's devotions, and of diverse others. In succeeding Ages there could be no que∣stion, but the like use was more con∣stant and uniform. I do find indeed Lu∣ther to have used conceived prayer, fre∣quently, but not solely, in private, and with marveilous affection: of his pub∣lick use thereof I have not been able to find out one instance; and I have reason to conclude there was none. For I have observed his most private Sermons (his Postillae Domestic) as well as his publick nes, at the utmost to have begun, onely, with a very bief Exhortation toLuth▪ Post. D∣ni. .  the people to attend, and that conclu∣ding without so much as the Lods pray∣er, [Ʋt Deo debitu cultu praestemus, Verbum Dei, ja ipsius mandatum ∣genter
audiamus, &c.] For the payingDomi. suae. 1532. & Do. miic. 3. &c. to God due Worship, let us diligent∣ly attend to the Word of God, accor∣dig to his commandment; and so he proceeds with very little ther preface commonly to his Text. Sometimes he begins even without any such Exhorta∣tion at all: and yet they who publish these his Sermons, at the command of the Duke of Saxony, pretend to have taken them, in the German Tongue, word for word from him: and tis plain they were very exact, otherwise such small prefaces as these would have been omitted Then for any conclusory pray∣er to, or after his Sermon, he common∣ly ends with such an ejaculatory petiti∣on, as we do, Quod tribuat nobis, or Fa∣xit Deus, &c. Which God of his mer∣cy grant us, or God grant this to us, according as the dependance suggests, and no more. But what is a greater ar∣gument, in stead of exercising any such pretended gift of his own in publick prayers, he kept close to the prayers of the Church, onely translating and pur∣ging them. His first attempt was on the XX. Sunday after Trinity, in the Year
1525, as he himself witnesseth. NuncEpist. d. l. Lang, & mi∣istr: Erphor. jam Principis mandato, crastina Domini∣ca publico experimento tentabitur in no∣mine Christi. Erit autem missa vernacula pro Laicis, &c. Now, saith he, in the Name of Christ, at the command of the Prince we will make a publick tryal of the next Lords dayes Service. There will be the Communion-service in their Mother-tongue for the peo∣ple. And there will be every dayes Service in Latine, with Lessons added in their Mother-tongue, as you shall shortly see in the publick Copies, which he was then preparing. And some∣thing of such a Form, purged by him, isForm: miss. & Com∣mun. pro. Eccl. Wit∣ten∣berg: extant in his second Tome, pag. 556, for the use of the Church of Wittenberg, where he taught: in which Office we find the Sermon to come in, in the same or∣der as in our Liturgy, and we cannot reasonably imagine any other than the publick stated prayers to have preceded it. Idem de Vernacula concione sntimus, ut nihil referat sive hic post Sybolum, si∣ve ante introitum Miss fiat, &c. The same do we judge (saith he) of a Ser∣mon in the Mother-tongue [namely,
that that should be used, as well as the Nicene Creed, in the Communion Service] yet so, that it mattereth no, whether it be made here after the Ni∣cee Creed, or immediately before the Introit of the Communion, though there is ther reason why it should not be made after the Introit. These I presume sufficient evidences, that Lu∣ther never pretended to, or exercised in publick any Gift of prayer. Nor in pri∣vate, when any were present with him, can I find any such use of his. Amidst those prodigis temptations which he endured, dreadful apparitions of flaming Torches thrown at him, which even ex∣animated him for a while, when heMelch. Adam. in vit. Luth came to himself, I find him onely at his Venite, in contemptum Diaboli, Psalmum de Profundis quatuor vocibus cantemus: Come, saith he, to those who were with him, in defiance of the Devil, let us sing the Psalm out of the Depths with four voices. This is not seeking God by the strength of imaginary gifts. In secret indeed, he used much and most fervent soliloquy with God, which we may call arbitrary, conceived, or extem∣porary
prayer, as we please. This ac∣count is given of him by Vitus Theodo∣rus his companion, during his abscond∣ing and solitude in the Forest by Coburg, Nulius abit dies, &c. There passes, saith he of Luther, no day, but he spende at least three hours in prayer, and those the sittest for studies. Once I happened to overhear him at prayer. Good God! what spirit, what faith was there in his rds! He asks eve∣ry thing with such reverence, as be∣ing sensible he speaks to God, with such faith and confidence, as speaking to a Father or Friend  ow, said he, that thou art our Father and God: I am sure thou wilt destroy all the persecu∣tors of thy children. But if thou wilt not do it, thy danger is conjoind with ours: it is all thy business: we engaged therein compelled by thee. Thou there∣fore shat defend us. In these words, very neerly, did I hear him praying with a plain voice, I standing at a good distance: and my soul burned within me with singular affection, to hear him speak so familiarly, so grave∣ly, so reverently with God, and in
his prayers plead to God promises out of the Psalms, as being sure all he ask∣ed should come to pass. Now if we consider what has been above spoken touching Mental prayer amongst the Romish Religious, and remember that this great spirited servant of God came out of a Cloister of the Augustinian Or∣der, in which life he had with great zeal and seriousness exercised himself, in all kind of their devotions, towards God, we shall soon conclude upon what institutions, methods and practices he arrived at this promptitude and power in this kind of praying. For the instance given is plainly Meditation worded, the soliloquie of a strong faith, and ardent devotion, with God, in such language as great affections broke out into. And this his long retired life, and converse in deep thought with God, together with his study, and being exercised in Scripture and much preaching, had ha∣bituated him for. Of his secret method and course of praying, and what he judged lest in such case, if any list to see more, they may view his Simple. Orand. Mod. where himself relates his
own practice; And his Enchirid. Piar-Precation. where he censures other practices; both extant in his seventh Tome: which still speak more in favour of the mental, little, or nothing of the present conceived way. And now having given this particu∣lar account of Luthers practice, I cannot believe that in the first and eldest Lu∣theran Churches, there ever appeared any such thing as Conceived prayer in publick. What their first publick Ser∣vice was, we have seen: That they now have publick Forms of prayer, and ad∣ministration of the Sacraments, all must acknowledge. That there should be amongst them, as in all Churches, some turbulent and fantastical men, no man can doubt▪ or think otherwise. That such men may practice at present conceived prayer amongst them, I will not deny: but this still must be acknowledged to have come in since Luthers time considerably, mand▪ System. Then▪ deinv.  c. .  . and so contradicts not what I have above asserted. And  am sure the doctrine of the modern Lutherans is temperate enough in this point. The utmost they say in the Controversie is, No man can
deny the expediency of set Forms, but he must conadd Scripture. Nec tamen ne∣gamus, ▪ ut qui in e sacrâ ube∣rioris sun profecûs, ad certas precandi formas se semperon alligent: Yet we do not deny▪ but that it is profitable, that they, who are ripe Proficients in devotion, do not alwayes tye themselves to constant Forms of Prayer. Thus taught a Divini∣ty Professour of theirs, of great note in the Year 1650, or since; and I searce know any man worthy to be heeded, who will not say with him herein. But enough be thus said touching the Origi∣nal progress and use of Conceived prayer, under any notion whatsoever, Haveing now spoken what I judgeSect 3. satisfactory, I am sure what is so to my selfe, touching all the propounded heads of enquiy, I know no conclusion which I can put to this discourse, that may ren∣der it more beneficiall, than if reflecting upon the present temper and Genius of our People, I consider (with all hum∣ble submission) whether somewhat be not to be indug'd thereto, by some qua∣lified use of conceived prayer, or a bi∣trary (but alwayes sober) forms,
in such cases where the law, either by ambiguity, or favourableness of expres∣sion, seems o give some appearance of liberty left to the Ministers discretion: & this, as well for the winning at present some persons to our Communion, as for the reteining others in it. We do find, in most cases generally, that prudent compliance gains more on many adver∣saries, than stiffnesse, and rigorous insisting on what is in strictness rightest and best. The  he that is righteous overmuch, is neither in theEccles: VII. 16. Aristot. Etic. Holy Ghosts, nor in the Philosophers judgment the best man in point of mo∣ralls. And whether in good Politicks there be not to be admitted a Prudenti∣al  or moderateness, which, being extended to Ecclesiastical as well as Civil sanctions, shall a little rebate the strictness of the injunction, , where by reason of the uni∣versality of the terms, and cases that could not haply be foreseen by the law-giver when the law was made, it seems to require or forbid more than is for the publick good (the great end of laws) whether I say such a temper
is not commendable, deserves much the consideration of wiser men than my self; to whom therefore I leave it, not takeing upon me to determin, in the general. Onely I humbly judge, that if we of the subordinate Clergy, with all deference and humble obedience to our superiours, o, by the use of that poor measure of Christian prudence, where∣with God has endowed us, in the fear of God and with conscience to our seve∣ral obligations, mete out to our selves (pro hic & nunc) what we judg most expedient, provided our practice still consist with a favourable sense or interpretation of the law, we are not to be blamed; at least, for our good in∣tention, and no refractary procedure, we may find, before all sober men, an easy pardon. We do not want great Precedents in cases of like nature, and there are also Precepts, or counsels, that look this way. St. Pauls Judaizing, to have taken off, if it might be, the prejudice which the be∣lieveing Jewes had against him & his do∣ctrine, is a praegnant instance of like practice, or an higher. Acts: XXI. 23,
24, &c. To pretend that he had the vow of a Nazarite (at least temporary) upon him, as he did in effect when he put himself into the company and state of four men that had, to be at charges to provide for those men and himselfe the legal rites and sacrifice, to shave his head and in the Holy fire devote the hair, to await the seven daies for the ac∣complishment of his purification & then to come into the temple solemnly to testify the accomplishment thereof conserting that the accustomed offerings should be made for himself also amongst the company (all which by the purport of the text it is plain he did according to the law in that case, and all this too, after that very law and all sacrificeing was abro∣gated by that most perfect and ever blessed sacrifice of our Lords own bo∣dyAct. XV on the cross, as had been determined by the very Hiersolymitan Council, was a compliance a very strange height: and yet as we see justifiable, both from the practice of that great Apostle, and from the advice of St. James, and the Elders of the Hierosolymitan Church▪ ver: 18, 20 &c. Let us but view this a
little more attentively: Put in the scales, on one hand, ingenuous dealing, the owning a mans self fairly, what accord∣ing to conscience and duty he is, and the asserting that Liberty with which Jesus Christ has made us free, haveing purcha∣sed it at no meaner a rate, than that of his own bloud; and on the other hand, the makeing a pretence, difficultly recon∣cileable with truth, and in pursuance thereof consenting to, and seemingly joyning in acts of worship, as difficultly justifiable under a Gospel state, if we now consider both practices according to due merit and right, who will not say the former is in its self much surer, bet∣ter and every way more laudable? Yet it was not so adjudged in those circum∣stances, or that juncture of affaires. Nor is this great Apostles practiceing thus a thing once said, but reasserted and mainteined by himselfe. Though I be saith1. Cor: IX. 19 20 &c. he free from all men, yet have I made my self servant unto all, that I might gain the more. Ʋnto the Jewes I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jewes: To them that are under the law as under the law that I might gain them that are under the
law: To them that are without law, as whithout law, that I might gain them that are without law; to the weak became I as weak; that I might gain the weak: I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means save some. A fuller prece∣dent to our purpose we cannot wish: & one of greater authority except in the case of our Saviour (which also we shall have instantly) we cannot have. Again, how fair are those Apostolical injunctionsRom: XV. 1, 2, 3. in like case. We then that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves. Let every one of us please his neighbour, for his good, to edification. For even Christ (Behold here our Lords example) pleased not himself. &c. To which passage it were easy to alledge many parallels. And the authority of those copies is very great, saith the Learned and judicious Dr. Hammond, which read .  serving the time (Rom: XII. 11.) besides that the designe of the context, and the parallel passage in St. Ignatius his Epistle to St. Polycarp, and the easiness of the variation, make it much the more probable read∣ing. There may certainly be such
thing, as a commendable time-serving; when considering the time, place, and posture of things, in the prosecution of a great good, we at once follow the rules of prudence and good conscience, sweetly reconciled and conspiring in the use of the same means. I confess it is much easier to discourse plausibly on this subject, than to practice unblameably: yet certainly such an accommodative temper is innocently practicable. How∣ever, we commonly teach, and most truly, that the Constitutions and Laws of the Church are alterable, or may be dispensed with: and whether those par∣ticular Lawes, which in strictness injoin ministers to use no other prayers in publick, but what are prescribed in the Liturgy, are not, as things stand at pre∣sent, fit to be a little relaxed, or possi∣bly are some way temperated already, is worthy of great consideration. It may truly be said in this case, as in that of the Judaizing Christians at Jerusalem, We see there are many thousands that believe, that are serious good men, and devoutly use our Church Liturgy, who yet are all zealous of a prayer before Ser∣mon,
and that too varied and accommo∣dated to particular occurrences, and lit∣tle new emergent cases. The body of our Church (I mean ofSect. 4. the conformable people of these Nati∣ons) seems to be mad up of three sorts of persons. The first, (which are far the fewest) are the honest old English Pro∣testants, people soberly brought up in the bosome of the Church, truly serious and judicious in matters of Religion, who, though they have had the happi∣ness never to be quite out of the Church, yet are not therefore merely of it, be∣cause they were born in it, but out of choice and conscience hold fast their Mothers sound Faith. These people well know how to address themselves to God in private, and in publick they would be fully content with the strict observation of the Churches rule, with∣out the addition of other, or daily new prayers. There are a second sort (much more numerous) whose harder lott it was, to be bred up in factious daies, and haply amongst factious men, who have∣ing never known what the Church of England was, till they saw it restored,
soon grew sensible of the whimsies and Fantastiall waies in which they had been kept, and whatever share they had un∣happily had thereof, seriously repen∣ted, and, with a sweet mixture of peni∣tent sorrow and joy, betook themselves into the arms of their mother, blessing God that they had lived to see, whence in truth they were descended. Many of these haveing tasted much devout af∣fection under the conceived way, al∣though they really like, and right piously use, our Liturgy yet cannot but have a mindful kindness for the sober use of that other kind of prayer, which hath often affected them; and therefore would not willingly have all exercise thereof precluded or forborn There are a third sort, much the worst, but vastly the most, who are of our Church, because it's that which is at present uppermost in these Kingdomes, and would be of any that should be so. And of these there are two sorts: The first are men of Gallio's temper, not careing for these thinges, not at all concern'd as touching matters of Religion. They esteem it fitting perhaps that some Religion there
should be in every state, but what kind, is to them no point of moment. Not∣withstanding, under our Religion it ha∣ving been a custome to have a prayer, of the Ministers making or conceiving, be∣fore Sermon, many of these very people, purely out of ill nature, would clamour against us, and call us idle, dull, unwor∣thy of what we have, should we lay down, or omit such Useage: As the man said of two Sermons a day, so stand these men for such prayers, they will have them, not that they care for them, but be∣cause their Minister is paid for them, as they apprehend. Another sort there is of these Temporizers, who are nearer of Nicodemus his state, when he first ad∣dicted himself to our Lord: in their hearts they have a real kindness for re∣ligion, and, had they their wills, they would have another constitution of it than what is publickly settled by law; but it is not their interest, or they have not selfe denial or fortitude enough to profess thus much, & therefore they are content to swim with the stream. I dare not say, but amongst these there may be many sincere persons, because
our establisht Religion, in those very points, which gratify not all mens hum∣ours, education or custome, is yet so in∣nocent, that though it do not every way please some mens fancies, yet it can hardly thwart any understanding mans conscience: and therefore acquitting these men from acting against conscience, and onely judging them to suppress some opinion or inclination of more unrea∣sonable affection, I am enforced to con∣clude there many be sincerity amongst them. Now certain it is, the farr grea∣test number of these have a great Zeal for conceived prayer, and would not so much comply as they do, should all use thereof be taken away. In summe, of these three sorts of our people, which I have thus given account of, the first it is plain is not indeed by any forbearence of conceived prayer to be lost; but of the second, it may be feared, many would be: and of the third sort, a multitude who are perfect Neuters in religion would clamour against us  such forbear∣ance: and as  the , as I may call them, instead of wining many of them perfectly to u (which may be hoped) we
should by such meanes make all of them more adverse, and ready to take parties against us, when ever oppor∣tunity should offer. I ought not to omit, that of those who hold off from our communion, there are many who come in frequently into our congregations, when the service is over, and both diligently heare and well like our sermons: now these people are told by those, who have prejudiced them a∣gainst, or seduced them from our Church, that one reason of our Ministers useing the Commonprayer is because they are carnal men, not haveing true grace, and so destitute of the spirit of prayer, and of those gifts, which themselves and their brethren have: and that because we want them our selves, we would sup∣press them in others. Now to convince these people of the abominable delusion and cheat, which is put upon them, there can be no more effectual expe∣dient, than the modest exercise of our abilities in this way; whereby it will be evident, that if in conceived prayer men are to speake sense, and what be∣comes the majesty of God, and this rea∣dily,
without hesitancy, drawling, losses, and insignificant canting expletives, the generality of the conformable Clergy can out do these very leaders in their own magnified way. And it cannot be de∣nied, but that many of their people have been so honest, that when they have discovered such cheats and slande∣rours pretences as these, they have de∣serted those their seducers, and retur∣ned to the Communion of our Church: yea I perswade my self, there are many kept blindfold still amongst them, of so honest minds, that were they but deli∣vered from this misunderstanding, they would do the like▪Sect. 5. But here the great question will be, how far the Laws of our Church will bear with what we plead for? Will they, as they stand at present, allow any thing of arbitrary Forms or Conceived prayer, in any case? And if they will not, who then of our Clergy can pra∣ctice either, with a Salvo to his conformi∣ty and duty? In answer hereto, I do acknowledge, that whoso peruses and considers the sta∣tutes and injunctions of King Edw: VI,
or Queen Elizabeth, will not there find, to the best of my memory, any thing that countenances either. And all fa∣vourable interpretation, as far as I can see, which can reasonably be fixt on those Laws, to our purpose, will be to say, that whereas it is thereby ordained, that all Ministers should in their publick ministration use the Forms prescribed, and no other, we are to remember in what times those Laws were made, re∣flecting on the then state of things; and then the words and no other, may be conceived to have been peculiarly in∣tended against the Romish Missal, Brevi∣arie, and Ritual, the onely open prayers which in those dayes appeared against our Liturgy: and consequently we may conceive, that whatever Minister, or∣derly and constantly, uses the Common Prayers of the Church, and, onely in such cases wherein nothing is in strict∣ness peremptorily injoined, a prayer of his own, conform to the Doctrine of the Church, is not thereby a Transgressour of the Law, in its principal intent and design. But I do not forget that I have spoken some thing already, which may
much rebate the force of this interpreta∣tion. Now as to later Lawes (though the later alwayes, the more of force, where there appears any thing of an Antinomy) I cannot say there are any such in our Church, wherein it was the intention of the Lawgiver to allow the free use of ar∣bitrary Forms, or Conceived prayer, so much as before Sermon. But waving a while the intention of the Lawgiver, if we may stand to the words of a later Ca∣non (which shall by me be allowed to be an Ecclesiastical Law) I do judge that interpreting them in a favourable sense, we may find something which gives a permission, though possibly not a plain allowance to such use as we plead for. And then the practice of approved men, and a general conniveance at this pra∣ctice, wheresoever it has been soberly and peaceably used, from those whom it has from time to time (so long in a manner as may be accounted prescriptory) concerned to execute the lawes, will make the permission much more consi∣derable. Before I proceed to particu∣lar proof, for the prevention of such
censures as I may possibly incur, I will guard my self by premitting the words of as excellent a person, as it may be, most our Church has had of his Order, and him a strong Patriot to our Litur∣gy, Discipline, and Church. The Church (saith Reverend Dr. Hammond)Pract. Cat. Lib: 3. Sect. 2. being obeyed in the observance of the Prescribed Liturgy in publick, permits sometimes (and, upon special inciden∣tal occasions, prescribes) other Forms in the Publick Congregations, so it be done prudently, piously, reverently, and to edification. And so also in the Family, and in the Visitation of the sick, if the particular condition of the one or the other require it: and in the Closet it is not supposed by our Church, but that every one may ask his own wants in what form of words he thinks fit. That the Church on in∣cidental occasions prescribes nw forms, is evident by frequent matter of fact, but avails not to what we are now con∣cernd for. That she permits other Forms than the Lturgy in the publick Congregation makes indeed for us, and we see it plainly to have been that
most pious and religious persons judg∣ment; but I am able to see no other pas∣sage in our Ecclesiastical laws, on which he could ground it, than the LV Canon of 1603, above insinuated. The title of the Canon is, The Form of Prayer to be used by Preachers before their Sermon. Yet in the body of the Ca∣non is no form of prayer prescribed, ex∣cept the Lords prayer for conclusion, onely heads set down for bidding of prayer, according to former useage. The words of the Canon are: Before all Sermons Lectures and Homilies, Preachers and Ministers shall move the People to joyne with them in prayer, in this form, or to this effect, as brieffly as conveniently they may. Ye shall pray for the Church, &c. All waies concludeing with the Lords Prayer. Now it is plain this Canon is very ambiguous; for it may be either understood of bidding of prayer (and as to the manner even of this, it leaves some liberty by those words in this form or to this effect) or of a form of prayer, which the preacher at his discretion may make, as briefe as conveniently may be,
compriseing the heads mentioned: which form may intervene, betwixt his move∣ing (or calling upon) the people to pray, and the Lords prayer, as now the com∣mon use of most preachers is. And al∣though the practice of men of greatest note in those dayes may seem to deter∣min the Canon to the former & more pri∣mitive custome of bidding of prayer, yet if we do not understand the Canon of a form of Prayer, the title and body will not well accord. Upon the whole this am∣biguity, & appearance of interfereing of one part with the other is so notorious, that it cannot reasonably be judged unseen to the compilers of the Canon; and would seem therefore to have been designed by them, as a prudential kind of temper, for the gratifying all sober and peaceable men, however of a differ∣ent practice in this point: For it is evi∣dent that the bidding of prayer, which most seems to be the thing injoynd, is yet so injoynd, as that the frameing a prayer on such and such heads (which was then become an usual practice) is not forbidden or censured, but rather, in the wording of the title and Canon, a con∣niveance
thereat insinuated. And this seemes the more probable to have been the Churches intention, for that in the Convocation held in the year 1640 it was proposed, that a short forme of prayer should be drawn up, compriseing the materialls specified in the Canon, which every Minister should use before his Sermon. And though such a form was prepared, and there was great con∣fidence that it would have been univer∣sally received, yet the excellent Arch∣bishop, President of the Convocation, putt a stop thereto; in all likelyhood conceiveing it fitter, tacitly to leave Preachers to their own discretion in this behalfe, than to make a new Canon contrariant to the old use, and former Kings and Queens injunctions. In the Office of the Visitation of the sick, the exhortatory part indeed is ex∣pressly left in a great measure to the mi∣nisters discretion. The words of the Ru∣bick are, and all along have been, The Minister shall exhort the sick person in this form, or other like: which words, in this form or other like, whether they may not, in equity and by parity of reason, be
extended to certain ensueing forms of prayer, ought to be considered. Sure it is, the dealing with the sick persons consci∣ence is afterwards wholely left, as to mat¦ter of expression, to the Ministers prud∣ence, some, & but some, materialls onely being suggested, and no form prescribed. And from hence it seems but a natural consequent, that it is free for the mini∣ster, as he sees occasion, and finds the sick mans condition to require, to enlarge or ary the prayers. These are the utmost grounds, besides the observation of ap∣proved mens practice, which I can find for that reverend Doctors judgment. At least, this is the utmost of what I have, to say touching any favour or per∣mission, which our Ecclesiastical laws give to any other publick prayers, be∣sides those prescribed in the Liturgy, in any case whatsoever. If it be said, Permission or Connive∣ance, concluded from such favourable interpretation of laws, and from some mens practice (though approved per∣sons) is not sufficient to justify so gene∣rally irregular a practice as this is acknow∣ledged to be, I say, it is not now so irre∣gular
as it was fifty or threescore yeares ago; (Consuetudo loci est lex loci) The state of things is much altered, the in∣conveniencies of it, as it is pleaded for, cannot be considerable, if any, and the mischiefs arising from the forbearance of it would be intolerable. And I could further tell those, who most rigorously dissent from me, a thing in their ear, that there is another practice as ge∣neral, publick and irregular, as what I urge or design, which they both allow, and daily join in, and dare not in their ordinary Congregations break off, ne∣glect, or intermit, notwithstanding it hath no more, from authority, and per∣haps never had, then bare permission or connivance, for its justification. It is said indeed in the Title-page of the English Psalms put into Metre by T. S. J. H. and others, that they were set forth and al∣lowed to be sung of all the people in our publick Congregations. But it is not specified, by whom they were allowed; and as to all Approbation or Allowance from tolerable Authority, those who have diligently searched after any possi∣ble foot steps of it, could never yet find
any, and are very confident there never was any. But of this haply more else∣where. However here is a precedent of a practice as obnoxious, as this I plead for, which passes, and is like to pass, cur∣rent amongst us all. Let not them there∣fore implead one another, whom the same cause joins. And now I should not think i diffi∣cultSect. 6. for any to collect, what  judge the utmost that may be done in the case of any Conceived prayer, or Forms of our own, without disobedience to the Laws of the Church: However I will speak it out with the freedome and ingenuity I promised. I account then, that the rea∣sons, above laid down, may make it ne∣cessary to use with prudence, sobriety, and submission to our Superiours, all the liberty which is left us: and, it being permitted to us, as would seem by what has been said, either to bd prayer be∣fore Sermon, or to comprise those heads, in the Canon suggested, in a prayer of our own, ending with the Lords Prayer, it can be no more a transgression of the Law commonly to vary our Forms, than it is simply to use a Form of our own
private composure; for that every Form so varied is still supposed such. Now it cannot be denied, but that since the Conceived way has been so magnified and cried up, a multitude of persons of worth having exercised themselves much therein, it is come to a very considera∣ble maturity and perfection. Many have run to and fro, and knowledge, or expert∣ness in this case, is encreased. As to those therefore who are masters of such facul∣ty of speech, if before their Sermons, and sometimes in the Visitation of the sick, when any particularity of the Patients condition requires it, they do, upon some thought, employ that their ability, and thereby accommodate their prayers as closely as they can, with due modesty, gravity & reverence to particular emer∣gencies and circumstances, I say (to speak in the Apostles language in ano∣ther case) I suppose it is good for the pre∣sent necessity: nor can I see any disobedi∣ence therein, except we should conceive some more particular restraint laid on such persons by their Superiours, than that which the Canon hath imposed. If it be said, that the practice of conceived
Prayer, or such new varied Forms, will bring the Liturgy into contempt or flight, and so that indirectly and by con∣sequence it is at once a transgression of all the Laws which prescribe the use of the Liturgy, and due reverence thereto, I answer by utter denying, that such moderate, discreet, and sober practice, as I have pleaded for, will ordinarily have such effect, and I have possibly some poor experience to the contrary. It will rather prove a grateful variety, adding new spirit and heat to the devo∣tions of the multitude, adorning and setting forth the Offerings of God; a point worthy our most serious zeal and study. Many possibly, that are scorners, will be scorners still: but this will tend rather to diminish, than encrease, the num∣ber. I am very sensible how obnoxious toSect, 7. censure these my concessions of the three or four last sections are, how un∣expected and surpriseing they may prove to any who have perused and considered the former discourse, and its purport. It may reasonably seem strange, that af∣ter evidence given touching the Vanity
of the common pretences to the Gift of prayer, touching diverse inconveniences and the Novelty of the practice, as also the irregular methods by which it has prevailed, I should in any measure act the part of an advocate for the per∣mission or continuance of such practice. But I desire all such, who are apt to take offence at what I have now said, to con∣sider, in what way I have pleaded for it; not for the sole and unlimited exercise of it at that rate, as it was, and still is by some practiced, but so regulated, as that the main inconveniences, thereof are a∣voided; not as coordinate with, much lesse in opposition to, the Church Litur∣gy, but onely as subservient thereto, and as I judge such sober and prudent ex∣ercise thereof a mean to reconcile many good minded people to our ministry and Church. All wise men know, that amongst the multitude, what is best and most orderly is not alwayes most ac∣ceptable, nor can be solely prevailed for. I never can think much on such cases as this, but that of the Stoick presently runs in my head.
,Epicte ex Eu∣ripid. . Who to Necessity does fairly yield, 'Mongst men is wise, in Gods mind best is skilld. How far this is applicable to our pre∣sent case, I leave to better judgments definitively to conclude, haveing, I hope with submission enough, spoken mine own thoughts. I have no interest of mine own in what I write: I have long since sacrificed all that to God and his Church. In what I have spoken▪ I designed the Publick good: It is possibly a weaknesse in me to think I could contribute thereto; but in my place I am obliged to endeavour what I can. He that shall say, that un∣der our present settlement all, that is establisht, is absolutely the best, and no∣thing can be amended, saies more than our Church does, and has a difficult proofOffice of com∣minat. lies on him. There is something, saith she, which is yet to be wisht: and 'tis sufficient to say what is establisht, is as well as for the time it could be. I have the same plea to enter for what I have
yielded to the present Genius of the age. People will not be perswaded, but that in these days they stand upon the shoul∣ders of all who have lived before them, as they commonly say. For knowledge, parts and judgment, they will give place to none, but the inspired times; and 'tis well if, in all things, they will yield thereto. To shew them what those gifts are in truth, which they pretend to, is one way to make them sober: this I have honestly endeavoured. To deny any use of them, is to make our selves, in their judgment, mad or obstinate; and for us to pretend to be without them (or which is the same, to give no instances of them) is to draw upon our selves the censure of being scandalously unfit for the places we fill: Both these, as rockes, I have endeavoured to decline, I conclude: In secret, let every one use such words as most incite or help his de∣votion (that being the sole intent of words in such prayer) or let him for∣beare any, if he perceives them to dis∣tract him. This has ever been the doc∣trine of the Church, and is ours. In Publick, who well considers what has
been said, will preferre mature and well contrived forms, such as I may confi∣dently say our Church has provided us, haveing far outdon all Churches, whose Liturgies I ever yet saw. And where∣soever the Church has permitted any thing to our Liberty, let no private per∣son dare to draw the reines straighter. Something of Variety there will be in diverse mens ministration, as long as men are diverse: and I cannot tell whether any man be ever so accomplisht, as that I may say, he is happy who never va∣ries from himself. Not to be content with such an Uniformity, as answers the law, is to be so far Nonconform. Let us therefore all rather study to use the liberty left us with prudence, so∣briety, and all sweetnesse of charity and peaceablenesse, each approveing him∣selfe to God in the conscientious dis∣charge of the ministry committed to him, and not censuring his brother, who it may be would be what another is, but that he sees not so far and cannot. And Happy is he who condemneth not himself in that which he alloweth. The End of the First Part.
OF THE GIFT AND DUTY OF SINGING TO GOD. . 1 Cor 14.15. . St. Basil. in Ps: . Synes-Hymn. 3. DƲBLIN, Printed Anno Dom. M.DC.LXXVI.
OF THE GIFT AND DUTY OF SINGING To GOD. CHAP. I. Sect. 1. What is out of Controversie on this subject. Sect. 2. The Points to be resolved in this Discourse. Sect. 3. How the inspired Church was qualified for this duty. Sect. 4. What the spiritual gift of singing, mentioned 1 Cor. XIV, 15, was. Sect. 5. What spiritual Songs, Psalms and Hymns. Sect. 6. What Rules laid down by the then inspired Authours for performance in this kind.
Sect. 7. What the melody of the heart. Sect. 8. A monition to be serious in this matter. BEsides the addresses, which we owSect. 1. to God, by way of sut, for the obteining what we want, that there are others due as well in return of gratitude for the Good things we re∣ceive, as in acknowledgment of his in∣finite Majesty, glory, and absolute per∣fection, scarce requires proof. These addresses we commonly call the Praises of God. Now whether Nature first taught, or God by secret instinct, or o∣therwise, directed the rational part of his creation to offer them up in words fitted to melody, and melodiously ut∣tered, cannot perhaps be precisely deci∣ded: certain it is that singing to God was one of the first acts of worship paid him by any of his creatures. When God was now laying the foundations of the earth, The mornign starres sang together, and all the Sons of God shouted for joy. Job: XXXVIII. 7. If by the Morning Startes we are not to understand the Angels (as to me seems most probable,
both for that the earth was founded be∣fore the creation of the Starres (Gen: I) and because the like appellation is given to some of the angels (Isai: XIV▪ 12.) yet by the sons of God here, as well as ch: 1. 6, we can understand no other. It would seem therefore, that while the Glorious Creatour framed the Visible world, the elder part of his work, the invisible creation, sung his praise: and that which most imployed them herein, in all probalility was, the infinite per∣fection, power, wisdome and goodnesse of God, which displaied it selfe in his handy work. How angels speak or sing, none below an Angel can tell. We can therefore hence take no farther di∣rection, for regulateing our practice, than this, that we are to praise God for his absolute excellence & perfection, how∣ever discovered by us; according to that of the Royal prophet, Praise himPs▪ C L. according to his excellent greatnesse. That all the generations of the old worldwere silent in thedivine praise, the honour & charity we owethem will not suffer us to think, though in what man∣ner they set it forth, we cannot say. It is
not incredible that he who first found out Musick, and taught men to handle the Harp and the Organ, contained not himselfe long after the invention, but in joy and gratitude tuned them to the praise of the insprer. But the next in∣stance, as far as yet I can observe, of praise sung to God, is in the case of the Israelites having passed the Red sea. The great subject of their song, was Gods miraculous mercies to them, and his no less mighty judgments on their Enemies. And here 'tis certain, they both sung in parts, and added instru∣ments to their song, Exod. XV. 1, 2, 20, 21. And since that time, singing Gods praise has in no age of the Church been disused▪ Before this; indeed, mankind may seem in a great measure to have conten∣ted themselves in paying their homage and gratitude by sacrifice, Gen. IV. 3, 4. and VIII. 20, &c. We may not, as I conceive, say, the Patriarchs were all along silent at their sacrifices: however, we are sure, since the constitution of the Church under Moses dumb sacrifices have not been usual. That therefore in the publick assem∣blies
of Christians for the Divine Wor∣ship, Singing praises to God and Christ, ought to take up a considerable part of the Common Service, I presume no so∣ber person will question or gainsay. That also we ought to praise God, as well for his own intrinseck worth and glory, as for the benefits which we per∣sonally, or the Church, and Mankind in general, receive at his hands is no less certain: That further, from the very infancy of Christianity to the present days, such practice has been constantly continued in the Church, though not onely the particular forms of Hymns, but the modes and adjuncts of singing them, have been very different, accor∣ding to the different state of Religion and the Church, and the gradual advan∣ces of art, will be as easily admitted. That sinally the inward manner of sing∣ing, the Melody of the heart, that de∣vout affection and frame of soul, which ought inseparably to accompany all our singing, and without which no voice or sound can be pleasing in the ears of God, is most to be attended and provided for, is together with what yet said,
matter of general accord. But the duty at large being thusSect. 2. soon concluded, it is not so easie to set down, beyond contradiction, due Rules for the best kind of perform∣ing it, or to define what particular manner of it is together must acceptable to God, and most conduceing to the e∣dificaion of the faithfull. There may reasonably be conceived doubts touch∣ing the subject matter or argument of what is to be sung, whether meer scrip∣ture, or also Hymnes of humane compo∣sure; then touching the form of words, whether metrical or plain prose; again touching the very manner of singing, whether onely with the voice or with conjunction thereof with Musical in∣struments, as is our present Church∣usage. In all these points and such other, it is necessary it should be stated, as cer∣tainly as we can, what is the best and fit∣test use, at least what is lawful and pro∣per to the Christian state, as well for the satisfaction of mens consciences, as for their direction in this their common du∣ty. And for resolution in all these, I shall direct distinct enquiries unto the
ensueing heads. 1. What was the prac∣tice in the inspired Church? How the faithful then were qualified for this du∣ty, and what rules are laid down by the inspired authours for its performance? 2. Wherein the Melody of the heart, spoken of by the Apostle, consisteth? The point, which is mainly regarded by God and to be heeded by us. 2. What has, since the inspired daies, been all along the practice of the Church? And un∣der this head, what in several ages has been the growth & progresse of Church Musick. 4. Whether the present prac∣tice of our Church may be justifyed by the forementioned authorities? 5. What may be done for the manageing this our present practice to the most spiritual ad∣vantage? In answer to all which I shall endeavour to carry the same temper, which I mainteined in the former dis∣course; and therefore beseech my rea∣der, abandoning all interest, prejudice, and partiality, freely to attend my rea∣sonings, and weigh their force, I haveing, as most sincerely I can avow, no greate design than the promoting serious piety, truth and peace.
In order to the takeing a full view of the Practice of the Inspired age (whichSect. 3. was the first point to be enquired into) it will be requisite to consider two things, as above insinuated. First how the faithful of those daies were qualified for the per∣formance of this duty, being most of them plain and unletterd people; and and then what rules those, who were certainly inspired men have given for management of such qualifications or en∣dowments, which are in those daies supposed to have been bestowed on the faithful. For according to these two certainly was the practice. As to the Former of these: We have above said, God has in no age been wan∣ting to his Church; and what any age has not had by ordinary means, he has supplied in an extraordinary course. When therefore the generality of the faithful were not qualified with abilities, got in the common way, for the indi∣ting of the divine praise, it pleased God, amongst other miraculous gifts of the spirit, which he poured out on his Church, to infuse into many a spiritual gift facilitateing them in the perform∣ance
of this part of the divine worship, and supplying them both with mat∣ter & words, & these too in due form for the praise of God. Thus much we under∣stand by St. Paul. (1. Cor▪ XV, 15. I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also: which words, by what has been said in the former dis∣course, it is evident, mu be understood of a spiritual gift, no wl they admit naturally any other sense. In those daies therefore, as there wee inspired pray∣ers, forms as it were dictated to the Faithful by the spirit, so were there al∣so inspired Hymnes or Psalms: they sung with the spirit. Now as to this spiritual Gift of sing∣ing,Sect. 4. thus miraculously infused, what must it be? Shall we say, skill in song, or the art of musick was inspired into the primitive Christians by the Holy Ghost? I will acknowlege Musick indeed an ac∣complishment worthy of the Holy Ghost for its author, fitt to come from heaven, both for its sweetnesse and its power. And if Bezaleel and Aholiah are said to be filled with the Spirit of God in respect of those meaner mechanical
arts, in which they were so skillful, much morè justly might we conceive the first sweet singers in the Christian srael inspi∣red even in regard of their melodious concent. But this was not the Apo∣stles intention: For by his opposeing Singing with, or by, the Spirit, to sing∣ing with the understanding, so that he who sung in his sense meerly with the spirit, did not also sing with the under∣standing that is (as before said in the case of like prayer) did not distinctly understand what he sung, it is plain the spiritual gift here meant must be such, as furnished or supplied what was sung. And this is further evident, from the 26th. verse. How is it then Brethren saith the Apostle; When ye come together Every one of you [inspired persons] hath a Psalm, hath a doctrine, &c. That, which was the particular product or effect of the Gift of singing, was a Psalm a new, and by virtue of this gift, conceived (as that, which was the product of the gift of Teaching, was a doctrine, or discourse for the instruction of the hearers) and that Psalme inspired, not so much as to any meer musical utterance or singing
of it, as to its substance and musical Form. What was thus by the spirit ut∣tered, as to its substance and sense, con∣tained the praise of God and Christ; and as to its Form, it was fit to be sung: and, upon the whole, was therefore a Christian Psalm; which the same Apostle, as I conceive, elsewhere calls a Spiritu∣al song, because thus immediately pro∣ceeding from supernaturall inspira∣tion. Shall we then now conclude, we have the due notion of the spiritual gift of singing, or of singing by the spirit? Sure∣ly for the main we have: it is a kind of inspired Poesie. But yet particularly in the place mentioned, it is certain the Apostle designed a stricter acceptation of the phrase, than what has yet been delivered, according as has been above made out touching the same Text, as a part of it relates to prayer. For, as al∣ready noted, Singing with the spirit be∣ing opposed to singing with the under∣standing, it must follow that the Psalm, or Holy Song, conceiued by such gift, was conceived in an unknown Tongue, and that in some measure unknown to
the very person who uttered it. Not but that such persons knew, in the gene∣ral, what they were employed in, when they thus sung, and might possibly have some coufused sense of the main drift or import of what the spirit moved them to utter, which sense might raise much holy zeal and fervour of divine love, with many other acts of Christian Gra∣ces in them (in respect of which the A∣postle saith, such persons speaking thus in an unknown Tongue edified them∣selves, ver. 4. though he suppose them still so far ignorant of the Tongue they spoke in, as that they could not utter, what they thus said, in their Mother Tongue, that is, could not interpret, ver. 13, 14, &c.) but a distinct notion of each sentence and word of such Psalm, by this spiritual gift thus uttered, it is plain by the Apostles whole scope they wanted (whatsoever some learned men say to the contrary) as will appear to any, who shall duly consider the A∣postles dscourse there, and compare therewith the interpretation of it, by me here and above given. Singing then with the spirit there signifies in strictness,
an inspired faculty of some sort of Di∣vine Poetry, even in strange and diffe∣rent Tongues. But although those particular Corinthi∣ans, of whom the Apostle there speaks, had this gift onely in strange Langua∣ges, it will not follow that it was ever thus confined or Eclipsed. There were certainly others, both of that and other Churches, who by a spiritual gift were able to sing in their own Tongue, and did so, as the spirit gave them utterance. And in this sense, the Spirit of sing∣ing, or inditing the divine praise, was not then altogether a new thing. For though it had been some time disconti∣nued, from the cessation of Prophets, yet before that cessation it had been conspicuous enough in the Church. By virtue of the inspiration hereof at some extraordinary seasons, several more emi∣nent Saints have conceived the divine praise in most lofty and divine Forms, uttered upon the sudden as the occasion required; which could not have been done, so elegantly and exquisitely, with∣out an immediate afflatus or breathing of the Holy Ghost. Of this Origin, and no
other, are all those Hymns on several incidental occasions in the Old Testa∣ment. To omit other instances: when Hanna had obtained the mercy she praid for, and brought the son of her prayers to present him to the Lord in Shiloh, whereas the Scripture text saith onely she prayed and said, the Targum paraphra∣ses it  And Han∣nah prayed with (or by) the spirit of pro∣phesie. Now what follows of Hannah's devotion being purely matter of praise, and not one petition, or any thing of prayer strictly so called, in it, it is plain the word praying must be taken in its amplest extent, for invoking God in ge∣neral, or directing any act of Worship with the voice unto him, in which acce∣ptation i evidently comprehends prai∣sing God. Hereby then it appears, that the old Jewish Church conceived the spirit of prophesie to be so universal a gift or inspiration, as amongst other offices to fit and enable them who had it, for the ready inditing and singing the Divine praise. And we have the same expressi∣on, more than once in the undoubted Canon of Scripture: particularly touch∣ing
Zacharias, on an occasion like to that of Hanna's, Luke 1. 67. And Zacharias was filled with the Holy Ghost, and prophe∣sied, saying, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he hath visited and redeemed his people. And &c. where prophesying must needs signifie his extraordinary for∣ming and uttering that inspired Hymn; and his being filled with the Holy Ghost, the inspiration which enabled him thereto. Proportionably also to this sense, are to be understood those Texts in the Old Testament, where we read of particular persons at certain times, prophesying to the Psaltery, and a∣bret, and Pipe, 1 Sam. X. 5. Thou shalt meet a company of prophets coming down from the high place, with a Psaltery, and a Tabret, and a Pipe, and an Harp before them, and they shall prophesie. And the spirit of the Lord shall come upon thee, and thou shalt prophesie also. Ye shall all, by extraordinary spirit, sing the divine praise in inspired Form. Thus too, when God took of the spirit which was on Moses, and put it on the seventy ∣ders, Numb. XI. 25. it came to pass when the spirit rested on them, they prophesied,
And to name no more places, 1 Chron. XXV. 1. David separated certain of the sons of Asaph, and of Heman, and of Je∣duthun, who should prophesie with Harps, with Psalteries and Cymbals. By these and several other passages, that might be alledged, it is plain that there was, in the ancient inspired times of the Jewish Church, a certain spiritual gift enabling those particular persons who had it, at such times as they had it, to indite, ut∣ter and sing the praise of God, and that so, as to be understood and taken no∣tice of by all who heard them. Wherefore the former and more gene∣ral notion, though it is not more proper to that Text of St. Paul, yet is more pro∣per to the nature of the thing. The gift of singing then, in its true latitude, was I say a kind of inspired divine Poesie, taking here Poesie for a Poetical faculty. This possibly may, if not offend some, who are as unmerciful to Poetry, as Plato was to Poets, yet not be readily received by all others. For it may seem reasonable, that as the first Christian singing was little else but an harmonious plain pronunciation, so their Christian
songs or Psalms, were plain prose, & wan∣ted all Poetical form. In answer whereto I say, that however it is not impossible, that there may be some men of such an odd natural temper, as to be neither de∣lighted with Poetry nor Musick, yet it is most certain the spirit of God is no such enemy to either, both of them haveing proceeded thence, and been conducted thereby. As to Musick more anon in a more proper place: our present dis∣course is more concernd touching Poe∣try. Now that the praises of God were conceived in Poetical form, by the direction and inspiration of the Holy Ghost, under the old testament, is be∣yond denial. How much soever is lost as to the knowledge of the old Hebrew Poesy, we are sure we have thus much skill therein, still left, as that we are able to distinguish betwixt the Hebrew Verse and Prose. And we are sure particularly, that whereas the one and thirty first Chapters of Deuteronomy are writ in Prose, the two and thirtieth chapter, to the fourty third verse, inclu∣sively, that is the whole song of Moses, is writ in Verse: and yet these forty three
verses, though strictly a Poem, are no less scripture, or of the Holy Ghosts in∣diteing, than is the rest of the book which is Prose. The same have we to say touching the Song of the Israelites, Exod. XV. the Book of Psalms, and o∣ther parts of the old Testament. Now where is the inconvenience in admitting, that the same Holy spirit, which under the old Testament inspired the praises of God for the publick use of the Church in Poeticall form, might also do the same under the Gospel state? Espe∣cially when this Ministration was to ex∣ceed2 Cor. III. 9. in Glory, and that glory to consist in notheing more, than the more liberal effusion of the Holy Ghost. Nay, if we may take words to signifie in scripture, what they signify every where, in com∣mon Authours and by common consent, it is sure, the praises of God were, un∣der the Christian state, thus inspired; and the gift, which we are now treating of, inabled men, otherwise than by in∣spiration unskillful, thus to indite them. We find, in two of St. Pauls Epistles,Sect 5. three several terms relateing, as it would seem, to those praises of God, which the
primitive Christins used to offer: And both for the further clearing this spi∣ritual gift, & for the makeing good what I have just now determined, it will be necessary to consider the import eah. The terms are in both places set down in the same order thus, Psalmes and Hymnes and Spiritual songs. Whether these terms are synonymous, and may signifie there much the same thing, some may question: but most interpreters con∣ceive them diverse.  do not deny but in many places of scripture, they, as o∣ther words different in their strict noti∣ons but agreeing in their common ones, may be used promiscuously. Thus I have already said a Spiritual song is called (1. Cor. XIV. 26.) a Psalm: and probably a Psalm (Mat: XXV, 30) is called an Hymn, viz. by reason of that common nature, wherein they agree: but the Apotle, in those two places mentioned, seeming to enumerate, or particularise, all the several forms of divine praise then in use, it will be most proper there to take them under different, and each in their strict noti∣ons; though what those are, in so great variety of Glsses, as we may find on
this subject, is not easie to resolve, beyond the contradiction of such, who stand affected to scruple or cavils. To proceed as surely as I can, I will first consider the common and agreed import of these words in our ordinary Books, and then what peculiar notion Scripture superadds to each. The most general of all those terms, in absolute nature, I take to be the word Song, in Greek  (which we have made English, commonly an Ode) now an Ode hath ever been esteemd to be of Poetical form, and comes as all know, immedi∣ately from the verb  or  to sing; which the Poets claim to themselves, as their proper, and in a manner speci∣fick, act: and are from thence almost as commonly called  singers (because compilers of Songs) as Poets. It is truly observed by that great Critick in this. .  1. . 2. kind, that there is no word so small, which admits not some mode of quality and quantity. Its quality lies in an apti∣tude for a flat or sharp sound: its quan∣tity, in e time or duration of its pro∣nunciation. Both ese make it sit for Musick. Now the disposing words and
sentences according to such fitness into harmony, by certain numbers and laws, is that which we call making Verses: and several such Verses artificially put toge∣ther we call a Song. The word Psalm signifies such a Song not meerly as it has in it harmony, or an aptitude to be sung, but as it is either designed, or actually sung, to some Musi∣cal instrument. And thus much is com∣monly agreed, and must be concluded from the Etymology of the word, and the import of its Original  exactly answering to the Hebrew , of both which more anon. Now each of the terms, Song and Psalm, in their own ¦ture are indifferent, or not determined to any sort of subject matter, hoy or common, sad, joyful or moral. Contrarily, an Hymn properly is a Song or Psalm in the praise of some true or reputed God. For that distinction of Theophy lacts will not hold water, that Psalms and Songs are of Men. Hymnes onely of Angels. We know Homer, Or∣pheus, Callimach, and divers others writ Hymns, who never dreamt of An∣gels singing: and the name Hymn is fre∣quently
in Scripture attributed to the praises given to God by men, not at all, that I have observed, to those by An∣gels. From any Origination of this word I can collect little or nothing. The Grammarians derive it form  and that, being of small use if any, is as much saith Hesychins as , and at this rate an Hymn and an Ode, or song, would be perfectly of the same import, but that use has taken the one in a common, the other onely in a sacred sense. Howe∣ver it is certain  is as much as  and as frequently, used to sig∣nify a Poet; as also  for . So that the result of the whole will be, songs (or Odes) Psalmes and Hymnes, all three of them, were wont, according to the common use of the words, to be com∣posures writt in Poetical form. We will now examin what scripture has superadded to the common notions of these words. In the places above mentioned, to the words songs is added Spiritual. This, say Commentatours, is in opposition to the lewd and lascivious songs, which were the great entertain∣ment of heathen mirth. It may be so: but:
though there appear some colour for the Antithesis in the immediate context, Eph. V, yet none in Coloss: III: and the form of speech so neerly agreeing in both, I rather incline to interpret Spiritual songs, as before insinuated, of songs indited by the Holy Ghost in the praise of God and Christ, and uttered by virtue of a pe∣culiar spiritual Gift, according to the passage of St. Paul to the Corinthians so fully, I presume, cleared. But Notwith∣standing all, it they were spiritual songs in any sense, they were songs still, and therefore according to the com∣mon import of the word, which we can∣not say scripture hath varied, indited in some Poetical form. As to the term Psalms, I am able to observe little or noad∣dition to it, or variation of it in scripture from that its common notion before de∣livered, saveing onely that it is in scrip∣ture alwayes used in an holy sense. It certainly signifies in the old testament Hymnes designed to be used with instru∣mental musick: and in the new it is con∣ceived, and that with great reasons, to have a particular reference to the book of Psalms. Thus when our Lord with his
disciples, after his last supper, at the Feast of the Passeover, is said to haveMat. XXVI. 30. sung an Hymn, it is generally thought by learned men, that as he took the very Elements of his Supper, and the FormPaul. Brug. on psa. 112. as be rec∣kons Camer. in Mat. 26. Monta. Jr. Light∣foot, &c. of Benediction, together with the Rites of Administration in a great part, from the Jewish useage in the Passeover, so he used the same Psalms with them, the Great Hallelujah, as they call the CXIII, and the five following Psalmes. Nor do I see any inconvenience of interpre∣ting these two passages of S. Paul & that of St. James, Ch. V. (in all which Chri∣stian men are injoined to speak to, admo∣nish, and sing with one another in Psalms) of the Book of Psalms chiefly or especi∣ally. However, that the notion above given is to be affixt to the te Psalms, even in the New Testament, I could produce almost endless authorities, Psal∣mi dicuntur eximia illa  Davidis & aliorum, qu in Templo citharis & Na∣liis aptari solebant, Gro. in Ephes. 5. 19. Psalmus, concisum & numeris distin∣ctum carmen. Propriè refertur ad instru∣menta, notatque modulationes artificios as certis caesuris & numeris incisa. Gualpt.
ad eund. loc. Psalmus, in quo concinendo abhibeiur musicum aliquod instrumentum praeter linguam Calvin in Col: 3. 16. And to omit the rest, of our men, To the same purpose speak Estins and the better sort of the Romish commentators. The Scripture Notion of Hymnes is yet behind: and though I do not re∣member my self to have ever met with any Hymnes in profane Authours, but what were writ in verse, properly so called, yet it must be acknowledged otherwise in the Holy Writings. To the nature of a Scripture-Hymn, it is suffi∣cient that it contain the praises of God, however indited, whether in verse or in prose. And indeed it may be obser∣ved amongst the very Heathens, that though most of their Hymnes now ex∣tant are writ in strict verse, observing usual measures and numbers, yet they had a freer sort of Poetry, called Dithy∣rambick, wherein sometimes they used to celebrate the acts and natures of their Gods. This some, who kept to severer laws themselves, conceived to neglect all laws: and particularly Horace him∣self doubted not to say of Pindar,
writing in this kind, —per audaces nova DithyrambosCarm. lib. 4. Od: 2. Verba devolvit, numeris{que} fertur Legesolutis. But the judgment of the Orat our touch∣ingCicor: de Ora∣tor: lib: 3. this way, to me seems much the tru∣er and juster; that it is onely Licentior & Divitior, of more daring freedome, and richer, as consisting of (numeris pro∣cerioribus) loftier, and as it were taller, feet or numbers, than common verse: but yet certainly it is no less Poetry than the strictest it is no less Poetry than the strictest kind of Verse. Now of this kind of Poetry may those Hymns in the Old Testament be, which some learn∣ed men, will scarce admit to be verse,Grot. in Mat: 26: 30: because they say they are nullis numeris astricta. Such, as near as can be discern∣ed, do I avow the Hymn of Deborah, of which particularly amongst others, the forementioned judgment has been pas∣sed. It has a very artificial, figurate, sublime & flourishing vein runs through it wholly; and each strain is melodious. The song of Hannah, alike censured, (1 Sam. II.) is indeed according to due
Decorum, more humble; but if there be any verse in the Original Text, truly verse, though of somewhat a freer sort than some other. And indeed with the Hebrews of old (whatsoever St. HieromIn pro∣log. ad Job. Orig. l. 1. c. 38. Davidis Lyra. and Isidorus Hispalensis of the Ancients, and Gomarus, and possibly some other Moderns, have fancied touching Dactyls and Spondees, and such regular feet in the Hebrew Poetry, and measuring verse in Scripture into such feet, which whoso tryes, will scarce find to succeed once in five hundred times, whatsoever I say is spoken touching such imaginary strict Hebrew measures) in the general, their poetry lay mostly in the character of speech, as we call it: they regarded the couplings, or number and harmony of clauses, one answering another, toge∣ther with little repeats, rather than any precise number of syllables or cadencies of Rhythme. Their Poetical style or character is well described, by the Wor∣thy Buxtorf, to have been (Diversum ab aliis libris, concisum scilicet & brevi∣bus membris conclusum, sublime, allegori∣cum, hyperbolicum, & quibuslibet figura∣rum luminibus illustre) Far different
from the style of their common books, as being concise, confined in short clauses, lofty, allegorical or full of allusions, hyperbolical expressing things above their plain state, and glorious with all variety of ornamen∣tal figures and repetitions. And as to any chiming of Rhythms, which the modern Hebrews now so much affect in the verse they write, the same industri∣ous Authour truly says, (Non alius cu∣ratusIbid. fuit, quàm qui suâ sponte prodiret, & fortuitò incideret, non autem studio laborato videretur accersitus; quod non rarò etiam Davidi imprimis accidisse ani∣modvertimus) There was none looked after by the Ancients, but what offe∣red it self of its own aceord, and fell in as by accident, and which could not seem drawn in by study, or thoughtful design: which success we may observe David (the sweet singer of Israel) to have had most frequent∣ly of any of the sacred Poets. Now this being admitted to have been the genuine nature and constitution of the old Hebrew Poetry, as I am sure it is, I may safely conclude there is not one
Hymn in the Old Testament, which is not indited by the Holy Ghost in Poeti∣cal form. As to those in the New, the Hymns of the Blessed Mary, of Zachari∣as, and of Simeon, it is sure we have them not in their Originals, (for they were undoubtedly uttered in Hebrew, at least in some Dialect thereof, however they come to us in Greek) and there∣fore we cannot make so exact a judge∣ment of them. Onely this we may say: that even in the Greek appears some∣thing of the Hebrews Poetical character of speech, before described: and let any one compare the Magnificat with Han∣na's Song, and he will soon say, the frame and style of both is so like, that as the one, being in Hebrew, is verse, so would the other be also, were it in that language; and consequently, that in all probability it was at first Poetical∣ly indited. And the same in proporti∣on, may as reasonably be concluded of the other. That address of the Church (Acts IV. 24.) which the Learned Gro∣tiusIn Mat. 26. reckons amongst the New-Testa∣ment hymns, I do not see how to make an Hymn of, there being not one strain
in it properly laudatory; but it is one∣ly an occasional prayer, indited indeed I confess by the Holy Ghost; and so an instance of inspired prayers, as those above mentioned are instances of inspi∣red Hymns. Those Hymns in the Re∣velation, which St. John heard sung by the Heavenly inhabitants, are confes∣sedly prose, though in what form or language he heard them, or conceived himself to hear them, we cannot speak. However therefore in regard as well of them, as of the Magnificat, Benedictus and the Nunc dimittis, and of other such (if there be any other) Hymns in the New Testament, I have said, it is sufficient to the constitution of a Scri∣pture hymn, that it contain the praise of God, in what form soever it be com∣posed. In summe, it appearing by what I have said, that both Psalms and spiri∣tual songs were alwayes of poetical form, and Psalms beyond question indited in that very form by the Holy Ghost; that also Hymn, were most usually of like form, by the instinct and conduct of the same Holy Ghost; and finally, that
the spiritual gift was a supernatural fa∣culty of conceiving and uttering new spiritual Songs and Hymns, it is most reasonable to conclude the spiritual gift or spirit of singing, spoken of as above by the Apostle, to have been a certain kind of inspired Divine-poesie; truly enough so called, though not at all con∣fining it self to the stricter and more curious rules of the Graecian or European use. It follows now that we proceed toSect. 6. such rules, which Authours undoubt∣edly inspired by the Holy Ghost, have laid down for the due managing of this gift, and regulating the Office of sing∣ing to God: and that we consider in what proportion they are accommoda∣dable to our present age. Two Rules we may deduce from that Text of Saint Paul, where we have the formention∣ed express term of singing by the spi∣rit. First, when he sayes, I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the under∣standing also, it is plain he allows it as a justifiabe design of the Corinthians zeal, that there should be singing with
the spirit: that is (to wave what was extraordinary and peculiar to that state of the Church; and to speak in the lan∣guage, as well as with proportion to the condition of the present Church) There ought to be in the praises of God, both Elegance and Harmony. Elegance ariseth from the proper, neat and de∣cent choice of sense and words. Harmo∣ny, first from the aptness of the words to Musick, and thus far Poetry goes; and then from the application of Musi∣cal Notes to the words, which, when done with humane voice, we call sing¦ing. Now both these, I say, the Apostle concludes ought to be in the praises of God, which Christian people, either more privately, or the Church in pub∣lick, offer up unto him. For the spi∣ritual gift, by the conduct of which the Apostle would have them sing, be∣ing no principle of slovenliness and un∣handsome expression, nor of harshness and confused jargon, but of the con∣trary, when he sayes I will sing with the spirit, he plainly resolves, both these are to be desired and endeavoured in
the praise of God: and he expressing himself indefinitely, we may extend the singing he speaks of to all instances of it, publick or private. For further clearing of this point we are to consider, that it may be said touching the primi∣tive Christians generally, they had neither learning nor art, and yet they had both. They had neither, as got∣ten by the common methods of Pre∣cepts and Exercise: they had both as immediately inspired into them by God. Arts and Learning were ever in the Christian Church, onely the manner of attaining to them has been different. So then, when the Apostle saith, I will sing with the spirit, it is as much as if he had said, what Learning and Arts there are, apt for the publick or private praise of God, in the Church, should be employed and used in the offering up his praise. This onely is the diffe∣rence betwixt the then state of the Co∣rinthian Church, and the present age: they sung by the spirit, when they sung in the elegance and harmony, which the Holy Ghost had immediately inspi∣red into them; we sing by the spirit,
when we sing with such elegance and harmony, as we have acquired by the common influence of the Holy Ghost upon our industry, and use of ordina∣ry methods. However 'tis plain, if both are to sing with the spirit, the work of that spirit being abilities qua∣lifying persons for this office of singing, both are to sing with some elegance and harmony, onely each with such as respectively they have. This then is the summe of the first Rule, that as the inspired persons were to exercise their gifts; so we, what more common skill we have, meet to the purpose, in singing the Divine praise. The second Rule we must fetch out of the same place, and particularly from those words, and I will sing with the understanding also. The Rule will be this; that all Art which is used, or which may be allowed in the praise of God, ought to be consistent with those praises being distinctly under∣stood; and that both by the persons, who utter them, and the Congregati∣on which hears, and so is to join there∣in, at least by consent. This is most
plain from the words already alledged, and may further appear from what im∣mediately follows ver. 16, & 17. Eise when thou shalt bless with the spirit (viz. by thy spiritual gift, or art as afore∣said  hw shall he that occupieth the room of the unlearned, say Amen, see∣ing he understandeth not what  say∣est. For thou verily givest thanks well, but the other is not edified. Great care therefore ought to be taken in all our Church-Musick, that the Musick as little as may be, prejudice the distinct perceiving of the words, and s atten∣ding the sense. For whether the Hymn, or Psalm, become ninelligible to the Commonaty by the strangeness of the language, or curiosity of the Musical form, in which it is performed, devo∣tion is equally destroyed, be it howso∣ever unintelligible; but of this more hereafter. A third Rule we are to fetch, from comparing the Text now mentioned, with those above alledged, touching Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs. Ephes. V. 19. Colos. III. 16, and that of St. James, chap. V. 13. Is any of
you merry, let him sing Psalms. I have said above, St. Paul speaking of singing indefinitely in the Text to the Corinthi∣ans, the passage may be understood of publick or private singing to God: and it is plain by the Context there, a man might sing by the spirit to his own pri∣vate edification, as well as to the pub∣lick benefit of the Church. However, the Apostle by the scope of his discourse, driving there more at publick than pri∣vate performances, it will be meet to take notice, that the two other places of St. Paul, and that of St. James, in∣join singing as Christian mens private entertainment. Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess, but be filled with the Holy Ghost: speaking to your selves (or to one another) in Psalms and Hymns, &c. Let not your mirth be that mad, revelling jollity of the Heathen, but in your private rejoycings, when you are together, entertain your selves with the praise of God; such joy both better becoming Christians, and being of bet∣ter consequence. The same evidently is the sense of the other places. Now from hence the Rule is, that singing to
God is not onely an office of publick Worship, but an exercise which should employ Christian people in their more private congress, in their Families, and as occasion serves, in their very soli∣tude too, at least oftner than general∣ly they assemble together in publick. It is really to be lamented, that many in our age will scarce hear of private Psalmody, but, because both it and some other Christian practices have been made stalking-horses and blinds by some hypocritical men, therefore inveigh against it & such other holy exercises, as bespeaking onely a Puritanical or Fana∣tick spirit. A like sad is it, that so many thousand excellent Wits, one ge∣neration after another, still evaporate onely in froth or lust. Certainly it were much more noble, and worthier of our Beaux Esprits, of our lotiest and swee∣test sons of Harmony, to tune their in∣struments in private, as David did his Harp, sometimes in the Divine praise, rather than ever to vain & carnal delight. But I hope there are not a few sober and conformable men, who are highly enough sensible of this extreme into
which the World is un, and if private Landing of God, must have an unhand∣  affixt to it, are not there∣fore deed from what is so clearly their  and  their inerest: After this Hersie wil they worship the  of their Fathers. , that general rule, by which al Gifts are to be sured, and the pfrmance of all Offices in the Church to be regulated, is applicable to this particular Gift and Office, and was evidently designed to this amongst o∣thers by the Apostle, in the very place where he laes it down. Forasmuch as ye are zealous of spiritual Gifts, seek that1 Cor. XIV. 12. ye may excell for the edifying of the Church; study that in the exercise of all Gifts, and therefore of this, as follows ver. 15, &c. Not onely then all unintelligible exercise hereof is to be forborn, as ver. 16, 17, of which we have already spoken, but all confused, disorderly or indecent management. In the publick, one must not be at his Las, when another is at his doctrine, and a third at his prayers or confessi∣ons. ver. 26. N must one mans per∣formance be such as shall confound the
the rest. ver. 28, 29, 31. But all, as to this Office, as well as others, must be done Decently and in order. ver. 40. And the decency certainly ought to be considered, in regard both of the matter sung, and the manner of sing∣ing. As to the matter sung in the in∣spired Church of old: No doubt but the Holy Ghost, who inspired into those primitive Saints, Psalsm, Hymns, or spiritual Songs, that is, the praise of God in fit from to be sung, provi∣ded much more for the fitness and de∣cency of the subject matter, than for any exactness of outward form; that was most heavenly, pure, and every way apposite and congruous to the age and occasion. And accordingly our first and chiefest care, in discharge of our present duty of singing to god, ought to be, that the subject matter of our Hymns be duly chosen, that it be becoming the Majesty of God, and sui∣ting with the condition and state of the Church. It is to be remembred, that there is a vast difference betwixt the Legal and Evangelical state, betwixt the Mosaical and Christian Worship,
promises and hopes. Though there∣fore, with due application, and taken in a Christian sense, we may with great advantage sing Davids Psalms (of which more hereafter) yet it is very certain, there ought to be Hymns in more ex∣press and direct Christian terms than are those, which were properly calculated for another Oeconomy: nor can any man imagine, that what was once fit for the service of God under the Law, and as such dictated by the Holy Ghost, is therefore eternally meet & seasonable, or most proper for a Christian Quire. Much less is it tolerable, that things should be foisted in to the Publick Lauds, because the words in which they are expressed, are of a rowling or jingling sound, and tickle the ear or fancy of an empty Musician. The pri∣mitive Church, by her Canons, com∣mitted the direction what should be sung, to deeper and graver judgments. Again, there is a Decorum, as to the very manner and kind of the Musick, which is to be observed. Musick is therefore used in the Worship of God, because of the power it hath upon the
mind of man, to raise good affections and calm disorderly ones. That Musick therefore, which in stead of exciting devotion, and composing the soul to a sedate and fixed temper, onely moves light & giddy thoughts, induces an aiery humour, and sporting, frisking dancing passions, is altogether to be banished the Christian Worship. To set Anthems or Services in the way of Madrigals or Galliards (as some of late have in a man∣ner done) is to debauch Devotion, to pervert the Worship of God, and as it were to take pains to make men wanton therein: And it certainly argues either want of judgment, information of, or attention to the true ends of Church-Musick, or want of seriousness, and a real fear of God, in the hearts of all such, who either introduce or affect such practice. For those Mercurial nimble-finger'd men, are either sensible of the natural effects of such Musick up∣on the generality of Mankind, or not: if they are, and et maintain such un∣seasonable use, I do not see how to ex∣cuse them of irreligion; if they are not, let them see how to acquit themselves
of ignorance in the power of their be∣loved Art and Humane nature. As to any conducency to edification, arising from order kept in singing, I do not see much to be wanting in the con∣stitution of our Church. First, there is no other Office actually engaging the Congregation, when Divine Hymns are sung, but that all both may and ought attend thereto, and, distinctly con∣senting, join therein. Then, in our Cathedral use, there are none to sing but such who may pass, in the style of the old Canon, for , regu∣larConc. Laod. Can. 15. fingers, who if they observe their rule (as they are generally able to do) can neither be presumed to disturb the Congregation, nor one the other; but all sweetly to conspire in such utterance of the praise of God, as must needs draw forth the affections, and engage the hearts of all such who are not stupid or heedless. And as to such others of the Congregation, who strike in at the Chorus's, or Versicles, or in chanting the Psalms, and such like parts of the Service, these are all exercised or skil∣ful persons, and create no interruption
to the devotion of any, but only make up the consent much fuller. In the Pa∣rochial use, especially of singing the Metrical Version of the Psalms, the com∣mon practice is indeed obnoxious. It is hard to say whether the Metre, the usual choice of Psalms by the Parish-Clerks, or the peoples singing be worse: all is pitiful and mean; and especially the singing oftentimes full of ungrateful jarres, discords, squeaks, screeches, roar∣ing, &c. which severally I wish brought to a more regular, comely and orderly course; and what may be done private∣ly, and without any noise, to this purpose, I shall hereafter consider. But the present disorderly practice, is no constitution of our Churches: at the utmost, it has been onely permitted, out of a kind of necessity, to the will of the people, because yet it could be no better; and therefore it is not to be imputed to our Church, especially by such who are adverse to her Laws, be∣cause there is no sort of men so stiffe for this practice as themselves. Lastly, as to the interweaving Hymns, sometimes with Lessons of Holy Scripture, some∣times
with prayers, though some men have spoken against it, I sincerely pro∣fess my self to judge it a most reasona∣ble and profitable Order. For, read∣ing suggests occasion, matter, and fresh thoughts for the praise of God. Praise again, whets and quickens the mind for new attention to the truths of the Gospel, or Rules of Holy Life. And prayer derives and fetches down a fresh influence of the divine grace, di∣sposing, and as it were, molding the heart into a softer and more zealous temper for praise. Thus by an happy enterchange, one Office makes ready or prepares the way to another, and a grate∣ful variety through the whole Service, takes off the Taedium of all, and ren∣ders the performance, though of a con∣siderable length, pleasing even to flesh and bloud. Now supposing these Rules observed, that the praises of God are gracefully indited, that they are intelligibly ut∣tered, that the matter be meet and pro∣per, and the manner of singing grave and reverent, and all orderly perform∣ed (which are, in summe, the parti∣cular
Rules laid down) what can there be wanting to make up such a consent and symphony, as shall be acceptable and delightful to God, but that Inner Part which the Apostle calls Melody inEph. V (or of) the Heart? And what that imports, we will now examine as a fit close to these Apostolical Rules. To sing and make melody to the LordSect. 7 in the heart is, say some, to sing ex corde from the heart, and not with theCaivin. tongue alone; more plainly others in∣tentionem hujus laudis ad Dominum diri∣gendo,Lyra. directing the intention of this praise to the Lord; more fully Theophy∣lact, with understanding, attention, and an heart not rambling. In summe, to comprehend all, The melody of the heart consists in a sweet concord and agreement of all those inward rational powers, which are fit to be imploied in the divine praise. And therefore, distinctly, to make up a full melody of the heart, there is a threefold care to be taken, and no point thereof any solli∣citude to modulate the voice: for that is supposed to be habitually done by art and custome, as by a second nature;
and to be, in a manner, as facil and ready as speech: nor should any singing, by grown and adult persons, be ad∣mitted in the solemn Service of God, but what is performed by such, to whom it is become thus natural. The first point of care must be in At∣tention to what we sing in the praise of God; I do not mean to the Notes, for this too many are too apt to, and con∣tent themselves with, but unto the words and their import. I appeal to any mans conscience and common rea∣son; should there be no difference be∣tween hearing an Anthem, and hear∣ing an ordinary Song or Catch? to the later men attend onely for delight and divertisement, and therefore princi∣pally heed the Musick. To the other they do, or ought to, attend as to a sacrifice of divine praise offered up to God, by their consent, so as, thereby at least, to join with the performers in the offering it up; and therefore men ought primarily to attend unto the sense, to the end they may be ready in each part with such their consent; and onely secundarily, and by the by, to
the Musick, that thereby their souls be∣ing more inflamed or quickened, might with more fervour present their share in the spiritual sacrifice, which not one∣ly God as Judge, but Angels as holily emulous attend unto. A second point, which should exer∣cise our care in singing is Intention, or real designing, desiring and endeavour∣ing to give to God that praise with our mind and full consent, which our words import. Psalmis & Hymnis cum oratisTom. 1. in regul. 3. Deum, hoc versetur in corde quod pro∣fertur in ore, saith St. Austin. It is cer∣tainly a fault in Holy-singing, for the mind not actually to consent and com∣bine with the Tongue, in each strain and particular of the divine praise. This a man may do, say some great pretend∣ed Masters in devotion, by consenting to the Service and all Hymns, which the Church shall offer, before he comes to them. A general agreeing thereto suffices, and particular intention is not of the ne∣cessary essence of devotion. An excel∣lent doctrine indeed, and such it seems, as the present devotion of the Gentle∣men of the Romish Church makes need∣ful
to be defended by their ablest Pa∣triots. I will but onely mind them what the Learned Cardinal of Cajeta saith up∣on the Text of their Angelical Doctour. Aquinas handling this Question, or one5 la.  lae. . 83. . 13. very neerly the same, resolves onely such want of Attention, and conse∣quently of Intention, to be sinful which is ex proposito, from purpose or design. But saith the Comment hereon, Author evagationem ex negligentia computat sub evagatione ex proposito, &c. The Au∣thour reckons (that is, understands to be reckoned) all want of Atten∣tion (and so of intention) through negligence, to be included under such want purposely and on design.—For such negligence being voluntary, therefore also is the Non-attention which arises thence voluntary also: and therefore sinful, and as bad as to invite a Guest, and under a mans ve∣ry own roof visely to intreat him. According to the doctrine then of this great man, if through negligence in∣tention be wanting, there must be sin in such devotions; and much more, if through design. Now whether amongst
them, a distinct and actual attention and intention be not both wanting through design, and that too through the de∣sign of their Church, when all their solemn and publick Services, being by their Church contrived into a form un∣intelligible by the common people, are onely so officiated by their Priests, let them answer. We may expect they will acquit themselves, when they can make out, that a man ordinarily may actually and distinctly attend and intend such sense, of which he has not know∣ledge. But let the Romists pass: if there be any amongst our selves who think such intention, as I speak of, is not necessary to make up the melody of the heart, I will onely desire such to consi∣der the following case. Whether, if I were to pay any solemn Homage, to∣gether with thanks for some peculiar acts of grace, to my Prince, and I should, before such address made, in∣tend so to do, and generally consent to the form of address; but when it were to be offered, though I came my self into the Presence to join in the tender, I should negligently withdraw my self from ha∣ving
any hand in the actual tender, and employ my self aside in little idle diver∣tisements with other things or persons, whether I say this demeanour would be accepted, or rather not construed as a contempt? Might I seem hereby to have paid my fealty, with all good af∣fection and humble duty? No man can enforce himself to think so. Now of the same nature must that mans devoti∣on be, who onely consents that certain praise shall be offered up to God, & by outward joining therein, as it were, puts himself into the Presence chamber of Gods Majesty, but then neglects God, & concurs not to the address by any con∣stant actual intention. Onely the mocke∣ry is so much more solemn, by how much God is the greater Soveraign. Let it therefore stand, that whosoe∣ver would sing in a manner pleasing and harmonious to God, must not one∣ly, at the first access, bring into his presence a general intention of offering praise, or paying worship to him, but also, throughout attending (as before said) to the sense and substance of what is offered, maintain all along a conti∣nued
consent, and distinct actual inten∣tion, as to the several particulars and members of such addresses, as shall be presented to his Majesty: and where∣soever this attention and distinct inten∣tion fails, there is a kind of chasme in the melody of the heart. Lastly, (what is but a further ex∣plication or carrying on of such distinct intention as above directed) to the end every part of this inward melody may be full, it is requisite that the Af∣fections be in some measure engaged (at least as they may be pposed atio∣nal powers) that the mind be imployed in the acting and exercise of such Chri∣stian graces as become hm, who would offer praise. Especially, amongst o∣thers (1.) In the exercise of Humility, or a deep sense not onely of our own undeservingness, but of our evil deser∣vings at Gods hands, and together of his infinite perfection, goodness, grace or free bounty. The Holy Seraphims when they sung their Sanctus (Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hosts; the wholeIsa. VI. 2 3. earth is full of his glory.) with two wings covered their face; and with other two
their feet, and flew onely with the re∣maining pair. Humility was their most active grace, even in the divine praise. And surely this ought to make many of us ashamed, if not of our confidence in singing, yet of somewhat else therein. The like exercise ought there to be of the mind (2.) In divine love, and ad∣miration of him, whom we praise. For though all his acts are wonderful, yet his goodness to mankind has outdone all that ever else he did, I had almost said, all he can do. In redeeming us, as he has done, he has most transcen∣dentlyIsa. IX. 6. got to himself the name, Wonder∣ful. And (3.) in gratitude, or an ho∣ly Zeal and study to express before men and Angels (seeing we are not able to make any appearance of recompence) how much we owe, and ever must owe to the God of our praise. And, which is a consequent hereof (4.) in Heavenly∣mindedness, or earnest desire to be in such an estate, wherein indefinently we shall do nothing but praise him, and praise him better than now we do or can. And, Lastly, for a close fit to such a symphony, in love and good
will towards mankind. For this we find to have made up two straines of three in the Angelical Hymn; After Glory be to God, comes On Earth peace, &, good will towards men. Those blessed spirits so exprest their praises, as at once not onely to publish to those of man∣kind who heard them, that God was now reconciling the world to himself in Christ Jesus, but also, by the very form of speech, to signifie their desire that it should be so, and their rejoy∣cing that it was so. Now that such sweet combination of Christian graces and good affections, is requisite to the making up the melody of the heart, there needs no other proof but the comparing St. Paul's words in his two Epistles: what to the Ephesians, he terms singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord, to the Colossians he styles singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord. These therefore must be the same, and one onely an explication of the other. Having taken this particular view ofSect. 8. the inward manner of singing, called by the Apostle, melody in the heart, for∣asmuch,
asmuch, as it is too often greatly negle∣cted, not onely by our Quire men, but by many others of the Congregation, I could not think I did my duty, if I passed this subject without a serious and passionate monition t all of our Com∣munion, that as they love God, our Church, themselves, or Heaven, they would principally attend, and be most zealous for, and in, this point of their duty. We have seen this to be the end of all other melody, this to be design∣ed in all and every of the Apostolical Rules for singing. It is to no purpose to sing with a or skill, in decent mat∣ter and manner of composure, in order, nay nor with understanding neither, if there be not such attention, such parti∣cular intention, and in some measure, such good affection, as described. Whatever there is in the outward pra∣ctice or rules, is but a mean to this tem∣per: nay, the very understanding it self is but subservient hereto. The un∣derstanding is indeed the leading power of the rational soul, the guide of the wil in all its choice, by which choice every man is either blessed or misera∣ble:
and it is therefore necessary, that we actually understand what we sing in the divine praise, that by contem∣plation and commemoration of those perfections and benefits, the glory of which we give to God, our will and all our soul may be more passionately drawn, and more intimately adhere and cleave to him by divine love, de∣light and complacency. We are to re∣member, that the great Worship which God now requires of us, as more pecu∣liarJoh. IV. 22, 23. to the Evangelical state, is a Wor∣ship in spirit and in truth. Such the Fa∣ther seeketh to worship him, and indeed all others his soul abhors, and is weary of. First, we are to worship him, by giving up our selves to him. This is worshipping him in spirit, when the soul is devoted, and really consecrate to him. Then in every act of Worship, the soul is really to direct its intention to him, and thereby to draw near to him, and this is worshipping him in truth. Whatever comes short of this, is but pageantry, and a more gay af∣front of God, any further than it con∣duces hereto. I therefore again most
earnestly conjure all who have, or pre∣tend to have, any zeal for our Church∣service, that they be careful in this matter. Alas! may it not daily be upbrai∣ded to many, according to the very li∣teral truth, that they who officiate in the Divine Service, and the Service it self so officiated, are to them as a very Lovely song of one that has a pleasantEzek. xxxiiii 32. voice, and can play well on an instrument: for they hear their words, but they will not do them? Or rather worse, they hear not, or heed not the words, but listen onely to the Musick, and rest therein? Now can we think but that this is most abominable in the Eyes of God? Nay, is it not so in the judge∣ment of all serious men, and even of natural conscience it self? Besides, what a disturbance must holy indignati∣on give to any good mans devotion, when he shall be diverted, and put be∣sides his attention of Worship, by be∣holding men, that pretend to be wor∣shipping of God, tyed fast by the ears, staring, gaping, anon smiling, whis∣pering, busie with every one neer them, unable to conceal the secret ti∣tillation
with which their curiosity, in attending Musick while they neglect the matter, strikes and affects them. If this be singing with the spirit, with art and skill, I am sure it is not singing in the spirit and in truth: it would not become a formal Jew, much less a Christian; it cannot be accounted sing∣ing unto God, but to our own sensuali∣ty. Neither our Church, nor any of her genuine Sons, own, or can excuse such practice, as arguing not onely a gross neglect or ignorance of the true and substantial Worship of God in those persons who are guilty of it, but ma∣king them accessary to the perverting and hindering it in others, and in a word, bringing a reproach and infamy on our Communion and Worship. Such incogitancy and wandring of thoughts, as common frailty, and the slipperiness and instability of the hu∣mane soul occasion, may find with God, through his mercy in Christ, an easie pardon, where these lapses are not indulged, but repented of, and striven against; and both the Worship, and the Worshippers, be nevertheless
accepted. But what we have taxed, being of a far different nature, and amounting to little less than a total a∣ctual aversion of the soul from God, as to such particular Worship, can never pass for devotion or service of God: and being without excuse with man, will never before God find any acce∣ptance, but, contrariwise, will surely add to the treasure of wrath against the day of wrath▪ and revelation of the righteous judgment of God. And those whom the consideration hereof will not work to more serious temper and intention, the Lord have mercy on: but how they can expect mercy till they repent & reform, they must pardon me, if I tell them in good earnest, I do not see.
CHAP. II. Of the Primitive Practice in sing∣ing, and the Progress of Church-Musick. Sect. 1. Singing a constant part of the Publick primitive Worship, and the first office amongst the Christians, which the Heathens took notice of. Sect. 2. What the Primitive Christians sung. Sect. 3. The way of singing in the Primitive and succeeding Church, for a considerable time, very plain. Sect. 4. Christians of all conditions used to sing, both privately, and in the pub∣lick Congregations. Sect. 5. Of the introducing more artificial Mu∣sick into the Churchuse. Sect. 6. Of introducing instrumental Musick into the same. Sect. 7. Of the Churches which have received it, or declared their approbation and desire of it. Sect. 8. A recollection and summe of the whole. IT follows now that we proceed toSect. 1. the third enquiry, What has, since
the inspired days, been the practice of the Church; and that we view here particularly, how Church-Musick has ad∣vanced in several Ages. Some learned men have, and it would seem not unfitly, made a di∣stinction betwixt Ecclesia Prima, and Ecclesia Primitiva, betwixt the First Church, and the Primitive Church. Let it be so; notwithstanding I am sure even in the very first Christian Church, singing praise unto God, was a con∣stant part of their divine Worship at all their solemn Assemblies. This indeed we have seen already proved. When you come together, every one of you hath a Psalm, hath a Doctrine, &c. Singing to God was no less frequent, than Pray∣ing or Preaching. And this we have seen to have been one reason of the effu∣sion of those miraculous gifts, particular∣ly of the Gift of singing insisted on in the foregoing Chapter, that the Church might not in its very beginning, be either destitute of Hymns proper t the Evan∣gesical state, or under any incapacity of ready providing such. And, if we look into days somewhat earlier than
that critical age of the Corinthian Church now mentioned, we shall not find ourSee too Luk. last. 53. selves at any loss for evidences of this practice. Acts II 46, 47. They continu∣ed daily with one according in the Tem∣ple, beaking bread, &c,—Praising God, and having favour (or charity) with all people. Nor was this their Publick and more solemn, but even their Private practice also. In the very Prison, and at Midnight too, Paul and Silas prayed, and sung praises unto God, and the pri∣sonersActs XVI. 25. heard them. And this practice was so universal, that many learned men have thought the Christian Church from the very beginning, to have taken up the custome of the Jewes in singing Davids Psalms. And amongst the rest, even Mr. Calvin himself professes this to be his judgment. Nec verò, mihi dubium est, quin ritum Judaicae Ecclesiae com. ad 1 Co. XIV. statim ab initio in Psalmis fuerint imitati▪ I do not, saith he, at all doubt, but presently from the very begin∣ning, they followed the Jewish use in singing Psalms. When the Church began now to di∣sperse it self wider into the Heathen Em∣pire,
it is very certain, that the first publick Office, which the Heathens could generally take notice of in the Christian Assemblies, was their sing∣ing. This the scoffer Lucian, or who∣soever was the Author of that Dia∣logue (if it were none of his) gives us to understand, while he designs itTom. 2. Phi∣lopatr. as a reproach to the Christians, that they did  Fast long, spending whole nights in watching & singing hymns. Such was the practice of the Roman Christians then: And as to the Eastern, in the same age,Lib. X. Ep. 97. de Chri∣stian. Pliny Proconsul amongst them, being to give an account to his Lord & Soveraign Trajan the Emperour, what the Chri∣stian superstition, as they called it, was, humbly signifies as much to him. Hanc fu∣isse summam vel culpae vel erroris [Christi∣anorum] quòd essent soliti stato die ante lu∣cem convenire, carmenque Christo quasi Deo dicere secum invicem; seque Sacra∣mento non in scelus aliquod obstringere, sed ne furta, ne latrocinia, ne adulteria admitterent, ne fidem fallerent, ne depo∣situm appellati abegarent: quibus pera∣ctis, morem sibi discedendi fuisse, rur∣susque
coeundi ad capiendum cibum, pro∣miscuum tamen & innoxium. This, saith he, I found to be the summe ei∣ther of their fault or errour, that on a set day they are wont to meet to∣gether before day, and to sing a∣mongst themselves a certain Hymn to Christ, as to a God, & to bind them∣selves by a Sacrament not to any wickedness, but that they commit not thefts, nor robberies, nor adul∣teries; that they break not their pro∣mise, that they deny not the pledge when demanded. Which being done, they use to depart, and then meet again to take meat, but in common and innocently. In this account gi∣ven by Heathens to Heathens, we have evident footsteps of three practi∣ces, observed usual in the Primitive-Christian Assemblies. The first, of singing Hymns in common; for though it be here carmen Chrisio dicere (to say an Hymn to Christ) yet we see the Scripture to have used the term singing;Apolo∣get. c. 2. and in Tertullian, where we have men∣tion of the same practice, the words are, coetus antelucanos ad canendum Chri∣sto
ac Deo: They held meetings be∣fore day, to sing to Christ and God, (or Christ as God). The second, of celebrating the Communion; And the third, of their Love-feasts: but these more darkly exprest, and they are not at present to our purpose. In two pla∣ces more of Tertullian, do I remember the like practice set down, Apolgetic. cap. 39. And again in his Book De Auim. cap. 9. Scripturae leguntur, Psalmi can∣tantur, Adlocutiones proferuntur, Pe∣titiones delegantur: The Scriptures, saith he, are read, Psalms are sung, Exhortations or Sermons made, and Prayers sent up. The like account too have we in Justin Martyrs second Apology: onely I have not observed the word singing () there, but in stead thereof  sending up praise and glory to the Father of all, through the name of his Son, and the Holy Spirit; and , . The Bishop giving thanks, and all the people answering in some benedictory or approbatory Form,
at least by their Amen. Yet in his Epi∣stle,Ad Ze: & Sceo. touching a Christian life, I find  We are to offer up Hymns, and Psalms, and Songs, and Praise. I esteem it needless to add more testimonies in so plain a case. Supposing it therefore abundantlySect. 2. evident by these passages, as well out of some of our ancientest Christian wri∣ters, as from Heathens, that the Christian Church, both First and Pri∣mitive, constantly used singing to God and Christ in their solemn Assemblies, for the fuller and clearer comprehension of their whole practice, it will be re∣qusite to enquire What they sung. And touching this point, there are three coclusions which may be laid down, and which I conceive may prove satisfa∣ctory. First, Those who were indued with the spiritual Gift before-described, did undoubtedly in publick exercise the same, and that as well by inditing anew Hymns to God and Christ by virtue thereof, as by singing the Hymns so indited. The first Church then sung
many times new nspired Hymns, pecu∣liar to that their state: and hereof no one can doubt, who has considered the purport of the toregoing Chapter. Secondly, We cannot well presume, but that some passages of these inspired Hymns were preserved, if not in some early-written Records (though not now extant) yet in the memories of such, who (like Janus) saw both backward and for∣ward, something of the inspired, and something of the more ordinary age of the Church. The reasonableness of this conjecture or supposeal, will be con∣cluded from what I have spoken in the first discourse, in the beginning of the fourth Chapter. Now this being ad∣mitted, it may be said, that in the Primitive Church there were several Christian Hymns composed by the Bi∣shops of the earliest age, after the ces∣sation of the miraculous Gifts, partly out of such passages as were remembred to have been used by inspired men, and partly of such additaments, as they according to their Christian discretion thought sit to make thereto, proper to their then present state. Hereof though very
little be come to us, yet that some of the Eucharistical part in the Office of the Communion may be of this Origin, I have above proved in the place just now named. And the same may I con∣clude touching that Doxology, so usu∣al in our Liturgy (Glory be to the Fa∣ther, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.) for in the same Dialogue, we now mentioned, it is plainly upbraid∣edLucian. Philop. to the Christians of that time (viz. of Trajan's age) that they did,  beginning with the Prayer Our Fa∣ther, and to it an Hymn with many names in it; which cannot reasona∣bly be understood of any Hymn else, there being none other, which comes under this character, that can pretend to be in any measure of such antiquity. However, Thirdly, that there were two sorts of Hymns usually sung in the Primitive Church, is clear out of Tertulli∣an.Apolo∣get. c. c. 9. His words are, Ʋt quisque de Scriptura sacra, vel de proprio ingenio potest, provo∣catur in medium Deo canere: Sometimes we sing passages out of the Holy Scri∣pture, sometimes Hymns of humane
posure. And as to the later of these; those Hymns, sometimes were such as had been received, and for some space used in the Church, sometimes of new∣er date. This, the very words of Tertullian now cited, De proprio ingenio, and that passage formerly alledged on another occasion, touching Paulus Sa∣mosatenus, that he took away the Psalms and Hymns, which had been used to be sung in the Church to the praise of God and Christ, pretending them to be new, and composed by men of later times, abundantly prove. But it is evident, the Hymns thus reject∣ed by Paulus were neither new, for that decantari solebant, they were used to be sung (& this was about the middle of the 3d century) nor that there was any culpa∣ble matter contained in them, for the Council censured Paulus, and restored them. So that we may without doubt conclude. he Primitive Church sung Hymns which were neither meer Scri∣pture, nor otherwise of divine inspira∣tion. One thing onely is to be added here, that though there were certainly in
those dayes diverse Hymns sung, which were composed by more private spirits, yet none generally were of publick use, till they had at least passed the appro∣bation of the Bishops of those Churches, where they were used. This is in part proved already, and will hereafter come under further consideration. Now as to the Primitive manner ofSect. 3. singing all Hymns, it is certain it was very plain. Thus much is suggested by that passage above mentioned out of Pliny, where the Christians singing is called Carmen dicere, the saying an Hymn to Christ: and it is both generally agreed, and considering the condition of the Christian Church, it could not be otherwise. For what of state, or Musical graces, could be expected, while in stead of their harps, they were to bear their cross? while they wandred up and down in sheep skins, and in goat∣skins, being destitute, afflicted and tor∣mented; while deserts were their cities, and caves their Oratories, and Mid∣night one great canonical hour. And yet I must confess indeed, the plain way of singing, seems not to have been onely
matter of necessity to them, but of choice also. Thus Saint Augustine hath recorded his information. DeConfes. lib. 10. c. 33. Alexandrino Episcope, Athanasio, sae∣pe mihi dictum commemini, quod tam modico flexu vocis facitbat sonare lectorem Psalmi, ut pronuncianti vicinior esset quam canenti: He had been often told, that Athanasius made the Psal∣mists to use so small modulation of their voice, that they seemed rather to pronounce distinctly, than to sing. (And so, to this day, are the Psalms com∣monly chanted amongst us) The same saith Rabanus Maurus more at large,De in∣stit. Cler. l. 2: c:  48, 49. concluding that the Psalmists voice should be such (non quae Tragicam excla∣mat artem, sed quae Christianam simplici, tatem in ipsa modulatione demonstrat, &c.) which is not so much accommodated to state and pomp, as expressing Chri∣stian simplicity in its very tuneing; and rather creating compunction in the Hearers, than savouring too much of art and curiosity; though he also acknowledge the secret efficacy of mu∣sick to affect the mind, and the reaso∣nableness of practising somewhat of art,
as we shall hereafter note: but possibly men are very prone in these cases to overdoing. However that Author is much neerer the Apostolick age, than either of these mentioned, who censures more se¦verely.Paedag. lib. 2. c. 4. . Thus Clement of Alexandria: And yet some now adays are scarce content with the Chromatick scale (though possibly the Father understood onely figurate com∣positions in general) but search after all the niceties of the whole three, & mix all together for Church▪use. I pray God it be with good success.Sect. 4. The Primitive singing being thus plain (all undoubtedly in one time and tone) there were no sort, sex or age, but what in some measure did or could join therein, either in private, or pub∣lick, or bothwise. And hereof we have great plenty of evidence. First, as to private singing; that passage of the last-mentioned Father is very memora∣ble.Ibid. , &c. Accor∣ding (saith he) as before we take our meat, it is fit we praise the Creatour of all; so also doth it become us, when
we drink, to sing to him, being made partakers of his good creatures.—Lastly, before sleep seizes us, it is right pious and holy to give thanks to God, as having partaken of his boun∣ty and favour, and so divinely to go to sleep. And this practice the Fa∣ther draws, as naturally enough he may, from that passage of St. Paul, 1 Cor. X. 31. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God, &c. Again, Tertullian about theAd ux∣or: l: 2: c: 6. same time speaks of the Husbands sing∣ing to the Wife, and the Wifes to the Husband, and this even at meals. AndAd Do∣nat. St. Cyprian to the same purpose. Nec sit vel hora convivii gratiae caelestis immu∣nis: sonet Psalmos convivium sobrium; & ut tibi tenax est memoria, voce cano∣ra aggredere hoc munus ex more, &c. Neither let, saith he, the hour of meal be without some Heavenly exer∣cise. Let thy sober table sound of Psalms, & as thou hast a good memo∣ry, in common custome set upon this Work with a clear voice. Thou wilt by this means betterfeed thy dearest re∣lations, &c. But most fully of all St.
Hierom in diverse of his Epistles. InEp: 17: ad Marcel. Cristi villulâ; &c. In Christian Villages (saith he) there is little to be heard but Psalms. Which way soever you turn your self, the Husbandman holding his Plow, sings Halleluja: The Mow∣er sweatig, refresheth himself with Psalms; the Vinedresser pruning his Vines, sings something of Davids. Elsewhere he speaks even of children, who being scarce able to speak, could sing Halleluja's to Christ. Parvulae adhue lingua balbutiens Christi Halleluja reso∣nat: And again, Cum avum viderit, in pectus ejus transiliat, de collo pendeal, nolenti Halleluja decantet: When theEp. 7: ad Laet. little child saw her Grandfather, she would leap into his arms, & hang about his neck, and sing an Halleluja to him, whether he would or no. These were the Songs of the Primitive dayes.Idem. Hic pastorum sibilus, haec arma culturae. These were the shepherds layes, and the plough mans whistlings. To conclude, asHom. in Psa▪ 41. to this private practice, Chrysostome has a great part of an Homily, exhorting to the use of it upon all opportunities & occasions It will not now be admited, that the
Primitive Christians, being privately thus exercised, by the way, in the House, at their meals, at their labours, in the field, in the vineyard, and in a man∣ner every where, all sorts should in those days be very ready to join in the praises of God at their publick Assemblies. Here, in their turn and season, they all struck in, so that the Amen almost equalledHiero: in praes. Ep▪ ad Gal. the thunder (Ad similitudinem coelestis tonitrui Amen reboat.) Nor onely joind they in so short Responsals, but in Davids Psalms too. Consona quem celebrant modulati car∣mina David, Et responsuris ferit aera vocibus A∣men. Auson: Ephe: lib: 2. Consonant to which practice of theirs, is the use of all our Parochial Churches, or may be, if the peoples devotion be not wanting; and in our Cathedral Churches, though in some particulars the Musick be softer and more delicate; yet from the chanting Davide Psalms, from the joining in the Amen, and other Responds, none commonly are
precluded, and, for a regular perfor∣mance thereof, any may be easily qua∣lified. Such being the universality of singing to God, in the first and in the Primi∣tiveSect. 5. Church, I cannot any otherwise interpret that passage of St. Austins, touching St. Ambrose's setting up the Practice of Psalms and Hymns in the Church of Millain, in the time of the Arrian Persocution, raised against St. Ambrose and his people, by Justina Mother of Valentinian, than onely of hisConfes. l. 9. c. 7. introducing a new way of singing. Ni∣mirum annus erat, &c. saith the Father. It was about a year, or not much more (before his Baptism) when Justina the Mother of young Valenti∣nian persecuted Ambrose the man of God, for the sake of the Heresie, whereto she had been seduced by the Arrians. The people all devoutly lay night and day in the Church, prepa∣red to dye with their Bishop.—Then was it appointed that Psalmes and Hymns should be sung secundum mo∣rem Orientalium partium, after the manner of the Eastern Church, lest
the people should sink under the irk∣somness of the affliction: And from that time to this day, has that pra∣ctice been reteined, many and almost all congregations imitating through∣out the other parts of the World. That the Easterlins sung before, the Father acknowledges: that the Roman Church, (within the Territories of which was Millain) sung before, we have already proved: Whatsoever new practice therefore was at that time in∣troduced, was not as to singing it self, as if absolutey then begun, as some have thought, but onely as to the manner of singing▪ St Ambrose reduced their former use to a greaer conformity with the East∣ern. Now how far the Eastern Church had at that time improved the way of sing∣ing, I am not abe to speak; for I can find but little recrded on the subject. That before this time, Nepos the Aegy∣ptian (a person much exercised in the Scripture, and of great faith, godi∣ness and industry) had compoed seve∣ralEccl. Hist. lib. 7. c. 19. Hymns of his own, which many Christian Churches used long after, Eu∣sebius proves out of Dionysius. That
both the form of composure, and the manner of singing of these Hymns, was more artificial and curious, than what had been the former use, is very pro∣bable, for that it is said, Many of the Brethren were greatly delighted therewith; which seems to import somewhat more delicious in them, that might be the cause of such delight, than was for∣merly usuall. What time Nepos lived in, I can give no other account, but that the above-named Dionysius Alexan∣drinus speaks there of him as lately dead at that time, when he wrote those things: now Dionysius flourished about the year 254, if we may believe Bellarmin. Elder than those of Nepos'sDionys. Ecces. Herr. & de divin. No. l. 1. c. 3. were Hierotheus his Hymns, whom some talk high of, as being (post Apostolos omnibus Doctoribus superior) the great∣est Doctor next the Apostles, and who lived, as tis said, in the very Aposto∣lick age, and was present with St. Pe∣ter, and St. James, and other of the Apostles, at the Funeral of the Blessed Virgin: but of what nature these Hymns also were, & indeed, whether there were any such Hymns or person, we must be
content to be in the dark. To come to times wherein we have clearer Re∣cords: And to omit here the HymnsHier. de scri∣ptor. Eccles. attributed to Clement of Alexan∣dria, That Saint Hilary composed a Book of Hymns, about the middle of the Fourth century, we are certain, from St. Hierom; as also that theseGavan. in Ru∣br. Brevis. Confes. l. 9. c: 12. were in strict Poetical Form, for such is that Beata nobis gaudia, extant in the Romish Breviaries, and reckoned to be his. That also St. Ambrose imitating him, composed Hymns strictly verse, we are assured by St. Austin, who re∣peats several Verses of one of them; & of others, more anon. That this Fathers Hymns were sung in the Church of Milan in his own age, is evident from his own Works: and that besides this moreAm∣bros. in Aux∣ent. artificial form of composing Hymns, he introduced more artificial notes and modulation, to what before used more plainly to be sung, is beyond question manifest out of S. Austin, who, having ac∣knowledged himself, before his conversi∣on, much given to the pleasures of hearing, but that God had now disin∣tangled him from those snares, adds,
Nunc in sis, quos animat eloquia tua,Confes. lib. 10: c. 33. cum suai & artificios voce cantantur, fateor aliquantulum cquiesco: non qui∣de ut ream, sd ut surgam um volo. Now (saith he) in such sounds as thy Oracles inspirit, when they are sung with a sweet and artificial voice, I have some complacency: not so in∣deed as to stick therein, but to rise [in my affections thereby] when I will. And a little after, having suspected himself to have been guilty of too much attention to, and affection from, the singing, rather than the thing sung, he complains himself sometimes to be in his thoughts drawn into too much severity a∣gainst so curious melody. Aliquand autm hanc ipsam fallaciam moderatis cavens, erro nimia severitate. Sed valdè inter∣dum; ut melos, &c. Sometimes, saith he, being too anxiously cautious against any fallaciousness of this sensi∣ble delight, I err by too great seve∣rity: And very much indeed in some instances; for that I could even wish that all the melody of those sweet tunes, in which David's Psalms are daily sung, were removed from my
ears, and the ears of the Church. And it seems safer to me, what I re∣member often to have been told me of Athanasius the Bishop of Alexandria, who made the Psalmists chant the Psalms with so small change of voice, that it might rather seem pronoun∣cing, than singing (the passage even now cited). From this place it appears, that at least in the Church of Millain, St. Am∣brose introduced more melodious and artificial singing, than was th Alexan∣dria or former use. Now that other Churches soon took up this practice, that passage of St. Austin, above cited,Confes: l. 9. c: 7. proves. Ex ill [tempore] in hodier∣num retentum est, multis jam, ac pene omnibus gregibus tuis, & per caeteras [partes] orbis imitantibus More curious ging obtained almost in all Churches, even in the very self same age that it was first introduced at Millain: so great was the authority, or success, of the Ambrosian precedent. It remains onely here to shew (be∣cause St. Austin in the fore-repeated place, seems at first a little to waver in
his judgment, touching the expedien∣cy of this practice) what was his last resolution, upon full thought and con∣sideration,Confes: lib. 10: c: 3. in the case: and that he himself fully sets down in the same place. How far he doubted, we have already said in his own words: After which he immediately proceeds resolving thus. Veruntamen cum reiscor lachrymas quas fudi ad cantus Ecclesiae tuae, in pri∣mordiis recuperatae fidei, &c. Not∣withstanding, saith he, when I re∣member the tears, which I shed at the singing of thy Church in the be∣ginning of the recovery of my faith, and that even now being affected at the same, I am moved, not so much with the bare singing it self, as with the things which are sung, they be∣ing sung in a clear voice, and with the meetest melody, I again acknow∣ledge the great profitableness of this institution. Thus I fluctu∣ate betwixt the danger of sensible pleasure, and the sense of wholesome advantage: but I am rather induced (not so indeed as to pass an irrevoca∣ble sentence) to appove the cu∣stome.
of such singing in the Church: to the end, that by this delectation of the ears, weaker minds may rise up to holy affections. Yet when it so happens, that the singing moves me more, than the thing which is sung, I confess my self so far to sin, as that I deserve punishment: and in this case, it were better not to hear singing. The result is (exactly pro∣portionable to what we have above determined) singing is wholesome, to be approved, desired and commended, as far as it is an help to devotion: but if through too much curiosity it prejudice distinct understanding, and directing the intention of the mind towards God, a plainer course were better. After St. Ambrose, many of the Fa∣thers, as well Greek as Latine, compo∣sed very artificial, lofty and admira∣ble Hymns, many in regular verse, some rather in the Dithyrambick way, & some fewer in a kind of Prose, cut out into short and incise clauses. That seve∣ral of these were, even in the days when they were composed, sung in publick, cannot well be questioned; And it
must be confest of that Seraphical Hymn (whether of St. Ambrose singly, or S. Ambrose & S. Austin jointly, cannot, it may be, be determin'd) called the Te De∣um. The Romanists in their common daily Offices, & in their more solemn extraor∣dinary Processions, pretend to retainGava. in : Bre∣viar. Sect. 5. c. 6. many of them still: one of St. Hilary's, thirty seven or more of St. Ambrose's, eight of St. Gregorie▪s, two of St. Ber∣nard▪s, & more of others: though if the be of such Original, their Holy Fathers the Popes have altered somewhat more in them than false quantities. But to let them pass: Those Hymns, being writ in strict measures, must needs have some melodies more proportionate and peculiar to them, than a plain pronun∣ciation: so that consequently, the Church-singing in these Ages, must gra∣dually have advanced to more of art. What date the particular, gradations, by which it rose to its present perfections are to bear, I am not able to give ac∣ount. The ancient Grecians, Arifoxenus, Euclid, &c. whose Musical works we have still extant, had indeed, I know, highly improved Musick long before
this time: The Diatonick, Chroma∣tick and Enharmonick scales, were di∣stinctly all stated; but I do not believe the Fathers, or the Christian people, to have been much acquainted with these curiosities. It is geneally agreed, that, of all Church-singing, that used by the Eaftern Church, was the sweet∣est and most modulate (St. Ambrose, as we have seen, took thence his pattern) and the cause and Original hereof we can well judge no other, than the re∣mains of that Art introduced by David into the Church-use, in the flourishing state of the Jewes: which art, though it had been uch broken by the calami∣ties of the Jewish Church, yet we can∣not conceive, but some scatterd parts thereof were propagated from fathers to children, and so continued down to the times of Christianity; for that even the very preent Jewes pretend to some∣what of such a Tradition. This being allowed to be the Original of whatever artificial singing came into the Primi∣tive Church, and withall it being ad∣mitted, what has been before proved, that the Christian singing in the First
Church, and for some considerable time, was most plain, let us see by what degrees art prevailed. The first step thereto, which I find on record, is the fifteenth Canon of the Council of Laodicea.  That none should sing in the Church, but the Canonical singers, which went up into the Desk, and read out of the Church-book. The occasion of this Canon, undoubtedly was, some confusion arising from the singing of the promiscuous multitude, together with the Canonical singers; the one sin∣ging by art, or at least aiming at some∣what of art, and the other in a more plain, but haply a little clamorous way. Yet still for the particular sense of this Canon, and the practice ensu∣ing thereon, we shall find our selves something at a loss. Zonaras thus com∣ments on it,  &c. The Fathers of the Synod would have modesty and good order to be kept in the Church. Wherefore they do not say, that every one may sing in
the Church that will, but onely the Canonical singers; those namely of the Clergy, who are ordained and appointed thereto, and who sing out of the Church-book, () That2 Tim. IV. 13. they call , which St Paul called the Parchments.—for the word signi∣fies skins, of which Parchment is made; and it is plain, the Fathers here call the Church-books  And one would think, that the Commentatour had fully hit the sense of the Text: But hear what Balsamon a great Cano∣nist, and no less than Patriarch of Anti∣och, saith on the same;  The Laity were not forbidden to sing together with the Quire; but with this Proviso, as both his foregoing and following words en∣force, that they did sequi not ducere: They might follow and take their parts, either alternately, or in closes mo∣destly, as the use was. And this will well enough accord with what we have said in the foregoing Section; and is fur∣ther proved, by that passage of Saint Chrystostom, recording the use in his dayes, which were considerably la∣ter
than this Council. In 1. ad Cor: Hom: 36. The singer singeth alone, & though all strike in, and sing softly after him, or take the closes, yet the voice comes as from one mouth. But what then is the distinct sense of the Canon, or the re∣straint thereby laid on the People? It is this, saith Balsamon: Many of theIn No∣tis ad Can 15 Laod. common Laity took upon them the parts of the Clergy, and not onely begun the Psalms, but sung too , other things than were writ in the Church-books (not therefore al∣lowed) These things, saith he, the Fathers forbidding, ordain that none but the Clerks, which go up into the Desk or stalls, should () begin the divine Hymns—nor sing any thing besides what was writ in the Church-books. So that according to this Authour, the Canon provides not onely against a rude, irregular manner of singing, but also against introducing unallowed Hymns: and as to the later chiefly, if his comment give its true sense. However, that hereby a more orderly course of singing was designed,
cannot be denied, there being another Canon of this Council (namely, the last but one) which is directly intend∣ed against singing strange & uncanoni∣cal Psalms or hymns; & we may not think the Fathers in the LIX. Canon did for∣get the XV, and meerly tautologize. This therefore we may take to have been one step towards more regular and artificial singing. Having now heard of Canonical sing∣ers, it will be expedient to consider, what kind of persons these were, and how they were made so; for that this possibly may give us some further light into the point in hand. Whereas there∣fore Zonaras plainly calls them ordained persons, and both he and Balsamon reckn them as being of the Clergy, it would seem, that some of the meaner of the Clergy were in those dayes parti∣cularly appointed to this Office: but we must know, it is not necessary, that they be ordained persons, or properly of the Clergy, who shall be reckoned Canonical singers. Amongst all the Orders of the Romish Church, the Sin∣ger or Psalmist is none: And it is, saith
Suarez, the constant doctrine of allDe Relig. Tom. 2. l. 4. c. 9. our Divines, that the Psalmist proper∣ly is no Clerk; yea, a Priests choosing and appointing him to that Office, suffi∣ces to his constitution. And if it be so with them now, much more was it so in those plainer and more simple ages. It is therefore observable, that the Ca∣non gives them not that style: so that I conceive the Canonists to have called them Clerks, onely at large, or in an improper sense, and in favour of them; and that in the same acceptation (pro∣portionably) Zonaras his  and  may be interpretable onely of their being appointed to this Office, having been approved and found able for performance therein. But am not concerned to justifie in strictness every Glossators terms: Let the Psalmists, or Singers, be ordained persons for that time, and in those Churches, or not; it is certain, in the Western Church, and since, they have not necessarily been so: though  could wish in our Church they were; provided all were fit for that Holy state, and their education had accomplisht them (as it might
have been ordered, and in some Ca∣thedrals is) in more liberal arts, than one. To the point in hand: From about this time, the name Singers, as noting a particular Office, becomes fre∣quent in our Ecclesiastical Writers: Now except we will make these Canoni∣cal singers no more than plain Readers (as truly to me seems unreasonable we should, seeing that Scripturas legere & Psalms canere, were different parts of the publick Service, even in Tertullian's dayes) we must then admit them to have been persons, who had more of dexterity and art in singing, than the common sort, either of the Clergy or People. And this not being to be had without mens addicting themselves thereto, and something of exercise and institution, we must conclude, that in the end of the third, and so more in the fourth century, some kind of arti∣ficial singing grew in request, and was both studied and practised: and that such Christian persons who were best Proficients therein, and could with most readiness, gravity, grace and clearness (Praecinere and praeire verba)
sing the Psalms and Canonical Hymns before the people, and set all in, were appointed peculiarly to this Office; to the end, that the people might take, as out of their mouths, and after them, what they were to sing, and withall might be kept in some tolerable consent and harmony. And this, if we do not admit, considering the Christian com∣monalty could not have all the Psalms and Canonical Hymns without-book, considering also they were not then ge∣nerally book-learned, and had not that plenty or frequency of books and co∣pies, which we have, for them to sing thereout, it cannot be conceived how the whole Assembly should vocally join in such publick Offices, which yet it is evident, and in a manner general∣ly agreed, they did. But whatsoever I have said touching any Essayes of more artificial Musick ap∣pearing in this age, I would have so understood, as that all their art was most pain, suitable to that the state of the Church. We are assured by the Authour of the Answers to the Orth∣doxQuae . 107. in Justin Martyr's Works (which
though haply they be not his, were cer∣tainly written in the beginning of the third century at the farthest) that then  there was but sim∣ply singing left, and no use of any instru∣mental Musick in the Church; for what then could be expected of that nature? And as to curit sity in Vocal Musick, Balsamon speaks not onely the practice, but, in his own sense, the law of those dayes, In Can. 15. Conc. Laod. The small fine tu∣nings of the voice, and extravagant modulations, were altogether forbid the singers. And though I said, St. Ambrose took up a more artificial and melodious way of singing from the Easterlings, yet understand me how fare. That Excellently Learned Countrey-man of ours had searchedMr. John Grego∣ry Ox∣on. more into all sorts of Msick and other Rarities, than ever I can hope for op∣portunity to do, who prnounced him∣self much deceived, if the Eastern Mu∣sik ever improved further than lain-song. Wherere I  conclude the same, no onely touching the Ambrosian pra∣ctice, but touching whatsoever singing
Ephrem Syrus, Gregory Nazianzen, St. Chrysostome, or any other of the Fa∣thers of these ages, used with the Hymns and Antiphons which they com∣posed, or with the Psalms of David, which any of them introduced, in their dayes, into publick use in the Churches where they lived or presided. This is the summe of what I can find to be said, touching any Artificial Musick brought into the Church, for three or four hundred years and upwards after Christ. The next advance I can perceive song to have had in Church-use, falls into the end of the sixth century. About that time flourished Gregory the Great,Ptia. in Vi. Greg. l. a man, whom none of his successours ever equalled, and very diligent in regulating and accomplishing (as no doubt he thought) all the publick Of∣fices of the Church. He stored his Church with Antiphons, and amongst other things, wrote Antiphonarium di∣urnum & nocturnum; as I conceive, sets of Antiphons for day and night: Then as to Musick, the Tunes in which we commonly chant the Psalms, if we
may believe Tradition, are most of them of his composure, and indeed the whole body of the old Plain-song in our Cathedral use. The CenturiatorsCent. 6. of Magdeburg report out of Joannes Di∣aconus, who writ his Life, that he setcap. 7. up a Singing-school at Rome, and taught therein himself. But whoso considers all Musical Monuments of his left, which the Romish Quires pretend for the main to exhibit & follow, must still acknowledge nothing of his above meer Plain song; All Notes ofMusices Choralis Medulla, sive Can∣tus Gregoriani tradi∣tio. Coloniae. 1670. the same measure and pow∣er. Notwithstanding, that both still in his dayes, and some time before, it was not otherwise, I cannot impute to want of Will, but of Skill: So mean was the progress most arts yet had made, so low their flight, in the Christian World. Of instrumental Musick introducedect 6. into Church-use under Christianity, we shall meet with nothing till the seventh century, and there is some question whether then: And yet I do not think this, as hereafter I shall shew, any
reasonable prejudice to our present pra∣ctice in this kind. I know indeed that Durantus, and out of him Suarez, andDe ri∣tib. Ec∣cles. Catho. lib. 1. c. 13. some other Moderns, pretend much more antiquity for the Christian use hereof. The onely authority, which Durantus produces for its elder date, is out of one Julianus on Job; & he says, if truly cited, Instruments were used in Churches before his time; but by whom, or where, he sayes not, possibly among the Jews. And though I find one Julianus Archbishop of Toledo in the Bibliotheca Patrum, & some Notes of his to reconcile opposite places of Scripture, & particular∣ly out of Job, yet no such passage therein can I find; and if I did, I have reason enough to suspect the validity of such blind authority, there being so many testimonies of known integrity to the contrary. That seems much more plausible, which is alledged touching Vitalian, of whom indeed Platina saies,In V. Ʋital. Cantum ordinavit, adhibitis ad conso∣nantiam, ut quidam volunt, Organis, He new-modelled singing, taking in, as some say, Musical instruments for better filling up. I have translated
Organis Musical instruments: for so the word signifies in its old Ecclesiastical use. Organa dicuntur instrumenta Musi∣corum, saith St. Austin (if those Expo∣sitionsIn Psal. 56. Orig. l. 2. c. 20. be his) and he calls the Harp and the Psaltery Organa. Organum vo∣cabulum est generale omnium Vasorum Musicorum, saith Isidorus Hispal. But to return. The same thing, it is true, is said of Vitalian by others. Now this Vitalian came into his See in the year 683. saith Platina: in the year 655. saith Baronius and Bellarmine, I think more rightly. But though, Quidam volunt, in Platina's language, some will have it, that Vitalian brought in Musical instruments into Church-use, alii nolunt, others and better authori∣ties deny it. And particularly, that Text of Aquinas is unanswerable as to the matter of fact he speaks of, though the reason, which he gives, is to pass amongst his other errours, as shall here∣after be proved. Instrumenta Musica,2d. 2de. Q. . 91. A. c. 2. sicut Citharas & Psalteria, non assumit Ecclesia in divinas laudes, ne videatur Judaizare: The Christian Church uses not Musical instruments, as
Harps or Psalteries, in the Divine praises, lest she should seem to Juda∣ize. As to Judaizing, he needed not have feared it; Musical instruments be∣ing first brought into the Worship of God, not upon any Jewish ceremonial precept, but upon natural expediency and reason, and not without the secret instinct of God, as shall be made ap∣pear, God willing. But that then they used not Musical instruments in the Church-service, is as plainly said by him, as a thing can be (Now he was in his height about the year 1264). And thus much is expresly confest by his learned Commentator Cajetan, and by the great Casuist Navarr. Nor is that any other but a poor evasion, which Soto, Suarez, and some other Writers use, that St. Thomas spoke not of Organs, but of other less Musical in∣struments; Organs, having been long before his time, namely as before said, pretended to have been introduced by Vitalian. For mine own part, I could be glad, were it made out, they were of much longer standing in the Christi∣an Church than Vitalian himself: but I
love to assert no more, than I appre∣hend I can prove; nor have I any so ill conceit or diffidence of our cause, as to suppress what I know is objected, or ob∣jectible against it. I say therefore they who affirm Vitalian brought in Organa, must understand the word in that large sense, before mentioned, wherein it signifies any Musical instruments, and not particularly of what we now call Organs: For the present Organ is not an instrument of such antiquity in the Western World, nor indeed any where else so ancient, as commonly thought. The Hebrew Organ, according to Mai∣mon, was onely a Metal-pipe, though of what fashion I cannot find. The in∣ventor, or time of the invention of our present Organ, those who have pur∣poselyMarin. Mer∣sen. de instru. Harm. l. 3. in init. writ hereof, cannot tell. The eldest account, to be found of it, is a description of it, produced out of an Anonymous Greek Philosopher, & him tao without date of age, who calls it, . The biggest instrument, the great Psaltery, the Hand-organ; , and many other names:
by which, it is concluded to have been a Graecian invention. There is also a very ingenious Epigram of the Empe∣rour Julian's, in description of it, pro∣duced by the same hand, I mean Mer∣sennus's, which shews, it must have been elder in Greece than the year 360. But it is agreed, saith the learned Mr. Gregory, treating of the time whenGreg. Poi∣hum. pag 49 first the Nicene Creed began to be sung, that the first Organ that was ever seen in the West, was sent over into France to King Pipin, from the Greek Emperour Constantine Copronymus, about the year 766. (Res adhuc Ger∣manis & Gallis incognita, instrumen∣tum Musicae maximum, &c.) A thingAnnal. Boir. lib. 3. then unknown to that part of the World, a vast Musical instrument, called an Organ, made of Tin pipes, and those blown with bellows, and struck with the hands and feet. After this pattern, the first which was made in the Western parts, was for the Em∣perour Lewis the Godly, about the year 820. as Bellarmine himself in aCor. 3. pr. 3. c. 7. manner confesseth. So that upon the whole, it is in a sort impossible Vitalian
could introduce the Organ. And that it came not suddenly into Churches, is already apparent. But though I have said the Organ was not in use in the Church in Aquinas his time, yet im∣mediately after, it must be acknow∣ledged: for it is twice mentioned by Durandus (who writ about the yearRatio∣nal. l. 4. c. 34, & l. 5. c. 2. 1300) as received before his time, and said to have been taken into the Chri∣stian Church, in imitation of David's and Solomon's practice, no bad prece∣dents in devotion. I could produce some later Canons, for the due regu∣lating Organical Musick in the Church: as that of the Concilium Senonense, De∣cret. Mor. c. 17. Organorum usum Ec∣clesia à Patribus ad cultum servitiumque divinum recepit. Nolumus itaque quòd Organicis instrumentis resonet Ecclesia impudica aut lasciva melodia, sed &c. That of the Council of Colen soon after, much to the same effect. De offic. & vit. Cleric. cap. 15. But all these and other authorities, suppose them intro∣duced; and of the strict time of their coming in, perhaps a more particular account cannot be given, than now has been.
The Organ being thus (silently) come in, an instrument of such admirable varie∣ty and fulness, and, as its very name im∣ports, the chief of all Musical instru∣ments, or in a sort all in one, it is rea∣sonable to expect Vocal Musick should advance apace; and so undoubtedly it did, though to speak precisely, gi∣ving each gradation its proper time and Authour, I am not able. I have above said, the utmost that the Eastern Mu∣sick ever rose to, was meer Plain-song: and if we may believe what is pretend∣ed still to be the Gregorian Musick, even that advanced no higher. Nor are there wanting those, who affirm thus much touching all the Musick of the Ancients, contending, that varie∣ty of parts was never heard of till very late dayes; and that if the Ancients sung to any instrument, as it is sure they did, both to Wind-instruments, and Stringed ones especially, they sung the same they played. I have many reasons, which perswade me the con∣trary, touching the old Grecian Mu∣sick, and induce me to say, that though they might sing, some of them, the
same which was plaid, as we do to in∣struments, on which more parts than one is plaid, when a Chorus sings; yet supposing with them, more than one sung, generally they sung with some difference of Parts. I am sure, out of their own Books, that they had a different way of pricking () for, say they, we have aBac∣chius. double use of it, for singing and for playing: and that no one voice could sing all that they ordinarily played; for they denied any voice to be of greater compass than 12 Notes: Now it is certain their old scale (whatsoever some have spo∣kenMar: Mib: in praes. ad 7. ant q. Music. auto∣res. of it without-book, who write of the Grecian Musick, nullo Graecorum Musi∣corum lecto, as is complained, and proved of Kircher himself) exceeds that of Guido's by a whole Diatessaron: This Meibonius proves in his Notes on Euclid's introduction to Musick, pag. 50, 51. Further, it appears by a multi∣tude of passages, which I could produce out of their Books, that they had diffe∣rence of time, as well as of Keys: Now what great use there could be of all these, & to what purpose their discourses
of consonants or concords, of the due consecution of intervals, and many more like points should be, I am utterly at a loss, if they had not amongst them what we mean by composition. I am sure I meetAristid. Quin∣til: de Msic: l. 1: cir∣camed. with the very name amongst them () and Rules for the contriving it Harmonically. As to matter of fact, though there is little, that I know of, to be said, whatever they set being all lost, as far as I can hear, yet that pas∣sage cited out of Athenaeus lib. 14. by Glareanus, is not to be contemned,Glare∣an. Do∣decar. lib. 3. Pro∣oem. that Pythagoras Zacynthius so plaid (Ba∣sim, alteramque vocem, ac acutam) A Basse, and another part, and a sharp one or treble, that if any had one∣ly heard, and not seen him, they would have thought they had heard three Harps plaid on. And for a conclu∣sion, [it is to me an uncontroleable evidence, that they had a long time both understood, and practiced varie∣ty of parts & even something of proper discant, because they invented the Or∣gan; an instrument which does miscere carmina (as in the Epigram of it). put in all parts with all variety of time.
But though I thus contend artificial Mu∣sick, & that of admirable variety, might be of such old standing in the World, I do not believe it came into the Church∣use, but with the Organ: And that even then, they, at first, and for some time, contented themselves with the plainest sort of Counterpoint, Note answering Note, Semibrief Semibrief, Minim Minim, in the several parts, without any divisionary discant. For as to the several present Ornaments and Figurations of Harmony, they are to be confessed (to use Mr. Gregorie's words) but a Yesterdayes business, a new though very rare invention. Not∣withstanding, I do not imagine it blame∣worthy, to use them in the Worship of God; provided those general rules, before laid down, touching singing to God, be not transgressed: For I would fain know, why I may not sing to God in the Musick of the age, as well as pray or preach in the language of the age. And I doubt not before I have done, to convince those adversaries, which open lowdest against our Cathedral use, that they themselves, not onely use, but
plead for (as Ordinances too of Christ) several practices, that are much more novel than Organs, or our Choral-sing∣ing. In the mean while, let us see whatSect. 7. Churches have received artificial and in∣strumental Musick; or at least, where we do not find any publick acts of Churches approving thereof, what has been the judgment of their more eminent Doctors, touching the use of it in publick worship, where it may conveniently be had. Touching the Romish Church, I need say nothing; they have Musick but too much: and by this their practice, as well as by others, violate all the Apostolical Lawes for publick edification. Onely, that some people may know, they are not in all things so opposite to the Pope, as in zeal they design, I will tell them, thatAd Thom: 2 a, 2 dae, q: 91. D. just: & . l. 1. q. 5. there is no Organ in the Popes Chap∣pel: because Organs are not of necessi∣ty in the Christian Church, say Caje∣tan and Sotus. And, is his Holiness then so strict an observer and Patriot of the simple, essential, necessary Chri∣stianity, as that no ceremony, or pru∣dential
profitable constitution will down with him? Or, because he is Univer∣sal Bishop, is he priviledged to be sin∣gular? Or rather, because, forsooth, he is, under Christ, the supreme Law∣giver, therefore he may choose what order he will be conform to, and what not? This in truth, together with some other little politick formality, is the true reason, as we well know, why Organs sound not so well in his Holi∣ness's Chappel, as a dozen or two of Eu∣nuchs voices, which possibly, as we Here∣ticks think, have as little necessity, and less decency; let his creatures say what they please. As to the Eastern Church, there is perhaps no Organ, or instrumental Musick therein. Alas! in most places, they have scarce the face of a Church: few Priests, andTho: Smith in Spt. Asi. Ec∣cles. Nti. those generally ignorant, even to stu∣pidity; fewer Oratories, and (if we may believe some, who have given us the latest accounts of the present state of certain of those Churches) scarce the advantage of Wine enough for the Communion. The good God in his time return and visit them. But I pre∣sume,
the account chiefly expected here, will be of the practice of the Re∣formed Churches. And I should in my judgment be much guilty of the breach of the fifth commandment, did I not give my Mother the Church of England the first place of dignity amongst them. It is not the flattery, or over-weening mistake of a fond Son of Hers, but the just censure of an Alien: Si me conje∣ctura non fallit, totius ReformationisIsaac. Casa∣bon. ad Cl. Sal∣mas. Ep. 40. pars integerrima est in Anglia, ubi cum studio Veritatis viget studium antiquitatis. If my judgment doth not deceive me (saith the learned Isaac Casaubon) the sincerest part of the Reformation is in England, where, together with the study of Truth, flourisheth also the study of Antiquity. This indeed was the design of our Church, not to bring in a new-coin'd Christianity, but to reform the doctrine and practice of corrupted Christianity, according to the Primitive purity: for which, though she have found many Enemies amongst unreasonable men, who are resolved to like nothing, but what is new, or their own, yet Wisdome is,
and will be, justified of her children; and we do not doubt but The children, which the Lord shall give our Mother, after the loss of those other, who have quitted their duty to her, shall yet say, The place is too strait for us, if there be nothing found in us more displeasing to God, than this the Rule of our Refor∣mation. With such calmness and Christian prudence our Church proceeding, did not find her self concerned, to melt her Organ-Pipes into Bullets, to purge Liturgies and Anthems by fire, & to destroy Ca∣thedrals, those glorious Houses of God in the Land; it being much more wor∣thy to reduce to due order, than to abolish and pervert, what was well de∣signed, and there being no footsteps of such Christianity in the Primitive ages, where there was more temptation to tumultuous practices. Thus it came to pass, that God was, and is, worship∣ped in our Church both in spirit and in truth, and yet in beauty, decency and sweetness. As to Forreign Reformed Churches, it having pleased God to plant them, where they are either more obnoxious
to the incursions, or subject to the power of Romanists, there was perhaps never any in the World in so settled a condition, as the English, and there∣fore it cannot be expected, that there should be either at the beginning of the Reformation, or in constant continu∣ance, such glory and order to be found in any as in it. We were certainly once the Envy of our Neighbours, and might be so still, were it not the endea∣vour of some amongst us (though I hope unwittingly and not with design) to make us their scorn. But to come close to the point: All the Forreign re∣formed, in a manner, follow the Luthe∣ran or Calvinian plat-form; and we may in good measure see, what we are to expect from them in the present case, by considering the sentiments of their great Doctors therein. As to Luther▪s own judgment, it was certainly for us: Speaking of the Communion-service,Apud Mech. Adam. n vt. Luth. p. 15. that it ought in every nation to be in the Mother-tongue, he saith, Missam Vernaculam opto magis quam prom to; quòd impar sim huic operi▪ quia Musicam simul & Spiritum desiderat: I rather
wish a Communion-service in our Mo∣ther-tongue, than promise it, being not sufficient for so great a Work: for it requires both Musick and a Spi∣rit. It is plain hereby, what he de∣signed, and would have had, though possibly, by reason of the troubled estate of affairs in his dayes, he was never able to effect it. I know indeed, that there is a passage cited, at the second hand, by a disguised Author, come to my sight, since I begun this Work, wherein Luther is said to have calledApolo. pro¦eject. Angl. Minist. Organs amongst other things, the En∣signes or Badges of Baal. As to this, First, there is no reference given to any place in Luther, neither by this Anonymous Writer, nor the Authour from whom he takes the citation, for the searching the time, occasion, con∣nexion, or manner of this speech of Luther's. Secondly, all men know Lu∣ther had his heats, and sometimes too writ in them, what he repented of af∣ter: 1 tom.  15 4. and it is a censure which he himself passed of several of his own Works (cum judicio legenda sunt omnia) that all things in those pieces were to be
read with judgment. Now there is a great difference betwixt what a man sayes in a little rant, as this seems to be said, and upon sober, mature and consciencious deliberation, in which temper, the former passage plainly was written. Lastly, we will give Luther's Disciples, that is, the Lutheram Doctours, leave better to understand their Teachers constant Doctrine, than strangers andFascc. Con∣trov. Theol. c. 21. adversaries. Thus therefore H: Eck∣hardus, Doctor of Divinity, and Super∣intendent of the Church of Schwattz∣burg: Luther does indeed, in a cer∣tain place, call both Churches, and Altars, and Fonts, and Chalices, &c. the Ensigns of Baal, but not simply so, Sed si singularis aliquis cultus illis affingatur; if any special holiness be attributed to them, or conceived in them. And so much would we say too in the same case: for we plead not for them so, as to make them idols, or as necessary by divine institution, but on∣ly as convenient Utensils for the more orderly, comely and devout worship∣ping of God. And thus we have not onely Luther for us, but all the Luthe
ran Doctors, that ever I have seen. And it is certain, that most, if not all the Lutheran Churches, which have any tolerable settlement, in Germany, Swedeland, Denmark, the Cantons of the Switzers, and under the Polish Do∣minions, or where else, have received and practice the use of instrumental mu∣sick in the Worship of God, as well as we; and those who have it not, being of the same mind herein with their Bre∣thren, reckon the want thereof a∣mongst the number of their mise∣ries. As to Calvin, he seems not to have been constant to himself in this matter; at least, not to have spoken with such perspicuity, or memory of what he said on different occasions, and at sun∣dry times, as that it is easie to recon∣cile him with himself. We have said in his comments on the I. to the Corin∣thians, he prosesses, he doubted not at all but the Christians, from the ve∣ry beginning, imitated the Jewish cu∣stome in singing Psalms: now it is sure enough, the Jewes sung Psalms to in∣struments. But it will be said for him,
he is to be understood there of the things sung, or of singing absolutely, and in the general, not of so strict a manner of singing. Be it so: yet in his comment on the Colossians, chap. III. v. 16, he allows it properly to be the nature of a Psalm, that in the singing thereof (adhibetur musicum aliquod in∣strumentum praeter linguam) some mu∣sical instrument be joined to the voice: from whence it plainly follows, that if Christians ought to sing Psalms, as he allows, and the Text enforces, they are then to use therein musical instru∣ments: And in his comment on Amos,Ad cap. 6. 5. he highly commends David, that where∣as being musical, and a lover of mu∣sick, he might have privately delight∣ed himself therewith, when he was now in peace and ease, and past all his dangers, yet he chose rather (appli∣care musica instrumenta ad pietatis exer∣citium, ut mentem suam ad Deum attol∣leret; and again, Ʋt scilicet resonarent laudes Dei in Temlo, ut inde unà cum aliis sese erigeret ad pietatis studium) to apply musical instruments to the exercise of devotion, that he might
thereby raise his mind towards God, and that they sounding the praises of God in the Temple, he might excite both himself & others to the study of Godliness. Who would desire a great∣er Encomium of the use of musical in∣struments in the divine Worship? Or what can be said more express in ac∣knowledgment of their natural and perpetual usefulness for the furtherance of devotion? One might now expect, Calvin should have set up Organs at Ge∣neva: at least, that he should have reckoned the want of them amongst some other things, which he was not able there to redress, and which he did (ferre, quia non utile est contendere)Epist. 3 3. endure, because it was to no pur∣pose to contend with that people. But we shall elsewhere hear him in ano∣ther tune, reckoning all instrumental musick, and singing thereto, in the Worship of God, to have been (parsCom∣ment. in Ps. 33. 2. legalis Paedagogiae) part of the chil∣dish rudiments of the Law,—foolishly borrowed from the Jewes—introdu∣ced into the Christian Church through inconsiderate zeal, and impious pre∣sumption.
sumption. More of this nature may be picked up out of the same Work. Truly, a man who had read those other forementioned passages, might have expected better language: onely Mr. Calvin had seldome much of that to spare. However, as good as he (though in other points too much his followers) were in this point of another mind: Particulary, it was both more Chri∣stianly and judiciously determined by Peter Martyr, That if there be anyLoc. Com. class. 3. 1▪ 13. p. 29. Church which use not singing, for rea∣sons which to her seem good, she may not therefore be justly condemned: provided she contend not the thing to be in its own nature, and by the command of God, unlawful, nor up∣on that occasion brand, or exclude from the fellowship of Christ, other Churches, who use both singing and Musick. Zanchy yet goes further, up∣on the V. to the Ephes. v. 19. Multiplex & magnus est usus hujus usicae, &c.Vid. & Zanch. in Co∣loss. 3. 16. Manifold and great, saith he, is the use of this Musick. First, that the glory of God may thereby be made more illustrious and august. Second∣ly,
The mind of man is after a mar∣veilous sort affected therewith. Third∣ly, Our heart being by this musick made more cheerful, the grace of God dwelling in us, is stirred up. The same is the judgment of Diodati, and many of the later Calvinists, who, though it was the fate of some of them, to be necessitated to be without Organs in their Churches, have declared their desire of them. And from this consent of their Doctors undoubtedly it is, that Organs are at this day in use in mostVid. Durel. Apol. p. 140. places of the Belgick Churches, and a long time have been; as is evident by the Decrees of their Synods, forbid∣ding the use of them upon Political and common occasions, out of the divine Worship, and commanding they should sound nothing but Psalms, and the pr∣ses of God. And not onely they, but several of the Pastors of the Reformed French Churches, who live in places where they can conveniently have Or∣gans, have also introduced them, asVindic. Eccles. Angl. . 27. the worthy Dr. Durell testifies, touch∣ing the Reverend Rochfort, Pastor of the French Church at Roterdam, and others.
Upon the whole then, as to theSect. 8. Practice of the Primitive Church, this has been abundantly made evident, that from the very infancy of Christia∣nitie, singing to God has ever been in use: that it has been a con∣stant part of the Publick Worship, and the fear of Persecution it self, stopped not the mouths of the Primitive Chri∣stians, but they were hereby first dis∣covered. I might have added for the further asserting this practice, that the time, when it was thus exemplarily in publick and universal use, fell into the later dayes of St. John the beloved dis∣ciple, who, according to Eusebius, saw the beginning of Trajan's Reign. There has been indeed Variety in the practice of the several ages: Some while they sung inspired Hymns, some while Scripture: afterwards Hymns of Hu∣mane composure, but consonant (at least supposed consonant) to Scripture and Faith. These Hymns were some∣times in Verse, sometimes in Prose; but howsoever, when of private compo∣sure, never admitted into publick use, till they had at least past the approbati∣on
of the Bishops of those Churches, where they were used. The manner and circumstances of singing too have been various: The first singing, was in a manner nothing but a modulate pro∣nunciation, so that all sorts publickly and vocally joined as to some parts therein. Nor did the Christian people then content themselves with the pub∣lick practice, but at home and abroad, every where and upon all occasions and opportunities, all conditions and ages were employed therein. By degrees their singing became more refined and artificial; and a particular Order of men were bred up, and appointed hereto. Ex vetere [Judaeorum] more, Eccle∣siaDe Of∣fic. Ec∣cles. l. 2. c. 12. sumpsit exemplum nutriendi Psalmi∣sias, quorum cantibus ad affectum Dei mentes audientium excitentur, saith Isi∣dorus Hispalensis And in process of time, instrumental Musick was added for the exciting devotion, for govern∣ing the Voices of those who sung, and making the praise of God more glorious: in which kind of musick, the Organ has generally now so obtained, through the very Reformed Church, that it
may, in a sort, plead universality of approbation. This is the summe of the Progress of Christian-song, or of Church∣musick, from its Primitive simplicity, to its present glory: Touching which I onely say, the Lord grant, the fervour of our devotion may, in some measure, answer the perfections of the present outward performances in this kind. CHAP. III. Of the English Practice, and the justifiableness thereof. Sect. 1. The fourth head of this Discourse. Different useage in singing observable in the practice of the English Church▪ Sect. 2. What regularly is, or is to be sung in our Church. Sect. 3. Pray∣ers may be sung, though of our Pray∣ers, onely some responsory Petitions are artificially sung. Sect. 4. Of the Antiquity of singing the Book of Psalms in the alternate way. Sect. 5. What Reasons might indue the Church to this Practice. Sect. 6. Whether and how the Psalms are proper
to be sung in the Evangelical state. Sect. 7. Of Anthems, and what sub∣ject and form fittest for them. Sect. 8. Of Voluntaries. Sect. 9. Of putting the Psalms into metre; and the pra∣ctice of other Reformed Churches here∣in. Sect. 10. Singing the English me∣trical Version stands in our Church, neither by law nor allowance, but by bare permission and connivance. Sect. 11. The gross indecencies and miscarriages common herein. Sect. 12. Whether in∣strumental musick in the Worship of God be lawful under the Evangelical state? Sect. 13. Whether it be expe∣dient? Sect. 14. Answers to Objecti∣ons. Sect. 15. A Transition to what re∣mains. HAving now the Practice of the Pri∣mitiveSect. 1. Church, and of succeeding ages, before us, it follows according to what in the beginning was propound∣ed, we proceed more narrowly to view our Own, and to examine whether it be justifiable, according to the Apostoli∣cal rules, and primitive or laudable pre∣cedents. Now it is obvious to any mans
observation, that there is at present practiced in our Church a double use∣age in singing: And I must ingenuously acknowledge, no two things which have the same name, and in any degree the same nature, common to them, can be more unlike one the other, than are our Choral and Parochial singing. And even in our most regular Quires, there are two different sorts of singing admitted, the Gregorian way or com∣mon Chants, and that more curious Figurate kind, in which our Services (as we call them) our Anthems, and some other parts of our Liturgy, are composed. Neither of these two last, according as generally used, can be challenged, as not being sufficiently Harmonious: and if in the later of them, the intemperate skill of some Masters have introduced too much curiosity and delicacy, as to point of composition, the fault is onely by excess of sweetness; of which hereafter. The Parochial way is indeed obnoxious in diverse regards, but of that also in its proper place. In the mean time, we begin with the exa∣mination of the Choral use, that big▪
much the more worthy to take place, and having more authority from the let∣ter of the Law. And first as to the matter, it is to beSect. 2. considered, whether what is according to law, or common custome sung, be in it self fit and meet. First, I do not account speaking or pronouncing in a Cathedral (that is a distinct, grave, plain audible tone) to be singing: for at that rate some might say (though with what reason, let themselves see) that we sing all. Now this being ad∣mitted, whatever is according to rule sung in our Quires, may be reduced to these heads, Psalms, Hymns, Creeds, or Prayers. That Psalms or Hymns in general are fit to be sung, cannot be denied; and for the particular Psalms sung with us, we shall suddenly, at large, consider them: and under Hymns at present, I comprehend Anthems. Of Creeds, we have two that are usually sung; the Athanasian, which is onely chanted or sung in the Gregorian way, on some more considerable Festivals; and that commonly called the Nicene Creed, which is curiously set by seve∣ral
hands, and constantly sung in the Communion-service. Now why any should deem it improper to confess our Faith in singing to God, I do not appre∣hend. What more apt to draw forth the exercise of faith, hope, gratitude & love, than the contempation of the divine nature, of the incarnation of our Lord, of the office and mission of the Holy Ghost, than the commemoration of all the parts of our Redemption, of our present advantages in Church-commu∣nion, and of our future expectations? We do without vanity profess, that in the singing our Creed, we exercise these several Christian graces, and at the saire time, both litt up our hearts to God in this our confession, and declare with joy before men and Angels, to the praise of our God, that we, from our hearts, receive these truths, and expect to be saved in the belief of them, blessing God, who has revealed them to us, and wrought in our souls a peswa∣sion of them. What any can blame  this practice, I do not see. Some are of a mind, that the Carmen Christo tan∣quam Deo, that Hymn which the Pri∣mitive
Christians used to sing to Christ as God in their early Assemblies, was their Creed, and the conjecture is not improbable. But touching the Nicene (though that we use is rather the Con∣stantinopolitan) Creed, it is certain, it has been sung in the Church, in a manner, from the very compiling of it. It was or∣dainedIn vita Marci. (saith Platina) by this Mark (Bi∣shop of Rome, about the year 336. ac∣cording to Bellarmin) that on all solemn days, immediately after the Gospel (Symbolum à Clero & populo magnâ voce decantaretur, eo modo quo fuerat in Niceno concilio declaratum the Creed should be sung with a loud voice by the Clergy & people, in that form wherein it was explained in the Nicene Council. The same is said of him by DurantusDe rit. l. 1. c. 13. Li. de reb. Ec∣cl: Li∣bel: de Ml: c: 1: and others. And both Walafridus Stra∣bo, and Berno Abbot of Augia, pro∣duce the authority of the Council of To∣ledo aledging, that it was also the usage of the Eastern Church so to sing it. To conclude, the singing not only the Nicene, but the Athanasian Creed too, is appro∣ved by several of the first Reformers: the Nicene, by Luther expresly, in the
communion Office which he modelled;Form. Miss. pro Ec∣cles. Wit∣tenb. Class. 3. Ioc. 13. parag. 29. and the Athanasian too, by Peter Mar∣tyr, in his common place thouching sing∣ing. So that they must not onely con∣demn antiquity, and the practice of the Universal Church, but even the judgment of the Reformers, both Lu∣theran and alvinian, who reprehend this practice. It follows, that we speak something touching singing of Prayers; for thatSect. 3. this some have prejudice against in our Church. Now they who will say it is in∣proper to sing Prayers, must, if they will, stand to that assertion, lay aside the sing∣ing of most of the Psalms; for they are not onely, all over, full of Petitions, but some of them in their very Titles cal∣led Prayers. Ps. XVII. A prayer of Da∣vid: So too Ps. LXXXVI. And Ps. XC. A prayer of Moses the man of God. Psal. CII. A prayer of the afflicted, when he is overwhelmed, and poureth out his com∣plaint before the Lord. And Lastly, Ps. CXL. Maschil of David: A prayer when he was in the cave. Yet it is certain, all these were both musically pend (design∣ed therefore by the Holy Ghost to be
sung) and have been all along, as well as at present they are, sung by all sorts of Christians. They therefore who are for such a Reformation, which shall take away all singing of Prayers, must rerm Scripture, as wel as the Catho∣lick practice of the Church in all ages. But let us consider, how small a poti∣on of our Prayers are sung. All our Collects; and such like Prayers, are onely read in a distinct, plan and au∣d ble voice: f there be any variation of a Note in the close of the Prayer, for the retaining or exciting the attenti∣on of te people, that all may berady to give their Amen, this is as much as is; & i no more than needful, for the reasons ntinuated. But let those, who reprehend this, consider how impossi∣ble a most it is, frequently to repeat any form of words, but we shall insen∣sibly, and of our own accord, fall in∣to some tone: And wish our severest censurers, though they use no form of Prayers, were not generally faln into more affected, uncouth and ungrateful toning, than any used in our Quires. Now if the Church, to prevent all
drawling and indecent tones (which are aptest too to fall in, in the closes of Sentences) hath brought in the use of such regular & easie variation of accent, rather than singing, who shall chage her with imprudence? Or rather, who ought not to commend her care? This therefore not well bearing the name of singing, the onely Prayers amongst us, which any can say we sing, are the Ver∣sicles and responsory Petitions, in the dayly Morning and Evenng Office, in the Litany, and in the Connunion∣se vice These are generally modula∣ted in a very plain way, d a more semn seasons sometimes sung after the newer figurate mode. Now if Pray∣ers may be sung, why not these? which are many of them Verses taken out of the Psalms, and the rest of them con∣cise sentences, resen bing the Psalmick Verses. Not to mention the grateful∣ness of this variety in the manner of Prayer (which in so long offices, to vulgar spirits, is not unnecessary) I must profess sincer'y, as to my slf, this modulate way many times quickens, & calls in my attention, and draws out, and as it
were lengthens, devout breathings of soul: I speak it not in vanity, but in the fear of God, and for the good of o∣thers; nor do I doubt, but there are thousands who frequent our Quires, that can say the same. I will conclude all I shall say, touching singing Pray∣ers, with the judgment of Mr. CalvinInstit. lib. 3. c. 20. Sec. 32. herein, Certè, si ad eam, quae Dei & Angelorum conspectum decet, gravitatem, attemperatus sit cantus, cùm dignitatem & gratiam sacris actionibus conciliat, tum ad excitandos, in verum Precandi stu∣dium ardoremque, aninos plurimum va∣let. Truly (saith he) if singing be accommodated to that gravity, which becomes the sight of God and Angels, [and such we may safely say our sing∣ing is] it not onely gains much grace and veneration to holy performances, but is of very great force, to stir up mens minds, to real attention and fer∣vour in prayer. In the judgment then of Mr. Calvin (however his pre∣sent followers swerve from it) singing is so far from being unbecoming of the Office of prayer, that it is an help to its devouter performance.
But to come now more particularly toSect. 4. treat of singing the Book of Psalmes; which that we take intirely as they lye, by considerable portions in every dayes Worship, offends some, and is looked upon as a lip-labour, or a kind of Po∣pish task of Devotion. I do not say, but that some are apt to satisfie them∣selves with the meer recital or chanting of them, that they go through the day∣ly partitions as a task, and rest in the outward performance: we are sorry for it, and dayly endeavour to redress it, nor do we want success herein, blessed be God: But I do say, the number of them is very great, who are not thus sensless, who heed, and understand, and sing them with grace in their hearts; and that the practice it self is highly laudable, and of singular conducency to edification. Taking that therefore for granted, I shall onely shew, for the reconciling all sober spirits hereto, that the use it self is of far greater antiquity in the Church, than that it can be suspe∣cted to be of Popish extraction: & then, that though the Psalms were calculated chiefly for the Jewish state and worship,
yet they are not so improper for Chri∣stian mens mouths, as many may con∣ceive. Some there are, who would fetch this practice as far as from the Apostoli∣cal age, and conceive those injunctions, that Christian people should speak to one another in Psalms, or Hymns, or in St. James his language, that they should sing Psalms, to be meant even of David's Psalms. Nay, there are who go high∣er, even to our Lords own practice; & be∣cause he complained to his Father upon the Cross, in the words of the first verse of the two and twentieth Psalm, con∣clude him then to have used the whole Psalm: And further, observing that after his institution and celebration of his Supper, he, with his disciples, sung an Hymn, judge them to have sung the Great Hallelujah, or the CXIV. and four following Psalms, which they say, the Jewes used to sing at the Pass-over. But these are onely conjectures: and proba∣bles of the lowest rank, are but bad ar∣guments. Such proofs do but little ser∣vice (especially now adayes) which are as soon refuted, as denied. It is most
certain the Hymns in those dayes were fitted to the present occasion by the Ho∣ly Ghost, inspiring their authours: and though much use might be made of the Psalms, as consisting, more than other books of passages, fit for devotion and praise, yet it was onely of scattered parts of them, as they were seasonable; according as is evident by that prayer of the Apostles, Acts IV. 24, & other like. To deal ingenuously then, the first instance, (as far as I know) which we have, savour∣ing of this practice, is the passage above cited, on other occasion, out of Ter∣tullian,Apolo∣ge. c. 39. Ʋt quisque de Scripturis sacris, vel de proprio ingenio potest, &c. By which it is plain, the primitive Christi∣ans used sometimes to sing the express words of Scripture. But this is yet ve∣ry short of our orderly course day by day, and the alternate, or responsory way of singing. To fix this institution upon its true authour or time, is not easie. I find no less than four several pretended institutours hereof. The first is St. Ignatius, the third Bishop of An∣tiochHs. Eccl. li. 6. c. 8. after St. Peter: touching him, Socrates reports, that he saw a vision of
Angels (like that of Isaiah's, Isa. VI. 2, 3.) praising God alternately; Et formam canendi in eâ visione expressam, Ecclesiae Antiochenae tradidit, unde illa traditio ab omnibus Ecclesiis recepta est: And he delivered to the Church of Antioch the form of singing, which he saw in that vision, from whence that way of singing has been received by all Churches. This single testimony is all the authority of ancient date, that I can find, producible for the pretence from Ignatius: and I must acknowledg, it is insufficient to work on my belief. So is also, what the Magdeburgenses citeCon. 3. c. 6. out of a book, which I could never see, intituled Fasciculus Temporum, That Pontianus Bishop of Rome appoint∣ed, the Psalmes should be sung in the Church night and day. This Pontianus came to that See in the year 233, & sate therein five years. But I meet with no such thing of him in  latina, or others: and there might be sung in the Roman Church, as I believe there were, cer∣tain Hymns (which might be called Psalms in a large sense) and yet no singing David's Psalms in course. The
third pretence is, that this institutionSect. 8. came from Flavianus and Diodorus, men of great authority and holiness, but then not so much as Priests, in the City of An∣tioch, under the Empire of Constan∣tius, about the year 340. who when their Orthodox & lawful Bishops were ever & anon expulst, and Stephanus, Le∣ontius, & other Arrians, obtruded as Bi∣shops,Theo∣doret. H. . 2. c. 24. stoutly opposed the invading Here∣sie, gathered & kept together the sound believers, and  dividing the Quires of those who sung into two parts, taught them to sing David's psalms. Which usage (saith the authour) being begun first at Antioch, went forth and prevailed to the ut∣most coasts of the World. The last of the assigned originals or institutions of this practice, is from Damasus Bishop of Rome, about the year 370. Touch∣ing him, Platina records, that he or∣dained (Ʋt Psalmi quoque alternis vici∣bus in Ecelesiâ canerentur, in fineque eo∣rumIn vit. Dan. as. verba haec ponerentur, Gloria Patri, & Filio, & Spiritui sancto) That the Psalms should be sung alternately
in the Church, and at the end of each should be added these words, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost. There is alsoConcil. Tom. 1. amongst the Epistles of this Damasus's to St. Hierom, one, in which he com∣plains to him (Psallentium nec mos tene∣tur, nec Hymni decus in nostro ore cog∣noscitur) That they had then at Rome no singers, nor was the glory of an Hymn known in their mouths. To which there is a pretended answer from St. Hierom, advising him to set up singing the Psalms, & to adjoin to the end of each Glory be to the Father, &c. and Hallelujah. But these Epistles, sayAd an. Chr. 60. n. 3. 43. Baronius, and others, are forged: the Roman Church sung the Psalms before, and all that Damasus set up, was a Ver∣sion of them from the Septuagint, brought out of the East by St. Hierom, to whose Writings he gave authority. In summe, if Damasus were authour of the alternate singing of the Psalms, it could be onely, as to the practice of it in the Western or Roman Church: the Eastern had it before. For though I have rejected the pretences from Igna∣tius
as well as Pontianus, because reported onely by single Writers, and those too of suspicious credit, yet the testimony of Theodoret, as to Flavianus and Dio∣dorus bringing up this practice at Anti∣och in Syria, swayes with me more, being corroborated by several reasons. First, that it is sure, the Psalms were sung alteruately in St. Ambrose's and St. Au∣stin's time, and the practice then said to have been an Eastern custome. The testimony of St. Ambrose is most express, as to the alternate singing: comparing the Church to the sea, he saith, (Tan∣quam undis refluentibus stridet, tum re∣sponsoriisHexac. l. 3. c. 5. Psalmorum, &c.) It sounds with the responsory singing of Psalms, as with the noise of many rowing wa∣ters. Passages out of St. Austin, may be produced in great plenty. Some of these we have had occasion a ready to alledge, mentioning the sweet melo∣dies (Quibus psalterium Davidicum frequentabatur) with which David'sConfes. l. 10. c. 33. Psalter was dayly sung; and his as∣serting it, to have been taken up by St. Ambrose, as a custome of the Eastern parts. Nor did they then onely sing thel. 9. c. 7.
psalms in publick Assemblies alternate∣ly, but even at home on more private occasions. For speaking of his friends behaviour, and his own, while his mother lay dead in the House (psalteri∣uml: 2. arripuit Euodius, & cantare coepit psalmum, cui respondebamus omnis do∣mus, &c.) Euodius, saith he, took the psalter, and begun to sing the psalm, I will sing of mercy and judge∣ment, &c, to whom all we who were in the House answered. And that they sung then (Latine being the common language of that Church) a Latine Version, though possibly somewhat corrupter than even the present Vulgar Latine, is plain from that place, where he complains, the custome of singing, hindred the amendment of the Transla∣tion. Illud etiam, quod jam auferre nonAng: de Doctri: Chri∣stian: l: 2: c: 13. P 132: . possumus de ore cantantium populorum, super ipsum autem floriet (which our pre∣sent Vulgate Bibles read efflorebit) san∣ctificatio mea. Now if we compute the time of these several Fathers flourishing, & together reflect upon the time of St. Ambrose's setting up the singing David's psalms in the Church of Millain, which
was under the persecution raised by Ju∣stina Mother of Valentinian, and parti∣cularly in the Consulship of Antonius andC: Sigo. de Oc∣cid: Im: l: 8. Syagrius, which fell into the year 382. (that is, two years before the death of Damasus, and eighteen before the death of St. Hierom; and in S. Austin's own knowledge, and almost sight) and consider all these Fathers to have been familiars or correspondents, frequent Letters and Transactions passing be∣twixt them, it cannot be imagined, St. Ambrose should set up a practice in his Church of Milan, and pretend to have taken it from the Eastern use, when, if Damasus had about that time, first in∣troduced it into the Christian Church (by the advice of St. Hierom, whose Translation is supposed to be then au∣thorized, & who appeared not publickly, if I mistake not my self, till the year 378.) he must needs have known it was a new thing, just brought up at Rome, and no old custome of the East. By this evidence it is plain, the pretence of this institution in the Christian Church, having been first from Dama∣sus, must needs fall to the ground:
Nay, there is reason to conclude, that if Damasus did set up alternate psalmo∣dy at Rome, he took it from St. Am∣brose, rather than St. Ambrose from him. And, which is the second rea∣son of my giving more credit to Theo∣doret's testimony, not onely St. Am∣brose and St. Austin assure us, that this practice came out of the East, but St. Basil too, a Father of the Greek Church, more Easternly than they, and some∣what elder: who thus writes;  The peopleBasil: Epist: 63: ad Cleric: Neo Caesar: with us rise by night, and before day come to the House of prayer, where, in humiliation and tears ha∣ving made their confession to God, getting up from prayer, they are set to sing the psalms: and now , being distributed into two parts, they sing in answer one to the other.—And if for this you forsake us, you must forsake the Aegytians, both the Africans, the Thebans, Palestines, Arabians, haenicians, Syrians, Mesopotamians, &c. so universal was the use. Pontianus and Damasus then being thus laid aside,
and the practice concluded of Eastern Original, upon the testimony of those three Fathers, the case onely lies be∣tween Ignatius, and his two Countrey∣men Flavianus and Diodorus; now the credit of Theodoret far preponderating that of Socrates in my esteem, and So∣crates his story besides sounding a little fabulously, I should positively have con∣cluded, that , that ad∣mirable pair of Holy men, as Theodoret calls them, to have been the first authours of singing the Psalter, in order & intirely, within the Christian Church, were there not one Canon of the Council of Laodi∣cea, undoubtedly elder than them, which evidently enforces us to admit psalmody (as thereby we understand singing the whole body of David's psalms) to have been of elder use in the Church at large. It is the se∣venteenth Canon of that Council; and if we might take it, as it standsMagde. Cont. 4. Car∣ranz. in some Latin Versions, it would seem a plain injunction of an orderly course of using the whole Book of psalms. It pre∣scribes (In processionibus non connectere, id est ex diver sis versibus & sensibus libri unum
canticum minimè conjungere, sed singulo∣rum psalmorum ordinabiliter debere fieri Lectionem.) That they should not in ordinary Assemblies, be any picking and putting together one Hymn out of several passages and verses of the book, but that each of the psalmes should be taken orderly and intirely as they ly. But the import of the Greek Text is clearly another thing, though still considerable as to the point in hand.  That there should not in a continued course, be sung in the As∣semblies a multitude of psalms together, (or all the psalms of the day, which were very many, when the whole book, be∣ing divided into seven Nocturns, was sung over once a Week, or when even in the Eastern Church, it was sung over once in twenty dayes) but there should be interposed a Lesson betwixt each psalm. This was, saith Zona∣ras, the Old use; the Old Tradition,In Can. 17. cor. c l. La∣o. saith Balsamon, that the psalms should be sung , as it were in one continued web, which, saith he, so
wearied the people, as that they ran out of the Church at them; and that, even after the Holy psalter was divi∣ded () into several Sessions or partitions: Wherefore this Canon ordains, that the Lessons be read betwixt the psalms, that the people having a little rest, may be fresher again for singing. And the Fathers deserve thanks for the insti∣tution. Behold then now a settled custome (though not particularly the same we use) of singing the psalter in course, before Flavianns and Diodorus; and that before the year 320, if we may believe Baronius computing the time of this Council: And it would seem of some standing, even then. Upon the whole, this use is so old, that as was said of the Head of Nilus, its rise in the Chri∣stian Church is not to be found: but I do verily believe, Flavianus and Diodorus brought up at Antioch first the Responso∣ry way of singing; there being, that I can find, no elder footsteps thereof, or pretences thereto, in the Christian Church, saving that of Ignatius, which I have laid aside for the reasons insinua∣ted.
Let this then be supposed to have been the rise and progress of this use. The psalter having been used, for time so old as does not appear, to be sungHexa∣em. ubi supra. by all sorts of Christian people toge∣ther (cantu virorum, mulierum, vir∣ginum, parvulorum, in St. Ambroses language) those Holy men Flavianus & Diodorus, first brought up the orderly singing it alternately at Antioch, Morning and Evening; which took presently all over Syria, and the East, and from thence flew to the (, in Theodoret▪s words) utmost bounds of the habitable world. For St. Basil set it up in Caesarea of Cappadocia, St. Ambrose at Milan, Damasus at Rome, and others otherwhere. Into England it came not, till about the year 680, being then brought hither at the command of Aga∣th Bishop of Rome, by John Arch∣nter of St. Peter's in Rome, and Ab∣bot of St. Martin's: But there are anci∣t pretences, that it was in France ch sooner, which that learned An∣uary Sir H: Spelman has collected and published, in his first Tome of the 5 Brittish Councils: and any one may
read them there if he please, and un∣derstand and digest them if he can. Since those ancient dayes, to insist on the approbations, ratifications, and regulations of it, which have ensued under several Bishops, and in later Coun∣cils, would not be to much effect. Sure it is, it has ever since stood in the whole Church without interruption, till of ve∣ry late days; and is no where better re∣gulated, than at present in our Church.Sect. 5. This being presumed a sufficient ac∣count of the Antiquity of singing the psalter, let us now search into the rea∣sons, which might induce those Holy men, whoever they were, that  in∣stituted it in the Christian Church, to set it up, and the Church to receive it: Now herein we can rather conjecture than determine. It is probabe, some such motives as these might be in their eye. First, the Eternal reason, that a publick sacrifice of praise should be paid unto God morning and evening. By these two periods and vicissitudes of times, it has pleased God to distinguish and measure out all time. The evening and the morning were the first day: and
so the paying to God a solemn Wor∣ship, or office of praise, at the returns of these is a worshipping him continal∣ly; and that according to his own war∣rantyExod. XXIX▪ 38, &c. and institution. Two lambs of the first year, shalt thou offer day by day con∣tinually. The one shalt thou offer in the morning, the other at even: This shall be a continual burnt offering, throughout your generations: continual, because continued in its seasons. Thus the Christian Church on earth, desired to imitate that in heaven, by praising God in such a proportion of continuity, as she could, and as he appointed. Besides this, there was undoubted∣ly regard had to the particular obliga∣toriness of Christianity. The Christian Law may justly be esteemed to require, that its professours outdo the ancient Jewes in devotion, as well as sanctity. Except your righteousness exceed the righ∣teousnessM. V. 20. of the Scribes and Pharisees (the most accomplisht and severest sort amongst the Jewes) ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven. It was not fit therefore, that the Christian Church should be outdone by the Jew∣ish.
These reasons possibly may suffice, for the quantity of the Worship, and its frequent returns: but why should they have pitched on these psalmes to be sung rather, than any new Christi∣an Hymns? And why too on this alter∣nate course? As to the former, there may be two reasons assigned. First, it being sup∣posed, that singing the Psalter was not set up in the Christian Church, till af∣ter the cessation of the miraculous gifts, there was nothing extant, fit to be sung, so little obnoxious to exce∣ption, as the Book of Psalms. Humane composures might be suspected, and, the Church being rent by Heresies, and one party jealous of another, even in their very Worship▪ undoubtedly were: but the psalms being confest by all, who own'd the name of Christian, to have been indited by the Holy Ghost, it might be thought, contention it self would be at a loss, to find a quarrel or plea against them. Secondly, I will not deny, but those dayes might un∣derstand the Apostolical commands of singing Psalms, and speaking to one ano∣ther
in Psalms, literally of the book of Psalms. And though they were here∣in none of the exactest Logicians, yet may it not be gain-sayed, but they were serious honest Christians: nor is the variation great; St. Paul injoyns Psalms, they in prudence choose these. And, as to the alternate singing them, that locution speaking to one ano∣ther, or betwixt one another, in psalms and Hymns appears favourable enough for it to any, who takes the first sense of words, that fairly offers it self: espe∣cially when this singing by way of al∣ternation, one part answering another, seems to have been the ancient way of singing in the Former Church. Exod. XV. 1. Moses & the children of Israel sang this song unto the Lord, I will sing unto the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously, the horse and his rider hath he thrown in∣to the sea. And ver. 21. Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel in her hand, and all the women after her: and Miriam answered them, sing ye to the Lord, for he hath triumph∣ed gloriously, &c. This is yet clearer by that practice of the Essens (a Sect of
the Jewes, which more approached to Christianity, than any other) record∣ed by Philo▪ Judaeus, and by him said toDe vit con∣templ. have been taken up with respect to this singing of Moses and Miriam. When they all rise, uo sint chori in me∣dio coenaculo, alter virorum, alter foe∣minarum, They divide into two Quires, in the middle of the room, one of men, the other of women. Each side has its praecentor, or leader of the Song, eminent both for digni∣ty, and for skill in singing. Then they sing Hymns in the praise of God, composed in several sorts of Metre and Verse: some times jointly with one voice, sometime alternately.—And when with such sweet exchan∣ges they have holily satisfied them∣selves, they join all again into one Quire, in imitation of the like institu∣tion, when the Sea, at Gods com∣mand, came together again for the destruction of the Aegyptians and pre∣servation of the Israelites, Moses lead∣ing the song to the men, & Miriam to the women. In these old precedents, the Church thought sit to alter some
circumstances for more gravity and de∣cency; yet so, as that she hath had re∣gard to ancient practice, singing some things alternately (especially Davids Psalms) and others by the whole Quire, all joining. But touching the nature of the sub∣jectSect. 6. matter thus sung, there is one great difficulty still recurs. It will be said, the same Hymn is not proper for a Christians mouth, because pertinent un∣to a Jew; nay, it is therefore impro∣per: Nor can either the practice of ho∣ly men, or the commands of Bishops, or the sanctions of Councils, no, nor even well▪ meaning zeal and holy emu∣lation, justifie an impertinent form of Worship. It might be answered hereto, and that soberly enough, that this practice having entred the Catholick Church by such methods, as above said, and having now the prescription of thirteen or four∣teen hundred years, and the publick prudence and piety of our own Church, having thought good to continue and re-establish it by particular laws in our reformation, so that it is not in the
power of particular objectors, to alter this the frame of the settled Worship, no modest and advised person ought, where the Question lyes onely touching the meetness and expediency of a thing, to oppose their private thoughts to the publick judgment and law; but rather submitting their own reasonings, to accommodate their de∣votion, as far as may be, to the pub∣lick form, seeing they cannot model the publick form, to the good plea∣sure of their own devotion. But I shall not at present desire any to exercise so much modesty or self-denal, as to submit their reason to the law of the Church, meerly for the authority of the same. I onely request them a while to suspend their reasonings and objecti∣ons, and to wave the prejudices they have conceived thence, so long as to consider, whether the Book of Psalms, if sung with understanding (as all Chri∣stian Hymns must be, otherwise they are impertinent, and unbecoming a Christian soul) may not be pertinent enough to the Evangelical state, and of excellent use in the publick dayly Ser∣vice.
Now for the removal of this impu∣tation, or suggestion of the incongruity of the Psams to the constitution of the Gospel, I desire the particulars following may be considered. First, that the Jewish and Christian Church are both in common, built on the same foundations; such as are the serious Belief and Worship of one, and him the onely living and true God, and of the same Meias or Saviour of the World: onely the Jewes of old were to believe in Christ as Future, because then he was indeed to come, we Christians believe in him as come already, and as having suffered, and being now exalted to the right hand of the Majesty on high, because really he is so. Moreover, as to the Rule both of Faith and Manners, we both receive the same divine Ora∣cles of the Old Testament; onely we Christians add thereto the New, but for the proof thereof, we neither have, nor pretend to have greater outward evidence than the Old: We have also for the main, the same Moral Law; onely Christ hath put a more advanced and refined sense on some things there▪
therein. Hitherto then both the old faithful Jew, and present Christian agree; and therefore a service suited to the Foundations of either Religion (as were the Psalms certainly to those of the Jewish) must suit the foundati∣ons of both. Secondly, it is considerable, that even in those points, wherein the Jew∣ish and the Christian Church essentially dffer, as were for the main, the out∣ward modes and institutions of their Worship, some temporal promises made to them, as objects of their particular Faith, and whatever else there is of the same nature, even in these points, I say, the Jewish Church was the type and image of the Christian. Their Tem∣ple, Altars, Sacrifices and Priests, all, though in different regards, figures of our Lord Jesus our eternal Priest and propitiation, as is discoursed at large in the greatest part of the ten first cha∣pters of the Epistle to the Hebrews; the very land of Canaan, the rest which was promised to them, and of which they were once generally possest, a si∣gure of the Evangelical and Heavenly
estate; Nay, their very Political laws, many of them, figurately or reductive∣ly Christian. Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treadeth out the corn, was said unto the Jew: that is to1 Cor. IX. 9, 10. the Christian, He that preacheth the Go∣spel should live of the Gospel. In fine, it may be said generally of all Gods deal∣ings with them, of the whole series and course of his providences to the whole Jewish state, under all its revo∣lutions and periods, from its very cra∣dle in Isaac, to its funeral in the last and fatal flames of Jerusalem, what the Apostle saith of some particulars, They1 Cor. X. 11. happened to them for examples, and were written for our admonition. Now the consequence of this consideration is plainly thus much, that forasmuch as in all typical and figurative speeches (with which, as is evident, the Psalms abound) there is a double sense, the literal and the interpretate, therefore (1.) if there at any time occur any pas∣sages in the Psalms, relating to the ceremonial Worship of the Jewes, the shadow being removed, and the sub∣stance taken, the literal sense looked
through, and used as a perspective glass, and the signification, as the main object attended, this will be found truly Christian, and fit to employ Christian devotion. And the like may be said (2.) Of the Historical parts of the Book of Psalms: perhaps mutato no∣mine, de te, apply the passages to thy self, and haply it concerns thee most intimately. Or if it be of more pub∣lick and political nature, the Jewish state and people were the Type, the Christian the Antitype. Besides, we know God is not onely to be celebrated in the Assemblies of his people, for his late, present and private dealings to∣wards us, or our own Countrey, but for his mighty works of ancient dayes, and all his marveilous loving kindness to the children of men. He is to be glo∣rified in his Saints, and admired in all them that believe, and in all those that2 hs. . 10 have believed too. And in proporti∣on hereto, was designed Psal. CVII, especially that Ecstatick horus of it, O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men; to men of all ages
and Nations, as well as of all conditi∣ons or degrees. And Ver. the last, Who∣so is wise, and will observe these things, even they shall understand the loving kind∣ness of the Lord, which certainly is no unedifying, or contemptible kind of knowledge. Hereto may be added (3.) That forasmuch as the Prophesies extant in the Book of Psalms, and de∣livered to the Jewes, have had their completion under and in the Gospel state, therefore if with the prophesie, we together consider the event (as cer∣tainly we ought) if we look on what was foretold, as now fulfilled, we have not onely reason, and most urgent in∣ducements, to admire the faithfulness, veracity and power of God, but convin∣cing instances of his providence, of his infinite prescience and omniscience, who knoweth and speaketh of all things to come, as if he saw and described them present; for indeed all things are present to him: And further, we have fresh testimonies of God's greater mer∣cy and dignations unto us, than unto those his ancient people. They lived onely to hear those things promised; to
us they have been all performed. Now certainly that which is apt, if sung with understanding and due attention, to wrap the devout soul into admirati∣on of God's omniscience, truth, pow∣er, justice, mercy and loving kindness, not onely in general towards mankind, but particularly to the Christian Church, yea, to a mans own self, is not any un∣sit matter to be sung in Christian As∣semblies: but of this nature generally are the Psalms. It is plain then, that neither the Ceremonial, nor Historical, nor Prophetick parts of the book of Psalms, render them improper for the present publick use of Christian people in the praise of God. Nay, we see they are very proper to engage our hearts unto greater fervours of love and grati∣tude towards God, who sed the Old Church with promises, prophesies and types, but us with real performances and substance. There remains then now no imperti∣nence, or unsuitableness, imputable to the Psalms thus taken, because they were fitted principally to the Jewish constitution: And whatever exception,
touching their unmeetness, can be made against our present use of them, must be grounded on some other re∣spect: perhaps on their being too peculiar∣ly accommodated to the particular con∣ditions of the holy men their authours; sometimes importing such profound mi∣series, into which the commonalty of Christians do not fall, or at least with which, few or none of the congregati∣on are, while they sing, either affe∣cted or threatned; sometimes again praising God for such mercies, which neither are of a publick nature, nor it may be have been received by one in ten thousand: again, at another time, expressing such vows and transports of devotion, which are not incident to common souls, and perhaps conside∣ring them in all circumstances, to few or none now adayes; And Lastly, on the other side, it may be, proceeding directly against the Christian law, by most bitter imprecations and curses a∣gainst Enemies, whereas we are all bound by our Christianity to love, bless and pray for our most merciless persecutors.
As to all which I say in general, that though all the particular passages in the Psalms, against which these exceptions are levelled, may not in the stict and literal expressions, in which they ly, be exactly apposite to the particular condition of many private men, nor haply to the common state of the Church, at the critical time of the pre∣sent use of them, yet a moderate mea∣sure of Christian discretion will remove these inconveniencies, and by a men∣tal application, and small variation of the sense (which in all publick Pray∣ers and Hymns, must be allowed to particular mens devotion, otherwise it is scarce possible any form, new or old, should in common suit all mens estates) bring them down either to their own, or others conditions, with good suc∣cess, and according to the Christian Rule in such cases. And for evidence hereof, I desire the following points may be considered: and that the rather, because I judge they may not onely re∣move the imputation we insist on, but also serve as directions, in the dayly use of the Psalms, for our singing with
understanding and true devotion. First then I say, it is a very gross mistake to think, that the faithful, in the publick Assemblies, are to mind onely their own concerns in the prayers and praises, which they offer up unto God. The Communion of Saints is part of an Article in our Creed: and where∣in can the scattered members of the Church, all the world over, hold communion more strictly and fervently with one another, than in their pray∣ers and praises each for others, and all in general? The Apostle injoines not onely that prayers, and supplications,1 Tim. II: 1. and intercessions, but also, that Giving of thanks be made for all men: and our Lord taught us to pray Our Father, for the Christian community together with our selves. There is not one Me, but all along Ʋs in the Lords Prayer. Now that, which suits not with my conditi∣on, may suit with the condition of some I know, or of thousands of faith∣ful ones in the world, which I know not, and perhaps never shall know, till I see them in the Kingdom of my Fa∣ther; and so, if offered up in the behalf
of such unknown Saints, whose condi∣tions those Psalms fit, will neither be impertinent, or unbecoming a Chri∣stian, nor without a reward. Secondly, there is nothing more un∣certain, than the condition of men on earth: That which is not my conditi∣on today, may be nearer me than I am aware, both as to Spirituals and Tem∣porals. St. Peter was zealously resol∣ved over-night, rather to dy with his Master, than deny him; and yet be∣fore the day broke, he had denied him thrice, and curst, and swore upon it. Holy Job was one day a great Prince, swimming in plenty, blessed with chil∣dren, a man of great reputation and interest; but within a few dayes, a mi∣serable despicable Lazar upon a dung∣hill, neglected, forsaken, or depri∣ved of all, and as it would have seem∣ed, of God too. Again on the other side, that which is not my condition now, possibly has been. Now in re∣gard of this variableness, and the vi∣cissitudes of humane things, it is a mi∣stake to think, that we are to offer no prayers or praises even in our own be∣half,
but such as strictly concern our present estate. Our Lord taught us to pray, not onely not to be led into tem∣ptation, but to be delivered from evil; to wit, from the evil of the temptati∣on, from being overcome by it, when led into it. It is certainly prudence, and a kind of Christian good Husban∣dry, to put up prayers before-hand, which may operate in the changes of our condition: and accordingly our Church most wholesomly provides we should, not onely in the Psalmes but Litanies, In the hour of death, and in the day of judgment, Good Lord deliver us. Then as to matter of praise: Does any man think he is to bless God onely, for the mercies he is in that instant ta∣sting, or did but just now receive? Far be such ill memories from Christi∣an gratitude! Our Royal prophet's Harp forgot not the woods and the cave, when it was tuned in a Palace and chair of State. The Petitions therefore and Thanksgivings, which suit not in strictness with my present state, may be pertinent and proper enough for my use, if applied unto
what possibly may be, or I remember has been my condition: And surely, there is no man of a more unhappy memory in the world, than he who forgets what he has been. Thirdly, it is to be considered, that as there cannot well befall us any such complicate distress in this life, but still we may perceive some blessings left, and therefore some cause to praise God, at least that it is not worse with us yet, so neither can we well imagine, such a complete union of all felicities on this side Heaven, which supposes not some Christian want; and so there will be still occasion for prayer, if to no other purpose, yet to this, that we may have grace not to abuse such heights of happiness: So that upon the whole, Prayer and Praise (of which two, the far greatest part of the Psalms is made up) let them concern what they well can, will never be unseason∣ble and improper in our own, or in the Churches behalf; one or both, in one time or other, they must needs meet with. Fourthly, We are to remember,
that many of the Psalms were designed onely, or chiefly, as prophetical songs, touching our Lord Christ, and so con∣cern him immediately, either in his Humbled or Exalted estate. Such are Psalms II, XVI, XXII, XLV, CX, and ve∣ry many more: now these, though they are neither all along pertinent to our own, nor the Churches present or future estate, are notwithstanding ve∣ry far from being improper Hymns in Christian Assemblies. If our dear Lords sufferings, if his reproaches, scorns and smart, if his wounds and bloud, if his agonies, death and burial, may be for∣gotten in our dayly singing to him, then let us sing, let us live no longer. But if each particular of them, deserve at our hands ten thousand grateful recolle∣ctions, praises and commemorations, and as many rivers of grateful tears, then let us not fear to sing to him, what he stuck not to undergo for us, the very afflictions and oppressions of his soul, when it was made an offering for sin. And if we are not to forget his Sorrows, why should we not also, though unworthy, sing his Glories?
Our praises certainly ought to follow him, from his Cross to his Throne. The Royal Psalmist leads the Ditty, andPsal. XXII. sings him sometimes even fainting un∣der the malice of his Enemies, and in the very dust of death; and anon sat atPs. CX. God's right hand, till his enemies are made his foot-stool. Now these holy strains, though exceeding what is inci∣dent to mortals state, are not yet im∣pertinent in the Christian Worship; ay, they perfectly symbolize with the pri∣mitive practice, they are (Carmen Chri∣sto) immediate Hymns to Christ. By these four considerations it is evi∣dent, that none of those Psalmes, or passages of psalms, which relate either to excessive and frequent miseries or mercies, if duly applied, can be im∣proper for Christian use in the Worship of God. To proceed then to another sort of Excesses. Fifthly, as to those complaints, vows, petitions, professions of love and zeal, and all other devotional parts, which import greater affection, fervour and transports, than what is commonly incident to most men in this
the waining age of Christianity, that these are somewhat improper for us, is our own fault, and so great an one, as certainly needs redress. However, they may be pertinent to others: and tis not fit they should be struck out of the Publick Service, to lower it to some, or many mens dulness. Publick standing devotions, must be suited to all degrees of Christians, that mens graces, of whatsoever height, may have opportunities for their noblest eleva∣tions. An humble soul can rejoice, that David and others have been thus affected, or have thus vowed, loved and professed, and will reproach it self for its own slackness and groveling state: withall, most easily turning such passages into prayers, that the like ho∣ly flames may be enkindled in its self, that it may not ever live a stranger to such raptures of good affection and de∣votion, and studying that against the next return of these Psalms in course, its heart may be in tune for them, at least, able to take them in some tole∣rable pitch. It cannot therefore justly be pleaded, that these parts of the
Book of Psalms, are improper for the present constitution of Christianity. Lastly, as to what remains, that ma∣ny passages, and sometimes whole Psalms, are unsuitable to the Christian spirit, and not framed according to the Evangelical law, because contain∣ing imprecations, and very dismal cur∣ses against Enemies, there is a double answer given by that great Exemplar of Learning and Godliness, Dr. Hammond.Praef. to Annot. on the Psalms. (1.) If those Psalms, or parcels of them, were rendred strictly according to the Hebrew Text, they would not appear so much imprecatious, as de∣nunciations of misery and destruction to such incorrigible enemies of God, his Church and people, whom nothing will stop in their malice but their own fall. And in favour of this interpreta∣tion, it is to be considered, that Da∣vid was a prophet, and therefore a ca∣pacitated and proper person to foretell or denounce such mens ruin, both for their own reformation, and for the support of the languishing Church. Further, it is most certain, that some of the Psalms, which are most
obnoxious to this charge, were really prophesies, and are so applied by the Holy Ghost in the New Testament: Two or three of them particularly to Judas, as predictions of his character, fall and punishment. St. Peter, Acts I, 16, 17. alluding to that passage in Psalm XLI, 9. My familiar, who did eat of my bread, hath lift up his heel against me, applies it to Judas. So as to Psal. LXIX, 25, &c. where we read, Let their habitation be desolate, and let none dwell in their tents; And proceeding in the same strain, ver. 28. Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be written with the righteous: All this by Acts I, 20. is plainly to be interpreted of Judas, and men of his stamp. In like manner also Ps. CIX, 8. Let his dayes be few, and let another take his Office, in the same place is referred to the same person. And if we read all these by the Futuretense, as they stand in the Original, thus, Their habitati∣on shall be desolate, and none shall dwell in their tents. They shall be blotted out of the book of the living, &c. And His dayes shall be few, & his office shall another take,
(and not imperatively, as Translatours commonly render them) the case is clear. If then thus we take them, these passages are no wise imprecatory, but prophetical. (2.) We are to remember, what has been before said, that the Church and people of the Jewes were the image of the Chri∣stian: These things are a Figure. As the Jewes had enemies, with whom they were to make no league, nor so much as truce, but utterly to destroy them, so have we; to wit, our spiritual ones. Turn then all these Psalms against the enemies of thy soul, thine own lusts, the World and the Devil: Pray that thine heart, which they have too long usurped as their habitation, may be for ever here∣after desolate of them, and that none of the same kind may ever enter that Tent. Thus taken, there can be no doubt of the propriety of these Psalms. For further evidence, that even these kind of Psalms may be sung to edifica∣tion, and Christian advantage, I shall produce the judgment, which a worthy and pious Divine (though no great friend to the Church of England) gives in the case, which haply with some men,
will goe farther, than many argu∣ments of mine. Dr. Ames then ex∣presly puts the case, How can we right∣lyDe con. scien. lib. 4. c. 19. p. 4. sing those Psalms, which contain cur∣ses and imprecations? To which he an∣swers three wayes, each worthy of due consideration, and as yet untouch∣ed by me. (1,) We may by occasi∣on of those curses, with fear and trembling meditate of the dreadful judgmens of God, against the sins of impenitent men. (2.) We may thence be built up in patience and comfort, against such temptations as are wont to arise from consideration of the prosperity of ungodly men, and the afflicted estate of Saints. (3.) We may also together pray God, that he would hasten his just judge∣ments (not against our own private enemies) but against the ungodly and incurable enemies of his Church. Let these three Answers be put to the other two, and Christian practice be regulated accordingly, and we can ne∣ver sing any imprecatory Psalms, but with happy advantage, and consistency with our Saviours precept, or the Evan∣gelical spirit.
But will some say, how are divine threats, or even promises themselves, with which the Book of Psalms is full, matter of divine praise, or fit to em∣ploy a Christian Assembly engaged in singing to God? I answer (has God given precedents of this nature, indited by his own Ho∣ly Spirit) and by his providence orde∣red his people should be inured to the practice of them, nay, and approved this practice, by declaring his accep∣tance of it in Holy Writ, and shall man interpose, question, or controle what is so plainly authorised by the divine plea∣sure? The Song of Moses has frequent both promises and threats in it: & as to the main body of it, is rather partly re∣prehensory, partly didactical, than any wise Eucharistical. The same must be ac∣knowledged too, touching a considera∣ble part of the Book of Psalms. The very titles  & such like, import, that this was not casual, or befel through any mistake or indiscretion of their Au∣thours; they were formally & fundamen∣tally designed to such purpose. And all this comports well with the Apostolical
precept, Teaching and exhorting one ano∣ther in Psalms, &c. In a word, we must not be self will'd, conceited, singular and humoursome in our devotions: To frame our minds and affections to those divine forms, which God hath set us, is certainly an holy conformity. Is not God terrible in praises? Is he not glo¦rified, when men fear before him, when repeating and believing the de∣nunciations of his wrath against sin, they tremble at his judgments, and be¦ing afraid at his displeasure, flee the cause of it (that is sin) as a deadly ser¦pent? Now what more proper to beget this temper (to imprint such a fear of God upon the heart, that it may not depart from him) than the use and con∣sideration of divine threats? Again, can we give unto God greater glory, than that of Faith and Hope? Abraham, saith the Apostle, being strong in faith, gave glory to God, not staggering at hisRom. IV. 20. promise. And what more proper to draw forth such Faith, than that the divine promises should dwell in our joyful lips, and be sung before God in his dayly praises. Besides, while we
sing them thus with Faith, we plead them to God, and (as in the Titles of some Psalms,  as if designed, To bring to remembrance even God's Word to himself) we become in a sort God's remembrancers, both in our own, and his Churches behalf. Can we well imagine a more profitable, a more com∣fortable service? I have thus reckoned up all the im∣proprieties or impertinences, I could find, or devise, against the present use of singing David's Psalms in our Christi∣an Assemblies. I have answered the imputations in their full force, and I trust I have shewn how such passages, or such Psalms, which are censured, or obnoxious to be censured, as most improper, may be of very heavenly use, if sung with understanding, at∣tention, faith, and due application. I hope then I may now leave the pre∣sent use of these Psalms, in the posss∣sion of its authority, the sum of which is this: They were indited by the Ho∣ly Ghost for the use of the Jewish Church, which in its foundations was the same with the Christian, and in its
very peculiarities a figure of it: The law of Nature requires, that the sing¦ing praise unto God, should be one part of his publick solemn Worship; and the Christian law requires, that those, who undertake its profession, should exceed rather, than fall below the Jewish standard of devotion: Speak¦ing to one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, indefinitely is pre∣scribed by the Apostle: Speaking or singing alternately, as it was an old use∣age, so seems there insinuated; and besides, it has been found serviceable mutually to quicken and excite the re∣ciprocate affection of the parties sing¦ing. Upon these inducements, Holy men, neer the eldest ages of Christia¦nity, thought good to introduce the singing these Psalms (as being undoubted∣ly of divine inspiration) and particularly this way of singing them: Ancient Bi∣shops & Governors of the Church appro∣ved, set up and injoined the practice within their own Churches: Synods and Councils more generally establisht it by their Canons: It has now the prescription of thirteen or fourteen hun∣dred
years in the Catholick Church: It is reinforced by the Laws of our own Church, and there is abundant reason for the continuance of it, from its par∣ticular conduciveness (as we have seen) to all kinds, parts and degrees of De∣votion. Now those, whom this ac∣count satisfies not, I fear will scarce be able to give so good an one, for any form of Worship, not set down in ex∣press terms in the New Testament, and together there, by the same letter, com∣manded. After this large and particular discus∣sionSect. 7. of the reasonableness of singing David's Psalms, I shall not judge it ne∣cessary to speak any thing touching our singing other Scripture-Hymns; the same plea much more suffiing for these, which is now presumed to have carried the cause for them, and they being of much more easie accommodation to our Christian concerns. That then which next offers it self to consideration in our Cathedral practice, is our Anthems. And here truly I must acknowledge, I apprehend it easier to give a satisfacto∣ry account of the Thing, thn of the
Name. Greek it must certainly be, as to its first Origin: But by what Analo∣gy of Language,  (a word no where, that I know, used, yet natu∣rally enough importing as much as, ) should be made , or how  from , or even  should come to signifie a Christian Hymn, with any tolerable violence, I am equally to seek. Nor will the  in Athenaeus (, thoughLib: 14. cap: 7. it be ) in my judgment at all found an Etymology in the case: So that I confess fairly, I find no such Greek word of this, or a cognate sig∣nification, in any Authour, sacred or profane. Which makes me rather con∣ceive, those modern Languages, whence immediately we have taken the name, have occasioned our corrupting it, from Antiphon (which the French have made Antienne) or from An∣thymn, which is neerer in sound to the Itaian Anthema, and our Anthem: now admitting either of these, but especially the later, we have a name, in my opinion, suitable to the nature of the thing, and which leads us to
the genuine notion of it. For I take an Anthem, to be nothing else, but an Hymn sung in parts. It differs fromIsidor: Orig. l. 5. c. 19: Rab: Maur: Inst: Cleric: l: 2: c: 51. what we call Responsories (said to be found out by the Italians very ancient∣ly) in that therein, according to the old use, Ʋnus Versum dicit, one sing∣ing the Versicle (with us, in Plainest song) the Quire answers their part, either in the same way, or in more ar∣tificial Symphony; and that these are short, constant or continuing still the same: whereas the Anthem is much larger, of various and more solemn form, and has usually greater curiosity and diversity of parts. The parts in∣deed are fewer or more, according to the pleasure of the Composer: and sometimes single Voices, sometimes lesser Chorus's, sing interchangeably and are answered by the Choru omni∣um, or full Quire. Even the subject matter, and the Form too is very dif∣ferent amongst us, not onely in diverse Churches, but even in the same Church; it seeming good to the pru∣dence of those, who have power in this case, to frame, or direct the framing
new Anthems, either suitable to some new emergent occasions, or for ma∣king the Service of God more grateful and inviting to humane weakness, which is apt ever & anon to be affecting something new. Now though the curi∣osity of the Musick in this case be (as we have said) a practice not of very many Ages, yet whatever else, as far as I see at present, there is herein, is of very ancient useage. We have seen St. Ambrose's practice and institution above: He certainly both composed new Hymns of his own, and set up the singing of them in parts, as far as the state (and possibly the skill) of his people would admit: And whence he took his pattern, has also been spo∣ken. The Antiphons of the old Church, said to be first sound out by the Grecians (though haply the great∣est reason, which the Ritualists have to say so, is because the name is Greek, whereas the thing was an Hebrew use) were certainly but old fashioned An∣thems. And those Ninety six Hymns, before-mentioned, in Breviaries, &c. are nothing but Anthems, especially
when sung in the Anthem-way. I know indeed, the present Antiphons in the Romish Church, are clear anotherDuran: de rit; l. 3. c. 17 Gavan. in rubt. Brev. Sect. 5. c. 7. thing. Ʋsu receptum est, ut sententia quae Psalmum aut Canticum praecedit, Antiphona dicatur. And as to their way of singing them. Inchoantur ab uno unius Chori, & ad ejus Symphoniam cantatur Psalmus per duos Choros, ipsâ∣qe Antiphonâ conjunguntur simul duo Chori. But that Church must be ac∣knowledged to have a singular art of introducing new practices at pleasure, and gloriously guilding them with old and venerable Names. Waving there∣fore this innovated kind of Antiphous, I say, it has certainly been, from the very Primitive times, customary, and may now justly be accounted prescri∣ptory, for the Fathers of the Church, Godly Bishops, to frame, or order the framing, Holy Hymns for publick use in the Service of God, as in their pious discretion and grave counsel, they shall judge fit: and these Hymns, if sung in parts, reciprocis & alternanti∣bus modulis, as now of long time the use has been in the Christian Church,
are most naturally what is meant by the old appellation Antiphons; they are tru∣ly Anthymns (which though it be a newer name, more fitly expresses the thing spoken of) And this I take to be both the Original, and true nature, of our Anthems. Having therefore so great Patronage for this practice, as to the general, in Antiquity, let us now consider what there is peculiar in our Churches use. As to the Musick of our Anthems, I have said enough already: as to their matter and form, these are the points, as yet very much untouched. And here I could wish, I could have found a Law for my guide, or could have ta∣ken some light from any publick con∣stitution, ever of force in this behalf: But whatsoever we have of a SanctionRu∣brick after the third Col∣lect, Morn. and Even. relating to this matter, supposes An∣thems as in use, and onely directs in what part of the Daily Office they shall succeed [In Quires, and in places where they sing, here followeth the Anthem] neither prescribing, nor so much as directing, of what materi∣als and frame they shall consist. We
must therefore have recourse to com∣mon practice, and that at present, ge∣nerally, is this: The Masters of our Church-musick choose some short Psalm of Psalms, sometimes also portions out of any other Canonical Book of Scri∣pture (according as best suits their Mu∣sical fancy) which they set to as curi∣ous Melodies, as they can; and this, thus composed, when they have try∣ed, and got practiced and performed by the Quire in private, they cause to be sung in the publick Service, in the place by Law prescribed for the An∣them, and then 'tis a new Anthem. What  judge in the several particulars fit to be regulated or controlled in this practice, I shall speak in the next Cha∣pter; ere onely more generally my design leads me to consider, what mat∣ter and form is most proper for An∣thems. And here I humbly beseech all, who shall please to give themselves the pains to read this , and chiefly, with all dutifulness, my Superiours, that they will not interpret what I write beyond my intention, or as ex∣ceeding the quality of my station, and
as if I took upon me to advise, pre∣scribe or dictate to those, from whom I ought to take Rules. I should with all submission entertain such Rules, were they given: but I neither know that the Church, or any the Gover∣nours thereof, have determined or di∣rected any thing in this case, and I am (as well as many others) too sensible, that there are great indecencies daily committed, and matters very unmeet introduced into the publick Lauds of the Church, by reason that our Church∣composers generally want that deep judgment in things sacred, which they have in sounds. Now the due design∣ing and contriving the divine praise, being a duty of such moment, and this present point therein being, as far as I know, untouched by any, I trust I shall not deserve censure, if with all sub∣mission I propose my thoughts herein, which possibly I may conceive my self several ways regularly enough obliged and authorised to do. To the point then: I have said, I take an Anthem to be, in its true na∣ture, an Hymn: now it being of the
essence of an Hymn, that it contain the praises of God, we may soon con∣clude of what subject-matter our An∣thems strictly are to consist. Whatever most plainly, directly, and becoming∣ly imports the praises of God, is most proper for an Anthem, and nothing else: now such passages of speech alone, immediately import the praise of God, in which we either design to speak wor∣thily of him, or confess and ow unto him; and most properly the former sort. Touching God, we can say no∣thing that we ought, but it must either concern his Nature, or his Works; what he is, or what he has done: and all, which he has done, relating ei∣ther to his Making, Conserving, or Governing the World, we are brought to this issue, that whatever words are primarily fit for an Anthem, must ei∣ther celebrate the infinite Majesty, Goodness, and Perfection of God, or else give him the glory of his Works o Creation and Providence. And this later Head of Providence must not be strained too far, or to such remote matters, wherein we are generally un∣concerned:
for by such means, the act of Worship, by us thus paid, will be less pro∣per, or our own; for that both our hearts are apt to be less affected with those things, which are far from con∣cerning us, and besides, for those things, which do more neerly concern us, we more strictly owe express lauds, thanks and gratitude. Now of passages of this nature, we may in Scripture ob∣serve three sorts. (1.) Some dire∣cted immediately to God, by way of an actual address to his Majesty: such are those in the Psalms, O Lord ourPsal. VIII. God, How excellent is thy Name in all the earth! Thou hast set up thy glory above the Heaven. And, O Lord, thou art very great, thou art cloathed with honour and majesty; with a thousand more: n the New Testament, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory,Rev. IV. 11. and honour, and power: for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are, and were created, and the like. n others (2.) the speech is turned to our selves; and that either singly, by way of Soliloquy stirring up our selves to the praise of God; as,
Awake up my glory, awake Lute and Harp, &c. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me bless his Holy Name, &c. Or, as supposed, utter∣ed amongst a community, either Cate∣goricallyPsal. CXLV. 3. and plainly, as, Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised, & his greatness is unsearchable: or Hortatorily & Opta∣tively, as, O come let us sing unto the Lord,Rev. VII. 12. let us heartily rejoice, &c. And, Bles∣sing, and glory, and power, and might be unto our God for ever and ever, Amen. A third sort have the speech directed to other men, or other things, calling upon, and as it were conjuring, all spo∣ken to, to join mightily in the divine praise. Thus Psal. CV. O give thanks unto the Lord, call upon his Name, make known his deeds amongst the people. Sing unto him, sing Psalms unto him, talk ye of all his wondrous works: Like forms oc∣cur, in a manner, all over the Book of Psalms, especially in the four or five last. Now all such words as these, are pri∣marily fit for Anthems. But will some say, Are no Anthems of more doleful and lamentable con∣tents to be allowed? Is not grief, con∣trition,
and sorrow for sin, to be stir∣red up thereby? I answer, though I do not conceive penitential Psalms to come under the name of Hymns, nor to be therefore very proper for An∣thems (plain and simple modulation, and which savours more of compunction & remorse, than curiosity of Musical Art, rather becoming them) yet such passages as are reducible to Confessions and Vows (the second member of the first propoun∣ded division) as they must be acknow∣ledged meet enough for Anthems, so they are very pertinent & proper to such purposes. Care onely here must be had, that such words be pitched on, which are most intimately proportionate to the Christian state, and which express such confessions and vows which Chri∣stian men may be supposed both sincere∣ly to make, and through grace able to keep. And to this purpose it may be expedient, to pick here and there such portions, as are most suitable to the pre∣sent circumstances, and not to take either one whole continued Psalm, or (without regard to the sense) such parcels onely as seem more apt to fall into Musical graces.
Now for my confining the subject∣matter of Anthems, within so narrow bounds (and especially, and most com∣monly, within the compass of the first member of the Division) I have seve∣ral reasons to produce, which whoso considers, haply will be of my mind. First, This is most conformable to the Original pattern, whence Anthems ei∣ther really were, or are pretended to have been taken; and that is, the An∣gels singing, as in parts, to God. In Isaiah's Vision (whatever fabulous there is in that of Ignatius's) it is certain the Seraphims cried one to another, Holy, Ho∣ly, Holy is the Lord of Hosts; the whole earth is full of his glory. And all gene∣rally who write touching the Origin of Antiphons, which were (proportiona∣bly) the same in the Old Church, as Anthems are with us, affirm this to be the precedent, whence they derive. Now in all the Angelical Hymnes, or those of the blessed Saints in glory, ex∣tant in Scripture, the contents are con∣stantly Laudatory; not excepting that (Luke II. 14.) which seems to con∣note something of a charitable intent to∣wards
Mankind. Secondly, the most natural design of Anthems, which may be presumed, is to pay to God a more solemn, heavenly, and exalted act of Worship: and then, why should we not immediately sing Of him, or To him? Why should we go round about, and employ our souls onely upon di∣vine subjects at large, not coming at God in our thoughts, but onely indirect∣ly, & by the interposition & consecution of many other considerations? Thirdly, The subjects specified, must be acknow∣ledged to be most naturally proper for all Psalms, & therefore most especially for those more choice ones, which we call Anthems. Is any merry, saith the Apostle, Let him sing Psalms. TheJam. V. most natural end of Psalms or singing, as to any effect on our selves, is Holy joy and gratitude: And then as to any other ends which either regard other men, or even God himself, whether we look on singing as destin'd to excite in others the like thankfulness, which we by singing express in our selves, or to pay to God a more cheerful and so∣lemn tribute of Praise, what is there,
which more naturally comports with all these designs, than the consideration of God, his nature, excellence, be∣nefits, and all his works? Especially, where such consideration is, as occasi∣on serves, intermixed with holy con∣fessions and vows, as above supposed. It is true indeed, a multitude of Da∣vid's Psalms are of other argument; and we have proved even those fit to be sung: but that not so much in their own nature, as by reason of humane infirmi∣ty, and for our own advantage, more than Gods glory. Thus the Psalmist in∣dited Prayers to be sung, but that one∣ly to quicken our dulness, and makeus more attentive, affectionate and fer∣vent therein: znd so too Doctrines of Faith and manners, as also threats, and promises (as the Druids did their Chronicles, and some old Nations, they say even their Pedigrees) to the intent the sweetness of singing drawing men to frequent repetition of them, they might more fully be learnt and di∣gested, more faithfully retained in me∣mory, more deeply imprinted in the heart, and have due effect: And ac∣cordingly
in compliance with the Holy Ghosts design, we do daily sing such matters, in the course of singing Da∣vid's Psalms. But when we shall be advanced above this state of imperfecti∣on, though even then we shall sing still, yet shall we no more sing prayers, for we shall want nthing which we may ask; nor Doctrinals, for we shall be no longer to learn; nor Promises, for we shall be possest of all promised; much less threats, for we shall be past the need, as well as misery of terrours: but we shall sing Gods Excellencies and Works, we shall acknowledge our own vileness in order to advance his glory, as the Elders are represented casting their crowns before the throne; and ifRev. IV. we may not be conceived vowing, we shall (which is in effect the same) be incessantly exercising an habitual resol∣vedness, to persevere in praising and loving God to Eternity. These there∣fore must be esteemed the meetest sub∣jects for us to sing to God, because, by divine appointment, they are at pre∣sent far the greatest part of what we sing, and hereafter will be solely, as far
as we know, the total summe. To these reasons, though others might be ad∣ded with great facility, yet I shall judge enough said to justifie the resolu∣tion above given. It remains, that it be now consider∣ed what Form is meetest for Anthems, abstracting from the subject-matter, namely, whether Prose or Verse. As to matter of present practice, it is sure our Anthems are mostly Prose: and the reason hereof, I conceive to be the cautioness of our Church-composers, who, lest the words of their Anthem should be excepted against, generally choose express passages of Scripture. In the mean time it cannot be denied, but that the Old Anthems, that is, the Hymns composed by the Old Fathers for publick use in the worship of God, and sung in way of Antiphons, were mostly verse of strict measures, as hath been sufficiently made out. In imitati∣on of which pattern, I humbly con∣ceive, that in our Christian Hymns or Anthems, we are not, and ought not to be bound up to the express words of Scripture, and especially not of the
Old Testament. A great part of Scri∣pture in general, but especially all Scri∣pture poetry (as is the Book of Psalms, whence our Anthems are most common∣ly taken) is full of allusions and refe∣rences to the Jewish Oeconomy, which though it be, as we have said, very useful when duly applied, yet to have the praises of God always conceived and sung in expressions, which concern Christianity onely at some distance, is not so meet: Besides, that there are many things writ in a kind of closer and more naked way, wanting in a Trans∣lation those ornaments which originally they had; so that to relax the style by a prudent paraphrase, would make all fitter for popular capacities, and more apt to move affections: especially, if put into Poetical form, which is ge∣nerally fitter for Musick, than Prose, and falls into it with more ravishing sweetness, where the Composer under∣stands the graces both of Musick and Poetry, and brings both happily to meet, and set off one the other. I will humbly give an instance: It is common∣ly sung in an Anthem, Praise him with
the sound of the Trumpet (and then our Musicians dally with that word Trumpet, repeating it, for meer sake of the Notes, till it become nauseous) Praise him with the Psaltery and Harp. Suppose, in stead hereof, we were to sing, composed Musically, according to the grace of the Verse, and with such melodious interchanges of Parts and Voices, as the words naturally suggest, thus in a Paraphrase; Together strive, who shall exalt himMr. Sam Wood∣ford. Psal. 150. most, What instruments the fittest are, Whether of Love, whether of war, Shrill Trumpets, or soft Harps to praise the Lord of Host! Trumpets, and Harps, shall in one consort move, The Cornet and the amorous Lute, The Cymbal & the warlike Flute; For he, who is the Lord of Host, is God of Love. Whose devotion must not needs soar higher, when carried on such lofty
wings, of Poetry and Melody, both so di∣vine? Nor is there wanting a precedent in this case, given by our very own Church. The Veni Creator, or Hymn appointed to be sung, by way of Antiphon, in the Office of Ordination of Priests, and Con∣secration of Bishops, is strict Verse. And though those Texts of the New Testa∣ment appointed to be used on Easter day, in stead of the Invitatory, be ex∣presly called an Anthem, or Anthems,Ru∣brick for Morn: Prayer. Rubr: on Ea∣ster day. yet we may conceive the reason of the di∣versity, why one is Verse, the other Prose, to be this; the later being translated ori∣ginally out of Prose, the Church thought good to retain the same Form (besides, that being substituted in the place of the Invitatory, it was to consist of such passages, for which Prose possibly might be conceived fitter) whereas the other being translated out of Verse, it was thought meet to put it in a Poetical Form. Though there∣fore we have thus from the Church a precedent in each way (and conse∣quently, both are by her adjudged meet) yet it seems to be the mind of the Church, that what Originally was
Verse, should (at least, at discretion might) in our Anthems be Verse still. But of Po∣etry, in offices of Divine praise, more anon. In the mean time, there is one pra∣cticeSect. 8. in our Cathedral or Choral use, of which justly some account may here be expected, namely, of what we call Voluntaries. Hereby we mean some Arbitrary (and commonly Extempora∣neous) Lesson, or flourish upon the Organ alone, beginning for the most part in grave, plain Notes, and then proceeding in counterpoint, and after∣wards in discant through the several parts interchangeably, as the fancy of the Organist suggests, till having main∣tain▪d what points he pleases, as long as he thinks fit, he comes to some gracefullse. The use hereof, is ei∣ther immediately before the Service be∣gins, and while the chief of the Con∣gregation are entring and taking their places, or betwixt the Psalms and the first Lesson: or Lastly, in some places betwixt the first and second Service, while those, who officiate at the Com∣munion-service, are going up to the Al∣tar. Now hereof I ingenuously con∣fess,
I can find little or nothing in any ancient or considerable Authours: and I conceive the practice to be a new Or∣nament, designed to make the Service of God more solemn, the minds of people more serious, and to take off or drown that little ungrateful hush or rushing murmure, which the stirring of so many people at such times, and in an Assembly must occasion. I really believe, the first ground hereof was taken from that practice of the Pro∣phets, and inspired persons under the Old Testament, of whom we read, that at sundry times, when they de∣sign'd to stir up the spirit of Prophesie within them, they called for Musici∣ans, and made them play before them. Thus the company of Prophets came down from the High place with a Psal∣tery,1 Sam. X. 5. and a Tabret, and a Pipe, and an Harp before them, and they prophesied. Their minds being hereby quickened, and their intention raised towards God, the inspired principle in them began to move (as we have said) in the Divine praise. It is remarkable, that instru∣mental Musick alone is there made use
of, as a means to awaken their inspired souls. But that passage of Elisha is yet more clear: Being consulted by Jeho∣ram a wicked King (who in time of2. King III. 13. peace sought onely to the Prophets of Baal, and never, till necessity drove him, to the prophet of the Lord) touching provision of water for the parched and perishing Host, he was much disturbed, and answers to him, What have I to do with thee? Get thee to the prophets of thy Father and Mother. Upon his second importunity, and good Jehoshaphat's joint∣ly, he becomes more compliant, though his reply still speaks the commotion of his mind. As the Lord of Hosts liveth, saith he, before whom I stand, surely, were it not that I regard the presence of Jehoshaphat the King of Judah, I would not look toward thee. However, as yet he was not in a condition to help ei∣ther: for, say the Hebrew Doctours, the , the immediate presence of God, and divine inspiration, enter not into a mind disturbed with passion; and therefore the Prophet added at the next word, ver. 15. But now bring me hither a Minstrel, And it came to pass,
when the Minstrel played, that the hand of the Lord (the spirit of Prophesie) came upon him, and he said, Thus saith the Lord, &c. On which passage, it is not amiss to take with us the Gloss of a great Scholar in this kind of Learning. Afferte mihi Psalten, qui scilicet instru∣mentiMun∣ster. in Loc, melodiâ auferat perturbationem ani∣mi, & inmultuarias in me sedet cogitati∣ones, quae Prophetiae non admittunt spi∣ritum. Bring me (saith he) a Mu∣sician, who by the sweetness of his instrument, may remove this pertur∣bation of mind, and appease these tumultuous thoughts of mine, which suffer not the spirit of Prophesie to move in me. And this being done, , as Josephus expresses it, being inspired at the voice of the Musick, he directs a miraculous course for their relief. It appears then, that the use of Instrumental Mu∣sick, singly and without Voices or Psalms joined thereto, for the raising the soul towards God, for the quieting tumultuous passions, and begetting a sedate, serious temper, fit to receive divine impressions, has very antient
precedents in Holy Scripture. And though I am not able to give an account how and when it came in to our Church, yet finding it there, and used onely, either immediately before the Congre∣gation engage in acts of Worship, to compose them, and to strike a reve∣rence and aw upon their spirits, as to what they are going about, or else in some little interstices and intermissions of Worship, for taking off disturban∣ces, and keeping mens minds in a gave, serious and revetial temper, I see not that it is at all blame worthy, but rather useful, commendable, and fit to be retained: for, that it has these effects, I am well assured there are thousands of serious people can testifie; and to exact a particular command or precept in Scripture for a practice of this nature, is as reasonable, as to re∣quire a Text for having convenien Churches, or decent places to assemble in, for having sets in Churches, or cushions to kneel or lean upon, or for any such useful accommodation and honest advantage of divine Worship. I there∣fore for the present dismiss this point,
and together the whole Cathedral use of singing, as having other place, ac∣cording to the method I have propoun∣ded, both to answer objections, and to give such further caution as I judge needful. The Parochial use, of Singing thoughSect. 9. much more obnoxious than the Cathe∣dral, has yet more escaped blame; and is much better approved (indeed strange∣ly doted on) by those of our Nation, who dissent from our Church: for no other reason more, that I can imagine, but that the one is of the Churches con∣stitution, the other is purely the peo∣ples creature, and of their own volun∣tary takeing up. In our Parochial Assemblies nothing commonly is sung, but some parts of the Book of Psalms, as they stand butcherd into English Metre. I do not condemn Verse in this case, which I have both before preferred to prose, in point of singing to God, and am rea∣dy further to commend; but such Verse as this, generally, Ne dii, non homines, non concessêre columnae,
the very stones in the walls, if sensible, would cry out against. The device of putting the Psalms into Metre, the lear∣ned and industrious Dr. Heylin tells us, was first taken up in France, by one Clement Marott, one of the Grooms of the Bed-chamber to King FrancisHistor. of Re∣form Pag. 131. the first; who being much addicted to Poetry, and having some acquain∣tance with those, who were thought to have enclined to the Reformation, was perswaded by the learned Vata∣blus, Professour of the Hebrew Tongue in the University of Paris, to express his Poetical fancy in translating some of David's Psalms. For whose satis∣faction and his own, he translated the first fifty of them: and after, fly∣ing to Geneva, grew acquainted with Beza, who in some tract of time tran∣slated the other hundred also, and caused them to be fitted unto several Tunes; which thereupon began to be sung in private Houses, and by de∣grees to be taken up in all the Chur∣ches of the French, which followed the Genevian platform. That Marot was the first which attempted the
putting David's Psalms in French Metre, I easily consent: and this must be about the year 1546, if by Vatablus his perswasion: but of an essay and design to put the Psalms into Vulgar Metre, I have some∣what an earlier precedent to produce. In the year 1524. Luther thus writes to palatinus touching this matter. Con∣siliumApud melch Adam in vit: Luch. est exemplo Prophetarum & prisco∣rum Patrum Ecclesiae, Psalmos vernacu∣los condere pro vulgo, id est, spiritua∣les cautilenas, &c. I intend, saith he, after the example of the prophets and ancient Fathers of the Church, to con∣trive for the common people, psalms in their mother-tongue, that is, spi∣ritual songs, that the word of God may dwell amongst the people, even in singing. I am therefore every where looking out for Poets: and seeing you have great command of, and ele∣gance in, the German Tongue, by rea∣son of your long use thereof, I desire you, that you would labour with me in this matter, and try to trans∣late some of the psalms into Verse fit to be sung, as here you have an at∣tempt and pattern of mine. Now I
would have all new and courtlike ex∣pressions declined, to the end, that, according to the peoples capacity, most plain and usual, yet cleanly and fit words may be sung, and that the sense may be rendred clear, and yet as near as may be to the psalm. We must therefore here use freedom, and ta∣king the sense, leave the words, ren∣dering them by other fit words: I have not so much grace of speech, as to be able to effect what I would in this kind: I therefore will try if you are an Heman, or an Asaph, or a Jeduthun. Thus Luther, whose endeavours and attempts in this case were, as we see, a∣bove Twenty years elder than Marot's: but in imitation, as he sayes, of the Pro∣phets under the Old Testament, and of the Ancient Fathers under Christianity. Which, that it is true, namely, that the Ancient Fathers, as well as the Prophets, composed Hymns for the people in verse, and that the whole body of the people, as well as some select persons making up a Quire, used Vocally to join in the pub∣lick singing such Hymns to God, we have had abundant evidences, and I
think undeniable ones. To Luther's judgment, that Verse was fittest for the peoples singing, I will add Peter Martyr's, who treating of Church-mu∣sick and singing to God, not onely de∣fends Poesie (when used as it ought) but adds a singular commendation of it. By its very Original, he asserts it toLoc: Com. Class: 3 Lor: 13 Sect. 25. have been of sacred design. The An∣cients, saith he, when they would either by common Votes pay God thanks, or impetrate any benefit from him, were wont to use certain solemn Verses or Poems. And after instances given in several kinds, by se∣veral Nations, he proceeds, Cantus autem, et si per sese hominum animos ob∣lect at, attamen cum illi Oratio subjici∣tur, quae sit numerosa, & pedibus qui∣busdam alligetur, &c. Now singing, saith he, though singly and of it self it delight mens minds, yet when such speech is added thereto as consists of numbers, and is bound to certain feet, as we see Verses are, it be∣comes much more sweet: And such truly was the Original of Poetry: nor can I deny it to be a gift of God;
but this I could wish, that amongst mankind it might be kept pure and chast. He proceeds, setting forth how ancient and frequent the use of it was in the Jewish Church; and touch∣ing the reception and use thereof in the Christian, we have spoken already more abundantly. The judgment of Mr. Calvin in this case, may be concluded from the pra∣ctice of Beza, of which partly accountBeza Tract. Theol. vol. 1. p. 654. has been given already, and more might be said out of his own works: for that so considerable a practice, as the rendring or singing David's Psalms in metre, should be set up in his Church, without his approbation, no man that knows of what spirit he was, will ever imagine. Though therefore I cannot say, that e∣ver any projected the putting David▪s Psalms particularly into metre, for the common people to sing, before Luther, yet that he did attempt it, and other of the Reformers proceeded by the same pattern, and therefore approved the practice, is evident; as also, that both the Antient Fathers, and the Re∣formers, did conceive verse fit for the
publick and solemn praise of God, and the later, at least, prefer it. The reasons hereof we may conceive to be (1.) The precedent, which the Holy Ghost gave in this case, inditing the praises of God in old Hebrew verse: which sacred Poems to render meerly word for word into the prose of the modern languages, may possibly seem to some not so much to translate, as to meta∣morphose, and in the worse sense to tra∣duce & disguise them. Such stripping them of their native glories, and making one∣ly their naked sense and inner substance English, or of any other like Tongue, while we allow that sense nothing at all of the graces of such Tongue, into which it is transplanted, for the adorning, or so much as it were skinning and colou∣ring it over, is only after a sort to make Skeletons of them, and naturalize those, not their goodly Original selves. To supply the lost excellencies of another lan∣guageMr. Cow∣ly: pr∣face to Pd. Odes. with new (and suitable) ones in our own, is, in the opinion of a very great Judge in this kind, the least ju∣stice we can do, to pieces of such ancient and admirable perfection. Though
therefore as the Psalmes are part of the Canon of Scripture, and of the Rule of Faith, they ought to stand in our Bibles (as they do) literally translated, yet when they become choice publick ymns to be sung in the divine praise, it seems fit they should, as neer as can be, be asser∣ted into their primitive glory, though in a strange land, & borrowed language. And (2.) The secret, and it may, unac∣countable sweetness, & ravishing power of Poetry, which there is scarce any Na∣tion so barbarous, that hath not given some attestations to. Some delightful objects only affect the sensual, others only the intellectual part. But when divine poetry, and graceful singing and musick do concur, they do To∣tum hominem rapere, transport the whole man, and lift the devout soul, in a manner, above it self. It is not easie to imagine in this case, what external advantages can be added unto these. I only lament, that whereas there are sundry excellent Versions of the Psalms in our Mother-tongue, which have de∣signed this restoring of Holy David's poetry to its self, and in many
respectively have well effected it, yet there is none made up out of all, or complete, fit for publick use, and au∣thorised. As to that which is at present in use inSect. 10. our Parish-Churches, it is as much de∣stitute of authority, as it is undeserving of any priviledge or approbation from it. I find no reason to discredit the ac∣count, which Dr. Heylin gives of the methods and degrees by which these Rhythms grew into so general requestHist. of Refor. p. 127. and practice. Being first allowed (saith he) for private devotion, they were by little and little brought into the use of the Church: permit∣ted rather, than allowed to be sung before and after Sermons; afterwards printed, and bound up, with the Com∣mon prayer-book; and at last added by the Stationers at the end of the Bible.—And further, soon after. At first it was pretended only that the said Psalms, should be sung before and after Morning prayer, and also before and after Sermons: which shews they were not to be intermingled with the Liturgy. But in some tract of time,
they prevailed so far in many places, as to thrust the Te Deum, the Benedi∣ctus, the Magnificat, and the Nunc dimittis quite out of the Church. This was their heighth; which to what party our Authour ascribes due, I speak not. But as to any stamp of authority upon them, take the same persons words. Though (saith he) it beIbid. expressed in the Title of those singing Psalms, that they were set forth and allowed to be sung in all Churches before and after Morning and Evening prayer, and also before and after ermons, yet this allowance seems rather to have been a connivance, than an approba∣tion: no such Allowance being any where found, by such as have been most industrious and concerned in the search thereof. And certainly if not so much as Allowance to be found for them, then much less any Law: so that I may safely say, any Minister may le∣gally dismiss or lay them aside in his Congregation, that pleases (though I do not conceive an equal liberty or pow∣er to substitute others) and it would be both prudence and piety so to do,
would the people be satisfied without them, or were we impowered to intro∣duce a better Version in their room. Upon the whole then, it must be con∣cluded, the present parochial use of the Psalms (thus perverted and mangled) rather than translated, is a necessary concession (pro hic & nunc) to popu∣lar will: and it is to be hoped, that some short time, and due meanes, may make the people wiser, and Reforma∣tion in this point easier. How much such Reformation is toSect. 11. be desired and endeavoured, will ap∣pear from the gross mischiefs and abor∣tious of devotion, which are generally the inevitable consequent of our com∣mon singing these Metres; part whereof are founded in the very Translation it self, and part in the ordinary method of using it. The Translation it self is so miserably peccant, that it is not easie to imagineChristi∣an. Syn∣ag. l. 1. ch. 5. parag. 4. any fault incident to Translations, which does not ever and anon occur in this. I presume the account of the common vi∣ces of Translations, given by the lear∣ned Mr. Weemse of Lathoquar in Scotland,
may pass allowed with all whom I have to deal with. A Translation, saith he, must not be servile, luxuriant, barbarous, contentious (which he ex∣plains non sensum, sed Etymologias ver∣borum interpretans) not affected nor ma∣licious. Of all these faults in this, I could produce plentiful and very frequent in∣stances (and some anon in most cases follow) saving only that I cannot be so un∣charitable to the ashes of the authors, as to suspect, much less to charge them of malice: they had undoubtedly an honest intention; but as to us, the con∣sequence is the same. —Quid refert ferro pereámne ruinâ? What has befallen in other Translati∣ons through the malice of those authors, comes to pass almost in every Psalm through the unskilfulness of these, the Original and genuine sense is noto∣riously misst or perverted. Then for the Poetry, none can easily be more faulty. Their being at a strait for a Rhythm, makes them at any time vio∣late sense, Grammar, and all proprie∣ty of speech, nay speak dishonourably or ridiculously of God himself. I can∣not
expect some men should digest what I say here, except I set down some few instances of many, to make good this charge: in the very threshold we find frequent stumbles (a very ill omen of the success.) The man is blest that hath not bentPs. I. 1. To wicked read his ear. Not one man of a thousand, that sings this, understands it. I have heard ma∣ny pretty Glosses what should be the sense of a mans reading his ear to the wicked; whereas the word Read here, must be taken to be a Noun substantive, and signifie Lessons or Doctrine, in which sense for some centuries of years it has been much unusual. Bending a mans ear is almost as uncouth. Then who can en∣dure,Ver. 3. except in Buffonry, or in a Ba∣lade, A trees due time and tide, and inVer. 5. judgment stand upright? But this is ele∣gancy in comparison of what follows inPs. II. 7. the next Psalm. For in this wise the Lord himself Did say to me, I wot. —Andver. 9. Thou shalt them bruise even with a mace, As men under foot trod.
I will pass by the servility of ver. 12. which perverts it into non-sense, or what is scarce intelligible, and advance a little farther into the book; for pos∣sibly some may think, more of practice might improve our Poets. But alas! they are all along constant to their strain. Psal. V. v. 6. there wanted a syllable to the verse, and another ne∣cessary, but very difficult accomplish∣ment called a Rhythm: the word to be Rhymed to is man; in comes than, and against all possible sense and reason, the verse runs; Thou shalt destroy them than. V 6. I have passed the excellent rhythming of consider to prayer, ver. 1. (parallel to Another of the same, Psal. LXXVIII. 4. where after must rhyme to wonder, & in the same Psalm, ver. 46. Caterpillar to Grashopper) having met with a trick or two to bring terminations to better chi∣ming: For examples sake, the Verse to be rhymed to is, His arrows keen and sharp,Ps. VII. 13. that quaint phrase will do the feat, While he doth mischief warp; and 'tis a new and neat metaphor, and, for ought I know, just then came out of the
Loom. To omit other passages in our way; this old hag Necessity riding us a∣gain, we are at a loss for a Rhyme toPs. IX. 16. mark: well, let the o in work go to wrack (and the business is done) Ly trapt in his ow wark. But if this will not do, as sometimes it will not, then we must even force words out of their sense. Their hearts thou wilt confirm untilPsal. . 17. Thine ears to hear be prest. That is, if we read according to the O∣riginal, Thou wilt prepare their heart, thou wilt cause thine ear to hear. To ad∣mirable purpose then these metres were, as it is said in their Title-page, confer∣red with the Hebrew; where undoubt∣edly too was found the Field which called is Taneos (the Genitive case of , (a word framed by the Greek Septuagint, or Chaldee Paraphrast) very barbarously retained by the Vulgar Latin as a Nomi∣native) for the field of Zoan. Well, but thePs. 78. 12. word prest is an elegant serviceable word, and therefore we must have it again within two verses of the placePs. XI. 2. where we last found it. Behold the wicked bend their bow,
And make their arrows prest. I had almost overlookt another flower,Ver 1. which grows very near this same. How dare ye then, Say thus my soul until? ver. 1. These words may seem good enough to treat wicked men in, but sure of God, or to God, we may ex∣pect more proper language. However, either we have it not about us, or that merciless Fiend Rhythm will not suffer us to afford it. For now my foes which vexed mePs. VI. The Lord will soon defam. Not unlike to this phrase, is that, Lord at thy wrath and threatening,P. 1. 14. And at thy chideing chear, &c. Shall we now hear a description of the Majesty of the divine appearance? On Cherubs and on Cherubims, Full royally he rode. That is, On the same, and on theP 1. v. 1. 1. same. Here is admirable conferring with the Hebrew, and much the Colla∣tors understood an Hebrew Plural. But let the state proceed▪ And like a den most dark he made His hid and secret place. Whether also what  next produce, he
spoken with more manners or propriety let all men judge. And so receive right thankfullyPs. XX. 3. Thy burnt offerings each one. According to the plain import of the words, though not according to the authors intention, as I believe, Take thy offerings and be thankful, Thus much out of the first Twenty Psalms, for a tast of T. S. his Poetical vein: onely I will add, I scarce know one Psalm of his ordering, out of which more, or worse stuff than this might not be produced. I have omitted many passages, because sufficiently in every bodies mouth. But surely may some think, his partner J. H. had better luck: Let us then take the first psalm of his handling, and 'tis a psalm of an excellent subject, and proper to fill Christian mens mouths; but rendred unfit for use, by reason a middle verse of it is made into intolerable barbarity or Non sense. This is the brood of Travellers, . 6. In seeking of his grace: As Jacob did the Israelite, In that time of his race.
Nor is he at all inferiour to T. S. in his elegant and proper juncture of words. We will take a few instances. In his next Psalm, we have a graceful pas∣sage; Mine eyes wx dim, my sight doth fail,Ps. 31. 9. My womb for wo doth ake. Certainly people might be very merry at singing these Psalms. Again v. 24. Be strong, and God will stay your heart, Be bold and have a lust. But not to trouble my Reader too far: there is one Psalm which is alone suffici∣ent for instances of this nature, namely Ps: LXXVIII, and which will satisfie any who reads it, that I do not unjustly censure J. H. his Poetry; He raind down Mnna for them to eat,ver. 24. A food of mickle wonder. Risum teneatis? Would not a man take this for a Northern Ballade? Nor does he handle God with more proper and decent expressions; For why, as stones thy strength is try'd. Of which not one word in the Original.Ps. 31. 2 Ps. 77. v. 8. What is his goodness clean decay'd, For ever and a day? And,
Gods mighty hand can help all this, And change it when he lust. Again, Yea many a time he turnd his wrath, And did himself advise:Ps. 78. 38. And would not suffer all his whole Displeasure to arise. I will not weary my self, nor Reader any farther. These instances I pre∣sume amply suffice to vince, that no man of sense or any tolerable education can sing these metres as they ly (except they be a little pickt and culled) with devotion, and that the very Translati∣on it self must needs flatten or nseate mens minds in this Heavenly exercise of singing to God. This will be more apparent, if we consider the Ordinary method of using it. The Parish clerk (a person common∣ly of as little judgment as most of the people, but of much more conceited∣ness and pertness) chooses any Psalm, that he has an humour for, that is ma∣ny times, any that first comes to hand, which he knows, and can fit a tune for: this he dictates out of the book, line by line, and the people sing it broken∣ly,
in such petite and imperfect shreds. Now herein are many mischiefes, of which the least is not the Clerks impru∣dent choice: He oftentimes shall begin in a broken sentence, with a causal, or illative, or such like clause; where for want of what went before, the act of judgment, or the perception of the subject matter and sense, being mi∣serably incomplete, such needs must be all their devotion, who sing. This evil is not seldom occasioned by the division of the Psalms into First and Second and Third Parts: For it must be acknow∣ledged, those who modelled them in∣to this frame, having regard onely to the strict quantity of four or five staves, which they thought neither too much nor too little to be sung at one time, indiscreetly made such lame partitions of them. That will be evident by any slight inspection into the book. To omit pre∣cedent instances: the Eighteenth Psalm is divided into five parts; the second and fifth begin each with a copulative clause thus, And like, &c. And still like, &c. The third with a discretive But e∣vermore, &c. And as if the mischief men∣tioned
did not occur too frequently by this means, it having of later years been found too tedious to sing alwaies one of those whole partitions at a time, there is occasion of subdivisions, and those made at the pleasure of the Clerk; so that as things stand in most of our Pa∣rish-Churches, 'tis three to one but these our publick Hymns to God, begin with imperfect sense. If we should e∣scape this rock, 'tis still as great odds, but the same persons imprudence drives us on another: A Psalm not proper e∣nough to the Christian state, and which concerns not at all the divine praise, but some other particular remoter sub∣ject, shall be proclaimed to be sung to the praise and glory of God; and the abused Congregation shall in his praise sing con∣fusion to their foes, that is, in effect ma∣ny times, direful imprecations one a∣gainst another. But admit we have a more prudent Parish Clerk (which God forbid but in some places we should have) or that he is directed and over-ruled in this case by the Minister, yet the Giving of the Psalm (as we usually term it) occasi∣ons
the same loss or stumble to devoti∣on, as before: the lines are so very short, and the sense of one so runs into the sense of the next, & that it may be into a third, that we must stay many times till the people have sung two lines, and the Clerk has read three, or both more, be∣fore we can comprehend what is the de∣sign of that sentence, the greatest part of which, notwithstanding we are sup∣posed to have already sung to God; now in so long a suspense of the mind, how it can possibly frame such distinct and pertinent thoughts, as in this Hea∣venly act of Worship ought to employ it, let any person of reason judge. After all, admit we could avoid each of the mentioned inconveniencies, yet the meer irregularities and discordant jarrings of the multitudes singing, in most places, so grates the ear, as that it is very difficult even for the best, the most prudent and charitable men, to be devoutly conversant in this so necessary and ravishing part of Gods service. They are St. Augustine's words, and and not purely an objection of mine. InIn Psal. 149. choro cantantium quisquis voce discrepa∣verit,
offendit auditum, & perturbat cho∣ru. Dissonant and clashing voices in a Quire, offend the hearing, and di∣sturb the whole Quire. Now in our Pa∣rish Churches none being hindred to sing (neither young nor old, serious nor vain, nay, scarce fools & madmen) & all wea and Pharisaical persons thinking, they then sing best when lowdest, doth it not daily come to pass, that one part of the Assembly squeaks, another roars, a third chatters, &c. and scarce one in ten sings so much as in a decent, grave and reverent tone? From all these grounds, how many ungrateful distur∣bances of devotion do arise, it is not ea∣sie to comprehend or state: so various unhappy junctures do occur in our pre∣sent parochial practice, and so frequent are the occasions of miscarriage! Now before we can come to considerSect. 12. what particular redress may be applied (especially in this last case) it is neces∣sary we lay one foundation, as well to justifie a certain particular means of re∣dress, which we shall anon direct, where it is to be had, as for the full vindicati∣on of our Cathedral practice: and that
is, some satisfactory evidence for the use of instrumental musick in the publick Wor∣ship under the Gospel. Touching this we must enquire, whether it be lawful and whether it be expedient, in the present, I mean the Evangelical state. The former of these I should not have thought necessary to have been asserted by any solemn proof (for it seems to me to have intrinsecal natural clearness enough in it self, to approve it self to every mans reason) but that it has been gainsayed by some persons of great piety and learning, and there∣fore deservedly of great authority in all the Reformed Churches. Wherefore the onely proof conceive, it needs will be the Removal of the reason, on which they build their plea of its unlawfulness, and that is purely this supposition, That the instrumental Musick used of old in the Jewish Church, was meerly a mat∣ter of remonial institution, and belon∣ged to the Judaical Paedagogy; no more therefore to be followed or practised by us under the Gospel, than their Cir∣cumcision, New moons, Sacrifice, and the like points of their Worship. This
has been affirmed by Mr. Calvin, as we have already seen, by Peter MartyrIn com∣ment. in 1. ad Cor. 14 (whom yet we have found elsewhere commending expresly Church-musick, whatever he meant by the name) and diverse other moderns; & indeed it seems insinuated by Aquinas himself in the place before-mentioned, & an elder author. In answer whereunto, though it might seem sufficient to say, it is (Gratis dictum) ma∣gisterially said, without reason assign∣ed for it, & they who affirm'd it, or do af∣firm it, by all law ought to prove (which I do not see to be possible in this case, nor have yet found fairly attempted) yet I shall propose such evidences, as may as fully evince the contrary, as a Nega∣tive can well be proved. Onely it will be necessary (in order to the making our way plainer) to pre∣mise that all circumstances of Worship, or modes and Ceremonies used by the Jewes, were not purely Jewish & legal but some of natural right, and fit to all states of the Church. The Jewes, for instance, used to pray kneeling, and lifting up their hands, and most times eyes; which postures, though evidently but
ceremonies and circumstances of prayer, yet he, who will say they are Judaical and unfit for Christian Worship, because used by the Jewes, must condemn not onely St. Paul, and the whole Christi∣an Church ever from the beginning, but even our Lord Christ himself. In like manner, the Jewes used to fast, which is but an appendage of divine Worship, yet is not fasting therefore peculiar to the ceremonial, but also proper for the Christian people. The same may be said of their Weekly Sabbath, plainly as∣serted to be ceremonial (Col. 11. 16.) which yet we do not doubt to copy in our Lords day. It were endless to rec∣kon up all instances that might be alledg∣ed of this nature: The result then, in a word, is. That these modes and ap∣pendages of Worship, which genuine reason and natural fitness dictated to the Jewes, are not to be esteemed purely Jewish ceremonies, or belonging to the legal Paedagogy, but (caeteris paribus) fit for all ages of the Church. And of this nature do I contend, the use of in∣strumental Musick in the Worship of God amongst them to have been: And
for proof hereof I say, First, it is of the essence of a Jewish or legal ceremony, that it be significa∣tive, or a Type of somewhat to come to pass, or to be done, under Christiani∣ty: And those things, which have an intrinsecal aptness and efficacy to excite devotion, may not be accounted Jew∣ish ceremonies, but natural and (as oc∣casion serves) standing helps of divine Worship. Now if any will affirm in∣strumental Musick to have been purely legal and ceremonial, what will he as∣sign in Christianity, as the substance of this shadow? Will he take up Clement of Alexandria his forc't allegories in this case, and say? The Decachordum orPaedag, l. 2. c. 4. instrument with ten strings, signifies the name Jesus, because the first letter of it Originally stands for Ten. And that the Psaltery denotes the Humane tongue, and the Harp the Humane mouth, which is moved by the spirit of God, as the Harp is struck by the hand. These things will not pass now, though they seem'dVid. Orig. in Gen. 1. pretty to an age, which turn'd the ve∣ry History of the Creation into Allego∣ries. (And yet I shall shew presently,
that not even Clement himself disallow∣ed instrumental Musick in the praise of God.) Or, as to the other point, if any will deny the natural aptness of such Musick to calm inordinate affecti∣on, to beget a divine temper, to draw forth the mind in love of God, and con∣templation of pure and heavenly goods, to lift it up above earth, and, in a man∣ner, above it self, how will he answer the experience and consenting suffrages of Mankind. It were easie to produce amongst the Heathen, many known pas∣sages of Socrates, Plato, Tully, nay, of thoe severer men, Solon and Lyurgus;Geogr. . 10. c. 11. Insom. Sip. . 2. c. 3. . l. c. 10. 1 . 16. 1. . the Collections of Strabo, Macrobius, and especially of Quintilian in this point. The case of Saul, when prophesying, the advice his wise men gave him, when the evil spirit should come upon him, the effect of his following their advice, together with what has been above touched of the Old Prophets, suffici∣ently speak the sense of the Jewes; and more might be added out of Philo. And that the Christian world never concei∣ved otherwise of the power of Musick is evident both from the practices of the
Ancient Fathers, refining and accom∣plishing Church Musick by degrees, ac∣cording as times would admit, and as the needs of the Church did require (of which an account particular enough has been already given) and from par∣ticular Texts of theirs, several of which have been already produced, and many more might be added: As St. Cyprian's,Epist.  2. p. 2 Hm. in P. 1. Prolect at auris religiosa mulcedo; St. Ba∣sil's comparison of God, in his providen∣tial contriving of divine Mysteries into Psalms to be sung by the people, to a wise Physician, and the , the delightfulness of the melody, and , the soft and smooth notes, to those sweets where∣with medicines are made up to make them more grateful, and gently effica∣cious; St. Austin▪s acknowledgment of the tears which the Churches sweet sing∣ing the Hymnes and divine Songs drew from him. (Quantum flevi in Hymnis & Canticis suave sonantis Ecclesiae tuae? &c.Cofes. l. 9. c. 6. Touching which passages, and diverse others, though it may be said, the Fa∣thers spake onely of Vocal Musick, there being then no other in publick Holy use
amongst Christians, yet (first) it is plain, the words of the Testimonies (of the two first, at least) are very indefinite and comprehensive of all musical sounds whatsoever, and are therefore attesta∣tions of the power and usefulness of mu∣sick in divine matters; and, Second∣ly, they all hold (à sortiori) touch∣ing our present use: that I will prove by setting down some of those wonder∣ful effects, which the author of Quaest. & Responsion, ad Orthodox▪ in Just in Mar∣tyr▪sQ. 7. Works attributes to singing. , &c. It chees the mind into a fervent desire of what is celebrated in song it allaies all passi∣ons that rise from the fleshly part: it drives away the thoughts which our invisible enemies cast in. Many more passages of like nature, both there, and in the Homily of St. Basil▪s but just now cited, were, I confess, spoken tou∣ching such Musick as was then in the Church, that is Vocal. But suppose people now to sing with due attention and understanding, instrumental mu∣sick being adjoined both to govern and help their Voices, must not all these
Elogies of the virtue of Church-musick be much more verified touching such accomplisht singing, than touching that meaner way? Of this I may truly a∣vow, what Luther does of musick in ge∣neral, if he be not misalledged by Se∣thus Calvisius for not finding that Epi∣stleAd S fl∣um musi∣cum. in Luther▪s Works, I can onely speak it at second hand) Scimus musi∣cam Daemonibus etiam invism & intole∣rabilem esse. No Devil can stand be∣fore such musick. Nay, saith he, Planè judico nec pudet asserer, post The∣ologiam esse nullam artem quae possit musi∣cae aequari. I am fully satisfied in my judgment, nor am I ashamed to aver it, that, Divinity excepted, there is no Science which can match mu∣sick; I suppose he meant as to its divine operations on the mind of man. And I really perswade my self, there is scarce any man void of prejudice, whose na∣tural temper can be so odd, as not to have some experience and sense of the power of musick in general: Much deeper impressions then, must such mu∣sick as I plead for make on all, were it not still, I say▪ for prejudice. To all
this I might add (what has been notedMr. . P. l. 5. Dr. Heyl. . by diverse before me) there can no reason be assigned, why instrumental musick should be ceremonial, and Vo∣cal not: Either neither, or both, must be part of the Jewish Paedagogy. The later our adversaries will not allow; let them therefore be just to their own reasons, and disclaim their assertion touching the former. I conclude then, that both were introduced (as we shall presently see, at Gods direction) into divine Worship, not as types, i∣gures, or Jewish ceremonies, but as outward helps, and natural advantages of spiritual devotion. It is a further proof hereof, Second∣ly, that the institution of instrumental musick, and of the Jewish Quire, was much of later date to the delivery of the Leviical Law, and the sealing up the ceremonial Canon by the hand of Moses. Not onely the Moral Law, but the  and the , The Judge∣ments 1 2. and the Statutes, that is, the Ju∣dicial and the Ceremonial part were compleated and consigned by Mser▪ Hearken, O Israel, unto the ,
and unto the judgments, which I teach you.and XII. 32. Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall you diminish ought from it. A new point of Jewish ceremony (purely  mean such) might not be made; and it any thing of that nature seem to have followed in the Prophets, it was onely an explication of Moses his institutions, and no new institution of it self. Now after this consignation of the Judaical law, and so of the ceremonial Worship, by Mo∣ses, there had passed neer 550. years, before  Quire was ordained, or in∣strumental musick introduced among the Jewes: for this fell into the quieter and more settled part of King David's reign, After that the Ark had rest, saith the ext: ( hron. VI. 31. and Chap. XVI. 4.) and is therefore by Ezra, by 10. way of eminency, called the Ordinance of David King of Israel, though the in∣stitution hereof were not purely by him: for the word of the Lord in this be∣half came not by him alone, but by o∣ther contemporary prophets. Thus we rea, 2 Chr. XXIX, 25. The Levites were set in the House of the Lord with
cymbals, with psalteries, and with harps, according to the commandment of David, and of Gd the Kings Ser and of Na∣than the prophet; For so was the com∣mandment of God by his prophets. And though we find but three prophets here spoken of, yet by how many more this institution was confirmed, we know not: for even Asaph was a Seer (2 Chr. XXIX. 3.) and Jeduthun the Kings Seer (chap. XXXV. 15.) and Heman undoubtedly inspired also: and this same, or somewhat relating to it, is called the commandment of David, and Asaph, and Heman, and Jeduthun, in the place last mentioned. From all which passages it is evident, both that this institution came from God, and that this, and no other was the critical season, whence it is to bear date: and conse∣quently, it will be very unreasonable to make that a part of the ceremonial law and worship, which came not into the world, till so considerable a tract of time after the consignation, recepti∣on and practice of that law and wor∣ship. To this argument, I see not what pre∣tence
of an answer can be made, ex∣cept it should either be said, that Mo∣ses did not fully deliver the ceremonial law (which is very unreasonable, and besides intolerable in them, who con∣tend he perfectly delivered the law mo∣ral, and withall contrary to diverse passages in the New Testament) or that some instrumental musick in the wor∣ship of God, though not so great va∣riety, was ordained before this time, and that by the very letter of Moses his law. Now in this behalf cannot di∣vine what should be challenged, except haply the silver trumpets, which the Priests the sons of Aaron, and they alone were to sound: and this pretence if it be made, I except against, as utterly void of truth. For let the law touch∣ing these Trumpets be examined, and we shall find, that though they were designed to different uses, yet the pay∣ing any praise, or proper act of Worship unto God by sounding them, was not in any of those uses included or intend∣ed, any further than we may be said indirectly and interpretatively to praise or worship God by every common act
we do in obedience to him. The place is, Numb. X, from v: 1 to 11. in the se∣cond verse we in two uses of them ex∣presly set down, both civil; they were to be ounded for calling Assemblies, and for the journeying of the campes. These two, together with the diffe∣rent sounds for each, are explicated and defined in the six following verses. In the  verse a military use, for blowing and , is assigned. The tenth verse seems to  something of a more  use, but that very im∣pertinent to our case. In the day of your gladness, and in your solemn daies, and in the beginnings of your months ye shall blow with the trumpets over your Burnt offerings, and over the sacrifices of your Peace offerings, that they may be to you for a memorial before God. They were to be sounded on publick solemni∣ties and Festivals, for notifying to the people those Solemnities, and the offe¦rings made thereon. To these uses and these alone were the two silver trum∣pets (and but two they were) appoin∣ted and limited: nor can any more rea∣sonably or naturally be  ei∣ther
from the law in this case, which I have faithfully represented, or from the Jewes practice in obedience thereto. The affixing them to the Priests, so that none might blow with these trumpets, but the Priests (ver. 8.) does not at allHar∣mon in 4 lib. M. d Prae. prm. in. help the matter: For it is most ratio∣nally and judiciously observed by Master Calvin in this regard, that God there∣by onely designed to root in the minds of the people a deeper aw and reverence in all publick actions, Ʋt cunctis actionibus praeiret sacerdotum au∣toritas, That they should enterprise no publick affairs without the autho∣rity of the Priests, and so of God. And for this reason he justly reduces this law of the silver trmpets, to the first commandment of Having no other gods. Therefore, saith he, they might not hold publick assemblies, except called thereto by the Priests sounding the Trumpets, that they might regard God in all such assem∣blies, and learn all assemblies were accursed, which were not called ac∣cording to Gods Ordinance. For the same reason, as he proceeds more at
large, they might not go to war, but receiving the alarm from these Trum∣pets; that so rashness and private re∣venge might never draw them into bat∣tel, but onely due and approved cause. And as to the words of promise annextVer. 9. thereto, And ye shall be remembred be∣fore the Lord your God, and be saved from your enemies; these are a further proof hereof, and as much as if it had been said, When you go to war thus duly called forth by God, it appeares you act in obedience to him, sighting, as it were, under his Banner, and with trust and dependance upon him; he will therefore be mindful to preserve such his consling and obedient sub∣jects. The same still, according both to reason, and the judgment of the said authour, was designed by God in appointing the Trumpets to sound on their Festival Solemnities, and over their Sacrifices: they might not ap∣point Festivals at their own will, nor offer according to their own pleasure thereon. (Id perinde fuit, ac si palàm faceret Dus nullos se probare dies Festos, nee sibi placere sacrificia, nisi praeeunte suo
mandato.—Authoritas proescribendi fuit penes sacrorum ministros) They were to expect Gods commands from his Priests, and when they met together according to his prescript order (thus signified to them) and offered accor∣dingly, Their Feasts and their Sacrificesver. 10. should be for a memorial before God, He would regard their Offerings, and remember the Offerers with his fatherly loving kindness.—O si sic om∣nia! An excellent commentary, and such, which, as far as I am able to see, exquisitely reaches the whole intent and the very words of the Text! We have then here no instrumental musick in the Worship of God prescribed, ac∣cording to the judgment of Master Cal∣vin. No more does the Feast of the Trum∣pets (Levit. XXIII. 24.) belong toVid. M∣ster. & P Fag. in lo∣cum  this cause. For that was, say the He∣brews, onely a memorial of Isaac's be∣ing delivered from the altar, and ex∣changed with a Ram. The same also they say of the Feast of the Jubilee (Le∣vit. XXV. 9.) and of the sounding the Trumpet thereon (though that was
doubtless to proclaim it) Wherefore the Trumpets which they sounded on both these solemnities, were not the silver Trumpets of the Sanctuary, but others made of Rams horns, such as were used at the fll of the wals of Jeri∣cho. And their doctrine and practice in these cases, they ground hereon, that  of old with them, and  still in Arabick, according to their Rabbies, signifies a Ram. Upon the whole then, it is plain, In∣strumental musick in the worship of God was not prescribed by the Ceremonial Law. There are indeed some footstep of the use of it upon a publick triumph, in thanksgiving to God, some months before the Law given; which the natu∣ral xod. XV. 20 fitness of the thing, and possibly se∣cret inspiration (for she was a prophe∣ess that begun it) might suggest, and that precedent in like cases might some∣times after be drawn into practice: But it never was a Divine Ordinance, nor became a standing Church practice un∣til Davids time; nor can therefore be a branch of the Ceremonial insti∣tutes.
Thirdly, To him that rightly, and without prejudice weigheth the matter, I doubt not but it will appear, that in∣strumental musick (so used, as I plead for) is not onely helpful unto us, ex∣citing the heart, and enlarging the af∣fections in the Worship of God, but that it is by a natural apness, congrui∣ty, and some kind of justice, becoming certain more solemn parts and perfor∣mances of that Worship; particularly I mean the publick Office of singing to God. That we are to sing to him, is granted on all hands: the issue then or point in controversie, seems to be in truth onely this, Whether when we sing to God, we are to sing well or ill? Harmiously, and with a sweet con∣sent of voice, as well as heart, or with such jarrings, confusion and disorder of Tones, as may make men even loath the offerings of the Lord? No man can be presumed to be so void of reason and justice as to say, Men may innocently for their ownr others delight and di∣version, sing well and regularly; but when they sing to God, 'tis no matter what disorder there be in their voices;
and disorder generally there will be, if instruments may not be allowed. The Scripture however gives the case on our side: Make ye his praise glorious, Psal. LXVI. 2. Sing unto him a new song, Play skilfully with a loud voice,  Make good play, (or make sweet melo∣dy)Ps. 33. 2. on the harp, as Isa. XXIII. 10. To which,  multitude of places out of the Psalms might be added. And it is cer∣tainly as reasonable, that we should praise God in the best sort we can, as with the best member which we haue, toPsal. CVIII. v. 1. use the words of the old Version. In a word, s necessary are instruments for the making up Harmony, and accom∣plishing publick ging, & so fit, & eter¦nally due to the divine praise, are such accomplishments, that even in Heaven, the Quires of the Blessed are represented, as if they not onely used Tongues, butRev. V. 8. Instruments, to those their Hllelujahs. In St. John's Visions, the four and twen∣ty Elders fell down before the lamb, ha∣ving every one their harps. And when the Lamb appeared on Mount Zion, andRevel. XIV. 2, 3. his pure retinue of an hundred and four∣ty and four thousand, which follow the
Lamb wherever he goeth, I heard, saith St. John, The voice of Harpers harping with their harps. And they sung as itRev. XV. 2, 3. were a new song before the Throne. They also who bad the victory over the beast, and over his image, and over the number of his name (such, I hope, were not Popishly affected) had the harps of God in their hands: and they sing the song of Moses the servant of the Lord, and the song of the Lamb. I do not conceive, that these things were real, or thus material∣ly transacted in Heaven; but these are the images and resemblances, most na∣turally approaching to, and by which we can best understand, what is done there: and if the Holy Ghost thought fit thus to represent to the Christian Church, the pattern of the Heavenly praise, it cannot be unlawful for us on earth, with reve∣rence and decency, to conform thereto. Fourthly, The ceremonial Law was given onely to the Jewes, to be obser∣ved by them till the coming of the Messiah: But not onely Jewes but Gen∣tiles, all peoples and Nations, whatsoe∣ver and wheresoever, all mankind are called upon, and required to celebrate
the praises of God, with singing and all manner of musick, and that for the salvation wrought by the Messias, our Lord Christ Jesus. Hereof though di∣verse evidences might be given out of the Psalms, yet none more full and sa∣tisfactory (that I know of) than what the XCVIII. affords, that being a Psalm undoubtedly designed by the spi∣rit of Prophesie, in praise of God, for the redemption of mankind and publication of the Gospel, to which, particularly, the second and third ver∣ses of that Psalm are four times expres∣ly applied by the Holy Ghost, namely,Luke I. 54, 72. & Ch. II. 31. & Ch. III. 6. in the Hymn of the blessed Virgin, of Za∣chary, and of Simeon, and in the prea∣ching of John the Baptist; and the nineth or concluding Verse of it, celebrates Christ as Judge, as the former celebra∣ted him as Saviour. Now in this Psalm, though the first Apostrophe, with which the Psalm begins, may seem chiefly directed to the Jewes, that they should praise God for his righteousness openly shewn in the sight of the Heathen, yet, Ver. 4. the speech is turned to all people, to the inhabitants of the Earth.
and those that are on the broad Sea, Gentiles as well as Jewes. Make a joy∣ful noise unto the Lord all ye Earth, Make a loud noise and rejoyce and sing praise. Sing unto the Lord with the harp, withVer. 7. the harp and the voice of a Psalm: With trumpets and sound of the Cornet, &c. Let the sea roar and the fulness thereof. the world and they that dwell therein To the Jewish ceremonial Worship, none, besides Jewes, were to be ad∣mitted, nor might by the Law join therein, excepting onely the  the Proselytes of righteousness, persons throughly turn'd Jewes: but to praise God with harps and cornets and all man∣ner of instruments, and that for spiri∣tual and Evangelical blessings, all the world, who are partakers thereof, are required and summoned. Therefore this institution cannot be meerly cere∣monial or peculiar to Judaism, but be∣longs to all ages and people even under the Gospel. Lastly, Where can any shew us that passage, either from our Lords mouth, or from the Apostles hand, which declares, or so much as insinuates this
institution to have been legal and cere∣monial, or abrogate? Or is it any where in the Old Testament intimated, that it was to be but Temporary? In summe then, and to bring the evi∣dence given as closely as may be to our cause, and together to the obviating our adversaries suggestions: It is plain, instrumental musick in the worship of God was of divine institution, and is expresly called a commandment of God; therefore it cannot be in it self unlaw∣ful, or what some may mean by Will∣worship: most passionate exhortations at least, if not commands, to this pra∣ctice, are directed to all mankind, Gen∣tiles as well as Jewes; therefore it is not purely Judaical: and evident it is, the reason of this institution was not such, as of the ceremonies, no signi∣ficativeness of Christian mysteries, but the natural efficacy of the thing to raise devotion, and its fitness to make the praise of God glorious, brought it in; therefore the reasons of the Law conti∣nuing, it is very unreasonable to say, the Law was temporary, except either at the making of this Law, it had been
declared such, or some subsequent pas∣sage, or Evangelical precept, had an∣null'd it, none of which can be produ∣ced. And to say it was abrogated in the Gross, as being part of the ceremo∣nial Law (which all acknowledge ab∣rogate by the Gospel) is still as unrea∣sonable, seeing it is neither part of it, as being of later date many centuries of years, nor a kin to it, as being not at all Typical, but of natural usefulness and decency, becoming the service of God, and helpful to us therein. Instru∣mental musick in the worship of God, is therefore lawful under the Gospel: Or rather (because if it had been one∣ly allowed of old, and that allowance no wise repealed, it might from thence have been concluded lawful, therefore having been once by God prescribed), it must be esteemed in some measure obligatory, to be continued and kept up, where the condition of affairs in the Church of God will admit. It remains now, that we examineSect. 13. the expediency of the practice we plead for: for, according to our great Apo∣stle, many things may be lawful, which
are not expedient And here, that none may have reason to suspect, I have wit∣tingly waved any difficulty, the solu∣tion whereof might conduce to any mans satisfaction, I shall extend the consideration of this Point to all cases, as well general, as more particular, which I can judge subject to question. As first, Whether it be expedient un∣der the Gospel, or in the Christian state in general? Then more specially, Whether it be expedient under the Re∣formation, or in a Protestant Church? And Lastly, whether in our Church particularly. When the Question is moved touch∣ing any thing, whether it be expedient, I presume mens common sense thereof is, Whether the thing, being consi∣dered according to particular circum∣stances, be good and eligible. Now un∣der the Gospel, or in a Christian state of things, that which is chiefly to be con∣sidered as most particular or peculiar to IV. 23. the worship required by God, according to the very Doctrine of our Lord him∣self, is this, that by way of Eminency we worship God in spirit and in truth; not
with external adoration, and formal addresses (as did a great part haply of the ancient world in genera) nor with figurative rites and sacrifices, as did the Jewes, but consecrating to him first of all our souls, and by faith and love sincerely cleaving to him in every act of Worship, which, according to his institution, we pay unto him. And hereto, if instrumental musick were in the least repugnant, or (as I plead for it) prejudicial, would have a thou∣sand times exposed both life and for∣tunes, before I would ever have writ a word in its defence. But, as I have above both asserted and proved it to conduce much to the composing the soul, to stirring up affections, and en∣larging the heart, as well as to other laudable purposes, so do I profess be∣fore the earcher of all hearts, that I have not spoken or affirmed such things of it, but upon mine own experience and present sense, and upon as great assurance, as well can be had, of the like, from a multitude of serious and discreet Christians, with whom I have conversed. I confess, indeed, Sing∣ing
it self (alone and without instru∣ments) when tolerably melodious and orderly, much contributes hereto: but when meet instruments are added to make up the Harmony, the efficacy is much greater, and, to minds in any indifferent aptitude, well nigh irresi∣stible. Being therefore  find this pra∣ctice to conduce so intimately to, and to comply with, what is most peculiar∣ly the Evangelical worship (namely, the affectionate adhesion of the soul to1 Cor. X. 23. God) I conclude it to be of the number of the , not onely lawful but expedient under Christianity. Why any should doubt, whether it be expedient under the Reformation, I can guess at nothing else as a reason, but the common infirmity of Humane na∣ture, which, through abhorrency of one Evil, too frequently runs into the contrary Extreme. There is indeed great abuse of Church-musick in the Ro∣mish Church. Gross and intolerable enough it had been, that all their pub∣lick service should be in Latin, and so by the very language commonly un∣known to the people: But that this
Latin too should be so disguised by their musick, and way of singing, that even the Learned themselves, except well skilled in the daily Offices (a matter of no small difficulty) and able to turn their books (which, if I mistake not my self, the meer Laicks seldom have) and, besides this finally, keeping their eyes almost constantly upon them, can∣not possibly understand any considera∣ble part of what is sung, or so much as in their minds go along distinctly, and join with the Quire (this I say) leaves them no excuse, and renders their publick worship meer Pageantry; both learned and unlearned (at least of the Laity) are unprofitable. Nor do we find their leaders at all concerned at this mischief: they are so far from designing their peoples understanding (in the publick worship I mean) that they plainly contend it not to be neces∣sary, and indeed may seem to have contrived all wayes imaginable to blind them. Hence it comes to pass, that in a manner, all Religion amongst them is placed in the performance of certain external acts (commonly thus or thus
frequently, or to such a number) and their people bred to believe, their meer having heard a Mass, or some such like office (of which they scarce understand a word) to be a principal service of God. Now, because it can∣not but be a dull and tedious employ∣ment for men to be held by the ears, an hour or two, with words, the sense whereof they are ignorant of, it was therefore contrived in order to making the people swallow so unpleasing and sensless a worship, that all delicacy of Musick and Singing should be used in far the greatest part of their publick Of∣fices, whether the subject matter of them were fit to be sung, or not. So that upon the whole, the use of Musick among those people, in their publick worship, is onely to amuse the minds of the weaker, and entertain the senses of the more delicate sort: 'Tis a relish hi∣ting, in some proportion, all palates amongst them; a very considerable part of those Solemnities, which make up one of the most marveilous Holy cheats in the world; namely, that of a pom∣pous irrational shew, obtruded not on∣ly
on the more silly Vulgar, but upon men in other things sober and ingeni∣ous, in the room of a most divine and spiritual worship (such as was that which Christianity delivered) and by them all, as blindly as resolutely, ac∣quiesced in. It is plain then, here is as notorious an abuse o sacred Musick, as can easily be imagined: for, where∣as the rule is, that we sing with under∣standing (both of ourselves, who sing, and as neer as may be of the hearers) here bth singing and musick are design∣ed to make the people digest a worship they understand not; nay, as would seem, to render that more unintelligi∣ble to them, so, as in the end, to put them off contented with a little noise and musick, in stead of a reasonable and spiritual Service. This corruption being so gross, if meer indignation did in the beginning transport some Reformers so far, that they contended for the abolishing of all Musick in the worship of God, and be∣stowed, as above confessed, ill names upon it, this their transport may be excused, from the natural proeness
of men to overshoot themselves through sudden passion, where the provocati∣on is so great: in the mean while, the like indignation (which some yet con∣ceive against our practice a present) cannot be so excused, because there is not in our practice like cause. Let there∣fore such, who pretend to be sensible of the excesses of some good mens zeal in other like cases, and would them∣selves, in this and in all others, be ac∣counted men of sobriety and reason, let them, I say, calmly examine things, and duly consider, before they pro∣nounce. First, it is sure, Reformati∣on imports the taking away nothing but corruptions: we are not to destroy all we find practiced, and make all new, but to reduce all into due order accor∣ding to institution. And secondly, in the doing of this, if we will not incur the just imputation of partility & unrea∣sonableness, we must be constant to our own reasons, and, as an admira∣ble person advises, whatever measures we take, provide we contradict not ourMr. H. . . selves. I say then, We found singing before the Reformation, as has been
confest, abominably abused, and swer∣ving very widely from the institution and ends of it: Now we reformed it, not by taking away all singing (because singing it self was of divine institution) but by applying singing onely to such parts of the publick offices as were pro∣per to be sung, by proportioning it to its true ends, and, to that purpose, re∣conciling it to the peoples understand∣ing. In like manner, we fid Instru∣mental musick in use in the Church be∣fore the Reformation, & we have seen it at first to have come in by divine in∣stitution, and upon just & reasonable grounds: now, if we will be consi∣stent with our selves, we are to reform this in like sort; not by a total aboliti∣on, or banishing it utterly out of the publick worship, but by accommoda∣ting it to due cases, and in proportion to its meet ends of helping the people in the praise of God, and raising in them a more Heavenly temper of mind. Thus, we redress the abuse of it amongst the Papists, as it was onely a publick wheadle, and used for keeping the ge∣nerality from ever understanding or en∣quiring
into the matter of the prayets or praises, which they ▪ & together we leave it pure (in the condition as or∣dained by God) an help in, and orna∣ment of the worship of God. t is ap∣parent therefore, that   under∣stand Reformation and our selves as we ought, or will be just to our own grounds, we must conclude instrumen∣tal musick, in the publick worship, to be expedient in the Church Reformed. t remains now onely, that we en∣quire whether it be expedient in Our Church; which being a Christian Church and a Reformed Chrch, nothing can make instrumental musick inexpedent therein, but some unhappy particula∣rity, which if it should fall into the Catholick Church in general, or into any Reformed Church in particular, would there also a ke revai to lter the case. Of such possible , I can conjecture but two, ublick dis∣tress, or an afflicted state of , and the case of Scandall to a con∣siderable number of wek brthren. This I shall speak to an n a  o∣ther objections; at present, therefore,
as to the former onely, I say, Though the common people will be ever queru∣lous, even in the greatest affluence of all things, and a certain vein of men, whom, by reason of their vices or ne∣gligence nothing can possibly make rich, alwayes really indigent, though as long as the world stands, and men have dif∣ferent interests and passions, there will be taking parties, and prosecuting ani∣mosiies, and thence necessarily some torteings and instability of State (all which must be acknowledged at present amongst us) yet this being no more, than what is in a manner every where, and has been in the most flourishing Kingdoms, we must allow, blessed be the God of our wealth and peace, we are very rar from being a poor or em∣broed Nation; How far unsettled we are, though many talk, I am well as∣, not one man of ten thousand can  define: as it ever was, men lousies are greater than their dangers, and their complaints than their sufferings. Thse who are sober, humbl, and , find little di∣, one at all, from any pub∣lick
oppressions or violence. Now in such a state of affairs, if we will be Christians, we are to bless God (and that in the most glorious and zealous manner we can) for our present injoy∣ments and establishment, and we are very unworthy, and a thousand times deserving to lose what we injoy, if we will not trust God as to what shall come. I would in have any man of judgment in State-affairs, compare the time of David's Kingdom, when he established the goody Choral service amongst the Jewes, with our present condition (circumstantiated as badly as any mecntents can with truth re∣present it) and upon due considerati∣on, I doubt not but it will be resolved, We are now a more flourishing people, than at that time were the Jewes. Wit∣ness the infinite Structure amongst us, publick and private, our sumptuous furniture, our Tables, our clothes, and not a few mens Coffers, I did not say debaucheries. Let us consider our Neighbours round about us, and we must certainly be false to God and our selves, if we do not acknowledge Gods
singular mercies to us in outward plen∣ty and wealth now for a considerable tract of time. Even those scarcities we have felt (as to what concerns the ge∣nerality) may vye with the plenty of diverse other Nations. In such a state of things, to esteem that small cost which is bestowed on the worship of God, grievous, is to be highly un∣grateful: whatever the charge of our Quires is, the age, God be thanked, may full well bear it. Wee the ate of the Church such, as when holy Bi∣shops ministred the Body of our Lord in Twiggen baskets, and his Eloud in cups of Wood; when the wals or their Oratories were Hurdles, and the ce∣ringSpeln. Concil. in Ap∣parat. sedge; or such as in aterage, when tyranny having  ∣tudes of the faithful, a  hat could be raised by publick chaty, not suffi∣cing to redeem them, St. AmbroseAmbr. Offic. l. 2. c. 28. Pssid, v. S. Aug. c. 24. broke and melted down the Church∣plate, to purchase the liberty of the captive Brethren, which St. Austin af∣terwards, in the like case, is said to have imitated, were, I say, this, or any thing neer it, our present state,
something then might have been plea∣ded, of the inexpediency or unsuita∣bleness of so costly service. But things being (praised be God) far other∣wise, Alia aliam aetatem decent; if God give us cieled hous, 'tis sit the publick places, for his Woship, partake of some proportionable beauty: and if we can maintain musick for civil purposes, it is unreasonable we should judge the expence burdense in sacred nes; especially when the endowments of ve∣ry few of our Quires, are much due to the bounty of this age. From this, which hath been saidSct 14 touching the present stae of our Church, we are furnished with a due answer to that scornful demand, ordi∣narily made by way of objection against our Church musick, namely, Where were your Organs and Quires in Christ and in his Apostles dayes? Where in the Primitive age? They were, where the Jewish sacred musick and singers were in the Patriarchs dayes, and in the time of the Egyptian bondage; where they were, during the wan∣dring of the Church, in the wilderness,
or its unsettled state, while planting in the land of Canaan, silent, and as it were in the womb of their causes, expecting the prosperity and meet con∣dition of the hurch, as the funss of time, to give them bith, and make them speak▪ We say, the outward modes and circumstances of divine wor∣ship, have been ever mdelled and al∣tered according to the outward state of the Church: it was so under Juda∣ism, it has been so in the several ages of Christianity, and it is reasonable it should be so at present. And this is the true reason, why insrumental mu∣sick so slowly came in to the Church, both Jewish and Christian: at first, the state of neither would admit it. Whn the Jewish Church arrived at a settled estate, it came in thereunto by Gods appointment: The hristian hurch remained longer under persecution, and i a unsettled condition, than the Jewish, and hence it came to pass, that as the Primitive Christians took up onely the most simpe  of sing∣ing (such as their condti  bear) so the advces to Ar were
more leisurely: and there being never any sensible variations in publick practi∣ces, but they find some contradictions and censures (Even St. Ambrose's Hymns were censured as a guieful stratagem upon the people) so it must not be denied, but these little gradations o art met with (perhaps mre than their) due shares: In the mean time, this must be acknowledged by all, that the Christian Church took up Singing it self (as they did the common grunds of their Religion) from the Jewish, though not as Jewish, but as of divine institution: and being taken up thence, the particular wayes and accomplish∣ments of the Jewish singing, have been imitated or revived under Christianity, by such gradations, as providence has given way and occasion unto. So that the imputation of Novelty here must necessarily cease. Those practices, which having first obtained in the Church in obedience to positive divine laws, have been afterwards discontinu∣ed by the fate or necessity of times (and such truly was what we plead for) must not be accounted new, when retrieved.
But the Primitive Church not onely used no instrumental musick in their publick worship, but the Fathers of the purer ages expresly condemn'd it. I do not deny, but some Ancients may have censured it (in my poor judgment, with more severity than they ought) yet not all, not many, that I can find: and those who are verst in the Fathers Writings must confess, it is no wonder to find the Fathers divided in their judgments upon points of greater mo∣ment than this. Though great Enco∣miums of Church-singing, and expressi∣ons of the wonderful effects even of the very musicalness thereof, may be pro∣duced almost infinite out of the Fathers, yet I remember my self to have met with onely four passages, which expresly & particularly speak of instruments wi relation to this purpose▪ And  faithfully set down the sense of  The first and eldest is of Clemens of Ae∣xandria, . c. 4▪ in the place formerly mentio∣ned. His design there is to shew, what mirth or musick becomes a Christi∣an Table: and after he has banisht thence, as unworthy of Christians,
, all the ivious and effeminate musick of the Gentiles ▪ and the witchcrafts of their  notes and Numbers, by which t drew their Gests and selves into intempe∣rance and vieness; he concludes, at a Christian Banquet, singing  God and Christ to be mst comy: and then proceeds to or purpse:   &c. But if you have a mi o sing and play to the Lte or Hp, you inur not blame: you sha herein imitte the Righteous Hebrw King, well-beloved of God [wh sung] Rejoice in the Lord ye righeous, praise is comely for the upright. ise the Lord upon the Harp, sing to him wh a Psaltery of tn strings.  a nw song unto him. Let all the wod judge, if this be to condemn grave and sober instrumental musick in e  of God. The next, of the Antiens (but he of no certain name n age) is the Authour of the Orthodx Quest∣ons and Answers in the Wor o
Martyr. His words are as followes. , &c. If sin∣ging or Songs were invented by the Infidels or Heathen world onely for deceiving delight, and brought in amongst them under the Law () by reason of their being children in understanding, why do we who have received the perfect rudi∣ments f Grace, far different from those mentioned manners, use sing∣ing in our Assemblies, according to them who were children under the Law? To which the Answer is,  Simple singing is not a thing which is agreeable purely to them, who are children, but singing with sensless instruments, with dancing and with Timbrels. Wherefore in our Assemblies, the use of singing with such instruments, and other Rites befitting children, is taken away, and simple singing onely left, and then he runs on in a long praise of the virtues of Church-singing. Now it is considerable, that in this censure,
we meet with instrumental musick in company with the Jewish custome of Dancing with jingling or rattling in∣struments in their hands, which con∣sists not with that gravity and decency, which we both plead for, and practice in our Church-musick; so that it is not simply our practice, but somewhat more, which is here condemn'd, and which we our selves should have con∣demned, if any where in use in the Christian Church. But it will be said, he condemns instruments in general, as being part of those childish rudiments, and tells us onely, simple singing was then in use. He does so, and speaks herein his own judgment, and as we have confest the practice of those times: Of that practice, the reason we have already seen, and find not our cause at all prejudiced thereby; and of what importance his judgment is, let us now confider: First, the Authour, cer∣tainly, was not Justin the Philosopher and Martyr: for, he cites Origen, and Irenaeus, and calls the later of them a Martyr; whereas, it is certain by re∣naeus himself, that Justin Martyr was
elder than them both: this is noted byIn ap∣parat. Sac. tom. 2. Possevinus. He makes mention also of the Manichees, a Sect not in being till above one hundred years after Justin Martyr's dayes. Sylburgius Sixtus Senen∣sis, and our Countryman R. Coke have much more to the same purpose. Then, as to the credit of this Authour, This was the censure of the learned Scultetus, andCritic. Sacr. li. 2. c. 5. from him of Rivet also, that there oc∣cur in that work, Tot frivolae, tot Ju∣stini candore, pietate, doctrinâ indignis∣simae solutiones, &c. So many frivo∣lous answers, most unworthy of the ingenuity, piety and learning of Ju∣stin, that if any take the paines to compare this, with the writings of the true Justin, he must acknow∣ledge he has compared lead with gold. This being their dearly beloved Rivet▪s censure, let the Dissenters make much of the credit done their cause by the authority of that anonymous writer. The third Authour, I mean in or∣derIn Apo∣theosi Adver. Jdae∣o. of time, that I have found, is that famous Christian Poet Aurelius Prudenti∣us: he being big with love and prase towards our Lord Christ, thus breaks out.
Quicquid in aere cavo reboans tuba curva remngit, Quicquid in areano vomit ingens spiritus haustu, Quicquid casta chelys, quicquid testudo resultat, Organa disparibus calamis quod consona miscent, Aemula pastorum quod reddunt vocibus antra, Christum concelebret, Christum sonet, omnia Christum, Muta etiam fidibus sanctis animata lo∣quantur. What  or  Trumpets sound, From their  with a mighty , What notes Theorboes, or chast Lutes rebound, What cords  of Organs cast, What caves, reflecting  voices round, Let all speak Christ, all in Christs praise : And let dumb Animals, Whose voice to harmony not falls, Into harmonious strings their hallowed Fibres twie. He who sung this, thought neither Wind nor Stringed instruments unfit for the praise of God and Christ. The last of those passages out of the
ancient Fathers, which I have met with, express to this point, is in St. Chryso∣stome. The authour of the Apology for the jected English Ministers, cites St. Chrysostome on 1 Cor. XIV. as ha∣ving there taught, that this kind of Musick was to be reckoned amongst the childish trifles of the Jewish Church. He did well to cite an authority, of so great credit, so at large, that men that could not spend a day or two to search the Father, and read over all his Homilies on every part of that Chapter, might through despair of finding out what they looked for, neglect to search, and not detect his idling and falsity. That person must have better eyes than I have, & have consulted more than Three Editions of Chrysostom, who can find any such thing there. In his commen∣taries upon the Psalms, if any where, a man might expect something on this subject: and therein on Psal. L. I find this passage, which may a little plea∣sure the Apologist. , &c. These instruments were then
permitted [we have seen by the Ho∣ly Scripture, they were commanded, and that by God] by reason of their weakness, and to mold them into love and agreement, and raise their minds, to do with pleasure those things, which brought them advan∣tage; and for that God had a mind to bring them to a great deal of dili∣gence by such allurement. For God considering their sordidness, and sloth, and groveling nature, contri∣ved by this means to awaken them, mixing with the labour of attendance, the pleasingness of Melody. Against this Text of the Father, we have no exception to make, but onely what has been already insinauted, and for which, diverse express Testimonies of Scripture have been alledged, namely, that this Musick was not meerly permitted or al∣lowed, but by prescript order comman∣ded; and that though the command was delivered by David, & the contem∣porary Prophets to the Nation of the Jewes, yet it is obligatory still (at least by way of direction to the Gover∣nours of the Church) in like state of
affairs through all ages and peoples, because the reasons hereof are not tem∣porary, but likely to last as long as the world: and as to that part, we need onely to appeal to the reasons here as∣signed by the Father. We acknow∣ledge God, in this institution, regar∣ded humane infirmity, and designed the raising our souls, and making us in love with devotion and diligence therein, nor did we ever pretend o∣therwise. And now, what has the appeal to the judgment of the antient Fathers ad∣vantaged our adversaries, or lost us? That passage of an uncertain authour, which was most against us, comes not purely home to the point; and besides, his judgment, in the confession of our adversaries, is but very mean, and the writing certainly spurious. That pas∣sage of St. Chrysostome (as falsly repor∣ted, as cited by them) we no further dissent from, than as he manifestly abates the express term of Scripture, otherwise he makes for us. The testi∣monies on the affirmative side, are most closely pertinent, subject to no ambi∣guity
and undoubtedly authentique. Others may add more, but this is suf∣ficient to shew, Primitive antiquity disallowed not our practice, though the state of the Church then admitted it not. Neither will the state of the Church now admit it (will some say) if you regard spirituals, and the scandal it ad∣ministers to the weak multitude. To speak freely my sense to this Ob∣jection, I cannot but believe there are many persons, who pretend daily to be scandalized, that are not concerned in conscience what they pretend or say, nay, that understand not what scandal means. The pretence of scandal, as it is used, seems to be an Objection, when all others fail, against whatsoe∣ver men have a mind to oppg: when they are driven out of all other shifts, then they have recourse to this plea, 'tis matter of scandal to the weak Now let us onely in a word, conside what scandal is, and we shall find the pretence of it (though indeed com∣monly unreasonable in most cases, yet) most vilely unjust in this. It is very
plain by the Apostles discourse in 1 Cor▪ VIII, that to administer matter of sandal to another, is by our practice to emboden or draw in any to do, what by reason of weakness (that is, by be∣ing young in the Faith, and not verst in discerning the differences of good and evil) he is not satisfied in his con∣science he may do: and by how much the sollicitation to such action is the stronger, by so much the greater is the scandal administred. Now in the present case, besides that it is very un∣seasonable for a generation of knowing men (as would seem at least) bred up in a Church, which has enjoyed the Gospel, powerfully preached in its purity, for above an hundred years in continuance, besides, I say, that it is very unseasonable for such people, in such circumstances, to pretend scan∣dal and weakness, with what truth can any say, considering the present practice of our Church, that they are scandalized at our Church-musick? That others, whom it is not in their power to restrain, practice it, can be no sin of theirs: and if they judge,
that the practice of it is a sin in those, who practice it, how are they the scandalized, when their conscience is supposed resolved in the case, that it is a sin, and they have all the liberty they can desire to forbear it, no one going about to impose it on them. Our Cathedrals stand indeed open to those, who will thither resort to that kind of Service, but if any approve not that way, there are Parish-Churches for their free recourse, where the practice is plainer: none are forced to our Quires, nor blamed for not coming to them (if they attend the regular wor∣ship of God elsewhere) saving onely such who are of the body of them; and even they had their choice, whether they would have taken upon them those places, to which such an obligation is appendant. Whereby it is evident, that those who pretend the consciences of men with us, to be burdened, amongst other spiritual oppressions, by Orga∣nical musick, and singing prayers, seek onely to draw an unjust Odium up∣on our Church, and discover their own complaints not to be without malice:
That the world might think they have reason for their secession and clamours, they cry out of the pressure of injuncti∣ons, which are not in being. But it will be said, still there is the power of Example to induce men into this suspicious practice, and the influ∣ence of great mens example upon infe∣riours being considered, this is scan∣dal forcible enough. I deny the pra∣ctice to be suspicious: We avow it to be good, and neither doubt of it, nor of the sufficiency of our arguments to ap∣prove it to all unprejudiced persons; and therefore we practice accordingly with full satisfaction of mind. The disseters from our Church generally presume it to be evil, and if they have reasons, which satisfie their conscien∣ces therein, to them it is so; and ac∣cordingly they forbear it, and we cen∣sure them not for so doing: let them in like manner not censure us for the practice of what, in the fear of God and sincerely in our consciences, we allow, and reap benefit by. If in the mean while, there be any persons of an amphibious condition, who doubt
whether the practice in contest be good as we say, or evil as they say, as these can be but very few (and therefore the pretence touching the multitude falls) so, if any of those do practice without full perswasion of Faith, let all judge who gives the scandal, We, who avow our own practice, and, though we are assured we can justifie it before God and men, yet leave those who are unsatisfied to their liberty in this regard, requiring onely, that as they are not censured by us for the use of their liberty, so neither that they cen∣sure others; Or They, who sruple, wrangle, disseminate all the doubts they can, seek for knots in bulrushes, amuse their own minds and others, and when they have done, will neither quietly use their own liberty, nor be contented we injoy ours. It is the re∣solution of a good Casuist of their own, touching a scrupulous conscience, thatAmes  con∣▪ 1.  c. 7. is, a conscience, which though it doubts, yet rather inclines to one side than the other, That, first, endea∣vours be used, by a just examination of the matter in question, to remove
the scruple: If that cannot be so effe∣cted, to lay the scruple aside, and banish it our thoughts; but if still it be troublesome to over-rule it, and act contrary to it. For (saith he) a Scruple being an unreasonable fear, and without due foundation, can∣not oblige; nay, nay, by customa∣ry acting against such scruples, con∣science becomes the stronger, and more quiet. Let them now act ac∣cording to their own doctrine, or ac∣cording to ours, and teach that others do so, and there will be satisfaction of conscience, and no sin in that behalf: but if they will do neither, but still perpetuate scruples, and pretences of scandal, we appeal to God and Angels, 'tis not we, but they that are guilty of the scandal, if any really be; and not of scandal onely, but of unreaso∣nableness, inquietude and confusion in the Church of God: and so farewell scandal. All, that I judge material by way of objection yet unanswered, is, what haply some may speak with truth and candour, as they conceive, from their
own experience; namely, That where∣as we pretend this kind of Musick and Singing, to be an help of devotion, they for their part find it clean contra∣ry. Possilly they will tell us, they censure not those who use it, nor load the practice with ignominious names, nor regard much any other arguments against it, but this their own sense, out of which they cannot suffer them∣selves to be argued: They cannot be∣lieve it fit for Christian worship, because they are conscious, that it consists not with the peoples understanding (which yet is required, as we have said in the Apostolical rule) and therefore if it do beget any good affection) as we pretend (such good affection must be onely some slight and confused passi∣on of the more sensitive part, and short infinitely of that rational devotion, or those distinct acts of Faith, love and gratitude, which are exerted by holy men in the paying such a Worship, each passage of which is understood: and besides, there are very few, if any, of the common people that can join herein, so that such service can∣not
be the common act of the Congre∣gation, but is limited onely to those of the Quire, most of whom also are concerned meerly as to the Notes and Musick, little, or seldom attending the sense, and engaging their souls God∣wards, as is necessary. Now, as to this objection, I con∣fess in good earnest, I look not upon it as a pretence or cavil in those who make it, but as their real thoughts: & as to the whole sober and serious part of those, who dissent from our Cathe∣dral Service, I really believe, some such misprision, as this, is summarily the ground of their averseness. Before, therefore, I come to the particulars, supposed to be matter of experience or spiritual sense, I shall humbly request such persons, that they will do them∣selves and me, and above all, the cause of Truth, so much justice, as with me a little to reflect, modestly and imparti∣ally, upon this their experience in the gross. First, when they came to make tryal (if ever they did) whether they could in a spiritual sort worship God in the Choral way, did they not come
prejudiced against the Liturgy it self, against our Vestments and Ceremonies, as well as against the Musick? Having been bred up in time of a general de∣suetude of such things, and seasoned with ill opinions of them, were they not surprised with variety of passions and concernments, partly at the Novel∣ty (as to themselves) partly at the un∣gratefulness of sundry occurrencies? And if so, then Secondly, How can they look upon themselves, when un∣der such little disturbances, to have been capable of making a fair and can∣did judgment or tryal? They were not haply, so far acquainted with the very Text of the Liturgy, as to under∣stand the reasons and particular excel∣lencies thereof, had it been officiated in the plainest way: how then can they justly lay the blame of their not under∣standing, of their want of due affecti∣on and consent, upon the sole Musick, when it is plain, they wanted such pre∣requisite information, as might capa∣citate them for such devotion; and be∣sides, their minds, being not void of disorder, could not calmly attend,
much less understand, consider, and dispose themselves to consent. It may be very true upon the whole, in stead of devotion, they were under some confusion, and forfeited that compo∣sedness of mind which is necessary for the meet Worship of God: but possi∣bly it is not true, that the Musick alone was the occasion of it; and they would have found it far otherwise, had they been acquainted with the ser∣vice before hand, as our people gene∣rally are (which is but a part of due preparation) or had they not suffered by those other prejudices and distur∣bances, that arose from thence. Per∣sons not well informed, or discompo∣sed, are very unmeet Judges. These men therefore, whose experience is so contrary to that of other sober persons in the same case, (and possibly, to the general nature of mankind) have all the reason in the world to suspect this their experience: and though they may esteem it to be a kind of spiritual sense, yet perhaps it is but some pecu∣liar complication of passions incident unto them, by reason of those unhap∣py
circumstances they are or were under: And then, the judgment framed here∣upon must needs be as fallacious, as its grounds. Wherefore, if they will reasonably and justly urge this argu∣ment, it behooves them first, to in∣form themselves of the particulars of our Service, and satisfie themselves touching the innocency of those small ceremonies in use amongst us, that they may not be surprised by the strangeness of either to them; then, to lay aside all manner of prejudice, which the fate of their education may have instilled into them; and being thus qualified, lastly, to make some second and better tryals, wherein they may be able to avow their impartiality. And that then the success may be otherwise, will be evident by the exa∣mination of the presumed particulars of their experience; of which the first is, that our Musick and singing consists not with the generalities understand∣ing. Whereto, I say, onr Quires may be better understood, as to what they sing, than any Parochial assembly in their common and mxit singing. The
blending of so many different and irre∣gular voices, their drawlings and affe∣cted tones, much more confound the words, than does our regular course. Witness our daily experience in the case: I forbear particular instances, how little our Congregations are under∣stood in their singing (nay, how lit∣tle many times they themselves under∣stand, as to the greater part of them) because such instances might be odious. But that our Quires may, with great facility, be understood, if people will not be notoriously wanting to them∣selves, is manifest; First, for that as to the main, touching all that is com∣monly sung, it is known before hand, that it will be sung such a day, and such a part of the day: The general Hymns, Responds, &c. our people have without book: The Psalms for the day, or season, all that have Books can turn to, and most join with the Quire: Those that have not, or cannot use them, may stand as neer some of the plain distinct voices of the Singers, or of some of the people who sing plainly, as they can, and by this
means understand all, and join, as to their minds, in the address. All the difficulty is in the Anthems, because these vary: but it is known first, that each Church has particular Books of its particular Anthems, which are disperst amongst the people with intimation, which is the Anthem to be sung at that time. Then, that most Anthems be∣ing taken out of the Psalms, all who have Prayer-books are furnisht with co∣pies of them. Besides, that frequent use makes the particular Anthems known in each Church, so that our ve∣ry people can repeat most of them. Lastly, there is the same advantage in this case, as beforesaid touching the Psalms, of some distinct clear voices, which may be understood every sylla∣ble by any, who attend to them. And indeed, our present graceful way of singing comes so neer distinct pronunci∣ation, that there is not so much diffi∣culty in understanding all, word for word, as is pretended, especially to those who are the least used to it. So that I may confidently averr, such who without prejudice attend, may easily
understand, what is sung in our Quires, if they are not negligent, or, in a sort, stupid. And the understanding being the great passage of all into the rational soul, this first imputation of our Mu∣sicks rendring what is sung unintelligi∣ble, being proved thus manifestly injuri∣ous, the other, for the main fall of them∣selves. For, as to the second, what shall hinder our Singings operating to as distinct and plenary devotion as may be, if all, that is sung, is, or (if peo∣ple prove not grosly negligent) may be most distinctly understood, and with much more certainty & ease, than in the Parcchial way? if my understanding can frame distinct notions, my will certain∣ly may exert as distinct desires or vows. And therefore Thirdly, if by the peoples joining with the Quire, in the praises or petitions they sing, be meant the peoples consent, it is plain by what we have now said, that this is no wise hindered. But if thereby be meant, the conjunction of their voices to those of the Quire, as this is not al∣waies necessary, so neither is it in far
the greatest part of what is sung pre∣cluded. There are few, if any of our people, who are the least used to Ca∣thedral Service, but can, and do sing with the Quire the plain Tones of the Psalms, in which too very often, we sing our most usual Hymns, the Te De∣um, Magnificat, and the rest. The same I must say of the Responds, when (as most commonly) plainly sung. Nay, even in the very Chorus's of our Anthems, as many as can sing musical∣ly may, and in the Versicles, or any other part of the Service, if any can∣not or may not vocally join, it is suffi¦cient, that the consent of their hearts di∣stinctly go along with the voices of those who sing. Weare certain in the antient Christian Church, the people generally sung onely some  or closes of Ver∣ses: & this was taken undoubtedly from the like practice of the Jewes, of which we have some foot-steps in 2 Chron. V, &c. where we find the words, at which the generality struck in, are said to have been, For he is good, for his mer∣cy endureth for ever; and yet it was t this close, that the glory of the Lord si∣led
the house. Notwithstanding it is plain by what we have said, much more is allowed, and daily practised by the people amongst us. But will some say, I cannot keep my mind attent to the things, except di∣stinctly I use the words, which it is granted I may not (at least alwayes) in the Quire. I answer, that is a mi∣stake, you may as well distinctly attend to the things signified by words, when those words are uttered by another, as when they are uttered by your selves. But if the exercise of the Organs of of speech be to any alwayes so necessa∣ry, there may be a kind of low whis∣pering singing, as well as there is such a speaking, which many use after the Minister in the publick Prayers, and which will spoil no Harmony, yet suf∣ficiently exercise your private self. It is sure God understands this, and those who find it necessary may use such still voice, when they cannot, without di∣sturbance of others, sing more audi∣bly. Upon the whole, I profess I see no advantage to devotion, which can
be imputed to our Choral way, used as it ought to be, or may be, and I hope generally is. But if any do find it, to put them under any such disadvantage, as they ought to impute this to a certain  or particular temper of their own, so they may safely, and, as a∣foresaid, without censure from us fre∣quent onely the plainer way. We take what we find best for us, and so let them do. Having thus answered all the objecti∣onsSect. 15. I could meet with or frame, which I could judge of moment, against our Church musick, I might here have end∣ed this Discourse: for I may seem much to have anticipated my self, as to the last Head proposed in the beginning (the spiritual advantage to be made by our present way of singing) having evinced the conducency of our practice to the most spiritual or Evangelicl Worship, the worshipping God with most affectionate adhesion of soul. But I have a bove insinuated, that even in our Choral use, there are some things ob∣oxious to censure, and which, I con∣eive, might be better ordered, or
contrived: and much more in the com∣mon Parochial way. Besides, the free∣dome and ingenuity I have all along professed, may seem to require, that I proceed a little more openly and di∣stinctly on the fifth propounded Que∣stion; which therefore I shall do. And let no man think I will spare any thing, which in conscience I judge justly chal∣lengeable. I hope ever to approve my self equally an enemy to Faction and Flattery; and that none shall be aggrie∣ved, either h my partiality on one hand, or the confessions which I shall make, and the amendments, which I shall desire, on the other. CHAP. IV How the present waies of Singing in our Church, may be mana∣ged to the most spiritual advan∣tage of all sorts. Sect. 1. A more express process to the last Head of this Discourse. No alte∣ration
of Laws necessary to redress what may be presumed amiss in the Choraluse. Sect. 2. A brief view of the old Jewish Quire, their Number of Members, their office, kinds of Musick, and sorts of Song. Sect. 3. Of the consti∣tution and present state of our Quires. Sect. 4. An account of the Particulars most obnoxious to censure in the Cho∣ral use. Sect. 5. The grand Original hereof, want▪ of Learning and due institution in the Quire: men or Church-Musicians. Sect. 6. The necessity and facility of redressing such want. Sect. 7. Of further remedies necessary. An hum∣ble supplication to the superiour Clergy, who shall condescend to read this Di∣scourse, that they will please to re∣sume respectively, and exercise their rightful powers in appointing the Daily Services and Anthems. Sect. 8. What may, without alteration or breach of Laws, be done in reforming the Paro∣chial singing. Sect. 9. An humble ad∣dress to the Parochial Clergy, to en∣deavour, as far as may be, such Re∣formation. Sect. 10. The Conclusion, by way of submission of all to the judg∣ment
of the Church, and earnest ex∣hortation to all Quires, to be of Gods mind, in preferring Devotion to Art. I Have already said, I do not conceiveSect: 1. my self yet discharged as to the last Head of this Discourse. My business therefore now is to enquire, more di∣stinctly, how we may manage our pre∣sent singing, in all our sacred Assem∣blies, to the most spiritual advantage: for it is sure, God is then most truly praised, when our hearts are most en∣larged and drawn forth toward him. Now, to this purpose, the point of main concernment is, How we may re∣dress whatever may be conceived amiss, or at least improveable, in our respective practices. Whatever those particulars are in our Choral way, I do not con∣ceive any of them to be of such nature or importance, as require any alterati∣on of Publick Laws. As to the parti∣cular statutes of some Churches, I can∣not tell what may be said: I must ne∣cessarily leave the judgment of them to such, who are particularly concerned and conversant therein, being my self but
acquainted but in very few. It is,Gloss: ad Decr. Greg l: 1. Tit: 25. Ver: Donet Lecti. ones. in effect, acknowledged by the Ca∣non-Lawyers, that the different cu∣stoms of several Churches, render it a matter very difficult generally to de∣fine, what belongs to the Office of each Dignitary in the Quire. Yet, supposing any tolerable concord for the main, betwixt the customs or statutes of particular Churches, several Dignitaries or persons must, by their Office, be inve∣sted with a power sufficient for what in∣spection or correction we shall desire; and so, neither here will there need any change of Laws, if the persons im∣powered will be faithful to their Office. And truly the change, as to matter of practice, will be so easie, as that it cannot possibly make any noise where∣soever introduced: so that upon the whole, none concerned need to fear the danger of making such change, who shall be convinced, that the practice we shall propose (being supposed a Point settled by no Law, and there∣fore arbitrary and changeable) is bet∣ter, and more conducing to spiritual Worship, than that which is in use al∣ready.
Now, before I come to parti∣culars, that I may not seem to have ne∣glected any general, which may give light into the case in hand, I shall pre∣mise a brief View of the Old Jewish Quire, and then consider the common state of ours; both which having in our eye, and together regarding the Apo∣stolicall rules before laid down, we may hope, what we shall conclude may escape the censure of being Rash, though hap∣ly not of being Insufficient. The old Jewish Quire is, as above-said,Sect 2. that Divine Originall, whence first we derive, and which, with such variations as the Evangelicall Oeconomy, the present Age, People and State of affaires do re∣quire, we pretend to transcribe: of this therefore it is necessary we take some view. And certainly it was not without some considerable design of providence, that an account hereof is set down so particularly in holy writt, especially in the Chronicles and in the Titles of the Psalms. First, as to the Number of the Quire∣men, it was exceeding great, as well it might be in a nation, wherein there was to
but one Quire, and yet, accounting from Thirty yeares old to fity (for such was the first Order touching the Enrolling the Levites for service of the Taber∣nacle Numb: IV. 2.) there were no lesse than thirty eight thousand able persons, fit for one Ministry or other about the Tabernale, when David first modell'd the Jewish Quire, 1 Chron: XXIII. 3. Not∣withstanding By the last words of David the Levites were to be numbred from twenty yeares old (ver: 27.) which must needs considerably enhance their num∣ber. Of this vast multitude of the Levites onely Four thousand were sett apart to praise God with the nstruments, which David had made (ver: 5) that is for the service of God Quire▪ wise. But it would seem, onely Two hundred eighty eight, and those by twelve in a course, used to be in ordinary attendance; so many being usually chose out of the rest, as they were best Instructed in the Songs of the Lord, and cunning or skill∣full at their Instruments: (Ch: XXV. 7.) the rest being probaly as a semiuary, whene vacancies, as they fell, or, at greater solennities, extraordinary mm∣bers,
might be supplied. Now suppo∣seing,De Rep. Heb: l: 2. c. 7. as P. Cunaeus amongst others ac¦counts, that after the hundred sixty∣eighth day each courses turn came again in order, then every twelve attended their week, and at the weekes end were relieved by another twelve. Onely each twelve being to have their  a Chief Musician or Praecentor, and there being but three of these chosen by joint consent out of all the Levites, ac∣cording to the number of the chief fa∣milies of the Tribe, namely, Heman, Asaph, and Ethan (Ch. XV. 17.) who is also ordinarily called Jeduthun, the attendance of these three, or of their Deputies or Vicars, (for such we may suppose those Secundaries, or Brethren of the second degree, next to Heman and the rest, to have been, ver. 18.) the attendance of these, I say, must needs have had more frequent returns. Now to collect in brief the particu∣lars of their duty in their Ordinary at∣tendance. The Quire of Twelve, with their Praecentor in the head of them (whose Office it was, as the Principal to begin the thanksgiving, Neh. XI. 17.)
were to stand every morning to thank and to praise the Lord, and likewise at Even, 1 Chron. XXIII. 30. This was (as we may conclude from what is re∣corded of the solemn sacrifices offered by Hezekiah) at the time of the conti∣nual burnt-offering, Morning and Eve∣ning; For thus we read 2 Chr. XXIX. 27, 28. And when the burnt offering begun, the song of the Lord began also, with the instruments ordained by David King of srael—And this continued until the burnt offering was finished. The same also seems intimated, though not in such express terms, 1 Chron. XXIII. 30, 31. And thus much is generally held by the learned, that since the dayes of David, the publick sacrifices of the Congregation, which they offered as in strict duty bound, were never presen∣ted without solemn Hymns sung by the Quire, according to the Ordinance of David. These Hymns, or this the song of the Lord, as above named, we may conclude to have been most frequently some of those four Psalms, wherein oc∣curs that solemn laudatory form. For he is good, for his mercy endureth for
ever. 2 Chron. V. 13. and VII. 6. Ezra III. 41. &c. Namely, the CVI, the CVII, the CVIII, or the CXXXVI Psalm: But not solely these; for none of these Psalms is intituled to Asaph, yet Hezekiah the King, and the Princes, commanded the Levites to sing praise un∣to the Lord in the words of David and Asaph the Seer, 2 Chron. XXIX. 30. And what Hymn they should sing at such or such time, if it came not par∣ticularly in course for the day, most probably their Praecentor did appoint atVatabl. Btr ▪ . 15. &c. his discretion; for this, diverse lear∣ned men conceive to be the import of Asaph's, Heman's and Jeduthun's be∣ing to prophesie with harps, Praescribe∣bant prophetias quas canerent, They prescribed the prophetick Hymns which the Levites sung. Now at the time of this their officiating, the Quires station was at the East end of the Altar, 2 Chr V. 12. on a Stage, or kind of Galle∣ry, made for that purpose, as Maimonides tells us. But though we have said there were only twelve required to attend atDe Eccl: Offic.  c. 3. a time (ten of whom, as Isidorus saith, on what ground I know not)
made up a Quire) yet others, whose course then it was not, might attend if they pleased: and those that did not, we may conceive employed, either upon new composures, (as is plain by the titles of the Psalms, directed for this purpose some to Asaph, some to Heman, some to Jeduthun, the three great Magistri Sym▪ phoniae, and others to The sons of Ko∣rah, who were also excellent Compo∣sers, but the three first undoubtedly inspired for Musical composition) or else in teaching or practising such Com∣positions. Thus, when Asaph and his brethren were chosen chief Musicians, Chenaniah was made chief Master of the Song, I Chron. XV. 22. Chenaniah chief of the Levites was for Song: he in∣structed about Song, because he was skil∣ful. And it would seem to every course or Ward, there was such an instructer: for, at the first regulating of the Quire, They cast lots, ward against ward, as well the Teacher, as the Scholar,  hr. XXV. 8. So that we need not fear to say, they had singing Schools, and their singing was very artificial. Such was their ordinary attendance
and emploiment. On extraordinary seasons and festivals, the solemnity was onely greater, and the Quire ful∣ler: And besides the Quire, there were certain Priests which sounded with Trumpets, but these, I conceive, distinct from the Quire, 2 Chron. XX. 26. and to sound usually before the Song of the Lord begun, 2 Chron. VII. 6. The Priests sounded the Trumpet before them, and all the people stood. The design of the Trumpets was, as above proved, to notifie the sacrifice to the people, and therefore it may reasonably be presumed, the sounding of them did not commonly interfeer with the Song (which begun, saith Maimonides, at the time of the Wine, that is, the Drink-offerings being pour∣ed out) but prepare the people for at∣tention. I do not deny, but that up∣on some extraordinary solemnities, such as was the dedication of the Tem∣ple, the Trumpetters and Singers were as one, to make one sound to be heard in prai∣sing and thanking the Lord: (2 Chron. V. 13.) but neither was this at the time of sacrifice, for the sacrifice came, along
after, Chap. VII. nor was this the or∣dinary sound or tune of the Trumpets, nor possibly were these the usual trum∣pets of the Sanctuary, made by Gods command all of one piece (for, of them there were by Gods command but two, whereas of these there were one hundred and twenty) but other more musical ones, fitted for consort by King David, the great inventor of Musical instruments for holy use. Fur∣ther, I do not conceive the Priests to have sounded constantly at the conti∣nual burnt-offerings every day (which yet were constantly attended as before∣said, with the service of the Quire) but onely upon their Festivals and so∣lemn days; because the letter of the Law, touching the institution of the trumpets limits the use of them (as to theP. Cun. de Rep. Hber.  2. c. 7. point of sacrifice) meerly to those, Num. X. 10. On these also, especially on the three great Festivals, even all the Priests, or, as many as would, might attend: onely those, whose course it was, were to minister about the sacrifices, the rest being imploied either in sounding a greate multitude of Trumpets, or,
proving auxiliaries to their brethren attending in course, if overburdened by the number of Free-will-offerings. And upon such times, saith the lear∣ned Bertram, All the three chief mu∣sicians (and therefore, undoubtedly, De Rep: Iud. c. 15. a greater number of the Singers respe∣ctively under them) were to ap∣pear, Asaph being to assist Heman on the right hand, and Ethan or Jedu∣thun to assist him on the left, and all to join in the song of the Lord. This, I presume, may be concluded in a great measure from 1 Chron. VI. 33, 39, 44. and 2 Chron. V. 11, 12. compared. Now, as to the Musical instruments, which they used in this their ministry, they were ordinarily Cymbals, Psalteries and Harps; for of these we have most frequent mention, in all Texts recor∣ding either the constitution, ministry or restauration ▪of the Jewish Quire. As to the first, it is said David spake to the chief of the Levites, to appoint their bre∣thren to be singers, with instruments of Musick, Psalteries, and Harps, and ymbals, 1 Chron. XV. 16. And of the Persons thus chosen, & their sons, when
established by Royal authority, we read They were separated for the Service, to prophesie with Harps, with Psalteries, and with Cymbals, 1 Chron. XXV. 1. In the Records of their Ministration, though upon extraordinary occasion, we have mention for the main onely of the same instruments, with the addition of an hundred and twenty Trumpets, 2 Chr. V. 12 And when restored by Hezekiah, it is said, Hezekiah set the Levites in the House of the Lord, with Cymbals, and with Psalteries, and with Harps, 2 Chr. XXIX. 25. So also in the dayes of Ne∣hemiah and Eza, Neh. XII. 37. Now these three sorts of instruments, if I mistake not my self, are of as different kinds as can be made. I find no ampler, nor can I conceive a more adaequate di∣vision of Musical instruments, than in∣to , & , stringedMer∣sen. de instru.  Harm.  l. 1. ad Prop. 1. instruments, wind instruments, and pul∣satil or ringing ones. (That of mobi∣lia and immobilia is frivolous) And touching the Harp, that it was a strin∣ged instrument, there is no question; though of what fashion Davids Harp was, at so great a distance of time, and
after so great loss of the Jewish Lear∣ning, we must, I think, be content to be ignorant: the most material point which I find of it, is, what JosephusAntiq. Judaic. l. 7. c. 10. tells us, that it had ten strings, and was plaid on with a quill. That what we render a Psaltery ( I mean in the Original) was a Wind-instrument, I cannot much scruple. All agree it was an instrument like a Bottle (for  also signifies a Bottle, and is so used in diverse places of Scripture) and the reason Etymologists give of the name, is, because it was apt to be filled with wind, as a Bottle with liquour.—Ad∣jungunturPag∣nin.▪ in Thes. ing. S. ad vo∣cem. etiam fistulae perforatae, aut ca∣lami perforati, è quibus egreditur dulcis sonus. To this Bottle were joined se∣veral Pipes, with many holes, out of which comes a sweet sound. At this rate, it must have somewhat resembled a Bag-pipe. The learned Buxtorf alled∣gesLexic. Rab∣bin. the authority of Aben Ezra, asser∣ting that the Psaltery had in it Ten holes; though Josephus tells us, it had  twelve sounds or notes, andUbi su∣pra. was struck or plied upon with the fin∣gers. This, possibly, may import no
more, than the stopping the holes di∣versly with the fingers, in order to va∣riation of Notes. However, in the Hebrew Glossary Aruch  is ex∣presly interpreted, an instrument in form of a Bottle, on which they make musick by blowing. I may not dissemble, but that I have met with considerable authorities to the contrary, asserting it to have been a stringed instrument; the chief whereof is the Translation of the Greek Septuagint, who three times translate, , with a Psal∣tery of ten sirings. But let us here con∣sult the Original: In one of the places, which they thus render, namely, in Psal. XCII. 4, The ten▪ stringed instru∣ment, if we must so read (which then according to Josephus, seems to have been the Harp) and the Psaltery, are expresly distinguished by a copultive  Ʋpon an instru∣ment o e [possibly notes or sounds, as probably as strings] and upon the Psaltery: which distinction makes it more reasonable to take  &  in those two other places, Psal. XXXIII, 2. & CXLIV. 9. for two distinct i∣struments
(according as the Interlinea∣ry of Arias Montanus, as also Tremellius, and our English Version read) than for one and the same: The omission of a co∣pulative is no infrequent thing in any Language I know. Besides, as is al∣ready intimated, though  should be an Epithet of  (which in my opinion is not so reasonable, I am sure not necessary) yet it will not infer the Psaltery to have had strings, it being equally applicable to sounds as well as strings. So that it is not conclusible from Scripture, that the Psaltery was a stringed instrument. Again, Mr. Ains∣worthOf Mu∣sick in the Tem∣ple. At the end of his Note on the Ps. (a very learned person in his way) reports from authorities, which I have not opportunity to search, that the Psaltery had strings, and they plaid thereon. This being onely his Version, and not knowing what the words are which he renders had strings, and they played, nor consequently what the ambiguities thereof are, I cannot build much hereon: whether it had strings or no, 'tis sure they played on it. But however, the excellent Buxtorf helps us here again, who produces Kimchi up∣on
Isai. informing us that there were Two sorts of Psalteries, some with strings, others without, and yet both came un∣der the name  Psaltery. And that, there might be two sorts, is not impro∣bable; for, after the Psalteries made and introduced by David, of the form of which we have already spoke, there were others made of Algum wood by King Solomon, and there were none such seen before in the Land, 1 Chron. IX. 11. Now that which induces me to this opinion, that the Psaltery was a wind-instrument (besides the mul∣titude of authorities, diverse of which I have produced, and could add more, were it not tedious) is, First, The Etymon of the word, by which it properly signifies a Bottle made of dry or dressed leather; and, that they should make a stringed instrument of such form or materials, seems to me very improbable. Secondly, the natural probability of the thing, it tending more (ad complementus Musices) to the perfection of Musick, and of the Quires performances in that kind, that these three instruments should be of
three distinct kinds, than that two of them should be of one, and the third of another, when (possibly) of the noblest kind of instruments (for such do I conceive wind-instrnments to be) according to the contrary Hypothesis there must not be one. Thirdly, the authority of Josephus designing (as it may seem) to prevent, or favourably decide the controversie, who having told us the Harp had ten strings, adds presently the Psaltery had twelve sounds. What precisely he meant thereby, we may be ignorant, but in the general, we cannot conceive he would have changed his terms, had the instruments he spoke of, been both of the same kind. I will set down his words, be∣cause none may suspect me of design, or wilful partiality: they are these;  Let each abound in, and enjoy his own sense. That Cymbals were a Pulsatil instru∣ment, there is no question, though the form of them be not certain: Quae∣namHarm instr. fuerint Hebraeorum Cymbala vix est
ut quisquam scire possit, is Mersennus'sl. 4. ad prop. 16. censure. As to their materials, we are sure from Scripture, that they were made of brass, 1 Chron. XV. 19. and in other places. And it is observable, that we have no Hebrew name signify∣ing a Cymbal in the Old Testament, of a singular form. There are indeed two names for them, one in a ual form,  the other in a Plural  (both from the same root  Tinnire, Palpitare, Hab. III. 16.) which shew us, by their Etymon, that Cymbals were a kind of ringing instruments, and by their Grammatical form, that they were used (at least) onely by pairs. And answerable are the suffrages of the Rabbies, Erant duo instrumenta aerea,R. Da∣vid a∣pud Pagn. in Thes. Ling. S. ad voc. Vid.  alios ibid. quae se invicem collidentia sonum redde∣bant: Cymbals were two instruments of brass, which being struck one against another, made a Musical sound; and (as we shall see present∣ly) a very lowd one. These notions, or descriptions of their instruments in ordinary, come the neerest truth, to my poor sense, of any that I have had advantage to col∣lect;
and admitting them for truth, it must be concluded, that of old, they praised God daily in the Temple, with instruments of the greatest variety ima∣ginable. But let the Psaltery have been a Wind-instrument, or a stringed-instrument, or some more artificial conjuncture of both in one (which possibly he meant,R. Sa∣lomon apud Buxt. who said it took its name from  stultus, and gave the reason, quia stultesce∣re facit omnia instrumenta Musica) it matters nt much, for it is sure, that (especially on Festivals and greater so∣lemnities) they used other instruments, besides the three above named, and such, which undoubtedly were wind∣instruments. Not to say any more of the hundred and twenty Trumpets, such was undoubtedly the Cornet, 2 Chron. XV. 14. Psal. XCVIII. 6, &c. which is the most proper rendering of  and possibly was meant by  too 1 Chron. XXV, 5. Such also the Flut or Pipe,  Psal. CXLIX, 3. & CL, 4. &  Isa. XXX, 29. both from  Hollow, and, as our Masters teach us, made of fine wood or Cane.
Such, lastly, the Organ, or Metal∣pipe  Gen. IV. 21. & Ps. CL. 4. and possibly some others. And if Cymbals should be suspected not to have been Pulsatil instruments, the Timbrel or Tabret, as  is indiffe∣rently rendred, 1 Sam X, 5. Ps. CL, 4. and many other places, can be ima∣gined no other. The same, I conceive too, is to be said touching the  which (I suppose, for want of a fitter word) our Translators rendred cor∣nets, 2 Sam. VI, 5. but perhaps signi∣fies nothing like them. The Septua∣gint rendred it Cymbals (and liker Cymbals certainly were those instru∣ments, than are cornets): St. Jerome, and from him Tremellius, more proper∣ly Sistra. The word truly signisies com∣moventia, as Arias Montanus renders it: and if we will hear the sense of o He∣brew Masters, these instruments were thus named, Quòd homo dum illa pul∣sat, agitet corpus & saltet: because he who beats them, mch stirs hisR, D. . ap Pagn. in Ts. body, and, as it were, leaps in beating. They would seem a certain kind of Kette-drums. For, whereas
some Grammarians have rendred Si∣strum an instrument like an Horn, the mistake is intolerable: it was an instru∣mentVid: Serv. in Virgil. Aen. 8. prope fin▪ & Rader. in Mart. l. 14. Ep. 50. made, è metallo arguto, of the most ringing metal, and used first by the Egyptians in the worship of their God Isis, named  from , be∣cause being struck and tost, it made a shrill sound; and was after used in war in stead of a Trumpet: —patrio vocat agmina Sistro. Virg. More instruments of this nature possi∣bly they might have: as also of  Ps. CL, 4. which I am contented to take for stringed instruments, though the Rabbies are not yet agreed what its im∣port is. In 1 Sam. XVIII, 6. we read of , most probably instruments of three strings. It is also usually con∣ceived, that they had instruments of eight strings, though I find yet no authority for it in Scripture, having reason otherwise to interpret, 1 Chron. XV. 21. and the title of Ps. VI. And of the Harps being a tenstringed instru∣ment, we have already spoken. Of the number of these instruments imploied at one time, I find nothing
more exact, than what Mr. Ainsworth reports out of Maimonides, and the Ba∣bylonish Targum. There might not be fewer than two Psalteries, nor more than six; nor fewer than two pipes or flutes, nor more than twelve; nor fewer than two trumpets [namely, when any of the more musical trumpets were mixt with the other instruments] nor more than an hundred and twen∣ty (as many as there was at the de∣dication of the Temple) nor fewer than nine Harps, but as many as they would, and one Cymbal onely [that is one pair, as a foresaid] In all the days of the solemn Feasts, and at the New moons, there were Priests blowing with trumpets at the hour of the Sacrifice [these were those trumpets of the Sanctary, Numb. X.]—Twelve daies in the year they play∣ed on the Pipe or Flute before the altar, viz. at the killing of the irst Passeover, and in the first good day of the Passeover, and in the first good day of Pentecst, and in the eight days of the Feast of the Tber▪ nces. Tis great number of instru∣ments,
I conceive, is to be understood, to have been used only on more solemn occasions; Otherwise there needed more than a Quire of twelve, for the meer instrumental performance, the least Quorum that could be for that purpose, being, according to this reckoning, sixteen. What their variety of tuneing was, it cannot be presumed, but we must be deeply ignorant, seeing we have little or no knowledge of their melody. Such singing as I have heard from the modern Jewes, in their devotions, seems to me very barbarous, and infi∣nitely short of what is in ordinary pra∣ctice amongst us: but it may justly be conceived to bear such proportion to the old Musick in Temple, as their condition now does to the state of their Fore-fathers in those days. I do not doubt, but of old their ordinary in∣strumentsVid. not. ad Lc. were framed, if not tuned, to diverse pitches In 1 Chr. XV, 20. we read of Psaiters on Alamoth, which Tremelli∣us worthily rendreth acutae symphoniae, Trebles, and gives this reason for it, that the word naturally signifying Vir∣gins,
the musick denominated from them, may justly be conceived to re∣semble their voices. In the next verse we have Harps on the Sheminith, which proportionably he renders Gravis sym∣phoniae, that is, as the word naturally signifies, an Eighth (we will suppose) lower. And in Ps. CL, 5, Even as to Cymbals, which we may conceive to admit of less varietie, yet we find there were the lowd Cymbals, and others of a much stronger and commanding sound than they, though both sorts to be emploied in the praise of God. In sum then, as I conceive the Psalteries ordinari∣ly amongst them to have been proporti∣onable to our Treble instruments, so the Harps to have born somewhat like our Tenor or Basse: and the Cymbals (con∣sidering the nature of the instrument) I cannot imagine to have supplied any other part, than what I may call a con∣tinued drone, though they might be of different pitches. The result of all is, that as they had all variety of instruments in their pub∣lick Worship, so these so framed, con∣trived and managed, that there was
most sweet and orderly Harmony a∣mongst them. And no less can any man conclude, who shall consider, that secret inspiration at first provided for the performance in this kind: The musical instruments were all framed by, or at the direction of David, who re∣ceived his art from the Holy Ghost. The art of composition to these instru∣ments, as also of managing them, was inspired into Heman, Asaph and Jedu∣thun. And for securing succession on every instrument, there was appointed a chief Musician: one on Neginoth (Ps. IV. title) that is, as Tremellius truly, laying aside all the more conjectural Glosses of others, interprets it, On the stringed instruments: another on Nechiloth (Ps. V. title.) that is, according to the same interpreter, on Wind-instruments: and Asaph chief Cymbalist, 1 Chro. XVI. 5. Together with these instruments, as already proved, was sung the song of the Lord, yet so, as that some diffe∣rence of song may be observed. This I ground upon the titles of the Psalms, some whereof are inscribed only Psalms, others Songs: Some  A song▪
psalm, as Psal. XLVIII, LXXIII, &c. Other  A Psalm-song, as Psal. XXX, LXVIII, &c.▪ Touch∣ing these two compound titles, I find this note of Tremellius: Both of them,In ps: 48. tit. saith he, used to be song with voice and instrument, onely with this dif∣ference. Canticum psalmum incipie∣batContra Isidor. Orig. l. 6. c. 19. vox cantorum modulari, & praeeun∣tem sequebantur instrumenta, &c. The voice of the singers begun or led in the Song-psalm, and the instruments followed their voices as they led: But in the Psalm-song, the Musicians with their instruments first begun the melody, and the voice of the singers followed with the song. VatablusIn tit. Ps. 30. has the same note, onely he tells us, the present Hebrew Doctors will not acknowledge themselves acquainted with any such difference. But the ti∣tles importing some difference, and none being more probable, as far as I can see, than this, I account this reaso∣nable: and in proportion hereto con∣ceive, those, which were intitled meerly songs, were usually sung with the Voice alone; those which are inti∣tuled
simply Psalms, with voice and instruments both beginning together. And I should think, the import of the words, Canticum and Psalmus, may justifie the conjecture. However, that the Jewes sometime sung with the voice alone, none can deny, any more than that at other times they sung in a mixt way. Further, in the very self-same Psalm or song, some little variation of sing∣ing, I presume, may be inferr'd from that word Selah, which, to omit all the learned Glosses thereon, signify∣ing in its natural import no more than Elevation, I take to have been in some proportion of the like force with them, if not as a sharp, yet as the usual letter for lowd musick is with us. But if not, the Septuagints rendring it  (that is, , saith Suidas) will in∣fer, that some variation of singing was designed to be notified thereby, though it doth not determine what. The like also do I judge touching Higgaion, Psa. IX, 16. namely, that it required some diverse modulation in what it was affixt to, as several of the Hebrews also say, though I should think it very contrary
to Selah: for its root  sometimes signifying murmumare, mussitare, it may be conceived to denote properly enough some very soft musick. Nor do I for∣get when I say so, that it is join'd with Selah, in the place where it is found: for, one part of the Quire being sup∣posed to be silent (as ordinary) while another part sings, the first might sing in a very soft low way [Higgaion] the part following, on the contrary, brisk and high [Selah] But this is onely a conjecture of mine own. That Shiggaion in the title of Ps. VI, signifies a certain peculiar way of Psal∣mody is allowed by several of the Rab∣bies. It was, saith Tremellius, Ode Erratica, id est, multiplex cantu, quae omnibus▪ rationibus musicae decantabatur simul: A mixt and changeable kind of song, which was sung with all Musicall varietyes at the same time. So that upon the whole it appeares, There was in the old Jewish Quire variety in their Vocal Musick, proportionable to that of their Instrumental. Nor was this their Chorall practice a businesse of one age, but from its first
constitution under David, was continu∣ed, and still, if any disorder or neglect had insinuated it selfe amongst the Quire∣men, orderly regulated and reinforced by the most Religious Jewish Kings; and when their afflicted state of affaires occasioned any interruption of it, forth∣with revived with their first hopes and maturations towards a settlement, as is plain from Ez. III. 2 Nehem. XI. 17. and XII. 27. 1. Macccab. IV. 54: so that it may be justly said to have expi∣red onely with their prosperity. Such was the Jewish Quire, their number of members, their quality, of∣fice,Sect. 3. performance vocal and instrumen∣tal, and such their time and continu∣ance. It cannot be expected, that the Christian Quires should answer in all particularities; not especially in the number of members, nor therefore in the variety and multitude of instru∣ments, nor possibly in diverse other points: We must acknowledge our selves for the main far out-done, and study to supply with spiritual and graci∣ous hearts, what we want in outward grandeur and state. The first visible
step to the forming a Christian Quire, I take to have been, the appointing Ca∣nonical psalmists or singers, of which we read early in the Church; & an account has already been given in that behalf. Now, though it be the Doctrine of the present, and was the Doctrine of the Antient Church (as we find by Isido∣rusDe. Eccl. Offic. l: 2. c. 12. Hispalensis, reporting the useages before his time) that Ad hoc oicium etiam absque conscientiâ Episcopi, solá jussione Presbyteri, eligi quique solent, quos probabiles in arte cantandi esse consti∣terit. There needs no ordination, nor even privity of the Bishop, to put particular men into this Office; but the Presbyters, whom it concerns, may choose such men, whom it shall be apparent to be skill'd in singing, and by their own authority invest them; yet it cannot be questioned, but that to the first constituting of such a particular Office in the Church, or such an order of men, whose business it should be, by their Office, to sing pub∣lickly to God in the Church, there was not onely the advice of godly Bishops, but also of Synods or Councils. We
meet, as before said, with Canonical singers in that ancient Council of Laodi∣cea. How long such an Order had been in the Church before that Council, I am not able to speak: but it is plain, such Order is by that Council approved, au∣thorised, and priviledged. There be∣ing a body, there would soon appear necessity of an head: and therefore it is very probable from the beginning of such singers, that, as well in imitation of the Jewish Quire, as out of the ex∣pediency and needfulness of the thing, there was appointed some able grave person, who in singing should lead and govern the Quire. In the same Isidore (though in another book of his) I findOrig. n l: 7. c. 11. the very present name Praecentor, and him defined to be, Qui vocem praemit∣tit in cantu, the person who leads in singing. He mentions also a Succentor, the person who takes up the song from the former, singing after and answering, and Concentor, qui consonat, who strikes in and sings along with both. What his Incentor, and Accentor elsewhereOrg. l▪ 6. c. . mean, I will not trouble my Reader with conjectures; nor concern my self
whether by Praecentor, he designed a person, who by his Office was over the rest (as we now commonly take the word) or onely such an one, who, as occasion served, sung first: though I do judge it probable (because highly requisite to order) that there was one, whose Office it was usually to begin the song, or appoint who should; and that such person had some little rule, or government of direction over the rest of the singers: So that the Praecentor may seem (at least, both in nature, and order of time) the first purely choral digni∣tary. But he is not the first at present, either in order or power▪ by Law: and therefore all I conclude hence is, that in Isidore's time at least (and proba∣bly before, for he writes of these, as no new things, but long customary in the Church) that is, about the middle of the sixth century, there were regular Quires in the Christian Church, and neerly resembling our present con∣stitution. In process of time, when Cathedral and Collegiate Churches came to be settled and indowed, those very indowments perhaps, or the con∣sequences
of them, made it necessary that there should be other Dignitaries instituted, one superiour to the Chan∣ter, though all of right subject to the Bishop. For, the notion of a Colle∣giate Church importing a society of Presbyters, and there being in every Cathedral Church such a Society or ol∣ledge, which were designed as the Council of the Bishop (and are by theDe off. Archi∣pr. ex∣tra cap. Mini∣steri∣um. Law, if I mistake it not, called Sacer∣dotes cardinales, by us, in common language, Canons and Prebendaries) and these being ordained to higher fun∣ctions than meerly officiating in the Quire, though all of them have places, and ought in course to attend and ffici∣ate in the Quire, it was not reasonable they should be govern'd by him onely, who was at the most but head of the Quire, and the Bishop could not al∣ways be present. This made the dig∣nity and office of the ean necessary, which being a name first taken from Military discipline, and signifying him. who had the command over ten souldi∣ers, by its anientest plea, would pre∣tend to no more than a right of Presi∣dency
over ten Canons or Regular priests,Augu∣stin. de morib. Ma∣nich. l. 1. In Monasteriis Decani appellati, qui de∣cem Monachis praeerant. And this, I believe at first, was the most regular number: but now, use has altered the case in that regard, though the name remain still. Now, for what further authority a Dean (as such) can pre∣tend to, derived from the Law in com∣mon, and not founded on particular statutes and custome, he must be con∣tent to claim in another style, and under the name that the Canon-law gives him, that I mean of Archipresby∣ter, with the addition of civitatis, which, that it was intended, touching the Dean, see the Glosse ad Distinct. XXV. perlectis. vocem Archipresbyter▪ And, as to the antient particulars of his Office, see them in the same istin∣ction, and de Off. Archipresb. extra cap. Officium. The more substantial part and summe whereof, as by later Ca∣nons may appear, is this, that he in∣spect the manners of the Clergy under him, and keep all in their duty. Vid. concil. Colon. de Metropolit. & collegiat. Eccl. c. 2. In animarnm regimine, & mo∣rum
correctione praemineat. stat. Sar. The next Dignitary in the Quire, is the Chanter or Praecentor, who also for any further power than what that term imports, must claim in another name, and, as the Law calls him, Primiceri∣us: a word onely derived, say some, from Primus, and not at all compoun∣ded,Brisson Lexic. Iuris. and signifying in Suidas his lan∣guage, , the first of his Order, and belonging to the Chanter, who is the first of the Quire, though not in the Quire. His duty is set down in diverse places of the Law, de Off. Primicer. extra cap. ut Primic. Et vid. Gloss. ibid. Et XXI. Distinct. Cleros. but most fully XXV. distinct. perlectis. the summe whereof, as to what is of present concernment to our Quires, I will set down. Ad Primicerium perti∣nent—Psalmistae at que Lectores; signum quoque dandum pro Officio Clericorum, pro vitae honestate▪ & Officium cantandi & peragendi sollicitè Lectiones, Psalmum, Laudes, Responsoria Officiorum, quis Clericorum debeat dicere. Ordo quoque & modus canendi in choro pro solennita∣te temporis. Clericos quos delinquere co∣goscit,
ipse distringat; quos emendare non valet, eorum excessus ad agnitionem Episcopi deferat. I translate it not, because all, whom it much concerns, understand it. The short of it is, he is by his Office to direct, instruct, re∣prove, punish and complain the Quire, as he sees occasion. According to our present constituti∣on, the next dignitary we have in our Quires, though not so much as insinu∣ated, that I can find, in the Canon∣law (except we should thus under∣stand the title of Custos, Extra de off. cust. cap. custos. Et, custos soll. which I do not conceive we ought) is the Chancellour. The name in our Law-Glossaries, has a double Etymology as∣signedCalv. Lxc. Jurid. it: either from cancellando, be∣cause it appertained to the Chancellor to peruse publick Writings, to cancel or correct such as were faulty, and to give solemn approbation, by his sl, or otherwise, to those he thought it; Or from cancellis, because this Officer being busied generally amongst p∣pers and records, had his seat within certain rails or lattices for greater secu∣rity
and privacy. The great Sir HenryIn Glossa. Spelman rather approves the latter. From such original the name being ta∣ken, is applied to several honourable Offices both in Church and State. And in our present case, the Chancellor is a dignitary, to whom (according toExtrac. Stat. sarisb. M. S. Penes Eccl. S. Patr. Dub. the institution of Osmund of happy me∣mory, Bishop of Sarum, and, as is said, Founder of that Church, a Church which deservedly wears the ti∣tle of Famous, and whose statutes are in practice in many Cathedrals besides it self) to whom, I say, it belongs to govern the Schools, to correct the books (such, I suppose, which are copied for the use of the Quire) to keep the Church seal, to peruse and put in order their Papers, to read such letters and instruments as are to be read in the Chapter, and some o∣ther things, most part now out of date; I believe him regularly the Cha∣pter Secretary. The last dignitary pro∣perly belonging to our Quires is the Treasurer, whom the Law calls by the name of Sacrist. De Off. Sacrist. extra cap. Ʋt sciat. To him belongs the
care and custody of the Church-plate, Ornaments, and such like Treasury, the provision of Candles, and some o∣ther small matters. Vid. & 25. distinct. Perlectis. prope fin. Now, though these particulars in the administration of the Quire, as o∣thers appertaining to the state of the Church, belong by Law thus distinctly, as stated, to each of the dignitaries by themselves, yet first, in the absence of any superiour, his power, for the re∣gulating any present occurrence, is supposed, both by law and custome, de∣volved to the next dignitary present. And secondly, as to matters of any great moment, to be transacted in ei∣ther cases, there is nothing done with∣out the joint-advice and consent of all the Dignitaries (or such at least of them, as can or will be present) as∣sembled with others of their Brethren, the Canons or Prebendaries belonging to such Church; which Assembly we call the Chapter, of whom the ean is the head. So that, by the by, we may take notice, whatsoever some people talk of the sole jurisdiction of Bishops,
there is, as we see, a Colledge of Pre∣sbyters, whom, as need serves, the Bishop calls to him, in every Cathe∣dral Church: The ean and hapter, as odious names as they are to some, are no other. But to return to my purpose. This is the Government of our Quires: As to the body of them, they cosist of chil∣dren and men. The children we usual∣ly take off from their parents, by their parents consents, and breed up n the art of Musick, and in some other parts of good literature, as we find them capable. And why it should be any more unlawful to teach children to sing sweetly and decently to God, & to employ them afterwards daily in such singing, in our Quires, than to suffer them to sing rudely in our Parish∣ hurches, I confess my self not able to imagine. The men are commonly such persns, as have been bred up in our Quires from their childhood, and there∣fore intimately understand their busi∣ness, as to point of singing. Some few of the elder more able of these are usually ordained Deacons or Priests, for
for the service of God in the Quire, and in that capacity officiate in our Quires: the others still retaining their Lay-con∣dition. The number of these is very different, according to the several con∣stitutions, endowments, and founda∣tions of our Quires respectively: but a Quire of less than twelve, in duty bound to attend, I have no where, to my knowledge, seen, and seldome or never of so few. As to instruments, we generally con∣tent our selves with the Organ alone, that indeed being (as now it is perfe∣cted) deservedly to be preferred be∣fore, and supplying well the room of all other instruments; and besides this its preeminence in variety and fulness, employing fewest hands, and not ob∣noxious to be out of tune upon every little accident, or requiring new tu∣ning each time it is used, as commonly stringed instruments do. Notwithstan∣ding we neither do, nor can condemn the grave use of stringed instruments, which therefore in the Kings Chappels, and perhaps in some other greater Quires, are upon some more soemn
occasions imploied. But as to those which I call properly pulsatil ones, they are not, nor ever, that I know of, were, used in the Christian Worship, any further than to call the people thereto. Such being the constitution, and such the government of our Quires, itSect. 4. may seem a little wonderful, that af∣ter such strict discussions of the expedi∣ency of all things, as this age has seen, there should any thing remain amongst us▪ practised in the Worship of God which sober men might esteem obnoxi∣ous or blameable: and truly I know no∣thing of that nature, which can pre∣tend to the authority of Sanction, or even of approved custome, for its sup∣port. The levity and unconcerned∣ness, that some of our Quire-men disco∣ver in the performance of their Office, is, I am sure, frequently checkt, and not unpunisht in several of our Quires. What is neer a kin hereto, their pre∣cipitant posting over the Psalms, and the like parts of their duty, as if wea∣ry thereof, and desirous to have them at a speedy end, escapes no better. And, I trust there are very few places,
in which, from any overt acts, conni∣ved at by their superiours, the perfor∣mers may justly be taxed of want of se∣riousness. If there be such instances, let all the world know, I apologize not for them, nor is it my intent in this discourse, in the least, to excuse them. But, to speak freely my sense, the summe of what I judge most obnoxious to just censure, is made up of the par∣ticulars following. First, it may be conceived, that some of our Anthems and Services, as our Church-composers have ordered the matter, savour more of curiosity of musick, than design of devotion. Whereas all Musick used in the worship of God, ought to be reverential, grave and easie, accommodated as well to the intelligibleness of the words, as to such tender affections and meltings of soul, as we profess it intended to be∣get, we may observe, on the contra∣ry, our Gentlemen sometimes bring us aiery, and even mimical composures, difficult and distractive of the Perfor∣mers thoughts, and not consistent e∣nough with the hearers understanding.
They contrive our Church-musick, in compliance with the vanity and vices of the age, and are more concerned to shew themselves Artists a la mode, than to fit their Melody for the engaging their own and others hearts in pious af∣fections towards God. From hence it comes to pass, that, Secondly, we have, in several of thse new pieces, strangely needless and nauseous, not to say sensless, repetitions; of such words or clauses I mean, on which no Empha∣sis lies fit to detain thought, or exercise devotion. If any word consist of con∣sonant and voluble syllables, fitter than others to bear some little sequel of Notes, which the Musician fancies, it shall be dalied with, and tost as a fea∣ther in the air, for no other reason, but because the Artist would shew his skill thereby, and tickle the ears and fancies of vainer minds: Whereas it is truly more at, I am sure it ought to be more the business of our Choral Ma∣sters, to reconcile musick, and the sense of the words. The Notes should fol∣low the matter; and as for such repeti∣tions, as the completing the Musick does
require, they should be made on words or clauses, which, by reason of their pregnant import (decies repetita place∣bunt) have still a new gratefulness in them, the more repeated, because they administer fresh matter of thought, and ardour of affection, to the devout soul. Thirdly, it may be adjudged another fault, neer a kin hereto, that these Gentlemen choose out words for Anthems as they sound, and not as they signifie. Nor is it enough to bear them out, that they be able to say, the words are express Scripture; for, ac∣cording to what we have above spoken, words may be unfit for Anthems, not onely because the soundness of their sense is suspicious, but, because they do not properly suit with the business of divine praise. Unsound, we will sup∣pose, nothing of Scripture can be, but, it is not the hundreth part of Scripture that was designed for La is, nor ought therefore to be sung to God Anthem wise. People might as well turn the Genealogies of the Patriarchs, or of our Lord Jesus, into Anthems, as some places of Scripture which they ha done.
Lastly, I cannot tell, whether some may judge our simple Voluntaries, or Musick, which no words accompany, not so congruous to the Christian state, and Worship. For my own part, I profess, they offend not, but help me: yet I will not say, but something more apt to general edification, might be substituted in their room. This is the summe total of such particulars in our Choral practice, as I can judge blame∣able or improveable. Now, if we search into the Original of these (and that is the first step to∣wardsSect 5. their redress) we shall find them, for the greatest part, due to the want of Learning, and meet institution in the common sort of our Quire-men and Church-musicians. To confess inge∣nuously, when it pleased God to bring back the captivity of Zion, if we were not as men that dreamt, yet we were truly surprised, and unprovided in a great measure, to celebrate, as we would, the happiness God had vouchsafed us, and the wonderful and most undeserved grace and goodness of the Doner. The truth is, the rage of the War, having
scattered our Quire-men, and ravisht from them their subsistence, had also put them to seek their bread in mean, miserable and illiberal waies: and those few Principles of Literature, which any of them had, were, by that means, extinguisht or lost, rather than impro∣ved, their natural parts lowerd and debased, or worse: so that the thin number of them, who survived these calamities to see the Restauration, re∣tained nothing but their Musick, which possibly they would have lost too in a great part, but that their necessities would not permit them to hang their harps upon the willows, their Musical skill being the most considerable means of support then left them. Neverthe∣lesse, they were not then to sing the Song of the Lord, nor any of the songs of Zion, but to contrive their melodies to the humour of such who would feed them: The influence hereof, both up∣on our Musicians, and Musick, is sad∣der than I will speak of. Now such as these generally being the persons, which, at the Restauration, were to be made use of (or none) to retrieve
the goodly Choral practice, they con∣tented themselves to indoctrinate those, whom they were to breed for successi∣on, in what onely themselves now un∣derstood: and, if they made even the most pregnant of these to be excel∣lent Musicians, they esteemed it a mighty service done the Church, and thought themselves amply to have dis∣charged their Office. This I take to be the great reason, why many of our Church-musicians are nothing but Mu∣sicians. And, besides this, I do not know, whether there be not some lit∣tle fate, or secret fascination, in the case, that those, who intimately study and understand musick, without great importunity, never give themselves to the study of any thing else, and ad∣mire no excellencies so much as, those of their own art. I confess my self to ad∣mire Musick, as much, I think, as any man ought to do: but notwith∣standing all the value I have for it, I cannot think this alone is a sufficient ac∣complishment for a rational creature, or ought to be made, as it were, the sole business of a mans life: and it would
really move lamentation in any conside∣rable man, to see how ill very great skill in musick oftentimes dwells. Some persons, upon this alone, may be ob∣served to value themselves above the most universal scholars ordinarily to be met with; whereas, take them out of that art, and they want the common judgment of men. And, though few or none of our Quire-composers may, I hope, deserve so severe a character, yet, with grief I speak it, if I should be challenged, out of all them that I have known, to produce ten persons, who, with their musick, understood Grammatical English, I should be to seek for some of the number. All the consequences hereof urge not, but, I may safely say, such being the defect in these mens education, Hence it comes to pass, that the younger sort being in∣tent on the musick, generally neglect the matter of what they sing; and the elder have onely a confused notion thereof: Hence, too, that levity, hast and unconcernedness, which is observable in some of their performan∣ces. These were the two first imputa∣tions
mentioned. Of the same Origi∣nal, also, is the unmeetness of much of our new musick in excessive curiosi∣ty, aieriness and difficulty; as also those frivolous repetitions, and that playing with words above taxed. Nor, in summe, can I refer the imprudent choice of Words for Anthems, and whatever there is of like nature, to any more unquestionable source: and I have good reason to assure my self, there are not a few of my mind. Now the redress of this defect is asSect. 6. necessary, as easie, though possibly it cannot altogether beeffected on the sudden. That it is necessary, none can doubt, who believes the Worship of God to consist in any thing else, but trifling, sport, lip-labour, and gra∣tifying mens carnal sense: and all the difficulty, that is in it, lies in taking care, for the future, of better educa∣ting our Choristers, and of supplying vacancies, as they fall, at present with men of more solid learning, though not of so exquisite voices and skill. Musick moderately good, is best, per∣haps, to all intents and purposes; but
of this more anon. In the mean time, the first step to a redress in this case, I have said to be greater care in the edu∣cation of our Choristers, that they be not taught musick alone, but, toge∣ther therewith, Grammar, and some Humane Learning; but, especially, that they be well instructed in Religion, by being brought not onely to repeat their Catechism, as usual, but inti∣mately to understand it, and carried a little further into the doctrine of Chri∣stianity. For, it is plain, by the ti∣tle of our Church-Catechism, it was designed chiefly for children before Confirmation: and no one can doubtDr. Hm in Pract: Cate. in . their fidelity to the Church, who have propounded further methods for grow∣ing peoples instruction, as judging much more necessary for them. And 'tis certain, there is no surer way to make men serious and sincere in Religi∣on, than by bringing them to a clear and good understanding of it. That the soul be without knowledge, it is not good, was the judgment of the wisestProv: 19. 2. of meer men. This begets in mens hearts, a perswasion of the real truth
and importance of Religion, and that a sense and fear of Gods Goodness, Majesty, Omniscience, and being pri∣vy to all our actions and thoughts, but more especially, eying our demea∣nour, both of soul and body, in all acts of worship to him. Now, for such institution of these small people as I desire, I cannot suppose, but the statutes of every Cathedral or Collegi∣ate Church, have made provision: at least I never knew, nor heard of any such Church in England, which had not a Grammar-School belonging to it. Nay, even in all lesser Religious Hou∣ses or Bodies, where the Fraternity maintained before-time, a Grammar-School-master, and a Preacher, it was1 Edw. 6. c. 14 enacted by Statute, soon upon the dissolution, that lands, tenements & hereditaments should be st apart for the maintenance of such a School-ma∣ster, and a Preacher. So that I can∣not suppose any such Church, as I speak of, destitute either of a School-master, or a arechist: and, in the onstitutions of such Schools, there are commonly clauses for teaching the Cho∣risters.
This shews us, the judgment of the Church-men of those dayes was not, that learning to sing was the bu∣siness of a mans life: and, if any of our Musicians now are so fond of their art, as to tell us, if we will have boys fit for the Quire, they must attend no∣thing but song and musick, their igno∣rance is not to be indulged, nor they allowed their humour herein. After a year or two sole attending song, if the boyes are capable, and the Masters di∣ligent, some lesser practice daily will perfect them, and a good part of each day may be allocated to such purpose, as I contend for. The influence here∣of would be much greater, than I have yet spoken: for, by this means, our Quire-men being in part bred scholars, would be more intelligent and serious, not onely in their Office in the Church, but abroad in their conversations; and in private too, they would be able to entertain themselves, and delight in reading, study and meditation, which might both improve them in know∣ledge, virtue, and even in Divine musick it self, and also keep them
from having their timely upon their hands (as now many of them have) and the intolerable inconveniencies consequent, of which I am silent. Pu∣det haec, &c.—Now, if there should be any who are of a contrary mind, and patronize a practice contrary here∣in, I beseech such persons seriously, and in the fear of God, betwixt God and their own consciences to confider, how they will answer God one day, for all the ignorance, idleness, irreli∣gion and ewdness of a certain Order of men, which is the unavoidable conse∣quence of these their sentiments and practice, and from which, in all hu∣mane probability, they had been deli∣vered, to the preservation of their souls, the glory of God, the removal of scandal from our Church, had they had such education as the Laws of our Churches designed them, and I here contend for. I dare put it under my hand, there will never be a devout re∣ligious succession of young people in our Quires, without a diligent School∣master, and a conscientious Catechist, or some good persons, who will dis∣charge
to the Choristers those parts. And, except our Quire-men do ap∣prove themselves, in divine offices se∣rious and devout, worshipping God in spirit and in truth, and paying to him a rational, as well as an harmonious ser∣vice, and, in their ordinary conversati∣on, discreet, sober, and, in some measure, exemplary persons, at least free from ignorance, impiety, luxu∣ry and idleness, we can expect no o∣ther fate to our Quires, than what be∣fell the Nests of lewd and ignorant Monks. God forbid, I should say or think, all at the Dissolution deserved that character; but, if we may believe History, so great a number of them were such, as, in all probability, brought the judgment of God on the rest. Not that I justifie neither all the proceeding of those daies in that affairs for, I understand not desolation to be a method of Reformation: But I just∣ie the Holy God, and own the deme∣rit of humane guilt. But to return to our purpose: This care being taken for succession, till such time as a more efined race f Quire∣men
might be thus bred, I must con∣fess, I see no reason, why Vacancies, as they fall, should not be supplied with men, who have somewhat else to commend them, besides their musical skill. Methinks it is a little iniquitous to prefer musick alone, before musick in conjunction with other liberal Arts and Sciences. It hath really moved pi∣ty in me sometimes, to consider a vir∣tuous, grave, learned person, who had served a double or treble appren∣ticeship to good literature of all sorts, and past several Scholastical degrees in the Univerisity, to have sat down in a Countrey Vicarage, or small Rectory, of fifty or sixty pound per ann. whither, possibly, he might bring with him, amongst his Books, from the Universi∣ty, a Basse Viol (the more portable and most considerable reserves of his other instruments, and musical divertise∣ments) which he could tune three or four wayes, and, betwixt his voice and it, with pretty variety make a lit∣tle quire by himself: This person, be∣sides great diversity of other Learning, and deep knowledge in Divinity, un∣derstanding
the antient and modern mu∣sick in a manner from the first grounds thereof, & being fit to be a Professour almost in any thing, yet, in frugality and content, shall enjoy himself and friends on that slender annual income, one equal whereto, our young gentle∣men, puft up onely with their own aires, daily huff at and complain of, as insufficient for their maintenance, and below their worth. Now, of these two orders of men, let even prejudice it self speak, which is to be preferr'd? But, to what purpose is this writ? will some say. Shall we think of fetching those reverend persons from their contented privacies? By no means: they do a greater service to God and his Church, amongst their Countrey Neighbours. They are hap∣py enough to pity the Grandees of the age, and more may envy them, than can equal them. But there are in both our English Universities, hopeful young Scholars, of no contemptible standing and proficiency, who, had they the advantages of some small addition to their fortunes, might become as ac∣complisht
persons as those before spo∣ken of, but it has been their lot to have miss't Scholarships or Fellowships, for that onely reason, that the Houses are full: these would be glad of a sup∣port, which would give them leisure for their studies, and would with their hearts accept and adorn the places we speak of. Besides such students, some∣times we may find other persons of ano∣ther education, though not Choral neither, who understand Musick as in∣timately as most do, and are masters of many other accomplishments there∣with, who would not look upon the Quire-service either as toil some or dis∣honourable. Now, suppose some per∣sons of either sort (and both are suppo∣sed men of understanding and serious∣ness) should be taken in to fill up pla∣ces as they become void, till such time we have like hopeful Plants out of our own Nurseries, would it not be more for the credit of the Church, and in∣terest of Religion, than to entail this Divine Office on men, for the most part, meerly musicians; touching which profession, I need not fear to
record this observation, that, as there is nothing more sweet than that soul wherein Learning, Virtue and Musick dwell, so, on the contrary, there is nothing usually more intolerably con∣ceited and fantastical, than a meer Musi∣cian. There are onely two things, which I see objectible against what I have com∣mended touching these supplies, where∣of the former is, that this would be a great discouragement to our young Quire-men, who have been bred up, and done service in expectation of these little promotions, which, according to this practice, they must certainly be disappointed of. Whereto I say, First, I conceive it will rather be to them an incentive to diligence and seri∣ousness, when they see it is not their meer musical skill, but their other im∣provements in religious knowledge and virtue, which must prefer them: and if they are thus improved, God forbid that they should be put by. As on the other side, Secondly, if they be, for the main, devoid of such improve∣ments, the places they have, be they
as mean as any of them use to be, are incouragements enough for them; and, if any of them think otherwise, let them seasonably divert to other imploiments, and, possibly, both they and the Church may be better provided for. The other Objection is, that by this means, our Church-musick may be∣come much poorer, and degenerate from those refined perfections, to which it is at present arrived. And to this, I answer, in a Text of the Canon-Law. In sacro ministerio dum blanda vox quaeritur, congrua vita negligitur: & cantor minister Deum moribus stimu∣lat, cum populum vocibus delectat. ItDist. 92. In Sancta. is not impossible, some men have been more curious in Church-musick, than God or his Church will thank them for: and, if we will hearken either to Fa∣thers or Councils, such nicety in sing∣ing, as some men seem to affect, may well be forborn. Art, indeed, was by divine institution to be used (as we have seen) and otherwise it is scarce possible, but that singing to God, must be one of the most ungrateful, nauseous and reproachful Offices imagi∣nable.
We would not therefore, that persons either wanting musical skill, or of grating and untuneable voices, should be appointed to this Office, whatever their other learning may be. Let here∣in Rabanus Maurus his advice be heard, Psalmistam & voce & arte praecla∣rum in∣ Cleric. lib. 1. c. 11. illustremque esse oportet: Singers ought to be excellent both for voice and art. But it is sure, that as this ought not to be their onely excellency, so neither ought their singing to be o∣therwise than grave, awful, and sa∣vouring of devotion and attention to the matter sung. Those delicacies, which by too much tickling of the ear, draw the mind off from the subject∣matter, have, in the Worship of God, been ever condemn'd, and must still stand so: and there ought certainly to be more simplicity in Church-musick, than in that, which is fitted for curious and wanton ars at Entertainments of mirth. I cannot but transcribe that passage of St. Hierom to this purpose, commenting on St. Paul's melody of the heart, part of which Gratian too makes use of in the Distinction now mentio∣ned,
Audiant haec adolescentuli, audi∣antIn E∣phes. c. 5. hi quibus psallendi in Ecclesia officium est: Do non voce sed corde cantandum est, nec in Tragoedorum morem guttur & fauces dulci medicamine colliniendas, ut in Ecclesiâ Theatrales moduli audiantur & cantica, sed in timore & opere, in scientia Scripturarum. Qamvis sit ali∣quis (ut  lli apparere) , si bona opera haberit, dulcis apud Deum cantator est. Sic cantet servus Christi, ut non vox canentis, sed verba placeant, quae leguntur, ut spiritus malus, qui erat in Saule, eiciatur ab his qui similiter ab o possidentur, & non introducatur in eos qui de domo Dei scenam fecere populorum. The summe is, as the manners of Quire∣men should be very different from those of Players, so should their musick too, not savouring of thse delicate rellishes which may be expected at a Theatre, but onely in a grateful sort transmitting such words and sense to the minds of the earers, as may enlarge their hearts towards God, and cast out of them the evil spirit (all vile and worldly af∣fe ) as David's musick did the evilspi∣rit out of Saul. Let us hear also the words
of an antient Synod in our own Nation,Concil. Clove. shov. can, a pud . Tom. 1 in the Year 747. Presbyteri—ne tragico sono sarorum verborum compositionem ac distinctionem corrumpant vel confun∣dant, sed simplicem sanctamque melodi∣am secundum morem Ecclesiae sect entur. Let not the Priests in singing corrupt or confound the frame and distinct pronunciation, or hearing of the sa∣cred words by Theatrical Notes, but let them observe or use plain and ho∣ly melody, according to the custome of the Church. I could add more of this nature, but that I have above ha∣ped on this string. Upon the whole, plain enough it is, that we ought not to be so sollicitous for the curiosity of musick or Voices, as for the devotion of the performers and people: and it were to be wished our hearts were bet∣ter, though our Musick were more ordinary: at least, even herein, a Mean is best. Further, let s consi∣der, what many times we gain, in ha∣ving so much regard meerly to exqui∣site Voices: we take in persons with such voices, for their voices sake, and as Jesuun, they wax fat and kick; nay,
by their own ill manners, they many times spoil those their voices, and then theres nothing left good in them: Now can any man of ordinary devotion not nauseate, in some measure, the prai∣ses of God, when coming out of such mouths? Wherefore I stick to this for∣mer assertion, that one meanes to improve our Choral practice to more spiritual advantage is, to fill Vacancies in our Quires, as they fall, with men of as good learning, and as much seri∣ousness, as we can get, although their Voices be but tolerable; who may both themselves sing with understanding, gravity and devotion, and promote, at lea not prejudice and disturb, the like melody of the heart in the people. This same expedient too, if applied, would also speedily redress those other points supposed censureable, of any un∣me , volous repetitions or less proper word in our Anthems: for persons of the character given, would sn most intimately perceive those ble∣mishes, and either cure them, or, of their own accords, lay aside any thing, if incurable.
But, is there no remedy in theseSect. 7 last mentioned points, till such new modelling our Quires can be brought a∣bout? Yes verily, and that most easie. For I do averr it, that particular An∣thems and Services are not to be pitch∣ed upon, or chosen day by day, at the pleasure of the Quire-men, or as they agree, but by the direction of their superiours. Let the compose what they wil, they ought not to bring their Composures into publick use, much less have liberty so to do, till such their Composures shall be allowed by those, whom it concerns in that be∣half. Such subordination we observed in the Jewish Quire, that the chief Musician, or Head of the Quire, pre∣scribed what for that time they sung; and therefore, certainly, it was allowed by him, at least before it was sung. And, supposing that there are in our Church∣es Anthems and Services already al∣lowed, to whom it belongs to appoint them, de jure, we have already spo∣ken. But, as to the allowance of a∣ny new Service (by that term, we mean onely some new musical compo∣sure
of our ordinary Hymns, the Te Deum, enedictus, &c.) whatsoever right the Praecentor might claim there∣to, because there is nothing in it new but the musick (and to him by his Of∣fice, as aforesaid, belongs the Ordo canendi) yet all such allowance & right of his, must be in subordination to the Bishop, as will appear by a Text of the Canon-law, presently to be produced. And, as to any new Anthems, because therein not onely the musick, but the words are new, (new at least, as to this kind of use and design) there∣fore none but the Bishop, or he whom the Bishop intrusts or authorises in that case, has power to give allowance thereto. This I prove hence: The Act of Uniformity injoins no other Form of Service shall be used in pub∣lick, but the Book of Common-pray∣ers, and that in Order as establisht. That Book contains not such Anthems as we speak of, but in the Rubrick sup∣poses, that in Cathedral Churches and places where they sing (viz. in a Choral way) there used to be Anthems, and assigns the proper place for them:
therefore, there being no new sanction, as to either the matter or form of such Anthems, it is left to those to appoint both matter and sorm meet for them, to whom, by ancient Ecclesiastical law and custome it did before appertain: But, by some of the most anient (a∣nons as we have seen, nothing might be sung in the Church without (at least) the Bishops approbation; and by cu∣stome, before any such law, godly Bi∣shops, as we have said, have framed or directed the new framing of Hymns, or Anthems, according to new emer∣gencies, for the use of their Churches; and finally, the letter of the Cann∣law is express to this purpose, um prae∣cesserit unusquisque in suis ordinibus ipseDist. 25. Per∣lectis. [i. e. Episcopus] est praeordinator in cunctis: Whatsoever preeminence of power any hath within his Order, notwithstanding the Bishop has a su∣perintendent direction or authority in all, namely, over all his Clergy, however dignified: Therefore nothing new, as to form of words, or mod of musick, may be admitted, at least stand allowed, in the Quire, with∣out
the approbation of the Bishop: And further, it is plain by the promis∣ses, that if by the connivance, or, which is more likely, without the pri∣vity of any preceding or present Bishop, any thing obnoxious, in the regards before mentioned, should have silently crept into use, it is in the power of the Praecentor, or, in his absence, in the power of him, to whomsoever his pow∣er is devolved, to lay aside such obno∣xious Services or Anthems, by appoint∣ing still, from time to time, others to be sung, which are not so. Supposing therefore, as needs I must, that both the Bishops and Choral Digni∣taries, are persons of such learning, that they will easily discern, and of such integrity and devotion, that they will not give their allowance to things thus censurable, in the stead of meditating any new particulars of redress in this kind, I will humbly take the boldness to become a passionate and dutiful sup∣pliant to the Fathers, and all the a∣thedral Dignitaries of the Church, that they will be pleased to consider their own Right, and to resume and exercise
their invaded power, by taking an usurped liberty out of such mens hands, who know not how to use it for edifi∣cation. It is not usually difficult to prevail with men, to claim and take what is their own; and there being no way so easie, so natural and regular, for the redressing the points conceived obnoxious, as this is, and withal this being surely effectual to this purpose, if applied, I cannot but rest confident, my supplication will as soon speed, as it comes to the knowledge of any concer∣ned herein; if yet the matter  plead for, be not already the practice in most Chuches. I am sure all men must con∣clude it unreasonable, that such peo∣ple should at pleasure prescribe matter and form for the publick devotion (as our Quire-men do, when upon their single fancy, they put new Anthems upon us) whom we have reason to la∣ment, as not understanding so intimate∣ly, as they should, the nature of de∣votion themselves. The onely point of this kind, yet re∣maining undispatcht, is our Voluntaries, of the lawfulness and design of which
we have already spoken; but, whe∣ther they are not improveable, & how, is at present to be considered. Possi∣bly, they advise not ill, who would have little difficult musick, and none at all which might be accounted Mute (that is accompanied with no Hymn) in Church-use. We observed above amongst the various musical Performan∣ces in the Jewish Church, what the ti∣tles of the Psalms stile a Psalm-song, wherein we found the practice to be this, the mustick begun, and the Song or Hymn followed: If this use were gravely or decently drawn into exam∣ple, and in stead of simple Voluntaries, some single voice, or lesser Chorus, at∣tended the Organ with a short Hymn, many peoples devotion would be less at a loss, and in stead of rambling at large, have whereon to fix, and such a conduct of thought, as, it may be, many want. I have observed in some Churches, in stead of Voluntaries, a Sanctus, or the Hymn Holy Holy Holy Lord God of Hosts, &c. to have been sung, the Organ joining as usually in o∣ther things. I wish that practice more
general, or else that some Versicle (or Hea∣venly strain) out of the Psalms were used, & then I know not, what malice it self would have to say against such practices nor indeed against any thing in our Cho∣ral use, if thus managed as is humbly submitted.Sect. 8 I now come to consider what may be done for the better regulating the Pa∣rochial practice. And the first step to a redress in the several mscarriages herein must be (as  conceive) the taking away from the Parish-clerk the power, which God knows how he came by, to set the Psalm, as is usual, or to choose what shall be from time to time the Psalm to be sung. Reason e∣nough have I given already, in my poor judgment, for so doing: and none can imagine, but the Mnister of every Parish may effect it at pleasure. Let then the Minister, as often as any Psalm is to be sung, assign to the lerk what, and how much, for such time shall be sung. And here I cannot bt judge the Ministers prudence will be such in his choice, as to avoid the most of the inconveniencies taxed (for all of the,
I do not judge, can be avoided, till we have a new Version of the Psalms brought into use, and, perhaps, some∣what else): Namely, nothing will be sung, as we may reasonably hope, in the ongregation, but what is fit, pro∣per and apposite to the Christian estate, al ridiculous or Non-sensical passages in the Translation will be declined and lad aside, and, possibly, the people inured to such a constant series or known course of Pslams, as that they will be able to sing with understanding, be∣cause they sing what frequent use shall have made them well acquainted with; besides other advantages, that Psalms suitable to the time, or to the subject matter of the Sermon (which is much conducing  the benefit of the people) may be chsen, &c. confess we shall still, while J. H. and T. S. and the rest of that vein, must hold the possession of that autho∣rity which no one can justifie, be at a great , comparatively to what we  be, might a new Translation of singing Psalms be substituted for this so faulty one of theirs. And I humbly
beg pardon, if I seem guilty of a Pa∣radox, in asserting, that the Reve∣rend Fathers of the Church both might (as  conceive) and would effect this, were it not adjudged imprudent to thwart a radicated popular humour, though unreasonable. I have said, the Bish f the hurch, and none regu∣larly by common right but he, may appoint in his Church the matter and form of Anthen: and thence I infer further, Therefore he may appoint Singing salms, parcelld out, and accommodated in the best sort he shall judge, for the use of his charge; for that these Psalms are sung onely as An∣thems: and, if he have power to do as much as this comes to, nay, the ve∣ry same in a manner, in the athedral, much more has he in a private Parish. I add further, that such Psalms so al∣lowed and directed by the Bishop of the Diocese, would be of much more re∣gular authority than these, which the people now sing: and even without the approbation or direction of the Bishops, as to these which we now have, I must say, as there is no English Version ex∣tant,
that I ever yet could see, which is not incomparably better than them, so there is one which has much better authority already, particularly, that excellent one by King James of blessed memory. That, beside the authority which it derived from its Royal au∣thour, was published cum privilegio re∣giae majestatis, with a Royal priviledge from his Majesty; and of what force the Kings Prerogative is in such Ecclesi∣astical affairs, I leave to those to di∣spute, who allow many things in pub∣lick Worship, without authority from it, or indeed, without any other san∣ction. But perhaps, what many others, as well as my self, would perswade, might we be heard, touching this Ver∣sion of King James's, or any other to come in the room of that usual, may be a good while unpracticable: and therefore, all the redress we can at pre∣sent expect in this behalf, must be from the Ministers of the respective Pa∣rishes, by their picking and culling out what is fittest for their peoples devoti∣on, and instructing them in the due
use thereof. Commonly it may not be expedient to take a whole Psalm as it lies, but here and there a verse: and though possibly, some people would not endure the introducing of a Trans∣lation wholely new, yet the altering sometimes a word or two, may a little polish the style, and advance the sense, and by this means, some small amend∣ment of the singing. Psalms may be effe∣cted. The next step must be to tune the peoples voices into some Decorum, or tolerable harmony, that the Praises of God may be sung so, as not to make a great number Loath the performance: and for this purpose, there is not any better mean than an Organ, which it were to be wished in all richer Parishes were provided; nor would it be a mat∣ter of so great difficulty or expence, as is generally conceived. But, because this can be had onely in some few Pari∣shes, we must turn our thoughts to what other methods we can devise. And in the first place, let care be taken, that such a person begin the tuning of the Psalm, as has himself a tunable
and hamonious voice, which may a little set the people in: Then let some others who will keep tune tolerably, be placed at meet distances, whose voices may be a kind of guide and go∣vernment to the rest. Ad i there are any (as in most ongregations there are some) who squeak, or bawl, or otherwise by indecent voices, di∣sturb the rest, let those people be pri∣vately admonished by the Ministers, not so much quite to desist from singing (for their hearts may be good) as to sing softly, and little above a whisper∣ing tone, to be heard chiefly by God and themselves. Lastly, let the mo∣thers, or those women, who attend the little children in the respective families of the Parish when they first begin to prattle and harp at tunes, be privately incouraged to teach them some ort Psalms, and the tunes of Psalms: for these persons many of them have fine pleasing voices, naturally musical, and delight too in the using them; and withal, children generally delight in singing: now, why ould we not herein imitate the antient Christians, of
whom we have above spoken, and breed our Children in their tender years to have the praises of God and Christ in their mouth? Every Mini∣sters discretion will add to these me∣thods, wherefore I am the briefer in them; and by care and diligence here∣in, we may, by degrees, improve our parochial assemblies into a more decent course of singing. I cannot conceive, I need to say muchSct. 9, to perswade any of my Brethren, incum∣bent on cures, to this endeavour. For, though as to singing to God, that, which we are chiefly to design, is that our Congregations sing with understan∣ding, and grace in their heats, yet there being a bodily Worship due to God as well as a spiritual one, and gra∣vity, seriousness and decency being ne∣cessary therein, and withall, an harmo∣nious concent of the voices of the peo∣ple being a very great furtherance of such inward affection, as ought to be imployed in singing, there is no truly conscientious Pastour, but will con∣cern himself, that the outward manner of singing be such in his Congregation,
as becomes the majesty of that God whom we worship, and may most tnd to the raising that devotion which we owe. And such persons  hope will please to consider further▪ that it is not meerly the outward manner of singing, the re∣dress of which (where faulty) I have presumed to commend to their care and prudence, but also the unmeet mat∣ter and form of what is sung. Hath it not been made evident, that from the very beginning of Christianity, and even under Judaism it self, singing praise unto God was ever esteemed a principal & most acceptable part of his Worship? And can we, whose business it is by way of office, to minister, & conduct others, in the publick Worship of God, justifie less care in the prase of God, than in praying to him? How comes it to be a less solemn act of Worship to praise God, than to pray, to sing than supplicate? Of the two, it is certain∣ly the me oble: and there is nothing on earth s like Heaven, as a Christian assembly sweetly joining with hearts & voices▪ & nging the Divine praises in the solemn and dedicated places of
Why then shall the dire∣ct  naging this Office, be per∣  Clerk, an ignorant  indeed deserves to im∣p the wisedom of an Age? If we  not trust him to direct a Prayer for u before Sermon, why should we trust him to choose sals or us? Especially, when all circumstance be∣ing considered, 'tis ten to one but he chooses unluckily. I hope there are va∣ry few amongst us much negligent herein; but if any of us be, seeing the gligence is every way insa∣ble, and most unworthy of o Office, let us not coninue it any one instance more: For we may be wel assured, that it will both inhance our own guit, and trash our peoples devotion; and t i no  han  affonting the M∣jesty of God in one of the nob prts of hi Worship. I have thus, wth all   an sirity, spoke my thogt n this other great Chrisa .  well assured, the ends  proposed to my self are such, as  shall not be ashamed to own at that Tribunal, where, the
most secret designs of all men shall be∣come publick: yet I am not unsensible, but there will be found some, who will judge I have strangely overshot my self in censuring (or acknowledg∣ing to be censurable) several particu∣lars, which are quietly, and, as some may suppose, laudably practised in our Church. Nor will they, or others perhaps, thank me ('tis well if either will pardon me) for my severity a∣gainst want of sober Christian know∣ledge and seriousness in a certain sort of men. I must acknowledge my self of the mind of thse people, who had ra∣ther rectifie any thing which they see obnoxi us (though not actually taxed) then  in and applaud, what it is difficult to defend: And, if I have been guilty of any harsh expression touching any things or persons in this behalf, it is truly my zeal for the ho∣nour and interest of our Church, that has transported me thereinto. I would not have it said, that a Church, whose reformation is the most accomplisht precedent in the Christian World (in the very judgment of Forreigners)
should be out done by any probable pre∣tences to a more rational and spiritual sort of lauding God, than what is in practice with her. I have not censured any thing, which is in use by any of her Laws, as far as I know. What little redresses or alterations in any case I have projected, I trust I have shewn to be every way congruous to Antient and Present Ecclesiastical constitutions, as well as to right Reason, natural E∣quity, and the general Rules of Holy Scripture. Did I know any thing here∣in contrary to any Law or determina∣tion of our Church, I should either ex∣punge it, or lay aside the whole for the sake of what were Heterodox, and not conform to those Rules which the Church gives us, and to which I hear∣tily submit my self, promising to re∣voke any thing I have written, if I shall be convinced of any discrepancy thereinto the Doctrine or allowed pra∣ctice of our Church, or to the great end of advancing true & spirituall Devotion. In the mean while as the severest ex∣pressions, which have fallen from my Pen, to my best remembrance, are le∣veld
against meer lip-labour, and con∣tenting our selves with outward Melo∣dies, when the heart is no whit at all engaged in the divine praise, so I pro∣fess I see no reason to repent of them, or desire them back again: but I rather think I ought to resume my concern∣ments in that regard, and to conclude with fresh and earnest importunity to all, of what rank soever in our Quires, whether the Dignitaries which preside, or the Composers, or Performers, that each in their order will, both for the Peoples and our Churches, and even for their own sakes be of Gods mind, by all their Art and Power de∣signing above all the melody of the heart, and preferring this to any Opinionative skill, or fancies of their own. Such fancies may do prettily elsewhere: Quaint divisions, sporting shakes and Trills have a meeter place. It has ever been accounted of most dangerous na∣ture to sport in holy things. Where∣fore, in the Name of God, let both all our sacred performances, and even our outward gestures in this the discharge of our Office, express all gravity, se∣riousness
and devotion: the contrary interrupts, disturbs, and, in a sort, profanes both our own and others devo∣tion; besides, that it brings inevitable scandal on our selves, and on the very service we are emploied in. It is a glo∣rious Character we meet with of the Jewish Quire in the days of Hezekiah, 2 Chron. XXIX. 34. The Lvites d help them [viz. the Priests, wh by their Office indeed, they were to , as being inferiour to them] till the work was ended, and until other Priests had sanctified themselves: for the evite▪ were more upright in heart to sanctifie themselves, than the Priests: And, shall the Jewish Quire out do us even in Spirials too? In a word, we see how reasonable, how antient, how pious, divine and Heavenly the whole cnsti∣tutin of our Quires is. As therefore, on the one hand, we ought not to be shaken in our profession and way of Worship, by the avils of dissentng and humoursome (though well-mean∣ing) men, so neither must we content our selves herein, that we are in the possession of a Worship, outwardly most
goodly, and established by Law; but to employ the utmost intention of un∣derstanding, will and affections there∣in, which is our reasonable Service. God and his Church have provided we shall sing with the spirit, the manner of our singing being with Art (a common gift of the spirit of wisedom) and the mat∣ter sung generally of divine inspiration. Let us take care we sing with the under∣standing, and in the Holy Ghost. Then shall our Psalms be unto him a swee smelling savour: Our Prayers and our Praise shall be set forth before him as in∣cense, and the lifting up of our hands as the Evening sacrifice. He shall meet us and bless us, and that in the beauty of holiness; & in holiness & beauty we will again praise him. We will praise him till he shall catch us up to met himself, & till we shall be ver with him: and then too we will sing and praise him again; we will then sing and praise him better, and world without End. Amen. Hallelujah.
OF THE OFFICE AND DUTY OF Preaching. In nostro Opere aliquando cavendum est Scandalum proximi, aliquando pro Nihilo contemnendum.—Si autem de veritate Scan∣dalum sumitur, utilius permittitur nasci scan∣dalum, quàm veritas relinquatur. Gregor. Mag: in Ezekiel. Homil. 7. DƲBLIN, Printed Anno Dom. M.DC.L.XXVIII.
Of the Office and Duty of Preaching. CHAP. I. Of the Nature of our present Prea∣ching, and its Difference from that spoken of in Scripture. Sect. 1. Different Judgments as to the Nature and Necessity of our present Preaching. Sect. 2. The Heads of this Discourse attemperated thereto. Sect. 3. An Entrance upon the First. Head, by considering what Preaching the Gospel signifies in the Nesta∣ment. Sect. 4. The difference between Preaching the Gospel, Teaching, and Prophesying. Sect. 5. What was most peculiar to that First preach∣ing. Sect. 6. There neither is, nor reasonably can be imagined, will be in the present or future ages, any such Preaching of the Gospel, as that in Scripture. Sect. . The Nature and frame of our Present Sermons Sect. 8. The name of preaching taken in a new Notion, when applied thereto. Sect. 9. The main particulars of the Difference
between our Preaching, and that spo∣ken of i Scripture. Sect. 10. What pretences there may be at present to the Gift. Sect. 11. The summe of the whole. IN relation to what we now call Preaching, the sentiments of all sorts who pretend to be serious in Re∣ligion (to which sort of men onely I design these discourses) may be redu∣ced to three Heads. As the First of which I will set, the Fancy of those men, who seem to make Preaching, in a manner, the whole business of the Ministry, and Hear∣ing all the Religion of the People: As if to be a sincere and zealous Christian, were onely to be Ever learning, and ne∣ver to come to the knowledge of the truth; to have itching ears, and a confused head, and an unstable heart. With these men to have heard a Sermon is much the same, as with the Papists to ha heard a Mass: and however they are usually great pretenders to, and admire  Gifts and the Spirit, yet the most of them have but a very mean
share of sober sense and reason▪ The second Opinion is of a more so∣lid sort, who having observed the great mischief, that some kind of Prea∣ching has done, could be very well content to have a general restraint of that arbitrary exercise hereof, which all Ministers take; and supposing that they had constantly the publick prayers and the Scriptures read, and now and then an Homily or two for the Generali∣ty, and the Catechism fr their chil∣dren all which▪ I here make known, I am far from slighting) they  complain of no scarcity of spiritual food: but as to commonly new Ser∣mons (though something fo state and greater solemnity they would allow to Bishops, and great Doctors, in more eminent Churches, and at certain sea∣sons) commonly new Sermons, I say, they conceive generally useless, if not pernicious. These men mean well, but the estate of our Church, and the manners of our people would be very ill consulted, should their advice take. The World will not now be perswaded, that the Ministry need no personal abili∣ties
or gifts of their own, or that, ha∣ving them, they are not to use them. There are men of very different princi∣ples, who will tell us to our faces, that if all our Ministry lye in the Reading to the people certain Offices, and Old fa∣shioned Essayes, from the Book, they are as well qualified for our functi∣on as we, and can discharge it as well, if not better, than many of us; and that we take too much upon us in pretending otherwise. Now, though haply we may not be able to stop all such peoples mouths, do we what we can, or preach we never so often, or so well, yet it is not fit they should have so plausible a plea against us, as this amounts to. The third is the judgment of those, who hold the middle between these two Extremes: and though they are as little sond of whimsies, novelties or changes, and as much admirers of our Churches institutions, as most men are, or any need to be, yet considering the Genius and manners of the age, and to∣gether the state of the hurch, as of a Vsiel afloat between two Gulfs (the wind, that blew her in, must blow
her forth, and keep her thence) they conceive the Pulpit to be one of the most likely means, as well to reform manners, as on both hands to secure our Church. There is indeed a diffe∣rence betwixt what preaching the Go∣spel was at first, and what we call preaching now, as we shall presently see; and 'tis not impossible, there may be a multitude of pretended Gospel∣preachers (an , unreaso∣nable and importunate Nation, that will neither speak sense and truth, nor hold their tongue) who cry out there is Necessity laid upon them to preach, when really there is, and long has been, a publick Expediency, if not ne∣cessity, that the most of them were si∣lenced, or sent to try that spirit of power, which they pretend to, in a way which seems to need inspiration: But yet as to this, which at present we call preaching, such of it, as is accor∣ding to truth, holiness and sobriety, there are many crave the pardon of deeper judgments, if they think, and publickly profess, there is a Necessity both that it should be, and that it
should be frequent; and Wo be to our Religion, when such Preaching failes, or grows more rare. To promote sound UnderstandingSect. 2. and hristian temper in a matter, which is now become so great a part of Religi∣ous Service, as the present Preaching is, I humbly crave to be heard with a sedate, unprejudiced and even mind, while I present a sober, and I hope, a modest discourse on these Heads, which I conceive the different senses of men, now mentioned, make necessary to be discussed. Namely (1.) Whether the Preaching of the Gospel, spoken of in Scripture, and Gospel-preaching, or what we call at present in usual speech Preaching, differ? And supposing there be a difference, in what points mainly that lies? (2.) Of what authority then our present Preaching is? (3.) On what occasion, and by what means and degrees, this diversity has come into the Church? (4.) What Necessity any men, in truth and reason, may plead, lies upon them to preach, as at present we understand Preaching? And Lastly, what in probability would be the mis∣chiefs
ensuing, in case what we now call Preaching should grow into disuse, or be generally restrained in ordinary Congregations? And I trust in the management of each of these, none shall have reason to complain of my want of temper. For satisfaction to the first of these,Se. 3. it will be necessary to consider, What preaching the Gospel strictly signifies in the New Testament, and then to re∣flect on what that preaching is, which we have in present practice. As to the strict importance of this Phrase in the New Testament, there can no notion be more certainly made out by the very Letter of Scripture, than that preaching the Gospel signifies the publishing, proclaiming or making known the Christian doctrine to people, who at the time of such preaching had not received, or perhaps heard of, Christianity. Thus the words which are rendred preaching, and the perpe∣tual use of them, as well in the holy as in common Writers, most plainly prove.  is the most usual word for preaching, answering the Hebrew ,
whence it seems derived: now both in the Old Greek of the Septuagint, and in our New Testament, it signifies to proclaim or publish any decree, law, or other matter of publick concern∣ment, as an Herald at Armes does in the way of his Office. In the case of Joseph's advancement, when he had interpreted harao's dream, and, as an especial honour done him, was made to ide in the second Chariot Royal, . They cried before him, saies our English, or word for word if we keep the same style, The cryer cried before him; but that way of speech seems not to be arti∣ficial enough, nor to observe due De∣corum.Vid: p∣plr. ald: Targ: Heos: & Jo∣ath. Ben∣ziel. & Hei∣ronym. qust. Hebr. The title to be proclaimed before him was  The King Father, according to that Chap. XLV, 8. God hath made me a Father to Pharaoh: Now, a ryer, or Bell-man, does not use to go on such a service, but some principal Officer at Armes. And in the case of Jonah and Niniveh, Jon. I, 2. Go to Niniveh that great City, and cry against it. . Make proclamation, summon it to yield.
Then upon the Cities repentance, Cha. III, 5. They believed God, and proa¦med a fast.    Greek, elder than this,    is, as by Proclamation▪ ¦mon the Graecins to Counc  according to such use, do we  word put in the New  . Whatsoever is done in secret, , shall be proclaimed upon the House to: see too Revel. V. 2. &c. Now this be∣ing in Authours of al sorts the import of this word, when we find it put in∣to the Apostles commission to preach, as it is expresly Mar. XVI, 15. as also when we find it used in the Historical reports of what they did by way of execution of their Commission, and in other like cases, we can reasonably in∣terpret it no otherwise. The other word ordinarily rendred by preaching the Gospel, and used in that eminent, but much abused Text of the Apostle, 1 Cor. IX, 16. is  This signifies indeed somethn more, namely, to proclaim, or bring good tidings; but it still imports the ntion of New, (for what was known before,
cannot well be called tidings) as well as of good and publisht. So that by the noation of this word also, To preach the Gospel, will be to publish the glad tieings of happiness and peace, through the boud of Jesus, to such to whom this doctrine is new. There are indeed other words of fre∣quenSect. 4. ue in the New Testament, which seem to be alied hereto, those I mean, o teaching Christ Jesus, and of pro∣phesying: But the Learned have alwaies observed as great a difference, as my discourse designs, betwixt these terms; and that difference evidently grounded in the Texts, where the words are used, Act v. 4. They ceased not to teach and preah Jesus hrist: and ch. XV, 35. They continued at Antioch, teaching and praching the Word of the Lord: Teach∣ing it to the Church, or Faithful; Praching it to the Jewes and Heathen, who believed it not. And this propri∣ety of speech is expresly observed by the Apostle, where professing his zeal for propagaing the Gospel, he rec∣kons up many of his Travels to that purpose, and avows that He strived to
preach the Gospel where Christ wasRom: 15 02 ot yet named, that he might not build on anothers fundation. Whence we ∣dently see the difference betwixt Eva¦gelists and Teachers: the  wee persons taken in by the Apostle o their assistance in conveting ifiels, the later persons settled in Churches, to instruct the Faithful for further edifica∣tion and growth. Very near a kin hereto were those called prophets in the inspired dies; nay certainly many of the Teachers or Doctours were also Prophets, that is, had the gift of prophesying, in the sense wherein the New Testament mainly uses that term, and as it signifies in∣terpreting or expounding the more diffi∣cult parts of the Prophets or Od est∣ment, and thence demonstrating Chi∣stian Religion. Act: XIII, 1. There were in Antioch certain persons, belonging to the Church, Prophets and Teachers, as the Greek Text naturally is to be rendred. And chap. XV, 32. Jds and ilas being prophets also themselves, exhorted the brethren in many words, and confirmed them, as to the grand Que∣stion
touching Circumcision and Jewish Ceremonies. If these persons had been onely prophets, we should scarce have found them in this great Council of the Apostles; we may therefore conclude them also Governours, or Teachers, or both. Besides, those, who have little kindness for Bishops, will allow Exhor∣tation to be hiefly the work of the Pa∣so, and confirming the brethren in the Christian Doctrine, the work pro∣perly of the Doctor or Teacher. And what could this confirming of the bre∣thren here spken of be, but, after the Apostles had delivered their sen∣tence, these mens arguing from the Scriptures of the Old Testament (the great Topicks likely to take with Jews) touching the reasonableness and agree∣ableness of the decree. So that we must allow, both that many Teachers were also prophets (for what should hinder more gifts than one to be inci∣dent, or concur in the same person? Or, what gift more fitly qualifying a person to be a Teacher in the Church, than that of prophesying in this notion?) and that prophesying in the New Testa∣ment,
signifies interpreting Scriptures, as abovesaid; though (as the learned Dr. Hammond notes) not excluding, but containing sometimes the gift of foretelling things to come, as we read of Agabus and others. That this con∣tended for is the main sense, wherein prophesying is to be taken, as thereby we mean a certain Gift or Office in the inspired Church, is most plain from the whole XIV. Chapter of the first to the Corinthians, and from diverse other places of St. Paul's Epistles on the same subject, too long and too many now to insist on. That this may reasonably enough be stiled prophesying, is evi∣dent from hence, because supposing the interpretation given, consonant to the Scriptures, it is but delivering the same Doctrine that the Prophets did, onely removing the obscurities, and making the Vision plainer; a kind of continuation and perfecter advance of their Office. And this, the case of Da∣niel, as to the seventy years, will most satisfactorily evince. Jeremiah had pre∣dicted, that after seventy years were ac∣complished,Jer. 25. 12. God would punish the King
of Babylon, and that Nation, and the Land of the Childaeans, for their in∣quity; and that he would visit his peo∣pleCap. 29. who were Captives there, and cause them to return to Jerusalem: The discovery of the Period of these seventy years, and ascertaining their accom∣plishment, from that particular occur∣rence, of Darius, son of Ahasrus, ofDan: 9. 1, 2. the seed of the Medes, being made King over the Chaldaeans (which was a ∣nishment of Babylon, and of the former King thereof, the Kingdom being trans∣lated from the Chaldees to the ldes) was a Prophetical act in Daniel, or a particular instance of the prophetick spirit in him, as well as many other passages of his, which needed a second Daniel to interpret them. And yet this was onely an interpretation of Scripture, for he himself saies he understood it by books, namely, out of the prophesie of Jeremy, which was at that time ex∣tant in scriptis, and in the hands of the Jewish Church. To alledge modern Authorities for this sense were endless, the whole stream of interpreters in a manner running this way; I shall there∣fore
content my self onely with an Em∣phatical one out of the Antents. The Authour of the Commentaries ascribed to St. Ambrose, whom though Bellar∣mine is plead to account an Heretick, yet he allows to be of the same ageAm∣bros in 1▪ ad Corin. 14. with St. Ambrose, wries thus. Prophe∣tas dicit interpretes Scripturarum: sicut enim propheta futu praedicit, quae ne∣sciuntur, ita & hic dum Scripturarum sensum qui multis occultus est manifestat, dicitur prophetare; By prophets he understands interpreters of the Scri∣ptures: for as of old the prophet foretold things not known, so the Expositor while he opens the sense of Scripture, which is hidden to many, is said o prophesie. This indeed is the fullest passage I meet with there, but the same sense frequently occurs in this au∣thour, and even upon this same Cha∣pter. But of this sort of prophets, we shall have occasion to touch again here∣after; and what we have said already, may amply suffice as a foundation, whence to discover a wide difference betwixt the first sort of preaching, and that, so called, in present use.
To return more closely to the point in hand, there is nothing that I know remains to make up the full and ad∣aequate notion of what the Scripture means by preaching the Gospel, but what we may collect from a brief view  the Commission and Powers given to those who were sent to preach it at first. Their Commission was, Go ye in∣tomar▪ 16 15. 26 all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. He that believes, and is bptized, shall be saved; and be that believes not shall be damned. These Preachers had the world for their Dio∣cese; and our Lords thus commanding them forth thereinto, was their Outward call. Then as to the powers or internal accomplishments they went out with, those were immediately from Heaven.Lu▪  Tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, till ye be indued with power from on high. In plain terms they were possessed of ex∣traordinary and immediate inspiration; as elder Brothers, of a double or mani∣fold portion of the spirit, by virtue whereof, whatever they delivered by word of mouth, was as infallibly truth and Gospel, as what they left consigned
in their writings. And though there may be just question, whether that Philip, who Preached Christ to Samaria, were Philip the Apostle, or rather theActs: VIII. 5. Deacon (Acts VI.) and so, whether he had that immediate outward mission be∣fore said to have belonged to the first Preachers of the Gospel, yet, as I makeVid: Act: 21. 8. no question, but all will allow him to have been an Evangelist, so I am sure there can be no doubt of his being im∣mediately inspired; for so much the se∣quel in the History of him, relating to the Eunuch, doth manifestly evince: Besides that it is certain, Samaria at the time of his Preaching had not re∣ceived the Faith. So that we are still inforced to conclude these two points peculiar to the first and proper preach∣ing the Gospel, Divine inspiration for the assistance of the Preacher, & Infidels, or which is much the same, Jewes, for his Auditors: and truly I see little reason not to admit the third also, of an extra∣ordinary commission: for, supposing the first and onely proper Preachers of the Gospel, to have been either Apostles or Evangelists, there is none of sobriety,
will not easily allow their mission or commission extraordinary. In summe then, the Preaching of the Gospell spoken of so oft in the New Testament, at least that Preaching, to which St. Paul said there lay a Necessiey upon him, was a Publication of Christi∣anity to the Unbelieving world, and that pursuant to an unlimited Com∣mission (and by the infallible conduct of the Holy Ghost) given immediatly by Christ Jesus. And I shall not con∣ceive, I need to concern my self in saying any more for the proof hereof. By what is said, it plainly appeares, there neither is at present, nor except immediate Inspiration should returne, can hereafter be, any proper preaching of the Gospell in the World. That which comes next to it is the publick Reading the Gospells to those, who as yet known them not; for they are in∣fallibly Truth and Gospel: Thus the reading Moses in the synagogue is (a little Catachrestically) termed Preaching him. Acts: XV. 21. Moses of old time
hath in every. City them that preach him, being read in the Synagogue every Sabbath∣day. And next to that, The publication of Christianity, in sense and terms as agreeable as may be to scripture, either to Jewes, Indians, or such unbelievers, who never yet so much as professed to own the Doctrine of Jesus. Now though both of these may with good colour of reason be Styled Preaching the Gospell, yet it is evident, neither of them comes up to that first Apostoli∣call performance in this kind, which, as we have said, can onely be accounted the proper Preaching of the Gospell, commonly spoken of in Scripture. And Now to reflect upon the preach∣ingSct▪ 7▪ in Present practice with us, and to take our Measures from Sermons, which deservedly we may account sober, Learned and Pious: They are discouses of this nature. The Preacher (as we call him) First, truly in the Fear of God & with good conscience, as he must answer it to the All seeing God at the great day, considers the temper and quality of the people, whom he is to instruct,  from time to time may be most
necessary and profitable for them, to make them sound in the Faith, upright in Heart, zealous of good workes, sober and peaceable. Such subjects being still found out and chosen, he bethinks himself of a place of scripture, whence he may be able most naturally methodically, fully and perspicuously to deduce such matter as he has to discourse on that Subiect: he reads both upon the Subject and Text, he meditates; Hoc amat, hoc spernit; He somtimes sees fit to change his first choice of Text, me∣thod, &c: and at length having resolved, as he judges, to best advantage, he sets upon the framing of his discourse, disposeing and modelling his matter, as he thinks most convenient for edificati∣ons possibly, first propounding his design, shewing how his Text is pertinent thereto, and to that purpose giving perhaps accompt of its connexion, sif∣ing its meaning, making such Partitions as he pleases, or it admits: He speaks to each as opportunity serves, Stating proving, argueing, from scripture, from Reason, from authorities of Fathers,  others. In the end, he en∣deavours
to bring all home to mens Consciences; either Expostulating and pleading with them in the behalf of God, or Reproving, Exhorting, Directing, Encourageing, as the matter best will bear, or as he sees most need∣full. And all along he cloathes each part with such Expressions and Orna∣ments of speech, which he hopes may give his mattter most advantage. Is it not plain that this, or some such as this (for I concern not my selfe as to those little particularities of method, which some Divines use, or have pre∣scribed) is the constitution & structureSect. 8 of our present Sermons? Now of a discourse contrived and framed after this manner, or any better one that wee may conceive, what can we say? Can we call this Preaching the Gospell, in the true scripture-notion of the phrase? We cannot certainly: For, as it is an Expli∣cation of scripture, if of the old Te∣stament applied to Christianity, it is properly, as we have seen, what the first Christians meant by Prophesying; and if of the New Testament, it is still
(at least Analogically) Prophesying; nor is there any scripture-term so pro∣perly applicable to it: As it handles or entreats of any particular Christian Doctrine, it is Teaching or Doctrine:1. Cor▪ 14. 6, 26. As it containes what we call the appli∣catory part, it is Exhortation, Reproof Consolation, or the like; which by way, of Office of old particularly belonged to the Bishops or Pastors of the par∣ticular Churches respectively. So that our Preaching, as it is at present exercised, takes in the work of pri∣mitive Prophets, Teachers, and Bishops or Pastors: but yet, neither is any one of these, nor all in conjunction, the Publication of Christianity to Infidel People; for they all rather suppose Christianity received, and are accom∣modated to edification of professors, not to the Conversion of aliens. The name of preaching then, as it is at present given to our Sermons, or may be verified of them, must be acknow∣ledged to have become a Term of art and to signify a New, and clea an∣other thing, than  intention and instituti
For the difference is great and in many regards. First, the Subject mat¦terSect. 9. is Particular in our Sermons, viz. this or that point of Faith, or matter of Practice: The subject matter to them who Preached the Gospell was Gene∣rall, Christian Religion; to tell men what it was, and to perswade them to it, takeing the best occasions and advantages they could for every thing, and confineing themselves no further to any, than they saw reason from particular circumstances, and the quali∣ty of the hearers. Secondly, in respect of the manner of handling, there are many points of difference might be insisted on. Their preaching was Naturall, loose and unpremeditate; Ours Artificiall, methodicall and studied: But chiefly theirs was brief, Various, and Inter∣locutory. They continued their speech, usually, but a very short space, and then fell off, as their auditours gave them occasion into disputes and rea∣sonings with them, answering, pro re nata, their demands, Objections, Doubts. Our discourses are Sett, as neer as we
can Even, continued a considerable time, and I fear, as some auditours too often judge, tedious. As to par∣ticular doubts and questions, we must and do answere them in private: Respect to the assembly, and it may be to the very persons, that propose them, permit not that this be done, nei∣ther alwayes nor ordinarily, in the Congregation. Thirdly, there is yet a greater difference in regard of the Principle, by which the Preachers are supposed to be acted. They were assisted immediat∣ly by an infallible spirit, so that all they spoke was Gospell; and therefore they might require absolute belief and sub∣mission: we have indeed the same sure word of Prophesy as they had, but that onely recorded in Scripture. Our Argu∣mentations & deductions from thence are onely by the strength of reason im∣proved by study, observation, converse, prayer & the Ordinary assistance of the Holy Ghost upon all these: and they are so farr onely certaine, as they agree with scripture and the Analogy of Faith; nor do we urge them further upon mens
consciences, than we can approve them such. Then as to the applicatory part, they of old had that wonderful gift of1 Cor. 12. 10. Act. 8. 2, 22. the discerning of spirits, and by this undoubtedly knew many times how to direct their discourses to the hearts and particular state of their hearers. We can proceed onely upon common acquaintance with people, credible in∣formation, and very often our own prudential Conjectures, and therefore must needs in a great measure shoot at a peradventure. Fourthly, the Auditors, and imme∣diate design, are very different. To the primitive preachers of the Gospel, as we have already observed, the au∣ditors were generally Infidels, Jewes, Greeks, Barbarians: To us real, or professed Christians. They were to suppose their hearers strangers from or enemies to the Truth: We are  of an un-Christian sin, called uncha∣ritableness, if we think ours . Ours are as truly of Gods Family, as our selves; for ought we know, many of them as sincere Christians, o how∣ever, if of different proficiency, yet
all baptized with us into the same Faith. The thing designed by them, was the bringing their auditories over to Christianity: We finding ours ge∣nerally Christian, can onely build them up in our most Holy Faith, the profession whereof they have already undertaken. Lastly, There is a difference also, and that very great, in our very mission and sphere of action. The Preachers of the Gospel, in the Scripture-notion, were sent either immediately by Christ with a Commission to preach to All Nations for the gathering Disciples all the world over;  and when. ul. they had preached a while in one place with such success, as to gain any consi∣derable number of Proselytes, were to run into another (having frequently immediate revelations to this purpose) and sleaving onely a Seminary (that is the faithful, whom they had con∣verted, formed into a little Church, little comparatively to ours at present) were to take the world before them. Or where the Apostles themselves could not go, the inspiration which was in
themselves directed them to send other inspired persons, who were plentiful∣ly in their Company, and to whom, the Holy Ghost guiding them herein, they gave Commissions, as they w sit, as large often as their own. Of this sort, and of such authority were they, whom the Scripture saith to have preached the Gospel. Whereas we are sent imme∣diately by the Church onely, and but mediately by Christ, without any pre∣tence of inspiration in the persons im∣mediately sending or sent, and our Walk is limited and appointed us; we are to have the charge of such or such a Flock, and to move onely within our allotted Verge. There might possibly have been as∣signed several other points of diffe∣rence, but I presume these the princi∣pal, and amply sufficient to my design. Onely I must acknowledge there is one sort of Preaching, called commonly, but cantingly, Gospel-preaching, the dif∣ference of which, from the Scripture notion of preaching the Gospel, I have not yet stated. Gospel-preaching some men call that, which is opposite to the
aching men their duty. If a man cry up Antinomian Free-grace, if he pro∣caim the favour of God, and pardon ofn, and promise men Heaven through Christs bloud, without any regard to that part of the Covenant of Grace, which concerns us on our side, with∣out any engaging them to an Holy and Christian life, if he extol a resolute Faith, and no need of any thing but casting our selves (even blind-fold) into the arms of Christ, this is Gospel∣preaching: Whereas he, who tells men, it is non-sense to talk of a Covenant, wherein there is not some part on both sides, and that the bloud of Christ operates not to the pardon or salvation of those men, who, by ungodly and im∣penitent lives, put themselves out of the Covenant of Grace, this man is onely a Legal preacher. Now truly such Gospel preaching as this, differs from preaching the Gospel, just as Christ does from Antichrist; 'Tis the preaching an∣other and contrary Gospel, and if any of those men, who thus preach or thus believe, come to Heaven, it must be by leading better lives, than their princi∣ples
induce them to. But to return from these extravagants. By what we have already said, weSect 10. are able to make a judgment of the pre∣tence to the Gift of preaching, a thing that has made so much noise in late years. If we take Preaching in the strict sense, wherein the Scripture uses the term, to pretend to a gift thereof, is to pretend to qualification for an Of∣fice not in being in the present Church: Again, if we take the name in the new and more improper notion, the Gift thereof must import, not what the pre∣tenders are Masters of, a little Theo∣logical Lullianism, or ability to prate endlesly on Holy matters that we under∣stand not, but a sober insight into Scripture and Divinity, both Contro∣versial and Practical, and to that pur∣pose good skill in Tongues, Logick, Rhetorick, History, and great varie∣ty of other Arts and Sciences; and su∣peradded to all these, a faculty of clear expression in each. For in the form of our present Sermons, we observed to concur Prophesie, Doctrine, and Pasto∣ral Application of all, according to the
nature of the matter, and circumstan∣ces of Time, Hearers, and the like; in which last part, the great business being to perswade, it is not specula∣tive and slight, but the most practised and profound Oratory, that will  in stead: Now where are those meerly Gifted men, that can shew a  a∣ble share in all these  is true indeed, in the Miracul  , the  properly soChrys. in 1. ad Corin, Hom. 36. called, the Prophets, Preachers  a∣stours too, many of them, did all by Gift. As there were  Poets, ac∣cording to what we have above discour∣sed, so were there also inspired Lin∣guists, Oratours, Disputants, & what not? But amongst all the pretenders to gifts in the present age, where ever yet was found the man, who having not learnt Tongues by usual means, was able to read the Hebrew or Greek Testament into English? And yet when Gifts were really in the Church, the interpretation of Tongues (which, say the Learned, had a particular reference to that of the Hebrew) was amongst the number, and as ordinary as that of
prophesie, Doctrine or Exhortation. Where then would our Gifted Brethren have been, had not the deep study of some men, which way they judge them∣selves to much above, furnished them with Translations? And yet after all the advantages of Translations, Comments, and even Analyses of the Bible in En∣glish, after so great plenty of Treatises on all parts of Divinity, and of Ser∣mons every day from the Pulpit, what miserable stuffe is it, our meerly Gifted Brethren vent in this kind? They are to be much lamented, if themselves are not sensible of it. Yet this very fa∣culty which they have, what is it but an Ordinary and mean habit of talking, acqui  certain unartificial kind of , and their own practice there as before said in the Discourse of  of Prayer. In summe, all that may be soberly admitted touching any Gift of preaching is this: If men will go through a due course of Learn∣ing by way of preparation, and then set themselves to the regular study of Divinity, and withall to the practice of it, studying too their own hearts,
upon this their industry accompanied with their prayers, they shall undoubt∣edly find such blessing and assistance of the Holy Ghost, that their minds shall by degrees be furnisht with Holy know∣ledge and Counsel, their thoughts re∣fined and lifted above poor and mean Idea's, their affections by contempla∣tion of such Notices, as are supposed Treasured up in their souls, habitu∣ally warm and active in holy matters, helping much. Cogitation and even ex∣pression it self. In a word, all their rational faculties will be improved, strengthened and advanced, and the more they exercise themselves, to∣wards, or in, what we call preaching, the greater will be the facility of it to them, and their dexterity therein. Their two talents by such use shall be∣come four; or their five, ten. In the mean while, here is nothing of an im∣mediate or sudden Afflatus; all is sup∣posed acquired by rational meanes: And to expect Gifts otherwise is Idle, Enthusiastical; and, either to pretend to them as otherwise come by, or to put our selves on Offices,
which require gifts above what Nature furnishes the ordinary sort of men with, when we have no such Gifts, is impudence and sacriledge, a profa∣nation of holy things, and an approach to Blasphemy, in iniuling the holy spirit of God to our crudities & presumptions. Upon the whole, we see the preach∣ing II▪ spoken of in Scripture, fell onely into the beginning of Christianity, it being a publication of the Gospel to infi¦dels by inspired persons: and that even in that very extraordinary age, when once people were brought to the Faith▪ the further institution of them was by more ordinary means, and in a more ordinary manner; namely, by prophe∣sie, or interpretation of the Scriptures to them, by Doctrine or a kind of Ca∣techistical or larger exposition of the Faith; the Pastours likewise in every Church did exhort, rebuke with all au∣thority. 2.  There was ever in the Church an Order of men (though of different degrees and power) whose business it was to eed the flock of God with instru∣ctions, counsel and mnitions. At pre∣sent indeed, thogh we retain the
name of preaching still, yet the thing we call so, is much different from that so called of old, being no such extra∣ordinar performance, but rather made up of those ordinary kinds or modes of institutin used in the Church from the very planing of Christianity, all of them being as it were conjoined in our present Sermons; which Office there∣fore requires not meerly some strength and pregnancy of natural parts, or some superficial knowledge of the Faith, and confident readiness of speech (all which together some men are pleased to call a Gift of Preaching) but Universal lear∣ning, deep study, and considerable practice both in godliness as a Christian, and in the methods of communicating knowledge as a Teacher. And such should be the accomplishments of each person to be admitted a Preacher, and such our present Preaching. CHAP. II. Of the Authority of our present Preaching, and how this Diffe∣rence came in,
Sect. 1. The second Head proceeded to: and first of the authority of our Of∣fice. Sect. 2. Different Orders of the Ministry in the inspired Church. Sect. 3. Of such Orders as were to be of perpetuity. Sect. 4. Of the au∣thority, that is, the certainty or truth of what we teach. Sect. 5. A proceeding to the third Head: and first, Of the Occasion which introdu∣ced this Difference. Tis such as ju∣stifies it. Sect. 6. Of different modes and methods of preaching. There have been, and ought to be such. Sect. 7. Of what Preaching there was in the Old Jewish Church. Sect 8. Of what Nature the Apostles Sermons. Sect. 9. Of the Sermons or Homilies of the Fa∣thers. Sect. 10. The original and continuance of Posills. Sect. 11. Of the breaking off of that course, and the introducing the present way, both in the Protestant and Romish Chrches. Sect. 12. An Apology for the Free∣dom above used. Sect. 13. Coroa∣ry touching the reading our Sermons▪ and Sect. 14. Of modest names to be given to our Sermons.
THE Nature of our present PreachingSect. 1. being such as acknowledged, it follows that we consider of what Autho∣rity it is: for possibly being so different from the Apostolical preaching, it may seem to some justly to be little regar∣ded. And here it will be necessary to speak briefly; First, as to the Right & au∣thority of our Office, & then as to the au∣thority of what we do in discharge of it, As to the authority of our Office, or our Commission: We cannot indeed pretend to be Apostles, or Evangelists, or even Prophets, as thereby is meant persons immediately inspired with the faculty of interpreting Scripture; we therefore must not, we do not pretend to such preaching of the Gospel, as was that by those inspired persons. But we do say, our office is set down in Scri∣pture under the more ordinary termes of atours and Teachers, and that it was designed  should be of perpe,  duration with the Church  We do say fur∣ther,  in that extraordinary age, , r interpretation
of Scripture, was not by virtue of mi∣raculous and inspired powers, but some (and that not infrequently) by more ordinary skill, acquired through study, converse with those who understood Mysteries, practice, prayer, and like usual means: And nothing hinders but such sort of Prophets and prophesying may still remain in the hurch; Nay, it is necessary such sort should remain. Now for the clearer comprehension hereof, it will be necessary we consider in a few words the different orders of those who laboured in the Word and Do∣ctrine in those Apostolick and extraor∣dinary dayes. And though it may not seem easieSect. 2. (nor perhaps prudent to undertake) to define how many different Orders there then were, yet that there were different Orders, is most certain. The A∣postle designing to set down for peace & regularities sake in the Body of Christ, which is his Church, of what dignity the several Offices and inspirations in the Church were, gives us this account as to the point in hand. 1 Cor. XII.
28. God hath set some in the Church; First Apostles, Secondarily Prophets, Thirdly Teachers. The other, whether gifts or offices, as not so neerly belon∣ging to our present purpose I meddle not with. What the Apostles were, we have sufficiently (to our design) spo∣ken already: these had the plenitude of the Holy Ghost and of power (as I may so speak) extraordinary inspirati∣on, and a Commission to preach all the world over. I do not doubt, but those prophets mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles, and in St. Paul's Epistles, and particularly in the passages last ci∣ted, and said to have then been in the Church, were persons immediately inspired, and that amongst other gifts, especially with the gift of interpreting the Prophesies and Scriptures of the Old Testament, for the happier conversion and confirmation of the Jewes. Out of these I conceive generally the Evan∣gelists to have been chosen, who were a kind of secondary Apostles, inspired persons, taken in by the Apostles to their assistance, and sent abroad indu∣ed with Apostolical power to preach
the Gospel where they themselves could not come (for they could not be every where) and they were most of them, as Antiquity tells us, of the seventy Di∣sciples,Luke: X. 1. whom our Lord sent Two and Two before his face. These were all extraordinary, and ceased with that extraordinary state of the Church, and to those onely it did belong properly to preach the Gospel; for these onely were qualified with an inspiration, which capacitated them thereto. But whoso diligently considers the Apostles discourse in the Twelfth and Fourteenth of the first to the Corinthi∣ans, will find that there were even in those inspired dayes, prophets and pro∣phesying of a more ordinary condition than that above mentioned. For chap. XII, 31, He conjures them to be zea∣lous of the best gifts; and chap. XIV, 1. Be zealous of spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may prophesie; again ver. 39. Be zealous, that is, earnestly desire and endeavour, to prophesie: and in order to the obtaining that ability, as in case of another, ver. 13. Pray. Upon which passage, saith St. Chrysostome, .
Let each do what is in him to obtain such ability: for, saith he, it is manifest by the Apostles prescribing such means, that it is partly in our power to obtain the Gifts he speaks of. But the same St. Paul is more express to Timothy. Ep. 1. c. IV. v. 13, , &c. Attend to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine: meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear unto all. Now as those were na∣tural means, things which are not above mens natural powers, supposing an or∣dinary divine concourse, so that the Gifts attained hereby were not always, even in those dayes, immediate and su∣pernatural inspirations, is evident as well from the nature of the means, as also from the Rules given by the Apostle to the Co∣rinthians, in the exercise of the abilities or Gifts they pretended to, 1 Ep. XIV. v. 29, 30, 31, 32. Let, saith he, the prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge: If any thing be revealed to another that sitteth by, let the first hold his peace. For ye may all prophesie (that is, all ye who are prophets) one by
one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted. And the spirits of the pro∣phets are subject to the spirits of the pro∣phets. Had all of them prophesied by virtue of an immediate and divine in∣spiration, whatever had been spoken thereby, would not have been to be judged, but to be received and belie∣ved, as coming from the infallible spi∣rit. And when he saith, If any thing be revealed to him that sitteth by, let the first hold his peace, it is plain he suppo∣seth the person who spoke, nt to speak by revelation; for the design of the revelation to him, that sat by, must be to controle, rectifie or explain what the other spoke by ordinary skill, or to some such purpose: wherefore it fol∣lows, The spirit of one is subject in such cases to the spirit of another, his name∣ly who had not the revelation (at least at that time) to his who then had it. And the Glosse in the orementioned Commentary ascribed to St. Ambrose, is pertinent hereto. Idiro dixit sub∣jectus est prophetis, ut ingen accend rt hac spe, quod spiritus conat adjuver. He therefore said is subject to the spi∣rits
of the prophets, that he might in∣flame their natural powers with this hope, that the spirit would help their endeavours. It is further worthily observed by the Learned and Venera∣ble Mr. Thordike, that this command of the Apostles to the Corinthian Con∣verts,Relig. Assem. ch. V. touching zealous pursuit of spi∣ritual gifts in this method, was occasi∣oned by what had been the practice of the Disciples of the Prophets under the Old Testament: for those, who are so often stiled the sons of the Prophets, are to be understood onely to have been their Disciples; and the Chaldee Para∣phrast Jonathan, a person well known in the Jewish Customs, accordingly ren∣ders them usually  The Dis∣ciples of the Prophets. 1 King. XX, 35, &c. which was undoubtedly the meaning of14, Amos also, when he professeth, I was no prophet, nor the son of a prophet, but a Herasman, &c. neither a prophet, nr a person that gave my self to the study of prophesie. Now the practice was on this sort: there were in diverse more emnent Cities, publick places, or noted Schools, where a society of
such as would, gave themselves to a more regular life, and religious exercise, and especially to the study of the law of Moses (most commonly under the con∣duct of some confessedly inspired per∣son) that they might also arrive at the like spirit of prophesie. Thus as we find at Jerusalem a Colledge, (2 King. XXII, 14, & 2 Chron. XXXIV, 22.)  An House of Learning, saith the same Paraphrast, so too at Ramah, where Samuel dwet, and whither Da∣vid fled to dwell with him: and accor∣dingly our Paraphrast renders Naioth, the place of Samuel's abode in Ramah, The House of Learning, 1 Sam. XIX, 8. 19. And whereas the Original Hebrew saith Samuel standing amongst the com∣pany of prophets as appointed over them, he rendreth  standing as a Doctor or Teacher over them. The like is to be said of the sons of the pro∣phets at Bethel and Jericho, 2 Kings , 3, 5. where the same reading of Disciples is stil observed: and of those also, over whom Elisha presided, 2 Kin. VI, as Samu∣el had done before over the others, t is true, the Gift of prophesie, as thereby
we understand an ability to utter things beyond mens natural powers or habitua∣ted capacities, was indeed of immedi∣ate inspiration from God: but that which qualified men for it, as a previ∣ous disposition, was the study of the Law of Moses, and manners suitable to it; and in this way, as is evident, of old they sought it. Now of those who thus sought this gift, some by divine dignation attained thereto; others, I say, stayed in that Ordinary know∣ledge, which by such studies they ac∣quired. Nevertheless even these later are by the Scripture called Prophets, in the latitude of that name: for so I take those passages, 1 Sam. X, 5. and Chap. XIX, 20. A company of prophets, which our Paraphrast renders  A company of Scribes, understanding the prophets there spoken of, not to have been all of them inspired persons; and therefore giving them that name, which in after times was the proper stile for persons deeply studied in the Law, (1 Chron. XXVII, 32.) and who some of them had run a course under eminent prophets, but themselves not attained
to the like inspiration; as was the caseMorh Ne∣boch. par. 2. cap: 32 of Baruch (if we may believe Maimo∣nides) which Baruch is frequently cal∣led a Scribe. See Jerem. XXXVI, 26, 32, &c. This acceptation of the word prophets for persons learned in the law of Moses, and Teachers thereof, though not at all inspired, is founded on ma∣ny other Texts of that Paraphrast, who generally when he conceives the Text to speak of prophets inspired renders them , but when of prophets by more ordinary means, and of more or∣dinary rank, he keeps to the above∣mentioned stile of Scribes, or  Do∣ctours, Jerem. XXVI, 16, XXX, 1, 15, &c. And such as these, beyond all question (though indeed not brought up under inspired men) were the cribes and Doctours amongst the Pharisees in our Lords time, who sat in Moses's chair, and instructed the people in Mo∣ses his Law, of which way of instructi∣on we shall have occasion to speak more hereafter. In summe; That Prophesying, to which men arrived by the ordinary means of study, prayer, exercise, and
Conversation with able persons, and which was controleable by immediate Revelation, such as we have found in the Corinthian Church, and have ob∣served the Original pattern thereof in the old Jewish Church or Synagogue, that prophesying, I say, was of a sort much inferiour to the other, which was by divine inspiration: There were therefore even in these extraordinary dayes, a secundary and more ordinary sort of prophets and prophesying. Now as out of the inspired prophets before spoken of, I conceive to have been chosen the Evangelists, so out of these more ordinary ones, the Pastours and Teachers in those primitive dayes. For I suppose it will be easily allowed, that generally the Pastours and Teachers were persons in a good measure skilled in the Scriptures of the Old Testament: and that they all had that skill by im∣mediate inspiration, I do not know it to have been so much as pretended by any men in their wits. , saith the Greek Scholiast The prophets (namely those of the inspired Order)
spoke all from the spirit, but the Teachers by their private skill. How∣ever though neither Pastours nor Teach∣ers were necessarily, as such, (nor, I believe, generally) inspired men even in those dayes, yet they were never∣theless God ordinance. He who set in the Church first Apostles, secondarily Prophets; set also Thirdly Teachers. . They were of Gods constitu∣tion. And Ephes. IV, 11. Christ gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some E∣vangelists, some Pastours, some Teach∣ers. They were Christs Gift. Further, that there should be a suc∣cession of men, whose business it shouldSect: 3. be by way of Office to feed the flock of Christ, and that this succession should continue, or be of perpetuity in the Church, is clear. When our XX.  Lord at first gave Commission to his A∣postles, he authorised them in this form. As my Father hath sent me, even so send you. His Father sent him with a power, among other things, to send others, as well to gather together, as to feed his flock: and as his Father sent him, with like power did he send his
Apostles. This power they well un∣derstood themselves to have received, and accordingly did send others, and them too as they were sent themselves, with a power for supply of their own mortality, or where the Work was too great for them, to send others also. And it is most plain from the Acts of the Apostles, and from St. Paul's Epistles, especially those to Timothy and Titus, that the Apostles in such places where they had converted numbers to Christi∣anity, did out of the gravest and ablest of the flock, choose persons whom they laid their hands upon, with Fa∣sting and Prayer, and thereby set them apart, or ordained them to minister in Holy things, to take heed unto, and o∣versee,Acts XX. 17 28, &  and feed the Churches in their absence. These persons thus set apart and impowered, were called , Elders or Presbyters, and we in English (as most of the European modern Lan∣guages have shortened the word) thence have the name Priests. Over these per∣sons the Apostles themselves presided, while alive and present; and afterward, in every greater and more famous
Church chose such a particular per∣son, as they saw to be fittest, and appoin∣ted him to preside, both in their absence & after their death, called both in Scri∣pture, and in the language of the Church generally ever since, a Bishop: To him within his Church, has ever appertained the power of ordaining o∣thers. Thus was Timothy set at Ephe∣sus, Titus left at Crete, and others o∣therwhere. And it is most plain, thatTi. 1. 5. Timothy and Titus being sent by St. Paul, did also themselves send others, ordain the Ephsians and the retians Elders in every city. Of these Elders or Priests, some laboured in the Word and Doctrine, were principally taken up in instructing the Faithful, and were thence called Teachers: and he who was principal in any Church, we may account to have been stiled Pastour. Others there were, who moved in a lower sphere, as intrusted, qualified and impowered, attending meaner Mi∣nistries, and were from such Ministra∣tion termed Deacons. And according∣lyRom. XII. 7. 8. the Apostle commands to keep each to his business, or that part to which
he was set. He that ministreth, let him wait on his ministring: Deacons on the services assigned them. He that teach∣eth on Teaching: Doctours on instru∣ction. He that exhorteth on Exhortati∣on. Pastors on Pastoral counsel & con∣duct. He that ruleth, with diligence: such chief Pastours as are to govern, let them be diligent in their inspections. 'Tis plain, that though all these derive their authority from the same fountain of power, Jesus Christ, yet these are all dif∣ferent: Having gifts different, ver. 6. Ru∣ling & Teaching do not necessarily meet, nay did not even in these inspired days, in the same person: Yea, even Teach∣ing and Exhorting, though now com∣monly the work of every Minister in every Sermon (so much difference is there betwixt our Preaching now, and their Discourses then) yet, were not in those dayes alwayes of the same per∣son. Doctrine & instruction belonged to one, afterwards. perhaps stiled the Cate∣chist; Exhortation to others, and chief∣ly to the Bishop, as shall presently be further evidenced. To summe up all: Jesus Christ sent
his Apostles, and impowered them to send Others: They exercised actually this power, and did send others, and ordered those Others thus by them sent to send Others, to ordain Elders or Priests in every city, some of whom (as to the point in hand) by their Office and charge were to Labour in the Word and Doctrine, which we at present call preaching. These also in their Generation regularly ordained o∣thers, as they were appointed and im∣powered to do; & the orderly succession is come down to us in this present age and Church: This is the summe, of all the sacred right, or Divine authority, of our Office, which as Pastours or Teach∣ers, we have or pretend to.Sect. 4. Briefly now as to the Authority, that is the certainty to truth of what we teach in way of discharging this part of our Office. First, as to the Foundation upon which we build, it is of Divine and in∣fallible authority, Scripture given by inspiration of God; the same Doctrine which those infallible preachers of the Gospel delivered by word of mouth first, and then consigned in writing.
We teach nothing necessary to be belie∣ved or done in order to salvation, which is not there contained, or does not, to any mans reason who understands com∣mon sense, follow from it. If at any time we teach such matters, which may seem less necessary, we let the world know, they are onely prudential, and we press them onely proportionably, and with prudential Motives. And here∣in also we have the example of the great Apostle, expresly discriminating his own sense and advices from Divine ora∣cles and commands. To the rest speak I, not the Lord▪ 1 Cor. VII, 12. And again, This I speak by permission, and not of commandment, ver. 6. Secondly, as to our interpretations of Scripture, and deductions from thence, we proceed not upon our own heads. We search what has ever been the sense of the Church, or what the purest ages have consented upon, and we interpret Scripture, where we can have it ac∣cording to such consent, either of the Church Universal, or of the Primitive and purer Church. Where we find not this consent, we compare Scripture
with Scripture, and apply the Analogy of Faith, we examine the context, de∣sign, expressions, we pray the assi∣stance of Gods spirit, we read again, we study, we consider again and again, before we presume to speak our own sense. And after all, we exercise no Dominion over the faith of any, but de∣sire to be believed according to the strength of our reasons. And Lastly, As we openly profess to all the World, that we are not in∣fallible, but men of like passions with the rest of Mankind (though we hope ours a little more subdued to reason and con∣science than all mens are) so on the o∣ther side, that we should not be so ob∣noxious to Errour, as are the common sort, there is all the reason in the world to believe. We are, as the an∣tient Prophets and Prophets sons above spoken of, bred up in the reading and studying of Holy Scriptures from our Childhood; we are instructed in Arts and Sciences, and peculiarly in the Ori∣ginal Languages of the Scriptures; we enter into the sheep-fold by the door, and climb not in any back-way; we give our
selves up to these things. And then if he, who promised, when he sent forth his Apostles to preach, that he would be with them to the end of the world (and that by his, Spirit the Paraclete, which should guide them into all truth) can now, the Apostles being dead, most of them (if not all) sixteen hundred years ago, can, I say, now no otherwise perform his promise, than by being with them in their successors, it is plain that if any sort of men may expect the guidance of the spirit more than others, we are the men. This is the summe of the Authority our Sermons pretend to. For a conclusion whereto, I shall onely say, that were I a Lay-person my self, I had rather in a difficult and uncertain matter, undetermin'd by the Church, err with my spiritual Guide, than ven∣ture at being in the right by my own self-conceit and way▪ wardness: For as it is scarce possible, that the Errour could be in any great matter, being a point supposed not yet determin'd by the Church, so it is very probable there would be more sin in such my hol∣ding of the truth, or, at least, in such
my venturing at it, than in an humble and submissive errour, where there were still a preparation of mind to em∣brace the Truth when seen. I now proceed to the third matter ofSect. 5. Enquiry, upon what occasion, and by what means and degrees, this difference betwixt what truly is, and what now is called, preaching the Gospel, came in? And I say, the true and great occa∣sion of this difference, is the different state of the Church. The alterations in the state hereof, since the Apostles departure out of the World, and the times immediately connecting there∣with, have been so great, as have ren∣dred that Primitive preaching the Go∣spel, both impossible and improper. It is first impossible, by reason of the cessation of that miraculous and in∣fallible guidance of the Holy Ghost, which as it was not Universal then (for though the Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists generally had it, yet not all the Teachers of the Church, as we have seen) so it seems not to have been necessary in the Church any lon∣ger,
than till the Canon of Scripture was finisht; the Church having that certainty now in these mate Records, which she had before from those living and vocal ones, the Apostles and Apo∣stolical men. We therefore confess in∣genuously, we do not preach as the A∣postles did, because we cannot; and we cannot, because God hath not thought it fit or necessary to continue such a measure of his holy spirit upon particular persons, as he indulged them. In the mean while, as the present Mini∣stry are not accountable for having taught no better than they could, so neither are the people, for having been no better taught. The condemnation of this age will not be, for having been meanly instructed. Let the people be∣lieve as soundly, and live as holily as the Regular Ministry teacheth, and there is no fear of their miscarriage. Again, the Apostolical preaching of the Gospel, would be in a great mea∣sure imprper in the  tate of the Church. It  as we have already made , the people to whom it was addres, not onely idel,
but even ignorant of Christianity: now neither of those can be supposed general∣ly of our people. Besides, we have seen it was various, occasional, interlocuto∣ry, which will not consist with the re∣verence due to the publick Worship of God in our Assemblies wherein we are to preach, nor even with the regard to be had to particular persons. For let any one judge, should we come, and in a short speech exhort people to turn Christians, and then give way to all the Questions, avils and Objections which any of our Auditours would put to us upon what we had said, or upon any o∣ther point in the whole Doctrine of Christianity, what confusion and ridi∣culous entertainment▪ not to say worse, would some mens impertinencies and weakness, others profane Atheistical vein create, both us and our Auditours? Thus the great Occasion of this diffe∣rence is manifest; and withall appears to be such, as that it justifies or war∣rants the difference which it hath cau∣sed, and leaves not the blame there∣of at the door of the present Prea∣chers.
As to the particular modes and me∣thodsSect: 6. which have been used in what we call preaching, since this difference came in, they have been very various; and indeed they ought so to be. For it be∣ing our grand design to perswade men to the sincere practice of their Christian Duty, we must perswade them as we can, that is, as they will suffer them∣selves to be perswaded. And this ju∣stifies our alteration of method, stile, and many other circumstances according to the temper and Genius of them, with whom we have to deal. A Physician, that has a melancholy, humoursome and self-will'd patient, is not blamed if he cure him with a trick, though he never talk to him in terms of Art, nor write a formal Recipe. Let us bring men to God and their Duty, and it matters not much how we do it. St. Paul our great pattern in this part of our Ministry, doth not deny, at least is not ashamed to own the imputation, that being crafty he caught them with guile, 2 Cr. XII, 16. In other terms, he saw what course would take with them, and that course he took. And
is the most charitable construction we can put upon that great variation of the way of Preaching, which from time to time we cannot but observe to have been introduced and practised in all ages of the Church, as well ordinary as ex∣traordinary. For we shall find, that even in those inspired dayes, not onely the way of one Apostle's preaching dif∣fered from anothers, but even upon different occasion, the same Apostle's from his own at other times. We will be∣gin with what certainly gave the first occasion, at least some precedent, to all such preaching as is now in use amongst us, and observe the difference all along. Now that was certainly that kind ofSect. 7. interpreting Scriptures, which was pra∣ctised by the Scribes and Doctors in the Old Jewish Church; which that we may see as particularly as we can, we will trace it from the very first begin∣nings, or even appearances of any pra∣ctice tending thereto. I cannot ob∣serve, that by any letter of the Law, the Priests or Levites are commanded to in∣struct the people in the Law at their pub∣lick Assemblies for Divine Worship, no
nor so much as thereat publikly to read it. We find indeed in the case Leprosie, this command to the people; Take heed in the plague of leprosie, that thou ob∣serveDeut. 24. 8. diligently, and do according to all that the Priests the Levites shall Teach you. And more generally, it is injoin∣edLevit: 9, 10, 11. Aaron andihis sons, that they should not drink wine nor strong drink, when they went into the Tabernacle of the Lord, to the end that they might put a diffe∣rence between the holy and unholy, and between clean and unclean, (that is, judge aright in all cases of conscience, which they should meet with) And that they might teach the children of Israel all the statutes, which the Lord had spo∣ken. Both these places indee suppose the Priests and Levites were to instruct the people in their duty according to the Law of Moses: And it is further a part of dying Moses his benediction to the Tribe of Levi, They shall teach Ja∣cob thy judgments, and Israel thy law, Deut. XXXIII, 10. But if we consider all these places with regard to the respe∣ctive connexions and dependances of each, we shall find that Teaching to
have been onely the Priests deciding emergent difficulties, or resolving doubts and Cases of Consciences, tou∣ching the obligation of particular points of the Law, as spiritual Guides and Judges in such matters: The pronoun∣cing to such as came to consult them, what the obligation of the Law was, and particular resolving their Conscien∣ces therein, most plainly, I say, appears to have been the Teaching there spoken of. And correspondent hereto is that passage in Malachi (Chap. II, 7.) The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts; where what is in the Hebrew  Mes∣senger▪ our Paraphrast renders  He ministreth before the Lord, of which rendring, the above celebrated Master Thorndike tells us, the Jewes give this reason, For standing to minister be∣fore the Lord in the Temple, he is alwayes ready for those purposes of satisfying their inquiries. Now this is very short of Lectures in course, or solemn Expositions of the Law at all their publick Assemblies. And as to any reading of the Law, all
the express injunctions thereof that I can find, were onely for the Kings rea∣ding it privately, Deut. XVII, 19. and for a publick reading it at the end of eve∣ry seven years, in the year of the release, at the feast of the Tabernacles, Deut. XXXI, 10. But who was publickly to read it then, will be some question: If we may interpret the meaning of the Text by the Jewes practice in this case, truly not the Priests or Levites. Let us hear the Comment of the Learned P. Fagius upon the Text. When all Israel is come to appear before the Lord thy God in the place which he shall choose, thou shalt read this law before all srael in their hea∣ring, ver. 11. Loquitr Mosi, & qu um locum in populo post illum obtinerent, &c. He speaks, saith he, to Moses, and to those who should be his succes∣sors in that place, as were their Kings, and before them their Judges. In the time of the Kings, the King himself, in the Women's Court, be∣cause that was the largest of any of the Courts of the Temple, from an high place, that is a woodden Pulpit, which they called  read the law,
not all of it, but some chief places out of Deuteronomy, that the people might be stirred up, and as it were molded into the performance of it. —Furthermore (as after a while he pro∣ceeds) it was the solemn use, accor∣ding to what the Hebrews report, that at such time as the King read, and published the Law in the Wo∣mens Court, Levites appointed to this purpose, called together the people with Trumpets through all the City of Jerusalem, and stirred up the whole multitude to the hear∣ing of the Law: that being wrapt in∣to admiration by such solennity, they might begin more attentively to hear∣ken, and those, who were yet ig∣norant of the matter, might more diligently inquire. More he has to this effect. Herewith also agree Mr. Ainsworth's Annotations. This was, saith he, performed by the Chiefest of them, either the High Priest, as Ezra, or the King: For this Com∣mandment was to Joshua (more right in that than Fagius, see ver. 7.) and therefore the King read it.—The King
read sitting, and if standing, it was more commendable. He read from the beginning of Deuteronomy, &c. They set up a great Pulpit of Wood in the midst of the Court-yard, and the King went up and sat therein, and all Israel gathered round about him. And the Minister of the Syna∣gogue took the Book of the Law, and gave it to the ruler of the Synagogue: And the ruler of the Synagogue gave it to the Sagan or Captain of the Temple (Acts V. 24.) and the Sa∣gan gave it to the High Priest, and the High Priest to the King, to ho∣nour him before the multitude. And the King took it standing, and if he would he sat down and read, &c. More is to be had there, out of the Rabbies, of the particular Rites and Circumstances at this solemnity: but this is amply enough to our purpose. Now hereby it does not at all appear, that it was either the Duty, or the Cu∣stome from the beginning of the Jewish Church, for the Priests or Levites so much as to read the Law to the people in their solemn Assemblies. And though
it may be said, from Moses his writing this Law, and delivering it to the Priests the sons of Levi, which bare the Ark of the Covenant, that this his committing it to them, was in order to their read∣ing it to the people, yet this is Gratis dictum, and the reply is easie; he gave it to them as the Keepers of the Holy things, as they bore the Ark of the Cove∣nant: and besides he gave it not to them alone, but also to all the Elders of Israel. The publick reading of the Law in the dayes of Joshua (Josh. VIII, 34.) was occasional: so too was that in the dayes of good Josiah, 2 Kings XXIII, 2. But in neither instance was it performed by the Levites, but, accor∣ding to what has been already spoken out of the late cited Authours, by the Chieftains of the people, Joshua, and Josiah themselves. Of the same nature too (occasional I mean, not solemn, and by way of settled course in the pub∣lick Worship) was that Teaching, per∣formed indeed by the Levites (assisted by the Princes to bring the people into obedience) at the command of Jehosh▪ phat, and designed for the reformation
of what abuses, oblivion and a long ne∣glect of the Law had introduced. In a word, it is generally received by the learned, that the Weekly reading the Law in the publick Assemblies, was brought in by Ezra (however as some sa it was appointed before) and not in use till his time. That, which be∣fore his dayes supplied the absence of this Office, was the frequency of Pro∣pets, which God raised up still a∣mongst the people as occasion required. So that hitherto, (till the time of Ez∣ra I mean) we can find no preaching in the Jewish Church, but either the Priests declaring the obligation of the Law, n cases put to them as doubts a∣rose, what was clean, what unclean, what fit to be sacrificed, what not; Or publick reading it (especially the Book of euteronomy, which most say was the onely Book first used to be read publickly) once in seven years by the King or Chief Governour; Or lastly, the prophers reprehensions, exhrtati∣ons, instructions and predictions, ac∣cording as they were immediaely dire∣cted by the Holy Ghost, which pro∣phesies
were all of infallible authority, and most of them in all probability re∣corded in the Scripture. We are now to see wh Ezra set up: And if we rest in what the cripture re∣cords, we shall surely come short of any weekly or daily course. n the first in∣stance of his practice, we have little or nothing new, but what some particular circumstances in the state of the Jewish affairs did then require. For the pub∣lick reading of the Law, then was part∣ly occasional and extraordinary (as that in Joshua's and Josiah's time before mentioned) and partly in pursuance of the Cmmand, Deut. XXXI, touching the seventh years course. We will view the place, Nehem. VIII, 1, 2, 3. All the people gathered themselves together as one man into the street, and they spake unto Ezra the Scribe to bring the Book of the Law of Moses, which the Lord comman∣ded Israel. And Ezra the Priest brought the Book of the Law before the Congregati∣on both of men and women—And he read therein before the street that was before the Water▪ gate from the morning [or first day-light] until the mid-day. And Ez∣ra
the Scribe stood upon a Pulpit of wood which they had made for the purpose, &c. In short, the City being now built and replenisht with inhabitants (Ch. VII, 73) newly returned from the Captivity, the people, in order to further settlement, required the Laws, by which they were to live. Here is the extraordinary oc∣casion. And with this the peoples im∣portunity, most happily did concur (at least very nearly) the time by the very let∣ter appointed for the publick reading of the Law: For it was in the seventh moneth, Chap. VII, last, and VIII, 2, that is in the moneth Tisri, our September, into which moneth fell the Feast of Ta∣bernacles, Levit. XXIII, 24; at which time it was injoined, the Law should be read, Deut. XXXI, 10. Unto which command, that Ezra had regard, is evident from all the circumstances; He read before all Israel gathered together, from a Pulpit of wood, as the Custome was; placed indeed in the midst of the street, the ourts of the Temple not being able to contain the multitude: and he read, from the first day light to the mid day; not a single Parasha or Fifty
fourth part of the law (for then they could never have advanced so far, as by the second dayes reading, to have found it written in the law, that they ould keep the Feast of Tabernacles, as they had ver. 14.) nor any such portion as the Jewes pretend to be of Ezra's insti∣tution. Now as to Ezra's reading, and Jeshua's, and Bani's, and the other Le∣vite giving the sense, and causing the people to understand the reading, this was no commenting on, or expounding the Text, but a bare rendring of it into a Dialect, which the people understood▪ They were but now returned from Ba∣bylon, where they had (what they say they did not in Egypt, nor in all their wandrings in the Wilderness) changed their language, and they now spoke Chaldee, so that the Original Hebrew wherein the law was writt, was become strange to them, and they needed in∣terpreters: Accordingly, though the law was read, as wit, in Hebrew, yet these interpreters all along rendred it in Chaldee, as the people understood. And this Text I take to be a very perti∣nent one, to prove that the Scriptures
ought to be translated into the Vulgar Tongus of all people that have them; but I conceive it wronged, if extended further. The other instance of Ezra's pra∣ctice, we have Chap. IX, 1, 2, 3. Now that reading, I mean the reading at that season, cannot that I know of, be founded upon any precept of the law; for it was upon a solemn Fast kept by all the people, not by the law, but upon publick Order and Custome a∣mongst themselves: and they read one fourth part of the day, and one fourth part they confessed. Yet forasmuch as it is said of the Readers, that they stood up in their place, and read, it would seem that this was in course and usual on such Fasts; at least that this was the beginning of some such course for the future. This is the summe of what reading of the law I find recorded in Scripture to have been set up by Ezra. As to any thing more, we must be beholding to Jewish rradition for it; and that perhaps may fix the institution of publick reading the law three times
a Week, on an elder and greater Au∣thour than Ezra: for thus saith Maimo∣nides, our Mster Moses appointed Isra∣elTe∣phill▪ Ubirch Chen. cap. 12. . 1. to read the law at Morning-prayer upon the Sabbath day, and upon the Second and the Fifth day [that is, Saturday, Munday and Thursday] that they might not rest three dayes from hearing the law: And Ezra appointed to read it at Evening Prayer upon the Sabbath, because of idle persons. And he ordered that three should read on the second and fifth dayes, and none less than ten verses. But still we have bare reading, no Exposition or Comment: this came in by little and little after the dayes of Ezra, as is affir∣med amongst others, and I conceive most truly, by the learned Peter Cunae∣us in these words; Sub priore templo lex recitata duntaxat à Levit is populo est, aut¦etiamD Re∣b. Hebr. l. 2▪ c. 17. domi à singulis legebatur; interpre∣tatio Magistrorum commentatio{que} nulla e∣rat. At sub posteriore, oraculis cessanti∣bus, receptum paulatim more publico est, ut verba Biblici contextus sensa{que} explica∣rentur; ad quam rem eruditi ingenium suum advocavere: Under the first Temple, the law was onely read by
the Levites to the people, or every man read it privately at home, there was no Exposition or Comment of the Doctours: But under the later, Oracles, that is, inspired prophesies, ceasing, by publick practice it grew in use, by little and little, that the words and sense of the Holy Text were expounded: to which purpose the learned amongst them applied their wit and study. This, I say, I take for a great truth, as to the date of their Expositions; but yet cannot but much admire, that if the publick read∣ing of the law in so frequent returns of course were appointed by Moses, it should not be more constantly practised before Ezra's dayes; or if practised, that we should hear nothing of it in ho∣ly Scripture. I know indeed almost as much, as what Maimonides saies, is saidAdv. Appi O  2 of Moses by others: by Josephus, , &c. Moses commanded to as∣semble for the hearing of the law every Week, ceasing from other works, and that we should exactly learn it. And there is a passage or two in Philo Judaeus in his third Book de Vita Mosis, which
look this way: but it is not unusual for these people to derive such Traditions from Moses, which are of much later date. That the Ceremonial Worship of God by Sacrifices, and like rites, was of old, amongst the Jewes, confined to the Temple, is generally plain from Scripture: that the publick Moral Worship of him, by Prayers and hear∣ing of the Law, was performed in their Synagogues, at least by such, who could not come up to the Temple, may not be doubted. But, if there had been any such constant publick reading of the Law from Moses's dayes, or un∣der the first Temple, we should cer∣tainly have heard more of these Syna∣gogues, than we do in the Old Testa∣ment. The judicious and deeply read Mr. Thorndike produces R. Menahem,Relig. Assm. Ch. 2. proving after the Cabbalistical way from Isa▪ , 21. that there were, even before Isaiah's time, CDLXXX Syna∣gogues in Jerusalem: but though he al∣low this may pass for an Historical truth under the second Temple, yet he rejects the assertion of it under the first, as one
of the crotchets, with which those mens brains are alwaies teeming; and concludes that  there be any express remem∣brance of Synagogues under Solomon's Temple, in the Scripture, he sup∣poses it to be, Ps. LXXIV, 4. 8.—But that remembrance so obscure, that it cannot be thought they could affrd the body of that people means to assemble for the Service of God. And truly the ambiguity of the Original Text, and the diverse rendrings it has received are so great, that it may be reasonably questioned, whether it be to be understood of Synagogues at all: so that I have good grounds to stick to my first assertion, of the very seldome read∣ing the Law of Moses, in any publick As∣semblies, till the time of Ezra. And from that time, as already said, the reading of the Law became frequent and of soemn course; and so may be presumed to have continued till the abo∣mination of desolation set up by Antio∣chu Ma. b. l. &c. piphanes, who not onely profa∣ned the Temple and the Altar, and forbid them to circumcise their children, and many such things, but also interdicted
the reading of the Law of Moses under pain of death. On this occasion, least according to Antiochus his design, they should forget the Law, and all their Ordi∣nances be changed, this expedient was devised: in stead of the Section of the Law, or Parasha to be read of courseVide Weems Chin. Synag. 1. c 4. Answ. n Gen. VI. (for they had divided the Pentateuch into 54 Sections, so that taking one each Sabbath, and putting two of the shortest together on two Sabbaths, they dispatched the reading of the whole in a year) in stead, I say, of a Section of the Law, they read a Section out of the Prophets called  as near as they could of the same subject with that, which ought to have been read out of the Law: a kind of Concor∣dance of which Sections of the Law and Prophets, we have generally printed in the end of the Hebrew Testament, When this persecution was over, they returned again to the reading the Law of Moses; yet so, as they left not off the reading of those parallel Sections out of the Prophets: so that these later may seem thus to have become a kind
of interpretation of the former, the Prophets of the Law. And this is the summe of all the preaching yet to be found in the Jewish Church, namely the reading the Law of Moses in course, with some Analogous part of the pro∣phets, which might seem an explication of it. But it is sure, before our Lords co∣ming into the World, much more had obtained: for though we find the LawAct. XIII. 15. Luk. IV. 16. and the Prophets were read in their Syn∣agogues, every Sabbath day, yet by the peoples expecting, and the Rulers of the Synagogues desiring from our Lord and his Apostles, after such reading or Lessons, some explication or word of ehortation to the people, it is plain, their Doctours had accustomed them to some such thing. The teaching in use amongst their Doctours, when sat in the Synagogues, is thus described by Philo. , &c.In. lib. mn. . I be∣m . One reads the Holy Tet; another of the most skilful amongst them, passing through whatever is difficult, gives an exposition thereof. But the Rabbies are more
punctuall in the account they give us: it being generally concluded amongst them, that one great design of the Sabbath and Feasts was, that the peo∣ple might thereon learn the Law, they tell us, the teaching thereof, which ought to be on the Sabbath and Feasts, must extend to three particulars. Thevid. R. Isaac. Abarb. in Deu. V. 12. first  the true delivery of the words, according to the received reading of them; a piece of no small skill of old amongst the Jewes. The se∣cond.  the Exposition or expli∣cation of the sense thereof. The third  An account of the Criticisms or subtleties thereof. These two last undoubtedly imploied their greatest Doctours, Scribes or Wisemen, as they are called, Matth XXIII, 34. And the performance thereof, especially of the second, they called  an inquisition, consultation, debate, or search touch∣ing the meaning of the Scripture. And the performer hereof  in the Greek of St. Paul , a Di∣sputer,1 Cor. l. 20. one that debates or discusseth any point. And to this purpose, ma∣ny of their Doctours used to sit together
in the Temple, and in their Synagogues, and to speak severally to the same sub∣ject, for the finding out the true sense of any part of the Law, or the due sta∣ting any difficulty▪ Thus we find them in our Saviours dayes, and him in the midst of them, Luke II, 46. His parents found him in the Temple, sitting in the midst of the Doctours, both hearing them and asking them questions. Such eposi∣tion of scripture, as we have seen it to have been called in the New Testament prophesying, so the learned GrotiusVid. Grot. in Act. IV. 36 proves to be the same with St. Luke's  or word of exhortation, as we render it, Act. XIII, 15. but im∣ports no more than word of prophesie, taking  in the Hellenistical sense. And this I take to be the highest pitch whereto the Jewish preaching or teach∣ing ever arose (the word of God in the mouth of the inspired prophets onely excepted) namely, a cursory exposi∣tion or debate, by several of their Do∣ctours, one after the other, touching any thing more difficult, which occur∣red in the portion of the Law or the Prophets, for that Sabbath read in the
Synagogue. In allusion whereto is1 Cor. XIV. 26. that of the Apostle to the Corithians, Let the prophets speak two or three, and let the others judge, &c. Now this kind of Discourses being,Sect. 8. as is evident by what has been said, ra∣ther of men opineing, and aiming at the truth, tha of those who were as∣sured that they had it by divine revela∣tion, and besides being miserably ser∣vile & unsatisfactory to humane nature, as being emploied generally on such points as the washing of Hands, Cups, Dishes, or the curing of meats according to tradition, and like Ceremonial api∣ces; or, if any point apprehended to be of greater moment did offer it self, lea∣ving1 Mc. VI. 46. & XIV. 41 that in suspense till a propht should come, as their usual speech and practice was, this kind, I say, gave very great advantage to our Lords and his Apo∣stles preaching: For (even to the Di∣sciples may I apply, in a great mea∣sure, what is said of the Master) They taught as persons having authority, and not as the Scribes. Our Lord himself was so far from determining any diffi∣culties of the Law, that he professed∣ly
took upon him to teach, wherein the Law came short of that more excel∣lent Doctrine, which he came to pub∣lish. He brought to light a new and living way, avowing himself to be im∣mediately sent from God to that pur∣pose, which the Jewish Doctours could not so much as pretend: and both by the concordance of his life, condition and doctrine with what the Prophets had taught, and by such miracles as had not been before heard of, he pro∣ved what he said, that he was not one∣ly a prophet and inspired, but The pro∣phet which was to come, of whom both Moses and all the prophets had spoken. His stile or way of speech was free, but most praegnant and powerful, his mat∣ter sublime, divine, and which by in∣trinseck evidence approved it self to be from Heaven, not trashing humane life with slavish bodily observances, but advancing it to the greatest perfection of Virtue and inward Peace: his man∣ner of delivery with all assurance and Parrhesie, never at any loss, hallucina∣tion, or surprisal. When consulted on a sudden, he was the same (as much
resolved in his own mind, and as pro∣foundly satisfactory to all his Hearers in the answers he gave) as if he had Fore∣thought. In a word, whatever there was of rectitude or worth, either in the ordinary or extraordinary way of the Jewish preaching, we find, but most infinitely transcendent, in his. He seems to have stoopt so low, in the en∣trance on his prophetical discharge, as to have become some while a Reader. As his custome was, he went into the syn∣agogueLuk: IV. 16, 17. &c. on the Sabbath▪ day, and stood up to read. And there was delivered to him the Book of the prophet Esias: and we find he opened it, and read. Having fi∣nished his reading, he sat down, and, as we have seen the custome to have been amongst the Jewish Doctours, he interpreted that Scripture to them, but not as they; for he shewed it to be ve∣rified in himself: This day is this scri∣pture fulfilled in your ears. And such was the evidence he gave hereof, that All who heard him bare witness, and won∣dred at the gracious words, that procee∣ded out of his mouth. As to the other kind of Ordinary preaching, in use a∣mongst
the Jews, by resolving difficul∣ties that arose, and informing mens consciences, Those who tried him with the hardest Questions which their Do∣ctours malice could pick out to con∣found him, went away confounded themselves; and those, who out of sin∣cere purposes consulted him touching any point, wherein they wanted coun∣sel, found more satisfaction than they ever expected, and were surprised into a new and Heavenly life. The extraordi∣nary preaching amongst the Jews, was that of the prophets, by virtue of imme∣diate inspiration; now whereas in all the prophets unto him, there was a certain stint of the spirit of Prophesie, some par∣ticulars revealed, and infinitely more reserved (the spirit breathing in them when and how long it listed.) to Him God gave not the spirit by measure, John III, 34. He therefore did most infalli∣bly and uncontroleably interpret scri∣pture, publish further the will of God, foretell future events, dispute, deter∣mine, counsel, comfort, exhort, warn, reprove, rebuke with all authority. In fine, in his preaching did all kinds and
parts of this Office, in the most accom∣plisht sort, concur. Nor was the Apostles preaching much unlike to their Lords, by reason of their ample participation of the same spirit: onely some Footsteps of their different natural tempers, education, and former condition of life, might per∣haps be respectively discerned in their preaching, if we may judge (as to me seems just) of their way of speech, by their manner of writing. Thus much will any man of moderate insight into the different Characters of speech easily conclude, who shall take the paines to compare the Epistles of St. John, and St. James, and St. Peter, amongst them∣selves, and all of them with those of St. Paul. All their Sermons that we have extant, are comprised in the Acts of the Apostles: Those generally agree with the account I have already given of them; namely, that they were discour∣ses fram'd, as occasion offered, for the pub∣lication or assertion of Christianity. To this purpose the main point they avow, is the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, by which they prove him to
have been the Messias, and his Doctrine from Heaven, and to require there∣fore the belief and obedience of Man∣kind. In this regard they had some∣thing in their subject different from that our Lord had: He onely foretold his resurrection, and gave it as a sign and proof that he was sent of God; they attest it as really come to pass, and publish this their testimony to the world. Besides, our Lord not going but to the lost sheep of the House of Isra∣el, who already believed the true God, and the Oracles he had commit∣ted to them, kept himself, as I may so speak, in a narrower compass of To∣picks, arguing chiefly either from Mo∣ses and the Prophets Writings, or from his own Works, which he wrought in witness that his Father sent him: Where∣as, the Apostles being sent into all the World, to preach the Gospel to every creature, and being to convert men from idolatry, and perhaps AtheismAct: XIII. & XXVI. 22. too, as well as from Judaism, took a larger scope as they saw occasion. Thus St Paul, when he has to do with the Jewes, urges onely Moses and the Pro∣phets
and that he taught nothing but what they said should come to pass: yet when he is to preach at Athens, a placeActs XVII: 18. of Heathen literature, we hear nothing of Moses or prophets, though he had still, for the main, the same subject, Jesus and the Resurrection; but in order to the taking those people off from their idolatry, and bringing them to the Faith, he takes arguments out of Phi∣losophy, and Philology too, as best suiting his Auditours Circumstances. So that, as beforesaid, we may reasona∣bly affirm, the very self same Apostles way of preaching differed much from his own at another time. We cannot see, but they took all occasions for all kind of teaching or preaching: Thus Philip preaches to the Ethiopian Eunuch, who was reading Isaiah, out of Isaiah, Act. VIII. 35. He opened his mouth, and began at that same scripture, and prea∣ched to him Jesus thence, interpreting no doubt that place of Jesus, and shew∣ing how it was verified in him. And it is very probable, St. Paul's Sermon to the Jewes in the Synagogue, after the reading the law and the prophets (Acts
XIII. 16.) had the like foundation in the portions of the law and the prophets at that season read. At other times we shall find them not making set discour∣ses, but disputing and arguing. Act. IX. 29, and XVII. 17, and XIX. 9. Again at another time, not so much teaching or proving any thing new, but upon what was already known and believed, exhorting and stirring up to particular duties (Chap. XX. 28, &c.) and as occasion required, intermixing pro∣phesies, and foretelling future events, Ver. 29. In a word, as the Apostoli∣cal Office was universal and extraordi∣nary, so there is no ordinary kind of Ministring the word, belonging either to Pastour or Teacher, which we may not observe, or conceive, the Apostles to have practised, as occasion served; though still with the addition of what was extraordinary, and at present un∣practicable, as aforesaid. Of what kind or frame their firstSect 9. Sermons in the Christian Church were, immediately after the cessation of those miraculous gifts spoken of, I know not whether any certain and distinct account
can be given: It would seem they were onely brief Exhortations, made by the Bishops or Presidents above mentioned, immediately after the reading of the scriptures. Thus in that account given of the Christian Assemblies on the Lords Day by Justin Martyr. On the Lords Day called Sunday, saith he, all of us that live in the City or Villages about it, meet together in one place, and the Records of the Apostles, or the writings of the Prophets, are read, as the time will suffer. Then the Reader ceasing, the President or Bi∣shop () in a speechApo∣log: 2. ver∣sus finem. makes an instruction and exhortation to the imitating such good Works as are supposed to be read of. (so I render it, not seeing what the words  can refer to, but some∣what in the Lessons). And in that an∣cient, however Pseudonymous work, intituled, the Constitutions of the Apo∣stles ( &c.) the Sermon, which is orderedLb. 2. . 57. to succeed immediately the reading of the Gospel, is called an Exhortation to
the people. This in Tertullian's Latin isLib: de Anim. c. 9 called an Allocution, or speaking to the people [Prout scripturae leguntur, aut Psalmi canuntur, aut Allocutiones profe∣runtur, aut Petitiones delegantur.] Tru∣ly all these names, which are produced out of Authours coming as neer those extraordinary dayes, as most we have, seem to intimate, the Sermons were then onely some brief Hortatory or Mo∣nitory speeches to the people, to which the speaker took the meetest occasion or subject that the portion of scripture read, in his judgment, afforded to him: And if so, this practice evidently came from the synagogue, whose way, if our Lord and his Apostles thought good to improve, the following age might well insist in thus improved. We shall be confirmed the more in these thoughts, if we estimate the Ser∣mons of that age, by those which we have of the Eldest Fathers. The first extant (as far as I can find) are those of Origen's, called in the Latin VersionDe ritu Conci: on, . c. 5,  commonly Homilies, some of them Tra∣ctates. An Homily, saith Ferrarius, is a very familiar speech, and as accom∣modate
as may be to the sense and understanding of the Common peo∣ple. Tractates, we know, is a name, which the ancient Latin Fathers properly enough gave their Sermons, with whom Tractare is to preach, in the new sense of preaching, that is as it signi∣fies to handle Scripture by way of Ex∣position and Application (It were fivo∣lous to alledge instances to this purpose, as were easie out of Optatus, St. Austin, & others.) And Tra tatores such Preachers.A l. Hae., cap. 4. . [Doctores, qui nunc Tractatores appel∣lantur] Whom the Apostle calls Tea: chers, we now call Tractators, saith Vincentius Lirinensis. Now Origen, who certainly flourished early in the Third Century, takes several of the Books of the Old Testament in order, making a roveing Exposition on a passage here and there: so that on all Genesis he has XVII Sermons, on Exodus XIII, on Levitious XVI, and to omit others on the Book of Kings  and scarce any of these half an hour long. That he took his subject generally out of what Lesson, had been read immediately before, is evident from infinite   his H∣milies;
I will mention one or two which first come to hand. I can not, saith he, set forth at present the dif∣ference of all these (namely statutes, judgments, &c.) Exigimur enim ad ex∣planationemHomil. X: in Exod. horum quae lect a sunt, be∣ing required to explain those things which have been now read. And that we may know the same person was not Reader and Preacher, or that it was not he himself who had read, we find him expounding on one Translati∣on, whereas the Reader read another. Lector quidem praesentis lectionis it a lege∣bat,Homi: : . & timuit populus Dominum, &c. The Reader of the present Lesson read thus, And the people feared the Lord all the dayes of Joshua: but we have it, And the people served the Lord. Which passages I confess, to∣gether with the nature of his Expositi∣ons, being considered, confirm in me the belief of what Eusebius reports of Origen's Sermons; Origen, saith he, being now past the sixtieth year ofEccl. Hist. l. 6 c 9 lis 26. is age, and having by long use and study, attained an habit and perfect maturity in Teaching, permitted,
what he never did before, that both his Disputations and the Sermons which he made in publick, should be taken by persons who wrote fast. It would seem then, his Sermons were chief∣ly extemporaneous Expositions, and ma∣ny of them perhaps not so much as re∣vised by himself, being taken, and possibly publisht, by other hands; and many of them undoubtedly never ta∣ken, but dying with the breath that uttered them. To view a little the Sermons or Ho∣milies of others of the Fathers; they must be acknowledged very diverse and unlike one another. Sometimes they have a Text, sometimes they have none, but pitch on any one or more subjects (what, and of as different natures as they please) and make there∣on a short cursory speech to the people. Thus S. Chrysostome has one Sermon Against Drunkards, and Concerning the Resurrection, between which two sub∣jects, though a man by wit may frame a connexion, yet is there no natural re∣lation or affinity of the one to the o∣ther: And notwithstanding he has two
such copious subjects, his Sermon seems but very little above a quarter of an hour long. There are an 100. of St. Austin's Ser∣mons, supposing most of those his which are sound in the tenth Tome of his works (not that I am so credulous, as to think all therein contained to be St. Augu∣stine's, but see not how it can be dis∣proved, but that the greatest part of them are his, and whether they are, or are not, it is sure they were Ser∣mns preached neer about that Centu∣ry, and so shew us the use of the Age) there are, I say, an hundred Sermons there extant, which I dare be bound to pronounce distinctly, and deliver decently, in the space of eight minutes, and some in almost half the time: A mul∣titude of S. erards are not much longer. Nor wl I doubt further to say, of many as well of St. Chrysostm's Homilies, as of much a greater number of those intitu∣ed to St. Augustin, what I have alrea∣dy proved touching Origen▪s, that they were made and delivered in the same  and place: in plain terms, they were extemporaneous discourses, or
such at the utmost, which very little thought furnisht; and there needs no other proof hereof, than the meer per∣usal of such of them. Res ipsa loquitur. Yet if any desire further proof, that not onely thse three named, but also diverse others of the Fathers, used thus to preach, either ex tempore, or as said upon very little thought, there are Authorities enough produced by Ferrarius to this purpose, both out ofDe ri: Conci∣on: l: 2: c: 8: Church-Historians of undoubted credit in this matter, and out of the very preaching Fathers themselves; to which Authorities it were easie to add. One of them is so praegnant, that I think I may not well wave it. It is of St. Gre∣gory the Great, who having profest he undertook not the Exposition of EzekielHomi: 14: in Ezek: out of rashness but humility, adds some∣what a strange reason of that his extem∣porary commenting; Scio, quia ple∣rumque multa in sacro eloquio sunt, quae solus intelligere non potui, coram fratri∣bus positus intellexi. I have found, saith he, that there are many things in the Holy Scripture, which being alone by my self I could not under∣stand,
but being placed in publick before my Brethren, I have under∣stood them. By which understand∣ing I endeavoured to gain this also, to know for whose sake [quorum meri∣to] such understanding was given to me. For it is evident, it was given me for them, in whose presence it was given me. By which meanes through Gods grace, it comes to passe, that my understanding increases, and my self-Opinion decreases, while for your sakes I learn amongst you, what a∣mongst you I teach; quia verum fa∣tcor, plerumque vobiscum audio quod dico; For to confesse the truth, for the most part I first hear with you what I say my self. An ingenous acknowledg∣ment! and by which it appeares this way of preaching, as I may so call it, was not accidental or on some extraordinary occasion, but usuall to this great man, and out of choice. That in these sudden discourses they did not alwayes take a whole sacred booke before them, but occasionally took their Argument (or subject) out of what hapened to be read on the day,
is clear from almost infinite passages of those sermons in St. Austins last Tome. I will take any instance that first offers it self, Aposioli lectionem mecum pariterDe tem: Serm: 190. audistis, frotres dilectissimi, &c. you have heard, most beloved Brethren, together with me the Apostle read unto you: and so he goes on cursorily treating of what had been read. Any may see more in the Book who pleases. I am far from pretending this was the onely way af sermonising amongst the antient Fathers: nor can I but acknow∣ledge multitudes, even of St. Chryso∣stome's and St. Austin's Sermons, to have been studied and elaborate. The same must be said of St. Basil's, the two Gregories, Nazianzen's and Nyssen's, of whose I read nothing which smell not of the Lamp: the same too, I conceive, of all St. Ambrose's genuine Discourses, and I believe of many others, which my leisure or opportunity has not given me acquaintance with. But in the mean time, while I allow diverse of the Fa∣thers, and especially the Greek ones, accurately to have penned many of their Sermons, I cannot say they did so al∣wayes:
for it must needs be presumed, they preached much oftner, than ap∣pears by these Sermons of theirs extant; and had al been so accurately penn'd, we cannot imagin, but we shou'd have had more of them come to our hands: nor can I allow all their neat Orations (no not all of Nazianzen himself, not∣withstanding he is stied the Divine) to have been properly Sermons. I must needs conceive their general way of preaching to have been more free and popular; and for this, as well as many other excellencies, I admire St. Chry∣sostome,De E∣loq: lib: 16 whose way I judge, with the worthy Caussinus, to have been the compleatest Idea of preaching to be found amongst any of the Fathers I have seen. In summe, the Sermons of the Fa∣thers, as far as I can comprehend them under certain heads, were either, as already said (1) some Expositions (too often Allegorical and roving) on Holy Scripture, sometimes taking a Book before them, and having dispatched that, proceding through diverse others; sometimes singling some pa, or par,
out of what had been read, or was to be read, that day (vid. Augustin. Ser∣mon. de Temp. 200.) Or (2) Some brief occasional speech suitable to the season or Festival; Or (3) In the praise of some Matyr, Saint, or de∣ceased Bishop; Or (4) n commenda∣tion of, and exhotation to some Vir∣tue; Or (5) Against some Vice, or Heretick, or like subject for invectives and reprehension; Or Lastly, Some Discourses like Essaies on some Moral Aphorism; as that of St. Chrysostome's on this subject, Neminem laedi nisi à se∣ipso, That no one is hut by any but himself; and his, and others on such like: But in many of these, usually (Absit dicto invidi) that clearness and turity of notions, that regularity of Method may be desired, which is to be found in our Modern Writers on like subjects. Though those might be ex∣cellent Sermons then, they would not be such amongst us at present: nor in∣deed can any think it should be other∣wise, at such distance of time, and after so great changes of the manners, tem∣per and condition of the Church.
In process of time, but in what ageSect. 10 first, I dare not take upon me certain∣ly to resolve, it came to pass, that the chief preaching in use, was onely some explication or descanting upon the Go∣spel for the day. The Original of thePlatin. in vita Sixt I. & Ber∣no Abb  1. yearly course of the Gospels the Roman Tradition affixeth to St. Hierom: He fram'd, they say, what they call the Lectionary. Whether that be so or not, it is sure the Order of reading certain portions out of the four Gospels at the Eucharist was very antient, as appears both by the forementioned Constitutions (Lib. 2. cap. 57.) and by the antient∣est Liturgies both of the Eastern and Western Churches (however Beza de∣niesDe Coen. Dom. contr. West∣phal. the use to have obtained in the East or even in Africk, but without reason that I can see). It is apparent also by St. Augustin's Preface to his Tractates (that is, his Sermons) on the  Epi∣stle of St. John, that in his time, upon all Festivals, there were [certae ex E∣vangelio Lectiones, quae ita sunt annuae, ut aliae esse non possint.] Certain Les∣sons out of the Gospel, which came in yearly course, and were not altera∣ble.
Now it would seem by the Ser∣mons of the Fathers of that age, that even then it was very usual to handle some part of the Gospel read, in their Sermons. The name indeed by which we call such Expositions, viz Postills, by its barbarity shews it self to be much of later date: whether we derive it from the ordinary initial form of the Gospels Post illa tempora, or from Post illa verba, because the comment follow∣edSpi∣mn & Martin. Dr. Skin∣ner. the Text, or from the French Appo∣stile, it will be concluded new enough; but the thing it self must be allowed an∣tient, and not taken up through the laziness of the Bishops, as gentle Beza saith, but in imitation of the Prophets in the primitive Church, and even of the Jewish Doctours, expounding (as we have seen) the difficulties of theUbi modo portion of scripture read in course, or on occasion. And this use being once got in, became so general, that it was for many ages in a manner all the preach∣ing they had, except in time of Lent. True indeed, as the Mass and the cor∣ruptions thereof came to prevail, e∣ven this, as well as all other preaching,
begun to grow very rare in the Roman Church, till such time as the dawning of the Reformation awakened them; but if they had any, it was, I say, ge∣nerally this: and which was the mis∣chief, notwithstanding the long conti∣nuance of this way, it was as little im∣proved, as can be imagin'd. Amongst those multitudes of Volumes of this kind, I can scarce say ever saw three worth the reading. At present this course is much bro∣kenSect.  off, as well in the Protestant, as I believe in the Roman Churches. In the hurch of Geneva, having laid aside almost all footsteps of the antient Form & Manner of Liturgies, (& therefore Go∣spels) this way of ostilling ceased there∣with: and it is not rare to find both Cal∣vin and Beza inveighing against it. Their way generally was to read or ex∣pound upon such Book of the Holy Scri∣pture, as they chose to themselves, ta∣king the whole Book orderly before them: and it must be acknowledged to have been very useful, and much to have furthered Christian knowledge. Amongst the Papists, Baronius tells us,
about thirty years before his time, Fa∣therAd an. 57. n. 164. Philip Nerius, the Florentine, Foun∣der of the Oratorian Congregation, and his Disciple Franciscus Maria Taru∣sius brought up the ensuing course, Di∣vino planè consilio, as he is pleased to say. Such persons who gave them∣selves more than others to devotion, meeting daily in the Church in the Afternoons, a Brother of the Ora∣torians begun with a Prayer, and then applied himself to reading such a part of scripture, as was meet to stir up the Hearers minds to piety. All along the reading, the Father who was president used to interpose, and explain, amplifie and apply what he thought fit of the things read; and sometimes to ask any of the Bre∣threns judgment touching what was read or said: and thus the exercise continued, almost Dialogue-wise, for about an hour. Then at the presidents comn and, one of the Brethren went up into the Pulpit, and made a speech out of the received lives of the Saints, and holy scriptures, and the writings. of the Fathers, in a free and natural
way, without Rhetorical colours or flourish. After him came up a second, and then a third, but each on a diffe∣rent subject, and the last commonly treated of Ecclesiastical History, re∣lating things in the Order of time as they were done. Each continued his Discourse half an hour, with great profit and delight of the Hearers; and then singing a Psalm, or Hymn, they went to prayers again and con∣cluded the Assembly. This practice he conceives most neerly to resemble those Apostolical Assemblies spoken of in the XIV. of the first to the Corinthi∣ans. The way has taken much, they say, in the Roman Church: and truly those amongst us, who separate from the Church of England, seem very neerly to have imitated it (except in the particular of Church-History, which was too painful for them, & of∣ten above their Learning) but that their prayers and discourses generally are of greater length. Notwithstanding it is very sure, that both in the Roman and Lutheran Churches, the way of Postil∣ling still continues frequent; and as it
might be ordered, it would be of great use and advantage. As to the present usual preaching by Doctrine and Use, the first that ever I find to have brought it up, was Dr. Ames, generally, I believe, a pious and good man; but given to more and much worse Novelties than that, & as far as I can see, amongst us a great Father of Independency. How much this way has taken and been improved since our late Civil Wars (at the beginning of which it was scarce twenty years old) as being a method in which even illite∣rate men could practice, I need not here speak. Thus much must be allowed, by running to and fro, knowledge has beenDn XII. 4. encreased. Those, who had nothing but noise and zeal to draw the people after them, gave occasion to the greater industry of such, who provided them more substantial, and yet more deli∣cate food: And thus both notions and language being refined, and Christian Doctrine in many points cleared, and withall the clearest, most taking and prudent Methods contrived and used, I am apt to think, that what we call
preaching has attained, in the better part of the conformable English Cler∣gy, such an height, beyond which it will not easily be improved, and to which, since the cessation of miracu∣lous gifts, it never arrived elsewhere. These things I have thus freely spo∣ken,Sect. 12 not out of any slighty opinion of the Antients; they were certainly ad∣mirable in their age, and it is at a vast disadvantage that their Writings now come to us: yet, notwithstanding all disadvantages, are those very Writings a glorious light to us, and such with∣out which we should be to seek, not onely in the Antient Rites, Customes, Laws & Discipline of the Church, but in many points as to the true Antient Ca∣tholick Faith; & unable to defend the genuin Christianity against the pretences and, innovations, as well of Lesser He∣reticks and chismaticks, as especially of those Grand corrupters of Christianity, our Roman adversaries. And in what∣soever those ages may be conceived to be outdone by us, by reason of any ad∣vantages we have above them, it is sure in the main they out did us: There
was more sanctimony, true zeal, and singleness of heart to be found in one of them, than in an hundred of us; they Lived more Sermons than we Preach, and these were the greater excellencies. People might go to Heaven without scholastical notions, and Rhetorical or polite discourses, but they cannot with∣out sincerity, resolution and holiness. Let therefore none think I have forgot∣ten the fifth Commandment, or go a∣bout in the least to detract from the re∣verence due to Antiquity: by speak∣ing freely of their way, I at once both acknowledge and vindicate their true worth. My design in any thing, which may seem to reflect upon them, is one∣ly to shew how variable a thing that which we call preaching is, and ever has been, since the proper and Aposto∣lical preaching ceased; and so to bring people to a sober understanding that they may not, to the justling out of o∣ther parts of the publick Worship, o∣ver-value Sermons, as admitting of more variation than any other office thereof: nor yet on the other side un∣dervalue them at present, this office
in all ages of the Church having conti∣nued, and being of divine institution; and the exercise of it in our Church be∣ing advanced to so elevate a degree of eminence, as must be acknowledged. Before I conclude this Head of theSect. 13 different Modes there have been of Preaching, there are one or two things which I think fit to add by way of Co∣rollary. And first, that it is a little iniquitous to expect, that the whole essential frame and structure of our Ser∣mons should be altered to such a degree of accuracy from what Sermons used to be, and what they still are otherwhere, not without vast pains and industry on our sides, and yet generally to require such inconsiderable circumstances, which are to the auditours (except they will be humoursome) indifferent, but would be to us of great ease. should still re∣main the same. As to what of Doctri∣nals we deliver, we must, all points con∣troverted on both hands being weigh∣ed, state maturely, prove demonstra∣tively, refute convictively; and in the Applicatory part we must perswade passionately, and as far as we can o∣mit
nothing which may move the dee∣pest concernment: and two such Di∣scourses at least, each of an hour long, we must bring forth every Week, which we are content to do; But after we have framed them with our utmost care, and perhaps know not how to alter or omit a sentence for advantage, if we do not like School-boyes say all by heart, we are censured as lazy; and this because the Antients perhaps, and most Forreigners (who generally take not that pains in ten Sermons, which many of us do in one) use so to do. Now I am bold with submission to say, this circumstance of reading or not rea∣ding, is indifferent to the Auditory: for suppose a man pronounce well, and as he ought, what matters it to those that hear him, whether his Book be o∣pen or shut, in his hand or in his poc∣ket? We are commanded to read the prayers, and they are not supposed therefore to affect less; where then is the disadvantage in decent reading our Sermons? But though this matter sig∣nifie nothing at all to any sber Hear∣er, yet, I say, it signifies much to the
preacher: it frees him from terrour, confusion, and perpetual anxiety, while he is speaking; besides, that it saves him before a great deal of preci∣ous time, which might be otherwise well spent, and which, it may be, he can ill afford from his other spiritual cares. To speak ingenously, and as the case stands: Account has been given what the old Preaching was; Give us that their Old liberty, or give us the New liberty which some men take, wel ne∣ver read, nay possibly, many of us need not study. What man so barren, who could not run a loose descant up∣on the Gospel in the Morning for a quarter or half an hour; and do as much by the Epistle, it may be, in the Afternoon? Or, who could not cut of such Text as he pleaseth to choose, deduce empty Doctrines, and give them needless proofs; and then while out as empty an Application? But if in stead of a quarter of an hours roveing discourse, or such longer tri∣fling, as insinuated, there be expected from us a solid Divinity-lecture of an Hour long, and not onely the Teachers
or Catechists, but the pastors and ap∣plicatory part too (in a manner a just Treatise) and these so often, truly those, who read such Sermons, may be pardoned if they do thereby offend, seeing the offence is onely by too much care not to offend. In a word, if we may not read, we must be more bold with our Hearers, and less accurate in our provisions: we must put in practice his rule, (Rem bene praevisam verba haud invita sequuntur) study well our matter, and neglect style, contenting our selves with such expression as naturally offers it self; and then, when we do not write much, we cannot read; which for ought I know, as the world goes, may be the better way. What I have said by way of extol∣ling many of our English Sermons, Sct▪ 14 would not have so understood, as if I va∣lued them at that rate that some seem to do, who have the vanity and weak∣ness, not to say worse, to thrust ot in a manner all publick reading of the scriptures, and spend the whoe time,
desing'd for that, in what they call preaching the Word: nay, so highly do they magnifie their labours in that kind, that they call their very Ser∣mons, the Word of God in their ordi∣nary language. I do admire indeed, as I have said, a multitude of our Eng∣lish Sermons; but I would never equal the best of them, to that which seems the meanest part of Holy scripture, nor allow them the name due onely to the divine Oracles. It is evident by what has been said, we cannot pretend to such preaching, as was that of the A∣postles: we must not therefore give our Sermons those names, which theirs both had and deserved; which is the other point I would add by way of Co∣rollary. Let us but have so much so∣briety and reason as not to contradict our selves, but be consistent with our own principles: We deny infallibility to the Pope and Church of Rome, and for most just reasons; And shall we each in terms assume it to our private selves, when we deny it to a Church? We do assume it, if we call our Prea∣ching Gospel, or our Sermons the Word
of God: they are at best but comments or Tractates upon it. The Fathers, and the Primitive Church have ever contented themselves with the more modest appellations of Homilies and Sermons, and them not God's, but theirs who made them. It may be ge∣nerally observed, those men, who most confidently thus arrogate to their preaching, have as little reasons for this high style thereof, as any men: but whether we have or we have not, it certainly becomes us to imitate the Fathers, at least in their humility, and to speak as the Catholick Church ever had done. And thus of the different modes of preaching, and their occasions. CHAP. III. Sect. 1. Of the fourth Head. The un∣reasonableness of some mens present al∣ledging t Paul's plea of Necessity of Preaching for theirs. Sect. 2. A Two-fold call necessary to authorise a present Preacher, and first, of the in∣ward  all. Sect. 3. Of the Outward call, and its necessity. Sect. 4. Who may confer it. Sect. 5. Of Necessita∣ted
want of Episcopal Ordination. Sect. 6. None amongst us can now pre∣tend a call to the Ministry, much less a necessity of preaching, who have not received Episcopal Ordination. Sect. 7. The pretence of meer conscience frivo∣lous, and fits all Hereticks and Secta∣ries. Sect. 8. Of imaginary cases ex∣traordinary. Sect. 9. Of the felicity of the Church of England in regard of regular Ordinations above other Refor∣med Churches. Sect. 20. What neces∣sity of preaching lies on Preachers law∣fully constituted. Two points premised. Sect. 11. First, Divine precept obli∣ges us. Sect. 12. Secondly, necessary compliance with the temper and expe∣ctation of the people. Sect▪ 13. The summe of all said for necessity of con∣stantly frequent Preaching, and a trans∣ition to what remains. WE will now proceed to theSect▪ 1. fourth Head of Enquiry, namely, What Necessity any men in Truth and Reason may plead lies upon them to preach, as at present we un∣derstand Preaching.
Now for the due stating hereof, we can no whence better (as far as I see) take our measures, than from a due consideration of the usual plea, which some persons, who seem to want war∣rant for their Preaching, bring for its necessity: and that is the Avow of St. Paul, A necessity is laid upon me, Yea,1 Cor. IX. 16. Wo is unto me, if I preach not the Go spel. The Question here will be, What necessity this was, which entailed such a Wo on him upon default of his prea∣ching, and wherein founded? For satisfaction to this matter, let us remember St. Paul's Office, and his Call thereto. By his Office, he was an Apostle; and no ones Call could be more immediate or extraordinary than his was: He was converted to Christia∣nity, by the appearing of Jesus Christ himself from Heaven: His Call to the Apostleship was notified by revelation to Ananias, the person emploied to com∣plete his Christianity, Acts IX. 15. He is a chosn vessel unto me, to bear my Name, before the Gentiles and Kings and the children of Israel. In order to such purpose, ver. 17▪ He was filled
with the Holy Ghost: And after all this, in a publick Assembly of the Church at Antioch, it was injoined by the Holy Ghost to the Prophets and Teachers in that Church, while they ministred toActs XIII. 2, 3. the Lord and fasted, that they should se∣parate Paul to the Work whereunto God had called him: And they did accor∣dingly; They fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on him, and sent him away. After all this, there were many parti∣cular injunctions directed to him, by immediate revelation, to Go and preach sometime in one place, sometime in an∣other. Acts XVI, 10, He is comman∣ded by the Holy Ghost into Macedonia. Acts XVIII, 9, He being at Corinth, the Lord spake to him in a Vision by night, commanding him, Be not afraid, but speak and hold not thy peace; for I am with thee, and no man shall set upon thee to hurt thee▪ for I have much people in this ity. Again Acts XX, 22, He goes bound in the spirit to Jerusalem, &c. To be short, we have thus a person miraculously called, authorised and in∣joined, and miraculously indowed too, to be a Publisher and a Witness of Chri∣stianity
to the Jewes and infides; we have this erson avowing, A Necessity lies upon him, and we be to him if he ap∣prove not himself such as thus called to be, if he preach not the Gospel, and lear not Christs Name before the Gentiles and Kings and children of Israel. This is the true summe of the Original case. Now this, I say, being the main passage of Holy Writ, which many of our pretended Gospel-preachers bring to justifie their irregular and prohibi∣ted (not say, as too often it is, schis∣matical) Ministry, A necessity, say they, is laid upon us, and wo be unto us if we preach not the Gospel, let us fairly consider, what in justice and reason may be inferred hence, to conclude a necessity of preaching incumbent on a∣ny persons, in the sense wherein we now take the term. And to proceed in this cause upon sure principles, I need not fear contra∣diction if I say, the ground of the Ne∣cessity protested hee by the Apostle, is the infallible Divine Call, and the immediate commands joined with im∣mediate inspiration, which he had for
preaching, that is, publishing the Faith of Christ Jesus to the unbelieving World. So that applying this passage of an extraordinary case to our ordinary state, as far as in parity of reason it will bear, we can onely say, Proporti∣onable to the evidence of any mans Call to the Office of a Teacher or Pastour, is the necessity which lies upon him to preach in the present sense of preach∣ing. Divines usually teach, there is aSect. 2. double Call necessary to this sacred Of∣fice, the one inward, the other out∣ward. Wherein the inward call, which is first requisite, doth consist, has been and is some controversie. There are many still, and have been more, who would have the inward Call to be little or nothing but a strong impulse of spi∣rit to take up the Office of a Teacher, a perswasion within a mans self (suppo∣sed to be wrought by the spirit of God) that he is to minister in the Gospel. This principle is perfectly Enthusiasti∣cal: for either this perswasion has a reason and evidence, which may justi∣fie it, or it has not. To say I am per∣swaded
that I ought thus to minister, because I feel an assurance hereof wrought in me by this spirit of God, is to prove a thing by it self; for this assurance is the perswasion: and how shall I prove it to come from the spirit of God, and not from a spirit of delu∣sion or self-flattery? 'Twere as good to say I am perswaded, because I am per∣swaded; Or, I am called to the Mini∣stry, because I presume upon it with a great inward confidence. If it have a reason, that must be such as wll ap∣prove such inward Call to others, as well as to our selves who haveit (o∣therwise it is still no reason) and that is to say in effect, what a soberer sort say in express terms, that the inward Call consists chiefly in personal abilities or qualifications for the Ministry. These they account chiefly two. (1) Know∣ledge of the Christian Doctrine in a de∣gree above the Commonalty of the Faithful, and (2) Dexerity, to in∣part or communicate this knowledge. Now it must be confest, a perswa∣on that God designed a man for the Mi∣nistry of the Word, grounded upon a
sober and modest sense of such inward qualifications as these mentioned, may plead fair for the name of an inward Call. For to deal ingenuously, an in∣ward Call to the Ministry must not be accounted a canting or Fanatical rm, as some are pleased to style it; no more must it be denied by us of the Church of England, that such perswasion as just now described, goes into the constitution of such Call: For in the Office of Ordination, it is demanded of the Candidate to Deaconship, Do you trust that you are inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost to take upon you this Office, &c. To which the Can∣didate answers, I trust so. And a∣gain, Do you think that you are truly called according to the will of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the due Order of this Church to the Mini∣stry? To which the Answer is, I thnk so: Which last question and An∣swer is again repeated in the Office for Ordination of Priests. In summe, if to the particulars a∣bove mentioned of such perswasion, grounded upon a due sense of the meet
qualifications, we add an hearty devo∣ting and serious inward giving up a mans self to God for the service of his Church in this way, out of a love and zeal to the souls of men and Gods glory, I see not what can be challenged as wanting in the inward Call: We will say then, that [whosoever being indowed with deeper knowledge of Christianity, and better gifts of utterance, than what the Commonalty of the Faithful have, does, with an heart really designing the Divine glory, & the eternal salvation of men, give himself wholely up to God for the service of his Church in the Mi∣nistry, has a true inward Call thereto. But in the mean time it cannot beSct: 3. said, this inward Call sufficiently autho∣riseth such person to set upon Preaching, as we now understand the term; much less that it laies, meerly of it self, such a Necessity, as was that avowed by St. Paul, to preach, no not in the sense wherein we now understand preaching. For it is necessary, both that some one else (and him duly commissioned) judge of such persons abilities, (no Law ever allowing any man to be sole
judge in his own cause) and that beingActs XIII, 2, 3 4 approved, he be solemnly separate and sent upon this Office, according to our Lords institution, and the power left with his Church to this purpose, and ever exercised in the Church. To such inward Call then it is needful there be added a due outward Call. And some kind of outward Call, all, who have had any grain of sobriety, have ever acknowledged necessary: Even Zuinglius himself (whatever isEccle∣siastes Oper. Zumg. Tom: 2 commonly imputed to him, that may seem contrary hereto) writ a Book as∣serting thus much, in which he main∣tains, against the Catabaptists, that none are to be admitted to teach pub∣lickly (in aliquâ piorum Ecclesiâ, nisi communi aliquo & unanimi totius Eccle∣siae consensu hoc illis permittatur.) in any Church of the Faithful, except they be allowed thereto by the com∣mon and unanimous consent of the whole Church. He affirms further, that those Offices of ministring in the word, spoken of by St. Paul in his Epi∣stles; none ever of the Faithful in the Primitive Church, took upon
him on his own head, except so ap∣provedFol 52. a. as before, or chosen thereto by the Apostles. And however he is much for popular Election, yet he would not have that to be without the ad∣vice and conduct of godly Bishops and Pastours. I will transcribe his words: Divinae ergo ordinationi & institutioni pristinae nihil perinde consentaneum vide∣tur, quàm si universa fidelis alieujus po∣puli Ecclesia simul cum doctis aliquot piis∣que Episcopis, vel aliis viris fidelibus & rerum peritis, pastorem aliquem deligant. There seems nothing so agreeable to the Divine Ordinance and instituti∣on, as that the whole Assembly of any faithful people, together with some godly and learned Bishops, or other faithful men skilful in holy mat∣ters, choose to themselves a Pastor: so that it is apparent, he did not reject all outward Call as necessary (for this in the general he contends stiffly for) but his errour was in the misplacing it, in accounting the choice of the people, taking to their assistance some learned and godly Bishops, or like prudent men, to be a due outward Call, without any
other Ordination. But this, however much practised by the Independents (saving onely that they would have no∣thing to do with Bishops, though never so godly or learned) has been generally rejected as an errour and grand schism, and indeed is so: it will be necessary therefore to consider further, what this outward Call is, and to whom it belongs to confer it. I have above proved out of St. Paul's Epistles, that the Apostles did choose, out of such persons as they had ordain∣ed, some one abler, graver, and more stedfast person, whom they set over the rest of the Ministry within such or such a City or Precincts, as their President or Governour, which person immediately, and even in those very dayes, was peculiarly or eminent∣ly called the Bishop. To this President o Bishop it is certain the power of Or∣dination was committed by the Apo∣stle  Tit. l, 4. For this cause left I thee in , that thou shouldest set in order the  that are wanting, and ordain  in Every City as I had appointed thee. And not onely this power, but
the outward rite used in the exercise hereof, is evident by many passages to Timothy, 1 Ep. V, 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other mens sin. In other terms, Or∣dain no man to that Ministry for which he is unfit. By both these places it is plain, that these Presidents or Bishops had the power of Ordination given them by the Apostles; and by the later it appears, that imposition of hands was the outward rite used in conferring orders: as also by 2 Tim. 1, 6, and by 1 Tim. V, 14: where that by the lay∣ing on of the hands of the Presbytery, we are to understand the imposition of some other Apostles hands, who assi∣sted St. Paul in the Ordination of Timo∣thy, is most amply proved by the ever Venerable Dr. Hammond in his Annota∣tions on Acts XI. last. Now that these persons, Timothy and Titus, were Bi∣shops (& most probably Metropolitans) not onely the Postscripts of the Epistles directed to them, but constant tradi∣tion in all Church-story, and the very power in those Epistles mentioned to be given to them ( in
the Language of Theophylact, the pow∣er of Ordaining and animadverting on or judging persons by them ordained) do beyond controversie evince. To say as some have done, from 1 Tim. IV, 5, that they were onely Evangelists, is as good sense as to say St. Paul was onely a Deacon, because he sometimes stiles himself  (as Ephes. III, 7, &c.) word for word a Deacon, but we better render it Minister: and proportiona∣bly by doing the Work of an Evangelist, in the place to Timothy, we must underst and doing the Work of a Preacher. There will be no end of confusion, if we will not distinguish betwixt the general and natural import of words, and their particular, or, as I may stile it, their artificial and more limited acceptation. And it is worthy our noting here what ZuingliusEccles.  48. tells us, Apostolorum nmen deposue∣runt, ut primùm uni alicui Ecclesiae affi∣xi, illius curam continuam habuerunt. Whatever title of dignity those sa∣cred persons had, if it were the A∣postleship it self, they laid aside that title, when once being affixt to one
particular Church, they undertook the continual care thereof. Tunc non amplius Apostoli, sed Episcopi dicti sunt. Then they were no longer cal∣led Apostles, but Bishops. This he founds on Acts XXI, 8, interpreting E∣vangelist Bishop, for that Philip was Bi∣shop of Caesarea. Let then Timothy and Titm have been first Evangelists, yet when affixt the one to Ephesus, the o∣ther to Crete, they became truly Bi∣shops of the respective Sees. And to them as Bishops, have we seen the power of Ordination to have been com∣mitted by the Apostle; we are sure therefore to Bishops it was commit∣ted. Touching the solemnities used in this Office, we need not speak. There is none will doubt, but imposition of hands (the outward rite before assert∣ed out of the Apostle) was accompa∣nied by a solemn benediction; and we find Fasting and Prayer added hereto. Acts XIII, 3. We will therefore acqui∣esce herein, as the sincerest pattern or account of Primitive Ordinations. That this power was committed to
meer Presbyters can never be proved. There are diverse of the Antients who expresly affirm, that at first, there were none of that second Order, which now we call Presbyters (or Priests) insti∣tued; though it be certain that be∣fore Ignatius his time, that is, imme∣diately after the decease of all the A∣postles (except haply St. John) out of the world, they were come in into the Church. The Authorities may be seen in the place last cited of Dr. Ham∣mond's Annotations: and more at large, in his fourth Dissertation against Blon∣dell cap. 19, 20, 21, 22. Whether the Prophets or Teachers in the Primitive Church, received any other Ordinati∣on, but that of Deacons (that is, of being assistants to the Bishops) seems very questionable; and truly, I should rather determine it in the Negative, for that we find both St. Stephen and St. Phi∣lip, who were then certainly onelyAct▪ VII. & VIII. Deacons, to have been eminent in this way. It is therefore highly probable, that the Bishops and Deacons were, in the scripture-times, the onely ordain∣ed persons. And if so, it is then sure,
Presbyters never received the power of Ordination: for, having it not from the Apostles, because they are supposed an Order not in being in their times, that they had it not from the succeeding Bishops, is evident from the eldest Ca∣nons we have. Apost. Can. 1, 2. & Con∣stitu. Apost. Lib. 3. cap. 11, &c. In∣deed  were almost endless to reckon up the Ecclesiastical sanctions and autho∣rities, which reserve Ordination as a peculiar prerogative of the Episcopal Order, and forbid presbyters solely to attempt any thing therein: nay really whatever assistance Presbyters contri∣bute herein is, as far as I can sind, byVid. 23 Di∣stinct. Presby∣ter. later Practice, and Law Ecclesiastical; though both undoubtedly upon grounds wholesome enough: However, accor∣ding to the best evidences I can see, the Authority properylies in the Bishop, and the Presbyters are assumed to him, onely for the security of the Church, and solemnity of the Action. And I may confidently say, there cannot be produced any one instance of sole pre∣sbyters undertaking to ordain other presbyters, or even Deacons, which
was not censured, at least as schisma∣tical, if not Heretical, from the time of the Apostles, to the peoples casting out their Bishop at Geneva. In the daies of the Great Athanasius, we find one Colluthus a Presbyter, who took upon him to ordain, and from whom Ischyras, one of Athanasius his most bitter adversaries, pretended to have derived his Orders: but in the Synodical Epistle of the Aegyptian Coun∣cilExtat in A∣thanas. Apol. 2 â. at Alexandria, it is avowed  All imposition of hands from him was void: and the reason is ren∣dred, because  He died onely a presbyter: and there∣fore he is declared to have been  in Schism, and all those who were ordained by him, communicated onely as Lay-persons. In Epiphanius his dayes, as he himselfContr. Hae. lib. 3. T 1 Hae 75 tells us, Aerius was alive, whom though I do not find to have attempted the Ordination of any, yet the Father accuses him of Heresie, for that he as∣serted the Order of Bishops and Presby∣ters to be one and the same, and the honour and dignity equal and he con∣futes
him thus, How is it possible that a Bishop and Presbyter should be equal, see∣ing the Order of Bishops is the Producer of Fathers, for it makes Fathers of the Church; whereas the order of Presbyters not being able to make Fathers, begets onely sons of the Church by the laver of re∣generation, but not Fathers or Doctours: for how should a Presbyter make any other, having not the power of imposition of hands? There is nothing of weight I have met with in antiquity objectible against this, but what some may draw from the do∣ctrine of St. Hierom, who upon diverse inducements (sufficiently detected by o∣thers) was not the greatest friend to the Episcopal Order. Yet though he teach, that at first Bishop and Presbyter were both one Order (which possibly may be true enough, if understood as it ought, they being but two Scripture▪ names for the same thing, and the or∣der which now we call presbyters, be∣ing of later date than Scripture, accor∣ding to the judgment of diverse above∣touched) and though he further tells us, the Bishop was set above the Pre∣sbyters
onely for remedy of Schism, and so, that the difference of order and authority is onely of Ecclesiastical, not of Divine right (in which regard he could not be an Aerian, it not appear∣ing that Acrius acknowledged any, e∣ven Ecclesiastical, disparity) yet in thisExam.  . 2. De Or∣din. point of Ordination, all who peruse him, however adversaries, if they will not obstinately contradict their senses, must confesse that he is more just to our Cause. For having endeavoured to equal both orders, as neer as he could, in this point yet he acknowledgeth the disparity in these words: QuidIn Ep. ad Eu∣agr. enim facit, exceptâ Ordinatione, Epi∣scopus, quod Presbyter non facit? What does a Bishop, excepting onely Or∣dination, which a Presbyter doth not? So that even in St. Jerome's judg∣ment sole Presbyters might not ordain. I find indeed some other Authorities, produced, to prove the parity of Bishops and Presbyters out of the Antients, but upon examination of them I conceive, any otherwise than as at first the terms were synonymous, all those Authorities abued: And I will not trouble my Rea∣der
with matters of this nature. The English Reformation never va∣ried this the Law and Practice of the Catholick Church: nor would the For∣reign Reformers, could they have hel∣ped it. This is plain enough by the Augustan confession, to which not one∣ly the Lutheran Doctours, but CalvinCap. de pte∣sta. cles. himself subscribed; Facilè possent Epi∣scopi legitimam obedientiam retinere, &c. The Bishops might easily retain the obedience due to them by Law (spea∣king of Popish Bishops) would they not urge such Traditions which are against good conscience, & swear us not to teach the pure Doctrine of the Gos∣pel, namely, the Reformed Religion. As to Calvinists, the learned Zanchy pro∣tests in his conscience before God, he ac∣counts all those no other than Schis∣maticks, who made it a part of the Re∣formation to have no Bishops set above their Presbyters in a degree of authori∣ty, where they may be had. And Calvin himself adjudges, There is no Ana∣thema which such are not worthy of, who would not be subject withal du∣tiful obedience  a Reformed Hie∣rarchy.
The passage is mis-cited by some, as having been in his Epistle to Sadolet, but it is extant much more at large, than I have reported it, in his Book De necessitate reformandae Ecclesiae.Inter opusc. in Fol. Genev. 1611. p. 69. Now if they would have left the Bi∣shops their lawful power, they must not certainly have invaded the power of Ordination: Calvin himself in the Book just now mentioned, acknow∣ledged both the antiquity and whole∣someness of those Ecclesiastical sanctions, that at least three Bishops should join in the ordination of a Bishop, & in the ordi∣nation of a Presbyter, the Bishop shouldPa 57. adjoin to himself a competent number of his presbyters: and accuses the popish Bishops of those dayes to have swerved from these Rules, to have lost their power according to those very sanctions by being Hereticks (which surely can∣not be imputed to our Bishops) and propounds the conditions, upon which they might retein it. Ʋt nominandi & ordinandi potestatem retineant, justum illud & serium doctrinae vitaeque examen restituant, &c. That they might re∣in their power of nominating and
ordaining, let them restore due exa∣mination of life and manners, which now for many ages is out of use a∣mongst them. Let them cease to be enemies to sound Doctrine; which certainly cannot, but with the great∣est unreasonableness, be imputed to the Bishops of our Church, whose Do∣ctrine, except in a very few contro∣verted points, our very dissenters themselves will acknowledge sound; and in those very points, if the sen∣tence of better Judges than themselves may be heard, is sounder than their own. Chemnitius that learned Luthe¦ran,Exam. Conc. Trid. par. 2. Desacr. Ordin. is yet more express. Answering that objection, Why the Ministry of the Reformed Church did not seek to be ordained by the popish Bishops, he allows, Si veri essent Episcopi, & pro∣fiterentur sanam doctrinam, rectè hoc si∣bi arrogarent. If they were true Bi∣shops, and professed sound doctrine, they might rightly claim this to them∣selves. But he challenges them of laying aside the Work of true Bishops (viz. ministring in the Word and Sacra∣ments) and refusing to ordain any
thereto, but to the offering the sacri∣legous sacrifice of the Mass, &c. And though he deny the superiority of Bi∣shops to Presbyters by Divine right, yet he allows it by Ecclesiastical law and Primitive practice, as St. Hierom did. I will onely add, where any Bishops embraced the Reformed Doctrine, di∣verse of the Forreign Reformation, who were not ordained before, were so far from not▪ acknowledging the power of Orders to be in them, that they sought for Ordination from them. Let us hear George Prince of Anhault, a reform∣ed Divine, and afterward Bishop of Mersburg. I, saies he, supplicated by my Chaplain Mr. James Styre, to theIn prae. fat. de ordin. fol. 62 Godly Bishop of Prandeburg, Reve∣rend Matthias of Jagan, who at that time by Divine Grace both knew and profest the Reformed Doctrine, and had received the true use of the Sa∣craments, and abolished all evident abuses in ordination, that he would be pleased to ordain me: and he had performed that office for me, as he had now most readily promised me, had not our gracious God called him
out of this life before the time: nor was there then any other Bishop in these Countries, which would per∣form it to me. Let the world now judge, if the reason why these men had not Episcopal ordination, were not because in those parts at that time there were no Bishops would join with them in the Reformation. Such was, and is, the state of those Churches! They must have Ministers and Sacraments as they can; and so the want of requisite or∣ders amongst them, is their Misery rather than fault. The utmost which has been taught,Sect. 5. within the Ages limited, with any al∣lowance in the Church, is either, what our Dissenters, I presume, will be asham∣ed to own, or will not help their cause: And 'tis, First, that the Pope, by reason of his plenitude of power, may give such a Commission to persons not Bishops, that they may confer the Lesser Orders, that is, those wherein Absolution, and the consecrating the Eucharist is not con∣cern'd. This is the constant doctrine of the Romish chool-Divines and Canonists. Hear the Angelical Doctour for them all
deciding the point. Collatio Ordinum alicui dupliciter convenire potest: aut deThom in 4▪ sent. 25, Distin. 1. q 1 . jure communi ratione suae ordinariae pote∣statis, aut ex indulgentiâ, sive generali, sive special, ratione commissionis: & hoc ultimo modo conferre ordines cone∣nit aliquibus, qui non sunt Episcopi. Ordi∣nation by common right belongs only to Bishops: By special commission some Cardinal Presbyters, and by general cer∣tain Abbots, confer the lesser orders, that is, to the Subdiaconate inclusively: And the reason some of them give, is, because, even with them, those are no Sa∣craments.Estius in 4. sent. Dis. ad. Would any man have thought, that the Pope himself, ac∣cording to his own Doctours, can dele∣gate no farther power of ordinations to Presbyters, however dignified, than that of making Subdeacons? Yet veri∣ly, so it is in their sense. And truly his very own creatures, the Fathers ofSes. 23. cap. 10. de Re∣o. Trent have given him no more. And even St. Hierom himself, however to repress the pride of some Deacons, who perkt up more than became their place, he sometimes magnifie the order of Pre∣sbyters, yet will not allow, that any
persons not Bishops may ordain, thoughContra Lucife∣rian. in danger otherwise to want successours, & thence proves some to have had no successors because not being Bishops, they could not ordain Clerks. But, was not the Father in this point too severe, & may not necessity dispense with what his Holiness's Doctours seem not to allow he may? Yes certainly may it, or else God help some Churches: To come then secondly, to what has been said most favourably of Non-Episcopal Ordination. It has been taught, though not by so many before the Reforma∣tion, as some seem to have pretended, that in case of necessity, & where Bishops cannot be had, Presbyters may ordain Presbyters. Presbyterum Presbyteros or∣dinare posse, concedit cum Magistro sen∣tentiarum,Fasci. Contr. pag: 249. sanior pars Scholasticorum, ut patet ad sent. 4. D. 25, saith Bishop Prideaux. What Consectaries the Bishop might draw from the Masters words, I know not, but I find no such thing expres∣sed, nor so much as fairly insinuated by the Master: and for pars sanior I am not judge enough to speak, but I am sure the pars major upon that distinction are a∣gainst
it, and not one that I have seen on the Text (at least expresly) for it. Their probleme indeed (and as no other is it disputed amongst them) Whether Episcopacy be a distinct Order, or onely an higher degree of the same Order, may seem to have some tendency this way; in which point their Doctours are divi∣ded very much. But I will acknow∣ledge these words in Alex, de Hales, Simi∣liter dicunt, quod ex demandatione Pa∣pae,Par: 4: q. 9. memb. 5. a 1. Ordinatus potest conferre ordinem quem habet. Some teach, that by au∣thority from the Pope, a person in Orders may confer the Order he has; & we will suppose this delegation onely in case of Necessity. But, would any of our Classical presbyters be content to fetch their authority thence? I suppose not, when a certain great man of Geneva would rather acknowledge Calvin ne∣ver to have been ordained at all (andBeza. in vi. Calvin. so to have been without any ordinary Call) than own him (Papisticis ordie¦nibus initiatum) in orders in the Church of Rome, though Bolsee tells us he was, and officiated some time in a CureIn vit: Calv. at Noyon in Piccardy. Again Richar∣dus
Armachanus, whom Bellarmin will notDescri∣ptor Eccl. Ann. 1350. Qaest: Armn▪ l: 11 c. 7. allow to have been Orthodox touching the power of Presbyters, is indeed more absolute, and hangs not this authority on the Pope. Videtur quod si omnes Episcopi simul essent defuncti, sacerdotes minores possent ordinare Episcopos. It would seem, that if all the Bishops were dead together, priests of infe∣riour order (viz. presbyters) might or∣dain Bishops: that is, they might choose out of themselves an ordained person, a presbyter, whom they might conse∣crate or set apart as Bishop: but he does not say, they might ordain a person, that never was ordained, though that may be acknowledged as a consectary thence. I must therefore say still, that I want an express antient autho¦rity for this doctrine, even in case of necessity. And it is very considerable, God from the beginning never suffered the Christian Church to be reduced to this Necessity, which possibly is the rea∣son that the case was not of old more narrowly sifted and determined. But though to deal sincerely, I can∣not find such antient authority, yet I do see some reason, which may plead
for it. It is certain (1) Necessity does many times warrant those violati∣ons of positive Laws, which it enfor∣ceth: it is not so indeed in Natural Laws, the obligation of which I con∣ceive no necessity can take off. We know who taught us, I will have mercy and not sacrifice. Rather than have no Sacraments, no publick Worship, no Order in the Church, uncanonical Or∣dination (by sole presbyters I mean) might be admitted, which I conceive to be the case of divers of the Forreign Reformed Churches, and it may be was the case of some particular persons amongst us, in the end of our late Ci∣vil Wars. And (2) though it be true, Nil dat quod non habet, yet there seems some natural reason, that a man may confer the power, that he has. The main power then that presbyters pre∣tend to, being that of administring the Sacraments, preaching, and otherwise officiating in the publick Worship, and there being, no doubt, but generally all presbyters at their Ordination, re∣ceived this power, what should hinder, but they may convey or propagate it,
that is, ordain Presbyters? If any say Canonical Sanction hinders, I allow it, and both acknowledge, & have proved, regularly they cannot; because though they recved power to minister as a∣bovesaid, yet not power of themselves to transmit or confer on others such power. Yet forasmuch as the power of governing the Church, our Lord Jesus being departed out of the World, devolved regulary to his Apostles, whom he had appointed, and the same power, after the decease of the Apo∣stles, devolved to the Bishops whom they had ordained, so put the case (which Armachaus above does) that all the Order of Bishops were extinct (or, which is much the same, were Heretical, enemies to the true doctrine of the Gospel, and would ordain none but first sworn to maintain that enmity) who shall say but the power of Ordina∣tion justly enough devolves to such Ca∣tholick and Orthodox Presbyters? And that the rather, because as the true Church is by the promise of Christ to continue to the end of the World, and he has obliged himself so long to be with
it, so he being supposed by such extin∣ction of the superiour Order, to have providentially cast the supreme propa∣gative power in Spirituals upon such Presbyters, at least within such Terri∣tories or parts of the World, who shall say (admitting still that they profess, believe and teach [quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus] the true an∣tient Catholick Faith, and are publick∣ly desirous of that antient regular Uni∣ty, which through the fate of their cir∣cumstances, they cannot attain) who I say shall implead these men, that they violate the orders and appointments of Christ Jesus? This, I say again, I take to be the case of most of the Forreign Reformed Churches: they do strictly for the main, hold the true Catholick Faith; they had very few of the Epi∣scopal Order (in many parts none) who would admit the Reformation, or ordain any who would not abjure it; the Order therefore thus amongst them became morally extinct: they were and are, as far as their circumstances will admit, desirous of the regular Unity and isipine all along maintain∣ed,
in the Catholick Church (Much hath been said already evidencing this, more might be added, not onely out of the first reformers, but out of some principal Doctours of those Churches now alive) I must therefore not onely acquit, but justify those Churches, and that upon the grounds given, in this behalf. But this is not at all the case of ourSect. 6. dissenters. It is one thing for Presby∣ters thus deserted and abandoned by their Hereticall Bishops, to assemble and ordein, where there can be, or will be suf∣fered, no Ordination by Orthodox and truly Catholick Bishops; and another thing for them to thrust out such Bish∣ops, usurp their office, and refuse Ordi∣nation from them. This was not at allGeorg: Princ. Anhalt de Or∣din: in Prae∣at▪ the practice of those reformed Churches. Ʋtinam siut nomina, &c. O that our Bishops, (say their Doctors) as they bear the names and titles, so would in good earnest perform the offices of Bishops! O that they would teach agreeably to the Gospell, or faithfully govern their Churches according to it! Oh how willingly & with what joy of heart would we accept, reverence, and obey
them as Bishops, yield them their due jurisdiction, and both attribute Ordi∣nation to them, and without refuseall take it from them: The same thing which both I alwaies, and Dr. Luther himself very often, both by word of mouth and in writeing, nay and in publick sermons in the Cathedrall Church of Mersburg, have protested and promised: This is not to throw our Protestant Reformed Bishops, to make head, even after their restaura∣tion, against their power, and to op∣pose ordination from them, contrary to the Lawes of the Catholick Church, and even of our own Kingdome. To come then to an issue in short: I say no man in these Realms can make out a Call to the Ministry who at least has not received Episcopall Ordination. The necessity of an outward call has been already evidenced, and more much might be said, that an inward call Suf∣ficeth not: For though a man were sup∣posed sufficiently assured in his own con∣science, to warrant his own practice be∣fore God, yet except there be some outward testimony of this mission, man,
cannot; and then, as to the world, such person has no call (De non existen∣tibus & non apparentibus eadem ratio) and consequently his Ministry is of no authority. Even our Lord Jesus him∣self, as he took not this Office upon him∣self, but being called by God, as was Aa∣ron,Hebr. V. 4. so neither did he content himself with a meer inward Call. The Heavens were opened, and the spirit of God de∣scendedMat. III 16, 17. & XVII 5. like a Dove, and lighted upon him. And lo, a voice from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; Hear ye him: Behold here an outward sensible Call from Hea∣ven, and the first instance of it antece∣dent to our Lords preaching. Besides that all along, The works which he did, testified of him. Now, such a Call as this, none now adayes can pretend. Those therefore, who will prove their Mission from God, must be content to own it to be from him mediately, viz. by the Ministry of men authorised by God. Now, God having committed all power into the hands of Christ, none can conwey this power of Ministry, but those who have it from Christ and
his Apostles, and their successours duly sent. And then, according to the constant Doctrine of the Holy Catho∣lick Church, evidently founded on Scripture, no persons otherwise ordai∣ned (except haply in case of inevitable necessity) than by Bishops, can pre∣tend to an outward Call. It will not avail our dissenters to say, they were necessitated to accept such irregular or∣dination, (which, according to the Doctrine of the Catholick Church, I have said to be null) for they may have their imperfect ordination compleated, or be regularly ordained, if they please. It will not suffice them to say, they have as good an outward Call as the Ministry in the Forreign Churches: for in diverse of them they have Bishops; in others where they have not the name, they have the thing; and where they have neither, they have a necessity, in a manner invincible, to plead for this irre∣gularity. In a word, our men have not so much of an outward Call, as we have seen even Zwinglianism it self avowes necessary; they cannot say they were chosen by the people with the approbation
of godly Bishops. Nay, they have not so much of an outward Call, as Erastus himself would allow of: They are not chosen by the people with the approba∣tion of the Magistrate; our King, both by his Laws and Proclamations, interdicting this their pretended Mini∣stry. There being then none of the antient, none of present Reformed Churches, whose Doctrine or practice will own this practice of theirs, they hereby cut themselves off, from the Body of Christ; and how they will escape the grievous guilt of Schism, if my words would signifie any thing, I would beseech them in the fear of God, and with tender regard to their own souls, and the souls of such whom they draw into Schism with them, that they would consider. But besides the sin of Schism, I fear they may, when they please to be im∣partial, find some farther guilt in this their practice: For having no due Call to the Ministry, they are intruders in∣to that sacred Office; intruders too (generally) upon a double account▪ First, as usurping the Office: Second∣ly,
as exercising that Office in provin∣ciâ alienâ, in other mens bounds, and without their consent, where, if these men were lawfully ordained, yet they had nothing to do to intermeddle; at least so far, as, on the dayes, and at the very hours of publick Worship, to set up altar against altar, and not one∣ly foment, but propagate separations. I will not use one exasperative word, but if either scripture, or reason (not to speak any thing of the authority of the Catholick, or our particular Church, which possibly some little value) if these, I say, or the rules of common and natural justice, signifie any thing amongst them, let them remember, that St. Paul, however as St. Chryso∣stome somewhere stiles him () the Teacher of the Ʋni∣verse, declined, as far as might be, to in∣terpose within other mens compass: let them consider, were they lawfully en∣titled to the care of those Flocks, and bound to give an account to God for the souls of such of them as miscar∣ly, which we are, how they would take from us, such practice as this of
theirs? Especially, when they must ac∣knowledge us, neither negligent, nor it may be, comparatively to them∣seives, insufficient for our charg: Let them assign to themselves or the world, what end of confusions and schismes there can possibly be, if it shall be law∣ful, when we are all agreed upon ne∣cessary truths, for every one that thinks he has better gifts, or a more effectual way of instilling Godliness and spiritual Truths into the hearts of men, without any publick approbati∣on, or so much as promise by him given, that he will keep to the Common Faith, to enter into other mens Charges, and draw away as many as he can to his new waies. Upon these Principles how can they forbid Papists, Anabaptists, Quakers, and all like sorts, to do dai∣ly the same to them, they do to us? Nay, do not these people, upon the same reasons, every day do the same to them? And how can they condemn those who mete by their own measures? It isOf the Church l. 3. c. 39. truly, and most reasonably, stated by Learned Dr. Field, that there are Three things implied in the calling of
Ecclesiastical Ministers. First, An Election or Designment of persons fit for so high and excellent imploiment. Secondly, The consecrating of them, and giving them power and authori∣ty to intermeddle with things per∣taining to the service of God. Third∣ly, the assigning and dividing to each man thus sanctified, that porti∣on of Gods people which he is to taken care of. And it is certain, both from scripture and antiquity, that the Apostles of Christ, and their immedi∣ate successours, commonly so divided those whom they had converted, that each City, and the places adjoining, made up but one Church. Now this assignation intitleing then the Pastours to their Flocks, should any in the A∣postles dayes have come from another City, and intermeddled in a City as∣signed to others (from Ephesus suppose to Corinih) and out of the Faithful there, under pretence of greater gifts, or a purer way, gathered a particular Church, and set up a way of Worship in opposition to that maintained by the regular Ministry of that Church, would
not this have been then adjudged both a schism, and an intrusion? Or could such New-comer, because several peo∣ple followed him, and preferred his Ministry, avow he had a due call to the Ministry in such place? Admit but this practice lawfull, and withall but suppose, that in a multitude there are some giddy, and not a few taken with Novelties, and there will be no end of divisions. And this is plainly the case betwixt the Non-conforming Preachers and our selves. In summe then, these pretenders to a necessity of preaching, having no call, neither to the Office (most of them) nor (any) to the ex∣ercise of it where they do exercise it, Reason & justice are so far from allow∣ing any necessity to lye upon them to preach, in the present sense, that if they would, all circumstances conside∣red, duly apply the Text of St. Paul, in stead of saying, Wo be to us if we preach not, they ought to say, Wo be to us if (in these circumstances) we preach; as ex∣ceeding the bounds of our Calling, and at once transgressing the rules of Ju∣stice, in doing otherwise than we would
be done by, and together the Laws of God, of the Catholick Church, of this Church, and of the Realm. But they will say, they are bound inSect. 7. Luke 9. conscience: They have put their hands to the plough, and are not to look back; the Flocks which they feed are their own, and have chosen them for their Pastours; there is a Covenant entred be∣twixt them and their Flocks, and there rises hence a spiritual consanguinity, all which obligations they cannot in con∣science violate. This is but the same thing over again in other words, and to give it likewse an answer over again in other words: Con∣science, or the practical judgment, when it acts contrary to, or besides its rule, is not conscience, but imaginati∣on, erroneous conceit, arrogance, or obstinacy, as the case stands: It is plain by the premisses, that the rule in this case dictates the contrary, and therefore there can be no sound process of Conscience in the matter; what there is of the Evils taxed, it concerns them who are guilty, respectively to consi∣der.
More particularly, as to the points pretended to oblige conscience; We would perswade none, who have given themselves up to God for the service of his Church in the Ministry, to revoke their own act; let them serve therein as they are capable: but then let them enter by the door, and not, by climbing in some indirect way, be so injurious to themselves, as to draw on themselves the guilt of being thieves and robbers. Oh! how willingly would we seethem regular Preachers, reforming and reducing the schisms they have been guilty of making, or accessory to, and drawing in the same yoke with our selves! What joy would it be to us, what comfort to themselves one day, and what benefit at present to the Church, for them to employ their parts and zeal, to peace, unity, charity and true Christianity! But this can never be done by the course they take: They that gather not with us, scat∣ter abroad. Then, as to meer popular Election intitleing them to the care of such par∣ticular portions of the Flock of Christ, and so making a Call, this pretence is
partly false, partly schismatical. If we should come to a Poll in the parishes where they preach, they would not have in most places, one fourth, in diverse, not one tenth man: I am mo∣dest in the account. But they are cho∣sen by those by whom they are cho∣sen, and so they are intitled to these. Such popular Election, I say, is schis∣matical, and 'tis already proved such. For either these men themselves, or their predecessors, seduced the people from their lawful Pastours into such privy Assemblies, and this made the schism: and the schism being thus made, to accept of the choice of such a people, and, by virtue of it, to head them, is to maintain and propagate the schism. The same too is to be said touching any Church Covenant, as they call it, entred into by such pretended Pastour and Flock. And let it be judged whe∣ther, if any, or all these pretences, would make up a due Call, all Here∣ticks and Sectaries in the world, who have but any numbers, might not a∣vow the same. And what end, I say, can there then be of Confusion, Division,
and every evil work? It is plain there∣fore, the pretence of meer conscience upon these or like grounds, is most fri∣volous, and would serve any the most erroneous, schismatical, or Enthusia∣stick parties in the world. But some, possibly, may say, ifSect. 8. Ordination by sole Presbyters be valid in any case, why not in all? The per∣sons ordaining being supposed still of the same Order, why should not the vir∣tue & efficacy be still the same? Now, the validity of Presbyters ordaining, has been acknowledged in the case of some; and more cases may be imagi∣ned, in which, necessity may press as much: As, suppose some Presbyters (or even private Christians) were cast on an Heathen Island, where, in pro∣cess of time they converted the inhabi∣tants to the Faith, but could come at no Bishop who might ordain a compe∣tent number of Ministers, nor even suc∣cessors for themselves; might not these Priests lawfully ordain others, and should not such Ordination be valid? And allowing this, that such Ordinati∣on, be to the persons so ordained, a
good and effectual outward Call to the Ministry, how can it be said in other cases, that those who were sent by sole Presbyters, which are still of the same order and power, have not a like good and effectual Call, and so, as much necessity lying on them to preach? To the Objection, I say, No man, that I know, ever accounted Ordinati∣on valid, upon any supposal of certain internal qualifications or virtues thereby imparted. If the validity thereof did ly meerly in some such supposed Com∣munications, it were true, admitting these Communications to be still the same (as there is little reason not to ad∣mit it) it were true, I say, that Or∣dination from Presbyters being valid in case of Necessity, would be valid also otherwise; the persons, at least, the Order, and consequently the Commu∣nications being the same. But all, that Ordination confers, is a Power to offici∣ate in holy things; now to the confer∣ring of such a Power, it is evidently re∣quisite, that he who confer it, have himself received power to confer it (o∣therwise his act is null): And this pow∣er
he must have, either in Ordinary method and due regular course, or by some extraordinary means; of which, besides Revelation, I know none as∣signable, but invincible Necessity. Now, though perhaps no man will say, that such Necessity puts any new inter∣nal virtues into any Office, yet, I con∣ceive, it cannot reasonably be denied, but that it casts a lawful power in many cases upon men, which otherwise they would not have; namely, it invests them with that Right, which by Law Positive they have not. Now, as to the particular case put, for the corroborating the Objection: Touching such Priests (nay, even such private Christians, if it should so hap∣pen) thus necessitated to ordain, it might rationally be said The seal of their1. Cor. IX. 2. Apostleship, were those Converts in the Lord. If they were not Bishops, nay, even Apostles unto others, yet doubtless were they Apostles to such people. In express terms, their local separation from all Bishops, joined with the con∣sideration of their success, would pro∣videntially constitute them Bishops (or
more) at least impower them to Epi∣scopal acts for the present Necessity, if not invest them with a right to pre∣side in, and govern those Churches, as the Apostles (several of them) did the Churches which were of their con∣version. But there are two things here to be noted: First, that this provi∣dence would as truly impower Lay-men to ordain, as Presbyters; and so it helps not▪ all those with whom we have to do. And secondly, 'tis worthy to be remembred, that this is an imaginary case, which is not known, as far as I can understand, to have come to pass. St. Philip indeed (we will suppose the Deacon) converted Samaria, but no fate or Necessity precluded his recourse to the Apostles at Jerusalem; and S. Pe∣ter and S. John were sent down to the Samaritan Church for the regular Con∣stitution thereof. Socrates also reports,Eccl: Histor: lib: 1. c▪ 15. that Aedesius & Frumntius (according to his relation) without doubt Lay-per∣sons, converted a certain Tract of Indi∣ans to Christianity; but having had success at first, on some smaller num∣ber of the people, Frumentius came o∣ver
to Athanasius the great, then Bi∣shop of Alexandria, and desired of him he would be pleased to send a Bishop, and some Priests for assistance, over to the Indians, for the fuller conversion of the Countrey: upon which Frumentius himself, being by Athanasius adjudged the fittest man to be their Bishop, was by him ordained Bishop; who therefore soon returned, carrying with him diverse Priests, and the success was great. So constantly has Providence own'd and maintained this Holy Order, that the Divine indulgence seems never to have neglected it, never to have settled a Church without it! I shall not suppose I need to say any more for the asserting the Validity of Ordinations in the Calvinian, and diverse of the Lutheran Churches (pardon me if for distinctions sake I use the names) where they had no Bishops at the Re∣formation; or for the disengaging my discourse from any objections, which may be made from my Concessions or Asserti∣ons in that behalf. Those Churches them∣selves will acknowledge themselves to have been all along much unsettled,
though some of them made to them∣selves Bishops, according to Armacha∣nus his way above mentioned (Such wasMelch: Adam. Vit: Gm. Theol. p: 246. the Ordination of George Prince of Anhault to the Bishoprick of Mersburg, according as the Letters testimonial thereof, penn'd by Melanchton, and extant in the Prince's life, report) & so arrived neerer to a regular Constitution: And all other persons of the Reformed Religion, who will hear reason, must allow something extraordinary in that great revolution of the Reformation. I shall rather therefore praise God,Sect. 9. and admire the peculiar favour of his Providence towards the English Church above most, if not all other Churches of the Reformation; against which Church even Envy her self, had it been pos∣sible to have stopt her mouth, must in this regard, have been eternally silent. It pleasing God, in the beginning, to encline the hearts of our Princes, and Bishops, as well as diverse of the great∣est quality, towards the Reformation, when the Fulness of time, according to the Divine disposal, was now come, there were several of our Bishops, tou∣ching
whose regular Ordination no men, who were not blind with malice, could move any question, which ap∣peared, as became their places, in the front of the Reformers: insomuch that the very Romanists themselves, when they will be just to their own Conscien∣ces, and candidly speak their genuine sentiments, must needs acknowledge (as some of them in effect have done) that we no more want due succession of Bishops regularly ordained than them∣selves; and possibly we shall not find the succession, in our Prelates, through whose hands it hath come, at any time so fowly tainted, as it has often been in the pretended Holy Chair. Howe∣ver, on all hands, our Ministerial pow∣er is secure. Let Episcopacy be of the strictest divine right any can imagine, we cannot for want thereof be convin∣ced ever to have been unchurched; Let it be onely of Ecclesiastical right, none can implead us as irregular: Nay, let any tell us, our Bishops by the Refor∣mation became Hereticks, and were excommunicated as such by the Roman Church (as we know in reality our
whole Church is now) yet till Rome dis∣claim the Doctrine of her own Schools, touching the Validity of Orders from Bishops turned Hereticks and cut off from the Church, they can never, by their own principles, invalidate our Ordination, or pretend against us, as they do against others, that we have neither Priests nor Sacraments. I see no need to take notice of some devised Fables amongst them, which besides, that even themselves, as well as others, have long since been known in private to have laught at, as ingenius pieces of Drollery, have been sufficiently de∣tected and exploded in the face of the World. I may therefore truly rejoice, we are, in this behalf, above both their Arguments and their Calumnies. And as to those Dissenters, who may seem to be risen out of our own bowels, whatsoever some of them, who are too much inclined to Enthusiasms, may im∣pute to a few of us, touching our want of what they call Gifts, yet they must acquit the generality even in this case; and so acknowledge, as much as man is capable to judge of, as to our inward
Call: but touching the regularity of our Outward Mission, they have no pre∣tence of reason to oppose to us. They must allow our Bishops to be Presby∣ters at least, and then the Bishops never ordaining any Presbyters, but by the assistance of other Presbyters (to which and other purposes, they have a standing Council of grave and learned Divines commonly resident in their Churches, called in ordinary language, the Dean and Chapter of the Church) they cannot deny, but all Presbyters amongst us were ordaine by the imposition of the hands of the Pre∣sbytery. Further, in the Assignation of his charge to each of us, though as some contend (without any sufficient reason) the people ought alwayes to have their choice, yet, because the consequences of such popular Elections in innumerable instances have been, and would still be found to be of most wretched and mischievous influence (for which cause such proceedings have been in a great measure laid aside in the Church nw these many ages) there∣fore no sober person can say, that such
choice is essential to any mans outward Call to the Ministry in this or that place. Notwithstanding it very seldome comes to pass, that any Minister is inituled to any Parochial Charge, without the consent either of some particular Chief persons amongst them, or of the person (of old) intrusted by the people tonomi∣nate for them the Patron, or of the ge∣nerality of them themselves; though if the people should be some time imposed upon for their good, as we may have seen it in some cases to have fallen out, they have no reason to complain of the injury. However sure it is, for the main, no man can be either Ordained, or instituted into any Benefice, against whom any of the Laity can make any just exceptions; provided those who have such exceptions to make, will be faithful and diligent enough to bring them in in season, and undertake the proof of them: The contrary pretence, if made by any, proceeds either from ignorance of our Church-laws, or from malicious calumny. So that I say still, though the people have not their plena∣ry choice, or sole nomination, yet the
Laws and practice of our Church pro∣vide for securing their rigt of appo∣bation, or (at least) tacit consent. Some imperfections there will be in all Churches while on earth, but truly as few in our Church (especially in this behalf of the Missi. of her Clergy) as in any that I know under Heaven. I joy, dear Mother, when I viewMr. Her∣bert The British Church Thy perfect lineaments and hue.— Blessed be God, whose love it was, To double moat thee with his Grace, And none but thee. But I shall too far digress: The summe is, it is apparent, that as to our most clamorous pretenders to a Necessity of preaching, and to a tender dread of a Wo to them if they preach not, in the present sense, as to all I mean, who are not called to the Ministry as before stated, the case is directly contrary; They ought not in these circumstances to preach, they sin in diverse regards in so doing; and, I hope, they will not in express terms aver, they are un∣der a Necessity of living in a course of known sin: Their pretences for them∣selves, against our Church, their cries
for that order which there is in other Reformed Churches, are so far from being just, that we have all reason to admire and adore the singular favour of God towards our Church in its happy regularity above others: and if they would have reformed according to the Pattern of the best Reformed Church in being, they ought not to have altered the constitution of ours, but conform∣ed themselves thereunto. It will be said now, Does there thenSect. 10, ly a Necessity upon all who are duly cal∣led, to preach. So that Wo be to them if they preach not, as now we take Preaching? Before this can be directly answered, there must be two considerables premi∣sed. First, that there being diversities of Gifts, and diversities of Administra∣tions, all men are not by their very Ordination, designed to the same part or kind of Ministring. We have seen it was not so even in the very Primitive dayes: All Elders that ruled well, did not notwithstanding labour in the Word and Doctrine. esides, it has been made evident, that the name Preaching
is now become a Term of Art, and si∣gnifies with us, what Tractare did with the Latine Fathers, to make in publick a kind of Commentary, with occasio∣nal Exhortations and Applications, on some Text of Scripture, or to instruct the Faithful on some particular subject: now this is not the same with bare pub∣lication of the Gospel, or the old and proper Preaching. All in Orders have authority to preach, or publish the Go∣spel, by publick solemn reading of it; but all have not authority to make thereon publick comments of their own. This difference is intimated in the very Form of Ordination. To the Deacon it is said, Take thou Authority to read the Gospel in the Church of God, and to preach the same, if thou be licensed thereto by the Bi∣shop himself. But to the Priest, Take thou authority to preach the Word of God, and to administer the Sacraments, &c. It is very cer∣tain from Antiquity, that Preaching, in the present sense, was long reserved as a peculiar of the Bishop (, in Justin Martyr.) and some tell
us, it is still in the Eastern Church. But yet that it was earlily required of the Presbyters, we have already seen out of the pretended Apostolical Constitu∣tions;Rit▪ Conc. lib. 2. c. 1. and Ferrarius has many more au∣thorities, to which I refer the Reader. But it is sure, 'twas onely committed to the more learned and eminent of the Presbyters at first (especially in great Churches) Episcopus autem quos doctos viderit, &c. Ths much must be ac∣knowledged also to be the meaning of that Canon of the Caesar-Augustan Coun∣cil. Nequis Doctoris nomen sibi imponat,Can. 5 praeter has personas, quibus est conces∣sum, secundum quod scriptum est. Let no one impose upon himself the name of a Doctour, besides those to whom it hath been granted, according as it is written. The Council, I presume, refer to Hebr. V. 4, No man taketh this Office upon him, &c. And I cannot con∣ceive what Licences to preach should si∣gnifie, when granted even to Presby∣ters, if all Presbyters by their Ordinati∣on had received equal power to preach in the present sense, as some pretend. Secondly, All who have received
power to preach, are not to exercise it at liberty where they please, but in the places assigned to them. This is again apparent by the very Form of Or∣dination: Take thou Authority to preach, &c. in the Congregation where thou shalt be lawfully ap∣pointed thereto. God is not the God of Confusion, but of Order; and The spirit of the Prophets are subject to the spirits of the Prophets. Preachers may often hear as well as preach, and it will as well become them (in loco) in place and time convenient. By the Lawes of the Church, Men are not generally or∣dained without Titles (The Antients held all such Ordinations void) And being ordained, they are appointed to exercise their Ministry in the parti∣cular places, to which they are limited, within such a sphere, and at times and seasons allowed. Men must not  interpose themselves into other1. Pet: 4. 15. mens Charges, or thrust their sicle into anothers Harvest, but each attend what he is authorised to, and in his own sphere. This the Lawes of God, the Lawes of the hurch, and al
wholesome Rules of Polity require. These things being thus premised, I say, Every Minister who is called toSect. 11 preach, that is, who is licensed, and has his place assigned him wherein he is to preach, taking preaching in the sense the people commonly take it at present, is in duty bound so to preach, and to preach ordinarily as often as the Law for the pesent allows, and his own abilities and due attendances on other parts of his Ministry will bear. And for proof hereof, I argue by parity of Reason, from such passages, as that Text of St. Paul's, touching himself, so often mentioned, A Necessity is laid upon me, and wo be unto me, if I preach not; and that of his to Timothy, I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Je∣sus Christ, who shall judge the quick and2. Ti. V. 1, 1. the dead at his appearance, Preach the Word: Be instant in season, and out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and Doctrine, and from other like pces. From whence, in brief, I say, if St. Paul having an extraordinary and immediate all, had a necessity lay on him to preach te
Gospel in that extraordinary way, wherein he was called, if Timothy be∣ing called in somewhat a more ordina∣ry way, was in his Charge to be in∣stant in Preaching (to the yet Hea∣thens perhaps) in Doctrine (to te faith∣ful) in reproofs, rebukes, exhortations, to all, both in season and out of season, then we also who are yet in a more or∣dinary way to teach and build up the Faithful, and convince Gainsayers, are to be diligent in our Ministry, to reprove, rebuke, exhort, as we have occasion and ability, that is, in our present language, we are to preach as often, as we well can and may. It is true, I have above mentioned several other kinds of preaching, be∣sides this publick in our pupits, and those kinds no less necessary in every Parish than is this. Resolving cases of conscience, private instructions and re∣bukes to particular persons as they need them, conduct and counsel to the sick, instructing children in the understand¦ing of the Catechism, and eve occsi∣onal religious discourses with neigh∣bours,
may be truly enough reduced to the general head of preaching: and we find very often more good done in these methods, wherein we have the advantage of interlocution and mutual exchanging words, than in publick Sermons; at least, these make our Ser∣mons more useful: Nor can it be thought, that publick Sermons either should thrust out these, or any wise com∣mute for the neglect of them. But in common language we do not call these preaching: however they will be un∣derstood to be comprehended under that term, Due attendance on other parts of our Ministry. Now, I say, these being supposed done, I conceive every Minister, as far as his abilities will bear, bound ordinarily to preach upon all Licit, and usual opportunities. For it seems plain to me, that Divine injunctions and precedents, interpre∣ted by parity of reason, thus far reach us. Further, Secondly, though much mightSect. 12. be said, and something suddenly shall, touching the need of preaching (what∣ever some are pleased to think) yet at
present we will onely say, Whether it be really needful, or not, does not much vary the case; it is sufficient to make it necessary that the people think it so, and will not generally be satisfi∣ed without its frequency. In the be∣ginning of the Reformation, as there was much need of preaching, by reason of the gross ignorance the people had been long kept in, so there was all dili∣gence used to procure and set it up e∣very where, as much and as often as the state of the age would bear; and this vastly furthered the protestant Cause: Now people will not be per∣swaded, but the Armes which got us the victory, are still fit for our defence; what at first promoted so much the Pro∣testant Religion, is a proper and na∣tural mean to maintain it, and give it all advantages. We see there is scarce any publick Office of Religion, that the greater part of men amongst us would not rather part with, than Ser∣mons; and thugh this should be ad∣mitted to be, as much perhaps it is,Rom: XV. 1, 2. their weakness and want of judgment, yet we that are strong, ought to bear the
infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves. Let every one of us please his neighbour for his good to edification: For even Christ pleased not himself. The same was our Apostles Practice as well as Doctrine, I am all things to all men, if by any means I might save some. Both1. Cor. 9. 22. our Lord and his Apostles seem to have made it their business, though with the greatest dis-ease and pain to them∣selves, to humour the weaker sort in∣to Christianity, and to have complied with them, till they had won them to a reciprocal compliance. And sure we cannot think our selves wiser than these so great Masters in gaining souls. But admit it were not our duty by so great labours, as our frequent preaching comes to, to comply with the weaker sort, who think it needful perhaps when it is not, yet still, except we think the ss of them is not to be regarded, it will be necessary to maintain it a while to instruct them better, to shew them the mattes which are more needful, and to convince them of their mistaken judgment; all which will not be done on a sudden, nor with a few Sermons.
A third Argument then which may evince the Necessity lying on us thus frequently to preach, is not onely the expectation, but the condition and real needs of our people, the several wants they are under. Now to make this as evi∣dent as I can in a few words: I say there is no sort of people amongstus whatsoe∣ver, but have need thereof more or less. I will for our present occasion distinguish our people a little otherwise than I did towards the close of my first Discourse. We may look on the multitude as made up of three sorts of men; Of per∣sons settled in some profession of Reli∣gion upon rational grounds and induce∣ments, Of many mre who are zealous for some particular profession ou of passion or interest, but in truth unset∣tled in any, and Of a far greater num∣ber who are indeed indifferent to all professions, and if they are addicted to one more than another, it is onely because the stream now carries them that way. To each of these it will ap∣pear upon consideration, that our pre∣sent Preaching is needful. As to the first, those I mean, who
have addicted themselves to some one profession of Religion out of a rational choice; the choice these men have made, is either right or wrong. If they have chosen, and are serious in the true Religion (which sort of men God knows we must lament, is far the fewest) yet is Preaching in the sense we take it, needful even to those, to stip up their pure minds by way of remem∣brance. They do not need it may be2. pet: 3. 1. so long Sermons, because they know these things; but they do need frequent and moving ones, because humane na∣ture is subject to inadvertency, dul∣ness, and forgetful security. The best men find reason to complain of dead hearts; & besides, he that thinketh he san∣deth, let him take heed least he fall. Now Sermons are singular helps (and perhaps unparalelable) ones in these regards: they call home the rangeing soul, they six the uncomposed, they quicken the dull, they awaken and raise up those who are faln, they strengthen those who stand, and call all to their watch. But if any on the other side are mista∣ken in their choice, and seem ratinal∣ly
settled in a bad way (as there are too many who can argue shrewdly for their errours) there is to these much more need of preaching, to unsettle them first, and then to fix them aright: which perhaps being a difficult and te∣dious Work, will require more labour, and longer and frequenter contention of discourse, both in publick and pri∣vate, than some who have not very fresh experience in these things will easily imagine. Now for the second sort, men who have a passionate zeal for some one Re∣ligion, but are truth ungrounded, and not well perswaded of the truth of Re∣ligion in general: The present age abounds with such. Interests and Re∣ligions are strangely conjoined and in∣terwoven by almost inextricable intan∣glements: and as mens interest leads them, they are zealous for this or that way or profession, not indeed that it is Religion it self, which at the bot∣tome they are concern'd for, but their interest being complicate therewith, they cannot pusue the one, and omi the other, and therefore they intitle
their zeal & noise to the more commen∣deble object, Religion. Now how great need there is, and what vast and impor∣tunate pains it will require to work these people to a sense of God and spi∣ritual goods, to bring them to prefer Faith and good Conscience, before their Nets and their Drags, before their gain or craft, cannot easily be estima∣ted: certainly a more effectual means than Preaching will not be found. Lastly, as to the indifferent multi∣tude, who are alwayes of the Religion of the State, that these are not to be neglected, forasmuch as God has un∣doubtedly many people amongst them, which first or last may be brought in, and that there is no way of effecting this, so likely as Preaching, because this being in fashion, this they will fre∣quent, who sees not? Whatsoever some (who mind onely the outer part, & are cntent with the fair face of a good profession & a civil honest life, as being Religion enough for the people) may according to the measure they have ta∣ken conceive, there is certainly as much need to convert men at present to hear∣y
seriousness in Christianity, to the intie belief and love of God, as there was at first to bring the World to the open owning, or admitting the Chri∣stian profession. And what means can be imagined, so likely to succeed as frequent and earnet Sermons, calcu∣lated for the purpose? It is to be con∣sidered, the ages have strangely altered, mens way of living is clear another thing, since the Apostles went about and taught from House to House. f we come now on such an Errand, we shall not find men on Week dayes at home, or not at leisure: or if we do, they shall quarel with us for thinking they are so bad as to need particular dea∣ling with them, who yet would en∣dure us patiently an hour or two on the Lords Day in publick. They will tell us they are as sincere as their Neigh∣bours, and need not to be sing'ed out, as Christians of a worse allay: but when they are in the multitude, they will take quietly those reprehesions and ag∣gravatives of their temper, which alone by themselves they would storm at. These Considerations, I do profess,Sect. 13.
and some others which I could add, and would did I not judge enough al∣ready said on this subject, do move me to plead, that on us who are called as above, there lies at present a Necessity that we preach, and that as I have said, we preach as often, as through our own abilities we can, and with regard to the other parts of our Duty, and the Laws of the Church, we may. Divine Commands and Precedents, the publick Opinion and Expectation of the people, the States and Needs of all sorts of men amongst us, require it at our hands: nor do I doubt, whatever some male∣volous spirits, who must alwayes have something to say against the Clergy, whether true or false, are apt to whi∣sper, touching the laziness of the Priests, as they in scorn style us, if account were taken, it would be found, that the generality of us are ready to declare the practice of what has been pessed,  both of our Judgment and Re∣solution: we are thus perswaded, and we will thus do; and we doubt not, but God will own us in so doing. But if there are any amongst us, who are
apt to profess themselves of a judgment different herein,  beseech them not to be too free so to do, till they shall have seriously weighed the grand inonvenien∣ces which must in all probability ensue upon such rarity of Preaching, as they seem to patronise, which is the main point now remaining of my Proposals in the beginning. CHAP. IV. Of the Mischiefs consequent upon suppsal Preaching should grow scarcer. Sect. 1. The last Head. Supposed, that Preaching is more frequent amongst us, than in our immediate Fore-fa∣thers dayes. Sect. 2. The Reasons, and Benefits thereof. Sect. 3. How far it may be suspected Preaching may grow more scarce, or in diverse places very much fail. Sect. 4. A Proposal of two general Heads of Woes conse∣quent. Sect. 5. Strict Observation of the Lords-day keeps up the Face
and Aw of Religion amongst our peo∣ple, and Two Sermons on the Lords∣day, keep up that strict Observation. Sect. 6. Afternoon-sermons on that Day no Novelty, or piece of Purita∣nism. Sect. 7. It were requisite, that in all great Towns or larger Parishes, there were a Sermon each Holy day. How it may easily be done. Sect. 8. The particular mischiefs consequent upon more scarcity of Preaching. The first. Sect. 9. The second and third, Sect. 10. The fourth. Sect. 11. The mise∣ry of the Clergy in such case. Sect. 12. The Conclusion, reflecting on the whole, addrest both to Preachers and People. WE are now, as our Last engage∣ment,Sect. 1. to view the Miseries which would ensue, or which we have all reason to expect, upon supposal Prea∣ching should grow into more disuse, or in many places for the main be left off. I take it for granted, that we have at present, all over the Land, much frequenter Sermons, than there were
in the memory of our immediate fore∣fathers, and perhaps in the memory of some now living. If it should any where be otherwise, as the offence is great, so Wo be to them by whom such offences come. The Canons indeed of 1603, do injoin all Beneficed Preachers resi∣dentCan. 45 upon their Livings to preach one Sermon (we will suppose, At least) every Sunday in the year; and benefi∣cedCan. 47. men not resident, to maintain a li∣consed Preacher on their Benefice, if the worth thereof will bear it: but with∣all they suppose, that there were then in being, partly by reason of want of sufficient maintenance, and perhapsCan. 46 57. through other mischiefs, beneficed men not preachers, whom they obilge to read the Homilies; and they provide that the Sacraments shall not be refused from their hand. That it was better, in such the penury of the Church, to makesuch mean provision of Reading Ministers, as they called them, than to suffer several Countrey-parishes, in large tracts, to be without any publick Prayers, Rea∣ding of the Scriptures, Sacraments, or any such open Christianity some
years together (as frequent instances may be given many flocks were, while our Church was opprest) all the world will grant. That the Church would have made better provision, if she could, or would the Revenues of those Cures have born it, none that is not highly uncharitable can doubt, and the very words of the Canons in everal places insinuate. That the Homilies are ten thousand times better than ma∣ny Sermons, both in the late, and even in the present times, he mut much foreit his judgment who shall deny (though perhaps some could wish, that they being penned at such a distance of time, and when Divines were neither so clear in many necessary points of con∣troversie, nor in the method of teach∣ing as now they are, were revised, and accommodated more, not onely to the language of the age, but to the more approved and methodical way of prea∣ching; and that also more were added thereto, as seems to have been the de∣sign of the Church.) But however these supplies of the want of Preaching were wholesome, and such, which while
the people had, they could be under no famine of the Word, yet did they not suit with the humour of the multi∣tude: they being most of them able to read themselves, judged themselves, in a manner, as able as such Teachers which onely read to them other mens Works; and so ran after Preachers whereever they could find them, and whatever they were. And which was the worst of all, notwithstanding those injunctions in the Canons in express terms, touching weekly Sermons, it is too sure, that in the times alledged, there was not such observance of those Canons as there ought to havebeen. In some hundreds of private Countrey-pa∣rishes, they had not four Sermons a year: But now for the main, in all Pa∣rish-Churches, we have generally at least one Sermon each Lords Day, and in the larger Parishes two; besides others occasionally on solemn Festivals, or the like dayes: which is more than those Lawes prescribed, and yet we have seen they prescribed more than was practised. The Reasons or means introductiveSect. 2.
of this so great change I take to be, the prejudice (many times very unreasonable) and contempt, which lay a∣gainst Notpreaching (or meerly Reading) Ministers, much promoted by all those who were enemies to our Church; this being an excellent popular subject, and which would admirably palliate their imputations of idleness and insufficiency to the Clergy. These imputations, however with the greatest injustice charged upon some, yet too reasona∣bly, for ought I know, on others, those, whom the Tumults and the Schism had engaged, prosecuting to the highest, together with another de∣vise which they made use of, where the forementioned ones would not serve, called Malignancy, violently voided a multitude of Benesices (those especi∣ally which were the fattest) and into all of them, which were either thus forced, or otherwise became void, none being preferr'd but pretended able and zealous Preachers, at least gifted men (who let them take what Text they would, were never out in their Sermon) preaching now swarmed: and
this practice having prevailed a while, till more Gifted Brethren were bred, & came to set up for themselves, wehad more Preachers (such as they were) than Chur∣ches, & in many places, almost as many Sermons as dayes. In this state of things, those few of the honest regular Clergy, that made a shift (though not without a great deal of persecution) to keep their Livings, observing the weapons used against them, doubled their dili∣gence, and would not be out-preach∣ed by their adversaries, but were as frequently in the Pulpit on the Lords Day, and all due seasons, as any of them, and to much better purpose; they sowed wheat, while the others onely threw abroad tares. This also gave occasion to all the serious and pre∣gnant Students in the Universities, who designed the Ministry, to bend their Divinity-studies towards preaching e∣specially, which they saw now was to be much their frequenter Work, than it had been formerly their predecessors: And afterwards, when by degrees the whimsies of the age begun to evaporate, those lately so famed Gifts, being grown
common, were not so highly valued as at first, but men of learning & education came again here & there to have place & ge into he Church, by which means the number of truly able and learned prea∣chers increased much; nor was their industry and assiduity, in every part of their Function, inferiour to any mens. Thus silently went on our Churches cause, and we had, almost unpercei∣ved by our Adversaries, a numerous stock of excellent Preachers as frequent∣ly in the Pulpit as any. And at last, when upon the Restauration many pla∣ces became void, by some mens refu∣sing the regular Conditions, upon which they might hold them, the Fathers of the Church being most intimately sen∣sible of the state of things, and of what influence Preaching was, preferred few or none (for I account not those, who were onely restored, preferr'd) to any eminent Cures, who were not ready Preaches, and careful enough to provide, that no advantage should be taken against the Church, for want of Sermons. On these occasions, and by these steps and methods, I conceive
the present frequency of Preaching to have so much prevailed of late years a∣mongst us. Now as to the benefit hereof, it has been and is, greater than perhaps I am able to give account of. Amongst the people, it cannot be denied, but Reli∣gious knowledge is much encreased; and we both may, and must in charity, conclude that serious Religion, and the love of God and Heavenly things, have thereby taken root more largely in the hearts of multitudes. Besides, our Clergy consisting in a manner wholely of Preachers, are much better able, on all occasions, to maintain discourse in some commendable sort with gainsayers of all parties, & vindicate the Truth, the Church and Themselves from the con∣tempt and unjust censures they meet with, than formerly many of them were: and they are further put upon a kind of necessity of daily improving their abilities, with which I cannot con∣ceive, but their zeal and resolution for Godliness must also grow: For though a man may read over an Homily, with∣out being affected therewith, yet I can∣not
conceive, how any can well medi∣tate, frame and deliver a Sermon (all which, at least as to the sense and sub∣stance thereof, he must have in his head, and retain for some time a full view and comprehension of) without concernment. I cannot therefore by any means consent to those men, who think frequency of Preaching (though Sermons should be supposed for the ge∣neral, but somewhat mean ad indiffe∣rent) a thing that might well enough be spared, or a superfluous innovation of dangerous consequence. The very failure of these advantages would be a weighty and considerable evil, were there no other that would ensue upon scarcity thereof. But will some say, to what purposeSect. 3. any discourse of such inconveniencies or evils? What suspicion can there be of scarcity of preaching, when we have more preachers than we can provide for? By way of answer hereto, I grant indeed, such a scarcity of it, as was be∣fore the Reformation, or immediately upon it, I am perswaded neither we
nor our Children shall ever see; nor, I hope, ever be able for the main to dis∣cern it to be less frequent than it is. But I obseve, that there are no Canos in being, expresly requiing Ministers to preach so often as most of them do; and even those very Canons abovemen∣tined annex no penalties enforcing their injunctions: so that all, that any can inur for the neglect of them, is per∣haps a reprehension from the Bishop; and what variety of checques there lies upon the Bishops power, how difficult it is for them (at least how chargea∣ble, even where they see reason to keep a troublesome Incumbent long sus∣pended, much less to deprive him, when he really deserves it, I am not unsensible. Sur I am, whatever some men in their ignorance, or through misinformation say, many things there are or may be, which can never be re∣drest when occasion shall requires, till the Bishops have more power, and less cntrole, from the Common Law. Besides, in several hundreds of ountrey pari∣shes, how long may the Minister (if, which God forbid, he should be saul∣ty)
neglect the Canons, before it shall come to the Bishops ear, before he shall meet with a Church-warden that dare present him, &c.  cannot also but be sensible, that amongst se∣veral thousands of men, some may be impotent through age, sickness or other accidents, and unwilling to pay a Sub∣stitute; and others may be downright in love with ease, averse from study, more intent on the injoyment of their Revenues, than on the discharge of their Duty. We know not also what Epidemical evils, by us haply not fore∣seen, but yet most justly deserved, may be by God judicially inflicted on us, pestilence, desolation, or the like: What may be the unhappy con∣sequences of these, and so how far de∣stitute any places may be of preaching, none can define. I would not have my discourse so un∣derstood, as if I did ominate, or so much as suspect any such event: I again say, I both trust and pray, no such thing may ever come to pass. I desire onely & design, on one hand, to perswade our people more to prize their mercies,
and better improve them; and on the other, to quicken in men of our Function that inward sense, which I presume them to have, of what weighty moment their digence in preaching is, that none may ever be found negligent therein. To come then closer to the mainSect. 4. point: However slighty opinion some may have of preaching, who are cloi'd with abundance, and will long admire nothing but what is rare, the change would soon appear dismal, were Tea∣chers removed into corners, or those li∣ving Oracles by any other means with∣drawn. It must needs be acknowledg∣ed, our people have been so bred and used to preaching, that upon the scar∣city or failure thereof, their souls would really languish, and spiritually decay, if not be soon perverted. But none can easily imagin any such plague could befal the people, without the guilt of the Clergy; except we should all be fatally taken off, which is a pre∣sumption I see not how any can make. No juncture of affairs can I suppose, which would justifie our holding our peace, or declining this part of our Of∣fice;
no time so Evil, wherein, in this kind, we may keep silence. We are set as Watchmen, and we must declareIsa: 21. 6. what we see. St. Paul's Wo will reach us else in our measure. But these are yet generals: we will consider particular∣ly the Woes, which, in all probability, would attend both the people and the Pasiours respectively, upon supposal prea∣ching should become neglected, or much scarcer than it is; and we will begin with the peoples share. I lay here for a foundation, thatSect. 5. That which keeps the face of Religion more bright and glorious in our English Church, than perhaps in any other, is very much our stricter observation of the Lords Day, and our frequenter preach∣ing thereon, than possibly is usual in Forreign Churches. We come not from the Church on Sundayes (and haply from the Communion too) to the Market, nor buy there our dinners, and go then to eat them in the next Ta∣vern we can get them drest in. At least on this Day (generally) we keep home, and see (most of us) that our Fami∣lies, do so too. And, as from Church
we go gravely home to our private and modest necessary refreshments, so, af∣ter them, soberly to Church again. I know indeed there are some, no great friends to this practice, and think such Observation Judaism, or Puritanism, or of some such stamp. I crave leave to di∣stinguish betwixt a Jewish Sabbath, and a Christian Feast, such as the Lords Day is. If by the Laws of the Christian Church, a Day be dedicated to the Lord, let him have it: Let us cease thereon from doing our own works, and finding our own sensual pleasures. Chri∣stian Feasting lies not in sports and sen∣sual mirth. He that keepeth a day, let him keep it to the Lord, and not take what the Laws of the Christian Church from the beginning have hallowed, and give it to dogs. It would be too far out of my way to vindicate the Holy observa∣tion of the Lords Day; onely because the giving all of it, which may be spa∣red from bodily necessities and modest or civil conveniencies, unto God, is by somelook't upon as a Novelty, give me leave to set down one passage of S. Chryso∣stom's, & another of St. Augustin's speaking
their sense in this case. ,Homil: 5. in Math &c. Let us, saith the first, set this law unto our selves as inviolable, nor to our selves onely, but to our wives and children, to spend thisVid. Pura ibid. t in Homil. de Ee∣mosyn: in San∣ctos Tom. 4. one Day of the Week, on which we assemble to hear the Word of God, wholely in the Meditation of those things which are said. He argues the reasonableness hereof from such practices as these: If men, who go into a Bath, abstain that day from several meetings and affairs, least they shoud loss the Benefit of the Bath, how much more on this Day ought we to forbear common matters, lest we blast thereby all the good which may be gained by our attendance on Spirituals? And St. Austin in the con∣clusion of a Sermon of his on a certain Lords Day, has this Exhortation. Nos autem Fratres, quaniam pasti su∣musTra∣ct. 7. in Johau. epulis salutaribus, quae restant aga∣mus, ut Diem Dominicam solenniter im∣pleamus gaudi is spiritualibus. Now Brethren, seeing we have been fed with this saving Food, let us pro∣ceed to what duties remain, that we
may solemnly fill up the Lords-day with spiritual joyes▪ I will here add no more, because I shall presently have occa∣sion to produce other passages, the con∣sequents of which will reach this point. At present, that which I am concern'd for is this, that this Observation of the Lords Day mainly keeps up the re∣verence, aw, and spiritual Grandieur of Religion amongst us; and the reason I give for it is, that I can assign nothing, which we have, that is not common to us with our Neighbours, or in which, perhaps, we are not outdone by them, whereto I can ascribe this effect, that the generality of our people, of all ages, sexes and conditions, are more religi∣ously given, and seem to have a great∣er sense of Religion, than is said other Nations have, save our more religious keeping of this day. Have we the Scri∣ptures? so have they. Have we pray∣ers in our Mother-tongue? So have all the Reformed Churches. Have we Ecclesiastical Discipline? Those Chur∣ches in their way are as strict, or stri∣cter than our selves. Is there some∣thing of outward decency, beauty and
glory in our publick Worship? As to state, how far are we outdone by the Papists! I must therefore attribute this effect to no other Cause. Now I say further, 'Tis our Sermons that keep up the observation of the Lords-day. We can get people to church twice on the day, and keep them there too, and have full Congregations, if we so of∣ten preach diligently to them: we should not, did we do otherwise. Some will be on Afternoons in the Ale∣house or Taverns, others at publick games and sports, others otherwise imploied, or not imploied, if we be not in the Pulpit: not one in twenty, who now come duly to Church, would then be there. But I am not ignorant, that this pra∣cticeSect. 6. of the Afternoon Sermons on the Lords-day, lies under no good repute with some men, who pretend to be great friends, and sons too, of our Church. The best name they can give it is, a Novelty, introduced by Eng∣lish puritan Overdoo's. I heartily grieve, if indignation will suffer me, when I hear such language, especially from men
that call themselves Protestants, and pretend not onely Devotion and Religion to be dear to them, but that they have searched Antiquity, and find no foot∣steps of this use there, nor any place for the Afternoon-Sermon in any Anti∣ent, or even in our Present Liturgies. I will endeavour with all temper, and I promise with the greatest sincerity, to wipe off the Aspersion in a few words, I must acknowledge, in the first set∣ting out of Christianity, we are not a∣ble to observe this practice; for they assembled for Divine Worship every day, and communicated too: nor can we think, their Communions were without Exhortations, as well as Pray∣ers; they preached then possibly every day. And when their more solemn Assemblies came to be fixt, as soon they were, chiefly on the Lords-day (Acts XX, 7.) it would seem they con∣tinued from the time of their meeting, till the Evening, or sometimes (accor∣ding as they met) till the Break of day, or other occasion, dissolved them, no one going home to eat, and then
returning to the Assembly; for that all generally brought somewhat with them, and a common Table or Meal was an appendance of the Lords Sup∣per. Onely I observe St. Chrysostome out of the Records of these dayes, ur∣ging St. Paul's injunction to TimothyHomil. X in Genes. sub init. (the Fathers words I shall set down presently more at large) Be instant in season and out of season, &c. and his practice in continuing his speech untill midnight, in the place of the Acts last mentioned, for the justifying his own preaching in the Afternoon also. But when the times of persecution were well blown over, and the Church in∣joyed settlement and leisure, in the Homilies of diverse of the antient Fa∣thers, we have plentiful testimonies that they preached in the Afternoons, as well as in the Mornings. Gaudentius Bishop of Brescia in the Arch bishopick of Milan, about the year 390, mentionsTra∣ctat. 4. de Pasch: Biblioth patr. Tom: . his preaching Twice on Easter-Eve tou∣ching the Pass-over. But that it was much more usual for them to preach twice on the Lords-day, is evident from St. Austin in sundry places. For
instance, The place last produced out of him may very reasonably be inter∣preted to intimate thus much: But in other places we may find him most ex∣press. Preaching on a certain day twice on the LXXXVIII. Psalm, he concludes his Morning-sermon thus. Quod restat si placet servemus, quia longus est Psal∣mus, &c. Let us for the present re∣serve the rest, if it please you; for that the Psalm is somewhat long, and I am yet to speak again to you in the name of Christ. Refresh your strength, I do not say, the strength of your minds, for I see in mind you are indefatigable; but as to the ser∣vants of your mind, that your bo∣dies may be able to indure in their at∣tendance. Refresh your selves, I say, and being refresht, return after Dinner. And again in his next Sermon he begins thus. Ad reliqua Psalmi, de quo in Matutino locuti sumus, animum attendite. Be pleased to attend now to the Remains of the Psalm, of which we spoke in the Morning. In his last Tome also, amongst the Sermo∣nes de Tempore, we shall find very ma∣ny
of them, which were for the same Lords-day, to be onely continuations one of the other, which at a years di∣stance would have been very strange; wherefore those Sermons not being all St. Austiu's, as we have already said, it is apparent, this was not onely his practice, but the practice of diverse others of the Preaching Latine Fa∣thers, & a thing then usuall. As to the Greek Fathers, I will one∣ly speak the practice of the greatest Preacher of them, St. Chrysostome. His tenth Homily on Genesis has this ti∣tle: , &c. An Exhortation to those who were ashamed to come to the Sermon after Dinner, or after Meal, &c. It seems by this and diverse other Homi∣les of his, many of his people made a considerable scruple, whether it were lawful to come to Church, not fasting, and by this meanes it came to pass,  he had a lesser Congre∣gation, and a thinner Audience, in the Afternoon, than in the Forenoon. Now the design of the former part of this Sermon is, to remove from them
this scruple, and to this purpose he shews them the consistency of odily and Spiritual Food, and That all times of the day are seasonable enough for spiritual instruction. What do I say (saith he) All times of the day? No, not the coming on of the night makes this unseasonable: and then he urges the passages of St. Paul before mentioned, adding O  &c. An attentive or sober auditour, though he has dined, is fit for spiri∣tual Doctrine. In his first Homily De Lazaro medico, he prosecutes the same subject again, but with more ear∣nestness, inveighing against them who condemned his useage of preaching af∣ter Dinner, , as a new and uncouth custome, and tells them he has much more reason to condemn that wicked custome which had then pre∣vailed, that they rose from table to sleep. So that it seems, this Father rather look∣ed upon it as a wicked Custome, not to preach in the Afternoon; & by his say∣ing, this wicked Custome had then with some prevailed, he intimates it had been otherwise formerly. In the same Ho∣mily,
he justifies his practice from Christs Preaching to the multitude, af∣ter his having fed them miraculously with the loaves. Our Lord, saith he, did not fill their bellies to excess and gluttony, but when he had satisfied them as far as necessity required, he led them to spiritual food. So, saith he, let us do, and accustome our selves thus to take our meat. Else∣where he again defends this his practiceAd pp: Anti∣: Hmi. 9. from our Lords long Sermon to his Di∣sciples after his last Supper: and adds, that where people use to come to the Afternoon-sermon, it will make them feed soberly, whether they will or no. In his next Homily, he highly commends the people for coming toHomi: 10. Church on the Afternoon in a full audi∣ence. And to conclude what I shall say out of this great Father, in his 28th. Homily d pop. Antiochen. He appeals to his Auditours themselves in which of these two they conceived they did better? when▪ the Morning-sermon being over, they went from the Church to their Table, & thence rose to sleep, or when after Dinner, they came again
to hear the Divine Oracles? &c. Now that hereby he meant Sermons, is plain, because all these are passages out of Afternoon-sermons preached by him. Upon the whole then it is evi∣dent, that it was the practice of the Primitive Church, to spend the Lords-Day wholely, as far as was consistent with necessities and honest convenien∣cies, in Holy Exercises; and particu∣larly, that at least in Cities and greater Churches, it was usual that the Pa∣stours thereof preached on that Day, Forenoon and Afternoon. I have already said, that as the Po∣pish Mass, and other appendant corru∣ptions prevailed in the Church, Prea∣ching grew much out of date. What was the effect hereof, I need produce no o∣therDe. Rom. Pont. l. 4. c. 12 A. To 10. . 980. witnesses but the Romish Writers themselves. To omit the black Cha∣racters of Ignorance and Wickedness, which both Bellarmin & Baronius give of the Tenth Age after Christ, & the times there about, when there was little or no Preaching in most places, of the Western Church at least, I will onely set down a story which Matthew of Paris reports
about the year 1072, of a Ghost which appeared to his freind & shewed written in his hand Letters, as sent from Hell, in which Satan and all his Crew, gave their humble service and thanks to the whole Ecclesiastical Order, that as in nothing they were wanting to their own pleasures, so [TantumM. P. Hist: ad ann. 1072. numerum subditarum sibi animarum suae praedicationis incuria paterentur ad in∣fernum descendere, quantum secula an∣teact a nunquam viderint.] they suffe∣red so great a number of souls to fall headlong to Hell, through their ne∣glect of Preaching, as no former ages had ever sent thher. When afterward, in some process of time, it pleased God to raise up Prea∣chers, knowledge soon increased, and in a few Ages, the Reformation gradu∣ally came on, which indeed no one thing more promoted than frequent prea∣ching. He, who mainly broke the ice, the undaunted Martin Luther, was a constant Preacher, and very far from thinking Afternoon-Sermons either No∣vel or unnecessary. Hear▪ him delibe∣rating declaring his thoughts in this
case to Nicolas Hausman a German Bi∣shop,In Praef. ad form. Miss. pro. Ecc. Wit: tenb▪ Tom: 2. & a freind to the Reformation. Instituendae sunt Lectiones quotidianae, al∣tera mane in Novo vel Veteri Testamento, altera Vesperi in altero Testamento, cum explanatione vernacula. Hunc ritum es∣se antiquum probat & res & vocabulum. We must set up, saith he, Daily Les∣sons, one in the Morning out of the Old or New Testament, another in the Evening out of the other Testa∣ment, with an Exposition thereon in our Mother-tongue. That this use∣age is Antient, both the thing it self and the name declare. Such indeed was, as we have seen, the Antient Fa∣thers great way of Preaching, an Ex∣plication on the Scriptures that day read, and such was Luther's generally.Luth: Con∣cion. Dib: Domin. & Festis. And according to these his advices, was his own practice, as is apparent by his Sermons extant, many of which are ex∣presly inscribed (ante Prandium) made Before▪ noon, others on the same day (A Prandio) Afternoon. These Authorities both of the Anti∣ent Fathers, and of this great Refor∣mer, may suffice to convince the world,
that Preaching Forenoon and Afternoon is a practice much elder than the English Puritans. Now as to that demand, Where shall we find a place in any Liturgies for the Afternoon▪ Sermon to come in? I an∣swer, Where did these Fathers find it? It is sure they preached publickly in the Afternoon-Assemblies. But suppose it had no place at all in the body of any Li∣turgies, suppose it immediately succee∣ded the Evening▪ Office, as commonly it does in our present use, where is the inconvenience or irregularity? It is not at all repugnant unto our Act of Ʋniformity. But if any will have a place for it in the Liturgy, why may it not properly enough come in after the second Lesson? The Custome we have seen of old was, to handle some part of what had been read; and when more naturally, than immediately after the reading or Lessons? Our Church pre∣scribes that to be the season for Cate∣chising Youth: We will suppose, due Catechising is not a bare hearing Chil∣dren repeat the words of the Cate∣chism, but explaining, asserting and
applying the Doctrine thereof in a plain and familiar manner. Suppose our Af∣ternoon-Sermons in our Parish-Chur∣ches such (as is most fit they should be) and do we not find a proper room for them in our present Liturgy? Such handling any Catechetical point, whe∣ther matter of Faith or Practice, may be done with the same facility in the Pulpit, as in the Desk, and with a Text prefixt (as the manner of our Sermons in the present Age is) as well as without one; and then who will not call it a Sermon? I will therefore now conclude Afternoon-Sermons not onely Antient, but as they may be managed, strictly enough Regular according to the Order of our present Church. Besides such frequent Sermons on theSect. 7. Lords Day, it is apparent to any one who reads the Antient Fathers, that there was seldome or never any Holy∣day past without a Sermon, as neither does there any usually at present amongst us in our Cathedral or Collegiate Chur∣ches, or even in our Universities. AndVid: Con▪ in di. as for Luther's part, we shall find him preaching Twice on sundry Holy-days.
I do not at all press that, because itCir∣cumci∣sion. Christ. & in Epi. pan▪ &c. does not seem so fully to comport with a certain oblique design of our Festivals, the honest recreation of several sorts of people thereon. But the irregularity of one Sermon every Festival, none can assert; except haply they should say, such Parochial Minister, who does it in his Parish-Church, would be singular; which I could easily answer by saying, I am sor∣ry for it. The second Service, which we know is as particularly prescribed for all Holy-days, as for all Sundayes, in the year, in the Rubrick after the Nicene Creed supposes the intervention of a Sermon, or one of the Homilies al∣ready set forth, or to be set forth by Au∣thority. The difficulty of reading Homilies would be none at all: and if any think thee are too few, they ought first to use these, till they are become familiar or trite (which I am sure now they are not to our people) before they com∣plain of the want of new ones. For my own part, I could most gladly hear a Partition out of The whole Duty of man, distinctly read on Holy-days in our Pa∣rish-Churches,
were it recommended by Authority; & it would savour of more ingenuity than some mens clancular bor∣rowing others Sermons. That incompa∣rable book entreating in each partition usually of some Christian Virtue (& the Saints being exemplary in all virtues) it, would not be unfit intertainment for the people on Saints daies; and I doubt not but the benefit thereof in Publick would be no lesse to the generality, than thousands, not onely persons but families, have found it in private. The Difficulty of provideing Ser∣mons so often would indeed be conside∣rable, but it might easily be alleviated, in Great-townes by a Combination or Rota of the Neighbouring Clergy, each takeing his turn in course, as it is a∣mongst the Masters in our Universities. Nor does this seem to me at all a Vio∣lation of the LXXIId Canon, for here is supposed no new solemnity appointed, onely the law is observed: and as to such Combinations as suggested, how easily may the Approbation of the Diocesan be had thereto? Further, it is not to be forgotten that there are weekly Lectures
settled in several Market-towns▪, which might be well adjourned to the Holy day that falls in the week. Now as to the benefit, in all proba∣bility it would be very great: Besides the usuall advantages of Sermons gene∣rally, this would conciliate some more regard to Festivalls, and bring people to the Church thereon: this might also be improved to instruct them in the par∣ticular designs of our Festivalls re∣spectively, the observation whereof they have many of them now little kindnesse for, because they understand not the reason o: This would also be a ground of familiarity and frequent con∣verse between the Clergy, so that they would be mutualy better by one ano∣thers excellencies: This lastly would stop the mouth of some, who admired much the diligence and Gifts of their Lecturers. I am not ignorant, that such Associations may be abused, or by un∣quiet spirits turned to evill purpose; but so may any thing, and such spirits will find waies, to hatch and communicate their mischiefe, more private & so more dangerous than this would be; where∣in,
suposeing there be one or two sober grave, peaceable, prudent men in the Combination (as there will, or may, be certainly more) no matter of suspicious or evill consequence can be going on, but it will be checkt, represt, or else discovered to those whom it concerns to know it. But I beg pardon for this digression, which yet is not much from my main design of defending and promoteing the Regular Frequency of reaching. To return then: I conceive it apparentSect. 8. by what has been above said, that our stricter observation of the Lords day is the main thing which amongst the multitude keps up the face of Religion (that is a fair, serious, awfull pro∣fession of it) and the Afternoon-Ser∣mons I say maintaine such the observa∣tion of the Lords day. Now of how fatall consequence it would be to Re∣ligion it self, and the Reall Power of Godliness, to have this its outward face Eclipst, may hence be estimated, that this is the great meanes which first in∣generates heaty Religion in us all. I do not deny but there are some dormant
principles of Religion in natural reason, but these require to be excited and for∣med by Tradition; and the more so∣lemn and serious we see the generality of men to be in the profession of that Faith, which they deliver o us, the more authority such Tradition has. Thus in plain terms stands the case; While we are children, and yet igno∣rant what Religion meanes, we are carried to the places of publick worshi to praiers and Sermons as to things  an Holy, awfull, tremendons nature, and of the greatest concernment: And the oftener we see people at these sa∣cred publick offices, and the more serious we apprehend them therein, the more affected we, while little, are therewith: And hereby we are pre∣pared with more reverence to regard those small notices of the Christian doctrine, which we are then able to take in. Afterwards, as by degrees our knowledge and reall conviction of con¦sicience enceases, so we come to a true inward sense of Religion, and thereby, to the hearty practice of it: So that it is evident, destroy this the Outward
aw and Face of Religion, and you pro∣portionably destroy the main Intro∣ductive principle of the real beliefe of Religion. And I have said, as preaching does decay this will decay. This is the Fist particular evill, that would ensue upon the supposeal put; and I may say, there needs no more. But from hence would follow▪ a verySect. 9. publick if not generall falling off of our people, both from our Church and from Religion it self. If Preachers should fail, Seducers would not: there are whole sholes of them ready to be thrown in upon us n a sudden, besides that we are overstockt on both hands already. First, multitudes would soon be drawn off by the Fascinations of the Romish Charmrs. Take away our prea∣ching and the best shew carries it. Ad Populum Phaleras. And if it once come to outward Pomp, as already said, they ut doe us a thousand: Their rich Al∣tars, their glittering Vestments, their pretty Images, their precious Reliques, their pompous Processions, the Morti∣fied lookes of many of their Monasticks, with their whole State, that I call it not
Pageantry of Religion, will soon in∣veigle the multitude, which as I have above complained are too much in∣different to all Religions, onely one they must have. Secondly, there are another sort of Enemies to our Church on the other hand: We have had too sad experience that Sedition and Rebellion are as the sin of Witchraft in another sense than we ordinarily interpret that speech: they most unreasonably and unaccounta∣bly charm and fascinate the mul∣titude; and there are not a few men of the old Blade, of a kind of odd Church Militant, who would be sure to set up for preachers, and draw away all those after them, who out of passion & not out of Reason are zealous against Popery. I may safely say, under God, next to our Lawes (for which God be blessed) and our King who maintains the Laws (and whom God long preserve to us) there is nothing hinders more the pre∣valency of these two Extremes, from swallowing up in a manner our Church, than does our frequent Preaching. This
now letteth and will lett, and I hope will never be taken out of the way. Lastly, that there is a great deal of A∣theism not onely secretly lodged in mens hearts, but overflowing in the out of many, is a sore, but just complaint. We shall frequently meet with persons, who will plainy speak it out, that Religion is onely a Politicall Intrigue, which cunning men devised, and fooles belie, and who will argue proportionably a∣gainst the very principles of faith and this not onely en passant, for proof and ostentatin of their wits some times, and to run down people, whom they judge so weak as to be concerned heartily for Religion, but desgnedly and with se∣riousnesse in other companies, to make proselytes. And such discourses are too much i mode at present, more counte∣nanced than they ought to be, or, which is much the same, started and promoted by some srt of men for their diversion, and the entertainment of their company. Now there is nothing, which gives a greater check to this growing evill, which really more counter-works these irreligious machinations, than our
frequent preaching does. We should soon see what a dreadfull progresse A∣theism would make, if while its Pa∣trons preach at evey table, where they may be bold, or as they call it pleasant, our Ministers held their tongue in the Pulpit, or came not so often thither. Some haply may say to confront this suggestion, Every man is not qua∣lified for an Atheis, that is, has not leisure, estate, authority, impudence enough (for little wit or education God knows will suffice) to set up or un∣dertake the patronage of Irreligion. Be it so; but too many have, and many more venture at it: So that I may safely say, were the doctrines or principles of Atheism sufferd to go without those publick contradictions and cnfutations which still, as occasion serves and our discourses lead us, they receive from the pulpit, the as yet uninfected part of our people, would soon be drawn in, and the most profane Impiety in∣sensibly get an uncontroleable head. It may be said perhaps, Popery would hinder this, as well as Protestants preaching; Let but any Religion be in
fashion, and Atheism can never prevaile. I answere, Popery is indeed a very fashionable, I mean, outwardly a very splendid, specious and formal Religion: but how has it hindered the growth of Atheism in Italy the very centre of Po∣pery? What do we mean by the usual diverb, the Italian Religin? To conclude then this head: These four grand Evills, A greater Decay of the out∣ward face & aw of Religion, A Falling off of our people on the one hand to Po∣pish superstion on the other to seditions on velties, giddiness, confusion & every evill Work▪ & lastly, of a multitude to down right Atheism, would suddenly & certain¦ly ensue, should frequent Preaching sail. As to the Miseries, which would be∣fallSect. 11 the Clergy, should they neglect this part of their office, & this their neglect be the cause of general want of preaching; First, I cannot be so unchaitabe to my brethren, as to think this will ever come to pass, or force my self to imagn they are not deeply sensible of the Direfull consequences thence to themselves. I will not therefore be so vain as▪ to expatiae on this head, as if I either suspected
them to want information, or judged my self able to instruct them. It must be presumed, we all know the Wo that attends such servants, whom our Lord at his coming shall find unfaithful; the bloud o those who perish will be requi∣red at  hands, and besides that, their own bloud will be upon their own heads  before that time, we can∣not, in this cas, but expect an earli∣er sha of Temporal Wo also to befall . It is scarce , generally more disoblige ur Neighbours, than by negle∣ctg them; and amongst all neglects, as there is none more publick and apter to  notice of by all sorts, than our  of Preaching, so there is none ordinarily likely to move higher & more notorious resentment. Now the infelicity of liveing in a parish, and ha∣veing the charge of a flock, where a man is not beloved, is so great, that I do not know, whether any Temporal misery be not to be chosen rather than it: for besides the perpetual grateing in∣quietudes of such a life, the troubles such Minister shall be imbroiled in, in getting those small dues on which he is to
subsist, and a thousand like perlexive incidents, he is almost under a necessity of being unserviceable to the Souls of his people. Further, we have heard much of the Contempt of the Clergy, and many vain and frivolous causes thereof assi∣gned: I may truly name one point, that would bring more contempt and scorn upon us, than perhaps all other put toge∣ther, and that is, Let us be Idle, or which with the people is the same, let us be silent or remit of out constant Preaching. But God be thanked this is imputable to very few, and I hope ne∣ver will be to many, of us. I have thus, as in a draught, presen∣ted the Evills, which would forth with,Sect. 12 in all probability, ensue, supposeing such Scarity of preaching as is not im∣possible, and as some men seem to pa∣tronise. I have also, with very great Freedome and Sincerity, asserted the Authority of our Preaching, which though it be not equall to that of the Apostles and of the Inspired age, yet it is as great as the present state of Christianity will admit: Greater it cannot be, except men should be again called, or sent, by
immediate voice from Heaven, and im∣powered by Miraculous inspiration: It is really such an Authority, which they have not, who pretend to that Necessity of Preaching laid upon them, which in∣deed does ly upon Ʋs. Our Office is of Divine institution, and designed to be of perpetuity, or of the same duration with the world: The power of it is regularly conveyed to us by those, who have had it in an uninterrupted succession from Christ and his Apostles; and as to our actual Ministry, it is not without the special conduct and concurrence of the Holy Ghost. Finally, as to the various Modes there have been of preaching in the World, we are not, blessed be God, much behind any of the Ordinary ages of the Church, and (if it may be spoken without offence) we are superiour to many. What I have to adde by way of conclusion, I shall addresse, with an humble but passionate concernment, to Preachers and People. As to us of the Clergy, I doubt not but generaily we can with truth ad justice profess touching our selves, before God and Men, in the words of St. Paul,
that Seeing We have this ministry, as we1. Cor: IV. 1, 2. have received mercy, we faint not: But we have renounced the hidden things of dis∣honesty, not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of the truth commending our selves to every mans conscience in the sight of God. This then being our case, if we meet with discouragements, ge∣neral or particular, let us with all pru∣dence indeavour to remove them; and if we cannot, yet setting before our eyes the Recompence of reward, and Looking unto Jesus, who has set us on work and promised to be with us to the end of the world, Let us stirr up the gift of God which is within us, and —Contra audentius ire, onely taken courage from our difficulties. What ever comes let us speak and not be silent: A better cause than ours never can be, & we are most unworthy to be ingaged in it, if we can by any meanes be pre∣vailed with to be wanting to it. Jacta est Alea, we have past Rbicon, ther's no setting a foot backward. Remember we him, who vowed, His. Soul should have no pleasure in them who draw back.
There can be no time wherein Preach∣ing will not be in Season or out of Season; I might say, scarce any time, in which some Preaching or other is not in sea∣son: where publicke Preaching is not opportune, private may be. In all therefore let us be Instant, let us en∣deavour by the plainest prudent dealing in all waies, by the strongest and most moveing arguments we can devise, to get within the hearts and consciences of men. If frequency of Preaching be a work so exceeding laborious to any of us, let us contrive with our selves by what methods we may alleviate or facilitate it, and do what lies in our power there∣to. Particularly, let us study and use the easiest and most familiar course. He was no mean nor unsuccessful Preacher who advised Optimi ad vulgus hi sunt concionat res, qui trivialiter, PopulariterLuther▪ apud Melch: Adam. in vi. & simplicissinè doceut. Those are the best preachers to the common people who preach in a mean, vulgar and most plain way. The condescending to such a course, would much ease many mens work as to themselves, and ren∣der their labours too more serviceable
to their people. Let our Arguments have life and energy in them, be such as are apt to create concernment, and it little matters how plain our Language or stile shall be: that which is most natural is certainly most usefull, and to all but Fops and Fantastickes most acceptable. There may be I confess great difference of Auditories, and it is most reasonable that accordingly we consult them; but we are to consider, there are few or no Auditories, which consist not of the Mixed multitude: he therefore that has spoken to the capacity of the meanest, has in all pro∣bability been understood, in things so spoken, by every one that heard him; and then it is hardly possible, but the generality are bettered. Truth and Godliness can scarce appear in so plain a dress, but they will ever be Venera∣ble. The fastidious spirits, as we may hope they are far the fewest, so we are sure they are unfittest for the Kingdom of Heaven; wherefore while we consult their provision, we must not starve the Children of the Kingdom. I will say no more on this subject: The Lord give
us wisdome and stedfast resolution, and then our Preaching will neither be un∣fruitful to any, nor infrequent. What I would beseech of such Hear∣ers, to whom these Papers shall come, is also nothing but what they must ac∣knowledge my Discourse enforces; Namely, that though they cannot come to our Sermons as to inspired pro∣phesyings, (for we are not, we pre∣tend not our selves to be infallible li∣ving-Oracles) yet that they would look upon the Christian Doctrine in our mouths to have more authority, than if taught by common and uncommissioned, that I say not also, as too often it comes to pass, unletter'd men. For they must allow us to be persons sent, and au∣thorised by God in an ordinary way, to be their Teachers, and the Guides of their Consciences: and then, if God follow his own institution with his bles∣sing, if he forget not or neglect his own promise, we must have usually more of the concurrent assistance and conduct of the Holy Ghost▪ in what we teach, than other persons who are not alike cal∣led to the Office. In proportion here∣to,
there are three or four Particulars which I would passionately press upon our people, and that as they ever ex∣pect any good by our Ministry, and as they would not have our labours rise up in judgment to inhance their everlasting woes. (1.) That they would alwaies come to our Sermons with serious and single hearts, not out of Custome, Curiosity, or design of Censure, Cavil or the like, but with an honest intention, and sincere desire, either to learn what they know not, or (if they conceive themselves to know enough) to be put in mind, and quickened in the sense of what they know. (.) That they will not satis∣fie themselves with the meer having heard a Sermon, and account that Re∣ligion enough for one day, though they neither heeded, nor, it may be, un∣derstood five sentences of it. This has been a great Evil of late years; much heard, and nothing applied or digested. People really have looked upon them∣selves so much the holyer, by how many more Sermons they heard, as some I say do for hearing a greater number of Mas∣ses.
Let us beware of this madness, & every one take closely & meekly home to himself, what belongs to him for his good. Reflect not on others, as thus and thus concern'd in the things which are spoken, nor on the Preacher, as too busie or troublesome. In health, you will not be angry with one, who shall bring you an excellent Preserva∣tive; nor in sickness with him, who presents you a sure and safe remedy, neither would you reject either. Have but the same concernment for your souls, as you wear for your bodies, and do in this case, as you would in that. (3.) Whereas in our Sermons, we, for the most part, shoot much at a peradventure, and being to hit the general conditions of men, cannot le∣vel alwayes so particularly at some pri∣vate concerns as is needful; and where∣as it has been made evident, that the private direction of conscience was one of the Eldest kinds of Preaching, if therefore there be any thing of conside∣rable moment, either in our Sermons, which our Auditours have not under∣stood, or are not duely satisfied with,
or in their own conditions, which we have not touched, let them not in∣dulge a foolish modesty to their own injury, but in private have recourse to us for such more particular advice and satisfaction, which they need, and we cannot give them in the Pulpit. Lastly, let me humbly crave of our people, that if in any case, their judgments and their Teachers come into competi∣tion upon equal evidence of Argument on both sides (as they apprehend) they would prefer their Teachers judg∣ments before their own. The reasona∣bleness hereof is founded in this, that the Teacher has authority from God, and so may be presumed to have more of the Divine guidance: besides, he is bound, as he will answer the contrary at Gods great Tribunal, to teach the Truth, and nothing but it, to his best knowledge; he has long given himself to search the Truth, he sees the dependan∣ces of one Truth on others, and so is better able to determine difficulties by the Analogy or proportion of Faith, than such, who perhaps seeing but few things comparatively, and not considering all
they see, easily pronounce sentence. And as to our sincerity, if men will imagine us to have any conscience, they cannot judge us so fond of Errours, as for the love of them, to venture together the damnation of our own souls, and of all those which God will require at our hands. Could we prevail in these few reaso∣nable requests, it were to be hoped, our Preaching would have, in a manner, as great success as we could wish: and though we have not the advantage of in∣spiration, or Miraculous Gifts, yet our people would not be without the ad∣vantage of a Nobler Faith, than most had even in the inspired times; & particularly they would enjoy the Blessing belonging to those, who having not seen, have yet believed. But though we should be so unhappy as not to succeed, yet we may not therefore slacken our Diligence: we know not how soon the case may change, nay, we know not how far we have succeeded already. Sometimes the seed springs and grows up no man knows how. However, our reward depends not up on our success, but up∣on
our endeavours and fidelity: Sup∣posing these, Though Israel be not ga∣thered, yet shall we be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and our God shall be our strength. Possibly we may some of us think this but mean felicity to be safe alone, but in thus doing we may reaso∣nably hope to save both our selves, and those that hear us. And accordingly thou O Lord, save thy People, And bless thy Clergy. FINIS.
