W3057A R38146 17197334 106175
TO The most Excellent Majesty OF JAMES the IId. By the Grace of God OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, FRANCE and IRELAND KING. Defender of the Faith, &c. This Book of the Ground: Platt's Generall and Particular Prospects of all the Parts of his MAIESTY'S ROYAL Pallace of Audley End; Is most humbly pesented & dedicated by his MAIESTIES Most Loyall Subject and Servant Henry Winstanley, Clarke of the WORKS of the said Pallace, AND THAT AT NEWMARKET.
ground-plan of the principal court of the royal palace of Audley End THE PRINCIPALL COURT the Principall entry Lodge the little Hall the little kitchen Cloyster A Tarrice Cloyster Lodge
ground-plan of the innermost court of the royal palace of Audley End THE INNERMOST COURT The great Hall The Screene Pantry Pantry Celler Celler Celler Part of the Celler Garden Celler Part of the Bouling greene Chapple A Cloyster Part of the Mount Garden Still Roome
general ground-plan of the royal palace of Audley End A general Ground Plat of ye Royall Pallace of Audley End & Offices & gardens belonging to it. by Hen: Winstanley Clarke of his Majesties Workes there The Mount garden Cherry garden Cherry garden A Bridge the Road to the Towns The Bouling greene the Innermost Court The Principall Court the Wilderness the Celler Garden the great kitchen the Wood yard The Court Yard A Walke of Trees A Bridge The River the great Pond the brewhouse yard the store yard A Pond A Bridge The River the Stables the Stable Yard The Barnes The way to Walden the brewhouse garden the Keepers lodge A Pond The great Road
general view of the royal palace of Audley End A General Prospect of the Royal Palace of Audlyene H Winstanley at Littelbury fecit
view of the entry of the royal palace of Audley End The Entry of the Royal Palace of Audlyend. H. Winstanley al Littelbury fecit.
view of the north side of the great court of the royal palace of Audley End The North Side of the great court (on the Left hand Ingoeing in. H. Winstanley at Littellbury fecit.
view of the south side of the great court of the royal palace of Audley End The Prospect of the south side of the great Court (beeing on the right hand in going in. H. Winstanley at Littalbury fecit
view of the east side of the great court of the royal palace of Audley End The Easte Side of the great Court (being the fore Side of the great Hall. H. Winstanley at Littellbury fecit.
view of the exit of the royal palace of Audley End The prospect of the Goeing out of the Palace. H. Winstanley at Littellbury fecit
full view of the great court of the royal palace of Audley End A full Prospect of the Great Court of Audlyene. H Winstanlay at Littelbury fecit
view of the side of the innermost court of the royal palace of Audley End The Prospect of the Side of the Innermost court. The opposet side is the same. H. Winstanley al Littelbury fecit.
view of the south side of the little court of the royal palace of Audley End The Prospect of the south Side of the little Court. H. Winstanley at Littelbury fecit
view of the innermost court facing the back of the hall of the royal palace of Audley End The Prospect of the Innermost court Towards the Back of the hall. H. Winstanley at Littellbury fecit
a full view of the innermost court of the royal palace of Audley End A full Prospect of the Innermost Court. H Winstanley at Littelbury fecit.
view of the back of the great court of the royal palace of Audley End The Back-side of the great Court Towards the Mount-garden. H. Winstanley at Littelbury fecit.
view of the back side of the innermost court of the royal palace of Audley End The Back side of the Inner-most (or little) Court Towards the Mount garden. H. Winstanley at Littelbury fecit.
general view from the mount garden of the royal palace of Audley End A General Prospect of the Royal Palace of Audlyene Seen srom the Mount-Garden H. Winstanley at Littelbury Fecit
view of the back of the great court in the direction of the wood-yard of the royal palace of Audley End The Prospect of the Backside of the great Court towards the Wood-yard. H. Winstanley at Littelbury fecit.
view of the back of the innermost court in the direction of the wilderness of the royal palace of Audley End The Prospect of the Backside of the jnnermost Court towards the Wildernest. H. Winstanley at Littelbury fecit
view of the bowling-green of the royal palace of Audley End The Prospect of the Bowling-greene side (beeing the backside next the Park.
view of the bowling-green of the royal palace of Audley End The Prospect of the Bowling-greene side (beeing the backside next the Park. H Winstanley at Littelbury fecit.
view of the stables of the royal palace of Audley End The Stables of Audley End
view of the back of the stables of the royal palace of Audley End The Back of the Stables
general view of the royal palace of Audley End A GENERAL PROSPECT OF THE ROYAL PALACE OF AVDLYENE view of the royal palace at Audley End A. The Principal Entry. B. The great Court. C. The great Hall. D. The jnnermost Court. E. The long Gallery. F. The Mount garden. G. The Celler-garden (or Wilderness. H. The Kitchin. I. The great Pond. K. Saffron-Walden. L. The ParK. H. Winstanley at Littelbury fecit.
