B4763A 99861376 113509
THe Reader, comparing Cabinet with Cabinet, the Kings with the Lords Digby's, will easily observe how the unnatural Enemies to this their Native Coun∣try (imitating their General, The grand Enemy to man∣kinde) have gone about seeking how they may devour it, by their restlesse Endeavours to bring in Forraign Ayds from Holland, Curland, Denmark, Portugal, Ireland, France, and from Rome it self, of Shipping, Arms, Ammunition, Men, Moneys, Horse and Foot, and that in no small proportions; 4000. Foot and 1000. Horse expected from France, 10000. Men from Ireland, and 10000. more from Lorrain; A strange Conjuncture, to concur in the ends pretended! The King and Pope to defend the Protestant Religion, Denmark and Lorrain to maintain Laws and Lioerties, Bloody Rebels in Ire∣land to uphold the Priviledges of Parliament in Eng∣land: But blessed be God, who hath discovered the Counsels of the Enemy, and thereby hath in a great part opened the eyes, and undeceived not onely multi∣tudes of their principal Adherents at home; but also Forraign Princes and States abroad, and hath withal defeated their Forces and Expectations both abroad and at home. This is Gods work, and it is marvellous in our eyes. Soli Deo Gloria.
The Lord George Digby's CABINET And Dr GOFF'S Negotiations; Together with His Majesties, the Queens, and the Lord JERMIN's, and other LETTERS: Taken at the Battel at Sherborn in Yorkshire about the 15th of October last. ALSO OBSERVATIONS upon the said Letters. ORdered by the COMMONS assembled in Parliament, that The Letters taken at Sherborn in Yorkshire, with Observations thereupon, be forthwith printed and published: H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com LONDON: Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Com∣mons, dwelling in Fleetstreet at the sign of the Golden Dragon. March: 6. 1646.
AN INTRODVCTION: OR OBSERVATIONS concerning the Letters taken at Sher∣born in Yorkshire, about the 15th of October, 1645. VVAr is carried on as well by Policy as by Power, by Councels as by Forces; and therefore the goodness of God appears as well when he discloses the Councels, as when he discomfits the Forces of an Enemy; when both mercies are obtaned, both must be ac∣knowledged; for a thankful heart, with external exaltations of joy (the issues of it) are Gods due, and mans debt for both. The great and most memorable Victory at Nazeby, was an instance of both on Gods part, and the setting then apart a Solemn day of Thanksgiving, with the publishing the Kings Cabinet Letters then taken (the more to manifest Gods mercy) were the endeavoured returns of a thankful heart on the Par∣liaments part. God hath again used the same method in his mercies at the Battel near Sherborn in Yorkshire, defeating the Forces, and delivering up to the Parliament the Cabinet and Councels of the Lord Digby, principal Secretary to the King, and a pestilent Traytor to the Kingdom: When God repeats over the same method in his mercies, he cals (as it
were) for the same method in thankfulnesse; in answer to which call, a day was devoted for a publick Thanksgiving, and an Order made not long after for publishing the princi∣pal Letters and Papers; Orders are sooner made then exe∣cuted; a throng of intervening occasions with some unhappy neglects retarded that till now; but now at last they appear many of them, with an imperfect sense, especially of those written with Cyphers; and more especially these of D. Goffs Negotiation; the cyphered Letters were uncyphered when taken, all except two, and the cyphers and uncypherings blot∣ted out in many places, why? Digby (who in all likelihood did it) can best tell; others may guesse it to be done, that all the mystery of iniquity might not be known to all, all are not equally his Confidents. Where there were Duplicates, use is made of the most perfect copy. The Reader need no warning to observe in what a forlorn condition they were in before Sherborn fight (even themselves being Iudges) its too too often repeated over to escape time; for the present, their drooping hopes were (for so in sence they expresse it) to shel∣ter themselves under the Mantle of the approaching Winter (a season not sutable to Action) and thereby faintly ex∣pecting a reprival till the next Spring, and then to be piec'd up again by Forrain Forces; but God the God of all seasons and of all successes, hath given the Parliament Forces Sum∣mer successes even in this last Winter season, and therein be∣fool'd their hopes, as almost all the considerable Encounters since Sherborn fight do aver: As also the late great Vi∣ctory in Wales near Cardiff; and each Garrison and Town taken in since by the Parliament Forces bears witnesse, as Lankford Garrison, Tiverton, Carmarthen, Monmouth, Shelford, Worton, Bolton, Beeston-Castle, Hereford, Skipton-Castle, Dartmouth, Belvoir-Castle, Chester, and Corf-Castle, Launceston, Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Cherk-Castle, and St. Maws, most of these of great im∣portance,
during which time the Enemy hath taken none, or none worth the naming. Besides these, the Parliament Ar∣my hath reduced many other Forts in the West. And the 16 of February last, God (the God of Hosts) gave a fresh Victory at Torrington in the County of Devon to the Par∣liament Army under the Command of their General Sir Tho: Fairfax; the gallantry and unwearied Activity, or∣derly Discipline, fidelity and successe of which Army, puts this Age to their admiration, and may put the next past their belief. By this great successe at Torrington, and others of later date, the tottering Remnant of their fugitive Army was coop'd up into Cornwal (a Corner of the Kingdom) and in∣to a Corner of that Corner; and is since, by Gods goodnesse, totally reduc'd, and with it, the very hearts of the Countrey too, who now own the Parliament Forces as their Friends, and pursue the others as Enemies. Besides, the Gallant ser∣vice of Colonel Morgan at Stow in the Wold in Glo∣cestershire, in totally Routing of the Army Sir Jacob Ashley gathered up in Wales to joyn with Oxford Forces, to make a new Army against the Parliament; where Sir Ja∣cob and most of his Officers in Commission, and One thou∣sand six hundred Horse and Foot were taken Prisoners, with Two thousand Arms, and all their Bag and Baggage. They who confess'd their desperate condition even before the Victory near Sherborn, what may be thought of them now, after all these subsequent Successes and Victories? Certainly, God hath fill'd up even to the brim their cup of Trembling. What's then their next work? They'll tell you, 'tis to implore Forraign Ayds, and to let in Forraign Forces into the Kingdom; and of what destructive consequence that is, let Him tell whom they hold themselves most bound to believe, even the King Himself, for Habemus confiten∣tem reum. He in His Printed Declaration Dated at Newark 9 of March, 1641. speaking to the Parliament, says,
Whatsoever You are advertised from Rome, Venice, Pa∣ris, of the Popes Nuncio solieiting France, Spain, &c. for Forraign Ayds, We are confident no sober ho∣nest man in Our Kingdom (so He calls it, but Advertè Rem publicam non esse tuam sed se Reipublicae)Seneca. can believe that We are so desperate or so senslesse to entertain such Designs, as would not only bury this Our King∣dom (Our Kingdom again) in sudden Destruction and Ruine, but Our Name and Posterity in perpetual scorn and infamy. If it should be now ask'd, What's became of Our Kingdom, Our Name, Our Posterity? Let the Kings foregoing words, and these following Letters, with those taken at Nazeby make Answer; for strong En∣deavours were and are yet on foot, not onely for raising For∣raign Force for England, but whole Forraign States and Kingdoms are prest upon to Declare, and to make an Offensive and Defensive War against the Parliament; and not onely those of the same Religion (to it with the Parliament) but the very Duke of Lorrain himself is Treated with to come over and Conduct his Army in Person, consisting of Ten thousand men: And where can a more desperate and Iesuited Prince, or a more declared Enemy to Protestants be found out? France is also Courted, though it's hop'd without successe; onely there is a clandestine Collection of Moneys going on amongst the rabble of their Popish Clergy to supply the King withall; and to make up the Messe, the Popish Irish Rebels, with their Commander in chief, the very Romish Antichrist himself is solicited and sought into. And now let the World judge, what precious Defenders of the Faith, the great De∣fender of the Faith hath found out, and what Faith is likely to be Defended. No more needs to be said, let the Letters speak out the rest.
Her Majesties Letter to George Lord Digby, PARIS, April 7. 1645. MOnsieur Digby, Though I received no Letters from you by Pooley, I will not forbear to write to you, though it were but to reproach you, & to tell you, that I fear that you are as inconstant to your friends, as men are to their Mistrisses; I do not speak of you; you know, that I am too well ac∣quainted with you. For my part, I have only this fault, to be a good Friend, and I believe you know it, there∣fore it will not be necessary to assure you thereof. I have seen the Dispatch that you sent to Iermin con∣cerning Hertogen; I believe that you will rest satisfied, for I have the same opinion of him that you have, and many of those things that he hath written are lyes, and within few dayes you shall hear that I have talk'd with him according to his desert; which I am resolved to do for some reasons that Iermin will write to you in Cypher, You think it strange that Wilmot is so well entertained here, which is done according to the Orders which I have under the Kings hand and yours: It is true, his good carriage here hath merited this good en∣tertainment. Henry Percy and he are not so good friends as We thought; We have discovered it in some occa∣sions, where there can be no dissembling. Concerning Th: Eliot he hath behaved himself well here, and hath to earnestly importuned me for his return, that ha∣ving no Order from the King to tell him that he should stay, I could not keep him longer here. For my part, I believe that he is very trusty, I have charged him to impart unto you what I told him; therefore I shall not write any more, my hand being more lame then ever, and I more. Your very good Friend, HENRIETTE MARIE R.
Letters concerning Dr Goffs Negotia∣tion with the Lord George Digby, Lord Iermin and others. Dr. Goff to Lord Jermin, April 16. COncerning the Tin, Sir William Boswel and I must both proceed together for many Reasons, and the course which is as yet thought best, is to put the whole quantity into Websters hands and Bain∣haqs contracting, That it may be sold at the highest rate, at the price currant of seventy two gilders per Cent. and in the mean time to advance such sums upon it from time to time as her Majesty shal have use of, paying the interest until the Tin be sold to pay that sum borrowed, be it a week, or a Moneth, or more. I proposed to the Prince of Orange the immunity from the Customes, who was very willing to give order in it to Greffier Muys, who hath since told me he will do his best; he is a very serious servant of her Majesties here, and ought to be gratified whatsoever be∣comes of other businesse. And because I know your intentions in that kind before, I did believe this business
would not be unacceptable to him, and a good expedi∣ent to finde some part of a present for him; he hath undertaken also to bring Allen and Hasdouck safly out of Dunkirk, but hath for the present ordered me to write to them to go forth, if they can, within these Ten days, there being no Holland ship there to trouble them in that time or more: If there were so much wit and duty in those that govern about Falmouth and Truro, they should do well to keep any Tin from coming out untill this be sold, if they be but as mischievous to others as to the Queen. The Queens letters are gone to the Duke of Curland for the assisting of the Marques of Montrsse, I hope to good purpose; but it is necessary to send the copy of the Queens letter to the King of Denmark, for free passage for his ships through the Zound; and a letter of Cre∣dence in the Queens own hand to Monsier Vicford, who from time to time may do the K good service by it with him. But the thing which gives sir W: Boswel & me most pain in this place, is the fear of the next interest day for the Iewels, May 16. on which it is necessary to con∣tinue the credit begun; but above all to redeem those parcels which lie so dangerously in Cletchers hands, be∣sides the acquitting our selves of the multiplyed promi∣ses made to Monsieur Vicford, for the redemption of his; it is evident that nothing in the world is of so great importance for the Kings service, as to finde money for the ships for Drp; but in the next place, these occasions mentioned must be served, and therefore it is very unfit to defer any longer the ratifications and procurations which Webster desires & how to transmit them to Eng∣land, & receive them from thence, I know not, since the Ambassadors of Holland are come away; if you please to let the King know the fitnesse of doing the thing,
this week Sir William Boswel and I will prepare the In∣struments, and send them several wayes, but the likeliest is by Paris to you, unlesse we may addresse our selves to the Portugal Ambassador, which yet hath not bin done. I shall obey your order in sending Saint Ibals Iewels by Master D'estrade, though they might be of use here; but if that design be pursued, as it must be, unlesse peace can be made, you will as easily send them back, and more money with them by D'estrade, as together with them the orders from France for preparing the ships in the King of Frances name. Mr. Hemflet and the Lady Stanhope are very thankfull to you for the businesse of their son, hoping that it shalbe represented in the form desired, that is, for the title of Lord Wotton, which will be the greatest contentment to them in the world. I am, Sir, Goff. Dr. Goff to the Lord Iermin. April 17. THe Prince of Orange was very inquisitive this week after my Letters from Paris, hoping to be resolved precisely concerning the sum of the Portion, as I percei∣ved by his discourse; for that point, I gave him this an∣swer, that the Portion alone could not be of that consi∣deration as to conclude the Mariage unlesse it were able to give the King such succours as might probably restore his affairs, which the sum demanded could not do; and that therefore I was ordered to assure him, that if the other Articles were accorded, the Treaty should not break off upon the sum of the Portion: from thence we came off of the other particulars, and the re∣solution was this, that the affairs of the Duke of Lorrain was to be pursued with all vigour, and for that end ships should be sent from hence to meet at the time perfixt,
that when the Ambassadors are returned, all endeavours shall be used to induce the States to a League defensive and offensive; and that Mr. D'estrade shall return home fully instructed in these particulars, that is, to remon∣strate the impossibility (as they call it) of the passage for Holland, and to facilitate the other to and from Deipe; And for the second, to persawde the sending of an Ambassadour from France hither to that purpose; which yet notwithstanding the prince of Orange thinks wil be very difficult, by reason of the King of Denmarks war, to which the Hollanders are violently carried; how∣ever the rumours, all endeavours are and shal be used to bring them to our desires, for which end I proposed that in the mean time we might at least have Justice from them, and such acts of amity, as by their past Alliance they were bound unto such as are, First, the liberty of their Ports to our men of war, and the free∣dome of them now detained. 2. The liberty to sell our Prizes here as we may do in Flanders, at least that both sides may sell in their Ports. 3. The dimissian of Strickland. 4. The permitting of Arms and money to be exported for the King both from hence and from Dun∣kirk, with the denyal of the same to the Rebels. 5. An open and Publique Declaration of the dislike of the Rebells late Propositions sent to the King, according as in conscience they are bound to declare, thereby to pre∣serve this People from the guilt of approving the rebel∣lion in England; that in so doing they should declare no war against the Parliament, and it would be a great pre∣paration for the work in hand: this the Prince of Orange seemed very much to approve of, and hath ordered me to prepare my papers in this kind against the time that their Ambassadors come from England; & began to ask me concerning the design, and whether I had re∣ceived
any Orders about it, for that I told him I should be particularly instructed by the next Post, he likes this very well, and D'estrade shall be instructed about it; this was all that past since the receipt of yours, besides that for conclusion the Prince of Orange would know whether if the Duke should fail us, our Treaty were at an end: I answered, No, for if the states would be brought to declare for the King, and with shipping, and in other particulars, as should be presented to them, I did not doubt but the King would quickly subdue the Rebels, which was the end we pursued in this affair; to which when he replyed with more cheerfulnesse then has been usual of late, That all indeavors should be used, I took my leave of him, and do of your—Theres no danger in discoursing, as you find, concerning the Portion; for the conditions for the Princesse must be proportionable to it; and if other things be accorded, they will be solicitous themselvs to inlarge the portion; for that end the Princesse of Orange is very civill to me, and desires much the businesse should go on. I should be instructed what to say concerning the condition and habitation of the Princesse before her going into Eng∣land. Dr. Goff to the Lord Iermin. April 24. I Will not doubt but that all my Letters of last week are re∣ceived; and if so, your Lordship doth perceive the whole Negotiation here, depends upon full instructions how to pro∣ceed in the particular Treaty of the Marriage; wherein the several circumstances being understood and agreed, it will quick∣ly appear what the Prince of Orange is at, and willing to do with the States for the Kings assistance, without the actual per∣formance
whereof, it is to be declared, that the private Arti∣cles shall not be signed. For this purpose, if the Copies of for∣mer Treaties cannot be had, it were necessary to set down par∣ticularly what Houses and what Dowry the Queen will pre∣scribe for the Princesse; and for the Portion, the lowest sum that must be admitted of, with the times of payment. Yet herein it cannot be prejudicial to leave much unto Debate here, it being resolved, That nothing shall be concluded till the States do fully declare in defence of the King, whilest their hands are bufie against Denmark (whither they are now sending sixty men of War, and Six thousand foot) it cannot be expected that they should be induced to supply the King with any forces presently, but yet these things following will be in their power, and may be expected from the Pr: of Oranges Negotiation with them, as soon as their Ambassadors return: 1. To enter into a League offensive, and defensive with the King, against all Enemies what∣soever: And though the effect hereof cannot be the present preparing and sending of Forces by Sea and Land, yet they will be brought by it, 2. To publish a Declaration of dislike of the Rebels ater Propositions sent to the King together with the ill usage of their Ambassadors. 3. To set at liberty those Ships of ours which are now detained, and to offer the liberty of their Ports hereafter. 4. To permit the selling of our prizes in their Ports and for that end, such officers for the King as shall be necessary. 5. To cause Arms and Powder to be Ex∣ported for the King, with denying the same to the Rebels. 6. To give Letters of reprisal to such of their own people as have been injured by the Parliament. 7. To permit the King to hire or buy men of War in these Countreys, to set to Sea a∣gainst the Rebels. 8. To admit of no Agents from England and Scotland that are not sent by the King, and to dismisse them that pretend from the Parliament of either: And in pursuance of these points, if His Majesty pleaseth to put out of His Protection all such of His Subjects which dwell or Trade here, as have assist∣ed the Rebellion, in England, the States may proceed to such Confiscations and Penalties as they shall think fit, whereby the King may finde a considerable profit, and they be invited to a more vigorous conjunction with him and if this be done for the present (France concurring in the same particulars) it is ap∣parant,
by Gods blessing, that the King must needs overcome the Rebels, if he can but keep his Person and the Princes out of their hands, till his friends that are joyned in League with him can send more powerful assistance. Though the Portion with the Princesse were as much as was demanded, and paid by several parts, as the prince of Orange should be able, it were not possible by that to serve the King to any effect, unlesse these things mentioned were together ob∣tained, whereby London might be impoverished, which is and will be the fountain of all this mischief: And on the other side, let the Portion be never so small and ill paid, yet if these things be done, and the King by vertue of this Marriage enabled to bor∣row Money, or by any means to appear stronger at Sea then they, and at Land with the same power he hath formerly done, by Gods blessing, he will be quickly restored, which will give all the world full satisfaction concerning this Treaty, and make the conditions Honorable beyond all question. Upon these considerations, I believe your Lordship may approve what I wrote by Mr. D'estrade, and send some Orders accordingly for proceeding in the Treaty of the Marriage apart from other things. And for them, besides what I am instructed to do already with the Prince of Orange, it will be very necessary to write to Sir Will: Boswel, that upon the coming of the Holland Ambassa∣dors from England, he according to his Office be instant with the States, to perform the duties of their former Alliances with the King: and that he make such other Propositions to them as he shall judge fit: But when the Prince of Orange shall finde matters succeed well, it will be necessary that your Lordship in the quality of an Ambassador appear here, to make a firm and quick conclusion. In the mean time, it is the opinion of the Prince of Orange that the businesse of shipping is without question the sole thing which ought to be intended by the Queen, and may probably restore the Kings Affairs again, though the Duke of Lorrains Voyage, and the Prince of Oranges endeavours should fail. When I wrote from Rotterdam, I was not clearly satisfied in the advantages on the Kings part, and since that the sicknesse of Dorp (who is now perfectly recovered again; and fixedly dispo∣sed as he was) kept me from the particular pursuit of that Ar∣gument,
wherein your Lordship had just cause to be little encou∣raged with what I wrote before; if it be possible to provide mo∣ney, it will prove an excellent Design, for the whole execution is to be disposed of by the King as absolutely as if they were Eng∣lish ships, and the Commanders English, the intention being not for P. and Q. but for honour and the service of the King, for which purpose Dorp desires to have large and particular in∣structions; also some person of trust and courage to be a ship∣board with him by whom he might correspond with the Queen: and that his Majesty would appoint some Ports to which all prizes might be brought, and there judged, which he desires should be principally 1.—and there Officers of trust to be esta∣blished, which proceed from his Majesty, as they do here for the States, or at  for  all which shall be particularly set down under his own hand, and before conclusion of the mat∣ter be made, be considered by the Prince of Orange who talkes of this particular with pleasure: The condition for himself is very short, but very great to prescribe nothing, but trust the King and Queen in that point: but for his Officers, he expects liberall pay and reward, as it shall be deserved: so that in all respects, this is to be esteemed his Majesties royall execution; but that the Com∣manders and Masters are strangers, and ships hired. And it is here pronounced by all that have knowledge of their Majesties affaires, and any thoughts and endeavours for their restitution, that this is so necessary to be done, that without it all other good successes will but serve to protract the war, and not at all to procure peace: for till London be humbled, the Rebell can ne∣ver be reduced to reason; but I know arguments in this kinde are not so needfull as prayers, that God would send some means to provide the money. For the Garter which is designed for the yong Prince it is ve∣ry earnestly desired by them all, and shall be constantly worne by the Prince in that manner as in England: The Pr. of Orange desires that the King would write himself to him concerning it, as also to the States, and that it may be conferred after the same manner as it was to the P. Elector in the field, if it might, before the beleaguering of any Town begin; but of these things both Sir William Boswell who hopes to be imployed in it, and Master Hemfleet will write at large.
Dr. Goff to the Lord George Digby. From the Hague, May 1. Stilo vet. THe Dutch Ambassadors have been here these five dayes, wherein they have begun their Report, and behaved them∣selves so well, that His Majesty cannot wish it better: That the King may receive fruit of their Report, it hath been proposed to the States, to establish a Committee to hear and examine the particulars, and to resolve what ought to be done: The States of Holland do not absolutely refuse to have any such Com∣mittee, but require the whole Narration to be made in publike: if so, it is like to vanish into air, and the Prince of Orange will be able to effect nothing for the King: However, the Ambassa∣dor Borrel whose soul is set upon serving the King, is resolved to attempt something which shall be very high and bold with the States: to that end, in the discourse he will make instructi∣ons; I shall be able to send the Copy thereof, not onely to your Lordship, but to all the world. It is not possible any creature can be more industrious then Hemflet is now. Before this time I believe your Lordship hath received Letters from the Queen, the honour of a Baron for his Son by the Lady Stanhop; Charls Henry de Kirkeouz that he be created Lord Wotton, and called by that name: This is represented to your Lordship, as the thing in the world most desired by them both, that so in the issue of the eldest Daughter, the name and family of Lord Wotton may be continued; for which they have already taken care to provide an honorable subsistence: Within a few dayes the Prince of O∣range goes into the field, before which our cosis will be past, if this Committee be setled, something of great consequence may be hoped, but if not, it is necessary that His Majesty think of some new Councels: this ungrateful, and will never serve Him. My last was sent by Paris: next week your Lordship shall re∣ceive another Letter from me, Your Lordships most devoted faithful Servant, Steph. Goff.
Lord Jermin to the Lord Digby. Paris, May 5. 1645. My Lord, THere is this week come one from you, another from the King, by the way of the Portugal Ambassador of the 21 and 20 of March, All your Letters that way are very long, we per∣ceive by them that some of ours go in ten dayes, therefore your Messenger may be faulty: I had another from you to day of the fourth of April, sent me by one G. Martin, you will do well to continue to write by that way; there is in it onely the propo∣sition for the Duke of Yorks going to Ireland, to which the Queen not being yet well enough to speak of businesse, desires you to stay till the next week for Her resolution: She is now re∣covered of all but weaknesse, a little cough and loosnesse do re∣main, but neither are of danger or trouble: You say that if the Queen could have been in estate to have sent the King any mo∣ney, if Her ship had come in time, that would have kept Her from the want She spake of induced by the stop; the credit that would have been raised by the return of the ship, would cer∣tainly have enabled Her to have sent some: So the thing is true, She might have sent, and yet that did not necessarily keep Her from wanting; in the mean time She was reduced to pawn some little things for Her present supply, but you shall hear no more of this matter: She was promised some other wayes of supply∣ing the King, upon which were also built the assurances you re∣ceived from Her, in which She hath been delayed beyond ex∣pectation, and what will yet be the issue, is not to be known: Hasdouck She hath found means at last to send away, I hope he is before this arrived, he hath good proportions of Arms and Ammunition, I know not yet what. I send you Doctor Goffs Letters of this week, by which you will see, and by those of the last what hopes there are of his Negotiation: The next week will absolutely determine the Duke of Lorrains resolution, the way proposed by the Prince of Orange, of Treatying the Mar∣riage
a part, and all the other matters by themselves, ought to finde no difficulty on our part; for he doth not expect no more then it is reasonable or possible we should, that any thing be concluded in the Marrige until we have our reckoning in the rest: The Queen doth therefore desire that the King would send to Her with all the speed he can, particular instructions for this Treaty of the Marriage, wherein there may be only such things as according to their fancy in Holland (for so they have expressed it) pertain to a Treaty of Marriage as demands, of por∣tion, assurance of joynture, and what houses will be comprised in that joynture, how Her own house shall be settled, what of∣ficers She shall have, and if you please to send a project of something in this kinde, it will be very necessary, and in the mean time they shall be entertained from hence with assurances that these things are coming, and that if we can agree in others, there can be no difficulty in those: The Propositions of the execu∣tion which you will finde in Doctor Gffs Letters, is undoubted∣ly a great and useful designe, and if we could by this Marriage bring that about, and a Conjunction of France and Holland with the King, that should be accompanied, but with those ad∣vantages that inevitably low out of such a conjunction, it would be a foundation laid against all possibility of ruining in this cause, and it would give us certainly time and breath to overcome at last even if the present great helps of forces from either of them or the means of passing the Duke of Lorrain should fail: For I must confesse by the last dispatch, I am least confident of his in∣tentions then I was: I make you all this discourse, to the end you should see that I conceive though the present fruits were expected from this Negotiation, are not in so good hopes as I thought them heretofore: Yet the Treaty in these more remote ones is to be continued, and the news of this week doth much en∣courage me to this opinion; for I finde all things in England in another kinde of posture, then a moneth ago, which I look on with great comfort: the reputation of our affairs is increased to that point, that if we decline not, I should not despair, that they might be willing here to proceed in the conjunction, and at would certainly bring in the States the onely reason why they here are so litte disposed to it, is the apprehension of the Parliment ships, believing that the onely power able to trouble
them in their Designs, of—if our Design for our effect in Holland could be gone through with, that might perchance be the greatest inducement here of any other to embark them in our affairs; for which purpose, I desire to know your opinion in one particular: There must go on our part 200+0 Pistols to the setting forth of this execution: if we should get the money here, I would know whether you would chuse to have it im∣ployed to that effect, or sent to you. We hear nothing yet of our Tin stayed at Falmouth, there is 196 blocks; pray remember to send an Order to Sir Nicholas Crisp and others who may be concerned in it, to deliver it to any whom the Queen shall appoint to receive it, if before she send they can have no good occasion to send it: This Bearer, Sir William Davenant is infinitely faithful to the Kings cause, he hath been lately in Holland, so that he met there the knowledge of our Treaty, so that it was neither possible nor needful to con∣ceal it from him; the Treaty of the Marriage and the Proposition he knows, the Design of the Duke of Lorrain he does not: of the other two he will speak to you: but charge him with secrefie, for the Qeen doth still desire that the businesse of the Marriage may not be divulged, and the other is destroyed if yet it should take vent: Pray if Davenant have need of your favour in any thing, use him very kindely for my sake, and let him know I con∣jured you to do so: you see by this I retain an opinion of some credit with you, though your Letters be cold and lesse kinde then they were wont: I am still in the same degree. I have been most entirely Yours. I hear Th: Elliot is yet at Hanure de Grace, which I am glad of, you will have had by my former, wherein I sent you my Let∣ter to him, and his Answer, time to have resolved what to do: in case my Letter should not be come, it is not unfit to tell you again he received the Kings command to stay, and the best advice I could give him to obey that command, but did notwithstanding resolve to continue his journey, and may now be gone for ought I know. This Letter I have sent by Portugal Ambassador, and I believe will come to your hands soonest that way, but there is something added concerning Sir William Davenant.
The Queen hath commanded me to let you know, that the de∣sires you would let Sir Iohn Moson know that she hath recom∣mended to your care his Interests, and that you would advance them in all reasonable things, she cannot recollect what he did in particular, but she desires you to advertise her what it is, and th you preserve your self uningaged till you hear again from her, and in the mean space you let him know her care. Dr. Goff to the Lord Iermin. May 8. SInce the receipt of yours, I am confirmed in that I wrote last from Grafier Muis, concerning the resolutions of the Prince of Orange; that though there have been overtures made from Brandenburgh; yet if the Prince of Wales may be obtained for his Daughter, they will not be hearkned unto: and it is not probable any treaty has been begun upon them, How that reserve may have slackned the adventures for this of the Prince of Wales. For as soon as I had given in the Extract of my Letters (which was most greedily called for) the conclusion was, that to gain time, Mr. de Zulecum should draw the project of a Treaty of Articles of both sides according to the particulars wherein I shall be instructed within seven dayes, as your Lordships Letter to him and to me doth promise, and is expected; that before the Prince of Orange his going from hence (which is like to be with∣in few dayes) an assurance may be given him that the Treaty will proceed well; and the effecting their desires depend only upon the effects of the publick, without which, the King and they will have small comfort of the businesse. There is now or never something to be done upon this State, by means of the excellent and clear relations which their Ambassadors do make both in private and publick in the Kings behalf: I have hitherto found as good succes of this as can be wished, besides that which is al∣ready written of the marriage. I have to let your Lordship know that there shall be a Committee of the States presently setled for the English affaires; that according to what shall be related to them by their Ambassadours, resolutions may be taken what to do; that these Ambassadours are so extremly set to bring the States to the Kings assistance, that no subjects of England could
expresse greater concernment,In the O∣riginal, Is Secreue∣rnt. they wild ursh (sayes the Prince of Orange) if they be not able to bring somewhat to passe; for the Dukes passage, the Prince of Orange sayes, that for the sae∣ty and convoy that which was promised before shall be perfor∣med; for the Transport ships must be sent from hence as was gi∣ven in instructions to D'estrad before, and shall be now repeated and enlarged in answer to his Letter of this week: Concerning that businesse, the States must not by any means be acquainted with the businesse, and therefore the course must be under pre∣tence of some service for France, to hire the ships of Merchants ere, which the Prince of Orange will give quick order for when it shall be requisite; he sayes e will write that which shall en∣courage them in it; and often wisht, that his zeal and affection might be a leading example to others, and that it should not be wanting: It is much feared the hiring of Holland ships in Franc may give such an alarm to the Parliament, that all French Poets will be presently bese; besides if there be numbers sufficient, the way were by power to constrain them at the instant, and not to send beforehand about it, upon information that the Rebels intend a defensive war only: the Prince of Orange said he was very glad of , for then if the King could preserve himself un∣till he could by sea do something upon them and their trade, they would be instantly ruined, and from thence  d—and this was th of that discourse. This day I visited Bural who makes many pro∣testations of pursg their Majesties affairs here in such a man∣ner that he considers not what he suffers by it. I have given him a paper of the things desired of this State, such as they may do without declaring war against the Rebels of England, and in justice they are bound to do being allied to the King already, such as with concurrence with France they are now sought to perform in a new league with his Majesty, wherein no∣thing is demanded of them but what within these four years by their Ambassadours in England they offered his Majesty; he approves of every particular, and I am assured will labour more effectually then any creature their Majesties have of their own; within a very short time will appear the utmost of our hopes from this place. For if either the Committee should be re∣fused, the Prince of Orange (as I have some doubt o it) or if be∣ing
setled, nothing should be resolved by it which may invite France to send their Ambassadours and joyn with; them it is evi∣dent that new councels must be sought, and that the King is not to linge away his Crown here; only what ever the event be, some means must be used—which is no where to be had—but if the event of this Committee for England be presently to grant us liberty of their Ports, to sell prises, to hire ships, to buy arms and ammunition here, to carry them out of Dunkirke, to grant Letters of reprizill to those Hol∣landers that require them against the Parliament, and after these things, by inviting of France to them to make a league offensive and defensive as we desire: I suppose it will be seasonable for the Lord Iermin to appear in this place and conclude the marri∣age, the conditions whereof will be very honourable what ever little portion they give, or how great conditions soever they ob∣tain for the young Prince: for certainly by it the Crown will be restored, and therefore I hope the whole businesse shall be re∣ferred to their disposall, except only the conclusion and signig which must not be untill the effects of the publick Treaty be ob∣tained; all this will yet appear more reasonable if the Duke pro∣ceed in his voyage; but though that vanish, as I fear it will yet, there is more substance in this triple alliance, if it may be got∣ten, then in any other councell in the world. I could now wish the Order of the Garter, with the Herald and Robes and Letters were come: the young Prince is very worthy of all honour and kindnesse from their Majesties, and growes  very proper and lovely person, as does Madamoisell more now then at first: per∣haps difficulty addes beauty, but truly she has a perfect good shape, white skin, excellently well fashioned, hands, neck and breast, the face is not ill all, but very good for many proporti∣ons there: tomorrow the young Prince and all the Horse take the field.
Lord Iermin to the Lord Digby. Paris, 12 May. THis Week I had none from you, but the Duplicate of that by Romen, whereof I made you Answer the last. The Queen had one from the King neer it at the same time. There is come by the way of the Wst two dayes since,  Copy of that Order for the Tin, that L A T first desired; it arrived here so late, that he stay ocasioned the disorder we have so often com∣plained of, it is during pleasure onely, which is well; so that there be no alteration, without advertising the Queen in time: for if again She should send a ship and money, and not have the Tin delivered, the same inconveniences would happen again. Sir Nicholas Crisp advises, that in the end of this moneth there will be a proportion for 4000 pounds sterling, which the Queen intends to send for in a Holland Man of War, and so hereafter for all that shall be to be had; by which, the Countrey shall be constantly supplied with money for their Tin; and the King shall have His profits both of the preemption, and Customes du∣ly paid to Him; which I desire you to assure the Lord Treasurer of, because I cannot write to him, it being easie for him to be in∣formed, how many blocks, and of what weight we received; and I do assure him, he shall have a just account of the Kings pre∣emption and Customes, and further profit; and that of con∣sideration, shall also be accounted for: And this I am sure is the best course that this businesse in nature is capable of. I send you Doctor Goffe's dispatch, by which you will see the condition of his affairs may be our successe, with the arrival of their Ambassadours (who perhaps will have some credit with their Masters) will open a way to more possibility of drawing them to a Declaration, then hath yet appeared,— for though things have little answered what was expected; we ought to have a little more patience, especially there being some hope of getting money: If you remember when the Duke Despernon lent the King the money in England, the Prince of Orange was to put that same into the Contoir of Holland; for the Duke to engage the Prince of Orange unto this, the Queen did secure him by jewels she left in his hands. Some hope here is, by the industry of Sir W. Godolphin who merits infinitely of
the King, that this money may be again lent by the Duke; if that be brought about, the Duke releasing the Prince of Orange, who is his security, the Iewels will return to the Queen, and will I hope finde the 20000 Pistols, which would be a thing of infinite consequence. The Affairs of the Duke of Lorrain I fear will fail: Next week undoubtedly we shall have the last Resolution, if it do, we must endeavour to get here the money that expedition would have cost them, or part of it, which is fitter to be hoped; for it is not likely we shall have it all, be∣cause in the passing the Duke away, they did their own businesse as much as ours, all, the Dukes; this week out of England is cheerful: I must confesse, if we abroad had been fortunate in any degree, near to that you have been at home, we could not have failed of being suddenly happy. There is arrived this day a Gentleman of Prince Rupert, to fetch his brother Edward into England, what the Queen will advise in that particular, I do not yet know. Here is Colonel Sands that killed Ch. Price, that hath earnestly desired the Queens Letter to the King for his pardon, and with those Letters would have returned home: the Queen by the Information she hath had of the businesse, was willing to favour him, but I advised him not to return un∣til we know how he will be received. Speak of the thing, and do him all the kindnesse you can, and let me know what the King will be willing to do at the Queens entreaty. So wishing you all happinesse, I rest Yours. The Queen cannot resolve yet concerning the Duke of York's going into Ireland, next you shall have Her opinion.
Dr. Goff to the Lord Jermin. Paris, May 15. VVHen Her Majesty shall be well enough to speak of bu∣sinesse, I hope your Lordship will finde means to in∣struct me more particularly concerning the private Treaty by the return from England, which I do most humbly beseech Her Ma∣jesty to do, for now is the time if ever to operate strongly upon this country, not only because the Prince of Orange is taking the field, where the things useful to us cannot be effected: but for that the Ambassadors do so plentifully declare the Iustice of the Kings cause, and necessity of the States concernment in it, That if the Prince of Orange lose this opportunity for want of words, or will, there is no reason to bestow more time upon any expe∣ctations from hence; and I assure you, that since your two last Dispatches, there is a new vigour towards the Kings affairs, both in the Prince of Orange and Princesse, which I could never di∣scern before, she not dissembling that till now, it did not clearly appear, Whether the Proposition of the Marriage were real or not. The Prince of Orange hath appointed Wednesday and Thursday of this week for the form of the private Treaty, to be drawn and agreed on, which could not be if there were any other in hand; however, they may be willing to allow that of Brandinburgh as a reserve, and for the Publique it is a very good way, though the Committee of States mentioned in my last be not yet obtained, the States of Holland, pretending that it was unusual to grant any to their own Ambassadors, however they have done it upon the demand of strangers here: upon Friday last they continued their Report before the States General (n corps) and after in the like manner before them of Holland for three hours space in such a method, and with such clearnesse for the Kings advantage, that no Subject of his could plead it better; the effect of this hath been the satisfaction of most of them, and the silencing of them that were most opposite. Burral is since gone to his Town Amsterdam, there to repeat what he hath done; and on Thursday next return to pursue the work here,
in which it seems to me by the manner of their proceedings, they intend to perish themselves, or His Majsty shall prosper. Muys the Secretary is as industrious as can be desired; but I fear he may think it long ere he finde some fruit of his labours; in all events, that person is to be retained: for whether we obtain the League or not, it is apparent that ships will be alwayes needful, an the use of their Ports and Arms, and to all which his con∣currence is of great importance. The Princesse is now of a tem∣per much different from that she was larely in, besides great de∣sires for that which concerns themselves most; there are the same desire for His Majsties affairs, vehement invectives against the Rebels, great satisfaction, in the Ambassdors much sollici∣tousnesse; what is now to be done, That the Prince of Orange must do somewhat before he go into the field, that some course must be taken to bring the businesse to a Committee of States, that Sir William Boswl, well affected, is slow, and so accustomed to receive denials, that it were unfit to use him; that an extraor∣dinary Ambassador from the King Ought to appear, but not yet, till the businesse be better prepared, that she will advise both with the Prince of Orange, and all others best affected to the King; that if I have any Proposition to make, I should bring it to her: This was the sum of yesterdayes discourse; yet after all this I must not conceal, That the Ambassadors complain that the Prince of Orange is much colder then they expected, as Mr. Hemflet sayes (if he be a good Author). This is all I have to say of our condition here this week, which indeed is nothing positive, but that very shortly it will appear what is to be expected from hence, and that the Prince of Orange and Princesse do now (as it seems to me) apply themselves very seriously to that end. An Extract of Dr. Goffs Letter to the Lord JERMIN. May 1. I Have discovered this last week, a thing which hath perhaps given me all the impediments I have met with, and is without doubt the cause of that sudden and positive demand, which Hugh made me from the Prince of Orange; it is the overture of the
match with Brandenburg, revived and pursued now these last four weeks, by an Expresse from the Marquesse, returned last Wednesday in all haste, with Order to bring the Marquesse of Brandenburg to Cleve or thereabouts, by the end of this moneth of May; for which purpose, he said he would ride day and night. This is that you may be assured of, The party himself ha∣ving discovered the whole businesse of Moieur Hemflet, who with much passion for the Kings interest told me what he had ound; and afterwards as it was concerted between us, made the same relation to the Princesse of Orange, and said, that he had it from me; she was extremely amazed (as he sayes) how I could get knowledge thereof; but in conclusion confessed the thing. How far the businesse hath proceeded, appears not yet, but by what the Prince of Orange, discovered last night with me: I am confident that nothing is done to the prejudice of the Prince of Wales pretentions, nor shall be, if our demands can be performed by them with ease, I say with ease; for I cannot pro∣mise any violence and hzrd of ruine to effect it; notwithstand∣ing all this, I do hope upon particular Instructions, to give a bet∣ter account of the businesse; however it shall cleerly appear, that there was perfect integrity on Her Majesties part, and that the frustration did wholly owe it self to them, not so much for want of desire (for that is not to be doubted of) but that they did not endeavour to effect those things which were most rea∣sonable for the King to demand, and perhaps not impossible for them to do, in the opinion of all that shall come hereafter to examine what hath passed. The Prince of Orange with many testimonies of his great desire of the honour of it, fell to speak of the Garter, and in sum, professeth how glorious an addition it will be to him, and his son; and if it may be sent the begin∣ing of this Campagne, that his son who hath the honour to be allied to the King, will think himself as long as he lives, much honoured in wearing that Order, after the manner that it is worn in England; wherein he was very particular in describing the several marks used, and gave me an account of his own electi∣on to that Order, which was managed with so much insolency by the Ambassador Carlson, that it is easie to collect, that was the cause of his not wearing it at first, and because not at first, never since; he added likewise, That Henry the fourth wore it always;
he adviseth, that a Letter should be written from the King after the usual manner under the Signer to the States, wherein His Majesty may be pleased to expresse the honour he hath done his Son in law: Such a Letter was written concerning Prince Maurice and himself, and is to be kept by the States. This ought to be presented by Sir Will. Boswel, if no Ambassador be here. And after that, either an Herald with the Robes, and the Order, should be sent with Sir W. Boswel into the field, where it may be done with more triumph (as he sayes) or in sending to Sir W. Boswel, an excuse may be made for deferring the Forma∣lities, and the Order worn presently. I told the Prince, that I hoped after the return of the Dutch Ambassadors, our Affairs here would be in so good a condition, that it would be necessary for the Lord Iermine to appear here as Ambassador, not onely to present that, but to conclude all other Affairs, which he said he hoped, and that now in short time we should see what was to be expected from hence; with which after many kinde promises he ended. Since my writing this Letter, I have been with the Princesse of Orange, where I finde such froideurs and objections (now, that the portion is like to be accorded) against the whole businesse, publike and private; that I beleeve, what I write hath taken place, and our businesse at an end. Dr. Goff to the Lord Iermin. May 1. Since the writing of my other Letter, I have been with Secre∣tary Muys, who gives great hopes of the States inclining to the King, and adviseth the Queen to use all means— which hath been spoken of, that that alone (though the Duke o Lorrain should ail) will bring all about that we desire. He con∣fessed the Treaty of Brandnburg; but that he knew for certain the minde of the Prince of Orange, was, if possibly he could, to make the match with the Prince of Wales; so that however the Prince be wavering, and fearful in regard of the Kings Affairs, yet the Prince of Orange is resolved to try what may be done, rather for the Prince of Wales then any other.
Lord Jermine to the Lord Digby. Paris, May 19. I Wrote to you yesterday by Colonel Fitz-Williams, I conceive you will finde cause to take the businesse that concerned him into consideration: I have sent you now a Copy of Dr. Gaffe's dispatch out of Holland, by which you will see the state of that businesse reduced to this onely hope, that the return of the Ambassadors out of England, may not onely give Prince Orange a disposition to set on foot that which before he was not con∣fident enough of his own strength to attempt, but also afford him some hopes of effecting it; of this we shall see a sudden issue: the other advantages we expect from thence, as the Ships for the Duke of Lorrain. Supplies of money by the marriage, are in an estate not much to be relied on; for the businesse of the Duke, I much fear will fall away: the money of the marriage will not be considerable enough to conclude t; for that Reason it may be we may single that advantage from the rest, even with∣out the consideration of the marriage: so that we have no more to do, but to attend the issue of the hopes of the Declaration, and according to that, proceed or let fall the whole businesse, and look after—as a thing to be managed according to the means we shall finde here, to go through with it. We shall know next week what to depend upon for the Duke of Lorrain, which failing, we shall presume our pretensions here for moneys in place of that which that expedition would have cost them here: The Clergy Assembles next, week with whom we shall set on foot the liberty the French Queen Regent hath given us to try their inclinations for the support of the Affairs of England Trasdunk is gone from Dunkirk three weeks since with four Frigots, 6040 Muskets, 2000 Pair of Pistols, 1200 Carabines, Swords, 400 Shovel, 27000 pounds of Match, and 50000 pounds of Brimstone. I hope he is arrived before now: His Arms were all embarked before Allen arrived there; so that I cannot assure you, that Allen will be provided with that proportion which I sent you word would be sent to Marq. Montrosse. The Queen hath sent 400 Barrels of Powder to Dartmouth; she hath ad∣vise of the arrival of 200, and hopes the other will speedily arrive: She could not get the Merchants to undertake the car∣riage of them without engaging Her self for them, i case they
were not paid in England: The Queen hath now received, a I wrote before, the Kings Order for shipping for the Tin from time to time; whereupon lst week She gave Order for 4000 pounds sterling to be sent to Falmouth, for that proportion which she was advertised by Sir Nicholas Crisp would be ready there at the end of May, and hath demanded a Ship of the Prince of Orange for that purpose: She had advised last week, that the ship is accorded so, that it is undoubtedly upon the way. The Kings Order concerning the Tin, was but during pleasure; ther∣fore, pray have a care there be no change, without giving the Queen timely advise of i. Her Majesty having been served by Sir Nicholas Crisp at Her coming out of England, with affection and diligence, is desirous to make him some return; and there∣fore intreats you to assist him in his Affairs, as he shall preset them to you particularly, for the transportation of some Wools: the proceed of which, he undertakes to return in Ammunitio. He is also a suitor to the Queen for Her Recommendation to the King, to be a Collector of the Customes in the West, in which he had formerly a promise. Pray advise me in your next, how far the Queen may reasonably enterpose in that particular. For the proposition concerning the Duke of York's going into Ireland, the Queen bids me tell you, that She cannot yet, for any reason She can discern, approve of it. The businesse of Her Majesties Jewels is so pressing upon Her, that unlesse in the future She be as fortunate as She hath been hitherto, She will undergo great trouble and inconvenience: That you may perceive this, I send you a short Note of the parcels engaged in Holland, for which there must be Use duly paid every six moneths, or the Jewels must be lost: For these sums for which they are pawned for, is very inferior to their value. For this Reason it is most necessary to continue the Tin in the Queens hands, least She should fail of those other means, that hitherto She hath had for the discharge of these Instructions; if otherwise She findes means to do it, then all the profits of the Tin will be duly accounted for to the King. Just now your Letter of April the 11, and the Kings of the 10 are come, to which you can have no Answer this week; they alwaye come to us not under a moneths time, whereas I perceive you receive ours in a fortnight. Pray rectifie this if you can. Paris
Lord Iermin, to the Lord Digby. Paris May 26. 1645. YEsterday I received yours, of the seventeenth of Aprill by the Portugall Ambassadour, by which you may please to observe, that all your Letters by that way, are still a Moneth at least a comming, it will be good to inquire where the stop is made, At the same time I received the Kings of the 3th of Aprill, by Sabra, and I marke that by him, they come still quicker; By both, and by all other concurring, I see that our affaires in England, if they had received any competent assistance from abroad, would have been in an excellent condition, that which I most la∣ment is the Queenes inability in the reliefe of M. Montrosse, for which I conceived she had provided by ordering Hasdock to furnish him out of the Proportions he had provided for England. The proportions designed for him, I have mentio∣ned in my former Letters, but Hasdok would not obey the Queens directions, but carryed all he had provided into Eng∣land, so that the Queen remaining without credit, or other meanes to do that worke, it remaines now imperfect untill she be furnished with one or the other; Something she hath since attempted, but it is not to be relyed on this May, that no po∣ssible things within her power shall be omitted for this pur∣pose, for she conceives the importance of it, even beyond that which you have represented. Our Holland news from Scot∣land which we have often doe no lesse then yours, confirme the necessitie and moment of this consideration, I send you herewithall what I had last week from Dr. Goffe, by which you will perceive there is since the returne of the Ambassa∣dour some new hopes of prevailing with the States for the Declaration against the Rebells, which is a thing of so great concernment, that we must make it our endeavour not to fu∣strate the hopes of it by a sudden breaking off the Treaty, and to defend our selves against the prejudices we sustaine by the
expectation of the successe, for that cannot be assured enough, to rely on it for great present utilities, and me thinkes it were an hard thing, being thus awaked in the consideration, to pro∣vide against both the inconveniences. The Duke of Loraie hath againe this last weeke made so many new Protestatious of his intentions, that the most positive commands that could be to Sir Hn. de Vic. have not prevailed with him to break off the Treaty, but his Troopes now march, though himselfe do not remaine at Bruxells, so that it will be impossible for a∣ny art to prolong the businesse beyond foure or five dayes, but there is no hopes to be allowed to it. The businesse here to be done, which shall be carefully attended, are, That of Holland, the forme I have proposed in this Letter, the supply of Marq. Montrosse with Armes and Ammunition; the West with the same, for the Prince his new Levyes, and for the supply of the Kings and Prince Ruperts Army, and the relife of Grnsey Castle, for the Prince of Wales his Army, Will. Godolphin is very sollicitous, what he will be able to effect is as doubtfull as the Queenes expectation in all the other particulars, Mo∣ney for the King is also in her thoughts and pretentions, and now the Clergy is assembled, upon which many of our hopes have depended, She will with all the instance and care that may bee, have that way attempted. Wee are at this time strangely sollicitous for you, for there seemes to be a gather∣ing together on both sides neere Oxford, like to produce some notable encounter, which cannot well be followed but with great event; God make them prosperous, and enable us here to contribute something more hereunto then our prayers. I am yours. Your last concerning Th. Ellytt, where you seeme to take notice we had not here provided according to order, is answe∣red in my former ones, so as I am confident you are fully sa∣tisfied in that point.
Dr. Goffe to the Lord Iermine the 29. of May. NOw that the Prince of Orange is gone into the Field, your Lordship will have reason to expect some certaine and good conclusion of all the Propositions which have been offered hitherto, and in summe it is, That the affaires of the King are now put into a way of consideration. Here I sent you a Copy of those Articles presented to the Princesse of O∣range and Master Borrell, a fortnight since, out of them the Ambassadours have this last weeke given in a Paper of their owne, believing it impossible to procure the acceptance of them all at one time. The Prince of Orange, with more warmth and chearfulnesse then ever before, told me upon my returne from Rotterdam, that he did not doubt but a good be∣ginning would be made for my purpose; Hee had given Sir William Roswell his taske, to propose the liberty of their Ha∣vens and hiving of Ships, and the Ambassadours theirs to urge the necessity of granting of Letters of Reprizall to the many complaints received in England from their owne Peo∣ple, and then he added; Believe me, by this means they shall be engaged insensible in a warre, Croyes moy, par ce moy n ils serent engages in sensiblement dans une guerre; Both these things have been done only the Ambassadours (as you may see by this inclosed memoriall which Reynswood gave me) have thought fit to insist upon the whole businesse, pretending out of their recredentialls, that his Majesty requires answer to these particulars. It has been thought a more probable way of ope∣rating upon this jealous people, to permit the Propositions to proceed the ordinary way, which is by sending Copies of them to their principalls in the severall Provinces and Towns, then, to make a Close Committee for the English affaires, but this will prove a very slow remedy for our evills, for the an∣swers must be had from the severall places, and a new Assem∣bly of the States, (who separate this Whitsontide) before any
conclusion can be made, this is all that could bee effected, though they were awakened by a very seasonable intelligence, that the Houses of Parliament at Westminster intended to send not only a Remonstrance against the two Ambassadours, but also severall envoyes to their respective Provinces to Treat with them apart thereby in ending o divide the Provinciall States from the Generall, and to fonent the quarrell which hath been already begun amongst them in that point, for re∣medy of this, the Prince of Orange told me they had resolved two things; First, that Letters should be dispatched to the particular Provinces to declare the danger of admitting any such Agents, and then an order to Ioachim at London, to de∣clare that all such Envoyes should be rejected, and for their Remonstrance, it is a thing much longed fo by these Ambassa∣dours, who are prepared to repay them in that kind with libe∣rall interest. But it falls out very il, that whilest these things are in agitation here, Sabran hath written hither, not concealing his great dislike of the matter, that France hath layed aside their intentions about Reprizalls, and are contented with the emp∣ty promises of the Houses that reparation shall be made, which by these Ambassadours are presented to the States as things to be despised, forasmuch as they have been told plainly, that it was not in their power to performe them, and were advised by the Lords themselves, to take from them of London and others of their Association five times as much as they deman∣ded, by which their pious protecting government, hath disco∣vered, how much they consider any particular mans safety and interest that lives amongst them, it is uncertaine what were the best remedy for this, for if your Lordship should complaine of this, before that reprizall were granted here perhaps in stead of finding amendment in France, some means might be used under-hand to divert these here from good intentions, if there were not feare of this, it would be of great advantage to the proceedings here, if Sabran were commanded presently to de∣mand performance of the promises, or else after a fit time to resume their purpose of reprizalls, this businesse alone, if it be obtained, will set ships to Sea against the Rebells before this
Summer be ended, as the Ambassadours say, but the Princesse of Orange told me that she feared France would deceive us, and the Ambassadours imputed all the timerousnesse of the Prince of Orange to private discouragements the Prince of Orange receives from France, and doe therefore counsell, that the Queen should now endeavour to get something done by the Queene Regent, and Cardinall Mazerine at this time, which might give assurance to the States here of their future concur∣rence with them, as for example, The publick and certaine rejection of Agier, the granting Letters of Reprizall, or some more imediate promise of joying with them there, they have not, or at the same time that out of your Letters I declare to the Prince of Orange what hopes the Queene hath in that kind, he tells me, the Letters that he received form Paris are very silent in the businesse; your Lordship will by this per∣ceive in what state our affaires are, and will by the next I hope give me order how to dispose of my selfe, for after I have fully informed my selfe of the state of her Majesties debts here, and have settled the businesse of this present Time, and seene the Ship under sayle fully instructed for England, I cannot imagine what I can doe in this place, separate from the Prince of Orange, for whatsoever is to be pursued here, will be as cordially done by the Ambassadour, and Mui, Sir William Boswell attending them, as can be desired. And with the Prince of Orange, as soone as the Instructions come for the private Treaty of the Marriage, I shall quickly dispatch that businesse, and leave the matter in this condition, that her Majesty hath proceeded with most cleare intentions, and that it is their own imbecillity, or unwillingnesse (which might admit of a worse name) that frustrates so great and important a Proposition, both for themselves and us. I have now received your Lord∣ships full Instructions concerning the dispatch for England, wherein the Prince of Orange hath complyed as well as could be desired. Coulster is judged the fittest man, both for his ap∣petite to the worke and courage. You may presume the ship will be at Callice by Gods assistance, about the last of May old Stile, and then Master Carteret may imbarque without
the toyle and expence of a journey hither, if this Letter come time enough to prevent him, if my last hath not done it already, since Sir William Coulster is imployed, you may be confident of a speedy return and dexterous mannagement of that businesse, for by his last he hath gotten great experience about the Tynn, so that if I durst venture upon it, I would charge Mr. Carteret with a journey to England to the King to whom it is necessary by this ship to make a large and various dispatch, and from the King to receive againe answers to many particulars, as the ra∣tification for Mr. Webster, upon which depends the whole Jewell businesse, and the good successe of that which is to be done hereafter; A Commission under the broad Seale to receive the Ruby Collar with a blanke for what name the Queen will put into it, with a procuration to pawne it, for that good thing is not like to produce money amongst Merchants. A Letter to Sir William Boswell from the K. that he obey th Queens in∣structions in making such Propositions to this State, as his Ma∣jesty shall ordain him, as likewise some particular Instructi∣ons to be sent him from the King concerning the Leage pro∣posed by him, in the mean time till an extraordinary Ambas∣sadour appeare here, for without some such Instructions as he cannot confidently doe any thing, so will the States lesse consi∣der what he proposes. The Instructions for the private Treaty with the Prince of Orange concerning Marriage, the Copy of their Ambassadours report, and Propositions, which Brrel hath promised to give me within six dayes. The Copy of the Ducth Commission for ships of war, that mutatis mutandis his Majesties Commission may runne in that forme, and not so strangely as some which are showne here. A Letter from the King to the Duke of Curland, with instructions to Mr. Vicforl about him; Some blanke Commissions for ships of war to be left in Sir William Boswells hands or mine, for that divers are ready upon their owne charges to put to Sea, if they had them, to the certaine ruine of the trade of London. Letters from his Majesty to the States concerning the Order of the Garter for Prince William, if they be not already obtained; Besides, that it were fit that I should give an account to the Lord Digby of
all the proceedings here since the returne of the Ambassadours, and in what state the other businesse is, For all these uses I con∣ceive Carteret might better imploy his time with the King, then at Truro, since without doubt Sir Nicholas Crispe, and Sir William Coulster can perfectly doe all that is there to be done, and especially since her Majesty ought as soone as conve∣niently it may be, to perfect the grant of the Tynn pre-empti∣ons to have a Pattent for it under the broad Seale, without which perhaps Merchants will make scruple to contract about it, and for her Majestie to buy all the Tynn with her owne money, it is thought will prove a thing impossible for her, and if possible, it would not bee the way of quickest and greatest gaine. Wherefore all these things being so neces∣sary to be dispatched to the King, if upon Carterets arriving hither it appears unfit to imploy him, Sir William Boswell is of opinion, some other person ought of purpose to be sent, which shall be done aswell and thristily as can be contrived. Sir William Boswell doth desire your Lordship to persue this inclosed Copy of the Kings Letter to him concerning the Gar∣ter, wherein the best way (as he thinkes) is prescribed, that it be done without the pompe of an Herauld; which way soe∣ver it be done, it will cost money, and there is nothing more certaine then that Sir William Boswell is one of the poorest and worthiest, and most contented servant that the King hath, he hath a long time lived here upon borrowing, and his thrifty Lady and he make a little goe farre; For his last imployment in this kind for the Prince Elector, the King allowed him one hundred pounds in consideration of the journey hee tooke, which now is like to be every way as expencefull, the Prince of Orange intending for Flanders. I have not seene Muis since your Lordships last Letter, but shall suddenly obey the order,A Present for Muis. supposing Master Webster will make no difficulty to hasten the money, one thousand Crowns, that is as I take it three thousand Guilders.
Lord Iermin to the Lord Digby. Paris Iune. 9. 1645. YEasterday I received yours of Aprill the twenty ninth from Oxford, whereby I must needs ob∣serve to you, ours are received in halfe the time that yours are comming hither, now you are removed from Oxford, I feare it will yet be harder for you to send to London about all things, the Queen recommends it to you, I send you here enclosed Doctor Goffs last dispatch, word for word, by that you will see the estate of that busines, Sir H. de vic, is now here, yesterday arrived, with the Dukes last de∣mands, tomorrow he attends Cardinall Mz. and as soone as the answer is gotten, and Queene Regents resolution in a supply of Armes and Ammunition we have now demanded, to which already we have some promises, advanced, Petit shall be dispatched who is stayed for that end, and to returne to us with some information of the state you are in, where the last letters speake so variously of that wee are in much paine. Armes and Ammunition I will be againe confident we shall speedily get, but for money, I can give no good hopes of it al∣though the Clergy be now together, from whom we have so many expectations; Sir Kenele Digby is arrived, at Roome, hath had audience of the Pope who hath given him the best re∣ception that the first visit was capeable of, that is, the fairest promises in generall that can be wished, if he may be relyed on there are good hopes of money there, but you know he is of a sanguine family and himselfe yet the melancholliest of it, he hath visited some other of the petty Princes of Italy but they are a frugall generation; Talbott is comming from Venice without any effect of his voyage; A man the Queene sent foure moneths agoe into Scotland to Marques Montross this day arrived; It greeves me Hsdonckes did not obey the Queenes order for his supply, but now againe that shall be suddainly attempted I hope with better successe, yet his arri∣vall
in the West hath beene very opportune for the designes of the Prince of Wales there, which I observe to you as a service solely of the Queenes, for nothing but her cōmands could pre∣vaile with him to undertake this supply, therefore pray give him what help you can to get his money; pray commend my service to Prince Rupert and make my excuse I write not unto him; by something I heare I hope you two are good friends which I much rejoyce at, and conjure you to doe all you can to the continuance of it if it be so, and to the making of it so if it be otherwise. I rest yours. The Queene hath written her selfe to the King. You will find in Doctor Goffs letter severall things desired to be sent from England all in my judgement most materiall and ther∣fore to be hostned to him or Sir William Boswell with the grea∣test expedition that can bee, e proposeth the sending of my ma, Carteret being already gone to Holland with instructions for the business of the Tinn, to attend that in England, may perhaps not follow the Doctors order in coming to you: for these things, there∣fore I pray you, as soone as you receive this, let them be dispatched and sent by an expresse of yours. Lord Iermin to the Lord Digby. St. Iermin August. 5.1645. I Wrot to you yesterday by the ordinary; Something I have to adde by this expresse the Queene sends to visit the King, and to bring her backe an account of his health, and of the state of his affaires, her resolution of sending Cockeram into Denmarke, is without doubt very oportune; for upon the conclusion of the peace with the Sweedes cannot but be in condition to help us, and if as it shall be in the first place demanded, he could be prevailed with to give us such an Army, as might Land in any place, where the King hath no
Forces, without fearing who they mett, their descent at Sear∣berough or Burlington would give a new turne to all; but this is a felicity I dare not hope. That which with more assurance I looke upon, which in the second place shall be sollicited, would be of infinite use, That is, a small number of men with some money Armes and Ammunition, and all to goe to Scot∣land to Marquesse Montrosse; but the men in that case must some of them be horsemen five hundred at least, and these horse to passe with them: This I conceive would enable Mar∣quesse Montrosse to make his victoryes profitable, as well as miraculous: But in the meane estate he is, for want of Horse (for of that he complaines in his Letter to me) and of Armes and Ammunition, his advantages have brought almost none to the King his affaires, for he advances not into the good parts of Scotland, nor is so considerable to the Army in England, as that they have forborne for feare of him to leave their Country exposed to him, I cannot send you by this bearer so great a volume as cockram instructions would be, but you shall have them by the next; he shall have order to offer the Islands that Poly had order to offer to the King of Den∣marks. The Winter growing on makes me not apprehend, that all our losses can bring us so soone to an end as this Summer, and the ill weather will reprive us untill either this or some other help be found out. The Queene is therefore now more industrious then ever, and hath found meanes to get twenty thousand pistols for—I once wrote to you of, so that if the persons that should have undertaken it be still of the same mind, and the Prince of O∣range which we have written to know, That businesse will go forward and may prove of great use in many considerations; But the importantest ayme in it is the insensible ingaging the Hollanders in the Warre. Sir Kenele Dgby writes hope∣fully of supplyes of money from Rome, but concludes nothing, the Irish troubling all our solas, untill the Peace be made with them, I feare all Catholique helpe will be drawne that way: Upon this purpose I must tell you with what amazement the delayes of the peace in Ireland is considered here, and you leave
us so ignorant of the condition of the treaty, that we know not what to say of it. Pray by the returne of this bearer, or the first likely passage, send me the state of it, their demand, the King of England his offers, and what you know of the difficul∣ties; If yet it be not concluded, it is not like that ever it will be, by those that mannage it now, And therefore it seemes to me for satisfaction of those that so much presse it, of the Irish and to satisfy this state, who are much of that opinion, and to secure our hopes at Rome and lastly to put that businesse into a possibility of being concluded, that the proposition long since made to the King, of having the treaty made here by the Queene and Queene Regent, were not unfitly resumed. For I am confident the King by this meanes, might have the peace upon better tearmes, and might limit the Queene by the same instructions that those that now treate are bound by, and up∣on this, one of these fruits would follow, that either—should have the peace, or the exorbitancy of their demands would be so apparent to the Queene Regent, that we should have great advantage by that; The only thing I feare is, that the King his party in Ireland might possibly not acquiesse, in such a peace, as would be fit for the King to make, and then he would have the scandall of it (for it will be a scandalous one, that is unavoidable) without the benefit of an assistance from Ireland: to conclude if nothing be done in Ireland, I think it most necessary that the offers of treating be with∣drawne from thence, and that the Queene may be trusted to Treate and conclude with the Queene Regent here, with such as the Catholiques from Ireland shall appoint. This I write to you to consider of it, by the returne of Sir D: Wyit you shall know more of this particular. This bearer send backe immediately and wrie without flattering your selfe or us, the pure and naturall state of affaires. God of Heaven keep you and give us if he please some other punishment for our faults, then that of our Countries falling into the hands of these Re∣bells, I am most entirely yours. I have given Petit thirty pounds for his Journey.
The Accompt. BOrrowed at Rotterdam of the Burgomasters, 400000 More of the Banke in Rotterdam, 25000 In all from Rotterdam, 425000 Borrowed of the Bank at Amsterdam by Mr. Sandys, 84500 At the Hague of Eletcher clftcher. 126000 More of him, 40000 At the Hague of Van. Cyren, by Sir William Boswell, 900 Of Monsieur Despernon, 20000 Of Webster by three Obligations together on the Pendant Pearles, 100000 Of him more, 43200 Of him more, and borrowed by him since 70000 Of Monsieur Vicford, 70000 Of Sir Charles Herbert, 20000 Of Collimore at Antwerpe, 64000 In all—1281700. Guilders. With Webster the six Rubies of the Chain left for about 20000 To Webster 20000 To the Pr. Orange, 300000 LEtters concerning Ireland from the Lord Digby, Marquesse of Ormond, Lord Iermin and others, And Fitz-Williams Treaty with the Queene about the Irish. Lord Iermin to the Lord Digby. Paris May 18. 1645. THe Queene hath written to the King by this bearer, Col∣lonel Fitz-Willams, with her owne hand, it is the first time she hath been able to use her Pen, since her sicknesse,
which now God be thanked is totally gone, she refers the King to me for severall things, I shall begin with that which con∣cernes this bearer, who is a brave man, and hath served in the wars of this Country with great reputation, he doth perswade himselfe, that if the Peace be made in Ireland, that he shall be able to raise there for the King, and bring into England ten or twelve thousand men, upon the conditions that you will find here enclosed, signed by the Queen, which he desired his Ma∣jesty should Signe for this end, that the King might see it was her opinion that the King upon this designe of his, should signe some others to him, to the same effect, so that you are to keep the Paper Signed by the Queen, and to propose to the King the signing of something to the same effect, if he approve of the businesse, which the Queen believes the King will find cause to doe, being by the opinion of many others, knowing in the affaires of Ireland induced to believe so, more then by the confidence of his undertakings, which yet may passe for someground, he having upon severall occasions already, both for the raising and recruiting of those Troopes with which he hath served this State, found himselfe very willingly followed by his Conutry-men; You will observe part of his demands to consist of a considerable body of Horse that must meet at the place agreed on for his landing, Marquesse Newcastle be∣ing here, and acquainted with this Proposition, and foresee∣ing the landing can only be towards the North in Lancashire, hath believed he might not be an improper person for the con∣duct of this body of Horse to this conjunction, and believes further, that the stage for it being among his friends he may serve usefull in it, how reasonably this is imagined cannot be determined here, for it must rest upon the disposition that the Kings Troopes in generall will be in, when the resolution for this particular shall be taken to determine whether M. New∣castle, or any other may be fit for the charge of Conducting a body of Horse to this conjunction with the Collonel, in case the King thinke fit to set forward the businesse, and that he be so fortunate as to goe through with it, the Queen doth approve of, but not as a thing to be much relied on, for it is a great
thing that will remaine to be done on the Collonels part, if the King should be able on his to comply with all the de∣mands, which the Queen besieves his Majesty in no estate for, neither doth she thinke they are demanded so much in hopes of having them performed, as that the promise should give him meanes in Ireland, the better to bring about underta∣kings, but rather, as that which when it shall faile, if it dis∣appoint no other enterprise of the same kind more like to pro∣duce the effects aimed at in this, which she hopes you will have a care of, can be of no inconvenience, and therefore adviseth you to consider it very seriously, and in what resolution soe∣ver shall be taken, that there be a speciall care had of giving the person of the Collonel all sorts of satisfaction, as a man fully deserving it, and zealously affected to the Kings service, if M. New. should be thought fit to have the charge of any Troopes appointed to joyne with those he shall bring, he is well contented all should fall under his command, and he to command under him, if any other hee must bee chosen, as that the Collonel may command him as Generall, this is as much as need be said to you of this matter. Pray doe me the favour to let the Collonel know I have recommended him to you, and use him very kindly; I have this night received se∣verall Letters form Holland, which I shall send you by an ex∣presse within few dayes, for we grow very neere concluding of all our expectation there, what will be the issue though as neere as we are, no man can tell, and the knowledge of it is no more of moment in that point, which heretofore was to be considered in it, how much influence it was to have in the swaying towards an accommodation, or to the continuance of the Warre, for it seemes the Lott is cast as to that matter, and if we save not our selves with our swords, there is little other hope of doing it, the knowledge of it would be of use in another respect, for if the issue were to be a Declaration of the States, to which would follow that of France there would be in that such a reserve of helpe, and so solid foundation of strength to carry through with this Warre, as there would be lesse necessity of exposing the fortune of it to frequent hazards,
the game might be more securely played, whereas if now we saw our selves totally without hopes of this support, may be that would demand more sudden and lesse seeure tryalls then else we should have cause to attempt; For this cause it is a great affliction to me, that I cannot so soone as I would give you that which might be some guide to your Counsells, pray believe it is not my fault, since I am not without the appre∣hension of the use you might make of it, as you see, and that upon my word, I am not negligent in it, which I desire you to represent to the King. The businesse of the Duke of Lorraine is not in the same state which the rest are, our hopes of money here, or breake with the Duke; The passing over of them, if it be obtained, will be of so great expence here, that we can∣not with any appearance of suceesse presse them for any more supplies of money for Armes and Ammunition, All I can say is yet gone, is Hasdank proportions consisting of 6040. Muskets, 2000. paire of Pistols, 1200. Carabines, 130 Swords, 400. shovels, 27000. pounds of Match, 50000 pounds of Brimstone, this Brimstone will I hope enable you in Eng∣land to make good store of Powder, for Mills, Saltpeter, Coale, and men that know how to make, may every where be had, 400, Barrels of Powder I have sent to Dartmouth, having undertaken to pay for it here, if it be not payd for there, for feare presently there should be want; I have newes of the arrivall of 200. of the barrells, and am confident the others will be very shortly there, and I shall give Callimore such helpes for his effecting last undertakings, that I am confi∣dent you shall receive good quantities of Powder from him I shall write to you to morrow by the Ordinary, and presently after by an Expresse, therefore now I will hold you no longer. There is a young Gentleman, one Captaine Carteret, a Ier∣sie man, taken prisoner lately, pray doe me the favour to speak he may be examined, hee was lately taken, as I remember neere Warwicke. I have spoken to the Collonel to say something to you in a businesse that concernes you and me. I remaine Yours.
Instructions to our trusty and well-beloved Servant, Daniel O Neile, Groome of our Bed-chamber. 27. Iune, 1645. You are forthwith to repaire unto our Ports of Dartmouth, and Falmouth where you are to conferre with Sir Nicholas Crispe, Knight; and with Captain Hansdonck, or any other owners Shipe or Friggots in our service. You are to let them know, that whereas by a Clause in their severall Commissions, they are ob∣lidg'd, upon extraordinary occasions of our service to employ their Frigots for six weekestime, according to our speciall Commands, wee giving them just payment and satisfaction for the time of their Ships, during the time that they are so employed by us, wee having now at this time such an occasion for them, as doth high∣ly import the good of our affaires, wee  require them to have in readinesse to expect our Orders, all such Ships or Frigots as can within a fortnight or three weekes time be set to Sea, for a moneth or six weekes service; and that for the present they doe send immediately with you over into Ireland, unto such Ports as you shall direct, all such Ships and Frigotts as are now fitted and ready there into Ireland, to expect and obey such Orders as they shall receive from the Marquesse of Ormond, Wee assuring the owners of the said Vessells, that they shall not only receive full satisfaction for the time that they shall bee withdrawne from their owne employments by this our Command, but that we shall carry the same in mind as the most acceptable and important service, that they can possible doe us. And we doe further Command you, that in case you shall find that more of the said Frigots then one cannot within very few dayes bee ready, that then you make use of the nimblest Vessell you can there find, and that whilst the others are preparing, you forth∣with transport your selfe with all diligence unto the Marquesse of Ormond, there to pursue such further directions as wee here give you, having first advertised us by expresses, what wee may rely upon, and when, concerning the shipping aforesaid expected for our service.
You are likewise to represent unto the Marquesse of Ormond the great Importance to the good of our affaires, that w speedily supplyed from our Kingdome of Ireland, with some good members of fot that we should be very glad you could fram such a body there so be sent over as might bee worthy by his comming to command it, in which case when we heare from him, we shall give him our further directions but for the present, that no time must be lost in sending over what numbers can be spared of our old English  there: as well as what may be procured of th Irish together with the best Antilerie, as well for Battery as the field, that the said Marq. of Ormond can assist us withall. You are to acquaint the said Marquesse of Ormond with the deligence used here to procure shipping for their Transportation, and what may be relyed on of that kind from hence. You are to employ your selfe in soliciting what ayds of all kinds may possible be had from the Irish, according as you shall bee instructed by the Marquesse of Ormond, And what by his ap∣pointment you shall promise or engage in our name by way of in∣vitation or encouragement to our service unto any in that King∣dome, we shall be carefull to make good but in this and all things else of your negotiation there, you are strictly and punctually to governe your selfe by such directions as you shall receive from the said Marquesse of Ormond and no otherwise. Of all this, and what we may expect from thence; and when, you are to give the speediest and punctuallest accompts you can unto our principall Secretary of States attending. To the Lord George Digby. 16. Iuly 1645. My Lord, I Do not thinke it very necessary to put my letter wholly in Cypher, having so secure a Beares as Sir Nicholas Byron; yet have (I suppose) so Cypherd it, as not to be understood but by your selfe, at my comming here I find all things contrary to what your Lordship expected, and much more to the Articles past betweene the Queene and me. For in those, free use of Religion a free Parliament, and the penall Lawes to be taken off; This were granted: But there is only of these a free Parliament granted, and incapacityes taken of,
withall an Article proposed by the Marquesse of Ormond and the Councell, that no propositions shall be hereafter made by the Irish Parliament, but such as they shall now propose at the making of the peace if they can agree, by which I find the Irish addes many trivialls, which else they would leave out. I have had some with Marquesse Ormond, who tells me e never had order from the King to grant to the Irish either the penal lawes to be taken off, or that they should keep any of the Churches, now in their possession: O contraire the restitution of them is desired backe, being the only principal points insisted on by the Irish. Truly my Lord, had you told me of this before my com∣ming from you, I could have told you, that in all probability, there would be no peace, having heard much of the Irish reso∣lutions before ere my comming out of France, and declared the same unto the Queen, which caused her to condescend that the three demanded poynts as by the Articles signed by the Queen to  you may see. I also find by Marquess Ormond that if the King instead of referring all things touching peace to the Mar∣quesse of Ormond, do not order the granting of the said deman∣ded poynts, viz. free exercise of Religion, a free Parliament, all penaltyes to be taken off, with such other poynts, as are already condescended unto, That the Marquesse of Ormond is resolved never to condescend to the demands of the Irish, and by the Irish, that they are resolved to have them or perish. I proposed to the Marquesse of Ormond the condition the King was in, and how necessary it was for him to have from the Irish in∣continant army from hence, and how the absolute ruine and destruction of the Irish depended on the least losse the King should sustayne in England for want of army; I said as much to the Irish, Both have promised me a breife of the obstacles, on perusall of which I shall quickly discover whether the Irish have, or not, a just pretence to except against such offers as hath beene made by the Marquesse of Ormond, on the behalfe of the King, and if found satisfactory, I am very confident you will speedily have what you expect, and the Character the King the Queene, &c. gave of me will render him to you very ser∣viceable and to &c. but if things goe crosse I conceive it were not amisse (if the King intends as the Queene did) to send
what here is mentioned to the Marques of Ormond, and in case things be concluded ere its comming, that it may lye dormant els to be put in use. I have enquired of the particular affaires spoken of, and find all faiseable: But for the present, there is nothing to be said. If you thinke fit, I pray recommend this to him who recommended me to your Lordship. Be also plea∣sed to present my most humble service to Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice, and be mindfull and desire them according to Prince Ruperts promise, to be so also of me; touching Titbery, I doubt also by meanes of it and the helpes offered to me i that country to reduce the best part of the Mrlands for the King, however affaires goes, I beseech your Lordship to let the King know, that I will live and dye faithfull to him, and to beleive that my endeavours shall ever be, to find occasions to let your Lordship see that I am. 16. of Iuly. 1645. My Lord, The most humble and solely devo∣ted of your Lordships servant. Fitz-Williams. The Scots have entred into Connaught destroyed Women and Children, as well as what men they met, finding no opposition: But Lord Tast is gone with sufficent force this weeke to repulse them, the Irish Commissioners are come to Dublin: and all hope for what is wisht. Marquesse Ormond is as willing of what was desired for my Father, as I was, and tells me he hath sent to the King for his Commission of being Privy Councellour, and I shall intreat your Lordship, that it may be sent by the first of your Lord∣ships packets. From the Lord Digby to the Lord Iermin. SInce the writing of my other of this same date in my bro∣ther secretaryes Cypher, I have received yours of the 28. of Iuly in my new Cypher, which over joyes me; and it is as a prediction of good fortune to us, that the Queen beares our disasters with that moderation. You doe now find that clearly true, which was my opinion before, that our ill successes would sooner warme that State to our assistance then our good, it be∣ing
their interest to ballance things here. For Gods sake ha∣sten powder and match in plenty to the Northerne Coast, and what muskets and pistolls you can; but ammunition in the first place, let them be directed to Burlington or Whitby; for Sarborough is lost, but yet with some caution as to enquire before they put in, least by any accident the enemy should have Garrison those places before we come thither. We are advertised from London that there are some letters in∣tercepted from the Queen to the King with blanks to be sigued by the King authorising the Queene to engage Ireland to the Queene Regent for some aydes; I any such there be, it is very unlucky not only for the ill use may be made of it here, but as it may be resented by my Lord of Ormond, who having com∣mitted to him the management of the affaires of Ireland and having discharged that trust so faithfully and prudently, may thinke himselfe injured in such Negociations by the by. God keepe you, and faile not to love him who is entirely. Yours. Bridgenorth. Aug. 9. From the Lord George Digby to the Lord Iermin. My dear Lord, IT is a great comfort to us to heare by this expresse, that her Majesty preserves her health, notwithstanding that trouble of mind which our misfortunes must needs have given her, and that in stead of despairing, her Majesty and you doe ra∣ther improve your diligence to procure us aydes, God send that your hopes may succeed, for my part, I thinke there is more probability in that of Denmarke for man, now the peace is concluded with the Swedes, and for money, from Roome, then any other way, the busines of Ireland hath hung long in suspence, although the King hath long since given my Lord of Ormond power to conclude Peace there, upon the ve∣ry utmost concession that can possibly be yeilded unto, with∣out causing a revolt, not only of all his party here, but also such a one of his Army, and all his Protestant subjects there, as would make it impossible for the Irish to afford us a∣ny aydes, they would have so much to doe within them∣selves against those that would not submit to Peace, upon such
tearmes, the truth of it is, the Irish have proceeded hitherto, as if they had no good intention; having not been contented with the offers of more, then their Agents did prosesse to expect, and insisted upon those demands, the granting of which they could not. but see would be absolutely destructive to his Majesty, that is the granting unto them the Protestant Churches in such parishes, where the num∣ber of Catholicks was greater, that is in effect all through Ireland. And whereas you write, that perhaps my Lord of Ormond is not the fit person to conclude that businesse, but that the mannagement of it should be remitted to the Queen, I am much afeard, that the expectation of that in the Irish, hath much retarded the hoped for issue of the Treaty, but God be thanked wee received men; Now the certaine newes that the Peace there is concluded, and that an Expresse from my Lord of Ormond is upon his way from Chester, with all the particulars, the utmost extent of my Lord of Ormonds power to grant was, the suspention of Poyings act, as to the pas∣sing of such Bills as should be first agreed on; The repeale of the penall Lawes, and the allowing the Papists some Chappels in pri∣vate places for the exercise of their Religion, but you may not take notice that he had so large a power, for happily he may have ob∣tained a Peace upon a better bargaine, thus much for that businesse; his Majesty approves very well of the course proposed by you for such aydes as may be obtained from Denmarke, but above all things, let the matter of money be laboured in, for without some competent stock of that against the next Spring, it will be impossible for us e∣ver to have a resourse againe. My former Letters will have acquain∣ted you with our progresse since our retreate from Wales, and the reasons of it, and I make no doubt but you will be satisfied, that the Kings businesse hath been as well conducted in that retreate from Wales and since, as the desperateness of our condition could admit of, and that in fine, we are likely to have gained the only thing wee could hope for, which was to preserve his Majesties person safe, till the season of the yeare should secure him in any of his principall Garrisons from the danger of a Siege; 'Tis true, I could have wisht that the Rebells had given us some leisure, either in the North, or at Huntington, where we have done them some mischiefe, and gained some reputation, and not obliged us to goe to Oxford yet this fort∣night, but pressing us as they have done, and doe, it is not o be a∣voided,
but I hope it is not possible, that they can any wayes en∣danger Oxford before the Winter relieve it; You write to me to tell you freely our condition without flattering you or my selfe, you will find in my Letters of late, especially by Porter, that I have not been guilty of that fault, nor shall I now, but the freedome which I shall at this time use in stating to you the greatest misterie of our misfortunes, I desire may be received by you, as the breathings out of my soule unto my dearest friend by way of prediction. It is most true, that as desperate as our condition seems, I have no apprehensi∣on, but that having got thus farre in the yeare, we shall bee safe till the next, from any further great mischiefes, and that probably by helpes from Denmark and Ireland, and moneys from you, our quarters being well mannaged for the preservation and recruite of our remaining Forces, we may possibly have a fresh and hopefull resourse the next Spring; these hopes I am confident the condition of our businesse it selfe will beare, would the humours of our owne party beare the patience; But alas, my Lord, we must not expect it, there is such an universall wearinesse of the warre, dispaire of a pos∣sibility for the King to recover, and so much of private Interests growne from these upon every body, that I protest to God, I do not know foure persons living besides my selfe and you, that have not already given cleare demonstrations, that they will purchase their own & (as they flatter themselves) the kingdoms quiet at any price, to the King, to the Church, to the faithfullest of his party, & to deale freely with you, I doe not thinke it will be in the Kings power to hinder himselfe from being forced to accept such Conditions as the Rebells will give him, and that the next newes you will heare, after we have been one Moneth at Oxford will be, that I and those few others, who may be thought by our Councells to fortifie the King in firmnesse to his principalls, shall be forced, or torne from him; and you will find the prime Instruments, to impose the necessity upon the King of submitting to what they & most of the Kings party at Ox∣ford shall thinke fit. Truly I have great confidence in the Kings ver∣tue & steddines, & I am much improved in it by this enclosed Letter wch he wrote in his great distress in Wales, upon occasion of declaring unto him there was nothing left for him to do but to seek conditions, I protest to God I knew nothing either of the letter or the occasion til a good while after it was sent, but having then gained a sight of it
I got leave to communicate a coppy of it only to the Queene, and to your selfe. My deare Lord, I shall adde no more at this time but only to conjure you, first to beleive that if I have any truth or honour in me, I have not the least unfriendly thought in the world towards any men∣tioned or poynted at in this Letter more then purely in relation to the Kings service, and in the next place that though I stand single against all the world, I shall not vary a tittle from those foundations of justice and right to the honour and interest of my gracious Master and Mistris which I have professed my selfe built upon, and that I will in spight of the world carry to my grave the honour of a servant entirely faithfull and unbiast, and of being worthy that happy relation to you of your best friend. And faithfullest friend. Ascot August 7. 1645. Denbigh this 26. of September. 1645. My Lord, I Have received your Excellencies dispatch by Si Nicholas By  and hs Majesty commands me to returne you his full  no all you pro¦cedings in th  of Ireland, of which hs ajesty is very mpaiently desirs t here the issu his affaires dpending so highly upon it, being by the strage delivery up of Bristll by Prince Rupert after so many other misfortune brought to so low a condition as were it not for the arquss of Menrosse sucesse, ad hopes of assistance ou, o Ireland we should almost despair, his Majsty concives that the reducement of Scotland to his obedience will have two orble effects o advan∣tage in order to Ireland, the on, of making the Scots there  to the peace, the other of affording sfe transpotation and landing in Scotland to such orces as may he had from Ireland, which it would be allmost impossible to transport with any afey into England. I have wrtten to my Lord Marqusse of Montrosse upon both tere subjects, your Excellenie ill be Peased to corrsond with him and to agree upn patiulars, since we must stt up all rests to make a strong Ware upon the Rbells this inter in which their London forces will be ardly kept from their homes ad if we give them leisure till he next spring they will swarme a∣gainst us; As for what conces your Excellencies owne erson his Majesty persists i his earnesft desire to have you here, for in good faith without flattery wee care likely to  more want of such a generall then of an army, and Prince Rupertsen  power, hath made way for you Excellencie to be heare in such condition may be for your honour, where you will he sure to have this comft of high value in his majesty to yur person, and of an entire affection to  in all those that have the honour to bneere him, and in no man living moe Your Excellencies most humble servant, to the Marquesse of Ormond. This inclosed relation of our condition will let you see the danger of Chester, which is somewhat more then is there exprest through want of owder; your Excellencie is conjured to hasten over some supply thither of Ammunition, and if possible of men, you know the great importance of that place in relation to Ireland. The Act transmitted hither, which your Excellencie mentions, was unfortunately taken by the Rebels, as it was carrying to Oxford, be pleased to direct how it may be supplyed.
Fitz Williams Propositions about the Treaty with the Queen, to bring Irish into England. Collonel Fitz Williams humbly prayes, and propounds as followeth. THat your sacred Majesty will vouchsafe to prvaile with his Majesty to condiscend to the just demands of his Irish subjects the Confede∣rate Catholiques in Ireland, at least in private, that upon the considerati∣on thereof, Collonel Fitz-Williams humbly propounds and undertakes with the approbation of M. Hartogan now employed Agent for the said Confede∣rate atholiques is Ireland, to bring an Army of 10000. men or more, of the kings subjects in his kingdom of Ireland, for the kings service into Englād. That Collonel Fitz-Williams undertakes for the sum of 10000 pounds sterling, to lev, ship, and arme the sid ten thousand men, and so proportiona∣bly for more or lesse and that the said moneys may be paid into such hands as may be safe for your Majesty, as well as ready for the said Coll. when it shall appeare the said Army, shall be in readines to be transported into England. That upon the landing the said men, there shalbe advanced to the Collonel, one moneths pay for all the Army according to the master for the present support of the Army. That Coll. Fitz-Williams may be Commander in chiefe thereof, and dispose of all the officers, and only be commanded by the King Prince, and ...... and qualified with such benefits, as have bin for∣merly granted unto your Majesties Generalls That have cōmanded bodyes apart from the Kings own Army, as the Earl of Kingston and others wher∣by the better to enable him in the Levies as wel as in the Generall conduct of the businesse. And that in respect the Order gives no power to the Irish: therefore that the said Forces shall not by any order what soever be divided, at least that the Collonel may be supplyed with a body of ... two housand, to be ready at the place of landing. That the Coll. may be pro∣vided with Armes and Ammunition or with mony requisite for himselfe to provide necessary proportions for to bring with him: That the Army shall be paid as other Armies of the King. Having taken these Propositions into consideration, we have thought fit to testifie our approbation and agreement thereunto under our Signe Ma∣nuall, assuring what hath been desired of us therein shall be forthwith ef∣fectually endeavoured, and not doubting to the satisfaction of the Confede∣rate Catholiques of Ireland and of the said Collonel, so that we may justly expect an agreeable complyance, and performance accordingly from all parties in their severall concernments. Henriette Marie.
Severall Letters between the Lord Ier∣mine and the Lord Digby, concerning Provi∣sions of Men and Armes, to send Forain Forces into England, and to the Earl of Mtrsse in SCOTLAND. Lord Jermin to the Lord Digby. St. Germain 11. August. I Write this onely not to omit one week, for until the next occa∣sion I can say nothing from hence; for without prophecying it is impossible to tell what will be the event of some things that are promised; now that which takes away my pain, is, that vain expe∣etations were never lesse dangerous; for if wee had none in the world, I see no way open to Treat, in the condition wee are in, though yours of the 6 of Iuly be very cheerfull: the Q. of Eng∣land is in perfect health; the Q. Regent came last night at 9 a clock to Supper to her, nd returned to Par at a 11. Card Maz. will be here to morrow, he is full of professions of desire to serve the Queen importantly, which now I observe, for that they are re∣newed on his part, since the necessities on ours. This is all I have to say: I am yours. Lord Jermin to the Lord Go. Digby. St. Germain, 14. Aug. I Have received yours of the 30 of Iune, and since the news of a defeat the Lord Gering hath had in the West; that, and the ad∣vance of the Scotch, makes us feare we are in very ill estate, but the Game must not be given over: on the contrary now is the time to redouble all kinde of industry, and that will be the Queen rule; hastn what she can supplyes of Powder and Armes to the West. swed provisions are Embarqued, but he himself I think will be ear another way, if he will be perswaded, for I have now sent back for him hit her. The Peace is made between the K. of and the Swed which will put the K. of  in a con∣dition
to help us: perhaps hee may bee able to send us an Army, which now that all the Rebels Forces are drawn West and South∣ward, (landing in the North) might give a new turn to all: So that in the first place he is to sollicite that businesse. If no such Force can be obtained, he is to sollicite for as many as he can get, those Horse, and some Foot, with Armes and Ammunition, and land them all in Scotland: for it appears that all the M. of Mon∣trosses Victories will be but fruitlesse, untill he be helped with more men out of Ireland, or some other Part; and himself in his Letter to me, sayes, That men were his greatest want. The Queen sends Petit to you tomorrow. I have no more to say; I am yours. Lord Jermin to the Lord Geo. Digby. St. Germain, 22 August. THe expectations here of relieving the King are so uncertaine, that I dare not yet say any thing of them; and besides, in effect they are not to be relyed on. I write now, being I would omit no week, the news from England is so desperately ill, that there scarce seems to be any resource left, but from abroad. I will not beleeve it possible there can be so great an errour committed, as to leave any way unattempted for the Irish Peace, & men from thence. Cocker a is gone to Denmark instructed amply, and I dare boldly assure you, with all that can be usefull to him. France and Holland are daily tryed, our duties are done, though little fruit appeares of it. All the Provisions for the West that could be procured are gone, and to M. Montrosse, to the value of 10000 pounds sterling: next weeke I shall write more largely. God keep you. I am entirely yours. The Lord Jermin to the Lord Geo. Digby. St. Germain, Aug. 25. VVE have received nothing this week from you, but find by other advertisements the King is still in Wales recruiting his Army: I see no danger of perishing before the Winter comes into our Relief, at least, if our own Party bee not totally forsaken of their hearts and hands; for if there remaine amongst them either understanding or courage, they will perceive how ill a bargaine
they must make with their Enemies at this time, if they fall into their hands by any way whatsoever. I am now most confident if wee hold out till next Spring, between this and that we shall find powerfull Forain succours. The design of—of which I have often written to you, may now in my judgement be reckoned up∣on, for we have the Money ready, the persons of the same minde, and all the difficulties raised that be in the way and the businesse in as good advance as was possible; since wee got the money, there is good reason to expect that within tow Moneths (they are promised sooner) we shall have—. This in it self may prove a great thing, but it is considered how it lookes upon the condition of our Affaires, that are very unlike to receive but by Forain assistance, which reasonably is not to bee helped without securing their passage, nothing sure can appeare so necessary for us: therefore pray take great care that there bee no delay in the dispatch of all things belonging to it, when there shall be recourse to you in that behalf. I omit to tell you more particulars of this businesse, both in what estate it is, and how it hath been retarded; but weekly now you shall be advertised. I heare there is some stop in the Treaty between Denmark and the Swedes, so that I feare will frustrate Cockerams negotiation, of which else I should hope very well. The Arms that went form hence to the M. of Montrosse, are arrived at Hamborough, and I hope are re-imbarqued from thence, Cockeram would have them goe that way: we have no news yet of those sent to him from Holland; what we are to expect from hence as towards a considerable succour (I mean of a body of men) is to be attended untill the end of their Campagne; for I confesse I am so far abused in the businesse, as to beleeve it is equally hard to say we shall obtain no such thing, as to assure it now; for without doubt there is no desire here to see the Monarchy of England de∣volve into another Government, and there is as little doubt that there are strong inclinations for the persons of the King and Queen, and desire to contribute to their re-establishment; the hum∣bling of the House of Austria, the beating them during the war, or making a glorious peace, I confesse are passions that prevail more, and it is no wonder, in the meane time we receive great curtesies. The Queen is most civilly and kindly used in all; one thing, her Penson duely paid, 12000 Pistolls they give lately, for the Armes
for the M. Montrosse, and the Powder should be sent into the west; 10000 more they have now given for the Ship, which designe is infinitely approved by them; and I doubt not but they will give the other 10000, that the setting them forth will come to; if they should faile, it will be otherwise provided. The Queen of Eng∣land hath given us a sharp alarm of another distemper like her last, but the feare is vanished almost after three fits, but being young in apprehension of one third, she dares not write her self. I am en∣tirely yours. Pray send me word whether the Barony passed to Mr. Hemflet be an English Barony, and to descend upon his Son by my Lady Stanhop; if not, you are to move the King for the, Barony of W∣ton for that son: this is a businesse in which the Queen was enga∣ged in Holland, upon the important services she received from Hem∣flett, and she will be very earnest with the King to have done. Pray send an answer to this. Let the businesse of the Fleet be kept with all secrecy. Severall Letters from his Majesty and the Lord Digby, to her Majestie. The Lord Geo. Digbies Letter to her Majesty. Madam, VVE live here in great disquiet, till we heare how your Ma∣jesty hath digested our late mis-fortune, God be thanked we have lost already the sharp sense of it. We have had many little successes since, and are likely to find our selves now within one fortnight in a posture fit to have a day, for all which certainly the Rebells will give us in the VVest, whither they have drawne all they have, even the Scots themselves; force us to fight proba∣bly they cannot till we are ready for them: and I beleeve as wee shall order the matter, they will bee likely to waste for want of Provisions, whilst we increase in numbers from VValis. I have writ to my Lord Iermin at large of the state of our Affaires here, of which I reckon the Clubmen not to bee the least comfortable
part: And this bearer Mr. P. Rogers passing through the VVest; where every day may beget great alterations to the better, will bring your Majestie the freshest intelligence from thence, hee is a modest and discreet young man, and certainly will deserve your Majesties encouragement. I beleeve by this time your Mjsty heares much noise from London of the Papers taken in the Kings Cabinet, it was unfortunately and heedlesly lost, to leave so preci∣ous things in a VVagon; I thank God I lost none of mine; it will certainly be fit for your Majestie to consider, and to give your advise how we should behave our selves now, as to the avowing of those Forain Treaties, which can be no longer a secret, especially that of the Prince of Orange, in case our late disaster hath not cooled his affection to the alliance; it will also be necessary the true Copies of all those Letters which have past between the King and your Majesty, be transmitted hither with all possible speed, for it will be impossible to answer and allay those scandalls which they will raise from them without that help, but with it, if the King hath writ nothing but what I have had the honour to bee trusted with, I am confident there is nothing in them but will heare a very faire construction. I am commanded by the King to repeat unto your Majesty, al∣though I writ it formerly at large unto my Lord Iermin, that in what concerned Sir Io. Greenvills being made of the Princes Bed∣chamber, the King would not have let the Prince have his will in it, although the young Man be the most meriting in England, had not the Princes engagements been so publike, as that it could not have been refused him without such an affront to his Highnesse in that place, as must needs have drawn great dishonour upon him, and great inconvenience to his Majesties service. I must not con∣clude without humbly acknowledging your Majesties great Justice in your contempt of those scandalls which his Majesties enemies have endeavoured to cast upon me; unto which I shall onely say thus much more, that I have been so pure a Virgin in point of my integrity to His and your Majestie, that I thanke God, no body yet ever durst ask me a question as to my own Interests. And as for any private negotiation, you may be sure I shall never proceed in a∣ny, but with your Majesties preceding approbation, be it upon terms never so just, nor shall I though with your consent, ever vary from
those principles which you have by you in a paper drawne by me, and presented to you, when you were pleased to engage certaine persons in the highest trust of the Kings and your service; this confidence I beg of you as to the publike, and another in what concernes matter of advantages and favours of my Master, that as for my selfe and nearest friends, I will never accept of any but by your Majesties kindnesse and generosity as well as the Kings; so for any other, I will never have the share in the procurement, but ac∣cording to what I shall understand more then conjecturally to bee most aggreable  your Majesties pleasure. Madam, whilst you have this relyance upon my intire dedication of my selfe to your Maje∣sty, no worldly accident can make unhappy, Regland Iuly 10, 1645. Madam, Your Majesties most humble, and most faithfull Creature. O SIR, MIschiefe will never cease to be active, for some amongst you concurring with others here, are indeavouring to serve Lord ring such another dog trick, as they did hope to have put upon your Lordship not long finee: but may their successe bee such as formerly it was, I hope the work and merit of that man is so well known to those in whose power it is onely to prejudice him, that it shall not be in such as these to work his ruine, which will bee but a preamble (if I can presage any thing) to your generall destru∣ction. In my last, I did intimate somewhat concerning Irish; I did it not out of any ill wil, God knows, I bear to them, but out of my zeal to his Majesty: I wish it may not be true, for indeed I feare it. A strong Argument is but lately suggested unto my reason, the Rebells have granted 2000 then to the assistance of Spaine in Flan∣ders; all the world may see that by this action they must needs dis∣please both the French, Portugalls, Holland States; into which fires
they would not thrust themselves you may bee certain, had they not strong assurances of some present benefit, greater in consequence to their affaires in hand, then all the other can be prejudiciall to it; and seeing the lownesse of the Spanish condition, and the symptom of ruine on all sides attending chat Crown, it is easily resolved what they build upon. And that Spain doth assure them for this assistance they will take of the Irish from his Majesty in this time of exigence, which tis possible they may effect, considering the present Pope is Spanish, and hath an Ambassador in Ireland, who beares the greatest stroke in those affaires; and who, if you will doe any thing effectuall, there must chiefly be wrought upon. I wonder at the  of those with the King, that sit at the Helme, and yet tolerate and countenance (if not reward) so many persons whom they cannot but palpably see marchcounter to his Majesties pro∣sperity. It is not now a time to dally, Courtship must be laid aside, and the surest course be taken to preserve that which is already brought into such a desperate condition. I have not been silent heretofore concerning Pr. R.Pr. R∣p. and I cannot chuse but smilingly consider the posture you are in, I meane your Grandees when they are all overtop't and stampt upon already by one; I have not forgot the time I saw him—. We have had a strong report concerning D. Hamb. escape from Pendennis, as also of the revolt of that place; which because I was consci∣ous of some practises on foot to that purpose, I was halfe prepa∣red to believe, till this day I was certified that it was yet a fiction, which though I am glad on, I cannot omit to tell you that it seems to me (I pray God it prove not so to others) incosistent with po∣licy to permit so guilty a person in a possibility of surviving his punishment and redoubling his former villany; for it is most cer∣taine, there is none can equally prejudice his Majesty if he escape, and the—is not unpossible to be wrought upon, for to my knowledge e favours deeply of the Puritan: And by the way, pray give mee leave to tell you it is not the least disadvantage a∣mongst many others to his Majesty in the prosperity of his affaires, and affections of his people to give private Governours such abso∣lute and almost uncontroulable indefinite power over the rest of their fellow Subjects within their jurisdiction, which they exer∣cise with so much onipotence and indiscrt Regality, for the
most part to their own ends and profit, that it is a miracle if this be continued, if the people retain any sense of loyaley and duty to his Majesty who permits it. Many did suppose, and those none of the weakestmen, that upon the late Defeat, his Majesty would seriously take to heart the many great and irregular Errors hither∣to admitted; and in order to his future recovery, have made a through reformation: which last, till it be done, the first can ne∣ve be expected. Above all, for the manage of Warre recourse is to be had to the Councell of the ablest and best resolved men, and they Courted in stead of such Nondas as have for the most part hitherto been looked upon: If you desire me to point at any, Sir Ken. Digby will doe it for me:Sir Ken. Digby. In his late published Treatise, hee will tell your Lordship that 120. 64. 2. 12. 25. 8. 70. is a generous and knowing man, a compleat souldier both in Theory and Pra∣ctice. And I will tell you, there is not a more sincere, honourable and fast friend, or one more easily oblieged. In fine, I have erred much in that conversation which formerly I have had with him, if there be three in Europe greater Masters of the Art of War, and fitter for a Generall Commander, or at least to moderate a Coun∣cell of War, in matters of action, I meane, and the manner of exe∣cution; as for Designe, I doe beleeve him not so excellent. There is a whisper of Lord Astly his employment, which indeed doth much recreate me, and make me hope such men will now bee loo∣ked upon. Sir Iohn Digbies death afflicts mee greatly, and grieves mee more to consider how sadly it will fall upon you. The Match with the Pr. of Orange which I heare talked of, if it were seriously effected, might possibly for the present adde some∣thing to the exigence of the condition, though little to the Ho∣nour of our Nation. But I beleeve there is so much jugling in Holland, that they are nothing lesse then in earnest in desiring to doe you good; and considering his Majesties lowne will not ad∣venture to Match, if it must be an engagement to involve them in your quarrell; to which God grant a happy issue, for indeed I fere it. I send you here inclosed some Predictions which 2000 sent me from 378. 100. I must confesse, though they create no faith, they adde somewhat to my doubts; wherefore I cannot chfe  com∣municate them with you, that you may passe your them, and till me freely what you think; for  are
both ancient and authentique. The Parliament sent an extraor∣dinary reward to Strickland in Holland, it seems he hath done them good service there. The Danes have concluded a Peace with the Swedes, and given him Norway, with two Danish Counties for per∣formance of Covenants. In Malta the Spanish Knights set upon the Portugalls, who being assisted by the French, massacred all the Spanish, Bobrook in Flanders is surrendred to the French, and they goe to besiege Bergen ocks. There is news in Towne the Iri have taken Youghall, and are gone to Corke. Montreull is newly arrived here from France, and is going for Scotland, the Plot is to unite France and Scotland as formerly, and as some say, to disjoyn the Scots and English, as now they are oyned. The first I beleeve, and as for the second, I cannot thinke it is desired, however pre∣tended by the French, who have already devoured this Kingdome in their hopes. 2000 bids me tell you, till his Majesty is in a more hopefull posture,  will adventure to doe nothing. Savil is still playing blind-man-buffe, and when we have served our ends of him, it is like, we shall make a Pageant of his greatnesse. I have no more now to wish unto you, then that this may come safe, to assure you that I will never desist to honour you, but still remain August 8. 1645. For ever yours. Δ 401. (That is Walsingham.) My Lord, JUst now I received yours of the 10. by Parsons, and because I ex∣pect back from London this evening, doe now prepare against his comming, determining so dispatch him immediatly for the Court. In my last I signified that  a moneth after the date, brought yours of the  of Iuly, with the first order in behalfe of my Co∣en , to which the Governour hath given an absolute de∣iall, contemning both the authority of his Majesty and Com∣missioners, and said to divers hee weighed it not a straw, with more to that effect: two dayes since, when Sir Iohn went to sol∣licite
the Lords to releeve him one way or other, Collonel lague was accidentally present, and said, Both the Lords and Governors might be highly ashamed to let such a man suffer; adding, that had he known of his wants, hee would one way or other have supplyed him, and now offered if their Lordships would please to assigne any place for him, he would take care of it, and bring it in; the Governour Interposed and said, all places were disposed of, in∣deavouring what lay in film to hinder it; what will be the issue I know not; but I am certain in the interim hee is brought to g want. In my last, I signified what constructions was already made here of your going to the North to your Lordships disadvantage; the report of going into Ireland was never plyed so as now; your voyage into Scotland is breathed out by the Lord Portland, who e∣very day exalts his malice to a higher key; it was his brother, who; together with P. R. gave birth to the first; and himself who gives life and authority to both. In good earnest, if some timely course be not taken, you will find him a dangerous man, his absence is no lesse necessary, then those that are in France already; this any La∣dy commanded seriously to recommend unto you, that person when he hath brought the Faction here to a maturity, is resolved to goe to the West, what the consequence of that will bee, I need not intimate; his brother deserves strict observation and notice, for he gives continuall notice of what happens at Court, worthy the knowledge of the Junto here; and is as it were the Spy upon you there. Here hath been a solemne expectation of P. R. these 3 days, and great jollity God knows amongst the Cumberlanders; but why they expect still, I know not. Something is lamenting here concerning Ireland, and P. R. but what it is, I dare not yet affirm, be∣cause I have hold only of the skirts of it, & have not made a ful dis∣covery, it is I think either about his going, or at least ending some body to comply with them. The Junto had a meeting last night, where it was resolved good use might bee made now against you with the Irish, upon occasion of your late Letter, if it be well fol∣lowed and the best use made of it, and that P. R. may upon that ooting take new occasion to ingratiate with them; whefore it was resolved either he or some friend should by Letters indeavour to operate on some person of repute there, some thinke it is Col∣lnel Pr, if him, they lose their labour, he will not bee jugled
withall. Thrice within this few dayes here hath been a Woman from Broon with the Governour: I can by no means learn the bo∣esse, though I much distrust it, but there is no remedy. I had almost forgot to tell your Lordship that the men here have resol∣ved lately to get into Mr. Ashburnhams bosome by one means or o∣ther; for the Junto holds him a very necessary person for their ends, and therefore must be laid hold of; but one of them affirmes him to be a slippery piec, and dangerous to build upon. From London I have nothing till C. come, who if he bring any thing of moment, I will add it. I have sent your Lordship a Copy of my Let∣ter directed lately to the Lord Herber, veratim, as I sent it by Lon∣don, as the speediest and surest way: Mr. Brasile mentioned in it, is a very able honest man, and of authority and repute amongst the Irish, the two mentioned in the latter end, are Marquesse A∣trim, and the Lord St. Albans. Here are strong reports the Irish are landed, which if true, they are honest, we are happy. My Lady commands me to put your Lordship in mind of Mr. Sutton, whom the Lady Cobam hath so often recommended unto your Lordship. I must not omit Monsieur Du Boys who is now comming towards you, he hath been long sick here, if you please to countenance or imploy him, you will find him faithfull, gratefull, and very usefull, as dare assure you, my Lord, August 16. Your Lordships humble Servant 401. POSTSCRIPT. I have sent you the last of the Independents, which will shew you how necessary a supply is. C. is not yet come, I know not what to thinke, to Lon∣don he would goe, and what stayes him there I can∣not imagine, wherefore I am forced to send by this. Sherborne still holds out, I really beleeve without any great danger, not withstanding some course Re∣ports. August 21.
His Majesties Letter to the Queen. Deare heart, BY Sobrans conveyance (whom I dispatched Sunday last) I hope before this can come to thee, thou wilt receive three Let∣ters from me; who although hee condemnes the Rebells proce∣dings as much as any, yet he declares in his Masters name a posi∣tive Neutrality, so that either he complies not with his instructi∣ons, or France is not so much our friend as wee hope for. I ra∣ther thinke the latter; yet I doubt not but thy dexterity will cure that coldnesse of friendship; which in my opinion will be the easier done, if thou make the chiefe Treate for our assistance, betwixt thee and the Q. R. in a familiar oblieging way; and withall shew∣ing all possible respect and trust to those Ministers whom she most esteems; it being impossible but they must rather applaud, then dis∣like thy familiarity with their Mistresse, and by it thou maist pre∣vent any tricks they may put upon thee. As for the affaires here, we are in so good state, that I am confident the Rebels (though all their strengths are now united) cannot affront us; and when my Nephew Rupert comes to mee (whom I certainely expect in few daies) I hope to be able to chuse fresh Winter Quarters, but where, I am not yet resolved, for which occasion and opportunitie must direct me. FINIS.
