C521 12260365 57857
THE HISTORY of POPERY; OR PACQUET OF Advice from Rome. The Fourth Volume. CONTAINING The LIVES of Eighteen POPES, AND The most remarkable Occurrences in the Church, for near One hundred and fifty Years, viz. From the beginning of Wickliff's Preaching, to the first Ap∣pearance of Martin Luther. Intermixt with several large Polemical Discourses; as whether the present Church of Rome be to be accounted a Church of Christ; whether any Protestant may be present at Mass: and other Important Subjects. Together with continued Courants, or innocent Reflections weekly on the Distempers of the times. Cujus aures clausae Veritati sunt, ut ab Amico Verum audire nequeat, hujus sa∣lus desperanda est— Cicero Rhet. 1. LONDON, Printed for, and are to be sold by Langley Curtis, at the Sign of Sir Edmundbury Godfry, near Fleet-Bridge, 1682.
THE PREFACE. PRefaces are many times more for fashion∣sake than necessity, and being esteem'd ra∣ther as Complements than serious mat∣ters; are as slightly passed over by the Reader, as superfluously added by the Au∣thor. More especially we might seem excusable, if we should not comply with the Tyranny of Custom herein, before this Volume, having preambled at large to the other Three; and given not only an account of the reason and design of this work, but answered most of the Objections and Scandals commonly cast upon it. This 4th Volume, 'tis true, is not large in bulk, yet contains the History of a very remarkable period; viz. From Wickliff's dawning, to the day-break of Luther; and exhibits not a few choice Occurrences, and most fit to be known, as by the Table may ap∣pear. Especially it demonstrates us to what a desperate degree of Corruption the Roman Church was degene∣rated, and what a Chaos of Errors, Superstition and Impiety she was become; insomuch that complaints were daily put forth by all those that had any Sparks of Grace and Virtue in them, though yet joining with her in communion: and as these abuses shew'd the need and necessity of a Reformation, so they both led
people to desire it, and also did justify the same when effected. But still some envious Carpers will come with Ju∣das's Objection,—Quorsum perditio haec, what need so much wast of Paper? What occasion have we for your paltry Sheets?  all these matters better and more copious  by a multitude of diligent Historians  accurately handled by many Learned Divine  nfess, men of Letters and leisure, are or may  sufficiently accommodated with Books of that kind; but many of them writ in Forreign Languages, and either unintelligible to our common Country-men, or too dear for their Pockets, or too voluminous for their time to peruse. 'Tis to serve these, that our Labours are design'd; nor have they we hope, been altogether unprofitable on that Ac∣count, but have given the vulgar Englishman as much Insight into the Mystery of Iniquity, per∣hap as any one single work whatsoever. Besides, though, Nil dictum quod non dictum prius, the matter be not new, yet there may be , a handling of the same things in another manner, and when di∣verse persons treat of the same subject, something may be found in one which is not in another; and in one Pacquet, you have many times the substance and choicest notes of several Authors, like a Posy made up of several Flowers. Before the late Troubles in England, or the date of forty one, several Godly learned men have either expressed (as Mr. Archer, of Christs personal Reign on Earth, p. 50. and 55.) or Intimated (as Mr. Mede on Rev. 11. 7.) That (in their opinion) Popery shall yet again for a while universally or very generally prevail in many or most of these Countrys and Nations out of which it hath been expell'd. With
whom as to this particular, the most profound and Reverend Archbishop Ʋsher did dot only concur in o∣pinion, but seems to be very much assured, or to have had a kind of particular foresight of the sharp per∣secutions that shall attend this last effort of Anti∣christs, if that Paper call'd his Prophesy may be cre∣dited, which I never yet heard disprov'd: to which we may add that dismal prospect of affairs which our eyes behold, it being certain that the Protestant Inte∣rest throughout Europe, was never lower since the be∣ginning of Queen Elizabeths Reign, than it is at this Instant. And therefore certainly since the danger is so near and so great, it concerns all Protestants to Arm themselves for the Encounter; to study the points in Controversy between us and the Papists as far as their Leisure and Abilities will give them leave, and both to establish themselves in the truth, and be acquainted with the Sophisms, specious pretences and inticing Fallaces of the Romanists, that they may the better avoid and confute them. More especially to warn people from Hypocrisy and sinful compliances, in case Superstition should ever prevail to a publick Establishment (which God for∣bid) we have at large in this Tome evinc'd the present Synagogue of Rome, not to be a Church of Christ, and the extream hazard all those run of their Eter∣nal Salvation, who continue therein; as also the Sin of frequenting their Idolatrous Mass, though only in formality, and outward Complaisance or Curiosity. There are too many Errors of the Press, which thou may'st meet with in this Volume, which I de∣sire thee to Correct and pardon; being generally very obvious to a Considerate Reader, by the sense and words foregoing and subsequent. And if there
happen any more material mistakes, I beg the same exercise of thy Candour; our Books are like our selves—Vitio sine nemo nascitur, optimus ille Qui minimis urgetur—. I shall detain thee no longer, but praying unto the Lord to preserve his Church from Errors with∣out, and to purge it from Errors within, I rest Thy Friend and Servant, In what I may, HEN. CARE.
Some of the principal Contents of this Fourth Volume. A. ABhorrencies of the Association considered. p. 26 Academy, a new one for correcting Grammar and Logick. 249 Addresses, Mr. L'Estrange's sentiments of them. 87 Advice from Geneva (a Libel so call'd) censured. 7 Aeneas Sylvius, how he got to be Pope. 250 Notable Sentences of His. 254 Amurath the Turk, appeals to Christ against the King of Hungary, for breaking his faith with him by the Popes Instigation, and obtains a great victory. 76 & 242 B. BAstards, Pope Innocent the eighth had sixteen. 262 Bazil, The Council held there, decree that the Pope ought to obey a General Council. 220 Bohemians, the Pope consents they shall enjoy the use of the Cup in the Sacrament. 229 Burning of Hereticks, the first Law for it in England. 84 C. CAlvinists, the Papists call the Church of England so. 7 Calvin vindicated from Rebellion. 175 Care, (the Author of this work) Burnt in Effigie by the Tories at Norwich. 207
Captains (of the Blew-Apron) complemented. 263 Cardinals will choose a Protestant Pope, and the Divan a Christian Grand Seignior: a very significant allu∣sion. 150 Church of Rome no Church of Christ, from p. 137. to 158 Church establisht, what it signifies in the Papists Di∣ctionary. 136 Clemangis, his Advice to depart out of Babylon. 218 Council of Constance, depose Pope John the 23d, and declare a Council to be above the Pope. 58 Constantinople taken by the Turk. 238 D. DEgrading a Priest, the manner of it. 70 Dispensation from a Pope, for a man to marry with his own Sister. 214 To practise Witchcraft. 244 To commit Sodomy. 261 Dissenters, a French Case put, touching the Prosecuti∣ons against them. 16 Dowdal, a Popish Priest in the Gate-House 1681, his Complaints of his Fellow-Priests and their Rogue∣ries. E. EMperor of Greece comes to Italy. 221 F. FAction, the word interpreted. 223 Feasts of ception and Visitation of the Virgin Mary  230
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, Dec. 23. 1681. Magnus ab Integro seclorum nascitur Ordo. A Preliminary Discourse to this Fourth Volume. The History of John Wickliff, his Parts, Doctrines, &c. with a brief Draught of the Complexion of those Times. IN our three foregoing Tomes we have trac'd the Roman Lucifer from his very Cradle, and pursued him in all his subtle windings, 'till we found him mounted aloft, exal∣ting himself above all that is called God, disposing of the Crowns and Kingdoms of Princes at his pleasure, and trampling their Royal Necks under his audacious Feet. We have also par∣ticularly considered the Rise and Progress of the Apostacy, under what pretences the respective Errors, Superstitions, and Ido∣latries crept into the Church, and how they were entertain'd and promoted from time to time by the Pope and his Clergy, in order to gratifie their own Pride and Covetousness. Thus have we follow'd the Thread of the Story to the 14th Century, at which time it pleased God to raise up Wickliff an English-man, who, more loud than any before him, sounded
the Alarm-Bell of Reformation, and by continual preaching and writing against the lazy Friars and their Fopperies, that the Impression; (altho his wicked Enemies burnt the good Man's Bones long after) made in the Minds of Men by his Doctrines, could never be totally effaced, but remain'd more or less in several parts, even 'till Luther's days: And indeed it wa high time for some such burning and shining Light to arise, for  all the World sat in darkness, and the shadow of Death. The name of Christianity was left, but scarce any thing else; the true nd lively Doctrine of our Blessed Lord and Saviour, was for the most part as unknown to those who call'd themselves after his Name, as to the Heathen themselves. The vileness of our natural State, the strength and turpitude of Sin, the end and use of the Law, the Offices of Christ, and the Holy Ghost the Comforter, the Nature of Faith, the true works of Grace, and liberty of a Christian Man, &c. were Points neither under∣stood, nor enquired after. There was rarely a word of Scri∣pture mentioned; Divinity and Learning were both confin'd close Prisoners to the Schools, and there miserably perverted into Cobweb Notions, and wrangling Sophistry. Instead of rea∣ding the Evangelists and St. Paul, Men spent their time and Brains in studying the crabbed perplexities of Scotus, and the Master of the Sentences, and the World forsaking the vivifying Power of God's Spiritual Word and Doctrine, was altogether first blinded, and then led with external gawdy Pomp, dazling Ceremonies, and multiplied humane Traditions. Scarce any thing else being seen in the Churches, heard in their Sermons, or intended in all their evotions; so that the People were taught to worship nothing but what they saw, and they saw almost no∣thing which they did not worship: Witness the multitudes of Images, Crosses, Pictures, Reliques, Shrines, Tombs, Altars, &c. all the Objections of their foolish Devotions. Instead of the Poverty and Purity of Christ, here was Pride and Superfluity, and all kinds of abomination of Life; instead of the Apostolical Labours and Humility, Sloth and Ambition had seiz'd upon the Priests. The simple and unlearned being far from all knowledge of the Holy Scripture, thought it enough for them to know only these things which were delivered them by their Pastors and Teachers, who were almost as ignorant themselves, and taught nothing but what they received from the Court of Rome,
whereof the most part tended more to the profit of their Order, advancing the Pope's Interest, or filling with Money his Coffers, than to the Glory of Christ, or real advantage of Souls. The Christian Faith was counted no other thing than to know, That Christ once suffer'd, that is, 'twas enough for us to know what the Devils also knew; Men were so addicted to the Hypocrisie of outward shews, that the Religion and Holiness, even of the most Learned and Pious, seem'd altogether to consist in the ob∣serving of Days, Meats, Habits, and such vain circumstances: Hence arose so many different Orders of Religion, or Fraterni∣ties of Monks and Friars, with Vestures of several fashions, and various colours: Hence likewise came your Pilgrimages to Loretto, to Rome, to Compostella, &c. As if St. James at Compostella would do that, which Christ could not do at London or Canterbury; or as if our Omnipotent Omnipresent Jehovah were not of like power or strength, and pity and compassion in every place; or could not be found, unless by running and gadding hither and thither contrary to his own Requirements. (Neither at Jerusa∣lem, nor in this Mountain, but in Spirit and Truth shall ye worship the Father, for such he seeketh to worship him. John 4. 22.) The Holiness requisite all the year was put off to Lent. No Coun∣try to be counted Holy, but Palestina, because thereon Christ had walked with his corporeal Feet. Instead of taking up the true Cross of Christ by Patience, Humility, Self-denial, Mor∣tification, &c. people go together by the Ears about the material Cross whereon Christ suffered; and though they knew not where to find it, yet upon an imagination that it was in those Parts, all Christian Kings and Princes are set agogg, many of them ruin'd, and 'tis believ'd, some millions of Men slain and destroy'd in these pretended Holy Wars; who though other∣wise never so debauch'd and wicked, are yet assur'd to go to rights to Heaven, the meritoriousness of this Expedition expia∣ting all their Villanies. This was the state of Christendom in those days; and wanted not the World then an Hercules to purge such an Augaean Stable? Yes certainly; and Providence provided him, even Wickliff, a valiant and well-appointed Champion, for whom I may borrow that Encomium which Syracides bestows on Simon the Son of Onias, Eccles. 50. 6. He was as the morning Star in the midst of a Cloud, and as the Moon being Full in her Course, as the Sun shining
on the Temple of the Most High, and as the Rain-bow diverting our fears of a Deluge, as the Flower of Roses in the early Spring, as Lillies by the Rivers, or as the Branches of the Frankincense-Tree in the time of Summer. Touching Wickliff's Parentage, all we can find, is, That he was born about the farthest part of York-shire; and Mr. Birckbek who was Minister of Gilling in those Parts, in his Learned Trea∣tise, Entituled, The Protestants Evidence, printed 1632. Centur. 14. assures us, That some of the Family remain'd there then, and probably may continue to this day; his words are these: Our Country-man John Wickliff was born in the North, where there is (near to the place where I live) an ancient and wor∣shipful House bearing the name of Wickliff of Wickliff. But in what Year he was born, is not Recorded, only 'tis certain, that he was liberally Educated, and became Learned beyond that Age, and flourished about the year of our Lord 1371. in the Reign of King Edward the Third, being then Fellow of Merton-Colledge in Oxford: (A happy Foundation, Illustrious for breeding many most famous Men, as Friar Bacon, Burley, Scotus, Occham, Peccham, Bradwardine, &c.) He was afterwards Ma∣ster of Baliol-Colledge in Oxford, where he commenc'd Doctor, and was chosen Reader in Divinity: In which public Lectures he shew'd himself a deep Schoolman, as in his ordinary Sermons a faithful Pastor of the Church, for whose Edification he spar'd no pains, for he Translated the whole Bible into the vulgar Tongue, one Copy whereof, written with his own hand, is, or lately was, extant in St. John Baptist Colledge in Oxford. He was beloved of all good Men for his holy Life, and admired even by his Ad∣versaries for his Learning: For we find Walden, his profess'd and spiteful Enemy, in a certain Letter to Pope Martin the Fifth, forc'd to acknowledge, That he was wonderfully astonish'd at his most forcible Arguments, the various and pertinent Authorities he had gathered, with the vehemence and smartness of his Reasonings. Nor was he unacquainted with Humanity, or polite Civil Lear∣ning, (especially he is observed to have been well read in our English Laws) and wrote so many large Volumes, as well in Philosophy as Divinity, as the same is almost incredible. He seem'd to follow in the course of his Studies the method of the Schoolmen, and amongst them was a profess'd follower of Occham, by reading of whose Works, and sundry others who
lived about the same time, or not long before, as Bradwardine, Marsilius, St. Amore, Abelardus, Armachanus, and that great and godly Learned Man Rob. Grosthead, and especially and above all by diligent perusal of the Holy Scriptures, God gave him grace and understanding to see the truth of his Gospel, and by seeing it, to loath all superstition, and the ill precepts and pra∣ctises of the then pretended Rules of the Church. In particu∣lar, by Occham and Marsilius he was informed of the Popes In∣trusions and Usurpations upon Kings, their Crowns and Dignities. Guido de S. Amore, and Armachanus, shew'd him the sundry abuses of Monks and Friars in upholding this usurped Power. By Abelard and others he began to have a right Apprehension touching the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Bradwardine taught him the Nature of a true sole justifying Faith, against Me∣ritmongers and Pardoners: Finally, by Grosthead's Work, with which he seem'd most conversant, he descried the Popes to be the very Antichrist, by hindering the Gospel to be preached, and placing unfit and unworthy Men in the Church, and in making all Religion subservient to his damnable Policy. Being thus enlighten'd, 'tis no wonder if in his Writings and Preachings he delivered many things against the then corrupted Doctrine of the Church; but his Positions were chiefly directed against the several Orders of Begging Friars, (who were his professed Persecutors) and all Foreign usurped Jurisdiction of the Pope. By which he purchased some favour, or at least con∣nivance at Court, and got his other Complaints against them for other matters, the more easily heard and regarded, for at that time the Friars Orders, by their manifold and notorious Disor∣ders, were become exceeding odious, and the Popes pretences of Jurisdiction by Provisions, Reservations, and Collations, not only grievous, but utterly intollerable. This made way unto those excellent Acts of Parliament of Praemunire, against any that should appeal to Rome, or draw the Subjects of England, ad aliud Examen, To any Foreign Jurisdiction; as also against Provisors, and the Abuses of Begging Friars, which fobridled and restrai∣ned the Pope's Authority, that he could but little prevail in Eng∣land, during the Raign of King Edward the Third, or Richard the Second. Towards making which Law, Wickliff had no small Interest, by disposing several of the Nobility and the Body of the Commons thereunto; maintaining no less Loyalty, and
Magnanimously than Learnedly, the King's Jurisdiction, Crown, and Dignity, by the Laws Civil, Canon, and Common. For which reason, the Learned Dr. James, in Wickliff's Life, tells us, That he was by one King sent Ambassador into Foreign Parts, and by another consulted here at home. But amongst all his Ar∣guments, he most insisted upon those, drawn from the common Municipal Laws of England, (the best Bull-works for the Prero∣gative and Imperial Right of our Kings, against all the Usurpa∣tions and Encroachments of any Exotic Claim) for the mainte∣nance of his Opinions; and the better to enable him therein, he had good Directions and Advice from time to time from the Reverend Judges and Sages in the Law. He was not so much hated of the Monks and Clergy out of Self-interest, because he opposed their lewd Practises; but he was much indulg'd and favour'd by the Temporal State for his Piety, Learning, and Virtue: For not only many of the Nobility, but the City of London, and the University of Oxford, were his Friends; which makes Walsingham the Monk angry who upon all occasions vomits out his Gall against poor Wickliff) that that famous Academy, where (as he saith) was the very height and top of Wisdom and Learning, should so kindly entertain him. Nor were they Freshmen, or younger Fry of Students there, that were his Admirers, but even the Heads and Chief of the Univer∣sity; for Mr. Robert Rigge Vice-Chancellor, and the two Pro∣ctors, took part with him; as also Nicholas Herford, John Ashton of Merton Colledge, John Ashwarby of Oriel Colledge, Minister of St. Maries Church; these all being Preachers, and Batchelors of Divinity, joined with him, and were put to Trouble for the same.
THE COURANT. Tory. NAY! now I think you are met with; what say you to that ingenious Piece publish'd last week, Enti∣tuled, A Postscript of Advice from Geneva. Truem. I shall not say much to it, let my Lords the Bishops look after it; for as Governours (under His Majesty) of our Protestant Church, I humbly conceive it concerns them abun∣dantly more than me, since 'tis plain, the Libel is the pawn of some rank invenom'd Popish Priest; and whether Nat. Thompson or Gammer Turner (a profest Papist, or a masqueraded one) Midwif'd it into the World, is not much material. It pretends indeed to fall soul on the Calvinists, which possibly Striplings in Divinity, or some of the short sighted Laity, may think at this time of day a mighty Service to the King and the Church. But whoever is conversant in Roman-Catholic Authors, cannot but know, that they frequently Nickname the Church of England, and her truest Sons, with that opprobrious Title. I appeal to all the Learned moderate Divines of our established English Church, if this be not true; nay, I my self at two hours warning could give more than 100 Instances of it: But I shall be content at present only with one, but 'tis of a Pope (who you know is Infallible in his Rogueries) in a Bull against Blessed Q. Elizabeth, we have these words, Impia Mysteria & Instituta ad Calvini praescriptum, &c. The wicked Mysteries and Institutes, ac∣cording to Calvin's prescription, by her received and observed, she hath commanded to be embrac'd by her Subjects. In a word, 'tis evident this skulking Author's business is to scandalize all the Learned pious Instruments, which God hath made use of for the first Reforma∣tion: As not only Calvin, Zwinglius, and Beza, p. 1 & 2. but Lu∣ther, Melancton, Bucer, &c. p. 5. Therefore with what Notion would a Cranmer, or a Ridley, or a Latimer, (those glorious Mar∣tyrs) or even Patient Hooper himself, or Reverend Jewel, and such-like famous Lights of our Church (some of them the very Compilers of the Venerable Liturgy) have beheld such a viru∣lent
Pamphlet? Or can any Man that has a value for the Prote∣stant Religion, but feel his Blood curdle, to see it sold with Im∣punity at the Royal-Exchange, and through the Streets of a Pro∣testant City, which by the very same devilish Hands was within these 16 years laid in Ashes. Tory. Come, come, you are hot and peevish; I doubt 'tis only because it presses you too close; for only those that know not how to answer Books, would stifle and have them suppress'd. Truem. Nay then, let it go on, for I am sure the matter of it has been answer'd 150 times: There's nothing in this Pamphlet but Parsons, that Bastard of a Jesuit, ('tis the Complement his own Brother-Priests gave him) printed long ago. You may find it too in a Book, Entituled, The Image of both Churches, written by one Musket a Jesuit, and printed in King James's time; or you may have the effect of it in a Pamphlet, Entituled, Philanax Anglicus, scribbled soon after His Majesty's happy Re∣stauration by a Popish Doctor of the Civil Law; to which, the Reverend Du Moulin, one of the Prebends of Canterbury, re∣turn'd an Answer. But if no such Refutations were extant (as 100 are) yet all the World knows your Bolsec was a most prosti∣tuted Liar, and the rest of your Authors forg'd and Counterfeit. Nor will, I hope, any that are truly of the Church of England, be bubbled with such stale Shams; but rather take notice who they are that thus blow these Coals, and keep such a noise against Calvinists, such a stir against Ignoramus Juries, and are so over∣joy'd at the prosecution of Conscientious Dissenters; and if they find them at bottom no other than either Papists, or Atheists, or Debauchees (who are half one half tother) they may then com∣petently judge whose Interest is promoted by these Intrigues. Tory. Well there's no talk to you now; but I'le warrant you L'Estrange will Crow bravely this fortnight for the other days work in the City. Truem. What! because his old friend John Starkey is made one of the Common-Council? I tell you, Sir, I value Roger's Observatorisms, no more than I do Eustace Commyne's Narrativisms; they both pretend to serve the Royal Family and the Bishops, and in truth they both perform it at the same Rate. Nor will you find much more reason upon the whole matter to thank St. Thomas, than you have to Sacrifice to Madam Address, who, 'tis forty to one when you come to try her, will prove as Errand a Jilt, and as Insig∣nificant as an Irish Evidence. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681.
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, Dec. 30. 1681. Potentes in Clero qui Religionem Christi dissipant sub pallio Sanctita∣tis, vel punientur hîc per praepositos suos, aut Laicos, vel destruen∣tur per vastationes Hostiles, vel congregant facinora in ultionem Divini Judicii.— Wickliff de verit. Script. p. 432. Objections against Wickliff, answer'd. An Example or two of his writing in his own ancient Style. His Troubles. The Ʋniver∣sity like to reject the Popes Bull, &c. THE Papists (who are most exquisite and ready forgers of Lies and Scandals on all that oppose or go about to detect their Villanies) have raised several Aspersions and Calumnies against honest Wickliff. As first, they affirm, That his Preaching was not out of Con∣science, but spite and desire of Revenge, because (forsooth) he was put by the Bishopprick of Worcester, which he aim'd at— Therefore he declaim'd so fiercely against the Church.
Answ. This is only the malicious suggestion of Parsons and Brerely, and such upstart Pettifoggers for the Church of Rome: There is no ancient Author (tho most of them, as being Monks, rail horribly against poor Wickliff) that mentions any such mat∣ter: Nay, Parsons himself gives himself the Lie, for in his three Conversions, Part 3. Cap. 5. Numb. 14. he saith, Wickliff con∣demn'd all temporal Goods—How then should he so greedily affect the Bishopprick of Worcester? And elsewhere he con∣fesses, That Wickliff was in great favour with the Duke of Lan∣caster, who bore chief sway during the time of King Edward the Third; so that if Wickliff had been so fond of a Bishop∣prick, sure that Duke's Interest might have got him one. 2. They object, that Wickliff taught, That so long as a Man is in deadly Sin, he is no Bishop or Prelate, neither doth truly Consecrate or Baptize. Answ. If Wickliff did say so, what more did he say, than what St. Ambrose had said before him—Ʋnless thou embrace and follow the good works of a Bishop, a Bishop thou canst not be.— Ambr. de dignit. Sacerd. cap. 4. Nay, there is a Vote of a Coun∣cil (if that will help the matter) in a Case almost to the same effect—Quicunque sub Ordinatione Presbyterii vel Episcopatûs, mortali Crimine se dixerint esse pollutos à supradictis Ordinationibus submovendos esse Censuimus: Whoever coming under Ordina∣tion of the Presbytery or Eiscopacy, shall be polluted with mortal Sin, we think it fit, That such be removed from those Orders, saith the Synod of Valentia, held under Damascus, cap. 4. It must be remembred, that Wickliff lived in a most cor∣rupt Age, when the Clergy were so seared in Impiety, that it required sharp Launcings, and good store of Vinegar to make them sensible. It was only their abuses he inveigh'd against so tartly, for elsewhere he reproves those that would not obey their lawful Prelates; and in his Book of the verity of the Scripture, he thus explains his meaning: Nomen non facit Episcopum sed vita, &c. It is not the Name, but the Life that makes a Bi∣shop. If a Man have the Name of a Prelate, and does not answer the reason thereof in sincerity of Doctrine, and inte∣grity of Life, but live scandalously in open Sin, he is but a Nomine-tenus Sacerdos, A Bishop or Priest in Name, not in
Truth. Yet still Wickliff did not deny, but that such an ones Ministerial Acts were valid; for so in the same Treatise, p. 138. he saith— Unless the Christian Priest be united unto Christ by Grace, Christ cannot be his Saviour; Nec sine falsitate dicit verba Sacramentalia, Nor can he pronounce the Sacra∣mental words without Lying; Licet prosint Capacibus, The notwithstanding they are available so far, that the worthy Receiver is thereby nothing hinder'd from partaking of the Grace signified. Obj. 3. They pretend, that Wickliff maintain'd, That it was not lawful for any Ecclesiastical persons to have any Temporal Pos∣sessions, or property in any thing. Answ. This is falsly imputed to him; he only tax'd the Abuses of the Revenues given to so many Abbies, Priories, and Mo∣nasteries, tending only to Superstition, and the keeping so many Drones in idleness: And therefore he was of opinion, That our Kings might dispossess them thereof, and give them Genti facienti Justitiam, to good and godly Uses. The Poverty he exhorted to, was no other than that which St. Paul recommends, viz. Having Food and Rayment, therewith to be content. He did not debar Ministers from actual having, but from Covetous affe∣cting the things of this World, which are to be Renounc'd (saith he) Per Cogitationem & Affectum, in the Mind and the Affections. Obj. 4. They charge him with asserting, That God ought to obey the Devil. Answ. This is so senseless and improbable a Slander, that no Man in his Wits can believe it. And on the quite contrary, Wickliff in his Commentary on Psal. 112. Expresly affirms, That the Devil can do nothing without God's permission. Obj. 5. Well, but if they cannot fix Blasphemy upon him, they will charge him with Treason. This is a frequent Strata∣gem of the Devils and his Instruments—If thou suffer this Man, thou art not Cesar's Friend, said the Jews of old; not that they cared for Cesar, but only to gratifie their own Revenge. Thus
the Papists charge Wickliff as a Teacher of Sedition, and an oppo∣ser of Magistrates; and that if a Civil Magistrate be in a mortal Sin, he is no longer to be obey'd. Answ. There is much craft and malice, but very little truth and no reason for this Slander. Wickliff indeed, in several of his Works, admonisheth the King (and all other inferiour Offi∣cers and Magistrates) that he beareth not the Sword in vain, nor hath his Office for nought, but to discharge well and truly the part and Office of a King, by seeing wholsom Laws duly executed, and Justice impartially administer'd: And tells him, That if he be defective in such his Duty, by suffering the Sword of Justice to rust in its Scabard, and his People to perish for want of good Governance, then he is not properly and truly a King, that is, in effect and operation, for so the words must necessarily be understood, being spoken by way of Exhortation. But otherwise, so far was Wickliff from mutinying himself, or per∣suading others to any act that was Rebellious, that never any Man in those times did so stoutly assert the King's Supremacy in all Causes, and over all Persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, against all usurped foreign Jurisdiction, for which (amongst many others) he gives this reason: That otherwise our Soveraign should not be King over all England, but Regulus parvae partis, a petty▪ Governour of some small parts of the Realm.—Nor does any thing, tending to countenance Rebellion, appear in any of his Works that are extant. But the Friars and proud Clergy having an inveterate spleen against Wickliff, and there happening to fall out about the same time a grievous Insurre∣ction of the Commons under Wat Tyler; occasioned chiefly upon a civil score, about Taxes, Commons, and Servitude, but much augmented by one John Ball a Priest, (and one of Baal's Priests too for ought I know, for he does not at all appear to be any of Wickliff's Followers) therefore, in spight to Wickliff, they cast the odium of that Frantic Tumult upon him and his Doctrine. But indeed as Wickliff was a person of extraordinary Learning and Piety, so that in substance he held and taught the very same Doctrines as are at this day maintained by the Church of England, is demonstrated by the Learned Dr. James, Oxford Library∣keeper, in his Book, Intituled—An Apology for John Wickliff,
shewing his Conformity with the now Church of England, &c. Printed Anno 1608. However to the end the vulgar Reader may better judge of this reverend man and his Works; I shall here produce some few passages out of two of his Books, Printed by the said James from the Original Manuscripts, remaining one in Bennet Colledge Cambridge, the other in the Publick Library at Oxford. The English being excusable considering 'twas wrote above 300 years agoe in his complaint to King Richard the Second, and his Parliament. Article 2. He hath these words— Nothing ought to be damned as errour and false, but if it favour errour or unrightewiseness against Gods Law. And Article 4. He prays. That Christ's teaching O be∣leave of the Sacrament of his own Body, that is plainly tawght by Christ and his Apostles, in Gospels and Pistles mayen be tawght openlie in Churches of Christen People, and the contrary teaching and false beleave is brought up by cursed Hypocrits and worldlie Priests unkunning in Gods Law, which say they are Apostles of Christ but are Fools. And he concludes that Article with these words— As Christ saved the wordle by writing and teaching of foure Evangelists, so the Fiend casteth to Damme the wordle and Priests, for letting to Preach the Gospel by these four; by fayned Contemplation, by Songs, by Salisbury use, and by worldly business of Priests. And in his Treatise against the Orders of Friars, Ca. 4. runs thus: Friars sayen, that if a man be once professed to their Re∣ligion, he may never leave it, and be saved, though he be never so unable thereto; for al time of his life, and they wil nede him to live in such a state ever more, to which God makes him ever unable, and so nede him to be damned. Alas, out on such heresie that Mans Ordinance is holden stronger than is the Ordinance of God. For if a man enter into the newe Religion against mans ordinance, he maie lawfully forsake it; but if he enter against Gods Ordinance, when God makes him unable thereto, he shall not be suffered by Antichrist's power to leave it. And if this reason were wel declared, sith no man wote which man is able to this new Religion by Gods dome, and which is not able, no man should be constrained
to hold forth this new sect, and thus this new Religion maie not last, but if it be by this Blasphemie to constraine a man unable by Gods dome to hold this new sect, and suffer him not to come to freedome of Christs Order. And Chapter the 4th. Friars saien, if a man bee professed to there holie Order, hee shal not Preach freelie and generallie, the Gospel of Christian men without en licence of his Soveraign, for virtue of obedi∣ence be his Soveraign never so cursed man of life and un∣cunning of Gods Law and enimie to Christian men souls, and in case a foule Devil of Hel; thowgh this man professed have receaved of God never so much cuninge of Gods Law, and power, and wil, to work after this cuninge; and so this man shall needes be damned for misspending of Gods treasure. For sith Gods Law saies, that hee is out of Charity that helps not his Brother with bodilie Almes, if he maie in his nede, much more is he out of Charity, that helpes not his Brothers soule, with teaching of Gods Law, when hee sees him runne to Hel, yea by gnorance. And thus to magnifie and maintaine their rotten sects, they neden men by Hypocrisie, falseteach∣ing, and strong paines, to break Gods heasts and leese Charity. Out on this false heresie and tyrantrie of Antichrist, that men be neded strangely to keep more his Lawes and obaye more to them then to Christ's Commandements ever rightful. And Page 17. Thus— As Christ saved the wordle by writing and teaching of foure Evangelists, so the Fiend casteth to Damme the wordle and Priests for letting to Preach the Gospel by these foure; by fained Contemplation, by Songs, by Salisbury use, and by wordly buysiness of Priests.
The COURANT. —Illa propago Contemptrix Superûm, Saevaeque avidissima Caedis Et violenta fuit; Scires è Sanguine Natos. Ovid. I. Metam. Tory Twas bravely done to 'ther day in the West. I love peo∣ple that will go thorough stitch with their Business; I can shew you a French Author, Naudaeus by Name that affirms, the Bartholomew-Massacre at Paris, had been one of the most glo∣rious acts of Christianity, if it had not unluckily been perform'd but by halves. Truem. Ay—but destroying of BIBLES (if that story be true) was sure attempted a little too soon; such Exploits would be time enough under a Popish Successor. 'Tis our present happi∣ness and comfort (under God,) that we live under a Prince who is a Defender of the Protestant Faith, content his loving Subjects should have English Bibles, and much averse in his Royal Na∣ture to such Sanguinary Rigours, as some hot-headed people (men of as little Estates or Interest in their Country, as of Brains, Piety, or real Loialty) would fain be practizing, to imbroil us in Confusions and help forward the Popes Design, by weakning the Body of Protestants with unnecessary and unnatural Heats amongst themselves. Tory. Well, I am sure our Parson, and hee's a Gentleman that wears a Scarf already, and hopes to be a Right Reverend ere long, told us last Sunday, that t'was a Duty to teize and worry Dissenters, and that it was their own faults if their Brains were beat out, for why the Vengeance don't they Conform? Truem. Prethee present my Service to his Reverence, and desire him from a Friend of mine, to return an answer to the Case following—Suppose his Doctorship were a Minister of the Reformed Church in France, whether at Charenton, Caen, or Saumurr, it matters not. Tory. Hold, hold, do you think our Doctor will suffer him∣self to be suppos'd into a Damn'd Presbiterian, a Traiterous Vil∣lain of a Calvinistical Hugenote.
Truem. Patience Man! The supposition Ile warrant you shall not infect him, therefore still I say for once suppose him so, and that Monsieur the Intendant of that Province, should thus accost him— Sir being your Neighbour I am so far your Friend, as to pitty and advise you, (for though you are an Heretick, you are yet one of humane Race, and may easily make a good con∣formable Catholick,) the King our Master will have but one Religion in his Dominions, and you must comply, or you are undone. He is resolv'd all his Subjects shall Worship God in the same Mode, therefore go to Church, or your Estate, Li∣berty, and perhaps your Life will be Sacrific'd to his Royal In∣dignation and your own obstinate Folly. Then Imagine he should answer thus.— Monsieur! I con∣serve a profound Respect to our Puissant and invincible Mo∣narch, am ready to obey all his just Commands, but in this par∣ticular I pray have me Excused, I dread his Majesties displea∣sure, but am much more apprehensive of God's; the one may hang, or break me upon the Wheel, but the other will Damn me to Eternity. I beseech you therefore interpose with his Ma∣jesty, on the behalf of me and my Brethren, that we may En∣joy the same liberty of Worshiping God as we have hitherto had under him and his Royal Predecessors; we vow all Duty and Allegiance to his Person and Government, we will defend him with our Lives and Fortunes. Nothing is so dear (unless our Consciences) which we will not Sacrifice to his pleasure and Honour, but in the Matters proposed we cannot comply without the offence of God and our Souls. The Catholick Gentleman (like any Observator) replies;— These are only Flams to colour Hypocrisy, Rebellion, and Disobedience, His Ma∣jesty is advis'd to put an end to all Religious Feuds amongst his people, thereby to render his Government more firm and secure; He is weary of the everlasting Squabbles of different Perswasions. The Temple of Janus shall therefore be shut, he will have no more Religious Wars a∣mogst his Subjects. To grant or connive at any Liberty of serving God after your own own way, is not a course to end Differences but to perpe∣tuate them, for should you be gratified, others may succeed with new∣scruples, and under pretence of Conscience carry on differences as high as ever, to the weakning of his Authority and Empire, &c. Now let the Doctor but tell us, what in this case he would Rejoyn to such a Catholick Monsieur, and if from the same Topicks our Protestant Dissenters cannot fairly excuse themselves; the Doctor shall have all the Money that the Devil and Thompson found out tother day under the Holy-Bush in Man∣nock-Hill, and a sine Cure into the Bargain. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681.
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, Jan. 6. 1681-2. Optarem quod omnes Ritus nostri forent a Deo Confirmati.— Wickliff de verit. Script. p. 581. An Omission in the last, supply'd. The means how Wickliff's Doctrine was spread into Bohemia, &c. His Death. His Bones dug up and burnt. BY a mistake at the Press last week, there was not only some things mentioned in the Contents more than there was room for in that Sheet, but also four or five Lines happen'd to be twice repeated: For the latter, we beg the Readers pardon; and as to the former, shall endeavour now to satisfie him, which is, Touching the Troubles and Opposition that Wickliff met with. If the strength or policy of Man could have stifled those Truths which he delivered, his Doctrine had long since been extinct; for the Pope was soon alarm'd therewith, and bestir'd himself amain to get Wickliff silenc'd; but such Esteem had he by his Vertues and Learning obtain'd, that when Gregory the Ele∣venth, in the year 1378. sent his Bull to the University of Ox∣ford,
expostulating with them for suffering him there to spread his Tenets, Walsingham the Historian tells us, That the Heads of the Vniversity were long time in suspense, whether they should receive such the Pope's Bull with Honour, or reject it with Contempt. Yet at last, the Reverence they bore to his Un-holiness, prevailed with them to entertain his Bull with Respect: However, we do not find, that they did any thing effectually against Wickliff. But the Archbishop of Canterbury was very violent against him; twice he was actually convented before him and other Bishops, and thrice summoned to appear. The first time he escaped by the favour of the Duke of Lancaster, who would needs have a Chair for him that he might sit, which the Bishops would not admit in their presence, and so a Quarrel arose, and nothing then was done. The second time he got off by means of a Messenger, who, just as they were about to pass Sentence upon him, came in from the Queen, charging them immediately to desist. The third time he prudently absented himself, and did not obey their Summons, because he had intelligence, that the Bishops had plotted his Death, by the way, devising the means, and encouraging certain Russians thereunto. However, in his absence, the Bishops, with the Rabble of Friars to assist them, took upon them to examine and censure his Writings, meeting for that purpose at the Gray-Friars, London, where, just as they were going about their business, happen'd a most terrible Earth∣quake, which much daunted them; yet at last they proceeded to pick out 9 Articles or Propositions, which they condemn'd as Heretical, and 23 others as Erronious: And then they got the King's Letters forbidding his Books and Doctrines to be pub∣lish't; yet still he remain'd firm and constant, and laboriously, both by preaching and writing, propagated the Gospel, and God wonderfully preserv'd him out of the hands of his Enemies, con∣tinuing Parson of Lutterworth in Leicestershire, and so died in peace in a good old Age in the year 1387. Nor was his Doctrine confin'd only to England, but shone and gave light into Regions far remote. Some say, that to avoid the fury of the Clergy, he himself for some years withdrew into Germany, and there preached the Gospel; but I do not find sufficient Ground for that opinion, but rather believe, the Truth might be propagated there by some of his Followers; and in particular, Cochleus in his History of the Hussies, l. 1. tells us,
Petrus Payne Anglus, Discipulus Wiclephi, Pragam cum Libris illius profugerat; One Peter Payne an Englishman, one of Wick∣liff's Scholars (who was sent with other Legates to the Council at Basil, where he disputed for three days together touching the Civil Dominion of the Clergy) fled into Bohemia, and carried with him some of Wickliff's Books. Some of which were Tran∣slated by John Huss into the Bohemian Language, as the same Cochleus relates, who also affirms, That one of the Bishops of England wrote him word, Esse sibi adhuc odie duo maxima Volu∣mina Wiclephi quae mole suâ videantur aequare opera B. Augustini, That he had then by him two Volumes of Wickliff's, which were almost as large as St. Austin's Works. Of which, many it seems are since lost or destroy'd by the Papists; but divers of them are yet extant. What opinion the University of Oxford had of the Learning and Piety of this good Man, appears by that Testimonial which they publickly gave of him under their Common Seal, dated October 5. 1406. which you may read in Mr. Foxes Acts and Monuments, fol. 112. And now being in his Grave, one would have thought he had been beyond the Sphere of Activity of the most inveterate Ma∣lice; but such is the nature of Papal Cruelty, that its Rage ex∣tends almost to the other World, and with a Barbarity more than Heathenish, violates Sepulchers; for 41 years after Wickliff's Death, the Council at Constance, the very same Conventicle that Decreed, That Faith is not to be kept with Hereticks, made an Order for taking up his Bones and burning them, in these words: For as much as by the Authority of the Sentence and Decree of the Council of Rome, and by the Commandment of the Church and the Apostolical See, after due Delays granted, this Holy Synod hath proceeded unto the Condemnation of the said John Wickliff and his Memory, having first made Procla∣mation, and given Commandment to call forth whosoever would defend the said Wickliff or his Memory, (if any such there were) but none did appear. And likewise Witnesses being examined by Commissioners appointed by Pope John and his Council, upon the Impenitency and final Obstinacy of the said John Wicliff, (reserving that which is to be reserved, as in such Cases the Law requires) and his Impenitency and Ob∣stinacy
even unto his end being sufficiently proved by evident Signs and Tokens, and also by lawful Witnesses of Credit, therefore the Sacred Synod declareth, determineth, and giveth Sentence, That the said John Wickliff was a notorious obstinate Heretic, and that he died in his Heresie, Cursing and Damning both him and his Memory. This Synod also Decrees and Ordains, That the Body and Bones, if they may be discerned and known from the Bodies of other faithful people, be taken out of the Ground, and thrown away far from the Burial place of any Church, accor∣ding to the Canon Laws and Decrees. Pursuant to this worshipful Decree, The Archdeacon and Offi∣cial of the Diocess shortly after came with their Officers to Lut∣terworth Church where Wickliff lay buried, and having disin∣terred his Bones, they with much Formality burnt the same, and turn'd his Dust into Ashes, which Ashes they also took and threw into the River, as if they would Interest all the Elements in their Inhumane Pageantry. Touching which, I find in a most Learned Treatise, written by Dr. Hoyle, Professor of Divinity in Dublin Colledge, Entituled, A Rejoinder to Mr. Malone's Reply concerning the Real Presence, p. 654. this remarkable passage▪ The Doctor having discours'd of the taking up the Bnes of Bucer and Fagius, adds these words—I cannot upon so good an occasion but glance at the like more than Savage usage of Wickliff, and signifie to the World a strange Accident not yet observed (in Print) by any, and which my self learned of the most aged Inhabitants, and they within a few hands from the very Eye-witnesses, and is a com∣mon Tradition in all Lutterworth: A Child finding one of Wickliff's Bones which in hast was left or forgotten, running with it to carry it to the rest in the Bonefire, brake his Leg. Here was Lex Talionis, Bone for Bone. And to this day for a perpetual Monument, in the very place where they burnt his Bones, tho the Townsmen for their own profit have often essayed to bring the Water that way, it never holds, but still makes a Bank. —Thus far the Doctor. I shall conclude this Weeks Task with a Copy of John Wick∣liff's Answer or Resolution to King Richard, touching the Right and Title of the King and Pope, which was as follows.
It being demanded, whether the Kingdom of England may lawfully, in case of necessity, for its own defence, detain and keep back the Treasure of the Kingdom, that it be not carried away to foreign and strange Nations, the Pope himself deman∣ding and requiring the same, under pain of Censure, and by vertue of Obedience. To which, Wickliff return'd this Answer— Setting apart the Minds of Learned Men, what might be said in the matter, either by the Canon Law, or by the Law of England, or the Civil Law, It resteth, saith he, not only to persuade and prove the Affirmative part of this Doubt, but the Principles of Christ's Law. And first, I prove it thus: Every natural Body hath Power given it of God, to resist against his Contrary, and to preserve it self in due Estate, as Philosophers know very well; in so much, that Bodies without Life are endu'd with such a kind of Power (as it is evident) unto whom hardness is given to resist those things that would break it, and Coldness to withstand the Heat that dissolveth it. For so much then as the Kingdom of England (after the manner and phrase of the Scriptures) ought to be one Body, and the Clergy with the Commonalty, the Members thereof; it seemeth that the same Kingdom hath such Power given it of God, and so much the more apparent, but how much the same Body is more pre∣cious unto God, adorned with Vertue and Knowledge. For so much then as there is no Power given of God unto any Crea∣ture for any end or purpose, but that he may lawfully use the same to that end and purpose; it followeth, that our Kingdom may lawfully keep back, and detain their Treasure for the de∣fence of it self, in what case soever necessity do require the same. Secondarily, the same is proved by the Law of the Gospel, for the Pope cannot challenge the Treasure of this Kingdom, but under the Title of Alms, and consequently under the pre∣tence of the Works of Mercy, according to the Rule of Charity. But in the Case aforesaid, the Titel of Alms ought utterly to cease; Ergo, the Right and Title of challenging the Treasure of our Realm shall cease also, in the presupposed necessity: For so much as all Charity hath his beginning of himself, it were no work of Charity, but of meer madness to send away the Treasures of the Realm unto Foreign Nations, whereby the
Realm it self may fall into Ruine, under the pretence of such Charity. It appeareth also by this, that Christ the Head of the Church, whom all Christian Priests ought to follow, lived by the Alms of Devout Women, Luke 7. 8. He hungred and thirsted, he was a Stranger, and many other Miseries he sustai∣ned, not only in his Members, but also in his own Body, as the Apostle witnesseth, 1 Cor. 8. He was made poor for your sakes, that through his Poverty you might be made rich, whereby in the first endowing of the Church, whatsoever he were of the Clergy that had any Temporal Possessions, he had the same by form of a perpetual Alms, as both Writings and Chronicles do witness. Whereupon St. Bernard, in his second Book to Eugenius, that he could not challenge any Secular Dominion by Right of Suc∣cession, as being the Vicar of St. Peter, writeth thus: That if St. John should speak unto the Pope himself, as Bernard doth unto Eugenius, were it to be thought that he would take it pa∣tiently? But let it be so, that you do challenge it unto you by some other way or means; but truly, by any Right or Title Apostolical, you cannot so do: For how could he give unto you that which he had not himself? That which he had, he gave you, that is to say, Care over the Church; but did he give you any Lordship or Rule? Hak what he saith: Not bearing Rule (saith he) as the Lords in the Clergy, but behaving your selves as Examples to the Flock. And because thou shalt not think it to be spoken only in Humility, and not in Verity, mark the Word of the Lord himself in the Gospel, The Kings of the Gentiles rule over them, but thou shalt not do so. Here Lordship and Dominion is plainly forbidden to the Apostles, and darest thou then usurp the same? If thou wilt be a Lord, thou shalt lose thine Apostleship; or if thou wilt be an Apostle, thou shalt lose thy Lordship; for truly thou shalt de∣part from the one of them. If thou wilt have both, thou shalt lose both, or else think thy self to be of that number, of whom God doth so greatly complain, saying, They have Reign'd, but not through me; they are become Princes, and I have not known it. Now if it do suffice to Rule with the Lord, thou hast thy Glory, but not with God; but if we will keep that which is forbidden, let us hear what is said: He that is the Greatest among you, (saith Christ) shall be made as the least; and he which is Highest, shall be as the Minister; and for Example, set a Child in the midst of them, so this then is the true form and institution of the Apostle's Trade. Lordship and Rule is forbidden, Ministration and Ser∣vices commanded.—Thus far St. Bernard, as cited by Wickliff upon this occasion.
THE COURANT. Tory. NAY, now all's out—I thought this 'twould come to at last, for D—me if I did not always suspect as much. I ever lookt upon Catholics as fine civil Gentlemen, and for their Church, I have a great Veneration, because she is a true Church, and a Mother Church, and their Worship is very glo∣rious and decent. What an absurd thing 'tis to imagine, that ever such Holy Loyal Men as their Priests are, should be guilty of Treason? Yet I did but say a Twelve-month ago there was no Popish Plot, and a Whiggish Son of a Whore gave me a slap i'th' Face, and threaten'd me with Newgate, for presuming to give the King and Three Parliaments the Lye. But it should seem Tempora mutantur, I hope e're long a Man may say, and swear too, That there never was any such Plot at all, with Impunity and without Controul. Truem. Prethee, what makes you so merry about the Gills this Morning? Hast thou been at Breakfast with the Painter at Aldersgate on his Whig-Pye, whose Crust was made of Gammer Celier's Meal, and baked in the red hot Oven of Dr. Tantivy's Skull? Tory. No, no, but on a better Dish by half; have you not seen Nat. Thompson's Loyal Intelligence. Numb. 98? Truem. Honest! and Loyal! quotha? If to invent and pub∣lish continual Lies and Scandals, be honest; if to abuse Go∣vernment with false Reports, engage publickly to vindicate Pa∣pists in all Cases, divide His Majesty's Protestant Subjects, and in a word, to do all that the Devil can suggest to imbroil the Na∣tion, be to be Loyal; then your Thompson may claim those Titles. Tory. Pshaw! this is only spight, because he there openly tells all the World, That the pretended Popish Plot was nothing in the World but a meer Contrivance of old Dr. Tongue's. Truem. Yes, and he contriv'd the Gunpowder-Treason too, and brought in the Spaniards in 88. He murder'd Sir Edm.
Godfrey, [or else he kill'd himself, as L'Estrange modestly hits in his last Observator.] 'Twas Tongue writ all the Letters from Coleman, and the rest of the folks at St. James's, to La Chese, and the Devil knows who besides. 'Twas Tongue— Tory. Leave your Fooling—young Tongue out of pure Re∣morse of Conscience will prove it. Truem. Leave your Roguing, and your pitiful ridiculous Sham∣mings; has not this very young Tongue set forth at large how he was at first Trapan'd to suggest that Story against his Father, in a Book printed by Mr. C—in the New Exchange, but, for I know not what reasons, stifled, and never suffer'd to be publisht? Has not this young Tongue an hundred and an hundred times, with Tears in his Eyes, bewail'd and repented of that unnatural Villany? Nay, but a fortnight ago he voluntarily declar'd, That the sense thereof lay so heavy upon him, that if ever he got out of Prison, (where he was like to starve, and had scarce Clothes to cover his Nakedness) he would forthwith Transport himself to the West-Indies; for his shame for that false and wicked Accu∣sation was so great, that he should not be able to walk the Streets. And is this pitiful Tool again furbusht up to make a new Attaque? But on the contrary, what if this be only a Contri∣vance of the Popish Traytors, and their Implement Nat? What if herein he most impudently abuses both old Tongue and young Tongue, and the public? Then no doubt His Majesty's most Ho∣nourable Privy-Council, the Judges, and all Inferiour Magi∣strates, and every Protestant English-man, will think it necessary to punish exemplarily the Villain, that in Print has broach'd such an horrid Scandal on the Honour, Justice, Prudence, and Safety of the Nation. For what that desperate pragmatic Huszy Celliers publisht in her Libel, for which she was deser∣vedly Pillory'd, was nothing so mischievous in its Nature and Tendency, as that which Thompson in this Paper does audaciously affirm; for which, if he scape Scot free, it must be by the strength of that Proverb—The Devil helps his Children. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681-2
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, Jan. 13. 1681-2. Imperante & florente Nequitiâ Virtus non solùm Praemiis caret, sed etiam sceleratorum pedibus Calcatur & supplitia luit. The horrible Schism between Popes and Anti-Popes, for fifty years together. HAving dispatcht what we thought necessary to say touching Wickliff, 'tis now time to return to the prosecution of our History of Popes, having left off with Pope Gregory the Eleventh, [See our Third Volume, Numb. 67.] who died Anno Dom. 1378. The attentive Reader cannot but have observ'd in the course of this History, many Schisms in the Papal Chair, that is, seve∣ral pretenders at one time, each of them bearing himself as the true and only Infallible Head of the Church. But now we come to speak of Schisma omnium gravissimum, The most grievous of all Schisms, as the Jesuit De Bussieres tells it; for it lasted half an hundred years, Pope against Pope, and the States of Europe, and all the Churches of this part of the World, divided, or rather rent and torn asunder, whilst these scuffling Fathers repeal
the Acts one of another, and Condemn each others Canons and Ordinances, yea Curse and Excommunicate, and openly pro∣nounce one another to be Antichrist; and all this in Books pub∣lisht, and yet extant concerning that matter. And there∣fore the Relation of this so famous quarrel, which we shall re∣cite as briefly as the matter will bear, cannot but be well wor∣thy the Reader's considerate notice. Gregory being dead, the people of Rome flockt to the Cardi∣nals, pressing them by all means, that they should chuse an Ita∣lian to succeed him, for if a French-man should be Elected, 'twas odds but he would remove the Papal Seat again to Avig∣nion, and then Rome would be undone, St. Peter be dishonour'd, devout People leave off their coming in Pilgrimage to his Shrine, and twenty other mischiefs would follow. The Cardinals pro∣mised them fairly all should be done to the Glory of God, but were no sooner got into the Conclave, but they were all in a confusion, instead of being assisted with the Holy-Ghost; for there were 14 French Cardinals, who stickled might and main to have one of their number chosen; but then a new Contest hap∣pening amongst themselves which should be the Man, and the people abroad crying no French man, no French-man, and threat∣ning to cut all their Throats if they did not elect an Italian, partly through fear, aud partly in spight to each other, and a little bribing too in the case, they at last chose one Bartholomew, Archbishop of Barry, a Nepolitan, who was then absent, but made hast to Rome, and took upon him the name of Vrban the Sixth. Theodoric à Nyem, who was his Secretary; l. 1. c. 1. tells us, That before his Popedom, he was a very honest fellow, but Magistratus indicat virum, Preferment strangely alters a Man, and commonly for the worse; for as soon as he was in the Chair, he was as proud as Lucifer, in so much, that when one day Otho Duke of Brunswick, Husband to Joan Queen of Na∣ples, (who immediately on his being chosen, had sent him 40000 Ducats in Gold and Silver to defray his first Expences) making a Collation for his Holiness, drank to him on his Knees; this scally Servant of Servants, out of meer Pride, would not for a long time take the Cup out of the hand of so great a Prince kneeling before him, 'till one of the Cardinals blushing for him, cry'd, Holy Father, it is time to drink, and then the insolent Pre∣ate vouchsafed to accept it.
But his Pride had quickly a check, if not a fall, for within 3 Months, the French Cardinals requested Leave of him, that because the weather was very hot, they might for change of Air retire to Anagnia, which being granted, they appoint their Rendezvous at Fundi, and to reinforce their Party, whea∣dle thither three Italian Cardinals, by promise privately made to each of them, That they would make him Pope, alledging, That the Election of Vrban was not free, but obtain'd by the Tumults of the people, &c. But at this Consult they chose in∣deed the Cardinal of Genoua by the name of Clement the Se∣venth. And now▪ Arma Armis, & Tela minantia Telis. Pope jostles Pope, and Curse at Curses spreads, Two Triple-Crowns are got to Loggerheads. Each of them labours to draw as many Princes and States of Christendom to his obedience as he can. Most of the Italians, all the English, Germans, and Portuguese, acknowledge Vrban for Pope Canonical, but the Kings of France and Spain were all for Clement, and some were so wise, as not to admit either of them. To strengthen himself, Urban in one day created 26 Cardinals, a jolly Company of Red capp'd Gentlemen! who were oblig'd to espouse his Quarrel; otherwise their Honour would be in the Dust, since it was deriv'd from him. He also besieg'd the Castle of St. Angelo, wherein there was a French Garrison, and took it, sends for Charles, a Noble Hungarian, and gives him the Kingdom of Sicily, and engages him to be his Champion. And because this Charles had no Money, the Pope not only sold to several of the Roman Citizens, the Proprietaries and Rights of many Churches of Rome, to the value of above Fourscore thousand Crowns, but also expos'd to sale the Gold and Silver Chalices, Crosses, and other precious Ornaments of the Churches and Monasteries; nay, he made bold with his very Gods, for he melted down many Silver Images of Saints, and coin'd them into Money, to pay the Soldiers of the said Charles's Army. So little do these Popes themselves make of that Bug-bear Sacriledge, when their own Ambition is concern'd!
Charles thus encourag'd, marches to Naples, and through the Treachery prepar'd by Pope Ʋrban, is receiv'd into the City, for he had inveigled to his Interest most of the best Families there, by his liberal promotion of them to the Dignity of Car∣dinals: But Joan the lawful Queen of Sicily (that had been so kind to assist him with Money) seeing him thus most ungratefully, as well as unjustly, invade her Dominions, retired to the New Castle; in order to whose rescue, her Husband Otho Duke of Brunswick, comes and besieges the City; whereupon the Popes Creature, Charles, counterfeits the Hand and Seal of the said Queen Joan, and sends a Letter as from her to Otho, intreating him to come to her with six only of his dearest and most faithful Friends, to Consult together in so great extremity what was best to be done; Otho suspecting nothing, goes thither by night, ac∣company'd with the Marquess of Montferrat, his Cousin Bal∣thasar, Duke of Brunswick's Brother, Son in Law of the Earl of Fundi, and three Captains, in whom he greatly trusted; but they fall into an Ambuscade prepar'd for them, who kill'd the Marquess and the three Captains, took Duke Otho and his Brother, and carried them Prisoners to Charles, who comman∣ded Balthasar's Eyes to be put out in the public Market-place, where the innocent young King Conradine, by the commandment of Charles the First, had been Beheaded, and kept Otho full 3 years under Custody. Queen Joan, when she heard that her Husband was taken, hoped that in yielding the Castle, which besides was in distress for want of Victuals, she might at least redeem her Life; but he sent her presently Prisoner into a cer∣tain Castle of Abruzzo, in the Chappel whereof, as she was kneeling at Prayer before the Altar, by his Command she is stran∣gled by four Hungarian Soldiers. All this was done by the councel of Pope Ʋrban, for his Legat à Latere was the Cardinal of Sangro, who was with Charles during all these Butcheries, and thought he offer'd to God good Sacrifice, when he had destroy'd them that had been faithful to Queen Joan, as well of the Clergy as Laity, either depriving them of their Goods, or depo∣sing them from Ecclesiastical Dignities, without any respect of Age, Condition, or Merit; in so much, that in one day he created 32 new Archbishops and Bishops, and many Abbots, all Neopolitans and Followers of Charles's part. Our Author adds, That he used the Enchantments of a certain Vagabond, who
named himself a Knight, and a little after was burn'd by com∣mandment of Lewis Duke of Anjou, whom he would have de∣ceived. Neither was our other Pope, Clement, in the mean while idle; a Man (saith the Author) of a large Conscience, and of great Experience, and very needy, whom Gregory the Eleventh, by reason he could not otherwise maintain his Prodigality, had appointed Legat in the Marca de Ancona and Lumbardy, more perhaps, that he might by that means have wherewith to live, from the Inhabitants of those Regions, under pretence of his Legation, than for any quiet or safety that he might procure unto them. Nevertheless he was covetous, or rather a greedy Griper, by reason of his Prodigality: For Otho Duke of Brun∣swick, having taken Verseil and 40 Castles in those parts from Viscount Barnabo, then Commander of Millan, who had deli∣vered them to Gregory, Clement being at that time Legate, sold them all to Barnabo for ready Money, who exercis'd against them all sorts of Cruelty, and exacted from them the Money he had disburs'd to Clement; and being come to the Popedom, he retained still the same humour, granting in fee for a very small yearly Revenue without any difficulty, the Lands and De∣mesnes of Cathedral Churches and Monasteries, to oblige great Men to his Faction, and giving (saith the Author) large Thongs of other Men's Leather. And when he saw that Ʋrban had at his pleasure created a King of Aulia, he resolved to give him a Competitor: This was Lewis Duke of Anjou, whom he crown'd and sent into Italy with an Army of sixty thousand Men. Upon which, Ʋrban thought fit to leave Rome, and to go into the Kingdom of Naples, whom Charles met not far from Aversa, and did unto him the office of a Groom, or Yeoman of his Stirrop, and many Country people came and kiss'd the said Ʋrban's Feet; but before they did so, they had thrice kiss'd the Ground. But yet for all this Complement, Charles, under co∣lour of shewing him the Castle of Aversa, kept the silly Pope prisoner, suspecting some ill Design from his Journey into those parts, and so much the rather, for that he himself had not ful∣filled his promise of putting Pregnan the Pope's Nephew (or as some rather thought, Bastard) into possession of the Dutchy of Capua. But soon after, at the Entreaties of the Cardinals
upon terms, set him at Liberty, and brought him to Na∣ples. The beforemention'd Pregnan was a notorious Villain, and addicted to all kind of Vices, and yet this Pope was so fond of him, that when his Debaucheries were complain'd of, he was always wont to cry, He is young, and yet he was then forty years old: Amongst other of his Pranks, he Ravisht a Nun of the Order of St. Clare, at which the people being much in∣cens'd, he fled to a Church under protection of his Uncle, the King having according to Law convicted him, sentenc'd him to dye; but the Pope interpos'd, alledging, That he was a supe∣riour Lord, in whose presence the King could not punish any Noble-Man, without his consent: And so the Criminal for this horrid Act escap'd the reach of Justice. Quia sic placuit Papae, (says Theodoric of Neym) because it so pleas'd the Pope to have it.
THE COURANT. Tory. WHat says little Harry (as the great Heraclitus calls him)? Does he not Triumph about Friday's work? Truem. Not at all, as I hear of; tho if some people might have their will, it would be almost matter of wonder to see Right at any time take place. But still I think, tho the Turky-Printer bustled as much as the best Powder-monkey, Extortioner, Soap-Chandler, or Splitter-splutter Suborner in the Pack, yet your Gang had no great cause of boasting, for some of the forlorn White Friars Troops I hear were cut off by the Shoulder-dabbers in their Retreat. But prethee what hast got in thy paw there? Thou art always (like the Observator) sumbling of Papers. Tory. 'Tis an odd thing I took up in the Street, and I know not what the Devil to make on't—However, for once I'le read it, just as Parson Whip-spur does his Sermon, which he never perus'd before he came into the Pulpit. The Copy of a Letter from a Roman Catholic in Albania, to a Popish Priest in Albionia. May it please your Reverence! WHat is every where admir'd, I joyfully congratulate; the wise and a live Conduct of our Vice Master, who by his unwearied pains and care, hath gain'd such a Senate as unanimously hath recogniz'd his pretensions; and tho never so much a Papist, he shall be so far (they declare) from being oppo∣sable, that he must not be question'd, which gives us great confidence (if our Friends could at last procure such a complying Assembly in your parts) we may once again have in prospect the Advancement of the Romish Catholic Religion (tho poor Ned, our grand Agitator, were most wretchedly Sacrific'd to the Glory of the De∣sign) over this whole Island, without much opposition. But we are even now startled (besides the late indignity of burning our Holy Father in Essigie) at some Rumours which are spread amongst us, for 'tis averr'd, the greater assurance we have of the Gentleman's faithful Adherence to his Holi∣nesses Supremacy and the See of Rome, the less hopes we have of his coming to the Imperial Dignity, or getting such a Senate as will bring our holy Enterprize to perfection in your Nation. For 'tis diffus'd as a Maxim, and generally receiv'd, That no resolv'd Papist
can be admitted as a lawful King there, according to the Rules of their present Government; They pretend to prove it thus—Every King of Albionia, accor∣ding to the Law, is to be in all Causes, and over all persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal, Supream Head and Governour: Therefore no resolv'd Papist can according to Law there be King, for be that owns the Popes Supremacy, disclaims his own Supremacy, consequently hath already renounc'd his Title, and agreed an Act of Exclusion against himself. And as for procuring such a Senate by the Laws establisht, (which are, and have graciously been declared to be our Rule) every Popish Recusant must be que∣stion'd, discover'd, repress'd, and debarr'd from any Office; and no man is to conceal, maintain, abet, aid, or assist a Popish Recusant, in advancing him to any place of Trust, Authority, or Government; but it shall be construed to sig∣nifie his consent to overthrow King, Religion, and Government establisht, in so much, that he shall incur the dang and penalty of a Praemunire, if not of Trea∣son: So that it cannot reasonably be suppos'd, that ever the more considerate part of the Commons can be surprized unwarily to chuse such Men, (as lye under the suspicion of the Guilt beforementioned, or that have been Abhorrers, Anti∣petitioners, or Addressers, against Legal Senates) to be their Representatives in any future Assembly of the States. To these gauling Objections of the Heretics which obstruct our hopes, I humbly implore of your fatherly Widom some Sale and Satisfaction, that so at once we may silence our Adversaries, and confirm our Friends. Thus doing, you may contribute much to the carrying on the holy Design, which hath been, and will be, the Desire and Endeavours of, Paradisopols, Dec. 5. 1681. Your most obedient Son, &c. Tory. Now would I give a Guinney to have this Priest's An∣swer; for tho I don't understand what this Letter is about, yet I love Replies extreamly: For certainly, he that has the last word, must be the wisest Man. Truem. For that very reason, Sir, I tell you—I am Your Servant. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681-2.
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, Jan. 20. 1681-2. Asperius nihil est misero cum surgit in Altum. The Cardinals vote, That if a Pope be negligent or unfit to govern, he may have Curators plac'd over him. Pope Ʋrban the Sixth drowns five Cardinals in Sacks. He dies. Boniface the Ninth succeeds him. POpe Ʋrban the Sixth being seemingly reconcil'd at Na∣ples with his Hector Charles the Titular King of Sicily, did with his precious Nephew, Pregnan, retire to Lu∣cera, (between Naples and Salerno) a place no less pleasant than safe for their persons, where he devoted himself to Sloth, and all kind of sensual Voluptuousness, whilst the Affairs of the Church every day ran to wrack, and the Cardinals were continually alarm'd and in danger between the Forces of the said Charles on the one side, and those of Lewis of Anjou (who, we told you, was with a great Army, enter'd into Italy, on the behalf of the other Pope, call'd Clement the Seventh); There∣fore at the instance of Cardinal Reatino, their Eminencies held a Consult together, where, after a long debate, it was resolv'd
by the opinions of many Doctors— That if a Pope should happen to grow negligent, or be found unfit to govern the the Church, or to be one so self-will'd and conceited, as to refuse all wholsom Advice, and thereby brought the Church (St. Peter's Bark) into danger, or were so ungovernable a Cockscomb, That without the counsel of his Cardinals, he would rashly do all things according to his own Fantasy and Lust; that then and in such case it was lawful to substitute by the Election of the Cardinals, some fit Curator or Curators, (Governours or Guardians) by and with whose direction and advice the Pope should be obliged to manage all affairs of mo∣ment in the Church. This was concluded by the Conclave, as you may see in the History of Theodorie a Nyem, l. 1. c. 24. (whose Testimony is so much the more to be valued, for that he was Secretary to this very Pope.) Now was not this a hopeful most holy Infallible Ghostly Father fit for a Bib and Muckinder, that must have Tu∣tors and Curators to direct him? Did these Cardinals (think you) believe, That their Pope was not subject to Error, when they conclude him such a Natural, as to need Managers and Guardians? But the truth is, How much a Sot soever he were, he prov'd too cunning for them, for having smoakt their Consult and De∣sign, next time they came (according to Custom) to Comple∣ment him, he seiz'd seven of the most busie of them, and with∣out any colour of Law, presently confiscated all their Estates, and thereby so terrified all the rest, that no man of them durst think any more of the Curatorship. These seven that he had snapt, he with a Cruelty suitable to a Pope, thrust into a mise∣rable Dungeon, and without any respect to their Age or Qua∣lity, put them to the Rack, and all manner of Tortures, his gracious Nephew, Pregnan, standing by to see Execution done, and upbraiding them whilst in Torments. But King Charles soon after (by reason of some Insolencies offer'd to him by the said Pregnan) coming to besiege Ʋrban himself in the said Castle of Lucera, his Impietyship was forc'd to fly over the Mountains, and with much ado got to Salerno, car∣rying his Captive-Cardinals under a Guard along with him, and one of them, broken with Tortures, not being able to follow him farther, he commanded his Hangman to knock out his
Brains, and left his Body in the Fields without Burial; the other six he dragg'd with him, (all but Cardinal Adam, a poor Monk, whom he gave to King Richard the Second of England) First to Sicily, and then to Genua, and at last, that he might not be troubled with them any longer, he caus'd them (saith the Author) all in one Night to be beheaded: But Platina saith, they were sown up in Sacks, and so flung into the Sea, after the manner of punishing Parricides of old, which is probable, since no doubt the Pope would call their Crime Rebellion against their Spiritual Father. But which way soever he dispos'd of them, all Authors agree, That they were never seen afterwards. Lewis King of Hungary dying, the before-mentioned Charles his Son was forc'd to go home thither to settle Affairs, where, by the Treachery of the Queen, he was beheaded, but had left two Sons, Ladislaus and John (Children very young) at Ferrara; whereupon the Pope thirsting after Revenge, and to wreck his Spleen on these two innocent Babes for the Injuries he pretended to have received from their Father, thinking he had a fit opportunity, departs from Genua to Lucca, then to Sena and Perusium, with a desire, as he pretended, to see Naples, but in truth with a design to defeat the young Princes of their Inhe∣ritance; but by the prudence and faithfulness of some Counsel∣lors to whose Charge they were left, their Lives and Estates were preserved from his malicious Fury. Then he return'd to Rome, and made in one day 29 Cardi∣nals, of whom 26 were Neopolitans. In the last year of his Popedom, calling to mind of the vast Gain that the Jubilee had brought to Clement the Sixth, in the year 1350. He would needs (tho against all Reason, except only that of private Lucre) abreviate the Term, and have it kept every 30 years, yet so, as that it should begin at Christmas, Anno Dom. 1388. and con∣tinue a year Inclusive. But tho he had laid his Bait for Money, yet he did not live to see the Fish caught; for being bruis'd by a fall of his Mule as he was riding to Perusium, he was carried to Rome, where after few days he died. Paucis admodùm utpote hominis Rustici & inexora∣bilis flentibus. Hujus autem Sepulchrum adhuc visitur cum Epi∣taphio satis Rustico & inepto. Very few (says Platina) lamen∣ting his Death, for he was a clownish Fellow, and inexorable. His Tomb is seen to this day with a very Rustical and foolish Epitaph.
And there's an end of one of our Popes, and if he were (as Roman Historians bear us in the hand) the Right and most Legi∣timate of the two, we may very well say, Bad was the best; for amongst other of his meritorious Feats he caus'd a Book to be written by one John de Therano his Chamberlain, the beginning whereof is, Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's; wherein he affirms, That these words of our Saviour have place only for a time, namely, until his Ascention, but afterwards they were out of Date, and of no force, seeing that himself saith, John 12. When I shall be taken up, I will draw all Men after me, that is, [Pray mark the Wit and Divinity of the Interpretation] All Kings and Kingdoms shall be under the Empire of the Pope, &c. Likewise John the Ligni wrote a Book in favour of this Pope Ʋrban against his Rival Cle∣ment; as on the other side, the Abbot of St. Vast wrote one for Clement against Ʋrban, wherein they call each Pope, Heretic, Schismatic, Tyrant, Thief, wicked sower of Sedition, Son of Belial, and 'tis believ'd they were not either of them much mistaken. Pope Vrban (you have heard) left the hopeful Crop of his intended Jubilee to be reap'd by his Successor, who was one Peter de Thomacellis, a Neopolitan, who was call'd Boniface the Ninth; Ignorant he was (saith our oft-quoted Author Theodoric a Nyem, l. 2. c. 6.) of writing and singing, and so unfit for Administration of the Affairs of the Court of Rome, that whilst he lived, he hardly understood the Propositions made before him by the Advocates in Consistory, in so much, that in his time, Inscitia ferè venalis fuit in ipsa Curiâ Ignorance was almost buyable (as a main step to preferment) in the Roman Court. Yet in all kind of Simony, so far he excell'd all his Predecessors, that not one Car∣dinal or Bishop was promoted, without extorting great Sums of Money from them. And indeed such an unreasonable Griper had Ʋrban before found him, (who only for his Personage and goodly Stature, had from a Vagabond Clerk preferr'd him to be a Cardinal) That he, for meer shame, was about to degrade him, if he had not been prevented by Death. Of this godly Gentleman's Invention (as some Authors re∣port) were the payments to the Pope, call'd Annates; concer∣ning which, it may not be wide of our mark to inform the vulgar Reader, what by that word is understood. Annates (deriv'd from Annus, a year) are no other than (Pri∣mitiae)
the first Fruits, or profits of every Spiritual Living for one year, to be paid by the Parson that is invested in it, at his first entrance thereupon; and near of Kin hereunto are Decimae, Tenths, (take it in a strict sense) viz. The Tenth part of the first Fruits, or of one years value of all Spiritual Livings, and these were anciently paid to the Popes, not only in England, but throughout the Western parts of Christendom; for the Pope as Pastor pastorum, claim'd Decimas decimarum, and that Jure di∣vino too, (tho never thought of 'till about, or some small time before, this year 1399.) by Example (forsooth!) of the Jewish High-Priest, who (Numb. 18. 16.) was to have Tenths from the Levites. But tho Jure Divino (as in many other cases of Clergy-cheats) were the Gloss, yet Interest was the Text; for Polydere Virgil (one of the Pope's own Publicans, or Peter-pence Collectors) is not shy to insinuate, l. 8. c. 2. (tho he refers them to a more ancient Original) That the first Rise of them was for the main∣tenance of the Pope's Grandeur, and that this Income was one of the fairest Flowers in the Triple Crown: But when once the payment of them had continued some competent time, it was politickly done upon any questioning of the Right to refer them to a Divine Original, which was sure to satisfie such, as used (in those times) to take the Pope's bare word for far greater matters. Yet the payment of these, with others, so much impoverisht the Kingdom of England, (for we are willing to sum up all here that we have to say, occasionally on this matter) that notwith∣standing such Allegation of Divine Right, the ancient Kings of England made no scruple sometimes to forbid the payment of them; as King Edward the Third once discharg'd the Pope's Nuncio from Collecting the first Fruits, &c. and many Prohibi∣tions were granted against the Pope's Collectors, on Complaints made by the aggriev'd Commons in Parliament, as appears in my Lord Coke's Jurisdiction of Courts, c. 14. and several Statutes, where it is termed once an horrible Mischief, and damnable Cu∣stom; and another time 'tis call'd a very Novelty; see the Acts, 2. H. 4. c. 1. and 1. R. 2. But so subtle was the Court of Rome, that when sometimes the Kingdom complain'd of these Burthens, and withall, the Kings in Exigencies press'd for aids from their Subjects, they would in a frolic of Bounty yield or assign the First-Fruits, &c.
for a certain time (a year or more) to the King, whereby they both inur'd the People to the payment, and the Prince to the con∣tinuance of it. But in the 26th of Henry the Eighth, they were given to the King and his Heirs and Successors for ever; and in the 32d of his Raign, a particular Court was erected for recovering them, which being dissolv'd in the first of Queen Mary, the thing was reviv'd again by 1. Eliz. c. 4. but the Court not restored, only the First-Fruits were order'd to be within the Rule and Adjust∣ment of the Exchequer, and a new Officer, viz. A Remembran∣cer erected of the First-Fruits and Tenths of the Clergy, who both taketh all Compositions for them, and maketh out Process against such as make default in payment. So that every Spiri∣tual person must pay, or secure by Bond, his First-Fruits, before his actual possession of his Benefices, which Bond is of like force with a Statute-Staple. The mode of Composition now, is for the Parson with Sure∣ties to enter into four Bonds, each condition'd for payment of the fourth part of the First Fruits, (according to the rate of his Living, as it was Taxed, anno 26. H. 8. (for that's the Standard) which is call'd, being so much in the King's Books, but yet with a deduction of Tenths) the first Bond payable at half a years end, the second at a Twelve months end, the third at a year and half's end, and the last at the expiration of two years. This we thought fit to add, out of the Respect we have to the young Clergy that are hankering after Benefices, to whom this Discourse at least (whatever our other Writings (through sini∣ster Informations) may be) will probably prove not unaccep∣table.
The COURANT. Trueman [Solus.] NOw shan't I see my old Correspondent, Tory; for he was drunk last night at the Queens Head with toping Confusions to the City Charter: But no matter—here's Ben. Tooks Goblin, Heraclitus, will do as well. He dashes through thick and thin, and flings durt on as good Scarlet as any i'th City. Alas poor fool! Their Reputations Crystal, none of the filth will stick, but Reverts to your own face, and will (one day) infallibly sink the pittifull and already Crazy Shipp 'tis squirted from. However by this the World may take notice, what respect the Tories pay to Authority, if their Magistrates don't humour them, presently they'l affront them to their faces, Hiss, Revile, slander and Libel them. Having been thus sawcy to his Superiors, 'tis no news if he snarl at the Courantier, who, he says, is much unacquainted with Guinnies; poor heart? I'm sorry for't, but the truth is, he has no Faction nor party to Bribe or Encourage him; nothing but God and the King, Truth and a good Conscience to protect and support him; and so long, he sings (as to the Guinnies) Nec habeo, nec Careo, Nec Curo; let Pimps and flatterers and L'Estranges, boast their hundreds of Guinnies sent 'um from the Divel knows who—He has enough, in being Honest. Yet sure the Milk and Butter and Cheese was the conceit of some Hunger-starv'd Curate of the Club, that lives on small Tyths, and is fain to make shift with such, Commons when every Monday morning he Trudges from near Dartford to London. Popish Nat still drudges on, but of late more bare fac'd; what abundance of little Tricks have his managers been trying, to raise some pretence of slr in Dr. Oatses Evidence, but I know not whether with more malice or folly? Is not yesterdays Sham a rare one, Mr. Oats swore He was Informed, Parson Elliot was Circumcised, yet upon a Commssion of Inspection (a nice business Ile promise ye) It appears—Nat says, that the man's twigg of Life has all its apurtenances; well, but does it follow that the Doctor might not be Informed otherwise? Away you ridiculous Scoundrels!—I'th' next place, Godfry's Murder (O that's a bone in some peoples throats) must be represented uncertain; prethee,
dear Nat? tell us (if thou darest) in thy next the inquisitive Gentleman of Sarum's true name, I'le warrant he's as good a Protestant as thy self. And now Enter Observator, who fiddles to the old Tune, For in earnest, the fellow has not Compos'd above one sheet (bating his Translations) these 20 years, tho he has blurr'd ten thousand Ream of Paper. He's much troubled, that Mrs. Joan should be questioned, and to bring in the Chat, tells two or three notorious Lies, in a breath, viz. That Care was Cited (as he call it) to Guild-Hall, that Janeway desired Joan might be sent for, &c. which is all utterly false. But above all, where is Rogers Wit or Modesty to Revive a sluttish story little to the Credit of the Parties Concern'd. But since you now twice together have Rak'd it up—I tell thee Roger once for all, that the debauch in the Church you mention was favourably told in Janeway's Mercury, and there are better men than you or I, that are or may be satisfied of the Truth on't. Nor was it first Publisht for any such base end as you maliciously suggest, but only to the Intent; that the Actors might be brought to just Punishment. For not a few good Churchmen think those Swine deserv'd to be Cast out of the Sacred Temple which they had so vily prophan'd, more than (or as much at least as) the 5 honest Protestants that were given to the Divel 'tother day near Ludgate, for not receiving the Sacrament at Easter; when they made it appear before, that they have since received it (and by the Doctors leave too) according to the form of the Establisht Church of England.—But why may not we have a Query or two as well as Heraclitus? 1. Q. Whether the Church-Warden that first presents men on his Oath for not coming to Church, and afterwards Acknow∣ledges to one of them before 4 Witnesses, That for his part, he did not know but he (one of the defendants) did use to come to Church, &c. have not a pretty Implicit vein of swearing? 2. Q. Whether a Parsons Wife, that when her Husband came to his Lodging at 12 a Clock on a Sunday Night, and told her he must go out a Hunting next morning? Swore twice, by God he should not go, may not for all that be a good daughter of the Church; Or whether her Husband be not thereby barr'd from all hopes of a Bishoprick by that old Canon, 1 Tim. 3. 4. because he can rule his Wife no better. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681-2.
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, Jan. 27. 1681-2. —Depravant publica Jura, Justitiám{que} fugant, Divûm nil verba verentes. Pope Boniface makes the people of Rome intirely his Vassals, sets up another Jubilee (besides that Ordain'd by Urban, Anno 1388.) in the Year 1400. Complaints of his horrid Covetuousness. POpe Boniface the Ninth (whose Life we are at present concerned with) came to the Chair, in the Year One thousand three hundred eighty nine. Platina says, He was then but Thirty years old: (But Onuphrius Snibs him for that Errour, and affirms, He was five and forty,) and highly commends him for his Continency, &c. But how well he deserv'd those Praises, you will by and by be better enabled to Judge. Of his Ambition, and Tyranny the same Author in the very next words gives us an Instance, Primus Populi Romani vim Omnem in Pontificem transtulerit Creatis suo nutu Magistratibus omnibus, &c. He was the first that transferr'd all the Power of the People of Rome unto the Popes, Creating all their Magistrates at his pleasure; It seems before, though the Popes bore a great sway
amongst them, yet the Citizens retain'd some part of their An∣tient Liberty, and Elected their own Officers, which made seve∣ral of the Popes not endure to keep their Residence there. But this bonny Boniface taking the advantage of the Feuds and Dis∣orders amongst them, and by the means of a Jubilee, which they Courted him to hold in their City, as you shall hear pre∣sently, ordered matters so cunningly, that he got to himself a∣lone the Domination In Alo & Basso, (As Feudal Lawyers speak) in High and Low; or, absolutely in All and over All: So that henceforth, the Pope must be Dominus Fac totum, Chief Master of Misrule, and becomes (forsooth) a Temporal Prince, and from hence our small Hucksters for Popery, little disguised Factors of Romes Braided Wares, such as L'Estrange, &c. draw their Argument. O! you must not call the Pope, the Antichrist, Man of Sin, &c. (which are Titles the Spirit of God in Holy Scripture invests him with,) but you must (blasphemously) call him his Holiness, and the Western Patriarch, and give him Com∣plemental Language and termes of Respect, For he is a Civil Prince: Thus you must first Reverence a Traitor, a Rebel, an Ʋsurper and a Murderer, as a Lawful Soveraign in Civils, and Honour a Blasphemous Villain, and Enemy to Christ, not only as a true Christian Bishop, but a Patriarch too, and Metropoli∣tan of all the Western Churches. And having got you so far, 'twill be no difficult matter to perswade you to alter this Reve∣rence to Adoration, and make you believe, he has as much Right in Spirituals as in Temporals, and as good a Jurisdiction over all the other Churches in the World, as over those of these Western Kingdoms, and then the Business is done, and you will quickly prove as errant a Batt-blind Bigotted Papist as any in Spain. To maintain his ill-acquired Soveraignty, he grievously fleec'd the Clergy with Subsidies and Exactions; But to make them part of amends, gave them leave to Extort what they could from the Laiety; He likewise Re-edified the Castle of St. An∣gelo, and the Capitol, and therein placed a Garrison, and For∣tified the Bridges over the Tiber, the more to keep the people in Awe and Subjection. You heard before how his Predecessor Ʋrban had for Lucre∣sake Anticipated the Jubilee, and appointed it to be kept almost Twelve years before it came in Course; but the said Ʋrban
dying, Boniface so far approved thereof as to let it go on, and take the Money that accrewed thereby, amounting to a vast Sum▪ But Ten years after, when the year 1400. began to approach, (which was the year on which the Jubilee should customarily be kept, as being the Fiftieth year,) He pretended, that what Ʋrban did was Irregular; and therefore he must have it so∣lemnly kept according to the Original Institution: so here were two Jubilees held in a dozen years space. But a little before the beginning of the said year, Boniface subtlely removes to Assise, pretending to stay there for a consi∣derable time; this Alarm'd the Romans, fearing least by reason of his absence whose Business it was to give the Blessing, the great Jubilee would not be kept at Rome, or at least not so much frequented, and so they should lose the profit of the Solemnity: whereupon, they very humbly Petition him to return to the Mother-City. But he had another Game to play, and therefore they more Intreat, the more Coy he seems, and upbraids them with their Disrespectful Carriage, and expresses much Aversion to the City; particularly he Charges them with that they had refused to take Senators at his Nomination, and that of their own humour they had appointed certain Magistrates called Conservers of the Chamber, who were insufficient men, and had suffered the Banderesii (a Faction not favouring the Pope) to have their will in all things, &c. So that at last to please him, and get the Jubilee at their Town, the Romans were glad not only to Banish the Banderesii and take such an one for their Se∣nator (which Office in those days appears to have been some∣what like that of our London Majors) as Boniface appointed, but likewise to give the Pope a great sum of Money, which making all friends, he comes to Rome, and thence forwards Rul'd them at his Arbitrary pleasure as aforesaid. We are Arrived at the Year 1400. and the Great Jubilee is Proclaim'd, Quo innumera ferè hominum multitudo ad Urbem Re∣ligionis causâ venerat. Whereupon a multitude of People almost Innumerable flock to the City on the Account of Religion and Devotion, saith Platina. But Theodorica Nyem l. 1. ca. 68. Tells us more at large, That innumerable Strangers out of diverse Provinces and Kingdoms came thither, and exceeding rich Offerings were presented to the Churches of the City and Shrines of Saints, the greater part of which came to the hands
of Boniface and others that were his Creatures; and yet the insatiate Wretch, not Content with these voluntary Presents, although they amounted to an incredible Sum, yet (being him∣self a bottomless Gulf, and in Covetousness, none like him,) sent his Money-Hucksters, or petty Chapmen abroad into di∣vers Kingdoms to sell Indulgences to any that would give as much for them as it would cost them to go to Rome to fetch them. The cunning Extortioners chous'd simple and Barba∣rous People of vast Sums of Money, so that by this Spiritual Pedlery they sometimes brought away clear out of one King∣dom or Province more than an hundred thousand Crowns, for they would undertake to forgive all Sins to all Men that would pay them, and that too barely on Confession, without im∣posing any Pennance; for money they Dispenc'd with all Irre∣gularities, saying, they had all the Power so to do, that Christ had given to Peter of binding and loosing on Earth; and by this means these Chapmen being well fatted, returned back to Rome with many fair Horses, and loaden with Treasures, and gave an Account of all their Collections to Boniface, where∣in he was so exact and severe, that if he detected any fraud or concealment, he punisht it with Death. Thus far Theodo∣ric. —Nay Platina himself relates, That in this Popes time, plena∣ry Indulgences were every where sold so cheap, that the Authority of the Keys and Apostolical Letters grew Contemptible; and that Boniface Indulging too much his kindred, [perhaps from hence we may date the mischiefs of the Nepotismo] many Simoniacal Acts were Committed. And (for a third Evidence) Crantzius, l. 11. ca. 10 and 12. testifies, That under his Popedom were made many and frequent Translations of Bishops, a super-abundance of such kind of Indulgences as were never so much as heard of before; and what he easily granted, he as slightly revok'd, causing himself to be generally ill spoken of throughout all Christendom, as one never sa∣tisfied with Gold. How sad and calamitous the face of these times was, Fro∣issard the Historian Vol. 3. Ca. 24. will inform us,—Men (saith he) will in future Ages wonder by what means the Church could fall into such troubles, and be bewildred in them so long: but sure this was a wound Inflicted by the Almighty to admonish the Clergy in what excess and superfluity they lived. But none took notice of these Divine warnings, being all blind∣de
with Pride and Arrogancy, each man striving to be equal, or superiour to another, so that all things daily became worse and worse, &c. It was about this time, that Tamberlain who had Conquer'd the Turks, and carried about in Tryumph their Emperour Baja∣zet in an Iron Cage, departed this Life, thereby leaving the Armenians, Persians, Aegyptians, Assyrians, and other Paynim Nations without an Head, whereby a great and easie door of Advantage was opened to the Christian to have recovered the (long and dear-sought) Possession of the Holy Land, had not the Pope instead of a Common Good, rather consulted his own private Interest and that of advancing his beggarly Kindred. For not regarding that glorious Enterprize, he fell to per∣secuting a certain sort of People, who from their Habit, were called the Albi, or White ists; concerning whom, Platina thus tells the Story,— Ex Alpibus descendisse, &c. In this Popes time, as I have heard from my Father who saw the very man, there came down from the Alps into Italy, the year before the Jubilee, a certain Priest attended with a great Multitude of folks; and he being array'd with white Cloth, did shew both in his words and behaviour so much modesty, that by all he was reputed a Saint. In Italy he found or made a world of Proselites of each Sex; who being cloathed with white Linnen without any distinction whether Men or Women, Clowns or Citizens, Free-men or Slaves, marcht about the Countty, and like Beasts, where Night over-took them, there in the open fields they took their natural Repose. In the Villages they publickly eat toge∣ther, bringing forth their Victuals as to a sacred Feast; the before mentioned Priest in the Head of them carryed the Cru∣cifix, which he said wept for the Sins of Men, and as often as that happen'd, all the Company fell a mourning and lamenting, and begging pardon of God: when they march'd or stood still, they Sung the Praises of the Blessed Virgin, in Hymns of their own, aptly Composed for that purpose. Thus they stroul'd along through truria, Pisa, and other Parts, the opinion of their Sanctity continually increasing, and not only surprizing the ignorant and credulous Rabble, but also drawing in Princes and Bishops to admire them, and favour their Pro∣ceedings; at last being wearied with Rambling his Gang made an halt at Viterbium, but gave out, That he would go on to Rome
to visit the Sacred Places and Bodies of Saints. But Boniface was jealous that this superstitious Pilgrim intended to play him a trick, and had a Design to make himself Pope, having such a vast Crew following at his heels, and altogether at his Devotion; and therefore clandestinely sends some Troops of Soldiers, who unexpectedly surpriz'd our devout vagrant, brought him to Rome, and there (for ought we find) he was put to Death. Platina himself half blushes at his Execution, and can scarce refrain tel∣ling us, That he fell a Sacrifice meerly to the Popes Envy and Jealousie: and adds, that immediatly after followed a dismal Plague or mighty Mortality at Rome. Boniface dyed in the Fifteenth year of his Popedome, An∣no{que} Dom. 1404. But in the mean time his Rival the Anti-pope, Clement at Avignon in France, departing this Life, Peter de Luna a Spaniard was by that Faction Elected Pope by the name of Benedict the Thirteenth.
The COURANT. Tory. TWas a Bill 'ile assure you on a Goldsmith for a Hun∣dred Guinnies. Truem. Guinnies, or Pistoles? I have heard some of those Gen∣tlemen deal much in French Commodities for all the Statute. Tory. No, no, Guinnies was the word, I could tell you the Complements that passed, the very names of the Club, and the Healths that were Huzza'd. Truem. Well, but what ails Rabbi L'Estrange to be so furi∣ous (all on a sudden) against young Tonge, and anticipate his Observa-Tory day, and kick and wince and bounce and drivel as if he were possest? Tory. O Sir! you must note our old Granny Lane, and friend Hodge (Captain Ely's Bail-procurer,) and bloody Natt. &c. lately renew'd their Acquaintance with Mr. Tonge, and endeavoured a fresh Intrigue of the old stamp; but finding upon Recollection, that he would not Correspond further with thm, and fearing all their Roguery would come out, the Reverend Clergy-guide sound himself oblig'd to cry Whore first, and so forcing (as he used to do) his poor Printers to Case it away on Sunday for Expedition, out dropt Mondays Observator; do'nt you know the Policy of prevention? Truem. Yet methinks it plainly appears, L'Estrange holds Correspondence not only with the What-dyee call't Court, and the pelting Parson, and Natt. Thompson, but with Mrs. Lane, and the open Papists too, else how came he by all those vou∣chers he Cites? Tory. No matter for that, Tros Rutilusve, Papist or Devil, as long as 'tis under pretence of serving the Church of England.— But do'nt you see how he Claws off, The Letter of the old Common Council-man to the New one? Truem. Spiders turn all things to poison; he talks there, of a Common practise of Canvasing to make an Interest, sure he means the Cats-turd Merchant's Printing of Bills to beg Votes for Com∣mon Council-men. Tory. Out, away! we never taxe our Friends, for to us that call our selves the Loyal, Libelling and affronting Magistrates and every thing is Lawful. But if the Whiggs do never so modestly assert just Rights, 'tis exposing the Government, fomenting of Discords, a scandal to the Church, and the Devil and all.—But still I think he has iustified Parson Pelling to purpose.
Truem. Yes, and much to his Honour that he has such a Champion; for wherever he had that Account, it will be proved to the Observators teeth and the Parsons too, that there are se∣veral Gross notorious Lies in't: besides, that it may be Scanda∣lous as well as False; he falls foul on a Reverend Divine (no way inferiour to his Client, for learning, Soundness of Doctrine, Ho∣liness of Life, or just Conformity;) who he says, sits on his Breech at the Gloria Patri, (observe how the Fellows fingers itch after Latine Service) the Creed, &c. Now suppose this had been true, 'tis as true, That Mr. Pelling Counter-marches with his Second Service to the Altar, practices bowing to the Altar, teaches his Flock to respond in reading the Psalms, &c. contrary to express Law—Jam sunt ergo pares.—One it seems is an Ʋnder doer, and the other an Over-doer. Tory. But these Excommunicati were Sinners of a long standing— Treum. Goodly! goodly! and what a Saint is he that says it!—I knew a fellow liv'd most scandalously several years about Puddle-dock as Stallion to an Old Lady, and another whose common Conversation is interlarded with horrid Oathes and Execrations, yet I never heard either of them were ever Presented or Excommunicated. Tory. Pish, those are Venial Sins, nothing so heinous as not paying the Parson his Easter-Offerings.—Did you ever hear of the man that first Whor'd the Mother, and then made the Daughter an honest Woman by Marrying her? Truem. No, but I knew a Popish Blade in Holbourn, that for almost Twen∣ty years together never came at any Protestant Church or Sacrament at all, yet so far from being questioned, that he is reputed not only a special Member, but a main Pillar of the Church—But now lets go to Queries. 1. Whether the Parson that accused his Neighbour and Brother Minister of the Church of England for not Christening with the Cross when it was altogether a ye, might not deserve Excommunication on that Authentick Canon—Thou shalt not bear false-witness, &c. 2. If a Parson when he comes from Reading over a Sermon shall say, He thanks God his Drudgery for that Week is over. Whether such a one can be sup∣posed to make the Gospel his delight, or be likely to Preach in season and out of season? 3. Whether Paul would ever have Excommunicated any Christian, because he received the Sacrament of Barnabas, and not of himself? 4. Whether it might not be as Lawful and satisfactory for these Gentlemen Excommunicated by Mr. Pelling, to receive the Sacrament of another Mini∣ster in the same Diocess, as for Roger L'Estrange to Receive it in another Na∣tion at the Hague, when he fled from Justice, and (for all his vapour of being so good a Church-babe cannot make it appear, he had for many years, (if ever) received it before? Tory. Hold your prating! else Ile say to you, as our Church-warden did last Sunday to the Constable—Come away to Church, or I'le Excommunicate you. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681-2
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, Feb. 3. 1681-2. Ʋt nemo doceat Fraudis & Scelerum vias Papatus docebit.— The wickedness of Pope Innocent the Seventh, and Gregory the Twelfth. The horrid Perjury of the latter. Three Popes at once, and the Scuffles between them. The wickedness of Pope John the Twenty fourth. An Owl disturbs a whole Council. TO Boniface the Ninth, succeeded at Rome (for you may please to remember, there was another Chair, and another Succession, all this while in France) Pope Innocent the Seventh. Concerning which Gentleman, Platina gives this account—Dum adhuc Cardinalis esset Carpere negligentiam, &c. Whilst he was but a Cardinal, he used always to be taxing the former Popes of their Negligence and Cowardice, affirming, That it was through means of their sloth, that this terrible Schism of the Church of Rome was not long e're this remov'd and extinct; but as soon as he had once got the Popedom himself, he follow'd those very Courses which he blam'd in Ʋrban and Boniface, and was so far from doing that which before he so much applauded, that he hated
any that durst mention it to him. His Government was inso∣lent, cruel, and tumultuous; the Inhabitants of Rome Addressing to him one time, That their Liberties might be restor'd, and the Garrisons in the Capitol, &c. remov'd, and that he would use some Endeavours for taking away the before-mention'd Schism in the Church, and joyn with the French King, who offer'd his assistance towards so good a Work; the proud Pope was not only deaf to their just Petitions, but sent Eleven of the princi∣pal Citizens Prisoners to his Nephew Lewis, who murder'd them, and caus'd their dead Bodies to be flung out at the Win∣dows. Enrag'd with these Tyrannous Barbarities, the people of Rome take Arms, and call in Ladislaus King of Apulia, to their ad, resolving to be reveng'd on the said Lewis; but he with the Pope flies to Viterbium, where having in some time raised considerable Forces, they send them against Rome; whereupon fearing greater mischiefs, they are content to receive the Pope, and invite him back to the City, who then created several Car∣dinals to strengthen his Party, and made his butcherly Nephew Lewis, Marquess of Pisa, and Prince of Firma. And soon after he himself died in the second year of his Papacy. But some time before his decease, the Dukes of Berry, Bur∣gundy, and Orleans, (a Triumvirate which at that time, by rea∣son of the King's indisposition, did govern the Kingdom of France) went all of them to Pietro di Luna, (who we told you took upon him the name of Benedict the 13th, and Pop'd it at Avignion) beseeching him to rectifie this disorder, that the Church might no longer appear as a Monster with a pair of Heads, and people not know which to obey as Chief Pastor, and therefore were importunate with him to renounce the Papacy, urging that nothing could be more glorious than an abandoning his private Interest for the advantag of the public: And the rather was this to be expected from him, since at his Election he had promised to lay down, whensoever things should be adju∣sted with Rome. In order to which, he assur'd him, That that Pope which should be made in Rome after Innocent, should do the like; every one concluding, That if those Favourites (one of France, and tother of Italy) were but once dispossess'd of the Keys, which they both exercis'd at that time, (tho sure one of their Keys at least must needs be but a Picklock) and a
third indifferent person chosen, he would every where be ac∣knowledg'd the certain and undoubted Pope. Benedict gave them the hearing, but gravely answer'd, That he (alas good Man!) valued not the honour, and was weary of the trouble, but could not, without offending God, consent to the Proposals, for renouncing the Church, and abandoning the Flock of Christ, which by the common consent of so many good and worthy Electors, was committed to his cure and custody, and was unwilling to bring a thing into question, which he had so legally obtain'd. But as for what respected the removal of the Schism, and restoring Concord to the Church, there was nothing which he more passionately desired; and he would condescend to any Assembly or Council for the debating or setling thereof, provided in a secure place in which every one might speak his mind freely: For his own part he declar'd, and swore to it too, That in case the Schism could not be taken away by any other means, he would Renounce, upon condition the other at Rome would do the same, for other∣wise it would be to no purpose to solicit it. The three Princes were not so short-sighted as not to see through Benedict's Veil of Hypocrisie, and how loth he was to quit the Chair; and he on the other side apprehending, lest they should make use of more powerful Arguments of Force to oblige him to comply with their Requests, fortified himself in his Palace, and was besieg'd there for five or six Months, 'till being weary of so close and tedious a Confinement, he em∣bark'd on certain Gallies on the Rhosn, and so escap'd into Cata∣lonia, which was his own Country: And indeed many suppose the before-mention'd Princes were instigated by the French Car∣dinals to get him remov'd chiefly for that reason, because he was a Catalonian, not a French-man, and that they might bring in one of their own Country-men to succeed him. Upon the death of Innocent, which happen'd in November, 1406. the Italian and other Cardinals which were at Rome, en∣ter'd into the Conclave, and all solemnly swore upon the Holy Evangelists, which their Dean held in his hand, That every of them respectively would, if he were chosen, renounce the Pa∣pacy, provided the French or Catalonian Anti-pope renounc'd his Anti papacy first. This was done to satisfie the French, who having brought up a custom of Pope-making, according to their
own mode, it seem'd an unsurmountable difficulty to bring them out of it, with Reputation, unless the Italians would thus meet them half way. At last in the Conclave at Rome, Angelo Corraro a Venetian, and Cardinal of St. Mark, was chosen, and assumed the name of Gregory the 12th. And to make (as they thought) sure work, before he came out of the Conclave, they made him promise in Writing under the hand of a Public No∣tary, and also gave him his Oath, to perform the fore-mention'd Condition. But (see the Faith of Popes!) no sooner was he setled in his Pontificial Gears, but he found too much sweetness in the place to leave it so easily; and indeed in this matter only, his Brother Anti-pope were well agreed, for he too, notwithstanding his said solemn Promise, did not care for leaving the Seat of Infalli∣bility, and so each of them shuffled and cut about the place of Congress, and whatever Town was nam'd, the other side wanted not Objections, and so no Agreement was like to succeed. Whereupon the Cardinals finding themselves shamm'd, declar'd against them both as Faith breakers, and unfit for the Holy Chair. And now the Cardinals of the French Faction resolv'd to aban∣don Benedict, and the Italians, Gregory; and to get another indifferently chosen. In order hereunto, the Cardinals both of Avignion and Rome met at Pisa, and by common consent De∣prive both Gregory and Benedict, all the Nations (except Cata∣lonia and the Scots, and some few petty Princes) concurring with them therein; and having so done, they proceed to elect a new Pope, and make choice of Peter Philargo a Fryar Minor, and Archbishop of Milan, who took upon him the name of Alex∣ander the Fifth, who was wont to say, he had been a rich Bishop, a poor Cardinal, and a beggarly Pope. But for all this Decree of the folks at Pisa, the two old ones would still be Popes, alledging, That the Convention at Pisa, was neither a free nor a general Council, and that Matters were not there fairly and Canonically Transacted, and therefore they would not abide by their doings, but would appeal to a general Council: And to secure themselves, Gregory fled to∣wards Romagna, and stay'd some time at Rimini, where he was magnificently entertain'd; And as for Benedict, he having held a Conventicle in the City of Perpignan by the intervention of his own Friends, retires into the Castle of Panischola.
So that now we had no less than three Popes all in view, and at the same instant, for still the condemned Popes desisted not from exercising their Papal and Ecclesiastical Functions; they conse∣crated Bishops, and created Cardinals, and particularly Gabriel Condolmero, who was afterwards Pope by the name of Eugenius the Fourth, was by Gregory made Cardinal at Lucca. Now if a Succession from right and lawful Popes and Bishops be necessary, it must be granted, That if the Roman Church is not such, but miserably interrupted, vitiated, and confounded by these Popes, of whom no Man can say which was the Right, and yet their se∣veral Ordinations pass'd in the crowd, and multiplied no doubt in time into many thousand Descendents, deriving Episcopacy and Priesthood from this corrupt Fountain, which seem indeed (according to the Notions which these Men advance at another time) to be but so many Nullities: And yet where is there any Bishop or Priest in all Italy or France that is Infallibly sure, that he himself holds not by the same crackt Title? But to return to the Story—Alexander (saith Theodoric a Nyem) was one that lov'd to live delicately, and to drink strong Wines; he was wholly rul'd by Balthazar Cossa Cardinal Dea∣con (the most profligate Villain that one shall read of) who succeeded him by the name of John the 24th. (or as some reckon, the 23d) The said Alexander died when he had held the Chair 8 or 9 Months, and Baptista Panaetius of Ferrara, a Cardinal, in his 56th Sermon, tells us, That the said Balthazar caus'd him to be poison'd by Marsilius de Parma his Physician, brib'd thereunto with a vast sum of Money, on purpose that he himself might fol∣low him in his Papacy. And how the said Balthazar got it at last, as to the manner, is very pleasant; for as soon as Alexander was dead, being at Bo∣nonia, and having by his former Administration got the chief Power into his hands, he commanded the Cardinals to Elect a Pope such as he might approve of; and they offer'd several to him, of whom he thought none fit enough: At last they reque∣sted plainly to shew who he was for? Give me (then saith he) the Cloak of St. Peter, (a Garment which they fling upon the new elected Pope) and I will give it to him that shall be Pope: Which being done, he put it on his own shoulders, and said, Papa ego sum, It is I am Pope; and was as good as his word: For tho several of the Cardinals mutter'd and grumbled, yet
none durst oppose him. This Prank of his is credibly related by Johannes Stella, in his Book De Pontificibus. To fix himself firm in his Seat, he courts Sigismund King of Hungary, and gets him elected Emperour, and summons a Coun∣cil at Rome, where a very odd accident fell out, which Nicholas Clemangis Archdeacon of Bayeux, a Man famous in those times, delivers as follows— At the first meeting of the Council, Mass being said after the accustomed manner to invocate the Holy Ghost, no sooner was the Council sat, and Balthazar him∣self in a Chair provided for him higher than the rest, but boeld a dreadful ill-favour'd Screechowl, the presage (they say) of Calamity, with an horrible voice flew over their heads, and seated her self upon the middle Beam of the Church, with her Eyes directly fixt upon the Pope. Behold, said some of the lewd Italian wits, the Spirit in the form of an Owl! Balthazar the Pope himself seeing how she glar'd at him, at first blusht for shame, then began to sweat, and by and by in confusion broke up the Council. And at the second Session she was there again in the same manner, and the Pope would have drove her away by noise and clamours, but she would not stir, 'till assaulting her with Pikes and Staves; having receiv'd several blows, she fell down dead before them all.
THE COURANT. Tory. BUT do'nt you perceive by the last Observator, that old Roger has a Months mind to stand, next Election, one of the Candidates for his n'own Country of Norfolk, when it shall please God and the King to bless us with a Parlia∣ment? Truem. No truly; for tho the doting fellow talks a little freakishly, yet we understand true English Norfolk Dumplings as well as himself, and are satisfied, That the generality of Free-holders, not only there, but throughout the Nation too, are (to use his own phrase) more clarified in their Ʋnderstan∣dings, than to chuse either Knaves or Beggars. Besides, that Gentleman has the same Antipathy to Parliaments, as some folks have to Cats, he sweats, and swouns, and is ready to run away at the sight or very smell on't. Nor has he any reason to ambition a place in an Assembly, which he has so grosly and im∣pudently abus'd, That when ever They meet, he knows his Ears will not be able to make Atonement for the petulancy of his Tongue, and the French Itch of his Fingers. 'Tis true, he has already dubb'd himself a Body Politic, sometimes his own silly self is (forsooth!) the Government, sometimes the Church; and in his own conceit makes as great a Figure in the World for Loyalty as Mother Celliers, or her younger Sister Mrs. Elia∣nor James, with her Sham-Papes of Adviso's. Alas. Man! he has places enow already; is he not Mouth Extraordinary of Faction? Principal Forger of Flams and Shams? Grand Engi∣neer for Bedaubing all Evidence of the Popish Plot? The mighty Artist at Blanching of Blackamoors? Supream Scavenger of the Town, into whose Cart all the Popish Kennel-rakers that can∣not find Stowage in Took and Thompson, empty their Durt, which he most industriously two or three times a week subtlely unloads at Protestants Doors:—And then,
For the whole Gang we hair-brain'd Tories call, He's Knight o'th' Shire, and represents you All. Tory. Well! But he tells you, the French King does not make all these Advances into Flanders meerly to pick up Cockle-shells, or catch Whitings. Truem. No, I'le warrant him; nor does he contrive the mighty Haven at Dunkirk, and expensive Fortifications there, to make a Retreat for Herring-Busses: But that wise and haughty Monarch has (no doubt) an Eye on enlarging his Empire, and in subserviency thereunto, prosecutes the poor Dissenters, aliàs Huguenots, or Protestants, within his Dominions, that he may the more plausibly engage the Pope to favour his Enterprizes, and lull Princes of that Communion asleep: Nor is it my busi∣ness to enquire why the Progress of his Arms were not stopt long since, when means (however diverted) were not wan∣ting; or to look over old printed Letters, to find who it was talk'd of Interests inseparable: This I will only say, That whe∣ther in other Parts of a different Religion and Interest, where a Popish and French Plot is apparently discover'd to be working in their very Bowels, it may be of use towards obviating his Designs, to divide Protestants, and worry one another to the undoing of many thousands, nay, hundreds of thousands of Families, damping of Trade, consequently lesseing the Re∣venue, and embroiling Affairs, and all this, for a parcel of (acknowledg'd) Trifles, or imaginary Stories, forg'd by a knot of ill Men, who have no other means to screen themselves from the Justice they apprehend out of conscious Guilt; may still be a Question. Tory. Pish, you are harping on the Popish Plot, but the same Author frankly tells you, 'Tis nothing but a Vision of Dragons in the Moon. Truem. Right! he's indeed pleas'd to call it so; but I humbly conceive, The King, the Nation, and especially (as 'tis worded) the City, has little reason to thank him for that Complement. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681-2.
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, Feb. 10. 1681-2. Quem mihi dabis de numero Praelatorum, qui non magis invigi∣let subditorum evacuandis Marsupiis, quam extirpandis vitiis. —Bernard ad Eugen. The calling of the Council of Constance. The horrible villainies there prov'd against Pope John, he is Deposed. A Council is above the Pope: The two other Popes likewise casheir'd, &c. VVE are Remarking on the life of Pope John the 23d. (or 24th. as others call him, for the business of Pope Joan, has made such a con∣fusion amongst the Johns, that the best Historians disagree in their reckoning) how he wheadled him∣self into the Popedom you have heard; nor have you I hope forgot, that at the same time there were actually Reigning two other Popes or Popelings, viz. Gregory, whom the French set up, and Benedict, whom the Spaniards supported; and each of these had his Court, and his Cardinals, and Princes, and Nations that own'd his Authority and obey'd him. But growing weary of this ridiculous Confusion, and the Emperour Sigismund having
taken the pains to Travel almost all over Europe, to persuade them to some expedient for healing this Schism: It was at last agreed, That a General Council should be call'd, nor did Pope John seem much to oppose it, hoping to get himself confirm'd therein by the Interest of Sigismund, whom he had procured to be made Emperour, and you know one good turn deserves another; but whether the Emperour found him so scandalously flagitious that he was asham'd to appear in his favour, or whether his solicitations could not be heard I know not, so it was, that in the Conclusion things fell out quite contrary to his Expectation. The place agreed upon (after much bandying) for this Congress was Constance a City of Switzerland, Situate on the Lake Bodenzee over against Lindaw. Whither Anno 1414. repaired Pope John, and the Emperour, and a vast conflux of People, for there were present 4 Patriarchs, 29 Cardinals, 346 Archbishops and Bishops, 564 Abbots and Doctors, Ten Thousand secular Princes and Noble Men, 600 Barbers, 320 Filers and Merry-Andrews, and (to accommodate the Holy Father) Four Hun∣dred and Fifty common publick Whores, (besides all their private ones) the whole Company of strangers Men and Women, that were then at one time found in that City, being Threescore Thousand and five Hundred: A fine jolly Company; and if you will believe them they had the Holy Ghost present with them too, but there are several reasons to question that, tho this merry one which follows be none of them; when on the first day of opening the Council, they were singing according to the mode, Veni spiritus sancte, &c. Come holy Spirit, &c. Some arch wags at the same time clapp'd up a Label in the Church, con∣taining these words as an answer from Heaven—Alijs rebus occupaii, nunc adesse vobis non possumus: We are a little busy at present about other affairs and cannot attend ye. This Synod held for the space of four years, and did more than a good deal of business, we shall not afflict the Readers patience with a recital of all their Worshipful Canons and pro∣ceedings, they that have a mind—Male Collocare bonas Horas, may read them in the Volumes of the Councils; what is remar∣kable we shall not forget to acquaint you with. And as a Pro∣logue thereunto, cannot omit that judicious Repartee of the Emperor Sigismund, some discourse happening touching the Re∣formation of the Spirituay, a grave old Cockscomb that had a
spight against a parcel of poor Friars, said, Quod oportea incipere à Minoritis, that they should begin first with the Mino∣rites, meaning the Order so called; No, quoth the Emperor, Non à Minoritis sed à Majoritis, not with the Minorites, but with the Majorites, meaning, the Reformation ought first to begin with the Pope, Cardinals, Bishops, and Superior States of the Church, and so descend afterwards to regulate the infe∣riors. The Council had not sat long, before Articles were Exhibited against Pope John, who fearing the worst, unknown to the Cardinals, in a disguise one night flies out of the City to Schaffuze, where he was sheltred by the Duke of Austria for a while, but the Emperor being therewith incensed, he was glad to bring back the poor Run a-way Pope, who was committed to safe Custody. And now they proceed judicially against him, Henricus de Pira and Johannes de Scribanis, Procurators of the Council, undertake to prove him Guilt of abundance of horri Crimes both before and during his Popedome; the Charge a∣gainst him was contained in 54 Articles, of several Murders, Poysonings, Sacrilege, Heresy, Tyranny, Simony, Infidelity, Notorious Atheism, &c. and in the same, this most Holy Fa∣ther is stiled Diabolus Incarnatus, A Devil Incarnate, par∣ticularly they proved, That he had committed Incest with Nuns, Ravisht several Virgins, That he was frequently Guilty of Adul∣tery; That he had caused Pope Alexander his predecessor to be Poyson'd, to make way for himself to usurp the Papacy. That he had sold many Lands of the Churches Patrimony, yea he had sold Churches themselves in the City of Rome: Nay their very Holy Reliques, as for Example he had truck'd away the Head of St. John Baptist for 50000 Ducates [For my part I wonder where he found out such a silly Chapman that would offer half the Money for a forg'd Skull] which had been deliver'd and carried out of the Nunnery of St. Sylvester where 'twas kept, if some Citizens of Rome had not discover'd it, and stopt it by force; for which he cast them into Prison and fined them un∣mercifully: That he had Conferr'd Benefices and Ecclesiastical Charges upon his Bastards, and meer Children not above Five years old. That to fill up the measure of his wickedness by the persuasion of the Devil he obstinately said, affirm'd and held an opinion, That there is no Life Eternal, or future Existence after this Life: Yea he said and obstinately believed, That the Soul
of Man dyeth and is Extinct, together with the humane Body after the manner of bruit Beasts, and that he had said and declared, That being once dead, even in the last day there should be no Resur∣rection. These and many other the like Crimes being fully proved against him, and he being allow'd liberty, not being able to make any tollerable defence for himself, but on the contrary being Convicted by the Confession of his own mouth, they pro∣ceeded to pronounce a definitive Sentence against him; That he should be deposed. Having first in the th. Session passed the following Canon. That a Synod Congregated in the Holy Ghost making a general Council, representing the whole Catholick Church here militant, hath power immediately from Christ. To which power of theirs every Person of what State or Dignity soever he be, even tho it be the Pope himself, ought to be obedient in all such things as concern the general Reformation in the Church, as well in the Heads, as in the Subjects. And the said Sentence being sent to John, he himself (our Authors say) approved thereof and declared, that he deserv'd it, and so was Deposed after he had been a Pope 5 years and 15 days. After which he was for some years kept Prisoner, but at last in the time of Pope Martin the 5th. who succeeded him for a great sum of Money, got not only his Liberty, but also to be made a Cardinal of Tuscany, and in that quality died in the year 1419.—And there's an end of quondam Pope John. And now 'tis time to see what our Holy Council does with the two other Imps of Infallibility. As for Gregory the 12th. he being abandon'd by Ladislaus King of Sicily, and seeing it was impossible for him to stem the tide of opposition, thought it would be more Honourable for him to seem to part with his pretended Popedome freely of his own accord, than to be turn'd out; And so sends Charles Malatesta his Proctor, to make a Renunciation for him, who to perform the Pageantry, came into the Council all arraid in the Pontifical Robes, and was seated in the Chair of state, wherein Gregory's name, he solemnly Renounces the Papacy, and in token thereof, pulls of all his Trinkets decently and in order, which so pleased the Reverend Gray beards, that they presently made Gregory Legate of Pisa. —And so good Night poor Pope Gregory.
But the third Gamster, stout Benedict defies the People at Constance and all their works. He swears he is Christs Viccar, I marry is he, and so he will continue, in spight of their Teeth. He says, Constance is not a place fit or free, and therefore none of his Subjects shall come there. However the Synod at Constance, Cite and cite him again and again to appear before their Worships, but he seem'd to reguard them no more, than Parson Hickeringal in our times does the Gentlemen of Doctors Commons. And tho after several Messen∣gers in vain, the Emperour himself undertook a tedious journey to persuade him to submit, yet still he stood it out, not only contemning their Authority, but thundring out Curses, Deprivations and Excommunications, and abundance of such Church-Granados at them; all which they declare Null and void, and proceed against him very vigorously, and in the up shot, declare him to be a Perjurer, a Sndalizer of the Church, an Abetter and promoter of Schism,  Heretick wandring out of the way of Faith, &c. And for these and the like offences, they sentence him not only to be depriv'd of his Papal Dignity, but also to be cut off from the Church as a dried and withered Member, and withall forbid all Persons to obey him, on pain of Excomunication. But all this would not do, for tho almost all his Consorts of Eminency and Power, had abandon'd him, (for Rats always fly from a falling house) yet he still persisted in his pretensions to the Popedome, continuing (saith Crantzius in Metrop. l. . c. 1.) Idolum cum Idolis suis Cardinalibus, An Idol with the Idol Cardinals of his own making: Yea in ipso mortis articulo, when he was just going out of the World, Anno 1414. he adjur'd the Cardinals that remain'd with him in the Fortress of Paniscola (whether for safety he had retreated) that they should forthwith chuse him a Successor. Which accordingly they perform'd, Electing one Giles Mu∣nion, a Chanon of Barcelona whom they call'd Clement the Eighth, but this pitiful shadow of a Pope, about 4 years after, Renounced his Charge, was content to stile himself Pope no longer, and what afterwards became of him, we do not at present meet with, in the Histories of those times.
Having thus clear'd the decks of the Three contending Popes, and for 2 years or upward there having been never an one at all, (during which time the Council lookt upon themselves as keepers of the Liberties, &c.) They now began to bethink themselves of chusing a new Pope, but first to prevent such Rogues as the last John was from vaulting into the Chair, they contrive a Test to be taken by all succeeding Popes in the words fol∣lowing: N. Elected for Pope, profess with heart and mouth unto Almighty God, whose Church I take upon me to Govern by his help, and to blessed St. Peter the prince of the Apostles, so long as I shall continue in this frail life, firmly to believe and hold the holy Catholick Faith after the Traditions of the Apostles, of general Councils and of other holy Fathers, and namely of the 8. general Councils, the first of Nice, the second of Constantinople, Ephesine the third,  the fourth, the fifth and sixth of them of Constantinople, the seventh of Nice, and the eighth of Constantinople, and also of the general Councils of Lateran, Lions and Vienne, willing to observe the same Faith inviolate even to the uttermost, and to Preach and defend the same, even to the spending my Blood and Life; as likewise by all means possible to prosecute and observe the Rites of the Sacraments Canonically delivered to the Catholick Church. And this my profession and confession, by my command being written out by the Notary of the Arches of the holy Church of Rome, I have subscribed with mine own hand, and sincerely with a pure mind and devout Conscience, I offer it to Almighty God upon such an Altar, &c. In the presence, &c. Then they appoint a Committee to proceed to the Election, who in 4 days agree upon one Columna, who being chosen on St. Martins Eve would needs call himself, Martin the 5th. and being brought in before the Emperor and Council, was Enthron'd with mighty Pomp and Solemnity.
THE COURANT. Tory. BUT were not you too rash last bout in stiling Mrs. J. Mother Cellier's younger Sister? Truem. I hold my self as much oblig'd to retract any thing that may seem a Scandal on the innocent, as I do esteem it my duty to Advertise the publick of ill Peoples designs. Now tho there were probable inducements that the Paper emitted in her name might be put upon her, as the Narrative which Celliers own'd is known to have been seen in Gadburies Hand-writing before 'twas in Print, yet since I am satisfied that Mrs. J. has always professed her self of the Church of England, and never that I can find Herded with the Romanists, but on all occasions has ex∣pressed a superlative Zeal and Affection to His Majesties Person and Government. I must wish a Deleatur on that passage, for as I am resolv'd ever to oppose and detect the designs of Papists, so never in the least to reflect on any (tho of never so inferior quality) that are His Majesties Friends. Tory. I wish the Observator would practise the same Candour, for in the midst of his pretended concern for his native Country Norfolk, he most scurrilously reflects on a Reverend Magistrate by calling him (tho unhappily true) short sighted Pug, and we ex∣pect (by his ungrateful returns) that in his next he will reproach him too for taking Bail for Murder, and living Litigiously a∣mongst his Parishioners and Neighbours, but if he do, the Devil a Peny more of Contribution shall he get from the Crape-Gowns of Dumpling-shire. Truem. This to me is all Arabick; prethee no riddles, how go matters in the Town? Tory. Hang't, I know not what to think on't. 'Tis pitty that excellent Writ De Haeretico Combrendo is out of date, some Friends of mine in the West would have made brave use on't; is it not pitty that those who can send an honest Christian to the Devil, for not paying an Easter-twopence, cannot plague him for the sin of not putting off his Hat? But have the folks at Farringdon without yet survey'd the Books?
Truem. Don't mention that affair, you'l get no Credit by it if ever a Factious Spirit appear'd, there he was visibly on your side. Tory. Well, well, prattle what you please, I'le wager Cock∣pit Law, that we Nick many of the Common Council. Truem. Why man? I believe there is not one in the whole City, but is Legally Qualified, you know Heraclitus and Ob∣servator upbraided them with receiving the Sacrament. Tory. No matter for that, the Statute of 25 Car. 2 C. 2. requires (we say) not only the receiving of the Sacrament: But the certifying the same on Record withing three Months after their being Chosen into the Courts at Westminster, or the Quarter Sessions, on pain of being disabled as therein is order'd and forfeiting 500l. Now if they have receiv'd the Sacrament never so oft, yet unless they do so certify on Record the Term ending, and no Quarter Sessions happening after within the three Months limmited, we will pretend they are Excluded, so shall we neatly turn them out and get 500l. a Man to boot. Truem. I have neither read the Statute you mention, nor pretend to be capable of judging of Law. But however those concern'd may no doubt find a Church in London, where the Sacrament is Administered next Lords-day, or I think no Mini∣ster can deny it to a Competent number, then may they lodge their Certificates on Monday in the Courts above, and so defeat your Malicious expectations, who I perceive do not so much desire your Neighbours Conformity to the Church, and Obedi∣ence to the Laws, as their Ruin. Tory. Nay Pax—don't talk so low'd, if you do for ought I know the Ten Guinnies we gave for this very Stratagem, may prove of no advantage to us. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681-2.
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, Feb. 17. 1681-2. Fragenti fidem, Fides frangatur idem. A brief Account of John Hus, and Jerome of Prague: The Burning of those two Martyrs: The Council of Constance de∣clares, That Faith is not to be kept with Hereticks. VVE have told you how the Synod of Constance order'd their Triplicity of Popes; but it was not only that, they sat four years about: For they likewise Condemn'd and Burnt those two Noble Servants of the Lord John Hus and Jerome of Prague, of whose excellent Lives and Honourable Deaths, it will be necessary to inform (briefly) the vulgar Reader. In our last Volume, we acquainted you with the Preaching of John Wickliff here in England, (Almighty Providence hon∣ouring this Nation so far as not only to have the first Christian King in the World, viz. Lucius, and to give Birth to the first Christian Emperor in the World, viz. Constantine: But also to lead the van in the Reformation, and 'twas from our Torch many other Regions that sat in darkness borrow'd their Light) these
two Bohmians had embrac'd several of those Truths which Wickliff had reviv'd in the World. For King Richard the Se∣cond's first Wife, being Ann the Daughter of the Emperour Charles the 4th. and Sister to the Emperour Wenceslaus, a Bo∣hemian by Birth, diverse of her Country-men follow'd her into England, whom some becoming Students at Oxford, where Wickliff then flourisht, they were not only hearers of his Preach∣ing but carried when they went away, several of his Books home with them into their own Country, as these de Realibus Ʋniversalibus, de Civili Jure & Divino, de Ecclesiâ, de questionibus variis contra clerum, &c. It chanc'd about the same time, a Noble Man of the City of Prague in Bohemia, had founded a great Church Dedicated to Matthias and Matthew, but com∣monly call'd Bethlem, Endowing it with large Revenues, for two Preachers every day (Holy day or Working day) throughout the year. Of these two Preachers John Hus was one, a Person of great Learning in those times, and of excellent Wit; but especially reverenc'd by the People for his blameless life and holy Conversation. He happening on some of these Books of Wickliffs, was presently convinc'd of the Truth of them, and began to defend the same, not only in the Schools, but likewise in his Sermons. At this the Pope and Clergy were mightily nettled, and wrot Letters to the King of Bohemia to punish him, where∣upon he was for some time Banisht the City of Prague, but the People murmuring that he was unjustly dealt withall, and the King himself not finding in him any Crime, he was restor'd; and this general Council coming on, to purge his Teritories from the scandalous suspition of being infected with Haeresy; the Emperour who then was Sigismund, Son of Charles the 4th. would needs have Mr. Hus appear there, and in order thereunto granted him his safe Conduct, both in the Latin and Dutch Language, in these words: Sigismund by the Grace of God, King of the Romans, of Hun∣gary and Denmark, Croatia, &c. To all Princes as well Eccle∣siastical as Secular, Dukes, Marquesses and Earls, Barons, Captains, Burgoermasters, Judges and Governours, Officers of Towns Boroughs and Villages, and in General to all the Subjects of our Empire, to whom these Presents shall come, Grace and Goodness. We Charge and Command you all, That you have respect unto John Hus, who is
departed out of Behomia, to come unto the General Council, which is shortly to be held at the Town of Constance, which said John Hus we have received under our Protection and into the safe Guard of the whole Empire; desireing that you would cheerfully receive him, when he shall come towards you, and that you treat him friendly, and shew him in all things favour and good will, for the expedition, ease, and safety of his Journey as well by Land, as by Water. Further ordain∣ing, That he and all his Company with their carriage and necessaries shall pass through all Ports, Bridges, Lands, Liberties, Towns, &c. Without paying any Custome, Toll, Tribute, &c. We will also that you suffer him to Pass, Rest, Tarry, and Sojourn at Liberty, without doing him any manner of hindrance, trouble or molestation; and that if need require, you provide a faithful Company to Conduct him, for the honor and reverence which you owe unto our Imperial Majesty. Given at Spire the 18th. of Octob. in the year of our Lord, 1414. On the 3d. of Nov. 1414. Hus came into Constance, of which two Noble Men of his Countrey gave notice to Pope John, desireing his Protection, who promised the same very freely, adding that if Hus had kill'd his Brother; yet no outrage nor hurt should be done him in that place. Yet for all this he had not been there a Month before they seized upon him, and put him in a base and loathsom Prison, and this too, before his cause was heard in the Council. The substance of the Articles at last exhibited against him, was as follows: 1. That he had taught Error and Herisy about the Sacraments of the Church, and especially about the Sacrament of the Body of Christ, saying that it ought to be Ministred in both kinds, and that after the words of Consecration pronounc'd there still remaineth material Bread in the Sacrament. 2. He doth Err as touching the Church, for that he doth not allow and admit that the Church signifieth the Pope, Cardinals, Archbishops and Clergy, but saith this signification was drawn from the Schoolmen. 3. That he hath said, That Tempral Princes and Lords may take away the Temporal possessions of the Church and Clergy, without any offence. 4. He teacheth that all Priests are of like power, and therefore affirms, That the reservations of the Popes Casualties, the
ordering of Bishops and the Consecration of the Priests were invented only for Covetousness. 5. That he erreth concerning the Church, forasmuch as through Contempt, he doth not fear Excommunication. 6. He erreth by holding, That a Man being once Ordain'd a Priest or a Deacon, cannot be forbidden from the Office of Preaching, &c. Upon these and other the like Articles, the Council proceeded against him in his sickness, and tho he often offer'd to defend his Cause, yet they would neither allow him any Advocats, nor permit him publickly to be heard. And in their Ninth Session they declared—Quod non obstantibus salvis Conductis Imperatoris, Regum, &c. Possit per Judicem competentem de Haeretieâ pravitate inquiri. That notwithstanding any safe Conduct granted by the Em∣peror or any Kings, Inquisition many be made against any Man for Haeresy by a Competent Judge, and process to be made according to Law. To relate the whole proceedings would be too tedious, how malicious and unjust his accusers were, how stout and faithful to him were several Bohemian Noble Men representing his Inno∣cence to the cruel Fathers, but all in vain, nothing but his Blood would satisfy; and so they proceed to pass the following sentence upon him. The most sacred General Council of Constance, Congregated together and representing the Catholick Church, for perpetual me∣mory of the thing. As truth doth witness, that an evil Tree bring∣eth forth evil Fruit, so it cometh to pass, that the Man of most damnable memory John Wickliff, through his pestiferous Doctrine, not through Jesus Christ by the Gospel, as the holy Fathers in times past, have begotten faithful Children, but contrary to the wholesome Faith, as a venemous root hath begotten many wicked and pestilent Children, whom he hath left behind him successors and followers of his perverse and accursed Doctrine, against whom this Sacred Synod of Constance is forced to rise up, as against Bastards, and diligently with a Sharp-knife of Ecclesiastical Authority to cut up Errors out of the Lords field, as most hurtful Brambles and Briars lest they should grow up to the destruction of others. Forasmuch then as in the holy General Council lately celebrated at Rome; it was decreed that the Doctrine of John Wickliff of most damnable me∣mory
should be Condemned, and his Books burnt as Haeretical, yet John Hus here personally present in this Sacred Council, not the Diciple of Christ but of Wicliff, an Arch Haeretick hath taught and affirmed the Articles of Wickliff, which were Condenm'd by the Church of God. Wherefore after diligent Deliberation and full Information, this most Sacred Council declareth and determineth; the Articles abovesaid (which are sound in his Books wrot with his own hand, and which he hath own'd) not to be Catholick, nor worthy to be taught but that many of them are erroneous, some wicked, other some to be offensive unto godly Ears, many of them to be temerarious and seditious, and the greater part of them to be Notoriously Haeretical; and doth condemn all and every the Books which the said Hus hath wrot, in what form or phrase soever they be, or whether they be Translated by others, and doth decree, That they shall be publickly burnt in the presence of the Clergy and People, &c. And the said Synod doth pronounce the said John Hus an Haeretick, and a Seducer and obstinate Person, and such an one as doth not desire to return again to the Lapp of our holy Mother the Church, neither to abjure the Errors and Heresies which he hath openly Preached and defended, wherefore this most Sacred Council decreeth and declares, That the said John Hus shall be deposed and degraded from his Priestly Orders and Dignity. Since this sentence mentions Degrading, it will not be amiss to consider the manner how that Ceremony is perform'd: Which is thus—The party to be degraded is attir'd in all his Priestly Vestments, and holdeth in the one hand a Chalice filled with Wine mixed with Water, and in the other a Guilt Paten with a Wafer. Then kneeling down, the Bishops Deputy taking from him these Trincats, Charges him to say no more Mass for the Quick or the Dead: Secondly, scraping with a piece of Glass his fingers ends, he Enjoyns him never to Hallow or Consecrate any thing, and Thirdly, rasing his shaven Crown and stripping  of his Priestly Vestments, he is Clothed in a Lay habit, and delivered into the Power of the Secular Magistrate.
Thus was poor Hus serv'd, and withal a Capp put on his head all painted over with Devils, and this word Haerisiarcha (or Ring leader of Hereticks) inscribed thereon, and so was burnt in the Month of July, 1415. He behav'd himself at his Mar∣tyrdom with a wonderful Cheerfulness, and seems to have had a Spirit of Prophecy; for whereas Hus in the Bohemian Tongue signifies a Goose, he told them—You now roast a Goose, but after a 100 years there shall a Swan rise up out of my Ashes, which was fulfill'd in Luther, who just 100 years after Hus's Death began to appear in opposition to the Pope. Likewise during the time of this Council, one Jerome a Learned Godly Man, of the City of Prague, hearing of the manyfold injuries done unto Hus, voluntarily came to Constance with an intent to defend his Cause, but not being able to pro∣cure any safe Conduct there, was returning back again to his own Country, but taken on the Road and brought bound into Constance; and there by the Council Condemn'd and Burnt, and his Ashes thrown into the River Rhyne, as Hus's likewise had been, so Industrious were the Romish Clergy to destroy all Memorials of these faithful Servants of God, whose Names do yet survive all their impotent malice, and remain Registred in the Book of Life in Heaven, and pretious to all good Men on Earth. What esteem the godly Nobles of that Age had of Mr. Hus, may partly appear by a Letter of 54 Noble Men of Morauia, under their Hands and Seals to the said Council.
THE COURANT. Tory. PRethee are Miracles ceas'd? No, no, There's a New Saint lately come over, call'd Cess Process that does daily Wonders, Dam Ignoramus is an Ass to her. Tory. What kind of Feats does she Profess? can she sham Godfryes Murder, and Esquire Thin's; and make the World be∣lieve, That they both kill'd themselves, or that it was done Justly? Truem. Pish! Natt. Implement will undertake all that, and more: This unknown Lady will in a trice Blanch ye a Blacka∣more, turn Swine into Sheep, make a Hog-dog-rascally Villain as Innocent as a Sucking Devil; Nay, shee'l make Subornation of Perjury Lawful: or (which is as good) render it Ʋnpunisha∣ble: and all this according to Law. Don't you know Bob∣bloody coat? the Sow sucker? Tory. Yes, yes, but now you talk of Rogues and Miracles, didst ever heard the Legend of Longinus? Truem. No, prethee let's ha't. Tory. Longinus you must Note was a Roman Red coat, and somewhat Purblind; They tell you, that he was the very Man that with his Lance pierced our Blessed Saviour's side, and some of the Blood happening on his Eyes, presently cured his sight; and his Soul being Illuminated as well as his Body, he was Converted and Believed, and Lived Thirty eight Years a Mo∣nastick Life in Cappadocia, and then was carried before one Octavius the President, to whom Preaching Christ, Octavius commanded all his Teeth to be struck out; and after that, his Tongue to be cut off: but still Longinus Preached on,—
—And then without Spake to good purpose when his Tongue was out, And at last, had his Head Chopt off, and after that did a Thousand Miracles. Truem. Well, and what of all this? This is word for word, in that ingenious Treatise, call'd Devotions of the Roman Church. Tory. 'Tis so, and likewise the same Author from the Ro∣man Festival, adds the following story; That the hand of Tho∣mas the Apostle that was in Christ's-side, would never go into his Tomb, but always lay without unburied, which hand had such vertue in it, that if the Priest when he goes to Mass, put a Branch of a Vine into that hand, the Branch presently putteth sorth Grapes, and by that time the Gospel be said, the Grapes will be Ripe; and then the Priest takes them and wrings them into the Chalice, and with that Wine Honseleth the People. Truem. A pretty way to get Liquor; But are these all the Miracles you have to tell us? Tory. Why, what would you have me talke Sense, and have an Information brought against me? Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681-2.
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, Feb. 24. 1681-2. Scito, Te mortalitèr peccare si servabis fidem datam Haereticis— Pope Martin the Fifth to the Duke of Lituania, apud Co∣chlaeum in Histor. Hussit. l. 5. Further Observations touching that wieked Tenet of the Romish Church, That Faith is not to be kept with Hereticks: That memorable Appeal of Amurath the Turk, to Christ, against the King of Hungary, breaking his League by the Popes War∣rant, &c. WE told you in the last how the Council of Con∣stance wickedly caused John Huss to be Con∣demn'd and executed, notwithstanding the safe Conduct given him by the Emperour: If you would have the matter briefly summ'd up, you may find it in Sleidan's Commentaries, l. 3. Aberat um fortè Sigismundus, &c. Sigismund by chance was then absent when the Council thus pro∣ceeded, and being inform'd thereof, took it very ill, and came thither to expostulate about it; but when once he was told by the Pope, That Faith is not to be kept with Hereticks, he not
only said by his Resentments, (tho the Bohemians oft inter∣ceded with him, and requested the safe Conduct might be made good) but also was one of the first that bitterly inveigh'd against him: Or if you will rather take it in the words of Nau∣clerus, thus—Incinerationem Johannis Huss Imperator non aequo animo tulit, &c. The Emperour was much dissatisfied with the burning of John Huss, because he had allow'd him his safe Con∣duct; but the holy Synod answer'd, That he could not be tax'd with breach of Faith in the Case, for the Council it self had not granted any safe Conduct, Et Concilium majus est Impe∣ratore, and the Council is greater than the Emperour, and therefore he could not lawfully grant any such thing against the pleasure of the Council, especially in matters of Faith. Bcanus and other Advocates for Popery, to excuse this Coun∣cil from the odium of allowing Breach of Promise made by Ca∣tholicks to such as they are pleas'd to call Hereticks, in that De∣cree, wherein it declares, That no Secular Power, how Soveraign soever, can hinder the proceedings of the Ecclesiastical Tribunal in Causes of Heresie; and consequently, if the Emperour, or any other Secular Prince, grants a safe Conduct, or engages by never so solemn Oaths or Promises to do any thing which they account prejudicial to that Jurisdiction, it is not obligatory, do alledge the Reason thereof to be, for that, it is a promise made of things out of and beyond the Power and Jurisdiction of such a Prince, which is to say, That altho in Cases properly appertaining to the Princes Jurisdiction he is bound by his Word, Promise, or Oath; yet in case of He∣resie, or persons suspected of Heresie, (for all is one with them) he is not, because the same is of Ecclesiastical Cognizance, and what is this less than to say, That Promises made to Hereticks are not binding? However, this to be the Doctrine of the Roman Church will further and undeniably appear, from the Sentiments of her al∣lowed Doctors in their Writings, and from their Practises. Their famous Bishop of Symancha, in his Catholick Institutions, cap. 45. tells us expresly—Haereticis fides à privato data servanda non est; Faith or promise made by a private person to an Heretick is not to be kept. And a little after—Any person is bound to reveal an He∣retick to the Inquisition, Non obstante side aut Juramento, the he hath bound himself by Promise or Oath to the contrary. And lest you should think some restriction in the word private Person, 'tis
plain he means All, for presently after he affirms—Nec fides à Magistratibus data est servanda Haereticis: Faith made by Magi∣strates to Hereticks is not to be kept. Now if it be not to be re∣garded either by Magistrates or by private Persons, it follows, that 'tis to be kept by no body at all. That incomparable Historian Thuanus, l. 63. ad Annum 1577. tells us, That the Popish Divines of France, Aperto Capite in Concionibus & evulgatis Scriptis ad fidem Sectariis servandam non obligari principem, contendebant; allato in eam rem Concilii Con∣stantiae Decreto: They taught publickly, both in the Pulpit, and from the Press, That Princes were not bound to keep touch with Sectaries, alledging to warrant such their Assertions this Decree of the Council of Constance. And what wonder is all this, when the Casuists justifie other grosser' Villanies? As the before-mentioned Syman∣cha, Instit. Cathol. Tit. Is apud quem Haereticus aliquid deposuerit non tenebitur post manifestam Haeresim, rem depositam illi reddere: A person with whom one that is an Heretick shall intrust any Goods, is not bound to restore them. Tolletus the Jesuit in his Instructions for Priests on the Title Excommunication—Non tenentur red∣dere rem verbis contractam: They are not bound to make good Con∣tracts with Hereticks. Nay, the Gloss of their Canon Law in Gratian, Caus. 15. q. 6. not only justifies the thing, but also assigns the reason of it—Si Juravi me soluturum alicui pecu∣niam, &c. If I have sworn to pay a man Money, and he happen to be Excommunicated, I am not bound to pay it, because we ought by all the means we can to vex ill men, that they may repent of their Evil.—Very pretty Popish Divinity! Cardinal Allen resolves, Pater qui filium habet Haereticum, &c. A Father that has a Son that is an Heretick, is bound to disinherit him, and Parents sin mortally that bestow their Daughters in marriage to Hereticks: And of this too, the Gloss of Gratian, Decret. l. 5. Caus. 23. q. 8. gives the reason, Because Hereticks are not to be esteem'd our Brothers or Kindred; but tho he be the Son of thy Mother, or thine own only Child, yet according to the Law of old, Thy hand must be upon him, that thou mayest put him to death. According to these Maxims, 'tis notorious, that the Apostate Church of Rome, and Papists, have acted; how often have Popes put Princes upon the breaking of their Treaties, Alliances, and Covenants? How remarkable is that Story of Ʋladislaus the fifth King of Hungary, about the year 1440. who having con∣cluded
a Peace with Amurath Emperour of the Turks, for ten years space, and sworn to keep and observe the same inviolably, Eugenius the Fourth (who at that time was Pope of Rome) hearing thereof, writes to Cardinal Julian then resident in Hun∣gary, to persuade the King to break that Peace, alledging and declaring. That no Peace made with the Enemies of Religion, (and in their esteem Protestants are worse than Turks) without first consulting the Pope, and having his leave, was good or valid. And therefore commanded the King to fall into Hostility, assuring him, That as for his Oath given at the Treaty, he had dissolv'd the same: Hereupon the King, partly by Intreaties, and partly by Threats, is prevail'd upon, to become a most perfidious wretch, and to the dishonour of the Christian name, treacherously to fall upon the Turk at unawares, which Amurath observing, and seeing his Forces like to be discomfited, he draws forth the Origi∣nal Articles of their League, and looking up to Heaven, cries out, Haec sunt, Jesu Christe! Foedera quae Christiani tui mecum percussêre, per nomen tuum Sanctè Jurantes; Nunc, si Deus es, tuas, measque Injurias, te quaeso, ulciscere.—[Bonfin. l. 3. Aenae∣as Sylvius, (afterwards Pope) p. 81. Spondanus ad Ann. 1444.] Behold, O Jesus! these are the Covenants which thy Christians so∣lemnly swearing by thy name, made with me; now therefore if thou art a God, revenge these Injuries to me and thy self, upon their perfi∣dious heads.—And no sooner had he pronounc'd these words, but the success of the Battel was chang'd, the Christians put to flight, and the perjured King, together with the wretched Car∣dinal that put him upon't, being both slain. Pope Innocent the Third, in the year 1213. in a Letter to Peter King of Arragon, charges him in the name of the Holy-Ghost, and as he expected ever to obtain Divine and Apostolical Grace, to abandon the people of Tholose, (certain honest Wal∣densian Christians, of whom in our Third Volume we have given an account) nor to afford them any Aid or Countenance as long as they continued in their Heresie, Non obstante promissione vel obligation quacúnque praestitâ: Notwithstanding any promise or obligation whatsoever before pass'd to the contrary. In the Year 1538. Paul the Third, sends abroad a Roaring Bull against our King Henry the 8th. wherein he admonishes and requires all Christian Princes, That they shall not under pre∣tence of any Leagues or Obligations, although corroborated by
frequently repeated Oathes, yield the said King directly or indi∣rectly any Aid, Favour, or Assistance; and to take them off from any apprehensions of their Duty, pretends to Absolve them all, from all Oathes or Obligations by them made, or to be made; and pronounces them to be void and of none effect. So likewise Pope Pius Quintus Absolv'd not only all the Subjects of Queen Elizabeth, but also, Caeteros omnes qui Illi quomodo∣cunque Juraverunt; All others who in any manner had sworn unto her. After Henry the Third of France was Barbarously Murder'd, by Frier Clement, all the World knew the Right of the Crown by Lineal Succession and Proximity of Blood belong'd to Henry of Burbon, but the Popish Doctors of the Sorbon being intrea∣ted by the People of Paris to give their Judgment, whether it were Lawful to submit to him? They answered, That Catho∣licks by the Divine Law were forbidden to admit to the Kingdom a Sectary and manifest Enemy to the Church; That all that should Assist him were guilty of mortal Sin, and would infallibly be Damn'd: And all that did Resist him unto Blood, would dye Mar∣tyrs, and enjoy an Everlasting Reward in Heaven. But to prove, That Popish Princes who have made never so fair Promises, did notwithstanding Persecute their Protestant Sub∣jects with the greatest Rigour, and act quite contrary to those Solemn Engagements, our Native Island affords a sad, and never to be forgotten Precedent; for when the Men of Suffolk upon the pious King Edwards Death, requested, that bloody bigotted and treacherous Queen Mary, to know, Whether she would al∣ter the Religion Establish'd in her Brothers days? She assur'd them with all Asseverations, That she would never make any Innovation or Change, but be contented with the private Exer∣cise of her own Religion. And on April the 12th. she made a Publick Declaration in Council, That although her own Con∣science were fixed in matters of Religion, yet she would never Inforce her Subjects, otherwise than God should put into their Hearts a persuasion of the Truth she was in.—But no sooner was she settled in her Throne, but slighting all these Engagements, she no less perfidiously than cruelly, fell to Burning her Protestant Subjects, purely for their Religion. Nay, do we not at this Instant see the like Proceedings in our next Neighbouring Country? where, notwithstanding many
Edicts and Solemn Promises Ratified, with all the formalities of Perpetual Laws; yet the poor Protestants, directly contrary to all these Priviledges, without any colour or shadow of Crime, save only their Religion, (wherein their Persecutors deal much more Generously, than if with fained Accusations and damnable Subornations: they should falsly represent them as Rebellious and Disloyal,) are daily harass'd, Ruinated and undone. Therefore the General Inference from these Premises is, That knowing so well the Principles and Practises of the Romish Church; no Protestants or men of sense should ever trust to any, though never so plausible Promises of any person of that Communion: For with such, all the most Sacred Ties, (besides those of Interest and present opportunity) are no more than Sampson's Bands, Dissolvable, whensoever their own Humour or their Ghostly Fathers Conveniency shall require it.
The COURANT. Tory. HOw? Hodge, concern'd in the Burning of London and Godfry's Murder? Trum. No, I never said he was, nor do I believe it; but this I say, such a wild suggestion might be maintain'd by as good Logick as any he uses to make out the Protestant Plot. Tory. As how? prethee a touch for Example; I'le engage not to believe the Consequence. Truem. I take it for undeniable, That London in Sixty six was designedly burnt by Papists: the Law hath determined it in the Execution of Hubert, who own'd the Fact, and that he was hired thereunto by Piedelon a French Papist. The Body of the City have Recorded it in the late Inscription of the Monu∣ment; and that great and sagacious Minister of State, the Right Honourable the Lord Chancellour in his Speech before Sentence on the late Lord Stafford, makes no doubt on't. Tory. But you may remember, that Hodge was a little disgrunt∣led at That Inscription, and has endeavoured to persuade the World, that they were the Fanaticks caus'd that Fire. But what if the Papists did do it, and Kill'd Godfry too, what's that to him? Trum. Nthing that I know on,—But this one might infer according to Mr. L'Estranges modes of Arguing, If they were Papists, and Hedge should happen to be a Papist too; then he may altogether as fairly be Charg'd with both these Exploits, as all and every the Dssenters are by him Tax'd with all the Villanies of Forty odd, when the greatest part of them were not born. Tory. Well, but what Colour is there for Hodges being a Papist? Truem. As many Colours as there are in the Rain-bow. 1. Two of the Kings Evidence have sworn his haunting of Mass, and ano∣ther Gentleman deposes, That he own'd himself to be of that Church whereof the Pope is Head. Now you that Rail and Ran at Juries, if they won't believe any lousie Witnesses, though they swear Dggers and Impossibilitie, ought methinks to Credit such unexceptionable Evidence. 2ly. The Gentleman has been oft Challeng'd to prove that for Eighteen years after the Restitution of the Liturgy, (viz. till after the Discovery of the Popish Plot, and that he was question'd as a Papist, he ever usually frequented his Parish Church, or receiv'd the Sacrament.
Tory. Oh, he Answers that in his Preface to his first part of Dissenters Sayings, referring people to one Mr. Gatford of St. Dio∣nis Back Church, for proof of his Receiving, &c. Truem. Call you that Sham an Answer? 'Tis but his nude Averment, he produces no Certificate from that Gentleman: Be∣sides 'tis known Mr. L' liv'd many years in St. Gileses Parish before the Plot, why does he not produce some Testimony in all that time from thence? can it be imagin'd so intelligent a per∣son, had he been so zealous for the Church of England as he now pretends, would ever have liv'd Eight or ten years together with∣out her Ordinances, and in disobedience and despight to her Laws and Canons. Tory. —But in particular as to the Fire-Jobb. Truem. Mr. L'Estrange some time before the Fire Printed a Pamphlet, call'd A Memento, wherein Chap. 6. speaking of some people put to death under Cromwel. He uses these words— Lon∣don was made the Altar for these Burnt Offerings, God grant that City be not at last Purged by Fire; I mean before the general Conflagration. Now since, Roger I think pretends not to be a Prophet, and no body takes him for a Conjurer: Ill will might on this occasion suggest him to be a Conspirator: for it has been prov'd, That the mischief was intended long before it was per∣petrated, and if one would talk of him, as he does of the Dissen∣ters,—one might say, his Prayer, God grant, is only to Cloak his Malice. That here's a plain Prediction. It must needs be therefore, that he was acquainted with the Design, and so bigg with Expectation, that he could not forbear Blabbing on't, and warming his fancy with the very Conceit of the Flames, just as Del Rio the Jesuit in his Magical Disquisitions could not forbear giving a dark hint of the Gunpowder-Treason several years before it happen'd.— Tory. These are unjust and inconsequent Descants on such an Innocent Accidental passage. Truem. I grant it,—But yet 'tis at this very rate, that L'Estrange Treats others, wresting the most harmless Passages to odious and horrid meanings. Quod tibi fieri, non vis alteri ne feceris. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681-2.
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, March 2. 1681-2. —Ʋmbrâque errabit Thynnus inultâ? Of the first pretended Act of Parliament that ever was in England against professors of Religion, how it was forg'd by the Prelates, and soon after Repeal'd. The bloody Statute of 4. Hen. 2. ca. 15. for Burning of Hereticks. WE have pursued the Papal History beyond the Seas, down to the Council of Constance, and burning of Hus and Mr. Jerome, that is, to about the year of our Lord 1415. which answers to the Third year of the Raign of our King Henry the Fifth. 'Twill therefore now be necessary to look back and ga∣ther what Observables occurr'd in England relating to our Sub∣ject not already mention'd, during the Raigns of King Richard the Second, and Henry the Fourth. We gave you before the Relation of Wickliff, whose Doctrines spread so fast, that the incens'd Prelates finding their Spiritual Thunders unable to re∣press them, bethought themselves to pray in aid of the Secular Arm, and to that purpose the King being young and dissolute, so extravagant to his Favourites, that he always wanted Money, the Bishops either by fair words, or the Bait of a Benevolence to be given him by the Clergy, prevail'd with him in the Fifth year
of his Raign to consent to an Ordinance of their framing, in these words following. For as much as it is openly known, that there be divers evil persons within the Realm going from County to County, and from Town to Town, in certain Habits, under dissimulation of great Holiness, and without the License of the Ordinaries of the places, or other sufficient Authority, preaching daily, not only in Churches and Church-yards, but also in Markets, Fairs, and other open places, where a great Congregation of people is, divers Sermons containing Heresies and notorious Errors, to the great emblemishing of the Christian Faith, and destruction of the Laws, and of the Estate of the holy Church, to the great peril of the Souls of the people, and of all the Realm of England, as more plainly is found, and sufficiently proved before the Reverend Fa∣ther in God the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishops and other Prelates, Masters of Divinity, and Doctors of Canon and Ci∣vil Law, and a great part of the Clergy of the said Realm especially assembled for this cause; which persons do also preach divers mat∣ters of Slander, to engender Discord and Dissention betwixt divers Estatés of the said Realm, as well Spiritual as Temporal, in ex∣citing of the people, to the great peril of the Realm: Which Preachers cited or summoned before the Ordinaries of the places, there to answer of that, whereof they be impeached, will not obey to their Summons and Commandments, nor care for their Moni∣tions nor Censures of the Holy Church, but expresly despise them. And moreover by their subtle and ingenious words, do draw the people to hear their Sermons, and do maintain them in their Er∣rors by strong Hand, and great Routs: It is ordained and assented in this present Parliament, That the King's Edmmissions be made and directed to the Sheriffs and other Miuisters of our Sove∣raign Lord the King, or other sufficient persons Learned, and ac∣cording to the Certifications of the Prelates thereof to be made in Chancery from time to time, to arrest all such Preachers, and also their Faitors, Maintainers, and Abettors, and to hold them in Arrest and strong Prison, 'till they will justifie them according to the Law and Reason of Holy Church. And the King wills and commandeth, That the Chancellor make such Commissions at all times, that he by the Prelates or any of them shall be certified and thereof required, as is aforesaid
This was the first pretended Statute that ever was in England for imprisoning Christians for Religious opinions, and by colour thereof, the Bishops committed great Cruelties, I call it preten∣ded Statute; for tho it be enter'd in the Parliament Rolls, yet it was no Legal Act, for it never pass'd the Commons: And there∣fore at the next Parliament in Michaelmas Term following, the Commons preferr'd a Bill, eciting the same, and constantly affir∣med, That they never assented thereunto, and therefore desired, that the said supposed Statute be annull'd, and made void, for they prote∣sted, That it was never their intent, that either themselves, or such as shall succeed them, should be farther subject, or bound to the Pre∣lates, than were their Ancestors in former times. And to this the King gave his Royal Assent, in these words: Il plaist au Roy, The King is pleas'd that it be so. Cook, 3 Instit. fo. 40. Foxes Acts and Monuments, fo. 406. But that you may more fully understand the fraud and sub∣tlety of their Reverences in this Affair, you must understand, That before the invention of Printing, the usual way of pub∣lishing Acts of Parliament, was to engross them in Parchment, and send them with the King's Writ into every County, com∣manding the Sheriff to proclaim them. Now John Braibrook Bishop of London, being then Lord Chancellor of England, he by a Writ dated 26 May, Anno Regni Regis R. 2. quinto, sent down the before recited Ordinance of the King and Prelates, amongst the Statutes that were then lately pass'd: But no less knavishly left out in the next Parliamentary Proclamation the said Act of Revocation, whereby the said supposed Statute was made void, by which means afterwards the other still pass'd as an Act, and was printed continually as such; but the Act that disannull'd it was by the Interest of the Prelates from time to time kept out of the Prints, the better to give colour to their imprisoning of the Laity at their pleasure. And farther, to make sure work, Henry the Fourth having usurp'd the Crown, to gratifie the Clergy who had chiefly assi∣sted him therein, in the second year of his Raign, he at their Instigation procured the following cruel and wicked Law to be Enacted, commonly call'd, The Statute Ex Officio, which that the Reader may the better observe the Spirit of Popery and Perse∣cution, and compare the Times and Actings of Men in past and more modern Times, I hope it shall neither be thought tedious
nor unuseful to recite the same at large Verbatim, it not being now extant in Kceble, or any of our Common Statute Books. ITem, Whereas it is shewed to our Soveraign Lord the King, on the behalf of the Prelates and Clergy of this Realm of England in this present Parliament, That altho the Catholick Faith builded upon Christ, and by his Apostles and the holy Church sufficiently determi∣ned, declared, and approved, hath been hitherto by good, and holy, and most noble Progeniors of our Soveraign Lord the King in the said Realm amongst all the Realms of the World most devoutly ob∣serv'd, and the Church of England by his said most noble Progeni∣tors and Ancestors, to the honour of God and of the whole Realm aforesaid, landably endow'd, and in her Rights and Liberties sustain'd, without that that the same Faith or the said Church was hurt or grie∣vously oppressed, or else perturbed by any perverse Doctrine, or Wicked, Heretical, or Erronious Opinions: Yet nevertheless di∣vers false and perverse people of a certain new Sect, of the Faith of the Sacraments of the Church, and the Authority of the same dam∣nably thinking, and against the Law of God and of the Church, usurping the Office of Preaching, do perversly and maliciously in di∣vers places within the said Realm, under the colour of dissembled Ho∣liness, preach and teach these days openly and privily divers nw Do∣ctrines, and wicked, Heretical, and Erronious Opinions, contrary to the same Faith and blessed Determinations of the holy Church. And of such Sect and wicked Doctrine and Opinions they make unlaw∣ful Conventicles and Confederacies, they hold and exercise Schools, they make and write Books, they do wickedy instruct and inform people, and as much as they may excite and stir them to Sedition and Insurrection, and maketh great strife and division among the people, and other Enormities horribly to be heard, daily do perpetrate and commit, in subversion of the Catholick Faith and Doctrine of the holy Church, in diminution of God's honour, and also in destruction of the Estate, Rights and Liberties of the said Church of England; by which Sect, and wicked and false Preachings, Doctrine, and Opi∣nions of the said false and perverse people, not only most great peril of the Souls, but also many more other hurts, slanders, and perils (which God prohibit) might come to this Realm, unless it be the more plenti∣fully and speedily holpen by the King's Majesty in this behalf; namely, whereas the Diocesans of the said Realm cannot by their Jurisdiction Spiritual, without Aid of the said Royal Majesty, sufficiently cor∣rect the said false and perverse people, nor refrain their Malice,
because the said false and perverse people do go from Diocess to Dio∣cess, and will not appear before the said Diocesan; but the same Diocesans, and their Jurisdiction Spiritual, and the Keys of the Church, with the Censures of the same, do utterly contemn and de∣spise, and so their wicked Preachings and Doctrines doth from day to day continue and exercise, to the hatred of Right and Reason, and utter destruction of Order and good Rule. Ʋpon which, Novelties and Excesses above rehearsed, the Prelates and Clergy aforesaid, and also the Commons of the said Realm being in the same Parlia∣ment, praying our Soveraign Lord the King, That his Royal High∣ness would vouchsafe in the said Parliament to provide a convenient Remedy, the same our Soveraign Lord the King graciously conside∣ring the premises, and also the laudable steps of his most noble Pro∣genitors and Ancestors, for the Conservation of the said Catholick Faith, and sustentation of God's Honour, and also the safeguard of the Estate, Rights, and Liberties of the said Church of England, to the land of God, and merit of our said Soveraign Lord the King, and prosperity and honour of all his said Realm, and for the eschew∣ing of such Dissentions, Divisions, Hurts, Slanders, and Perils, in time to come, and that this wicked Sect, Preachings, Doctrines, and Opinions, should from henceforth cease to be utterly destroyed, by the Assent of the States, and other discreet Men of the Realm, being in the said Parliament, hath granted, stablished, and ordained from henceforth firmly to be observed, that none within the said Realm, or any other Dominions subject to his Royal Majesty, presume to preach openly or privily, without the License of the Diocesan of the same place first required and obtained, Curates in their own Churches, and persons hitherto priviledged, and other of the Canon granted, only except. Nor that none from henceforth any thing preach, hold, teach, or instruct openly or privily, or make or write any Book contrary to the Catholick faith or determination of the holy Church, nor of such Sect and wicked Doctrines and Opinions shall make any Cnvencles, or in any wise hold or exercise Schools. And also that none from henceforth in any wise favour such Preacher or maker of any such or like Conventicles, or holding or exercising Schools, or making or wri∣ting such Books, or so teaching, informing, or exciting the people, nor any of them maintain, or any wise sustain, and that all and singular having such Books, or any Writings of such wicked Doctrine and Opi∣nions, shall really with effect, deliver or cause to be delivered all such Books and Writings to the Diocesan of the same place within 40 days,
from the time of the Proclamation of this Ordinance and Statute. And if any person or persons, of whatsoever kind, estate, or condition, that he or they be, from henceforth do or attempt against the Royal Ordinance and Statute aforesaid in the premisses, or in any any of them, or such Books in the form aforesaid do not deliver, then the Diocesan in the same place in his Diocess, such person or persons in this behalf defamed or evidently suspected, and every of them, may by the authority of the said Ordinance and Statute cause to be arre∣sted, and under safe custody in his Prisons to be detained, 'till he or they, of the Articles laid to him or them in this behalf, do Canonically purge him or themselves, or else such wicked Sect, Preachings, Do∣ctrines, and heretical and erronious Opinions do objure, according as the Laws of the Church do require, so that the said Diocesan by him∣self or his Commissaries do openly and judicially proceed against such persons so arrested, and remaining under safe custody to all effect of the Law, and determine that same business according to the Canonical Decrees within three months after the said Arrest, any lawful Impediment ceasing. And if any person in any case above expressed be before the Diocesan of the place, or his Commissaries canonically Convict, then the same Diocesan may do to be kept in his Prison the said person so Convict for the manner of his default, and after the quality of the Offence according aud as long as to his discretion shall seem expedient, and moreover to put the same person to the Secular Court (except in cases where he according to the Canoni∣cal Decree ought to be left) to pay to our Soveraign Lord the King his peculiar Fine, according as the same Fine shall seem competent to the Diocesan, for the manner and quality of the Offence, in which case the same Diocesan shall be bound to certifie the King of the same Fine in his Exchequer by his Letters Patents sealed with his Seal, to the effect, that such Fine by the King's Authority may be required and levied to his use of the Goods of the same person so convict. And if any person within the said Realm and Dominions, upon the said wicked Preachings, Doctrines, Opi∣nions. Schools, heretical and erroneous Informations, or any of them, be before the Diocesan of the same place, or his Commissaries, after the Abjuration made by the same person pronounced, fall into Relapse; so that according to the holy Canons be ought to be left to the Secular Court, whereupon Credence shall be given to the Dio∣cesan of the same place, or to his Commissaries in this behalf, then the Sheriff of the County of the same place and Mayor and Sheriffs or Sheriff, or Mayor and Bayliffs of the City, Town, or Borough of the same County next to the same Diocesan, or the said Commissaries shall be personally present in preferring of such sentences, when they by the same Diocesan or his Commissaries shall be required: And they the same per∣sons and every of them, after such sentence promulgate, shall receive; and them be∣fore the people in an high place do to be burnt, that such punishment may strike in fear to the minds of others, whereby no such wicked Doctrine, and heretical and erroneous Opinions, nor their Authors and Fautours in the said Realm and Dominions against the Catholick Faith, Christian Law, and determination of the holy Church (which God prohibit) be sustained, or in any wise suffered, in which all and singular the pre∣mises concerning the said Ordinance and Statnte, the Sheriffs, Mayors, and Bayliffs of the said Counties Cities, Boroughs, and Towns, shall be attending, aiding, and supporting to the said Diocesans and their Commissaries.
The COURANT. Tory. I Have read that passage we talkt of t'other day in Mr. L'Estranges Memento; by the same token in the same page, he gives an account of Addresses, in these words—And now from all parts are to be procur'd Addresses—Sweet Lon∣don leads the way—The Commission Officers of the Militia in Suf∣folk, Leicester, Sussex, and my Country-men of Norwich, &c. These numerous and pretending Applications were but false Glosses upon his Power, and Cromwell was too wise to think them other; gain'd by Contrivement, Force, or at least Importunity, half a score pitiful wretches call themselves the people of such or such a County, and here's the Total of the Reckoning.—Thus far L'Estrange, Momentop. 30. Truem. I marry; and he talks like a South-sayer—But hang't, let's prorogue the Discourse of him and his Atchievements. Have you seen Father Dowdal's just and sober Vindication? Tory. No, what's he? Truem. Even a worshipful Roman Catholick Priest, very lately (if not still) a Prisoner in the Gate-house for Religion forsooth! 'Tis a small Treatise of five or six sheets, bound, printed 1681. and to be sold by William Downing in Bartholomew Close. The design on't is to detect the Intrigues of five Priests and Jesuits that were his Fellow Prisoners, but still you must note the Man owns himself a stanch Catholick. Tory. Hey-day! Is Satan's Kingdom then divided against it self? Do the Brethren in Iniquity squabble? Truem. Pish! that's no News; did you never read the feuds between the Fathers in Wisbich Castle, and Parsons the Jesuit and his gang in Q Elizabeth and King James's time? There you may learn the very Quintessence of Railing, the Elixir of Billingsgate. Tory. But what says this Reverend Father Dowdal? Truem. Why it seems being in Gaol in the Gate-house, the wily Jesuits, &c. his Fellow-sufferers, Povre, Turner, Parsons, Mac∣karty, &c. cheated him of his snack of the Charity (as he calls it) of abundance of devout Lasses, Countesses, Ladies, and the Devil knows who, that had no better use for their Money than to bestow it upon this Hypocritical Tribe of Traiterous Villains: Hinc illae Lachrymae, Here's the Root of the Quarrel. And p. 2. he affirm, That altho they are reputed Sufferers for Jesus
Christ's sake, yet they have practis'd the greatest Injustice that could be, more becoming Heathens than Christians, mor suitable to Infidels than Catholicks, and much less to reputed Priests and Jesuits. p. 60. (speaking of the same Holy Fathers his Fellow-sufferers) he says—Each of them could with Authority nobly treat one young Woman or other of very ill Repute, all day long in their Rooms; it was not worth taking notice of, if one of them sent for more Bottles of Wine and Brandy in one day, than I drank Beer or Ale in a whole wee: Either of them might lawfully call two or three of their younger evotes, their Wives, and as many more their Misses, who used to call them Husbands and Gallants in like manner; the rest of the young Women must be their Sisters, and such as were elderly, their Mothers; yea, our holy Patriarch Mr. Povre himself took the liberty to lock himself up daily in his Chamber for some hours with a young Woman he pretended to be his Niece, altho a con∣demned Priest in Newgate, his own Country-man, has openly assur'd, there is no such Relation between them. A Gentleman of good Credit did assure me, That one of the Women this godly Man us'd to have lock'd up in his Chamber, bore a Bastard to one of his Acquaintance, who kept her for his Miss some years.—p. 37. In all my Travels in most Kingdoms of Europe, I never was Eye∣witness to more Tricks and Knavery than I have seen practised by the fore-named Companions of mine in this Prison, altho re∣puted Priests and Jesuits, &c.—This is a Popish Priest's own Testimony of the practises and conversation of his Brethren Priests and Jesuits but the other day in the Gate-house; and that too, at a time when they pretended to be Confessors and Suffe∣rers, forsooth! for Religion. If the Goats and Foxes are thus rampant and mischievous in the Pound, that kind of Creatures must they be abroad in the Common? But, Tory, methinks you are asleep. Tory. I am sorry our Loyal Friends, the Catholicks, should be thus expos'd by a Bird of their own Feather: Could you but have told me such a Story (tho never so Fictitious) of the Pres∣byterians, it had been worth hearing, and would have made me as merry as Herlitus Ridens, or Roger's Fiddle. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681-2.
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, March 10. 1681-2. Et Ficta arguunt, fidémque faciunt. A Letter of Thanks from the Devil to the Bishops and Clergy, for their persecuting the old Dissenters. WE shew'd you last week by whom, and with what Artifices the first Sanguinary Laws, or Acts of. Parliament in England, against Reli∣gious Dissenters were obtain'd. It remains that we should give you a brief Prospect of the Mischiefs, Cru∣elties, and sad Effects which thereupon follow'd. But first, since both the worth of the Matter, and surprizingness of the Form, and the series of Time, do all invite us to it, we think it will not be unacceptable to recite here, a certain Congratulatory Epistle then sent abroad, and by a bold Prosopopoeia directed from Old Nick himself to his trusty and well-beloved the Prelates and Clergy. For tho the Original has no Date, yet the Reverend and Laborious Mr. Fox (who publisht it verbatim out of the Registry of the Cathedral of Hereford) concludes it to have
been written about the time of King Richard the Second: The words whereof (Translated) are as follow. I LUCIFER Prince of Darkness and profound Horror, Em∣perour of the high Mysteries of Acheron, Captain of the Dun∣go ebus, King of Hell, and Lord omptroller of the Infernal : To all  Child on of Pride, and Companions of our Realm, and especially to our dear Allies, the Princes of the Church of this Age (of which our Adversary Jesus Christ saith to his Pro∣pht, I hate (the Church, or) Congregation of the wicked) send Greeting, and wish Prosperity to all that obey our Command∣ments, that serve the Laws of Satan already Enacted, and that are industrious to put in Execution our Precepts and Decrees. Know ye, That in times past certain Vicars of Christ following his steps in Miracles and Vertues, living in Humility and a poor mean Life, converted (in a manner) the whole World from the Yoke of our Dominion, unto their Doctrine and Course of Conversa∣tion; to the great Contempt of our Prison house and Kingdom, and no small prejudice of our Jurisdiction and Authority, they nothing dreading to bid defiance to our Forces, and trample upon the Majesty of our Estate; for then scarce did we receive any Tribute from the upper World, neither did the miserable sort of common people rush in at the Gates of our deep Dungeon as they were wont to do with con∣tinual rapping, but in those days the easie, broad, and pleasant way which leadeth to Death, was unfrequented, and lay wast, without the hideous noise of trampling Travellers, or being trod by the feet of wretched Souls. So that our Courts being without Suiters, all began to howl, and as being robb'd and spoil'd, continued in an∣guish and heaviness. All which considered, we could not without diminution to our Glory longer suffer it, the impatient Rage of our Spleen was moved, nor would our Captain General by a shameful negligence endure it any longer; and therefore seeking out the Remedy to prevent like exclu∣sion and inconveniencies for the future, we provided our selves of a most opportunate Expedient. For instead of these Apstles, and other their Adheonts, who conduct themselves by the same Line and Level, as well in Manners as Doctrine, and are odious Enemies unto us; we have caused You to be their Successors, and preferr'd you in their steads who are the present Prelates of the Church, whom we have advanced by our great might and subtlety, as Christ has said
of you—They have Raigned, but not by me. Once we pro∣mised unto Him all the Kingdoms of the World, if he would fall down and worship us; but he would not, saying—My Kingdom is not of this World, and went his way when the Multitude would have made him a Temporal King. But to You truly that are fallen from the state of Grace, and that serve us in the Earth, is that my promise fulfill'd, and all Terrene things by the means which we have bestow'd upon you, are under your Government. For he hath said of us ye know—The Prince of this World cometh, &c. and he hath made us to Raign over all the Children of Unbelief. There∣fore our Adversaries before-recited, did patiently submit themselves unto the Princes of the World, and did teach Men so to do, saying, Be you subject to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake: And again, Obey ye them that are made Rulers over you, &c. For so their Masters commanded them, saying—The Kings of the Heathen have Dominion over them, &c. But I on the contrary think it long 'till we have poured out our Poison upon the Earth, and there∣fore fill your selves full with the enjoyments thereof; and be you not only unlike those Primitive Fathers, but also clean contrary to them in your Lives and Conditions. Neither give you to God that which belongeth to him, nor yet to Caesar that which is his; but exercise you the Power of both the Swords, according to our Decrees, making your selves doers in worldly Matters, fighting in our Quarrel, in∣tangled with Secular Labours and Business; and climb ye by little and little from the miserable state of Poverty, unto the highest Seats of all Honours, and the most Princely places of Dignity by your devised Practises, and false and deceitful Wiles and Subtlety, that is, by Hypocrisie, Flattery, Lying, Perjury, Treasons, Deceits, Simony, and other greater Wickedness than any which our Infernal Furies can devise. For after that ye have by us been advanced thi∣ther where ye would be, yet that doth not suffice you, but as greedy Stravelings more hungry than you were before, ye oppress the Poor, scratch and rake all together that comes to hand, perverting and tur∣ning every thing topsy-turvy; so swoln, that ready ye are to burst for Pride, living like Letchers in all Corporal Delicateness, and by fraud directing all your doings, you challenge to your selves names of Ho∣nour in the Earth, calling your selves Lords, Holy, yea, and Most Holy persons. Thus either by violence you Ravage, or else by ambition, subtlely ye pilfer away and wrongfully wrest, and by false Title possess these
Goods, which for the sustentation of the poor Members of Christ (whom from our first fall we have hated) were bestowed and given, consuming them as ye your selves list, and therewith ye cherish and maintain an innumerable sort of Whores, Strumpets, and Bawds, with whom ye ride pompously like mighty Princes, far otherwise going than those poor beggerly Priests of the Primitive Church. For I would ye should build your selves rich and gorgeous Palaces; that ye fare like Princes, eating and drinking the daintiest Meats and pleasantest Wines that may be gotten; that ye hoard and heap toge∣ther an infinite deal of Treasure, not like to him that said, Gold and Silver have I none: For why should you not serve and fight for us according to your Wages? O most acceptable Society of Fellowship! promised unto us by the Prophet, and of those Fathers long ago re∣proved: Whilst that Christ called thee Synagogue of Satan, and liken'd thee to the mighty Whore, which committed Fornication with the Kings of the Earth, the adulterous Spouse of Christ, and of a chast person made a Strumpet. Thou hast left thy first Love, and hast cleaved unto us, O our blessed Babylon, and our Citizens, which from the Transmigration of Jerusalem, come hither! we love you for your deserts, we rejoyce over you which contemn the Laws of Simon Peter, and embrace the practises of Simon Magus our friend, and have them at your Fingers ends, and exercise the same publickly, buying and selling Spiritual things in the Church of God and against the Commandment of God: Ye give Benefices and Honours by Petition, or else for Money, for Favour, or for filthy Service; and refusing to admit those that are worthy to Ecclesiastical Digni∣ties, and preferring those that are unworthy; you call into the Inhe∣ritance of God's Sanctuary, Bawds, Lyers, Flatterers, your Nephews, and your own Children, and to a childish Boy ye give many Prebends; the least whereof ye deny to bestow upon a poor good Man; ye esteem the person of a Man, and receive Gifts; ye regard Money, and have no regard of Souls; ye have made the House of God a Den of Thieves; all Abuse, all Extortion, is more exercised a hun∣dred fold in your Judgment Seats, than with any Secular Tyrant; ye make Laws, and keep not the same, and ye dispense with your Dispensations as it pleaseth you; you justifie the wicked for Re∣wards, and you take away the just Man's desert from him; and briefly ye perpetrate all kind of mischief, even as it is our will ye should, and ye take much pain for Lucre's sake in our Service, and especially to destroy the Christian Faith, for now the Lay-people are
almost in doubt what they may believe, because if ye preach any thing to them at some times, (altho it be but seldom seen, and that negligently enough, even as we would have it) yet notwithstanding they believe you not, because they see manifestly that ye do clean con∣trary to that ye say; whereupon the common people doing as ye do, which have the Government of them, and should be an Example to them of well-doing: Now many of them leaning to your Rules, do run headlong into a whole Sea of Vices, and so continually a very great Multitude flocketh at the strong and well fenced Gates of our Dun∣geon; and doubtless ye send us so many day by day of every sort and kind of people, that we should not be able to entertain them, but that our insatiable Chaos, with her thousand ravening Jaws, is sufficient to devour an infinite number of Souls. And thus the Soveraignty of our Empire by you hath been propt up, and our intolerable loss re∣stor'd. Wherefore most especially we command you, and give you most hearty thanks; exhorting you all, that in any wise ye persevere and continue, as hitherto ye have done; neither that ye slack henceforth your Enterprize: For why? by your helps we purpose to bring the whole World again under our Power and Dominion. Over and be∣sides this, we commit unto you no small Authority, to supply our places in the betraying of your Brethren; and we make and ordain you our Vicars, and the Ministers of Antichrist our Son, for whom we have made a very fair and expeditious way and passage. Further∣more we counsel you that possess the highest Rooms of all other, that you work subtlely, and that you outwardly and feignedly seem to pro∣cure Peace between the Princes of the World, but that you cherish and procure secret Causes of Discord: And like as craftily ye have destroyed and subverted the Roman Empire, so suffer ye no Kingdom to be over much enlarg'd and enrich'd by Tranquility or Peace, lest perhaps in so great Tranquility (all desire of Peace set aside) they dispse themselves to view, and consider your most wicked Works, sup∣pressing on every side your Estate; and from your Treasures take away such substance, as we have caused to be reserved and kept in your hands, until the coming of our well-beloved Son Antichrist. We would ye should do our Commendations to our entirely beloved Daugh∣ters, Pride, Deceit, Wrath, Avarice, Belly-chear, and Letchery, and to all other my Daughters, and especially to Lady Simony, which hath made you Men, and enrich'd you, and hath given you suck with her own Breasts, and therefore in no wise see that you call her Sin.
And be ye lofty and proud, because that the most high Dignity of your Estate doth require such Magnificence. And also be ye Covetous, for whatsoever ye get and gather, it is for St. Peter, for the good of the Church, and for the defence of your Patrimony and the Crucifix, and therefore you may lawfully do it; ye may promote your Cardinals to the highest seats of Dignities, without any lett, in stopping the mouth of our Adversary Jesus Christ, and alledging again, that he pre∣ferr'd his Kinsfolks, who were of a poor and base Degree, unto the Apostleship; but do not you so, but rather call as ye do, those that live in Arrogancy, in hughtiness of Mind, and filthy Letchery, unto the state of wealthy Riches and Pride; and those Rewards and Pro∣motions, which the followers of Christ forsook, do ye distribute unto your friends. Therefore as ye shall have better understanding, pre∣pare ye Vices cloaked under the similitude of Vertues: Alledge for your selves the Glosses of the Holy Scripture, and wrest them di∣rectly to serve for your purpose; and if any Man teach or preach otherwise than ye will, oppress ye them violently with the sentence of Excommunication, and by your Censures heaped one upon another, by the consent of your Brethren, let him be condemn'd as an Here∣tick, and let him be kept in a most strait Prison, and there tormen∣ted 'till he dye, for a terrible example to all such as confess Christ. And setting all favour apart cast him out of your Temple, lest perad∣venture the ingrafted word may save your Souls, which word I ab∣hor as I do the Souls of other faithful Men; and do your endeavour, that you may deserve to have the place which we have prepared for you, under the most wicked Foundation of our Dwelling-place. Fare ye well with such Felicity as we desire and intend finally to Reward and Recompence you with. Given at the Center of the Earth, in that our dark Conclave, where all the Rabble of Devils were present, for this purpose specially call'd unto our most dolesom Consistory, under the Character of our terrible Seal, for confirmation of the Premisses.
THE COURANT. Truem. BUT is Monsieur L'Estrange so very angry, say you? Tory. You must note, this extream cold March bears hard upon such Gentlemen as have old Aches, and Necturnal Pains (the sharp Memento's of their youthful Sins) about them; and there∣fore no wonder if friend Roger be now as petvish as a sick Mon∣key, or any ill Minister of State in Parliament time. Conse∣quently is not at leisure to answer that small Objection of his not coming to Church, or receiving the Sacrament for 18 years toge∣ther. But let's leave him to his Observatorisms, and praying for leisure to write against Papists; and tell me, prethee, what thinkest of the Abhorrencies of the Association which hath made such a Figure in modern Gazets? Truem. I have heard from my Grannum an old Proverb—A great Cry and a little Wool. For my part I abhor all Treason and Rebellion, and all that tends thereunto, as much as the best of you all; and I believe there is scarce one of these Gentlemen Abhorrers, (they being for the most part such as are in present Imploys) but have sworn, That they Abhor levying Arms with∣out his Majesty's Authority, or under pretence of his Authority against his Person, or any Commission'd by him; which is the main thing Abhorr'd in this pretended Paper of Association. Now what a ridiculous impertinent business is it, when not only by common Loyalty we are oblig'd, but also have sworn a thing, (it may be twenty times over) to come afterwards, and impor∣tune His Majesty with a formal verbose Complement to the very same purpose? I see no reason in the World for this, unless a Man have a mind to intimate, either that his Oath is not to be taken, or that he has a mind to get a Knightship, a place in the Custom house, or some good Job or other. As to the Paper call'd The Association, it may be a very ill Pa∣per; but if it were found at my Lord Shafsbury's (which whe∣ther it were or no, or how it came there, is still disputable) yet
since there is no offer or pretence of proof, That it was of that Lord's writing; that he ever saw it, or heard it read; that he or any body else ever promoted it, or attempted getting of hands to it, or that any Mortal ever approv'd of, or sign'd it: How is that Lord concern'd? Or why such publick Abhorrence and Cla∣mour? If we must in solemn Addresses declare our Abhorrence of every wicked Paper, why were you not, Gentlemen, as zea∣lous, and ready with your Abhorrencies of Coleman's Letters, and all the Contrivers of them? That there was an Association enter'd into by private persons in Q. Elizabeth's time, when under colour of advancing the Inte∣rests of the presumptive Heir, Mary Queen of Scots (a Papist), Plots were continually hatcht against that good Protestant Queen's Life and Government is well known, and so far from being ill re∣sented, that at next Parliament it was confirm'd. Now from that wholsome Experience, there was something of the same kind proposed in the House of Commons of the last Parliament (but never design'd to be obtruded, without the Concurrence of the Lords, and the Royal Assent). Now this noise of Abhorrence seems at bottom not to be levell'd so much at the Paper said to be found in the E. of Sh's Closet, as under that name, to vilifie and expose the Proceedings of the Commons, and render them odious, as if they were all guilty of that very Paper. Tory. Well, but what say you to Godfry's Murder? Thompson says now, he kill'd himself, and L'Estrange lends a lift that way too. Truem. That's such a Superlative piece of Impudence, as shews the Popish Plot still goes on, else they would not dare thus affront the Justice of the Nation, and out-face our very senses, as if we were just ready to believe their absurd Transubstantia∣tion. In a word, 'tis such an impudent Calumny on the Dead, and Abuse to the Nation, that I think it would not misbecome the whole Common Council to express their Abhorrence of such Popish Shams and Lies, and to Address to the Right Honou∣rable the LORD MAYOR, That Thompson be call'd to Ac∣count for't. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681-2.
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, March 17. 1681-2. Plangunt Anglorum gentes Crimen Sodomorum Paulus fert, horum sunt Idola Causa malorum Surgunt nigrati Gierzitae Simone Nati Nomine Praelati hoc defensare parati. Qui Reges estis, populis quicunque praeestis Qualiter his gestis, gladios prohibêre potestis? Versic. Parl. exhib. Anno 18. Rich. 2. The Proceedings against Dissenters, in the Raigns of King Richard the Second, and King Henry the Fourth. WE have told you the severe Laws made against all those that in these dark Times durst open their Eyes and see farther than Popery, the Church then, as by Law establisht, thought fit to permit them; such Hereticks were generally call'd Lol∣lards, they were the Puritans, the Fanaticks, the Whigs, the Brummingham's of those days, and how busie the Magistrates especially of the Clergy, were to put the said Laws in Execu∣tion against them, will appear in the following account.
'Tis true, during the Raign of King Richard the Second we do not find any burnt to Death for the profession of Religion, but many were imprison'd, harrass'd, and in great trouble, and especially William Swinderby a Priest, and Walter Brute a Lay∣man, but Learned, and a Graduate of the University of Ox∣ford, the several Articles against whom, and their Answers thereunto, you may read at large in Foxes Acts and Monu∣ments, too tedious here to recite; I shall therefore only note, That John Bishop of Hereford having by solemn sentence denounced the said Swinderby to be an Heretick, Schismatick, and a false informer of the People, and to be avoided by all faithful Christians, He the said Swinderby did thereupon Appeal from such the Bi∣shops Sentence to the King and Council, by an Instrument under his hand, which, both in respect of the Matter, and of the English wherein it is written, being such as was then current, (now above 280 years ago) I shall trespass so far on the Rea∣ders patience as to repeat it verbatim. IN nomine Patris, & Filii, & Spiritûs Sancti, Amen. I Wil∣liam Swinderby Priest, knowledge openly to all Men, That I was before the Bishop of Hereford the Third day of October, and be∣fore many other good Clerk, to answer to certain Conclusions of the Faith I was accused of, and mine Answer was this: That if the Bi∣shop or any Man couh shew me by God's Law, that my Conclusions or my Answers were Errour or Heresie, I would be amended, and openly revoke them before all the people; but they sayden singly with word, That there was Errours in them, and bidden me subject me to the Bishop, and put me into his Grace, and revoke mine Errour, and shewed me nought by God's Law, ne Reason, ne proved which they weren. And for I would not knowledge me Guilty, so as I knew no Errour in them, of which I should, therefore the Bishop sate in Doom in mine absence, and deemed me an Heretick, a Schisma∣tick, and a teacher of Errours, and denounced me accursed, that I come not to correction of the Church; and therefore for this unright∣ful Judgment I appeal to the King's Justices for many other Causes. One Cause is, For the King's Court in such matter is above the Bi∣shop's Court; for after the Bishop has accursed, he may not fear by his Law, but then mote he sech succour of the King's Law, and by a Writ of Significavit, put a Man in Prison. The second Cause: For in cause of Heresie there liggeth Judg∣ment
of Death, and that doom may not be given without the King's Justices: For the Bishop will say, Nobis non licet interficere quenquam; that is, It is not lawful for us to kill any man, as they sayden to Pilate, when Christ should be deemed. And for I think that no Justice will give sodenly and untrue Doom, as the Bishop did, and therefore openly I appeal to hem, and send my Conclusions to the Knights of the Parliament, to be shewed to the Lords, and to be taken to the Justices to be well adviset, or that they given Doom. The third Cause is, For it was a false Doom; for no Mn is a Heretick, but he that Masterfully defends his Errour or Heresie, and stifly maintains it: And mine Answer has always bene Condi∣tional, as the people openly knows, for ever I say, and yet say, and al∣way will; that if they cannen shew me by Gods Law that I have erret, I will gladly bene amendet, and revoke mine Errours, and so I am no Heretick, ne nevermore in Gods grace will ben en no wise. The fourth Cause is, For the Bishop's Law that they deme Men by, is full of Errours and Heresies, contrary to the truth of Christ's Law of the Gospel. For there as Christ's Law bids us Love our Enemies, the Pope's Law gives us leave to hate them, and to sley them, and graunts Men pardon to werren again Heathen Men, and sley hem. And there as Christ's Law teach us to be merciful, the Bishop's Law teachs us to be wretchful; for Death is the greatest wretch that  mowen done on him that guilty is. There as Christs Law teaches us to blessen him that diseazen us, and to pray for him; the Popes Law teacheth us to Curse them, and in their great sentence that they usen, they presume to Dam hem to Hell that they cursen. And this is afoue Heresie of Blasphemy: There as Christ's Law bids us be patient, the Pope's Law justifies two Swords, that wherewith he smitheth the Sheep of the Church; and he has made Lords and Kings to swear to defend him and his Church. There as Christ's Law forbideth us Letchery, the Pope's Law justifies the abominable Whoredom of common Women, and the Bishops in some place have a great Tribute or Rent of Whoredom. There as Christ's Law bids to minister Spiritual things freely to the people, the Pope with his Law sells for Money, after the quantity of the Gift, as Pardons, Orders, Blessings, and Sacraments, and Prayers, and Benefices, and preaching to the People, as it is known amongst them. There as Christ's Law teaches Peace, the Pope with his Law assoiles Men for money to gader the People, Priests and other to fight for his Cause. There as Christ's Law forbids Swearing, the Pope's
Law justifies Swearing, and compels men thereto. Whereas Christ's Law teacheth his Priests to be Poor, the Pope with his Law justifies and maintains Priests to be Lords. And yet the fifth Cause is, For the Pope's Law that the Bishops demen Men by, is the same unrightful Law that Christ was demet by of the Bishops with the Scribes and with the Pharisees; for right as at time they gaven more credens to the two false Witnesses that wit∣nessed against Christ, then they deden to all the people that witnesseden to his true Preaching and his Miracles: So the Bishops of the Pope's Law geven more Leven by their Law to two Hereticks and Apostates, or two comen Wymen that woulden witnesseden againes a Man in the cause of Heresie, than to thousands of people that were true and good. And for the Pope is this Antichrist, and his Law contrary to Christ's Law, fully I forsake this Law, and so I reed all Christen men; for thus by another point of this Law, they mighten conquer much of this World: For when they can, they by this Law present a a man an Heretick, his Goods shulen be forfet from him and his Heirs, and so might they lightly have two or three false Witnesses to Record an Heresie again what true man so hem liked. Herefore me thinks, that whatsoever that I am an Christen man, I may lawfully appeal from a false Dome of the Law, to be Righteosly demet by the trouth of God'd Law. And if this Appeal will nserve, I appeal openly to by Lord Jesu Christ that shall deme all the World, for he, I wot well, will not spare for no man to deme a trouth. And therefore I pray God Almighty with David in the Sauter Book, Deus Judi∣cium tuum Regi da, & Justitiam tuam Filio Regis, judicare populum tuum in Justitiâ, & pauperes tuos in Judicio: That is, O God, give thy Judgment to the King, and thy Justice to the King's Son, to judge thy people in Justice, and thy poor ones in Judgment, &c. What afterwards became of this Swinderby, we find not in History; but as for Walter Brute, having worried him a long time, they at last prevail'd with him to submit himself in a Scroll under his hand, in these words following. I Walter Brute submit my self principally to the Evangelie of Jesus Christ, and to the determination of Holy Kirk, and to the General Councils of the Holy Kirk. And to the sentence and deter∣mination of the four Doctors of holy Writ, that is, Augustine, Am∣brose, Jerome, and Gregory. And I meekly submit me to your Correction as a Subject ought to his Bishop.—Fox, fo. 461.
Touching the Deposing of King Richard the Second, and the Ill-Favourites and Mis-government which originally occasion'd that Princes Misfortunes, being foreign to our Subject, we shall say nothing here. Those that desire to be satisfied therein, may read an excellent, tho short, Discourse, Entituled, The Life and Raign of King Richard the Second, printed not long since for the Publisher hereof, wherein a more full and true account is given thereof, than in any of our Histories extant in English. As King Henry the Fourth, who was the Deposer of King Richard, was the first of all our English Kings that brought into mode the cruel burning of Christ's Saints for opposing the Pope and his wicked Doctrines, so as far as I can find the first Martyr in that kind, was one William Santre Priest, (whom elsewhere I find mention'd by the name of Sir William Chatris, Parish-Priest of the Church of St. Scithe the Virgin in London) who was con∣sumed by the Flames in the year of our Lord 1400. The Articles or Heretical Conclusions which he was charged to hold, were these: 1. Imprimis, That he should say, That he would not worship the Cross on which Christ suffered, but only Christ that suffered on the Cross. 2. That he would sooner worship a Temporal King, than the foresaid wooden Cross. 3. That he would rather worship the Bodies of the Saints, than the very Cross on which he hung, if it were before him. 4. That he would rather worship a Man truly contrite, than the said material Cross of Christ. 5. That if any Man would visit the Monuments of Peter and Paul, or go on Pilgrimage to the Tomb of St. Thomas or else∣where for the obtaining any benefit, he is not bound to keep his Vow, but may distribute the Expences that such a Journey would cost him in Alms to the Poor, and it would do as well. 6. That every Priest and Deacon is more bound to preach the Word of God, than to say the Canonical hours. 7. That after the pronouncing of the Sacramental words, the Bread remaineth of the same Nature it was before; neither doth it cease to be Bread. Are not these, Christian Reader! mighty Crimes? And yet for these this poor Man was first very solemnly Degraded from all their pretended Holy Orders, and then most barbarously burnt as
aforesaid: Ought not such Examples make Protestant Englishmen fond of a Popish Successor, who must infallibly act over again the same Barbarities, when ever his bloody Clergy shall instigate him thereunto, upon themselves or their Posterity? The next dying Witness to truth was one John Badby a Taylor, of the Diocess of Worcester, who was burnt in Smithfield, Anno 1409. His only Crime was for asserting, That the Sacrament consecrated by the Priest is not the very Body of Christ, but that still the Bread remained; and that when Christ sat at Supper with his Disciples, he had not his Body in his hand, to the intent to di∣stribute it to his Disciples, &c. And 'tis remarkable, that when he came to dye, and was put in a Tun or Vessel, and Fire put to him, he crying out (to the Lord, not to Men, as by the Sequel appear'd) Mercy, Mercy, the Prince (King Henry's eldest Son) being present, caused the Fire to be stopt, and made him large Offers, not only of Life, but of Preferment too, if he would change his Opinion; but he with a glorious Constancy refused those Temptations, and chose rather to Seal the Truth with his Blood, than betray it by a base Compliance with such worldly Allurements. King Henry to confirm his ill got Soveraignty, resolving in all things to gratifie the Clergy, the Empire of the Pope and his Party became so strong in this Realm, that scarce any durst oppose them; the Bishops having got such an Ascendant on the King, and besides being Arm'd with the Statute we formerly recited, and with additional Constitutions of their own, power of Impri∣sonment, Temporal Sword, Fire, and Fagot, Reigned and Ruled as uncontroulable; so puft up with Pride, that they thought all things subject to their extravagant Power, and daily boasted how they would utterly extirpate Heresie, (as they call'd the Profes∣sion of the Truth) out of the Land. And indeed to the Eye of Humane Reason, nothing seem'd more easie to effect, under such advantageous Circumstances. But 'tis the nature of Truth to flourish by opposition, Premi potest non suppremi, It may be op∣prest, but never supprest. All their kicking was against the Pricks; Providence supported That, which they with united Councils, and Force, and Fraud, and Policy, and Power, thought to over∣throw, as will appear in the Sequel of this History. A fair war∣ning, would Men but be so wise as to heed it, of the vanity of such or the like attempts to all succeeding Generations.
The COURANT. Truem. YES, I do aver, L'Estrange refusing on the 18th of October, 1678. to License Thompson's Narrative, touching the manner of finding Sir Edm. Godfrey's Body assign'd for a Reason, That he did not know but if he should License it, he might offend some great persons at Whitehall. Tory. O! but Thompson, Numb. 128. says, That's a false and scandalous Aspersion: And Observator, Numb. 111. says, 'Tis a damn'd Lie. Truem. 'Tis not a Straw matter what those two Gentlemen say, their veracity is notorious. Mr. L—the Printer went with Thompson then to L'Estrange, stood by, heard the words, and at that instant took particular notice of them, because he ad∣mir'd what might be the mysterious meaning, and is ready to depose the same upon Oath, when ever-lawfully required. And as for the reason L'Estrange now gives, viz. [It was before the King and Council, and he durst not meddle with it] That's no reason at all, for tho the Inquiry after the Murderers might be before the Honourable Board, as indeed it was before all the Magi∣strates in the Nation, yet what harm or offence could it be in the mean time to publish a true Narrative of the matter of Fact, when, how, and in what manner, the Body was found. It might also be noted, That L'Estrange refused to License two Elegies on the same Gentleman, which were both Licensable, as appears in that one of them after his refusal was Licens'd by my Lord Bi∣shop's Chaplain, who sure understood his business as well as Roger, and the other, after a long ruffle and threatning to Complain, Roger made shift to License himself, but not without 2 or 300 Oaths and Curses. Tory. I confess I always observ'd Mr. L'Estrange mighty ten∣der in Licensing any thing that might reflect on the Roman Ca∣tholicks: 'Twas sometime before the discovery of the Plot, the Parsons Sons had a publick Feast, and some body had made a Copy of Verses on that occasion, wherein having reckon'd up what excellent Men in all Professions Clergy-mens Sons had prov'd, the Author concludes thus: Blush Romanists at your unjust Restraints, Our Church fills Earth with Hero's, Heaven with Saints: Whilst from your Cells a spurious Issue springs, To ifle Subjects, and to Murder Kings.
These two last Lines were such an abomination to our Friend, that he would not License the Paper, unless they might be cross'd out, and cross them he did before he would sign it, tho in some of the Copies the Printer mae bold to insert them. Mr. Birch was the Bookseller, who is ready to attest this business—And so much at present for L'Estrange. Now here's Thompson's second Letter to Mr. Prance; what have you to say to that? Truem. I say, That Paper is the perfect Resemblance, or indeed a Demonstration of the whole Genius and Nature of Popery in general, for what is Popery but Lies and Nonsense, obtruded upon the World with the height of Impudence? And just such is that Let∣ter. The shameless Author of which opposes Legal Oaths, and Judicial Records, with pitiful Surmises, and forged Flams. Affirms over and over again with a ridiculous Effrontery things that half the Town know to be false, and others which common sense can ne∣ver admit, as that of his Shoes being glaz'd with walking on the Grass, and the Hay seeds in the sams, and his Face being Fly∣blown, &c. and all this in the midst of a very cold snowy October. Is it not pleasant to hear him tell the world, That Mr. Brown the Constable, who first moved the Body, and the Surgeons that view'd it, and the Maid that wash'd the Clothes, who have all sworn there was no Blood, are no competent Witnesses; and yet this Sir Nicholas Nemo, with his unknown Knights of Bo peep on their bare Say so's, must be credited. Does not Thompson own himself a prodigious wretch in putting his name to this Paper, so directly contrary to what he himself printed, just at the time when the thing happen'd; and yet now to take not one word notice there∣of tho so home charg'd upon him by the Ghost. Is it not absurd vapouring to cry, Such, and such and such things shall be prov'd by undeniable Witnesses. and yet after so many Challenges not be able to name one? 'Tis true, he in∣timates as if one Wren had something to say, but sure I am it cannot be that Sir Edm Godfrey kill'd himself; for I my self have many times heard that Wren say and swear, That he deserv'd part of the 500l. Reward, as being an occasion of the discovery of Mr. Prance's being in the Murder; and that before ever Mr. Prance was seiz'd, he had such violent Suspitions, or Impul∣ses, as he call'd them, that he was concernd in't, that he could not rest in his Bed a nights: And will this Man, after all this, swear, That Prance knew no∣thing of it? Tory. There is, I am told, another Gentleman, tho not named yet hinted at in that Paper, that is to help on the Job with a civil Oath or two upon occasion, a certain pragmatical primatical Tittle-tattlecal pretended Councellor at Law.—But we'l Adjourn our Discourse of him 'till next bout. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681-2
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, March 24. 1681-2. Omne meum Nil meum. An Apology in Answer to an Accusation of Plagiarism. Tolling of Ave's in honour of our Lady. People forc'd to do Penance for not bringing Litter for a Proud Prelates Horses as he would have them. The story of the Lord Cobham, and Sir Roger Acton entred into. TIs pleasant to consider how many little Artifices the Devil and his Instruments, ill Men, have vented their Malice against this poor innocent Weekly Sheet, and how Sedulous they have been, and are, either (if they could) totally to suppress, or at least, to asperse and Calumni∣ate It. This makes me hope, It may have done some Execution against the Kingdom of Antichrist; or that it may be of use to the Protestant Religion, since the Advocates of Popery do so Rave and fret against it. But that which I shall particularly take notice of at present, is, The Gentleman that calls himself the Observator, who, Numb. 14. has the Forehead to Affirm, That All the Pacquets are stoln. A charge so general and ap∣parently
False, that it deserves no Answer, but Contempt or Pity. But afterwards he comes and Asserts, That out of Foxes Acts and Monuments, and the Magdeburgh Centuries, I furnish this Weekly History. To this I Reply, First, That if any body pretends to give the World an Account of things Transacted Two or three hundred Years or more be∣fore himself was Born, 'tis twenty to one, if he will deal like an honest Man, but he must Consult Historians that have Treated of those Affairs; else what he Writes will be Fiction and In∣vention, not History. Secondly, If he means that I make use of no other Authors but Foxe and the Centuriators, 'tis notoriously False; I having for carrying on this Work, perused many Hundred Authors, as any unbiass'd Learned Reader cannot but observ. Thirdly, He notes several Passages in the Two last Pacquets, that are in Foxe. 'Tis very true, What then? Do not I there Cite Foxe for them, where is the Plagiarism? I Write to the Common People, and Publish it thus in Successive sheets, that so it may fall into the more Hands; I pretend, not to Instruct the Learned, but to give the Vulgar (such as perhaps never read Foxe, and know nothing of the Magdeburgh Centuries,) a ge∣neral Prospect of Popery, that they may know, and Abhor it: Those things which in Foxe are tediously told, I abridge, what is less material I omit, Remarkables I Transcribe, and fairly tell the Reader where I have them: and what Felony and Treason is there in all this? Fourthly, Why may not I furnish my Matter from Foxe and the Centuriators? I doubt the Observator has some particular spite at them. The first continues the Memory of many Glorious English Martyrs barbarously Butcher'd, even since the Reforma∣tion, under a Popish Princses (of excellent Vertues, setting aside her Blind, Bloody Zeal,) which perhaps the Observator would have had forgot; And the Second's Learned Labours and In∣dustrious Researches into Antiquity, have wrested one of the Church of Romes boasted Weapons out of her hands, and taught us to distinguish the real Testimonies of the Fathers, from Spu∣rious Suborn'd Knights of the Post, though in Gray Perriwiggs and Venerable Names. I wonder what Authors the Gentleman would Advise us to; perhaps his friend Father Cressy's Church History; or the Golden Legend:—But he that regards every
bark of Cerberu may quickly be Deaf. Let us proceed in our intended Work, and let Mr. Observator be never so angry at it, we will again make use of Mr. Foxe, and from thence observe to the Reader, That though the Church was already over∣burthen'd and almost suffocated with a vast Mass of vain Super∣stitious Ceremonies: yet Tho. Arundel Bishop of Canterbury, in the days of King Henry the 4th. about the Year 1410. took upon him to encrease them, by Commanding, That in all Monasteries and Collegiate Churches there should every Mor∣ning be Bells Rung, in Honour of the Virgin Mary, which commonly was call'd Toling of Aves: For the promoting of which, he sent his Mandate stuft full of Wicked and Blasphe∣mous Expressions, to the Bishop of London; and towards the Close thereof used these Words, We therefore desiring more earnestly to stir up the Minds of all Faithful People to so devo an Exercise, &c. do grant to all and every Person that shall say his Pater Noster, and the Angels Salutation, Five times at the Mor∣ning Peal, with a Devout Mind; as oft as he shall do it, for each time forty days of Pardon by these Presents. Given under our Seals in our Manner of Lambeth, the 10th. of February, in the 9th. Year of our Translation.—Now we appeal to the Reader, if this were not a Lumping Pennyworth to have Forty days Par∣don of all Sin, whatsoever Villany a man should in that time Commit, meerly for Muttering over Five Pater Nosters, and Five Aves, what a kind good humour'd, pleasant, delicate in∣viting Religion is Popery. Yet now I think on't, my Country-men of Wengham did not find it so, under his Predecessor William Courtney Archbishop of the same Province, when they were forc'd to do a scurvy scan∣dalous Pennance for the horrid Sin of not bringing Litter for his Graces Horses decently and in order. The Sentence against whom being very notable I shall here Recite it, and (to spight the Observator) it shall be out of Fox too. Erroris Mater Ignorantia, &c. Ignorance the Mother of Error, hath so blinded certain Tenants of the Lord of Wengham, viz. Hugh Penny, John Forestall, John Boy, John Wanderton, William Hay∣ward, and John White; That at the coming of the Lord Arch∣bishop to his Pallace at Canterbury on Palm-Sunday-Eve, in the Year 1390. being warn'd by the Bailiff to carry Hay, Straw, and Littor [Foenum Stramen sive Literam, 'tis in the
Original, which may be noted from an Archi-episcopal Elegancy] to the aforesaid Pallace, as by the Tenure of their Lands which they hold of the See of Canterbury they are bound, refusing and disdaining to do their due Service, as they were accustomed, brought their Straw not in Waines and Carts pub∣lickly and in sufficient quantity, but sneakingly in Sacks, and hugger-mugger, to the undervaluing of the Lord Arch-bishop, and derogation of the Rights of his See of Canterbury. For which, being call'd, and personally appearing before the said Lord Arch-bishop on Thursday in Easter week, sitting on his Tribunal in his Castle of Statewode, they did humbly submit themselves to his Judgment, devoutly craving Pardon and Mer∣cy for those Crimes which they had committed in this behalf. And then having sworn them to stand to the Commands of Ho∣ly Church, and to perform the Pennance that should be En∣joyn'd them; his Grace did Absolve them, imposing on them, and each of them, a wholsom Pennance, after the manner of the Fault, viz. That on the Sunday next, the said Penitent should leisurely go bare-footed and bare-headed, in an Humble and Devout Manner, a Procession to the Collegiate Church of Wengham, each of them bearing on their shoulders openly a Sack full of Hay and Straw, with the mouthes of the Sacks open, so as the Hay and Straw may appear hanging out. And to perpetuate the Memory of this Foolery, the Pictures of these poor men doing this Ridiculous Pennance, were entred in his Graces Register, a Copy of which taken from the Original you have in Foxe, with this Superscription, being as 'tis pro∣bable the Words they were to say in their Procession. This Bagful of Straw I bear on my Back, Because my Lord's Horse his Litter did Lack; If you be not good to my Lord Grace's Horse, You are like to go Bare-foot before the Cross. In the 11th. Year of King Henry the 4th. The Commons of England in Parliament, perceiving how abominably the Clergy Monks, Fryars, &c. abused those vast Revenues which they En∣joyed to all kind of Pride and Licentiousness, Preferr'd a Bill to the King, to take away their Temporal Lands, and to Im∣ploy the same to the better Advantage and Safety of the King∣dom:
Alledging, that the Temporailties then in the Possession of Spiritual Men, amounted to Three hundred and twenty three thousand Marks by the Year. But as the Clergy had mainly Assisted that Prince to Usurp the Crown, so he did not think it safe to disoblige them at that juncture: and therefore put off this Bill with a Le Roy S'avisera. And about Two Years af∣ter, the said King Henry dyed, viz. the 2d. of March 1413. in the 46th. Year of his Age: to whom succeeded his Son then near 30 years of Age, by the name of Henry the Fifth. By the Preaching of Wickliff and his Followers, the Eyes of great numbers of the People were in some measure enlightned to see the Errors and False Doctrines then obtruded in the Church, which much Incensed the Prelates with Rage; and par∣ticularly observing, that Sir John Old-Castle, a valiant Religious Knight of Kent, (and who in the Right of his Wife was Lord Cobham) to be a great Favourer of that Doctrine, they resolve to take him to task; but first of all, Complain of him to the King, in the first Year of his Reign, who sent for, and discour∣sed him; to whom the Lord Cobham declared his Loyalty and Obedience: but added, That as touching the Pope and Prelates he ow'd them neither Suit nor Service, for that by the Scriptures he knew the Pope to be Antichrist, &c. Upon which, the King would talk no further with him. Then Arundel the Arch-bishop began to Cite him, before him, and not being obey'd, Pronounc'd him guilty of Contumacy; at last the Lord Còbham, drew up a Confession of his Faith, being an Explanation of the Apostles Creed, and very Ortho∣dox; with which he repaired to the Court, and humbly ten∣dred it to the King, but he refused to receive it; and by the Kings Commandment, he was sent to the Tower: and in the 23d. of Sept. 1413. Conven'd before the Arch-bishop, and the Bishops of London and Winchester. The chief Objections against him were, That he held Erroneous and Heretical Opinions in these Four Points, viz. Touching the Sacrament. Touching Pennance. Touching Images. And touching Pilgrimages. Therefore he delivered in to the said Bishops a Writing In∣dented, containing his Opinion in each of these Particulars; which not being long, we shall here recite Verbatim.
I John Old-Castle Knight, Lord of Cobham, Will, That all Christian Men, Weet and Ʋnderstand, that I Clepe Almighty God into Witness, that it hath been, now is, and ever with the help of God shall be, mine intent and my will to Believe faithfully and fully all the Sacraments that ever God Ordain'd to do in Holy Church: and more∣over to declare me in these four Points, I Believe, that the most Wor∣shipful Sacrament of the Altar is Christs Body in the Form of Bread, the same Body that was Born of the Blessed Virgin our Lady Saint Mary, done on the Cross, Dead and Buried, the Third Day Ros from Death to Life, the which Body is now Glorified in Heaven. Also as for the Sacrament of Pennance, I believe that it is need∣ful to every man that shall be Saved to forsake Sin, and do due Pen∣nance for Sin before done, with true Confession, very Contrition, and due Satisfaction as Gods Law limiteth and Teacheth, and else may he not be Saved: which Pennance, I desire all Men to do. And as of Images I Ʋnderstand, that they be not of Beleeve, but that they were Ordain'd sith they beleeve was zewe of Christ, by sufferance of the Church, to be Calenders to Lews Men, to Re∣present and Bring to mind the Passion of our Lord Jesu Christ, and Martyrdom and good Living of other Saints: and that who so it be, that doth the Worship to dead Images that is due to God, or put∣teth such hope or trust, in help of them, as he should do to God, or hath Affection in one, more than in another, he doth in that the greatest Sin of Maumetrie. Also I suppose this fully, That every Man in this Earth is a Pilgrim towards Bliss, or toward Pain: and that he that Knoweth not, ne will not Know, ne Keep the Holy Commandments of God in his Living here (albeit that he be go on Pilgrimages to all the World, and he die so) he shall be Damned: he that knoweth the Holy Commandments of God, and Keepeth them to his End, he shall be Saved, though he never in his Life go on Pilgrimage, as Men now use to Canterbury or to Rome, or to any other Place.
The COURANT. Papist and Tory. Tory. WEll, and how go Cases now? Papist. Not altogether so well as we expected. The heat against Dissenting Hereticks in many places begins to Cool; not can we get the people to believe, That Godfrey Mur∣der'd himself. Tory. Murder'd himself! Why Thompson Num. 131. talks as if he were still alive, and expected next fair Wind. For he says, the Truth of his Two Sham-Letters will be as effectually prov'd, as the Appearance of the Viscountess Cambaen's Steward did clear that business. Which can no otherwise so effectual∣ly, nor indeed, at all be done; without Sir Edmund Bury's ap∣pearing alive again; and indeed, I have often wonder'd that the Church which boasts of Miracles for one of her Notes, hath not all this while wrought One, by raising that Gentleman again to Life, which undoubtedly would destroy the suspition of the Plot for ever. Pap. Tush! I may tell you as a Friend, we are better by half at Raising of Lies, than at Raising the Dead. This Godfrey's Ghost always haunts us, and all the skill of the South-sayer Gadbury, the Hagg Celier, or our Saterdotal Conjurers cannot tell how to Lay it. How many Devices have we started to Evade, not the Guilt, but the Scandal of having Murder'd him. Once we would have put it upon the Earl of D. to which purpose we scatter'd about a Libel, call'd Reflections, &c. But that not ta∣king, comes in Macgrath and his Crew, and they were for Swear∣ing, That he hang'd himself, and his Man Mr. Moor cut him down. This being likewise Confuted, we revive our first story, and Now we would make the World think, he Murder'd himself with his own Sword. Tory. If you had left the Management of this Intrigue to Roger, he would have dispatcht it better by half, than Natt. for to speak Truth, all the Priests are but Bunglers to him. Pap. O, but he had formerly given it under his hand, That he did not in the least doubt, but Sir Edm. Godfrey was Murder'd by Papists.
Tory. No matter for That, He shall unsay it again for Two pence, and prove, that they were Presbyterians kill'd him; and then we will have a new Set of Abhorrencies go about, to Abo∣minate, Detest, and Defie John Calvin and all his Works. This were somewhat to he purpose; but to come as Natt. does, with Ifs and ands, If Sir E. B. Godfreys Body were full of Blood. If his Nostrils, &c. were fly blown. If his Body stunk, and Cakes of putrified Blood were found in his Cloathes, &c. Well, what then? Why then, if all this were true, Natt. Thompson is a Lyer, for Printing in October 78. a Narrative upon his own per∣sonal view, quite contrary to all these Assertions. But Friend Natt. the Whiggs have often told you, That these Suggestions are All notorious Lies, forg'd out of a devilish Design to Conceal Murder, and stifle Treason, &c. and they have Challeng'd you to produce the Witnesses that you boast of, and you have not been able to name One, except it be Mr. W. and him the very next Week you ubraid with Tankard stealing. Pap. Well! well, a little patience, we have a parcel of Wit∣nesses on the Stocks, and as soon as we can Equipp and Rigg them something may be done. Tory. Well, go on and prosper, I hear Natt. is like to have but a hard Bargain of it. But I am for Sam's Coffee-house to wait on the Guide to the Inferiour Clergy, the Reverend Squire Ro∣ger; how neatly he comes off, about saying, That he would not License a Narrative of Sir Ed. B. Godfreys Murder for fear of offending some Great Persons at White Hall. Pap. Well! what says he to that, I hear 'tis Sworn against him. Tory. Why he says, What if the Printer do swear it, 'tis not the first time that a Perjur'd Rascal has Sworn against L'Estrange. Papist. Yes, and in the same Observator Num. 114. is very an∣gry with some body, for declaring, That he would rather believe Prance [he should have added, and Three more] upon Oath, than Mr. L'Estrange's single Protestation on the Sacrament. Well, if the World can meet with no better proofs than these, and his Preface to the Proposals for Reunion with the Church of Rome, to prove, L'Estrange no Roman Catholique, I shall still have the Charity to esteem him One, and so my Service to him. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681-2.
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, March 31. 1682. Nulla Ratione fieri potest, ut in rectè factis effugias Invidiam. Quis enim Umbram effugiet Invidiae, nisi pariter & Virtutis Lucem effugerit? The Story of Sir John Old-Castle continued. A severe Law against Lollards. A note touching the Oath of Sheriffs. The strange manner of putting Sir John to Death. Tyburn, whence the Word deriv'd. Sir John vindicated from Treason, and the Imputation of Debauchery, the reason of that latter Scandal. OUr last acquainted you with the Grounds of Sir John Old-Castle's Troubles, and what an honest Christian Answer he gave in Writing to the Bi∣shops, touching the Four Articles whereon princi∣pally they accused him: yet therewith they were nothing satis∣fied, but would needs have a more direct Answer, and giving him time to consider of it, that he might know how to please them, sent him a silly Blasphemous Scroll containing their Creed, and Determination in those Points, which was as follows;
First, The Faith and Determination of Holy Church touching the blessed Sacrament of the Altar is this; That after the Sacra∣mental Words be once spoken by a Priest in his Mass, the material Bread, that was before Bread, is turned into Christs very body. And the material Wine that was before Wine, is turned into Christ's very Blood. And so there remaineth in the Sacrament of the Altar, from thenceforth no material Bread, nor material Wine which were there before the Sacramental Words were spoken. How believe you this Article? Secondly, Holy Church hath Determined, That every Christian Man living here bodily upon the Earth, ought to be shriven to a Priest Ordained by the Church, if he may come to him. How feel ye this Article? Thirdly, Christ Ordain'd St. Peter the Apostle to be his Vicar here on Earth, whose See is the Holy Church of Rome: and he granted that the same Power which he gave unto Peter, should Suc∣ceed to all Peters Successors, which we now call Popes of Rome; by whose Power in Churches particular, be Ordained Prelates, as Arch-bishops, Bishops, Parsons, Curates and other Degrees more, whom Christian Men ought to obey, after the Laws of the Church of Rome: This is the Determination of Holy Church. How feel ye this Article? Fourthly, Holy Church hath Determined, That it is Merito∣rious to a Christian Man to go on Pilgrimage to Holy Places; and there especially to Worship Holy Reliques and Images of Saints, Apostles, and Martyrs, Confessors, and all other Saints besides, ap∣proved by the Church of Rome. How feel ye this Article? I cannot say, whether the Lord Cobham on the Receipt of this Scrole did more admire, or pity their Blindness. But on the Twenty fifth of September in the before mention'd Year 1413. he was again Conven'd before them; where the Arch-bishop telling him, That he was Cursed, and ad∣viseing him to desire Absolution: The Knight reply'd, God had said by his Holy Prophet, Maledicam Benedictionibus vestris. Mal. 2. 2. Which is as much as to say, I will Curse where you Bless. And afterwards kneeling down on the Pavement, and lifting his hands towards Heaven, he said, I here Confess me unto thee my Eternal Living God, That in my frail Youth I Offended thee most grievously, in Pride,
Wrath, and Gluttony, Covetousness and Letchery, and many Men have I hurt in my Anger, and done many horrible Sins, for which, Good Lord, I ask thee Mercy. And then weeping bitterly, he said to the People, who in great Numbers flock'd to hear his Examination,—Behold good People, for the breaking of God's Law, and his great Commandments, they never yet Cursed me, but for their own Laws and Traditions most cruelly do they handle me, and other Men.—And being question'd by the Arch-Bishop about his Belief, he Answer'd,—I Believe fully and faith∣fully the Ʋniversal Laws of God; I Believe that all is true which is contained in the Holy Scriptures of the Bible. Then proceed∣ing to Examine him, touching the Four Articles before speci∣fied, A Long Discourse happen'd, (which you may Read (and worth reading it is) in Foxe, but too tedious to be here Re∣cited,) his Answers were quick and pertinent, and amongst others he has this Expression,—Rome is the very Nest of Anti∣christ, and out of that Nest come all the Disciples of him, the Pope is the Head, the Prelates, Priests, and Monks are the Body; and these pil'd Friars are the Tail. In fine, they proceeded to a Definite Sentence against him, whereby they Condemn him, as a most pernicious, detestable, and obstinate Heretick; and order him to be delivered over to the Secular Power to be put to Death: in pursuance whereof, he was carryed back to the Tower; from whence he made some means shortly after to escape, and remain'd for near Four Years in Wales, till he was taken and put to Death, as by and by we shall acquaint you. This Escape of his enraged the revengful Clergy, and there∣fore a Sham-Plot was set on foot to bring all his Friends, and whoever had any favour for Wickliffs Doctrine into a general odium and danger. In those days it seems St. Giles's Fields were a Woody lonesome place, full of Bushes and Thickets, and very probably being so near the Town, many good People not da∣ring for fear of Discovery to Assemble in the City, might meet there for the Worship of God, and hearing his Word: This (according to the Common Construction of Malice) is Ru∣mour'd to be a Conspiracy against the Government, and upon this suggestion our Historians (who by the way, either were Monks, or such as borrow from those that were) came thither at Midnight, and finding some persons there, caused them to be
Apprehended, and shortly after Sir Roger Acton, and several others of them; (Parsons in his Second Part of Three Conver∣sions, pag. 197. says Thirty seven; but Sir Richard Baker in his Chronicle fo. 177. says but Twenty eight) were Executed, for the pretended Treason. And to push home the matter, in a Parliament held the next Year, They obtain an Act of Parliament [2 Hen. 5. Ca. 7.] with this frightful Preamble—For as much as great Rumours Congregations and Insurrections here in the Realm of England by divers of the Kings Liege-people▪ as well by them which were of the Sect of Heresie commonly call'd , as by other of their Confedracy, Excitation, and Abetment now of late were made, to the Intent to Annul, Destroy, and Sub∣vert the Christian Faith, and the Lw of God, and Holy Church, within this same Realm of Egland; and also to destroy the same our Soveraign Lord the King and all other manner of Estates of the same Realm of England, as well Spiritual as Temporal; and also all manner of Policy, and fi∣nally, the Laws of the Land: The same our Soveraign Lord the King to the Honour of God and in Conservation and For∣ification of the Christian Faith, and also in Salvation of his Royal Estate, and of the Estate of all his Realm, wling against the Malice of such Hereticks and Lollrds, to provide a more open Remedy and Punishment, &c. hath Ordaind, That the Chancellour, Treasurer, Iustices of each ench▪ Iustices of the Peace, Sheriffs, &c. shall take an Oath to Root out, and Destroy all manner of Heresies and Errours, commonly cal∣led Lollardries; And that all persons Convict of Hesie, by the Ordinary, shall forfit all their Lans and Tenements, Goods and Chattels. So that by this Law, the poor People were in as bad ease for Heresie, as if they had Committed Treason or Murder; they must lose both  and state, only here was no Cor∣ruption of  and 'tis osrvable, that pursuant to this Act, there wa even since the Reformation this Clause in the Sheriff, Oath, viz.—Ye shall do all your pain and diligence to Destroy and make to Cease all manner of Heresies and Errours mmonly call'd Lollers within your Bayliffwick. [See Book of
Oathes, p. 27.] And so it continued to the beginning of the Reign of King Charles the First: and then, viz. the Fourth of December 1625. it was by direction of the Kings Council Re∣formed, and that Clause omitted. But now 'tis time to return to speak of Sir John Old-Castle, he had now sheltred himself about Four years in Wales, and though the King at the Prelates Instigation had set forth A Proclamation Promising a Thousand Marks, to any that should bring him in; yet (says Baker) so generally was his Doctrine favour'd, that the Kings offer was not much regarded; till at last, he was taken by the Lord Powis, and sent Prisoner up to London, and being in the Interim Outlaw'd for the aforesaid pretended Treason, he was drawn to the Place since call'd Tyburn, and as his Crime was represented double, so likewise was his Punishment, being both Hang'd and Burnt, the first as a Traytor, and the last as an Heretick; and 'tis said, several others in those times, were serv'd in like manner; insomuch, That some have deduced the Etymology of Tyburn, from those two Words, Ty and burn, the Necks of Persons being tyed thereunto, whose Leggs and lower Parts were Consumed in the Flames. Having given this Succinct Relation of this Affair of Sir John Old Castle, I am not Ignorant what rubbs have been thrown in the way, and Scandals raised upon his Memory, by Parsons the Jesuit, and others, which are reducible unto Two sorts, viz. 1st. That he was a Traitor to his Soveraign. 2ly. That he was a Drunken Companion, or Debuchee. As to the First, being a very material and heinous Charge, we shall refer the Confutation thereof to our next Pacquet. But this last being as groundless as Trivial wee'l dispatch it at present. That Sir John Old-Castle was a Man of Valour, all Authen∣tick (though prejudic'd) Histories agree, That he was a Gen∣tleman, both of god Sense, sober Life, and sound Christian Principles, is no less apparent by his Confession of Faith, de∣livered under his own hand, (Extant in Foxe,) and his An∣swers to the Prelates. But being for his Opinions hated by the Clergy, and suffering such an Ignominious Death; Nothing was more obliging to the then Domineering Ecclesiastick Grandee, than to have him represented as a Lewd Fellow;
in Compliance thereof to the Clergy the Wits (such as they were) in the succeeding Ages, brought him in, in their In∣terludes as a Royster, Bully, or Hector: And the Painter bor∣rowing the Fancy from their Cozen Poets have made his Head commonly an Ale house Sign with a Brimmer in his hand; and so foolishly it has been Tradition'd to Posterity. Nor is this our private Conceit, but the Observation of that Learned and Ingenious Divine, the Reverend Doctor Fuller, who in his Church History of Britain, Lib. 4. fol. 168. has these words—Stage-Poets have themselves been very bold with, and others very merry at, the Memory of Sir John Old-Castle, whom they have fancied a Boon Companion, a Jovial Royster, and yet a Coward to boot, contrary to the Credit of all Chronicles, owning him a Martial Man of Merit: The best is, Sir John Falstaffe, hath relieved the Memory of Sir John Old Castle, and of late is substituted Buffoon in his place; but it matters as little what petulent Poets as what malicious Papists have Writ∣ten against him. —The spightful Calumnies of the Latter we shall wipe off in our next.
The COURANT. Truman and Tory. Truman THe Business I was about to tell you, was this;— After the Discovery of the late Popish Plot, a Gen∣tleman at the desire of an Eminent Bookseller in Fleet-street Wrote a Brief History of all the Papists Bloody Persecutions, Plots, and Massacres throughout Europe: This Manuscript was carryed by the Bookseller to Mr. L' Estrange to License, which being unwilling to do, he Cavill'd at it, after he had kept it some time in his hands, that the Author had not Quoted the Authors or Books whence he had taken the Relations, and unless that were done he would not License it. The Gentleman at the Booksellers desire, made all the Quotations punctually and set them in the Margent, and the Copy was again carried to L'Estrange, who nevertheless, Resolving not to License it, put off the Bookseller with many delays near Three Months; and at last, told him in plain termes, It was not fit to make the Breach wider, betwixt the Papists and Ʋs, and there were too many of such kind of Books already: Neither could he get the Copy out of his hand. Tory. Perhaps L'Estrange kept it, that he might prevent its being Licens'd by any body else. Trum. This I'm sure, The Bookseller lost his Season, Copy, and Charge of Writing it, for this Man's Abritary Pleasure. Tory. But what then did the Author of the Book do? Trum. The Gentleman followed the business so Close, threat∣ning to take his course at Law, that at last he got the Copy; and without any Alteration, carried it to one of my Lord the Bishop of Londons Chaplains, who immediately Licensed it; wondring Mr. L'Estrange should Refuse to License so useful a Book, which was afterwards Printed with that License at the Authors own Charge; under the Title of—The Antichristian Principle fully Discovered, in a Brief and true Account of all the Hellish Plots, Bloody Persecutions, &c. Tory. Prethee let's leave talking of L'Estrange, you do so worry him with Pamphlets, that the Gentleman swears and vows
has not time to Write against the Papists; but if you would but let him alone, you should see how he would Swing them off. Trum. Yes, as he has done in his Preface to Proposals for Reunion.—But Pray have you seen a Sheet call'd, Reason why all good Christians should observe the Holy Fast of Len. Tory. Yes, 'tis Printed for What-dee-call-him in Corn The Author is afraid Care will Calumniate him for a Papist in Mas∣querade. Trum. No truly, I heard Care say the other day at a Coffee∣house, That he does not take the Gentleman for a Masquerader, but for a down-right Popish Priest; and besides, that if there were no Popery, yet there is abundance of Felony in the Pam∣phlet: for you must note, in the Year 1677. There was a Book of Six Sheets and an half, Intituled, The Holy Fast of Lent de∣fended against all its Prophaners; without any Printer or Book∣sellers Name to it, sold by Papists, and owned by them. Now comes this little Squirt of an Author, and after a new Preamble of half a score Lines, with a Relishing touch on Mr. Hickeringil and Care, steals his whole Pamphlet out of That. As for Ex∣ample, his Second page, is page Nine; of the Large one. His Third page, is page Eleven; of that. His Fourth, is page Twelve, and Thirteen; of the other. His Seventh page, is to be found page Forty one, of the other: And so all the rest. Tory. But have you seen my Lord of E's Book, called, The Paschal Fast? Trum. Yes, I have seen it, and shall say nothing to That at present. But as to this whissling Pamphlet, the best Answer me∣thinks will be, that of the Statute 5 Eliz. Ca. 5.—Be it En∣acted, That whoever shall, by Preaching, Teaching, Writing, or open Speech, notifie, that any Eating of Fish, or forbearing of Flesh is of any Necessity for the saving the Soul of Man; Or that it is the Service of God, such Persons shall be Pu∣nisht, as spreaders of False News. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, April 6. 1682. In Bonos licet plerumque cadit Viros, ut Calumniis impetantur, non diu tamèn durant tales Eclipses; sed Sol veritatis illustrioribus apparebit Radiis; Et Memoria Justi erit in Aeternum. The Treason alleadg'd against Sir John Oldcastle inquired into. Parsons the Jesuite answer'd. Remarkable Circumstances Con∣sidered, evincing as well Sir John's Innocency, as Sham-practice in the Proceedings against him. I proceed now to Vindicate the memory of that (as I chari∣tably believe) Faithfull Servant and Blessed Martyr of Christ, Sir John Oldcastle, from the foul Guilt of Treason. Mr. Foxe is very Elaborate on this subject, in answer to Alanus Copus, but as I shall sum up the most material of his Argu∣ments, so I shall add several others which to me seem of great weight. Whereof some are General and previous considera∣tions. As, 1. It appears that before Sir John Old castle was question'd by the Bishops, he was so far from being a Malecontent or addicted to Sedition or Disloyal Conspiracies, that on the contrary he
was much in the Kings Grace and favour, so that the Prelates durst not Convene him without first complaining to the King, for fear of his Majesties displeasure, and when they had acquainted him therewith, his Majesty kindly sent for him, and discoursed him, perswading him to submit to the Bishops, &c. all which argue that he was then of unquestion'd Loyalty, else the King would never have Condescended to such a particular care and fa∣miliarity. 2. There was no pretence then of any Charge of disloyalty, or any Treason or Conspiracy brought or alleaged against him by his Adversaries, but only for Heretical Opinions. And presently after Sir John was sent to the Tower, and there was kept close Prisoner, and so could have no time before, nor opportunity then to Contrive such a ormidable Insurrection as is laid to his Charge: Nor could he do it after he made his escape, for all Historians agree, he fled into Wales, and lived there several years, so that he could not be present with the pretended Conspirators in St. Gileses Fields. 3. It has in all Ages been the method of all Persecutors to blacken the Servants of God tho suffering purely for the Testimo∣ny of a good Conscience, with the odious Titles of Traitors, Rebels, and disturbers of the Civil Goverment. Of our Blessed Lord himself, they reported that he was an Enemy to Caesar; of his Holy and peaceable Apostles—These are they that turn the World upside down. So in the primitive and succeeding times, Nemesion an Egyptian Martyr, was first accused for a Thief, and when that could not be proved, was by the same Judicature, Con∣demn'd for a Christian, and yet was scourg'd twice as much as the other Felons, and at last burn'd amongst the Thieves, although he never was Thief or Felon. Against Cyprian it was slanderously alleadged by no less man than Galenus Maximus the Proconsul, Quod diu Sacrilegâ, &c. That he had long liv'd with a mind full of Sacrilege, and had gather'd to him men of wicked Conspiracy. 4. The only Historians of those times were Monks, who were Sir John's most bitter Enemies, and therefore no wonder if they draw him in an hideous and frightfull shape. Some of their Lies you shall have particularly examined by and by.—But now let's hear the Effect of the story as they themselves (tho much disa∣greeing in Circumstances) related it, and as the Indictment against Sir Roger Acton and others imports, viz.
That after Sir John escaped out of the Tower (which Parson 2. part of the 3. Conversions p. 247. says was about the Feast of St. Simon and Jude) several of his friends and Favorers on the 10 of January 1413-14. Assembled in the Thickets in St. Gileses▪ fields, with an intent to destroy the King and his Brothers, and set up Sir John as Regent, and that the King keeping his Christ∣mas at Eltham in Kent about 6 Miles from London, having notice, went PRIVATELY [Parsons as aforesaid p. 197] at midnight, and took several of them, amongst whom were, Sir Roger Acton, John Brown Gentleman, and John Beverly a Preacher, who with about 30 more [for they do not agree in the number] being forthwith Tryed were Condemn'd of Treason and Hang'd, and Sir Roger Drawn hang'd and Buried under the Gallows, and Sir John Oldcastle being put into the same Indictment and not being found, was outlaw'd for the said Fact, and so being taken 4 or 5 years after was upon that out∣lawry without any further Tryal or Judgment Hang'd and Burnt. This is the Tale—The Credit of which depends partly upon the Testimonies of Historians, and partly upon that of the Records of the Commission and Indictment. We shall consider each of these, whereby the Reader will more clearly perceive how Improbable it is in all its parts and how ill laid together in the whole. 1. As to the Historians, Thomas of Walsingham is the first whom all latter Authors follow as a Flock doth the Bell-weather, and when we have told you that he was a Benedictine Monk of St. Albans, you may easily make Judgment of his Sincerity, and what truth there is in those who take matters from him upon trust. Amongst the rest I observe the Jesuite Parsons makes great use of John Stow's Testimony, and indeed take notice of any Popish Author speaking of modern English History, you shall find commonly Stow's Chronicle strutting his Margin; this made me wonder why they should make choice of him, who was but a mean Mechanic (being by Trade a Tayler, and ignorant of the Latin Tongue) rather than so many other Learned Authors, till I suppose at last I hit upon the reason, in a Treatise of Dr. Matth. Sutclife, (afterwards Dean of Exeter) Intituled A Three∣fold Answer &c. to Parsons 3 Conversions; Printed Anno. Dom. 1606. where p. 3. That Reverend Author (who no doubt being Contemporary with Stow had good grounds for his Assertions)
saith—John Stow is a simple Story-writer and a worse Protestant, For 'tis well known that certain crafty Companions and enemies of Reli∣on were too much Conversant with him to write truely in these matters. And p. 24. Stow hath the most part of his Lies concerning the Lord Cobham, [alis Sir John Old castle] out of Walsingham, which understanding he understood , being Latin, and he a meer English Tailer.—Now it was no difficult thing if he Imployed persons Popishly Affected to Translate for him; for them to Impose upon his Ignorance what would make for their Cause, and then twit us with the noise and pretended Testimony of a Protestant Author. Secondly that which might lead some Historians into an Error, was that in the second year of this King Henry the 5. an Act was made (part of this we recited in our last) That all Convicted of Hresy should forfeit all their Lands and Goods, wherefore since they were to lose both Life and Estate, the noise went that Haere∣sy was then made Treason, tho indeed it was not so. I will give an Instance or two of such misled Authors. Thomas Walden in the Prologue of his first Tome to Pope Martin has these words speaking of this very business, Nec Mora Longa processint qui Statutum, &c. Nor was it long, but it was publickly Enacted by a Statute, that all the Wicklevists as they were Traitors to God, so should also be accounted Traitors to the King. So Roger Wall of the Acts of King Henry 5. Statuit et decrevit ut quot quot Illius Setu quae dicir Lollardrum, invenirentaer aemuli et fautores, eo facto Rei Proditorij Criminis in Majesttem Regiam haberenter. He establisht and Decreed (saith he) That all that should be found Embracers or favourers of the sect which is called Lollards, should for that only Fact, be Adjudged Guilty of the Crime of Treason against the Kings Majesty: And Polidore Virgil in the 22 Book of his History, harps upon the same string, declaring that all the Followers of Wickliffes Doctrine were deemed Hostes Patriae, Enemies of their Country, which is all one as to say Traitors. And yet all this while the Statute does not make them Traitors, nor speak any thing of putting them to Death [for in case of being Convict of Haeresy and refusing to Abjure, they were already to be burnt by the Statute of 2 H 4. Ca. 15.] But it being so vulgarly taken, as appears by these Examples, 'Tis no wonder that knowing Sir John Old-castle to be convicted for what they call'd Haeresy and that he was Executed, they delivered to posterity that he was
Executed for Treason, as Imagining Haeresy to be Treason by the Law. In the next place as to the Records, I willingly acknowledge there is no kind of humane Testimony that ought to challeng a greater Reverence Probant et non Probantur; yet even Records themselves are liable to be falsisied, and whether sometime of that kind is not to be suspected here, may still be a question; there being not a few Symptomes of Fraud and ill practice. As, 1. The Commission issued to Indict and Try them bears Date the 10th of Jannuary, 1414. which was on Wednesday next after the Epiphany [or Twelfth day] And by the Record of the Indict∣ment it not only appears, that they were the very same day Indict∣ed and the Bill found [which is very much that a Court should sit the very same day the Commission Authorising them, bears date; for what time was there then for summoning a Jury,] &c. But also in the same Indictment it is averr'd that the very same 10th of January too was the day on which the aforesaid Conspira∣tors (to the number of Twenty Thousand) were so in Warlike manner assembled in St. Gilses-fields. See both the Records in Foxe fol. 529. Which being so, one would expect rather to hear of Commissions Issued not so much to try them, as to raise Forces to suppress them; Inter Arma silent Leges, twenty Thousand Rebels got together where not like much to value a Commission of Oier and Termener. 2. In the Record of the Indictment it is said, per Sacramenta duodecim Juratorum exstitit presentatum, by the Oaths of 12 Jura∣tors it is presented. But the names of the Jurors are ommitted, whereas I humbly Conceive, if any such Indictment had been really and bona fide framed and found, the Jurors names (as in all other cases) would have been here particularly Inserted in the Record. 3. The Crimes alleaged in this pretended Indictment are of several sorts, some of them Extravagant and all very observeable, for tho there be some matters Treasonable, to colour the process; yet the bottom of all appears to be that they were Enemies to the Church—But take the very words of the Record, and Judg of them your selves—By the Oaths of 12 Jurors 'tis presented, that John Oldcastle of Coulingin the County of Kent Chevaleir [Note, tho he were styled Lord Cobham in Right of his Wife, yet he was no Peer of the Land and others vulgarly called Lollards
who long have rashly held diverse Heritical Opinions contrary to the Catholic Faith, and other manifest Errors repugnant to the Catholic Law, to maintain such their Errors, not being able to Accomplish their design as long as the Royal power and Regal State of our Lord the King, as well as the State and Office of the Prelatick dignity within the Kingdom of England should conti∣nue in prosperity, falsly and Treasonably Contriving as well the State of the Kingdom as the State and Office of Prelates and the Religious Orders within this Kingdom utterly to Annul, and our Lord the King, his Brothers, the Prelates and other great men of the Realm to Kill. And to compel the Religious Orders to leave divine Worship and the Observation of Religion, and to follow worldly Occupations, and demolish both Cathedrals and Religious houses and spoil them of their Goods, and to appoint the said Sir J. O. Regent of the Realm, and to set up ma∣ny Governments in the Realm as a people without an Head, to the final destruction as well of the Catholic Faith and Clergy as of the State and Majesty of the Royal dignity, did falsly and Trayterously order and propose that he with many other Rebells unknown, to the Number of 20000 men from diverse parts of England Arrayed in Warlike manner should Privately Rise, and on Wednesday next after Epiphany in the first year of the King at the Parish of St. Gileses, &c. in a great field they una∣nimously came together and met to fulfill such their wicked Intent, persevering therein to Kill the King and his Brothers viz. Tho. Duke of Clarence, John of Lancaster, and Humphrey of Lancaster, and also the Prelates and great men aforesaid, as likewise to disinherite the King of his Realm, they came Riding into the said Field, Array'd after the manner of an Insurrection against their Allegiance, to subdue our Lord the King, unless by him with a strong hand they had Gratiously been hindered. These are the very words of the Indictment, which we the rather have repeated, because the same was not Translated by Mr. Fox.
The COURANT. Truman and Tory. Tory. And how fares our Friend Nat? Truem. Why truly the Lords of the Council (to use his own insolent Expression) have put him in a way to prove his Letters about Sir E. B. G. murdering himself. Tory. As how prethee? Truem. By justly sending him and his two Vouchers to New∣gate. Every thing you know naturally tends to its Center, hence no doubt the impudent lie first came, begot by the Stallion Popish Priests and Midwif'd by Dame Celier, and thither 'tis now return'd. Tory. I'l tell you this is a great disappointment. There were Te Deums intended to have been Sung by our Catholic friends, and Hundreds of us were got to the Tavern to be drunk for joy, and now to be thus Balkt, verily as Monsieur Coleman said—There is no Trust in Man? Will not this fadg; then what shall we do now, What sham is next? O Roger where art thou? Truem. Never trouble thy head with Roger, he is playing at Cross purposes. For Example. The Question is—Mr. L'Estrange why did not you for eighteen years together come to Divine service and receive the Sacra∣ment according to the Establisht Church of England. The Answer is—the Parson of Dionis Backchurch. The Question is—M. L'Estrange why did you refuse to License a Narrative touching the manner of Sir Edmundbury Godfreys being found, and say you did not know but you might offend some great people at White-hall. The Answer is—'tis not the first time. The Question is—Mr. Le' Estrange is you are no Papist, why did you go to Mass, and own your self to be a Member of that Church whereof the Pope is the Head? The Answer is Brass Screws.
The Question is—Mr. L'Estrange why did you refuse to Licence an Inno∣cent Copy of Verses meerly because therein it was said—That from the Cells of Jesuits and Monks there proceeded a brood to Riffle Subjects and to Murder Kings? The Answer is—Original Copy. The Question is—Mr. L' Estrange why did you refuse to Licence both an harmless and usefull Historical Collection of Popish Massacres and Cruelties, and say 'twas not fit to make the breach between us aud the Church of Rome wider? and this since the Discovery of the present Plot? The Answer is—Forty Eight, and pordage. The Question is—Mr. L'Estrange with what face could you affirm such a notorious lie, that there were never above 50 Quakers at a time in the noisome Little-Ease of Bristol? The Answer is—Sir John Knight and 300 Horsmen. The Question is— Tory. Prethee leave thy fooling—I wonder you dare talk at this rate at this time of day; a Catholick friend of mine sent me a Copy of Verses last post out of Lancashire, i'l read a stanza or two of them. We must not Blabb, but only hint, If all things fail the Divel's in't Wait but a little longer Our Plot will prove that 'tis no wonder For Bones well sett, (if broak asunder) After do grow the stronger. For mark ye well altho our Plot In its first Tract succeeded not, Yet much we have got by't. The Haereticks by shams and fears Are set together by the Ears Whilst Whigg and Tory fight. The Tory he Swaggers and Sings Drinks the Dukes health before the Kings, And damns to be Emphatick, When he expresseth wish and hope To Kiss the Gouty Toe of Pope Ere he'l endure Fanatick Then for our hot Tantivy Boys That more with Oaths than pray'rs make noise They'r Birds deile their Nest Whose Priest-Craft is preferment meerly Which or to get, or save they clearly Will pass through any Test. Our Friends are numberless to think on The Dammee Blades and those that drink on And Whore without all shame The Crack-farts, Hectors, Atheists, Bulleys, The Bankrupts, Poets, Sots, and Cullies, And some I dare not name. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, April 14. 1682. —Livor post Fata quiescat Tum suus ex merito quemque tuatur Honos. Some further Remarks on the Story of Sir John Oldcastle. An Epitaph offered to his memory: The miserable death of his persecu∣tor Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, who made a Constitution against Reading the Scriptures. LEt us go on to Examine the Matter of Treason charg'd on Sir John Oldcastle, &c. And must request the Reader to Remind the Record of the Indictment, recited in English in our last, in which besides the unaccoun∣table omission of the Jurors names and the improbability that the supposed Fact should be Committed, and Commission to the Judges, and their Session, and the Conviction, should all bear date and happen upon one and the same Numerical day, there are these other Observables that present themselves. 1. 'Tis therein alleadged that the design of these Imaginary Traytors in St. Gilses Thickets was to make Sir John Oldcastle Regent, and why not rather King? since the same Indictment
charges him with design to kill the King. And yet if he had a mind to be Regent, why should he design to kill the King, for then presently his Regency must needs expire. The truth is, this very expression renders it suspicious, that this pretended Indict∣ment was obbled up afterwards by the Clergy or some of their Agents, during the Kings Absence in France, at which time the Notion of setting up for a Regent might be probable. But when this supposed Insurrection happened, the King was not gone, but lay at Eltham. 2. The number of the Rebels are said to be Twenty Thousand, and Array'd in Warlike manner; now 'tis very strange and im∣probable how so great a Number could get together, and more strange that they should all be routed and disperst meerly by the Kings coming to them into the Thickets, for we do not read of any Army leavied by the King to oppose them: Nor do we hear of one person kill'd, nor so much as a Broken Pate or a Bloody Nose in all this terrible Insurrection; had there been such a Forces, their designs so horrid against the Kings Life, he would have hardly ventur'd himself amongst them so ill pro∣vided. 3. It would seem by this Indictment, that these Twenty Thousand Rebells were all Horse men, for it saith proditoriè modo Insurrectionis contra Ligeanceas suas Equitavêrunt, they Trea∣sonably after the manner of an Insurrection came Riding, &c. Now this increases the Miracle, for 'twas a work of great time and vast Expence to raise an Army of Twenty Thousand Horse; But besides, if they were Horse what did they do in St. Gileses Thickets? Sure that was none of the best places to Randevouz in; again, if they came Riding thus in Battel Array Twenty Thousand strong, how does the other part of the Indictment hold water, where 'tis said Privatim Insurgentes, Privately Rising; a Clause which shrewdly intimates, that some of the Clergy have been tampering with this Indictment, and that it was not drawn with much Advice of the Kings Learned Council at Law, for they would never have thus contradicted themselves or inserted such impertinent words as Privatim Insurgentes. 4. Nor is it less pleasant to consider, that there should be Twenty Thousand Horse levyed in open Rebellion to perpetrate the most horrid Treason that could be Imagined, and these should be all discomfited, and such vast Numbers of them taken,
that our Monkish Historians talk of all the Prisons about London being fill'd with them, and yet none of all their names known but Sir John Oldcastle, (what the same time by the general Current of History seems too to have been at the same time in Wales) Sir R. Acto, Mr. Brown, and Beverly the preacher, for so the Indictment sayes, Quam pluribus Rebellibus Ignotis, &c. 5. A most material exception to this pretended Indictment is, that therein the Kings Brothers are stiled John of Lancaster and Humphrey of Lancaster, whereas in truth they then were, and ever since the 13th year of their Father Henry the 4th had been Dukes of Bedford and Gloucester, as you may read in Caxtons Chronicle; now can any wise man imagine, that the Kings Council if they had drawn this Indictment upon so great an Impor∣tant an occasion, would have been so negligent a sto omit those Princes Titles and only with an unpardonable Rudeness call them John and Humphrey?—Credat Judaeus Apella. 6. If the matter had been Treason, why were not the offenders executed in such manner as in cases of Treason the Law requires; but we do not find that they were Hang'd drawn and quarter'd but only Hang'd, which is not the Judgment in Treason. 7. As for Sir John Oldcastle himself, after he was taken and brought upout of Wales, which was about the year 1417. There being then a Parliament sitting, the Records thereof do give this following account, viz. That Sir John Oldcastle of Cowling in the County of Kent, Knight, being Out-lawd in the Kings-bench, and being Excommunicated before by the Arch-Bishop for Haeresy, was brought before the Lords, and having heard his Convictions, [It seems the Haeresy was charg'd upon him there as well as the Outlawry] answered not thereunto for his Excuse, upon which it was Adjudged that he should be taken as a Traytor to the King and the Realm, and carried to the Tower of London, and from thence drawn through the City unto the New Gallows in St. Gileses without [the old] Temple Barr, and there to be Hanged and burned Hanging. In which Proceedings we may note, 1. That he was never try'd by his Peers, that is by any Jury, for he was but a Commoner, not a Peer of the Realm, and suffered upon the Outlawry and Excomunication, and therefore when we said in our last p. 123. That without any farther Tryal or Judgment he was Hang'd and Burnt, we desire to be understood,
intended, of any Legal, common or ordinary Trial or Judgment according to the Course of the Laws. For, 2. If he were duly Out-law'd for Treason, upon his being taken, there was no need for carrying him before the Lords in Parlia∣ment. For by the very Out-lawry he would have been Attainted, and without more ado should have had Judgment in the Kings Bench as a Traytor. But it may justly be suspected that the Judges of that Court, perceiving what kind of practises there had been in this case, declined to be so far concern'd therein, and therefore Certified the Record into the Parliament, which they did, together with the Bishops Sentence of Excommunication filed▪ to the Record. A method very strange and unpre∣sidented. 3. 'Tis observable, that after all this, the Lords did pass such Judgment on him as was not due to a Traitor, and though it be true, the Parliament might by Act have Attainted him, and thereupon Ordained a special Judgment as they should have thought good; yet since they did not so proceed, since he was before Attainted by the Out-lawry, and thereupon (or else without any Colour of Law) suffered, I conceive their Lord∣ships could not lawfully vary from the common Judgment of Treason. 4. It is further to be noted, that in the Records of the said Parliament it is added, that a motion was made, that the Lord Powis [one of the Ancestors no doubt of that Popish Lord now in the Tower for High Treason] might be thanked and Rewarded, according to the Proclamation, for his great pains of taking of Sir John Oldcastle Knight, Haeretick; But the Roll there does not mention, Traitor; so that it seems preten∣ded Haeresy was his greatest, indeed for ought we can perceive main, and probably (Except breaking Prison) his only Crime. Yet we are not ignorant that the Old Monks, and the Modern Jesuite Parsons, bring several other most false Accusations against him, as that he was an Anabaptist and would have had all things in common, but this Calumny seems to have no other grounds, than his complaining of the superfluity of the Clergy in those timer and wishing that their abundance had been distributed to better uses; nay, they blush not to write, Tantâ praeditur fuit demen∣tiâ ut putaret se post tridum à morte Resurrecturus, He was so madd, that he perswaded himself, that he should Rise again
the Third day, as another Saviour of his Sectaries; as Parsons 2d. of his 3 Conversions p. 250. relates from Walsingham, or (as Stow botches up the story) The last words that he spake to Sir Tho. Erpingham Adjuring him, that if he saw him Rise from Death to Life again the Third day, he would procure that his sect might beat peace and quiet. Now let any man read his papers and discourses in Fox, savouring of such firm piety, prudence and sobriety of mind, and then judge how unlikely he was to be Guilty of such a phrensical Extravagance. But possibly he might at his Execution, say that though they so severely perse∣cuted those. Truths which he bore Testimony to, and sought by all means to suppress and bury the same, yet they would Rise again, and his Doctrine be Reviv'd. And from some such true words the Father of Lies and his Journy-men the Monks, might take occasion to raise that wicked scandal. And now having thus fairly represented Sir John Oldcastles Case to posterity, we take leave of his Manes, but that we may do it civily, tho the prejudice of those times would afford him nei∣ther Tombstone nor Grave, yet certainly we my be allow'd to offer an Extempore Epitaph to his Memory. On Sir John Oldcastle, Lord Cobham who suffer'd Decem. 1417. Rome's Old new fraud in Cobhams Fate we view; The Hereticks must still be Traitors too; All Popish Sham-plots are not hatch'd of late; Long since their Int'rest Culli'd in, the State; For God, and for the King the Prelates Cry'd But only meant their own Revenge and Pride. Had the sly Meal Tub fadg'd, or Irish Oathes Been Jury-proof, old Churches hated Foe's Ere now, had been Old-Castled, Hang'd and Burn'd; And Loyalst Patriots into Rebells turn'd, But Midwife Time at last brings Truth to Light For after Death each man receives his Right. Then sleep, brave Hero! till last Judgments day Raising to Glory thy twice-martyr'd Clay Romes malice, and thy Innocence display
But here we may note, that before the Execution of this noble-man, viz. in the year 1414. his bitter Persecutor. Tho A∣rundel Archbishop of Canterbury, who originally caused his trou∣ble, and Condemn'd him for Haeresy, and who in a synod had forbidden the Scriptures to be translated into, or read in the English Tongue, was taken away by a strange death, His own Ton∣gue being so swell'd that for many days he could swallow no sort of sustenance and so was starv'd to death. A most remarkable Judgment, that he who by his Canons forbad the Food to the Soul, and had pronounc'd Sentence of Condemnation on many Innocents was now both famish't and struck Dumb together. Thomas, Gasconous in his Theological Dictionary thus plainly tells the story. Tho. Aruudel Cant. Archiepiscopus sic Linguâ Percussus erat, ut nec deglutire nec Loqui per aliquot dies ante mortem suam potuerit, et sic tandem obiit. Atque Multi tu nofieri putabant, quia vrbum Alligasset, ne suo Tempore praedicatur. Tho Arrundel Archb. of Canterbury, was so smitten in his Tongue that he could neither swallow, nor speak, and so died, which was thought by many to come upon him for that he restrain'd the word of God from being preached in his days.
The COURANT. A CHARM against ROGERISM. Triceps est Cerberus, tèr ego te Despuo Triplex est Eumenis, tèr te ego Despuo Vomas, dico vomas, tèr vome & Improbam Pectore purgato Rabiem ad Phlegetonta Remitte. Enter Jesuit solus. NOW shall I turn Heraclitus Ridens, and split my sides with laughing, to see how sweetly matters go on. 'Tis the hopefullest Spring I have known or read of, above 100 years, and all our Projects are blythe and blooming. How kindly do our Councils work and cully in the hood-wink'd crowd; the French Monarch (our mighty Patron) plays a Game at Tick-tack with his Holiness, and the World stares and gapes as if they were at Sharps. What if he clip the Wings of the duller Orders? Let him go on and prosper, Roma interim crescit Albae Ruinis; No matter for those swarms of Drones, our active Society (if the Fools prove peevish and stubborn) may beg their Lands. Nor need we fear the gripes of his Talons, since we have twisted our Interests inseparable with his, for Campanella has shifted the Scene, and 'tis resolv'd in spite of Providence, one Monarch and one Religion shall govern the Europaean World. They are piti∣fully read in School craft that cannot modelize Divinity to each complexion of Affairs; there lies a little spot on the Northwest corner of the Map that has cost us many a pangful Thought, Fa∣ther La-Chese long since undertook the Conversion of those Infi∣dels, and tho he met with some rubs, despairs not in time to accomplish it. If one Broad-side does not sink a Vessel, another may, the Needle's in, and the Thread must follow. O Beata Maria! into what Confusions have we put the Hereticks amongst themselves? Well! let Whig and Tory scuffle 'till their Hearts ake, whilst we tour aloft, like the Vulture hovering over the Lion and Wild-boar in their Combatings, as hoping to devour the Carcases of them both. O the Church! the Church! the
Church by Law establish'd! There's Musick enough in that very sound to supersede the office of the Organs. But then not one in forty Dreams what those words signifie in our Dictionary. Pshaw! Pshaw! you Dolt-heads! Verity is Ʋnity; there is but one Church in the World, and that's the Catholick, and Catho∣lick is Roman, and there's the Riddle unfolded. But how is this Religion by Law establish'd? We'l make That out I'le war∣rant you, you shall have enough of Magna Charta. Is there any prescription against the Church? Shall any Laws prevail against St. Peter's Right? Or indeed what power have Excom∣municated Hereticks to make any Laws at all? All such Provi∣sions are still-born, Ipso facto void, as errant Felo's de se as we would make Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, and holy Mother-Church unjustly disseiz'd, may lawfully make a Re-entry. Let's first down with the Dissenters, crush them, maul 'um, hang 'um if we can, or ruine them at least, and then their Church of Eng∣land shall have Polypheme's courtesie. O Bristol! Bristol! thou hast done gallantly! I could not but snicker the other day to see a parcel of Wooden-shoe'd French Hereticks that had fled thi∣ther for shelter, how sillily they look'd when they saw a parcel of English Calvinists dragg'd out of their Meeting, and hurried to Gaol. But we have a greater work in hand, 'tis a Protestant Plot must do our business, and a Protestant Plot we'l have, if it cost us as much as we got by burning of London. There are a fresh Cast of Beuk-blawers listed, spick and span new ones, never yet baulkt or blasted by an Ignoramus; they only want a little Docu∣mentizing as to matter, persons, times, and places, (for all the rest they remember right well;) I must away and Discipline them, and if they prove such incorrigible Bunglers as our Irish Rascals, let 'um be damn'd blacker than Luther. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, April 21. 1682. Quae si cum sociis Stultus cupidúsque bibisset, Sub dmina Meritrice fuisset turpis & excors Vixisset Canis Immundus, vel amica Luto Sus. The Grand Question, Whether the Church of Rome be in any kind to be esteem'd a Church of Christ? entred into, the Rea∣sons why the same is here discuss'd. The definition of the Church, and how divided. HAving deduc'd our History somewhat below the year 1400. and being Arriv'd at those times wherein our Ancestors in England first of all were brought to Capi∣tal sufferings for the purity of Religion, and were (to use the Apostles phrase Hebr. 12. 4.) forced to resist unto Blood, the wicked Impositions of the no less cruel than Idolatrous Papal Hierarchy. It will be convenient if not necessary to inquire what opinion we ought to have of the Church of Rome in its present state. A task we undertake not meerly for diverting the Reader, tho sure variety, in all other things delightfull, will not here be offensive, nor the intermixing Polemicks with History be censured,
since we find precedents of it in the best and most approved Au∣thors. But we do it for his satisfaction too, that he may make the truer Judgment of those many Tragical Scenes, all fill'd with fire and fagot, Blood and horror, Popish fury triumphant, and Pious Innocence torn and mangled and Butcher'd with a thousand Barba∣rities. For though to each Judicious peruser the very prospect of these Cruelties is enough to satisfy him that these are the Talons of the Vulture, not the sweet Breathings of the Holy Dove, practises of the Synagogue of Satan, not of the Church of the meek and mercifull Jesus, yet some hot and superficial Readers, espe∣cially in this debaucht and unhappy Age, may be apt to say, Here's a Clutter indeed with a parcell of Peevish Fellows, what if they were burn't or hang'd out of the way; whose fault was it? why would they not conform, and honestly come to Church? if the Church of Rome be a true Church wherein a man may go to Heaven, why did they trouble themselves and the world, and make a Schism, and disturb the Government? you make a stir and call them Martyrs, but for ought I know they were Follies Martyrs rather than Gods, and I remember I have seen a Book Intituled Semper Iidem, or a parallel betwixt the antient and modern Phanaticks, Printed here at London with (I think) Authority, I am sure publickly and without any trouble to the Bookseller Richard Lownds at the White Lyon in St. Pauls Churchyard, 1661. which renders Oldcastle, Bishop Latimer, Woodman, &c. as errant Whiggs and Raskals as ever liv'd; a sort of turbulent Hereticks that interrupted the Churches Tranquility, and would needs be turning the world upside down, though they knew neither why nor wherefore, &c. Suppose one should meet a Spark of this mettal, (and such frequently now adays at every Coffee-house you may meet with,) is it not fit my honest Country men should be ready provided to Confute his Folly, and do right to those Glorious Worthies, who did not sacrifice their Lives to a sullen Obstinacy or factious Freake, but for the pure truths of God (worth a million of Lives) and departed from Rome because she was so far departed from God, that if they had further accompanied her (afterdivine Grace had open'd their eyes to see her Abominations) they must necessarily have fallen into Eternal perdition. To Demonstrate this (therefore) it will I think be not un∣worthy your while (and presently too, lest the Disease come
upon us before the Medicine be provided, and black darkness surround us, e're every body be sufficiently Acquainted with it's Hellish Nature) to consider the three points following, viz. 1. Whether the present Church of Rome ought in any sort to be esteemed a true Church of Christ? 2. Whether any person Living and Dying in the Communion of that Church, and understanding her Doctrine and practises, and joyning therein may (ordinarily) be saved. 3. Whether any person (as suppose a Protestant out of fear, compliance, &c.) may be present at Mass understanding the same without committing of grievous sin. These Three particulars, we shall endeavour in this and some following Sheets, to discourse of with all plainness and Candor, so far from any violation of Charity, that we thereby only design a most necessary Caution to prevent poor missed souls from preci∣pitating themselves into endless Ruin and Destruction. As to the first Quaery, touching the present Roman Churches being a Church of Christ, two things are to be premised and explained. 1. What we mean in this debate by, Church of Christ. 2. What we understand by the Church of Rome. 1. The word Church taken in its full Latitude signifies, the whole company of all those whom God by his word and spirit calls to the knowledge and profession of his truth, and from its members being called forth and separated from the rest of the world, that live in gross and avowed Atheism or Idolatry, without the knowledg and acceptation of those supernatural verities, the Incarnation and Crucifixian of the Son of God for the sins of men, upon the terms held forth in the Gospel, it is termed the Church, in Greek , derived from the verb , Evoco, to call out, or from. The Church thus absolutely and simply considered in this Latitude is but one, as the State and Company of the Kingdom of great Britain is but one, since all and every one called to this Grace, of how different estate, qualities or condition soever, belong one way or other to this Company; but in this Church thus considered there are sundry differences and respects, that is, the persons called to the Faith of Christ are of diverse sorts; for some part of the Church is already reduced from this mortal life, and Crowned with that Glory, whereunto they were called when
here on Earth, and thence stiled the Church Triumphant, the other part is that which is successively abiding in this world, which for that time, is called the Church Militant, because it lies as it were in the Camp always alarm'd, and fighting against Hells Triple League, the world, the Flesh, and the Divel, under the Banner of our Lord the blessed Jesus, and patiently waiting for the victory. But amongst these latter, there are again two sorts. First such as are effectually called, and these are the Elect only, whom God not only calls, but chuses, by his free Grace, inspiring them to obey that calling, and to live Holily worthy of such their voca∣tion, and who shall infallibly be Saved in the life to come, and this Company, we call the Invisible Church; because only God knows who are His, and tho we see the men and by their fruits charitably hope they are Gods Elect, yet to speak precisely no mortal eye can infallibly discern them to be such, since many times the Bristol-stone glitters as bright as the Diamond, and Hypocrites make as fair outward shew as the real Saint. The second sort therefore of the militant Church, are Hypocrites and nound members, who are not effectually called, but disobey the truth whereof they make profession. These distinctions being thus premised, we proceed to acquaint you what we mean by a true Church of Christ, and we shall do it in the very words of our mother the Church of England in the 19th Article of her Faith,—The visible Church of Christ is a Congregation of Faithfull men, in the which the pure word of God is Preached, and the Sacraments be duly Administred accor∣ding to Christs Ordinance in all those things that of Necessity are requisite to the same. So that here we see wherever the word of God is sincerely preach'd and heard, and the Sacraments Admi∣nistred according to Christs Institution, there is a Church of God, for those are the marks whereby the Church may be known. So that the visible Church, which is also Ca∣tholick [or Ʋniversal] under the Gospel (not confined to one Nation as before under the Law) consists of all those throughout the world that profess the true Religion. And particular Churches, which are members thereof are more or less pure, according the doctrine of the Gospel is taught and embraced, Ordinances Administred, and publick Worship perform'd more or less pure in them. And not only the purest particular
Churches under Heaven are subject both to mixture and Error, but some may and have so degenerated as to become no Churches of Christ, but Synagoges of Satan, tho yet there shall to the end of the world be a Church on Earth to Worship God according to his will against whom the Gates of Hell shall not prevail. Now whether the present Church of Rme be not one of these Apostatized Adulterous Churches against whom such a Divorce is sued out, we shall proceed to Inquire, as soon as we have told you what we mean by the Church of Rome. And that is, The whole Church of Rome as it is a Body consisting of one vissible head the Pope, and of all Papists wheresoever, Clergy, and Laity, professing themselves members of that Head, and owning the Faith and Doctrine thereof. This Body or Company, I say, is not in any sort to be accounted a true visible Church of Christ, which I conceive will appear by diverse Arguments of which I shall give you one at present. That Church which over throweth the main and proper cause of our Salvation is no true Church of Christ. But the Church of Rome overthroweth the main and proper cause of our Salvation. Therefore the Church of Rome is no true Church of Christ. The Major I presume no man will deny, and for the Assumption 'tis notoriously evident, for they have over∣thrown the principal and fundamental Article of Justifica∣tion, which is the Head and summ of all Religion; they err in the Efficient Cause of our Justification, which is the free Grace and favour of God, which they deny building it upon mans merit of Congruity, or works pre∣paratory and dispository to Justification, &c. Coupling it with mans free-will. They Err in the material cause Christ; Obedience, this they deny to be our Obedience or the matter of our Justification. They Err in the Form of our Justification, which it the Imputation of Christs Righte∣ousness unto us. They Err in the Instrumental cause, to wit, the Justifying Faith, denying is to be a certain particular trust or Assurance in Gods mercy for the Pardon of our Sins. They Err in the very Meritorious cause Christ our Redeemer, several ways overthrowing all his Offices. They Err also in the final cause of Justification, being the
free Gift of Eternal Life, while they say the same is merited by the Condignaty. They overthrow the very Fundamentals of Religion, by denying the sufficiency of the Scriptures for the Rule of Faith, and the necessity of its being known to Gods people. They deny the right use of the Sacraments whilst they attribute unto them Grace ex opere operato, and teach that their efficacy de∣pends on the Intention of the Priest. They deny the truth of Christs humane Body by their absurd whimsey of Tran∣substantiation, and the vertue of His only and all alone sufficient Sacrifice, by their propitiatory Masses, &c. So that 'tis plain they have Corrupted or abandoned the main and proper Fundamentals of Salvation, consequently has no Claim to the Title of a Church of Christ.
THE COURANT. Tory. HAVE you seen the famous Panegyrick, the Sacrific to the Rising-Sun? Truem. No, nor can guess what you mean. But I have heard, that amongst all sorts of Idolaters, they were only a parcel of forlorn, servile, debauch'd, effeminate, Hen-hearted, Chicken-soul'd Persians, that worship'd the Sun rising. And since you mention that word, it puts me in mind what I read the other day in a Pamphlet, Entituled, A warning against the dangerous pra∣ctises of Papists, written by one Thomas Norton in good Queen Bess's days, Anno 1586. Let it be well-weigh'd (saith he) what they mean to the Realm, That under colour of Succee∣ding, so far undermine the Head of our Country, that they convey the countenance, favour, and supportation of a great corrupt number of such as may frame themselves any hope of Gain that way, to persons that by such kindled Ambition may be the more hastily embolden'd: This to do, is to shew us a Sun rising, to whose Worship they would fain draw us, from our Sun declining, as they suppose. No, no, our Queen is our true Sun, and whatever shining Thing they would set up in her time, is no right Sun, but an unlucky Comet. And it is not yet Noon, I trust, with our Sun; or if it be, I hope yet God will lengthen the day to our Sun, for his Honour-sake, as he did to Joshua, and rather have all good Subjects so to hope, if the residue of that day may be so spent as Joshuah spent it, and for which God did prolong it, viz. To rid the World of God's Enemies. Let it be considered what Hopes, Anticipa∣tion, and most dreadful Mischiefs, which I fear and abhor to name, the encouraging of such succeeding, (which is the work of Papists) may minister where the only Person of our most dear and precious Soveraign standeth between them, and (their desired Effect) the utter undoing of us all; and specially where the power of Revenge may by possibility fall into their hands, for whose sake it should be attempted. It is no small mischief,
danger, and appalling of our Faith and Courage, when our Prince must be defended against those that by possibility may aspire to be our Princes themselves, and to  it upon good Subjects.—I dispute no Titles, I have no reach beyond our Queen. I can see nothing beyond our Queen  a Chaos of Misery, therefore I am loth to look so far; my only care is, and all good Subjects ought to be, for our Queens Maje∣sties Preservation. What other Title soever be pretended, be it good or bad, if it shall once threaten danger to the Queen's Majesty, whose Title and Governance we know to be true, and have felt to be good, I wish it destroyd and put out of hope, lest it hope too soon, too much, too high, and join with too many. —Thus the very syllables of that Author. Tory. Well! and what the Devil does all this signifie? The idle Dream, I'le warrant ye, of some seditious Puritanical Whig. Truem. The Book, Sir, was printed by Authority, and seems but to express the general fears and apprehensions Protestants were then in, from the prospect of a Popish Successor. But the truth is, Mr. L'Estrange was a little too young to be Licenser in those days. Tory. Why, there's the business; Tempora mutantur, Prote∣stants dread a Popish Successor? I must tell you, Sir! that who∣ever is cautious against such a Blessing, is Ipso facto, to be reputed, stigmatiz'd, and prosecuted as a Whig, a damn'd Phanatick, a Rascal, a Traitor, and infallibly an Enemy to the Church of Eng∣land as by Law establish'd; and all this, if need be, we will have proved as plain as the way to Dunstable in the next Observator. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, April 28. 1682. Papae tempus adest, magnò cum optaverit empum, Intactam hanc Gentem, & cum spolia ista, diem{que} Oderit.— Arguments proving the Church of Rome not to be the true Church of Christ. IN our last we Explain'd the Notion of a Church in its seve∣ral Acceptations, as far as was necessary; and offer'd one Reason (then) why the Roman Church was not to be esteem∣ed a true Church. We now proceed to Consider the same a little further: And our Second Argument shall for the greater Authority be taken from the Profest, Publick Doctrine of The Church of England, (if the Book of Articles and Homiles be al∣lowed to Contain her Doctrine, which some Mens Heterodoxies and bold Preachments of quite contrary Tenets, whilst they yet vapour and boast themselves as the only true Churchmen, has rendred a Quaere.) Argument 2. The true Visible Church of Christ is a Congre∣gation of Faithful Men, in which the pure Word of God is Preach∣ed; and the Sacraments duly Administred, according to Christ's Ordinance in all those things that of necessity are requi∣site to the same.
But the Church of Rome is not a Congregation of Faithful Men, in which the pure Word of God is Preached, and the Sa∣craments duly Administred according to Christ's Ordinance in all those things, that of necessity are requisite to the same. Therefore the Church of Rome is not a true visible Church of Christ. The Major is the Express Words of the Nineteenth Article of the Church of England. And least any should say, That we may indeed from hence conclude Affirmatively, not Negatively, viz. That where these Marks are, There is a Church; but not, that where they are not, there is no Church; be pleased to take no∣tice, That the Church of England delivers these Words by way of Definition of a Church, describing it by the proper Marks: Now a Definition, all that understand the Art of Reasoning know, is not only positive in it self, but Exclusive and Negative, in regard of that to which it is Oppos'd. The Minr is also declar'd, and asserted by our Church in her Homilies: As for Example, in That for Whit-sunday (part 2d.) We have these Passages—First, It [speaking of the Church of Rome] wants these true and proper Marks of a true Church; [having before mentioned these very Marks] For neither are they Built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, re∣taining the sound and pure Doctrine of Christ Jesus; neither do they Order the Sacraments, or Ecclesiastical Keys in such sort as he did first Institute and Ordain them. Again, They want the Spirit of God; if it be possible to be there, where the true Church is not; then it is at Rome. Again, He that is of God, heareth Gods Word; whereof it followeth, That the Popes in not hearing Christs Voice, do plainly argue to the World, that they are not of Christ, nor yet possest of his Spirit. Thus the Homily! whereby I think this Argument is sufficiently supported; and will appear Cogent to all such as own themselves So of the Church of Eng∣land; and indeed 'tis pity any such should now be to be Infor∣med, That the Church of Rome is no true Church. Nor is this Argument less strong in it self against the Papists: For the Proposition is St. Paul's, Gal. 1. 8. That Man or Angel (and by parity of Reason That Church) which teacheth other∣wise than the Apostles taught is accursed: and whether such Church offend herein by adding to Christs Doctrine, or by de∣tracting or taking from it, 'tis all one, the Crime is the same 'Tis  another thing, another Gospel. For as for taking away,
as the Apostle saith, Whoever shall keep the whole Law and ye offend in one point he is Guilty of all, James 2. 10. So most truly too, saith St. Ambrose in his Sixth Book upon Luke, Negat Christum qui non omnia quae Christi sunt, Confitetur. He denyeth Christ who doth not confess and acknowledge all that Christ taught. And for adding unto, the same Father Writing upon those words, Be not the Servants of Men, 1 Cor. 7. 23. thus testifieth, Servi homi∣num sunt qui Humanis se subjiciunt Superstitionibus; They are the Servants of Men that submit themselves to Humane. Traditions: And if they are the Servants of Men, they are not the Servants of Christ: So St. Paul concludeth, Gal. 1. 10. So that the Pro∣position, as it is Asserted by the Church of England; so is it like∣wise Justified by the Authority of the Holy Scripture and anci∣ent Fathers. Then as for the Assumption, That in the Church of Rome neither the Word of God is truly Preached, nor the Sacraments duly Admi∣nistred, is notorious; for as to Doctrine, they have added their own Figments, as Transubstantiation, Purgatory, &c. and do Preach contrary Doctrines to the Scripture; and as touching the Sacraments, they have not only Augmented the Number, and made Five new ones of their own, which Christ never Insti∣tuted, viz. Confirmation, Orders, Pennance, Matrimony, and Ex∣tream Ʋnction; But also they have utterly Corrupted those Two which our Lord Ordain'd: For in Baptism besides Water, they use Spettle, Salt, Oyl, Chrism, contrary to the Institution; and they lay such a necessity upon this Institution, That all that dye with∣out it (even Infants) they say are Damn'd. [See Bellarm. de Bap∣tism. L. 1. Ca. 4. and Rhem. Annot. on John the 3d.] In the Lords Supper, they have turned the Sacrament to a Sacrifice, made an Idol of Bread, changed the Communion into private Masses, taken the Cup from the Lay-people; and committed ma∣ny other Abominations. Therefore I conclude this Argument, The Church of Rome not having the Word of God purely Preach∣ed, nor the Sacraments rightly Administred, according to the In∣stitution, is in no sort to be esteemed a Visible Church of Christ. Argument 3. That pretended Church which overthroweth, and denyeth the only Rule of Faith, is no true Church of Christ. But the Church of Rome does so. Therefore. As to the Proposition; the only Rule of Faith is the Scripture or written Word of God, John 5 32. 2 Tim. 3. 16. Now to overthrow this Rule, is to overthrow the Foundation of the
Church of God, which is built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Ephes. 2. 20. That is the Scriptures of the New and Old Testaments. As for the Assumption, That the Church of Rome hath over∣thrown this Rule is Evident: for First, She hath added another Rule of her own; to wit, Traditions and humane Inventions, which are contrary to the Scriptures, as Christ saith, Matt. 15. 16. Gods Ark and Dagon cannot stand together; what Com∣munion hath Christ with Belial? What agreement hath Divine Purity with bold Forgeries? Secondly, they overthrow as much as in them lies, this only Rule of Faith, whilst they subject the Authority and Sense of it wholly to the Church of Rome, or the Pope; so that Gods Word is not received of the Church of Rome, as it is the Word of God, but as the Word of Men; con∣trary to that of the Epistle, 1 Thess. 2. 13. Argument 4. That Church which holdeth not the Head Christ, is no true Spouse or Church of Christ. But the Church of Rome holdeth not the Head Christ. Therefore. The Proposition is undeniable, Eph. 4. 16. and 5. 23. The Assumption may thus be proved, That Church which is whol∣ly Idolatrous holdeth not the Head Christ. For if Worshiping of Angels, which is but one kind of Idolatry, separates from the Head, as it does by the Apostles Testimony, Colloss. 1. 18. then much more all kind of Idolatry.—But the Church of Rome is drown'd in all kind of Idolatry, as not only Worshiping of Angels, but likewise of Saints, and Pictures, and Images, and of a piece of Bread, &c. Besides, she adhereth to another Head, viz. the Pope; and not to the one only true Head Christ: and what agree∣ment hath the Temple of God, with Idols, 2 Cor. 6. 16. And the member of an Harlot cannot be withal a member of Christ, See 1 Cor. 15. 16, 17. Argument 5. The true Church of Christ is the true Flock of Christ. But the true Church of Rome is not the true Flock of Christ.—Ergo. The Proposition is undeniable, from Cant. 6. 6. Acts 20. 28. John 10. 16. The Assumption is proved, John 10. 3, 4, and 17 verses. There it is laid down as the property and Characteristick Mark of Christs Flock, That they hear his Voice and know it, and follow it. But the Church of Rome hears not Christs Voice, nor acknowledges, or follows it; but the Voice of Antichrist, and the Antichristian Syna∣gogue:
they hear not Christs Voice, as Christs Voice, but as the Churches Voice; And this is likewise affirm'd against Rome, by the Church of England in the before Cited Homily for Whit-sunday. Argument 6. That Church which practiseth not the true Bap∣tism of Christ, is not the true Church of Christ. But the Church of Rome does not practise the true Baptism of Christ. Ergo— The Proposition I suppose will be granted; Baptism being an Initiating Ordinance, without which, none can be Members of the Visible Church. The Assumption is thus proved; True Baptism is a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith and of the Covenant of Grace made unto us in Christ: But the Bap∣tism in the Church of Rome is not such; for the Church of Rome denyeth the Righteousness of Faith, and the Justifying by Faith: yea, she maketh Baptism the Instrumental Cause of Justification, so as that it confers Grace Ex opere operato (by the meer thing done) and they require not Faith in Christ as necessary for the Party to be Baptized, But only a Disposition [Conc. Trent. Sess. 7. Can. 6. and 8.] and principally the whole Force of Baptism, and so of all their Sacraments, depend upon their Priests intention. So that the Church of Rome hath no more of Baptism, but only the External Form of words (and those fullyed with abundance of lewd Ceremonies,) together with the Element of Water. For a Sacrament is a visible sign of an Invisible Grace; which Invisi∣ble Grace the Church of Rome destroyeth, while she placeth the Grace in the Sacrament it self;—denying and Accursing [Sess. 7. Can. 6.] only Faith in Gods Promise, to be sufficient to receive Grace: Thus they destroy the Nature and use of Christs Sacraments, and of Baptism in special, while they sepe∣rate it from the Doctrine of the Word of God, and from the necessity of Justifying Faith. Thus their Church is quite Removed from the Foundation, and built upon another Bottom. Thus Bap∣tism to them of that Church is nothing else, but a Seal to a Blank, or which is worse, a Sealing up of their Condemnation, whilst their Sins are not washed, but their Souls drowned in Errour and Idolatry, as the Aegyptians in the Red Sea, a Type of Baptism: Yea, they make a very Idol of their Sacrament, and of the Priest together, whilst to these they attribute that Grace, which the only Author and Fountain of true Baptism can give, and present their Children in the Faith of that Church which denyeth true Faith in Christ.
THE COURANT. Jesuit. PRethee whither so fast my dear most obliging Friend? Tory. I have just now seen an Express from his Emi∣nency Cardinal H. (Patron of our Nation at Rome) which assures, That all this Ruffle of the most Christian King, against that Court, is only a Sham Contriv'd on purpose to wheadle in Neighbours into a good Opinion of the French, whom you know our Common People naturally hate, but yet (he says) at this Juncture it will be highly necessary for a certain Gentle∣man's purpose (whose Interest is Inseparable) to set Monsieur fair in their thoughts, under pretence, That he will prove (forsooth) a Second Harry the Eight. Jesuite. —I hate a blabbing Tongue; 'Tis only taking wind makes things smell strong: This ought to be kept a Secret; not but that we are long since satisfied in the Intrigue, and know whose Influence at present Governs the Sorbon, we must adapt Principles to occasions, vcer our Sails to catch the Wind. 'Tis a thriving piece of Haeresie, prethee promote the Hint, That Lewis's Arms shall Effect what one of his Predecessors Coyn threatned—Perdam Babylonis nomen, and get our Observator and his Cullyed Pupils to advance the Notion; nothing will be more advantagious as present Circumstances play; The White Witch shall Unravel the Enchantments of the Black one; Let us alone to Retrieve the Business at next favourable opportuni∣ty. Tory. But I have further Intelligence; O most Swinging! Asto∣nishing! Confounding! Incredible! Blessed News! I promise you. Jesuit. Is't possible! For Old Acquaintance sake let's have't. Tory. I beg your Diversion, Sir! You that (they say) tell Lies so Dear, must not expect to hear Truth Gratis. But yet to save your longing, I'le give you a Tast, Poor old Odiscalchi, his Holiness, is Dead, as a Door-nail; The Cardinals are shut up in the Conclave, and now they are Canvasing, Bribing, Intriguing, Tugging like mad, for a new Infallible Noddle. Jesuit. That's News indeed, but preethee, who's like to carry't?
Tory. Ay! that! that! I cannot forbear laughing to think, how 'twill vex thee; and I'le tell thee't for no other Reason, but because 'twill make thee Hang thy self, They're going to chuse a Protestant Prince to be their Pope! Jesuit. Then I le be Hang'd' Tory. Ay! ay! So thou hadst been long ago if th'adst had thy Deserts, and so thou wilt at last, whether that be so or no! but this is certain, a Protestant Pope they'l have! The Flying Squadron are resolv'd on't; And Spain, Germany, and France, (for all the Interest you boast of there) strike in with them: What a blessed Reformation shall we have! Jesuit. Why then say I, farewel Catholick Cause! shaw! shaw! He'le worm out the Catholick Faith, and sapp the Church by degrees; and in a while we shall have damn'd Conventicles held in the very Lateran. Tory. No! no! There's no fear of that neither; for the Pope Presumptive, though he is known to be a Protestant, has promis'd a thousand times, and vowed and sworn he'le maintain the Ro∣man Catholick Church as 'tis Establisht by the Canons Jesuit. Ay! there's the Knavery on't! The Fallacy, dost thou not smell the Raguery? Tory. Not I, I protest Father, but to say truth, I never had a very subtle Nose, and yet I can at any time scent a Presbyterian Plot as far off as Ʋtopia. Jesuit. Why man? by the Church as 'tis Establisht by the Ca∣nons; he means no doubt, the Church as it ought to be Reform'd by the Canons of Scripture: For can any Man be so Mad, so Bewitcht, as to think a Protestant, will be true to the Catholick Interest? Tory. Why not Sir? As true I'le warrant you, as a Popish Successor will be to a Protestant Interest. Jesuit. Well! O my Conscience the Cardinals are a Pack of Knaves, they betray the Catholick Cause: I am confident most of them are Hereticks in their Hearts. Tory. Why so? why so? good Sir! They have Subscrib'd the Council of Trent; They have taken all the Holy Tests and Canonical Oaths, and given all the Security of their Catholicism that's requir'd by Law of Holy Mother Church, and why should we be so uncharitable as to Censure them for Hypocrites? Jesuit. Hang 'em! hang 'em! They'r rotten at Core, let 'em Swear their Guts out, they that are so Zealous for a Protestant
Pope, may well be suspected to have an Hugonot in their Bel∣lies. Tory. Why now I'me vext to hear one of your Order, Father, (whose Society esteem themselves not only the most Learned and Politick, but Men of the best Intelligence too) talk so like a Ninny. 'Tis the mode all over the World, since the last Comet, and the Conjunction of Satura and Jupiter; Have you not seen the News brought by a Post pidgeon to Scanderoon? The Grand-Seignior is lately Dead too, (All Flesh is Grass, Turk and Pope must come to't,) and the Divan being Assembled, because he left no Heirs of his Body Lawfully begotten, nothing will satisfie them, but they'l Elect a Christian Prince to the Ottoman Em∣pire. Jesuit The Devil they will? Tory. Nay never question the Truth on't, you shall see it shortly in Muddimans Letter, and Infallible Natts Intelligence. Jesuit. Then hey go mad! say I, The World is going out of its Wits, and the Ʋniverse becoming an Intire Bedlam. What false to their own Religion, the most Sacred of Ties? betray their own Interest? I'le be Flead if there be one true Mussulman in the Divan, if this you told me last be true. Tory. Come, come, Fiat Justitia ruat Coelum. Dost think all the World understands their true Interest? Mankind are oft led by the Shadows, and Fancies, and Humours, and Whims, and a Thousand Capricio's: I could tell thee of another as great a Wonder as all this comes to. Jesuit. Nay, nay, lets have the bottom o'th Bag, honest Tory! Tory. What would you eat Sweet-meats with Shovels? come, come, enough's as good as a Feast, either at Souters or Pedlars-Hall; what I have, will keep cold, and I'le reserve it for ano∣ther Collation: Father Adieu! Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, May 5. 1682. Omnia amisit, qui veritatem amisit. An Objection Answered, touching Baptism; The Church of Rome hath no true Ministry, &c. IN our last we urged, That the Church of Rome does not practise the true Baptism of Christ; whence an Objection may arise thus, If the Church of Rome have not the true Baptism of Christ, why then are not Papists when Converted to the true Faith of Christ, Rebaptized? How stands their former Baptism good? To which I Reply in the words of the great Saint Augustine, (Contra Cresconium, Lib. 1. C. 30.) speaking of the External Form of Baptism used amongst Hereticks, such Baptism is not to be Repeated, but the Errour thereof Corrected. And in his Se∣venth Book against the Donatists, Chap. 40. He hath these Words, The Divine Scriptures in many places do shew, all these to be strangers from the Church, who are not in the Rock, and appertain not to the Members of the Dove, and yet they Baptize and are Baptized, and have Sine salute Sacra∣mentum salutis: without Salvation the Sacrament of Salvation. And L. 5. chap. 17. Hereticks (saith he) have Lawful Baptism
(that is for the External Form) but not Lawfully. And so Bel∣larmine himself determines the Case, Cum veniunt ad Ecclesiam Baptizati ab Haereticis, agnoscendum est quod est Ecclesiae, id est, Baptisma, corrigendus verò Error; When those that are Baptized by Hereticks come to the Church, the Church acknowledges what is her own; that is, the Baptism; but the Errour is to be corrected. The Sacraments operate effectually, Non quia dicitur, sed quia Creditur: Not because the Words are uttered, but because there is the Word of Faith purifying the heart as the Apostle speaks, Act 15. And therefore the Church of Rome having deny'd the Faith of Righteousness, and the Righteousness of Faith, and the saving Doctrine of Baptism; She hath consequently rendred Baptism to be of none Effect to her unto Salvation; But yet still, when any Papist is by the Grace of God and the Preach∣ing of the Word, and of saving Faith Converted to the true Church of God, the Seal of Baptism is not again affixed, but the Evidence of saving Faith and Testament of the Gospel be∣ing written in his heart, is now added to the Seal, and so it be∣comes compleatly authentick, as not being bound necessarily to outward means. Nor do we here exclude Gods free Agency in Baptism, who in the Party Baptized in that Heretical Church may (if it please him) work Grace, finding his own Water and his own Words; finding, I say, his own Seal, he can add his Co∣venant of Grace unto it; yet no Child there Baptized coming to the years of Discretion (unless he Renounce the wicked Faith, and Relinquish the Idolatrous practices of that Romish Church) can have benefit by his Baptism; but to him it is Penal and Pernicious as Augustine speaks.—And now I proceed to another Argument: That the Church of Rome is not a Church of Christ. Argument 7. That Church which hath not a lawful Ministry, is not a true visible Church of Christ.—But the Church of Rome hath not a Lawful Ministry.—Ergo. I know this, to many will seem a Paradox, but 'tis a certain Truth, for if the Church of Rome hath not a Lawful Ordination, how can it have a Lawful Ministry: But it has no Lawful Or∣dination. 1. In regard of the Efficient Cause, either Remote, as the Pope, as Head; whence all their Ministerial Power is de∣riv'd: or immediate, as the Ordainer; on whose Intention their Gratia gratis data dependeth: So that here is a Nullity in the
very Foundation of the Papal Priest-hood. It is deriv'd from the Pope, as Head of the Clergy and Church: a Title Anti-christian and Usurp'd; and so their Ministry is Anti-christian. And if the Pope, being Antichrist, and an Usurper, and Conse∣crating Bishops by vertue of his Papal Supremacy, as Christ's sole Vicar, and Peter's Successor, cannot convey any power of Order upon his Bishops and Clergy; what lawful Ministry can we expect in that Apostolical Synagogue? So that Calvin (an Author whom for Honour's sake I mention, in a lewd Age, when thousands decry him, that either for Learning and Piety are no ways comparable to Him) was in the Right, in his Book cal∣led, The Method of Reforming the Church.—Nego sub toto Pa∣patu unum esse verè Episcopum; I deny that under the whole Pope∣dom there is one truly a Bishop; and what then shall we say of their Priests? neither have they any Ministerial Grace, because it depends (according to their Belief) upon their Ordainers In∣tention, and not upon Christs Ordinance, Grace, and Promise. But, 2ly. They fail too in the Formal and Fixal Cause of Ordina∣tion: They have quite altered and Corrupted the Form, and so the End thereof, adding a New Form, which overthroweth the Old, and imposeth a New End, viz. making the whole Essence and use of their Ministry to consist in Priesthood; that is, in Sacrificing of an Idol, and so turning the Office of a Minister of the Gospel, into an Idol-Sacrificing Priest. For in the Form of their Ordination set down in their Tridentine Catechism, Part the Second; after Imposition of Hands with the sign of the Cross on the Party that is to be Ordain'd; The Chalice with Wine, and the Paten with the Host, is delivered into his hands with these Words,—Accipe potestatem offerendi Sacrificium Deo, Missás{que} Celebrandi tam pro vivis quam pro defunctis, &c. Re∣ceive thou Power to Offer Sacrifice to God, and to celebrate Masses as well for the Living as the Dead, &c. And this praecipua Sa∣cerdotis functio existimanda est, is to be esteemed the principal Office or Function of a Priest. Ad Extremum verò, &c. In fine, Imposing hands again, he says, Receive then the Holy Ghost, Whose sins soever ye Remit, &c. Ei{que} Coelestem illam, &c. And thus the Bishop giveth unto the Priest that Heavenly Power of Retaining and Forgiving of Sins, which the Lord gave to his Disciples. Thus the very words of their Ordination. Now we
know that this power of Remitting and Retaining of Sins the Church of Rome placeth not in the Dispensing and Preaching of the Word of God, but in their Sacrament of Pennance. Thus they have wholly perverted their Ordination, both for the for∣mal and final End. Nor do they less fail in the Material Cause, ignorant unqualified Persons being ordinarily made Priests, and such as only are able to Mumble over the Mass and Matins. But it may be Objected, That in Popish Ordination there is a Power Confer'd to Preach the Word of God. 'Tis true, they do use these words of our Blessed Saviour which the Church of England useth, viz. Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins ye Remit, &c. Which we do indeed understand of the dispensation of the Word and Sacraments. But the Church of Rome otherwise, meaning thereby the Priests power of Binding and Loosing in their Sacrament of Pennance. And it is in vain for them to say, That their Priests in their Ordination have any Power confer'd upon them to Preach the Word of God, when their Practise is far otherwise: Neither indeed is it lawful for them so to Preach the Word of God, as it behoveth faithful Mi∣nisters of the Gospel, viz. purely and soundly to the saving of Mens Souls. For the pure and sound saving Doctrine of the Word of God is branded for Heresie in the Council of Trent. Nor may their Bishops or Priests deliver the sense of it otherwise than according to those Canons and Decrees: In a word, See the Conc. Trid. Sess. 14. Can. 3. Si quid dixerit, &c. If any one shall say, That those words of our Lord and Saviour, [Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins ye Remit they are Remitted, and whose sins you Retain they are Retained] are not to be understood of the power of Remitting and Retaining sins in the Sacrament of Pennance, but shall wrest them contrary to the Institution of the Sacrament, to the authority of Preaching the Gospel, Let him be Anathema. Well therefore does the pious and judicious Calvin conclude,— Totum Sacordotium Papisticum non solum impia est vera Ministerii profanatio, sed Execrabilis in Christum comumelia, & quisquis est sacerdos Papalis, dnec titulum illum abjecerit, Christi Servus esse ne∣queat. The whole Popish Priesthood is not only an impious Pro∣fanation of the true Ministry, but an execrable Reproach against Christ: So that whosoever is a Popish Priest, until he re∣nounce that Title, he cannot be the Servant of Christ. True Ordination is a sacred Institution of Christ, whereby
the Person Ordain'd is Invested with a Power to Preach the Word of God, and to Administer the Holy Sacraments accor∣ding to Christ's Ordinance.—But the Ordination used in the Church of Rome is not according to Christ's Institution, to wit, whereby the Person Ordained is Invested with a Power to Preach the Word of God, and to Administer the Holy Sacra∣ments according to Christ's Ordinance.—Therefore in the Church of Rome, there is no true Ordination; therefore no true Ordination, Therefore no true Church. The Assumption we have already Demonstrated, For first, for Administration of Sacraments, the Priests Power is re∣spectively and specially limited to their Eucharist and Pennance. 2ly. That Eucharist is a meer Idol, and blasphemous Sacrifice, and no true Sacrament at all. 3ly. The very Words of Christ used in true Ordination of all Orthodox Churches, which are understood of Dispensing the Word and Sacraments, the Church of Rome perverteth and wresteth to Absolution; and most im∣pudently faith, That to understand it of Dispensing the Word of God, is to wrest the sense contrary to the Institution of this Sacrament of Pennance. But now a like Objection will occur thus,—If in the Church of Rome there be not true and lawful Ordination, why then, when any of their Priests are Converted to the true Faith and Church of Christ, are they not Re-ordained? To this we may Answer, That although their Ordination were altogether unlawful and unwarrantable, according to the Institution of the Church of Rome, yet coming to us of the true Church, after the paring and shaving off of their Power of Sacrificing, and of Sacramental Binding, and Loosing, and Pennance, and Restoring to the Word of God (prophaned and abused by them to a wrong sense) its Original and true mean∣ing, whilst the Priest so Converted openly Renounces the Mass, and witnesseth his Abhorrence and Detestation of all that abo∣minable Sacrifice, and subscribes to the Articles and Doctrine of our Church; they are hereupon Received, and their Ordina∣tion now stands good, which before was vitious and Anti-christian. See for this more fully Mr. Francis Mason's Book of Ordination, L. 5. Ch. 12. The same Reason is to be given of the Ministry of the Church of England, which in times past was derived and descended from that false and Corrupt Church.
Some will say,—The Church of Rome is as a Diseased Body, which though never so Corrupt is yet still a true Body: for he is really a Man to whom the Definition of a Man agreeth, in∣dued with a reasonable Soul, though his Body be never so much Diseased, as with the Plague or Leprosie. I Answer, Many deceive themselves and others with this Comparison. They should first prove the Church of Rome to be a Living Church, before they can properly compare the Body of it to the Body of a Living Man; for else it is a meer Peti∣tio Principii, a shameful begging of the Question. For I deny the Church of Rome to be an Organical Body; to wit, a Living Body, No, no, It is a meer Corrupt and stinking Carcass: and as a dead corrupt Corps is not to be accounted an Organical Body, as wanting the Soul to Actuate it; and so cannot be called tru∣ly a Man, or a Mans Body; but Cadaver a Corps. No more is the Church of Rome (no less Dead than Diseased,) a true Church, for a dead Member can but Equivocally be call'd a Member. Nor will it follow, That because there may be an hidden Church of God within the borders of the Church of Rome: Therefore the Church of Rome is a true visible Church. For if any amongst them be of the Number of Gods Sacred ones, before their Effectu∣al Calling they are Members of that Antichristian Church, but being Call'd they are no more of it, but in it; and there be∣ing in it, will never prove it a true Church. It may be alledged, That the Church of Rome hath only added to the Foundation, not taken away, or subtracted from it, and the Nature of an Addition is not directly to deny, but by Consequence at most. I Answer, We have already proved, That they have destroyed the Foundation, and that both by Subtraction and Addition. As their Traditions and Decrees overthrow the Foundation of the Scriptures; for if the Scriptures affirm one thing, and their Traditions another, These are obey'd, and those rejected. What say you to In∣vocation of Saints, doth it not directly overthrow the pure Worship of God, and Faith in him alone? Doth not the Mass directly overthrow the one and only Sacrifice of our Lord up∣on the Cross? And so of the rest.
The COURANT. Tory. WEll! I'le say that for Roger, he's a brisk mettle∣some laborious old Wretch! He writes four or five Observators a week. Truman. Do not call it writing, man, but casting; or say he is so often troubled with the Hickup, or overflowing of the Gall. The old Gentleman delights much in calling other people Monkeys, but sure 'twould make a Stoic smile, to see how like an Ape he sits cracking of Nits on the Head of the Tory Plot. Tory. Why? What would you have him do, scribble all the year round about Brass-screws and Antipendiums? Trum. Now you speak of that old business, I can tell you a story that is altogether as strange, and much more true than the transmutation of the Screws. Some Years ago there was a very great parcel of English Rogues and Biddle's Catechisms seiz'd by a Friend of mine; the obscenity of the first, and the Blasphemies of the second against the blessed Trinity, deserving a suppres∣sion. But some Casuists resolve, That though Books be unfit to be sold, yet it may not be unfit to take money for them. So it happened, that these very Books, by Art Magic, were invisi∣bly convey'd to Cambray-house, where a certain old Lady then had Lodgings, and upon paying down a pretty round Sum to a Friend in a corner, the self-same Books, of their own accord, came one Night out of a Window into a Cart, and so disprsed themselves into most of the Stationers Shops about Town. There is one J. S. still living, who they say can attest this Miracle. Tory. But what is all this to honest Roger? Trum. Nothing, nothing at all. I only told it, to prove that there is such a thing as Necromancy and Black-Art in the world. And therefore to return to Mr. L'Estrange; what think you of his owning (Observ. Numb. 129.) That he has been forty times at Mass beyond the eas? I dare challenge him, and all his Admirers, to poe that he was so often at any Protestant Church in twenty years time. And I cannot fathom the Policy of this Declaration, unless it were to give old friends an Item, that for all his late sacra∣mental Rant, he does not forget them. Tory. You must note, he did not trudge to those forty Masses out of devotion, nor curiosity, but purely out of duty; for I have
been told, that when he was abroad, he was a little Retainer to Cardinal Van Hess, and officiated in his Chappel in the way of his proper Calling, playing in Consort on the Base-Viol. So that probably he was not at Mass under the Character of a Papist, but as Fidler in ordinary to his Eminence.—But see how in his last Observator, Numb. 132. he boxes about the Statute 25 Ed. 3. and will needs have the words [Eldest Son and Heir] to be under∣stood not only of the Eldest Son, but of any other Heir. Trum. Though some of the Inferiour Clergy may take him for Guide, the Inns of Court scorn to be his Pupils, for all he stiles himself (Observ. Numb. 84.) Roger L'Estrange of Grays-Inn Labourer. The Man is as much out in his Law, as he uses to be in his Divinity. For (tho God forbid any should be so wicked) to imagin the Death of a collateral presumptive Heir to the Crown is not Treason by this Statute. Coke 3 Instit. fol. 8, 9. (speaking of the same words) Before this Statute some did hold, that to com∣pass the Death of any of the King's Children was Treason, but by this Act it is restrained to the Prince, the King's Son being Heir apparent. If the Heir apparent to the Crown be a collateral Heir ap∣parent, he is not within this Statute. Roger Mortimer, Earl of March, was Anno Dom. 1487. (11 Rich. 2.) proclaimed Heir apparent: Anno 39 H. 6. Richard Duke of York was likewise pro∣claimed Heir apparent, and so was John de la Poole, Earl of Lin∣coln, by R. 3. and Henry, Marquess of Exeter, by King H. 8. But none of these or the like are within the purvieu of of this Statute.— But since Roger will be dabbling with Statutes, prethee read to him the following Clause of the Act of the 3d of King James, c. 4. —And further be it enacted, That if any person or persons, at any time after the tenth of June, &c. shall either upon the Seas, or beyond the Seas, or in any other place within the Dominions of the King's Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, put in practice to absolve, persuade, or withdraw any of the King's Subjects, or to reconcile them to the Pope or See of Rome; or if any person shall be wilfully absolv'd or withdrawn as aforesaid, or willingly reconciled, or promise obedience to any such pretended Authority; every such person and persons, their procurers and counsellors, aiders and maintainers, shall be to all in∣tents adjudged Traitors, and shall have judgment, suffer, and forfeit as in Cases of High Treason. From whence 'tis plain, that every English Subject that has bin brought up in the Protestant Religion, and afterwards revolts and turns Papist, and so is reconcil'd to the See of Rome, is ipso facto guilty of High Treason. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, May 12. 1682. Nunquam satis dicitur, quod nunquam satis discitur. Popery is a kind of Atheism, proved in many particulars. OUr Two last have contain'd some Arguments, pro∣ving the Church of Rome not to be a true visible Church of Christ, which will further appear, if we can Demonstrate the same to be Guilty of the hor∣rid sin of Atheism; To know whether she be or no, we must di∣stinguish the several kinds of Atheism. Atheisme is Two-fold, Open and Colour'd. Open-Atheisme is, when men, both in Word and Deed deny God and his Word. Colour'd Atheisme is not so manifest, and hath two Degrees. 1. When men acknowledge a God, a First Cause of Causes, or Infinite Being, that made and Governs the World, but yet deny or are Ignorant of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost Thus the Ephesians before they Believed the Gospel are called , Eph. 2. 12. and said to be without God, (when yet no doubt in their natural Judgment they acknowledged)
because they deny'd Christ. And in like manner though the Samaritans Worshipped the God of Abraham, yet our Blessed Saviour saith, They Worshipped they knew not what, John 5. 46. And the Psalmist saith of all the Gentiles, that their Gods are Idols. The second Degree of this Colour'd Atheism, is when men do rightly acknowledge the Unity of the Godhead in the Trinity of Persons; yet so as by necessary Consequences, partly of their Doctrine, and partly of the Service of God, they over∣turn that which they well maintained, And in this Respect, I say, That the very Religion of the Church of Rome is a kind of Atheism. 'Tis true, every Papist is not so shameless as one of their Popes, who, shewing some of his Confidents his Vast Trea∣sures, Hellishly said, Quantas divitias nobis peperit haec Fabula Christi! What a world of Riches has this Fable of Christ brought us in! Yet the very Doctrines of their Church, if understood and believed, directly tends to lead all those of her Commu∣nion to the like, or as desperate Impiety. For, 1. Whereas the Church of Rome maketh the Merit of the works of men to Concur with the Grace of God, it overthrows the Grace of God, If it be of works, it is no more Grace, Rom. 11. 6. whereas in words they own those glorious Attributes the Ju∣stice and Mercy of God to be Infinite, do they not by Conse∣quents deny both? For how can that be Infinite Justice which may any way be appeased by humane satisfaction? And how is God's Mercy Infinite, when we by our own satisfactions must add a supply to the satisfaction of Christ? 2. He that hath not the Son, hath not the Father, John 21. 23. and consequently is an Atheist. Now the present Roman Reli∣gion hath not the Son, that is, Jesus Christ, God and Man, the Mediator of Mankind, but hath transformed him into a feigned Christ: For, instead of one Jesus Christ in all things like unto us in his Humanity, Sin only excepted, They have framed a Christ, to whom they Ascribe two kinds of Existing, one Natural, whereby he is visible, touchable, and Circumscri∣bed in Heaven, The other not only above, but also against Na∣ture, by which he is substantially according to his Flesh in the hands of every Priest in every Host, and in the mouth of every
Communicant, invisible, untouchable and uncircumscribed, and thus in effect they abolish his Man-hood. 3. They Degrade our blessed Lord of his Offices, and have Committed High Treason against the King of Glory, and will you contend that such Arch Traitours are still true Subjects? For one Jesus Christ, the only King, Lawgiver and Head of the Church, They joyn unto him the Pope, not only as a Vicar, but also as a Companion or Equal in Government. In that they give unto him power to make Laws binding Conscience, To resolve and determine infallibly the sense of Holy Scripture, &c. For one Jesus Christ, the only real Priest of the New Testament, they joyn many Secondary Priests, who pretend to offer Christ daily in the Mass for the Sins of the Quick and the Dead. For one Jesus Christ the All sufficient Mediator of Intercession, They have added many other Companions to Intercede for us. And for the only. Merits of Christ, in whom alone the Father is well pleased, they have devised a Treasury of the Church, containing besides the merits of Christ, the Over plus of the merits of Saints to be dispensed to men at the Popes discretion. By all which we see, That Christ, and consequently God himself to be worshipped in Christ, is changed for a Fantasie or Idol of mans conceit. 4. There is always, and will be a Proportion between the worship of God and our perswasion of him; and men in give∣ing unto God any worship, have respect to his nature, that both may be suitable, and he be well pleased. Let us there∣fore now turn our Eyes, and behold with horror and detestati∣on, what manner of Worship the Roman Religion affordeth: It is for the greatest part, meer Will-worship, without any allow∣ance or command from God; as is in effect acknowledged by their own Durandus in his Rationale, wherein he pretends to give an Account of the Original, Reasons and Mystery of those Devises, and as we in several parts of this Work have particu∣larly proved. It is a fulsome Carnal Service, consisting of In∣numerable bodily Rites and Ceremonies borrowed partly from the Jews, and partly from the Heathen, it is divided between God and some of his Creatures, in that they are Worshipt both with one kind of Worship, let them paint and dissemble it how they can with nice and unintelligible distinctions. Thus
then, if by their manner of worshipping we may judge how they conceive (as most rationally we may) it will appear they have plainly abandon'd the true God, and have set up to them∣selves a Phantasie of their own. For God is no otherwise to be Conceived than he hath Revealed himself in his Creatures and word, and specially in Christ who is , the Image of God, 2 Cor. 4. 4. And  The Character or lively figure of his person, Heb. 1. 3. I proceed to another Argument.—If the Church of Rome, which was once the Spouse of Christ have Committed Adulte∣ry, and the Bill of Divorce be long since sued out, she is no longer to be called or counted a Spouse or Church of Christ. But she hath plaid the Adulteress, and the Divorce is pass'd— Ergo. That the Church of Rome hath long since, and still doth com∣mit Idolatry, (which is Spiritual Adultery, Jer. 3. 9. Ezek. 23. 37.) is notorious; I shall at present only Instance in three particu∣lars. 1. Because they worship Saints and Angels with Reli∣gious Worship, which without exception is proper and only due to God; yea, they transform some of them into detestable Idols, making them Mediators of Redemption, especially the Virgin Mary, whom they call not only Lady, but Goddess and Queen, whom Christ her Son Obeyeth in Heaven, a Me∣diatress, our Life, our Hope, the Medicine of the Diseased, &c. And pray unto her thus,— Prepare thou Glory for us, De∣fend us from our Enemies, and in the hour of Death receive us, Loose the Bands of the Guilty, bring Light to the Blind, drive away all Devils, shew thy self a Mother, by thy Mater∣nal Right Command thy Son to receive our Prayers. See for this the Roman Missal and Breviary, and Bellarm. L. 2. De Sanctis, Ca. 1. 6. 2. Their Idolatry is manifest in that they Worship Images, or (at least to give them their Excuse and Evasion into the Bargain) Worship in, at, and before Images, having no Commandment so to do, but the contrary. They alledge that they use and worship Images only in Remembrance of God, but this it all one, as if an unchaste Wife should re∣ceive many Gallants into her House in the absence of her Hus∣band, and being caught in Bed with them should answer, That they were friends of her Husband, and that she was so kind to
them only in remembrance of him. Would any man accept of such an Excuse, much less will the great Jehovah, who is a Jea∣lous God, and hath sworn that he will not have his Glory gi∣ven to another. 3. They are Guilty of Idolatry, and that too more absurd than the Heathens themselves; For they Wor∣ship a Breaden God. For if our Blessed Saviour according to his Humanity, be absent from the Earth,  undoubtedly he is; For the Heavens must receive him until the times of the Restitution of all things, Acts. 3. 21. Then the Popish Host is as abominable an Idol as ever was. But you will say, a known Harlot may afterwards remain a Wife, and be so termed, if she be not actually Divorc'd? But as to that, in the second place, I answer, the Bill of Divorce is long since Sued out; her Sins have separated her, and her God: We have it expresly in the Word of God, 2 Thes. 2. You have her Apostacy exactly foretold and described—De∣ceivableness of unrighteousness—strong delusion, that they should believe a Lie, and what follows—That they all might be damn'd, v. 12. So in the 13. of the Revelation, The Roman Apostatiz'd Church is set forth by the name of the Beast. And Ca. 14. 9. It is said,—If any man Worship the Beast, and his Image, and receive his Mark in his Forehead, or in his Hand, he shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the Cup of his Indignation, and he shall be tormented with Fire and Brimstone in the presence of the Holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb. And the Smoak of their torment Ascendeth up for ever and ever, and they have no Rest Day nor Night, who Worship the Beast and his Image, and whosoever receiveth the Mark of his Name. And therefore Ca. 18. 3. It is said,—I heard a Voice from Hea∣ven saying,—Go out of her my people, &c. Since God hath Commanded us to come out of Her, we may conclude her utterly Divorc'd from God; for we may not wholly forsake any people, till they forsake Christ. And therefore though an Adultress, till publickly detected and cast off, may pass for a Wife, yet after she is Convicted, and the Divorcement solemnly declared, she ceaseth to be a Wife, though she boast never so much of her Marriage in her youth, and though she can shew her Wedding Ring, yet all this will not
prove her in any sort a Lawful Wife; nor intitle her to any pretence of Claim to the Affections or Estates of the Hus∣band. But the Truth is, though the Church of Rome have thus proved Disloyal to her Lord, and committed Whoredome on every high Hill, and under every Green Tree, yet with the Strumpet mentioned by the Royal Preacher, She wipeth her mouth, and saith, I have done no wickedness: For it hath of late continually been her cunning, to make the Adorable Je∣sus, (under pretence of being still his Spouse) a Cover, and Cloak of all her Abominations, (as a Subtle and Unreclaimable Adultress, deals with her too long suffering and patient Hus∣band) That so she may seem to be an honest Matron, though indeed she be a notable Strumpet. And this indeed is the highest point of the Mystery of Iniquity.
The COURANT. Truem. WEll! and how proceeds the worthy Mr. L'Estrange with his Translation, of the French Jesuit? Tory. What! do you mean The History of Calvinism, I have not feen it yet, but am told 'tis Dedicated to the most Christian King, and that the honest Author tells him, he doubts not but shortly to present his Majesty with the story too, of its utter ex∣tirpation, [The Northern Heresie must down] They say 'tis an excellent piece, and will Claw off the Whigs confoundedly. Truem. Yes! yes! a very suitable Subject for such a Pen! our Churchmen have great cause to thank him, and give him Guin∣neys for Blowing up the Church with Jesuites Powder, under pre∣tence of shooting Phanaticks. 'Tis mightily, no doubt, for the Advancement of our Religion at home, and must be a most charm∣ing invitation and encouragement to Protestant Princes and States abroad, to Love and Honor England, if such Books shall be so kindly entertain'd amongst us, and those Holy Men whom God raised up to be the First Reformers of his Church, publickly ex∣posed and ridicul'd by the prophane Buffonery of every mercina∣ry Rascal.—But no matter for that till we see the Book abroad, —where do'st think I was to'ther night. Tory. I'le be hang'd if 'twere not some damn'd Conventicle, or Treason-whispering Club. Truem. Had Gadbury to solve the Question Try'd, That Louse-killer could not have guess'd more wide, No! no! Man, I was even at the Academy of Non sense S's Coffee-house. Tory. I am glad of that however, for since peoples going to Church, though driven thither in the Devils name, passes for a laudable Conversion, the very entring into S's must be esteem'd so many steps of Loyalty.—But prethee how didst like the Con∣versation? Truem. Why, the Room was large and crowded, and there was Fire and Smoak, and Hobgoblings in black, and swearing and cursing, and gnashing of Teeth. Tory. Why, thou describ'st it like the bottom of Hell? Truem. No, no, Sir! only an Antichamber an't please ye!
The Universal Buzz was against the Whigs and Shaftsbury, one magnify'd Craddock for an Hero, another Painted Wilmore black∣er than the Devil, a third was telling who should be Poculiz'd to, and a fourth who should be Hang'd first after that man en∣tred into his Office, a fifth was arguing how expedient it was to make a Bonefire of the City Charter, &c. when all on a sudden entred the Observator. Bless us! I shall never forget it, what cringing, and complementing, and Sir-reverencing was there! It put me presently in mind of the Play call'd The Lancashire Witches, where in one Scene the Haggs being Assembled at Sabbatt, when the Foul Fiend makes his appearance, they all start up and cry, Now, now our Great Master's come; Arise, prepare, salute his Bum. And so they go and each reverently kisses the Tail of the Goat. Tory. Leave your fooling, and tell us what said the Oracle. Truem. Nay, you may now have all his Discourse in Print for Twopence, he and the Company only predicted a brace or two of Observator-sheets to us. Tory. Now thou talk'st of predicting Sheets, I'le tell thee how thou shalt get to predict next Tuesday's Heraclitus. Truem. Though 'tis grown so horrid silly of late, that 'tis hardly worth a Stratagem, and the attempt will not bring half so much honor as attacking the Smyrna Fleet, yet let us hear it however. Tory. Go but on any Sunday Night to the Sun in Aldersgate∣street, and send up Half a dozen Bottles of Claret to the Select Cabal, and tell them a Gentleman below drinks the Duke's health to 'um, you shall presently be admitted, and hear the whole Manuscript read, canvass'd, debated and corrected. Truem. Well! I do not know any body so fond of a Goose Egge. That Paper had formerly some Witt with its malice, a little Salt now and then as well as Roguery, but now 'tis become a meer Caput Mort; The very Dreggs of Impertinence. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, May 19. 1682. Ite truces Animae, & Letho Tartara vestro Polluite, & totas Erebi consumite poenas. Whether Salvation may be obtain'd in the Church of Rome? The uncharitableness of Papists towards Protestants. The desperate Hazards ran by Roman Catholicks, &c. IN our Pacquet N. 18. We stated Three Questions, which we proposed to treat of in Order. 1. Whether the Church of Rome were a Church of Christ? 2. Whether Salvation were therein attainable? And 3ly. Whether a man may be present at Mass without sin? The First of these, in that, and Three other Pacquets since, we have dispatcht. Now we proceed to the Second; a point nice and difficult, and which ought warily to be handled, That neither excess of Zeal consume our Charity, nor conceits of Charity violate Truth, and encourage Error. The Papists look upon it as a Ruled Case, extra Ecclesiam non est salus, out of the Pale of the Church there is no Salvation, and He that hath not the Church for his Mother; neither hath God
for his Father; which Axioms are very true, if by Church they would suffer us to understand the universal Church of Christ, but they restrain that Term to the present Ecclesia malignanti∣um, the Apostatiz'd Congregation of Romanists, united to the Pope as their Head, and guided in their Faith according to the Canons of the Conventicle of Trent, and averr that all are Damn'd eternally that do not joyn with them therein. 'Tis a notable Rant to this purpose, of one of their Tribe, in a Book called The Reconciler of Religions, Printed Anno 1663. and De∣dicated to Mr. Laurence Dibusty of London, Merchant, p. 51. The Sacrilegious, Illicit, and Invalid Ordination, (saith he) of or by Story (which was the first pretended Holy Mission of Protestants, and from whence they hitherto derive their Orders, was not worth a straw, and consequently their pretended Holy Orders [he speaks of the Church of England) are not worth a Pins head; therefore they are no true Preachers. What are they then? Forsooth, In∣truders, Thieves and Robbers, Hypocrites, Ravenous Wolves and Murderers, Sons of Belial, false Prophets and Priests of Baal, which is their Heresie, Rebellion, and stubbornness against the Church. Now if the Protestant or Sectarian Preachers [pray ob∣serve, he makes no distinction between Church-men and Pres∣byterians] be such, what must the Protestants and Sectaries them∣selves be? If the Blind lead the Blind, shall they not fall both into the Ditch? Sure enough they shall, even into the Ditch of everlast∣ing burning Brimstone and Fire.—But yet more remarkable is that of Costerus the Jesuite, in his reply to Osiander, Pro∣posit. 8. p. ult.—Fieri nequit ut Lutheranus moriens salvetur, Gehennam evadat, ex Aeternis Ignibus eripiatur. Si mentior dam∣ner ipse cum Lucifero. 'Tis impossible that any person that is a Lutheran should be saved when he dyes, or can escape Hell, and be snatcht from Eternal Fire. If I lie in this assertion, let me my self be damn'd with Lucifer.—Nay in the Irish Massacre, and during the Bohemian Persecutions: The Papists several times told the Protestants, that they kill'd their Bodies in pure kindness to their Souls; for, say they, since we know all you Hereticks must certainly be damn'd. And that the longer you continue in the Errors in this Life, the greater will be your torments; therefore we cut you off thus betimes, that your pain may be the less, &c.—The mercies of the wicked are cruel∣ties, and this is the charity which Roman Catholicks so much boast of.
But God forbid Protestants should entertain such Sentiments, we dare not pry into the Ark, the Lord, and the Lord only knoweth who are his, we will not therefore presume to pass a peremptory doom, or affirm that no Papist can be saved, but this we may maintain with truth and safety, that none by that Doctrine, which at this day according to the Canons of the Council of Trent, is taught in the Papists Assemblies can come to Salvation. Though still we doubt not but in such their As∣semblies there have been from time to time, and still are, not a few, who although out of weakness they have Commu∣nion with them, yet either they never gave an hearty Assent to those more grievous and fundamental Errors which are there∣in taught, or were ignorant of them, or before their death re∣nounced them, and in the true Faith of Christ, though fullied with many infirmities, they dye and are saved. For as of old in Jerusalem, when it was most corrupt, there were still many there, who bowed not their knee to Baal, but did sigh and cry out, by reason of those Abominations which were committed in the midst thereof. So there is no doubt but under the Papacy such at this day may be found, who though they dwell in the Tents of Kedar, may yet be Heirs of Canaan; but these are not properly said to be of the Roman Church, though in it. Nor is this any thanks to the Church of Rome; she prohibits the true Doctrine of Salvation to be Preach'd, and advances Errors that utterly make void the Gospel, and suppose some Predicant Friar or so, should transgress the Rules of the Coun∣cil of Trent, and so Preach the Word of Life to the People, as that Souls come thereby to be saved. For Example, say he shall Preach unto them, that they must believe to be saved by nothing but the merits and righteousness of Christ imputed unto them. That they must not look to be saved by their in∣herent righteousness, but by the only mercy of God to them in Christ. That every one must have a particular Faith and Affiance of his own, for the pardon of his sins. That they must Worship God only, and pray unto him, and that in Christs name only. That there is no Sacrifice for sin, but that of Christ once offered upon the Cross. That Christs Blood doth so purge away sin, as there remains no stain, nor punish∣ment after this Life, &c. I say, if any Friar shall dare Preach thus, I deny not, but he may be an instrument of saving many
Souls. But in the mean time does not he fall under the heavy Curses of the Tridentine Canons? Is not the Inquisition ready to clapp him up for an Heretick? Do these that have imbib'd such his sound Doctrines dare avouch them, or are not they forc'd to recant and do pennance for the same? So that if any by some special providence, secret power, and unlimited mer∣cy of God, in the Church of Rome shall come so to believe, as thereby to be saved, both he and his Faith are disavowed, as not being the Faith of the Church of Rome, but accounted and accursed by her as Heretical. Therefore as we deny not but some particular persons, that outwardly seem of the Church of Rome's Communion, may en∣joy everlasting Life, so we cannot but look upon the generality of them in a very deplorable case, and their Souls in unspeakable danger; for the reasons following. 1. God saith expresly in his word, Rev. 14. That if any man worship the Beast, and his Image, and receive his Mark in his Forehead, or in his Hand, he shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God. And afterwards, he saith, all such shall be tormented in Fire and Brimstone. Now whoever is joyned or reconciled to the Pope, and submitteth himself to the Laws and Kingdom of Antichrist, doth Worship the Beast and his Image. Whoever openly professeth Popery, receiveth the Popes Mark in his Fore∣head. Whoever yieldeth to the practise of the Romish Religi∣on, receiveth his Mark in his Hand. Let them therefore consi∣der how they will avoid the Judgment threatned. 2. Our Blessed Lord and Saviour Matth. 15. Teacheth us that such worship God in vain, as teach for Doctrines the Precepts of men; But the Doctrine of Popery, as it addeth to Antient Ca∣tholick Religion, is nothing but a Mass of humane Inventions, Devises and Precepts. Their Decretals are the Popes conceits, their Forms of Worship contained in the Missals and Breviaries, are meerly Humane. From mans devise proceeded the Popish Worship of Angels, Saints, Images, &c. Most part of their Re∣solutions of Cases of Conscience, is grounded on the Popes Laws. Finally, the turnings, skippings, heavings, greasings, spittings, and other Ceremonies of Mass-Priests, and their Followers, pro∣ceed from man's invention. Popery therefore by Christs rule is nothing but vanity, weariness and vexation of Souls, whilst they seek to serve God, not according to his appointments, but their
own fond imaginations, and how shall a vain Religion bring any man to heaven? 3. We read, Rev. 22. Without are Doggs, and that Enchanters, Whore-mongers, Murtherers, Idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie, shall be excluded out of the Kingdom of God. Now, how like two Dogs do the Pope and his Adherents refuse and bark at Gods word, and bite and tear those to pieces, who seek to feed them with the Bread of Life. Not a few of the Popes have been Magicians and Necromancers; as Benet the 9. Gregory the 6. and 7. Sylvester the 2. Paul the 3, &c. And one of their Offices in their Church, is that of an Exorcist or Conjurer. They permit publick Stews, allow Concubines, and to Monks, Friars and Mass-Priests forbid Lawful Marriage. They have murdered and Mas∣sacred millions of Christians to erect and uphold their Anti-chri∣stian Kingdom. They set up Idols in Churches, and every corner of their streets, and in high-ways, giving Divine Honour to the Cross, and to the Images of the Trinity, and calling the Sacrament their Lord and God; and making Vows, Prayers and Confessions to Saints, and burning Incense to Images, and saying Mass in Honour of Saints and Angels. Finally, they do not only make and delight in Lies, as forging not only horrid slanders against M. Luther, Zwinglius, Calvin, and other sincere Preachers of Gods word, but also against all Protestants, asserting that we teach, That God is the Author of Sin, That Christ despaired, That there is no Hell but horror of Conscience, That good works are not to be practised or commended, &c. All which we expresly detest; Therefore these wickednesses in Papists, not being so much the sins of particular private men, as the natural consequences of their Tenets and ge∣neral avowed Practises of their pretended Church, must needs render the condition of any Soul in that Communion very dan∣gerous and hazardous. 4. No man can come to God the Father, but by Jesus Christ, as our Lord testifieth of himself, John 14. Who also sheweth, That he is the way, the truth and the life: And by his holy Apostle, 1 Tim. 2. teacheth us, That there is no Mediator betwixt God and Man, but the Man Christ Jesus. But contrary hereunto the Papists vainly hope and imagine to come to God, not only by Christ, but also by the Virgin Mary, by Angels and Saints; They also seek out new ways, and content not themselves with such as the infinite wisdom of our Lord prescribed unto us, and do foolishly believe
that the Pope by his Indulgences, and every Hedg-Priest by mum∣bling over his Masses, is able to redeem mens Souls. 5. Whoever buildeth his Faith upon other foundation than the Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, doth build upon the Sand, and not upon such a firm foundation, as will abide in the day of the Lord. But the Papists generally build their Faith up∣on the Popes Decretals, upon unwritten and uncertain Traditions, upon false pretended Miracles, lying Legends, and silly Fables; do they not then build upon ruinous foundations, and if so, what is like to become of the Superstructure? 6. By their own Canon Law, Chapt. si papa. dist. 40. 'tis affirm'd, That the Pope may be remiss and negligent in his Office, and silent in teaching, and lead innumerable people with him into Hell: Now if the Papists are to adhere to the Pope as their Head, and to follow him, how can they escape when he leadeth them into Hell? So that if they know not, or will not believe the Scriptures, nor any other Arguments, yet their own Decrees may teach them, that follow∣ing the Pope, innumerable Papists run blindfold and headlong into Perdition. 7. How is it possible that they should be saved, who are Igno∣rant of the means of their Salvation, who hold damnable Heresies repugnant to the Apostles Doctrine, whose Faith is Faction, and their Practises Idolatry, Perjury, Treasons, Massacres, and all kind of Abomination, and this conniv'd at, promoted, excused, justify∣ed, nay commended and applauded by their Church, as means to propagate the Gospel. But all this is too true of the Papists at this day, and therefore what Scripture grounds have we of hope, un∣less they speedily repent and depart from these Abominations. But if any man shall ask, what then is become of all those, that either now die, or in times past are dead in places where Popery is or hath been professed? We answer, secret things belong to God, we dare not pretend to sentence those that are gone, but would caution such as survive. Of those that held the foundation and lived good lives, we hope well; nor were several of the most destructive errors ever inforc'd upon the belief of men, before the Conventicle of Trent; and there may, and no dobut are many amongst the Papists at this day, who though conforming to them in outward Ceremonies, yet hold not the errors of Popery positively, but keep themselves to the old Apostolick Faith, and of such persons Salvation we have no cause to despair. God grant that the rest also may see their deformi∣ties▪ and upon what a dreadful precipice they stand, and revoke their errors, and hearken to the call of God to come out of Babylon, lest they are partakers of her plagues, and joyn themselves with a sincere heart to the true Church of God, and so be saved.
The COURANT. Tory. YOu see, our Reverend guide, disowns the Translation of The History of Calvinism. Alas! good pious man! he declar'd it unfit to be turn'd into English. Truem. Sure no more unfit than Pere Simon, which is sold in Paul's Church yard as commonly as the Practice of Piety. They were L'Estranges own Pupils that reported he was upon that Job, but possibly he may have dropt the Design, finding it smell too Rank; or thought it unfit to be Englisht in wholesale, That so he may more advantagiously retail the good Fathers notion in Observator's four times a Week. Tory. But for all that—He's satisfied, that John Calvin Introdu∣ced his Government and Discipline by a Rebellion, [Observ. N. 139.] Truem. Tho I have nothing to do with Calvin or his Discipline, yet I must tell L'Estrange to his Beard, though he wore a Sword three Inches longer than he does, That in this particular He lies (to use his own Phrase) like a Kidnapper, or any dying Jesuit. For the Bishop of Geneva had quitted that City, and the Form of Government was popular before ever Calvin came amongst them. The judicious Hooker (a Testimony more valuable than a million of Observators) in the Preface to his Ecclesiastical Policy, gives this account of that Affair. At the coming of Calvin thither, the Form of their Civil Regiment was popular, as it continueth at this day! neither King, nor Duke, nor Nobleman hath any Power or Authority over them, but Officers chosen by the people, yearly out of themselves to order all things with publick consent: For spiritual Government they had no Laws at all agreed upon, but did what the Pastors of their Souls by perswasion could win them unto: Calvin being admitted one of their Preachers, and a Divinity Reader amongst them, considered how dangerous it was that the whole Estate of that Church should hang on so slender a thread, as the liking of an Ignorant Multitude is; if it have power to change whatsoever it listeth: Wherefore taking unto him two of the other Ministers for more Countenance of the Action (albeit all the rest were against it) they moved, and in the end per∣swaded with much ado the people to bind themselves by Solemn Oath, First, never to admit the Papacy again; and Secondly, to live in O∣bedience to such Orders concerning the exercise of their Religion, and the former Ecclesiastical Government, as those their true and faith∣ful
Ministers of Gods Word, had agreeably to Scripture set down for that end and purpose. Now prethee, where's the Treason or Rebellion in all this? Tory. Come! come, have you observ'd Roger's Advertisement N. 138. What a damnable kindness he has for Dr. Oats—If any man will be so kind and generous, as out of an affection to the Pro∣testant Religion, &c. to call Simson Tongue to a Legal account, &c. Roger L'Estrange out of a zeal to a publick good, will furnish Au∣thentick Papers and Materials, &c.—What in the name of Non∣sense is the meaning of all this? Truem. Why, first here is Roger, honestly declares, that is he not a man that has any affection to the Protestant Religion; for if he had, he might (being so well furnisht with Tools and Materials) call Tongue to an account himself, without putting others upon it, if it be a business that will (as he pretends) be a Service to the Protestant Religion. But 2ly. There seems a greater mystery▪ Roger has more than once been tampering with this Mr. Tongue, and at Christmas last renew'd his Intrigue with him, much about the same time, Fairwell and Pain began privately to broach their Sham; now if Godfrey's Murder could have been turn'd off, and people been made believe that Dr. Tongue and Dr. Oats con∣triv'd and invented the whole Scheme of the Plot, so Artificially that it deceived the King and four Parliaments, and all the Jud∣ges, &c. Then how innocent would the poor Roman Catholicks appear? and what glorious Martyrs Whitebread, Coleman and the rest? But this trinkling with young Tongue taking wind, Roger cries Whore first, and fills the World with Exclamations, that Mr. Tongue forsooth! had a Plot upon—But Roger! Roger! for all your Lapwinging, there is more of this matter known, than you are aware of, and there will come a day of Reckoning. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The fourth Volume. FRIDAY, May 26. 1682. Quocunque aspicies nihil est nisi Terror & Orcus. That the present Faith of the Church of Rome is to be refused upon pain of Damnation. The Woes threatned to them that abide in her Communion. Greater the Sin, and more sore the punish∣ment of such as revolt unto her. The Judgment of the ancient Divines of the Church of England in the Case. TO reinforce and corroborate what we offer'd in our last of the extream hazard, all that continue in the Romish Church at this day, do run in Relation to their Eternal State; We shall now advance, and endeavour to Demonstrate the following Proposition, viz. That the Faith of the Church of Rome, is to be refused upon pain of Damnation. And First, For Explanation of the Terms.—By the Faith of the Church of Rome, is understood the Doctrine of the said Church, delivered to be believed of all men that  to be saved, as matters revealed by God to that end. And this is ∣sidered as one individual or singular thing, for though indeed it
be divided into several Articles of which it consists, yet it is conceived by themselves as one intire Body, because they are all knit together by the same Bond; namely, by being assented to and believed upon one and the same reason, and all to be re∣ceived on pain of the same Anathema—Thus Fisher the Jesuite (under the Mask of A. D.) in his Treatise of Faith, Ca. 4. — Faith must be intire, whole and sound in all points, and it is not sufficient stedfastly to believe some points, mis-belie∣ving or not believing other some or any one. —For not to believe any one Point whatsoever, which God by revealing it, doth testify to be true, and which by his Church he hath com∣manded us to believe, must needs be damnable, as being a no∣table Injury to Gods Verity, and a great disobedience to his Will.—And that Chamaelion the Arch-bishop of Spalatto, when he was return'd to his Vomit in his Consilium Reditûs p. 20. as∣serts the same.—All Articles (saith he) of Faith determined by the Church are fundamental, none of them may be deny'd without Heresie.—Thus every Member of the Church of Rome, must as stedfastly and absolutely believe the least point of Re∣liques, Images, Purgatory, &c. delivered by the Council of Trent, as the greatest mysteries of the Godhead, Trinity, Incarnation, &c. And if he deny any of the former, he is no less an Heretick, than if he deny'd any of the latter: Yea, though he believe all that they propound to be believed, save some one, he is for want of believing that one (if he know that the Church propounds it to be believed) a Miscreant or Mis-believer: The reason of which is this, that if the Church may err in one thing, it may err in an∣other, and so can be no sure foundation of Faith. Now to refuse the Faith of the Church of Rome, is nothing else, but not to acknowledge the Doctrin by her delivered to be true, but to abhor it as false; not of every particular point, but of all joyntly together: For we freely acknowledge, that the Papists do hold several great mysteries of Divinity truly and soundly, wherein we also agree with them, but yet we may not receive their Faith for true, as it is by them delivered, for one Intire bo∣dy of Divinity revealed by God, to be believed by all men that will e saved. So that to refuse the Faith of the Church of Rome is not to believe that it is true, or to believe that it is false, and this we say is required by every man upon pain of Damnation. Which words,—Ʋpon pain of Damnation are not so to be un∣derstood,
as if we presumed to pronounce sentence of Condem∣nation against all that continue in the Church of Rome, we have disclaim'd such Temerity; but thereby is meant, that the belie∣ving that Doctrin as a matter of Faith, is a thing in it self dam∣nable, that is, such as maketh a man liable to damnation. How it shall fall out with particular men in the event, we neither know, nor take upon us to inquire, only we say, that their mis-belief is such a sin, as setteth them in a state of Damnation. To prove this, we must consider, That there are Two ways, by which sin leadeth a man into the state of damnation: The one is, the desert or fitness it hath to procure damnation: The other is, the actual meriting or deser∣ving of Salvation. Into the former, sin casteth a man off it self. Into the latter he falleth as by sin, so by the Ordinance or Decree of God who hath laid the penalty of Damnation upon it. Hence ariseth this Argument against receiving the Faith of the Romish Church. That which maketh a man unclean in Gods sight, hath a fitness to procure Damnation: For unclean things are unmeet for the presence of God, and consequently meet for Damnation;—But the Faith of the Church of Rome, maketh a man unclean in the sight of God: For it is erroneous in so high a nature (as we have proved that it makes a man guilty of High Treason against God, by Installing the Pope in the Throne of God, giving him Power and Authority to determine as a Judge what is matter of Faith, and what not, without any Commission or Warrant from God. Nor do they only give him authority to Interpret the Scripures, but also allow him to set up a Forge [of Tradition] where he Hammers what he list∣eth, and Vends it to be received upon pain of Damnation, for the word of the ever living God. What is it to fulfill that of the A∣postle, 2 Thes. 2. 4. To sit in the Temple of God, shewing himself that he is God, if this be not? And must not all they needs be ac∣cessaries to this High Treason, that acknowledge such his Usurp'd Authority, and yield obedience to it? Or how can it be reason∣ably denied, that there is a worthiness and fitness in the Faith of the Church of Rome to procure Damnation? Therefore nothing remains but the Ordinance or Decree of God, to appoint Damnation as a punishment of this sin, according to the desert thereof. But that was passed long since by the Lord himself—You shall put nothing to the word which I command you,
Deut. 4. 2, & 11. 30. There's the Precept, and the Penalty is express'd, Rev. 21. 18. If any man shall add to these things, God shall add to him the Plagues that are written in this Book. But more plain∣ly, 2 Thes. 2. 11, & 12. The Lord shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe lies, that all they might be damned which be∣lieve not th truth. Here we see the Lord wrappeth them up in Damnation by his Sentence that believe Lies (that is) false and erroneous Doctrin, nor agreeable to the Truth which they ought to believe.—What then is wanting to them to make the Faith of the Church of Rome damnable, and the Professors thereof liable to Damnation, when both the thing it self deserveth it, and the Lord hath decreed, that they which believe it, should have ac∣cording to their desert? Since therefore it thus plainly appears, that every man is bound upon pain of Salvation, to refuse the Faith of the Church of Rome, in what a desperate case are those that continue in it? 'Tis not for nothing that the Almighty God of Love and Compas∣sion makes Proclamation by his Sacred Herauld, Rev. 18. 4. Come out of her people, lest ye perish with her, and partake of her Plagues. We have a famous example in that depravation of the true Reli∣gion, and setting up of Idolatry under Jeroboam, 2 Chron. 11. 14. The Levites [that dwelt amongst those Revolted 10 Tribes] left their Suburbs and their Possessions that belonged unto them [a great Act of self-denial] and came to Judah and Jerusalem, to do the Ser∣vice of the Lord in the Temple there. And after their example many people out of all the Tribes of Israel (that abhorred Jeroboam's Idolatry) came thither also for the true worship of God: They knew to abide amongst Idolaters would bring them to destruction. But if such wrath attend those that continue in that Commu∣nion wherein perhaps they were Born and Educated, and to which sinkt by so many Chains of prepossession, and hardned against truth with a thousand prejudices, what Indignation may those expect, who were born in Goshen, within the daily sound of the Gospel, and free tenders of the word of Life, in a Land of Bibles, baptized into a Reformed Church, engaged for by Protestant Sponsors, Educated by Religious Parents, and under the sweet distillations of Divine Manna, from the Lipps of sound and able Preachers, If such as these I say will be trudging back to the Gar∣lick and Onyons of Egypt, if these Apostatize after so much light, and embrace Popish darkness, What remains—But a certain
fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery Indignation which shall de∣vour the Adversary. He that despised Moses Law died without Mer∣cy under two or three witnesses; of how much sorer punishment suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under Foot the Son of God [in his Soveraignty, Laws and Ordinances] and hath count∣ed the Blood of the Covenant wherewith he was Sanctified an unholy thing [imperfect without the Virgins Milk and Saints Intercessi∣ons] and hath done despite unto the spirit of Grace.—As the A∣postle argues in the same Case, Hebr. 10. 27. It is reported by Ireneus cont. Haeres. L 3. Ca. 3. And by Eu∣sebius in his Ecclesiastical History L. 3. Ca. 25. That Holy and Beloved Apostle St. John, when he spied Cerinthus the Heretick in the Bath where he was, made all the haste he could possible to be gone, apprehending it dangerous to be under the same Roof with him. Yea the very Heathen (as Tully de natura deorum L 3. witnesses) being at Sea in a violent storm, were much afraid of being Ship-wrackt, because they had Diagoras the Atheist abord amongst them. I would to God some Protestants were but as care∣ful for their Souls, as (I say not the Apostle, but) the Heathen were for their Bodies, and used the same discreet caution to pro∣vide for their Eternal Salvation, as they had to procure their Tem∣poral safety. Neither was the Apostle any thing concern'd in the Impiety of Cerinthus, or these Heathens with that of Diagoras, and yet both He and They doubted some evil might befall them because they were in the Company of such profane wretches? And can any Protestant Imagine, that he may be free from dan∣ger, though he joyn in Faith with the Pope that great Anti-christ, though he harbour those Locusts, Priests and Jesuites, and converse daily with them, and hearken to their Syren Musick, and Imbibe their gilded poyson, out of that Cup of Fornication wherewith they have Intoxicated the Kings of the Earth? No, No, touching of Pitch always defileth. It cost Jehosaphat dear, though he were o∣therwise a good King for going to War with Idolatrous Ahab against a common enemy. For what said Hanani the Seer, 2 Chron. 19. 2. Wouldst thou help the wicked, and love them that hate the Lord? Therefore for this thing, the wrath of the Lord is upon thee. What then may they look for, who like the Laodiceans are lukewarm, neither hot nor cold, altogether indifferent whether they be Papists or Protestants, prepared to shift their Religion, as the humour of the Successor shall happen, such as are not asham'd
to declare beforehand, that they had rather be Papists, than joyn with any of the Reformed Protestant Churches beyond the Seas, that scoff at the very name Protestant, and make it the best part of their Religion to swear and damn and rail against, and perse∣cute all those pious peaceable Protestants that cannot (suppose it be through the error or weakness of their Conscience) come up to the usage of some insignificant Ceremonies acknowledged to be indifferent, though otherwise sound in their Faith, Loyal to their King, readily paying all Taxes, useful to the publick, and peaceable to their Neighbors, whilst at the same time these high soaring Nominal Sons of the Church of England (as they love to stile themselves, though there is scarce one in forty of them, but either is ignorant of, or does not believe her Articles) shall speak well of, applaud and caress Papists, and argue for their Principles, and extenuate for their Treasons, &c. what shall we say of such people?—The Lord Rebuke them. But least we should seem Fanatical in this assertion, that the Faith of Rome is to be refused on pain of Damnation, we shall here add some Testimonies of the Reverend Fathers and Divines of the Church of England. 1. The famous Jewel in the defence of his A∣pology, part. 6. Ca. 22. Div. 2. We have departed (saith he, speak∣ing of the Church of Rome) from them who have utterly forsaken the Catholick Faith. 2. Dr. Reynolds Conclus. 5.—The Church of Rome is not distemper'd with a little-Ague, such as hindreth not greatly the functions of life, but is sick of a Canker, or rather of a Le∣prosie, or rather of a Pestilence, insomuch that she is past hope of Reco∣very. 3. Dr. Whitaker de Eccles. Cont. 2. Quaest. 6. C. 1. hand∣ling this Question exactly, An Ecclesia Romana sit vera Ecclesia Christi visibilis; whether the Church of Rome, be a true visible Church of Christ, resolves it in the Negative and goes on; eam nos non modo non solam Catholicam &c. we say not only that it is not the only Catholick, but not at all Catholick, Not Only Not Catholick, that is, Ʋniversal, but we affirm it is not a true par∣ticular Church of Christ. Quare deserendam esse ab omnibus &c. And therefore we say, she [the Church of Rome] ought to be forsaken of all, who would be saved; as the Synagogue of Antichrist and Satan, it is not any Church at all, nullam in eâ salutem in eâ sperandam esse, there is no salvation to be hoped for in it. With which home Testimony of so great Luminary of the Church of England, we shall conclude.
The COURANT. Truem. VVHat hast got there so busily poring upon? Tory. By the Mass, a most Divine Scrol! and as I am credibly assured, found in the Friary at the late Fire at St. James's. I'e warrant ye, if I knew the Holy Father that lost it, and did but Restore it, he would streight forgive me all my Drinking and Whoring. Truem. Ah! but how would you come off for your Lying and Slandering the Whiggs with notorious scandals, which is your daily practise? Tory. Pshaw! all that's so far from Criminal, that 'tis meritori∣ous; but there's another thing troubles me, the Plague on't is, though the Priest compound one's sins with Heaven; he cannot get Releases from stubborn Earth; if he would but as easily wipe out my Landladies Chalk, and cross my Chirurgeons Bills, as he can mutter out an absolvo te, he were a rare fellow indeed! However I'le away to Thompson or L'Estrange (they are the two great In∣ternuntii of Intelligence between the Cloyster'd Monks, and the Lewd world) and have an Advertisement, and make the most on't. Truem. Prethee let's hear it first. Tory. I'le warrant, you had rather hear one of Baxter's tedious Sermons; but to vex thee, and shew thee what a dainty curious Religion we may with good Industry one day arrive at, I'le read it from the original Copy (if that be not one of Heraclitus's Bulls) as follows. A Revelation from God Almighty done unto St Bridget, First Printed at Rome in the Italian Language, afterwards in Dutch, in French, and now in English. Know my loving Friends, that when I was Apprehended of the Barbarous Jews, I received a hundred Buffets upon my Cheeks, and upon my Lips, thirty blows with Fists; when I was taken in the Garden of Olivet, I fell seven times, going from one side to the other, I fell often; and to make me rise up again, I received of the Jews two hundred and five Kicks; I also received seventy two upon my Arms; and eighty two Blows upon my Shoulders; I also re∣ceived twenty two Blows round about my Loyns, they drew me up by the Hair eight and thirty times; I was shouted at a hundred and five times; I have been drawn up by the Hair of my Head
from the Earth eight and thirty times; upon the Pillar I received one deadly wound, and on the same Pillar received six thousand six hundred fity six. Blows, I was whipt to the Bones too, and twenty times they gave me a hundred deadly wounds, with pressing on the Crown of Thornes: I had three deadly wounds upon the Cross, they spit upon my Face two and twenty times, the Soldiers that ap∣prehended me w five hundred and eight in number, and they that followed me were three hundred and three, of them that led me bound there were three hundred and three, I spilt out of my Body three millions eight thousand four hundred and thirty six drops of Blood.—They that pray daily seven Pater Noster's, and seven Maria's, until the number is filled of my Drops of Blood, I will give them five Graces: The First, he shall not come in Purgatory. Secondly, the same Graces, as if he had shed his Blood for the Catholick Faith. Thirdly, the Soul of his Friend shall have hope not to come to Purgatory. Fourthly, if he die before the number is finished, it shall be holden as if it were accomplished. Fifthly, they that carry this about them in De∣votion, shall not die without being visited of the most Blessed Mother Mary. Set thy Intention to give God daily thanks, that God for thy Salvation hath spilt so many Drops of Blood, that thereby thou may gain God's Grace, Amen. Truem. This is goodly Gear in Earnest! I wish you a good Market for't, but in the mean time prethee what's the meaning of your friend Hodg with his Sham-Letter from Scotland? Tory. Troth! I think the old fellow's mad, or has an ambition not to be out rival'd by Thompson in Roguery of that kind; what the Devil need he take such pains publickly to be the Papists Ad∣vocate, they can shift well enough for themselves, his Post is to pelt the Non-Con folks; really the man is grown too open of late, and our friends of the Crape-gown are forc'd to be asham'd of him. If he continue to scribble so many Observators a week till the Dog-das, there's no remedy, we must prvide a Lodging for him at Hogsdon, or an Apartment opposite to his quondam fellow Servant Oliver's Porter. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The fourth Volume. FRIDAY, June 2. 1682. Quid primum discendum est in Scholâ Christi nisi ut Re∣nunciemus nobis? Whether any Protestant may in compliance, or for fear, &c. be present at Mass without grievous sin? IN discharge of our promise, N. 18. we now come to consider this Question. Whether any Person that has been Educated in the Protestant Religion, and rightly in∣structed in the Doctrine of the Gospel; may if he happen to live amongst Papists, or Popery should prevail, be pre∣sent at their Mass, and Communicate with them in the rest of the Ceremonies by them used, without offending of God and ha∣zarding his Soul. By our stating this Quaere, the Reader may perceive we speak not here of those who out of curiosity happen to go into a Popish Chappel or the like, meerly to see the manner of their Foppish Ceremonies, though yet I must say even this is not unattend∣ed with danger, for as those that out of wantonness imitate Stammerers, many times come to stammer themselves against
their wills; so if People will thrust themselves into Temptation, who knows but God may give them up to believe Lies?—But that which we intend in this Discourse, relates to such as know already what the Mass is, but for some carnal reasons, out of fear, or in compliance with the times, &c. do resort thereun∣to, and this we averr they cannot do, without great and dan∣gerous sin. For, 1. Though God, by the wise Preacher saith to every man, My Son, give me thy heart, and that without the inward affecti∣on, all external Postures of Devotion are vain, yet it is also true, that God requires the whole Man, and we must serve him with our Bodies, as well as with our Spirits; for which he him∣self in his Holy Word Assigns the Reason, viz. Because the one as well as the other is his, since our Bodies are Redeemed with the Blood of a Crucified Jesus of infinite value, shall we dare to prostitute the same before an Idol? since they ought to be Temples of the Holy Ghost, will you pollute them with abomi∣nable Sacriledge? since they are designed for a blessed Immor∣tality, and to be partakers of Divine Glory: How vile a thing is it to sully them with assisting at loathsome Superstitions. St. Paul envying against Ʋncleanness, uses this very Argument. —Your Bodies are Members of Christ; how monstrously wick∣ed then is it to make them Members of an Harlot? when the Lord speaks of his faithful Servants, he Characterizeth them by this special note. They have not bow'd the Knee to Baal, nor have kissed his Hand. He might have said, they are not cor∣rupted with Superstition, or they do not own Baal for God, but to express that the same was not enough, the Holy Spirit by name declares, that they have not so much as by outward gesture exhibited any worship to the Idol, and does he not by this Description admonish us also to abstain from all such Pollu∣tion, if we would be accounted of the number of his people? But you will say, you keep your hearts right to God, and whatever others do, you fix your Devotion on him, and know that 'tis abomination to direct your prayers unto, or to expect help from an Idol, and therefore you address your prayers on∣ly to God, though with your Face directed towards an Image. With this very pretence, the Corinthians of old endeavoured to excuse themselves, when Paul reprehended this Crime in them, 1 Cor. 8. They went to the Feasts which were kept in honour of
Idols, and with others were partakers of those solemn Ban∣quets. But did they do this superstitiously? No, for Paul, as in their person, brings in this excuse,—We know that an Idol is nothing, whatever men esteem it, and that there is but one God. But the Apostle does not take this for a sufficient Plea, but tells them, that for all that, a weak Brother that sees them, may conclude that they do it in honour to the Idol, and so by your example may be tempted to Idolatry. When the wicked Sacri∣fice to the Devil, whoever in such an action mixes himself with them, adjoyns himself to the Devil, you cannot at once be par∣takers of the Lords Table, and of the Table of Devils, who∣ever chuses the one, must of necessity renounce the other. Were such evasions of a good Intention to be allow'd, how rashly and foolishly did Daniel's Companions expose them∣selves? Could not they thus have concluded amongst themselves, others indeed will Worship the Image which the King hath set up, but we though we bow before it, will still Worship the living God. In the mean time to avoid danger, we will go with the Crowd, and pretend to do, as they do, would such a Cavil have excused them before God? sure none will dare to say it. What then, shall we ame them for an incon∣siderate Zeal, that they would rather be cast into a fiery Fur∣nace, than by dissembling, derogate from the Honour of God? This we cannot do, because the Holy Ghost expresly commends them for this noble Resolution and Constancy, and Heaven gave Testimony to it by a Miracle; and what is written is for Example and Instruction. But how witty is man to find out Glosses and Colours to pal∣liate his Crimes; some fancy to eyade all this by saying: These things are true of Heathen superstitions, who sinned not only in using ill Ceremonies, but also by Worshipping false Gods, and therefore 'tis no wonder, if the Lord did so abominate their Rites, but this is nothing to the Papists, for though the Worship of God be corrupted amongst them, yet they have no other intention but to Worship the true God. But to this, I answer, whenever the World goes about to Worship God in a perverse and unlawful manner, at the same Instant it Adores an Idol with whatsoever varnish it may co∣lour its impiety. In vain do those that set up Superstitions Condemned by God, alleadge that they mean thereby to Wor∣ship
God; for since that the Lord neither hath instituted, nor will accept thereof, such Worship is exhibited to the Devil, rather than to him; For which cause the Apostle Paul speaking of those who turn'  Corruptible Image, says, they served the  Brazen Serpent was not made by the Capricio of men, but by the Command of God; nor was it only a Symbol of a Divine Benefit, but also a Type of Christ. In after-times this was abused to Idolatry, nor did that abuse want a specious pretext of the name of God: Now suppose any one had feigned to Worship that Serpent to accommodate himself to the Superstition of the Rabble, would any say he were guiltless? The Golden Calf was made by Aaron to represent the true God; but be∣ing against God's Command, and contrary to Truth, the Lord pronounc'd it Idolatry. The like may be said of Jeroboam's Calves, for he did not pretend to Introduce any new God, only set up those Figures to prevent his people's going up to Jerusalem to pay their Devotion, whereby he thought the State of his Kingdom would be endangered, yet still it was gross Idolatry, because he instituted a Rite without warrant from the Word of God, and contrary to the Divine Command. Now if any one had offered Sacrifice there, not cordially, but only in Complement to the King, would he have been inno∣cent? or do we read of any of the Servants of God, paying their Devotions there? or rather on the contrary, do not we find that God by his Prophets continually did forbid and con∣demn the same? Was the Temple at Samaria Dedicated to Jove or Mars, to Baal or Ashdod? No, no, 'twas Consecra∣ted to the God of Israel; but was it ever the more lawful to Worship there? Secret Idolatry though varnish't with the name of God, is prohibited, as well as that which is open, as was that of the Gentiles. But the better to understand wherein, and how far it may be lawful for a Christian to whom God hath made known the Abominations which abound in the Popish Church to Commu∣nicate with them, we must note, that of those things wherein they place the Worship of God, some are inventions directly contrary to God's Word, some other are depraved and corrupted by latter use, though originally not evil.
2. Some of their Ceremonies are in no sort to be excused, since they contain apparent Idolatry, others are vain and fool∣ish, which yet do not defile a man, unless he have entertained a Superstitious Opinion in observing them. 3. Some things are there wickedly Imposed and Command∣ed, which yet a man may observe without offence; others which neither can, nor ought in any manner to be observed. I shall not enlarge on each of these, 'tis enough in general to have hinted them, and to shew that I intend not to forbid a Christian Man wholly and without exception from Communi∣cating with the Papists in any Rite, Ceremony or Observation whatsoever: I only shew the danger of being partakers with them in what is plainly evil. As for Example, Mass is every day said, those that would appear Religious go thither, can this be excused? A Person but meanly instructed in the Gospel, cannot but know that that action is abominable Sacriledge. For how can any man bow down before an Idol (their Breaden God is no more) with a design that all present shall think that he does it un∣feignedly, and not sin grievously in so doing. If this be not Criminal, what means that of the Holy Ghost, whereby we are forbidden to have any Communion with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather to reprove them. I see a wicked work adoing, and odious to God, I thrust my self in, and make as if I approv'd it, with what Face, with what Fore-head can I afterwards deny, that in so doing I have sinned? For what is this, but to boast with those un∣godly ones of whom David speaks, Let us do whatever we list, God seeth not? But you will say, though you freely confess, that in the Mass there be many corruptions, yet in your Opinion it is a Remembrance of the Lords Supper, and in that respect you come there to be put in mind of our Lords Death. But tell us, I pray, what Similitude hath the Sacrament instituted by our Lord, with this Mock-Shew. For First, The Papists Ima∣gine their Mass to be a Sacrifice, which reconciles to God not only the Living, but also the Dead, and is this think you nothing? Secondly, The Canon, a principal part of the Mass, is stufft full of Execrable Blasphemies. Thirdly, Herein
are Prayers offered up for the Dead tormented in Purgatory, which we know to be altogether Superstitious. Fourthly, Were there nothing else amiss but that Diabolical Fiction, whereby they think that Christ is there offered up to God; That by that Act, the Sins both of the Living and the Dead may be Expiated; is not this to deny the Death of Christ? which is made of no value, unless it be acknow∣ledged to be the one only and perpetual Sacrifice. And is not the Lords Supper hereby Prophaned? These Pollutions can no more be separated from the Mass, than heat from Fire: And whoever comes to participate thereof, can he be pure and clean, doing such a filthy work; Is this the Ho∣nour we give to God our Father? This the gratitude we pay to Christ our Redeemer? That when we see them both thus reproach'd and dishonoured, we not only do oppose, but joyn our selves Companions in the Wickedness, and in∣vite others by our Example to do the like.
The COURANT. Truem. [Eading] THe Jesuites are hated by all the World, and yet they always Reign. They are like the Astro∣logers in Tacitus, Divinatuli genus hominum potentibus infidum, quod in Urbe & vetabitur semper & retinebitur, A sort of people treacherous to Princes, (deceiving them with fair promises and vain hopes) who were always regarded with horror in the City, and yet were always harbour'd there; they have been driven out of seve∣ral states, but they ever found means to Re-establish themselves. They are the greatest enemies, and the greatest friends to Monarchies, enemies to those where they cannot govern all things at their plea∣sure, and friends to those that intirely submit to their Conduct. The more Absolute the Monarchy is, the more they love it; for they themselves are also most Absolute, and govern their Society altoge∣ther Despotically; therefore they hate perfectly Aristocratical and Democratical Governments, because there they cannot make so grand a fortune, for to do it 'tis necessary they should be Confessors to all the Magistrates, and all that have any share in the Government, who yet still would not be so easily wrought upon, for 'tis not to be hoped, that they should all at once be brought to a Death bed, but there will still some survive that will not accord the Fathers those advanta∣ges they aim at; nor will the Popes Excommunications so soon make Impressions of fear. Tory. What the Devil art thou Mumbling there? Truem. 'Tis a late French Book that calls it self sure and honest means for the Conversion of all Hereticks: I was Translating a Pa∣ragraph of it, part. 2. p. 56. meerly for Exercise, 'tis good to be a little acquainted with the French Tongue, for who knows how soon a man may have occasion or't, and besides methought 'twas a pretty notable Description of the Jesuits. Tory. Prethee let the French and the Jesuites alone, they are honest Fellows, and mean England no harm; all our danger is from the Whiggs and the Fanatichs, this Preaching and Praying will undo us. I was glad to see the Blessed Work began here i'th Town t'other day, Bristol is a brave Example to follow; what though the Trade be lost, what's Trade to be valued, when Whiggery is in the Case? I hope to see all the Dogs Muzzled, and that e're long we shall have no History but Thompson, nor any
Divinity or Politicks but the Observator. And then people will be quiet and not disturb the Government. Truem. The Government we live under, ought certainly to be regarded with all respect and veneration, and he that goes about to disturb and vilifie it, deserves exemplary punishment. But there are a parcel of Vermine that horribly prophane the word, for though they are not fit for the Office of a Scavenger, they call themselves The Government. There was Tory Tom, a Wor∣shipful Journey-man Barber, who with half a dozen Ruffians like himself, the other Night way-laid and fell upon an honest Gentleman in Cheapside, that neither saw any of them before, or gave them the least provocation, and had 'tis probable mur∣dered him, if by accident one or two had not come in to his Assistance. Being taken up for this Exploit, O, cries Tory Tom, —The Government is on our side, will you send me to Prison for my Loyalty? as if the Government would favour Breach of the Peace and Assassinations, or Loyalty consisted in violation of Laws. Ask Thompson why he Prints horrid Popsh Lies three times a week, he'll tell you 'tis to serve the Government: Why did he endeavour to Sham Godfrey's Murder? No doubt out of pure Loyalty. Why did Roger forge that damnable double Printed Story from Scotland on purpose to raise false Scandals? and get an opportunity to vindicate the Papists. Why still, if you will believe him, all is for the interest of the Govern∣ment, when in truth such Villains pretences are the greatest Affronts in the World to the Government, and will no doubt in due time be deservedly punisht as such—Quod defer∣tur non aufertur. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, June 9. 1682. An non nimiae Impudentiae est Excusare opus, quo Deus contu∣tumeliâ afficitur, & proximi impelluntur ad exitium. A further detection of the sin of going to Mass, and complying with Papists in their wicked and Foppish Ceremonies: The Case of Naaman the Syrian explained. TO deterr any Sober Christian from daring to be pre∣sent at the Popish Mass; he needs only consider the horrible Idolatry that is there committed, where a bit of Bread is adored for God, and no longer e∣steemed Bread, but God himself. 'Tis most true, were the Lords Supper there rightly Administred, there would then be there a true Exhibition of the Lords Body and Blood, but it would not therefore follow, either that the substance of the Bread is chang'd into the Body, or that the Body lies included under the Bread: For the end of Instituting that Sacred Supper, is to elevate our Minds to Heaven, not to detain them in the visible Elements; but indeed by what right does that promise. —This is my Body which shall be delivered for you,—at all be∣long
to the Mass? Before our Lord promises any thing there of that kind, he commands the Sacrament to be distributed amongst the Faithful. Is this done in the Mass? No, but on the clean contrary, the Priest dispatches it all alone as a private affair, and on such a manner, as if he purposely meant to Excommunicate himself from the whole Congregation. Christ adds another Com∣mand, that we should do This in remembrance of him, shewing forth the inestimable benefit of his Death with Thanksgiving. But how can this be done in the Mass, where not one word is un∣derstood? but all things are whisper'd by the Priest with an ob∣scure murmur and unknown. Furthermore, the Lord directs his word to his Disciples, when reaching forth the visible sign, Bread, he promises them the Communion of his Body, but in the Mass there is no such thing, but the Priest after the manner of Conjurers or Jugglers, blows upon the Bread [sufflation they call it] that with a secret Exorcism he may Inchant it. And what is there in all this of God's Institution? can day and night be more different than our Lord's Supper, and this Romish Pagean∣try? What then shall we account the Adoration paid there to the Bread? Must we not confess it execrable Idolatry, more gross than ever was practised amongst the Heathen? and if so, tell us with what fore-head, with what Conscience can any Christian man dare resort thereunto, that he may seem to Conform, and do as others do? Here's an Idol erected to that very purpose, that it may be Worshipped and Invoked in God's stead, I come, and down on my knees, and publickly profess to adore it, what Fig-leaves, what excuses, what evasions can palliate so shameless a wickedness? But let us in some other particulars consider what these com∣plying men must do, if for sinister ends, and temporal respects, they will, against the convictions of their Consciences, joyn in outward Communion with the Papists.—They must not only on Sundays come to the Holy water Bottle and Mass, but also on Holy-days, a great part of which are instituted by Superstition; then there is a Mass sung in honor of such or such an He or She Saint: Now to omit that many of their Saints were little better than Devils, and that several of them as St. Christopher, &c. were mere Phantasms, Romantick Hero's, that never had Being but in the Lying Le∣gend, &c. passing by all this, I say, and supposing they were all Saints in good earnest, yet still here is a Mass sung in honor to a
person dead: Now what can be more vile than that the Supper of our Lord should be transported to such an abuse? Besides what Prayers are there used, are they not for the most part impious an fill'd with Blasphemies? and yet will you voluntarily interest your self in these Profanations, and countenance them with your presence and complying approbation, and yet hope to escape guiltless in the terrible judgment of a jealous God, who is of purer Eyes than to behold vanity, or connive at sin? There is none of us (I speak of those to whom God hath vouchsafed the Light of his Gospel) but is well satisfied, that the Obsequies of the dead, as they are practised amongst the Papists, with the Masses attend∣ing them and other appurtenances, are meer abominations, as well, because they are falsly feigned against the manifest word of God, as more especially because they extenuate and depreciate the ef∣fect and vertue of the Death and Passion of our Blessed Saviour. But now if it happen any of your Relations, Friends or Neighbours dye, you that call your self a Christian come with others to at∣tend the Funeral, you are prefent at the Masses, and pretend with the rest to pray for the Soul of the deceased; dare you offer to justify all this? if it be your Father or Mother that is departed, you will presently be smelt out for an Heretick, if you do not only approve of this Sacriledge, but purchase it with your money, and give so many shillings to some Priests to say so many Masses to redeem their Souls out of Purgatory. I will not mention the dam∣nable Superstitions you must run through at Easter, when you must prostrate your self before the Vicar of Antichrist, some wicked Popish Priest, who by the authority of the Pope, gives you Absolution, and injoyns you pennance, which perhaps may it self be as great a sin as any you have committed; as to murmur over so many Ave Maria's, to say so many Prayers before a Cru∣cifix, to buy so many Masses, &c. and to what end all this, why, forsooth, that thereby as so many Compensations you may satisfie God for your sins; if this can be approved and justified, I know not what ought to be Condemned. But furthermore when a man has thus spun out his days in Hy∣pocrisie, and liv'd in this filth, the last Scene is still the worst in the Tragedy, and that is when he comes to dye; then come the Priests and the Monks, the Devils Fans to Winnow him like Wheat, and though he knows they are the very Locusts that pro∣ceed out of the bottomless pit, yet out of complaisance he must
seem to hearken unto them, to be satisfied with their gibberish prayers, to be content with their lew'd Absolution and ridiculous extream unction, and under what throws and pangs and tortures of Conscience must such a poor soul lye, when he perceives he must immediately appear before the Tribunal of that Judge, whose Truth he dares not to acknowledge, especially when this Sentence shall Eccho in his Ears, that Christ shall disown all those as un∣worthy of his Kingdom, who have here been ashamed to confess him before men. But how fond are we to indulge our sins, and what sorry Shields will men make use of rather than not have some colour of pa∣tronage for their crimes? These Nicodemites, these colloguing Hypocrites, who think they can make a match between Light and Darkness, and at once pass Homage both to Christ and Belial, that they may seem cum ratione Insanire to offend God with warrant from his own word, plead Scripture (the Divel did so of old) for their practice, and alleadge the example of Naaman the Syrian 2. Kings 5. who being Miraculously Cured of his Leprosy, came to acknowledg the true God of Israel, and resolv'd not to Worship any other Deity, for so saith he to the Prophet Elisha v. 17. Thy Servant will henceforth Offer neither Burnt Offering nor Sacrifice unto other Gods, but unto the the Lord. But then in the next verse he comes with this Reserve—In this thing the Lord Pardon thy Servant, that when my Master goeth into the house of Rimmon to Worship there, and he leaneth on my hand, and I bow my self in the house of Rimmon, the Lord pardon thy Servant in this thing.—And the Prophet said unto him—depart in Peace.—Which say these men, implies an appro∣bation or leave for him so to do; if therefore it were permitted for him rather than lose the favour of the King his Master, to wait on him into an Idols Temple, and bow down and pay the external signs of Worship there, still keeping his heart upright to the Lord; why may not we for like reasons assist at Mass, since in our hearts we contemn and abhor it. This is the full force of the Objection. To which I answer, 1. My friend, thou that makest use of this Plea, I cannot but admire since in the word of God thou hast a general road, the Kings High way plainly set forth by commands, and hedg'd in with Pro∣hibitions not to depart from it, and trackt by all the Troops of Pilgrims to the new Jerusalem, wherein thou canst not err; why
dost thou rather chuke to decline and start aside after this parti∣cular Example, as into a By-path rarely troden, where easily thou may'st go astray? How comest thou so Eagle ey'd to discover thee private passages, and small Chinks and Crevises, and yet art so blind thou canst not see the Door? Canst thou be ignorant that 'tis a very dangerous thing to follow particular Examples without some other Warrant? For sometimes to some persons God as by a singular priviledge hath permitted that, which to all in general he hath forbidden. And many things he suffers, which he does not approve: We do not read, nor is it credible that this Syrian Ge∣neral was ever Circumcised, will you hence raise an excuse to avoid your own being Baptized? what if we should say, thou art more bound to confess publickly thy Faith, and abstain from all appear∣ance of Idolatry than Naaman was, because God has vouchsafed unto thee a greater measure of understanding; because somewhat was indulg'd to his ignorance, will you, who are many degrees be∣yond him in knowledge claim the save priviledge? How absurd, how rash is this? be not deceived, God is neither a Sophister, nor will suffer his glory to be fullfilled, or his Justice eluded by any Sophistical tricks or evasions? But, 2. This Scripture is by them abused, and being rightly inter∣preted, gives not the least countenance to their practise who al∣leadge it; For first you must note, that this noble Syrian, as long as he liv'd in Idolatry and Superstition, with great cost and pomp was wont to Sacrifice to his Idols, for the meanest men would strain themselves upon such occasions. But now what does he re∣solve; that henceforword he would only Sacrifice to the God of Israel. Now what was that less than to make a publick & notorious Pro∣fession of his having abandon'd the false Gods and only to cleave to the Lord? whence the world might as easily perceive, that he was no longer an Idolater, as if he had proclaim'd it with the sound of a Trumpet; For how could they doubt but he had cast off those Gods to whom he paid no more Offerings as he was wont to do? be, hesides loads away two Mules with the Earth of Canaan, whereon he might adore the living God, least otherwise by the contagion of profane Earth his Sacrifice should be polluted, which was another solemn testimony of his Profession. But afterwards he beggs pardon if he go into the Temple of Rimmon; if he did this, that he might counterfeit a worshipping of that Idol, it would be some pretence indeed for them. But the matter is quite
otherwise, for the words import only thus much,—If the King my Master shall happen to go into the Temple of Rimmon, and lean∣ing upon my oulder, shall worship there, though I bow down in civil respect to my Prince and Master, let not the Lord impute it to me as though I worshipped the Idol. The bowing of his body here intend¦ed was no simulation of Idolatry, but a civil duty which he was wont to pay the King. Those therefore that will defend them∣selves by this Example, must first purge themselves from all suspi∣tion of Idolatry, and openly show that they renounce superstiti∣on, and then we shall have no controversie with them, but till then 'tis vain and ridiculous for them to think to shelter their impie¦ty under this president. Another excuse they would raise out of that pretended Epistle of Jeremy▪ in the Book of Baruch chap. 6. where in v. 4. are these words, Now shall ye see in Babylon Gods of silver, and of gold, and of wood borne upon shoulders,— be not afraid of them,  but say you in your hearts? O Lord we must worship hee —I answer, 1. This Epistle is Apocryphal, and so not of sufficient authori∣ty, and 2. the words are nothing to the purpose; the Text only admonishe them when they see them, they should not be afraid of them, but instead of joyning with them in their Idolatry, should pay their Devotions to God. That of Paul Acts 21. is somewhat more colorably, yet well considered makes as little for their turn. Paul, say they, though he knew the Ceremonies of the Law to be abolish'd, yet to gratify those of his own Nation, shaved his head (according to Law, Numb. 6. 18.) and vow'd and perform'd a purifi∣cation after the manner of the aw, f this were lawful for Paul to do, we conceive we ought no more to be forbid the frequenting of Masses and other Popish mysteries, 1. I answer, 1. They are grievously reproachful, first to God in com∣paring a Ceremony instituted by himself, with abominable Idolatry, and in the next place to Paul, unjustly loading him with this infamy, for was it a Ceremony condemn'd by God which Paul used? or rather was it not yet an indifferent thing, 'till the Light of the Gospel should shine more clearly? 'twas certainly a thing for that time placed in the liberty of Believers, either to practise it or forbear. The shaving and purgation 'tis true, were part of the legal shadows, but yet a Christian might use them to Edification, it being simply no more than a Sacrifice of praise; and this is that which St. Paul else∣where witnesses of himself, That to the Jews he became as a Jew, and to the Gentiles as a Gentile, that he might bring them all to Christ. How preposterous is it then to bring this indifferent action to excuse those things which they know are plainly wicked, as if there were no difference between a mans shaving his head, and his bowing down before an Idol 2. Observe the Apostles scope, intent or end herein, had he done it to re∣tain the good opinion of men, or for avoiding danger to his person, it would have been something to your purpose, but 'tis evident he yielded to this compliance, only to avoid giving offence to weak Brethren, and that he might indulge something to those who were but yet rude in the Faith.
The COURANT. Truem. WIll not the blind self-seeking party leave Snares for themselves with their own hands to weave? Will not the Serpent cease to bruise their Heels, Whom he pursues, though broken heads he feels? Will harmless Doves never become so wise To know the Birds of prey through their disguise? 'Till they are all beguil'd with painted shows, And quite devour'd by Buzzard, Kites and Crows? Tory. What art thou mumbling over a Whig-charm, or some of Withers's Rhymes? prethee speak to the purpose, and tell us what news? how joggs the slippery world? Truem. I seldome read Gazets, nor much trouble my head with the motions of the superiour Orbs. Commend me to the poor ho∣nest Muscovite, who resolves all Inquiries with this profound Re∣ply, —God and our Great DUKE knows all. Tory. What, dost take me for an Informer, or an Irish Evidence? I do not mean matters of State man! But how fare our Observators, our Thompsons's, our Heraclitus's, and all our good friends? Truem. Brisk, bonny and rampant! O the effects of a promising Midsummer-moon! Heraelitus takes upon him to Libel Dukes and Earls Cum Privilegio, and bids defiance to Scandalum Magnatum, and all Law, but that of a Fullers-Rents (dgel. Thompson Re∣priev'd from the Pillory till next Term, hopes to hand it over to Michaelmas ('tis an easie matter to swear that Teague is sick, and Dermond and Shaire out of Town) in the mean time he vapours and swaggers, and tells the World N. 16. That he doubts not but to prove his damnable lies by sixty witnesses, if a Christian Jury can but be retorned. The meaning of which is, a Jury of Papists, for Nat's prompters acknowledge none but Roman Ca∣tholicks for Christians.—O Tempora! O Mores! What an age are we faln into, when such a wretched Miscreant, the Off scouring of Jayls, and common Spout of Popish slaunders, dares Arraign the Justice of the Nation, and scandalize the most Honourable City in the World, as if it contain'd generally a pack of Heathers and Villains, without honor, honesty or Conscience, so abandon'd to partiality and perjuries, that scarce twelve honest men could be hoped to be found amongst them, and all this with Impunity!
Tory. Well! well! honest Nat for all this passes for a Loyal useful fellow, and went very diligently last Sunday to see the Laws put in Execution against the Conventicle in Jewen street, for the hononr of the Protestant Religion.—But have you forgot Hodge? Truem. No Sir! but since he has got that infallible trick of a Scold, resolv'd to have the last word, 'twere no great matter (if for a pennance) we let him chatter alone, and observe upon himself for a Moneth or two. However, out of a pitty to the old Drudge, that he may not want Subject, and so be forc'd to trump up more Scotch Letters, we shall bestow upon him a Remark touching that passage Observ. 143. That the Inscription on the Monument is a rank reflection on the Papists: You must note this Inscription has long lain heavy on this Gentlemans stomack, and made it Rejounce several times before. Divers Parliaments have been satisfied that London was burnt by the Treachery of Papists; one of that Crew was legally Condemned and Executed for it; the whole Body of the City convinc'd thereof, ordered that Inscrip∣tion, and that great and upright Statesman, the Right Honou∣rable the Lord Chancellor, in that excellent Speech at the Sen∣tence of that Popish Traitour Stafford, (for which as I understand he receiv'd the thanks of the whole House of Lords) mentions it as a thing out of dispute,—Does any man (says his Lordship) now begin to doubt how London came to be burnt? Yet after all this, comes Squire Fiddle-faddle the Observator, Rowland Pep∣pins Herauld, Roger L'Estrange the Pamphlet-monger, and he, forsooth, will have it otherwise, and acquit his Clients the Papists of that Villany, and by his good will, would tear down both the Inscription and Monument. Which yet we hope shall teach Ages to come, To hate the Treacheries of Barbarous Rome. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, June 16. 1682. Hoc quidem vulgare est in mundo, ut quisque aliorum peccata Clypei loco ad sua tegenda opponat. Some other excuses for going to Mass where it is by Law established, weighed and found too light. The Plea of those that say they go out of Curiosity considered. A Pathetical Caution against all such sinful Compliances. WE have not yet run over all the little Excuses which our Semi-Romanists have got, for when once carnal wisdom and corrupt nature have en∣gaged a man in an ill act, they will muster up and furnish him with whole Regiments of Apologies, Evasions and Sophisms, wherewith to defend, or at least extenuate his practice, rather than he shall forsake his Dalilah, or abandon the silver shrines, and that craft whereby he gets his living, though never so unjust, wicked and unlawful. One of their Pleas is like that of Lot, begging leave to retreat to Zoar, Gen. 19. 20. Is it not a little one? (only here is the dif∣ference he was flying from, they are posting to [spiritual]
Sodom.) They alledge this is sure but a small offence to be pre∣sent at Mass, and we hope the Almighty, who is a God of In∣finite Mercy will easily pass it by, &c. To this I answer, though true it is, that there may be com∣parison between the commands of God, whereby some are great∣er and some lesser, as our Saviour pronounces Faith, Righteous∣ness and Charity to be the chief points of the Law, yet if we consider each command by it self, every one of them is of great weight, and by a willful breach thereof, we commit no less than High Treason against that Infinite Majesty, who is the Author and Establisher of such commands; nor ought we to esteem any thing small or light, that is repugnant to the Divine Will, especi∣ally in a matter of this moment, as we have proved it to be, tend∣ing to advance Idolatry, rob God of his honor, harden Papists in their impiety, and laying a stumbling block before weak Christians: Remember that famous History Recorded by Jose∣phus, and in the Book of the Maccabees, touching Eleazar and the Jewish woman with her seven Sons. All that Antiochus and the persecutors urg'd them to do, was only to taste a little Swines-flesh, a small business you'l say, what not eat a bit of Pork? and yet being expresly against the Law of their God, they all chuse rather to dye with exquisite Tortures, and the reason is notably given by the good old man, 2 Maccab. 6. 24. in these words,—It becometh not our age in any wise to dissemble, whereby many young persons might think that Eleazar being fourscore years old and ten, were now gone to a strange Religion. And so they through mine Hypocrisie, and desire to live a little time, should be deceived by me, and I get a stain to my old age, and make it abominable. For though for the present I should be delivered from the rage of men, yet I should not escape the hand of the Almighty, neither alive nor dead. 'Tis true, this History is no part of Canonical Scripture, but yet it was never esteemed Fabulous, but the Church has always reckon'd them for Holy Martyrs, and applauded their Faith and Constancy, and consequently must condemn those that practise the contrary. In a word, those that repute this feigned com∣pliance with Idolatry for a little matter, and dare join with Pa∣pists in their damnable Superstitions, know not how highly Gods Honour ought to be prized by all his Creatures, which have their Being to no other end but to glorify him, nor have sufficiently
weighed that Tremendous Declaration of the great Jehovah, Isaiah 42. 8, I am the Lord, my Glory will I not give to another, nor my Praise to Graven Images. Obj. You will say here's a stir indeed about going to Mass! will you compare that with the Idolatries of the Heathen? are not the Papists Christians? I answer, That the Church of Rome is no Church of Christ, we have lately prov'd at large; that she is guilty of Idolatry is apparent, & in this respect, worse Idolatry than the Heathens, be∣cause she is faln into the same by Apostacy: 'Tis an aggravation of her Crime that she was once a Spouse of Christ, a man resents more sensibly the Disloyalty and Adulteries of his Wife, than those of a common acpuaintance or ordinary friend. Nor is this any other than the Doctrine of the Church publickly profest and taught in her Book of Homilies, part the 2. p. 213.—The Church of Rome as it is at present, and hath been for the space of 900 years and odd, is so far wide from the nature of the True Church, that nothing can be more. And again, in her Homily against the peril of Idolatry, she thus plainly expresses her self, That [the Church of Rome] is an Idolatrous Church, not only an Harlot (as the Scripture calls her but also a foul filthy old withered Harlot, and the Mother of Whoredme, guilty of the same Idolatry, and Worse than was amongst Ethnicks and Gentiles. Thus thought, thus spake the Church of England heretofore, and whatever some young flashy heads (who fancy a Reconcilia∣tion with Rome, possible) may pretend, our Church till of the same Jugment, witness Dean Stillingfleet's learned Discourse Of the Idolatry of the Church of Rome; witness to that excellent and most true Assertion, publickly delivered by the Right Ho∣norable the present Lord Chief Justice Pemberton at Plunket's Trial, p. 100. That Popery is a Religion ten times worse than all the Heathenish Superstitions; so that we have the present Papists not only accused by our Church to maintain and practise Doctrines and Fopperies worse than Heathennism, and the Charge made good by our most able Divines, but also judiciously condemned from the Bench for the same. However it may be still Objected, what if Popery (which God forbid) should once again in after Ages gain the Ascendent of England, and the Mass happen to be Establisht by Law; may
not I, if I am a Minister brought up in the Protestant Religion comply so far as to say Mass, if it be done purely out of a good in∣tention, thereby to gain an opportunity of Preaching the saving Doctrine of Christ to the people for their Edification, who other∣wise will be bereaved thereof. I answer, as Jehu replied to Joram, talking of peace, 2 Kings 9. 22. What peace! so long as the Whredoms of thy Mother Jezabel and her Witchcrfts are so many? So what talk you of Preaching to Edification, when you practise shall lead to Destruction: This is an excuse that proceeds from the Belly, not from the Heart, he that makes it, whoever he shall be, has more respect to the keep∣ing a Fat Benefice than the Salvation of the people, or if indeed his aim should be right, it will not follow that what he does is not sinful; for good intentions can never justify bad actions, God indeed sometimes by his omnipotent providence can pro∣mote his word even by means unlawful, being an All-wise Artist that can bring good out of evil, but shall it therefore be said, that he approves of the irregularity, or that he is excusable that com∣mits it? when he that mounts the Pulpit to take upon him the Person of Christ by instructing the people in the Gospel, under his name and authority, and performing the office of an Ambas∣sadour from Heaven, shall fain a consent to abominable Idolatry, which is openly repugnant with the chief Scope of the Evangeli∣cal Doctrine, what hopes are there of Edification from such an Hypocrite? Let such boast their pious designs as much as they please, those Cobweb pretensions are all instantly swept away and overthrow by this one word of Eternal Truth, That no Evil is to be done, that good may follow. Others there are, that alledge they haunt Popish Chappels only out of curiosity, spectatum veniunt, they come meerly to see, but let them remember too—spectantur & ipsi, they are seen by men; which if Papists, may by their presence be Confirm'd in their Idolatries, and if Protestants, may be scandaliz'd and perverted by their Example, for who can tell what their Intentions are, when they do as the rankest Papists do; and (what is yet more) they are also seen by God, who will revenge and punish such their mispending their precious time, and abetting of damnable Superstitions. It is not safe to touch upon the borders of evil; Dinah in curiosity went out to see the Maids of that Country, otiosè spectat, sed non otiosè spectatur, her gazing was her vanity,
but her being gazed upon produced worse than vanity; far was it from her thoughts, that such a petulant curiosity should for∣feit her Chastity, yet we see what a fearful Tragedy ensued. Our great Grand-mother Eve express'd more than an inclination to Fall, in that she presum'd to hold Chat with the Serpent; Peter the Champion of our Lord (the only man whose Sword was drawn in his Quarrel) is so far infected with the Air of the High Priests Hall, that as he warmed himself at the Fire, so he cool'd in De∣votion to his Master, till at last he utterly denies him, and swears and curses to it like any Tory. Most dangerous it is to come within the smell of false Religion; Tertullian in his Book De Coonâ militis, cuts off all appearance of Idolatry, not permitting Christian Soldiers to wear a Lawrel, because Heathen Victinus were encircled with such Garlands, etiam Draco Terrenus de longinquo non minus spiritu absorbet Alites, faith the same Father. The Babylonish Dragon will infect with his Breath even a far off, and will you be so fool hardy as to ven∣ture into his Don? Will any except a mad man run into an house infected, to riffle for a rich Suit? or dip his hand into a fiery Cru∣cible to pull out Gold? or hazard his Soul for acquaintance with all Religions? and damn himself in a vain curiosity? Fly from Idols is the charge of the Beloved Apostle, 1 John 5. 21. I will destroy those (saith the Lord by his Prophet Zephaniah 1. 4.) that swear by the Lord and Melcham. Justly therefore doth rhe Apostle Paul cut off all Association with Idolaters (an Association worthy to be abhorr'd by all true Protestants.) I would not that you should have fellowship with Devils; no Society with Devils spiritually by having fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, Ephes. 5. 11. nor Sacramentally by combining in the practise of a false Religi∣on. It carries a special Emphasis, Numb. 25. 4. That Israel joyned (or as som. Translations render it, coupled) himself with Baal-peor and what followed? The anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel. He that will be safe from the act of evil, must wisely prevent the occasions; some indeed by a kind of spiritual Anti∣peristasis have thrived in Religion, by being inviron'd with He∣resie and Infidelity, but these men are presidents for wonder more than Imitation, their paths are not for ordinary steps. Who dares venture on the mercy of Lions, because Daniel in the Den found a guard? or commit himself to a flaming Furnace, because the Three Children escaped scorching, 'Tis merey above
expectation to deliver that man, who willingly casts himself into the mouth of a Temptation. To close this Subject, let us therefore beware of Blending Re∣ligions, of thinking at once to serve God and Mammon, of being both Papists and Protestants as conveniency serves. Those that are neither hot nor cold, God will spue them out. The Jews might not Plow with an Ox and an Ass in the same Yoak. The Church of Galatia might not indure the Co-partnership of the Jewish Ceremonies. If Moses and Christ might not stand together, much less Christ and Belial, the Lords Table and the Altar of Devils. Let us be united within our selves, and bequeath oppositions to the Monks, and persecution to the Inquisition; learn manfully and resolutely to defie Rome and Hell, come not within the pale or scent of her Idolatry, and be ever stedfastly zealous for the Pro∣testant Religion, whereof Truth is the circumference, and Jesus Christ the Centre. This resolution (to conclude in the words of Mr. Wotton an eminent Divine in the Church of England) will bring safety in peace, and in war victory, that no ill tidings shall affright you, (no Plots harm you) no losses discourage you, no menaces turn you out of the right way; the Lord Jesus himself, like the Angel in Joshua, will march at the Head of your Troops, and be as a Cloud to refresh you in the heat of Summer, and as a Fire to warm you in the cold of Winter, your Swords shall eat the Flesh of your enemies, your Pikes and Bullets shall be be drunk with their Blood, and Babylon shall be cast like a Milstone into the Sea, to the Glory of God that hath appointed her this punishment, the in∣crease of Religion, the safety of the State, and the honour in this Life, and everlasting Salvation in the Life to come.—Necessity of Separation from the Church of Rome, p. 295.
The COURANT. Truem. PUt case I say, that a Gentleman that scarce ever came to Church in almost twenty years together since His Majesties Restauration, thinks convenient (for Reasons best known to himself) to make a Solemn Declaration, that he is no Papist, &c. and that he intends to take the Sacrament upon't, and comes on the Wednesday to the Curate and Church-wardens, desiring them to be witnesses, and they or one of them (know∣ing him infected with the Itch of Scribling) tell him they will sign it, but would by no means have their names exposed in Print; whereupon he solemnly promises their names shall not be Print∣ed, yet on the Saturday following Prints them at large, and has them bawl'd about all the Streets, [see Observ. Numb. 126.] and yet for all this premeditated Breach of Faith, (at which an Heathen would blush) roundly goes next day to the Sacrament. —What would you think of this man, and the credit of his Protestation? Tory. I must needs think him a great Knave, and his Declara∣tion no more to be credited than a Jesuites under the Gollows. Truem. Hold, hold, or you'll be Excommunicated at Sam's, why our Old Friend in High Holbourn is the very man. Tory. How? Nay then the Case is alter'd: I'le lay a wager he'll deny it. Truem. So the Papists do their Plot, and so 'tis probable he would the Creed, when 'tis for his advantage; but his denial makes it nevertheless a Truth. The Gentlemans Trade is Leasing-making, and if that were half so Criminal in England, as 'tis said to be in Scotland, he had trudg'd further North-west long ago. Tory. Come, come, we shall have you in the Observator. Truem. I value the driv'lings of an Observator, no more than Harry Care does the silly Tories impotent malice in burning him in Effigie at Norwich. O Heavens! how some peoples Fingers itch to be at Fire and Fagot, and will play at small games rather than stand out. Had not the Writ De Haeretico Comburendo been un∣luckily abolisht, they would no doubt have been glad to have Roasted the poor Fool in bad Earnest; yet know no more harm by him than the Man in the Moon, only that he has the courage to write against Popery once a week, when swarms of Libels and
Pamphlets are scattered every day to promote it; I had almost said with Impunity. Tory. There's no fear of Popery man; hast thou not seen a choice Book Intitutled—Plain dealing is a Jewel, &c. Truem. Yes, though like the Pestilence it yet walks in darkness, I got a sight of it, by the same token, the Author p. 15. makes a Solemn Declaration (just like Brother Roger) That he is a Pro∣testant and never was at Mass (in England you must understand him) in his Life.—But the Devil cannot hide his Cloven Foot, for p. 12. he puts us upon Petitioning His Majesty for Mercy to the Few Papists in England, and to stop their Convictions upon their present prosecutions [poor Lambs they are shrewdly hurt. Yet some think more has been actually levyed on the Protestants at Bristol within a twelvemonth, than on all the Papists in England these seven years] and this he recommends as the only expedient to ease the poor French Protestants from the Persecution. Now I should have thought, that the Petition for a Cessation of Prose∣cution of Protestant Dissenters, would be a more likely medium for that purpose; for if we teaze our Protestant Brethren, meer∣ly on the Account of Non-conformity to our Ceremonies; do we not justifie the French King in Harassing those that differ from his Establisht Church, not only in Ceremonies, but most material points of Doctrine too? Tory. Well, but he tells you that if we should be Bless'd with a Popish Successor, yet 'tis impossible he should establish Popery. Truem. That's the most errant sham in nature, and some day or other when we meet, I doubt not but to Demonstrate, that in such a case (which Heaven prevent) the persecution on all forts of Protestants would be much more bloody and cruel than that in Queen Maries days; and he that does not already ap∣prehend why, is only fit for Laine Prayers, and drinking of Healths with an Huzza? Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, June 23. 1682. Tu Portentorum locus es, conformis eorum, Cum Nilo portenta paris, nutris Crocodilos. Theodor. à Nyem. L. 3. Ca. 41. ad Romam. The Papal History after the Council of Constance, prosecuted. The loud complaints of Clemangis and other learned Godly men of the miserable corruptions of the Church in those Times. The Life of Martin the V. His tricks to avoid a Reformation, he dispenses with a man to Marry his own Sister. THough we have made a long, yet perhaps neither al∣together useless nor unseasonable digression, to give our Country-men a true Idea of the Church of Rome, and what a necessity there is incumbent on all true Christians to abandon her Communion, and not pollute their Souls by mixing with her damnable Idolatries and Super∣stitions: We must remember to return and reassume the inter∣mitted not neglected Thred of Papal History. Which the Reader may remember we diverted from Numb. the 8. concluding with the flagitious and detestable Life and justly deserv'd deposal of
that most Holy Monster John the 23d. lias the 24th. and that most scandalous tug for the uerring Chair, which for several years depended between him, and Gregory and Benedict his two Com∣petitors, who being at last all three cashier'd by the Council of Constance: In their stead was set up Otho Colonna, by the name of Martin the 5th. The beginning of whose Popedome their best Chronologies assign to the Year of our Lord 1417. But before we proceed to the particular story of his Life, it will be necessary for clearing some passages that we may meet with therein, to take a brief review of the lamentable state and condition of the Church in general, in and about those times, which we find so sensibly described and bewail'd by several pious learned men of that Age, that their complaints seem rather writ with Tears of Blood than Ink. Amongst these, Clemangis Arch-Deacon of Bayeux in France, for his courage and zeal to truth, deserves to lead the Van; His Book De Corrupto Ecclesiae Statu, of the corrupt Estate of the Church, as it was produced at the Council of Constance, so it well deserves every studious Gentlemans Reading, that would fully satisfy him∣self touching the horrid abominations of Rome. I shall only select a few passages,—Having set forth by what steps and degrees the Church at one and the same time rose to her temporal height and spiritual declination, and by what subtleties the Popes engrossed all Dominion, and how greedily they and their Creatures the Cardinals hunted after gain, he proceeds to their further Cha∣racter thus.—They bear more patiently the loss of Ten thousand Souls, than of Ten Groats; nay, they regard the ruin of Souls with no consideration or emotion of mind at all, but for the least diminution of their own private pecuniary advantages they presently grow mad and furious.—The Study of Divinity, and such as make Profession thereof, are made a meer May-game and Laughing-stock, even (which is most monstrous) to the Popes themselves, who prefer their own Tradition far before the Commandments of God. And now that worthy and excellent function of Preaching, sometimes attributed to Pastors only, is of that base account with them, that they think it too mean a work for them to meddle with, and that nothing is more un∣becoming their dignity. The same Author in his Epistle concerning the Study of Divi∣nity, tells us, That in those days the Monasteries both of Monks and Nuns, [each Sex it seems was as bad as the other] are become so many
Brothel-Houses; their Divinity meerly Scholastick and Chimerical, the very same which St. Paul intended to describe by those words,— They dote about Questions and strife of words. Their fruits are like those of the Lake of Sodom, outwardly fair, but inwardly smoak and filthy ashes; Ecclesiastical Persons are generally the Successors rather of Simon Magus than Simon Peter: No man hath Orders given him without silver or gold, nor is any refus'd or debarr'd from the sacred function that brings mony, be he never so wicked. To such a prodigie of wantonness and debauchery are they grown, that their people the better to defend their Wives chastity from the attempts of these Clergy-stallions, will have no Priests except such as are known to keep Concubines. The Legends of Saints are read instead of the holy Scriptures, and the Saints brought into the place of God. And in a Letter to a Student at Paris, discoursing of the Council of Constance, he assigns several reasons why no Reformation of the raigning abuses of the Church was to be expected thence: For, saith he, these Carnal Sons of the Church do not only not regard spiri∣tual things, nor have any feeling of them themselves, but they persecute those that are according to the Spirit, as ever since the time of just Abel, whom Carnal Cain murdered, it hath been, and will be to the worlds end. These are they that for Temporal Commodities fly to the Church, and yet living even worse than secular men, they covet, scrape and rob all they can, desiring to bear Rule, but not to serve, glorying in their superiority, oppressing their inferiours, and rejoycing in their own pride and luxury. They account gain godliness, and are always ready to act or suffer any thing whatsoever for their temporalities, how lewdly soever they are gotten, scorning and laughing at all those that are de∣sirous to live justly, holily, chastly, innocently and spiritually; with such the Church at this day is so full, that almost in every Chap∣ter and College scarce any other can be found. And can we imagine that such will endeavour the Reformation of the Church in manners and discipline, and honesty of Life, who count that Reformation their greatest Calamity, and desire nothing so much as that it may be lawful for them to do whatsoever pleaseth them freely, without controul or punishment?—Thus far Clemangis of the manners of the Dignified Clergy, almost 300 years ago, and I wish the Picture may not serve too well for some Ages since. Nor was he the only complainant, Cardinal Zabarella a famous Lawyer in his Treatise De Schismate, written about the year 1406, talks much at the same rate, and affirms, That with the flattering
Canonists there was nothing so unlawful, which they thought not law∣ful for them to do, insomuch that they extolled the Pope above God himself, making him more than God, so that (saith he) if God afford not his helping hand to the present state of the Church, it is in danger of an utter overthrow. Nor was John Gerson the Learned Chancellour of the Parisian University (who was also one of the Assistants at the Council of Constance) silent. In his Book De Examine Doctrinarum, It is not (saith he) in the power of the Pope or any Council to change what is prescribed by the Evangelists and St. Paul, as some do Dote: Yea, we are to give more credit in a matter of Doctrine to the assertion of a simple unlearned man speaking according to the Scriptures, than to the Declaration of the Pope or Council, being contrary thereunto. We have seen in what a maimed condition the Church was, and that there were some able Physicians that both saw, and might they have been suffered, were able 'tis probable to have cured her wounds: Nay, all the Empericks at Constance pretended at least the same design. But they made use of but an ill expedi∣ent, when they elected the before-mentioned Martin the Fifth. For though in the Council he had carried himself very subtilly, and under colour of moderation had not only avoided opposing either party, but given each side grounds to hope him most in∣clinable to their particular Faction, which much facilitated his choice, the rather for that the Emperour was much taken with that stayedness of his temper, and expected no small fruits of Re∣formation from so unbiass'd a Conduct, yet no sooner were his Temples Impaled with the Triple-Crown, but he appeared divest∣ed of that moderation which before he made shew of, and wholly addicted to advance the secular interest, Dominion and Treasure of his Chair. Therefore when soon after his Election, the Emperor Sigismund, who had had so great an influence in his promotion, press'd him earnestly to proceed on vigorously with the promised Reformation, the crafty old Father wheadled it off, That the Bishops &c. continuing so long together at Constance, was a great inconvenience to their respective Churches and charges; that there∣fore it was now very necessary to give them a short recess? that Re∣formation was a thing highly needful, but withal being a matter of great importance, it required mature deliberation. Therefore he thought fit to dissolve the Council at present, on condition that another should be call'd within 5 years, and in the mean time he would endea∣vour
to prepare matters; and that afterwards in 7 years they should have another Council, and thence forwards for ever a Decennial one, that is to say, a general Council every 10 years should be con∣ven'd and sit to Redress the grievances of the Church.—Having Cajoled them with these fair stories, to make them the rather believe that he was in honest earnest, he presently ordains and appoints a place for the next general Synod, viz. That it should be held within 5 years at Pavia in Italy. And then in the 45th. Session (they having done very little, or indeed nothing towards Reforming the Root of all the Churches corruptions, but only fiddle-fadled about number of Canons for ordering of Annates, Collations, Reserved Causes, Appeals, Commendums and the like Ec∣clesiastical Trumpery, comes Cardinal Winbald, (like the Popes Chancellor) and dissolves them, by pronouncing these words— Domini ite in pace—My Lords, you may be packing, or get ye gone in peace. Which was done, saith Platina, sublato omnium consensu maximè verò Imperatoris, without any of their consents, but especially against that of the Emperour. Nor could the Emperour prevail with Martin to continue a while in Germany, but he would away for Rome, alledging that in the absence of the Popes, the Saints Chappels were gone to de∣cay, and (which was a more cogent reason by half) Tyrants had seized a great part of St. Peter's Patrimony. He was no sooner got into Italy, but he engaged in several wars, and reduced the Dutchy, Spoletto, Perusia, Bononia and other places which had set up for themselves: He likewise made Lewis of Anjou King of Naples, though Joan the Queen thereof had before declared Al∣phonsus King of Aragon her Hir. The time being come for holding the Council at Pavia, the Pope for fashion sake sends thither one Arch-bishop, a Bishop, an Abbot and a Friar, who met there only two Abbots of Burgundy, and these six began forsooth a Council; a Worshipful Representa∣tion of the whole Catholick Church on Earth! But the Plague breaking out, they adjourn'd from thence to Sena, where things not fadging just as Pope Martin would have them, he quickly gave that Assembly too a Writ of Ease, without their effecting any thing. But for a colour still promises to call frequent Councils, and that next seventh year they should have one at Basil. Having thus sham'd off the means of Redressing the Churches grievances, and correcting abuses, he settles at Rome, and begins
to reedify several decay'd buildings, which the Romish Historians gloriously Intitle Restoring the Church. But his main business was to scrape money together. For saith Antoninus, He was generally blam'd as one that too greedily labour'd to heap up riches, being in no wise able to say with the Apostle (whose Successor he pretended to be) silver and gold have I none. But all his vast Treasure was lewdly consumed by his Kinsmen, and especially by his Nephew the Prince of Salerno, to whom it fell by his death, he bestowing most of it on hired Soldiers and Enemies against the Church. And now he had spun out the time, till the Council at Basil was to Assemble, how he would have shuffled it off, or rendred it insignificant, we know not, since then God was pleased to cut him off, dying of an Apoplexy the 20 of February 1431. in the 53 year of his Age, and when he had held the Chair 13 years 3 months and 12 days. This is that Pope whom many flattering Popish Authors extol for his vertues to the Skies, when yet besides his sordid covetous∣ness and other pranks before-mentioned, Angelus de Clavasio, a Friar Minorite, in his Book call'd Summa Angelica, in the word Pope affirms, that this very Martin after long consultation, gave a man leave to marry with his own Sister, dispensing with the Po∣sitive Law of God and Nature. This Pope likewise was a very busie stirrer up of persecutions and bloody wars against the poor Bohemians as Hereticks, they having sometime before embraced Wickliffs Doctrine. But of this, and the other troubles of those people for the sake of the Gospel, we shall take another opportunity to discourse.
The COURANT. Truem. MEthinks you look Cloudily to day, Monsieur Tory? does Tuesdays Verdict stick in your Gizzard? would not the Sham take? Could not poor Nat get a Christian Jury (as he call'd it) that might believe the Sun was a Bottle of Ink, and that Sir Edmondbuy Godfrey Killed himself 4 days after he was Murthered? Tory. Prethee why dee talk so? you know I never justified that story, I think 'twas very ill done, and the Contrivers of it deserve to be punisht. Truem. Why, this 'tis, for a man to be unfortunate, and down the wind; his friends streight abandon him, as vermine run from falling Houses. All the while bonny Nat was towring upon the wing, alarming the world with his Regiments of Five-Hundreds, and his Troops of Sixty's, that should Swear Canon-pooof, and drive the Nail home and Clench it, then you and all your party appeared openly in favour of the welcome News—I know not what to think on't, says one, I was never satisfied in that business of Godfrey's Murder. Nay, quoth a second, there are shrewd Circumstances in these two Letters to Prance, they are ingeniously Pen'd, and a great deal of weight in them. Alas, Sir! adds a third; 'tis not to be doubted but he can make it all out (and by such a number of Protestant Witnesses too, not so much, you see, as a suspected Papist is concerned) else you must think he would never write so confidently, I fancy here will be a notable discovery, and then what will become of Madam Plot, when she has lost one of her main Crutches. Damme, concludes the fourth man, that story of Godfrey's being Killed at Sommerset-house was all Bubble; why the Divel should the Papists meddle with him? the three poor fellows were meerly sworn out of their Lives, and so were all the rest; that noise of a Popish Plot was nothing in the world but an intrigue of the Whigs to destroy the Kings best Friends, and the Devil fetch me to Hell in a Hand basket, if I might have my will, there should not be one Fa∣natical Dog left alive in the three Kingdoms.—This Gentlemen was wont e're while to be the stile of Discourse at Sam's and Margarets, and now when the Oracle Nathaniel's 600 and 60 witnesses are dwindled to half a dozen, and they only serv'd to prove him and his associates impudent lying villains, and that he
is like to scour a Pillory; do you desert the Cause, and come sneaking like a Quaker, and Cry—Friends never own'd it? Tory. A Pillory! never fear it. Nat Ile promise you has friends in a Corner; what he did was only to Print the Papers for money in the way of his Trade, and he has discover'd his Authors, what would you have more of the honest man? Truem. I will not presume to prejudge his doom; I doubt not but the Reverend Judges will do him and the Nation Right, but for what you alleadge, that he did it for others, in way of his Trade, will for him be but a vain excuse; for he has made it his own Act, he did not do it Ignorantly, or by surprize, not imposed upon by false Information, or mistake, but willfully, and with a malicious design, as appears, 1. For that it was contrary to his own personal knowledge, he himself view'd the Boy at the White-house (as is proved by Affidavit) and from the Testimony of his own Eys, he himself then Printed that there was no Blood, that it was evident he was strangled, &c. 2 When he first publisht his pre∣tended Sarum-Letter (which was only to sound the waters) there was pre∣sently a satisfactory answer return'd, yet soon after he Printed his first Let∣ter to Prance, and that too being solidly refuted, he flung out a second, and has himself all along in his Intelligence, and by word of mouth espoused the thing and boasted he would prove it sometimes by 500, sometimes by 60 witnes∣ses. Nay since the very last Term, has vapored in Print at the same rate, and endeavoured before hand to cast a scandal on any Jury that should try him. Now if such a man, in such a cause, wherein the honor of the King, and of the Justice of the Nation, and the whole Protestant Interest is so highly concern'd, and so impudently arraigned and aspersed, shall escape without some exemplary mark from that Justice, which he has so daringly affronted, it might prove an unaccountable precedent. Tory. But what should be his design in all this? Truem. We need not go to Gabury to discover that; 'tis plain it was to sham off the belief of the Popish Plot, that it may still proceed; to excuse the Papists from that barbarous murder, and fix the Odium of being guilty of innocent blood on the King and his Judges, and all the Protestants in the Nation▪ for putting Green, Berry and Hill to death wrongfully, And this alone, methinks should open your eyes to see through the boasted Loyalty of Thomp∣son & all such fellows, and their kindless forsooth to the Church of England, and what interest it is, that under that disguise they serve. And to shew all the world that the Popish Plot is still working on, for it can never be imagined that three such little inconsiderable fellows would ever have troubled their heads with such a business, or dar'd to have broach'd it in that audacious manner, had not men of wier heads and greater figure abetted them. Though Pin and Farwell own'd themselves Authors of the Letters, yet if ever the matter can be throughly sifted, Te wager that a Jesuit or Priest was the Composer of them. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, June 30. 1682. Infanda Tellus, quáque vix pejor stygem Vehit profundis apta suppliciis humus, Quousque sae vos, misera lassabis Deos Experta Fulmen?— An excellent discourse of Clemangis, that we ought to depart out of Babylon. The story of Pope Eugenius IV. who is deposed in the Council of Bazil. IN our last we mentioned the Complaints of Clemangis, the Reverend Arch-Deacon of Baior, touching the lamen∣table corrupt state of the Church, and shall now add another notable discourse of his, in an Epistle to Gerrard Market a Doctor of Paris, which though somewhat long, we chuse to recite, not only for the Excellency of the matter, and to shew what sentiments that good man had of the Church of Rome, in those days, that it was even become Babylon; but also because the Papists by their Expurgatory Indices have utterly endeavour'd to suppress it, leaving out the said whole passage in such Editions of that Author's works, as are Printed amongst them, being as follows,
That we are to fly out of Babylon, according to the admo∣nitions given in both Testaments, thou confessest; but dost suppose that flight is not to be understood Corporally, changing the place, but spiritually, not imitating the Corrupt manners of the wicked. Truly what thou say'st is not amiss, yet sufficeth still not for a full resolution. Was not the Patriarch Abraham commanded to depart out of his own Country, and from his kindred and fathers house, non solum Affectu sed etiam Effectu, not only in Affection but actually, nay his bodily departure is first commanded, and then he is enjoin'd to withdraw his very mind and thoughts from it too; and the reason is, because the Inhabitants were Idolators. Turn over the whole Canonical History, and thou shalt not find that God hath ever poured down his Vengeance upon any Babylonical Congregation of men, but that first consulting the safety of the Righteous, if any were amongst them, he called them forth, left being cover'd with the wicked, as it were under the same Roof, they should perish in they same destruction.—Thou wilt say perhaps whether shall we fly? there is no place where Babylon is not, no City that is not Drunk with the Cup of her Fornication: But tell me I pray, have you seen all the Cities, that you can give so absolute a sentence of every corner? Our Saviour teaches his Disciples, if they were Persecuted in one City to fly unto another; and lest they should make this very objection, that there were no Cities to which they could retire themselves, he taketh away the excuse by adding—Verily I say unto you, that you shall not go to all the Cities of Israel until the Son of man come; plainly inti∣mating thereby, that there should be always Cities, dedicated to the honour of his name, unto which in times of Persecution they might fly, now what Persecution is more to be avoided than that which constrains men to do that which is wicked, execrable and contrary to the Law of God, where not only sound Doctrine is not received, but such are cruelly tormented that contradict their wills? what wilt thou do there, where if thou propose any thing that is good, no man will hearken to thee? and if any man commit wickedness thou shalt be con∣strained to imitate it; where if thou give sound Judgment of any thing, they will say thou art beside thy self, [a Fanatick] but if thou art furious and mad, thou shalt be counted wise; and
if thou withstand the violence of their perversness, thou shalt reap to thy self another fruit, but an iplacable hatred with the danger of thy Life, what is it to be made drunk with the Cup of Babylon, but by a long conversation there to be so infected with Contagion as following the wandring multitude to embrace falshood for truth? for whereas thou sayst that that man flieth from Babilon according to the Exhortation of the Prophet, who though he may live in the midst of a wicked and perverse Nation, differs from them, nevertheless in his life and Conver∣sation; know that this indeed sufficeth as long as the violence of the fury compelleth not a man to wickedness, and so long as Gods mercy tollerateth the sins of the place, not yet grown to full height. But where their state is desperate and past hope of amendment, and from all parts send up a continual cry to Heaven for vengeance, whoever willfully abideth there, and dreadeth not the Thunderbolts of divine wrath, how different so ever he may be in his private sentiments and manners, is guilty of a sinful stupidity. 'Tis true, if thou seek here an assured settled Rest in all respects, thou seekest Impossibi∣lities, and wilt never find it, neither within or without thee. All things are full of War, confusion, danger, every thing encompassed with snares and subtleties, neither canst thou re∣tire the within thy self; but they follow thee. But yet notwith∣standing though there be something of Babylon every wheere yet that Babylon is not every where, that is the mother of For∣nications and Abominations of the Earth, whose Judgment, as John saith, is Ascended up to the Heavens, which hath made drunken all the Nations with the Wine of her Whoredom, and constraineth all her Inhabitants to Commit Fornication, to Blaspheme, to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and to Worship the Dragon, with which impieties whosoever is polluted, how can he find peace within himself, except he hate the Fornications of that Whore; forsake, Condemn and detest them? To which whosoever shall adhere, is made one body with her, because so long as he converseth with her, he cannot be freed from her manners, being by force and fury drawn unto them, &c. Thus far Clemangis on that subject, and that the Church of Rome at that time was grown the very Babylon, which he descri∣beth, wherein was Confusion and every evil work, is apparent from the Histories of that Age.
Pope Martin dying Anno 1431. one Gabriel Condelmere, a Venetian, descended of a mean family, was Elected and assum'd the name of Eugenius the 4th, and holding a Consistory imme∣diately after his Coronation, such a multitude flockt together, that the whole Pallace totterd, and the people run out in such confusion fearing it would fall upon their heads, that one Bishop was Kill'd. Some Informers giving this new Pope notice that Martin his Predecessor had left vast Treasures to his friends and Nephews, he would needs force them to surrender it to him, and in order thereunto Imprisoned the said Martins Vice-Chamberlain, and great heart-burnings arose in the family of the Colunni against him. Pope Martin before his death had assigned a Council, and sent thither as his Legate, Julian Cardinal of St. Angelo, who had began the meeting, but Eugenius had little stomach to Confirm it, because they had been so sawcy as in the very second session to declare—That the Pope himself in those things that appertain to faith is bound to obey a General Council, which if he refus'd to do, unless he repent, Let him be duly punisht. And indeed he endeavoured to play a Shamm, by offering to refer it to Bononia, under pretence that the Greeks (who were now upon some overtures for a Reconciliation with the Latin Church,) could more easily repair thither. But the Emperour Sigismond fearing delays, wrot to him very earnestly of the mis∣chiefs that would happen by such Translation of the Council; and how much all Christian Princes would be dissatisfied therewith. And withall prepares to come himself into Italy, whereupon the Pope more out of fear than good will, approves of the Council of Basil, and confirms the Legantine power of Cardinal Julian. The Emperour Sigismond comes to Rome; but the Pope re∣fus'd to Crown him, unless he would first promise to Ratify the pretended donation of Constantine, and also grant all those things de novo, and swear forthwith to depart Italy: All which Valla cannot mention without Indignation,—what (saith he) would be more absurd than to be crown'd Emperor, and at the same time renounce Rome to be Crowned of him, who he confesseth and (as much as in him lieth) maketh Lord of the Roman Empire? And to Ratify a donation, which if it be true, leaveth to the Emperor nothing of the Empire? which I think Children would not have done. I shall not mention all the quarrels of this Pope, the greatest part of whose times was spent in Wars and Bloodshed; insomuch
that the Romans not able to endure his Cruelties, once drove him out of the City, making him run away in the habit of a Monk, and pelting him with durt and stones, whence he retired to Florence, and remained there some time; but having by his friends again reduc'd Rome to his obedience, he used greater severities, than ever, and notwithstanding he had so approv'd of the Council of Basil, yet now will needs dissolve it, and accor∣dingly recalls Cardinal Julian, his Legate, from thence; on the other side the Fathers of the Council, by their Letters first intreat, and afterwards admonish him to come thither himself, or at least not to disturb the peace of the Church, by offering to obstruct their proceedings, but he persisting, and appointing another Anti-Council at Ferrara, they formally Cite, Accuse, Adjure, suspend, and at last depose him from the Popedome, and in his room Elect Amades Duke of Savoy, by the name of Felix the Fourth; who before led an Hermits Life on the Banks of the Lake of Lausanna. However Eugenius still swagger'd as Pope in Italy, and having got together a Conventicle of Cardinals, (most of their own making) and others in Ferraria, in the year 1438. (and next year by reason of the Pestilence removed to Florence,) John Palaeologus the Emperor of the East, and several Bishops of the Greek Church, upon a treaty that had been advanc'd for a Re∣conciliation between the two Churches, resolved to have a per∣sonal Conference, and being at Sea, upon his Voyage for Italy, Charles the 7th King of France, who sided with the Council of Basil, sent forth a Fleet of Gallies into the Ionick Sea, to meet him; and acquaint him that the lawfull Council was held at Basil, not at Florence, and therefore to perswade him to Land in France, whence he should be honourably Conducted to Basil. But the Pope understanding this design, by large Bribes Corrupts the Admiral of the French Gallies, who willfully steering a wrong course, misses the Emperour, and so he Lands in Italy. The presence of this Emperour and the noise of an Ʋnion like to be patcht up between the Two Churches, added not a little lustre to the Popes Council; yet the proceedings of the Council of Basil extreamly troubled him, and against them he and his Coun∣cil published several Bulls and writings, wherein they blush not to affirm, That it was so far from truth, That he ought to obey general Councils, that he then most merited when he contemn'd the
Decrees of the Council, and that this proposition—The Council is above the Pope, is Heretical; although both then and ever since it was and has been held and affirmed by all the Universities of Christendome; whence it will follow, that whilst the Roman Church boasteth her self superior to all other Churches, and the Roman Bishop above all other Bishops; by this Decree of Euge∣nius, the Bishop of Rome is made superior to, and of higher Authority than the universal Church, and consequently the pretended Infallibility of the Church, should be derived not now to the Romish Church, but to one only man; which shews him evidently to be the Antichrist, according to that Interpretation of St. Augustine, de Civitate Dei, Lib. 18. Cap. 2. That Antichrist should not not only sit in Templo Dei, in the Temple of God, but In Templum, into the Temple. As if he himself were the Temple it self, and he alone the Church. Besides by these Tran∣slations let the Christian Reader judge of that Infallibility, of the Church represented in a Council, since here he sees these Two Councils, at one and the same time, in one and the same question, do decree things directly contrary. But 'twas not with Paper pellets and spiritual Thunders that this stouthearted Pope Attaqu'd the Council of Basil, for a truce being concluded between the Kings of England and France, whereby the Soldiers on each part were dismiss'd, Eugenius subtlely Inveigles the Dauphin of France (afterwards Lewis the 11th.) who gathers up near 30000 of those disbanded Troops, and marches towards Basil, Colouring the Expedition with many remote pretences, but indeed with a design to unroost the Fathers there, and force them to break up. But they were no sooner entered the Territories of Basil, but the Cantons of Switzerland hastned to its succour and relief. And 4000 Switzers with incredible Valour stood the Shock of all the great Army, and con∣tinued the Battel all night, scarce 150 of them escaping, but thereby they put a stop to the enemies advance, and preserv'd the City and Council.
The COURANT. Inter Serpentes et scorpiones Nemo securus Ingreditur. St. Hierom. Tory. FOr all your Tatling Catholick Nat, tho unhapily Cag'd since I saw you last, yet defies the Wooden Ruff and the Whipping-post. The good man avows to all the World—He has done nothing to be asham'd of. Truem. I told you then I should not meddle with the success of his present Adventures. Nor will I dispute whether hebemore meritorious, better be friended, less Guilty, or born under more in∣dulgent Stars than his Sister Cellier. 'Tis certain their ends were the same, though they pursued several means, her story of Prances being Racks, and his of Sir Edmondbery Godfrey's Killing himself, being a like design▪ to Sham that Murder from the Papists, and load the Justice of the Nation with scandal. But all I shall say is, that he had long since a prior right and Title to the Pillory, for (if he be not belied) this very Loyal Protestant was the Gentleman (that besides some Cart-loads of bare fac'd Popery) first Printed and Publisht a certain Libell, the Reprinting of which from his Publique Copy, after it had many days haunted the Town, brought another to that Ignominious stand. Tory. Prethee let Nat alone, he's safe enough, and I think at this juncture your Faction have little cause to boast. Truem. I know not what you mean by Faction; for some Folks of late have got new Dictionaries, and they call Religion Sedition; the Nine and Thirty Articles, Fanaticism; drunken madness Loyalty; horrid damming and swearing, zeal for the Church; Traiterous Papists, good confiding subjects; moderate Churchmen, the worst sort of Whigs; asserting liberty and pro∣perty, (though in never so dutifull and legal away) Rebellion; pro∣moting a general good of the King and Kingdome, Faction; and endeavouring the safety of the Nation against Popish Conspiracies, a Presbyterian Plot.—But if by Faction may be understood, a few boysterus Troublesome people, with as little sense as honesty, that
contrary to the rightful customes of the place they live in, bandy against and disturb the Majority (as suppose, out-number'd above one Thousand in three, and by persons of as good or better Quality every way than themselves) and struggle to overthrow the Right, Laws and Priviledges of the whole Community, and when with Innovations, Noise, Shamms and shamefull foul practi∣ses, they themselves have first industriously rais'd Feuds and Cumbustions, do then think to file them to the account of such, as justly and innocently oppose their lewd designs; if this I say may pass for a true description of Faction, then on my Con∣science Popery and Torism are as errant Factions as ever pester'd a State. Tory. Thou art always harping upon Popery; I tell thee once again, that party is not worth minding; where shall you meet a man that now adays will own himself, a Roman Catholick; now quoth Roger, we have taken the Oaths, &c. There's Sing and Nevil shall talk as zealously for the Church by Law, as any Country Curate, and is not this a happy Reformation? Truem. A Wolf is never the less a Wolf, but the more dange∣rous, for wearing the Lambs-skin that he lately worried; I tell you there are still Papists in England, and Bloody Traiterous Papists and a damnable Company of them too; when was St. Omers and Doway more empty, and yet I'le warrant you all the Jesuits are not gone to Convert the Great Mogul. Do not their raskally hedge-Priests flutter up and down as thick as Filfares? who may not any day meet at 'tother, end of the Town with Father Mathew's (my Lord Peters's Ghostly Tool) Father Fincham, (Brother to the Right Worshipful, in Cromwel-shire) Father Witherington, —(Who once in doleful dumps, Being drunk, said Mass upon his Stumps:) Cum multis aliis quos cum proscribere Nolo; strutting up and down streets, as briskly as if they hoped to sing te Deum in Pauls, and what business, think you, have these reverend Blades here? Tory. Nay, how do I know? perhaps they only come over to turn Informers against Protestant Conventicles.—Do any of them Lodge in the Savoy? Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, June 7. 1682. Crudeles Impiorum Misericordiae. The Debates of the Bohemians at the Council of Basil. The Story of Zisca, his wonderful success and Epitaph. The use of the Cup permitted to the Bohemians, &c. AMongst other Occurrences that happened at the Council of Basil (which began to be Assembled Anno 1431. and continued sitting almost 12 years) very remarkable were their proceedings with the Bohemians. How God had been pleased to enlighten that Na∣tion with the knowledge of his Truth, and to discover to them the errors and wickedness of the Church of Rome, by the spread∣ing of Wickliffs Books amongst them, we have heretofore acquaint∣ed you. As also how those good seeds were cultivated by the pains of those laborious Husbandmen in the Lords Vineyard, John Huss and Jerome of Prague, who were both cruelly mar∣tyr'd, (contrary to the safe conduct granted them) by the Coun∣cil of Constance, about the year 1415. Whereby the Gospel had taken such Root amongst the Bohemians, that all the powers of darkness could not pluck it up; yet of those of them that re∣fused
the Church of Rome, there were two sorts, some that only contended to have the use of the Cup in the Sacrament restored to the Laity, but in other Doctrines agreed with the Romanists; and these for that reason were commonly called Calixstines (from Calix a Cup;) the other not only complained of the Sa∣criledge of the Papists in that respect, but also pressed for the purity and simplicity of Religion in all Articles and Ceremonies, and these were sometimes call'd Piccardines, and sometimes Ta∣brits, for the cause herein after mentioned. You must note, after the burning of Huss and Jerome, the Nobles of Hungary, to the number of 50 and upwards, in the name of themselves and the whole Commonalty, sent Letters under their Seals, Dated 2 Sept. 1416, to Constance complaining thereof; as likewise did the Nobles of Moravia: But that Bloody Conventicle vouchfased them no answer, but on the con∣trary stirred up great persecution against them, so that the Hus∣sites were not only Excommunicated, but their Churches broke open, and their persons and goods every where exposed to vio∣lence, which occasion'd such a tumult on the 13th. of July 1419 at Prague, that the common people being enraged, threw 12 Senators of Old Prague, with the chief City Majestrate out of the Windows of the Senate House, who fell upon the points of Spears. Pope Martin the 5th. Anno 1420, publickly excommunicates the Bohemians, Exciting the Emperor and all Kings, Prince, Dukes, &c. to take up Arms against them, Intreating them by the Wounds of Christ, and their own Salvation, unanimously to fall upon them, and quite Extirpate that Sacrilegious and cursed Na∣tion, and withal promises [so zealous and bountiful was his Ho∣liness!] an universal remission of sins to the most wicked person that should kill one Bohemian Heretick—History of the Bohemian Persecution, p. 27. But some small time before this, some thousands of those that profess'd the true Religion, finding they could not live peace∣ably in Prague, retired from thence to a stony Mountain about 10 Miles distant, which they named Tabor, and encompassed it round with a Wall and other fortifications, constituting there a kind of Common-wealth, and resolv'd to defend themselves by Arms, and hence they were call'd Taborites. The Emperour Sigismund spur'd on by these Incentives and large promises from the Pope of gairing Heaven, gathers a most puissant Army from
all parts of the Empire, and resolves utterly to extirpate these poor Bohemian Hussites. Who being in this sore distress, one John de Trosnovie, call'd Ziska, because he had but one Eye, of a Noble house, but mean fortune, yet great valour and conduct, undertakes to gather together the scatter'd people, and to head them against their Enemies, which he perform'd with such suc∣cess, that Aeneas Sylvius (afterwards Pope, and no friend to be sure to the Bohemians) who wrote the Story of those Wars, af∣firms his Atchievements will rather be admir'd than believed by posterity; for with handfuls of those poor unfurnisht people, he fought eleven several Battels with Sigismund's numerous, well provided and fresh recruited Armies, and in all of them came off victorious, nay though in one of them he lost his other Eye and so was blind; yet afterwards he continued no less fortunate a Leader, so that at last Sigismund despairing to vanquish him, but by a Treaty, consents to declare him his Lieutenant, and allow him a Pension, on condition he and his followers would acknow∣ledge him the said Sigismund as King.—But before this Treaty was fully perfected Ziska dies. Some say that he should bequeath his Skin to make a Drum of, or that his followers should carry it about with them, think∣ing thereby to fright their Enemies, but this I conceive but a Fable, and yet 'tis little more than what our valiant King Edw. the 1st. did; who on his Death-bed, commanded that his Bones well boil'd from the flesh should in a fit Vessel, be carried about by his Son, 'till he had Conquer'd the Scots, telling his Son, that as long as he had his Fathers Bones with him, none should overcome him. This is certain, that after his Death the Bohemians call'd themselves Orphans, as having lost the common Father of their Country man; nor will it be amiss to insert here his Epitaph written on his Tomb in the City of Tabor, as we find it before the History of the Abbot of Ʋrsperge.—I John Ziska rest here, in the skill of Military Affairs, not inferiour to any of the Emperours or famous Captains of old. A severe scourge of the pride and covetousness of Clergy-men, and a most valiant Defender of my Country. That which Appius Claudius being blind did for the Romans in well counselling, and furious Camillus in valiantly exploiting; the same have I done for my Bohemians. I was never wanting to the good fortune of the war, nor it to me. I have foreseen though blind, all advantages and opportunities of well
doing, and with Ensigns display'd have fought eleven times in the open Field, ever victorious. It seemed to me most fit and honourable to take in hand the most just cause of the miserable and hungry, against the delicate fat and full-cram'd Priests, and in this doing, I have found the assistance of God giving a Blessing to my arms; if their en∣vy had not hindred it, no doubt I should have merited to be numbred amongst the illustrious men; nevertheless my Bones lye here in this sacred place, without asking the Pope any leave, and in spight of his Teeth.—John Ziska the Bohemian, an Enemy of Priests that are covetous of dishonest gain, but in a godly zeal. After his death, the Pope and Emperour thinking the Hussites much discouraged thereby, as in truth they were, sent several great Armies against them, but still they were strangely discom∣fited, for the Bohemians (saith Monstrelet) feared neither death nor torments, their very Women took arms and fought, and the dead Bodies of many of that Sex were found amongst the slain in several Battels. Wherefore being not able to extirpate them by War, they are invited to come (in order to hearing their demands and giving them satisfaction) to the Council of Basil. Indeed most of the Bohemian Churches being sensible of the perfidious treache∣ry used to Huss and Jerome at Constance were loth to send any Deputies thither, but the Nobility over-rul'd the matter, that some should be dispatcht to render a Reason for the Innovations in Religion laid to their charge. Commissioners were therefore chosen and sent, amongst whom the most eminent were John Rokizane of Prague, and Nicholas Episcopius of the Taborens, both famous Divines, and of the No∣bility, Procopius the General of the Taborens, and William Rastka Baron of Postupiez, and others, who being honourably conducted in their passage, and courteously received at Basil: They declared that at Constance they had been condemn'd unheard; though they held nothing but according to the Scriptures, and then ex∣hibited the four Requests and Articles following, desiring that the Council would grant them, or allow them to defend them by Argument. 1. That the use of the Cup may be restored to the people, and that the Service of the Church might be in their own Tongue. 2. That Clerks or Ministers might usurp no Authority in Se∣culars.
3. That the word of God might be freely Preached without disturbance. 4. That there may be publick punishment of publick offen∣ces. These Articles being read, the Popes Legate demanded if they had nothing else to propound, because he had heard it re∣ported, that they affirmed that the Orders of Monks were from the Devil, Procopius made answer, from whence else, I pray, can they derive their original, which was instituted neither by the Patriarchs nor Prophets, neither by Christ nor his Apostles? However a Conference was appointed, and 40 days (some say 50) the Disputation lasted; and when the Bohemians could not be confuted by Arguments, they were at last wheadled into a com∣position; John Rokisane being himself corrupted with the hopes of an Arch-bishoprick, seduced others of the Commissioners, and so matters were subtilly carried, that leave being given by the Council, that they should enjoy the use of the Cup, in other matters they were brought to consent. These four Articles with some Explanations were afterwards named the Concord, and Com∣missioners were sent into Bohemia from the Council and Empe∣rour, to declare that Realm was received again into the Bosome of the Church, and a Diet being there Assembled on that occa∣sion, Rokisane very rhetorically explained and magnified the be∣nefits of this agreement, whereby so much War, Bloodshed and Devastation, as otherwise might have happen'd to the Kingdom, was prevented, and now he was pleased to mention the Pope and Cesar in other Language than heretofore, when he was wont to stile the one the Whore, and the other the Beast. This Rokisane continued a pitiful Hypocrite long after, and at last died uncom∣fortably, Anno 1471. The craft of the Council in granting the Cup to the Bohemians provided in all other things they would submit was considerable, for hereby they set at variance the Calixstines and the Taborites, and consequently prevented all their further endeavours of Re∣formation, and the pure professors of the Gospel, henceforwards were as much hated and persecuted by those that enjoy'd the use of the Cup, as by those that disown'd it. It was no little grief to many, especially of the zealous Tao∣rites to depart in this manner from the Doctrine and Discipline of Christ delivered to them by Huss, and return again to the pro∣fession
of the Church of Rome, nor could they ever be wholly brought over to embrace it, but the truth has remained still a∣mongst them, and great Persecutions have they suffered even to our times; as by the History thereof brought down to the year 1632. and Printed at London, Anno 1650. appears. To return to the Council of Basil, the other most material De∣crees they made, were, 1. That no Actions, Suits or Controver∣sies should by Appeals be carried up to be decided in the Courts at Rome, which were above four days distant from thence. 2. A Regulation of the Cardinals, that they should not be above 24 in number, and to exclude the Popes Nephews and Kindred from that office. 3. Against the payment of Annals or first fruits to the Pope. 4. Against Priests keeping Concubines. 5. They brought two new Holy-days into the Church, viz. The Conception and the Visitation of the Blessed Virgin Mary. As long as Sigismund the Emperour, and Charles the 7th. the French King lived, who both favoured this Council, the same continued Assembled, but afterwards wanting such friends to back them, it mouldered away insensibly, so that at last most of the Fathers and Ambassadours of the several Princes abandoning it, it was broke up and dissolv'd. And also Felix that by the said Council had been elected Pope, was prevailed with to renounce that dignity, and resign his pre∣tensions of Papacy to Nicholas the 5th, the Successor of Pope Eu∣genius, about the year 1450. But remarkable it is with what kind of arguments this very Council (perhaps none of the worst in the whole Pack) endea∣vour'd to silence the Bohemians, which appear out of the Letters of Cardinal Cusanus (one imploy'd by the Council to manage the controversie) in his 2 and 3 Epistle to the Bohemians, where he maintains these assertions: 1. That the Scriptures can by no means be of the Essence of the Church, either begun or continued, but only of the seemly Order thereof. 2. That the Church is not known by the Gospel, but the Gospel by the Church.
The COURANT. Tory. AH Trueman? now do I expect to be pelted with Droll and Railery upon poor Loyal Nat's persecution last Wednesday. Truem. Never fear'd Tory! I perceive thou art already in a state of Mortification, your whole Brother-hood have of late put on their Ah Wednesday Faces; I scorn to throw water on a drown'd Rat, 'tis your Tory generosity to triumph over the miserable. I am satisfied that the injur'd Justice and Honour of the Nation is vindicated in exposing two of the Conspirators, yet I would al∣most as soon have lost an hand, as flung a rotten Egg at either of them 'Tis to me rather matter of grif than merriment to find such ill Instruments imploy'd to abuse the Church of England, and that Venerable name of Loyalty, by pretending to be Sons of the one, and Friends of the other, when Popery and Divelism are the only things they toil to advance. But especially would it not make a man turn Heraclitus (I do not mean such a Motley Scoun∣drel as lately Usurps that name, but the good old weeping Phi∣losopher himself) to see so many things that wear the shapes of Rational Creatures; and call themselves English-men and Citizens, and Protestants too, yet favour and encourage such lewd Varlets. Nat indeed has had the luck first to handsel the Engine, but is it not notorious that the Observator, Heraclitus, &c. with their A∣betters, push on the very same designs? and why then should not they have neighbours fare?—But prethee, how go other affairs of greater consequence? Tory. Our friends have wrote to Ireland to put a stop to the Embarquing of any more Swearing-Teagues, being like to be suf∣ficiently furnisht and better cheap at home, B—and H—them∣selves were not so perfectly Sataniz'd but some modesty was left, They pretended at most but to transactions in Cooks-shops and pri∣vate Chambers; but when men shall give the Sun the Lie, and with Oaths rampant run down the certain knowledge of 2 or 3 thousand people at once, these are Blades that deserve encourage∣ment. Truem. Much good d'ye with your stock,—but all this is nothing to the Point, what say you to the Election of Sheriffs? Tory. I only say, as once upon a like occasion, an Eminent
Mouth said, after he had offered to lay 10 Guinneys to one on the wrong side,—Alas! who should have thought it! Tru. I confess two thousand seven hundred to 1500, viz. twelve hundred odds, is some small disproportion, but by this, all the world may perceive what an inconsiderable interest these Sir Troublesomes that make so much noise have, when brought to the Test, and how egregiously they mis-represent things; a To∣ry's tongue always runs high Fullum's; bounce and vapour is his Dialect, he evermore turns to the magnifying end of the Pro∣spective, and is pugnacissimum Animal (as one of the antients calls a Gander) a creature that can rant and swagger, but let him come to service, and he shrinks and dwindles, and proves a meer Egyp∣tian Reed, that not only deceives, but wounds the hand that leans on him. Indeed how should it be otherwise, since his vanity, roaring, huzzaing, swearing, &c. never afford him time to think, for 'tis observable, your actions were not more extravagant than your Pleas and pretensions for them were absurd and silly, and you were abundantly more out-done in Reason and Argument than in Number. Tory. Hang me, if Gadbury and L'Estrange did not 3 moneths ago promise us success; for that trick I'le ne'er trust Stars and Observators again. We thought our selves profound Politicians, and that we had laid a train of small Shams and little tricks that would infallibly have done the work, and hang'd up all the Whigs, that is, all that are soberly loyal and oppose Popery, before Christ-mass-day. Tru. Yes, you had twenty pleasant Crotchets in your Noddles, but above all, that was a dainty one of the 4000 Guinneys offer'd. Really the Gentleman deserves rather to be Sainted than She∣riff'd, that withstood such a charming temptation. Tell me in ear∣nest, are not you yet ashamed of that whisking Lie? what a black design must that needs be at bottom, that must have such ridiculous fictions, horrid practises, and lewd shameful arts to promote it? Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, July▪ 14. 1682. Singuli decipere et decipi possunt: Nemo Omnes, Neminem Omnes fefellerunt. —Plin paneg. The manner of the Interview between the Patriarch of Constan∣tinople, and Pope Eugenius the IV. The matters in debate between them An Accommodation pretended to be made. But the Greeks refuse to stand to it. Constantinople taken by the Turk. HAving in our last, related the Transactions between the Council of Basil and the Bohemians; it will be now no less Convenient to set forth what passed between the Greeks, and Pope Eugenius, at his pretended Council at Ferrara, as well for that it happened about the same time, as for the near Resemblance both in the occasion, management, and Issue of both Treaties; for each of them was in order to an Accommodation, to which they were Invi∣gled by Bribes and ill practises rather than strength of Argument, and though a kind of submission to Rome in both cases was paht up by the Deputies or Commissioners, yet the same was presently disown'd by their Principals and came to no effect.
We have told you how Eugenius the 4th (though deposed by the Council of Basil) yet took upon him still as Pope, and Conventicled an Anti-Council at Ferrara, (though, because re∣moved from thence to Florence, 'tis commonly call'd the Council of Florence,) to which, we briefly acquainted you that the Emperour of Constantinople with his Patriarch, and several Bishops, Repaired. The occasion whereof was this,— Almost Fourscore years before, John Palaeologus Emperour of the East, being infested with a people called the Triballi, unhappyly makes a League with Amurath the Third, Emperour of the Turks, and consents to admit Threescore Thousand of Amurath's Forces into Europe, which were wafted over by the Genoese Gallies, and establisht their Metropolitan seat at Adrianople in Thrace. They had not long been entertain'd, but according to the usual course of Forraign Auxiliaries, instead of assisting they were for driving out or subdueing those that Invited them thither, and being now by continual new Accessi∣ons of Numbers and fortunate successes grown formidable to Constantinople it self, which they already threatned, and in very few years after actually made themselves Masters of, the poor Grecians being in this distress, their Emperour made Application to other Christian Princes for succour, and especially to the Pope, as a Mster wheel in that affair. But his crafty Holiness, who never does a Courtesy Grtis, hoping to make an advantage of their necessity, tells them he is willing to procure them Assistance, but they hold several Heterodox tenets, as denying Purgatory, maintaining there must be Leaven for the Bread for the Sacra∣ment, and especially denying Peters Primacy, and not submit∣ting to him as supream Universal Bishop, and if they would reform themselves in these matters, they need not doubt of aid, and for their satisfaction he would call a General Council, where the several points should be fairly debated, &c. The Emperour being thus straitned, consents thereunto, and brings with him Jsph the Patriarch of Constantinople, and a great train of his Bishops; transported by the Gallie of the Venetians, the Coun∣trymen of Eugenius, The Formalities of Greeting between this Western Pope, and Eastern Patriarch, are very remarkable; which I shall give you from the Original Acts of the Council of Florence, writ∣ten in Greek by some of the Attendants of the Constantinopolitan
Bishop— &c. In the Morning before the first hour of the day, we saw Caristinus come running to us, sent from the Emperour, who acquainted the Patriarch, that the Pope expected that his Great Holiness [, for you must note, the Patriarch assum'd the title of his Holiness as well as the Pope,] should go to him and adore him and kiss his feet, and the Emperour had already insisted and contended three days, that the same might be waved, but-could not obtain it, of which in the mean time he thought fit to Adver¦tise your Great Holiness, that you may know in what manner you must approach him. This was irksome news to the Patriarch, who expected to be received in a far different, way and with greater marks of Affection and esteem. For whilst he was at Venice he had thus declared himself to one of his Domestick Favourites, discoursing about the Pope—I have determined with my self, that if the Pope be a person of more years than I, then I will esteem him as a Father, if of equal years I will carry my self towards him as a Brother, but if he be younger than I, then I will regard him but as my Son: And my mind is, that if there be any meet Pallace neer to his, that hath a private passage from one into the other, I will take it up for my Quarters, that I may privately go to him, and he likewise to me again, &c. [thereby to void priority of visits and Ceremony] wherefore when now he heard talk of Kissing his Feet, he was astonisht; however he proceeded, and we came (when the Courts were all ready full) to Ferraria, and staid right against the Castle, near the Bridge, and before noon there came six Bishops in the Popes behalf to Congratu∣late the Patriarch, who told them, That he owed not the Pope any such Salutation as Kissing his Feet, but for as much (said he) we be Brethren let us Embrace and Kiss each other in Brotherly manner, else I will do nothing. The Patriarch also had other Speeches concer∣ning that matter, unto which they made answer, and the Patriarch advis'd with all the Bishops that came with him about this weighty affair, who all (Nemine Contradicente) Voted . That the same [The Toe Kissing] was neither Just nor seemly, nor profitable to be done. But the Popes Bishops return again in the morning, and with repeated instances press the Kissing of the feet, to which the Patriarch answers, from whence hath the Pope that Right? shew us what Synod hath bestowed it upon him? or where is it written? especially since the Pope calleth himself the Successor of St. Peter? Then the
Bishops told him that it was an antient Custome of the Pope, that all persons salute him in that manner, Bishops, Kings, the Emperour of Germany himself, and the Cardinals who are greater than the Emperour, (here's Divinity for you!) in as much, as they are persons Consecrated. Whereunto the Patriarch reply'd, That this was a new Invention, I will not (quoth he) assent unto it, I will never do it, but if the Pope be pleased that I salute him Brotherly, according to our antient manner, in that sort I will go unto him, but if he refuse that, I will have nothing to do with him, but will return back again.—Thus far the said Greek Synod. You see he was very resolute, and here was a long Voyage like to be spoil'd and come to nothing; but at last an Expedient was found out, viz. That whereas the Pope thought to have made the Patriarch kiss his Feet in a full Assembly publiquely, he was forc'd to receive him and take that Homage in his Privy Chamber, the Cardinals only being present. But then a new difficulty arose, about the order of sitting in Council, who should have the uppermost place, the Pope conten∣ded, that the Grecian Emperour and Patriarch with the Orien∣tals should sit on the left side the Church, and the Western Bishops on the right hand, and himself at the higher end of all, in the middle, as head of them all, in a more eminent Seat. The Emperour on the contrary, pretended the place belonged to him, At last it was ngreed the Western people should sit on the right hand, the Eastern ones on the left; Pope Eugenius's Throne placed by the High Altar; the Roman Emperours (though absent) in the next place but some degrees lower; and equal with him the Cardinals. The Emperour of Greece had his Throne set right against the Popes, and on his left hand, but a little lower sat the Pt. of Constantinople, and equal with him, were the seats of the Legates of the Three other Eastern Patri∣archs, and of the Archbishops and Prelates, Ordine quisque suo. Being thus at last seated, the 4 principal Controversies deba∣ted between them, were. 1. Touching the procession of the Holy Ghost, the Greeks not acknowledging that he proceeded from the Son, but only from the Father, and therefore charged the Laines that they had added the word, Filioque, and from the Son, to the Creed. 2. About the Bread used for the Sacrament. The Greeks contending, that it ought to be Leavened, the Romanists, that it must be unleavened. 3. About Purgatory
which the Greeks denyed; and the last (tho principally inten∣ded) about the Popes Primacy and being supream head of the universal Church, which they would not acknowledge. These points were argued strongly on both sides in the said Council: ( so they have been also in Books, I my self have now by me a Catalogne of 19 Learned Greek Authors who have wrote against the Latine Church.) But the most prevalent reasons 'tis supposed that sway'd with the Greeks were, the necessity of the Empire, and the hopes of the Forces to assist them, toge∣ther with the Popes Artifice in making Two of the most Lear∣ned of the Greek Bishops Cardinals, viz Isidore Bishop of Russia, and Bessarion Bishop of Nicea; winning them to favour his▪ pretensions; in fine an Instrument of union is mutually con∣cluded upon, in the year 1439. beginning Laetentur Coeli, Let the Heavens Rejoice, &c. Whereby the procession from both Father and Son was acknowledged, and that the Sacrament may be indifferently Celebrated with Bread Leaven'd or Unleaven'd, That the Souls of the Faithfull that have not fully satisfied for their Sins, do go to Purgatory, and that the Pope is head and Sovereign over the whole Church. But Michael Bishop of Ephesus with others stoutly withstood the same, especially the two last Articles. And Joseph Patriarch of Constannople immediately after his Subscription died suddenly, falling down with the Charter of Union in his hand. Pope Eugenius would have had the Greeks proceed to chuse another Patriarch, promissing to ordain him without Mony, [no small kindness I'le promise you, from a Pope!] But they perceiving what the Old Fox would be at, viz. That as he had got his Supremacy acknowledged under their hands, so he might enter into actual possession thereof, and begin to Exercise it over their new Patriarch, refused the same, alledging by their Laws and Customes, that their Patriarch could not be chosen any where else, but at Constartinople, for he must be Consecrated in his own Church▪ &c. Whereupon the Pope much against his Inclinations, takes his leave of them, and suffers them to depart. But no sooner were these Prelates returned home, and given an account of their proceedings, but they were Rejected by their Churches and Brethren, as having Betray'd them into unjust slavery to the Bishops of Rome, which they would by no means submit to, ay so offended they were, that they Excommuni∣cated
all those that consented to the aforesaid Union, and when they died cast them like dogs into ditches, denying them the Honour of Christian Burial. And so they and their posterity stand out in opposition to the Church of Rome to this day, but by reason of the oppression they live under, are very Ignorant and (as the natural Consequent thereof) superstitious admirers of their own Rites and Ceremonies. I my self have convers'd with some of their Priests whose Beards and long hair (for they are as stiff for that, as Popish Priest are for Shaven Crowns) were the main Testimonies of Learning or Theology they could produce. Latine few of them understand, for they have not Schools for it, nor are they Criticks in the true antient Greek, (for the Language is now no less degenerared than the people;) yet there are here and there some, few Indifferently well Learned amongst them. The Fathers they most adhere to and Reverence are Chrysostome, Basil, and the Two Gregories, the one surnamed Nissene, and the other Nazianzen. Their Liturgy is ordina∣rily that of St. Chrysostome, but on Festival days they use that of St. Basil, which being both written in the antient or Learned Greek, cannot much more edifie their vulgar, than Latine Service doth our illiterate Papists. Not long after this Congress at Ferrara, viz. in the Raign of Constantine Son of the said Emperour John Paloeologus, the City of Constantinople was subdued by the Turks, Mahomet the Great, Investing it by Sea and Land with an Army of Five Hundred Thousand, and after 54 days Seige storm'd and masterd it, on the 29th of May, 1453. Murdering young and old, and Commting all kind of Cruelty and Barbarity, and in the Turks hands it has ever since remain'd being now the Metropolis of the Ottoman Empire. Some that are much at leasure, have observ'd it as I know not what fatality, that as this City was first made famous by a Constantine, the Son of an Helena, a Gregory being also Patriarch, so it was lost by a Constantine, as Augustus was the first that the Son of Helona Gregory being also Patriarch, establisht the Roman Empire and Augustus the last. But I think the base humour of the Citizens is much more to be taken notice of, who when their Religion, Lives, Liberties, Estates, posterity and all were thus at stake, and though they were exceeding Rich, were yet such sordid Misers that they would not part with any money to pay the Soldiers that were to defend them, but chuse rather to hide it in the Earth, and so hastned their own Ruine by discouraging the Soldiers, and deserved∣l lost both their adored muck and their more useless Lives, and their poste∣rity remain the most miserable slaves in the Word to this day.
The COURANT. Tory. VVHat does this Pacquetting fool mean by this old known story of the City of Constantinoples sordid niggardly, Couardise? If they had a fancy to bury their Gold and their Consciences, and save their pence in Coffers and dunghills for the enemy, rather than expend them for their pub∣lique safety, and so become both slaves and Beggars—what's that to us. Truem. Nothing that I know of, but—Aliena pericula Cautos, for there may have been folks in the World since 1453, or at least may be hereafter, who when their Religion Lives, just antient priviledges, &c. may be as much at hazard, as those of the Constantinopolitans were, and from a people altogether as Ill principled, and no less savage than the Mahumetans, may yet be so far from breaking a Bagg to prevent the impending ruine, that they shall scarce stir a foot, nor bestow a little Breath and Sweat, not so much as hold up an hand, nor speak a seasonable word in defence of undermined Religion and Invaded Liberty. Tory. Well! I'le say that for our folks, we spare for no pains nor Cost—To undoe our selves and our Neighbours. How many Cabals, Tavern Conventicles, private Treats, &c. have we had of late! There's Loyal Nat scribles on at the old impu∣dent rate, as if he defy'd all Justice, and Courted Preferment from the Pillory to the Gallows, and then the Indefatigable Observator fills the Bog-houses in Town with Antipendiums, flams, shams and Forty ones, that old wretch (were he not well paid for't) would live a Dogs life amongst them, for the Whigs have had a Company of plaguy Books out of late, there's the unanswe∣rable Julian, The Roguish History of Whiggism, the Samaritan, and I know not what all. Truem. Yes, and the third part of the Conformists Plea for the Nonconformists, such a modest rational and truly Christian dis∣course, as one would think should Convince any soul that reads it. Tory. Convince me no Convinces; I thank God never read any Books but L'Estranges and those that are Printed for
Ben. Took, and they satisfie me abundantly. But they say there's another Boody thing abroad, call'd Elymas the Sorcerer. Truem. Yes, a shrewd unpleasing discovery; it seems all the Popish Tools do not herd amongst the Fanaticks. Tory Hang Father Mambourgh, what will you believe a Jesuite? Truem. No, Hang him, and all the society too, say I, and all that adhere to 'um, but yet when some Jesuits were hang'd in earnest, I remember there were plenty of Tory-fools ready to believe 'um, who knows but some people may be still as simple? Tory. Prethee, leave tattling of these Phamplets, and let's talk of that which all the World talks of, who do you think will bechosen Sheriffs? Truem. What a foolish question do you ask, just as if you had been Huzzaing at the Towzer? is not the business already fairly decided, agreable to prescription, Charter, common rea∣son, and the very Concessions of the party first opposing? have not the ablest Lawyers in the Kingdome given their opinion? Can any thing be more home than Turners Adjudged Case? are not Ten parts in Twelve of the whole City (even hundreds of those who Polled contrary) now satisfied? Is there the least colour or shadow of Argument to the contrary? To break through all this, will it not be to overturn the very basis of the City Government? A new way of destroying the Charter without a quo Warranto? And yet at last impracticable, for, alas! Right is Right, and 'tis not Tricks and Huzza's can alter it: The law is true steel Twill not long stand bent, but in time always Cuts their fingers that misimploy it, nor can any man be Counter-secur'd against it. Because the Dog-days are comming on, do you think any body so mad as to hazard the exposing themselves to Ten Thousand just Actions, Indictments, Impeachments, and God knows what else, meerly to comply with an odd Capricious humour? Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR▪ The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, July 21. 1682. Probitas Laudatur, at alget. The Turk Appeals to Heaven against the perfidiousness of the Christians, occasioned by the Pope. Memoirs of Pope Nicholas the V. His dispensation in a Case of Witchcraft. Pope Calixtus the III. his Indulgences, Saint-making, &c. VVE have not done with Pope Eugenius the 4th, till we have acquainted the Reader with that remarkable occurrence, which formerly we occasionally mentioned, (yet not here to be omitted in its proper place) viz. How that Ʋladislaus King of Hungary having concluded a Peace with the Turk, Pope Eugenius who was of a robust Hectorly temper and himself continually en∣tangled with Wars, dispatches Cardinal Julian to that King, promising him some aid by Land, and also the assistance of a Navy by Sea to Embarrass the Enemy, if he would fall upon them sud∣denly notwithstanding that League. The King urg'd the obliga∣tions of Amity he was under by the Treaty, but the Pope who is always an Alexander and prepared with Tools to Cut asunder those
knots he cannot fairly untie, tells him that's but a foolish scru∣ple, for no Treaty was good, nor League valid that was made with the Enemies of Christ without his, the said Popes License, Command and Ratification, being Christs plenipotentiary in that behalf; by these Instigations, from one of such boasted Sanctity, the King was Inveigled to brek his Faith with the more faithfull Ifidel, and to fall upon the Turk unawares not dreaming of any Hostility. But observe how justly providence Reveng'd this horrid perfidiousness, when Amurath the Turkish Emperour (saith Bosinius in his Hungarian History, decad 1. lib. 6.) saw himself distress'd and his Army put to flight by the ungarians, he pull'd forth of his Bosom the Articles of Peace sworn unto between Ʋladislaus and himself, and sprding it abroad with eye stedfastly lift up towards Heaven, Behold! Behold! (saith he) O Jesus Christ; these are the Covenats of Peace which thy Christians have mde with me: They have holly sworn by thy Divine Majesty, but Treth rousy have violated the Faith given in thy Divine name, and perfid usly denyed their God; now O Christ, if thu be God, I bsech thee Revenge here these thine Injuries, as well as mine, and to them that as yet acknowledge not thy Name, shew the punishment of violated Faith, and revenge so notorious a Perjury. Scarce had he utter'd these words, when his Forces began to Rally, and the success of the Battel which before seem'd desperate Enclin'd to his side, which ended in an Intire Victory, King a Prince of exemplry Valour and Generosity, being himself san in the field, and Cardinal Julian the Popes Legate wounde, and in his Retreat killed by the Christians themselves, as being the Author of this miserable defeat, by that disloyalty of which he was but the Instrument from the Pope: This hap∣pen'd Anno Christi 1444. and by this Victory the Turk gain'd an Inoad into Hungaria, and from thenceforwards daily pre∣vailed against Christendom. And here e may take notice of the prevarication and flttery of Platina in his Lives of the Popes, (especially in the latter panear his own times, for that Histo∣rian himself died about 40 years after, viz. 1481) if it be not rather the Legerdemain of Omiphrius and others, who in many places have Castrated, altered, and added unto the true antient Platina, as by some of the first Editions plainly appears. But in
the Platina we now commonly have this Treacherous prank of this Pope Eugenius, is thus cunningly slubber'd over. Ʋladislaum Polonem Regem cum Juliano Caesarino diacono Cardi∣nali in Turcos miserit: Quorum de numeris ad Triagenta Millia uno praelio caesa, inter Hadrianopln Danubium sunt, licet in tartâ Victoriâ ipse cum Cardinali ab Hostibus Interfetus sit. Constans praeterio in pactis servandis est Habitus, nisi quid pollicitus fuisset, quod revocare quam perficere satius esset. He sent Uladislaus King of Poland with Cardinal Julian against the Turks [not a word of the Peace in being, nor other Circumstances will this Pontificion Biogra∣pher tells us] of whom Thirty Thousand were slain in one Battel, though yet at the same time both the King and Cardinals were slain. This Pope was accounted constant in keeping his word, unless he had promised something which 'twas better to Revoke than perform—By these last words, they would pallitate their Popes Roguery in this affair, but the German Historians were more honest than to Conceal it, Nay Aeneas Sylvius (afterwards himself a Pope) L. 1. Epist. 81. takes notice of it, and acknowledges That God by this signal Over-throw taught us, as it were from Heaven, that Oaths ought not to be kept, not only with the Domestick friends of the Faith, but also with the Enemies thereof. Pope Eugenius went the way of all flesh Anno 1446. To whom succeded one Thomas de Sarzana by the name of Nicholas the fifth, who had been Imploy'd by Eugenius in Germany to compose the differences, and take the Emperour from siding with Felix (formerly Duke of Savoy who was Created Pope (as we told you lately) by the Council of Basil, and was still living) during this negotiation, he Contracted a friendship with the before men∣tioned Aeneas Sylvius, and such avorn the Imperal Court, that soon after he came to the Chair, Foelix the Anti-Pope finding himself abandon'd voluntarily resignd his Pope-ship Anno 1449. and accepted of a Legates place under Nicholas; and so the Schism (as they call it, that is having two or more Popes at once, and this was just the Thirtieth of that kind) which had lasted almost Ten years, was soder'd up and Cured. The year 1450. was the great Jubilee held at Rome, an excellent Fair for the Popes Merchandize, and which brought him in abundance of Money—Tanta multitudo Roman venit, quanta nunquam antea, There came saith Platina) such a power of People (the world was always full of fools) to Rome as never the
like was seen, and one day there were 200 men and 3 horses and a Mule Kill'd upon Hadrians-Bridg by reason of the Crowd. The next year the Emperour Frederick takes a Journy into Italy, as well to be Crown'd as to Marry Lonra the King of Portugals Daughter, Pope Nick being naturally a Coward, was very apprehensive, lest Frederick calling to mind the antient Right and Authority of his predecessors should take upon him the Rule and Government of the City, and thereof Fortified the Capital and Castle of St. Angels and all the Gates, &c. But he was more afraid than hurt, for Frederick had no such design against him; but being Crown'd and Married and magnificently treated for sometime at Rome, peaceably returned into Germany. When Constantinople was beseiged by the Turks, the Greeks (saith Antonius part. 3. Tit. 22. C. 13) sent Ambassadours to Pope Nicholas Imploring his assistance of men and money; but Nicholas would not hear them; yet Platina would make us beleive he was so much afflicted for the loss of the City, that it was one of the causes of his Death, which happen'd Anno 1455. 'Tis a remarkable odd story which Bodin in his Daemonomania, and Jacob Sprenger the Inquisitor of Witches, in his Book Intitu∣led Malleus Maleficarum tells of this Pope, viz. That a certain German Bishop being sick, for whom Nicholas had a great kind∣ness, he understood by a Witch [the Divel it seems was these Holy Fathers Oracle] that his indisposition proceeded from Witchcraft, and that there was no way in the World to Reco∣ver him but by a contrary Charm: by which the Witch her self that had bejuggled him must die: He therefore sends Post to Rome, and begs Pope Nicholas leave, to be Cured by this White Witch, and accordingly his Holiness grants him a Dispensation both as to Imploying the Witch and the Murther that was to follow, the Bull alleadging that he allow'd that same, because of two evils we are to avoid the Greater, [the Popes worship had forgot that we are not to do evil that good may come on't, indeed that maxime has no place in the Roman divinity, for by Blood and Murder, force and fraud, perjury and all kind of villany they pretend to ad∣vance the Glory of God, true Religion and Holy Church,] well! this License being arrived, the Witch under the Popes Blessing and Authority, at the Bishops Intreaty undertakes the Job, and ply'd her business so much (I cannot say so well that about Midnight the Bishop was perfectly restored to health, and
at the very same Instant the disease passed into her that had be∣witched him, whereof she dyed. We come now to Calixtus the third, named before Alphonsus Borgia, who was no sooner Elected but he denounc'd War against the Turks, saying that he had long since vow'd the same; and in testimony thereof shew'd a note formerly subscribed with his own hand, in a certain book containing the words following— Ego Calixtus Pontifex Deus omnipotenti voveo, & Sarct Individu Trinitate me Bello, maledictis▪ Interdictis, execraionibus & dmum quibuscunque rebus potero Turcos Christiani nominis hostis saevissimos persecuturum. I Pope Calixtus do vow to Almighty God and to the holy undivisible Trinity, that I will persecute the Turks, Enemies of the Christian name, by Wars, Curses, Inter∣dictions, Execrations, and by all other means that I can. 'Twas a riddle to all present, how he should qualify himself with the Title of Pope so long before he was Elected, but it seems the mans head ran much upon it, nor were the Threatnings of such an old decripie fellow (for he was about Fourscore) very terrible. However, in pretence at least of Carrying on this sacred War he laid a Tenth on all the Clergy of Christendome, and publisht a Croysado, according to Custome, granting thereby full Remission of sins to all that should Contribute to that expedition, provided that once in their lives, and once at their death, they were Confessed; and also gave Authority to whomsoever would give Five Ducats, to Absolve and dispence in many cases; Alponsus King of Naples, and Philip Duke of Burgudy, were admo∣nished to Cross themselves, (that is to serve in person, for in such cases, all both Soldiers and Commanders wore Crosses on their outward Garments) but as the business was suddenly started, and for a spurt carried on with wonderfull vigour, so in little time the zeal abated, and the preparations declin'd. Some few Gallies the Pope did equipp and put out to Sea, that did the Turks some damage, and sent a Friar with great presents to the King of Persia and the Cham of Tartary, perswading them likewise to fall upon the Turk. For a blessing on these Enterprises, he ordain'd that a Bell should every day between Noon and Evening be Tll'd, at the sound whereof, whoever did on their knees mutter over 3 Ave Maria's and Pater Nosters should have three years and three fortieth parts of Indulgences [that is to say, for three years a
man might live as he list, and defie both God and the Divel, and for the rest of all his sins being divided into Forty equal parts, every time he mubled over three Ave's and Pater's at the tinkling of that Bell, three of those parts should be wip'd off the score, so that Foureteen bouts would Ballance the whole Account.] He likewise appointed a General prcssion or Letany the first Sunday of every Month, in which whosoever assisted should obtain seven years and a seven fortieth part of Indulgences, besides a Prayer in the Mass for Victory over the dels, and he that said That had three years Indulgene. If all these Baits of dvotion would make men Saints, he yet had another trick would do the fe and that was Canonization, which he bestowed one Edmund of terbury, one Vincent in Spain, and several others, that as little drv'd that Title as he had just power to bestow it; which Bess seeing, and especially how rashly and indirectly the same  manag'd, was not a little scandaliz'd thereat Tese New Saints (quoth he) make me doubt of the old—Lange in praefat. But he that was for btrding Saints upon Heaven, was no less busy in robbing Princ of their Rights upon Earth, for Alphonsus King of Naples dying▪ this Calixtus publisht his Bulls, declaring that the Realm of Naples being vacant, appertain'd only to him as a Fiefe of the Church, and commands Ferdinand the Son of Alphonsus, that neither he nor any other should call himself King thereof, on pain of Excommunication; whereupon Wars were like to ensue, but the same was happily prevented by the Popes death, who was called out of this World in the year of our Lord 1458, leaving behind him in his Coffers One Hundred and Fifteen thousand pieces of Gold, as Platina affirms, a Treasure very different from His, that said—Silver and Gold have I none, and yet these Money monging Popes are not asham'd to boast them∣selves his Successors.
The COURANT. Unum aliquem voluptate ac deliciis fluere, gementibus, undique ac lamentibus aliis, hoc non est Regni sed Carceris esse Custodem, Tho. Mor. Utop. Truem. VVHether so fast man? Tory. To the new Academy. Truem. What? to learn to ride an Hobby-horse, and practice the noble science of defence with Bean stalks and Bull rushes? Tory. No, no, our's is not Monsieur's vaulting-room, but a Schola Illustris, that undertakes to new model all Arts and sciences. Truem. A gallant enterprize! as how I prethee? Tory. Why first we begin with Grammer, and Correct the old fashion'd use of words and Phrases; as for Example, to Elect two persons shall henceforwards mean, to chuse but one; the lesser party is to be call'd—A Majority. Confirmation shall signifie He-go-mad, or a fatal necessity of approbation without a dram of free-will in the Case; and to desire people to do a thing must be interpreted, that you do thereby actually do it your self in spight of their teeth; in Geometry and Arithmetick our Doctors of the Chair teach, that a part is greater than the whole, and Twelve hundred more by a bundance than Four and twenty hundred. Logick they affirm ought not to be the Art of Reasoning but of Scolding. Truem. Nay then by my Vote, Roger L'Estrange shall be consti∣tuted Logick-Reader to both Universities. Tory. I must tell you there are some there think themselves not a little oblig'd to that Reverend Guid, else they would never have made him such a present. Truem. Yet I have heard of a certain Squire Tyburn-wards, that owes a Gentleman near Cambridge the Sum of Twelve Pound upon Note or Bond, and having been several times dunn'd for it, has promised payment, and bound those promises with Oaths and Execrations, as solumn and dreadfull as those where∣with
with Roger uses to disprove himself a Papist, yet has not paid the money, at least it was not paid just before the time he re∣ceived the Guinnies, nor is it as we believe, satisfied to this day; Mr. L'Estrange would do well to give an account of that affair in his next Observator. 'Twould be altogether as edifying to the publique as Brass-screws, or his being sent for to the old Dog! Talk no more of debts and duns—how goes the business in the City! Truem. Alas, it does not go sir! but 'tis driven. Tory. What may be the grounds and design of all this bustle? Truem. As far as I can learn, on the one side, the Generality of the Citizens have a mind to preserve their Right of Chusing of Sheriffs, and acting in Common-Hall as time out of mind hath been accustomed; on the other side, there are some that scarce know what they would have themselves, but however they make a horrid noise and clamour, and every body that will not be as mad and silly as themselves, they count a Traitor and a Fanatick, many of these are influenc'd by Strangers, that endeavour by rudeness and ill Language and all kind of Affronts to provoke and raise some tumult or disturbance, and rather than fail will swear it, on the most peaceable. Or if we may beleive what a printed paper relates, and names the person, one of these sticklers confessed lately, that the business so strugled for, was, to get Sheriffs to hang up half a score that were uneasy, &c. But as one Innocent mans blood is enough to draw down divine vengeance on the whole Nation, so who knows where Blood hounds if once flesht, would stop? as to the present Controversy is it not fit to be consider'd, 1. If my Lord Mayor be allow'd a Right to chuse one of the Sheriffs against the mind of the Common Hall, then whether the Cities late plea to the quo Warranto, in defence of the Charter, be not thereby confess'd to be false and invali'd? 2. If the Sheriffs for the time being, have not a right to declare the free choise of Sheriffs for the year ensuing, and to manage the Poll, (if any be demanded then whether we have had any Sheriffs duly chosen this hundred years? for 'tis certain the Sheriffs not the Mayors have done it; nor did ever any Mayor Adjourn the Common-Hall, before the business dispatcht, but Sir Samuel Starling, and he paid for it, being cast at Law upon serious consideration of all the Judges. Tory. But what have you to do with these matters? Truem. Just as much as the Observator; therefore I humbly conceive may do it altogether as lawfully. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, July 28. 1682. Dividimus muros et moenia pandimus Vrbis. The History of Aeneus Sylvius, or Pope Pius the II; the Arts used by him to get the Chair; how strangly he was thereby altered. Certain notable sentences of his. VVE hasten—Because sooner than intended, we must, it seems, close these unwelcome and ungrate∣fully received sheets. Who would suspect that in a Protestant Kingdome, and in an age too wherein one of the most damnable Popish Plots that ever shockt a State, was so providentially discovered▪ (and is it not still apparently working?) An History of Popery manag'd with an exact fidelity, and some small neither unusefull nor unpleasant digressions for the Readers Entertainment, should (even amongst Protestants) meet with misconstruction and Contempt—But let them slight on. Those that love Lees, and loath the generous Wine, We envy not, their Pallate's with the Swine.
Pope Calixtus being dead, there were but Two Competitor for the Papacy, viz. Cardinal Rotomagensis, and Aeneas Sylvius, so that during the four days space wherein the matter was debated in the Conclave, the only difficulty was which of these they should chuse, nor was either of them wanting to push on his own promotion, and asperse his Rival. On the one side, Rotomagensis runs up and down from one Cardinal to another whispering—What have you to do with Aeneas? how can you think him worthy of the Papacy, will you confer so important a charge upon that gouty Beggar? where is his knowledge, where his Learning, will ye make him a Pope because he is a Poet? It is not long since he came out of Germany, and who knows but he may transfer the See thither? I should never have Ambition'd the Chair, had I not seen a person stand for it of so much weaker parts than my self; besides I am the antienter Cardinal of the two, and I believe you think I have parts and Learning sufficient to govern the Church of Christ, moreover I am of Royal Extraction, and have wealth, friends and faculties, wherewith to accomodate and releive the Necessities of the Church, and upon my Election, the many Benefices which I now hold will be divided amongst you. These reasons, and especially the last, were very prevalent with many, particularly the Cardinal of Avignon espous'd his Interest, not so much because he was a French man, as in hopes that upon his promotion, his Church, Pallace, and office in the Chancery would fall to his share; therefore cunningly in the night he gets together certain of the Cardinals in an house of Office [A sweet place to confir notes about chusing an Head for the Church!] and there contriv'd a method how Rotomagensis should carry the day. But there was fraud in fellowship; for the Cardinal of Bologna, one of this House-of-Office-Cabal, discovers the Intrigue to Aeneas a little after midnight; presently up gets he, and away to Cardinal Roderigo a Spaniard of Rotomagensis's faction, as having from him and the Cardinal Avignon received a promise in writing that the Chancellorship should be conferr'd upon him. Aeneas expostulates with him for siding with his enemy, who excuses himself so well as he can, telling him he did it not out of any personal Aversion, but because he thought verily the other would be chosen, and he was loath to hang an arse, and so perhaps lose his Chancellors place: Will you then (quoth Aeneas)
sell your Vote? and by Simony incur the displeasure of God Almighty? will you obtrude an hairbrain'd Youth upon the Vatican, and one that is an enemy to the Nation? know you not the Chancellorship which is promised you, is already bestow'd and Confirm'd to the Cardinal of Avignon, and so you are meerly Chous'd, for can you think that a French Pope will do more for a Spaniard than for one of his own Countrymen! Having thus rattled up Don Roderigo, in the next place he finds out the Cardinal of Pavia, whom he accosts in this manner, —I hear you resolve to chuse Rotomagensis Pope, are you not asham'd to degenerate so much from Cardinal Brando your Ʋncle, who with so much labour and sweat assisted to transfer the pontificial Court from Germany to Rome, [He means in the Schism, when the Duke of Savoy took upon him to be Pope] and you that are his Nephew would Transport it from Italy into France; surely Rotomagensis will never give the Italians precedence before the French, and yet you an Italian will Confederate sooner with France, than with your own Country. Can you have the heart to see your self a slave to the French, when it is in your power to make the French truckle to your Nation? The Cardinal Pavia reply'd—That he did not believe that the French had any designs against the Interests of the Church, they having given with so much Generosity most of the provin∣ces it possesseth, and surely they would not take away what they so lately had given.—Suppose saith Aeneas, that should be, ought it not however to stir up your heart against this Cardinal of Roan to consider the Infamy of his manners, who is addicted to all kind of Lasciviousness and debauchery. You have often told me you would sooner dy than give your Voice for him, what reason have you for so great a Change? is he in the twinkling of an eye become an Angel of a Divel? or are you become a Divel of an Angel? Pavia (who was but a silly fellow, and easily made to comply with either side) began to weep,—What you say Aeneas is true, but what shall I do? I have now pass'd my word to make Rotomagensis Pope, and if I do not, I shall be held Infamous and a Traitor: To which Aeneas briskly reply'd Things stand so now, that which way soever you turn you, you cannot avoid the blame of a Fool and Traitor, yet it is in your power to chuse whether you will betray Italy your own Country, or betray him and be faithfull to your Country and your best friends.— These words overcome old Pavia, who presently joyns with
Cardinal Peter de Sancta Maria Nova, and other Italians, in the Cardinal of Genoa's Chamber, where they all resolve to prefer Aeneas. Rotomagensis fearing things would not fadge according to his expectations, seeing Aeneas going to take up the Billet to give his Vote, whispers him very submissively—AEneas I re∣commend my self to thee, remember me, I beseech thee, and have compassion on me. But Aeneas takes him up short thus—poor Worm! thou mistakest in Recommending thy self to me. The scrutiny being publish't, it appear'd that Aeneas had three Voices more than Rotomagensis, but they could not yet obtain their two thirds. Then the Cardinals Roderigo and Santa Anastasia declared for Aeneas with a loud Voice, which Cardinal Prosper Colonna observing, being ambitious to have the Honour of making the Pope (since now there wanted but one Voice) arose and went towards Aeneas, and being stopt and held by Cardinal Niceno and Rotomagensis, he cry'd out—I joyn my self to Cardinal Aeneas and do make him Pope; which being heard by the rest of the Cardinals, they all threw themselves down at Aeneas's feet, saluted him Pope, Corfirmed the Election afterwards with the usual suffrages. Then Cardinal Bessarion Apooglized to the New Pope for himself and all the rest of the Cardinals that favour'd Rotomagensis—To whom the crafty old Fox (being now sure of the Chair) very gravely reply'd—I assure you, you shall be all equally dear to me, for I acknowledge my Elect∣ion not from this person, or that, but from God, aud the whole body of the sacred Colledge, inspired by the Holy Ghost from whence all pefection cometh; so bold and profane was this wicked Pope, to attribute that to divine designation, which he had ob∣tained by fraud and notorious Canvasing of Parties. This Aeneas whose other name was Piccol homini, but after he came to the Popedome called Pius the second, was a native of Siena, his patrimony so mean, that Platina tells us, when he was a Boy and learnt Grammer, he was forc'd for meer Poverty to do Husbandry work for his livelyhood, but being of a notable wit, he quickly became a good Poet, then studied the Civil Law, and afterwards Divinity, he was scribe in the Council of Basil, and Master of the Ceremonies, and by them imploy'd in several Ebassies, and wrote the Transactions of that Council; mainly opposing Eugenius, and asserted, that a Pope ought to be subject to a general Council. Most remarkable is the Epistle he wrote to
Gasper Schck the Emperours Chancellor (Epist. Aen. Sylvii 54) —All men abhor and detest Schism, the Remedy is brief and safe, viz. That Princes or their Ambassadors Convene in some common place, and conclude matters among themselves; for he shall be undoubted Pope, whom all Princes would obey; nor do I see any of the Clergy so constant to Death as to suffer Martyrdome either for the one part or for the other; we all commonly hold that Faith which our Princes embrace, and if they should Worship Idols, we would also do the same, and not only deny the Pope but God also, if the secular power press us thereunto, for Charity is grown cold, and all Faith is gone, &c. But Honours change manners; no sooner was he Pope, but he begins to sing another Tune, and sets forth a Bull entituled Retra∣ction revoking his former Acts and opinions, and the things which he before had seemed to detest in other Popes, he himself now both applauded and advanced. So likewise by another Bull begining Execrabilis, dated in the second year of his Popedome, he strictly forbids any to presume to Appeal from the sentence of the Bishop of Rome to any future Council; and pronounces all such Appeals, whether of Emperors, Kings, Bishops, &c. to be void, vain, execrable and pestiferous. In another Bull which begins—In minoribus agentes, directed to the University of Cologn, Anno 1463, he professeth that it repenteth him that he wrote the Dialogue and other Books touching the Authority of the Council, and is not ashamed to add, That then like St. Paul he ignorantly persecuted the Church of God, affirming now on the contrary, that the Authority of the Pope is above that of the Church Representative, and endeavouring to prove the same by the very same Text, which before he had expounded in a quite different sense. Nor was he less pragmatical in his Actions than his prede∣cessors, For the Augmentation of the Papal Majesty he feared (saith Stella in his Life) neither Kings nor Dukes, people nor Tyrants, but if they would not obey, he Persecuted them so long both by Wars and Censures till he perceived them to be recovered. Thus he became an enemy to Lewis King of France, who went about to restrain the Insolences of the Clergy in his Dominions, he Thundred forth terrible Execrations against Sigismond Duke of Austrea, for that he had Chastised the Cardinal of St. Peter ad Vincula, he deposed the Archbishop of Ments for having an ill opinion of the Church
of Rome, and brought many Towns of Campania to the submission of the Holy Se. But his Ambition cannot better be descry'd than from his 36 Epistle, where he offereth and promiseth the Empire of the Greeks to Mhomet the Grand Seignor, if he would become a Christian and succour the Church, that is to say, his Faction, that he might more easily rend and at his pleasure tram∣ple upon Christendome, which he continually harrass'd with Wars. Yet it must be acknowledged, that he was more Learned, and a man of better sense than most of those that have possess't the Chair, and till he was blinded with self-Interest had a very pier∣cing Judgment of things, as appears by these his following sayings or Apothegms recorded by Platina and others. Proverbial Maximes of Aeneus Sylvius or Pope Pius the II. 1. Every sect grounded on Authority, wants humane reason. 2. The Christian Faith, if it were not approved by Miracles, yet ought to be received for its innate Honesty and Excellency. 3. Marriage with great reason was forbiden to Priests, and yet for the greater reasons ought to be restored to them [Note that in some late Editions of Platina this sentence is struck out, but it is in mine Printed at Cologn, 1611] 4. To search into and study the Course of the Stars is a thing of more delight and ostentation than profit. 5. A Covetous man is never satisfied with Mony, nor a Scholar with knowledg. 6. Those who have the happiness to know most, have the per∣plexity to meet with most doubts. 7. Learning to the vulgar ought to serve instead of Silver, to the Nobles as Gold, but by Princes to be valued as pretious stones. 8. Laws on poor people have force, but towards the great ones they are Dumb.
The COURANT. —Quae tanta Insania Cives! Creditos avectos Hostes? Truem. ANd have you dispos'd of the House in Alders∣gate-street? Tory. Yes, yes, that little man is to be Abbreviated in Michael∣mas Term, and Sir Richard to enter upon the premises at Christ∣mas; so 'twas resolv'd at our Club last night at the Queens Head l'le assure you. Truem. Very fine! and who are the rest that you design the Two Gentlemen shall have the honour of being Executioners to? Tory. Why, not above half ascore Lords, Four Aldermen, and about Three hundred and fifty Commoners. Truem. That's a small business, prethee let it be two or three thousand when your hands in,—But how will you do for Evidence. Tory. Pshaw! let's have confiding Juries, and wee'l presntly find Witnesses enough in the divels-name; there's a spot of ground near Pauls where they grow as fast as solun-Geese do in Scotland; Godwin the Tailor who swore his wife (Colledges sister) into Newgate tother day, will do well for a young beginner, besides we still maintain the old Reserve at 'tother end oth' Town on purpose for opportunity. I saw some of them on Wednesday last in Fleet-street as fine as if the Divel were their Tailor; they looked l'le promise you more like Lords than Common Knights, look, look quoth a roguish Porter seeing them go by, observe the difference; all the while these fellows swore against Papists they were forc'd to sneak up and down and beg Coffee at the Amsterdam, and dne five of them on a Loyn of Mutton, but no sooner did they Tack and puff Shafsbury into the Tower, but Hey bys up go we! The plate Fleet arriv'd, it rain'd Lac'd Cravas, and Beavers, and the Fairies brought them New Suits and Guinnies in the pockets, and ever since the miracle continues, and they live like Princes.
Truem. But how if one of your Gazet-Sheriffs should not be willing to hold after this. Tory. Nay then I faith Roger L'Estrange has spent his time and pains to a fine purpose. Pray do you know what Company that Gentleman is of, he has stickled more in this No-Choice, than any Livery man of them all. Truem. Who Roger, hee's a Haberdasher of small Wares. Tory. Well, you see he claws off Prance still. Truem. Yes, he went by there the other morning, and put forth his Snout out of the Coach against Prances door, and loll'd out his Tongue and Bleated just like a Calf, was not that now ingeniously done, and much like a Gentleman. Tory. You mistake he only paid his Adorations to the Golden Cross, and said an Ave Maria, and so Jogg'd on; but prethee what is that dog story he keeps such a clutter with. Truem. The matter of Fact was truly and nakedly as follows, Miles Prance and another man and a third person that was a Constable went one evening into Sam's Coffee-house, and sat down quietly without speaking to any body, but before Prance had drunk his dish, a Journy-man Draper whisper'd the Company and told them who he was, presently twenty or thirty of them flock about him, call'd him scurrilous names and gave him all kind of Affronts, which he took patiently, only laught at their folly, and paying for his Coffee, he and one of the persons that came in with him, went to the Old Dog Tavern and sat down in the Kitching, where the other man in a Frolique would needs send to Sa'ms for L'Estrange, who refusing to come, unless a Name were sent, the same person return'd the Boy again to tell him, that one Squire Ketch would speak with him; whereupon a Committee of four or five were sent from Sams, who began a quarrel with Prance for sending for L'Estrange, and he deny'd (as most truly he might) that he sent for him; but there were no such Oaths or Execrations utter'd, nor did ever Mr. Allens boys make such Affidavits as were Printed, but all those lies were calculated on purpose to fully Mr. Prances Evidence against Thompson, the day before whose Tryal this story was first blaz'd abroad by the Observator. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, August 4. 1682. Monstra, non Homines pagina nostra refert. The wicked Lives of Pope Paul the II. a profest enemy of Learning, and Sixtus the IV. who granted a License for Sodomy; the story of Pope Innocent the VIII. and his Sixteen Bastards. OUR last acquainted you with a pretty tolerable Pope, a man of sense and Letters, and only tainted with Pride and Covetousness and a few such ordinary Vices, but we now come to Brutes and Monsters, hardly to be matcht by the Nero's and Caligula's or any the like prodigies of the Heathen World. Pope Pius the 2d. intent upon an expedition against the Turks, dyed at Ancona in the year 1464. And is honour'd with this Epitaph. Frigida membra Pii retinet lapis iste loquacis, Qui pacem moriens attulit Italiae; Vendiderat pretio Gentes, & Crimina multa, Virtutis specie gesserat ille Pius.
Here the cold Bones of tattling Pius ly, Who by his Death brought Peace to Italy; Nations he sold, and many Crimes did act, But mask'd with seeming vertue each lewd Fact. Peter Barbs a Venetian succeeds, by the name of Paul the second, one of the most pevish fancifull fools, that we shall meet with in any History. One of his first exploits was to abolish all the Abbreviators, to whom Pope Pius his predecessor had sold those places, without returning any of their Mony. What these Gentlemens Office was, I am not wise enough to acquaint you, but it appears to be both of Honour and profit, else they would never have stickled so much about it. His pretended reason for putting them down was Ignorance, when in truth they were the Learnedest men Pius could get together from most parts of the World, and Platina who writes the Lives of the Popes hitherto, was one of them, a person no way contemptible for parts, as the size of Learning went in those times. When some of these discarded Officers, petition'd him to refer their Cause to the hearing of the Auditors of the Rota, (a certain Court of Judica∣ture in Rome) and Platina spoke for all the rest; this haughty Pope return'd this swaggering Answer—What dost talk to us of Judges? dost thou not know that all Laws are lodg'd within the Closet of our Breast (Ita nos, inquit, ad Judices revocas, ac si nescireo omnia Jura in scrinio pectoris nostri collocata esse?) This is our sentence, let them all be packing, I regard them not, I am Pope and it is lawfull for me to disannull or approve the Acts of others at my own pleasure. And because Platina, not satisfied with this Answer, wrot him a Letter about the same affair, he accused him of Libelling and Treason, which Treason was that he had alkt of Appealing from his Holiness to a General Council; upon this poor Platina was Jail'd for four Months, and not long after taken up again upon a Sham plot, and put upon the Rack with several others, of whom diverse, being persons of good quality, whom he names in his History, dyed of their Tortures; and when it appeared there was no such Conspiracy, as the Pope had fancied, yet they were long kept in durance, least, forsooth, he should seem to have Committed them at first without cause; and when other accusations fail'd, he accused them of Heresy for
disputing of the Immortality of the Soul out of Plato, whom, yet, (as Platina truly observes,) St. Austin affirms to come nearest therein to the opinion of a Christian; and to compleat his ridi∣culous folly, he very gravely pronounced, all those to be Hereticks that should either in jest or earnest make mention of the name of an Academy. This will not appear strange, when you consider what the same Author relates, that this Pope hated Learning, and had such a spight against the Studies of Humanity, that he called all that follow'd them, Hereticks; and for that reason, exhorted the Citizens of Rome not to suffer their Sons to be any longer at the Stu∣dies of Learning, for that it was sufficient if they had learned to write and read, and therefore Genebrard fitly calls him, Hostis Virtutis & doctrinae, the enemy of virtue and Learning. The most memora∣ble things that he did for the good of the Church, was that he bought up at any rate all the extraordinary pretious stones he could hear of, to make the Papal Mitre more gay and glorious, for he took much delight to be gaz'd at and admired in that Bravery; likewise he decreed that none should wear Scarlet Caps but Cardinals, and in the first year of his Popedome he gave them Cloth of the same Colour wherewith to cover their Horses and Mules when they rode; that the Apostatized Church might even litterally resemble that Whore described to us in the Revelations. In the year 1465▪ the Cardinal of Laurence dying, who was exceeding rich, by the Popes consent bequeath'd his Estate to his two Brothers, called Scaranupi, but no sooner was he dead, but the Pope seized on the Legatees and kept them in Prison till they surrendred the Estate to his disposal, and so got those riches which (saith Platina) the late owner would rather had fallen to the Turks than him, as being one that he hated and always had quarrels with. Another of his excellencies, was that he had appointed publick Races all the Lent, and propos'd Prises to those that won, every day, so that there ran old men, young men, and Children, Christians and Jews, nay they ran with Horses and Mares and Asses and some upon Cows, with such di∣version to the Company that they could scarce stand for Laugh∣ing, Ʋnde pontifex ipse solidam voluptatem percipiebat, from which his Holiness himself did take solid displeasure. Excellent sport for Christs Vicar! He was a great Epicure, and if store of Belly-Timber were not brought him, would roar and cry out like mad; he would drink too like a Fish, and when he went abroad 'tis
reported he used to paint his face, as Wenches do. He Excomu∣nicated George King of Bohemia for being infected with the Heresy of John Hus, and deprived him of his Kingdome, which he liberally bestow'd upon Matthew King of Hungaria. In the 7th year of his Popedome he dyed suddainly some say of an Apoplexy, but Gsper Pencerus affirms that he was strangled by the Divel in the very act of uncleaness; this is certain he was a great Whoremaster, and was publickly known to have one Bastard, whence John Pannonius a Bishop of those times made this Epigram on him. Pontificis Pauli testes ne Roma requir as Filia quam genuit, sat docet esse Marem. Pope Paulus a male, Rome need no further trial, His Bastard Daughter makes it no denyal. To fill his Coffers he decreed that the Jubilee should be brought down from 50 years and Celebrated every 25 years (and so it is observ'd to this day) by which means it would come in the year 1475. whence he promis'd himself abundance of money, but like the rich fool in the Gospel he was cut off be∣fore that time, dying as you have heard Anno 1471. and here Platina's History de Vitis Pontificum concludes. The next Pope was Fancis de Rovere a Savoyard, General of the Franciscans, who would be called Sixtus the 4th, he created two Cardinal, Peter Riere whom he had brought up from a Child with his Brother Jeronimo, and Julian his Brothers Son (who was afterwards Pope Julius the second) this Peter (who was supposed to be his own Bastard) he so prodigally enricht, that he seem'd born for nothing but to spend money, for in those two years that he liv'd a Cardinal he consumed Two Hundred Thou∣sand Crowns in his ordinary Household Expence, and Dyed Forty Thousand Crowns in debt, being himself wasted and con∣sumed with debauchery; touching this Pope himself, hear what a Character Agrippa a Roman Catholick gives of him and his d∣ings in his Vanity of Sciences, cap. 64. Amongst all the Pimps or Bauds of thse latter tims there was none more famous than Pope Sixtus the IV. who built at Rome a goodly Brothel-house or publick Stews, wherein according to the example of Heliogabalus he kept multitudes of Buxome Strumpets wherewith he furnished his friends and followers, gathering by this Whorish merchandize no small ad∣vantage to his Treasury, for these priviledg'd Courtsans at Rome
did weekly pay every one a Julio to the Pope, which yearly Re∣venue amounts many times to the sum of Twenty Thousand Ducates, and in such request is that Office with the prime Grandees of the Church, that the Rents of the Bawds are cast up together with the Patrimony of the Church, for thus have I myself heard them casting up their accounts (what Revenue or preferment such a man had) he hath two Benefices, one Cure of Twenty Ducates, a Priory of Forty Ducates and three Whores in the Bawdy-house [that is, he is to receive their Rent.] Thus far Agrippa. Think you not now that the Church of Rome may most properly in all senses be called a Whore and mother of Fornications? But though this were a prodigious peice of Impudence, yet this Incarnate Divel of a Pope proceeded to greater Abominations, for Wesellus of Gro∣ningen, who lived in the time of this Sixtus, and being a man famous in those days for his knowledg in the three Larned Lan∣guages, was thence commonly called Lux Mundi the Light of the World, in his book of Papal Indulgenses, assres us, that this Pope Sixtus at the request of the before mentioned Peter Riere (whom he had made Cardinal of St. Sixtus and Patriarch of Con∣stantinople) and of Jeronimo his own Brother, and of the Cardi∣nal of St. Luce (who had the chief place belonging to Hunting under Paul the second) permitted unto them and ever of them Sodomy during the three hottest months of the year viz. June, July and August, with this Clause Fiat ut petitur, let it be done as it is desired. yet this good Father wrot Book of the Conception of the Virgin Mary, and Authorized that execrable blasphemous book of Alamus de Rupe a German and Dominian Frier intituled Compendium Psalterii Mariani, wherein all that the Prophet David says of and to the Lord is attributed unto the Virgin Mary; he also instituted a new Society of the Rosary, for the Credit where∣of James Spengerus Provincial of Germany, devised a book of certain Miracles (which Sixtus approved and defended with his Bulls and Indullgences) wherein we read—That the Virgin Mary entering into the Cell or Chamber of this Alani, the doors being lk, and having woven some of her hair into a Ring, married her self therewith unto him, offering her self unto him to be kissed and her Breasts to be handled and sucked in as familiar manner as a Wife to her Husband, with many other accursed Blsphemous lies, by which we may with amazement consider into what a bottom∣less pit of Impiety the superstitious minds of the common people
wereby these lew'd Atheists overwhelm'd! the only commen∣dable thing this Pope did that we can here of, was that he erected the Palatine Library in the Vatican, and assign'd a Re∣venue thereunto to maintain the Officers belonging to it; he was Pope 13 years and dyed in the year 1484. To him is at∣tributed the Invention of Beads, for the counting of Prayers, because he ordered those of the Society of the Rosary so to do, that they might know when they had done their Task; of which Mantuan takes notice. Hi filo insertis numerant sua Murmura Baccis. Their murmering Pray'rs they count with Beads on strings Touching the Religion of this Pope, 'tis thus expressed in an Epitaph made for him by Johnanes Sapidus. Riserat ut vivens Caelestia Numina Sixtus, Sic moriens nullus Credidit esse Deas. As Sixtus when he liv'd mockt God, so he Even at his death believ'd no God to be. Then came Innocent the 8th of the Family of Cibo, originally a poor boy brought up with the Servants of the King of Sicily, but being for his extraordinary Beauty preferr'd to the Cardinal of Bononia (you that are acquainted with Italy and the man∣ners of the Scarlet Princes may guess for what purpose) he soon got advancement. He was the first of all the Popes that publickly made his boasts of his Bastards, and indeed he had some reason being very plentifully stock't that way, for before he came to the Chair he had no less than 16 Bastards, eight boys, and as many Daughters, how many more he had afterwards we find not. But there was but two of them alive when he was made Pope; of whom Onuphrius gives this Account, that his Son Francis and his Daughter Theodirina, his Bastards, were by him Enriched beyond measure, he distributing and squandring away vast summs of mony got by Indulgences in pretence of an Expedition against the Turks amongst those Brats and other of his Relations.
The COURANT. Parque referre pari licuit, sempérque licebit. Truem. HAve you been to Congratulate the Captain? Tory. Who? Captain Confirmation? no, I have had no leasure to be drunk to day; but I'm the Son of a Whigg, if he be not a rare man; Montecuculi and Turenne were but Ratcatchers to him for Leading up with a Huzza! and cut∣off the Rear with Bar-shot! Truem. I pray do any of the Antients that wrot the Tacktiks, or the Art Military, make the discipline of the Tap a qualification absolutely necessary in a Commander? Tory. No, hang 'um, dull fools! they did not understand it, but where drink's the only valour, why should not a Hogshead have the Conduct? and then how gallantly and magnificently it sounds, Brave Captain—Fill us two Pipes? Noble Captain—fetch me up a Piss-pot. Nor is Five pound a night for keeping in awe Legal Riots and quelling peaceable seditions, and many a Bottle called for by the by to attone the sin of defaulting, a thing to be slighted, and therefore no wonder if there have, since the me∣mory of man, been mighty strivings amongst the formidable Gyants of Blew Apronland for martial preferment. Truem. Which puts me in mind of an old story in our Coun∣try (though nothing to this purpose) of a Woman that had four or five Children, and a Bitch that happen'd to encrease the World with as many Whelps, strait the little Brats (being you must know in Hobb's state of nature) began to catch for propriety, Dick said—This shall be mine; and Tom said—This shall be mine, and each made sure of one; then says Tom, my Puppies name shall be Captain, no, quoth Dick, mine shall be Captain, and so said they all; and in short fell to Loggerheads about the point, the Mother hearing them screaming and crying, one with a Bloody Nose and 'tother with a torn Muckender, came in to part the fray; to whom with many a bitter sob, they relate the occa∣sion of their quarrel; whereupon like a discreet Matron, be quiet, be quiet, quoth she, you bawling Bastards, all the Puppies
shall be Captains; and so the Controversy ended. Tory. Well! but what's the New's abroad? Truem. They talk of more and more Plots still. Tory. As how prethee? Truem. Why, they say, there is so many Popish Priests and Jesuits come over (but for no harm Ile warrant you) that they can't all get work, therefore what do half a dozen of the cun∣ning'st Rogues in the bunch but to get elbow room subtilly give out with great Confidence, that there are Warrants out against Father such an one and Father such an one, and by these Arts have frighted away many of their Brethren into the Country, and now monoplize the whole Imployment of Mass-mumbling and Whore-shrifting to themselves. Tory. A pretty stratagem! but we have a Plot going on too. Truem. Prethee what's that? Tory. To Indict all the Whiggs in England for a Riot at Guild-Hall on Midsummer-day. Truem. That's fine! but how can it be done with any handsome Colour? Tory Let us alone for Cloth and Colour too, the way is found out and discover'd by a notable paty Old Tory that lives to the South of St Pauls, who being on Tuesday last in Aldersgate-street and talking of those businesses, some of the Company alledged, that one that he knew of those now prosecuted in the Crown-Office, was diverse miles of in the Country that day; no matter for that, no matter for that, quoth this Sir politick Nestor, the proceeding is just, all over according to Law for all that, for his heart was with them, and that makes him as guilty of the Riot as the Sheriffs themselves. Truem. 'Twas an Ingenious explanation, but I must take leave for I am for Tunbridge to night. Tory. Then pray present my service to our friend, Mr. Com∣mon Simpleton! and desire him to drink less Water and more Wine next week, upon my life his Heraclitus will be fit for nothing in the world but to send down thither for service in the Back∣walks. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, August 11. 1682. Donec erit Papa, donec erunt pia scripta virorum Pellis ovilla trucem non Teget ulla Lupum. The Turk aud Pope intimate Friends, Reliques pretended to be found. An Epitaph upon Pope Innocent VIII. The detestable Lives of those Two Monsters, Pope Alexander the VI. and his Bastard Caesar Borgia. WE are yet in the story of Pope Innocent the 8th. In whose time it happen'd, that Bajazet the Grand Seignior of the Turks going about, according to the unnatural policy of that barbarous Empire, to make away his Brethren, one of them named Gemes (Zizimus, Onuphrius calls him) a person famous for his Wisdom and Valour, escaping, endeavour'd to defend himself by Arms; but being unhappily routed by his Brother on the plains of Bythinia, retired himself to Rhodes, where being taken by the Grand Master of the Order, for a sum of Mony was delivered unto Innocent, under whom and his Successor he was kept Prisoner for many years, and at last dyed
in Captivity, and though we never hear they made him a Christian, yet they forgot not to make advantage by him to them∣selves, for so much did Bajacet apprehend his Liberty, that he held Correspondence with the Pope, and allow'd him a Pension of Forty Thousand Crowns (Phillip de Comines who liv'd in that Age, says it was Sixty Thousand) per annum, to oblige him to keep the said Gemes the more strictly and warily; and no doubt his Holiness esteem'd a Mussalmans Mony altogether as Catholic as if it had been the most Christian Kings. Nor was this all the toens of their Amity, but the subtle Turk knowing well enough how to gratify the superstitious Pope, sent him the top of an old rusty Lance, which he told him was the end of the very Spear wherewith the Soldier (Longinus the Papists will have his name to be from the Greek word , which signifies a Spear) pierc'd the side of Jesus Christ when he was Crucified; you may perhaps wonder where this Rarity had lain so many Hundred years, but Onuphrius will tell you very punctually, that it was found a long time before at St. Andrews Church in Antioch (I pray by the way how came it thither?) That when the City was taken one Boemundus caught it up, and though he could not before subdue the Cittadel, yet then he presently took it, and with this piece of a Spear, Hostium multa Millia prodigiose delevit, prodigiously destroy'd many Hundreds of his Enemies; then it was carried to Constantinople as a present to the Emperour, and being there found by the Turk, he now very Courteously sends it to the Pope, who most Religiously (saith Onuphrius) laid it up in the Vaican Church; nor wanted he the good luck to find another somewhat more pretious Relique, for Peter Gonsalvo de Mendoza repairing the Church of the Holy Cross in Rome, spyed in the midst of the Wall a fragment of the Title of the Cross of Christ written in three Languages, which 'tis said was hid there by the Emperour Placidius Valentinianus above a Thousand years before. But this Imposture, the Letters themselves bewray'd; the dull Monk that forg'd it, was none of the best Graecians, for instead of  it was both Barberously and against all sense and Grammer, written . However both these Inventions, serv'd to supply Innocents Successor with a plentifull Harvest of Indulgences, and consequently brought in abundance of money; for as for Innocent himself, he dyed soon after, in the 8th year of his Popedome, and was Buried for the greater
Sanctity of the business, just by the place where he had reposi∣ted the Holy Spear. You may remember our last told you his true original Name was Cibo, and that he had a competent stock of Natural Sons and Daughters; in respect of which, and Allu∣sion to that (then unquestion'd) story of Pope Joan, Marullus bestow'd this Epitaph on him. Quid quaeris Testes, sit Mas an Faemina Cibo? Respice Natorum Pignora certa Gregem, Octonocens Pueros genuit totidemque puellas; Hunc merito potuit dicere Roma Patrem. Spurcities, Gula, Avaritia atque Ignavia deses, Hoc Octave! jacent, quo tegeris, Tumulo. No need of Groping here, the sex to scan, His numerous Bastards prove Cibo a man. Eight Boys he got, and just as many Lasses, No news then, if he for Rome's Father passes. Uncleaness, Avarice, Sloth, Gluttony, Are all Entomb'd at once, where he doth ly. But let Innocent be never so bad, the Proverb will be vereified —Seldom comes a better, his Successor extreamly exceeded him in all kind of wickedness. This was Roderic Borgia, who being chosen Pope, Anno 1492. was called Alexander the 6th. As for the means his coming to the Chair, Hieronimus Marius in his Eusebius Captivus, affirms, that it was obtain'd by a Compact with the Divel Immediately and expresly, and indeed he that once boasted he had all the Kingdomes of the World in his gift, might well enough pretend to bestow the Triple Crown, or who more fit than Satain to bestow the Papacy, a place which for many Hundreds of years has brought him in so much advan∣tage, as if it were design'd only to serve his Interests? But other Historians mention only a bargain with Old Nick at second hand, by the meditation of Bribes, Simony, &c. Thus Onuphrius in the life of this Alexander and Volaterranus in his Anthropoliga, attest, that he mounted to so high a Dignity by the endeavours of some Cardinals whom he had Corrupted with Bribes, and especially of Ascanius Sforta, who sold himself at a high price, Ʋt hic omnium ejus Ordinis deterrimus, pro optimo pontifex renun∣tiaretur, That this fellow the very worst of all the Cardinals (and God knows had was the best) might be made Pope. And that
most credible Historian Guiccardine relates it more accurately in these words—He was chosen Pope by means of the discord that was betwixt the Cardinals Ascanius Sforta, and Julian of St. Peter ad vincula, but add withall, that by a new Example in the sight and knowledg of all men he bought the Popedome, partly with Mony, partly with the promise of his great Offices and Benefices, by which means he got the Cardinals Voices, who contemning the Command∣ment of the Gospel, were not ashamed to sell the power to him, to make Traffique of the sacred Treasures, by a Coelestical Authority. To this abominable Negotiation many amongst them were drawn by Cardinal Ascanius, not only by perswasion but Example, who being Corrupted by an Insinite desire of Riches, bargained to have the Vice-Chancellorship (which was the principal Office of the Court of Rome) enriched with most excellent furniture.—And then he pro∣ceeds to give the Characters of this Pope Alexander in these terms —His manners were very dishonest, there was in him no sincerity, no Shame, no Truth, no faith, no Religion; but rather insatisfiable Covetous∣ness, Ambition beyond measure more than Burttish Cruely, and a most violent desire to raise his Sons, which were many in number, whether by right or by wrong to the highest Dignities; thus uiccardine a man of the Romish Communion; Noris the Friar of Padua much less plain, calling him Occultae Iniquitatis summéque dissimulationis Hominem, A person of secret inquity and the deepest dissimulation. At this time Charles the 8th of France laid Claim to the King∣dom of Naples, to prevent whose Neighbourhood the Pope makes a League with Alphonsus of Aragon, (who likewise pre∣tended to the Crown) upon these conditions, that Alexander should invest the said Alphonsus at the same price as he did his Father, and send his Legate to Crown him. That Alphonsus should pay the Pope Thirty Thousand Ducates, and give the Popes Eldest Bastard (whom he had made Duke of Candia) Twelve Thousand Ducates Per Annum, out of the Revenues of that Kingdom Fora Pension, and the first of the seven principal Offices that should be void; and bestow certain Benefices of very great value on his Holinesses younger Bastard, named Caesar Bor∣gia whom he had already created Cardinal, and the better to do so, because by the Canons, Bastards are disabled from that dignity, though he had before publickly own'd him to be his own Son, and did so ever afterwards, yet now to serve a turn, procured false Witnesses to swear that he was the lawfull Son
of another man. So much less did he regard Subornation and Perjury than the violation of a Canon. In the mean time the French King advances with great suc∣cess. Whereupon (saith Paulus Jovius L. 2. see also Guiccardine Cap. 19) the Pope to divert or put a stop to his Carreer, sends Buiccardo of Genoa as his Legate to the Grand Seignior Bajazet, suggesting to him that the said King Charles design'd as soon as he had setled his affairs in Naples, to Invade Greece; the Turk thankfully receives this Admonition, Treats the Legate Honourably, and with them returned a vast sum of Mony and an Ambassador of his own, to whom amongst other matters given in charge, there was a Letter written in the Greek Tongue, wherein Bajazet earnestly importunes the Pope to make away his Brother by Poyson, promising upon his faith to give him for the same not only Twenty Thousand Ducates, but also to bestow upon him the Seamless-Coat of Christ, as some years before he had sent the point of the Spear before mention'd. But these Ships were Intercepted, by the Brother Cardinal Julian an Enemy to the Pope, and a friend to the French, who seized all the Mony as due to him from the Pope. At which his Holiness was much afflicted, and sought new means to reestablish this Correspondence with Bajazet. But still Charles passing through Italy without resistance comes to Rome with his whole Army, and enters the City with dis∣played Ensigns, and his Lance upon his Thigh; in the begin∣ning of the year 1494. to the great Terror of the Pope, who fearing he should call him to account for such undue practises of obtaining the Papacy, or take from his usurped Dominions and Power, or joyn with several of the Cardinals (that were that way already inclined) to require a General Council; with which one word (saith Jovius) the Popes are more terrified than with any other Accidents whatsoever. Alexander for the present retreats to the Castle of St. Angelo, and thence with Bribes and flatteries Corrupts diverse of the Kings Council, to divert him from any Reformation of the Church; and so upon agreement that the Pope should surrender into his hands the Castle of Civetta Vecchia, and certain other strong holds, and pronounce him Em∣perour of Greece, and some other Articles, matters were com∣posed between them, and for performance of this Treaty, the Popes Son Caesar Corgia, was to go along with him, as an Hostage; as also Gemes the Turks Brother, Charles Alledg∣ging
he might do good service in the War he designed against the Mahume∣tans. But this Gemes was no sooner come to Naples but he dyed, not with∣out manifest tokens of a slow Poyson given him to drink to shorten his Life. And from whom this Treacherous more than Barbarous Murder proceeded, may be Guess'd by that Transaction between the Pope and Bajazet, who (saith Guiccardine) had long time made good use of the Avarice of the Vicars of Christ, that he might possess his Empire in Peace. Then at the Vatican the Pope received the King, who with bended Knee kissed his Feet, and another day, the Pope Celebrating Mass, he held the ason whilst he asht his hands, which Ceremonies the Pope caused to be Painted in a Gallery in the Castle of St. Angelo, to transmit the memory thereof to posterity, it being always the trick of Popes to screw up present Com∣plements into future duties. Soon after King Charles returned into France, and having first lost his Son the Dauphin, was himself snatcht away by a sudden Death, which Philip de Comines saith, was foretold by Hierom Savana∣roa (a good man esteemed a Prophet at Florence, and afterwards Burnt) who predicted his successes in Italy, but withal told him, that if he did not procure the Reformation of the church according to his dnty, there hung a scourge over his head, and God hath pronounced a sentence against him which he would Ex∣ecute elsewhere. Pope Alexander now studies nothing but to Advance his Bastards not without Tragical examples of Whoredome, Incests and Cruelty, odious to the Barbarians themselves. He had conferr'd all secular power on the Eldest, which Caesar, the younger, took so ill, that one Evening he causd him to be murder'd and flung into Tyber, being moved thereto likewise by Jealousie, as fearing he had more share in the love of Madam Lucreta their Sister than himself, for you must note she was not only Stumpet to them both, but also (O horible Incest!) to her own Father the Pope himself, who first took her from a mean Spaniard he had Married her to before his Popedome, as being now below her dignity, and bestow'd her on the Prince of Pizaro; from whom on pretence of his Insufficiency he caused her by Judges of his own chusing, to be divorc'd, and once more Married to a Bastard of Alphonsus King of Arragon; yet still continuing his own detestable Com∣merce with her; whence Pontanus gives her this Epitaph. Hoc jacet in Tumulo Lucreta nomine, sed Re Thais, Alexandri Filia, sponsa, Nurus. In this Tomb lies the Pope's and Nature's shame Thais in Trueth, although Lucrete in Name; See, what Infallibility can do! She was his Daughter, Miss, and Son's Miss too.
The COURANT. Tory. THey are divelish mad, I'le tell you that, and threaten you most Confoundedly. Truem. Poor blustering vapours! Chits and Asrseworms! scarce fit to be of the Life-guard to a Cherry-Tree! Tory. What news from the Wells? Truem. Nothing extraordinary, the great stones still stand just where they did, as fixt and stable as English Liberties or London Charter; the ratling of Guilt-Coaches has not remov'd them an Inch. Yet we had abundance of Fools, Cullies, Sharpers, and Jilts, so that sometimes the Factions on the walks, were a pretty symbolical Landscape of those in Church and State; the sharking Trepan was the Jesuite that Embroil'd all Company; the Mas∣querade-Papist play'd Booty; the ranting Bully snatcht up the stake of Loyalty, and ran away with it, whilst the poor Old Cava∣leir was pointed at for a Whigg. But what is this Glorius Feast of yours, so much talkt of. Tory. Why, there should have been Fifteen Hundred of us, and 'twas not our fault there was not so many, for the Tickets were at last given abroad like Saffolds Pocky Bills. Truem. I'le assure you, 'twas a brave opportunity for Loyal Journy-man Taylers, this Cucumber-time. Tory. Yes, they Indented with their Bellies not to Eat again this Fortnight.—And then to see the Condescention and Charity, as well as Policy of the business; Illustrissimo's and Grandee's, and Porters, and Sons of Whores, and Prentices, so sweetly mixt, you'd wonder at it! O my Conscience (besides the Lords and people of Quality, who you know have got the Lord knows what) the very rest of the Company were not much less worth, that Ten Thousand Pounds. Truem. That's great I'le promise you; especially their pru∣dence too, being put in the same Ballance with their vast Estates! yet (suppose it true) I have known one single Ignoramus Grand Jury able to buy the whole Society Twenty times over. But to talk seriously—I have a just veneration for any person of Honour that might divert themselves at this Conventicle, but
for the rest, I must needs say, an Haunch of Venison is not much more valuable than a Mess of Pottage, and for a few little people (Boys, and Journymen and I know not who) to single out themselves, and appropriate (forsooth) the Tytle of the Loyal, (which every good Subject in England is proud of) is not this in effect to call all those many Thousands that join not in the ridiculous frolique, Traitors and ? and do not such practises most apparently tend to Faction, distinguishing and setting up of parties, and Sedition? nor is it difficult to Ima∣gine what Influence such meetings will have on wild unbridled youth, when in defiance to their Indentures (for breach of which the Law and prudent necessary Custom of the City has awarded Little-Ease and Bridewell) they shall dare be Scaperloytering to a right Honourable Feast. Nor is it any answer to say, they do it to shew their Loyalty, for that's demonstrated in being obe∣dient to the Law, and their Masters, not in Drinking Healths, Swearing, roaring and Huzza-ing. Tory. Well for all your slighting of Health-drinking, I conceive it a most necessary thing in these times, for you see what Loyal-Nat-Pillory-Thomson, saith last Saturday, how one Saunders a supposed Whigg being Indicted at Hereford Assizes, the Court gravely put it to him whether he used to Drink the King and the Dukes Health? who answer'd, He could Eat the Kings as well as any man in England, but it seems had a great Fine laid upon him. Truem I verily believe this another of his impudent Scandals on the Government, and doubt not but the worthy persons concern'd will vindi∣cate themselves from his Libel, for can it be Imagin'd that any of the sage Judges, would so far forget themselves, their Dignity and Gravity, as to ask such a pitifull ridiculous question? is Health Drinking, an Hellish Custome condemn'd by the Law of God, Habakkuk 2. 15. and Mortaity, and his Majesties Proclamation, now become the Shibholeth of Loyal? Tory. Well, well, I'm sure they are all Whiggs and Phanaticks and Traitors, that wont Drink the ukes Health (for the Kings of late is somewhat out of fashion) but prethe tell us what is that place in Habakkuk, for I do not oft trouble my head with the Bible? Truem. The words are these—Wo unto him that giveth his Neighbour Drink, that puttest thy Bottle to him, and makest him Drunk also, that thou may'st look on their Nakedness, thou art filed with shame for Glory, the Cup of the Lords right hand shall be turned unto thee, aud shamefull Spewing shall be thy own Glory. Printed for Langley Curtis, 1682.
The Weekly Pacquet OF Advice from Rome: OR, The History of POPERY. The Fourth Volume. FRIDAY, August 18. 1682. Dubium nullum est iis quos spiritus Christi tangit, quin sciant, sese Offerre summum & gratissimum Laudis sacrificium, quicquid contra hanc Cruentam Blasphemam & Sacrilegam Meritri∣cem Diaboli legere, dicere, scribere possunt —Luther in Epist. ante R. Barius M. De vitis pontificum. Pope Alexander Poison'd, by a mistake with Wine prepared to Poison a Cardinal. Thirty Thousand years pardon granted, Julius the second, a Tory-Pope, flings St. Peters Keys into Tybur. Pope Leo the X. sends out extravagant Indulgences, which Luther opposes, and so we are brought to the beginning of the Reformation. THe Pope was so far from punishing his base begotten Caesar Borgia, for murdering his Brother mention'd in our last, that he not winked at it, but resolves still to advance him to Riches and Honour; in order to which the said Caesar flung off his Cardinals Robes, and openly delar'd he would be no longer a Priest, but a man of Warr; then he married Charlotte nearly related to the French King, who was willing to bestow her on him, because he had a mind
to change his Bedfellow, and concluded by sweetening the Pope by this match, to obtain a Divorce. Caesar being return'd into Italy, designs the ruine of all the Governours or Lieutenants of the Cities of Romania, and to take the Government and profits all to himself; for effecting which, there was no kind of Trea∣chery or Cruelty which he left unpractised, Stabbing some, Poisoning others, and Strangling diverse; whilst the Father stri∣ving as it were to exceed the Son in wickedness, was playing the same Game with the Cardinalls and chief Barons of the City; insomuch that Volateran and Guiccardine are weary with relating their Barbarities, and the politick Florentine, Nick Matchiavil, when he would give the World the Character or true figure of a Tyrant, does it in the person of this Caesar Borgia, as Zenophon describes an excellent Prince, in the name of Cyrus. Amongst other devises both Father and Son were exquisite Practioners in Poyson, and had thereby taken off several of the Richest Cardinals.—But —Non Lex est Justior ulla Quam Necis Artifices Arte perire sua. 'Tis Just, such witty Engineers of Death, By their own Arts should lose their hated Breath. The manner of this Popes death both Onuphrius, Volateran, and Guiccardine relate as followeth,—He Supping one night in a Vineyard near the Vatican, to enjoy the coolness of the Air, was suddenly carried desperately sick into the Pallace, and the next morning he died, black, swoln, and beyond all credit deform'd, which happened as it is credibly reported by Poyson in this manner: Caesar Borgia his Son Duke of Valentia, had resolv'd to Poison Adrian Cardinal of Corvoto, in whose Vineyard they were to Sup that Night, he sent before certain Bottles of Wine which he caused to be delivered to a Servant of his with a strict charge that no body should tast or touch it; it happen'd before Supper time the Pope came, and being very hot and thirsty, called for Wine, and because his Supper was not yet brought from the Pallace, the fellow thinking this to be some more excellent sort of Wine than usual, willing to gratify his Holinesses Pallate, gave him some of it; and just as the Father was drinking, in came the Son, and not imagining it to be of the Wine he had so prepared, drank of it too, but he being young and using present Remedies escaped with his Life, but not without
great Languishment which incapacited him for Actions for the future. This Pope had Raign'd, or rather Rag'd 11 years, and the people were so pleas'd they were rid of him, that Guiccardine tells us, Multitudes ran from all parts of the City, to glut their eyes, if they could, with the dead Carcase of this Serpant, who with such unbridled Ambition, perfidious Treachery, horrible Cruelty, monstrous Luxury, Insatitae, Avarice, and selling without difference, or re∣spect all things holy and profane, had Infected the whole World. Nor does Onuphrius the Popes own Historiographer, give him a better Character; His Treachery (says he) was more than puni∣cal, his Cruelty Barbarous, his Covetousness and Extortion unmea∣surable, his desire to enrich his Children, whether by Right, or by wrong, unsatiable. He was strangely given to Women, by whom he had four Sons and two Daughters. His principal Where was Va∣noccia, a Roman, whom for her Beauty, rare meen, pleasant wit, and Eloquence, in the time of his meaner Fortunes he liv'd with after the manner of a Wife.—Now was not this a rare fellow to be Christs Viccar, Peters Successor, Head of the Church, Infalli∣ble? &c. Yet this was the pretious Pope, who in the year 1494. Publisht with his own mouth, a pardon for Thirty Thousand years to as many as would say a certain Prayer before the Image of St. Anne, the Mother of the blessed Virgin, Beginning— Bene∣dicta sit Sancta Anna Mater tua, ex quâ sine maculâ & peccato processisti, &c. Blessed be St. Anne thy mother, of whom without spot or sin thou didst proceed, &c. Where are now the Dominicans who Preached the contrary Doctrine? the most Holy, most infallible Monster, you see, has concluded the point against them. Next came Pius the 3d, in the year 1503. he was an Old de∣cripite fellow, and lived not above a month, then upstarts that Hector Julius the second, for before ever the Cardinals met, he had made his Party by Bribes and fair promises; and so with∣out ever shutting the doors of the Consistory was declared Pope; his first business was to Marry a Bastard Girle he had, named Felix, to one of the Ʋrsini, and his next was to drive the French out of Italy; he took Cesena and Forolivio from Caesar Borgia, the Son of Pope Alexander the 6th, Expell'd the Family of Bentivo∣gli with their Wives and Children out of Bononia, Excommuni∣cated the Venetians, and gave their Lands to the first that could
take them, Interdicted Alphonso Duke of Ferrara, and made open War against him because he took part with the French, and went in person to the seige of Mirandula. And passing once over the Bridge of Tyber, with a naked sword in his hand, he flung the Keys into the River, which gave occasion to that Epigram. Hic Gladius Pauli nos nunc defendit ab Hoste Quandoquidem Clavis nil suvat ista Petri. Since Peter's Keys with Foes can not prevail, This sword of Paul to save us shall not fail. And Monstrelet the Historian thus describes him,—He left the Chair of St. Peter, and took upon him the Title of Mars the God of War, displaying in the field his Triple Crown, and spending his Nights in the Watch. What a goodly sight was it to see the Mitres, Crosses and Crosier staves Flying up and down the Field? sure no Divels could be there, where Benedictions were sold so cheap. Upon this, Lewis of France and Maximilian the Emperour resolve to call a Council at Pisa, and to summon this Pope thither as being notoriously scandalous, incorrigible, a Fomenter of Wars, and altogether unfit for the Popedome; and though the Pope used means to take off the Emperour, yet Lewis per∣sisted and caused certain Medals to be Coyned, upon which was Inscribed these words—Perdam Babylonem, I will destroy Babylon, and on some of them, perdam Babylonis nomen—I will destroy the Name of Babylon. By which 'tis evident he meant Rome, so that the notion of its being Babylon is neither new, nor set on foot by Protestants, though 'tis true his Holiness was herewith so much offended, that by his Bull he took away from the French King the Title of Most Christian, and offer'd the same to Henry the 8th of England (then one of the Popes white Boy's) on whom afterward was bestow'd, that of, defender of the Faith, but, God be thanked, our Protestant Brittish Monarchs as they yet usually retain the one, so they may justly, when they shall think fit, assume the other, without being beholding to a raskally Divels Priest for either of them. In opposition to the Council of Pisa, Pope Julius sets up a Conventicle under that name in the Lateran at Rome, who Excom∣municate the other folks, and damn all their proceedings; but
n the heat of their Carier Julius dies, on whom those that knew him bestow'd these Epigrams. Fraude capit totum Mercator Julius Orbem, Vendit enim Caelos, non habet Ipse tamen. By fraud that Huckster Julius scrapes up pelf, For Heaven he sells, yet hath it not himself. And again, Genui tui Patrem, Genitricem Graecia, Partum Pontus & unda dedit, nunc Bonus esse potest? Fallaces Ligures, mendax est Grecia, Ponto Nulla fides; in te haec singula, Jule! tenes. From Genua and Greece his Parents blood, At Sea he had his Birth, can he be good? The Genoe's alway false, Greeks Liars be, Faithless the Sea; all Julius meet in thee. In a word, the Popedome of Julius was so imperious and bar∣barous, that the Cardinals were upon the point of ding the next that should suceed in that See, to the good behaviour, and prescribing certain Rles whereby e should Act, but what a pretty Torisme is it to hedge in a Cuckow, guide Infallibility, and bound the perrogative of the Chair, which according to modern Casuists, is unliitable? he dyed in the year 1513 in the 10th year of his pontificate, and the greatest Enology that Ouuphrius himself can bestow on him, is, that he was Bellicâ Gloriâ plusquam pontificem deceret Clarus, More famous for war like Glory than became a Pope. The next was John de Medicis, a very pretty forward Child, for he got to be an Archbishop almost before he had left his Go-Cart, and at Thirteen years of age was made a Cardinal, and at 37 arriv'd at the Popedome, by the name of Leo the 1th. On his Coronation day, he spent an Hundred Thousand Dtes, and in one morning, the Colledge of Cardinals cnsenting (say; our Author) for fear, not of free will, he Created one and Thirty Cardinals, amongst whom were two of his Nephews. He continu'd the Council of Lateran conven'd by his Predecessor, and extinguisht that of Pisa, he exacted great summs of mony
throughout all Europe by his Legates, under pretence of making War against the Turks, and his Prodigality causing continual want, he used (saith Guiccardine) very licentiously the Autho∣rity of the Holy See, and spread abroad throughout all the World, without any difference of times and places, most ample Indullgences, not only to succour the Living, but also to deliver the Souls of the departed out of the pains of Purgatory. And it being notorious that such Indulgences were granted only to rook people of their mony, there arose thereby many scandals, especially in Germany, where his Ministers for a very small price sold these braided Wares, and in Taverns play'd away at Dice the power of delivering Souls out of Purgatory, and the money thus raised he gave to his Sister Magdalene, who appointed the Bishop of Arembauld her Commissary for that business, which place he executed with exceeding great Covetousness, and Ex∣tortion, so that Preachers were not asham'd to publish in their Pulpits, that at the sound of the mony, as it was cast into their Bason, the Souls skipp'd for joy amidst the flames, and presently flew out of Purgatory, and that whoever gave 10 Soulz might deliver thence what Soul he pleased, but if there was but one farthing less, they would do nothing. These horrible abuses being thus daily without all shame committed, it pleased God to raise up Martin Luther, who first began to inveigh only against such exorbitant Indnlgences, about the year 1516. but afterwards the Pope instead of Re∣formation sending forth his Thunderbolts against him, he grew more wearily to scan the Doctrines of the Roman Church, and so open'd a way for the Reformation, which hence may properly bare date, and therefore here, as an happy and very proper period we shall give a Conclusion to this 4th Volume. SOLI GLORIA SOLA DEO.
The COURANT. Tory. THe truth is, 'twas a great disappointment, and has utterly spoil'd the wit of an Health to Blewcap! but are not your Whiggs at Chichester most abominable Varlets, to Massacre our Reverend Father's Jades at this rate? Truem. Yes indeed, Nat Thomson and L'Estrange I see resolve to make Martyrs of the poor Beasts; one of the Roman Emperours made his Horse Lord Mayor, and an Ass you know tutor'd the Prophet, why then may not an Episcopal Steed be Sainted? We men of Kent I remember got long-tails by being uncivil to Bishop Beckets Nag, and who knows what heavy Judg∣ments may befall these Clowns of Sussex for such a damnable Plot against Old Roan or sorrell Ecclesiastick? but the truth is, all the whole story is a Ly, the Phanaticks kill'd my Lord the Bishops Horses, no more than they burnt London, and yet Roger L'Estrange has charg'd them with both. Tory. Well! let the Horses go to the Dogs, oly as long un∣buried as the fellow did, a few years ago, but in the mean time what can you say touching the man that was slain there the other day? Truem. There was a fellow fit for the Imployment, that took upon him to be an Informer, but staying too long after the Bran∣dy bottle, the Meeting it seems was broke up, this loss of a Jobb and the Liquor together enrag'd him to that degree, that he must needs break a worthy Gentleman's Windows, whose Coachman going out to enquire the cause of that Burglary, the Informer not only abus'd his Master with vile Language, but assaulted the Coachman, who in his own defence, laid him in the Kennell, but no sooner had he recover'd his Leggs, but away he runs to the Man's you wot on to make his sad Complaint how he had suffer'd by the Whigs for serving the Church. Into the Celler he is carryed for a Cup of Benediction and Consolation, and being Drunk before, adds to the debauch, and so good Night! Now this accident is to be fill'd to the Dissenters account, and you must needs believe that he dyed by means of the scuffle between him and the Coachman. But pray tell us, what makes Squire
Hodge so desparately mad with the Parliaments, and fall so foul on their priviledges at this juncture, I hope we are not like to have one this Winter? Tory. No, no, Hang 'um we all hate the very name; the Popes Holiness himself would be as well pleas'd to hear of a General Council as we of a Parliament. You see Roger aforesaid makes it Rebellion and half seas over to Forty one, to expect an annual Parliament, though there are a Brace or two of as fair laws for it, as any in the Statute Book. Truem. I never wonder to hear naughty Boys rail against Birch; no doubt the Gentleman's Journey to Holland, cost him Mony, and he may be allow'd now to swagger; don't you re∣member how the Collier huff against the Mayor when he was got out of the Liberties. Tory. Yes, but his saying 'tother day that Rebellion always attended the Reformation, was a little to broad. I left a note last Night at Sam's to caution him to more prudence, for if he go on at this rate the people will conclude him a Papist, though Prance should never make a word on't? Printed for Langley Curtis. 1682.
