D1630A R174659 47682887 172843
The DISCOVERER VNCOVERED. OR A Vindication of those four close Prisoners in the Tower, from the Exceptions, uncharitable Surmises, and Criminations of the Author (J CANNE spell his Name) who wrote that Libellus Famosus, called The Discoverer, and Published June 4. 1649. By LAPIS FRƲCTIFERA, a Notorious Parliamentarian, and Friend to the Army. PSALME XXXV. V. 11. False Witnesses did rise up, they laid to my charge things that I knew not. 12. They rewarded me evil for good, to the spoiling of my soul. REVEL. XI. V. 10. And they that dwell upon the Earth, shall rejoyce over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to an∣other, because these two Prophets tormented them that dwelt on the Earth. 11. But, after three daies and a half, the Spirit of life from God entred into them: and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon them which saw them. LONDON, Printed in the Yeer, 1649.
Reader, YOur Friend. Briefly, I shall throughout, deal with what is most to purpose any where in this Discoverer's First Part (and do wish for no better Quarter than I give) As for himself, seriously, he is a man of litle Conscience, no Shame, That he can write THE COƲNCEL OF STATE, To all the wel-affected People of this Nation. And, We take our selves bound in obedience to God, and [trust to the Nation] &c. Moreover, This being so, and [a thing well known to us] we have thought it necessary to afford [our encouragement and fur∣therance.] And all the while, a contemptible, mean-bred, de∣cayed Parson doth it. Further, I am constrained to suppose these men the Authors of several Books (which, Heaven knows, and not I, whose they be) not declared to be theirs; through the importune attribution of that Author, and Others: which told you, I go on with.
The DISCOVERER, ƲNCOVERED. BVt it is not Treason to speak against Tyranny, Arbitrary power, Taxes, Oppressions, though such speech may be made use of to make Commotions, &c. and possibly hath been improved hereto within these half-score yeers: Yet, I wot, not by them, who cald on the People (at home, and somewhere abroad) to joyn with them against Robbers, Rebels, Murderers; for the settlement of this Common-wealth, &c. To step forwards, and see if the men named (M. Walwyn, Lievt. Col. Lilburn, M. Prince, and M. Overton) by the Discoverer, hide mischief under it. First, In the General Discovery, its said, Discoverer. They seek to have the people dis-affected towards the present Government and Governors, as if the Parliament might and could ease them of Tythes, Excise, Free-Quarter, &c. and will not. Vindication. But prove me that (John,) that these men seek to dis-affect the People towards the present Government. You vapour in the Title, That here things are cleerly demonstrated, by reason, and proof abundantly. Where's this demonstrated? —Well, to stay us, He saith [the Accusation.] (1) Its false. Discoverer. For the Parliament hath declared there shall ly upon the people no burden which they possibly can remove; And likewise its their daily study, &c. And could he not say, its likewise their endeavour? I would fain have seen this done. 2. If men would but consider in what a Condition we are, &c. Discoverer. they would not blame the Parliament, &c. Prithee! in what a Condition are we, that yet we cannot be otherwise, nor remedied?— Consider, &c. for I don't tell you. Further: Discoverer. It (saith he) can be proved (if need be) that the Land is put to 100,000 lib. yeerly charge by their means. Vind. A way with you; here is need of proof, and is none: thou art all Can, and emptie: soundest, but not satisfiest. (2) Its Treacherous. Discoverer. 1 They Conspire against the Supream Authority, stir up the People. &c. Vid p. 14. of the Picture of the Councel of State. 2 A Declaration of the Free Commoners of England.
Vind. Here (Reader) he takes it for granted, that these 4 men (praenominated) and their Party (for a melancholy conceit hath possest the mans heart, and he talks idley of the designs of a Party) did write the Papers mentioned: and that you are already opinio∣nated that such wrote them. For you shall not here be convin'd thereof, or have them proved to be so. However, the former quo∣tation shall be cleered (infra) when speak to 4th Particular, p. 22. The Latter is not theirs: one Protest therein is, Against these mens imprisonments, &c. 2 They give out reproachful terms, Discoverer. against men in Authority (and this is 4, a State-destroying Stratagem) the Picture, p. 14. 17 and the Declaration. Vind. The Latter Paper is not theirs, and the quotation in the Former shall in another place cleer. 3 Their proofs are light and few. Discoverer. This, the Discoverer saith he shall shew hereafter. Discov. p. 7. In the last place oqserve what they say [Manife∣station p. 8.] Could we have had any assurance that what is desired should have otherwise, or by any have been done; and had not had some taste of the relinguishment of many good things that were pro∣mised, we should not have been so earnest and urgent for the doing thereof: To which we Answer, 1 Their Freedom and Power hath been but a litle while in their hands: (and they have since dene nothing less necessary than these: should have been added, should it not?) 2 For the many good things they speak of, we shall shew by and by what they are. 3 Sometimes haste makes waste (and so (believe it) it would of these many good things.) Secondly, Discoverer. The Particular Discoverey. 1 Of Hypocrisy in their speeches. Vind. Here come in for the 1, 3, 4, 5. Particulars, Quotations from the writings of one, known to be n'one of these Four. And for ch. 2 a Quotation from a writing of one of them, which this very Concealer of himself, Printed at Amsterdam (where if he dar'd stay, we had not been now troubled with him here. per. Advise from M.C.) This kind of dealing is as like if cursed Achi∣tophel, after he occasioned Absalom's going-in to his Fathers
Concubines, (2 Sam. XVI.) upon the top of the house, had been the teller of it to all the People, and said, he did it to undeceive the Nation. 6. Of their Atheisme and Anti-scripturisme, or little better. Discoverer. That they are men who regard not God, neither the Scriptures, nor any Religion; it may be cleerly seen by the Agreement of the Peo∣ple, which they call the Standard and ultimate scope of their De∣signes. Amongst all theor Proposals and Articles (30 at least) there is not one thing proposed for the holding forth and furtherance of Gods publike worship and service. Vind. That their Omission of such an Article, among Propo∣sals for the Government of this Nation must argue nothing less, or little better than that they are men who regard not God, neither the Scriptures, nor any Religion, wants ground. That they are neither Atheists, nor Anti-Scripturists, their Manifestation (in p. 6.) doth sufficiently manifest. And that they are as regardful (as men are of the Apples of their Eyes, which they'l let none touch) of Religion, and Faith; of the Confession of the one, and the Practise of th'other; The x. head of their Agreement doth luculently declare; Where its Articled, that Representatives shall not restrain any person from PROFESSION OF HIS FAITH, or EXERCISE OF RELIGION, according to his Conscience. 2. Of their good things proposed. Disc. 1. They will have Tythes taken away. Discoverer. It is well (read Phil. I. 16.) BVT &c. (wicked Ahab-like I King. XXII. 8. and I Chron. XVIII. 7.) 2. To their Expressions concerning Levelling. He saith, Note, They grant the thing lawful in it self. &c. Vind. And Note, They Profess (1.) They never had it in their thoughts &c. And (2.) to attempt an inducing the same is most injurious [unless there did praecede an universal assent thereunto from ALL, and every one of the People (as there did from all and every on of the Believers. Act. II. v. 44, 45. and Cap. IV. 32, 33, 34, 35.) which you may expect the day after Dooms day. Disc. But, saith he, Discoverer. ALL must be understood [restrictively] that is the Poor Commoners &c. For rich men, &c. they Protest against for having exercised Tyrannie, &c. Vind. O the extremity of this mans malice! —where, when
said these men thus? Why must they be so understood? —!—! Reader, You saw their serene Vindication from this in p. 4, 5. of Manifestation. Here he would make their Levelling-Designe apparent. 1, Discoverer. 3, 4, 5 6ly, By Sentences fetcht from Books not writ by either of them. 2. By ones writing it, A Tyrannical Ʋsurpation of Lords to lay Fines and other Services upon their Tenants, &c. Vind. One would think while they allow one the Lord, and call th'other, Tenant, we need not fear such a Design: the plain contrary is spoken. Notwithstanding the Discoverer should have proved the Fines, &c. righteously laid, while he denied them Ʋ∣surpationes. 3ly. Discoverer. They make Divisions. 1 They stir up the People every where against the Army; (And how proves he this?) One of them saith, The Faction of a Trea∣cherous Party of Officers in the Army, hath twice Rebelled against the Parliament, and broken them to peices. Vind. And what's this to purpose? where is that saying where∣in they stir up the People against the Army? 2 Is a Party of Offi∣cers the Army, &c? 2 They have been busie to raise Sedition and Mutiny amongst the Souldiers. Discoverer. For this he brings, 1) A Quotation from p. 12. of Juglers Discovered; whereas there be but 11 pages in all; and I have read so much in the Book (which otherwise I had not) as is in p. 10 and 11, and must needs return a Non est inventa. 2) A quotation from p. 9. of English Souldiers Standard, which bears no bodies name but Mr William Thomson's 3) A quotation from p. 9. of Bloudy Project (he saith, its Mr Walwyn's) which would not have them swayed by, but forsake the Covetous, Proud, Bloud-thirsty, &c. A notable Mutinous, Sedi∣tious, Trayterous saying no doub! judge of it. 3 Their next work is to continue and encrease this Mutiny. Discoverer. 1) By Commending and Justifying the Seditious Souldiers. Vind. Its easier to this man to call these Souldiers such, than to prove them so: He freely doth the former: let's us go look (for him) after the latter.
2 By urging and instigating fellow-Souldiers to take revenge upon their Commanders when others are justly punished for Muti∣ny, Standard p. 8. Discover. Vind. What's spoken there, is of the severe, and painful punish∣ments, for small offences, inflicted on Private Souldiers: whilest an Officer turns a Bear, a Wolf, a Tyrant, and is not punished. 3 By perswading th' Army; that there is now no Martial Law: Discoverer. And wherefore? but, that, when they have wrought Sedition, and Treason in the Army, there may be no means, course, or way found out for to stop the breach, till all be lost, scatred and destroyed. Vind. An harsh Censure, and Calumnious: Its too grosse a peece of folly for these men to be guilty of. If other, ordinary means (Common Law) will do it, would but men make their work, to hinder a course extraordinary? How-ever this man hath spoke out too, a strange amendment in our Laws, and Law-givers; in our Courts of Judicatory, and Judges, &c, That if Treason be wrought in the Army, it can by no means be stopt till all be lost, save by the way of Martial Law; if this Fire be there, it cannot be quenched (till all be con∣sumed) unless by such water. Here the Discoverer tels us, They understand not what Marti∣al Law, is. Now, one is ready to think himself (the Discoverer) doth, and is apt to instruct them who if they understood what it is, would not speak so ignorantly, &c. (as himself there speaks) now, What saith he? Martial Law is grounded upon pure reason, &c. — Pish! none can understand by this, any thing of the nature of Martial Law, as its different from the Cannonical, Common, &c. Prithee, tell, What is this Martial Law, which is grounded upon, &c? What's the formalis ratio of it? — mum. Poor man! Let us take time, and go and ask; either, our Masters can informe us; Or, their Patients (in some measure) tell us; Or, (in Troth) it will no whit concern us. 4ly. Discoverer. Those whom they have hitherto acknowledged to be the Su∣pream Authority of England, they now deny; and title, The Gentle∣men sitting at Westminster. Vind. For Vindication, Observe, 1 That the page cited, is not positive, assertive; but made up of Quaeries. 2 What's spoken, is upon the Supposition, that they are a mock-Parliament (as some
of the chiefest amongst themselves (saith the Author of that Picture) stil'de it. 5ly. Discoverer. They have sought by false Suggestions to set strife and di∣vision between his Excellency, and the chief Commanders of the Army, in publishing to the world that the General is their stal∣king-horse, and a Cipher, &c. Vind. It imports the affirmer (and not the 3 other Gentlemen) to prove it. Now, put him to it, and he will speak for himself, Ju. IX. 21. 2 Its directly spoken to those under Command, (vid. line 2 of the Quaere) not to the General, &c. and (its true) that man who reports it to the Party; or, presents this to the General, comes neerer to make strife, division. 6ly. Discoverer. They have sought to make discord between the Parliament and Councel of War, by a subtile and dangerous Stratagem; name∣ly, That the Parliament should appoint a Committee of their own Members, to hear, examine, and conclude all Controversies be∣tween Officers and Officers, and between Officers and Souldiers. Vtnd. He must be of a jealous eye that will say he sees such a (subtile) Design here. The Parliament hath formerly had a Com∣mittee of their own Members residing with the Army; And what better imployment they could there have, than concluding Con∣troversies amongst them, bringing them to Agreement, and ma∣king peace there, Nescio. 7ly. In the Declaration of the Free Commoners, &c. there is Re∣bellion protested and declared. Vind. In what words I pray? — I forbear. That Declar: is none of the four mens. Next he comes to observe, Discoverer. What they say of others, and 1. They complain (in the first part of New Chain, which is not proved theirs) against erecting a high Court of Justice for Tryal of criminal causes. To which he answers, 1. They mention it for no other end, but to flatter Malignants, &c. Vind. An untoward, most base surmise, rather slander, to them who are elongated so many measures (more than many) from the malignant party, as himself hath past to approach it, and joyn hands to bring unto dishonour, these (I doubt not) well-affected, true-hearted English-men. 2. Discoverer. They speak of persons pickt and chosen, as an usual policy to
introduce (by such means) all usurpations. Answ. Herein they discover great uncharitableness, and extreme malice.—We are to interpret things in the best part. Vind. Where is the Ʋncharitableness, where the extreme ma∣lice discovered? Said they that the Parliament did it to introduce &c? No. The Affirmative is yours, by construction. 3. They do see the way of tryal by 12. men, Discoverer. to be a Constitution so equal, & just, as that they conceive it ought to remain unalterable. Answ. 1. What if there should be 13. or 30. or more, or less, were it not as well, and just? Vind. But what if they shall not be of the Neighborhood, nei∣ther Sworn? will it be as well, and just? Answ. 2. In other Countries for tryal of Criminal Causes, Discoverer. their Proceeding is not by 12. sworn men, but otherwise, and yet equal, and just in it self. Vind. Who deny's it? But what Reason we should alter what's our own way, and (no doubt, Never any was so simple as to say, its not) better? though th'others prove good. Answ. 3. The Parliament made choise of able, judicious, Discoverer. and conscientious men, and called many such together, to th'end they might proceed legally, &c. therefore they speak evil of them. Vind. THEREFORE &c. How deep he works? He's enter'd their Hearts. As St James saith Cap. II. v. 4. he becomes a Judge of evil thoughts. And who art thou that judgest another? Cap. IV. 12. 2) They complain for censuring a Member of the House for de∣claring his judgement in a point of Religion. Discoverer. Answ. 1. What the Parliament did in this thing, it was upon that ground— all occasions of discord ought altogether to be ta∣ken away. Vind. We man notwithstanding ask this Discoverer, 1. How he can tell this? and 2. Whether the Parliaments taking cogni∣zance of two Members private discourse about matters contro∣versal, be a likely meane to take away discord? not, to create amongst them all, difference? 3. Whether the Member censu∣red, was not upon such a ground, as here is mentioned, called in again? Answ. 2. Discoverer. For the Reserve in the Agreement concerning Reli∣gion
(to which its said this is directly opposite) If they mean that the Parliament hath agreed that any blasphemous and heretical doctrine shall be propounded, and defended in the House, We know no such thing: neither do we know what Reason that Member had, to speak there what he did, &c. Vind. The words were not spoken there, or in the House, till reported &c. (this Discoverer hath taken up very weak reports.) To know the Truth, I did procure an honest friend of mine, and one that's acquainted well with Col. Downe (and much honours him) to step to his Lodging, and enquire here-anent; and he re∣turned with, as I said. 2. There is a book of the Censureds extant, containing a Nar∣rative of this business. And wherein somthing is said to Ventilate the contrary Opinion. Read it, and then judge. 3. Its without controversie, that the suspension was directly op∣posite to the Reserve in the Agreement, according to the native, common, and Grammatical sense. The words are these. That such as profess faith in God by Jesus Christ (however dif∣fering in judgement from the doctrine, worship, or discipline pub∣likely held forth as aforesaid) shall not be restrained, but shall be protected in the profession of their faith, and exercise of Religion, according to their Consciences, in any place, &c. Yet, I shall add, that I know not whether the Parliament ever yet agreed to it. Answ. Discoverer. 3. Note what Englands new Chaine is, &c. Because the Parliament will not countenance Blasphemy, &c. they cry out Tyrants &c. Indeed this is the great and grand business, Religion, and Orthodox Doctrines, are not (as they desire, and seek for) utter∣ly cast off and rejected. Vind. I may not say the Parliament doth countenance blasphe∣my, because they admit amongst them, those that hold such an o∣pinion. But such a man as the Discoverer may say (narmlesly) to reject them, is not to countenance them: And, for the Writers of the New Chaine to complain against casting-out upon such terms, is to complain, because Religion and Orthodox Doctrines are not cast off: which hath necessary consequences of like tendency with the former. But, (thou sink of filth) how knowest thou they De∣sire? When, or where did they seek for the rejection of Religion, &c? — (whose damnation is just. Rom. III. 8.
3) The third thing which hath brought England into New Chains, is the Act for Pressing of Sea-men, Discoverer directly contrary to Agreement of the Officers. pa. 22. Answ. 1. There is no Law so firmly made (much less an Agree∣ment of Officers) but when the Peoples safety, and necessity require, may lawfully be changed—This was the Parliaments case, &c. Vind. Had this necessity been made appear to them; we can∣not but hold out, that these men would not have so much as Ar∣ticulated one sillable, pend one Jod of complaint against it. Answ. 2. They speak against it, and cry out New Chains, &c. Discoverer. And why all this? But to make the Sea-men mutinous and sedi∣tious, &c. Vind. How he interprets things in the best part? — I remem∣ber, now, this is a Rule he layes down for others. And because he askes the Question, I'le answer, Why all this? but, to cleer what's right, and stand to it. 4) They tell us they want Freedom, and are in Chains, Discoverer. because the Parliament stops their mouths from Printing. Ans. 1 They would have the State to stand still, and suffer them, with their Seditious, and scandalous Libels to strik them, as often as they please, &c. Vind. They would not be stopt from speaking Truth, and Dis∣covering the Tyrannies of bad men (as it follows in that place.) And this Sycophant hath invented wicked thought, (which never entred their guile-less Souls) and foisted them here; in confort with those slanderous ones, which un-worthy great men in their several daies have had their earthly upholders to coyn; and impose on such sincere, spirited men as their fearful hearts suggested (and that truly) to be dislikers of their exorbi∣tancies, studiers of Common safety, and couragious for the Cause of the Oppressed, &c. Answ. 2 Such as prescribe remedies against Conspiracies, Discoverer. give this as the first, and Principal, namely, To prevent, and cut off (if possible) the occasion, that it may not break forth, &c. Vind. Wherefore serves this? — We are at a loss (Reader) and cannot tell whereat he strik's, unless wee'l (to pleasure him, and comply with his unmanly immagination) opinar, conceit a Conspiracy among these men, forenamed. Which, for me to do,
were (I protest before the God above) as to obstruct my sight, by erecting in the way of light, one of the most grosse Media's devise-able, cald, Prejudice. Ans. Discoverer. 3 Men who have acted by the principles of reason, and nature, have always bin careful to stop the publishing of seditious books &c. Vind. And that these mens Books are such, pray Credit, for he can't lay it down. Discoverer. 4) Whereas they would help themselves by mentioning Staple∣ton, Hollis, &c. Its a Sophisme, &c. because Pilate did not well in Condemning Christ, therefore he did ill to Condemne the Theeves. Vind. Following his termes, he hath lost the Sence. These men argued not the Ordinance [ill] because made in the time of Stapleton, &c. but [the worse] the more severe, and unreason∣able, when hightned wrath rose up terribly, to quash even all, but Royallists; and at last Petitioners for Peace. 5) We suppose they will now object no more against the Parlia∣ment for imploying that Apostate Judas (M. Discoverer. Haiden) as an Exe∣cutioner to search after un-licensed Books, seeing themselves have done execution upon him, murdered him in a most barbarous, and cruel manner, and secretly (saith the Margent.) Vind. I can think this man will not lay Haidens death to these 4 mens Charge. Its deep; and can the Levellers go off with good report? lets hear. Mr Thomson (a man whose death was lately purchased at a deer rate) attending (on a Saturday) a Prin∣ting-press without Cripple-gate, Haiden comes in with two men, and layes hands on some Papers, which T. resolved he should leave behind him. Now H. opposing, T. draws his dagger, and pricks H. in the arme neer the shoulder, and afterwards turns him out: after which, H. goes and procures some files of Mus∣quetiers, and went to look for Books at Mr Larnars, where (after many reaks plaid) he brings down their narrow stairs such bundls of Books in quires, under his armes, as would require a mans strength to carry, &c. Then, Sunday-night he goes to M. Paines, and then brake all his Presses (of great value) to peeces, &c. But (to cut short) till Munday he had not his wound drest, (though the Marshal-General, oft urged him to it) and after that he lived about a month (after his most barbarous and cruel murdering by the Levellers) and then died that infamous Villaine, (with the mark of a Rogue in his hand.)
And further to satisfie thee, Reader, nextly take the Coppy of a Paper which I remember I saw pasted-up upon Postes, Gates, and observable Places concerning him. At a COVRT MARTIAL of his Excellency, the Lord General, held at White-Hall, the 9th of March 1648. THat whereas one John Haiden hath of late been imployed by some members of the Army, in some particular Services; especially, for suppressing of scandalous Books and Pamphlets; and upon pretence thereof, Information is credibly given, that he hath committed many Insolencies, and Misdemeanors of high nature, to the dishonour of the Army, contrary to the Trust reposed in him, to the great and insufferable damage of several people. These are therefore to signifie, That this Court doth disclaime any Act, or Thing that he hath so done, upon any pretence of Authority from any Member of the Army whatsoever. And all Souldiers are to take notice hereof, That they give not any Aid or Assistance unto him, upon pretence of any Warrant or Information of what nature soever. HENRY WHALLEY, Advocate. And here he tells us of an Atheistical, and Hellish Counsel, Discoverer. suggested by Walwyn, to a woman lying under a sore and heavie Temptation, to lay hands on self. Its a Transcript of what is in that stream of slander, termed Walwyns wiles. Vind. A sore and heavie charge (God deliver me)— But (hearken! a whisper) is it true?  your ear. You must not lightly credit evil reports &c. — For— To question it speaks out the like to the unpardon∣able sin, Infidelity. Yet (honest soul!) lend a little bear (the Sabatical, perfect, blessed number of) 7 Church-men sub∣scribe that Book, and he who seeth the secrets of darkness can tell, how many of the sodality will (pray hold them not for Pu∣ritanes) take their oaths of it.—I am at a stand—Give me leave to suspend judging, till some friends be enquired of, who in all likely-hood, its more than probable, know the Truth of the story. The Gentle-womans tender Husband, loving Sisters, and deer Son (to whom the remembrance of the fact is no small grief) an∣swer, They never heard of any such suggestion, till this (grievous) book came forth; And good cause they have to think such words
never were spoken by the Gentle-man named. A special Instrument (in the hand of God) was he to the spinning forth her life so long, by his prevailing consolations, instructions, &c, after he under∣stood her distemper, which he was ignorant of, till the doleful ty∣ding of this good Womans desperate casting her self into Water made him know it, as appeared even by his mode of telling the news thereof, when he came to home. And (for my part) I think its improbable he hath such an Opinion, Because when he might opportunely have discoursed thereof, he was silent, viz. when our friend Mr W. R. (amicus non emultis) and I, walking in his Company along Moor-fields, talkt thereof, upon occasion of Mr W. R. having borrowed from me that Discourse of Suicide, entituled BIAOANATOS. And the Penner of that Wily stream of slander (presents it like an un-cloakt naked falsity) hath cautelously omitted the delivery of any circumstances anent the same, with which, if this had bin clothed, doubtless one or other, some man or woman could have bin found out (without descending into the Abysse, or applying to the Heavens) to have attested they knew the speaking of them, and have told us the Place WHERE, the Company IN WHICH, the Occasion WHEREVPON, one Time or other (of oftentimes) WHEN, such words were spoken, or ought suggested to this purpose. As to the Scribe who wrote that pacht, Soloecismatical Trea∣tise, he's unlike a Reformist, (and therefore I think him none of the Subscribers. For they are at least Independents. I use not the Name in Odium, but distinctionis gratia.) saying p. 24. You shall find these mens Petitions spirited with such PROVOCATIONS as these; The Magistrates must have no power to impress, or con∣strain the People to Armes by Sea, or Land, &c.— Taking away the Ministers maintenance under the name of Tythes, &c— Pre∣tending the uselesness of Lawyers in a Common-wealth. Whereas, the Grand Reformers in the Agreement, say p. 22. We do not impower them to imprest, or constrain any person to serve in Forraign War, by Sea, or Land; Nor for any Military Ser∣vice within the Kingdom, &c. And in the Declaration of the said General, and general Officers concerning it, p. 29. The taking a∣way of Tythes, &c.— And in the same page, Putting all the Laws, and the Proceedings thereof, into the English Tongue. And Mr
Hugh Peters, a man whom the Subscribers will not except a∣gainst as an Incendiary, hath often told (and that well) A great many thousand souls live in America, and know not what a Law∣yer means; and to what end, unless to that by those men intend∣ed, I shall willingly leave to the seven mentioned, to answer. Concerning it, I say no more, but from the bottome of mine heart (ô LORD, thou hearest) I do supplicate; that those who were at first the light, heedless Deliverers of these, and such like speeches, never so much as dreaming of their being unhappily circumvented, and engaged to save their credits by attesting or swearing the Truth of them; And, that those who have used them to the supplanting this unharmful mans hurtless soul; may never (after the doleful sight (which thou our Judge wilt on a day present them) of the mischievous service they are put to) be in∣duced to steer desperately, and make their own Catastrophies, (through like perpetrations to that direfully exemplified) real Testimonies to the censuring world, of their assuming such a cruel Opinion in the time of horror, in the hour of tryal, Temptation.— For, Matth. XXVII. 3, 4, 5. JƲDAS, when he saw that JESƲS was condemned, REPENTED HIMSELF—Say∣ing, I have sinned in betraying the Innocent bloud. But they said, What is that to us? See thou to that. And— he departed, and went, and HANGED HIMSELF. 6) They would have the Councel of State disolved. Discoverer. 1 Because these men fear, as the Case now stands, they MAY design to perpetuate their power, and keep off Parliaments for ever. Answ. 1 The Plot is no more but thus: A man should throw away his Meat, Money, Armour, &c. because such things MAY do him harm. The expression whereof, is conviction sufficient. Vin. An inept Simile indeed (as is obvious to any mans judgment.) But 2 Opportunity is too shrewd a Temptation for men, to &c.— Answ. 2 The Councel of State can no more hinder, Discoverer. or keep the Parliament from sitting, than the Courts of Chancery, Ex∣chequer, &c. Vind. Hold there. Can those Courts do any one of these Great matters next mentioned? which, how neer they may be improved to the feared end, I will not, do you say. I wish it may no more hinder, &c.
2 Because they are possessed with power to order, Discoverer. and dispose all the Forces, &c; Publique Treasure; To command any Person whatsoever before them, To give Oath for the discovering of Truth, To imprison those that shall disobey their Commands, and such as they shall judge contumacious. Answ. 1 To whom a Iurisdiction is given, unto it such things are necessarily granted, without which nothing can be done.—They finde fault because they have power to Act the things which pro∣perly belong to such a State. Vind. Then are some States deficient in what's proper, yea ne∣cessary to such States. Which, what man, is so childish as to think? Can other States give Oathes of the Nature of that Ex Officio? Interogate (Prisoners) in matters Criminal which concerns them∣selves, &c. or nothing can be done? Answ. 2 Consists of 5 Particulars, which saith he, Let be con∣sidered, &c. and considered they should have been by me, if they had not been immediatly so presumptuously obtruded (as they are) for Assertiones. 3 They object against the Persons. Discoverer. 1 The Chief of the Army. Answ. The Lord alwayes made them chief Instruments to pre∣serve this Land from their horrid, inhumane, and bloudy Wiles, and workings against it. Vind. Yet, such horrid, inhumane, and bloudy Wiles, and work∣ings never were in rerum natura, but in the forges of lying fancies. 2 The Iudges of the Law. Discoverer. Answ. Here likewise we know their meaning; its confusion they would have: — Take the light away, and darkness must needs follow: That a Iudge of the Law, quatenus such, is unfit, &c. it is the most sence-less thing that ever was uttered. Vind. Concerning this kind of men, you have had Advice e∣nough in the Advertisements for new Elections, &c. Further, Note, the General, and General Councel, carefully put in this to the Agreement of the People, page 17. In case any Lawyer shall be chosen of any Representative, or Councel of State, then he shall be uncapable of Practise as a Lawyer, during that Trust. Thirdly. What a notable stirre is here (by an oblique touch) put upon the other Members of the Honorable Councel of State. Ob∣serve
it. If those Judges of the Law which are among them, should (suppose, by the next Representative) be taken away, then dark∣ness must needs follow, (or this Preacher is beside his Text. 3 Treasurers of Money. Discoverer. Answ. And why not? It will be time enough to give a further Answer, when we know the Cause and Ground, wherefore such are excepted. Vind. The Cause and Ground wherefore such are excepted; there can be none so ignorant as not to know. Its superfluous to present a Reason (which the ingeny of any one, not born an inno∣cent, will dictate) against those mens being in such a place. 4 Exception is, That 5 were Members of the Lords House, Discoverer. And most of them such as have refused to approve of your Votes, and Proceedings, concerning the King, and Lords. Answ. 1 The Parliaments proceeding with the King, and Lords, is one thing against which, they (he means, the 4 men in question) do Protest. New Chain, Part 2. page 17, 18. Vind. The man Answers any thing, so he answers with some∣thing: Here he tels us of Contradiction, Falshood, Hypocrisie, (such things, as his tongue freely, delivers) and conceals those words (of whosoever were the Authors) of that Discourse, which sufficiently speak the plain sence, viz. We also Protest against their — judg∣ing, and taking away mens lives IN AN EXTRAOR∣DINARY WAY. We also Protest against the Election and Establishment of those High Courts of Iustice, as unjust in them∣selves, and of dangerous Presidence in time to come. And this is what they have to that purpose. Answ. Discoverer. 2 They are here at their old Game to make Division be∣tween the Parliament and Councel of State. Vind. Would I had not cause to say, This man will, (patrizare) Iusts to do the deeds of that old Gamester mentioned Iohn VIII. 44. as he doth here. Answ. 3 There are none of the Lords House, Discoverer. neither of the House of Commons, Members of the Councel of State, which did any thing in relation to the Treaty, or declined that last proceeding, &c. Vind. Why? no body said there are (whether there be or no) any such Members of the Councel of State. But (Further) take no∣tice of the most ill-condition-like trick that ere I observe play'd
by a poor Answerer; The words quoted are taken from the next following Section (in the New Chaine) and the 5th (Subsequent) exception, doth intervene. The said Section begins thus, Some of your own House, forward men in the Treaty, and decliners of your last proceedings. To which this Answerer saith nothing, not a word. 5 They except against such as were Iudges in the Star Chamber, Discoverer. and approvers of the bloudy, and tyrannical Sentences issuing from thence. Answ. Can there be imagined, an exception more light, irra∣tional, groundless; For what if a man had been a Member of the High Commission Court, or of the Popes Conclave, this could not be any just bar, whereby he should be disabled from any future Office, Place, or Imployment, if nothing else did appear, and the Person o∣therwise in every respect fitted, and qualified for the work. Vind. 2 Kings XXIII. 9. Nevertheless the Priests of the high Places came not up to the Altar of the Lord in Ierusalem, but they did eat of the unleavened bread among their brethren. These men hold with that good Advizer, who wrote, Though some of these men may now be better Patriots, and otherways affected; yet since there be others untainted, not unworthy Choise, GOOD REASON it is, that they should be prefered before these. And hath not the Parliament made such an exception only, a bar sufficient, to disable men from being Chosen into Places, &c? And presumest thou (Discoverer) to say, this bar was not just? Here is a fit place to discover the vanity and folly of their book, Discoverer. entituled, The Picture of the Councel of State. And here 1) Note, the Original and moving cause wherefore the State apprehended them. Not onely had these men &c, but withal had made a Traiterous Book—This being [known] the Parliament gave Commission and Order unto the Councel of State [for the ap∣prehending and securing of those Mutineers.] The Councel ac∣cordingly appointed some Officers of the Army to see the Parlia∣ments command executed, &c.— the which done, and the Persons brought before the Councel, it was shewed them (by the Lord Pre∣sident) by what Authority they were sent for, and the Reason why, &c. Vind. How imperfect the Relation is, let every one judge, that knows, or hath heard the proceedings reported. How untrue,
you'l see by laying parallel to it, the Presidents words, to wit, This Councel having information that you have a principal hand in compiling and promoting this Book, and the Parliament having referred the enquiry after the authors and publishers to this Coun∣cel; therefore they have sent for you. And remembring the War∣rant for Commitment run thus—upon suspition of high Treason, &c. 2) For their Answer, Discoverer. We must expect shortly a further dis∣covery. The next place unto which they bring us, is the Councel of War, and say. 1. By their means, after these fair blossoms of hopeful liberty, breaks forth this bitter fruit of the vilest and basest bondage, that ever English men groaned under. Answ. 1. When it is to plead for mutinous Souldiers, &c. we shall hear them speak of good daies, times of Peace, all Courts of Iustice open (vid. the letter of two of them) but if it be to reproach the Army, they can make their tongues to say quite contrary, no∣thing but bondage &c. (new Chain p. 9. Vind. The man deals but dis-ingeniously, never tells us what this better fruit, &c. which these men (are said to) except against, and which praecedes this citation without mean, was, whereby his Reader might have at hand, before his eyes, the matter he is to judge of, to censure, or acquit. For this his common trick, he may be called the Concealer, vid. pag. 30, 38. 2. He is so cross, hee'l make Contraries of Convenients. Hear them, Its a time of Peace, and all Courts of Iustice are open. There breaks forth bitter fruit of the vilest and basest bondage, &c. Gross contradiction (for so he calls it) where lurkest thou, lyest thou hid? Come, ô man of Confidence (vid. Conclusion of his book) come with thy further Discovery, for this doth not make her appear.—If I look for it, it shall be at the catch of Opposition betwixt Peace and Bondage. And if I find it not there, the Reader must know he is to turn Seeker, if she be finde-able; if not, then Expectant till the next Discoverer come. — Token. Peace. I see (in the letter) stand free from malignant Cavaliers, and Bondage seems (in Chain. p. 9.) under the lefts sides hanger.
But they are cleer of one another. Are not at fighting terms. Jer, XXIX. 7. Seek the Peace of the City whither I have caused you to be carried away CAPTIVES— For in the Peace thereof shall ye have PEACE. Answ. 2. He is here quite beside the Saddle with a piece of the L. Col. letter; which being matter of report, which I cannot enquire about, Ile onely say, the Reader may in the Concessions of the Discoverer, have enough to complain of. Another cause of their complaint, Discoverer. is, that such Petitioners as have moved in the behalf of the People, have had their Petitions burnt by the common-hang-man. Likewise, for passng an Ordi∣nance for Tythes upon treble damages. New Chain, 1. p. 7. & 2. p. 4. Answ. The Persons whom they do accuse all along, naming a prevailing power in the Army &c. they have not had a hand in the things whereof they accuse them. Vind. Its openly laid before us in the begining of that Section, in the first part, that its the House, not their Army, is blamed. And in 2. part, the Authors charge upon them, the passing this Ordi∣nance, no otherwise, than as they (contrary to the importunate de∣sires of the Agitators, and Remonstrance of the Army) permitted the conjunction of the Ʋsurpers, to those guarded to their places, One of the first fruits whereof was this Ordinance. Lastly, Discoverer. There are many other accusations of this nature brought against the Councel of War, and Commanders of the Army, of all which we shall speak in our next Discovery. The one thing more, is toucht before. Vind. Now Reader, recollect your thoughts, and seriously con∣sider, whether he, who is so vain, so false in his tongue, and noto∣rious a make-bate, is to be heard, and not answered, reproved? Whether this unus ex plebe, (in our Common-wealth) be fit to sit a Judge, and sentence such men as these? and, Whether he hath cleerly demonstrated, by Reason and proof abundantly, that they have done already that for which they ought to suffer death? as he (out of the abundance of his heart) saith, p. 33. like the Priests, and Prophets, and all the People, against Ieremy, Cap. XXVI, v. 8.11. From my Counting-house, June 6. 1649. ERRATA, P. 4. l. 3. for heart, r. head. p. 1 s. l. 24. r. thoughts. FINIS.
