E1471 99897325 135245
THE DECLARATION OF THE LORDS AND Commons assembled in the Parliament of England, to the Subjects of Scotland. WITH HIS MAIESTIES Message to the Lords of His Privy Counsell of SCOTLAND, upon that occasion. Charles R. Our expresse pleasure is, That this Our Declarati∣on be Published in all Churches and Chappels within Our Kingdome of England and Domi∣nion of Wales, by the Parsons, Vicars or Cu∣rates of the same. Printed, by His MAJESTIES Command, AT OXFORD, By LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to the Vniversity. 1642.
The Declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of England to the Subjects of Scotland, &c. WEE the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of England, considering with what Wisdome and publike Affection, our Brethren of the Kingdome of Scotland did coneurre with the endeavours of this Parlia∣ment, and the desires of the whole Kingdom, in procuring and establishing a firme peace and amity between the two Nations; and how lovingly they have since invited us to a nearer and higher degree of union, in matters concerning Religion and Church government, which we have most willingly and affe∣ctionatly embrac'd and intend to pursue; Cannot doubt but they will with as much forwardnesse and affection concurre with us in setling peace in this Kingdom, and preserving it in their own; that so we may mutually reap the benefit of that amity and allyance, so happily made and strongly confirmed betwixt the two Nations. Wherefore as we did about a yeare since, in the first appearance of trouble then beginning a∣mongst them actually declare, That in our sense and appre∣hension of the Nationall allyance betwixt us, we were thereby bound to apply the authority of Parliament, and power of this Kingdom to the preservation and maintenance of their peace. And seeing now that the troubles of this Kingdom are grown to a greater height, and the subtile practice of the Common E∣nemy of the Religion and Liberty of both Nations, doe ap∣peare with more Evidence, strength, and danger then they did at that time, we hold it necessary to declare that in our judge∣ment the same obligation lyes upon our Brethren by the a∣fore-mentioned Act, with the power and force of that King∣dom to assist us in repressing those amongst us, who are now in
armes, and make warre not only without consent of Parlia∣ment, but even against the Parliament, and for the destructi∣on thereof. Wherefore we have thought good to make known to our Brethren, that His Majesty hath given Commission, to divers eminent and known Papists, to raise forces, and to compose an Army in the North, and other parts of this Kingdom, which is to joyne with diverse forraine forces intended to be transpor∣ted from beyond the Seas, for the destruction of this Parlia∣ment, and of the Religion and liberty of the Kingdom: And that the Prelaticall part of the Clergy and their adherents have likewise incited His Majesty to raise another Army, which in His own Person he doth conduct against the Parlia∣ment, and the Citty of London, Plundring and Robbing sun∣dry well-affected Townes within their power. And that in prosecution of their malice, they are so presumptious and pre∣dominant of His Majesties resolutions, that they forbeare not those outrages in places, to wich His Majesty hath given his Royall word and Protection. A great cause and incentive of which malice, proceeds from the designe they have to hin∣der the Reformation of Ecclesiasticall government in this Kingdom, so much longed for by all the true lovers of the Protestant Religion. And hereupon we further desire our Brethren of the Nation of Scotland, to raise such forces as they shall Iudge sufficient for the securing the peace of their own borders, against the ill-affected persons there, as likewise to assist us in suppressing the Army of Papists and Forreiners, which, as wee expect, will shortly be on foot heere, and if they be not timely prevented may prove as mischievous and di∣structive to that Kingdome, as to our selves. And though we seek nothing from His Majesty that may diminish His just Authority or Honour, and have by many humble Petitions endeavoured to put an end to this unnatu∣rall Warre and Combustion in the Kingdom; and to procure
His Majesties Protection and Security for our Religion, Li∣berty & Persons, (according to that great trust which His Ma∣jesty is bound to by the Lawes of the Land;) & shall still cōtinue to renew our Petitions in that kind. Yet to our great griefe wee see the Papisticall, and malignant Counsell, so prevalent with His Majesty, and His Person so engaged to their power, that wee have little hope of better successe of our Petitions then wee formerly had, and are thereby necessitated to stand upon our just defence; and to seeke the speedy and powerfull assistance of our Brethren of Scotland, according to that Act agreed upon in the Parliaments of both Kingdomes, the com∣mon duty of Christianity, and the particular interests of their owne Kingdome. To which wee hope God will give such a blessing, that it may produce the preservation of Religion, the Honour, Safety and peace of His Majesty and all His Subjects; and a more strict conjunction of the Counsells, designes and endeavours of both Nations, for the comfort and releife of the Reformed Churches beyond Sea. 7. Novemb. 1642. Hen. Elsing, Cl: Parl: D. Com. Iohn Browne, Cler: Parliam.
His MAjESTIES Message to the Lords of His Privy Counsell of Scotland, upon the afore-said Occasion. RIght Trusty and Right Welbelo∣ved Cosens and Counsellours, and Right Trusty and Welbelo∣ved Counsellours, We greet you well. We have lately seen a Pa∣per presented to Us by the Earle of Lynsey, as a Declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of Eng∣land, of the 7. of November, to Our Subjects of Our Kingdom of Scotland; which, after many high taxes of Us and Our Government, very ear∣nestly invites, and in a manner challenges Assi∣stance, from that Our native Kingdom, of Men and Armes for making a Warre against Us, make∣ing a clayme to that Assistance, by virtue of the late Act of Pacification, to the which (out of Our desire to make a perpetuall union between Our two Kingdoms, for the happinesse of both, and by it the more firmely to establish Our owne greatnesse and just power,) We cheerfully con∣sented.
As We are at Our soule afflicted, that it hath been in the Power of any factious, ambitious, and malitious Persons, so farr to possesse the hearts of many of Our Subjects of England, as to rayse this miserable Distemper and Distraction in this Kingdome, against all Our reall Actions and Endeavours to the contrary; so We are glad, that this rage and fury hath so farr transported them, that they apply themselves in so grosse a manner to Our Subjects of Scotland, whose expe∣rience of Our Religion, Iustice, and Love of Our People will not suffer them to beleeve those hor∣rid Scandalls laid upon Us; and their Affection, Loyalty, and Iealousie of Our Honour, will dis∣dain to be made Instruments to oppresse their Native Soveraigne, by assisting an odious Rebel∣lion. We have from time to time acquainted Our Subjects of that Kingdom with the Accidents and Circumstances which have disquieted this: how (after all the acts of Iustice, Grace, and Fa∣vour performed on Our part, which were, or could be desired to make a people compleatly happy,) We were driven by the force and vio∣lence of rude, and tumultuous Assemblies, from Our City of London, and Our two Houses of Par∣liamēt.
How attempts have been made to impose Lawes upon Our Subjects without Our Consent, contrary to the Foundation, and Constitution of this Kingdom. How Our Forts, Goods, and Na∣vy were seised and taken from Us by force, and imployed against Us: Our Revenue and ordinary subsistance wrested from Us. How We have been pursued with scandalous, and reproachfull lan∣guage; bold, false, and seditious Pasquills, and Li∣bells publiquely allowed against Us; and been told that We might, without want of modesty and Duty, be Deposed. Now after all this (before any force raysed by Us) an Army was raysed, and a Generall appointed to lead that Army against Us, with a Commission to Kill, Slay, and destroy all such who should be faithfull to Us. That when We had been by these meanes compelled with the assistance of Our good Subjects, to raise an Ar∣my for Our necessary defence, We sent diverse gratious Messages, earnestly desiring that the Ca∣lamities and Miseries of a Civill Warre might be prevented by a Treaty, and so We might know the grounds of this misunderstanding. How We were absolutely refused to be treated with: and how at last the Army (raised, as was pretended, for the defence of Our Person) was brought into
the Field against Us, gave Us Battaile, & (though it pleased God to give Us the Victory) destroyed many of Our good Subjects, with as imminent danger to Our own Person and Our Children, as the skill and malice of desperate Rebells could contrive: of all which and the other Indignities which have been offer'd Us, We doubt not the Duty and Affection of Our Scottish Subjects will have so just a resentment, that they will expresse to the world the sense they have of Our sufferings. And Our good Subjects of Scotland are not, We hope, so great Strangers to the Affaires of this Kingdome, to beleive that this Misfortune and Distraction is begot and brought upon Us by Our two Houses of Parliament: (though in truth no unwarrantable Action against the Law can be ju∣stified even by that Authority.) They well know how the Members of both Houses have been dri∣ven thence, insomuch that of above five hun∣dred Members of the House of Commons, there are not now there above eighty, and of above one hundred of the House of Peeres, not above fifteen or sixteen. All which are so awed by the multitude of Anabaptists, Brownists, and other Persons, desperate and decayed in their Fortunes, in & about the Citty of London, that in truth their
Consultations have not the freedome and Privi∣ledge which belong to Parliaments. Concerning any Commissions granted by Us to Papists to raise Forces, We must refer Our good Subjects to a Declaration lately set forth by Us upon the occasion of that Scandall, which We send together with this: and for Our own true & zealous Affection to the Protestant Religion, (the Advancement whereof Our Soule desires) We can give no other Instances, then Our constant pra∣ctice, on which malice it selfe can lay no blemish; and those many Protestations We have made in the sight of Almighty God, to whom We know We shall be deerly accomptable, if We faile in the observation. For that scandalous Imputation of Our Inten∣tion of bringing in Forraigne Forces, as the same is raised without the least colour or shadow of reason, and solemnly disavowed by Us in many of Our Declarations; so there cannot be a cleerer Argument to Our Subjects of Scotland that We have no such thought, then that We have hitherto foreborne to require the Assistance of that Our native Kingdome, from whose Obedience, Duty, and Affection We should confidently expect it, if We thought Our own Strength here too weake
to preserve Us, and of whose Courage, & Loyalty We shall look to make use, before We shall thinke of any Forraigne Ayde to succour Us. And We know no reasonable or understanding man can suppose Our good Subjects of Scotland are obliged, or enabled by the late Act of Parliament in both Kingdomes, to obey the Invitation which is made to them by this pretended Declaration; when it is so evidently provided for by that Act, That as the Kingdom of England shall not make Warr against the Kingdom of Scotland, without consent of the Parliament of England, so the Kingdome of Scot∣land shall not make Warr against the Kingdome of England, without the Consent of the Parlia∣ment of Scotland: & when they have alwayes de∣clared themselves so carefull of Our Honour, Safe∣ty, and just Rights, which now undergoe so great violation. This We have thought fit to say upon occa∣sion of this late Declaration, and doe commend it to you the Lords of Our Privy Counsell of Our Kingdome of Scotland, to be communicated and published to all Our loving Subjects there; and if the grave Counsell and Advice, which you deri∣ved hither by your Act of the 22th of Aprill last, had been followed here, in a tender Care of Our
Royall Person, and of Our Princely Greatnesse & Authority, then would not this face of Confusion have appeared, which now threatens this King∣dome: And therefore We require you to use your utmost Endeavours to informe Our Subjects of that Our Kingdom, of the truth of Our Condition, and that you luffer not the Scandalls and Imputa∣tions laid on Us, by the malice and Treason of some men, to make any Impression in the minds of Our People, to the lessening or corrupting their Affection and Loyalty to Us; but that you assure them the hardnesse We now undergoe, and the Armes We have been compelled to take up, are for the defence of Our Person, and Safety of Our Life, for the maintenance of the true Protestant Religion, for the preservation of the Lawes, Li∣berties, and Constitution of this Kingdome, and for the just Priviledges of Parliament: and We looke no longer for the blessing of Heaven, then We endeavour the defence and Advancement of all these: and We doubt not a dutifull Concur∣rence in Our Subjects of Scotland, in the care of Our Honour and just Rights, will draw downe a blessing upon that Nation too. Given at Our Court at Oxford, the sixth day of December. 1642.
