E2302A R234012 45789294 172605
SEVERALL VOTES OF THE Lords and Commons, Concerning His Majesties Message and Propositions. Wherein is declared their intention to proceed against the Traitors and Rebels of the Kingdome. And that the Earle of Essex shall (according to his Com∣mission▪ put the same in execution. LONDON, Printed for Francis Kit Aug. 30. 1642.
The Kings Majesties PROPOSITIONS TO THE HIGH COVRT OF PARLIAMENT. THe Kings most excellent Ma∣jesty having severall times and by sundry practises both in his owne person, and by his Mini∣sters, endeavoured to streng∣then himselfe, and to raise an Armie against his Parliament, being seduced thereto by those evill affected and bloud-thirsty Papists, who have by their practi∣ces endeavoured, and do daily endeavour to ruine both our Religion, and destroy the whole King∣dome; but finding that their designes are made frustrate by the providence of Almighty God, and the endeavours of the Parliament, whose
active care and timely prevention hath given a curb to their head-stoing malice, and almost re∣turned their plots upon themselves. Yet so full of malice are they, that one designe hath usherd on another, as may appeare by their practices from the beginning of this present Parli∣ament to this very day. First, they perswaded His Majesty to withdraw himselfe from his Parli∣ament. Secondly, they perswaded his Ma∣jesty to take the Prince and the Duke of York from the protection of the Par∣liament. Thirdly, they perswaded His Ma∣jesty into a beliefe that his Person and Honour could not be safe, during his residence in London, or neere his Par∣liament. Fourthly, they perswaded his Ma∣jesty, that the Parliament, or some particular members of the same, had a designe to subvert the Fundamentall
Laws of the Kingdome, and to alter Religion. Fiftly, they caused His Majesty, having left London, to make his resi∣dence in Yorke, being a place remote from the Parliament, and (as they conceived) fittest for their rebellious and traiterous designes. Sixtly, they perswaded His Ma∣jesty to levie a War against his Parli∣ament, under c pretence of raising a∣guard for his Royall Person. Seventhly, they caused his Ma∣jesty (having raised an Armie) to be∣siege Hull, and to proclaime Sir John Hotham Traitor, a member of the Parliament, in whom resides both vertue and valour. Eighthly, they caused His Ma∣jesty to ordain a Commission of Array for
every Countie; which Commissioners have opposed each Countie of this King∣dome, causing much bloud to be shed. Ninthly, they have caused His Majesty to set up his Standard at No∣tingham, and to march up against Co∣ventry with his Armie; but being re∣pulst by the well affected partie of that Citie, they were forced to retreat, and at their retreat, by the providence of God, they were repulst by the Lord Grey, and some of them fled, others ta∣ken prisoners. All which his Majesty taking into his Princely consideration, and finding the gteat misery that is like to ensue to this Nation if this civill warre should continue; hath beene gratiously pleased to propound severall propositions for pacification, sending them by the Earle of Dorset, the Earle of Southampton, and Sir Jobn Culpepper, to the Parlia∣ment for their assent thereunto, being desirous (notwithstanding though he have set up his Stan∣dard at Nottinham) yet so farre his tender love and affection to his English Subjects doth extend,
that he was gratiously pleased to let them under∣stand his desires, in these insuing Propositions. 1. That they would decline the be∣gining of a Warre, and withdraw their present forces. 2. That they would declare against tumults, and punish the Authors. 3. That they would nominate a se∣lect Committee to goe to Nottingham to treate with others chosen by his Ma∣iesty for that purpose. 4. That his Maiesty was willing to stand to such a treaty of Pacificati∣on as they could agree of. The summe of his Majesties desires being read in the House, the Lords and Commons (no way questioning his Majesties Royall intention) but knowing that so long as his Majesty is invironed with so many wicked Councellors and evill affected persons, which ayme at the destruction of the King and Kingdome, who for feare of the Iustice of the Law, seeke the subversion of Justice, and who to advance popery seeke the extirpation of the true Protestant Religion, such who make
his Majesties Anthority a Cloake for their villany to the great dishonour of his Majesty, causing the Subject to be disaffected by reason of the mani∣fold oppressions which they have suffered by those who have pretended those things to be done by his Majesties Authority; Wherefore knowing how many times his Majesty hath beene seduced by these wicked Achans, they have small reason to hope that a good effect can be produced by a treatie during their residence so neare the Kings person, they of all things hating peace, warre be∣ing the Crowne of all their Actions, and the end of all their plots and stratagems. Wherefore after some debate thereon, it was voted in both Houses, that in regard his Majesty did still adhere to the councells of those that were evill affected to the Parliament, and had proclai∣med the Earle of Essex Traitor, withall that do adhere to him, that unlesse his Maiesty shall recall the said Proclamations and take downe his Stan∣dard, they cannot condiscend to his demands, ts also feared that these particulars are framed by Evill Councellors, onely to gaine time of the par∣liament. And therefore it is resolved that the Earle of Essex should goe on according to his Commission to subdue the Rebells and Tray tors of this State and Kingdome. FINIS.
