E2941 E56_15 99866040 118300
Englands Alarm to VVar against the Beast: By command from Heaven, and His Israels Example upon Earth, comming in to rescue David out of the hands of a cruell Lord and a bloudy Edomite: upon the same ground from Scripture and Reason, Israel had then, and Christians now, To resist the Prince ruling in the Aire, and with the Kings of the Earth. In 3. Sections: Wherein, I. The History of Sauls War against David is so related from the sacred Text, that it relates in whole, and in part, to the three last yeeres affaires: The most remarkable Passages between the King and the Parliament before the War brake forth. II. And to the bloudy Execution of the Edomite in this War against the Parlia∣ment in Ireland and England ever since. III. Here is also excellent Reason given, Why the Tribes came not in sooner; and sufficient Reason, Why they came in so Armed at the last: Relating ful∣ly to this present time, The wonderfull Providences, The admirable Deli∣verances, Strange Discoveries, &c. As at this day. Also, To confirme the hearts and hands of the Godly in their warfare: and to strike terrour to the wicked, fighting for the Devill, and against Gods hidden ones, contrary to the Vow in Baptisme, Oath of Allegiance, and Covenant en∣tred into by all good Subiects; And To stablish the heart in a patient expecta∣tion of the glorious end GOD will make, Though, for a time, He will plead with all flesh by fire, and by His sword, and the slain of the LORD shall be many. He who affirms. That Christians may not resist wicked Rulers, does affirme with as with as loud a voice though he would not be heard) That Christians may not re∣sist the Evill-one, ruling in wicked Rulers, and acting violences by their hands, Scl. de Imp. PSAL. 11. 5, 6 7. The Lord tryeth the Righteous but him, that loveth violence, His soul hateth, &c; ISAIAH 60 22. A little one shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong Nation, I the Lord will hasten it in His time. Printed in the second yeare of the Beasts wounding, making war with the Lamb, and those that are with Him,  and Faithfull for Thomas Ʋnderhill.
An Apologie for the Epistle following. I Shall lay open the depths of Sathan, hidden works of darknesse. Then I shall shew a Traine of Providences, &c. The sure mercies of David: I can tell my selfe, now, I shall, against my Rule, speak excellent things in the eares of a foole: shew him the Sun in your hand (as the Proverbe is) he will not see it: Tell him it is the Word of God, what cares he, he will not heare it. Tell him it is a Pearle, he regards it not. A very swine, A brutish man, Mad upon his Idols. Yet let us do our endeavours to make him sober. Surely this before him, will do it, if any thing under heaven can make him heare and see both. For he will see the Devill here all along acting a bloudy part; and, if the Devill be not in him, he will see himselfe, and his owne Actings in the Devill. He will heare two men speaking to him from the dead also, he will see all their notorious violences acted over afresh by his own hand now. He must heare the voice of the Eving God too, and see what end the LORD makes. Those Persons all, whom he and his fel∣lowes have dealt so hatefully with, shall be set on high before his face, (the higher, the lower he would have pressed them downe) there singing the high praises of their GOD; and himselfe amongst others his fellow Malignants laid low, as contemptible as their own dung, gnawing their tongues for paine. Whether he will heare, or whether he will forbeare, it is at his perill: Let him that is filthy, be filthy still: and let the foole hold fast his folly: sober men will heare, and be in∣structed.
To the most Malignant Reader. IT is granted on both sides (there are but two) That now is the time all over the Christian world, when Kings go forth to battell: All their Subjects are engaged now. It is high time then to consider the Case, weigh it well with all our hearts, and with all our soules. There are but two great Commanders in the world, God and the Devill; All serve under thse two. Another Commander there is (we call it mans Will) and boa∣steth great things, but an underling it is, and subservient, obeyed in refe∣rence to the other two, who rule in chiefe: so the question is single, Who must be hearkened to or obeyed? Not whether Gods Command, or mans Will contrary thereunto? Though this is the greatest question in the world, and most stubbornly argued; nor will it be answered, no not when it is answered and fairly proposed to every mans consideration, judge yet so it was answered more then sixteen hundred yeeres ago, therefore Act. 14. 19 it cannot be the question now: But this; Whether God is to be o∣beyed or the Devill? I confesse it is a strange question: But it were a stranger answer, and argued more then a distemper in the brain: To say, That the Devill is to be obeyed, and God is to be resisted. And yet so much thou must say, if thou wilt accuse Israel now for taking up de∣fensive Armes, being charged thereunto in obedience to God, and in defi∣ance of the Devill; for this is the very Case, which we will propose in Is∣raels Case fist: and anon, bring-it-up to our times, and make every line then run parallell with our Case now. This was Israels Case; All true Israel once tooke shield and buckler, came in so armed to re∣scue David. Did they well? It must be granted they did well, and their bounden duty in rescuing David, and in him, themselves, out of the hand of a cruell Lord, and bloody Edomite. Indeed it would argue more then indiscretion in us to censure all Israel at that point, for taking up defen∣sive Armes, though we could give no reason for what they did. But the
sacred Text is cleare in the point, That the Tribes came-in, not with an intent to resist Saul their King; no, nor the Edomite neither, (and that a Malignant may think strange, being not like, but the same now, with the Edomite then, a bloody adversary to Israel; and yet Israel not resist him:) But to resist the evill Spirit commanding in chiefe with both: This evill Spirit commanded in Saul, else he had not throwne a javelin a David, quickly after at his owne son, Jonathan: nor had Saul after all this sealed a Commission to an Edomite, to execute the pleasure of his owne will upon Israel. 2. And the evill Spirit ruled in the Edomite too, else he had not executed Sauls Commission to destroy a City of Priests, man and beast there. The Tribes then came-in, not to resist Saul, but the perverse will in Saul, acted by the evill Spirit upon Saul. They took up defensive Armes to withstand the notorious violences, the astings of Sauls and the Edomites wills acted by their evill Spirits: These outrages, extreame violences, actings of an evill Spirit, Israel withstood then, and no body else in the world, but as the body was acted by this evill Spirit. And this is Israels Case now, I meane all true Christians in the world. And such is their practise, according to Israels example in all Ages, by allowance and command also of all the Laws in Heaven and Earth. I repeat it again; Ʋpon the same ground from Scripture and Reason, All true Christians now are engaged, as Israel then, To help the Church a∣gainst the mighty; To come-in now with shield and buckler, To oppose and resist with all their might, Not their King [no; This resistance has an affice, a full agreement rather with duty and loyalty] nor the Pa∣pists, nor the Athiests neither, but that evill Spirit in both, The actings, and notorious violences thereof, and of a private and perverse will acted thereby, which has done all the mischiefe, done in the world, since the be∣ginning of the same, and will do all the hurt there it can while the world stands: All true Christians now will maintaine a Resistance against the Actings, as aforesaid, of this will, which, like the tongue, is a world of iniquity b, defileth the whole body; setteth on fire the course of Jam. 3. 5, 6. nature, and is set on fire of Hell, (i. e.) of that evill Spirit, whose Mansion-house is Hell, but now he is the great Peripatetick of the world, walking to and fro therein, and, by the help of mans will, a willing ser∣vant to him, does all the violences, insolencies and wrongs our eyes have seen, or our eares have heard have been done in both Kingdomes: Thie evill Spirit, this Will (call it what you will, if it be not the Devill, yet it Acts his Commands.) This evill Spirit, all true Christians will
oppose and resist now; Nay, they have solemnly protested before the Lord, That this evill and uncleane Spirit shall not rule over them, he shall not be king in their world, they will break his bands, and cast away his cords, they will oppose and resist him to the death, and no Body else in the world, but as the body is acted and effectually wrought in and upon by this evill Spirit: and, if so acted, they will resist him or them what ever Bodies they be, though Kings and Princes and Nobles of the Earth: for upon the same ground from Scripture and Reason, will they make this re∣sistance, by which they stand charged to obey God, and to resist the De∣vill. And if you finde any other resistance maintained now by men, or books, then against the actings and notorious violences of mans private will, acted by that evill Spirit so powerfull upon Saul, and working as effectually in the Edomite, I meane, him or them, who say of our Jeru∣salem now, Rase it, rase it eaven with the ground; If, I say, any other resistance is maintained in those books, then onely onely against that Power, which Commands in the Ruler, not by God, but against Him; then let those books be served, as the King served the Rowle, be first cut it, then burnt it; onely read the books first c, which the King did not do, whereas, c Jer. 36. 23. which is verily thought, had he read the Rowle thorow out first, he had not burnt it afterward. I will name the chiefe of these books here; That Answer to Doctor Fearn, and the fuller Answer. That of Anti-Turkisme [Cavalierisme is too gentile a word, for they are the same with the Turks, & more bruitish; though Turks (as one writeth) are in the lowest degree of men, next to bruit Beasts in the shape of Men.] And the same Authours Vindication of the same Book, against a Bishop in name, who hath in that Vindication, not onely given the Bishop a bone to pick, but choaked him therewith, for he has made the Bishop and his fellows speech∣lesse for ever, in point of Reply thereunto. Not so onely, he hath burnt this note of infamy upon their foreheads, [gain-savers of the Truth, Nothing for it, but all they can against it] more visible there then is the bone in the throat, which the Anatomists (too Rabinically) do call Pomum Adam, Adams Apple: And let Scripture and Reason be served so to, (being first read thorow) and that full Letter, which has so cleared a just Cause, that the Answerer hath not found with all his search, [yet he did his utmost, with all his skill, strength, wrath, malice, and what the Devill could help-him into, because he found the Devill his Father there, a most notorious lyer, yet he found not] one word of sense to reply unto that Letter: But yet let this, and that, and the other, have the same execu∣tion
aone upon them, as aforesaid, and as was done upon that abominable and cursed Pamphlet (for we must not call it a Book) giving liberty to riot, and dance upon the Lords Day: let those Books be burnt by the hand of the common hangman in all the Cities and Townes thorow the whole Kingdome; for so such Papers should be served, which give such li∣berty to sport and play away the Lords Day: or a liberty to Subjects to resist their King. But if thse Books (I will call them Books, having for their Patrons, Truth and Reason, and such onely are worthy the name of Books d) perswade obedience to Rulers, submission to that power God d Libri  nomi∣e dignan∣di in veri∣catis tan∣um & ra∣tionis cli∣entelam s∣dare de∣bent, Ver. de Aug. l. 1 has set over them, and resistance onely against that evill Spirit, the great Monarch of the world, King of the bottomlesse Pit, working mightily now, and effectually in the Rulers of the world, and in their sworne ser∣vants, Israels enemies, the Edomites there: if a resistance onely of that power in the Rulers not for God, but against Him, giving full Com∣mission to Athiests, and bloudy Papists, to do as the Edomite did against Nob, and as Saul would have done against Keilah; if so, allow the Books, read what they say, and heare them out, it is Scripture and Reason, and be stubborne and bruitish no more, but obey. Shew thy selfe a man, who wilt never oppose so reasonable a charge as this, Obey thy Soveraigne Lord, Resist the Devill, and thy owne will, the Devils right hand, in the world: Grant so much we are agreed, and altogether to fight against the Devill, and this perverse will, as long as there is a Spirit of life with∣in us, and a drop of quick bloud at our heart. All this is commended to thee, and charged upon thee before God the Father, His Son Jesus Christ, His Elect Angels and Men. Therefore do not dare to refuse nor gain say such a sacred Truth, so firmly grounded upon sacred Scripture and Reason both; Scripture specially now opening it selfe unto thee, wherein thou mayest, with one cast of the Eye, Read and Remember David and all his Afflictions; The Church and all her enemies. Their deadly persecutions, contrivances and complottings how to do her mischiefe: The contrivances and admirable providences of her Lord God to do His people good. All this thou shalt read here, and at last thou shalt see all the Tribes comming in to set David free from his Adversaries; and then fast upon his Throne, (so God will deale with His Church now appearing in His glory) for David has a Kingdom on earth at last. But, O the admirable wayes unto it! These are Gods wayes. He will make David Ruler over all His House; he shall learne to obey first. He shall be a good, a mercifull King; he shall go thorow sore temptati∣ons
first: He must be the highest man in the Kingdom, he must be the lowest there first: He shall have afair house, his little house must be smitten and burnt first: He shall have all in God, but all must be taken from him first: He shall live to enjoy a Crowne on Earth in despight of Devils and men there, who will persecute him as they can, even to the gates of death, and in their way, cast shame and all manner of reproach upon him first: Da∣vids way to the Crowne, is the Churches way to her Glory: The very same dark-paths, intricacies, and back-wayes in it: Davids enemies, the Churches enemies for ever: Davids God, the Churches God for ever: Davids security, the Churches confidence for ever. Many are the trou∣bles of the righteous, The Lord will deliver them out of all. For who is God, save the Lord? or who is a rock, save our God? So it comes to passe, That the righteous are an everlasting foundation. Here they will put their trust for ever. Amen.
Englands Alarm to VVar. Sect. I. Davids Story, and Sauls persecution of him briefly related, his secret practises, and fine contrivances to take away Davids life, coloured∣over, and made specious with goodly words, and lovely actions; Re∣lating fully to the words and actions the King, seduced by evill Coun∣cell, has spoken and done seemingly for, but indeed cleare against his Parliament ever since they sate, to the time the War broake forth. Chap. 1. After a short, but righteous Apologie, Davids story is Re∣lated; Sauls persecution of him; The cause and manner, the same with the persecution now; The heads or parti∣culars of the three Sections. THE Sword is come-in amongst us, drinkes blood, eates flesh: We make no question but God has gi∣ven it a Commission, and it cannot be still; And for just cause all this, even because of His Peoples sinnes. Let us lift up our hearts with our hands unto Lam 3. 41, 42, 44. GOD in the heavens: We have transgressed, and rebelled, Thou hast not pardoned. Thou hast covered with Anger, and persecuted us: Thou hast slaine, Thou hast not pittied Gods people say now, as they said then, and they say it heartily. Yet, as Job said, sit∣ting in the dust, GOD forbid that I should justifie my accusers: till I die, Job 27. 5, 6. I will not remove my integrity from me: My Righteousnesse I hold fast, and will not let it goe: My heart shall not reproach me so long as I live.
A people so blasphemed, so reproached say as much now, and are so resolved; Their consciences bearing them witnesse, and Goa also, That neither against the Law, nor against their King have they offended. If Psal. 11. 3. the foundation be destroyed, what can the Righteous doe? Was Davids complaint long agoe, and the Righteous may resume it, being now as David then, the Butt and Marke at which the wicked bend their Bow, and make ready their arrow, at this day; even against the upright in heart. And that they may have some colour for this their bloody worke, they deale with the righteous now, as Saul did with David then, and as the Edomites did with Christians ever since; They put∣over them the skins of the fiercest beasts, that so the dogs might bee the more fierce upon them. Just so now, the wicked persecute the righteous with fire and sword, and they make the world believe they doe all this by the knowne Lawes of the Kingdome; for they perse∣cute none other but the Incendiaries of the Kingdome, the only Re∣bels and Traitors there: Well, as David said (for I shall make his Case run paralell with ours all along, he is the Emblem of the Church to this day, and will be to the worlds end) The Righteous know not what to doe, but their Lord knowes, whose Throne is in heaven, whose eyes behold and try the children of men. To Him they commit their righteous Cause, and yet they must not be silent, hearing themselves charged with rebellion, and treason, as heavy a charge every whit as Heresie is: They will take the same liberty, which is granted to Church-robbers, Traytors, yea, and Sorcerers too; all these, saith Lactantius b, are permitted to speak for themselves and to speake all b Sacrileg is & prodito∣ribus & ve∣neficis, l. 5. Cap. 1. they have to say for themselves, before judgement passeth upon them. Indeed the greatest reason, that so they should doe, for so their crimes will be manifest, or their righteousnesse will be cleared as the noone day. There were strange crimes (yet I should not say so, be∣ing but after the manner and practise of the wicked in all times up∣wards to this day) horrid crimes charged upon Paul, and they con∣cluded against him before he was heard, That Paul ought not to live any longer, and so they spake before Festus; who having examined Act. 25. 24 the matter very fully, professed as heartily, That he found many and grievous complaints against Paul, but nothing proved, no, nothing at all: notwithstanding his adversaries, a multitude of them, importune me, said he, very much to write his inditement to my Lord Augustus; And, as I am an honest man, though I have their clamours against
him once and againe, yet I have not one word for certainty to write unto my Lord; Therefore hither I have brought him especially un∣to thee, O King Agrippa, that, after thou hast searched out the whole matter, I might gather something whereof to write; for it seemeth unreasonable to send a Prisoner, and not withall to signifie the crimes laid against him. Festus spake like an honest man indeed, He will under∣stand the cause before he indites his Letter, or the prisoner before Augustus. And Agrippa speakes as honestly too, Paul, Thou at per∣mitted to speake for thy selfe. The servants of the Lord desire no more favour then Paul has from an Heathen King. Let their crimes, so ma∣ny and grievous, be fairely examined: and if any one crime be proved against them, let them suffer as evill doers for all suggested against them. But we are sure they can cleare themselves, and their upright dealing as the noone day, even as Paul did then, and as David be∣fore him: And because Davids history is theirs now, we may reade the Churches story now, in Davids story then: I will reade Davids story quite through from point to point, that we may see anon, how paralell the lines thereof run-up to the Churches story now. Davids story begins like a Comedy, with a marriage, but quickly there is a turning of the Scene, proves a Tragedy, and ends in blood. David was envyed by Saul, for two Reasons: 1. Because he had wrought salvation for Israel, slaying Goliah the Philistine with his owne Sword. 2. And, because the Kingdome must be established in Davids house, and Saul knew it, therefore he envied David, and pursued him 1 Sam. 23. 17 to the death: but because bloody intentions have no pleasant appea∣rance, Saul vailed them over with sugered words, and lovely acti∣ons, he causeth many love-tokens to passe betwixt himselfe and Da∣vid: as if he purposed not only to affiance his daughter to David, but marry himselfe unto him too. See the depths of Sathan, that evill spirit, who wrought so effectually upon Saul! All his words and a∣ctions were as soft and smooth as Oyle and Butter, but inwardly drawne swords, to slay David therewith. But the people remote from the Court, I say remote from the Court (for Israel in and about the Court knew very well, that Saul hated David, and would have nailed his head and the wall together twise, and once he would have served his Son Jonathan so too, for being a friend to David: Therefore, I say, Israel remote from the Court) were wholly taken with things in
appearance, and so judged of Saul and David, and of their actions: so as, if one of the two were too blame, David was he. And these co∣lourable pretences stood Saul in some stead, to vaile the peoples eyes, for some time, and not long; for wicked and malicious inten∣tions will work-out, and discover themselves, as five will, and light will, they will not be hid. Saul plots against the righteous, layes a snate here, and there a snare for Davids soul: The Righteous God dis∣covers all, and breaks the snare, which enrageth Saul yet more, the evill Spirit taking advantage thereby. And now Saul pursues David with open ae, and sword in hand, up to Naioth in Ramah, and from thence to Nob. There he enters his foot first into bloud, and goes up to the knees therein quickly, for he takes an Edomite to his side, gives him a Commission, useth him as his right hand, & presently he (with other Edomites with him, for we cannot imagine that one should do that xecution alone) smites a City of Priests, slayes men, women, and sucklings there, and beast also: Where I shall note, That all this is done by the knowne Lawes of the Kingdome, for the Edomite accuseth the Priest, Saul gives the Priest leave to answer for him∣selfe, then execution is done according to the knowne Law, which Saul and the Edomite have enacted. We shall enquire farther into these matters, when I shall handle them in order, why Saul takes the Edomite to his side, gave him a Commission, being a knowne adver∣sary to Is ael, whereof I shall give a better account anon. And then, though we are concluded, That the Lord is righteous, and His Judge∣ments are as the great deepe: yet I shall search into them, and finde∣o reason enough to satisfie us, why the Lord suffers the Edomite to make such a slaughter in Israels Land, and His owne Kingdome: To do execution according to their wills, upon those, who did their du∣y, by direction from Gods mouth: We shall see reason for all this, though God needs not give account of His matters, yet we shall see, so He is pleased to do. And now Davids History proves Tragicall indeed. The Priests are slaine, and David is strucken-at thorow the priests sides: he sees Sauls sword now, and against whom it was pointed. So away he flies, and to Keilah he comes in all haste, expecting relief there; for he had done the inhabitants such a piece of service, as was very notable & would have engaged them to David for ever, had they been honest men. But Keilites cannot consider what David had done for them,
they ponder not the kindnesse of God towards them, nor mans kind∣nesse neither. And now David, having a strong hold over his head, is resolved therein to defend himselfe; but the Keilites proved treacherous, they (after their manner) will betray David, and he is warned thereof, (for a mighty Councellour was with David wheresoe∣ver he went) and away he went from Keilah to a mountaine in the wil∣dernesse of Ziph Saul pursues his way, and bloudy intentions, and after he goes, for he sought David every day: but it followes, (God  2. 1 delivered him not into his hands.) The Keilites would have done it, so would the Ziphites too, these would have delivered up David into Sauls hands; yea, but God would not do it, and His is the overruling Hand: These adversaries shall but shew themselves so, shew their teeth unto David, discover their treacherous hearts against him, that is all they shall do, more they would do, but they cannot. Therefore Psal. 54. David makes a Psalme of praise to his God, for that deliverance. Here a great question will be proposed anon, (I do but give the heads here) why the Tribes came-not-in all this while, now they saw what was done to Nob, what was offered to be done to Keilah; and saw the sword was pointed directly to Davids throat; why yet the Tribes came-not-in? Some will Answer, Conscience withheld them; had they come-in to help David, they had resisted their King: I shall cleare the contrary in the third Section, for it is the chiefe purpose thereof. Other conceits there are, I will passe them over in this place. This is certaine: Things were not ripe yet, nor yet Gods time; Davids straits must be yet greater then they were at Nob, or when he was at Keilah: and and there must be farther discove∣ries yet, of Gods right hand with David, and of his adversaries a∣gainst him: whereof towards the close of the Work. Saul pursues David still thorow all the Thousands of Judah 1 Sam. 23. 23.; [malice will draw bloud, but it cannot, yet will pursue to the death] he and his men have cooped-up David and his men, for they have compassed David round about. Then God wrought wonderfully for David, as His Name is, and His Manner, and the Earth must help David; [A Drossie earthy people shall help David, shall work for his deliverance, though enemies to him.] And though Saul has David as a prey in his hand, yet the Lord sets up a Rock of separation betwixt David and Saul: David is almost under Sauls nose, within the reach of his speare, and yet saul cannot reach him: O wonderfull! It is so indeed, therefore 1 Sam. 23. 28. they called the place Sela-Hammahlekoth e, as at this day.
takes no notice of this, no not of Davids Rock in his way; he  David still, and he pops-into a Cave? all alone, where David, and all  mn were, [the man shall run strange adventures that  David, and may escape once and again: but beware the third , he that pursues David may fall into the Philistines hands aon, as Saul did.] Note againe, how various and changeable mat∣rs are in the cying-on of Davids Wars. Saul had David in a coop e other day, now David has Saul at the same advantage. It was so,  will be so in Davids wars ever more. Then Saul had the advan∣tage, now David; Down and up, Ʋp nd down: But the advantage i shall on Davids-side, whether he rise or fall, for he is instructed. To make advantage of his falls, Saul cannot of his risings; Either he shall not see his advantage, or shall make no advantage thereof at all. David shall see his advantages, and make use of them for glorious ends, and towards Saul, to cleare his innocencie as the noone day. For now it shall appeare to all Israel, and to Saul himselfe, That Da∣vid is a man after Gods owne heart, (and will shew him the kindnesse of the Lord:) And that Saul is mis-informed, and all his Courtiers are liers all; Now Saul and David are come to a Parley, and David is heard to speake for himselfe, he can speak with such evidence of Truth, that the quarrell had now ended, (for the evill Spirit in Saul seemes to be quite silenced (for a short time) and Saul himselfe so fully convinced concerning Davids uprightnesse, as that he seems to  Sam. 24. 16. melt into tears, nay it is so indeed, he wept heartily:) but that the evill Spirit moves in Saul againe and the Ziphites, a mischievous genera∣tion,  Sam. 26. and enemies to Peace, did egge-on, and drive Saul to pursue David againe [see what he Devill will do, and these Ziphites as e∣vill as he, and as like him, as the children are like the father] these hurry Saul-onward, and after David he runs (for the Devill drives him) having three thousand chosen men of Israel with him. A marvel∣lous  Sam. 24. 2. thing! That thousand chosen men of Israel with him! And yet I shall make it no marvell at all anon; for if a King will fall despe∣rately upon his owne sword, there is another will do as desperately as the King does, fall upon it too. It is no marvell at all, That Saul 1 Sam. 31. 5. 6. hath three thousand chosen men with him: But this is the wonder, That, after such a conviction, as we read before, he should yet, with such a company, seek David to slay him. But that is no wonder nei∣ther: The evill Spirit is with him, and the Ziphites his Councellours: These will drive-on Saul furiously, but David shall see whereto they
drive; for he has his 1 Sam. 26. 4. spies abroad, and they tell David where Saul is; and thither he goes, as bold as a Lion (for his Cause was good, and though it was stormy without, yet alwayes cleare within) he came to the place where Saul had pitched, beheld it well, and there went downe, he with two more, even to Sauls Campe by night, and there they found Saul asleepe, and all his people round about him sleeping too; (God would have it so.) Then said Abishai to David, Let me smite thine enemy once; one blow shall do the deed, there shall not need a second to destroy him: No, sayes David; (and observe what he sayes) The Lord forbid that I should stretch forth my hand against the Lords Anointed, suffering thee to take away Sauls head; but take away his speare, &c. and so they did, then gat them away, and no man awaked, for a deep sleep from the Lord was fallen upon thm. [The Lord will finde out a way to cleare Davids innocencie as the noone day] David was no sooner gon, but he calls out to Abner, Captaine of Sauls guard, reproves his negligence above many, bids him behold the speare, &c. which stuck so neare his Masters pillow, his Masters Verse 16. head was in the same danger, and Abner asleep the while! When Saul heard that, (for it could be no mans voice but Davids) his heart seemes (and in his owne apprehension) to close with David now. Observe what Saul sayes, and what David replyes, for now they are Vers. 21. as their last Conference. Matters are fairly debated, and concluded betwixt them, even with a blessing from Sauls mouth: Then Saul Vers. 25. returned to his place: But Saul was resolutely bent to oppose Gods decree, touching the setting of the Crowne upon Davids head, there∣fore Suspectum semper in∣visum que domianti bs, qui, pr∣xim s de∣sinartur, Iac. H. 1. lib. 1. cap. 7. he envied David; and the evill Spirit wrought effectually upon that advantage: so as David did not trust Saul, nor regarded his words, for indeed bloudy thoughts lodged within him sill; nor was he sui juris, but of the possession of himselfe quite: The Keilites had a part in him, the Ziphites also, and the evill Spirit divided Saul betwixt them, they have him in their power, and drive him as they will, and so David will trust none of them all: Nay they prevailed so, That David distrusted God a little, and so away David runs to Gath, and when Saul heard that he sought no more after him, sayes the Text 1 Sam. 27. 4., intimating no lesse then this; That Saul would have pursued him still, but that he was out of Sauls reach. About this very time the Tribes came-in, when all was cleare before them touching Sauls im∣placablenesse, and stubborne resolution; touching Davids upright∣nesse, & the treachery of Davids friends, then the Tribes came-in, after
they saw all faire wayes had beene used to incline Saul, to hold him back from shedding bloud, after they had prayed and fasted too; for this I must make good also. Then the Tribes came-in with shield and buckler, as we read. And so we have a briefe relation of Davids Story, and Sauls persecution, which will relate clearly and fully anon, the History of our time. I shall not do as the wise Judges did, in a  Case, wherein it was hard, and dangerous to give righteous Judge∣ment, They bad the Parties come and appeare before them a hundred  years after. I cannot do so now: As I shall relate an ancient History, so I must declare how it relates to these present times: for in setting downe Davids Story, and Sauls persecution of him, I must needs set downe the story of these dayes fully, and wholy, for no Chronicle in the world gives us the like story, so paralell with the Churches story now, and affaires of these dayes: For example, A King, the chiefe Actor then, a King the chiefe Actor now; Persecuting David then, persecuting his owne subjects now: All under colourable pretences then, the same pretences and shewes now. The delivering up of the sword into Davids hand was the pretence (and no more) of the quar∣rell then; the same pretence now. Saul takes an Edomite to his side, and gives reason for so doing then; The King takes Edomites (for they say of our Jerusalem, as aforesaid) into his bosome, and gives the same reason for so doing now. The Edomite informeth against the faithfull servants of the Lord then; so they do now, but with much more fore-head, and lesse shame now than then, as will appeare. The King impeached the servant of the Lord then, so the King does now. The servant of the Lord made answer to his Master, the clearest that ever was read: The servants of the Lord do render as full and fair accompt of all their actions now. Notwithstanding, the king gives a Commission to the Edomite to smite all the Priests, because one had done his duty then: The King gives the Edomites the very same Commission now. And so a City was smitten and burnt with fire then: Cities and Townes, yea, two Kingdomes, are smitten and burnt with fire now. And yet the Tribes come-not-in, no, not yet: Why? I will tell you the reason for that in due time. They did come-in then to help David; And all true Israel will come-in anon to help the Church (that we are sure of) in obedience to God, and in defiance of the Devill, so soone as the Kings intentions shall be yet more clearly manifested: our Edomites sins shall be full: Israel shall sufficiently groane under such Task-Masters, crying unto God
against them, &c. when the Edomites bloudy intentions shall be yet more fully manifest; and when the treachery of the Keilites and Zi∣phites (for such we have amongst us) shall be yet more fully discove∣red to the world; and when by all this Israels sins shall be purged, their hearts prepared, their strong holds, forts and brest works (vaine confidences meant thereby) are destroyed, all and every one, then Israels deliverance comes carried on, as upon Eagles wings; when Israel is very low, in Davids Case, their Ziglags smitten (all vaine con∣fidences) their comforts taken thence, and they have strengened their hand in God: Then as all Israel once came in to help David, so will all true Christians now joyne hand and shoulder, and heart to∣gether to help the Church: but of this in the last place. All along, for I am entering into the particulars of the Story, we shall read words and actions then, words and actions now, answering each other, as face in water answers fce: Then how heart an∣swers heart, the world will judge whether we will or no. I must ob∣serve ri H∣stori   qui falsi aud∣e q ∣ri  au∣d,  Ora. the Law of History: I must not be so impudent as to speak what is false: nor must I be so bold as to conceale the truth: Spe∣cially being perswaded that the speaking out the truth now in such a Case as this, may prevail with the Reader now, more then if one came to him from the dead. Again, this comforts me all along in the things done then and now, which run up so paralell each with other, that yet I hope, the destruction of the Kings house now, will not answer the destruction then to Saul, and his house. It is true▪ Never any man from that day to this houre, persecued David and prospered. Compare it 1 Sam. 18. 17. with 31. 3. And very notable it is, That Saul was wounded with those instru∣ments of death in the enemies hand, wherewith he would have had David to have been wounded; and he perished by the very sword, which he would have made drunk with bloud in Davids bowels: 1 Sam. 31. 4. Nor was this all, he would have destroed David, that the Kingdom might not be established in Davids house; and he slew all the Priests for Davids sake, and so he ruined himselfe and his whole house; for 1 Chron 10. 16. Saul died and his three sons, and all his house died together: from such a destruction the Lord deliver the King and his Kingdome: And we hope the Lord will do it, though the Kings hand (now in the hands of bloudy and pernicious men) is as rough now; his intentions a∣gainst the Church now, are as bloudy now, and as manifestly so, as Sauls were against David; yet we hope the destruction will not be
such, though God is the same, and the Church as deare to him now, as David was then. We have onely this thred (a weak support) to beare up our hope herein. That we read not, Saul had any one Pro∣phet, nor any good man (so much as is in shew) with him, who ju∣stified his way of persecution against David. But the King is in the Schole of the Prophets, has those by him eminently knowne all over the Christian world, for Learning and Piety, who (if we be∣leeve heresay, I beleeve it not) do justifie the Kings way, saying of it, It is the right way, and according to the Scriptures: and they who are against that way, do turne head against the Scripture of God, the 13. to the Romans, touching that matter. This may be some inducement to the King, to prosecute this stubborne way, having such persons ap∣proving his doings; The greater their sin (if they do so by conniving at it, or not contending against it with all their might) But it may render the King more excusable, a tanto, then Saul was. I will give a full and faire accompt of this way of persecution, all the turnings and windings in it, as Saul followed-on against David; And we shall see how it runs-up all along with the way of persecution now: And if this way prove it selfe according to the Rule and Line of the Word, in any one degree or step of it: If it hath any agreement with Peace, Righteousnesse and Holinesse, then all the true Israel of God are utterly unacquainted with the good Word of God, and have erred concern∣ing the way of Holinesse, from the beginning of the world upward, un∣to this day. I will examine and ponder the Kings way, what it was anciently, and what it is now, the severall steps and motions therein; beginning with the first step, as followes.
Chap. 2. Sauls bloudy intentions to David varnished over with faire Words, and lovely Actions. These are compared with Words and Actions now: And so all the most Remark∣able Passages and Acts of Grace, which passed between the King and Parliament since they sate, till the War brake∣forth, are Recorded, and Weighed, but found Light. PEace is in Sauls tongue, War is in his heart; There he conceived mischiefe, but yet, that he might not make his wicked thoughts legible to all Israel; that they might not break-out at his mouth, nor at his fingers end, (as they have done before a few in the Court) he vailed the peoples eyes by meanes we shall fully understand by and by. He persecutes David with his tongue, and hand too, but so pri∣vaely and cunningly, that the people, remote from the Court, could read no such thing, but that Sauls tongue was for David, and his hand too. Nor would they eneraine a thought that Saul, the chiefe Master and Dispencer of Justice. would do unjustly. True indeed it was, That Saul had almost (tantum non) pinned or nailed Davids head and the wall together; Saul sought to smite David even to the wall with his javeline 1 Sam. 19. 10.: And it was so violent and sudden (for it was by the Devils motion) that David had no more time then to 1 Sam. 18. 10. slip a∣way and avoid the place, so the javeline was smote into the wall: And though this was twice, yet this was knowne in the Court onely, perhaps to some dwellers hard by. It is as true also, and as cleare every whit in the sacred Text (but the people inquire not into that, not what is written, not they) That an evill Spirit from God 1 Sam. 18. 10. came upon Saul, and that is reported twice too; And this evill Spirit was so active in Saul, That, whereas he might have rested and slept quietly in his owne house, he runs about (tanquam ostro percitus) from place to place, (for he must run whom the Devill drives) and is restlesse in the pursuit of Davids soule; so as Saul might say, and others also, and all say truly, and the people
might beleeve it too; That Saul did not go away from his Court, but was din away; he was indeed, for an evill Spirit did drive him, which is clearly written: But I say, the people observe none of that, No could they heare what good Jonathan spake of David unto Saul his faer, Davids works have been to-thee-ward very good; he did so, and so, and so  ronght a great salvation for all Israel; wherefore then wilt thou si against innocent blood, to slay David without a cause  . 4. 5.; The people, Al Isrel, remote from the Court, heard none of all this; they heard what a salvation David had wrought, and they might think, as Jonathan did, judging his fathers spirit by his owne, that Saul seeing that salvation did rejoyce, thou sawest it, and didst rejoyce, Verse 5. said Jonathan: so the people might think too; and that David was in all the blame, and Saul in none at all; That David had done some great matter against Saul, because Saul did so persecute him, so the people may think; and the people might very well be so deluded, for Saul did cover his malice with faire words, as a potsheard may be covered with silver drosse . 26. 23; go and tell David from me, said Saul; The King hath delight in thee, and all his servants love thee 1 Sam. 18. 22.. Nor could there be greater shews, nor more lively expressions, then were in Saul towards David; nor were his shews greater then were the reali∣ty of his actions, as the people must understand them; We do ac∣couut Acts of meere Right and Justice, to be Acts of most transcen∣dent Grace; (and so we can flatter) but indeed the Acts of Saul to∣wards David, could seeme no otherwise then Acts of most transcen∣dent Grace, and that was the account that David himselfe made of them; he was sued unto twice to be the Kings Son-in-law, and Da∣vid was exceedingly taken with it, seemeth it to you a light thing to be a Verse 23. Kings Son in-Law, seeing that I am but a pore man and lightly estee∣med? It made David quite forget that unkingly act of throwing the javelin at him; And the people must needs be taken as much with it also, seeing a poore shepherd matched to a Kings Daughter, for the people could not tell what Saul had said in his heart, I will give him Verse 21. her, that she may be a snare unto him, and that the hand of the Philistines may be against him: [Note it by the way, That this very snare where∣with Saul intended to catch David, took Saul himselfe, as we may read, 1 Sam. 31. 3. It is ominous, and a point of desperate folly, to lay a snare for David] But this snare was contrived in the Court, and that which was said, was said in the heart, whose language the
people cannot understand till it be made legible by the hand. So much as was in sight was an act of most transcendent Grace: True in∣deed it is, and it is legible, that Saul spake to Jonathan his son (bad 1 Sam. 19 1. councell to a young Prince, therefore an Almighty hand staied Jona∣than upright, conversing with such a Father, and amongst such Coun∣cellours) and to all his servants, as we heard, That they should kill David: But this was not legible to the people, it was a secret from the Court, where David had a good friend, (Jonathan) who will tell him all he heares, and what his fathers bloody intents are, that so he might pre∣vent them. Saul goes on, sends Messengers to Davids house to watch 1 Sam. 19. 11. him, and to slay him in the morning; but his wife makes an ill-favoured shift to save her husband, and tells a lie to boote. So David escaped Psalm. 59. at that time, and makes a Psalme of Thankesgiving to the LORD after his manner; so many deliverances, so many Psalmes to call to remembrance. Then to Ramah he runnes, and Saul sent Messengers as fast after him, and then came himselfe thither (we shall read more of that in due place) And now that Saul is at Ramah, David flies from thence, and comes to Jonathan; he and David are made sure together, and fast one to the other. [Marke it by the way, Saul had his Scout to spie, as you shall heare anon: The LORD provided for David too, he had a Spie at Court, a fast friend there close at Sauls elbow. Be thou as David was upright with the LORD, thou shalt have a Jona∣than, a true friend at Court, that is certaine] I proceed, The Father ob∣serves great signes, and tokens of their love, so his anger kindled a∣gainst Jonathan and reproacheth him shamefully; it grieved Saul that 1 Sam. 20. 30, 31. David liveth upon the ground (that is the expression) commands Jona∣than to fetch him unto his Father, for he shall surely die: Jonathan will see reason for what he does; he will not run out of the Court gates to fetch David to his Father, because his Father said, David shall die: Jo∣nathan was a good man, notwithstanding the bloody words his ear dranke in from his Fathers mouth continually, and his conversing daily with bloody Courtiers [God, He onely, keeps the heart upright and from pollution, even there where Satans throne is] there Jonathan was a good man and an obedient Son notwithstanding. Object. Nay but he was not you may say, for his Father, a King, commands, and Jonathan, a son, disobeyes. Ans. It is seemingly so indeed, and, as we use to say, That he is an obedient servant, who obeyes his Lord, never examining what is the
command and charge, nor how unjust; as the Kings Attourney did obey, commanded by his Master to accuse the six Members sitting in Parliament of high Treason: This was an obedient servant, say we, but what says the Lord our great Master in heaven? I think the Judge∣ment Deut. 19. 19, 20, 21. from the LORD is, That this wicked servant shalbe drawn first, and hanged after. For ye shall do unto this evill servant, as he had thought to have done unto his brother. This was the Law anciently, what propor∣tion the laws have now, with this then, let the honest Lawyer judge. Now we are informed of and resolved in an high point, or question, who has an obedient ear? Who obeys indeed? He who disobeys the perverse will of Saul, and obeyes the Holy will of GOD: This must be our resolution now, which was Jonathans then, he disobeyed, he re∣sisted (as some expresse it) his Father, pleades Davids case, and his innocency, which vexed Saul not a little, as appeared by his Answer, for he made reply to that, with his Javelin. Now Jonathan has a full discovery of that Evill spirit ruling in his Father, takes a little lad with him, and betakes himselfe to his bowe (for Jonathan is allowed the wisdome of the serpent) shoots an arrow, sends words after the Boy, but intends them to Davids ear, make speed, hast, stay not, the evil spirit workes effectually in my Father. Then he sent back the lad, runs to David, they imbrace one the other; bid farewell, then turned back to back, Jonathan back to his Fathers Court, David hastens for∣wards, and comes to Nob, that strong hold, we shall come thither anon also. Chap. 3. Words and Actions then, are compared and weighed with these now; and being weighed, are found light now as then. Now we will looke over what has been said, and take the result there from, which is briesly this, gathered to our hands; Sauls words (those that were heard abroad) were as soft as butter, when war was in the heart; his actions also (those the Common people, remote Psal. 55. from Court, and unacquainted with matters & transactions there can
take notice of) were very lovely, full of favour, and indeed, most tran∣scendent Grace: yet were they snares and traps, or, to expresse it as the Searcher of hearts does, very drawne swords. This is the Result of all Sauls Words and Actions hitherto, the very product the Spirit gives us there-from. Now I will compare together Words then, and Words now; Actions then, and Actions now; and for the intentions of the heart, I will leave them to the world to read, for they will be legi∣ble by and by. The King (in the hands of wicked men) has given good words; so did Saul too: The King now, by his evill Councell, has made so many Declarations of his grace and favour, so full of engagements, that he is worse then an Infidell that will not beleeve him; so they say, who, what ever they know, care not what they say. I will entreat but this, observe this Story well, and we shall never trust bare words; no, nor the most lovely Actions neither that can be in shew. In this Story we have all this, most gracious words, and most transcendent Acts of Grace, yet proved themselves meere traps and snares, very drawne swords. It is possible now, to say no more yet, that Acts of meere Right, and Common Justice, (the Acts and Grants of the King have been no other, no not even for the continuance of a Parliament) may prove as deceitfull now: And whether so or not, the Court and places there-abouts can more then guesse, for the Court is witnesse of as hard dealing from the King against David now, as it was in Sauls time against David then. Nay, (to go-on a little in the generall) Court, City, Countrey, all, now can tell us, That, as, when Sauls words were most like unto oyle and butter, most smooth and soft, then were the thoughts of his heart most bloudy and treacherous, even as drawne swords: so now, when the Kings-party made some o∣vertures towards a peace; when they gave most goodly words (as oft times they did) then were the most devillish projects hatching, and bringing forth to the birth: when the wicked made shews of Ju∣stice, then they plotted against the Just, and gnashed upon him with their teeth, against all the rules of humanity and justice also; when the wicked seemed as Angels of Light, then did they carry-on De∣signes most horrid and hellish, as it is at this day. But, what a good God, what a discovering God does Israel serve! Who would not serve Him! He suffers the wicked to conceive mischiefe, to travell with iniquity, and then to bring forth falshood: He leaves them to Psal. 7. 14.
their owne Councells, to make a pit, and dig it deep, and then they must fall into the ditch they have made; their mischiefe must returne Verse 15. Verse 16. Verse 17. upon their own head, and their violent dealing must come downe upon their owne pate: (proceed) I will praise the Lord according to his Righteousnesse: and will sing praise unto the Lord most high. O that the wicked could consider all this, and this which follows, Let not him that is dceived, trust in vanity: for vanity shall be his recompence. Job 15. 31 But I must not stay upon Generalls: More particularly, Thus, Saul commanded it to be said to David then, The King delighteth in thee, and all his servants love thee; he carrieth the same regard to thee, as unto his owne childe; for thou must be the King Son-in-law. The King now hath said as much, That he tendered the Parlia∣ment, and their safety then, as his owne safety, or the safety of those most neare to him in place and affection; And the very next day, yes, the very next day, these lovely words were drawne swords. But let words go: His Actions, before and after, were such, as if he meant to exceed Saul, in loving kindnesses to David, he would marry (not as Saul, his Daughter to David, but) himselfe to his good peo∣ple for ever, his Kingdome should be his wise, he would be eternally theirs, so long as this world lasteth. So he spake, and so he did, per∣haps, heartily intending all good to all his good people: But no sooner did his Majesty turne aside, and give his Eare to his pernici∣ous Councell, but all was turned the cleane contrary way: To the ruine of himselfe and his Kingdome. Chap. 4. Vile and pernicious Councellours pervert their Masters minde (making shewes of much good to his poore people, the clean contrary way; To the destruction of the King and King∣dome. NO, say his Majesties most wicked, desperate and pernicious Councellours, in whose hands he is, for thus they say; That his Majestie has no Malignants about him, none that councell him, but
for the good of King and Kingdome: And that it is so, thus it may appeare to the whole world, (and so they would cast a vaile before the eyes of the multitude) First, by what his Excellent Majestie has done; and by the Acts of most transcendent Grace, which has passed his hands: Consider on them in order, and first, what he has done. There were vile Councellours set up in high places, the vilest men A. Psal. 12 8. were exalted, and then the wicked walked on every side: This his Ma∣jestie suffered to be cast into prison, and the one of them he suffered to be brought unto the Block: Besides, he suffered the prison doores to be opened, and let the oppressed go free. We will say this onely: This was marvellous in our eyes. The B. The wise man hath given a double observation upon it, and it shal suf∣fice here: The righteousnes of the upright shall deliver them, but transgres∣sours Pr. 11 6, 8. shall be taken in their owne naughtinesse. The righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked commeth in his stead. As he put the wicked downe, so, at the same time, he exalted pre∣cious A. men, and honourable indeed, he set them in high places. This was marvellous also in our eyes: And we judge not what B. the Councels were, and the intentions of the heart in setting-up those so precious men, and truly honourable, though in the multi∣tude of such Councllours there is safety; and to such Councellours Pro. 11. 14. 12. 20. there is joy: But we praise God, That the snare is broke. What snare? A great snare, the snare of the world, the faire offers thereof, its Pompe and Glory, that snare is broken. They were tempted, saith the Heb. 11. 37. Spirit, with the Glory of the world, that's certaine. If stoning could not serve the turne, nor sawing asunder neither, tempt them with the glory of the world, see what that will do? It is not possible to with∣stand that temptation, without an Almighty assistance: How have the mighty fallen here? Alas, the humble know full fell, The world knowes no other but his owne, those that love the world and his glo∣ry, and are content to live and die with it closest to the heart. If the world do conferre any glory (which is to guild gold with copper) upon the precious, and truly honourable in the world, it is because they should fall downe and serve the world, and blaspheme their God, which they will rather die then do, though they should be stoned, sawne asunder, or slaine with the sword, for they looke to be exalted in due time, and to obtaine a better Resurrection: Therefore, they will not be servants to men (mens lusts) not they; They are firmly
resolved, though they might be promoted to great honours, and have a house full of silver and gold, yet they will not pleasure man, and grieve their God. His good Subjects of Scotland, Rebels some moneths before, and A so written upon every Post and Pillar, are stiled and enacted Bre∣thren, loyall and faithfull Subjects to God and their King: The breach was made up, and a day of Remembrance commanded, and all this by his Majesties command, never such an Act of Grace! We acknowledge it, and blessed be His glorious Name, who B made up the breach, wide as the Sea; caused war to usher-in peace; gave his people honey out of that devourer; delivered his good peo∣ple there, and here, from all the expectation of the enemy, from the op∣pression of his hand, and sword of his mouth We praise His glori∣ous Majestie for all this; And we do not question how upright the Kings heart stood in that matter, because he calls his good people of England Rebels and Traitours now, for doing their duty, and much lesse (in shew, and indeed) against him, then the Scots did; and yet they did nothing but what they had warrant to do from the law of Nature and Reason, and their Book, the Kings Law-Book too. His Majesty put down the two Courts, as infamous over the Chri∣stian A world, as ever was, or is the Spanish Inquisition, the Popes truest Purgatory: for these Courts were turned against the Righteous, and with such violence and extremity, that it was justly accounted, the greatest tyranny, and feverest kinde of persecution under heaven; Whence it came to passe, that those Courts stank before David and all Israel. There the estates of men were consumed, their consciences wracked, their persons abased, and abused worse then Davids fer∣vants, yea, more cruelly then will a Mastiffe-Dog touse a poore sheep, or lug a swine: So and worse then so were the servants of the Lord toused, crapped, and lugged by the eares. In these places they said unto the soule of the Righteous, Bow downe, that we may go over, and he laid his body as the ground, and as the street to them that went o∣ver Isa. 51. There they gathered themselves together against the soule of the Righteous, and condemned the innocent bloud. I say the innocent, he was the But, and the Mark that they bended to; he that served God and feared an oath, he that lived in all good conscience, Act. 23. he was smitten on the mouth; and because he did so, even because he was upright in het: when the vilest Priests, such as made the Offering of the Lord
to be abhorted, when such as they were purged there; Not as the King of Babylon purged those two base persons, in the fire Jer. 29. 22.; but pur∣ged after the manner of the Court, which was to cleare them, whom God and His Word condemned: These Courts his Majestie hath put downe, he has taken those yokes from off the neck. He has so, and we thank His glorious Majesty for this His transcen∣dent grace, and favour to His good people evermore, Who intends B. them good, and will have good done unto them, what ever mans in∣tentions were then, or would have done since. It is cleare enough, That the Kings intentions (seduced by evill Counsels) were not to disburden his people, not to take off their yoke, but to make it yet heavier, and more to establish the foot of Pride; Nor do we judge of the heart now, or of the thoughts, transactions, or discussions of the minde then, within his inward closet, and privy chamber there: we do not judge of these secret talkings and parleys of his minde any far∣ther, then as lawfully we may, and ought to judge of them now, be∣ing cast into a faire mould, and as his Majestie has given them a true stamp, and shape ever since. His Majestie has passed an Act against the Bishops Voting in Par∣liament: and more then that too, touching that matter And this was A. a very lovely Act indeed. Indeed it was, and as equitable, as ever was any Act in the world; B. for enquire what Bishops did there? All the mischiefe they could a∣gainst the LORD CHRIST, and His hidden ones. Therefore a most equitable Act. We againe and againe thank His glorious Majestie, Whose over-ruling hand did all this: The King did not do it with a cleare intent thereby to bring glory to God, and reliefe to his oppres∣sed people, groaning under those Task-masters; for his Majestie has made a full Declaration of his minde that way; and his people un∣derstand it very well: Let the Parliament have their will in this also, let them take his Bishops (said his wicked Councell) out of the Court, and let them be taken with his Majesties favour, and Act of Grace that way: But the hand of the Philistines, said Saul: The Ar∣my of the North shall come-up (said the Kings evill Councell) and over-power the Parliament, and undo all that has been done in fa∣vour and honour of David and his Court. It is presumption to judge of the Kings intentions to be so, and so bloudy, and destructive towards his Parliament, and by consequence
to his Kingdome, when his Words and Actions were so clearly other∣wise, good, pious, and most advantagious to King and Kingdome; To iudge his intentions now argueth rashnesse, headinesse, and pre∣sumption, all three. No, it does not: For we do not iudge of thoughts, proiects, con∣trivances, B while these are the secret Talkings, as was aforesaid, and par∣leys of the minde, for this were rashnesse, and madnesse both, be∣cause they are in the dark to us, and indiscernable: But we may, and ought to iudge of them, when they are made legible by the hand, de∣monstratively known to the world in full Declarations, touching the Army in the North, and his Bishops also. There are more Acts of transcendent grace yet behinde, But I A will summe up all in this one: The King has passed an Act for the continuance of a Parliament, a fundamentall mercy, and such an Act of Grace, as never the like Act passed from any Kings hand. Yes, there has: But let that go: For we will thank God here, B who can make, a grand enemy to the Parliament, and as great a Traitour to the King and Kingdome, Digby, I meane, [not Lord now, but Nobile Portentum, a Noble Monster, in the Heathens ac∣count,] Nequita sordus imbuta Nobitia portenta, al. Mx. lib. 3. c. 5. Josh. 10. 2. an active Instrument to work-out this grace and good to the Kingdome: We care not what his intentions were, too bad, and bloudy, and so they have declared themselves; but we Praise, we Blesse, we magnifie the LORD Jehovah, Who did as great a work at that time, in our dayes, as he did in Joshuahs day, when He made The Sun to stand still upon Gibeon, and The Moon in the valley of Aiialon: VVe exalt and magnifie this God; and so we are resolved to doe while we have any being; and not to give any thanke] to the kings Councellours, and yet we will give the King his due, for we say, and shall make good what we say, had this Act been from the King, an Act of Grace, there had been grace in it: I mean, he had given grace unto it by continuing a gracious aspect upon it, and his Influence in∣to it, seeing it was not imaginable how he could, in so doing, wrong himselfe or preiudice his prerogative, for it had been good for his Kingdom (and that was the end) then it could not but be good for him. But that his People may know and be assured what grace was in that Act of continuing his Parliament, the King with-hol is all grace from it; Makes it, what he could, and to his power, headlesse, and uselesse; he takes away all life and power from it, so far as was in
his power: I beleeve the oldest man living never heard of the like, of an Act of grace made so gracelesse. And yet I think I have read of an Act somewhat like it, and that was as bloody an Act, I think, as ever was done in the world, and yet it seemed and carried the face, and obtained the opinion in the People (a little while) of an Act of grace. Thus it was, Duke D' Alva, (all the world knew what he was) had be∣sieged a Towne in the low-countreys so long, that the Inhabitants, in extremity, treate with him for their lives, he shall have a peaceable en∣trance, all the Ammunition, and all, onely the Inhabitants crave their lives: It was granted, their lives I meane, and the People accept it thankefully, as an Act of grace, for life is a precious thing. When the Conquerour (a Tyrant rather) was entred the city; he keeps the Peo∣ple pent-up still, and denies them bread, and yet tells them he keeps Covenant with them and keeps himself to the Articles of agreement: They have their lives, but they shall have no bread, for bread, that was not expressed in the Covenant: No? O monstrous! But it is boor∣lesse to cry out and dispute the matter now, otherwise I could make this good at large, as I shall by and by very briefely; That the Con∣querour granting them their lives, did, in the same grant give them bread too: But the Lord has Answered this matter by himselfe, so I will passe it over, and apply it, onely telling the Reader this first, That this Act of Grace was so gracelesse, that it rendered him o∣dious to all people after this; and did the King his master Philip of Spaine no small disadvantage too, for it lost him a little Kingdom, which neither his Sonne, nor his Sons son could ever recover againe, no not to this day; They will not be subject to him who would give them their lives but no bread to sustaine life; I will apply it (so far) as it fits to our purpose. Truly this Act of the King, which is so extolled, is but too like this  mentioned, life was granted; why then bread too, in the  grant: bread is denied a poor People, why then life is denied them, for they cannot live without bread [though I read of a maid, that did live without bread or meat, and was named Meatlesse, it is a loud lie told by a Papist amongst a thousand more after his manner] I say life here cannot be preserved, in an ordinary way, without bread [or something like it] therefore take away bread, you take away life: so the King, grants an Act, for the continuing his Parliament; an Act of grace indeed it is, which lyes in this, included in the same Act, a
grant of all things which lay in him, whereby to make the Parliament succesfull, and, by necessary consequence, himself happy, viz. his pre∣sence, the influence of his very spirits into it, his free ascent to the pas∣sing all Acts tending to the forementioned end: But his Maiesty, se∣duced by evl counsell, with drawes all this, which is as bread to life; as the Soule of a Parliament, he withdrawes all, and yet this grant, be∣fore specified, must be called an Act of grace; No, God knows, and he knowes, and all his people know, there is no grace in it at all, for he has withdrawne his gracious presence from his Parliament, and in∣fluence thereunto as aforesaid. No, his Maiesty did not willnngly withdraw himself, his Parliament A erced him to do as he did, to withdraw from the Tumults about the Court, and from the City. Take heed what you say; God, the searcher of hearts, ears us B what we say; and what was spoken in secret, is made manifest now, and that which was hid is knowne and come abroad, and the Parlia∣ments A. 8. 17. Righteousnesse touching this imputation, and the Cities in∣cency is cleared at this point, as the noone-day; therefore pray let s speake and heare Reason. Lesse cannot be said, but what his Maiesty is pleased to say; he did A not go from his Parliament but was driven; so he said again and again. If it be so urged again and again, we will grant it, he was driven, and B did not go but run; which was Sauls case: Certainly the Parliament did not drive away their King from his Court, no more then David did drive Saul from his house, but an evill councellour did it, and a∣way he goes, nay he does not go but run, for he must run whom the Divell drives, and that was a sad ease, we will note it by the way; Saul pretendes that David sought his life, and away he goes in purit af∣ter David, but when did Saul returne to his house? Good Reader marke the answer, and take heed of making that the cause of thy ght which is not the Cause, and so it fails out to thee, that thou, whose will carrieth thee from thine house, shall never returne thither againe in peace. It was so with Saul, and that is the Answer, he never returned un∣to his house in peace: I say in Peace; it is true, there is mention a great while after, that Saul after a conferrence with Davîd went home, and 1 Sam. 24. 2. 26. 25. after a blessing upon David, Returned to his place. I cannot tell where, or what that place was, perhaps some strong Fort, Castle, or the like, for war was in his heart, so long as the evill Spirit was there, and
there he was, though non-plussed then, and silenced for a time; But this is certaine, where ever Sauls house or place was, he had no peace there, for surely he never ceased from persecuting of David, till Da∣vid went to Gath; and about that time Saul heares a noice of a great Power comming against him, whither of Israelites or Philistines I cannot tell: But the sacred Text tell us plainly, That he, who ran from his house at the vill Spirits motion, and the motion of his own will, never returned againe in peace, never enjoyed quiet rest there, at home afterward. This puts me in minde of a communication be∣twixt two great persons, and a resolution thereupon: Go thou one way, and I will go another, (both their own wayes, driving-on furi∣ously towards a cursed end) so they wen on-ward, setting their face against God, and their back one to the other, but never met again. Truly it yeelds us a very sad consideration, but this onely we will say touching the King driven (they say) from his Court: There he might have rested within the armes and imbracings of his good peo∣ple, most quietly and securely there, had it liked and pleased his Ma∣jestie best: But his will seemed his best Councellour (amongst the rest we know no other reason) and he did otherwise, and most contrary to his owne rest, and quiet, egged-on, and acted no doubt, by that evill Spirit, acting most effectually, and envying evermore to Kings and people all, their rest and happinesse. So he went from his Court, and his good people, or rather was indeed, or too truly, driven thence by the instigation of his wicked Councell, and a common Adversary, as aforesaid: And now he lives as one in the land of Nod, where he never enioyed himselfe, nor one dayes rest and quiet ever since. Councels (which are carried headlong) advised his Maiesty at that time to repair unto a strong hold, [O that they had told their Master where that strong hold was, onely the Almighty God, and next, the peoples hearts] there to make war with GOD and his good peo∣ple. So war was in proposition quickly, great preparation for it then, the sweet words wete all lost, as the Proverbe sayes, turned into gall, or drawn swords. This we shall read in the next Section; where the lan∣guage of the heart, bloud and death is made legible to all the world, in the bloudiest characters. I will shut up this Section with the wise mans  2. 26. 27.  proverbs, Whose hatred i covered by deceit, his wickednesse shall be shewed before the whole congregation. Whos diggeth a pit, shall fall therei and he that rolleth a stone, it shall return upon him. A lying tongue hth thse, that are afflicted by it, and a sttering mouth ke rie. Finis. . Sect.
