G1476A R223566 99899610 154167
Timothy's Lesson: Or, A SUMMARY RELATION Of the Historical Part of HOLY SCRIPTURE, Plainly and familiarly Comprized in Metre, for the Help of Memory, and Instruction of the Ignorant. By E. G. Master in Arts, and Physician of the Hospital of St. Bartholomew, of the Foundation of Queen ELIZABETH, of the City of GLOƲCESTER. The Fourth Impression Corrected and Amended. DEUT. 11.19. You shall teach them your Children, speaking of them, when thou sittest in thine House, and when thou walk∣est by the way, when thou liest down, and when thou risest up. COLOS. 3.16. Let the Word of Christ dwell plenteously in you; teach∣ing and admonishing your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, &c. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1699.
In MOMUM. WAS Momus (trow you) whelp'd in Butcher's Stall, That he resembles so that greedy kind? For mark: the worst that is of men let fall, Lying in midst of better Fare, half pin'd, He chambers, as a bait pleasing his mind. Fie on him, fie, that he so currish lie, Should joy in that, which others do defie. Or was he of that Cur's most spiteful Brood, Which sate in Crib, keeping the Ox from meat? For he from others keeps that wholsom Food, Which (hungry Souls) they seek for with their sweat, And yet himself disdains thereof to eat. O cursed Envy! that to stray the more, Will even himself lead way unto death's door. Or rather sprang he from that hellish Hound, That welcome damned Souls to Pluto's place? He so doth triumph when ought may be found In others, that may turn to their disgrace. (O worthy progeny! O noble race!) What e're he deemed was, be sure of this, Were he a God, yet now a Dog he is. What, what a Dog? and should his snarling bay, Scare men from that the wise have healthful tri'd? No, worthy Jason held on in his way, Tho' he might seem by Sea and Land deny'd, By Bulls repell'd, by Dragons fell envied. Shall hope of Treasures earthly so inflame, And shall not heavenly much more do the same?
The Author to the Curious READER. I Leave Perfection of a Poet's Skill, (which doth with silver Rays poor Rusticks daunt To Silvester's, and to Du Barta's quill, and such as harbour where the Muses haunt; Bathing in Crystal Streams of rare Conceits, conceiting what they list of any subject, Subjecting whatsoever them delights, unto their Wit and Art, their natures object. To such leave I, the Majesty of Poetry divine: More rife is their Dexterity, their Wits more ripe than mine. There needs no Garland where the Wine is good, nor Colours, where the Substance is most pure: Sincerity by Truth hath ever stood, and shall, so long as doth the Truth endure, More Truth than Sacred Verity, no Creature can require. And who so likes Simplicity, lo here his full Desire.
THE FIRST PART Of the SUM of the HOLY HISTORY. SECT. I. IN the Beginning GOD alone, did Heaven and Earth create; He spake the Word, and it was done,Genesis. Chap. 1. as Scriptures do relate. The Earth had neither Form nor Face, the Darkness covered all, When thus he made in six days space, the Creatures great and small. The first Day he commanded Light, The Darkness to prevent: The second Day he rear'd in sight, the stately Firmament: The third, the Earth with Fruits adorn'd, the swelling Sea debars; The fourth, the Sun and Moon were form'd, with all the Glorious Stars:
The fifth, the Fish with Scales and Fins, and then the feathered Foul: The sixth, the Beasts and creeping things, and then that living Soul, Which that one God, in Persons Three, did make by Consultation, With purpose that the same should be, the Mirror of Creation. Even Male, and Female perfect man, right Holy, Wise, and Just: For he did bear God's Image then, though he were made of Dust. Thus having finish't all with speed, and blest them, and protested, That each thing made was good indeed, the seventh Day he rested. For Adam's Aid, who was alone, the Lord God formed Eve: Flesh of his flesh, Bone of his bone, and unto them did give, A Sovereign Power in Paradise, to rule by Sea and Land. And all the Creatures did rejoyce, to do what they command; And all the Fruits were theirs for meat, that in the Garden grew; Save one alone, which if they eat, Death certain shall ensue. But Eve for all that listened unto the Serpent's lies, And took and eat the Fruit forbid; yea, Adam ate likewise, And thereby thought like God to be; but for this great Offence, Poor Souls! to shame and misery they were cast out from thence.
Now wretched Man was wrapt in woe, and in his loyns his Heirs, For cursed and corrupt they go:Verse 15. yet to prevent despairs, God promised them to restore unto a State more stable, And Eve unto her Husband bore,Chap. 4. Cain and his brother Abel. Abel was slain by cursed Cain, who did his Goodness scorn,Anno mun∣di, 130. But Evah did conceive again, and godly Seth was born. SECT. II. FRom Seth did spring a Race of Men religious and upright, Yea Henoch walkt with God, and then was taken out of sight. His Grand-child Lamech did beget Noah: and then began,Anno 1056 The Sons of God their face to set, on Daughters fair of Man: Thence Giants came and mungrel kind,Chap. 6. on whom the Lord did frown, And for their sin and wicked mind, did threat the World to drown. Noah alone on Earth did live, uprightly; him God sent, And did an hundred Years them give, and twenty to repent. Mean while built Noah at his Charge, an Ark three stories high: The wicked World liv'd still at large, and dream'd that Noe did lie:
Till Fountains burst, and open stood, Heaven's windows all,Chap. 7. for rain, Which quickly caus'd a fearful Flood, for down it pours amain, And all the Earth with ruin fills;Anno 1656. Men, Beasts, and Birds must die, When as the Flood above the Hills flow'd fifteen Cubits high. Which rag'd well near a Year about, and then was Noah bidden To bring those living Creatures out, which in the Ark were hidden. And out they came, both they and theirs, four Women and four Men, The unclean Creatures all by pairs, the clean by sevens; and then, They offer'd Sacrifice,Chap. 8. God smell'd a smell of Rest; wherefore He promised though Man rebell'd to drown the World no more: And plac'd the Rainbow for a pledge and did again vouchsafe To Man, a Sovereign Priviledge above the Beasts,Chap. 9. and gave Their flesh for Food. Thus having made a Covenant of Peace, With Noah and his Sons; he bad they should Mankind increase. Of Japhet did the Gentiles spring, of Cham the Canaanite, Who curst was for uncovering his Father's shameful sight, But Sem unto the Blessed Line, was Heir, and from him came, A Race and Progeny Divine to Father Abraham.
Now all the World, in speech was one, and did to build conspire A Babel, and confusion they gained for their hire. SECT. III. THis Abraham a faithful Man, left Land and Kindred all,Anno 2008. And wandring up and down he ran where e're his God did call. From Ʋr he went to Canaan,Chap. 12. with Sara and with Lot, To settle there he scarce began but that by Famine hot, To Aegypt he was forc'd to flie, where fearing much his life, Before King Pharaoh fainingly he did deny his Wife. To Bethel he goes back again,Chap. 13. where Strife began to grow, 'Twixt Lot and him; for Wealth amain, did in upon them flow. Old Abraham, with humble Heart, to younger Lot gave place, And in distress did take his part and rescue him in chase.Chap. 14. Melchizedec did him meet and bless, but childless still he staid, Till Ishmael;Chap. 16. and that increase was but by Sara's Maid: Yet God by special Promises,Chap. 13.16.15.5.17.6. Chap. 17. himself did often tie, As Heavens Stars, and sand of Seas, his Seed to multiply.
And seal'd it with a Sacrament, to him and his Heirs Male; When solemnly he did appoint, to circumcise them all. Mean time he did him entertain,Jam. 2.23. very familiarly; Much like a Friend,Chap. 18. as was most plain, when Sodom's sinful cry Did pierce the Skies, and God down came, and if but Ten good Men Could there been found; for Abraham, the Lord had spar'd it then. So Fire and Brimstone fearfully from Heaven fell apace, And furnace-like the smoak did fly:Chap. 19. just Lot in better case, To little Zoar fled for life, where in a drunken mood, On's Daughters (having lost his Wife) he got a * cursed Brood. SECT. IV. THence Abraham went to Gerar Land,Chap. 20. where he again for fear, Deny'd his Wife, but by God's Hand, Abimelech did forbear. Long had he waited, hope was past, yet still he did believe; And God remembred him at last, and Sara did Conceive:Chap. 21. And in her old Age Isaac bare, and nurst him on her knee, And joyful Abram did not spare to make a feast; but see
This only Son, and only Heir, of Promise God Commands, To be both slain,Anno 2108 and burnt with fire and that by Abram's hand. Well: he obey'd, and call'd his Men, Wood, Knife, and some he took, On, to the place they go, and when was bent the deadly Stroke God staid his hand, and in the stead of Isaac there was ty'd, A Ram for Sacrifice. Indeed here Abraham's Faith was try'd.Chap. 22. His Son thus spar'd, his godly Care was next about to spy, For him a Wife, and therefore sware his Man's Fidelity.Chap. 24. Who full religiously perform'd the Office on him laid, And with Rebeckah soon return'd, a fair and vertuous Maid; Whom Isaac married, but still, She barren was, they pray'd: God heard, and granted all their Will,Chap. 25. and further to her said; The Babes that in her Womb did strive, were Twins and Nations twain, The younger should prevail and thrive, the elder should remain A servant: Esau was his Name, and as he Venison sought, And back again well wearied came, his Brother Jacob bought His Birth-right for a Mess of Broth, mean while was Isaac blessed, Though envious Philistines be wroth,Chap. 26. ver. 14, 15. and him with Wrongs oppressed.
When Age came on and Eyes waxt dim, then solemnly he meant, To bless his Son, requiring him, Venison for that intent. About goes Esau with his Bow, but Jacob doth prevent him; The means his Mother did him show, and cunningly present him,Chap. 7. In Esau's Clothes and Skins of Kids, unto his Father; who Mistrusts the Voice and therefore bids, come near to feel and know. With fat of Earth, and Heaven's Dew, with happy Seed and Kin, He blest him (reverend was the shew) and then came Esau in. And he with Tears and piteous Moan, the Blessing sought in vain, He came too late, alas 'twas gone, with that he beat his Brain To seek and work Revenge, and then the days (quoth he) make speed, Of mourning for my Father, when I'll slay him for this Deed. SECT. V. THen did Rebeckah forthwith call, and send Jacob away, Lest Esau should upon him fall, his bloody Vow to pay. And Isaac charg'd him (taking leave) to play a wiser part, Then Esau, who did vex and grieve, by heathen Wives his Heart.Chap. 21.
But he should to his Uncle go, and match in godly Race, And blessing should be with him; so, he went out from their face: As he in fields that night did sleep, in Haran on a Stone; By Dream he saw a Ladder steep from Heaven; and thereon The Angels passing, and above God standing all in view, The blessed Promise of his Love, with Jacob to renew. There Jacob vow'd the Lord to fear: thence on he went apace, Inquiring in the fields to hear, of Laban's dwelling place. The Shepherds shew'd him readily,Chap. 29. his Cousin Rachel there: Whom he saluted chearfully, and she could not forbear, But ran and carry'd home the News: then Laban hies to meet him, To dwell there he must not refuse, where all his Kindred greet him: A match was made, and seven Years for Rachel serve he must; But Leah in the light appears, so false was Laban's trust. Well, seven more he was content, to serve for his Beloved, And thought the time full quickly spent,Chap. 29. vers. 20. Chap. 31.38, 39. though full of Toyl it proved. God blessed Laban for his sake, but him he blest much more. Whatever Wages he did take, to him was Gain and Store.
Then Laban did envy his Wealth, yet loath to let him go, But Jacob fled away by stealth,Chap. 31. and made him (following) know The wrong he did; and both good Friends, after a chiding parted. Then Jacob in his Journey sends to pacifie hard-hearted Esau his Brother, who in Arms was then against him bent; But God prevented all the Harms, and Esau did relent. So Jacob called Israel,Chap. 32. (for God had chang'd his Name When he prevail'd at Peniel) in peace to Shechem came. Here Dinah did a gadding go and to her self brought Shame: And to the Shechemites much wo, and to her Brethren Blame. SECT. VI. THence up to Bethel had he word, to go to pay his Vow Of Holy Worship,Chap. 35. for the Lord again to Canaan now; From Padan Aram had him set; where mightily he grew In Family and Substance great: his Sons Names here ensue. Reuben, Dan, Levi, Simeon, Issachar,Chap. 29.30. Napthalin, Aser, Gad, Judah, Zebulon, Joseph and Benjamin. These Twelve were Patriarchs, whose Seed, still multiplied more,
Even to those Thousands promised so oft and long before. Judah the Royal Line enjoy'd, who for a Deed amiss, Had Tamar's Life with fire destroy'd, but that the Fault was his. Young Joseph Jacob's Joy,Chap. 37. the rest still stomached and spited, Yet Hatred he deserved least, had him his Brethren righted; For Envy they conspir'd to kill, but Reuben did perswade; Yet secretly they did him sell, to Men of Merchants Trade;Chap. 38. Who sold him unto Potiphar, where though he lived chaste, And faithfully himself did bear, yet was in Prison cast.Chap. 39. But God beheld his Misery, and gave him Wisdom great; By which he was advanced high, even next to Pharaoh's Seat. For when the King no Rest could find, of Dreams that him had past,Chap. 41. Th' ungrateful Butler then to mind doth Joseph call at last. And then he was from Prison sent, and set before the King; Where he to Pharaoh's great Content, Expounded every thing. Besides, he shew'd a ready way, the Famine to withstand, Which Pharaoh lik'd, and then did lay on him the Charge in hand. So by him was Provision made, against the time of Need:
Wherewith (to Pharaoh's gainful Trade) all Aegypt he did feed.Chap. 47. vers. 14.17.19. SECT. VII. OLD Jacob and his Sons also,Chap. 42. were pinch'd with Penury, Wherefore he charged them to go and Food in Aegypt buy. They went with Grief, and bought in Fear, not dreaming of their Brother, Nor did he Countenance them bear more kind than any other; Till when they came to him again,Chap. 45. Affection was so great, He could no longer it contain, within his Breast for heat. With weeping Eye and joyful Tongue, he then did plainly tell, He was their Brother Joseph, whom to Aegypt they did sell. The Joy of either was so much, that neither now could bear it; Their sobbing Passion was such, that Pharaoh's House did hear it. Who understanding what they were, commanded presently, With Charets, Horse, and Furniture for Jacob they should hie. So He with all his Family,Anno 2298. Chap. 46. came thither out of hand; And welcomed most lovingly, were plac'd in Goshen Land. In Goshen Land did Jacob see the fulness of his days,Chap. 47.
And in his Sons Prosperity, his fill of earthly Joys. But solemnly before his Death, he blest his Sons each one:Chap. 49. And Joseph eke gave up the Breath, e're many Years were gone.Chap. 50. Now when these Fathers both were dead, and still their Seed did grow: There rose a Pharaoh in his stead, that did not Joseph know. He Tyrant-like with heavy Hand, of Bondage prest them down,Exodus. Chap. 1. And gave the Midwives strait command, the Males to kill or drown. SECT. VIII. BOrn in these Flames was Moses mild,Anno 2428. and by God's Providence, Though cast in River Flags (poor Child) yet was he freed thence; By Pharaoh's Daughter, who did take,Chap. 2. and keep him as her own; Until he came to Man's Estate, when fearing to be known, For killing an Aegyptian; he forsook the Court and fled: And all this was by God's Decree, whose Work must now be sped. For God had heard the grievous Cry, of Hebrews sore oppressed, And Moses he meant to imploy in having it redressed.Chap. 3. And called and sent him away,Chap. 4. to proud King Pharaoh;
Requiring him without delay to let his People go. But Pharaoh did the Lord despise,Anno 2508. and asked what was he? Increasing more and more their Cries, by greater Cruelty. The Lord to tame this Tyrant stout,Chap. 5. and his own Folk to right, With Moses sendeth Aaron out,Chap. 7. to make him know his Might. They caused Blood, Frogs, Lice, and Flies, with Murrain, Scabs, and Hail; And Grashoppers and darkened Skies, all Aegypt to assail;Chap. 8. Excepting Goshen Land,Chap. 9. where dwelt God's People Israel.Chap. 10. Yet Pharaoh's Heart did nothing melt, for still he did rebel. Then was the Passover ordain'd, and with the Paschal Blood,Chap. 12. The Posts of all their Doors were stain'd, for their Safegard and Good; Lest that the Angel passing by, should smite them with the rest: For he the First-born did destroy, of Aegypt Man and Beast: Which Slaughter caus'd them dreadfully at Midnight up to start, And to entreat with woful Cry, all Israel to depart. From Aegypt then they forced went, with borrowed Jewels plenty, When they in Aegypt Years had spent four Hundred Ten and Twenty. But Pharaoh did repent the Deed, and forthwith did not slack,
With Men and Chariots to make speed again to bring them back. And to the Red-Sea them pursu'd, they passed thorow dry,Chap. 14. He followed with Courage proud, but in the midst did lie. For God affrighted Man and Horse, and made his Chariots fall; The Sea return'd with raging Force, and drowned King and all. Of this so strange Deliverance, was then a godly Song,Chap. 15. Recorded for Remembrance, and so they march't along. SECT. IX. ABout this time (the learned Judge) did patient Job endure,Job. All Mischiefs that the Devil's Grudge, and Malice could procure To Children, Servants, Goods, good Name, to Body, and to his Mind; By Fire, Sword, Whirlwinds, Botch and Blain, by Wife and Friends unkind. Who long and large Discourse had, to prove him plagu'd for sin, Whereby they did Affliction add, to Misery he was in. And to such Passions did him drive, 'twixt hearts Despair and Hope, That Flesh and Spirit did strongly strive, and scarce to Breath gave scope: But God at last, Just Job commends,Chap. 42. and doubl'd his former Weal,
And check't his three censorious Friends, but now to Israel. The Lord their God in open sight directed them the way;Chap. 13. By fiery Pillar in the Night, and shady Cloud by Day. With Angel's Food and Waters fine, from Rocks that forced Stream, He fill'd them,Chap. 15.24.16.3.17.3. yet they did repine full oft, e're that they came To Sinai; where the God of Might in Glory did appear And Israel trembled at the sight:Chap. 19. nor durst,Chap. 20. nor might come near. There did He give the Ten Commands, and other Laws did Write, For to contain them in the Bands of Holiness and Right. There did he unto Moses showChap. 26. the Tabernacle's Frame; In every Point he taught him how to make and use the same.Chap. 28. There made he choice of Levi's Tribe, the Priesthood to attend. And did their Duties all describe at large from End to End. Mean while had Israel made a Calf,Chap. 32. and grievously offended; But Moses Zeal in God's behalf, deserves to be commended: Who sharply punish'd with the Sword, about three Thousand Men, And earnestly besought the Lord, to spare the Remnant then. God granted it,Chap. 33, 34. and promised his Angel should (in Token
Of Love) them lead; and then he did renew the Tables broken. Full forty Days and forty Nights, was Moses in the Hill, Recording what the Lord indites, his Precepts, Laws and Will. Familiarly and face to face, and fasting from all Food, He waited in that Holy Place: and thence he came and stood In press of People to recite all that the Lord had said;Cap. 34.30. What time his Face did shine so bright, as made them much afraid. SECT. X. WHen as the Tabernacle now,Anno 2510. was finished and reared: And with Appurtenances due,Chap. 40. well furnished appeared. Towards Canaan the promis'd Land,Numbers. Chap. 10. that flow'd with Milk and Hony, They marched forth Band after Band, with stubborn Hearts and stony. For by the way they soon forgot Gods Mercy and his Power; And car'd not how they him provok'd to Anger every hour. They long for Flesh, they MANNA loath,Chap. 11. and back they will retire. They fret at GOD and Moses both,Chap. 14. for crossing their desire: Nor would they warned be, though they his dreadful Judgments saw
On them inflicted day by day, which liv'd not under Law. As Korah,Chap. 16. Dathan, Abiram, with thousands more among,Chap. 12. Nadab, Abihu, Miriam, and such as Serpents stung. Yet tempted they the Lord so long, and with so high an hand; That in his Wrath he swore, not one, should enter to the Land. Save Joshua and Caleb, who returning with the Spies,Chap. 14. Affirm'd the Truth that they did know, and cross'd their Fellows Lies. So wandred they in Wilderness, the space of forty Years; Till all were dead that did transgress; as by God's Book appears.Chap. 26.64. Their Sons he then did forward bring, 'gainst all that kept them back, As Sihon, Og, and Moab's King, whose Name was Balaack. Who hired Balaam them to curse, and so thought to molest them; But for himself it was much worse, for Balaam three times blest them: He and those two, and five Kings more, which were of Midian,Chap. 21.24. Were in revenge of Baal-peor, subdued, spoiled, slain.Chap. 22. Here Reuben's Tribe, and Gad also,Chap. 31. their Heritage possest, On promise they should marching go in Arms before the rest.Chap. 25.17, 18. Here Moses named every one that should the Land divide,Chap. 32. Numb. 34.
And gave a fit Possession unto each several Tribe. And now must Moses make an End, as did his Fathers all: Wherefore he did not time mispend,Deut. 31. but presently did call For Joshua, and gave him Charge, the People to conduct, Whom he by Sermons long and large,Chap. 28.29.30.32.33. divinely did instruct. Which with a sweet and Swan-like Song, in heavenly wise he ended; And blest the Tribes each one along, and forthwith he ascended Mount Nebo, unto Pisgah Top,Chap. 34. whence as he did survey, The Canaan Land, the earthly Hope, God took his Soul away,Anno 2549. To Heavens rest; and buried then, his Body none know where, When Peerless he amongst all Men, had lived sixscore Year: And yet his Eye-sight did not dim, nor Natures Forces wither; There Israel lamented him, for thirty Days together. SECT. XI. THen did the Lord call Joshua,Joshua 1. and bid him to be Strong, And trust in him who is his Stay, and boldly go along. So he the Captain sends out Spies,Chap. 2. whom Rahab safe did hide, And they return'd in joyful wise, which made them to provide
To pass with speed into the Land, at Joshua his Word,Chap. 3. The Jordan Waters back did stand, and Passage dry afford. In midst whereof in open view,Chap. 4. they did a Pillar rear, The Circumcision they renew,Chap. 5. the Manna ceased there.Chap. 6. Then set they upon Jericho,Chap. 7. and also upon Ai. But Achan's Sin did work them wo, and from the Conquest stay, The Gibeonites by Subtilty were saved,Chap. 9. but the case Of all the rest, was for to die, and give God's People place: Who cast them out, and did them kill, with a victorious Hand, For this the Sun and Moon stood still, at Joshua's Command.Chap. 10. When he had now fully possest, each several Tribe in order, And given to all Content and Rest By Lot in every Border: Religiously he did them press, a Holy League to make,Chap. 24. For him and his,Chap. 25. he did profess none other God to take: And them and theirs he did adjure to fear this God for ay. So having seal'd the Covenant sure, he pass'd by Death away.Anno 2566. Full soon had they the Lord forgot, when Joshua was dead, Then Judah had the Charge and Lot their Armies forth to lead,Chap. 1
But for their great Transgressions, and League with Canaanite, God gave them to Oppressions, of cruel Men of Might. Who spoyl'd them without Mean or End, and did them sorely grieve, Until their God did Judges send,Chap. 2. their Grievance to relieve; Against King Cushan's Tyranny,Chap. 3. stout Othniel raised he, And when fat Eglon made them cry, lame Ehud made them free. 'Gainst Sisera of Canaan, did Deborah prevail, Now Ruth obtain'd that honest Man,Chap. 4. when nearer kin did fail, 'Gainst Midian a mighty Host,Chap. 7. march'd Captain Gideon. Bloody Abimelech did boast;Chap. 9. he next would Reign or none, The proud oppressing Ammonite,Chap. 11. by Iphtah was subdued; The Philistines for all their Spite,Chap. 15. the Birth of Sampson rued. Whose matchless Strength miraculous, was over-match'd by Guile, Of Dalilah perfideousChap. 16. who wrought his Bane the while. When none amongst them rul'd as King, each what he listed did: Then Micah made a molten thing,Chap. 17. and it he worshipped. And at such time, that hainous sin, upon the Levite's Wife, 'Twixt Israel and Benjamin,Chap. 19. cost many a thousands life.Chap. 20.
SECT. XII. ELI was Judge in Israel,1 Sam. when for his Sons lewd ways, God threatned him by Samuel.Chap. 3. that he a Scourge would raise: This Samuel a righteous Man, was last of all that judged, And in his time the Kings began,Anno 2905. for then the people grudged; And being male-content and sad,Chap. 8. would have a King to Reign, O're them as other Nations had, which was to Samuel's pain. But yet the Lord did them appoint, a goodly Man and tall,Chap. 9. And Samuel did him anoint their King; his Name was Saul. A Princely Mind God to him gave, with Complements of Place; And he with Jonathan did brave His Enemies oft in Chase.Chap. 13. Yet God that him advanc'd so high,Chap. 14. from Toyl and Asses Care; He disobey'd when foolishly,Chap. 15.2. King Agag he did spare.Chap. 15. Therefore the Lord did him reject, and little David chose, Anointed Israel's King Elect,Chap. 16. when he should Saul Depose. Now great Goliah plaid his Prize,Chap. 17. but David knockt him down, The People shout with joyful Cries,Chap. 18. and give him chief Renown.
Saul bit the Lip at David's Praise, and hated him the more; Yea, sought his Life all manner ways, and chas'd him like a Boar.Chap. 19, 20. With Javelin and with threatning Sword, with Troops of Horse and Men, From House and Home, from Bed and Board,Chap. 22, 23. from Desart, Den to Den. Forced he was himself to fain, with Achish to be mad,Chap. 21. And for Defence to entertain lewd Runnagates was glad.Chap. 21. But Jonathan his faithful Friend,Chap. 18. at no time did forsake him,Chap. 19. And ever did him warning send, when Saul us'd means to take him.Chap. 20. Although for it he did engage, himself in Danger deep, For such was Saul's suspicious Rage, none might his Counsel keep. Abimelcch did give him BreadChap. 22. in his Necessity, But for it he was murdered,Chap. 22. and all his Progeny. Had David labour'd like for like, his Enemy to repay, He had both time and place to strike,Chap. 24. and Soldiers bad him slay:Chap. 26. When they were come in Cave alone, when with him fast asleep, But he the Lord's Anointed one, from harm did safely keep. And that he did both Mercy love,Chap. 25. and bloody Vengeance flee, When churlish Nabal did him move, wise Abigail did see.
Now Saul with Envy almost pin'd,Chap. 23. and driven to distress, Sought by a wretched Witch to find, some Comfort and Redress. Of which he fail'd, and in the field as desperately he fought. His Sons were slain,Chap. 31. his Soldiers yield, and gastly he besought His Armor-bearer him to kill; but he the deed abhor'd, His own Heart blood he then did spill, with his own Hand and Sword. SECT. XIII. THen David was proclaim'd and reign'd2 Sam. Anno 2945. in Hebron, Judah's King: But Ishbosheth had Israel gain'd, by Abners counselling. Long War was 'twixt the Houses both,Chap. 2. of David and of Saul, Till Abner with his new King Wroth to David's side did fall. This Abner and eke Ishbosheth,Chap. 3. were slain by Villany: But David did lament their death, and Murderers all defie, And being now established,Chap. 4. sole King of all the Land: And seeing each thing prospered,Chap. 5. that he did take in hand: He solemnly doth think it fit, to fetch the Ark more near him, But Ʋzzah's Death did hinder it,Chap. 6. God's Judgment did so fear him.
Yet afterward he brought it on, and purposed to rear, A House for God; but he would none,Chap. 7. as Nathan made appear. When he had all his Foes subdu'd, and as a Monarch reign'd, In Peace and Ease; see what ensu'd, his upright Life was stain'd,Chap. 11. With Murder and Adultery,Chap. 12. whereof though he repented, Yet was he punish'd diversly with haps to be lamented. First Absalom shed Amnon's Blood,Chap. 13. for Incest then he rose, And like a Villain armed stood,Chap. 15. his Father to depose. Achitophel that crafty Wretch had chief hand in this Matter, But Hushai did him o're-reach,Chap. 17. by Skill he had to flatter. Shimei doth curse, and rail,Chap. 19. and throw stones at him as he fled, Sheba doth now Rebellion blow, but for it lost his Head. The Peoples hasty numbering,Chap. 24. cost seventy thousand Lives,1 Kings. And lastly in his aged Years,Chap. 1. the Son a Wanton bred, Even Adoniah boldly tears the Crown from off his Head. This Prophet after God's own heart. this sweet Psalm-singing Prince, Did to his God at last depart, with Peace of Conscience.
SECT. IV. NExt him did Salomon his Son,Anno 2985. the Kingdoms Scepter sway, There never sate on regal Throne, his peer unto this day. For Wealth,1 Kings. for State, for princely Port, for Plenty and for Peace, For Wisdom rare, and great resort; which made his Fame increase. Witness his Sentence in that Case,Chap. 3. of Queans crying out of Wrongs, His Purveiance,Chap. 4. his horses Race, his Proverbs, Writings, Songs: Witness the Glorious Temple,Chap. 6. which he built for God's Great Name; The Carvings, Coverings, Hangings rich, the Treasures of the same. Witness his Prayers that excel,Chap. 8. for Words, for Zeal, for Fitness, His Offerings wonderful and well may that wise Queen bear witness. Who wondring at the comon fame, unto his Court resorted, To hear and see; and when she came,Chap. 107. loe! half was not reported. Yet Solomon who had these Mines of Wisdom and of Treasure, By many Wives and Concubines, and surfeiting in Pleasure; Was drawn from true ReligionChap. 11. and from Sincerity, To wicked Superstition, and gross Idolatry.
For which God's Judgment did begin, his Kingdom rent in twain, Judah alone and Benjamin, did to his Heirs remain. The other Tribes, in number Ten, from their Allegiance fell; Set up a King, and nam'd him then, the King of Israel. His Throne was at Samaria on which he ruled them; But Judah's Seat Imperial, was fair Jerusalem. And there did Rehoboam reign,Anno 3015 when Shishak rob'd the Temple:Chap. 12. And next him, his Son Abiam,Chap. 14. the worse for his ill Example. Then Asa, then Jehosaphat,Chap. 15.14. both good and holy Kings, For reformation; saving that,Chap. 22.43. they let alone some things. SECT. V. Kings of Israel. MEan time, in Israel, Nebat's Son,Chap. 12. King Jeroboam reigned. Who first, at Bethel and at Dan, those Calves and Priests ordained, Nadab his Son, King Baasa,Chap. 15. King Elah, and King Zimri, Did for the Crown each other slay. so likewise did King Omri:Chap. 16.
But his Son Ahab with his Wife, that cursed Jezabel, Exceeded in ungodly Life, and to such Fur fell: That good Eliah fled for fear,Chap. 17. who was by Ravens fed; Who rais'd the Widows Son most dear, who laid Baal's Prophets dead. By whom King Ahab warning had;Chap. 18. but words did naught prevail, Nor Famine,nor yet Benhadad,Verse 2. who strongly did assail Samaria:Chap. 21. yet for all that he killed Naboth just, And after got Jehosaphat,Chap. 22. to serve unto his Lust. For crossing which, poor Micaiah,Verse 27. was in the Dungeon cast, But Josaphat in Battel saw,Verse 34. proud Ahab slain at last. His Son took place when he was dead, even wicked Ahaziah, And after him was Joram Head,Chap. 1. as then did good Eliah, In fiery Chariot take his flight to Heaven;Chap. 2. and in his place, His Spirit did on Elisha light, with double Power and Grace. To work great Miracles,Chap. 4. as by the increased Oyl was proved, And by Naaman's Leprosie,Chap. 5. which strangely he removed. And by the Plenty propheed,Chap. 7. in starv'd Samaria, Which the proud Prince that said he ly'd, to his small comfort saw.
But Jehu did this Joram quell, and reigned in his stead, He slew also vile Jezebel,Chap. 9. Baal's Priests and Ahab's Seed:Chap. 10. His wicked Son Jehoahaz,Chap. 13. succeeded;Vers. 3.4. and the next Was his Son Joash:Vers. 25. either was by Aram's Armies vext. Next Joash, Jeroboam's Plea, and Place was to succeed, Now Jonas threatned Ninivy,Chap. 14.23. but they repent with speed. Now did Hosea take his Text, and Amos Prophesie, But Jeroboam dead,Chap. 15. the next was his Son Zachary. Whom Shallum slew in open fightVerse 10. and reigned in his stead, But Menahem did him requite,Vers. 14. and in his Seat succeed. Then Pekahiah, Men'hem's Son,Vers. 23. did wear the Crown until His Captain Pekah seiz'd thereon,Vers. 25. and did his Sovereign kill. Nor had this Pekah reigned long, but he receiv'd his Doom, Hoshea did revenge the Wrong,Vers. 30. and reigned in his room In his time did Salmanazer,Chap. 17. besiege Samaria strong,vers. 6. And took Hoshea Prisoner,Anno 3265. and led with him along, All Israel into Syria, where they did still remain, And planted in Samaria, of his Assyrian Train.
Whom God by Lyons did molest,Vers. 25. for their Idolatries, Which made them get an Hebrew Priest, to teach them better ways. SECT. XVI. The Kings of Judah. THus leaving Israel dispossest, the course of Story brings Us back to Judah, which was blest, with more religious Kings. There next unto Jehosophat, did his Son Joram Reign, Then Ahaziah,Chap. 8. then upstart Athalia who had slain All the Kings Sons that she could catch;Chap. 11. young Joash scap't alone, By help of Friends, who made a Match, to place him on his Throne. He reign'd and did God's House repair, and left them when he died King Amast, his hopeful Heir, then Joel prophesied. Ʋzziah Amaziah's Son,Chap. 12. was struck with Leprosie.Chap. 14. As he did reign,Chap. 15. and then begun Isaiah's Prophesie. Jotham a Prince of God's behest,Chap. 16. succeeded next Ʋzziah:Chap. 18. And after him Ahaz that beast,Anno 3260. and then reign'd Hezekiah.Chap. 18. Against him proud Senacherib,Chap. 19. sent railing Rabshekee,
Who to his cost was answered, and caus'd with shame to flee. Now was the Prophet Micak heard, and Nahum: but we find, That this good King from death reserv'dChap. 20. towards Babel is too kind. Next him, his Son Manasse reign'd,Chap. 21. a wicked cruel King,1 Chron. 33.12, 13. Until he was in Babel chain'd: but thence God did him bring. Ammon a man profanely vain, his Father worse way took, And was by his own servants slain: now preached Habakkuk.2 Kings 21.13. Then young Josiah, Ammon's Son, a worthy Prince and zealous, Made such a ReformationChap. 12. as was and will be famous. Now Jeremiah Trumpet-like cries out; and Zephaniah: But Necho's men in Battel strike, and kill good King Josiah.Chap. 23. His Son Jehoahaz the Crown obtain'd; but reign'd not long, For Pharaoh Necho put him down, and cain'd with Fetters strong;2 Kings 24 1. And plac'd his Brother in his room, Jehoiakim by name,2 Chron. 36.4. Who Babel's Vassal did become for three Years space with shame. And then rebelling brought againAnno 3389. great Nebuchadnezzar. With all his huge and warlike Train: who took him Prisoner, And bound and carried him away, with whom to Babylon,
Ezekiel and Mordecai,1 Chron. 3.16. and Daniel are gone, With other moe of Royal Seed,2 Kings 24.8. young Jechoni alone,vers. 10, 11. Was left behind in's Fathers stead: to sit on Judah's Throne; Nor sate he long but Babel doth, his Souldiers stout command, To fetch him and his Treasure both, and Chief Men of the Land. His Unkle Zedekiah plac'd,Anno 3399. was in his room, and cowned; Who likewise did rebel at last, but Babel's King so frowned,Chap. 24.17. That up against Jerusalem, the fourth time that he came,ver. 17.20. He by strong Siege so starved them,Chap. 25. that Warriours fled with shame.Verse 3.5. King Zedekiah also fled, but Chaldees quickly caught him, And that due Judgment might be had,Chap. 25. they unto Riblah brought him, And slew his Sons before his face,Verse 6. and then put out his Eyes, And chained him with all Disgrace, that else they could devise. And so to Babel they return,Anno. 3400. with Prisoners and with Prey, The Temple after that they burn, and take all thence away. Yea,Verse 8, 9. burnt the Palace fair and rich, which Solomon did build: And all the goodly Houses which Jerusalem did yield.
SECT. XVII. BEing now at Babel fast in Hold,Dantel. the finest Wits were sought,Chap. 1. Or captive Children to be school'd, and Chaldee learning taught. There Daniel among the rest, did to such Ripeness come, That when a Dream the King opprest, and Wizzards all were dumb. The Dream forgotten, he disclos'd,Chap. 2. which was an Image greatVerse 27. Of Metals different compos'd, from head unto the feet. This made the King much to admire,Verse 4, 6. him and his fellows all, Yet three were cast into the fire,Chap. 3. for that they would not fall Before his Image hugely trim: but fire could take no hold. Another Dream then vexed him, which Daniel did unfold;Chap. 4. And eke the state of future Times, Of Monarchs Crowns surprising.Chap. 7, 8, 11, 12. Of Christ precisely he divines and of the Deads arising, But Babel's King restored back,Chap. 4. from Beasts made better end, Next him reign'd Evilmerodach, even Jeconiah's Friend, To him succeded Balshazzar.Jer. 20. who in his drunken Feast, Did neither God nor's People spare,Chap. 25. for Blasphemy and Jest;
Till fingers writing on a wall, dazling his very sight, Did so his Countenance appall,Verse 8. was never man so fright. This Writing Daniel did expound unto his further pain, For even that night he was uncrown'd,Verse 30. and by Darius slain. SECT. XVIII. WHen now full seventy Years were spent,Anno 3458. in their Captivity, King Cyrus Proclamation sent, for their Delivery. Zerubbabel doth then retire,Ezra. Chap. 1. with all the Temples Treasure. And full Commission to repair the Ruins at their pleasure. But crafty Foes did plot apace, the Lord's Work to withstand,Chap. 4. By flattering Speech unto their face. and Letters under hand; Yea, Haman's Hatred cankered, had clean destroy'd them all, Had not Queen Esther ventured,Esther. Chap. 3. and sav'd them from the Thrall, Then Haggai, also Zachary,Ezra. Chap. 5. the slackness do reprove; And shortly after Malachi, their lack of Zeal and Love. At last the Temple finished, was by Zerubbabel, And Nehemi with Letters sped,Nehemia. Chap. 2. to build the Walls as well.
Which he perform'd for all the hate of Enemies prophane,Chap. 6.15. Tobiah, wicked Sanballat, and worse Samaritane. And then he kept a solemn Feast, whereat the Law was read,Chap. 4. Verse 1, 2. Chap. 8. And seal'd a Covenant with the rest, their God to serve and dread. Next Kings and Dukes, the Maccabees,Chap. 10. (as Stories do recite) Did rule them: but the Monarchies, still top't them by their Might.1 The Baby∣lonians. In such Subjection did they mourn,2 The Gre∣cians. four hundred Years, and odd, Until Messiah, Christ was born,3 The Ro∣mans. true Man and very God.
The Dukes of David's Stock, after the Return out of Cap∣tivity. 1 Jeconias, Jer. 52. 2 Shelathiel, Hag. 1. 3 Zorobabel. 4 Reza. 5 Joanna. 6 Judas Hyrcanus. 7 Joseph Primus. 8 Abner Semei. 9 Eli Mattathia. 10 Azar Mahat. 11 Nagid Artaxad. 12 Haggai Eli. 13 Maslot Naum. 14 Amos Syrac. 15 Mattathia Siloath. 16 Joseph Secundus. 17 Janna Hyrcanus. This Janna was slain by Antiochus Epi∣phanes King of Syria, who tyrannized over them, until Mattathias the high Priest arm∣ed and encouraged his Sons against him; who drave him out of the Countrey, and successively reigned in his room.
The Princes and Kings of the Family of the Maccabees. 1 Judas Macchabeus the Son of Mattathias, reigned—5 years. 2 Jonathan an other Son—19 years. 3 Simon a third Son—8 years. 4 Johannes Hyrcanus—31 years. 5 Aristobulus his Son—1 year. 6 Alexander Janneus—27 years. 7 Alexandra his Wife—9 years. 8 Hyrcanus her Son succeeded, but Aristo∣bulus his younger Brother rebelled and made War against him: wherefore Hyr∣canus sent Embassadors to Pompey the Ro∣man Captain for Aid. Pompey came to Je∣rusalem, subdued the Rebels, gave the Go∣vernment and Priesthood to Hyrcanus, and carried Aristobulus with his two Sons Alex∣ander, and Antigonus Captives towards Rome. Alexander escaped by the way, and returned, and got part of Galilee; but was taken again by Gabinius, and afterward put to death at Antioch by Scipio the Father-in-law of Pompey. Antigonus was set at liber∣ty by Julius Caesar, after the Battel between him and Pompey. But coming into Jewry, he dealt cruelly with his old Uncle Hyrca∣nus the high Priest, cutting off his Ears, and banishing him into Parthia, for which Cause he was taken again, and Executed at Antioch, by Antony, Herod's Lieutenant in Jewry.
Herod also sent for Hyrcanus out of Par∣thia, and put him to death, and so came the Family of the Maccabees fully to an end, and the Kingdom of Jewry was established to Herod and his Heirs. The Posterity of Herod. THE Kingdom or Province of Jewry was given by Julius Caesar to Antipater of Idumea the Father of Herod, in recom∣pence of the faithful and good Service which he did in Aegypt, in the time of his Wars and Dangers there. 1 Herod the Son of Antipater, called He∣rod the Great, was made King by the Senate of Rome, and reigned 37 years. He pulled down the Temple, that was built after the Captivity, and built another after the pat∣tern of Solomon's, wonderful rich and stately. He put to death Aristobulus and Alexander his Sons, upon suspicion of Treason: in his thirtieth Year was Christ Jesus born. 2. Archelaus another of his Sons ruled Judea nine years. 3. Herod Antipas another Son, governed Galile; he beheaded John Baptist. 4. Philip another Son, governed Ituria. 5. Herod Agrippa, the Son of Aristobulus, who killed James, and was eaten up of Worms, Acts cap. 12. Agrippa his Son (mentioned with Bernice his Sister, Acts 25.) being a Child, was carried into Syria, and the Romans took the Government of Jewry again into their own hands, as in former time.
A Brief Supputation of the Years and Times from the Creation of the World,The Age of the World unto the Birth of Christ: Collected out of Junius, according to the Scriptures. Gen. 5. ADam being 130 years old be∣gat Seth— 130 Seth at 105 years old begat Enosh— 235 Enosh at 90 begat Kenan— 325 Kenan at 70 begat Mahalaleel— 395 Mahalaleel at 65 begat Jared— 460 Jared at 162 begat Enoch— 622 Enoch at 65 begat Methushelah— 687 Methuselah at 187 begat Lamech— 874 Lamech at 182 begat Noah— 1056 Noah at 502 begat Shem— 1558 In his 500 year he begat Japhet, for thus Junius readeth it out of the Hebrew (Brother to Japhet the El∣der,) Gen. 10.21. Shem at 100 years old old begat Arpachshad — 1658 This being two years after the Flood, (which came in Noah's six hundreth year) it followeth that he was begotten in the five hundred
and second year of Noah, Gen. 11. verse 10. Gen. 11 1693 —Arpachshad at 35 begat Shelah 1723 —Shelah at 30 begat Heber. 1759 —Heber at 35 begat Peleg. 1787 —Peleg at 30 begat Reu. 1819 —Reu at 32 begat Serug. 1849 —Serug at 30 begat Nahor. 1878 —Nahor at 29 begat Terah. Terah at 70 began to beget Chil∣dren (saith Junius) and at 130 begat Abram— This plainly appeareth, for Terah was 205 years old when he died in Haran, Gen. 11.32. and Abram going out of Ha∣ran, shortly after was but 75. Gen. 12.4. Now deduct the Son's Age out of the Fa∣thers, and there remaineth 130. to Terah at Abram's Birth. 2108 Abraham at 100 years begat Isaac. 2168 Isaac at 60 begat Esau and Jacob. 2293 Jacob being 130 years old, goeth down in∣to Aegypt, Genesis 47.9. 2315 Jacob died 17 years after his coming into Aegypt, Gen. 47.28. 2368 Joseph died 53 years after his Father Ja∣cob, Gen. 50. 2428 Moses was born 60 years after the Death of Joseph. 2508 Moses was 80 years old when he stood be∣fore Pharaoh, Exod. 7.7. 2510 The Tabernacle was reared the second year after, Exod. 40.17. 2549 Moses died 40 years after the departure out of Aegypt, and 39 after the Taberna∣cle erected, Deut. 1.3.
Joshua died 17 years after Moses. 2566 Othniel died 40 years after Joshua. 2606 Ehud died 80 years after Othniel. 2686 Deborah died 40 years after Ehud. 2726 Gideon died 40 years after Deborah. 2766 Abimelech usurped 3 years. 2769 Tola died 23 years after Abimelech. 2792 Jair died 22 years after Tola. 2814 Iphtah died 6 years after Jair. 2820 Ibzan died 7 years after Iphtah. 2827 Elon died 10 years after Ibzan. 2837 Abdon died 8 years after Elon. 2845 Sampson died 20 years after Abdon. 2805 Eli died 40 years after Sampson. 2905 Samuel succeeded to the time of Saul. Saul began his Reign, and reigned alone, and with Samuel 40 years. 2905 David reigned 40 years. 2945 Solomon reigned 40 years. 2985 Rehoboam reigned 17 years. 3025 Abiam reigned 3 years. 3042 Asa reigned 41 years. 3045 Jehosaphat reigned 25 years. 3086 Jehoram reigned 4 years after his Fathers Death; having been made Viceroy twice in his Father's life-time. First in his se∣venteenth year, as appeareth, 1 King. 22.51. compared with 2 King. 1.17. 3111 And again, in his 22 year, as appeareth 2 Kings 3.1. compared with cap. 8.16 Athaliah reigned 6. 3115 Joash reigned 39 year. 3121 Amasiah reigned 29 years. 3160 In his seventeenth year (or the fourth of Jeroboam King of Israel) there was a Conspiracy against him, and he fled to
Lachish, and lived there a banished Man 11 years. Ʋzziah his Son being in the mean space made King by the common people, 2 Kings 14.21. See Junius his Note on the place. Ʋzziah reigned 52 years. 3177 About this time began the Greek Olym∣piads, by which they made a Computation of all memorable Matters. It was a Game instituted by Hercules, on the Hill Olympus in Greece, which was held in the beginning of every fifth Year, and continued five days with great Solemnity, and Concourse out of all Countries. 3229 —Jotham reigned alone 15 years. 3244 —Ahaz reigned 16 years. 3260 —Hezekiah reigned 29 years. 3289 —Manasse reigned 55 years. 3344 —Ammon reigned 2 years. 3346 —Josiah reigned 31 years. 3377 —Jehoiakim reigned 11 years. 3388 Jeconiah reigned three months, and was carried captive to Babel, 2 Chron. 36. 3399 —Zedekiah reigned 11 years. 3425 From Zedekiah to the Exaltation of Jehoia∣kim, 2 Kings 25.30.—26 years. In Sum. From the Creation of Adam, to the Flood, are — 1656 years. From the Flood to the death of Joshua, are — 910 years. From Joshua to the death of Eli, are — 339 years. From Eli to the Deportation of Jeconias, are — 473 years.
From the Captivity of Jeconias to the Edict of Cyrus for their Deliverance (promised Jerem. 25.11. and performed in the first year of his Reign) are—70 years.Anno 3458. From the Edict of Cyrus, beginneth the first of Daniel's 70 weeks. These 70 weeks are to be expounded as the Sabbaths, or Weeks in the year of Ju∣bile, Levit. 25.8. and continue in the whole — 490 yeare. These are divided by Gabriel the Angel into three parts, Dan. 9.25. First he appointeth 7 Weeks, or a Sab∣bath of Weeks, or a Jubile of 49 years, for the building of the Temple, and resto∣ring of the pure Worship of God. Secondly, he appointeth 62 Weeks (which contain 434 years) for repairing of the City, and building the Walls. And these begin with the Commission of Nehemiah, (from Darius, Artaxerzes Longimanus) Neh. 2.9. and reach unto the last Week in which Messiah began to preach. Thirdly, he speaketh of the last Week, and divideth it into two parts. 1. In the first part, and midst of it, or in the fourth year, he saith that Messiah shall abolish the Sacrifice and Oblation: namely by offering up himself once for all, Heb. 10.14. Which is more plainly expres∣sed, Dan. 9.26. where he is said to be cut off, or Crucified and delivered to Death. But nothing to him, that is, Death shall not prevail over him, but that he shall make good his Judgments upon a rebellious and gainsaying People. For it is said, (He shall
destroy the City, and the Holy Things.) or the Temple; and that with such Severity, as if a flood of Wrath and Judgment swal∣lowed up all. These 69 weeks and a half week con∣tain 487 years, which fall out just, by this Account From the Edict of Cyrus to the Re-edi∣fying of the Temple,Ezra 6.15.7.12 Anno 3507. and the return of the People, by the Command of Artaxerxes, the whole time of Ezra his Story, are 49 years. From the Temple finished,Anno 3577. to the Repai∣ring of the City Jerusalem, and the end of Arsanes his Reign; the time of Nehemia's Story, — 70 years. From thence to the Death of Alexander the Great, are — 12 years. Alexander died in the first year of the 114 Olympiad, and Christ was Crucified the last year of the 202 Olympiad. Which 89 Olympiads contain 356 years, and so is the Sum 487 fully made up. The latter part,Anno 3945. or other half of the week, is referred unto the Revelation of the New Testament, cap. 11.3. where it is said that the two Witnesses shall Prophesie, 1260 days, or 42 months; which make up three years and a half: and so the full number of the 70 weeks.
THE SECOND PART SECT. I. OF Abram's Seed and David's Line directly Christ descended:Mat. 1. Luke 3. So have th' Evangelists Divine by Scripture left commended. Before him was an Herald sent, his Coming to proclaim: Who cry'd in Wilderness, Repent,Mat. 3. the Paths of God make plain. His Clothing was of Hair and Skin, his Meat of no great Cost, And for reproving Herod's sin,Mat. 14. his Head at last he lost. This was that John the Baptist whose Birth, Name and Office high, The Angel Gabriel did disclose,Luke 1. to his Father Zachary. Who thought it not to be believ'd,Verse 18. and for it was struck dumb, Till old Elizabeth had Conceiv'd and all to pass was come. To Mary eke of Nazaret,Verse 26. a Virgin Pure and Chast,
With Salutation high and great, this Gabriel did haste. Shewing that she must Mother be, God's dear Son forth to bring, The Holy Ghost by high Decree, her overshadowing. And at that very time betroth't she was to Joseph Just: When being found with Child,Mat. 1. he thought that part with her he must. But then an Angel warned him by Dream to keep her still, For that she had Conceiv'd within, was God's own Work and Will, At Bethlem she was brought to Bed, and Jesus Christ was Born, And in a Manger swaddeled,Luke 2. as one cast out to scorn: But heavenly Angels made him known to Shepherds, forthwith they Found out the Babe, as had been shown, and publish't it with Joy. Then was he Circumcis'd and Nam'd, and (as the Law indented) Brought to the Temple, fitly fram'd, and to the Lord presented. Where Holy Simeon did him bless, and with a Song embrace him: And aged Ann, a Prophetess, preach't publickly to grace him. Yea, Eastern Wisemen came from far, and did rich Treasures bring, Directed by a special Star, to find out Judah's King. Who worshipped, and warned were by God in their return,
To take good heed, and not come near, King Herod who did burn With Wrath and Envy 'gainst this new∣born greater King of Jury, And being mocked sent and slew the Infants in a Fury. But God to Joseph warning gave, to Aegypt thence to fly, The Babe and Mother, there to save, from Herod's Cruelty. King Herod dead, then hasted he to Israel again: But turn'd aside to Galilee, because his Son did reign. And all this was for to acquite the Prophesies of old, From Aegypt and a Nazarite, to come he was foretold. SECT. II. AT twelve Years old with Doctors he in Temple doth dispute;Luke 2. The Hearers all amased be,Vers. 46. his Mother is also mute. At thirty Years he was by John Baptiz'd in Jordan, and Proclaimed God's Beloved Son,Mat. 3. while Heavens open stand. To Wilderness then was he led,Mat. 4. and fasted forty Days: The Devil there he vanquished, though tempted many ways. And so, his Ministry of Weight, he closely sets about:
He chuseth Twelve Apostles straight,Mat. 10. Luke 10. and also sends them out: And seventy more, by two and two, he sent with like Command, To Preach, to Heal, and to Subdue the Devils that did withstand. To quicken them, the more, he did part of his Glory shew, Being on the Mount transfigured into an heavenly Hew.Mat. 17. Nor was he idle,John 2.14. Luke 19.45. but did purge, the Temple first and last, And still he did Repentance urge as up and down he past. At Nazaret he took his Text in Esay's Prophesie:Matt. 13. Whence hardly scaping,Luke 4. he did next to Capernaum hie. There Satan shew'd his discontent, but strongly was cast out. Unto the great Astonishment, of all that stood about. He taught a Doctor of the Law,Matt. 4. John 3. a Lesson new and strange. In the Woman of Samaria he wrought a wondrous Change.John 4. Matt. 5. He made a Sermon on the Mount, most heavenly and large. Nine blessed Sorts he did recount, and press the Preachers Charge. The Laws of God he likewise there did perfectly Expound, He taught them how to pray,Matt. 6. and where and gave them Precepts sound. For practice of True Piety, and taking heed also,
Of Cares and of Hypocrisie, and many Duties moe, Which uttered were in Parable,Matt. 6. verse 26. Christ's Parables. or in plain Speeches brought, Each Word and every Syllable, with Power upon them wrought. By Builders. (Mat. 7.24. Mat. 21.22. Luke 14.28. Bridegroom. (Mat. 9.15. cap. 22.2. cap. 25.1. Brides. (Mat. 6.26. cap. 10.29. cap. 23.37. And Bread. (Mat. 15.26. cap. 7.9. John 6.48. By Beasts. (Mat. 8.20. cap. 7.6, 15. cap. 12.34. Thieves. (Mat. 24.43. Luke 10.30. John 10.1. Spirits unclean. (Mat. 12.27. & verse 47. By Servants. (Mat. 6.24. & 18.31. & 24.46. Lu. 17.7. Shepherds. (Mat. 18.12. Jo. 10.11. Mat. 9.36. & 25.33. Salt. (Mat. 5.13. Luke 14.34. Mark 9.49. And Seeds. (Mat. 13.3. cap. 17.10. cap. 13.24. & v. 31. By Net. (Mat. 13.47. New Cloth and Wine. (Mat. 9.16. & verse 17. By Light. (Mat. 5.14, 15. & 73. & 6.22. John 8.12. And Leven. (Mat. 13.33. & 16.6. Feasts. (Luke 14. verse 12. verse 8. verse 16. And Friends. (Luke 11.5. & 16.9. By rich Men. (Luke 12.16. & 16.1.19. & 18.10. Trees. (Mat. 7.17. & 12.33. & 15.13. & 21.19. — & 26.32. Luke 13.6. And Treasure. (Mat. 6.19. & 12.35. & 13.34.52. — & 25.14. By Children. (Mat. 11.16. & 18.3. & 24.28. Lu. 15.11. Women. (Mat. 12.50. & 24.41. Luke 15.8. Ways. (Mat. 7.13. John 14.6. And Vines. (Mat. 21.33. & 20. 1 John 15.1. he taught them out of measure, Deep Mysteries which long lay hid, which he from Heaven brought
And by strange Miracles he did confirm what he had taught. SECT. III. AT Cana he did at their need,Christ's Miracles. John 2. Matt. 14. turn Water into Wine, And with five Loaves five Thousand fed. by his great Power Divine. Another time four thousand Men,Matt. 15. with seven Loaves he filled. He walked on the Sea,Mat. 6.26. & 15.32. and when it rag'd, the Waves he stilled. Cood sight he gave to many blind, Mat. 9. & 12. & 20. Mark 8. John 9. And Speech unto the dumb, Mat. 9.32. & 12.22. Mat. 7.32. The lame, their Limbs do firmly find, Mat. 12.10. Luke 13.11. John 5.8. The deaf to Hearing come. Mark 7.32. He healed Sicknesses long bred. Mat. 4.24. & 8.6.14. & 9.20. & 14.26. Even foul and leprous Evils, Mat. 8.3. Luke 17.12. Yea more, he raised up the dead, Luke 7.12. Joh. 11.1. & 5.21. Mark 5.41. And dispossest the Devils. Mat. 8.29. & 9.31. & 17.15. Mark 9.20. Yet for all this he was not free, but had Controllers many, To carp and quarrel, pry and see, if fault they could find any.Mat. 26.2. Cap. 22.35. John 8.6. Among the rest the Sadducees, with those of Herod's Train,
The Scribes also and Pharisees did ever more remain His deadly Enemies, and did seek to trap him in a Snare, By crafty Questions, rough or meek, what way, they did not care. Mat. 19.3. & 22.16.35. Mat. 8.11. Luke — 10.25. & 11.15. But yet his hour was not come, he still preach't painfully, And them bequeath'd a heavy Doom,Matt. 23. for their Hypocrisie. Jerusalem her fearful State,Matt. 24. he did with Grief foresay, The manner eke he did relate, of the last Judgment-day. But comforteth his chosen Ones, with spiritual Consolation, As sweetly may be seen in John's divine and long Relation.John 14.1, 16, 17. And so to Bethani he went, where Simon him received; And Mary's Box upon him spent,Matt. 26. dissembling Judas grieved. Then was the Passover prepar'd, and Judas pointed out, A Traitor to his Sovereign Lord: and then he went about, A work of Grace, a Sacrament, a Supper to ordain, A Seal of Love, a Testament, that should with his remain: Thence went he to Mount Olivet as was his use to pray, Of scattering and of Scandal great, he told them by the way.
SECT. IV. MEan while did Priests a Council call, and did his Death conspire, They hired Judas in their Hall, to work them their desire: Who promis'd to effect it so, as that they should not miss; With him their Captain, on they go, their Token is a Kiss. As Christ in Garden praying was, with Sighs and Groans most deep, That fearful Cup to have it pass, the rest opprest with sleep: In comes this rude and bloody Rout, which Peter could not bear, But drew his Sword and laid about, and cut off Malchus Ear; Which Jesus heal'd,John 18. and to their Will, he yields though at his words, They first gave ground and backward fell,Verse 6. though arm'd with Clubs and Swords. The poor Apostles fly for fear,Matt. 26. yea,Verse 56. Peter thrice denied His Master;Chap. 27. Judas doth despair and hang'd himself and died.Verse 5. To high Priests-Hall they led him then, and witness false suborned: Spat in his Face,Matt. 14. and by their Men, he was both beat and scorned. Then did they him to Pilate send,Matt. 27. where being found most clear, To free him Pilate did intend, and that the Jews did fear.
And then began with Might and Main, tumultuously to cry, To let loose Barabbas again,Luke, 23. and Christ to Crucifie. Nor were the common Souldiers slack,Matt. 27. to strip him of his Weed, A Scarlet Robe put on his Back, and in his Hand a Reed. And on his Head a Crown of Thorns, then do they bow the Knee. So, on him having spent their Scorns, to Golgotha goes he, They forced Simon by the way, to help him bear his Cross, On which they did his Hands display, and nail, without remorse: Betwixt two Thieves they did him place, and gave him Gall to drink, They shew'd him all the vile disgrace, that Heart of Man could think: Thieves, Pharisees, Priests, Passers by,Mat. 27.38. Luke 23.34. all scoff and wag and Head, All which he bare most patiently, till all was finished. Then rent the Temple vail in twain,Matt. 27. the Stones did cleave asunder. The Graves did ope, the dead again, did rise and walk with wonder. The Earth lay trembling, and the Sun abash't in darkness bode, And then cry'd the Centurion,Luke 23. Matt. 27. this was the Son of God. His Body Joseph did take down, and lap in Linnen sweet, And in a new Tomb of his own, did bury it as was meet.
The Priests his Resurrection fear'd and therefore took good heed, To keep him sure with Watch and Ward, and seal'd the Tomb with speed. But he the third Day did arise,Matt. 28. as he had them foretold, Then did the Priests, to publish lies, corrupt the Guard with Gold. SECT. V. CHRIST being Risen, did appear, and charged the Eleven, To Preach and Baptize every where, by warranty from Heaven. And purposing to furnish them, with Knowledge, Tongues and Art, He bids them from Jerusalem,Chap. 1 in no wise to depart. Till Promises performed were; which said; out of their sight, A Cloud to Heaven did him bear, and two in Garments white, Did check their gazing, and fore-show his coming back again. Then to the City back they go, where all as one remain In Prayer and Request to God: there Pe er doth propose To fill the number that was od; the Lot Matthias chose. Upon the day of Pentecost,Chap 2. in cloven Tongues like fire, From Heaven high the Holy Ghost, th' Apostles did inspire.
Then did they in strange Tongues report the wondrous Works of God, Astonish't was therewith each sort of Strangers that abode Within the City; others mook't, but Peter took their part, And by his Sermon soundly knock't,Chap. 3. three Thousand at the Heart. Then John and he together joyn'd,Chap. 3. and heal'd the Creeple lame, To Prison though they were confin'd, yet were they freed for shame. To preach the Truth they were all bold,Chap. 4. and many Wonders wrought, Nor would they be by Priests controll'd though oft in danger brought. For they in suffering did rejoyce, and God sent Help at need; The Hypocrites at Peter's voice,Chap. 5. were suddenly struck dead. Then did they for poor Widows moan,Chap. 6. seven honest Deacons chuse, Of which was blessed Stephen one,Chap. 7. who martyr'd was by Jews. Saul was consenting to this deed,Chap. 8 and with his threatning sore, Scattered th' Apostles far and wide, but God's Word grew the more. By Philip in Samaria, with Power it was taught, And into Aethiopia, 'twas by th' Eunuch brought: Damascus succoured many a Saint; which Saul no sooner found, But to the Priests he made Complaint, for power to bring them bound.
And quickly sped: but see a change, this hot blood-sucking Saul, By Vision heavenly and strange, became bold-preaching Paul. At Joppa Peter rais'd the dead,Chap. 10. and did the Gospel plant, And in Caesarea he sped, Captain Cornelius want. At Antioch the Word was spread,Chap. 11. by Preachers there disperst, Who truly following Christ the Head, were there call'd Christians first. Now Herod stormed:Chap. 12. James was slain, and Peter prisoned fast: An Angel loosed Peter's Chain, Worms eat the King at last. SECT. VI. BUt Paul (call'd Saul) surpast them all, in Patience and Pains-taking: To preach the Word to great and small, he evermore was waking; By Day, by Night, by Sea, by Land, by Pen, and eke by Mouth, Though Perils great were oft at hand, yet publish't he the Truth: Four special Journeys did he make, in lesser Asia one, And twice he cross'd theor Mare Aegeum. Grecian Lake, and then to Rome is gone. With him also the Holy Ghost,Chap. 13. set Barnabas apart. Their Charge was in the heathen Coast, the Gentiles to convert.
From Antioch they first set out, and unto Paphos came: Where Sergius to the Faith was brought, and Elimas to shame, Then in Pisidia did he preach, and in Iconion, He stayed long, and still did teach,Chap. 14. till Stirs cause him be gone. Thence did he unto Lystra flee,Chap. 14. and there he heal'd the Lame,Verse 11.19. For which, a god, then ston'd, but he, thence back to Antioch came. Th' Apostles at Jerusalem,Chap. 15. did now a Council call, A false Opinion to condemn which did the Church befal. A second Journey they intend, but John Mark doth divide them: Barnabas doth to Cyprus bend, but Paul and Sylas hide them. Through Syria and Silicia, and with them they consort Young Timothy, of whom they have,Chap. 16. a special good Report. To Macedonia by night, they called were and sent, The Devil there gives God his Right,Vers. 17. there Lydia doth repent, And eke the Jaylor: forthwith they to Thessalonica moved, Thence to Berea,Chap. 17. where they joy to see their preaching proved. In Athens next did Paul dispute,Chap. 18. and thence to Corinth came,Verse 3. Where he with Aquila did sute, and Crispus Christian frame.
There Gallio doth shift his hand though hardly Jews complain, So back he goes to Syria and to Antioch again.Verse 22. SECT. VII. THen did he his third Journey hast, towards Graecia once more. Through lesser Asia he past, as he had done before. At Ephesus he made some stay, for there the Word prevailed, There was Apollo shew'd the way,Chap. 19. and there Demetrius railed. Philippi last he visited, and thence he sailed back, To Troas; where he rais'd the dead and after did not slack, Unto Jerusalem to come; yet sailing thither-ward,Chap. 20. The planted Churches all and some to see, he had regard. (For in his Journies as he went) he preach'd and Churches planted, And coming back, was diligent for to supply what wanted. He did Confirm them, and Ordain Elders in every place, With Fast and Prayer, and then again commend them to God's Grace. At Ptolemais one day they bide, and to Cesarea walked, Where Philip's Daughters prophesi'd, and Agabus fore-talked Of Paul his Bands and Sufferings great,Chap. 21. but he was naught dismai'd
To suffer Death (though they intreat) he ready was he said: So, up he went, and being there made to them full relation; With Praise to God they gladly hear the Gentiles strange vocation. To please the Jews, they did advise to purifie him there, But in the Temple Stirs arise, and like to cost him dear. Had not the Captain ceas'd the strife, and by his great Friendship, Account he rendred of his Life, and Faith, and scap't the Whip. Then was he brought before the Priest,Chap. 22. and smitten, but the Fray, 'Twixt Sadducees, Scribes, and the rest, hindred the Plea that day. Then was he unto Felix sent,Chap. 23. his Answer there to make, Thither also the high Priest went, and did Tertullus take: The Orator, to plead their Case;Chap. 24. but nothing yet they gain'd. Till Festus came in Felix place, before him being raign'd, And King Agrippa:Chap. 25. he thinks well to yield him up in Bands: But Paul to Caesar did appeal,Chap. 26. and so escap'd their Hands. To Italy then was he bound, with a Centurions Guard: But Perils great on Sea they found,Chap. 27. the like hath scarce been heard. Tost up and down the Ship at last,Chap. 27. stuck fast within the Sand:
And there was all to pieces dasht: yet all came safe to Land, At Malta:Chap 28. where the Viper quick, maid the Barbarians quail, Paul scap'd the Danger, heal'd their sick, and thence to Rome did sail. Where he arriving was by Jews, both met and entertained, He told the Brethren joyful News, and two Years there remained In his own House, but guarded by a Souldier of the Train, Until that Nero cruelly, did cause him to be slain. SECT. VIII. AS Paul in preaching got the Prize, so John did mount most high, God's Holy hidden Mysteries,Revelation. and Secrets to descry. Who, in the Spirit, on the Lord's Day, in Patmos banished, Wrote Words divine, and blest are they which understand and read. First, to the seven Churches he sends healthful Salutation,Chap. 4. Then sets he out God's Majesty and Book of Revelation.Chap. 5. But seven Seals this Book did close, and none could be found out Worthy the Seals for to unlose, till came the Lyon stout Of Judah's Tribe, the Lamb once slain, he every Seal did open,
And each Seal drew as in a Chain, some strange and special Token. The first reveal'd a Horse milk white, (the Gospel's Speed and Power) The second red,Chap. 6. and did delight by bloodshed to devour. The third was black, and notice had of Plague and Famine fell, The fourth Horse then full pale and sad, did Antichrist foretel, The fifth Seal open'd did bewray, Saints Souls that had been killed; Which under Heavens Altar lay, till were the Number filled. The sixth unsealed, there were seen most fearful Signs and Wonders:Chap. 7. But God seal'd (spite of Satan's spleen) twelve times twelve thousand Numbers: Last, opening the seventh Seal, loe Angels seven attend,Chap. 8. Before the Lord,Chap. 11.15. and they reveal the World's State to the end.Chap. 8. These Angels seven Trumpets had, but each in order blows, And for the World would be so bad, denounced nought but Woes. SECT. IX. THen mightily with glorious Look,Chap. 10. Christ Jesus is revealed, And in his Hand a little Book, but open and unsealed. This Book Saint John did take and ate, and it th' Estate contained,
Of God's Church present, and of that her Glory which remained. For present state, she never wants, the preaching of God's Spell, Two Candlesticks,Chap. 11. two Olive Plants, two Witnesses this tell. And though she cloath'd be with the Sun, and on the Moon do tread; Yet Wars against her are begun, by Foes that make her dread: And first the Dragon caus'd her flie,Chap. 12. into God's Wilderness, But Michael from Heaven high, his Fury doth repress. Then did a Beast make War on her,Chap. 13. seven headed, and ten horned. And after him there did appear another Beast adorned. Like to the Lamb, with Horns but two yet Dragon-like he spake, And did what the first Beast could do, compelling all to take His Mark upon their Fore-head: yet the Lamb had thousands still, On Earth,Chap. 14. that him with Praises greet, signed to do his Will. SECT. X. NOr doth he Babylon forget,Chap. 14. th' Idolatrous drunken Whore, Three Angels he against her set, and after seven more; The first, by preaching to descry. the next, to shew her Fall,
The third doth Torments notifie, bequeath'd her Lovers all. Those seven, seven Vials had,Chap. 19. full of the Wrath of God, Which they pour'd out as they were bad on all the Earth abroad.Chap. 16. Unto the ruin of the Beast, and of the Whore of Rome:Chap. 17. That golden purple Antichrist; for this her heavy Doom, Kings of the Earth, and Merchants proud,Chap. 18. take up a Lamentation: But Holy Saints sing Praises loud, for Churches Preservation, Unto the Conquerous of Fame,,Chap. 19. that cloath'd is with the Word, And bears on Thigh, a mighty Name. and in in his Mouth a Sword: Who summoned triumphantly, to his victorious Feast, The Fowls that by mid-heaven flie, as for his Foe, the Beast, He with the Prophet false were cast into the Brimstone Lake: The Sword devoured all the rest, that part with him did take. And then the Devil that Dragon stout,Chap. 20. that Serpent old (once chained, A thousand years, and then let out, he fiercely rag'd and reigned, With Gog and Magog's armed Strength,Chap. 20.9. whom God consum'd in ire,) The Devil (I say) was cast at length, in Lake of Brimstone fire. And with him all the damned Race: for God comes on his Throne,
A dreadful Judge, before whose Face, both Heaven and Earth are gone, And Hell, and Grave, and Se, and Land, deliver up their dead; Who all before the Judge do stand, and Books are opened; As they have done, Doom doth begin, his Work each one commendeth; The wicked out, the godly in, and so the Session endeth. SECT. XI. NOw doth Saint John lively describe, the Church her glorious State, Wife of the Lamb, th' espoused Bride, Christ Jesus heavenly Mate: Who was found worthy to be clad,Chap. 19. in pure and bright Aray: And was exhorted to be glad, against her Marriage day. Jerusalem New, Holy, Great, from Heaven down descending,Chap. 21. God and the Lamb there hold their Seat, it lightning and defending. The Form it is each way four square, the Matter Gold and Pearl, The Citizens more noble are, than earthly Lord or Earl, Twelve Gates there are for Entrance wide, the Porters Angels stout, A Wall most high on every side, doth compass it about. The weight of Glory there reserv'd, can no Man's tongue impart,
Eye hath not seen, Ear hath not heard, nor enter can Man's Heart. There is no Sorrow, Pain nor Care,Chap. 22. no want of Cloth or Food, No Filth, no Darkness, Curse, nor Fear, No want of any Good. There is of Life the Tree and Spring, the Store-house of all Treasures: There Saints triumph, there Angels sing, in Paradise of Pleasures. There lives our Head, let us not slack, but ever watch and pray: Our Saviour will come quickly back; even so, come Lord away. Sine fine sit Laus Deo.
Certain Brief Notes collected out of the late and approved Wri∣ters, for the better Understan∣ding of the Book of the Re∣velation. SAINT John received and wrote this Apocalyps, or Revelation of the Mysteries of God, when he was in Patmos. Patmos is an Island, lying in the Aegaean or Graecian Sea, which divideth Asia from Europe, whither he was banish∣ed by Domitian the persecuting Emperour of Rome, about the Year 96. The seven Churches to which he wrote were seven famous Cities of Asia the lesser, and Greece, where the Gospel was first planted. The Seven Seals. THE first is referred to the times of the Primitive Church, wherein Christ by his Apostles and Ministers, subdued Na∣ons to the obedience of the Gospel, Acts 2.41.
The second, is referred to the time of the cruel Persecutions, under the bloody Emperors, Caligula, Nero, Domitian; and the rest, unto the time of Constantine, who comforted the Church. The third, shewing the Plagues of Fa∣mine, Pestilence and Wars, that followed the Contempt of the Gospel, is referred, chiefly to the Times of the Goths, Hunns, and Vandals. (And these Plagues come on Horseback) noting the generality or disper∣sing of them into many Countries. The fourth, some make to signifie a part of the Plagues fore-mentioned: but more probably it signifieth Antichrist; as King James was of opinion. See more in the Description of Antichrist following; and more at large in that Christian, Learned, and Magnanimous Premonition of his Ex∣cellent Majesty, prefixed to his Apology for the Oath of Allegiance. The fifth, sheweth the safe Estate of them that have suffered for the Truth, being un∣der the Altar of God's Protection. The sixth, sheweth great Alterations, and Commotions of States and Kingdoms; the Devil stopping the Course of the Gospel; and Christ preserving his, in all Corners of the Earth. Chap. 7.2. The seventh, sheweth the Effect of the Devil's Rage, namely the springing up of Heresies, the fall of Ministers and Teachers, the height of Corruption and Abomination in the Pope and Turk.
The Seven Trumpets. BY these, God proclaimeth open War with the World; but his Elect are still in safe Estate. Cap. 8.3. The four first Trumpets shew the hatch∣ing of Heresies and Errors, and the in∣crease of them after the first 300 Years. The three last shew the full Growth and devilish Power of them, in the Pope, and Turk, to the Affliction of the Church and the final Judgment and Torment of A∣theists and Papists, denounced by three Woes. Cap 8.13. A Description of the Church. SHE is called a Woman, Chap. 12. First, because without Christ her Husband, she is weak and can do nothing. 2. By Conjunction with Christ she bring∣eth forth Children unto God. 3. Because her Love and Affection is al∣ways set on Christ her Husband. She is clothed with the Sun of Righte∣ousness Christ Jesus. She treadeth on the Moon, that is, con∣temneth the World and earthly things.
She hath a Crown of Twelve Stars, that is, the Doctrin of the Gospel garnished with the Ministry of the Twelve Apostles. She laboureth of Child; namely and first of all Jesus Christ the Heir of all; and then of his Members in all Ages. The destructi∣on of whom, the Dragon did and doth still watch. Chap. 12.4. A Description of the Devil. HE is called a Dragon, Chap. 12.3. for his Cruelty and Malice: and a red Dragon, for his thirst and greedy desire af∣ter Blood. His seven Heads shew his manifold slights and subtilties. His ten Horns shew his great and dread∣ful Power. His seven Crowns, signifie the Victories he hath gotten. His Tail, of Ambition, Lust and Cove∣tousness, reacheth to Heaven and brusheth down the third part of the Stars: that is, many of the Ministers, from their glorious Firmament, to the Earth of Shame and Ob∣scurity. Verse 4. This Dragon was chained a thousand Years. Chap. 20.2. These years the Learned do account from the 36 Year of the Birth of Christ, (for then the Devil began to be mad, because the Jews being cast off, the Church of the Gen∣tiles began to increase by the power of the
Gospel preached) until the time of Pope Hildebrand, or Gregory the Seventh, who was a wretched Conjurer, and familiar of the Devil, and therefore a fit Instrument at hand, for the Dragon's devillish and perse∣cuting Purposes, which Rage and Eager∣ness he executed, during the time of the se∣ven Viols, the last seven Plagues. A Description of the first Beast. HE is called a Beast, Chap. 13.1. and signifieth in Scripture a Monarchy sometimes, Dan 17.4. He is said to rise out of the Sea; that is, out of the boyling and broyling of heathen Nations, did the great City the Queen of the Nations, or Roman Monarchy arise, to tyrannize over the Church of God. Chap. 12.15. His seven Heads signifie the seven Go∣vernments of Rome, namely, Kings, Consuls, Decemviri, Dictators, Tribuni militum, Empe∣rors and Bishops. Which last was not then come when St. John wrote. Chap. 17.10. His ten Heads signifie ten Kings, that is, great Power, large Dominion and Com∣mand. His ten Crowns signifie many Victories: but in that they are on his Horns, and not on his Heads, it sheweth he prevailed more by his Power, than by Subtilty; contrarily the Dragon, whose Heads are said to be crown∣ed. Or as petty Kings use to wear their
Crowns on their Hats, in token of the Ho∣mage they owe, so this Beast, on his Horns in token of Subjection to the Dragon, of whom he received his Throne and Autho∣rity. Chap. 13.2. The Description of Antichrist ob∣served by the Learned to be four times fully and definitely set down in this Book. CHAP. 6.8. FIrst by a pale Horse,The first Description. having Death for his Rider, Hell for his Convoy, and Power over the fourth part of the Earth (or Europe) to kill with the Sword, and with Hunger (or the Famine of the Word, as the black Horse did by corporal Famine) and by Beasts, (as Locusts and Frogs. Cap. 9.16.) by whom she procured the Death spiritual of Kings and Nations, that drank of the Cup of her Abominations. This being done, the Souls of the Saints cry for Vengeance, ver. 10. and their Cry is heard, and Request granted under the sixth Seal, ver. 12. & 17. CHAP. 9.1. MOre at large and in this kind,The second Description. by his Craft and Strength, &c. He is called a Star fallen from Heaven; or
some notable Person of great Dignity in the Church: falling like Lucifer, from giving light unto the World, and erecting a King∣dom by a noysom pack of crafty cruel Ver∣min. He hath the key of the bottomless Pit: (Or of Hell it self,) whither he sendeth and letteth in, thousands of Souls, thorow the smoaky Mists of Darkness, Ignorance and Superstition; out of which Smoak, came those Locusts (or Abbots, Cardinals, Monks, Friers, Priests and Shavelings) which sting like to Scorpions (or, with damnable Errors and Heresies) all save the green ones of God, ver. 4. And these so stung, finding no Com∣fort in Pardons, Masses, Merits, Dirges, Cros∣ses and the like, shall in torment of consci∣ence seek for death and not find it, ver. 6. These Locusts are strong and fierce as Horses; and their Crowns shew them to be Conquerors. They have the faces of Men (or fair pretences of Holiness) but hair of Women (or hearts full of Lust) Teeth of Ly∣ons (to catch enough, and hold fast enough: witness the many fat Morsels they did de∣vour, where-ever they were seated.) Their King is a bad one, or Abaddon; the Devil, and his Vicar the Pope, the spoylers and destroyers of the Church of God. Their Doctrin is set down, ver. 20. Worship of Devils and Idols (or spiritual Fornication) Murder (both spiritual and corporal) Sor∣cery (by Relicks Agnus Dei's, inchanting Prayers to preserve from Shot, Thunder and the like.) Fornication (corporal, through inordinate Lusts and Lechery, increased by Idleness and Belly-chear, in both Sexes
restrained from holy Marriage, to a filthy monastical life, as by many Proofs hath been made apparent,) Theft, (robbing God of his Titles, and bestowing them on Anti∣christ:) and cousening men of their Goods, by Pardons, Jubilees, juggling Wares and Merchandise. The description is ended, Chap. 10.6. Where the Angel sweareth, Time shall be no more: and the next Angel or seventh, blowing the seventh Trumpet, doth shew the Mystery of God to be finished ver. 7. CHAP. 18.11. THirdly,The third Description. by his growth and manner of government. He is called another Beast (because he differs from the former (ver. 1.) or civil Roman Emperor, in spiri∣tual Jurisdiction, tyrannizing over men by an Ecclesiastical Power, which the Emperors had not. He is said to rise out of the Earth (or from a base and low Estate, to mount up through the Emperours favour) by little and little. He hath two horns (like the Lamb,) signifying his Kingdom and his Priesthood, his Civil and Ecclesiastical Power, which he usurpeth from Christ, but hath indeed from the Dragon; (like whom he spake) in all his Decrees, Canons, Practices and Pro∣ceedings. He did all that the first Beast could do, that is, he is strong and mighty, and nothing inferior to the Ethnick Empe∣ror, priding himself in lies and wonders: ver. 13. sending fire of Excommunication rom Heaven; deceiving by damnable Do∣ctrins
of Devils, verse 14. Killing and burn∣ing for Hereticks, all that will not worship the Beast, and marking all that do worship, for slaves and vassals. And this Mark must be set in their Foreheads (to signifie their Profession, and to acknowledge their Sub∣jection; or in their right hand) to testifie their absolute actual obedience to his Com∣mands, upon supposition that he cannot err. None may buy or sell without this Mark, and therefore Perjury and breach of Pro∣mise and Faith with Christians, is a vertue in a Catholick. Now that Rome is this Anti∣christian Beast, the Number doth signifie and shew, ver. 18. and & , Latine Ser∣vice, Romish Faith, Romish Church, and sweareth to it in number and measure. Up∣on this Beast are seven Viols of God's Wrath and Vengeance, prophesied to be poured out, Chap 16. and the seventh being emp∣tied, it is said, that Babylon came in remem∣brance before God, Verse 19. CHAP. 17.3. LAstly, by his dangerous and deadly Al∣lurements, as the true Spouse, (Chap. 12.) for here the adulterous Spouse is liken∣ed to a Woman; but yet a Whore, for her spiritual Adultery; and drunken with the Blood of the Saints, tho' a gorgeous and glorious Whore in outward shew, ver. 6. The Inscription by which she is to be known, is called a Mystery, Verse 5. First, and she takes her self to be the Visible Head of the Church, the mystical
Body of Christ, and the Dispenser of the Mysteries of God. Secondly, as she deserves indeed, and as the rest of her Titles bear witness: verse 5. Mother of Whoredoms, &c. or a Mystery of all Abominations under a pretext of Ho∣liness. Now, this Whore of Babylon, that rideth on the Beast, is not any one Man, but a Suc∣cession in Government, Chap. 17, 18. The Beast is said to have seven Heads, Chap. 13.1. and Chap. 17.7. Which are expounded to be Roma Septicollis, or Rome built on seven Hills: the names whereof are these, Palatinus, Qui∣rinalis, Aventinus, Viminalis, Coelius, Exqui∣linus, Capitolinus. Or else seven Forms of Government, as is shewed before, of which the sixth, viz. (the Government by Empe∣rors) was in being, when St. John wrote: Chap. 17. ver 10. The seventh was not then come, namely, the Ecclesiastical Govern∣ment by Bishops; which succeeded at Rome, upon the Translation of the Imperial Seat to Constantinople, (and was to continue but a short space) or, about two hundred seven∣ty six Years, viz. from the time of Constan∣tine, to the time of Phocas the Emperor, who gave to Boniface Bishop of Rome, the Title of Universal Bishop, and Head of all Churches. And by this means (the perfection of defe∣ction, and Popish Corruption coming in) was brought forth the eighth Beast, one of the seven in shew, because still seeming to succeed the Bishops in Ecclesiastical Form of Government.
The means by which Antichrist shall be Confounded. CHAP. 11.3. THey are called two Witnesses, and they may signifie either the old, and new Testaments, both which Antichrist hath en∣deavoured to disgrace, deface, corrupt, sup∣press and destroy, calling the Scripture a nose of Wax, and a dead Letter, a leaden Rule; and preferring the Traditions of Men above them. These Witnesses in the Primitive Church, were cloathed in sack∣cloth, and preached Repentance, by the space of five or six hundred Years. But ha∣ving done their Message, the Roman Beast made War upon them, and overcame them, so that they lay open to contempt, cared for of none, understood of few, and feared of all to be medled withal. (Yea, they were killed) and the very Throat of them cut, by a ge∣neral Censure, Printed at Venice, An. 1562. Which condemneth all for heretical, that contradict their Traditions. Thus lay their Bodies without Vigor, Ver. 8. (as sometimes the Law, until it was revived, 2 Chron. 34.14.) and worldly men rejoyced, Ver. 10. for now they had liberty
to do what they listed, a Pardon for all might be procured by their Purse. Yet at last (praised be God) we see these Witnesses to arise again, and beginning to shine in their former Glory, ver. 11. Which happy Alteration and Exaltation of them, hath bred such an Earthquake, among the Nations that a good part of them that were in Subjection to that City, are fallen from her, and have rejected her yoke, Verse 13. 2. Or these Witnesses may signifie the Preachers of the Word. Two only are mentioned, because two are sufficient in Law. These for preaching the foresaid Truth and Doctrin, discovering the Man of sin, and his Corruptions, were put to cruel Deaths and Torments; but rose again in the person of their Successors, supplying their room, and still bearing witness to the same Truth. Of which grew that memo∣rable and miraculous Observation, Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae, the Martyrs Blood the Seed of the Church. The mighty and marvellous power of this Truth, hath of latter times so encreased, that many King∣doms and great Nations, have in few years been converted thereby, to the true Wor∣ship of Almighty God.
The seven last last Plagues and Viols of God's Wrath. CHAP. 16.1. THe first Viol being poured out, there fell a noysom and grievous Sore. Some understand by it the Pox, called Mor∣bus Neapolitanus, a strange and loathsom Ul∣cer, which first lighted on the ancient chief Crutches and supporters of the Pope; name∣ly the Italians, Spaniards and Frenchmen, for their filthy Whoredoms and Beastliness, in the Year of our Lord, 1494. The second turned the Sea (of the World) into Blood, by Turkish and Popish Massacres, Murders and mortal Wars. The third sheweth the Increase of that Plague: It cometh home even to the very Doors, their Rivers and Fountains ran Blood. The fourth, caused the Sun (by scorch∣ing and drying) to torment with Dearth, Plagues and sundry Diseases.
The fifth darkened the Kingdom of the Beast: which is fulfilled in the Revolt of Protestant Princes, from Obedience to the Pope, and it is to them the greatest Plague of all others, Verse 10. The sixth dryed up the River Euphra∣tes, (which was the best trusted defence of the old Babylon) that is, consumed the Riches, Honour, Glory and Strength of Romish Babylon. And this maketh the Fish, nay, the Frogs, to bestir themselves: for it is said, (that three Frogs came out) a plural number; noting their multitude and threefold direction. For, First they are raised and inspired by the Dragon the Devil. Secondly, they are maintained by the Beast, Antichrist. And thirdly, they are instructed by the false Prophet, the Apostatick Church, to de∣fend the Triple-crowned Monarch the Pope of Rome. Frogs they are fitly named, being indeed Animals of either Element, Air, Earth, and Water, croaking in every Corner to stop the Leak, to fill up their Euphrates, and to gather again the Kings of the Earth, Verse 14. The seventh Viol foreshews the final Overthrow of Rome, by Rents, Convul∣sions
and Confusions, Commotions of their City and Kingdom. And in so fearful a manner, as may astonish even those that hear thereof. Revel. 18.4. Come out of her my People, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her Plagues. FINIS.
