H1918A 99896416 154197
STRENGTH MADE PERFECT IN Weakness. In Four Sermons Preached By William Hickocks M. A. Quandoquidem nobis denegatur diu vivere relinquamus aliquid quo nos vixisse testemur. Sen. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Three Crowns and Bible, at the Lower end of Cheap-side, 1674.
THE EPISTLE TO THE Reader. READER, THE worthy Author of these Ser∣mons, Mr. William Hickocks, was Educated in the Schools of the Prophets, and that in an happy time, when the envious man was not per∣mitted the Nurseries, and Vine-yards, to poyson and spoyle them, with the Tares of unsound Doctrines, and evil Examples; and it pleased God to Sanctifie his Liberal and Pious Education, that he became not onely a good Christian, but also an able Minister, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit. He made the work of his Mini∣stry, the work not only of his Head, but
Heart too; shineing with the splendor of Knowledge and Holiness, and burning with very Holy, Well-grounded, Affectionate, Zeal; giving himself to spend, and be spent; ready to impart his very soul and all, in Delivering and Ʋrging his great Master's Errand. Observing his Spirit, (as I had frequent opportunity of Con∣verse with him) I often thought he sa∣voured too much of the other World, to be far from it; and so it was indeed. His Light was too bright and hot to last, his Race too swift and eager to hold; he threw himself with strong girds before his feet, and soon apprehending the prize, left his Body behind. Great Labours, and Publick, as well as Personal deep Re∣sentments, exhausted his Spirits, and quickly reduced his Body to the dregs of Melancholy, so that he was often (as Epaphroditus once) sick even to death for the work of the Ministry. God also early called him forth (as David when but a stripling) to grapple with Goliah-like Temptations, wherein indeed he was Conqueror; but yet (as Christ) with great faintness of Spirit: the Lord there∣fore
seeing him weary, took him up in his arms and carried him home, excusing him his otherwise-remaining travel. Oh! how precious had his experiences been, had he had Life and Health to acquaint us with them? Oh! the depth of the Wisdom and Counsel of God, and his ways past find∣ing out! that so fruitful a Tree should not be spared! that a Vessel of Mercy, and Honor, so purged and fitted for his Ma∣sters use, should be dashed in pieces, even as soon almost, as it was seasoned and broached! But yet, blessed be God, al∣though the Earthen Vessel be broken, we have not lost all the Treasure; the less it is, that is saved, the more we should make of it; as we carry it towards the Parents of many Children, when they leave but one onely little one behind, we account it very dear; especially if it be like the Parent: and truly so is this lit∣tle Book in thy hand; it being a repre∣sentation of the Consistency of Faith and Doubting, Fear and Hope, Heaviness and Gladness, in one and the same Godly Per∣son; whereof the Author was a famous
Instance, as if this had been his very Tem∣per and Complexion. Behold then here one onely little Birth (These Ser∣mons being Published as they were ta∣ken in Short∣hand. some∣thing hurt indeed in the com∣ing forth, for want of better Midwifry, but yet) of many, resembling the Parent, and costing him his very Life. Behold, Reader, I present thee with a taste of the Fruit, under the waight whereof, the Tree did Bend, Break, and Fall; yet shall we answer at last, if we Refuse, or Receive so costly Grace in vain. Oh! what a sad account shall we have to make, if this man of God, and the many others which are lately taken from amongst us, should be gone to Heaven to complain of our Ʋnthankfulness, Ʋntractableness, Ʋnfruitfulness, Ʋnsteadfastness, &c. whereby we have broken their Hearts. Good Reader, I warn in Paper and Inke, and would more gladly do it in Tears, if the Lord would please to hear Prayers, that we may be Restored to the free Publick Exer∣cise of our Ministry, Amen.
The second Epistle of Paul to the Thessalonians, the second Chapter, the sixteenth and seven∣teenth Verses. 16. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father who hath loved us, and hath given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace. 17. Comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and work. AS it is the duty of all, when they have the Truth made known to them, to receive it; so much more is it the duty of believers that have received the Truth, to hold it fast: As we are to buy the Truth, so having once bought it, never to sell it; as we are to lay hold on it, so never to let it go: as it is our duty to im∣brace the Truth, so it should be our care never to let it go, never to leave it. The Apostle having in this Chapter, ex∣horted the Saints to steadfastness, to watch∣fulness,
and carefulness; he presseth his Ex∣hortation, from variety of Motives, taken partly from the Apostasie of those that are seemingly friends to the Truth; partly from the misery of the enemies of the Truth; and then again, in regard of the holyness they were adorned with, and the happiness they should ere long injoy; and therefore he re∣peats his exhortation to stedfastness, in the Verse before the Text: [Therefore Brethren stand fast, and hold the tradition (not of men but of God) which you have been taught, (that is those Doctrines you have received) whe∣ther from our mouths, or writings, that is from the Apostles, who were infallibly guided by the Holy Ghost: And to this Exhortati∣on he adds Supplication, in the words now read; wherein take notice of four things. First, The Persons praying; Paul, Silva∣nus; and Timotheus. Secondly, The Persons prayed for; The Saints of the Church of the Thessalonians. Thirdly, The Persons prayed too; and they are two; First, God the Son. Secondly, God the Father. The Apostle mentions the Son first, no that he is so in order of Nature; but he  not curious in placing his words, though
very well knew, that God the Father is the first Person in the Trinity; God even our Fa∣ther, where we have first, his Love asserted, [who hath loved us] Secondly, declared and illustrated; first, in the effects of it, [and hath given us everlasting consolation] and then in the cause of it, [and good hope through grace]. Lastly, The Petitions themselves, or Bles∣sings prayed for; and they are two, Consolation, and Confirmation. Consolation, comfort your Hearts. Confirmation, stablish you in every good Word and Work. My time is but short, the Text is large, and therefore I must but only in many things para∣phrase upon the Words. [Now our Lord Jesus Christ] Now or first, the Apostle here adds this Supplication to his former Exhortation; from whence I might note First, Doct. I. That the Ministers of the Gospel are not only to Preach to, but to pray for the People. As they are to speak from God to them, so they are to speak for them unto God: that great Prophet of the Church, our
Lord Jesus Christ himself, did not only reveal his Fathers mind to his Disciples, but often prayed and that earnestly for them; as in that 17. Joh. and other places. Ʋse; And if this be so, then by way of equity, People ought to pray for their Minister; but to pass to the second, after his exhorting them to stedfastness, he goes to Prayer; and it shews thus much, that Paul's exhortations to them, were not sufficient of themselves to stablish these Saints, without the grace of God; in as much as these things given in command to stedfastness, is backt by Prayer; it intimates how little these will prevail unless God touch the Heart: from whence we have this Do∣ctrine, Doct. II. That Ministers Preaching, with∣out Gods blessing, will do Peoples souls no good. The voice of Ministers in Preaching is but an empty sound, and though it come into our ears, will never reach the Heart, unless the doctrine have efficacy from the Spirit of Truth. Neither Paul or any of his fellow-labourers in the work of the Gospel, will bring people into, or keep them in, the ways of the Lord, unless God bless their labours to that end: none of these blessed Apostles could by any of their own power, by the height or strength of arguments, prevail with them, to obey the Gospel; they could never convert to
the Truth, or keep them in the Truth, unless God were pleased to turn their Hearts; this is clear by the Jews under the Old Testament, and the people under the New; the Word of God that came to the Jews, how often doth Isaiah, Jeremiah, Eze∣kiel, and other Prophets, tell them of their sins, but they would not hear; see how the Lord complains in the 17. Jerem. 25. Since the day that your Fathers came forth, out of the Land of Egypt, unto this day, I have sent unto you, all my Servants the Prophets, daily, riseing up early, and sending them; yet they hearkned not unto me, &c. for all they had so many messengers from God to them, and this too afterward repeated in several places, yet they did not hearken to God: neither when they were in their own Countrey, nor in a strange Land: and so in the New Testa∣ment, Peter and Paul here, That laboured more abundantly then they all; yet how inefficatious was it to many: when he Preached to the Jews, 13. Acts 45. ver. They were filled with envy, and spake against those things, that were spoken by Paul, contradicting and blaspheming: And so among the Gentiles, instead of pre∣vailing with them to bring them to the Truth, he was persecuted by them, 1 Cor. 3.5, 6. Who is Paul, or who is Apollo; but Mini∣sters by whom you believe: and though he did prevail with many, it was not of them∣selves, but it was the Lord that gave the in∣crease:
your believing, your getting grace, your growing and increasing in holiness, is only through the blessing of God: There∣fore when Paul tells us of several places where he did good; he saith, when he came to such or such a place, there was a door opened to him; as a door of utterance to the Apostle, so a door of entrance to the People, that they received the Word of God: and though his commission runs, That he might turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Sathan unto God, &c. 26. Acts 18. yet he is only the instrumental cause, God is only the efficient cause; God alone commanded the light to shine out of darkness; he alone that is the heart searcher, is the heart changer; he opened Lydias heart: we need not go far to evidence this Truth, we need not go abroad, but stay at home, to see this sad spectacle; how many faithful Preachers, hath God sent to this Land of ours, for many scores of Years together, scarce any Nation under Heaven, hath had that plenty of Ministers, and Ordi∣nances, that England hath had, and that powerful Preaching, since the Apostles days, that we have had; and yet what little fruit to be seen: How many setled upon their Lees, and will not be brought off? he that was filthy is filthy still: How great are the abo∣minations, Lying, Swearing, Whoring, Drunkeness, &c. How doth the love of many wax cold? How many back-sliding from the
Truth, and ways of God, what ever Mini∣sters say to the contrary? People, time after time have been call'd on to walk after the Spirit, and not after the Flesh, yet they re∣fuse to return: may not the Lord say to us, as to the Jews, Isa. 5.4, 5, 6. verses, What could have been done more to my Vine-yard, that I have not done in it? Wherefore when I looked that it should bring forth Grapes, brought it forth Wild-grapes? I wish we have no occa∣sion to take notice of the words following: vers. 5. And now go to; I will tell you what I will do to my Vine-yard; I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up, and break down the wall of it, and it shall be troden down; vers. 6, And I will lay it wast, it shall not be pruned, nor digged, but there shall come up briers and thornes; I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it; which judgment, God in his mercy prevent: it is true, Ministers may do thus much; save their own souls, by taking heed to their Doctrine, and their lives, and by warning people of their sins; and though Ministers by Preaching, may leave people without excuse, they can∣not say at the last day, Lord if we had known our duty we would have done it; Ministers Preaching may add to Peoples sufferings, they may increase their condemnation another day; but alas, it is not in the power of Ministers, to affect Peoples hearts, or reform their lives; how earnest then should Ministers and People
be, that when the Word of God is Preached, they should pray that the power of God might accompany it; Peoples prayers should be, that as God would send forth Labourers into his harvest, so that God would make that food that's sent them, to nourish their souls in spiritual life unto life eternal; for man lives not by bread only, but by the Word of God; as natural life is not preserved through bread, without the concurance of Gods pro∣vidence; so neither spiritual life, without the influence of his Spirit; the Sword of the Spi∣rit is only able to strike through our lusts, the weapons of our warfare, are only mighty through God. People had need pray, as for their Ministers, that they may have a door of utterance; so for themselves, that they may have a door of entrance; that with readiness of mind, they may be brought to, and built up in their most holy Faith; that when the Gospel comes by Preaching to them, it may come not only in word but in power of the Holy Ghost. Thirdly, Whereas he prays not only to God the Father, but to the Lord Jesus Christ, for these Saints comfort and establishment: we have this Doctrine, Doct. That as God the Father, so the Lord Jesus Christ, is the author of the Saints graces and comfort.
As the form of the Apostles salutations in most of his Epistles, is grace and peace from God our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ; so he concludes generally, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. Reason, Because Col. 1.19. It pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell: Joh. 1.16. And of his fulness have all we re∣ceived grace for grace: Col. 2.9. For in him dwelleth all the fulness (not only the fulness of Divinity, but the fulness) of the Deity, of the Godhead bodily: that second Person of the Trinity, who was true Man, was likewise true God, therefore he is the author of all good: from hence then (for it is very remarkeable his mentioning the Son) let us (I say) make this use of it; let us honour the Son, as we honour the Father; I and the Father are one (saith Christ) Joh. 10.30. and the Apostle, Phil. 2.6, 7. saith of Christ, Who being in the form of God thought it no robbery to equal with God; but made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men, &c. though he were a creature as he was Man, yet he is true God Creator; as he is God, he is the be∣stower of the same gifts, as God the Father, and he together with God the Father, doth inable people to leave their sins, and to walk in his ways; this we may see, Ephes. 1.23. and Chap. 2.1, 2. vers. compared, where speak∣ing of Christ, the fulness of him that filleth
all in all; and You hath he quickned, who were dead in trespasses and sins, wherein in time past ye walked, according to the course of this World, &c. Christ inables the Saints to make progress in holiness, to proceed in every good Word and Work. Fourthly, He directs us what course to take, that we might obtain blessings from God; namely from God. Doct. The way to obtain blessings from God, is to seek it of God. For the Apostle prevents an objection which they might make; he exhorts them to stedfastness; but they might say, Object. How may we do to keep in the ways of God? whence should we have this power? He Answers, We may have it from God, and from Jesus Christ, as appears in the Text. [Now our Lord Jesus Christ] He doth not say the Lord Jesus Christ, but our's; mark whom he speaks it of, not only of him∣self (Paul the believer, and Silvanus, and Timothy) but the Saints, the believers of the Church of Thessalonica: from hence observe this Doctrine. Doct. True faith doth apply Jesus Ch as it's own portion.
Psal. 119.57. Thou art my portion oh Lord: And again, Psal. 16.5. The Lord is the porti∣on of mine inheritance: Lam. 3.24. The Lord is my portion saith my soul, therefore will I hope in him. And so true Faith doth apply Jesus Christ to the soul, as it's own portion: Therefore when Thomas (that stag∣gered in his faith) came to confirm it, by put∣ting his hand into his side, &c. he saith, My Lord and my God, Joh. 20. ver. 28. Ʋse I. To apply this then, You then that have Faith, prize it; as Christ is call'd Pre∣cious, so likewise is Faith call'd Precious; it is precious Faith, by which you come to imbrace precious Christ; now as Christ is the gift of God, so Faith is the gift of God; and you cannot receive Jesus Christ (who is the gift of God) but by Faith: John 1.12. To as many as received him, he gave power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name; Believing is receiving. Ʋse II. Oh then labour for Faith, we can never go to Heaven without Faith; consider what will it advantage you, that he is the Lord Jesus, unless he be your Lord Jesus? what profit is it to you te is a Savi∣our, if he be not your Saviour? we have no ground of comfort, to hear of the Lord Jesus ist, till we believe in him, and m; if we believe not, we m dye in  sins: [Our Lord Jesus, or our Saviour] he word signifies) Our Saviour, e
Doct. Christ is our Saviour. As he is call'd often throughout the New Testament; Christ is our Saviour, and he alone; There's no other salvation to be had in any other, Acts 4.12. First, Christ is our Saviour, as he saves us from Sathan, Ephes. 4.8. He led captivity captive; it is Christ that came to destroy the works of the Devil; and when he did come, he did conquer and overcome principalities and power, Col. 2.15. it's Jesus Christ that recovers sinners out of the snare of the Devil, that's the first. Secondly, He saves us from sin, Matth. 1.21. Thou shal't call his name Jesus, (saith the Angel) for he shall save his people from their sins. I might shew you both joyn'd together, in the 2. Ephes. 1.2. And you hath he quick∣ned, who were dead in trespasses and sins; where∣in in time past ye walked according to the course of this World, according to the Prince of the power of the air, &c. First he saves his people from the power of sin, he sets them into a glorious liberty, Joh. 8.34, 36. (saith our Saviour) He that commits sin, is the servant of sin: and in the 36. vers. If the Son make you free, you shall be free indeed: and (saith the Apo∣stle, Rom. 6.11.) reckon your selves to be dead indeed unto sin; but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord: 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. For∣asmuch
as ye know that you were not redeemed from your vain conversation with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, but with the pre∣cious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish. Secondly, Jesus Christ saves (as from the power of sin) so from the pe∣nalty due to sin, from the punishment of sin; as first from the curse of the Law: Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, Gal. 3.13. secondly, from the wrath of God; 1 Thes. 1.10. Jesus who delivereth us from the wrath to come; 1 Thes. 5.8, 9, 10. For God hath not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ: Who died for us, that whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him: it is he alone by whom we obtain salvation. Let us only apply it in a word. Ʋse, How precious then should Jesus Christ be to us? saith the Apostle Peter, Ʋnto you that believe (therefore) he is precious: 1 Pet. 2.7. vers. I! he is your Saviour, He that believeth on him shall not be confounded: Oh! how do captives love their Redeemer? when they see the man that comes to free them out of bondage, how do they love the sight of him? Oh how should sinners love Jesus Christ who is their Saviour! 1 Cor. 16.22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be anathama, Maranatha: Oh let it not for shame be said, that we love not the Lord Je∣sus
Christ! Oh cursed is that man that loves not Jesus Christ who comes to bring blessed∣ness to him! we should love Jesus Christ, be∣cause he is altogether lovely, white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand, Cant. 5.10. none can save us but he. Then again the conexion of the words is very remarkable, the Apo∣stle doth not say our Lord Christ himself, nor our Jesus himself, but our Lord Jesus: he joyns Lord and Jesus both together; and what the Scripture joyns together, we must not put asunder: from whence we may raise this Doctrine. Doct. They whose Jesus is, he is their Lord: (or if you please thus) They to whom Christ is a Jesus, he is a Lord: or, Whom Christ saves, them he rules. To whom Christ is a Saviour, to them he is a Governour: Christ  be our Jesus, he is our Lord; if we mistake here, we are un∣done for ever: Act. 5.31 The Apostle speak∣ing of Jesus Christ, he faith thus, Him hath God exalted to be a Prince and a Saviour, &c. he hath exalted him to be a Prince and a Savi∣our, to give repentance to Israel, not only a Saviour but a Prince: they go both to∣gether, where Christ is a Saviour there he is a Prince: where Christ gives remissi∣on of sins, he giveth power over sin, Rom. 6.14. (saith the Apostle) Sin shall not
have dominion over you; for you are not under the Law but under grace: you that are un∣der the saving grace of the Gospel of Iesus Christ, you are set free from sin; not but that you may fall into sin, but it doth not bear sway in your soul; it cannot have it's full command, you cannot be led captive to sin. Ʋse, Now this may be for a use of trial, to try whether Christ be our Saviour yea or no; examine your selves, be faithful to your own souls: would you know whether Christ be your Iesus or no? ask your selves this questi∣on, is he your Lord or no? is he your Go∣vernour? he is the King of Saints, as well as the Saviour of his people: if you follow your lusts, and live in sin knowingly, and wil∣lingly walk after the sinful desires of your own hearts, Christ will profit you nothing: you shall find what I say to be true one day, (I wish you find it not by sad experience) if you will not be subject to the holy com∣mands of Christ, do not so much as expect mercy from Iesus Christ: for Iesus Christ tells you himself, if you will not be ruld by him, he will not save you: if you will not obey his Gospel, he will be a destroyer and not a Saviour to you: remember what he hath said, Luk. 19.27. if you refuse obedi∣ence to him, look not for any favour from him: As for those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither
and slay them before me. That man that would have his lusts reign, and not me rule over him; bring that soul before me, I will throw him into Hell: Many shall flatter themselves, (as in that 13. of Luk. 25. and come with confidence, saying Lord, Lord, open unto us, &c. let us go into Heaven, but he shall an∣swer, Lord? why call you me Lord? I know you not, whence ye are; but then they shall begin to make apology, and say, we have heard thou art a Jesus, we have eaten and drunk in thy presence, we have been at thy Ordinances, at thy Word and Sacra∣ments; thou hast taught in our streets; but he shall say, ver. 27. I tell you I know you not, you are strangers to me, I never remember you kept my commands. I tell you I will not take notice of you, depart from me all ye work∣ers of iniquity; if you will not take one an∣swer, there's a second, depart from me all ye workers of iniquity; Oh how sad will it be then! therefore now take the advise of our Saviour, ver. 24. Strive to enter in at the straight gate, for many shall seek to enter, but shall not be able. Christ will save only those that obey him; therefore I beseech you let me put this question to you, (for I would fain not have you go to Hell) pray ask your own hearts alone, in secret, is there no known sin committed? is there no known sin I de∣light in? if thy heart make known to thee that there is, if thou wilt not leave this sin,
it is a sign that Christ is none of thine: Rom. 8.2. The Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, hath made me free from the Law of sin, &c. those that Christ saves, he hath said. Sin shall not have dominion over them: Paul that great admirer of Iesus Christ, he tells the people plainly (that they may not flatter themselves) Rom. 8.1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, and least they should mistake, (he saith) that walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, &c. who though they have their sins, and their fail∣ings, yet their desire is to walk not after the lusts of their Hearts, but after the Spirit: for, for all Christ died for sinners, yet if they live and dye in their sins, Christ will not save them: if we live after the flesh we shall dye, Rom. 8.13. and though it be true, and this be a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, That Jesus Christ came into the World to save sinners; yet know this on the other hand, Jesus Christ did never intend to save those that remain im∣penitent, hard-hearted, and stubborn sinners: that live and dye in wickedness, they shall find no mercy: Job professeth his Faith in the Re∣deemer, yet if he were not his Lord and Go∣vernour, woe to him: the Prophet Isa. 3.11. saith, Woe to the wicked, it shall be ill with him; for the reward of his hands it shall be given him: remember this, We shall as surely go to Hell for all Christ dyed, as if he had never dyed, if we live and dye in sin: therefore, if thou
wouldest have Christ a Saviour, make consci∣ence of obeying Christ: Blessed are the unde∣filed, in the way, (saith the Psalmist) Psal. 119.1. who walk in the Law of the Lord. ver. 8. I will keep thy statutes, oh forsake me not utterly. If thou wil't keep Gods statutes, thou mayest expect to be kept safe; and vers. 11. Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against thee: I, then may we hope to do well: ver. 30. I have chosen the way of truth, thy judgments have I laid before me: ver. 31. I have stuck unto thy testimonies: Oh Lord put me not to shame: and again, ver. 101. I have refrained my feet from every evil way, that I might keep thy word: 102. I have not departed from thy judgments, for thou hast taught me: ver. 162. I rejoyce in thy word, as one that findeth great spoyles: ver. 163. I hate und ab∣hor lying, but thy law do I love: ver. 166. Lord, I have hoped for thy salvation, and done thy commandments. Then indeed if we make it our business, design and endeavour, to keep the commandments of Christ, we may then hope to see the salvation of God; then and not till then: 2 Titus 11. For the grace of God that bringeth salvation, hath appeared: ver. 12. (mark) Teaching us to deny ungodlyness and worldly lusts, and that we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world: ver. 13. Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Sa∣viour Jesus Christ, ver. 14. Who gave himself
for us, that he might redeem us from all ini∣quity, and purifie unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. Now this is as well the command of Christ, that they make consci∣ence of their duty to him, as well as to look for salvation from him; therefore if you would have Christ for your Jesus, be sure that he be your Lord, that you do him ho∣mage; observe his Laws, and reverence his Name, (not by bowing at the name Jesus) bowing is a note of subjection, and sheweth, that all creatures are subject to Jesus Christ; unto the authority of Christ, have respect to all his commands: if people will not, but walk after their lusts, will do wickedly: remember this, that instead of salvation, you must ex∣pect (or how ever you will find) destruction, and perdition, as it's call'd, 1 Tim. 6.9. and Psal. 11.6. Ʋpon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest, &c. For God is angry with the wicked every day, Psal. 7. ver. 11. Christ hath plainly told peo∣ple, he will be no Saviour to them that refuse obedience to him; Mat. 13.41. Christ tells you what he will do, The Son of man shall send forth his Angels and they shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity; and shall cast them into a furnace of fire, &c. Oh that sinners would believe, what they shall one day feel; that they would now fear and tremble, that they may then be delivered from wrath to come:
therefore though thy sins be never so pleasing and delightful to thee, cast it from thee, Mar. 9.43. It is better for thee to enter into life maimed then to bo cast into Hell, &c. Oh let us be wise for our salvation, willing to part with our most pleasing sins, rather then to have our souls destroyed, and cast into Hell; in∣to everlasting burnings: think not that Jesus Christ will save you, unless you turn from sin; and therefore pray earnestly that you may be converted, and have your sins blotted out, the 73. Psal. 24. Oh let this be our earnest prayer, That we may be guided by Gods counsel, that Jesus Christ may be ours: Joh. 17.6 Thine they were and thou gavest them me, and they have kept my word; then may you be sure he hath promised and prayed for you, ver. 22, 24. Father I will that those whom thou hast given me, those that have kept my word, may be where I am, that they may behold my glory, which thou hast given me, &c. If Christ be our Lord, he will be our Jesus, but not else. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, who hath loved us, and hath given us everlasting consolation and good hope through grace, comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and work.
Afternoon Sermon. The 2 of the Thessalonians 2. Cap. 16, 17. Vers. 16. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father which hath loved us, and hath given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace. 17. Comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and work. YOU may Remember, in the mor∣ning we took notice of four things: first the Persons praying, Paul, Silvanus, and Timotheus: second∣ly the Persons prayed for, &c. thirdly the Persons prayed to; and that's first God the Son; and secondly God the Father, whose love we have first asserted, and secondly de∣clared: fourthly the blessings prayed for; and the first is Consolation, secondly Confirmation.
We made entrance on the first Person pray∣ed to, [Our Lord Jesus Christ] not the Lord Jesus, but our Lord Jesus. Doct. I. Faith applies Jesus Christ to it self. Doct. II. Again, Christ is our Jesus. And from the connexion [Our Lord Jesus] we noted, that, Doct. III. To whom Christ is a Jesus, to them he is a Lord. Whom Christ saves, them he Rules. To proceed [and God even our Father] God is often call'd, as here, so in other places, frequently our Father; not only of Paul, Sil∣vanus, and Timotheus; but yours and ours together: you that are Saints, thence note this point, Doct. God is the Father of the righteous; or, He is the Father of the Saints. God is the Father of all that are truly religious Persons, of all the Disciples of Je∣sus Christ. Christ after his resurrection, in 20. of Joh. 17. saith to Mary, go to my Brethren and say, I ascend to my Father and to
your Father: the Father of our Lord Jesus, and our Father. Object. But how shall I know whether God be my Father or no? Answ. By these two marks, or signs; by our Repentance, and by our Faith. God is the Father of repenting, believing, sinners; though he be the Father of all, in respect of creation, and common mercies; yet God is only the Father (through Iesus Christ) of those that repent, 2 Cor. 6.17. Come out from amongst them, and be you separate, saith the Lord, and touch none unclean thing. &c. And I will be a Father unto you, and you shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord God Almighty: They that leave their sins, and cleave to God with full purpose of heart, have just ground to call God Father. Se∣condly, To them that believe, Joh. 1.12. To as many as received him, he gave power to be∣come the Sons of God, even to as many as be∣lieve on his name. Gal. 3.26. ver. For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus: thou that hast an heart to repent of sins, and to believe in the Lord Iesus, may'st have comfort, to go to God as thy Father. Ʋse I. But to apply this, if this be so, then we may see, first the Saints dignity, 1 Sam. 18.23. David speaks of this as a great privi∣ledge, that he was related to the King, and what do you take no notice of it? seemeth it a small thing to you that I call the King Fa∣ther?
Oh then, what priviledge is it to be the adopted Sons and Daughters of the King of Kings. Secondly, We may see the Saints safety; consider what God is; and then we shall see what cause of comfort they have that are Gods people. Consider first, he is of great power, Job 42.2. ver. He can do any thing though never so difficult, nothing is too hard for the Lord; he is the mighty Potentate, he doth whatsoever he pleases: he is mighty in strength, who hath hardened himself against him and prospered? He can bind mens hands, and rule mens hearts, and do what ever he will: Ephes. 3. ver. 20. He is able to do exceeding abundantly above what we can ask or think: who is so great a God as our God? we that fear him: Psal. 77.13, 14. Thy way oh God is in the sanctuary: who is so great a God as our God? thou art the God that dost wonders, thou hast declared thy strength among the people: Job 11.7. Canst thou by searching find out God? canst thou find out the Almighty unto perfection? Here's thy priviledge, if thou have the work of grace wrought in thee, here's thy safety, God is thy Father, that God that never wants power, to defend his people, that is seen in the mount, and will not many times help, till we are in extreamity, that his power may then be mani∣fest; safe they are that have God for their Fa∣ther; he is sufficient to protect them.
Consider secondly, God is very wise; a wise Father, and that in regard of his know∣ledge, and in regard of his prudence; he knoweth what ever men do in the World, Job 34.21. For his eyes are upon the ways of man, and he seeth all his goings. Ver. 22. Ther's no darkness, or shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity can hide themselves: Iob 12.22. He discovereth deep things out of darkness, and bringeth out to light the shaddow of death. He knoweth men better then they know themselves; God needeth none to give him intelligence, he knoweth what is done in the secret closet of eve∣ry one of our hearts: Nay, secondly he is very prudent too, he knoweth how to order his af∣fairs; he is wise in heart (saith Job): that man is wise indeed, that knows how to out∣wit the wisest of men: God knoweth how to ensnare the wicked in the works of their own hands, 1 Cor. 4.5. Isa. 44.25. That frustra∣teth the tokens of the liars, and maketh the divi∣ners mad, that turneth wise men backward, and maketh their knowledge foolish. Come on (saith Pharaoh) let us deal wisely; but he was out∣witted: Exod. 14.28. God turns the counsel of Achitophel into foolishness: God is never at a loss, he knows what to do. Consider thirdly, He is a very tender Fa∣ther too; he is very pittiful, very merciful, a very tender Father, that lays to heart the miseries of his people; when they were in Egypt he pittied them; Isa. 63.9. In all their
afflictions he was afflicted, and the angel ef his presence saved them, &c. (speaking after the manner of men) they that lay the troubles of others to heart as their own: and he is not thus pittiful only to his Israel, but to all his people: Psal. 103.13. Like as a Father pittieth his Chil∣dren, so doth the Lord pitty those that fear him. Nay, Consider fourthly, He is a very careful Father, he minds how it goes with his children: 1 Pet. 5.7. Cast all your care upon him, (saith the Apostle) for he careth for you: you are never out of his eye or thoughts; when Zion said, The Lord hath forsaken me, and my God hath forgotten me; Isa. 49.14, 15. (saith God) Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea they may forget, yet will not I forget thee, &c. The condition, and troubles, and miseries thou art in, are always in my thoughts: Psal. 9.18. The needy shall not always be forgotten: the ex∣pectation of the poor shall not perish for ever: That's the second, but Use III. Hence we may learn our Duty, (If God be the Saints Father) and what's that? First duty, To pray to him: whom should they go to but to their Faither; Be careful for nothing (saith the Apostle) but in every thing let your request be made known to him, by prayer and supplication: Phil. 4.6. and Mat. 7.24. Psal. 145.18. ver. The Lord is nigh unto all that cal upon him.
Second duty, Trust in him; whom should we trust, if not our Father? therefore trust in him; Psal. 146.3. Put not your trust in Prin∣ces, nor in the son of man, in whom there is none help: ver. 5. Happy is he that hath the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God: The Scripture denounceth a woful curse to him that trusteth in any thing but in God; Jer. 17.5. Cursed be the man that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arm; and ver. 7. Blessed is the man that trusteth in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is: God takes notice of those that trust in him, Psal. 33.17. An horse is a vain thing for safety; neither shall he deliver any by his great strength: So long as we trust to our selves, at any time, for any thing, our case is sad; but none that trusted in the Lord, have any cause ever to be ashamed. Thirdly, Let us Honour him (if a Father) and that in three respects: first in our thoughts; have always good thoughts of God, what ever his providences be towards us; Psal. 145.17. The Lord is righteous in all his ways, &c. what ever God doth is good, he is just, he is righteous in all those ways, that are most ca∣vil'd at by men; Job 34.21. He will not lay upon man more then is right; everyman may say in the bitterest cross in the World, God hath not dealt with me after my sins, it's a mercy we are on this side Hell. Secondly, Honour God, as in our thoughts, so in our words; speak well of God, Psal. 118.1. Give
thanks unto the Lord for he is good, for his mer∣cy endureth for ever. Psal. 146.1, 2. ver. Praise the Lord oh my soul, while I live will I praise the Lord: I will sing praises to God while I have a being. Now praising God is honouring of him: He that offers me praise, glorifieth me: Psal. 50.23. Thirdly, Honour him in all our ways: 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eat or drink, whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God: and Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorifie your Father which is in Heaven: Phil. 1.11. Being filled with the fruits of righ∣teousness, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory of God: Be very obedient, obey him willingly, constantly, universally, in all his commands, because he is our Father. Lastly, We that profess our selves to be Gods chil∣dren: be like him, Be ye merciful as he is mer∣ciful; holy as he is holy: But to go on: [Who hath loved us] Doct. God loves his People. Psal. 145.8. ver. Psal. 147.10, 11. The Lord loves his Saints; Love! I here's love indeed: 1 Joh. 3.1. Behold what manner of love is here, that we should be called the Sons of God: And if this be so, Ʋse, Then bless him for his love; thank him for it: Psal. 103.1. Bless the Lord oh my soul, and all that is within me, praise his holy Name.
And that in this respect, First, God loves us undeserved, and that in two respects; first, before we loved him: 1 Joh. 4.10, 19. Herein is love, in that he loved us first: and secondly, God loves us, as before we loved him, so when we had nothing to render us lovely to him: Rom. 5.8. While we were sinners, ungodly, in our wickedness, when we had nothing but sin and corruption in us; not that he loved his peoples sins, but their persons: when the whole head was sick, and the whole heart faint, nothing but sores and putrifying corruptions; yet he loved his people though he hated their corruptions; he loved them, and loved them before they had grace. Ephes. 1.4, 5, 6. ver. Having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will: To the praise of the glory of his grace, &c. Secondly, As God loved us undeservedly, so constantly: Jesus Christ having loved his own, he loves them to the end: A friend loves at all times (saith Solomon) in time of adver∣sity, as well as prosperity; there are few such friends in the World, but God is such a friend; he loves his people, when others care not for them: God will love you that are his people, always, at all times; Isa. 54.10. The mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee; neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, saith the Lord, that hath mercy
on thee. He hath taken you into an everlast∣ing covenant with him; and else where they are call'd everlasting hills, because they last as long as the World lasteth: but there will come a time, when they shall be broken, and the Earth shall be no more: Oh but his love is everlasting, when time shall be no more. Ʋse II. Secondly, If this be so, then let them that have grace, take heed of offending God: a wise man will be willing to please, and loth to displease such a Father as he is; take heed of doing evil in the sight of God, stand in awe and sin not; for all iniquity is abomination in the sight of God; God loves you, oh do not provoke him. Ʋse III. Again thirdly, Doth God love his people? then let us love them that fear God and walk in his ways: Ephes. 5.1. Be followers of God, as dear children: God loves the righteous. First, Hereby we shall resemble God. Secondly, Hereby we evidence our love to God, 1 Joh. 4.20. Thirdly, Hereby you will evidence Gods love to you, if you love those that are Gods: 1 Joh. 3, 14. We know we are passed from death to life, be  we love the Brethren: and 18.19. vers. Let us not love only in word but in deed and in truth. Ʋse IV. Fourthly, Doth God love his people? then let us not be troubled, though
the World hate us, what though men regard us not, remember this, if thou fearest God, God loves thee, rejoyce in this oh Saints! thou that art the servants of God, though thou art not the favourite of great men, thou art the favourite of the great God. [And hath given us everlasting consolation] Ever∣lasting consolation, that is everlasting happi∣ness; everlasting life: it is therefore call'd everlasting consolation, because the happiness of mans life, is the comfort of his life: com∣fort in Scripture and consolation, is taken for happiness. Blessed are they that mourn for they shall be comforted: Mat. 5.4. That is, they shall be brought into that glorious hap∣piness: Luk. 16.25. Son remember, that thou in thy life time, receivest thy good things, and Lazarus evil things, but now he is comforted and thou art tormented: He is comforted, that is, he is made blessed, as appears in the op∣position of the words, but thou art tormented; Luk. 6.21. Blessed are you that weep, but you shall laugh: it is not taken in that sense, we commonly take laughing in; but ye shall be made happy, that is the meaning: and so  24. Woe to you that are rich now, for you have received your consolation:  are rich in self conceit, in prid vain glory, that boast in the multitud of your riches, you have received your consolation; (as if he should say) you have all the happiness you are like to have; they shall have
no more: From whence this Point, Doct. God hath given his people everlasting happiness. God hath given it them in the promise of the Word: Luk. 12.32. Fear not little flock, it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom: and ere long they shall have the performance of it, God is giving everlasting consolation, it is not long ere thou shalt receive it. Ʋse, And if it be so, then be not dejected at short tribulation, and the troubles you meet with in the World, why? though you be afflicted for a moment, Yet the rod shall not always lye upon the back of the righteous, Psal. 125. and Psal. 126.5. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy: Psal. 30.5. Weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the mor∣ning: the night of this World may be a night of affliction, but in the morning we shall have joy and comfort; Joh. 14.1. Let not your hearts be troubled (saith our Saviour); and we know saith the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.1. When this earthly tabernacle shall be dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not made with hands, &c. as soon as you dye, your trouble shall end, and your joy then begins; and then no man shall be able to take that joy from you; Joh. 16.22. God will hide his face from you no more; Isa. 54.7. For a
moment have I hid my face from thee, but with great Mercies will I gather thee. [And good hope through grace] this is taken two waies, Doct. I. As God gives his people ever∣lasting happiness, so he gives them hope of it. Rom. 15. vers. 13. He is call'd the God of hope: as the object of our hope, so the Author of it, Secondly, Good hope. Do. II. The Saints hope of happiness is a good hope: Good in the rise of it, the work of God: in the nature of it; the work of the Spirit: in the end of it; it makes People good, therefore let us all labour for it, Doct. III. The ground of Peoples hope of Everlasting happiness, is meerly through the grace of God. The Saints everlasting happiness, is from the free grace of God. Rom. 6.23. The gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord Ephe. 2.8. For by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. And if it be so. Ʋse Why then I mighty shew you, it is not from man's deserving, that he hath happiness,
man cannot merit Heaven, it is not from the desert of man; for mans merit, and God's free grace, are quite opposite, one to another. I should have show'n the folly of that opinion, that hold men may merit happiness from God. For First they must do that which is good. And Secondly that only. And Thirdly by his own strength. Fourthly, more then he ought to do. And Fifthly, the works must be Proportion∣able to the happiness he expects. But First, no man can do good, for we are born evil. Secondly, not only good, for in many things we offend all. Thirdly, we are not sufficient of our selves. Fourthly, if we could do what we should, yet not more then we are bound: for we have but done our duty Luk. 17.7.8.9.10. Read it at your lea∣sure; doth the Master thank is servant, &c. I trow not, &c. Fiftly, if he could do more then God requires of him, his work could never be so good as to call for such a reward of everlasting happiness: ther's no Proportion, between the little good we Creatures can do, and that happiness God hath laid up, for them that fear him: it is an Opinion that hath neither Religion, nor reason, in it, and such as some of the Papists themselves have been a∣shamed of. [Comfort your hearts] whereas the Apostle
prays for these blessings, we may observe this Doctrine. Doct. God's people, have need of Comfort in this World, as well as grace. I say not as much need; mistake me not: not so much need, and that in two respects. First, they may serve God without Comfort, but cannot serve him without grace: they may serve God, though God hide his face, and thereby excercising their patience. Secondly, they have not so much need; be∣cause they may be saved, without Comfort, but they cannot without grace: it is not said, the Mourners shall be destroyed, but the Transgressours. Psal. 37. vers. 38. Without Holyness none shall see the Lord: but he saith not, without Comfort none shall see God: it is possible, though not usual, for a Child of God, to live and die without comfort, that is; with∣out any manifestation, of the love of God to him; God may hide his face from him all his daies: Heman complains, that holy and wise man, that he had been afflicted, with terrors from his youth: and so Job and David, how long lay they under afflictions, without comfort. Saith one that was upon his Death-bed, and could find no Comfort: did you ever read of any one that upon his Death-bed had no com∣fort (if he were the Child of God) that God
hid his face from? and he was answered, yes: saith he, one he had, and that was the Son of God himself, who, when he was ready to give up the Ghost cried out, my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me. But they have need of comfort, in two re∣spects; first, because they will have much trouble in the world Psal. 34. vers. 19. Many are the troubles of the Righteous; 1. Cor. 15.19. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we were of all men most miserable. 2. Tim. 3.11.12. And all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer Persecution. Secondly, without comfort, their hearts will be ready to fail them: Gods peoples natural strength is but like to that of other mens: there∣fore if they have not strength given them from above, (having more troubles then others) they were never able to bear up. Joh 16.33. when Christ tells them he is going out of the world, he gives them a Cordial before hand to prevent their fainting: In the World you shall have trouble, but be of good cheer, I have over∣come the World: and in the, 14. 15. 16. Chap∣ters are several Cordials which he gave them, to support their hearts, as seeing he left them in a troublesome World: and therefore he pro∣miseth them; that when he was gone he would send them a comforter. Joh. 14.16. And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, even the Spirit of Truth, &c. the Second Doctrine, from hence, in that he prays
that God would Comfort their hearts, is this: Doct. II. Christians in time of trouble ought to pray to God to comfort them. Reason I. And that First, because none else can comfort them. Reason II. Secondly, because God hath comforted his People, when they have been in trouble: my flesh and my heart faileth, but God is the strength of my heart and my por∣tion for ever. Psal. 73.26. and Psal. 94.17. Ʋnless the Lord had been mine help, my soul had, long since dwell't in silence. and vers. 18. 19. 22. when I said my foot slippeth, thy mercy oh Lord, held me up in the multitude of my thoughts within me thy comforts refresh my soule, but the Lord is my defence: and my God is the Rock of my refuge. Reason III. Thirdly, pray to God for comfort, for as he hath comforted his people in the old, so in the new Testament, 2. Cor. 1.3. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; the Father of mercies, and the God of all Comfort, ver. 4. 5. who comforteth us in all our Tribulations, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, with the same Comforts, wherewith we our selves are comforted of God; for as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our Consolation also aboundeth by Christ. And again, God hath promised, he will still comfort his people: he will suite comforts, ac∣cording
to the troubles his people are in. Isa. 66.13. As one whom his Mother Comforteth, so will I comfort you, &c. as a tender Parent her Child, if but little faith, weak in grace; God will comfort his according to their trouble. Joh. 14.18. I will not leave you Orphans, (so the word signifies) now that we may have comfort in trouble, let us repent those sins that are the cause of our trouble, he that confesseth and forsaketh his sins shall have mercy: God doth not willingly afflict his people, let us therefore be humbled for our sins, and for the sins of others: for the sins of the Nation, for our Sodome sins: Pride, Idlness, and fullness of Bread: let's be humbled, for our earthly mindedness, luxury, carnal security, for our not prising the Gospel, abusing the Gospel, turn∣ing the grace of God into wantonness; let us be humbled, for our own sins, [the sins of our Relations, of our families: that we have not loved the Simplicity of the Gospel, that we, could not indure plain powerfull Practical Preaching of the Word, if not curiously Cook't, and finely drest, the food of our Souls would not down with us; Oh! let us be humbled for all our sins that is the way to have comfort, take the Councel of the Apostle James: Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up. Jam. 4. ver 10. and then we may ex∣pect these three Cordials; to comfort us. First, God will be with us in all our troubles. Secondly, God will do us good by them.
And lastly, he will bring us out of them. First, if we humble, and repent us of our sins, God will be with us, in our troubles; who ever thou art, and what condition soever thou art in. Isa. 43. vers. 2. When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and through the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burnt; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. God will be with his People, underneath shall be his everlasting arms: God was with his People of Old in Egypt, in the Wilderness, in Captivity: he was with Daniel, in the Den; with Paul, and Silas, in the Stocks; with Peter, in Prison, with John, in Pathmos. Secondly, God will do us good by our trou∣ble. Rom. 8. vers. 28. All things shall work to∣gether for good to those that love God, &c. and in very faithfullness thou hast afflicted me, (saith David) and it is good for me that I have been afflicted, &c. and who can harme you if you do well; saith Paul; God will draw us off from sin, by it, make us meet to be perta∣kers of Heaven; our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a more ex∣ceeding and eternal weight of glory. Thirdly, God will in due time, bring you out of trouble, God will not alwaies leave his People in trouble: the Rod of the wicked shall not alwaies rest upon the back of the righteous: and Psal, 34.4. I sought the Lord, and he heard
me and delivered me, and vers. 17. The Right∣eous cry: and the Lord heareth; and delivereth them out of all their troubles; Oh let's labour to have an humble Spirit! to be affected with and humbled for our sins; and a praying Spirit, and God will deliver us: waite but for a time, &c. It is good for a man to waite and quietly to hope for the Salvation of the Lord. Lam. 3.26. For God will not suffer us to be tempted, above what we are able: but will make away to escape. But to go on. [And stablish you] &c. Doct. Christians should labour to be Esta∣blished. First, in every good word, let your speech be alwaies seasoned with grace: our discourses should never be frothy but Savory. Eph. 5.3.4. Foolishnes, and filthy talking let it no be once named, saith the Apostle: and (by the way) take heed of deriding Scripture, of jesting with Scripture Phrases: but the meaning of the words is, that you may be stablished in the Truth of the Gospel; that is in all Doctrinal and Practical truths: the meaning is, I pray (saith the Apostle) that you be not led a side, by the errour of the wicked, either in regard of unsound Opinions, or unholy conversation; hold fast the form of sound words, walk in the truth, with well doing; buy the truth and sell it not: labour to be sound in God's statutes in regard of your judgment, and sincere in your
practices. I should have given you many Mo∣tives, to press you to this duty of stablish∣ing. Motive I. This will be to the honour of God, and make the world believe, that God is in this People of a truth: certainely, ther's a God in Heaven, that makes his People on Earth to be steadfast in their service of God: that they will not turn aside from the com∣mands of God. Motive II. Again, this will be the joy, of Ministers here and hereafter, 3. Epistle of Job. ver. 4. I have no greater joy, then to hear that my Children walk in truth: and Paul tells us, of these Thessalonians, that their steadfastness did comfort him in all his afflictions. 1. Thes. 3.7.8.9. Therefore my Brethren, we were com∣forted over you, in all our afflictions, and distress, by your faith: for now we live, if ye stand fast in the Lord: for what, thanks can we render to God again for you, for all the joy, wherewith we joy, for your sakes before our God: I this will rejoyce our hearts indeed, if you hold fast: stand fast, and we cannot tell how to be thank∣full enough to God for it: oh; what a joy is this that God hath honoured us so far, that the word of God in our mouths, was not in vaine; but that People continue in the truth: and, so it will be, the Ministers joy hereafter: 1 Thes. 2.19.20. For what is our hope, or joy or Crown
of rejoycing? are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, at his coming? for ye are our glory and joy. There will be the glory of Ministers, when they come before the judg∣ment seat of Christ: when they can say, Lord here am I, and the Children thou hast given me; and then to conclude with that, Phil. 4.1. Therefore, my brethren, dearly beloved, and longed for, my joy and Crown, so stand fast in the Lord, my dearly beloved. Motive III. And lastly, this will be for your comfort, in this World, and in another world: by this you will make your calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.11. And so an en∣trance shall be Ministred unto you abundantly in∣to the everlasting Kingdom, &c. and that you may be so. Means I. First, labour to converse much in the Scriptures, do but as they direct you and you will not do a miss, this was the commen∣dation of the Bareans: they were called Noble, because they searched the Scriptures; most People erre from the truth not knowing the Scriptures, Psal. 1. Therefore if you would not walk in the Counsel of the ungodly, not stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the scorn∣full, let your delight be to meditate in the Law of the Lord. 1. Joh. 4.1. Beloved, believe not e∣very spirit, but trie the Spirits, whether they be of God: trie them, how? Trie all Doctrines▪
bring them to the Touchstone, to the word; take no Opinion upon trust: weigh Opinions in the balance of the Sanctuary; Isa. 8.20. To the law, and to the Testimony &c. and 2 Pet. 1.19. We have a more sure word of Prophesie, whereunto you do well to take heed, &c. Means II. Secondly, if we would be esta∣blished: let us be very watchfull, and that the ra∣ther, because unsound Doctrines, and ungod∣ly Practices are very suitable to our corrupt Natures; be watchfull that you may be streng∣thened in the waies of the Lord: take heed that you fall not from your own steadfa∣stness. Means III. Thirdly, be earnest with God in prayer: that he would stablish you, and that. Reason. I. First, because none can stablish you but God, Joh. 15.5. Without me you can do nothing: there is so much unbelief remains in the heart of the best men in the World, that we shall soon depart from God, unless he keep us: therefore, we must watch our hearts: Now he that stablisheth us with you, in Christ, and hath anointed us, is God: 2 Cor. 1.21. Reason II. Secondly, let's pray to him, for stablishing, because he hath promised to sta∣blish
his People in every good ord and work: though God's people my backslide for a time, yet if they belong to God he will humble them, for their sins, it shall cost them dear, and as Paul prays for it, 1 Thes. 3.13. That they might be stablished: so he tells them of God's promise. Phil. 1.6. Being confident of this very thing, that he which hath begun a good Work in you, will perform it untill the day of Jesus Christ: and 2. Thes. 3.3.4. The Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you and keep you from evil. Means IV. The last direction I shall give you, look to recompence of reward; (Heb. 11.) that made Moses, leave all the pleasures of the World, the pleasures of sin which were but for a season; look to that reward to them that keep close to his commands, Psal. 84. vers. 11. For tht Lord God is a Sun and Shield: the Lord will give grace and glory: no good thing will he withhold, from those that walk uprightly: now what would you have more? what can you desire more? Walk but uprightly, God will never disappoint you: you may believe him, Jam. 1.12. Blessed is the man, that endureth Temptation, for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to them that love him: I shall conclude all this Ex∣hortation, with the Direction and Exhortation of the spirit of God, Rev. 2.7. To him that over∣cometh, will I give to eat of the Tree of life, and vers. the 10. Be faithfull to the death, and I
will give thee a Crown of Life: Oh, take notice of the advice, given to the Church of Philadelphia: Rev. 3.11. Hold fast that thou hast, that no man take thy Crown: and Rev. 22.12. Behold, I come quickly: and my reward is with me to give every man, according as his Work shall be: God will render to every man according to his Workes: Rom. 2.7. To them who, by patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory, honour, and immortality, eternal life; Eternal life, should be the end of all our Preaching, and your hearing, so the Apostle: Rom. 10.1. Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved: this was the portion of Scripture I first took to discourse upon, when I first came amongst you: and the desire of my Soul was, that your Soules should be saved; and I desire still, that I, and my People may serve the Lord: and therefore I wish, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all: and the Lord grant that they which love not grace may have grace wrought in their hearts: and that you that have grace, may grow in grace, more and more: I wish even your perfection: I dare not appeal unto Hea∣ven as Paul, Act. 20. but this I pray: that your love may abound more and more, in knowledge and in all judgment: 1 Thes, 5.23. And the very God of peace, sanctifie you wholly, and I pray God, that your whole Spirit, Soul and Body, may be perserved, blamless, unto the omming of our Lord Jesus Christ: Heb. 13.20
21. and the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus that great Shep∣heard of the Sheep, through the blood of the ever∣lasting covenant: make you perfect in every good work, to do his will working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, who hath loved us, and hath given us Everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace, comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and Work. Amen. FINIS.
1 Pet. 1. vers. 6. Wherein ye greatly rejoyce, though now for a season (if need be) ye are in heaviness through manifold Tempta∣tions. THough many Saints have but a small Portion in this World, yet there is alotted to them a goodly heritage in another world: though they are not filled with the good things of the earth, yet they are promised (which is better) the glory of Heaven though they have but a little in Possession, yet they have much in reversion, and though many of them be Poore many times as to the things they have in hand: ye they are very Rich as to what they have in hope. These Saints to whom Peter Writes, were Pilgrims and Strangers here on Earth; scatttered up and down the World, they had no certaine abode, no continuing City, yet they soug on that was to come, they looked for a City whose Builder and Maker was God; Silver and Gold; many of them either had none, or very little; and as to the Possessions of the Earth, their Portion was not great: Houses and Lands
they were either denyed or deprived of, they suffered the Spoiling of their goods, yet they were begotten to a lively hope, unto an inheri∣tance better then this world affords, unto an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled that fadeth not away; reserved in Heaven for them and that they might know it was not only re∣served, for them but to be obtained by them the Apostle tells them, They should be kept by the power of God through Faith unto Salvation; which now as it was promised them should ere long be manifested, ready to be revealed in the last time, and the Apostle having shewed what they had hopes of, he shews what effect this their hope had upon them; namely much joy and Alacrity in the minds of their present Suf∣ferings and Calamities; as the words I have read do declare unto you: Wherein ye greatly re∣joyce, &c. In which Verse we may Observe, First, The Christians great Joy. Secondly, The Christians great Sorrow. I. You have here believers great Joy, a∣rising from hopes of their future Salvation, in these words, Wherein you greatly rejoyce. II. The Christians or the Saints great Sor∣row arising from sense of their present tribula∣tion, Ye are in heavyness through manifold tem∣ptations. Which Heaviness, or which Temptations, are set forth
First, By the time of them. Secondly, By the ground of them. I. By the time of them, and that is declared in these words, Now for a season. II. By the ground of them, and that is sup∣posed or intimated, If need be. Wherein you, &c. Wherein, that is in the hopes of Heaven, in the hopes of their inheritance, in the hopes of the glory of God, and that eternal Salvation that was promised to them, and expected by them; as the 4. and 5. verses do declare. Wherein you greatly rejoyce; you, though others do not, yet you rejoyce; others do not rejoyce in the hopes of Heaven, they have no right to it, no hope of it, they have no ground to expect it, it is not promised to them, nor no ground have they to look for it; but you that are the elect, the chosen, the called peo∣ple of God; you that were as elected by the love, so sanctified by the Spirit of God. 2. ver. Wherein, that is in hopes of the glory of God, you rejoyce, you greatly rejoyce, you triumph for joy. Though now for a season, or though now for a little time, you are in heaviness, or in grief, through manyfold temptations, troubles and trials, you have in the World. The words are not difficult, they may afford us these six Instructions. From hence we might Observe, You are in
heaviness through manyfold temptations. First, That the people of God in this world, are exercised with manyfold temptations. Secondly, That the Saints of the most high, or the people of the great God, and his peculiar Peo∣ple, are sometimes in heaviness through their ma∣nyfold temptations. Thirdly, That the temptations true Christians are exercised withall: shall be but for a season. Fourthly, That there is need why God's Peo∣ple sometimes should be in this heaviness, should be exercised through manyfold temptations. Fifthly, That when Gods people are in heavi∣ness, when they are exercised with manifold temptations there is need of them. Sixthly, That they that fear God should rejoyce in hope of their eternal Salvation, though now they be in heaviness through manyfold tempta∣tions. I shall begin with the first and be but breif in it. You are in heaviness through manyfold Temptations, manyfold temptations, it semes are your portion, the Doctrine that lies plain before us is this. First, That God's people in this World are often under many temptations. Many temp∣tations, or diverse temptations as the word is elsewhere Translated. James. 1. vers. 2. Count it all joy when you fall into divers temptations.
In opening this truth I shall endeavour very breifly to answer these to Queries. First, What is meant here by temptations? Secondly, How it may appeare that the god∣ly are exercised, or annoyed by divers temp∣tations, or manyfold temptations? First, What we are to understand by temp∣tations? Answer, To that I answer this word temp∣tation is taken several ways in Scripture; but there are two Sorts of temptations that are especially mentioned in the sacred Word of God; there are temptations to evil, and temp∣tations by evil; temptations are taken, either for an allurement unto Sinning, or for Chastisement by suffering, either for temptations to Sin, or temptations to Sorrow. Temptations are taken sometimes, for temp∣tations unto Sin, so in Scripture often; to mention but some few places now, so we are to understand it in that place in that blessed form of Prayer (that may be well used if not abused as too often it is) Mat. 6.13. We are taught to pray, lead us not into temptation; that is, lead us not into temptation to Sin, and so the Apostles sense is in what he saith. 1 Tim. 6. vers. 9. They that will be rich, fall into temp∣tation, they that are resolved they will thrive, and prosper in the World whatever comes of it, which way soever they get it, they fall in∣to temptation, that is as the words following ex∣plane it, into a snare, and into many foolish and
hurtfull lusts which drown men in perdition, and destruction. Now in this sense it is true the god∣ly have manifold temptations, the best of men are not sometimes without the strongest and greatest temptations: temptations unto Sin, they are often tempted, by the Devil, and by the World, and by their own Hearts, to sin, and that in several kinds, the Act of sin, the Practices of sin, the Course of sin, they are of∣ten tempted to cast of the fear of God, and ser∣vice of God; so Job was, though he did not harken to, and was not overcome by that temp∣tation; but of these temptations it is not meant here. Secondly, As there are temptations to sin, so there are temptations to sorrow, as there are temptations to doing evil; so there are temp∣tations in suffering of evil, and so temptations in Scripture are put for crosses, and troubles, and afflictions that the godly meet with in the world, and St. Paul's troubles, amongst his ene∣mies the Jewes, are called his temptations, Acts. 20. vers. 19. Serving the Lord with all humili∣ty of mind, and with many teares and tempta∣tions which befel me by the laying in wait of the Jewes. Many troubles that he met with through that cross and perverse People that he Preached often unto, and so the Exhortation of the Apostle James is to be understood, James. 1. vers. 2. My brethen count it all joy when you fall into divers temptations, that is, not when you are tempted to many sins, but when you are
afflicted through many troubles; though you meet with many crosses in the world, yet do not be troubled, but rejoyce, at it is, vers. 12. Blessed is the man that endures temptation: that is blessed is the man, happy is the person that endures Persecutions, afflictions for godliness sake, for the Gospels sake, that is willing to suf∣fer, hath a heart to suffer, and strength to suf∣fer, in the ways, and service of God, and so the time of temptation in this sense is taken for trouble, for the time of Persecution, for the time of affliction, and so our Saviour opens this Phras Luke. 8.13. vers. compare it with Mat. 13.20.21. vers. what in the former place in Luke, is called temptation in Matthew; is called Per∣secution and Tribulation; what one saith when temptation comes, the other calls it Tribulati∣on, or Persecution arises, by and by he is of∣fended, and so we are to understand temptati∣ons here in the Text, manyfold temptations, that is, manyfold afflictions, variety of troubles, and Calamities, all sorts of crosses which are therefore here called by the name temptation, because men are tempted or tried by them, they try mens faith, and love, and obedience; they discover their sincerity, and integrity. So much for the first here, what is meant by temptation. Secondly, How it doth appeare that the godly are exercised with manifold temptati∣ons? This I might shew by an Induction of particulars, by testimony of Scripture, and by
instances in the several sorts of temptations, or troubles that the godly are afflicted with in this World.: I will speak to one or two; take one Testimony of Scripture for it a few places I shall mention, Psal. 34.19. Many are the af∣flictions of the Righteous. 2 Cor. 4.8. We are troubled on every side, Psal. 88.3. My soul is full of troubles, Psal. 25.17. The troubles of my heart are inlarged. As soon as ever men begin to be good, to lead good lives they are apt to see bad days in some senses. Heb. 10.32. After you were illu∣minated you endured a great fight of afflictions. After you were brought to the saving know∣ledge of God troubles were, presently your Portion, the cross is the constant companion of the Gospel. I might shew further from whence it is, from the malice of the Devil, the rage of wicked men, the sins of our own hearts, the wise pro∣vidence, the merciful providence of the good God towards his people, they have troubles and temptations in all kinds, of out ward man, of inward man, in friends, in enemies, in their persons, in their relations, possessions, what ever they have that is neare and deare to them; but I cannot stand on iculars, let me only mention one, that e temptation that the Text mentions, and that is the temp∣tations that happen to the Saints here through Persecution, for those whom the Apostle writes to 1 Pet. 1. they were scattered throughout
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bi∣thynia, driven up and down for the Gospels sake, to save themselves from the hand of wick∣ed men, and amongst many temptations this is one, the temptation of Persecution, this is the common temptation of the Gospel, of them that profess and believe it, and indeavour to live according to it; wicked men do what they can, that hate godliness themselves, to discourage others from it, and discover their malice not only in bad Language, but in the base usage of them that fear God. I might shew as to malicious reprocahful Language how common a condi∣tion this hath been for all the Saints in all times, let them be never so good they shall be ill spoken of; and they that are the greatest blessings to the places where they live shall be looked upon as the greate stroublers of it, as they said thou art he that troublest Israel, whereas wick∣ed Ahab and his Idolatries brought their misery upon them. And so Jeremy he must be ill spoken of, he was the man that did all the mischeif in his days, whereas poor man what did he do, he did only pray for them, and Preach to them, and tell them of those sins that brought those evils upon them, and yet he must be accounted  man that was the Author of all their mise no place is fit for him but the Prison, or the Dungeon; and so Paul and Silas, Acts. 17.5.6. when they came to preach the Gospel they raised up against them the worst, and the baser sort of the people, and they must
revile them, these are they that turn the World upside down: alas what had they turned upside down: but men's lusts and the Devils King∣dom, the Devil knew that well enough and therefore he so much opposed them; alas they are so far form being the disturbers that they are the quieters of a Land; they do not over∣throw but uphold kingdoms, the holy Prophets and the holy People of God are the Chariots of Israel and the Horsemen thereof, and when once they are removed then ruine may be expected; they are the only means that God makes use of sometimes to keep of misery from a people; let but Lot go out of Sodom and then Fire, and Brimstone comes down from Heaven upon them; while Jeremy continues praying the Lord forbeares punishing; but when God would bring his judgments, then, there comes, pray not for this people, This is the common Portion of God's people, they must be thought the troublers of the place, they are the men that do all the mischief, that bring all the cala∣mities, as if nothing but holiness was the ruine of the world, &c. But that is not all, the bad Language they give them, but the bad usage they meet with is the great temptation, and trouble that the people of God are annoyed by, they do not only open their mouthes against them, but they stretch forth their hands to vex them; God's people they are the Butt for them to shoot the Arrowes of their fury against, Lord saith
David, Psal. 3, 1. How are they increased that trouble me. Many are they which rise up a∣gainst me, Gal. 4.29. and it was not their case alone but saith the Apostle, as then he that was borne after the flesh persecuted him that was borne after the spirit, even so it is now: and so it will be to the end of the World, these two seedes will never agree, wicked men hate the godly at their hearts, and when they have power, and opportunity, they will manifest the hatred of their spirits by the incivilities they will do them, they will vent their malice, the fury and rage of their hearts in their bud deal∣ings with them, 2 Cor. 11.24.25. Not on∣ly the persons that knew not God, but the Jewes that pretended aquaintance with God, they were Paul's great adversaries. This is the condition of God's people, they shall be exer∣cised with great temptations, with Persecutions in the world. David tells us, 1 Sam. 26.20. He was hunted as a Partridge in the Mountains. Psal. 102.6.7. I am like a Pellicane, (saith the Psalmist) of the Wilderness, I am like an Owle of the Desart: I watch and am as a Sparrow a∣lone upon the House top: and Paul tells us of those brave men, those choise Saints, even those, the World was not worthy of, Heb. 11.36. They had trials of cruel, mockings and Scourgings, yea moreover of bonds and imprisonment, they were stoned, they were Sawen asunder, were tempted, were slain with the Sword, &c. The land was not able to beae their words and
their lives; and Paul saith this was his case, 2 Cor, 11.23. He was in stripes above measure, in Prisons more frequent, in deaths oft, of the Jewes five times received I forty stripes save one, thrice was I beaten with Rods, once was I sto∣ned, &c. And it was not his case alone but of other Saints, not only in his time, but all others must in one kind; or other suffer and in this sense, All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer Persecution: either the Persecution of the hand, or the Persecution of the Tongue, be reproached and vilified, if not abused, and imprisoned; if not in reference to their liberties, and estates, yet in one kind or other they shall be annoyed; Nay the godly many times are molested and wronged by those from whom they may in most reason expect the most civility, Psal. 41.9. My own familiar friend in whom I trusted which did eat of my bread hath lift up his heel against me. See how many loved Christ, and see how many of his servants, as Christ saith among the Twelve there was a Judas, Mat. 26.21. Verily I say unto you that one of you shall betray me, and they were exceeding sor∣rowfull and began every one of them to say to him Lord is it I? and he answered and said, he that dippeth his hand with me in the Dish, the same shall betray me. Nay we read the first man that e∣ver was born in the world that was a good man was a persecuted man; he was persecuted to the death, and that by his own brother, Joh. 1
3.12. Cain was of that wicked one and who slew his Brother? and wherefore slew he him? because his own works were evil, and his Brothers good. One would think he should rather have preser∣ved him, no, such was the wickedness of his spirit, that that was the cause that he could not be quiet until he was destroyed: his own works were evil, and his Brothers good, and the A∣postle makes the Application in the 13, vers. marvel not my brethren if the World hate you: If you fear God and are willing to serve him be, sure the World will hate you, those that are nearely related to you, you may expect they will be injurious to you. Saith Christ to his Disciples, think not that I am come to send peace on the Earth (but the fruit of the Gospel is peace) but the Sword (that is trouble will follow that) I am come to set a man at variance against his Father, and the Daughter against her Mother, and the Daughter in Law, against her Mother in Law, and a mans foes shall be they of his own house, The Preaching of the Gospel is not the cause, but only occasion through some mens imbra∣cing of it, whom God gives grace to, and others rejecting and opposing of it, it doth occasion divisions amongst those that are naturally most united; there is a caution given; Jer. 9.4. take ye heed every one of his neighbour and trust ye not in any brother; for every brother will utterly supplant, and every neighbor will walk with slanders, i. e. raise false reports of you, and
bring you to suffer unjustly; though every brother and every neighbour will not; yet many neighbours and many relations will do so. That's one great temptation that the people of God have in reference to wicked mens persons. Secondly, In regard of Sathans temptations they have many troubles too. For those whom Sathan knows he cannot destroy for ever, he will do what he can to disturb here, and though he cannot destroy them, yet he will afright them here. Temptations of troubles are the portion of God's people in this world. Ʋse, The meditation or thought of this truth may be useful both to those that are in a prosperous, and them that are in a suffering Condition. If God's people be under many troubles, many temptations in this world, then you that fear God and yet prosper, let the considera∣tion of this stir you up to a two-fold duty. First, To expect troubles, to expect temptations how ever you flourish in your out ward man yet do not think prosperity will always last. While God blesses his people with comfort, and mercy, bless him; and praise him, but look for an alteration, expect a change. They that at present enjoy their ease, and safety and liberty, and have many comforts, and delights
in the world, O use the world but do not abuse it in those blessings God gives you, but re∣joyce as though you rejoyced not, remembr∣ing, it will not be always thus with you. Think upon this truth, temptations and trials will befall you, sooner or later, troubles will be all our portion, remember the daies of dark∣ness are a coming, the time of suffering will come before we go out of this world. Saith Christ in the World you shall have trouble but in me you shall have peace. Though hitherto many of God's people may have met with no considerable temptations, yet they may have their share of them, they may have many of them; let not those that are in a prosperous Condition, in any respect let them not always expect Halcyon days, the clouds may soon gather, a storm may come before we are aware, and trouble is many times nearest, when we think it fur∣thest off. Secondly, As we should expect temptation, and expect trouble; so let us prepare for trou∣ble. Get your selves furnished with those graces that may sure your conditions, that you may not be overcome by temptation; O pray, get a stock of holiness that may stand you in stead in the evil day, and in the hour of temp∣tation; O be not without faith and meekness, &c. that we shall have so much need of in the time of trouble. The Scripture tells that we are pilgrims and strangers here on earth, as
all the godly were in all times, we have a long journey to take from Earth to Heaven, we must pass through the Sea of this World, and the Winds will blow, O let us be prepared a∣gainst a storm for we must meet with fowl weather, Acts. 20.22.23. Paul tells the El∣ders of the Church of Ephesus, behold I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem not knowing the things that shall befall me there, (only one thing he knew) Save that the Holy Ghost witnesseth in every City, saying that bonds and afflictions abide me. What success I shall have in Preaching I cannot tell, or what other things may happen, but I am sure to meet with troubles here; and why should we expect otherwise then this good man did; Now we had need be prepared against them, for in every place we are like to find them. Secondly, Let them that suffer in the world take heed of rash judging themselves; let no Person think that his case is bad because his condition is sad, let no Person think he his none of God's people because he meets with so many troubles, you, saith the Apostle, are in heavi∣ness through manyfold temptations. Let us not think that God doth not love us because he doth afflict us, Paul was a pretious servant of Jesus Christ, one that knew Jesus Christ, and loved him, and yet afflictions and troubles e∣very where were his portion, Heb. 12.7. If you endure Chastisements God deals with you as sons for what son is he whom the Father Chastens not?
It is not a sign of the hatred but of the love of God; whom the Lord loves he Chastens, and whatever troubles we may meet withal in this world, 1 Pet. 5.9. remember this, the same af∣flictions are accomplished in our brethren in the world. Secondly, You are in heaviness through many∣fold Temptations, not only have them, but you are sensible of them: from whence the Doctrin is. Observe, That the Saints may be in heaviness through their manyfold temptations. You are in heaviness, or you are sadned, you are grieved. God's people may have their spirits much sadned through the variety of troubles they meet with in the world. The word in the Text you are in Heaviness, or you are sadned comes from a word that signifies such grief as brings tears into the eyes; such a grief as is expressed by weeping; you are those that even cry, your grief is such that causes tears; I the thought of the great troubles you meet with hath such sorrow and grief, not on∣ly the troubles of the soul but the troubles that God's people meet with in the world they much sadden their spirits and much grive their hearts, Psal. 6, 6, 7. David speaks of his Temptations, saith he, I am weary with my groaning, all the Night make I my Bed to swim, I water my Couch with my tears; day and night he was full of griefe, full of weeping Myne eye is consumed beeause of grief, it waxeth
old because of all my enemies, not only the troubles that he had as to his Soul, the thought of his sins, but the troubles of the world did much affect him, Psal, 38.6. I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the day long. 8. vers. I am feeble and sore broken, I have roar'd by reason of the disquietness of my heart. And so the Church, Lam 1.16. the Church having spoken of her misery what, a sad case she was in, in the world, saith she, For these things I weep, myne eye runneth down with water, because the comforter that should relieve my Soul is far from me; and how great the trouble was, that was then the Churches portion, the whole book of Lamentations verifies. Grace doth not make people insensible, they whose hearts are sanctified may lay to heart their troubles. Though grace doth correct, and abate mens passions, and rectify nature, yet it doth not destroy nature, or natural affections. The Saints here, that were the called and chosen people of God, they had their sorrow, and grief as well as their gladness, the work of grace wherever it is in truth wrought in any soul, doth much restrain mens violent passions; yet when men begin to be good they do not cease to be men. Religion doth not rob people of their senses. The godly have their fears as well as their hopes, & as they have their joys so they are not without their sorrows, you are in heaviness through manifold temptations. Afflictions are afflictions to them that fear God as well as to
others, Heb. 12.11. no chashiment for the present seemeth to be joyous but grievous. Let no Person think because the crosses and troubles he meets withal in the World do sad∣den and afflict him, therefore he hath no grace; that surely if they had grace they should have no such thing as grief, and trouble of heart. See the Holyest men we read of tell us the troubles of their hearts were often inlarged. Though the power of godliness doth moderate our affections to things here below, yet it doth not make us insensible of what we suffer here below. Grace doth not rob men of Humanity, as not upon a Civil account, so neither doth it upon a Natural account: people do not cease to be men and women when they come to be truly godly; if Persons were not affected & afflicted with their troubles, afflictions were no afflictons to them, &c. Do not therefore pass sentence upon thy self as one that is an unconverted Person because the great troubles thou meetest withal in the world are laid to heart by thee; though grace do diminish, yet it doth not destroy mens pas∣sions, James 5.17. the Apostles us, Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, though he was a man of exceeding great faith, yet you find him sometimes a man of great fear. The Scripture records, as his grace, so his natural temper, that eminency of grace that was in him, did not destroy that that was natural in him. Christianity doth not introduce a Stoical Stupi∣dity, that they do not at all regard how things
go with them; we may have grace in our hearts, and yet lay to heart our sufferings; we may be truly brought home to God, and yet af∣fected through sense of our afflictions in the World. Only here let me put in a few cautions. First, Though God's people are in heavi∣ness and sadness through the great troubles that they meet withal in the world; yet, you that fear God, take heed you be not in such heavi∣ness as those who have no hope, do not sorrow as them that have no hope, or no ground of hope, for the blessing of God upon them here, much less for happiness with God hereafter: rejoyce in the Lord, while you have sorrow in the world, saith the Apostle, rejoyce in the Lord always, and he makes a repetition, and a∣gaine I say rejoyce. This is his councel to the suffering Saints; even when most afflicted, as David, 1 Sam. 30.6. when he was in that great trouble, when his Wives were taken Captive, and his Children, and the people speak of stoning David, what did he do? but David in∣couraged himself in the Lord his God: so should we do when we are discouraged as to the world, then we should incourage our selves in the Lord our God, at what time I am afraid, I will trust in thee; let not our afflictions here, make us think it will never be otherwise hereafter. Secondly, Let not your heaviness, or trouble, or sadness in the World be joyned with discontent; do not murmur because we
meet with troubles, let us not think because we are afflicted that others are in a better con∣dition then our selves, because they thrive and and flourish in the world, O let us not quarrel at any of God's providences, let us say as that good Old man Eli, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good: the Lord is good and doth good, and he doth nothing but what is good for us: we have no cause to quarrel when God doth afflict us; let us then take care that we do not fret our selves to do evil, for there is no evil in the City but God doth it, and good is that God that sends that evil, and all evil shall be for good to them that fear God. Thirdly, Let your heaviness be greater for your transgressions then for any affliction or temptation; let us more grieve for sin, that is the cause of trouble, then for all those troubles that are caused by sin, let us more lay to heart our own corruptions, then all the malice of wicked men, and the afflictions we meet with in the world; we had not known what sorrow meant had not sin been in our hearts and been in our lives: let us mourn more for sin, or however be sure that our natural sorrow be accompanyed with spiritual sorrow, that we have that godly sorrow that workes repentance unto Salvation: for worldly sorrow alone only causeth death, O let sin be more laid to heart and the crosses in the World less laid to heart; let us mourn more, for our transgressions and we shall less mind our afflicti∣ons.
Fourthly, Let not our heaviness, or sadness, or grief of spirit, that is occasioned through troubles in the World, cause us to neglect our duty: let us take care that we do not so grieve for what we suffer, as to forget what we have to do, let us not so mind our misery as to for∣get our duty, or omit our duty to God or Man, in the places of our general and particular cal∣ling, which God hath set us in the world. When sorrow is so excessive that it drives us from God and from his wayes, from delighting in him, we have cause then to be in heaviness for it; we are not so to mind what we suffer, as to forget what we do. That sorrow is never like to do us good, nay that sorrow doth not make us at all to be good that keeps us from doing good; if we once come to that pass to neglect our du∣ty, that heaviness is to be lamented. Applicat. Beloved, we have heard Gods peo∣ple are in heaviness through manifold temptations, but let me tell you, If Gods people be in hea∣viness here, what heaviness shall Gods enemies be in hereafter? If God chastise his faithful ser∣vants, sure he will punish his enemies; if this be done in a green Tree, what shall be done in a dry; if Gods people have their temptations, surely wicked men shall have their tribulation, tribulation and anguish upon every one that doth evil; doubtless if manifold temptations be the lot of the righteous here, dreadful tribulation will be the portion of the wicked hereafter; doubtless the time is coming, Prov. 11.8. vers.
The righteous is delivered out of trouble and the wicked cometh in his room: the time is coming when sin and sorrow shall be gone from the people of God, and then everlasting sorrow shall be the portion of all ungodly men, Matth. 13.41. ver. The Son of Man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity; them which follow sin, devise sin, commit sin, tempt others to sin; he shall cast them into a furnace of fire, there shall be wail∣ing and gnashing of teeth, there is heaviness in∣deed: Then shall the righteous shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father. If they that fear God be so heavy in this World, if the yoak of Christ be so uneasie, how intolerable will the misery of wicked men be in another World? If those that fear God have had such troubles of Spirit, as David, That they have roared by reason of disquietness of heart, then certainly hypocrites, and unbelievers, and the enemies of God and godliness, the time is coming, they shall have such a life that they would be glad it might be at an end, but alas it shall never end, Rev. 9.6. ver. They shall seek death and shall not find it, and shall desire to dye and death shall flee from them. O be∣loved, if the Godly, the pretious Servants, the faithful People of the Most High, drink of the bitter cup of Gods wrath; if they taste the cup of Gods anger, sure the wicked shall drink the dregs of it; if God afflict those
whom he loves, how will he punish those whom he hates? Ʋpon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible tem∣pest, this shall be the portion of their cup. If Gods people be in heaviness here, if they have manifold temptations, many sorrows shall be to the wicked hereafter. The end of the first Sermon. I Now come to the third Observation which is this, That the temptations that Gods people are exercised with shall be but for a season; and now for a season, saith the Apostle; if need be, the troubles of Gods people shall not last always, but for a season, or for a little while; yet a little while, it will not be long, it will not always be at this pass, it will not always be thus sad with you, Light is sown, as the Psalmist tells us, for the righ∣teous, and joy for the upright in heart: Though they may have an hour of darkness, and though they that are most sincere, may have an hour of sorrow, yet light is sown for them; and as it is sown for them, so it shall come up, they shall have it, Psal. 126.6, 7. They that sow in tears shall reap in joy; He that goeth forth and weepeth bearing pretious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoycing bringing forth his sheaves with him. Gods
people shall not be always under haches, their troubles are but for a season for a while; they are but for a season; either for a season in this life, or at most but for the season of this life. First, They are manytimes but for a season in this life; Gods people manytimes out-live their troubles; many temptations that God brings his servants into, he brings them out again even in this World; their fits of sorrow do not last always, though they have their sad paroxismes, they have some intermission notwithstanding sad fits, and yet they have a deliverance: you have heard of the tempta∣tions of Job, and you have heard of the de∣liverance of Job, Psal. 34.19. ver. Many are the troubles of the righteous, and what shall they always last, no, the Lord delivers them out of them all; and as it was then, so it is verified at this time, (especially those that are the great troubles of the people of God, God doth with the temptation make away for escape: The Lord took away all Job had, but yet he gave him all again; nay the Lord, Job 42. gave him twice as much as he had before: God delivered him out of all his adversity. And as it is so sometimes as to Persons, so it is as to Nations; God manytimes saves his people in this World out of the greatest ca∣lamities, he brings them with joy and com∣fort out of them: we Read often of Israel, the Lord sold them into the hand of their
enemies, for such and such sins as they were guilty of, and yet the Lord raised Saviours to them, and delivered them out of the hand of those that hated them. God often in wrath remembers mercy towards his people in this World, The rod of the wicked, saith the Psalmist, shall not rest upon the back of the righteous; though it may come there, yet it shall not stay there: God manytimes doth provide a way to escape out of the greatest of his peoples miseries, and sometimes he gives them that faith whereby they are con∣fident that deliverance shall come, Psal. 71.20 21. vers. Thou who hast shewed me great and soar troubles, shalt quicken me again, and shalt bring me up from the depthes of the Earth, thou shalt increase my greatness, and comfort me on every side. He was not so deep in the pit of affliction, but God would raise him up again; and he was not so surrounded with crosses, but God would comfort him on every side: Yea confident he was of this, and that faith manytimes of deliverance, keeps up their Spirits under the sense of their present troubles, Psal. 27.13. ver. saith the Psalmist, speaking of the good issue he hoped for, I had fainted unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the Land  the living: the thought of his future salvation did refresh and up∣hold his Spirit, under the sense of his pre∣sent tribulation. Nay, Sometimes though Gods people have
not that faith to believe they shall be delivered, yet he will shew them that mercy to cause deli∣verance; as God is able, so he always doth abun∣dantly beyond what his people ask and think, if not beyond what they pray for, yet beyond what they hope, they shall have, Psal. 31.22. v. I said, saith David, in my haste I am cut off from before thine eyes, but it was far otherwise, never∣theless thou heardest the voice of my supplicati∣ons when I cried to thee: I was brought to this pass, there was no hope of deliverance for me, I did not expect to see good day in this World; but God did otherwise, he dealt graciously with me; I went on in my duty, and God heard me; and as the Psalmist tells us, Psal. 116.11. vers. I said in my haste all men are lyars: whoever professed or spoke, that any mercy would be shewed him, that ever salvation should be wrought for him, and that he should be delivered out of the hand of his Persecutors, he did believe it was a meer story, a very lye, and yet the Lord re∣membred him in his low estate; I was brought low and he helped me, return unto thy rest O my soul, for the Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee: God did shew him mercy, though he did not expect mercy; nay, such a mercy as to be delivered in this World: I shall one day fall by the hand of Saul, and yet Saul died, and he lived: Gods people, I say, many∣times they are delivered in this World out of eminent dangers, though great, though
long troubles, though soar, and though last∣ing, yet they are not everlasting, they do not continue as long as their days continue. Many have been under great temptations, soar persecution, and yet have outlived their persecutors, David did Saul, and Paul did even when they were past hopes; 2 Cor. 1.9, 10. vers. We were pressed out of measure above strength, insomuch that we despaired even of life, but we had the sentence of death in our selves, that we should not trust in our selves, but in God which raiseth the dead: Who delivered us from so great a death, and doth deliver; in whom we trust that he will yet deliver us: and he tells Timothy, 2 Tim. 3.10, 11. vers. of the great troubles and persecutions that came to him, but out of them all the Lord de∣livered him: and so in the same Epistle, 2 Tim. 4.16, 17. ver. when he was brought before Nero, all men forsook me, yet God did not forsake me, the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me, and I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lyon: though he was very near unto death, yet his life was preserved, God did make, with that soar temptation, a way to escape. The troubles of Gods peo∣ple shall be but for a season, sometimes they are but for a season in this life. Secondly, At the most they shall be but for the season of this life, they shall last no longer; so one Paraphrases upon the words, they are but for a season, as long as this short
life lasts, so long you may be afflicted, if there be occasion for it, but then there is an end of all: 2 Cor. 4.17. vers. Our light af∣fliction which is but for a season, but for a moment, it shall not be hereafter, it shall be but here while the moment of this life lasts, then it vanishes away; when our lives go, if we fear God, all our troubles will go away with them: there is a time for every thing, this present time is the time of the Saints afflictions, the time that Gods people suffer, this is the time of temptation of all that fear God; when this life is at an end, afflictions will be out of season, there will be none of them when this life ends, the suf∣fering of the godly will then be at an end; death puts a period to all their troubles, they continue but while they have their abode in this earthly tabernacle, no longer shall any cross or affliction be their portion, Revel. 14.13. vers. Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord, from henceforth, yea saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours, and their works do follow them. Blessed are they though they seem the most cursed of any people, in some respects, while they live; yet blessed are they when they dye, for they rest from their labours, that is though not from their labour of service, and love to God and his people; yet from their labour of sorrow, they shall then have no burden of persecution or affliction to bear; as no evil shall be done by
them, so no evil then shall be suffered by them; as they shall not know what sin means in another World, so neither shall they understand what sorrow means; weeping and wailing, all tears then shall be wiped from their faces, and ever∣lasting joy shall be upon their heads; no distur∣bance of Spirit shall be the Saints lot in another World; no evil work, nor work of iniquity shall ever follow them; mens Pesecutors may follow them to the grave, but then they must leave them, then your bodies shall go into your graves in peace, and your souls shall go to God that gave them, to the Spirits of just men made perfect, that are without sin, and without suffering, that are for ever serving God, and continually injoying God. In Gods presence where Gods people shall be after this World, there is no part of their lives that is imbittered to them; there is fulness of joy, and their is pleasure for ever∣more at Gods right hand; it is not only some little comfort is given them, a this World to bear up their Spirits, but there the joy shall be everlasting pleasure for evermore. O well may believers say, as God by the Prophet, Say you to the righteous it shall be well with him; though it be very ill with him whiles he lives, yet it shall be well with him when he dyes, his troubles he shall see they were but for a season, though he may have many inconveniences in his earthly taber∣nacle, yet he shall find nothing of dislike
when he comes to Gods everlasting habita∣tion. Secondly, Why is it so? Why shall the temptations of the Godly be but for a season? Why shall their affliction not last allways? I will give you a two fold account of it. I. Because of the mercifulness of God, he is a God of tender mercy, he compassi∣onates all his creatures, in all respects, but much more them who are not only the work of his hands, but the delight of his heart, as all that fear and love him are, he hath great kindness for them; and this account is given, why the Lord will not always chide his people? he is a merciful God, Psal. 103.8, 9. vers. The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy, and then it follows, he will not always chide, nei∣ther will he keep his anger for ever; angry he may be with his children, when they are faulty and disobedient, But he will not keep his anger forever; Why? the verses follow∣ing declare, Like as a Father pitieth his chil∣dren, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him; for he knows our frame, he remembers we are but dust: God knows what frail creatures his people are, and though some chiding they may bear, yet his frowns they are not able to undergo; that is the reason God gives, why he would not shew himself always displeased with his people, he should break their hearts with such thoughts, Isa. 57.16, 17. vers. I
will not contend for ever, neither will I be al∣ways wroth, why? for the Spirit should fail before me, and the Soul which I have made: the very heart of Gods people would be bro∣ken with a long continuance of their troubles, and therefore he will in wrath remember mer∣cy, as it follows, For the iniquity of his co∣vetuousness was I wroth, and smote him; I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his heart: I have seen his ways and will heal him; I will lead him also, and restore comforts unto him, and to his mourners. I know that he is not able always to bear my afflicting hand, I will take it of, it shall be but a little while; the rod is upon his back but it shall not rest there, I will manifest my love again to him, Isa. 54.7, 8. vers. For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee: In a little wrath I hid my self from thee, for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have mer∣cy on thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer. A little wrath, but a great deal of Love; a lit∣tle while, a moment, God hides himself, but eternally will he manifest himself, and his love to his people. Beloved, the mercy and compassion of God is such, that he will pro∣vide a way for his peoples deliverance out of their troubles. As God will not himself more immediately afflict his people always, so neither will he suffer others to afflict his people; but he will be sure not to suffer The
rod of the wicked to rest upon the back of the righteous, Why? Least the righteous put forth his hand to iniquity, least their temptations be too strong for them, and so saith the Apostle, God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above what you are able, but will with the temptation make a way to escape that you may be able to bear it: You shall have such troubles as may sometimes afflict and humble you, but you shall not have such troubles as shall quite deject, and cause your spi∣rits to fail before him, that is the first Reason, because of the mercifulness of God. II. Because of the faithfulness of God; God hath said he will deliver his people, and he will be as good as his word; though men break, God will keep his Covenant; he is a God of truth, he hath methods to deliver his people out of temptation, he will make a way to escape. Now God hath made (I cannot stand to shew) God hath made many pretious promises for the redeeming of his people out of their adversity; he will shew kindness to them, though he may be angry, yet he will not always chide: and though he may afflict them, yet he will not forsake them, &c. Now as Solomon said in regard of his Father David, What thou hast spoken with thy mouth thou hast fulfilled it with thine hand, as it is this day: and so it is true of all persons that fear God, what God
speaks he will fulfil, Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but not one jot or title of Gods Word shall pass away unfulfilled; as Gods threatning of Judgment against the wicked shall be made good, so certainly shall the promises of mercy made to the righteous; All the promises of God are yea and amen, in Christ Jesus. Applicat. Now then to apply this, in a word, If this be so as we hear, the temptations of the godly, the afflictions and troubles they meet with, will be but for a season; Let this quiet our hearts under sufferings, viz. the consideration of this, That they will be but for a season, they will be but for a short time, they will not be always; are we afflict∣ed, remember the time is coming we shall be comforted, hath God laid any trouble upon us, as to our inward or outward man, upon our persons or relations, in private or other respects, it will not be always so; these troubles they shall be but for a season, and this season will not last always: let us not be troubled, or though we be troubled, let this keep us from being overtroubled; let this quiet our spirits under trouble, the considera∣tion of this truth, That they will be but for a short time, for a season. Two things may quiet our Spirits under the greatest of miseries and crosses in this
World; if we consider either how just they are, or how short they be. First, If we consider the equity of them, all the troubles we meet with in the World, they are very just upon us; God doth not afflict us but there is a cause for it; there is need of it and cause for it; God is never displeased, but we have provoked him; he never hides his face, but we have given him cause for it; nay, God is never so angry with his people as he might be; we may all say with the Psal∣mist, Psal. 103.10. ver. He hath not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities: What ever sad condition we are in, besure it is not so sad as we deserve; is God angry with us? why he might manifest his hot displeasure against us; is he very angry? why truly he might be more angry then ever he shews himself in this World to any of his people: God might to the best of men render his anger with fury, and his rebukes with flames of fire. Ezra speaking of the calami∣ties of the Jews, which were very great, Ezra 9.13. ver. saith he, Thou O God hast punished us less then our iniquities deserve: How did God cut of thousands of them? how many perished by the Sword, Plague, and other Judgments? and those that were left alive, were carried into captivity: we were punished, I but not so as we deserve; our troubles were great, but they might have
been greater; Thou hast punished us less then our iniquities deserve; our trespass is grown up unto the Heavens, and we might all of us have been thrown into Hell: God suffers us to live, and hath not punished us as our ini∣quities deserve; so that we are on this side the Grave, nay that we are on this side Hell, it is a mercy; alas are our troubles great? our sins are greater; are our temptations, our af∣flictions, many? our sins are more; there is no body that hath so many troubles, but he may sit down and soon count the number of his crosses, but who can count the number of any mans sins; our crosses, our troubles, are soon numbred, but our impieties, nay our iniquities are innumerable, they are more then the hairs of our head, and cannot be num∣bred; have we many crosses? remember we might have had more crosses; remember our sorrows are not so many as our sins; we may well therefore ask the question when any persons heart is disquieted, so as to be discon∣tented, and fret at providence that is so af∣flicting, as the Church, Lam. 3.39. vers. Wherefore doth a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins? Thou art punish∣ed, what then? what cause to complain? it is for thy sin, thy sin deserves this punishment, and What a living man complain? thou mightest have been in the grave; thou art here yet on Earth, thou mightest have been long ago in
Hell; and What a living man, and complain for the punishment of his sin? and as they say, we may all say under any of our troubles, It is of the Lords mercy that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not. Secondly, As our troubles are very Just, so they shall not be very long, they shall be but for a little while; as the pleasure of sinners, so the perplexity of Saints shall be but for a season, but for a season; Our light afflictions which are but for a moment, if any of our troubles should last as long as our lives last, that will not be long; for as the Apostle speaks, What is your life, it is even as a vapour that soon passeth away: if always afflicted whilest thou livest, remember the time is hastning that thou shalt dye, and then no longer disturbed: this saddens thy Spirit, that so long thy conditi∣on hath been uncomfortable; let this support thee, thou shalt not be for ever miserable, Psal. 68.13. ver. Though ye have lien among the pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of a Dove, covered with Silver, and her feathers with yel∣low Gold: though you have been in this af∣flicted and uncomfortable estate, yet the time of joy and prosperity is coming to you; re∣member that temptations may be sore, and great, and may seem to be long, yet they will be but for a time, they will not last always, these clouds will be blown over; af∣ter rain will come Sun-shine; though the
Lord hide his face for a moment; weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes in the mor∣ning: I may say to many of us, let our trou∣bles be what they will, those that believe in God, and endeavour faithfully to serve him, to them is alotted the more troubles: If we have lived but any considerable time in the World, I may say to you that are elder, as the Apostle saith in another case, The night is far spent, the night of your sorrow is al∣most at an end, the day of the resurrection a coming, that day of gladness when you shall not know what affliction means; when Pharaoh asked Jacob how old he was, he tells him, and afterwards saith he, Few and evil have been the days of my life. If the days of our life be evil, let this comfort us they are but few, they shall be few; you know the life of man it is not many years, many of us have out-lived most of those years; it will be ut for a sea∣son, the time is coming all these sorrows and miseries will be out of season. The length of a trouble doth greaten it, though it be small in it self; a little burden carryed a great way is great, and so the shortness of a trouble doth much lessen it; though our troubles be great, yet remember they shall not last al∣ways, they shall be but for a season; Lift up therefore the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees, I may say as the Apostle doth.
Fourthly, If need be, saith the Apostle, you are in heaviness through manifold temptations; If need be, why then this is implied, that some∣times there is need you should have temptati∣ons, there is a necessity for it: from whence the Doctrine is this, Doct. I. That there is need sometimes why the people of God, the faithful people of God should be under manifold temptations, should be afflicted in the World. As distempered bodies need Physick as well as food; so Souls that are distempered with sin, need afflicting providences as well as holy Ordinances: Gods own children are not such, but sometimes they need the rod as well as the Word; they need affliction as well as Instru∣ction; there is need, if need be; there is some∣times a necessity in the ordinary way of Gods providence, why Gods people should be un∣der trouble. Quest. If any should ask what need there is? I thought to have Answered it in these twelve Particulars, but I will only speak to some few of them. First, There is need why Gods people should be afflicted or tempted, to discover the truth of their graces; there is need there∣fore of affliction, that they may be made to appear what indeed they are; times of
trouble are times of tryal; and thence it is that afflictions are in this verse called by the name of temptations, Through manifold temptations, that is, through manifold troubles and trials, or through diverse trials, diverse troubles: I say afflictions are here, and so often elsewhere, called temptations, because they try what people are, Psal. 66.10. ver. Thou O God hast proved us, thou hast tried us, as Silver is tried: How were they tried? how? by afflicti∣on, by the troubles they met with in the World; as the 11. ver. shews, Thou brought∣est us into the net, thou layest affliction upon our loyns: thou hast tried us, that is by these afflictions thou hast tried us; as mettals are tried by the fire, so are Gods people, in the furnace of affliction, 1 Pet. 1.7. ver. That the trial of your faith, being much more pretious then of Gold that perishes, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise and honour, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ: These temptations are for your trial, Job 23.20. ver. Job speaking to God saith, He knows the way that I take, and when he hath tried me, I shall come forth as Gold: When he hath tried me, how is that? why, that is by the tri∣als he sends me, he discovers what I am; then I shall come forth as Gold; by troubles and crosses in the World, he tries his people, he tries their faith in him, and their love to him, he discovers their sincerity.
Quest. But what need of these trials? I may Answer, Negatively, and Affirma∣tively. I. Negatively, God need not try us by troubles, for he knows what we are; he knows what we are before he afflicts us, and what we shall be when we are afflicted; thou un∣derstandest my thoughts a far of; God is fully acquainted with all our ways, not only the ways that we have gone in, but the ways that we will go; God can tell when we prosper, what we shall do when we come to suffer, he understands our thoughts a far of; God can tell when we are in flourish∣ing condition, whether we shall flinch from his Service when it is like to bring us to suffering; The heart is deceitful above all things, and yet I the Lord search the heart, and try the reins: Though man doth not know his own heart, how he shall carry himself in a time of suffer∣ing, yet God knows it; 2 King. 8.12, 13. ver. God could tell when Haziel was a Subject, what he should do when he was a King; he could tell what a bloody cruel man he should be; God could tell who should be his peo∣ples Persecutors long before they knew it; they are not needful in reference to God, Joh. 2.23, 24. vers. Jesus Christ, it is said there of him, Many believed in his Name, when they saw the miracles that he did: But Jesus did not com∣mit himself unto them, because he knew all men,
and needed not that any should testifie of man, for he knew what was in man: it is spoken of him as he was God, God doth not need to send troubles to discover to him what we are, God knows us before hand. II. But Affirmatively, God seeth it re∣quisite to discover to our selves, and to dis∣cover to others what we are; and in these two respects there is need of temptations, for the trial of Gods people, and sometimes they are a means to discover us to our selves, some∣times to others: Sometimes to our selves, and they discover men sometimes for the better, sometimes for the worse; many persons that fear God, have worse thoughts of themselves then they ought to have, &c. Now God brings them to a fiery tryal, and they see through the help of God they are inabled to stand out against all opposition; then they begin to think there is something of good in my Soul, and they manifest the truth of grace. And then sometimes for the worse; many a man and woman hath better opinions of them∣selves then they have ground for, and the troubles they meet with in the World they plainly discover it: God brings them to this pass, you must either disown the truth, or de∣ny your selves as to the World; you must either lay down that godliness you seem to have, or lay down your livelyhood, or lay down your lives; and now they see, or may
see they were not the men they took them∣selves for, they see how that the truths of Jesus Christ lay not so near their hearts as they thought for; they are willing rather to part with that faith and love they have, then to part with those good things they have; many a person it is thus with: Sometimes they discover the weakness of grace, sometimes the want of grace; sometimes the weakness of grace, Peter thought when the Lord told him of suffering, That all should be offended because of him, that he should never be offended; Though all men forsake thee, yet will not I; and yet Peter when he comes to trial, his Faith staggers; and so sometimes it discovers the total want of grace, that people are other manner of persons then they took themselves for; times of affliction they manifest that many are of another manner of Spirit then they did imagine. Secondly, Afflictions discover not only per∣sons to themselves, but they discover them to others; discover them to the World, make it known what people are; and so sometimes for the better, many are thought worse of in the World then indeed they do deserve; the people of God are often judged a company of Hypocrites, there is no such thing as good∣ness, faith, and holiness, in them; and if they come to suffer, you shall see what they will do; many are their evil surmises, and the
Devil if he cannot Persecute them, will re∣proach them: now God lets the World see that these people are mistaken, his Servants were such as loved him in truth; when it comes to this, that they must leave all or not follow Christ; they count not their life dear to them, all is nothing then to Christ. The stedfastness of Gods people in times of suffer∣ing, testifies to the World, that they that were called Hypocrites were the most upright per∣sons that lived: 1 Cor. 11.18, 19. ver. There are divisions among you, and I partly believe it: For there must be also Heresies among you, that they which are approved may be made manifest among you: That it may appear that they are indeed lovers of the Truth, they will own it in such a time when it is so much opposed; that they that are approved of God may be made manifest to the World, that the wicked may say, though some are covetous, yet all are not bad men as they would think. And sometimes for the worse to many, because they are not openly profane, are judged by the multitude that they are religious persons; but when the Profession of Religion becomes dan∣gerous, they then begin to be troubled, the World then sees what they are. In hazardous times, good men are made a spectacle to the World, and Angels, and Men; the Angels, the good and bad; the Angels of light, and the Feinds of darkness; and the World both of
godly and ungodly, see what men they are, who were not before acquainted with them; God makes it manifest that many that profes∣sed much, never yet loved him, &c. Many, saith Christ in that Parable of the seeds, they received the Word with joy, but they had no root in themselves; they endure but for a while, and when Persecution ariseth, by and by they are offended: What must I serve God and suffer? Truly if this be the fruit of this service, I shall have no mind to it; many their hearts say as those wicked ones, Job 21.14, 15. vers. What is the Almighty that we should serve him? and what profit should we have, if we pray unto him? What shall we get by suf∣fering? why if this be the way, they will not walk in it, &c. The Jews would not ad∣mit of Proselites in the days of David, be∣cause then the fear of David was upon all round about him; nor would they admit of them in the days of Solomon, because then out of love to the peace and prosperity that he had in the World, they might imbrace the truth of Religion, which in their hearts they did not delight in. Many men do make use of Religion sometimes out of fear, and sometimes out of love; out of fear of suffering when Religion is not owned, and out of hopes of getting by Religion when it is in esteem. The falseness of peoples hearts is seen in this, in love to their neighbour; they have a great
love for them that are rich, but none for them that are poor; The rich hath many friends, but the poor is hated of his neighbour: This dis∣covers the falsness of peoples hearts in reference to their love to God; their love to the people of God is discovered in this, that they will speak well for them, and associate with them, when God is pleased to bless them in the World; but if God once come to afflict them, they desire to have no more to do with them: Amongst many professing Israelites there are but few Nathaniels, few that are Israelites in∣deed: and the times of suffering manifest what people are. Again, There is a great deal of need of trouble and trials, to bring Gods people to more earnest praying to God, that they may more firmly and constantly seek him: when Gods people are involved in trouble, cannot tell which way to turn themselves, then they will go to God for help; when Jehoshaphat said, 2 Chron. 20.12. speaking of his enemies in Prayer to God, Wilt not thou judge them? for we have no might against this great com∣pany that cometh up against us: neither know we what to do, but our eyes are to thee, our eyes are upon thee: Truly when people are at this pass, in referance to Personal or Na∣tional suffering, when they do not know what to do, then their eyes are upon God, and
then their hearts are to God, then God shall hear always of them, &c. The Lord knows if prosperity drives us away from him, that af∣fliction will bring us in to him; the Prodigal that cared not for his Father while his estate lasted, when poverty was come, I will arise saith he, and go to my Father. As long as we can have Friends, Comforts, and Mercies to delight in, we do not take so much delight and pleasure in drawing near to God, God will let us have nothing else to delight in, Isa. 26.16. vers. Lord, in trouble they have visited thee: when thy chastning was upon them; they that would not come at God be∣fore, they would visit him in trouble, and they powred out Prayer; they that did but say a Prayer before, they now shall Pray a Pray∣er, and Pray it heartily too. Crosses and troubles will make men mind Religious Duties, that before they little re∣garded: Upon the worst of men it hath this influence sometimes; the Persian Messenger said thus, when the Grecians hotly pursued our Host, and we must needs venture over that great River that was now frozen, but was beginning to thaw: Then, saith he, did I behold many of those Gallants who de∣nyed before, and so boldly maintained that there was no God, I saw every one upon his knees raying that the Ice might hold untill he got
over. O then nothing but Pryer will serve their turn? I will go and eturn to my place, and I will distress and disturb them, and in their affliction they ll seek me early. FINIS.
