L1760 669.f.21[59] 99869954 163554
A LETTER Written & presented To the Late Lord Protector, Then Lord General, and the Councel of War: but smothered in his Hands. To the truly Noble from the Fountain victory, and somewhat more, Conquerours of Nobility, the Religious CRUMWEL, and the rest of the Council of VVarr. I Did think to Petition you: but what? to be valiant, honest, wise? that were to suppose you not so. Not so. God's given the Vote on your side. It shall be a Remonstrance of the most horrid Monsters that ever eyes be∣held. They say they are from God. Do you startle? Will you fight them? Dare you fight them? You have fought with men and overcome; but dare you fight with Monsters? such Monsters, do: for believe it, if you do not, if others shall, it will be sung of you, as of Saul, his thousand, and David his ten thousand. I'le tell you their Names, and if you'l embrace the Adventure, I'le discover their Denns. The first the Law of England, (Treason! oh Treason!) The Law of England claims its Original from the Law of God: so that whatsoe∣ver is not so, is void ipso facto, by the Principles of Parliament, though nothing more contrary. If this fail, it claims its extract from Reason, yet nothing more unreasonable; I'le prove it with my life, but then the Honour is mine, not yours. Jenkins the Judge, who is of the Countrey of Heralds, and (by Law) proves them Traytors that preserve him, ingeniously confesseth their Pedigree from Cu∣stome or President: then which, what more uncertain? what more wicked? what more unconstant? what more Devilish? The other is Tythe Piggs, a Monster too, far more dangerous then the wild Bore of the Forrest. Will you fight them? say, I'le leave you this Momento; When the Parliament were so modest as to Petition the King 7 or 8 years leave to be just, they were at last compel'd to be so whether they would or no. If you ask leave to be valiant, to be honest, who will grant it you, but they that cannot hinder it? Be valiant, be wise, go on and prosper, you have the Prayers of the Worthies of the Nation. LONDON, Printed by J.C. for the Authour, 1659.
