p2512a e143_7 99871760 156598
A PLEA FOR MODERATION. Printed in the yeare 1642.
To the READER. READER, I conceale my name, for two reasons; both derived from the consideration of thee: from thy approbation, thy dislike: thy approbation, because, having what I aimed at, I expect not the ceremony of thy thankes; thy dislike, because my supposed crime shall not injure my name. As for mis-constructions, I shall neither value them, nor wonder at them. Farwell.
A PLEA FOR MODERATION. TO plead precisely for Moderation, it is very ne∣cessary to be well acquainted with Extreames, and the ill condition and consequence of them; which, like the counterfeit Mother, would have the childe divi∣ded, but not aright: for indeed, as in every extreme, the A∣gent, which ought to be free, is hurried on with a kind of violence, so that it operateth not properly; therefore a sound and well ordered judgement, which is ever delibe∣rate, can never be conversant in such extreames, but is e∣ver wanting to give its true weight and measure to all proceedings. This age is much like weather we have had of late, Aguish, therefore distempered; many faire and foul daies in one, many good and bad ages in one. There was a time when she was extreamly frozen, both in her Reli∣gion and Lawes, and almost lost by scarce feeling where she was, the cold had so benumm'd her: Every one might then ghesse that this was not onely a symptom of her dis∣ease, but an absolute Ague-fit, fit to be purged. And let not any man think, that the glowing fire & fierce zeal of some now (I had almost said of most) in this twi-light age, is an extirpation of that cold; but rather a consequent of that former chillness: Contraria contrariorum sunt consequentia. And now, I pray, take a little view how these contraries do meet; but not in uno tertio, yet (though that's my prayer) but in resemblance. Before the beginning of this (happy I hope) Parlia∣ment,
the Pulpit and Presse were stuffed full of that do∣ctrine of caeca obedientia, and prosecuted with so much ex∣cessive violence, as no man could reckon otherwise, then that they intended a deluge of ignorance to overwhelme the greatest part of this Common-wealth. That made Schollers angry at the heart; since, è contrario verum, as high a plea for ignorance is set up; and let mee tell you, with more zeale, but lesse wit, by Preaching and Pam∣phleting against humane learning. This, I confesse, trou∣bleth Schollers, but they know not how to helpe it. Before the beginning of this Parliament, the practice of men and the Pulpit were full of having the persons of men in admiration; since, è contrario verum. I am affraid men are deified and adored: onely before it was idolatry, or superstition at the least; now 'tis neither. Before, many painfull and pious Ministers were had in obloquie and dis-respect, I wish I could not say that since, è contrario verum; those very men are become the subject of slandrous tongues. Before, men preached for so much libertie, as it was in∣deed justly stumbled at; now è contrario nimis verum, men preach for such a kind of liberty as we would faine bee quit from, for fear of danger to soule and body. These extremities I may not unfitly compare to two pictures, fixed in a frame of like resemblance, and made to look directly one against the other, but never approach neerer one unto the other then where they are fixed. What strange distractions, what variety of opinions doth this monstrous error, Extremity, produce into the world? Because I would not bee a Papist, a Consubstantiate Lutheran or Ubiquitarian, an Arminian, a Socinian, &c. therefore I must be a Brownist, a Separatist, a Familist, &c. nay an Atheist; that some hold to bee the best Re∣ligion, if they could but prove it one.
Because I infinitely dislike to bee lesse then what a Sub∣ject ought to bee, and am a reall lover of my Country, and would have the Lawes established bee put in execution, and doe assuredly thinke that they who goe about to shut us out from this, and denie us to bee Magna Charta-men, are, and have beene, great disturbers of the true peace and tranquillity of the Kingdome; therefore I must not give Caesar his due. Because I doe from my very heart detest and abhorie the Hierarchicall power of Bishops, so farre as it is sutable to that power which, by degrees of usurpation, was gained to the Sea of Rome to make it so therefore I must have no Bishops at all, therefore I must contemne and sleight the function; who, although they were in the ancient Church gallant Conduit-pipes to convey the sense and meaning of the Scriptures to us of the later age, nay the Scriptures themselves; yet wee dwarfs, notwithstanding wee are necessitated to creepe upon their shoulders, if wee meane to looke further then they, will never acknowledge them to bee our props and guides; who, although some of them, as may bee well proved, had a deciding power both in Temporall and Spirituall matters, some of us now would have them enjoy neither; all which before Popery was thought of. Because I in particular did much reprove, and that o∣penly, those over growne ceremonies of the Church in the time of this Hierarchicall power, both for their quan∣titie (although admit them all good, yet not expedient) and for their qualitie, by reason that, in very deed, what they added were most of them (if not all) bad; therefore we must not have those ceremonies used which by Law tye our conscience, untill the wisedome of the Parliament shall constitute others in their roome, and do fasten upon us that constraint which we cannot wave; and by a better reason
I will doe those things which in themselves are indifferent, because publicke authority enjoines them, then not to doe them, because they are enjoined: Nay, some there are who would not stick at the performance of them, were they not enjoined at all; it seemes that's their impediment. A strange spirit of contradiction! but me thinks a stranger doctrine to be preached in this ill-independent age. If this be not a way to introduce a full height of libertinisme, I know not what is: I name not atheisme, but it is an easie matter to ghesse what kind of Daughter such a Mother may and will bring forth. Now, this let me adde by the way, that when men shalbe admitted to cavill at the performance of former Laws, which certainly the gravity of that time framed with due advice and caution (although peradventure many of them are but temporary, and may admit of alteration sutable to times & occasions) I say, when men shall (out of I know not what kind of neglect of authority) dispense with these, how can it be expected, that those Laws which hereafter shalbe made, shall find any better successe at the hands of those, who do most naturally reject Government and Rule? But I have bin told, they are not of a considerable number; the Papists are the great danger in the Common-wealth. I confesse them to be dangerous men, especially those that are Jesuited: their practice hath been very factious, and their doctrine is venemous, and distressed Ireland hath too-too-much felt the smart of it; but (God be thanked) they have neither clawes nor teeth here, that I know of. But as for that unconsiderable (I may say inconsiderate) number, I wish they may be alwayes so in the first sense, so long as they continue in the second: And for once, let the Papists and them goe together for the malignant party. By this time you may partly discerne the scope of my intended discourse: It is A Plea for Moderation, a Plea for a
Medium. And I perswade my selfe I shall, at one instant make two contrary sorts of people glad and sad, the Papist, the Separatist; that whilest by this meanes both think to enjoy their Religion still, their Opinion I would say, both misse of what they aime: for this Moderation, this Me∣dium, shall give neither of these the least satisfaction. I have learned by way of diversity, what a Medium may be thus distinguished, into Medium Participationis. Abnegationis. The first is that for which the Laodiceans received such a sentence from the mouth of God in the Revelations, to be a Repudium for their luke-warmnesse: This is the onely principle whereby the Temporizers of every age walke and steere their course; a blind guide, an Iguis fatuus, which very frequently leaves them in the mire: This is such a prin∣ciple as proposeth to it selfe no other end then the present advantage; and truely his halting in jest betwixt two, makes men often become lame in earnest; and when they are grown such Cripples, no wonder if they close in the Hos∣pitall of fooles. Machiavell never lost himselfe so much as in this par∣ticular; for, if it bee once found out that there can bee two severall men in one, ten to one but hee shall ever after have the hard hap not to be trusted in either condition. A Puritan is an unlucky name thrown into the world; but if ever there were such a man, this is he who justly may assume that title, He is like the feet of Nabuchadnezzars Image, part of iron and part of clay, an ill mixture, therefore not likely to be of any long perpetuity; this is not the Medium I plead for. It is the Medium abnegationis I plead so strongly for. Albeit I am neither Papist nor Separatist, yet by Gods help, I trust I may bee of a true Religion, and maintaine Ortho∣doxill veritie; and, indeed, I branch my Medium: first, into
Religion, because that is of the highest concernment, and most of all justled at in this clay-iron age. It is true that of Aristotle, Qui ubique est nullibi est, and may bee made good by the medly of so many opinionative Religions now set on foote by the step-mothers of sound Religion; who so much magnifie their bastard issue before her, as indeed shee scarce undergoes any thing at their hands but nips and pinches: I confesse shee hath beene of late dressed in too gaudy, too garish an attire; and therefore now, to make her do strict penance for how long God knows) she is left stark naked, exposed to summer scorches, and winter colds; and I pray God when she puts on any thing next, it do not prove her winding sheet. As I would not have her go like a pain∣ted strumpet, so I should be glad to see her in a comely dresse. I remember, I did even now take the Bishops by the hand; but my intent was not so to take my leave of them: I have somewhat more to say of them before they go; I seriously wish they had beene carefull to keepe my last medium, the want of that hath exceedingly prevented me of something I would have said: but thus much I will declare, There have been Bishops, Diocesan Bishops, Lord Bishops, all good Bishops, not Jure divino (pardon me for that) but Jure Ecclesiastico vel civili, & ex favore Principis: Ancient Histories will warrant me for that; and they are so copious and so well knowne, I hope no man will request a quotati∣on; yea all this the Ministers of the Gospell were made ca∣pable of: therefore (in my judgement) not incongruous to the function; and if the government must downe, because some are bad, why should not the government stand, be∣cause some are, and primitively have beene good? For ought I can perceive, it is as good an argument. I denie not but the way of a Presbytery may be good in a State, not here; but however, durst I presume to beg, or think of beg∣ging the least stemme from sacred Majestie that is due to
it, our Bishops, peradventure, might bee much better then they are, if the Ministers of every County, by a majority of voices, did, out of themselves, choose their Diocesan Bishop, and there be settled for his life: but then I conceive it is fit, for maintenance, that the least should be a thousand pounds a yeare to live upon, and the greatest no more. In this particular I am for a parity; nay I would have none of them Lords, but such on whom his Majestie should by his more especiall favour bee graciously pleased to bestow the title, who is the undoubted fountaine of honour and digni∣ty. And if I hit aright in the understanding of that Text so severely urged against that, which is, Be you not called Lords, the meaning is, Bee not ambitious, desirous, covetous of that Title; otherwise, perhaps, some one might call them Lords in spite of them, and so, against their wils, incurre the breach of our Saviours precept. And as concerning that of Saint Peter, Be not as Lords over Gods heritage, the mean∣ing is, You shall not have absolute rule over them; for so the word  signifies, which hinders not but that they may have it subjugated to the chiefe Prince and State under which they live; for, indeed, as it is admirably well observed by that English Seneca, Sir Edward Dering, in a Treatise of his, when our Saviour tells his twelve Apostles that the Princes of the Gentiles, and the Kings of the Gentiles, &c. exercise dominion, &c. , It shall not bee so with you; that is, You shall not bee as the Kings and Princes of the Gentiles, who assume an absolute and independent power: No, this I conceive is clearly prohibited them: and (although by the word  be not meant, as some would have it, domineering or tyrannizing in a bad sense, but governing and ruling in a good sense, and seemly for men duely authorized thereto, as Gods Vice-gerents on Earth; yet) I hold Clergy-men totally uncapable of it: and this I conceive to be the meaning of that worthy Knight,
which (I say) doth no way hinder, but that they may, never∣thelesse, have a subordinate power limited them by a super∣intendent authority above them of the King and Lawes of the Kingdome; and with this caution I take the word. I adde a further Plea in behalfe of Common-prayer, or a set forme of prayer, which is our Church Liturgie. I grant that there may be some things in it (if the great wisedome of the Parliament so please) fit to bee expunged; but if this Kingdome should bee so unhappy, as to lose such an ornament of her Religion as this; for my part, I should not grudge to die a Common-prayer Martyr: but I shall not wonder if the set prayers of our Church be so sleighted as they are, when a number (of I know not what sort of people) cannot relish the chiefest of prayers, the Lords prayer; and yet our Saviour in one of the Gospels gives us a plain di∣rection, When you pray, say, Our Father which art in heaven, &c. And as for the Doctrine of the Church of England, grounded upon the infallible Testimonie of Holy writ, which a man would blesse himselfe to heare stumbled at, (I hope) none dare bee so impious as argue against it: if he be, I cannot see how he can avoid Saint Pauls Anathema. Now let me apply my Medium to mixt and civill affaires, and see if wee can fall into an uno tertio there; nay see, that if wee fall not there, wee are either split or sunke. Preroga∣tive, admirable in it selfe, provided it have its due bounds and limits, hath by some beene so expatiated, as indeed, in their apprehensions, it was unfathomed: I would those men had either well understood what it was, or, not under∣standing it, would have been hushed in their own ignorance by a silent humility. The liberty of the Subject, an excellent strengthening of our meum & tuum in the world; but by some so diameterly opposed to Prerogative, that, with them, Non bene conveni∣unt, nec in una sedemorantur Majestas & libertas. I thinke
this Common-wealth much happier, if they go (like Hip∣pocrates twinnes) hand in hand: And it was a good speech, though from a band man (I shall beleeve the Divell when he speakes truth) This Kingdome will never bee well, unlesse there be a right understanding between the King and his people Mordecay's advice to Hester, concerning the deliverance of the Jewes, hath been mis-applied by diverse; for, as I take it, there was King in the case, and that King bowed & sued to; I hope with us hee shall be esteemed a third Estate in Parliament. Rehoboams losse of ten Tribes was a very strange and sud∣den falling off, and seemed for the present an exceeding great blow to Rehoboam himselfe; yet wee see no expresse reason alledged in Scripture, either in respect of Rehoboams sinne in particular, or of the Peoples in generall; but the Text saith, it was of the Lord: neverthelesse those revol∣ting Tribes are plainly charged with rebellion for it, and a commendation is given to Judah for sticking close to their true and lawfull Prince. Nay see what became of those revolters ever after; amongst all their Kings that raigned over them, I do not read of one of them that was good, whereas Judah had diverse; for Jehoram, one of the race of the Kings of Judah being wicked, had this brand upon him, that he walked after the Kings of Israel. Nay observe how Abijah the sonne of Rehoboam doth, in this very parti∣cular, taxe Jeroboam with rebellion against his Lord; and so having addressed his prayer to Almighty God for victory over Jeroboam and all his rebellious troope, Abijah with 400000. men of Judah and Benjamin, had the conquest of Jeroboam with 800000. men of Israel, full twice so many, and at that time kept them under due obedience. Here may you see a most remarkable judgment of God for their rebellious undutifulnesse. Observe further how many severall and sundry waies they were punished, both with idolatrie and other enormous sinnes, which crept amongst
them, and perpetuall wars and troubles abroad, and in a short time brought to captivity; whereas Judah on the contrary had still a greater measure of peace and tranquilli∣ty. And one thing I cannot but take notice of; It is said that those of Israel who sought the Lord their God, went up to Jerusalem to worship:1 Kin. 12.27. which begat a great jealousie in Jeroboam, fearing lest if the people went up to do sacri∣fice in the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, it would bee a meanes to turne their hearts back againe to their Lord Rehoboam; and what followes? So shall they kill mee (saith hee) and goe againe to Rehoboam: there was his jealousie, as hee had good reason; wherefore hee prosecuted one wickednesse with another, as it is indeed the usuall way in all rebellions; they cannot bee thought safe, but by attempt∣ing and heaping up a load of higher and greater crimes. Princes are like the bond of Wed-lock, once make them the Fathers of our Country, and wee take them for better for worse: wee may perswade them, wee cannot compell them without breach of divine precept; once let them be the Lords annointed, and it is sacriledge to touch them, I meane unfittingly. The common people made Caesars, but being once made, it was utterly out of their power to un∣make them againe; nothing could do it but death. And if a King should breake an oath, made by him to his people, for a right governing according to his Lawes; yet, under favour, his breach quitteth not his Subjects of their allegi∣ance: and if this stand not for a truth, for my part, I do not know by what principle any man can walke; for, destroy but this foundation, and then your Anti-governists will alwaies finde starting holes, upon the least dis-content, to shake off that yoke which is undoubtedly laid upon every Subject, as a necessary tye of their obedience and loyalty to their Sove∣raigne, and that even as they tender the peace and quiet of a good conscience.
Therefore you shall read in the Chronicles, though God permitted the people to worke treason against King Amaziah, because, as it is there said,1 Chro. 25.27. hee turned away from the Lord his God; yet, I trust, no man can denie but that it was reckoned treason still in the peo∣ple. But it may bee objected, Quorsum haec? wee have a King (God bee blessed for him) farre other∣wise; otherwise indeed, and one who may well bee an exact patterne of pietie to all his Subjects; Nay what a happy peace and contentment have wee enjoy∣ed under our most gracious Soveraigne, till wee our selves, I know not which way, have quarrelled with our selves? I answer, that I urge not this but onely as an argu∣ment à minori ad majus; if Princes are not to be rebel∣led against, neither by the reall sword, nor by the me∣taphoricall one, the tongue; that is, neither by speech nor action, though they should be Nero's or Caligula's; in how ample and high an estimation should we then have those, who are reverâ good ones, and not dip∣ped with the least colour or resemblance of such Ty∣rannists? Therefore Bracton expresseth it admira∣bly, where hee said, Omnis quidem sub Rege, & ipse sub nullo nisi tantùm sub Deo: And in another place, Si autem aliquid ab eo petatur (cum breve non currat contra ipsum) locus erit supplicationi, quod factum suum corrigat & emendet; quod quidem si non fecerit, satis sufficit ei ad poenam quod Dominum expectet ultorem; nemo quidem de factis suis praesumat dispu∣tare, multò fortiùs contra factum suum venire: thus far Bracton. It is not for nought that the Apostle doth so inse∣parably knit these two together, feare God and ho∣nour the King: as if hee should have said, there is
none can give that honour to the King as hee ought, except hee be one that truly feareth God; and none can truly feare God as hee ought, if hee give not the honour due to his Prince. And if Saint Paul could check himselfe with a scriptum est, Thou shalt not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people; what can be thought of those that would infringe his legall Prerogative, which is as undoubtedly his, as our estates are ours, and by as firme a Law, untill hee shall please to give way to the altering of it, by his owne free and wil∣ling assent and consent first had and obtained, which must not bee drawne from him by the least constraint or forcible perswasion whatsoever? That of the Proverbs is a sure rule, Feare God and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change. And I pray tell me, what is the cause why such mis∣takes and heart-burnings arise in the world, but onely the great want of charity in a number. Love covers a multitude of sinnes, saith the Scripture: Ex conse∣quenti, what doe you then call that which rips them up, and layes them open? Indeed love gaines a mul∣titude of good; good to others, to themselves who use it: and where can wee better manifest it then to those whom God hath placed in eminency above us? Would it not grieve us much if our children should prove Chams unto us? If therefore there bee truly that relation (as wee are bound to beleeve it) certainly their wounds must needes pierce through our sides, and their contempt must needs bee our reproach. I am not ignorant that this is a very hard lesson to take out; but, to come to my Medium, it must bee done: for, to speake the truth, while wee want this Theologicall vertue, Love, wee are very apt to doe injury to them wee love not; and it argues a
great partiality to our selves. What saith Saint Paul? to repeate him a little, Though I speake with the tongues of men and Angels, &c. Though I had the gifts of Prophesie, &c. and knew all secrets: yea had all faith, &c. Though I feed the poore, nay though I give my bodie to bee burned, and have not love, all is nothing: And yet (God he knowes) what an innume∣rable company of pretenders are there to all these, but it is without Love. The Apostle goeth on to tell the nature and condition of Love: and do but view what characters hee puts upon it. Love suffereth long. is bountifull. envieth not. boasteth not it selfe. is not puffed up. disdaineth not. seeketh not her owne things. is not provoked to anger. thinketh not evill. rejoiceth not in iniquity, but in truth. suffereth all things. beleeveth all things. hopeth all things. endureth all things. never falleth away. Here is a chaine consisting of fifteene linkes, all of them most expressive and emphaticall. What a hard taske have the men of our age to imitate all these? what a brave Medium were here to fall upon? Let me once, for all, speake boldly, and it will easily be found to bee true upon due search and sad examination, that there is not one the least tumult or distraction in a Na∣tion, not the least discontent in a family (by which, as
by Hercules feete, may be measured the proportion of the whole body) but it ariseth from the want of due observation of all these. I might expatiate my selfe in these particulars; but my care is, as much as I can, to save time and trouble to the Reader. I professe not my self a Divine, it is not my way; therefore I leave peculiar applications to the ingenious. Now, by the rule of Contraries, I might illustrate un∣to you what is opposite and repugnant to Love; but di∣verse mens practice now a dayes will in this point in∣struct you better then I. There is much to bee said, but I shut up all in Love; and I wish from my very soule all mistakes and mis∣beleefes might end there; which will never be, while they so be; for unlesse they vanish, no roome for Love: That  is extreamly mistaken abroad, for it is often made but the baite, whilest the hooke layes hold on private interests. And truely, as my hearty prayers shall be ever bent for a most prosperous event of proceedings in these instant great Assemblies: So it shall still be one prayer of my Petition, that there may be Love at the end of every thing; and I am confident such a Petition as this, needeth neither clubs nor swords to force its ad∣mission. FINIS.
