R1554 E602_6 99865569 117814
AN EXACT SUMMARY, OF The transactions in the TREATY at BREDA: CONTAINING, The most remarkable Occurrences that hap'ned in their Consultations: And the Scots Commissio∣ners Proposals to their [declared] King, for an Agreement; his Answer thereunto: With the sending of a Letter to the Queen his Mother in France, touching his Condescensions. As it was related by Dr. Rivet, Tutor to the Prince of Orange. Also, the Declaration of the States of Hamborough, concerning the Parliament of England; And the Pro∣ceedings of the Queen of Swedens Embassador, touching the declared King of Scots. London, Printed for G. H. and are to be sold at the Royall-Exchange. 1650.
AN EXACT SUMMARY, OF THE Proceedings of the Treaty at Breda. Illustrating, the most remarkable Occurrences which hap'ned in their severall disputes and consulta∣tions. SIR, HAving lately crossed the Alps in Italy, I am now returned to fair Breda; a Town swelling with delight, gallantry, and wealth; whose Artisans are very rare and eminent, both in the Schools of Mars, and Venus; and indeed so beautifull is the Fa∣brick, that the King of Spain formerly said; That she was fitting to be shewn and seen upon Holy-dayes, by rea∣son of her great worth, and excellency, in training and nursing of the most true-bred Cavalry. In which beautifull place (during my residence there) I made the Treaty my chiefest object; the trans∣actions whereof [between the Royall-party and the Scots] I seriously re-viewed with an Eagles eye; And because I will not deceive your expectation, nor leave you unsatisfied therein, I shall presume to salute you
with an exact Summary, of the most Remarkable Occurrencs that happened in their disputes, and con∣sulations; which were as followeth: The Commissioners (on both parties) for many dayes, having been very private in their negotia∣tions, their results are now come to some maturity; occasioned by the Commissioners last finall and De∣claratory speeches and propositions; where in plain terms they laid open to their declared Kings view, the apparent and inevitable danger that threatned him, if he still persisted in his evill wayes, depending and hearkening too much to the advice of his corrupted Counsell; and that if he did not speedily cast them off, and unfeignedly embrace the advice of his sub∣jects of Scotland, they would (for the future) make no further addresses unto him; and therefore hum∣bly desired him, speedily and effectually to give in his finall Answer to their Desires and Proposals; to the end, that those judgements might be prevented, which so inevitably threaten the destroying of the Cedars of his late Fathers house: And first, they hum∣bly desired, that he would graciously be pleased to signe and subscribe to the solemn League and Cove∣nant, and to give his assent for the setling of the Presbyterian Government, throughout his Domi∣nion. To which particulars he answered, that as for the Covenant, he held it both unnecessary and un∣suitable for him to signe thereunto; it being a thing proper for the obliging and binding of the people more firm and stedfast in their lawfull obedience and loyalty to their Soveraign, rather then a Soveraign to take an oath to be true to himself, and the preser∣vation of his own person, which by the laws of God
and Nature he is bound to perform, &c. Further in∣timating, that he would give his consent for the pro∣pagating and tendering the same to all his subjects, for their subscriptions, &c. so that himself might go free. But this would not satisfie the Scots, for they have other ends to serve upon him. From this branch, the Commissioners insisted up∣on the next, which was, That he would be pleased to give his assent for the setling and establishing of the Presbyterian Government, which after he had a while maturely debated thereon, he replied, that he would freely assent thereunto [provided] that he might enjoy liberty of conscience in the way of Episcopacy, and that he might have the continu∣all use of three of his Chaplains, to administer, and practise with him, and that they might have free leave to go along with him into Scotland: But this was ab∣solutely denied by the Commissioners, urging it was against their Covenant, and they seemed to be much displeased at the motion, and said, it was in vain to treat, if he stood that way affected. Lastly, they earnestly implored him, that hee would be pleased to condescend, that the Militia of that Kingdome might continue in the hands of such as the Committee of Estates should confide in, for the preservation of the Kingdome peace and tran uili∣ty, and putting it posture of defence, in cafe of any opposition or attempt; to which he replyed, that he could not in honour give his assent thereun∣to; but (because he would not altogether leave them unsatisfied in their desires) for five years, hee most freely gave his condescension; desiring a bles∣sing from heaven therein to accompany them.
But the Earl of Lannerick (fore-seeing what would ensue, if the Treaty took not effect) implored him, to signe to an Agreement; and to give his condiscen∣tion to those particulars before related: By whose perswasions, he assented unto them, and consented to an Agreement. And I was certified by a Gentleman of very good estimation, that he heard Doctor Ri∣vet (Tutour to the Prince of Orange) affirm, That he was an eye-witnesse of the King of Scots signing the Agreement, and that all things in debate between the Commissioners, were concluded on the first of this instant May: And that a Messenger was forth∣with dispatched into France to the Queen (from her sonne) wherein he certified her, that the Treaty was finished, and that hee had made an Agreement with the Scots Commissioners, and yeelded to most of their demands, in relation to themselves; but with provision for the royall-party. It is likewise reported, that the Covenant is to be imposed on none in England, but all that will take it may; and likewise to be authorized and allowed of, in all that have already taken and subscribed thereun∣to; And that he hath also condescended to conform himself to the form of Divine worship in Scotland; [which I cannot be perswaded to give credit to] But this is done chiefly by the Lord Lannerick, who hopes (by giving all that is demanded) to bring the demand∣ers into a condition to lose all they have got, and to frustrate their expectations, in what they really thought to have accomplished: For divers of the royall-party leaves no means unattempted, for the propagating of Monarchicall interest, and have ear∣nestly solicited the Duke of Lorain (as I am very cre∣dibly
informed) to give his assistance therein; which (if the Peace between France and Spain could be effe∣cted) would bee ready enough to do you mischief; and Scotland would be made a trap-door (secretly) to let in your enemies; therefore be wise, and secure that passage this Summer, lest missing so fair an op∣portunity, you repent when 'tis too late. As soon as the Treaty was concluded, the Com∣missioners dispatched a Letter to the Committee of Estates in Scotland, with a Copy of the Articles; desi∣ring a confirmation of the same, the Lord Louthain and the Lord Liverton, being confident they will prove satisfactory to the Kirk and State, but the Earl of Cassels and others, are of another minde. But the counsels by which these things are carried, are not primarily Presbyterian, for the Queen of Swedens Secretary (here resident during the Treaty) seems greatly affected to Monarchy, and hath given large promises from his Mistresse, for the propaga∣ting thereof; which occasioned a great rumour, that if the Scots had not answer'd their expectations (by receiving of what promised in way of condescension) that their declared King would go into Sweden, giving out (how true I know not) that a marriage between the Queen and Sweden, and the King of Scots, could not be unacceptable to her Councell. But yet notwithstanding all this, the royall-party (here seems to be exceedingly crest-faln, and much cast down, by reason of the falling off of many in place and authority, who formerly promised them aid and assistance, and that which doth at present so much distaste them, is the receipt of an extract from Hambrough; wherein is intimated, the arrivall of Mr.
Richard Bradshaw Resident for the Parliament of Eng∣land, who was very joyfully received, and entertai∣ned with a gallant volley of great shot, and a noise of Trumpets; Upon his going to audience, he was ac∣companied with severall Coaches, and divers English Merchants, and others of good quality: Where ha∣ving delivered his Embassie, with an excellent grace and singular Oratory, the States seemed to be exceed∣ingly pleased thereat, shewing good affection to the present Government of England, and withall decla∣red; That they desired nothing more then a constant and perfect league of amity and friendship with his Masters (the States of England and Ireland) and that nothing should be wanting in them, for the due ob∣servation and performing thereof; with some other declaratory expressions, much to the same effect. Here are divers Commanders (both English and Scots) who daily look for employment, and are per∣swaded the Scots, &c. will engage against England this summer; but as far as I can gather (by their agita∣tors in these parts) there is little probability. Not∣withstanding, I shall diligently attend their motions, and if I can attain to any thing worthy your accept∣ance, be confident it shall be communicated to your knowledge; By Breda, the 15. of May, 1650. Your most affectionate Serviteur, J. P. FINIS.
