B3892 99887129 183342
A FAIRING For Young-Men and Maids: If you'l take my advice, this I would have you do, Then every Young-man take his Lass, and drink one Pot or two. To the Tune of, The Winchester Wedding. By Tobias Bowne. This may be Printed, R. P. AS Thomas and Mary did meet, it was on a Summers day, With words they began to greet each other upon the way: Pray what are you bound for the Fair this Young-man unto her did say, And if that you be going there, i'le be glad of your Company; He said that he did love her. as a young-man a Maid should do, And every Stile they went over, he gave her a kiss or two. But when they came to the Fair, they merrily spent the day, But meting with William and Betty, thus Thomas to them did say, We'l drink before we part, come give us a Bottle of Wine, Since thou art with thy Sweet-heart, and I am come here with mine: The Maids were not unwilling, as far as I understand, But Will was for kissing and feeling a Maid upon every hand. And when they were full of Canary, their stomachs began for to rise Then Thomas began to court Mary, with hand upon one of her thighs: Said he art thou willing to Wed, for I have some goods before hand, Besides when my Father is dead, he promis'd me all his Land, And this is a good beginning, besides I have more at home, You may get a little by spinning, and I can both Weave and Comb.
My Mother will give me a little, if I get an honest Young-man, She saith I shall have the Kettle, and likewise the Warming-pan: My Granum will give me a Cradle, which is both firm and strong, Sister Margery will give me a Ladle, these Goods comes in ding dong: And this is a good beginning, besides I have more at home, I may get a little by spinning, and you can both Weave and Comb. Then William struck up to Betty, and thus unto her did say, Since thou art a Girl that's pritty, i'le give thee a Fairing this day, Why sit you so melancholly, my pretty sweet Betty my Dove, Though Thomas be all for Molly, it's thou art the Maid that I love, And this unto thee I will promise, then hang Sorrow cast away care, We'l be as far forth as Thomas, before we get out of the Fair. If that you will change your condition, and that you do fancy a Man, I pray Bett have no suspicion, tat you I do seek to trappan, My tongue and my heart is united, I scorn for to tell thee a lye, Sure I have no cause to be slighted, then prethee love do not deny, Though we have a small beginning, as little as nothing I know, You may get a little by spinning, and I can both Reap and Mow. And thus we may live in content, as they that had a great deal more, Then out of the door they went, and walked the Fair all o're, To buy each other a Fairing, as young-men and Maids should do, And when they were home repairing, they walked away two and two, It was Thomas and Mary together, with William and Betty so rare, Pray what Man can say any other, but that they had made a good Fair. What Maid can there be so hard hearted, an honest Young man to deny, That is the cause many are parted, without any reason why, I would have you strive to prevent it, or else it may be to your loss, I know that you are not contented, when you one the other do cross, And now my new Song it is over, for I have no more to say, But wish every Maid a true lover, that I have seen here to day. Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden Ball in Pye-Corner.
