D1840 99887102 181827
Dolly and Molly: OR, The Two Country Damosels Fortunes at London. Dolly and Molly came up to the Town To try their fortune, wandring up and down: At length both marcht together to a Ball, There Moll a Gallant got Doll none at all: But Doll atlast in town was richly marry'd, Moll got a Clap and shamefully miscarry'd. To an Excellent New Play-House Tune, Or, Bacon and Beans. With Allowance, Dolly and Molly are new come to Town Doll hath got nothing, but Moll a silk Gown: Dolly was handsome though pevsh and coy But Molly was buxome and free to enjoy. Dolly and Molly they went to White-hall, Dolly got nothing but Molly got all: Dolly she scorned to have a Gallant, But Molly had all things that Dolly did want. As Dolly and Molly were walking near th' Court, A youngster did Dolly began for to sport; But she put him of with a pish and a fie, Saying, Lord Sir be civil, else from you i'le flye. When Dolly refused him, to Molly he went, For one of the two to enjoy he was bent: He asked her a question which made her to smile, Then a kiss and a Guiny did Molly beguile. He took her aside and he pleas'd her so well, That Molly consented with him for to dwell, There's nothing on earth that's to Molly deny'd, Her humour to please, and to pomper her pride. He gave her fine cloaths and all things of the best, Because that her dilicate body be prest, Her Country speech did so heighten his charms, That Molly could seldome rest out of his arms. Now Mally is rich and Dolly is poor, But Dolly is honest though Mally a Whore: Doll said 'twas a pleasure to be modest and coy But Moll swore 'twas pleasanter to enjoy, Quoth Mally to Dolly i'de have the be wise, You'l never get any thing if you are nice: Observe but what state I do live in, and then You'l surely learn to be kinder to men. Oh Dolly the pleasures of love art so sweet, When with equal desires togeather we meet: that nothing on earth can compare with that bliss, Besides 'tis an honour to becall'd a fine Miss. Thus Molly tempts Dolly to go to the sport, And about her brave Gallants begin to resort: For Doll was handsome in Country gray, And was far more tempting then those that were gay Says Dolly to Molly 'twixt anger and scorn, Oh Molly you'l wish you had never been born: Those immodest pleasures which you so commend, Will bring you to sorrow and shame in the end Thus Molly and Dolly could never agree, Mally had Gallants more then two or three, She traded with all that had silver and gold Till at leangth like a town Miss she grew bawdy & bold 'Twas Dolly's good luck a place for to get, To wait on a Lady whose fortune was great Accounting it better a servant to be, Then a Lady of pleasure of the highest degree, This Dolly was pritty and clenly and neat Her body well shapt not to small nor too great Her Mistris she pleas'd and behav'd her self well, That Dolly most happely with her did dwell. Now Dolly is got into all peoples favour, & many young Shopkeepers strive for to have her: But Doll put him of with a modest reply: Saying Sirs I am resolved a Maiden to dye. But at last the coy Virgin was struck with loves dart Little Cupid hath wounded poor Dolly to'th heart For one of these youngsters so closely did ply, That Dolly no longer knew how to deny. Then marri'd they were having all friends consent And happilly love to each others content: She proves a kind Wife, and a good Husband he, Then what greater blessing on earth can there be: But Molly dispis'd her and call'd her young slut Saying, Dolly there's more ways then one to go to't I'le take my delight with the blades of the times: Such pleasures as those without doubt are no crimes But a little while after such was her mishap, Poor Molly had got a most desperate Clap, Her galiants forsook her and left her forlorn, Crying out, you foul Whore we your company scorn. Now Molly's disstressed, and the pain must indure, She flyes to a Quack her distemper to cure: But Dolly lives bravely, and her I commend, For honesty always will thrive in The End. Printed for P. Brook by, at the Golden-ball, in West-smithfield.
