E2805M 52529153 178793
The Humble ADDRESS Of the Right Honourable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal In Parliament Assembled. Presented to HIS MAJESTY. On Tuesday the Eighteenth Day of February, 1700. AND His Majesties Most Gracious Answer thereunto. WE the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, Return Our most Humble Thanks and Acknowledgements to Your Majesty, for Your Concern express'd for the Protestant Religion in Your gra∣cious Speech, and Your Care for its future Preservation, by Recom∣mending to Our Consideration a further Provision for the Succession to the Crown in the Protestant Line. We are highly Sensible of the Weight of those Things Your Majesty is pleased further to Recommend to Our Consideration; and therefore humbly desire You will be pleased to Order all the Treaties that have been made between Your Ma∣jesty and any other Prince or State, since the late War, to be laid before Us, that We may be Enabled to give Our mature Advice, when we are Informed of all those Matters necessary to Direct Our Judgements. And We humbly desire of Your Sacred Majesty, that You will enter into Alli∣ances with all those Princes and States, who are willing to Unite, for the Preser∣vation of the Balance of Europe; Assuring Your Majesty, that we shall most readily Concur in all such Methods, which may effectually Conduce to the Ho∣nour and Safety of England, the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, and the Peace of Europe. And We humbly Return Our further Thanks to Your Majesty, for the Letter communicated to this House the Seventeenth of February Instant; and having taken it into Our immediate Consideration, We humbly Desire of Your Majesty to Issue the necessary Orders for Seizing the Horses and Arms of the Pa∣pists, and other Disaffected Persons, and for Putting the Laws in Execution for Removing them from London; and that You will be pleased to give Directions for a Search to be made after Arms and other Provisions of War, which in that Letter are said to be in Readiness. In the mean time humbly Addressing to Your Majesty, That Order may be given for the speedy Fitting out of such a Fleet, as Your Majesty in Your great Wisdom may think Necessary in this present Conjuncture, for the Defence of Your Majesty and the Kingdom. His Majesties most Gracious An∣swer to the Address. My Lords, I Thank You for this Address, and for the Concern You Express in Relation to Our Common Security both at Home and Abroad; I shall give the Necessary Orders for those Things You desire of Me, and take Care for Setting out such a Fleet as way be necessary for Our common Defence in this Conjuncture. FINIS.
