l166 47012495 174462
The Lady Isabella's Tragedy; OR, The Step-Mothers Cruelty. Being a Relation of a most Lamentable and Cruel Murder, committed on the Body of the Lady Isabella, the only Daughter of a Noble Duke occasioned by the means of a Step-Mother and the Master-Cook, who were both adjudged to suffer a Cruel death, for committing the said Horrid Act. To the Tune of, The Ladies Fall. THere was a Lord of worthy fame and a Hunting he would ride, Attended by a noble Train, of Gentry by his side. And whilst be did in chase remain, to see both sport and play, His Lady went as she did feign, unto the Church to pray. This Lord he had a Daughter fair whose beauty shin'd so bright: She was belov'd both far and near of many a Lord and Knight. Fair Isabella was she call'd, A Creature fair was she, She was her fathers only jay, as you shall after see, But yet her Cruel step-Mother, did envy her so much, That day by day the sought her life her Malice it was such. She bargain'd with the Master-Cook to take her life away, And taking of her Daughters Book, she thus to her did say. Go home sweet Daughter, I thee go hasten presently. And relito the Master-Cook these words that I tell thee. And bid him dress to Dinner straight, that fair and milk white Doe. That in the Park both shine so bright, there's none so fair to show. THis Lady fearing of no harm, obey'd her Mothers will, And presently she basted home, her mind for to fulfill. She streight into the Kitchin went, her message for to tell; And there the Master Cook she spy'd, who did with Malice swell. You Master-Cook it must be so, do that which I thee tell, You needs must dress the milk white doe, which you do know full well. Then streight his cruel bloody hands, be on the Lady laid, VVho quivering and shaking stands, whilst thus to her be said. Thou art the Ore that I must dress; see here behold my Knife For it is pointed presently, to rid thee of thy life. O then cry'd out the Scullen boy as loud as loud might he; O save her Life good Master-Cook, and make your Pies of me, For pity sake do not destroy, my Lady with your Knife, You know she is her fathers , for Christ's soke save her life. I will not save her life he said, nor make my Pies of thee, But if thou dost this deed bewray, thy Butcher I will be, But when this Lord be did come home for to sit down and eat, He called for his Daughter dear, to come and carve his meat. Now sit you down his Lady said, O sit you down to meat, Into some Nunnery she is gone, your Daughter dear forget. Then solemnly he made a bow, before the company, That be would neither eat nor drink, untill he did her see, O then bespake the Scullen-boy, with a loud voice so high, If that you will your Daughter see, my Lord cut up that Pye. VVherein her flesh is minced small and parched with the fire: All caused by her Step-Mother, who did her death desire. And cursed be the Master-Cook, —O cursed may he be, I proffered him my own hearts blood, from death to set her free. Then all in black this Lord did mourn, and for his Daughters sake, He judged for her Step-mother, to be burnt at a Stake. Likewise he judg'd the Master-Cook, in boyling Lead to stand; And made the simple Scullen Boy, the Heir to all his Land. Printed for P. Brooksby at the Golden Ball in Pye. Corner.
