q157c 47012600 174568
THE Queens Lamention OR, The most sad and mournfull Complaint of her Sacred Majesty, the Queen of England, upon the death of her most dear and well Esteemed Son, the most Elustrious Prince, Henry Duke of Glocester, 3d. Brother to our gracious King, Charles the 2d. Deceased the 13. of September, 1660. Carried over from France, by Sir James O Neal, Knight and Baronet; comitted to the Press by his own Importu∣ning desire. To the Tune of, Franklin. SWéet Heavens have béen pleas'd of late to shew How Stars and Comedies in mourning go, For my sweet Darling bright, Wherein was my delight, To Heaven took his flight, And left me here. Oh that his Charlot frée had béen so strong For to have taken me with him along; My swéet Clustrious Babe As ever woman had, His last good night have made, Opitty me. His Crmso ooks so swéet, his Lilly hand; Methinks I sée him yet by me to stand, His shadow with me still My grieved heart doth kill. But unto Heavens will Wee must obey When late he was in France, his comely Grace My spirits did advance to sée his face: And constant was to me A séemed Deity; Joy and Felicity I had in him the Second Part, to the same tune. HIs comely gestures fed me with delight, When that his person did appear in my sight, Whose Princely looks did fly Like Comes from the sy, 'I would make a heart to e. Why Heavens, were you so with delight. To take my Prince so soon out from my sight: Methinks I sée his Ghost, Swiftly to Heaven post, Dear Henry I have lost O pitty me. His Princely pietie, his godly zeal, The holy defties, would not conceal, But down from Heaven they Ascend in one dy, And fetch my Dear away, O pitty me. Angels would have it so, for they decréed, He needs away must go, and withall spéed, A Prince with them to be, In Ammortallity, For everlastingly With them to Raign. Yet whatsoever place, I walk or stand, Methinks I see his face close by my hand, His shadow I do sée, Where-ever I shall be, Unto Eternity. He was so sweet. O let all Nations be sad for the Prince, For which no remedy cannot be since, Angels rejoyce me know, While that me mourn below, To Heavens see me go Then to my Dear. O that I could but fly Like to the Dove, Even up to the Sky to find my Love. Then would I enter in Amongst the Cherubims, To sée my darest friend That was so sweet O death why didst thou send Thy art so soon, Couldst thou not hold thy hand, fill I came home, To have receiv'd one smile From my own dearest child, Before his last exile, But now he's gone. O Heavens may you be to me so kind, And grant some remedy unto my mind, Which now oppressed is, My vitalls doth deercase, My grief transcending is, O pitty me When I to England shall now take my way, My comfort is but small; yet all my joy Is in this Gracious King, My blessing be on him, When I do come again, Lord succour me. LONDON, Printed for Charles Tyus on London-Bridge.
