P2266 C.20.f.9[118] C.20.f.9[119] R216095 99884639 192668
The pining Maid OR A Pattern for Lovers Giving a brief account of the unfortunate death of a young Man living in Coventry, Shopkeeper, who drowned himself for the Love of a Maid daughter to a Captain of the said City, because she denyed her promise and would not yeild to be his wife and now she lives in a most sad condition and is very much troubled in her mind the Poet having a bint of some of her grief cmposed these lines into meeter, according to her directions and so caused it to be Printed for all young men and maids, to take example by the same. The tune is, alack for my Love I must dye. woodcut of women with coffin COme all young Men & Maidens and listen unto me, I briefly will declare how I'm plung'd in misery, And all through my own séeking I well may say truly, And 'tis for my Love that I mouen. There was a gallant young Man in Coventry did dwell, He was a brave Shop-keeper as it is known fall well, He loved me to dearly the truth of it to tell, And &c. Thrée years in Love together was this young Man and I, Our hearts in one were linked fast I cannot it deny, But I was the first breaker of the bands of amity, And, &c, He was as well beloved as any Man could be. He was civil in his carriage to'th high and low degrée, Yet for all this poor soul he could find no Love And, &c.
pa to the same tune. MY Parents they that I should e Also I was cu with him to lead my But my Pride and A did seek this deadly A And 'tis for my Love  ourn. His heart wa no or could rest but  ight He sought all mea pase me and feed my fo delight At last for to reward him I paid him with despight, And, &c. For when that Marriage it grew nigh than I did him forsake, And gave him a flat answer then in their de did speak, Oh Mary don't deceive me and cause my heart to break And, &c, He  & wall'd he wrung his hands and thus to me did say Sweet Mary it thou lovest me oh cast me not away, But still with a scornful look his words would not obey, And, &c. He seeing no prswasions my stony heart would move, He sighing sadly went away I did it him to prove I thought he did dissemble but he did mean true Love And, &c. He laid himself upon the bed but there no tast could be, In's mind he was perplexed as plainly you may see; That very nght be drown'd himself all for the love of me, And, &c. when  was brought me was , was tormented it to do Yet all things I kept secret and made no outward show, And, &c, Within a small time after appeared in my sight His gashly Ghost that lov'd me and did me sore affright, And groaning cry'd now I do come for my own hearts delight, And, &c. Into such a damp if struck me and wounded so my heart, If a thousand swords had pierc' me I could not a felt more smart Nor can all the Physitans yet cure me with their art, And, &c. My friends thy much do blame me and all the Town beside, Those that which I kept company now cannot me abide Because I would not yeild to be his Bride And, &c. Now I have made a solemn Oath and mean to keep it truly, Because he lov'd me so well for his sake a Maid to dye My self I will refrain from all had company And, &c. Ile live on bread and watter good dyet ile forsake, In the world I live in misery sweet Christ me ready make, Oh John I come, I come all this is for thy sake And, &c. The fist I made light of it yet now it doth grieve me sore That I, should cast a man away that lov'd me long before I was the causer of his death which was worth worlds and more And, &c. I hope I soon shall follow him whom I do love so dear, Though then I made light of him and for him did not care I thought love but an idle toy but now I find it dear And &c. Young Maidens all both great & small to you these lines I send, Be faithfull in your promise and true unto your fend Least at the last you'r forced to cry out in the end And, &c. Trust not Love o'e much I speak it flat and plain, Run not the hzard of it but constant still remain For fear it be to late to call yesterday again And, &c. For through foolish fancy a many well do know. I wrught my lovs destruction I sought his overthrow Now in Coventry fair City my love doth lye full low And, &c. So adieu you faith ful lovers where ever that you be, Be sure to keep your promise in every degree, Though I remain upon the earth yet still my hearts with thee And 'tis for my love that I mourn. Printed for Phillip Brooksby near the Hospital-gate in West-Smith-field.
